



THE

Universal Etymological

English Dictionary:

CONTAINING

An Additional Collection of Words (not in the first Volume)
with their Explications and Etymologies from the Ancient British, 
Teutonick, Dutch, Saxon, Danish, French, Italian, Spanish, Latin, 
Greek, Hebrew, Chaldee, &c. each in its proper Character.

ALSO

An Explication of hard and technical Words, or Terms, 
in all ARTS and SCIENCES; with ACCENTS directing
to their proper Pronunciation, shewing both the Orthography and
Orthoepia of the English Tongue.

Illustrated with above Five Hundred CUTS, giving a
clearer Idea of those Figures, not so well apprehended by verbal
Description.

LIKEWISE

A Collection and Explanation of WORDS and PHRASES us'd in our
ancient Charters, Statutes, Writs, Old Records and Processes at Law.

ALSO

The Theogony, Theology, and Mythology of the Egyptians, 
Greeks, Romans, &c. being an Account of their Deities, Solemnities, 
Divinations, Auguries, Oracles, Hieroglyphicks, and many other curious
Matters, necessary to be understood, especially by the Readers of English
POETRY.

To which is added, 

An additional Collection of proper Names of Persons and Places in
Great Britain, &c. with their Etymologies and Explications.

The Whole digested into an Alphabetical Order, not only for the
Information of the Ignorant, but the Entertainment of the Curious; and
also the Benefit of Artificers, Tradesmen, Young Students and Foreigners.

A WORK useful for such as would UNDERSTAND what they
READ and HEAR, SPEAK what they MEAN, and WRITE
true ENGLISH.

V O L. II.

The Third Edition with many Additions, 

By N. BAILEY, Φιλόλογος.

LONDON:

Printed for THOMAS COX at the Lamb under the Royal Exchange.

MDCCXXXVII.









Illustrissimis PRINCIPIBUS, 

FREDERICO LUDOVICO, 

WALLIÆ PRINCIPI, 

WILHELMO AUGUSTO, 

ANNÆ, 

AMELIÆ SOPHIÆ ELEONORÆ, 

ELIZABETHÆQUE CAROLINÆ, 

GEORGII AUGUSTI

ET

WILHELMIMÆ CHARLOTTÆ, 

Magnæ Britanniæ Regis & Reginæ.

Propagini Clarissimæ.




DEDICATIO.

PRINCIPES Serenissimi, 

CUM decennio abbine elapso illustrissimo
patrocinio vestro prius hujus dictionarii
volumen committere fuerim ausus, nunc
denuo fretus indole perquam humanâ
vestrâ hocce mei prioris operis qualis
supplementum, serenas in vestras manus
& patrocinio tradere sustineo, id aliquid saltem admi­
niculi studiis vestris Anglicanis adferre posse sperans.
Quod ut sit, etiamque ut vos vita diuturna, felicitate­
que in terris haud interruptâ, & in cœlis quamvis
serò sempiternâ fruamini, cordate optat præcaturque, 

Humillimus vester cliens,

N. Bailey.






THE
PREFACE.


THE English Tongue, the present Speech of Great
Britain, and the Subject Matter of this Dictionary, 
is a compound of ancient Languages, as British, 
(Welsh) Saxon, Danish, Norman and modern French, 
Latin and Greek. From the five first of which, 
the Bulk or conversable Part is derived, and from
the two last, the Technical Words or Terms of
Art and Science. The British Tongue, tho' originally the
native Language of the Country, makes, however, but the smallest
Part of the Composition. For the Britains having been gradually
weakened by their Wars with the Picts, Romans, Saxons, Danes, 
&c. for the Space of one Thousand Years, were at last obliged
to retire over the British Alps, carrying with them their Language
into that part of Britain call'd Wales, where they have preserved
it to this Day. Mean while their victorious Oppressors, have
outed the proper Owners of their Country, and not only occupied
their Lands, but industriously disseminated their own Languages.

The Roman Legions, tho' they resided some hundreds of Years
in Britain, made no extraordinary Alteration in the British
Tongue, so tenacious were the Britains of their native Language at
that Time.

Nor did the Danes make much more, by reason of the Shortness
of their Reign, which was but about twenty seven Years, except in
some of the Northern Counties, where they made their first Set­
tlements, about 200 Years before they arrived at the supreme Pow­
er. To this may be added, the Aversion that their Barbarity to the
Britains had wrought in them, to their Government, Persons and
Speech.

The Saxons, by a longer Possession, did more suppress the British
Tongue, then mixed with some Latin and Danish, and cultivated
their own Tongue universally throughout the Kingdom.

To them succeeded the Normans, who industriously laboured to
eradicate the Saxon Language, and establish the French in its Stead
and by this Means, the present common Speech of England is for
the greatest part of a Saxon and French Original.

But as for our Technical Words or Terms of Art snd Science, 
we, like the rest of the Nations of Europe, have fetch'd them from
the Greeks and Latins, together with the Arts and Sciences them­
selves.



We have likewise, by Commerce and Converse, introduced many
Words from the French, Danes, Germans, Italians, &c.

By this Coalition of Languages, and by the daily Custom
of Writers to introduce any emphatical and Significant Words, that
by Travels or Acquaintance with foreign Languages they find, has
so enriched the English Tongue, that it is become the mod copious
in Europe; and I may (I believe) venture to say in the whole
World: So that we scarce want a proper Word to express any
Thing or Idea, without a Periphrasis, as the French, &c. are fre­
quently obliged to do, by reason of the scantiness of their Copia
Verborum.

This Copiousness of the English Tongue, rendring it not possible
to be comprized in the first Volume, has been the Occasion, and
the general Acceptance that my Labours therein have met with, the
Encouragement, for my proceedure in it, and presenting the World, 
with this second, in order to render this Dictionary as compleat as
I am capable.

But besides what I would before have inserted in the first Vo­
lume, had there been Room, I have since found many Words and
Terms of Art, and have had others communicated to me by some
Persons of generous and communicative Dispositions, and have also
added to this much other useful Matter, not at all in the former.

AND whereas bare verbal Descriptions and Explications of ma­
ny Things, especially in Heraldry and the Mathematicks, produce
but a feint and imperfect Idea of them in the Mind, I have here
given Cuts or engraven Schemes, for the more clear apprehending
them.

And it being so common with our modern Poets to intersperse
the Grecian and Roman Theology, Mythology, &c. in their
Works, an Unacquaintance with which renders their Writings either
obscure, or at least less intelligible and tasteful to the Readers, I
have in this Volume taken Notice of the most material Parts of the
Accounts we have of their Gods, Goddesses, Oracles, Auguries, 
Divinations, &c.

And as there has been among the Ancients, and is not yet grown
out of use, a sort of Language called Hieroglyphical, i. e. expressing
Matters by the Forms of Animals, Vegetables, &c. in Painting or
Sculpture, I have interspersed in their Proper Places the moil ma­
terial Remains we meet with in Authors of those mysterious Cha­
racters, for Assistance of such as desire to be acquainted with the
Dialect of such speaking Pictures, as our Oxford Almanacks were
wont to be, and such Histories in Sculpture, as that on the North
side of the Monument near London-Bridge.

And again, for the better understanding of History-Painting, I
have here described in what Form, Postures, Dresses, and with
what Insignia, Statuaries, Carvers and Painters, ancient and modern, 
have and do represent the Heathen Gods, Goddesses, Nymphs, 



Heroes, Virtues, Vices, Passions, Arts, Sciences, Months, &c. and
thro' the Whole there are inserted many Curiosities too many here
to be mentioned.

And forasmuch as many Persons of a small share of Literature
and not very conversant in Books, are frequently apt to accent Words
wrong, especially those that are Technical, and such as are not the
most common, I have placed an Accent on that Syllable, on which
the Stress of the Voice should be laid in pronouncing: And here
I would desire the favourable Censure of Criticks, in that I have not
confined my self to the placing it always on the Syllable that the
Greeks have; because they would if so accented, frequently found
very uncouth, and harsh to English Ears, and very dissonant to
the Genius of the English Tongue, 

As to the Method of this Volume, it is exactly the same as the
first, and as to the Etymology, where I could not find any Original
I have in their Stead writ [Incert. Etym.] i. e. the Etymology is
uncertain. Tho' I am persuaded that many, nay most of our com­
mon Words (excepting such as are humourous or canting) do owe
their Original to the Saxon Language. But the Saxons having been
a warlike People, who minded fighting more than writing, and the
Art of Printing being not then found out, has been the Occasion
that there were few Books in the World in those Times, and the
greatest Part of them probably destroyed by the Normans, and the
Iron Teeth of Age having been gnawing the Remains of them for
now near seven hundred Years, it is no Wonder, that what is left is
so imperfect.

But having in the Introduction to the first Volume given an Ac­
count more at large by what Steps and Gradations our English
Tongue is come to be what it now is, from what it anciently was
and not having Room here to expatiate, I shall desist, hoping that
these my Labours may be both as acceptable and serviceable to my
Country-men as they have been laborious to me in the compiling.

I shall only take this Opportunity to apprise the Reader, that
in this third Edition I have struck out several hundred Words that
were in the former Edition of a near affinity to those in the first Vo­
lume, and therefore may be well enough spared, and have supply'd
their Places with other Articles that I presume will be more accep­
table.

And for the Satisfaction (but not the Imitation) of the Cu­
rious, I have added a Collection of Words, &c. used by the Canting
Tribe.

As for those who would have this Work compleat in one
Volume, I recommend to them my Dictionarium Britannicum
in Folio, which I hope will give them entire Satisfaction.

N. BAILEY.






ALPHABETS of the English, Saxon, Greek, and
Hebrew Characters, parallel'd for the Use of those
who would acquaint themselves with the Etymological
Words.


English Capitals, A B C D E F G H I K L M
O. English Capitals, A B C D E F G H I K L M
Saxon Capitals, A B C D E F G H I K L M
Greek Capitals, Α Β Δ Ε, Η Γ Ι Κ Λ Μ
English small, a b c d e f g h i k l m 
O. English small, a b c d e f g h i k l m 
Saxon small, a b c ð e f ʒ h i k l m
Greek small, α β δ ε η γ ι κ λ Μ
Hebrew, א ב ד ג ח י ק ל מ

English Capitals, N O P Q R S T V U W X Y Z
O. English Capitals, N O P Q R S T U W X Y Z
Saxon Capitals, N O P R S T V W X Y Z
Greek Capitals, Ν Ο Π Ρ Σ Τ Χ Υ Ζ 
English small, n o p q r s t v u w x y z
O. English small, n o p q r s t v u w x y z
Saxon small, n o p cp r ſ t v &wyn; x y z
Greek small, ν ο π ρ σ τ ξ υ ζ
Hebrew, נ ן פ ר ס ט ו ז

Greek, Ch Χ χ Ph Ρ ρ Ps Ψ ψ Th Φ φ φ Ο ο Ω ω
Hebrew, Ch ח Gu ע Ph פ Sh ש Th ת Tz ץ
Saxon, Th Ð, ð, That &#thorn; And &
Hebrew Vowels, a τ e ָ i ֵ oτ ְ u ו






THE
Universal Etymological
English Dictionary:
Being also an
Interpreter of hard Words.


A

Aa Roman Character, A a Italick, 
A a Old English, Α α Greek, 
א Hebrew, are the first letters
of the alphabet, and in all languages, 
ancient and modern, the character ap­
propriated to the same sound, is the
first letter, except in the Abyssine.

It has been observed that the forma­
tion of the sound of A is easy and simple, 
requiring no other motion but a bare
opening of the lips, and spiration, and
therefore is the first sound emitted by
Infants in crying, which is usual at
their first coming into the World: and
likewise that more grown Persons are
apt upon any sudden or extraordinary
occasions to express admiration, an­
guish, joy, &c. by it. And tho' the
pronunciation of it is free and open, 
yet the sound of it is varied, being pro­
nounced, sometimes open, as in the
words ball, call, &c. and sometimes
close, as in make, cake, &c.

A [among the Ancients] was a nu­
meral letter, and signified 500. 

A or a with a dash, signified 5000.

A [among the Romans] was used as an
abbreviation of the word Absolvo, i. e.
I acquit; the judges being wont to give
their sentence upon persons, by casting
tables into a box or urn, on which
were the letters A, C, or N L. If they
acquitted the person try'd, they cast into
the urn a table with the letter A marked
on it; if they condemned, with the let­
ter C, for Condemno, i. e. I condemn; if
the matter was hard to be determined, 
with the letters N L, for Non liquet, i.e.
It does not appear plain. Hence Cicero
calls the letter A Litera salutaris, i.e.
the Saving Letter. A was also used by
the Romans, as the first letter of the Lit­
teræ Nundinales, in imitation of which, 
the Dominical letters were introduced.

A is used in the Julian kalendar, as
the first of the seven Dominical letters.
It was in use among the Romans long
before the establishment of Christianity, 
as the first of the 8 Nundinal letters, 
in imitation of which the Dominical
letters were first introduced.

A [among Logicians] is us'd to denote
an universal affirmative proposition;
according to the verse, 
Asserit A, negat E, verum generaliter ambæ.
Thus, in the first mood, a syllogism
consisting of three universal affirmative
propositions, is said to be in Bar ba ra.
The A thrice repeated denoting so ma­
ny of the propositions to be universal.

A or AA or Æ [with Physicians] is
used in prescriptions, and denotes sim­
ply equal parts of the ingredients
therein mentioned.

AAA [with Chymists] is sometimes used
to signify Amalgama or Amalgamation.

AB, at the beginning of English Sax­
on names, is generally a contraction of
Abboð, i. e. an Abbot or Abby; so
that as to the names of places, it may
be generally concluded, that the place
belonged to a monastery elsewhere, or
that there was one there.

AB [of בא, a father, Heb.] accord­
ing to the Jewish computation is the
11th month of their civil, and the 5th
of their ecclesiastical year, which lat­



tex begins with the month Nisan, and
the former answering to part of our
July.

The Jews observe the first day of
this month as a fast, on account of the
death of Aaron, and the 9th on account
of the burning of Solomon's temple by
the Chaldeans; and also of the building
of the second temple, after the capti­
vity by the Romans: And also in re­
membrance of the edict of the emperor
Adrian, whereby they were banish'd
out of Judea, and forbid so much as
to look back towards Jerusalem, tho' at
a distance, with design to lament the
ruin of it.

They have also a notion that on this
day, the persons who were sent as
spies by Joshua from the camp, return'd
to the camp and engag'd the people
in rebellion.

They likewise observe the 18th of
this month as a fast, on account of the
going out of the lamp in the sanctuary
that night, in the time of king Ahaz.

ABACUS [Ἄβαχος, Gen. of Ἄβαξ, 
Gr. which some derive from דבא, 
Heb. to be elevated or raised, and
thence take it to signify a high shelf, 
&c.] it was used among the ancients
for a cupboard or buffet.

ABACUS [Ἄβαχος, Gr.] a count­
ing table anciently used in calculations:
This was sometimes a board cover'd
with sand, dust, &c. sifted evenly upon
it, on which Geometricians, &c. used
to draw their schemes.

ABACUS Pythagoricus [i.e. Pythago­
ras's table] a table of numbers contrived
for the more easy learning the princi­
ples of arithmetick, and supposed to be
the multiplication table, and thence it
has been used to signify an alphabet or
A B C.

ABACUS [in Architecture] is the up­
permost member or capital of a column, 
which serves as a sort of crowning both
to the capital and column, tho' some
erroneously make it to be the capital
itself.

The ABACUS [according to Vitruvius]
was originally designed to represent a
square tile laid over an urn or basket.
The original or rise of this first regular
order of architecture is said to be as
follows. An old woman of Athens hav­
ing placed a basket covered with a tile, 
over the root of an Acanthus [Bean­
foot] the plant shooting forth the fol­
lowing spring, encompassed the basket
all round, till having met the tile, it cur­
led back in a kind of scrolls, which
being observ'd by an ingenious sculp­
tor, he formed a capital upon this plan;
representing the tile by the Abacus, the
basket by the vase or body of the capi­
tal, and the leaves by the volutes.

The ABACUS is something different, 
in different orders. It is a flat square
member in the Tuscan, Dorick, and
ancient Ionick orders. In the richer
orders, the Corinthian and Composit, 
it loses its native form, having its.
four sides or faces arch'd or cut inward, 
with some ornament, as a rose, some
other flower, a fish's tail, &c.

But there are other liberties taken
in the Abacus, by several architects.
Some make it a perfect Ogee in the
Ionick, and crown it with a fillet. In
the Dorick, some place a Cymatium
over it, and so do not make it the up­
permost member: In the Tuscan order, 
where it is the largest and most mas­
sive, and takes up one third part of the
whole capital, they sometimes call it
the Die of the capital; and Scamozzi uses
the name Abacus for a concave mould­
ing in the capital of the Tuscan pedestal.

ABADDIR, a name given to the stone
that Saturn is fabled to have swallowed
instead of his son Jupiter: For the poets
feign, that Saturn, having been fore­
warned, that he should be expelled his
kingdom by one of his sons, to prevent
it, as soon as ever his wife Rhea was
deliver'd of a male child, sent for it, in
order to devour it; but having served
his wife so once, she afterwards, instead
of the child sent him a stone, wrapped
up in swaddling cloaths, and so deceiv'd
him, and preserv'd the child. See Saturn.

ABALIENATION [in the Roman
law") a giving up one's right to another
person, or a making over an estate, 
goods or chattels by sale, or due course
of law.

To ABASE [Sea term] to lower or
take in, as to lower or take in a flag.

ABASED [in Heraldry] is a term used
of the vol or wing of eagles, &c. when
the top or angle looks downwards to­
wards the point of the shield; or when
the wings are shut: The natural way
of bearing them being spread with the
tip pointing to the chief or the angles.

A Bend, a Chevron, a Pale, &c. are
said to be abased, when their points 
terminate in or below the centre of the
shield.

An Ordinary is said to be abased, 
when below its due situation.

To ABATE [of abbatre, F.] proper­
ly to break down or destroy (in a com­
mon sense) is to diminish, to make or
grow less.



To ABATE a writ [in Law] is to
destroy it for a time, thro' want of
good ground, or some other defect; as
the appeal abateth by cousenage, i. e.
the accusation is made void, or defeat­
ed by deceit.

ABATEMENT [abaissement, F.] a
lessening; also that which is abated in
a reckoning or account.

ABATEMENT [in Law] the act of
abating; also signifies the entring upon
an inheritance, by stepping in between
the former possessor and his next heir.

ABATEMENT of honour [with He­
ralds] is sometimes an absolute reversi­
on or overturning of the whole escut­
cheon, or else only a mark of diminu­
tion, as a Point dexter parted tenne, a
Goar sinister, a Delf, &c. These marks
must be either tawney, or murrey; o­
therwise, instead of diminutions, they
become additions of honour.

ABBESS [of Ἀββατεία, Gr. Abu­
teſſe, Sax.] a governess of nuns.

ABBEY [of Ἀββατεία, Gr. Abbot­
rice, Sax. a government
or kingdom] a convent or monastery, a
house for religious persons.

ABBY [of Ἀββατεία, Gr. Abbot­
rice, Sax. a government
or kingdom] a convent or monastery, a
house for religious persons.

ABBIES anciently one third of the
best benefices in England, were by the
pope's grant appropriated to abbies, 
and other religious houses, which when
they were dissolved by K. Henry VIII, 
and become lay-fees, there were 190
dissolved, whose revenues were from
200 to 3500 l. per annum, which at a me­
dium amounted to 2853000 l. per annum.

ABBOT [of Aboð, Sax.] the chief
ruler of an abbey of monks and Fri­
ars, who were at first lay Persons and
subject to the Bishop and ordinary priests
of the diocess, in which the monastery
or abby was built; and these being for
the most part in remote and solitary
places, they had no concern in the af­
fairs of the church; but like other lay
men were used to attend divine service
in their respective parish churches on
Sundays and holy-days; and if the abby
was at too great a distance from the pa­
rifli church, then a priest was sent to
them to administer the Sacrament.

In process of time they were allow'd
to have a priest of their own fraternity, 
and he was for the most part the abbot
of that monastery; whose power was
limited to his monastery, and he was
still under the direction of the Bishop.

Some of these abbots making use of
the opportunity of their retired life, 
and applying their mind to study, in
time came to be men of learning (al­
lowance being made for the ignorance
of those times) and set themselves stre­
nuously to oppose the growing heresies
of those times; whereupon they were
by the bishops call'd from their retire­
ments or monasteries and placed near
the great cities to be more ready at
hand to give assistance.

By conversation their primitive sim­
plicity and humility wore off, and they
growing ambitious of power, and exces­
sive in pride, and desirous to be inde­
pendent of their bishops, they not only
obtain'd the title of lords and other
dignities of episcopacy, but by degrees
were variously distinguished: As,

Bishop ABBOTS, abbots, whose ab­
bies have been erected into bishopricks.

Cardinal ABBOTS, abbots, who are
also called cardinals.

Commendatory ABBOTS, or abbots in
Commendam, are seculars, and do not
perform any spiritual offices, nor have
any spiritual jurisdiction over their
monks, altho' they have undergone the
tonsure, and are obliged by their bulls
to take the orders, when they come of
age.

Crozier'd ABBOTS, are such as bear
the crosier or pastoral staff.

Mitred ABBOTS, are so called, be­
cause they wear a mitre when they of­
ficiate, and are independent upon any
person but the pope, being free from
the bishop's jurisdiction, and having
the same authority within their bounds, 
that the bishop had; these mitred ab­
bots in England were also lords of par­
liament.

Regular ABBOTS, are real monks or
religious, who have taken the vow, 
and wear the habits.

ABBREVIATED [abbreviatus, L.]
made shorter.

ABBUTTALS [of aboutir, F. to li­
mit or bound, or of butan or onbutan, 
Sax.] the buttings and boundings of
lands, highways, &c. either towards
the east, west, north, or south.

ABDICATIVE [abdicativus, L.] be­
longing to abdication; also negative.

ABDOMEN [of abdo, L. to hide, and
omentum, the caul]

ABDOMEN [with Anatomists] the
lowermost of the 3 Venters, or great
cavities, which contains the stomach, 
liver, bladder, spleen, guts, &c.

ABELE-tree [with Botanists] a finer
kind of white poplar.

ABER [Old British] the fall of a
lesser water into a greater, as of a
brook into a river, a river into a lake
or fea. The mouth of a river; as A­
berconway, &c.



ABERE-MURDER [of abere appa­
reat, and mort murder, Sax.] plain or
downright murder, in distinction from
manflaughter and chance medley.

ABETTORs [in Law] are also those
persons, who without cause procure
others to sue out false appeals of felony
or murder against persons, that they
jmay thereby render them infamous.

ABGATORIA [of abghittin, Irish]
the alphabet A B C, &c.

ABIB [ביבא, i. e. a green ear of
corn, Heb. which in Iudea us'd to be
ripe in that month] it was called Nisan
before the coming of the Jews out of
Egypt, and it was reckoned the first
month of their ecclesiastical year, and
answers to part of oar March and A­
pril; but in the XII. ch. of Exodus, 
God having commanded it to be reck­
oned the first month of the ecclesiastical
year. By that computation Tizri was
the first month.

This translation of the order of the
months happened about the season
Of autumn; and Scaliger and others
tor very cogent reasons suppose that
the beginning of the world was at that
season.

Upon the 14th day of this month was
the passover to be kill'd.

ABJETINE [abietinus, L.] made of;
also of or pertaining to sir.

To ABJUGATE [abjugatum, L.] to
unyoke) to uncouple.

ABJURATION [in our Old Customs]
signified a voluntary banishment of a
man's self from his native country or
kingdom for ever.

This was anciently admitted in some
criminal cafes instead of death, to
which penalty they were rendered lia­
ble by the letter of the law; provided
they did betake themselves for shelter
to a church or church-yard.

This blind and ill-directed zeal began
about the year 1000, in the reign of
king Edward, call'd the confessor.

Whatever place or building had been
consecrated by the clergy for any reli­
gious use whatsoever, whether real or
pretended, was rendered a screen for
potorious offender against justice and
the laws of the realm, protecting them
who were guilty of all manner of villa­
nies, murther it self not being excepted.

But the church not thinking it self
sufficiently honoured by these privi­
leges, its power by degrees extended
further and the offender might com­
mute his banishment from the king­
dom with abjuring his free liberty of
living in common with his fellow sub­
jects, by confining himself for ever to
a monastery or other place of sanctuary
to which he had taken for shelter.

Nor are there wanting in history in­
stances of these criminals frequently
making sallies out from them; and hav­
ing robb'd and plundered their neigh­
bours, carried their booty like rave­
nous beasts inro their dens, where
they spent it in riot and luxury.

ABJURATION [in a Law Sense] sig­
nifies a solemn promising, never to
yield or give obedience or the assistance
of a subject to any other person claim­
ing a right to the crown in prejudice
of the king then reigning.

To ABLEGATE [ablegatum, L.] to
send abroad upon some employment;
also to send a person out of the way
that one is weary of.

ABLENESS [of habilitas, L.] capa­
bleness to perform.

ABLUENT [abluent, L.] washing
away, cleansing.

ABLUTION, a cleansing or purify­
ing by washing.

This ceremony was first used by the
Jewish priests before the offering of sa­
crifice; for which purpose king Solomon
made a great laver or sea of brass, into
which the priests having first thrown
the ashes of the sacrifice, they wash'd
themselves.

The ancient Romans likewise, in imi­
tation of this ceremony, were wont to
wash their head, hands, feet, or whole
body, before they began the office of sa­
crificing.

The modern Roman catholicks apply
it to what the priest, who consecrates
the water or host, washes his hands
with; and also to that small quantity
of wine and water that they drink af­
ter swallowing the wafer or host to
wash it down.

ABNEGATION, a denying a matter
point blank.

ABOMINABLE [abominari, accord­
ing to the native sense of the word, 
from ab and omen, L. signifies to account
a thing for an ill omen, or an unlucky
sign, and therefore to pray against it by
certain forms of speech] fit or deser­
ving to be abhorred, loathed or hated.

To ABOMINATE [abominari, of ab
and omen) properly signifies to take a
thing for an ill sign or unlucky omen;
to pray against it, or wish the contra­
ry, by certain forms and speeches; we
uie it for to abhor, hate or loath.

ABON [with the ancient Britains] signified a river, and was a
general name for all rivers.

AVON [with the ancient Britains] signified a river, and was a
general name for all rivers.



To ABORT [atortir, F. of ab and
orior, L.] to miscarry, to bring forth
the fœtus, before it is arrived at its
maturity for birth.

ABORTION [with Gardeners] a term
used of fruits that are produced too
early before their time, as trees hap­
pening to be blasted by noxious
winds, are subject to this malady, never
bringing their fruit to maturity.

ABORTIVENESS, miscarriage; also
unsuccessfulness.

ABOUT, an English particle, that
is used in various senses; as for

Around, encompassing, as the tower, 
city, &c. has a ditch or moat about it, 
i. e. is surrounded with water.

2. Motion in a Place, as to walk about
the town, garden, &c.

3. Near in Place, Quantity or Time;
as I live about or near the city.

Quantity, as he has an estate of about
500 l. per Annum.

Time; as it is about (near) 12 of the
clock.

ABOUTED [with Gardeners] a term
used to denote that trees are budded.
It properly signifles a swelling, formed
in the human body, which has come
to head or abscess, and is applied to
trees, in that the buds of them do in
like manner arise like small heads.

ABRACADABRA, this word is a
spell or charm, which is still in use and
esteem with some superstitious persons, 
who pretend to do wonders by it in
the cure of agues and fevers, which is
to be written in the form of a triangle, 
decreasing one letter every line, till it
comes to a point; and the illiterate
write the letters in English characters, in
the same form.

Image omitted. Written in Hebrew, in a form of a triangle.



ABRACAR, a name which Basilides, 
an heretick of the second century; gave
to God, who he said was the author of
365, i. e. 365 days in the year, to
which the letters אדבאדאב אדבא Abra­
cadabra, are said to amount. The au­
thor of this superstition is said to have
lived in the time of Adrian, and had its
name after Abrasan, or Abraxas [Ἀ­
βραξας, Gr.] a deity that the author ado­
red; this he made his supreme deity, 
and ascribed to him several petty sub­
ordinate divinities, as 7 angels, who
presided over the heavens; and also ac­
cording to the number of days in the
year, he held 365 virtues or powers, 
or dependent intelligences. The value
of the letters in the word, according to
the Greek numbers, made 365 thus, 
Α Β Ρ Α Σ #x0391; Σ
1 2 100 1 16 1 200

To ABRADE [abradere, L.] to shave
off.

ABRASION [with Surgeons] a su­
perficial raising of the skin.

ABRASION [in a Medicinal Sense]
the wearing away the natural mucus, 
which covers the membranes, particu­
larly those of the stomach and guts, by
corrosive or sharp humours.

ABRASION [with Philosophers] that
matter which is worn off by attrition
of bodies one against another.

ABRIDGMENT [abregement, F.] an
abridging, &c. wherein the less mate­
rial things are insisted on but briefly, 
and so the whole brought into a lesser
compass.

ABRIDGMENT [of account, &c. in
Law] is the making it shorter, by ab­
strasting some of its circumstances.

ABROO'D [of breðan Sax.] as to
sit abrood as an hen on eggs, to cherish.

The ABRUPT [abruptum, L.] the
uneven, rough, broken, or craggy part
of the abyss. Milton.

ABRUPTNESS, the breaking or be­
ing broken off on a sudden; also
cragginess of a rock, mountain, &c.

To ABSCIN'D [abscindere, L.] to
cut off.

ABSCISSÆ [in Conick Sections, or
other Curvili­
neal Figures]
are the parts
of the axis cut
off by the or­
dinates, and ac­
counted down­
wards from
the vertex of the section; thus V b or
V B are the Abscissæ in this figure.
Some writers call these the Intercepted
Axes or intercepted diameters.

Image omitted.



To ABSENT one's Self, to be vo­
luntarily absent, not to appear, to keep
out of the way.

ABSINTHIATED [absinthiatus, L.]
mingled with wormwood.

ABSOLUTE [with Grammarians]
without regimen or government, as an
ablative absolute.

ABSOLUTE Nouns Adjectives [with



Gram.] such adjectives as are in the po­
sitive degree, as great, little, low, less.

ABSOLUTE Nouns Substantives, such
nouns whose significations imply a sim­
pie idea; as a Man, a Horse, Earth, 
Air, &c.

ABSOLUTE [in Theology] is some­
times used to denote a thing being
without any cause, in which sense God
is absolute.

ABSOLUTE is also used to signify
free from conditions, as the decrees of
God are said to be absolute in respect
to men.

ABSOLUTE [with Romanists] is used
in opposition to Declaratory, as they
hold that a priest can forgive sins abso­
lutely; but the protestants say only de­
claratively and ministerially.

ABSOLUTE Motion, Signifies the
change of place in any moving body.

ABSOLUTE Numbers [in Algebra] a
number which possesses one intire part
or side of an equation, and is always a
known quantity, and the reclangle or
solid under the unknown roots in Qua­
draticks and Cubicks; thus in this equa­
tion; a a+-16 a=36, the absolute
number is 36, which is equal to the
product of the two roots or values, 
multiplied one into another; this is
call'd also Homogeneum Comparationis, 
by Vieta.

ABSOLUTE Place, is that part of
infinite and immoveable space, that any
body possesses.

ABSOLUTELY [with Geometricians]
is used to signify intirely, compleatly, 
as a circle or sphere is said to be abso­
lutely round, in contradistinstion to a
figure that is partly so, as an Oval, a
Spheroid, &c.

ABSOLUTION [in the Canon Law]
a juridical act, whereby a priest as a
judge, and by virtue of a power dele­
gated to him from Christ, remits sins.

ABSOLUTION [in the Civil Law]
signifies a definitive sentence, whereby
a man accused of any crime is acquitted.

ABSOLUTION [in the Reformed
Churches] is ususally understood of a
sentence by which a person standing
excommunicated, is freed or released
from the excommunication.

ABSOLUTORIUM [with Physicians]
an absolute remedy, or most effectual
medicine; also a certain cure or per­
fect recovery,  L.

ABSOLUTENESS [of absolu, F. ab­
solutus, L.] arbitrariness, freedom from
conditions, &c.

To ABSORBB [with Gardeners, &c.]
is a term applied to those greedy
branches, that growing on fruit trees, 
do drink up and rob the other branches
of the nutritious juice, that they stand
in need of for their nourishment and
augmentation.

ABSTERSIVE Medicines, such as are
used to clear the skin and outward
parts of the body from filth.

ABSTRACT [in Philosophy] that
which is separated from some other
thing by an operation of the mind cal­
led abstraction.

An ABSTRACT Idea, is some simple
idea, detach'd and separated from any
particular subject or complex idea, for
the sake of viewing and considering it
more distinctly, as it is in itself, its
own nature, &c.

ABSTRACTED Mathematicks, is used
in opposition to mix'd mathematicks;
the former signifying pure arithmetick, 
geometry, or algebra.

ABSTRACTED Nouns Substantives 
[with Grammarians, &c.] are such nouns
as denote a thing; the existence of
which is real, and in the nature of the
thing; but subsists only in the under­
standing; as Humanity, Truth, Vigilance, 
&c.

ABSTRUSE [absirusus, L.] far re­
mov'd from the common apprehensions
or ways of conceiving.

ABSURDNESS [absurditas, L.] dis­
agreeableness to reason, impertinence, 
folly; an error or offence against some
generally allowed truth or principle.

ABUNDANTIA, an allegorical divi­
nity, which was represented under the
figure of a young virgin amidst all sorts
of good things, in good plight of body, 
having a fresh lively colour, holding in
her hand a horn, said to be that of A­
chelous.

Self ABUSE, the crime called other­
wise, self-pollution.

ABUSIVENESS, offensiveness, af­
frontingness, &c.

ABYSMAL, pertaining to an abyss.

ABYSS [Ἀβίσσος, Gr.] a bottomless
pit or gulf, or any prodigious deep, 
where no bottom can be found, or is
supposed to have no bottom; a vast un­
fathomable depth of waters, such as is
supposed to be inclosed in the bowels of
the earth.

Not only the ancient Hebrews for­
merly, but also the generality of the
eastern people, even at this day, are
of this opinion, that the abyss, i.e. the
waters and sea did encompass the
whole earth, and that the earth was
immersed in and floated upon the abyss
like a water melon, and that the earth



was founded upon the waters, or at
least upon the abyss. They believe
that this abyss, which in the beginning
covered the earth, was put into agi­
tation by the spirit of God, or by some
mighty or impetuous wind; and that it
was called an abyss by way of prolepsis or
anticipation, because it afterwards con­
stituted the sea, and the waters of the
abyss issued from it, and were formed
by its flowing: Or that the earth rose
out of the midst of this abyss, like an
island rising out of the ocean, appear­
ing suddenly to our eyes, after its hav­
ing been long conceal'd under water.
Calmet.
That fountains and rivers are deriv'd
from the abyss or ocean, which they
suppose issue from them by invisible
channels, or subterraneous passages, 
and return to it again, thro' others of
their own making in the earth.
That at the deluge the abyss or
depths below, or the fountains forced
their springs, and spread over the earth, 
while at the same time the sea broke
its banks, and the cataracts of heaven
being open'd, their united waters over­
flowed the whole terrestrial orb.
In a scripture sense the abyss is us'd
to signify Hell.
It likewise represents the Giants, &c.
And St. John, Rev. 9, &c. represents
the depths as the abode of wicked men
and devils.

AC at the beginning or end of
a name of a town or place
is the Saxon word (Ac) which
signifies an Oak, and generally denotes
the place to take its name of Oak, as
Acton, is as much as to say Oak-Town, 
and Austin's Ac, Austin's Oak; and as
for the names of persons of the same
form, they are for the most part de­
rived from the places of their birth, or
some atchievement there.

AK at the beginning or end of a name of a town or place
is the Saxon word (Ac) which
signifies an Oak, and generally denotes
the place to take its name of Oak, as
Acton, is as much as to say Oak-Town, 
and Austin's Ac, Austin's Oak; and as
for the names of persons of the same
form, they are for the most part de­
rived from the places of their birth, or
some atchievement there.

AKE at the beginning or end of 
a name of a town or place
is the Saxon word (Ac) which
signifies an Oak, and generally denotes
the place to take its name of Oak, as
Acton, is as much as to say Oak-Town, 
and Austin's Ac, Austin's Oak; and as
for the names of persons of the same
form, they are for the most part de­
rived from the places of their birth, or
some atchievement there.

ACACIA [with Botanists] the name
of a shrub, or the gum of Acacia, cal­
led also the binding bean-tree.

Rob. ACACIA, conserve of sloes, 
which is used instead of the true Acacia.

ACACIA [with Medallists] a kind of
roll, resembling a bag, seen on medals
in the hands of several of the consuls
and emperors, after Anastasius.

ACADEMICKS a name now used
for members of
modern academies, or instituted societies
of learned persons.

ACADEMISTS a name now used
for members of
modern academies, or instituted societies
of learned persons.

ACADEMY a place where learned
men assemble to confer about the disco­
veries that have been made in arts or
sciences, or for trying experiments, in
 order to their further improvements.
It sometimes is us'd to signify an uni­
versity or single college.
Again, any school where arts and
sciences are taught is called by this
name.

ACADEMY, is also now used for a
sort of collegiate school or seminary, 
where young persons are instructed in
a private way, in the liberal arts and
sciences, as those of the Nonconformists.

ACADEMY [of Horsemanship] is also
used to signify a riding-school, a place
where Persons are taught to ride the
great horse, and other exercises, as
fencing, &c.

ACATALEPTICK [of Ἀχαταλεϖτος
Gr.] incomprehensible.

ACATHARSIA [Ἀχαθαρσἰα, of α neg.
and χαθαἰρω, Gr. to purge or cleanse]
that filth or impurity in a diseased bo­
dy, which is not yet purged off.

To ACCEDE [accedere, L.] to come
to, ro draw near to, to enter into.

ACCELERATED Motion [in Me­
chan."] a motion which receives continu­
al increments or accessions of velocity.

ACCELERATION [with Philoso­
phers] a continual increase of motion in
any heavy bodies tending towards the
center of the earth, by the force of
gravity.

ACCELERATION [with the ancient
Astronomers] a term used in respect to
the fixed stars, and signified the diffe­
rence between the revolution of the
Primum Mobile, and the solar revoluti­
on, which was computed at 3 minutes
and 56 seconds.

ACCELERATORES [Anatomy] cer­
tain muscles, so called of accelerandi, 
i. e. hastening.

To ACCEN'D [Accendere, L.] to kin­
dle, to set on fire.

ACCENSION [Philosophy] the in­
kindling or setting any natural body on
fire.

ACCENT [with Rhetoricians] a tone
or modulation of the voice, used some­
times to denote the intention of the ora­
tor or speaker, to give a good or ill
signification to his words.

Grave ACCENT [with Gram.] is this
mark (`) over a vowel, to shew that
the voice is to be depress'd.

Acute ACCENT is this mark (´) over
a vowel, to shew that the voice is to be
raised.

Circumflex ACCENT is this mark (^)
over a vowel, in Greek, and points out
a kind of undulation of the voice.

The Long ACCENT [in Grammar]
shews that the voice is to stop upon the



vowel that has that mark, and is ex­
pressed thus (‾).

The Short ACCENT [in Grammar]
shews that the time of pronouncing
ought to be short, and is marked thus (‿).

To ACCENTUATE [accentuatum, 
L.] to pronounce in reading or speaking
according to the accent.

ACCENTUATION, a pronouncing
or marking a word, so as to lay a stress
of the voice upon the right vowel or
syllable.

ACCEPTABLENESS, agreeableness, 
pleasantness, &c.

ACCEPTANCE [in Law] a ta­
cit agreement:
Thus if a man and his wife, seized of
land in right of his wife, do join in
making a lease by deed, reserving rent, 
the Husband dying, the wife receives
or accepts of the rent, the lease shall
be made good by this acceptance in her, 
and shall bar her from bringing the
writ Cui in vita against the tenant.

ACCEPTATION [in Law] a ta­
cit agreement:
Thus if a man and his wife, seized of
land in right of his wife, do join in
making a lease by deed, reserving rent, 
the Husband dying, the wife receives
or accepts of the rent, the lease shall
be made good by this acceptance in her, 
and shall bar her from bringing the
writ Cui in vita against the tenant.

ACCESSION [with Physicians] the
fit, or time of being worst in any Inter­
mittent; the same as Paroxysmus.

ACCESSORY [by Statute] a person, 
who encourages, advises, or conceals
an offender, who is guilty of felony by
statute.

PER ACCIDENS [with Philosophers]
that which does not follow from the
nature of the thing, but from some ac­
cidental quality of it.  L.

ACCIDENT [accidens, L.] a contin­
gent effect, or some thing produced ca­
sually and without any fore knowledge
or destination of it in the agent that
produced it, or to whom it happens.

A thing is also frequently stiled an
Accident, in reference to its cause, or
at least as to our knowledge of it, and
by this an effect either casually produ­
ced, or which appears to have been so
to us, is commonly understood.

Common ACCIDENTS [with Logoci­
ans] is the fifth of the universal ideas, 
and are when the object is a true mode, 
which may be separated, at least by the
mind, from the thing of which it is
said to be an accident, and yet the idea
of that thing shall not be destroy'd; as
round, hard, just, prudent, &c.

Entitive ACCIDENTS [in Metaphy­
sicks] are either primary or secondary.

Primary entitive ACCIDENTS, are
such as are absolute, as Quantity and
Quality.

Respective entitive ACCIDENT [with
Logicians] is relation.

Modificative entitive ACCIDENTS 
[with Metaphysicians] are quando
(when), ubi (where), situs (situation),
habitus (habit).

Prædicable ACCIDENT [with Logici­
ans] implies a common quality, which
may be, or may not be in the subject, as
a particular colour, as redness in a Wall.

Predicamental ACCIDENT [with Lo­
gicians] is when it is in its essence or
nature to subsist in, inhere or cleave to
some substance, and cannot be alone.

ACCIDENT [with Physicians] is such
as does not flow immediately from the
first cause, but from casual interposi­
tions: Some use the expression in much
the same sense as symptom.

Absolute ACCIDENT [with Roman
Catholicks] is an accident which does,
or may possibly subsist, at least miracu­
lously, or by some supernatural power,
without a subject.

ACCIDENTS [in Heraldry] are the
principal points in an escutcheon.

ACCIDENTALNESS [of accidenta­
lis, L.] the happening by chance.

ACCLAIM, acclamation. Milton.

ACCLIVIS [in Anatomy] a muscle
called also Obliquus ascendens.

ACCLIVITY [ac­
clivitas, L.] is a
steepness reckoned
upwards on a slope,
declivity is a steepness
downwards; thus BA
is an acclivity, and
AB a declivity.

Image omitted.



ACCLIVOUS [acclivis, L.] rising up­
wards, steep up.

ACCOLLE [in Heraldry] collared,
or wearing a collar,  F.

ACCOMMODATION, the compo­
sure or putting an end to a difference,
quarrel, &c. also convenience.

ACCOMMODATION [in Philosophy]
the application of one thing by analogy
to another.

ACCOMPANIMENT, something at
tending or added as a circumstance to
another, either by the way of orna­
ment, or for the sake of symmetry, or
the like.

ACCOMPANIMENTS [in Heraldry]
are all such as are applied about the
shield, by way of ornament, as the belt,
mantlings, supporters, &c.

To ACCOMPANY [accompagner, F.]
to go or come with.

ACCOMPLISHMENT [accomplish­
ment, F.] the entire execution, achieve­
ment, or fulfillng of something proposed
or undertaken.

ACCOMPLISHMENTS, acquire­
ments in literature, art, science, good
behaviour, &c.



ACCORD [in French Musick] is the
production, mixture and relation of two
sounds, of which the one is grave, and
the other acute.

ACCRETION, growing or sticking
to,  L.

ACCRETION [with Naturalists] is
frequently apply'd to the increase of
such bodies as are without life, and it
is also called Apposition or Juxta-posi­
tion.

ACCRETION [with Civilians] a
vague or vacant
portion of ground, joined or united with
grounds held or possessed by another.

ACCREMENT [with Civilians] a 
vague or vacant
portion of ground, joined or united with
grounds held or possessed by another.

ACCROCHE [in Heraldry] is when
one thing hooks into another,  Fr.

ACCURATELY [accurate, L.] with
exactness and nicety.

ACCUSABLE [accusabilis, L.] that
may be, or deserves to be accused.

ACCUSATION [in the Civil
Law] is the in­
tending a criminal action against any
one, either in one's own name, or that
of the publick.

ACCUSATION [in the Civil
Law] is the in­
tending a criminal action against any
one, either in one's own name, or that
of the publick.

ACCUSERS [according to Cornelius
Agrippa] the 8th order of the devils, 
whose prince is called Asteroth, i. e. a
spy, and in Latin Diabolus, of διαβἀλλω, 
Gr. to deny falsely, who in the Reve­
lations is call'd the accuser of the bre­
thren, &c.

ACCUSTOMABLY [of accoutume, 
F.] customarily, according to custom.

ACEPHALI Versus [Poetry] Greek
and Latin verses, that begin with a
short syllable, and end with a long one.

ACEPHALOUS [ἀχέφαλος, Gr.] with­
out a head.

ACERB [acerbus, L.] of a compound
taste, which consists of sour, and a de­
gree of roughness, or of a taste between
four and bitter, such as most unripe
fruits have.

ACERBITUDE [acerbitudo, L.] sour­
ness, harshness in taste; between sour­
ness and bitterness.

ACERRA [among the Romans] a
kind of altar erected near the gate of a
person deceased, wherein his family 
and friends did daily offer incense, till
the time of his burial,  L.

ACERVATION, a heaping up toge­
ther,  L.

ACETABULA [Anatomy] certain
Glandules in the Chorion, one of the
skins which cover a child in the womb.

ACHE [with Farriers] a disease in
horses, causing a numbness in the joints.

ACHERNER [in Astronomy] a bright
fixed star of the first magnitude in Eri­
danus, whose Longitude is 10, 13 de­
grees, and latitude 59, 18.

ACHERON [Ἀχέρων of ᾰχος sor­
row, and ῥέω, to flow, or of α privat.
and χαιρω, Gr. to rejoice, i. e. a sorrow­
ful river] a river of Epirus, over which
the poets feigned departed souls were
ferried. The reason why the ancients
placed Hell in Epirus, seems to be, be­
cause Eyrus abounding in mines, and
it being observ'd that the labourers
pass'd over this river to go to their
work, and that few of them returned, 
gave occasion to think, the mines of
that place having destroy'd abundance
of men, that this was a river of Hell.
The waters are said to be strongly im­
pregnated with vitriol, &c. and to ap­
pear of a bluish colour, and to emit un­
wholsome vapours.

To ACHIEVE [achever, F.] to at­
chieve, to accomplish; to perform or
finish some notable act or exploit.

ACHIEVEMENT [achevement, F.] a
notable performance.

ACHILLES, a name which the school­
men give to the principal argument al­
ledged by each sect of philosophers in
their behalf.

ACHRONICAL [achronicus, L. of
α privat. and χρό­
υος, time, Gr.] out of, or without time.

ACHRONICK achronicus, L. of 
α privat. and χρό­
γος, time, Gr.] out of, or without time.

ACIDS, are kinds of salts, all whose
little particles are long, pointed and
sharp at their extremities, and make the
tongue feel a sharpness, as citrons, le­
mons, oranges, tamarinds, &c. the
most sensible effect of them is the coagu­
lation of those liquors, with which they
are mixed. The manner how these
coagulations are effected, is by the Acids
stopping the pores of the liquor, upon
which they are poured, in such sort, 
that the subtile matter cannot pass
more into it, and so they grow thick
and lose their motion.

Natural ACIDS [with Physicians] are
such as have a proper sharpness of their
own, as juice of lemons, &c.

Artificial ACIDS [with Chymists] are
such as are prepared by the fire, in chy­
mical operations.

Manifest ACIDS, such things as affect
the tongue, with a sense of sharpness
and sourness.

Dubious ACIDS, such things which
have not enough of the acid nature, to
give sensible marks to the taste; but yet
agree with the manifest acids in other
properties.

ACIDITY [with Chymists] the
acidity or keenness of 
any liquor that consists in keen parti­
cles of salts dissolved and put into a
violent motion by the means of fire.

ACIDNESS [with Chymists] the
acidity or keenness of 
any liquor that consists in keen parti­
cles of salts dissolved and put into a



violent motion by the means of fire.

ACIDULATED [of Acidula, L. spaw-­
waters] having a mixture of nitre, vi­
triol, alum, and salt.

ACINI [with Botanists] are taken for
those grains that grow thick, or small 
grains growing in bunches, after the
manner of grape-stones, of which the 
fruits of the Elder-tree, Privet, and i
other plants of the like kind are com­
posed.

ACINI [with Physicians] the seed that
is within a fruit, and thence they in
their prescriptions frequently use ova
exacinata, i. e. the Acini or seeds being
taken out,  L.

ACME [ἀχμή, of α neg. and χαμγω, 
to be weary, Gr.] the uppermost point, 
top, or pitch.

ACME [with Physicians] is used to de­
note the third degree or height of dis­
tempers, of which many have four pe­
riods. 1st, the Arche or beginning; 2d, 
Anabasis, the increase or growth; 3d, 
the Acme, when the morbifick matter is
ar the height; 4th, the Paracme or de­
clension of the disease.

ACONTIAS [ἀχόγτιας Gr.] a sort
of comet or blazing star, in form re­
sembling a javelin or dart.

ACORNED [in Heraldry] bearing a­
corns.

ACQUAINTED [of accointe, F.] in­
telligence or notice of, made known to, 
inform or having told of any matter.

ACRE, an act of parliament made in
the time of king Edward I. ordained, 
that an acre of land should contain 160
perches or poles, to be made out square, 
or 4840 yards square, or 43560 feet
square; but in divers places in this king­
dom this has been altered by custom, by
varying perches in the number of feet, 
as 18, 20, 24, and sometimes 28 feet to
the perch.

ACRIDOPHAGI [of ἀχρίοτες locusts, 
φαγειγ Gr. to eat] a people of Ethi­
opia, that fed principally on locusts, 
which they took and salted in the spring
of the year for their standing food dur­
ing the rest of it.

ACROSPIRED [with Malsters] a
term used of barley, which in malting
sprouts at the upper or blade end.

ACROTERES [ἀχροτήρια, Gr.]

ACROTERIA [with Anotomists] the
utmost Parts of a man's body; as his
fingers ends, &c.

To ACT [actum, sup. of ago, L.] to
do, operate, or perform.

ACT [actus, of ago, L. to do] is the
effective use or application of some
power or faculty, by means of which
something is effected.

ACTS, are also the deliberations and
resolutions of a publick assembly, as of a
parliament, council, convocation, &c.

ACT [in the Universities] is a thesis
or argument, publickly maintain'd by a
candidate, either to shew his proficiency, 
or as a candidate for some degree.

ACTS [in the Dramatick, &c.] are
the divisions or principal parts, the in­
tervals between, which are for giving
respite both to the actors and spectators, 
while the actors are changing their ha­
bits to represent other characters, or
for preparing themselves for other
parts, during which time the audience
is diverted, with musick, a song, 
dance, &c.
The number of acts in a well con­
certed play is generally five. Which
see.

ACT [in Physicks] an effective exer­
cise, or application of some power or
faculty.

ACT of Faith [in the inquisition in
Spain] a solemn day held by the inqui­
sitors for the punishment of such as they
declare Hereticks, and the absolution of
the innocent accused, called by them
Auto de Fe, which see.

ACT [with Metaphysicians] is that by
which a being is in real action; so Run­
ning is an act, not as it is in the power
of any one, but as it is really per­
form'd.

ACTING [with Logicians] is the fifth
of the Categories, either in itself, as dance­
ing, walking, knowing, loving, &c. or
out of itself, as beating, calling, break­
ing, warming, &c.

Preparatory ACTION [in Law] is
that which
grows from some doubt in the princi­
pal; as suppose a man sues a younger
brother for land, descended from his
father, and objection is made that he is a
bastard, the bastardy must be first try'd, 
and thence the action is call'd Prejudicial.

Prejudicial ACTION [in Law] is
that which
grows from some doubt in the princi­
pal; as suppose a man sues a younger
brother for land, descended from his
father, and objection is made that he is a
bastard, the bastardy must be first try'd, 
and thence the action is call'd Prejudicial.

ACTION upon the case [in Law] a
writ brought for an offence done with­
out force against any man; as for defa­
mation, non-performance of promise, 
or some other misdemeanor.

ACTION upon the case for words, is
brought where a person is injured or de­
famed, or for words spoken which affect
a person's life, office or trade, or to his
loss of preferment in marriage, service, 
or which cccasion any particular damage.

ACTION upon the statute [Law term]
an action brought upon the breach of a
statute, as where perjury is committed
to the prejudice of another.

ACTION [with Painters and Carvers}



the Posture of the figure, or that is ex­
pressed by the disposition of its parts, or
the passion that appears in the face of it.

ACTION [in Poetry] is an event, ei­
ther real or imaginary, which makes the
subject of a Dramatick or Epick poem.

ACTION [in an Epick Poem) is rec­
koned the second part; and this action, 
which is represented by the recital, must
be universal, imitated, feigned, and the
allegory of a moral truth.

ACTION [in Commerce, or of a Com­
pony] is a part or share in the stock of a
company; the same in France, as shares
or subscriptions in England, &c. also the
obligation, instrument or bill, which the
directors of such companies deliver to
those who pay money into their stock.

ACTION [with Orators] is the ora­
tor's accommodating his person to his
subject; or the management of his
voice and gesture, suitable to the matter
he delivers.

ACTION [with Orators] some give
directions;
1. To hold out the hand, when you
speak of begging; up, when you speak
of praying.
2. To beat down the hand, when an­
ger is spoken of or display'd.
3. To clap the hands together, in
speaking of any thing wonderful.
4. To open one or both hands, when
you would make any thing plain.
5. To draw the arms back close to
the sides, when any thing is requested.
6. To put forth the fore-finger, in
demonstrating.
7. To turn down the first finger, in
urging.
8. To put up the same, for threatening.
9. To put out the middle finger, for
reproaching.
10. To touch the left thumb with the
index of the right hand, in reasoning
and disputing.
11. To touch a finger with the other
hand, in distinguishing and numbering.
12. To bring the hand towards one, in
speaking of himself.
13. To move the hand towards the
head, in speaking of understanding; to­
wards the breast, when speaking of the
will, soul or affection.
14. To fold the arms, when sadness is
imitated.

ACTION [in Metaphysicks] is an acci­
dent, by which a thing is said to act.

ACTION Immanent [in MetaPhysicks]
is an action that does not pass from the
agent to another subject, as understand­
ing, thinking, &c.

ACTION Transient [in Metaphysicks]
is that which passes from one subject to
another, as striking.

Necessary moral ACTIONS [in Ethicks]
are when the person, to whom the law
or command is given, is bound absolute­
ly to perform it by virtue of the law of
the superior.

ACTIONS morally good [in Ethicks]
are such as are agreeable to the law.

ACTIONS morally evil [in Ethicks]
are such as are disagreeable to the law.

ACTIONARY the proprietor of an 
action or actions, or
shares of a company's stock.

ACTIONIST action or actions, or
shares of a company's stock.

ACTIVENESS [activitas, L.] nimble­
ness, readiness, or propensity to act.

Sphere of ACTIVITY of a Body, is
that space which surrounds it, so far as
the virtue or efficacy of it extends and
produces any sensible effect.

ACTUAL Fire [with Surgeons] that
which burns at first touch, as fire itself, 
or searing irons.

To ACUATE [acuatum L.] to sharpen.

ACUTE accent, see accent.

ACUTE angle [in Geome­
try] any angle less than a
right angle; or containing
less than 90 degrees.

Image omitted.

 

ACUTE angled triangle [in 
Trigonometry] a triangle which
has all its angles acute, as;

Image omitted.



ACYROLOGIA [Ἀχυρο­
λογία, Gr.] an improper way
of speaking; a bull.

AD, at the beginning of English proper
names, signifies the same with ad or apud
with the Latins, and so Adston signifies at
some stone, Adhill near or at some hill.

ADAD [דדא, Syr. i. e. the one] a
deity of the Assyrians, the sun, they rec­
koned the earth to be his wife, which
they call'd the goddess Adargytes.

ADAMITES, a sect of Hereticks, who
sprung from the Carpocratians and Gno­
sticks, and held the opinions of an infa­
mous heretick named Prodicus. They
pretended that since their redemption by
the death of Christ, they were as innocent
as Adam before his fall, and therefore
pretended to imitate him, by both sexes
meeting together in their assemblies na­
ked, asserting that if Adam had not sinned
there would not have been any marriages.
They rejected prayer, and are said to
have deified the four elements of water, 
air, earth, and fire.
This heretical sect was renew'd at
Antwerp in the 13th century, with the
addition of many blasphemies, by one
Tandene, who being follow'd by 300O
soldiers, ravished women and maids, 
giving spiritual names to their lewdness.



One Pikard a Flandrian did in the 15th
century renew this abominable sect in
Bohemia, from whence it spread itself
into Poland.
They are reported to have assembled
in the night, and used these words, 
Swear, Forswear and discover not the Se­
cret. See Bayle.

ADAR [דדא, i. e. mighty, Heb.] is
the 12th month of the Jewish Ecclesi­
astical year, answering to our February, 
and sometimes also part of March, con­
taining usually 29 days.
But the Jews customarily reckoning
by the Lunar year, which is shorter by
11 days than the Solar, which at the end
of every three years makes a month
they then add an intercalary month, 
making that year consist of 13 months, 
and call it Veadar, or a second Adar, 
which consists of 29 days.
The finishing the building of the tem­
ple is commemorated on the third day
of this month, which was very solemnly
dedicated at the instance of the prophets
Haggai and Zacharia.
On the 7th of this month the Jews
keep a fast, on account of the death of
Moses. On the 13th they keep a fast
which they call Esther's in comme­
moration of that observ'd by her, Morde­
cai and the Jews at Susan; and on the
15th they celebrate a festival call'd Pu­
rim, on account of their deliverance from
Haman's conspiracy . They likewise ob­
serve the 25 of this month in Memory of
Jehoiakim king of Judah's being advanc'd
above the other kings who were at his
court by Evil Merodack, king of Babylon.

ADDER's grass, an herb.

ADDER's Wort, an herb.

ADDITIONS of Estate or Quality [in
a Law Sense] are yeoman, gentleman, 
esquire, &c.

ADDITIONS [of Degree] the same as
names of dignity, as duke, earl, &c.

ADDITIONS [of Place] as such a per­
son of London, Bristol, &c.

ADDLED [of aðel, Sax. a disease, or
of aðlian, Sax. to be sick] empty or rot­
ten, commonly said of eggs, q. d. a sick
egg.

ADDLE, the dry lees of wine.

ADDLE-headed, empty-scull'd, silly, 
stupid.

ADDUCENT [adducens, L.] drawing
or leading to.

ADDUCENT Muscles, see Adductores.

ADEONA [among the Romans] a god­
dess to whom they ascribed the care and
tutelage of young children; whose
charge was, that when the child could go
well, it should go to the mother and
make much of her. Mammea the mother
of the emperor Antoninus built her a
sumptuous temple at Rome.

ADEPHAGIA  [Ἀδεφχγία, Gr.] an eat­
ing to the fill, greediness.

ADEPS [with Anatomists] a smaller
part of the body, differing from pinguedo, 
in that it is a substance thicker, harder, 
and more earthy. It flows from the
blood through peculiar vessels into bags
or bladders, which receive it.

ADEQUATE [adæquatus, L.] some­
thing equal to or co-extended with an­
other, and filling the whole measure and
capacity of it.

To be ADEQUATE, is to be every
way equal, as to capacity, extent of
power, and all other properties; neither
falling short of it, nor exceeding it in
any part.

ADEQUATENESS [of adæquatus, L.]
equality, &c.

ADES [ἄδης of α privat. and ἰδεῖγ, Gr.
to see, because of its darkness] the god of
Hell, or Hell itself, so called of a king of
Epirus, who employed a great many
men in digging mines, where most of
them dying, he was called the god of
Hell and riches.

ADESPOTICK [adespoticus, L.] with­
out master, lord, or owner.

ADFECTED [adfectus, L.] com­
pounded.

ADHESION [in Natural Philoso­
phy] signifies the state
of two bodies, which are joined or fasten­
ed to each other, either by the mutual in­
terposition of their own parts, or the
compression of external bodies.

ADHERENCE [in Natural Philoso­
phy] signifies the state
of two bodies, which are joined or fasten­
ed to each other, either by the mutual in­
terposition of their own parts, or the
compression of external bodies.

ADIAPHORA [Ἀδιάφυρα, Gr.] things
indifferent, neither commanded nor for­
bidden, which, while they are such, per­
sons are at liberty to do, or not to do.

ADIAPHORIST [of α and διαφορέω,
Gr.] a moderate or indifferent person.

ADIAPHORISTS, a name given to
those Lutherans, who adhered to the sen­
timents of Melanchton, and afterwards
to those who subscrib'd the interim of
Charles V.

ADIAPHORY [Ἀδιαφορία, Gr.] a sort
of easiness or cool inclination, as to
the choice of one thing before another;
cool affection or behaviour towards
another person.

ADJOURNMENT in Eyre [Law Term]
an appointment of a day, when the justi­
ces in Eyre meet to sit again.

ADIPSA [Ἄδιψα, Gr.] medicines or
juleps to quench thirst.

ADJUNCT [adjunctus, L.] joined to.

ADJUNCT [in Civil Coucerns] a colle­
gue or fellow officer, associated to ano­



ther, to assist him in his office, or to
oversee him.

ADJUNCT [with Philosophers] what­
ever does not naturally and essentially
belong to a being, but is adjoined or
added to it over and above.

ADJUNCTION, a coupling or join­
ing to,  L.

ADJUTOR, a helper or assister.  L.

ADJUTORIUM [in the Medicinal
Art] a means of cure, subservient to
others of more importance.

ADJUTORY [adjutorius, L.] aiding, 
aflisting, helping.

ADJUTRIX, a she-helper,  L.

ADMINISTRATIVE [administrati­
vus, L.] pertaining to administration.

ADMINISTRATOR [in Polity] one
who has the management of publick af­
fairs, instead of a sovereign prince.

ADMINISTRATORSHIP [of Admi­
nistrator and Ship, a termination signi­
fying office] the office of an adminis­
trator.

ADMIRABILITY [admirabilitas, L.]
admiration.

ADMIRABLENESS, marvellousness, 
wonderfulness.

Rear ADMIRAL, the admiral of the
third squadron in a royal fleet, who
carries his flag with the arms of his
country in the mizzen top of his ship.

Vice ADMIRAL, another of the three
principal officers of a royal navy, that
commands the second squadron, and car­
ries his flag in his ship's fore-top.

ADMIRALTY Court, the chief court
at London of the lord high-admiral, 
erected for deciding maritime contro­
versies, trial of malefactors for crimes
committed on the high-sea, &c.

ADMIRALTY Court, a tribunal in
which causes relating to maritime af­
fairs are try'd.

All the processes and proceedings in
this court run in the name of the lord
high-admiral, and not that of the king.

The lord high-admiral has in the
court a deputy, who is stiled Judge of the
Admiralty, who is usually some eminent
doctor of the civil law: The proceed­
ings in matters relating to property in
this court, are determined by the civil
law, the sea being accounted out of the
verge or limits of the common law.

The proceedings to action are by way
of libel, and the plaintiff gives security
that he will prosecute the suit, and pay
whatever shall be awarded against him, 
if he fails; and on the contrary, the de­
fendant secures the plaintiff at the dis­
cretion of the judge, that he will make
his appearance in the court, stand to
every thing his proctor shall do in his
name, and satisfy any judgment that
shall be given against him.

They make use also of the laws of
Rhodes and Oleron in this court. And
the former decrees and customs of the
English court of admiralty have the
force of precedents for deciding contro­
versies.

In criminal causes, such as piracies, 
the proceedings were anciently by ac­
cusation and information; but this be­
ing found inconvenient, two statutes
were made in the reign of king Henry
VIII, that such should be try'd by wit­
nesses, and a jury, authoriz'd by special
commission of the king to the lord ad­
miral of England, at which some of the
judges in Westminster-hall are also in
commission.

There are distinct boundaries and
precincts of power to the common laws
of England, and the admiralty; for in
the sea, as far as low water mark rea­
ches, the place is reckoned to be in, and
the causes in the national county. And
such cases as happen to be thence ari­
sing, are determinable by the common
laws; but when the sea is full, the ad­
miral has jurisdiction there also, as long 
as the tide lasts, over matters done be­
tween the low water mark, and land.

ADMIRATIVE, of or pertaining to
admiration.

ADMIXTURE [of admixtus, L.] a
mixture or mixing with or to.

ADNASCENTIA [With Anatomists}
branches that sprout out of the main
stock, as the veins and arteries.

ADNASCENTIA [with Botanists]
those excrescencies, which grow under
the earth, as in the Lily, Narcissus, Hy­
acinth, &c. which afterwards become
true roots.

ADONIA, festivals celebrated in ho­
nour of Adonis; wherein the women
imitated the lamentation of Venus, for
the death of Adonis, and when they
were tired with this, they changed their
notes, sung his praises, and made re­
joycings, as if he were raised to life 
again.

These festivals were held at Athens, 
and likewise at Alexandria, where his
image used to be carried about the city
in great state; but the greatest solem­
nity was in Syria, where were mighty
lamentations for one day for the loss of
him, and as much rejoicing the next, 
when it was pretended that letters came
that he was alive and taken up into
heaven.



ADONICK Verse [so called on account
of its being a kind of Verse first compo­
sed for bewailing of Adonis] this sort of
verse consists only of a Dactyl and Spon­
dee; and is rarely used, but at the end of
every strophe or strain in Sapphicks; as
Terruis Urbem, Hor.

ADONIS was a beautiful young shep­
herd, the son of Cynaras king of Cypress, 
and his daughter Myrrha, who used to
be much upon the mountain Libannus, 
whither Venus is said often to descend to
meet him; Mars envying him, being his
rival, and therefore turning himself in­
to a wild boar, one day as Adonis was
hunting, struck him into the groin with
his tusk, and kill'd him. Venus hearing
his dying voice, hastened to his assistance, 
and by the way pricked her foot with a
thorn; and the blood falling upon a rose, 
turned it from a lily colour to a carna­
tion: the goddess laid his body in soft
lettuce, and bewail'd his death after an
unusual manner, and chang'd his blood
which was shed on the ground, into the
flower called the Anemone. Venus after
this went herself into Hell, where she
obtain'd of Praserpine, that Adonis might
be with her six months in the year and
other six in the infernal regions.

By Adonis, mythologists mean the sun, 
who during the summer-signs is with
Venus, that is, with the earth we inha­
bit; but during the other six is in a
manner absent from us; or else they by
Adonis understand corn, which is hid six
months under ground, before the com­
ing of the time of harvest. And by the
Boar that killed Adonis, they understand
the winter, when his beams are of no
force to expel the cold, which is the
enemy of Adonis and Venus, i. e. of beau­
ty and procreation.

ADOPTIVI an ancient sect so
called, on account
of the manner wherein they conceived
our Saviour to be the son of God.

ADOPTIANI an ancient sect so
called, on account
of the manner wherein they conceived
our Saviour to be the son of God.

ADORABLENESS [of adorabilis, L.]
worthiness to be adored.

ADORNMENT, adorning, orna­
ments, beautifying.

ADOSCULATION [in Botany] a join­
ing or insertion of one part of a plant
into some cavity, as it were mouth to
mouth.

ADRASTIA, otherwise called Erynnis
according to the poets, the daughter of
Jupiter and Necessity, the revenger of im­
pieties, that laid hold of all souls, not­
withstanding their various turns and sub­
terfuges, and brought them to justice and
punishment, and sunk them into the
most profound, unheard of, and eternal
darkness.

ADROITNESS [of Adroit, F.] dexte­
rousness skilfulness, neatness, handiness,
cleverness.

ADRY [a and ðriʒʒe, Sax.] thirsty.

ADVANCE Foss [Fortification] a ditch
of water round the esplanade or glacis
of a place, to prevent its being surprized
by the besiegers.

ADVANTAGEOUSNESS [of avanta­
geux, F.] profitableness.

ADVENTITIOUS [in the Civil Law]
is applied to such goods as fall to a per­
son either by mere fortune, or the libe­
rality of a stranger, or by collateral suc­
cession, in opposition to Profectitious, i.e.
such goods as descend in a direct line, 
from father to son.

ADVENTITIOUS Glandules [Anato­
my] those kernels which are sometimes
under the arm-holes, in the neck; as in
the King's-Evil, &c.

ADVENTURESOM, bold, daring, 
hazardous.

ADVENTURESOMNESS [of avantu­
reux, F.] venturesomness.

ADVISABLENESS [of avisable, F. and 
ness, Eng. termination] fitness to be ad­
vised, done, &c. expediency.

ADVISEDNESS [of aviser, F.] consi­
derateness.

ADVISEMENT, consultation.

ADULTNESS [of adultus, L.] the be­
ing grown to ripeness of years.

ADULTERANT [adulterans, L.] adul­
terating.

ADULTERATED [adulteratus, L.]
corrupted, marred, spoiled, counterfeit, 
made of a baser alloy or mixture.

ADULTERATENESS, baseness or
counterfeitness.

ADULTERINE [in Civil Law] a child
issued from an adulterous amour or com­
merce.

ADULTERY [with some whimsical
Astronomers] a term used of an eclipse of
the moon, which (as they suppose) hap­
pens in an unusual and irregular manner, 
as horizontal eclipses, where, though the
sun and moon are diametrically opposite, 
yet by reason of the refraction, they ap­
pear as if above the horizon.

ADULTERY, is the act of incontinency
or whoredom in married persons; but if
one be married, and the other unmarried, 
it is fornication in the unmarried, and
adultery in the married.

This crime was punished by the law
of Moses with death, both of the man and
the woman who were found guilty of
adultery.

The antient Romans had no stated
law against Adultery, and Augustus the
emperor was the first who introduced a



law to punish it, and had the mortification
to see it executed in the person of his
own children.

By the laws of Lycurgus, an adulterer
was punished as a Parricide; in England, 
in the time of king Edmund, adultery was
punished as homicide; by the laws in the
time of Canutus the Dane, the punishment
of the man was banishment, and the wo­
man was to have her ears and nose cut
off.

In most of the countries of Europe, at
this day, it is accounted a private matter, 
and none is allowed to prosecute a wo­
man offending in this case, but the hus­
band; and the punishment with us is
usually divorcement and stripping her of
her dower.

And tho' the husband be guilty of the
same crime as well as the wife, she can­
not prosecute the husband for his fault.

Socrates tells us, that under the emperor
Theodosius women convicted of adultery
were punished with a publick constu­
pration.

In Spain, adultery was punished by
cutting off the offending part.

In Poland, before christianity was esta­
blished, the adulterer was punished by
nailing him by the testicles in the pub­
lick market place, with a razor lying
within his reach, leaving him under a
necessity of either perishing in that con­
dition, or doing justice on himself.

The antient Saxons burnt the adulte­
ress, and over her ashes erected a gibbet, 
whereon they hanged the adulterer.

The Locrians tore out the eyes of the
adulterer; and adultery was severely pu­
nished in most of the eastern nations.
See Jealousy or Bitter Waters.

ADUMBRANT [adumbrans, L.] sha­
dowing.

ADUMBRATION [in Heraldry] is
when any figure in a coat-armour is born
so shadowed or obscured, that nothing
is visible but the bear purfile, or (as the
painters call it) the out-line; when this
happens, it is said to be adumbrated.

Lord ADVOCATE [in Scotland] an
officer of state, appointed by the king, to
advise about the making and executing
Law, to defend his right and interest in
all publick assemblies, to prosecute capi­
tal crimes, &c.

Colledge of ADVOCATES [in Scot­
land] a college consisting of 180, appoint­
ed to plead in all actions before the lords
of sessions.

Faculty of ADVOCATES [in Scot­
land] a college consisting of 180, appoint­
ed to plead in all actions before the lords
of sessions.

ADVOCATESHIP [of avocat, F. ad­
vocatus, L. and ship] the office of an ad­
vocate.

To ADVOW [in a Law Sense]
thus he is said to
avow, who having taken a distress for
rent, &c. justifies or maintains the act, 
after the party distrained has sued a re­
plevin to have his goods again.

To AVOW [in a Law Sense]
thus he is said to
avow, who having taken a distress for
rent, &c. justifies or maintains the act, 
after the party distrained has sued a re­
plevin to have his goods again.

ADUST [in a Medicinal Sense] the
blood, when by reason of its excessive
heat, the thinner parts of it steam thro'
in vapours, the thicker remaining black, 
and full of dregs, as if parch'd or burnt;
when so, it is said to be adust.

ÆACEA, solemn feasts and combats ce­
lebrated in Ægina, in honour of Æacus.

AEACUS [of Ἀιαχίζω, to beat, or ἀιάζω, 
to lament] according to the poets, was
the son of Jupiter and Europa, or Egina.
The Painims supposed him to be of such
justice, that he was appointed by Pluto
to be one of the judges of Hell, with Mi­
nos and Rhadamanthus, to discuss the
trangressions of dead men, and to assign
to them punishments according to their
merits.

It was said to be decreed Jove, that
Æacus should judge the Europeans, Rha­
damanthus the Asiaticks, and that the
office of Minos should be, when any thing
was difficult, to take the matter into his
cognizance and give the decisive sentence:
And therefore Æacus and Rhadamanthus
had only plain rods: But Minos sat above
them on a throne by himself, and held a
golden sceptre.

When the dead were entred Pluto's
palace, they were brought before these
three severe and just judges, who exa­
mining into the actions of their lives, 
might allot them rewards and punish­
ments according to their demerits.

The place of judicature is represented
to be a large meadow, called the Field of
Truth, out of which were two passages, 
one leading to the Elysian Fields, and
the other to Tartarus.

ÆGLE, one of the daughters of Hes­
perus, who were called Hesperides, who, 
according to the poets, had gardens, cal­
led from them the Hesperian gardens, in
which grew golden apples, that were
guarded by a watchful dragon.

ÆL in compound names, is a Sax­
on particle, and signifies all, or
altogether, as πᾶν does in Greek. Ælpin, 
signifies altogether conqueror, Ælbert
all-illustrious, Aldred altogether reve­
rend, Alfred altogether peaceful.

AL in compound names, is a Sax­
on particle, and signifies all, or
altogether, as πᾶν does in Greek. Ælpin, 
signifies altogether conqueror, Ælbert
all-illustrious, Aldred altogether reve­
rend, Alfred altogether peaceful.

AEL a Saxon particle, according
to the different dialects, is pro­
nounced Ulf, Wulf, Hulf, Hilf or Helf, 
and signifies the same that we pronounce
Help; so Alwin is victorious help; Ael­



wold an auxiliary govenour; Aelfgiva, 
a giver of aid or assistance.

ÆLF a Saxon particle, according
to the different dialects, is pro­
nounced Ulf, Wulf, Hulf, Hilf or Helf, 
and signifies the same that we pronounce
Help; so Alwin is victorious help; Ael­
wold an auxiliary govenour; Aelfgiva, 
a giver of aid or assistance.

AELLO [Ἀελλὸ, Gr. a whirlwind or
storm] one of the harpies or monstrous
birds, mentioned by the poets.  L.

ÆNIGMATICAL [Ἀινιγματιχὲς, Gr.]
pertaining to riddles, &c.

ÆOLUS [according to the Poets] was
the son of Jupiter and Acesta, who be­
ing god of the winds, had his residence
in one of the islands near Sicily, called
Strongyle, where he is feigned to have
kept the winds close prisoners in a cave, 
giving them liberty when he thought
convenient.

The moral of this is, Æolus was once
lord of the seven islands on the west part
of Sicily, and being wellskill'd in divin­
ing from what coasts the winds would
blow, which he conjectured from smoak
ascending from the Æolian islands, and
the fiery eruptions, could foretel storms
and tempests, and what winds would rule
for such a season; for before the south
wind blew, the island Lipara would be
covered with a thick cloud; and before
the north, the isle would send forth clear
flames, with exceeding great noise and
roaring. Some said that Strongyle, others
that Lipara was the habitation and work­
house of Vulcan; and this they thought
confirmed by the stones that were thrown
out upon it by fiery eruptions. The
ancients us'd to lay down rough iron, 
and the reward for working it into swords
or other necessary utensils, and are re­
ported to find them ready made upon
the shore the next morning. This gave
the Poets a handle to make him king of
the winds.

ÆOLII SCLOPE, a wind-musket, 
which will shoot bullets with wind and
air, as forcibly as with powder.

ÆON [Ἀὶον, Gr. age] the duration of
a thing.

ÆONS, from the Ideas which are
imagined to be in God, some hereticks
personifying them, and feigning them
distinct from God, and to have been pro­
duced by him, some male and others fe­
male; of an assemblage of these they
have composed a deity, which they cal­
led Πλήρωμα Gr. i. e. fulness.

ÆQUILIBRIUM [in Mechanicks] is
when equal weights at equal distances, 
or unequal weights at unequal distances, 
mutually proportionable to the center, 
cause the arms of any ballance to hang
even, so that they do not outweigh one
another; even weight and poize.

ÆQUIPONDERANT [æquiponderans, 
L.] weighing equally; being of an equal
weight.

ÆRA is said originally to have signified
a number stamped on money, to denote
the current value of it; and if so, it may
come from Æs, brass, from which plural, 
Æra, came the feminine singular, Æra, 
and that because they put the word Æra
to each particular of an account, as we
now do Item, or else; because the Romans
anciently marked down the number of
years in tables with little brass nails; and
so in reference to the last mentioned cu­
stom, the word Æra came to signify the
same with Epocha, viz. a certain time or
date from whence to begin the new
year; or some particular way of reckon­
ing time and years.

And in this sense the word is thought
to be composed of these initial letters
A. E. R. A. for Annus erat regni Augusti, 
the Spaniards having began their Æra
from his reign. There are many Æra's
used by chronologers, the most eminent
of which are.

The Æra of the creation of the
world, which began, according to the
Julian account, on the twenty-fourth
day of the month of October, which
some place, 3951 years before the birth
of Christ; others reckon 3983, and Kep­
lar 3993.

The Christian Æra, from the birth
of Christ, begins December 25.

The Roman Æra, from the building
of the city of Rome, begins April 21, and
is 752 years before Christ's time.

The Turkish Æra or Hegira, which
they account from Mahomet's flight, 
begins the 16th of July, A. D. 622.

The Æra of the Olympiads begins
from the new moon in the summer sol­
stice 770 years before the birth of Christ.
This Æra and that of Iphitus is chiefly
used by Greek historians.

ÆRIAL Perspective, is that which
represents bodies weakened and dimi­
nished in proportion to their distance
from the eye.

ÆRIZUSA [Ἀηριζουσα, Gr.] a jasper
stone, resembling the air or sky in colour.

ÆSCULAPIUS [Ἀσχλήπιος] of α pri­
vative, and τοῖ σχιλλεσθαι because he
suffers not to die] the poets make him
the son of Apollo, by the Nymph Coronis, 
whom Apollo killed with an arrow while
she was big with child, because she had
admitted another to her bed, but pre­
serv'd the child, by cutting it out of her
womb, and afterwards it was suckled by
a goat.

Others say, that Æsculapius poor
infant, whom his cruel parents being
ashamed to own, laid in a wood near Epi­
daurus, and was fortunately found by



some huntsmen who observing a lambent
flame about its head, they accounted it
a prognostick that the child would prove
in time an eminent person, put him to
nurse to a woman named Trigo. Being
grown up, he studied Physick under Chi­
ron the Centaur, and proved so great a
proficient in the art, that he obtained
the stile of the god of physick.

He had a temple built to him in a city
of the Remans named Tetrapolis, which
was enrich'd with noble presents, offered
by persons, who ascribed their recovery
out of dangerous sicknefles to Æsculapius
And the walls of this temple were hung
and in a manner hid with memorials of
miracles done by him.

The Grecians celebrated plays to him
every five years, nine days after the 1sth-­
mean games, in the woods near the city
Epidauris. Æsculapius was worshipped
under the form of a serpent by the Ro­
mans, who, when the city of Rome was
grievously afflicted with the plague, sent
ambassadors to Epidauris to fetch the
god Æsculapius to their assistance, and
they say, the serpent that was worshipped
there for Æsculapius, followed the am­
bassadors of its own accord to the ship
that carried it to Rome. The Romans
built a temple for it in isle of Tiberina.
Sick people us'd to lye in this temple for
recovery of their health, and oftentimes
when they found themselves no better
reviled Æsculapius.

To Æsculapius were dedicated the
serpent, the goat, the raven, the dog, 
and the dragon.

The ancients painted him in the form
of an old man, with along beard, having
on his head a crown made of the branch
of a bay-tree, and in his hand a staff
full of knots, about which a serpent
twisted itself, and at his feet was either
a dog or an owl.

These things were design'd as hiero­
glyphicks of the qualities of a good phy­
sician, intimating that he ought to be as
cunning as a serpent, as vigilant as a
dog, as experienced as a person of great
age, to be capable of managing a con­
cern so difficult as physick is.

It is reported that Dionysius the Sicilian
tyrant, coming into a temple, where the
statues of Apollo and Æsculapius were
standing together, Æsculapius having a
grave beard of massy gold, he took away
the beard, colouring his sacrilege by
putting a jest upon Æsculapius, saying, 
it was not just that he should have a
beard, when Apollo his father had none.

ÆSTIVAL, belonging to summer-time.

ÆSTIVATION, a dwelling or resi­
dence in a place for the summer-time.

ÆTAS, age; hence anno ætatis suæ, 
under the effigies of persons, signifies in
the year of their age.  L.

ÆTHEL [Æð, Sax.] noble or fa­
mous as Æthelred, famous counsel, &e.

ÆTHER [Ἀιθήρ, of ἄει θέω, I run al­
ways, or of αὶθειν, shining bright, or of
ἀει θέρωνalways warming, Gr. or of
דרא, Heb. illustrious] is most commonly
used to signify a very fine, thin, diapha­
nous fluid, which, as some suppose, sur­
rounds the earth, up to as far as the in­
terstellary world, and which easily pene­
trates and runs through all things, and per­
mits all things to run as easily through it.

Dr. Hook calls that medium or fluid
body, in which all other bodies do, as it
were, swim and move, Æther. But this
some disapprove of, as favouring too
much the Cartesian Doctrine of an absolute
Plenum, which has been proved an im­
possibility, by many infallible reasons and
experiments. Therefore as we call
the Medium, in which we breathe and
live, the Air, by which we mean an
elastic, fluid body, which either has very
large interstices devoid of all matter, or
else is in part fill'd with a fluid, very
easily moving out of them by compres­
sion, and returning as readily into them
again, when that compression is taken
off; so we also do agree to call that
finer fluid Æther (if it be a body) which
is extended round our air and atmos­
phere, above it and beyond it, up to the
planets, or to an indefinite distance, 
tho' we scarce well understand what we
mean by the word Æther.

ÆTHEREAL World, all that space
above the upper element, viz. Fire, 
which the ancients imagined to be per­
fectly homogeneous, incorruptible, un­
changeable, &c.

ÆTHEREAL Oil [Chymistry] a fine
subtil oil, approaching nearly to the na­
ture of a spirit.

ÆVITERNI [among the Romans] cer­
tain deities, so called, because they re­
mained to perpetuity, to whom they
always offered red oxen in sacrifice.

AFFABLENESS [affabititas; L.] easi­
ness to be spoken to, or of address, gen­
tleness, courteous or kind behaviour.

AFFECTION [with Naturalists] a
quality or property of some natural being.

AFFECTION [in a Legal Sense] sig­
nifies a making over, pawning or mort­
gaging a thing, to assure the payment
of a sum of money, or the discharge of
some other duty or service.

AFFECTIONATENESS, fulness of
affection.



AFFECTIONS [with Humanists] are
distinguished into

Primary AFFECTIONS of Being [in
Metaphysicks] are Unity, Truth and Good­
ness.

United AFFECTIONS of Being [in
Metaphysicks] are such as are predicated
of Being, singly and solely, and are con­
vertible with it, without any conjunction;
as every Being is good, and all good is a
Being.

Disunited AFFECTIONS of Being [in
Metaphysicks] are predicated of it with
a disjunctive term, and by taking in both
parts of the sentence are convertible
with it, as Being is either necessary or
contingent, and whatsoever is either ne­
cessary or contingent is a Being.

AFFECTIONS of Body [with Natu­
ralists.] certain modifications of a body, 
occasioned or introduced by motion, by
means of which the body comes to be
so and so disposed.

AFFECTIONS of the Mind, are what
are commonly called passions.

AFFIANCE [with Divines] signifies
an acquiescence of the mind, by which
it is supported against all unnecessary
doubts and fears, upon account of the
divine all-sufficiency in general; but
with a more special eye to knowledge, 
wisdom and providence.

AFFIDATION, a mutual fidelity be­
tween one person and another,  L.

AFFIDAVIT [i.e. he has plighted
his faith or sworn] a deposition, or the
witnessing a thing upon oath.

To make AFFIDAVIT [Law Term]
to swear to the truth of a thing before
a magistrate.

AFFIRMATION [in respect to the
people called Quakers] signifies a solemn
declaration in a judicial way, which by
of parliament is indulged them in­
stead of taking an oath, as other persons
do, and is in all matters of meum and
tuum or right, obligatory and valid, but
in criminal causes of no force.

AFFIRMATIVE Heretick [in the
Popish Law] one who owns the errors
he is charged withal, and maintains the
same in his examination with firmness
and resolution.

AFFIXION, a filing or fastening to.

AFFLATION, a blowing or breath­
in upon.  L.

AFFLATUS, a blast or inspiration, 
a blowing or breathing upon.  L.

AFFLICTEDNESS [of afflictus, L.
and ness] affliction.

AFFLUENCY [affluentia, L.] abun­
dance, great store, plenty, wealth.

AFFLUENT [affluens, L.] abounding
flowing to, increasing.

AFFLUENTNESS [afflueutia, L.]
great plenty.

AFFRAY [probably of affrayer, F.]
a fight between two or more parties.

AFFRAY [in Common Law] 
is an affrightment
put upon one or more persons; which
may be done by an open shew of vio­
lence only, without either a blow given, 
or a word spoken; as if a man should
appear in armour, or with weapons not
usually worn, it may strike a fear into
such as are unarmed, and therefore is a
common wrong, and is enquirable in a
Court-Leet; but differs from an assault, 
because that is a particular injury.

AFFRAIMENT [in Common Law] 
is an affrightment
put upon one or more persons; which
may be done by an open shew of vio­
lence only, without either a blow given, 
or a word spoken; as if a man should
appear in armour, or with weapons not
usually worn, it may strike a fear into
such as are unarmed, and therefore is a
common wrong, and is enquirable in a
Court-Leet; but differs from an assault, 
because that is a particular injury.

AFFREIGHTMENT [of fretement, 
hiring or fraighting, F.] the same as
affretamentum.

AFRESH [of frais, F.] freshly, anew, 
newly, over again.

AFFRONITRE [affronitum, L. of
Ἁφὸς froth, and γίτρογ, Gr. nitre] the
spume or froth of nitre.

An AFFRONT, an injury done ei­
ther by words, bad usage, or blows,  F.

AFFRONTE [in Heraldry] facing, or
fronting one another.

AFFRONTIVENESS, abusiveness, 
offensiveness.

AFFULSION, a shining upon.

AFTER Birth a skin or mem­
brane in which the
Fœtus or child is wrapped in the Ma­
trix, and comes away after the birth of
the child.

AFTER Burden a skin or mem­
brane in which the
Fœtus or child is wrapped in the Ma­
trix, and comes away after the birth of
the child.

AFTER Pains, pains felt in the loins, 
groin, &c. after the birth is brought
away.

AGALAXY [agalaxia, L. of Ἀγαλαχ­
τεία, Gr.] want of milk to give suck
with.

AGAMIST [agamus, L. of ᾶγαμος
Gr.] an unmarried person; a batchelor
or widower.

AGAPÆ [Ἀγαπαι, Gr.] feasts of cha­
rity in use in the first age of christianity, 
celebrated in memory of Christ's last
supper with his apostles, at the time
when he instituted the Eucharist.

These feasts were celebrated usually
in the evening after divine service, the
Christians of the same congregation eat­
ing together in great simplicity and uni­
on, what every one had brought with
them; there being no distinction be­
tween the rich and the poor; and after
having eaten a frugal and moderate sup­
per, they communicated of the bread and
wine, and gave each other the kiss of
peace.



But this custom good and laudable as
it was in its original, began soon to be
abus'd, as the apostle Paul complains in
i. Cor. XI. 21.

AGAPE [Ἀγαπή, Gr.] charity, kind­
ness, love; alms-giving.

AGAPET [of Ἀγάπη, Gr. and peto, 
L. to haunt after] a whore-master; one
who haunts after women.

AGE [probably of apa, Sax. i. e. al­
ways] the whole continuance of a man's
life; also the space of an hundred years
compleat; also a certain state or por­
tion of the life of man, which is divided
into four different ages, as Infancy, 
Youth, Manhood, Old Age,  F.

Infancy or Childhood, extends from
the birth to the fourteenth year.

Youth, or the age of puberty commen­
ces at fourteen, and ends at about twen­
ty-five.

Manhood, terminates at fifty.

Old Age, commences from fifty, and
extends till the time of death.

Old AGE [Hieroglyphically] was re­
presented by a raven, because that bird
lives a great while, and therefore to re­
present a man dead in a very old age, 
the Egyptians painted a dead raven.

AGES [of the World] are certain pe­
riods or limits of time, which for the
convenience of chronology and history
are distinguished, by those accidents and
revolutions that have happened in the
world; the generality of chronologers
agree in making seven ages or periods.

I. From the creation of the world to
Noah's flood, which contains 1656
years.

II. From Noah's flood to the birth of
Abraham, which contains 382 years.

III. From Abraham's birth to the de­
parture of Moses and the children of
Israel out of Egypt, which contains 550
years.

IV. From the Israelites going out of
Egypt to tne building of Solomon's tem­
ple, which contains 479 years.

V. From the laying the foundation of
the temple to the reign of Cyrus in Ba­
bylon, which contains 493 years.

VI. From the reign of Cyrus to the
coming of Christ, which contains 538.

VII. From the birth of Christ to the
present year 1736, the whole from the
creation of the world, to this year 1736
makes 5789 years.

The chronologers do pretty general­
ly agree, as to the dividing the time
from the creation into seven periods or
ages, yet they differ as to the time con­
tained in these periods: So that Cheve­
reau in his history of the world reckons
more than thirty different opinions.

Again, the poets distinguish the age
of the world into four periods; the
Golden, the Silver, the Brazen and the
Iron age; the Golden Age was in the
reign of Saturn; the Silver, that of the
beginning of Jupiter; the Brazen Age, 
was when men began to depart from
their primitive simplicity and honesty, 
and to fall to injustice and rapine; and
the Iron Age, when they grew not only
covetous and unjust, but added cruelty, 
savageness, and barbarities to their vi­
ces.

It is not improbable, but that this no­
tion of the four ages was taken from the
history of the golden image, seen by Ne­
buchadnezzar in a dream, mentioned in
Daniel, by which the first monarchy was
denoted the golden one, the secend sil­
ver, the third brazen, and the fourth
iron, and that the Greeks, who of a long
time had commerce with the Egyptians, 
had it from them.

AGENCY [agence, F.] acting, ma­
nagement.

AGENHINE [or third Night, apnhine, 
Sax.] a person that comes to an house
as a guest, and lies there the third night,
after which time he is looked upon as
one of the family; and if he breaks the
king's peace, his host was to be answer­
able for him. See Hogenhine.

AGENT, a factor or person who does
business for another.

AGENT [in Polity] a resident or un­
der embassador that takes care of the
affairs of his king or prince in a foreign
court.

AGENT [with Philosophers] is that
by which any thing is effected.

AGENT [in Theology] it is strenuous­
ly disputed among divines whether
man is an agent or patient, i. e. whe­
ther it is purely in his power to do or
refuse any particular act, and thereby
render himself accountable or not at the
day of judgment, for what he has acted
or done in this life.

AGENT [in Physicks] that by which
a thing is done or effected, or which
has a power by which it acts on ano­
ther; or induces some change in ano­
ther by its action.

Natural AGENTS [with Scholas­
ticks] are such as are im­
mediately determined by the author of
nature to produce certain effects; but
not the contrary thereto, as fire which
only heats, but does not cool.

Physical AGENTS [with Scholas­
ticks] are such as are im­
mediately determined by the author of
nature to produce certain effects; but
not the contrary thereto, as fire which
only heats, but does not cool.

Free AGENTS [with Scholas­
ticks] are such as may
eoually do any thing, or the contrary
or opposite of it; as acting not from any 
predetermination but from choice, such
the mind is supposed to be, which may
either will or nill the same thing.

Voluntary AGENTS [with Scholas­
ticks] are such as may
eoually do any thing, or the contrary



or opposite of it; as acting not from any 
predetermination but from choice, such
the mind is supposed to be, which may
either will or nill the same thing.

Univocal AGENTS [with Naturalists]
are such agents as produce effects of the
same kind and denomination with them.

Equivocal AGENTS [with Naturalists]
are such agents whose effects are of a
different kind from themselves.

AGGLOMERATION, a winding in­
to a bottom.  L.

AGGLUTINANTS [in Medicine]
strengthening remedies, whose office and
effect is to adhere to the solid parts of
the body, and by that to recruit and
supply the place of what is worn off and
waited by the animal actions.

AGGLUTINATION, a glueing to­
gether.  L.

AGGRANDIZEMENT [aggrandisse­
ment, F.] a making great; but more es­
pecially in worldly condition or estate, 
a making honourable.

AGGREGATE [aggregatum, L.] the
whole mass arising from the joining or
collecting several things together.

AGGREGATED Flower [with Bo­
tanists] a flower which consists of many
little flowers, meeting together, to make
one whole one, each of which has its
Stylus, Stamina, and sticking seed, and
contained in one and the same Calix.

AGGREGATION [in Physicks] a spe­
cies of union, by which several things
which have no natural dependence or
connection one with another, are col­
lected together so as in some sense to
constitute one.

AGGRIEVANCE [probably of ad
and grief, Fr.] affliction, great trouble, 
wrong, injury.

AGILENESS [agilitas, L.] nimble­
ness, activity.

AGIO [in Holland] a term used in
merchandise, which signifies the diffe­
rence in Holland or Venice of the value
of current money and bank notes, which
in Holland is often three or four per
Cent, in favour of the note.

AGITATION [of beasts in the forest]
anciently signified the drift of beasts into
the forest.

AGITATORS [in the time of the
civil wars in England, A. D. 1647, per­
sons chosen out of every regiment to
sit in council, and manage the affairs of
the parliament army.

AGNATION [Civil law] that line of
consanguinity or kindred by blood, which
is between such males as are descended
from the same father.

AGNOMINATION, a nick-name,  L.

AGONEA, sacrifices offered for good
success in business.

AGONES Capitolini [among the Ro­
mans] festivals held to Jupiter, as pro­
tector or guardian of the capitol. At
this festival poems were sung or recited
in honour of him by the poets.

AGONIA [of α neg. and γονὴ the se­
men, Gr.] a defect of the seed.

To AGONIZE [agonizare, L. of ἀγω­
, Gr.] to strive valiantly, to play
the champion.

AGOUTY [in America] a little beast
of the shape and size of a rabbet, which
has no more than two teeth in each
jaw, and feeds like a squirrel. But is a
fierce creature, and when irritated, will
stamp with its hind feet, and erect its
hair.

AGREEABLENESS [qualité agreeable, 
F.] suitableness, pleasantness, &c.

AGREEMENT [in Common Law] a
joining together or consent of two or
more minds in any thing already done, 
or to be done hereafter.

AGRIONIA [αγριώνια, Gr.] a so­
lemnity observed in honour of Bacchus, 
which was celebrated in the night after
the manner following. The women as­
sembled together and made a strict search
for Bacchus, and after sometime of search
not finding him, said he was retired to
the muses, and had hid himself among
them. This ceremony being over, they
fell to feasting, and diverting themselves
with proposing riddles and cramp que­
stions; and ivy being looked upon as
sacred to Bacchus, great quantities of
it were used at this time.

AGROUND [a-ʒrunð, Sax.] upon
the ground; also nonplus'd, obstructed.

AGRYPNOCOMA [ἀγρυπνία, watch­
ing, and χῶμα, a deep sleep, Gr.] a
waking drowsiness, a disease wherein
the patients are continually inclined to
sleep, but scarce can sleep, being affec­
ted with a great drowsiness in the head, 
a stupidity in all the senses and faculties, 
and many times a Delirium too. It is
the same as Coma Vigil.  L.

AGUE TREE, Sassafras.

AGUILLANEUF, the name of a cer­
tain ceremony of the French Druids, 
who, when they were to go to gather
mistletoe against New-Year's Day, walked
about the fields adjoining to the forest, 
crying out, Au gui l'an neuf, i. e. to the
mistletoe the new year, to the mistletoe the
new year. Also the same name was ap­
ply'd to a sort of begging which was used
in some bishopricks for the tapers in
churches, but this custom was put down, 
Anno 1592.



AGUISHNESS [of aigu, F. sharp] the
quality of an ague, coldness, shivering­
ness.

AID a tax paid by the vassal to 
the chief lord upon some
necessary and urgent occasion, either
ascertain'd by custom or specified at the
grant of lands.
Anciently an aid was due for knight­
ing the king's eldest son, both in England
and France; also there was an aid granted
upon marrying the kings eldest daugh­
ter, both in England and Normandy &c.
but by a statute made, call'd the statute
of Westminster in the reign of Edward I.
it was ordain'd that it should not be
demanded till she was seven years eld, 
nor that aid for the kings eldest son
that it should not be levied till he was
15 years of age.

It was also customary to grant an aid
in Feudal tenures for the ransoming the
chief lord, if he should happen to be ta­
ken prisoner, and accordingly when
Richard I. was taken prisoner by the
emperor Henry IV in his travelling thro' 
Germany incognito, was levied in En­
gland an Aid of 20 shillings upon every
knights fee for his ransom.

This was sometimes extended to re­
deem the chief lords wife or eldest son.

There was also in ancient times an
Aid levied for building and fortifying
castles and on several other occasions.

AYDE a tax paid by the vassal to 
the chief lord upon some
necessary and urgent occasion, either
ascertain'd by custom or specified at the
grant of lands.

Anciently an aid was due for knight­
ing the king's eldest son, both in England
and France; also there was an aid granted
upon marrying the kings eldest daugh­
ter, both in England and Normandy &c.
but by a statute made, call'd the statute
of Westminster in the reign of Edward I.
it was ordain'd that it should not be
demanded till she was seven years eld, 
nor that aid for the kings eldest son
that it should not be levied till he was
15 years of age.

It was also customary to grant an aid
in Feudal tenures for the ransoming the
chief lord, if he should happen to be ta­
ken prisoner, and accordingly when
Richard I. was taken prisoner by the
emperor Henry IV in his travelling thro' 
Germany incognito, was levied in En­
gland an Aid of 20 shillings upon every
knights fee for his ransom.

This was sometimes extended to re­
deem the chief lords wife or eldest son.

There was also in ancient times an
Aid levied for building and fortifying
castles and on several other occasions.

AID PRIER [i. e. Aid Prayer] a word
mads use of in pleading for a petition
in court, to call in help from another
person who hath an interest in the thing
contested.

AID of the king [Law term] is where
the king's tenant prays aid of the king
on account of rent demanded of him by
others.

AIDS [in Horsemanship] are the assist­
ances and helps that the horseman gives
an horse, from the gentle and moderate
use of the bridle, the spur, the caveson, 
the poinson, the rod, the action of the
legs, the motion of the thighs, and the
sound of the tongue.

AIDS DE CAMP [of the king] cer­
tain young gentlemen, whom the king
appoints in the field to that office.

AIGLETTE [in Heraldry] an eaglet, 
Or a young eagle,  F.

AJOURE [in Heraldry] signifies some
part of an ordinary that is so taken away
that the field appears; it is a French
term, and is derived of jour a day or
light, and signifies that the part which
should be covered by the ordinary is so
far exposed to view.

AIGUISCE [in Heraldry]
as a Cross
Aiguisse, signifies a cross ha­
ving two angles at the ends, 
cut off, so as to terminate in
points; but it is not like the
Cross Fitchee, that goes tapering away
by degrees to a sharp point, for this
Cross Aiguisce has only an obtuse point
made by taking off the angles.

Image omitted.



EIGUISCE [in Heraldry]
as a Cross
Aiguisse, signifies a cross ha­
ving two angles at the ends, 
cut off, so as to terminate in
points; but it is not like the
Cross Fitchee, that goes tapering away
by degrees to a sharp point, for this
Cross Aiguisce has only an obtuse point
made by taking off the angles.

Image omitted.



AIR [aër L. of ἀὴρ, Gr. of τοῖ άεί ῥεῖν
because it is always flowing, or as others
from ἄημι to breathe, or as others say of
[ךוא Heb. light] is generally understood
to be that fluid in which we breathe, 
and the earth is enclosed, and as it were
wrapped up.

All common air is impregnated with
a certain vivifying spirit which is abso­
lutely necessary to the preservation and
continuance of animal life.

This vivifying spirit is inflammable or
of a nature proper to be aliment or fuel
to fire, and is capable of being adust or
consumed thereby; for this spirit is ac­
tually destroy'd by being caus'd to pass
through the fire and the air which has
been so burnt (as has been prov'd by
experiment) will deaden red hot coals
and extinguish flame, and destroy life.

The particles of which air consist give
way to every small impression, and
move readily and freely among one ano­
ther, and this is a proof that air is a
fluid.

And as the pressure encreases so does
its density, and as the pressure decreases
it expands itself.

AIR is found to have these six proper­
ties following.

1. It is liquid, and cannot be con­
geal'd like water.

2. It is much lighter than water, but
yet it is not without its gravity.

3. It is diaphanous, that is, it trans­
mits the light.

4. It can easily be condens'd and rari­
fied.

5. It has an elastick force.

6. It is necessary for flame and respi­
ration.

I. It is much more liquid than water
is, and cannot be congeal'd, and that
for the reasons following.

1. Because it seems to have pores much
larger, full of finer matter, of a very
quick motion, whereby the particles of
air are continually driven about, as it
appears by this experiment, that if air
be pent up in a vessel, it is easily conden­
sed; whereas no person yet, by any In­
vention, has been able to condense water.



2. The particles of air are very fine
and branched, so that they leave inter­
stices between one another, and can ne­
ver be formed into a compact body.

II. Water has been proved by expe­
riment to be 840 times heavier than air, 
from whence it will follow, that a cer­
ain bulk of air contains in it 840 times
less homogeneous matter than an equal
bulk of water does; and this is the rea­
son why air may be condensed, but not
water.

III. The Air is Diaphanous, because
having very wide pores, and separable
parts, it admits the matter whereof light
consists through right lines. And hence
it is, that not only the fun and the pla­
nets shine or reflect their light upon us, 
but also the fixt stars are seen by us at
immense Distance. But as deep water
does not transmit all the rays which fall
upon it, because the series of light is in­
terrupted by the motion of the watry
particles: so many of the rays, which
fall upon this prodigious bulk of air over
us, must needs be broken off and inter­
cepted before they reach us; which pro­
bably may be the cause, that where the
sky is clear, it is not quite transparent, 
but appears of a more blue and waterish
colour.

IV. AIR is condensed and rarefied, 
because it consisting of branchy particles, 
those particles are scatter'd by an extra­
ordinary quick motion, which is call'd
Rarefaction, 

Again, they are easily thrust into a
less compass, while their branches are
driven together, and ciofe one with
another, and thereby crush out the li­
quid matter which lay between them;
and this is call'd Condensation.

There are a multitude of experiments
to prove this; as there are a sort of
guns, into which such a quantity of air
may be forc'd, as to shoot out a leaden
bullet with great violence.

V. That the air has an elastick force, 
that is, that it has a power to return to
the same state, and re-occupy the same
space which it fill'd before, whenever the
force that crusheth it into a narrower
compass is removed, the beforemention­
ed experiment does demonstrate.

VI. That AIR is necessary for flame or
respiration. Without air, flame and fire
go out, and air seems to have a nitrous
or sulphurous matter in it, that the air
which lies upon so many plants, animals
and minerals, upon which the heat of the
sun continually operates and extracts a
good part of them must needs carry a­
way with it innumerable particles of sul­
phur and volatile salts wherewith things
abound, as chymical experiments de­
monstrate.

Every time the air receiv'd into the
lungs passes out of them, the vivifying
spirit is either destroy'd or left behind;
and thence an animal will die as well
for want of fresh air as by reason of the
total want of air.

It is computed that the quantity of vi­
vifying spirit that is contain'd in a gal­
lon of common air, will suffice one man
for the space of a minute.

AIR [in chymical wri­
ters] is expressed by one 
of these characters

Image omitted.



AIR [in Horsemanship] is a cadence and
liberty of motion that is accommodated
to the natural disposition of a horse, that
makes him work in the manage, and rise
with obedience, measure and justness of
time. Others use the word air in a strict
sense, to signify a manage that's higher, 
slower and more artfully designed than
the terra a terra. The walk, trot and
gallop are not in the general accounted
airs; others again use the word air for
the motion of a horse's legs upon a gallop.

AIRINESS [of air] briskness, liveli­
ness.

High AIRS, are the motions of a horse
that rises higher than terra a terra, and
works at Curvets, Balotades, Croupades
and Capriols.

AIR [with Physicians] makes one of
the six non-naturals.

Innate AIR [with Anatomists] is sup­
posed to be a fine, aerial substance, in­
closed in the labyrinth of the inward
ear, and to minister to the due convey­
ance of the sounds in the sensory.

AIR [with Musicians] signifies the me­
lody or the inflection of a musical com­
position.

AIR PUMP, a machine or instrument
contrived to extract or draw the air out
of proper vessels. See Pump.

AIRY Meteors [with Astronomers] such
as are bred of flatulous and spirituous
exhalations or vapours; as winds, &c.

AISLE [in Heraldry] signifies winged,
or having wings.  F.

AISTHERIUM [of αἰσθάνομαι, Gr. to
perceive] the sensory of the brain.

To AKE of ace, pain or grief, or
[acian, Sax.] to be pain­
ful, to be pained.

To ACHE of ace, pain or grief, or
[acian, Sax.] to be pain­
ful, to be pained.

To have on AKING tooth at one, to
be angry at, to have a mind to rebuke
or chastise one.

ALA, the wing of a fowl.



ALA [in Anatomy] a term used for se­
veral parts of the body, which bear a 
resemblance to the figure of a wing, as
the top of an auricle, &c.

ALABASTRA [with Botanists] the 
buds or green leaves of plants which in­
close the bottom of flowers before
they are spread.

ALAMODE [à la mode, F. i. e. after
the fashion] a sort of silk for women's
hoods and scarves.

ALARM [Metaphorically] any 
manner of sudden noise, 
&c. causing fear, fright or trouble;
also a chime set in a clock or watch.

ALARUM [Metaphorically] any 
manner of sudden noise, 
&c. causing fear, fright or trouble;
also a chime set in a clock or watch.

ALASS [probably q. d. O me lassum, 
O tired me, L. or helas, F.] an inter­
jection of complaint, grief, &c.

ALATERNUS [with Botanists] the
most beautiful shrub for hedges, of a
lovely green colour and bearing sweet-­
scented blossoms.

ALBERGE [Botany] a small forward
peach of a yellow colour.

ALBIFICATION, a making white, a
whitening,  L.

ALBURN Colour, a brown. See Au­
burn.

ALBURNUM [with Botanists] is es­
teemed by some to be the fat of trees, 
that part of the trunk that is between
the bark and timber, or the most ten­
der wood, and is hardened after the
space of some years.

ALCADE a sort of judge or mi­
nister of justice among
the Spaniards, much the same as a pro­
vost.

ALCAID a sort of judge or mi­
nister of justice among
the Spaniards, much the same as a pro­
vost.

ALCAICK Verses, Latin verses that
consist of two dactyls and two trochees, 
so named of Alcæus, the first inventor.

ALCAICKS, are of three species; the
first consists of two dactyls and two tro­
chees.

Exilium impositura cymbæ.

The second consists of five feet; the
first of which is a spondee or iambick;
the second an iambick; the third a long
syllable; the fourth a dactyl; the fifth
a dactyl or amphimacer; as Horace, 
Omnes eodem cogimur, omnium
Versatur urna, serius ocyus
Sors exitura.

These two are called Alcaick Dacty­
licks; the three species has the first an
Epitrite, the second and third Choriam­
bus's, and the fourth a Bacchius, as
Cur timet flavum tiberim tangere? cur
olivam.

An ALCAICK Ode consists of four
Strophes, each of which contain four
verses, the two first are Alcaick verses
of the same kind; the third an Iambick
Dimeter Hypercatalectick, i. e. of four
feet and a long syllable; the fourth is
an Alcaick of the first kind. The Al­
caick Strophe entire is as follows.

Omnes eodem cogimur, omnium
Versatur urna, serius ocyus
Sors exitura, & nos in æternum
Exilium impositura cymbæ.

An ALCAID [in Barbury] the gover­
nour of a city.

ALCALIZATION . [with Chymists] 
the act of im­
pregnating a liquor with an alcaline
salt.

ALKALIZATION [with Chymists] 
the act of im­
pregnating a liquor with an alcaline
salt.

ALCALIOUS, of or pertaining to
Alcali.

ALCHYMY [of al an Arabick parti­
cle and χυμία or χυμη, of χίω to melt
metals] that sublimer part of chymistry
that teaches the transmutation of me­
tals, and making the Grand Elixir or
Philosophers stone, according to the cant
of Adeptists. The word signifies no
more than bare chymistry without the
addition of the Arabick particle al, 
which they will needs have to signify a
wonderful virtue here; some have de­
fin'd this study of Alchymy to be ars sine
arte, cujus principium est mentiri, medium
laborare, & finis mendicare, i. e. an art
without art, which begins with lying, 
is carried on with labour, and ends in
beggary. And thus it was found to his
sorrow by Penotus, who having spent
his whole life and fortune in this art in
vain, died in an alms-house
at Yverdon
in Switzerland, and was us'd to say, that
had he an enemy he did not dare openly
to attack, he would recommend the stu­
dy of alchymy to him.

ALCOCHODON [with Astrologers]
i. e. the giver of life or years, the pla­
net which bears rule in the principal
places of an astrological figure when a
person is born; so that his life may be
expected longer or shorter according to
the station, &c. of this planet.

ALCMANIAN Verse, a sort of verse
compos'd of three dactyls and a long syl­
lable, as
Munera, lætitiamque Dei.

ALCOLETA, the tartarous sediment
of urine.

ALCORAD [with Astrologers] a con­
trariety of light in the planets. Arab.

ALDER tree [alðor, Sax. alnus, L.]
a tree well known, delighting to grow
in watery, boggy places.

ALE COST, an herb.

ALE-DRAPER, a victualler or ale­
house keeper.



ALE-STAKE, a may-pole, because the 
country people drew much ale there; 
but not properly the common may pole; 
but rather a long stake drove into the 
ground with a sign on it that ale was 
there to be sold.

ALECTO [Ἀλήχτω, of α and λήγω to
cease, q.d. without repulse] the daugh­
ter of Acheron and Night, or Pluto and 
Proserpine, and one of the furies of hell.

ALECTORIA [Ἀλεχτωρία, Gr.] 
the cock-stone, or 
capon-stone; a stone about the bigness 
of a bean and of a crystal colour, found 
in the maw or gizzard, or rather gall-­
bladder of a cock.  L.

ALECTORIUS [Ἀλεχτωρία, Gr.] 
the cock-stone, or 
capon-stone; a stone about the bigness 
of a bean and of a crystal colour, found 
in the maw or gizzard, or rather gall-­
bladder of a cock.  L.

ALECTRYOMANCY [Alectryomantia 
L. of Ἀλεχτρυωμαντεία, of Αλέχτωρ a 
cock and μαντεία, Gr. divination] an 
ancient divination, in which they made 
use of a cock in discovering secret and 
unknown transactions of future events. 
The method was this; they first wrote 
on the dust the twenty four letters of 
the alphabet, and laid a grain of wheat 
or barley upon every one of them; then 
having prepared a cock magically, they 
let him loose among them, and those 
letters out of which he picked the corns 
being put together, were thought to 
declare whatever they had a mind to 
know.

@ALECTRYOMACHY [Ἀλεχτρυωμα­
χία, of ἀλέχτωρ a cock and μάχη a fight] 
the sport of cock fighting.

ALEMBICK [with Chymical 
Writers] is express'd by this 
character. 🝪

Image for the unicode is omitted.



ALEMBOT [with Paracelsians]
the philosophers 
salt, the key of art.

ALEMBROTH [with Paracelsians]
the philosophers 
salt, the key of art.

ALERT [of alerte, F. of ala, L. a 
wing] upon the wing, brisk, chearful, 
pert.

ALERTNESS [of ale, F. ala, L. a 
wing] pertness, liveliness.

ALEXANDRINE [with Poets] a me­
tre that consists of two syllables more 
than the common Heroick or Pentame­
ter; as, 
The same the fate of arms and arts you'll 
find, 
They rose with equal pace, with equal 
pace declin'd.

ALEXICACON [Ἀλεξιχαχυν, of ἀλέ­
ξω to expel or drive out and χαχὸν evil]
a medicine to expel any ill humours out 
of the body.

ALEXITERICUM [with Physicians] a 
preservative against poison or infection.

ALGA saccharifera [with Botanists] 
sugar bearing sea weed. By hanging in 
the air, this plant will afford repeated 
efflorescences of white sugar, as sweet 
as any prepared from sugar canes.  L.

ALGAROT [Chymistry] a preparation
of butter of antimony, wash'd in a large
quantity of warm water till it turn to
a white powder. It is otherwise called
Mercurius vitæ.

ALGEBRAICAL Curve [in Geometry] 
is a curve of such a nature, 
that the abscisses of it will 
always bear the same pro­
portion to their respective 
ordinates; thus if the pro­
duct of any Abscisse, A. P. x. 
multiplied into the same quantity, P. 
will be always equal to the square of the 
correspondent ordinate, P. M. 2. yy, 
the equation expressing the nature of the 
curve will be px=yy, and the curve 
is the common parabola.

Image omitted.



ALGIDNESS [algiditas, L.] coldness, 
chilness.

ALGOL [in Astronomy] a fixed star of
the first magnitude in the constellation
Perseus, in longitude 51 degrees 37 mi­
nutes, latitude 22 degrees 22 minutes, 
called also Medusa's head.

ALGORISM [with Mathematicians]
the practical operations in the several
parts of specious Arithmetick; also the
practice of common Arithmetick, by ten
numerical figures.

ALHANDAL [in Pharmacy] the Ara­
bian name of Colocynthis, as Trochiscæ
Alhandali, are Trochees composed of Co­
locynthis, Bdellium and Gum Tragacanth.

ALIAS, a second or further writ issu­
ed from the courts at Westminster, after
a Capias issued out without effect.

ALIENATION, a making over, or
giving the right and property of a thing
to another; also the drawing away or
estranging the affections of one person
from another.

ALIENATION Office, an office to
which all writs and covenants and entry, 
upon which fines are levied and recove­
ries suffered, are carried, to have fines
for alienation set and paid thereon.

ALIENILOQUY [alieniloquium, L.] a
talking wide from the purpose, or not
to the matter in hand.

ALIFEROUS [alifer, L.] bearing or
having wings.

ALIGEROUS [aliger, L.] bearing, 
carrying or having wings.

To ALIGHT [alihtan, Sax.] to get
off the back of an horse; also to settle
upon, as a bird.

ALIMA [of α privative, and λιμὸς, 
Gr. hunger] medicines which either
prevent or assuage hunger.  L.



ALIMENT [in a Medicinal sense] all
that which may be dissolved by the fer­
ment or natural heat of the stomach, 
and converted into the juice call'd Chile, 
to repair the continual waiting of the
parts of the body.

ALIMENTAL [alimentalis, L.] per­
taining to nourishment.

ALIMENTARINESS [of alimentarius, 
L.] nourishing quality.

ALIMENTARY Duct [Anatomy] that
part of the body through which food
passes, from its reception into the mouth
to its exit at the anus, including the
gula, stomach and intestines, Dr. Tyson;
also it is sometimes us'd for the Thora­
cick Duct.

ALIPEDE [alipes, L. of ales a bird, 
and pes a foot] nimble, swift of foot.

ALIPTERY [alipterium, L. of ἀλιϖ
τέριον, Gr.] a place belonging to, or an
apartment in baths, where persons
were anointed.

ALKALI [so called from the Arabick
particle al and Kali] an herb called o­
therwise Salt-wort or Glass-wort, which
is a kind of sea-blite, and one of the
principal ingredients in making glass, 
and affords a great quantity of this kind
of salt, and is either fixed or volatile.

ALKALI Salts, are only acids con
centrated in little molecules of earth, 
and united with certain particles of oil
by the means of fire.

Fixt ALKALIES [with Chymists] are
made by burning the plant Kali, &c.
and having made a lixivium, or lee of
the ashes, filtrating that lee, and evapo­
rating the moisture of it by a gentle
heat, so that the fixt salt may be left at
the bottom of the vessel. This fixt
salt being rendred very porous by the
fire having pass'd so often through it in
its calcination, and probably by fixing
there some of its essential salt: and be­
cause that many of the fiery particles do
also stick in those pores, when any acid
liquor is mingled with it, causes a very
great ebullition or effervescence.

Volatile ALKALIES [Chymistry] are
the volatile salts of vegetables, which
are so called because they will ferment
with acids.

ALL [al, Sax.] the whole.

ALL [in names proper or common]
seems to be derived from Ealð, Sax.
old, according to the custom of the Nor­
mans (l) being liquidated into u makes
au, as Auburn, antiently written Alð­
byrn, and Aldington, Aunron.

ALLABORATENESS, a being well
wrought.

ALLSEED, a plant so called from its
abounding with seed.

ALL-GOOD, the herb mercury, Of
Good Henry.

ALLAY, the tempering and mixture
of other metals with gold and silver.

ALLEGORICALNESS [of allegorique, 
F. allegoricus, L. of ἀλληγοριχος, Gr.j
being an allegorical.

ALLEGORY [ἀλληγοῤία, of ἄλλος ano­
ther, and ἀγορεύω I say, Gr.] a saying
one thing, and meaning another. It is
a continued metaphor, in which words
there is something couched different
from the literal sense, and the figurative
manner of speech is carried on through
the whole discourse; or it may be defi­
ned to be a series or continuation of
metaphors, as that allegory in Horace, 
Lib. I. Ode 14.

O navis referent in mare te novi fluc­
tus, &c.
Where by the ship is meant the common­
wealth; by the waves, the civil war; by
the port peace and concord; by the oars
soldiers; by the mariners, magistrates, &c.

ALLELUJAH, the herb wood-sorrel, 
or French sorrel.

ALLER [with antient Writers] a Word
used to express the superlative degree, as
aller good the greatest good.

ALLER SANS JOUR. [Law phrase]
i. e. to go without a day] signifies to
be finally dissmiss'd the court, another
day of appearance being appointed.

ALLERIONS [in Heral­
dry] are small birds painted
without beak or feet, like
the martlet or martinet. O­
thers fay, they are like ea­
gles without beak or feet, 
so called, because they have
nothing perfect but the
wings; that they differ from martlets, in
that their wings are expanded and the
martlets are close; and also that they
are not represented facing as the Alle­
rions are as in the figure.

Image omitted.



ALLEY [in a Garden] a straight pa­
rallel walk, bordered or bounded on
each hand with trees, shrubs or other
low plants, as box, &c. some distinguish
an alley from a path, in that an alley
must be wide enough for two persons to
walk abreast.

ALLEY, in a compartment, is an alley
which separates the squares of a par­
terre.

Counter ALLEY, a little alley by the
sides of a great one.

A Diagonal ALLEY, is one that cuts
a square, parterre, thicket, &c. from an­
gle to angle.

Front ALLEY, is one which runs strait
from the front of a building.



ALLEY in Perspective, is that which is
larger at the entrance than at the issue, 
in order to make the length appear
greater.

Transverse ALLEY, an alley which
cuts a front alley at right angles.

An ALLEY in Ziczac, an alley which
has too great a descent, and by reason
of that is liable to be injured by floods, 
to prevent the ill effects of which it has
usually platbands of turf running across
it from space to space, which are of ser­
vice to keep up the gravel; also an alley
in a labyrinth or wilderness is so cal­
led, which is formed by several returns
of angles, in order to render it more
solitary and obscure, and to conceal its
issue.

ALLIED [allié, F.] matched, united, 
also joined by league.

To ALLIGATE [alligatum, L.] to
bind to.

ALLIGATOR, a kind of a West Indi­
an crocodile, an amphibious creature, 
living both on land and water; they
grow as long as they live, and some are
18 feet in length, and proportionably
large, they have a musky smell, so strong
that the air is scented for an hundred
paces round them, and also the water
they lie in.

ALLIOTH [Navigation] a star in
the tail of Ursa major, of much use to
navigators in finding out the latitude, 
the height of the pole, &c.

ALLODIUM [Civil Law] a freehold, 
every man's ownland or estate that he
possesses, merely in his own right, not
yeilding any services to another, and is
opposed to Feodum.

ALLOWABLENESS [of allouër, F.]
being allowable.

ALLOY [aloy, F.] a certain quan­
tity or proportion of some
baser metal mixed with a finer or purer, 
and so the quantity of copper or silver
that is mixed with gold, to make it of
a due hardness for coining, is called the
alloy of it; and if metal have more of
this than it ought to have, it is said to
be of a greater or coarser alloy.

The quantity of alloy, for reducing
pure silver to the standard of the mint
of great Britain, is 18 penny weight of
alloy, to 11 ounces two penny weight
of silver, which makes one pound of the
current coin.

ALLAY [aloy, F.] a certain quan­
tity or proportion of some
baser metal mixed with a finer or purer, 
and so the quantity of copper or silver
that is mixed with gold, to make it of
a due hardness for coining, is called the
alloy of it; and if metal have more of
this than it ought to have, it is said to
be of a greater or coarser alloy.

The quantity of alloy, for reducing
pure silver to the standard of the mint
of great Britain, is 18 penny weight of
alloy, to 11 ounces two penny weight
of silver, which makes one pound of the
current coin.

ALLUM [alumen, L.] a mineral well
known.

Saccharine ALLLTM, a composition of
allum, rose water, and whites of eggs
boiled to the consistence of a paste.

Plumose ALLUM, a sort of saline mi­
neral stone, most commonly white, in­
clining to green, which rises in threads
and fibres, resembling a feather.

ALLUM [with Chy­
mical Writers] is ex­
pressed by one of these 
characters.

Image omitted.



ALLURINGNESS [of ad and lure]
enticingness.

ALLUSION, a speaking a thing with
reference to another; and so allusion is
made to a custom, history, &c. when
any thing is spoken or written that has
relation to it.

ALLUSION [in Rhetorick] a dalli­
ance or playing with words alike in
sound, but unlike in sense, by changing, 
adding or taking away a letter or two.

ALLUSIVENESS [of allusio, L.] the
having an allusion to.

ALLUVION [in the Civil Law] an
accession or accretion along the sea
shore' or the banks of large rivers, by
tempests or inundations.

ALLUVIOUS [alluvius, L.] over­
flowing.

ALMA [of almus, of alendo, L. nou­
rishing, &c.] nourishing, fostering, che­
rishing, as alma mater Cantabrigia, the
fostering mother Cambridge.

ALMACANTORS [with Astrono­
mers] circles of altitude parallel to the
horizon, the common pole of which is
in the Zenith. Arab.

ALMICANTERAHS the same.

ALMICANTURAHS the same.

ALMACANTOR Staff [with Mathe­
maticians] an instrument of box or
pear wood, with an arch of 15 degrees, 
for taking observations of the sun at
his rising or setting, to find the ampli­
tude, and thereby the variation of the
compass.

ALMANACK, distribution or num­
bering. Arab.

ALMODARII [Law Term] lords of
free manours, lords paramount.

ALMOIN. See Frank Almoin.

ALMONARY the office or lodg­
ings of the almoner, 
also the place where alms are given.

AUMRY the office or lodg­
ings of the almoner, 
also the place where alms are given.

ALMOND [amygdala, L.] a sort of
nut well known.

ALMOND Furnace [with Refiners] a
furnace for separating all sorts of me­
tals from cinders, pieces of melting pots, 
and other refuse things.

ALMONDS of the Throat, are the
glandulous substance, placed on each
side the Uvula at the root of the tongue, 
resembling two kernels; these receive
the Saliva or spittle from the brain, and
disperse it to the tongue, jaws, throat



and gullet, to moisten them, and make
them slippery. These being inflam'd
and swell'd by a cold, &c. straighten
the passage of the throat, and render it
painful and difficult to swallow even
the spittle. This is called a sore Throat, 
and by some the falling of the almonds of
the ears.

ALMOND Tree, a pretty tall tree re­
sembling a peach tree, one of the first
trees that bloom; its flowers are penta­
petalous, and ranged in the rose man­
ner, are very beautiful, of a purple red
colour, and make a fine shew in a gar­
den. These trees grow frequently in
Germany, France, and the neighbouring
countries, especially in the Holy Land, 
near the river Jordan, and the Jordan
Almonds are esteemed the best; the pistil
of the flower becomes a fleshy fruit, 
which contains a seed, which is the Al­
mond, and which drops out when it
comes to maturity; it is of two sorts, 
the sweet and the bitter.

ALMONER an ecclesiastical officer 
of the king, &c. whose
office is to take care of the distribution
of alms to the poor, to visit the sick, to
receive all things given in alms; also
forfeitures by misadventures, and the
goods of self-murtherers, &c.

ALMNER an ecclesiastical officer 
of the king, &c. whose
office is to take care of the distribution
of alms to the poor, to visit the sick, to
receive all things given in alms; also
forfeitures by misadventures, and the
goods of self-murtherers, &c.

ALMOST [Al-mæſt, Sax.] for the
most or greatest part.

ALMS [Ἐλεημοσύνη, Gr.] that which
is freely given to the poor.

ALMSFEOH [Almeſfeoh, Sax.]
alms money, Peter pence, anciently
paid in England to Rome, by our Saxon
ancestors on the first of August, called al­
so Romescot, Romefeoh and Heorthpenny.

ALMUCANTERS. See Almacantars.

ALMUG Tree, a sort of fine wood
growing on mount Lebanon.

ALOES [Ἀλοὴ, Gr.] the gum or juice
of a tree growing especially in Egypt.

Hepatick ALOES, is so called from be­
ing of the colour of the liver.

Succotrine ALOES, is so called from
Socotra, an island near Tanquebar in E­
thiopia.

Caballine ALOES, is so called because
used by farriers on horses; it is the
coarser sort.

ALOGII [of α neg. and λόγος, Gr. the
word] hereticks who deny'd that Jesus
Christ was the eternal word.

ALOGY [ἀλογία, Gr.] unreasonable­
ness, especially in eating.

ALOPECIA [ἀλωπεχία, of ἀλώπηξ a
fox, Gr. the fox-evil] a disease called
the scurf, when the hairs fall from the
head by the roots.

ALOUD [of &wyn;louð, Sax.] loudly, 
with a strong and audible voice.

ALPHABET [in Polygraphy] a dupli­
cate of the key of a cypher, which is 
kept by each of the parties who corre­
spond together.

ALPHETA [Astronomy] a star of the
second magnitude; also called Lucido
Corona.

ALT [in Musick] high, see Alto.

ALTARS [altaria, of altus, high, or
altitudo, L. height, because they were
usually erected in high places] the an­
cient heathens, when they offered sa­
crifice to the celestial deities, erected
their altars on the brows or tops of
mountains; and when they sacrificed
to the terrestrial deities, to whom they
ascribed the care and tuition of the
earth, they erected their altars on the
plain superficies of the earth; but when
they sacrificed to the infernal deities, 
they did it in grotto's, caves, and other
gloomy recesses.

ALTAR of Prothesis [among the
Greeks] a small preparatory altar, 
whereon they bless the bread before
they carry it to the altar, where they
perform the liturgy.

ALTERABLENESS [of alterare, L.]
liableness to be altered.

ALTERANT [alterans, L.] a pro­
perty or power in certain medicines, by
which they induce an alteration in the
body, and dispose it for health and re­
covery, by correcting some indisposition
without causing any sensible evacuation.

ALTERATION [with Naturalists]
that motion whereby a natural body is
changed or varied in some circumstan­ 
ces from what it really was before, tho'
as to the nature and bulk, they appear
to sense the same.

To ALTERNATE [alternare, L.] to
do by course or turns, as an alternate
office, i. e. an office which is discharged
by turns.

ALTERNATE Leaves [of Plants] are
those where there is a correspondence
between the sides of a branch; the
leaves of the one following those of the
other.

ALTERNATE Angles [in Geometry] 
two equal angles made by
a line cutting two parallels
and makes those parellel
the one on one side and
the other on the other, as x and u, z and
y are alternate angles.

Image omitted.



ALTERNATE Proportion [with Geo­
metricians] is when in any set of propor­
tionals the antecedents are compared
together, and the consequents together.



ALTERNATION [by some Mathem.]
is used for the different changes and al­
terations of order in any number of
things, as the changes rung on bells, &c.

ALTERNATENESS [alternatio, 
L.] a suc­
cession by course.

ALTERNATIVENESS [alternatio, 
L.] a suc­
cession by course.

ALTERNATIVELY [aternative­
ment, F.] by turns.

ALTERNITY [alternitas, L.] inter­
changeableness.

ALTILOQUENCE [of altiloquens, 
L.] talking loud or high.

ALTILOQUIOUS [altiloquus, L.]
talking aloud; also of high matters.

ALTILOQUY [altiloquium, L.] loud
talk; also of high things.

ALTIMETRY [of alta high things, 
and metiri, L. to measure] a part of ge­
ometry that teaches the method of ta­
king and measuring heights, whether
accessible or inaccessible.

ALTISONOUS [altisonus, L.] sound­
ing high, loud, shrill, clear, &c.

ALTITUDE of the Pole [in Astro­
nomy and Geography] is the height or
number of degrees, that the pole in any
latitude is rais'd or appears above the
horizon.

ALTITUDE of a Triangle [in Geo­
metry] is the length of a right
line let fall perpendicular
from any of the angles on the
side opposite to that angle
from whence it falls, and
may be either within or
without the triangle, as is
marked by the prick'd lines in the fi­
gure annex'd.

Two images omitted.



The ALTITUDE of a Rhombus [in Geo­
metry] or of a Rhomboides, 
is a right line let fall per­
pendicular from any angle
on the opposite side to
that angle, and it may be either within
or without the figure, as the prick'd lines
in the figure annex'd.

Image omitted.



ALTITUDE [with Astronomers] the
height of the sun, moon, planets, or
point of the heavens comprehended be­
tween the horizon and parallel circle of
altitude, or between the star or assigned
point in the heavens and the horizon.

ALTITUDE [in Cosmography] is the
perpendicular height of a body or ob­
ject; or its distance from the horizon
upwards.

Meridian ALTITUDE of the Sun, an
arch of the meridian, contained be­
tween the sun and the horizon, when
the fun is in the meridian.

Apparent ALTITUDE of the Sun, &c. [in Astronomy] is what it appears to our 
observation.

Real ALTITUDE [in Astronomy] 
that from which
the refraction has been substracted.

True ALTITUDE [in Astronomy] 
that from which
the refraction has been substracted.

ALTITUDE of the Equator [Astron.]
the complement of the altitude of the
pole to a quadrant of a circle.

ALTITUDE [in Opticks] is the per­
pendicular space of place betwixt the
base and the eye, or height of the visual
point above the base.

ALTITUDE of a Figure [with Geo­
metricians] the perpendicular distance
between the vertex and the base.

ALTITUDE of Motion [Mechanicks]
the measure of any motion counted ac­
cording to the line of direction of the
moving force.

ALUDELS 
[with Chymists] a
sort of pots used
in sublimations;
they have no bot­
toms, and are fit­
ted into one ano­
ther, as many as
there is occasion.
At the bottom, 
in the furnace, 
there is a pot
holding the mat­
ter that is to be
sublimed, and at
the top there is
a head to receive
the flowers that sublime up thither.

Image omitted.



ALUMINATED [aluminatus, L.]
done with alum.

AM [Eom, Sax.] as I am.

AMABILITY [amabilitas, L.] amia­
bleness, loveliness.

To wave a naked Sword AMAIN, is
as much as to command another ship to
lower her topsail.

AMALGAM [of ἃμα together,
and γαμεῖν to join, 
Gr.] a mass of mercury united and in­
corporated with some metal.

AMALGAMA [of ἃμα together,
and γαμεῖν to join, 
Gr.] a mass of mercury united and in­
corporated with some metal.

AMALGAMA 
[with Chymical Wri­
ters] is expressed
by one of these cha­
racters. ⩩

The unicode for the right-hand image is found. Two images for the alchemical symbols are omitted.



To AMALGAMATE, is to mix mer­
cury with gold, silver, &c. to reduce it
into a kind of paste, to be used in gild­
ing, &c. or to change it to an inpalpa­
ble powder; also to moisten any thing
into a softness, especially for a medici­
nal use, this operation is denoted by
chymists by letters AAA.

AMARULENCE [amarulentia, L.]
bitterness.

AMATORCULIST [amatorculus, L.]



a trifling sweet-heart, a general lover.

An AMATORY [amatorium, L.] a
philter to cause love.

AMAXOBIANS [of αῖμαξα a chariot]
a people who had neither houses nor
tents, but dwelt in chariots. Anc. Geogr.

AMAZEDNESS [of a and Mase, 
Sax.] the being amazed, astonishment.

AMAZONS, a certain warlike nation
of women of Sarmatia on the river
Thermodon : who, as it is related, did
not permit men to live among them
but once a year; and if by the conver­
sation they had with them they brought
forth male children, they are reported
to destroy them as soon as born, but
preserv'd the females very carefully and
trained them up to arms.

They kept the left side of their bosom
uncovered, having burnt that breast
that it might not be an impediment to
them in the drawing their bow, but
made use of the right in suckling the girls.

They are reported to have extended
their empire as far as Ephesus in Asia; 
but penetrating into Europe were de­
feated by the Athenians, under the com­
mand of Theseus.

AMBAGES, a circumvolution or long
detail of words remote from the true
scope of the matter; a compass or fetch-­
about of words; a tedious lengthening
out of a story.

AMBAGIOUS [ambagiosus, L.] full
of far-fetch'd speeches.

AMBER [ἄμβαρ, Gr.] a sort of hard
gum of a bright yellow colour, of which
there is good store in Prussia. It is said
to grow like coral on a rock in the
North Sea, and being broken off by the
waves is cast up on the shores and into
the harbours. Pliny and others will have
it a resinous juice issuing from old pines
and firs, and being discharged into the
sea, and having undergone there some
alteration is thrown on the shores.
Others suppose it a bitumen trickling in­
to the sea from subterraneous sources.

AMBER GREASE a fragrant drug, 
which melts al­
most like wax, of an ash or greyish co­
lour; it is used both by apothecaries
as a cordial, and by perfumers as a scent.

It is found in several parts of the
ocean upon the coasts of Muscovy and
on the Indian shore.

Some imagine it to be a compound of
wax and honey, which being hardened
by the sun and falling into the sea is
there brought to perfection; this opini­
on is the more probable in that an es­
sence much resembling it may be ex­
tracted from a composition of wax and
hony; and this opinion seems to be fur­
ther supported in that large pieces have
been found before it has arrived at its
full maturity, which being broke had
wax and hony in the middle of them.

AMBER GRIS a fragrant drug, 
which melts al­
most like wax, of an ash or greyish co­
lour; it is used both by apothecaries
as a cordial, and by perfumers as a scent.

It is found in several parts of the
ocean upon the coasts of Muscovy and
on the Indian shore.

Some imagine it to be a compound of
wax and honey, which being hardened
by the sun and falling into the sea is
there brought to perfection; this opini­
on is the more probable in that an es­
sence much resembling it may be ex­
tracted from a composition of wax and
hony; and this opinion seems to be fur­
ther supported in that large pieces have
been found before it has arrived at its
full maturity, which being broke had
wax and hony in the middle of them.

Liquid AMBER, is a sort of native
balsam or resin, resembling turpentine, 
clear, of colour reddish or yellowish, of
a pleasant scent, almost like that of am­
bergrease.

Oil of AMBER, is a hue yellow trans­
parent, ponderous oil, procured after the
spirit, by augmenting the degree of fire.

Spirit of AMBER, is an acid liquor
drawn from amber, by pulverizing and
distilling it, in a sand bath, &c.

AMBIDEXTER, a prevaricator, a
jack on both sides.

AMBIDEXTEROUSNESS [of ambi­
dexter, L.] the using of both hands a­
like.

AMBIENT air [with Naturalists] the
encompassing air, so called by way of
eminency, because it surrounds all
things on the surface of the earth.

AMBIENT Bodies [with Philosophers]
the same as circumambient bodies; na­
tural bodies that happen to be placed
round about, or encompass other bodies.

AMBILOGY [ambilogium, L. ambiloquium, L.]
double speaking.

AMBILOQUY [ambilogium, L. ambiloquium, L.]
double speaking.

AMBILOQUOUS [ambiloquus, L.]
double tongued, speaking doubtfully.

AMBIT of a figure [with Geometri­
cians] the sum of all the bounding or
encompassing lines that enclose it.

AMBITIOSITY [ambitiositas, L.] am­
bitiousness.

AMBITIOUSNESS [of ambitieux, Fr.
ambitiosus, L.] ambition, aspiring mind, 
disposition or quality.

AMBLE [with Horsemen] is the pace
or going of a horse; the motion of which
is two legs of a side, raised and set down
together, after which the two legs of
the other side rise, and come down in
the same manner; each side observing
an alternate course.

AMBLE free [with Horsemen] a horse
is said to amble free, that goes a good
amble when led by the halter in a man's
hand.

AMBLYOPIA [of ἀμβλυωϖία, Gr.]
dulness or dimness of sight, when the
object is not clearly discern'd, at what
distance soever it be placed.

AMBRA [ambra. Sax. amphora, L.]
a vessel among the Saxons. It contained
a certain measure of salt, butter, meal, 
beer, &c.

AMBROSIACK [ambrosiacus, L.] be­
longing to or of the quality of Ambrosia.



AMBROSIAN Office [of St. Ambrose
Bishop of Milan] a formula of worship
used in the church of Milan.

AMBRY, a cupboard or safe for keep­
ing cold victuals to be given to the poor;
also a place where the arms, vessels, 
plate, and all things belonging to house­
keeping are preserv'd.

AMBS-ACE [q. d. ambo, i. e. aces, 
ambesa, F.] two aces thrown at one
time by dice.

AMBULATION, a walking.  L.

AMBULATORY [ambulatorius, L.]
going or moving up and down, not be­
ing fixed to any place; as Ambulatory
Courts in opposttion to Sedentary.

AMBURBIAL Sacrifices [among the
Romans] a solemnity of leading the beasts
round the city before they are sacrificed.

AME [of Antwerp] a vessel contain­
ing 50 stoops, each stoop seven pints
English measure.

AMENABLE [of amener, F.] trada­
ble, that may be led or governed.

AMENDABLENESS [of amendement, 
F. or emendabilis, L.] capableness of be­
ing amended.

AMENDE [in French Customs] a mulct
or pecuniary punishment, imposed by
the sentence of the judge for any crime, 
false prosecution, or groundless appeal.

AMENDE honorable, is where a per­
son is condemned to come into court, or
into the presence of some person injured, 
and make an open recantation; also an
afflictive pain, carrying with it some
note of infamy or disgrace; as when the
person offending is sentenced to go na­
ked to his shirt, a torch in his hand, and
a rope about his neck, into a church or
before an auditory, and there beg par­
don of God, or the king, or the court
for some delinquency.

AMETHYST [in Heraldry] is the
purple colour in the coats of noblemen, 
which is called purpure in the coats of
lower gentry, and Mercury in those of
soveraign princes. See Purpure.

AMETHYSTIZONTES [of Ἀμεθύστι­
σον, Gr.] the best sort of carbuncles or
rubies.

AMFRACTUOSITY [of am­
fractuosi­
tas, L.] fulness of turnings and windings.

AMFRACTUOUSNESS [of am­
fractuosi­
tas, L.] fulness of turnings and windings.

AMIABLE Numbers [in Arithmetick]
are numbers that are mutually equal to
the whole sum of one another's aliquot
paits, as the number 284 and 220; for
the first number 284 is equal to the sum
of all the aliquot parts of the number
220. The aliquot parts of which are
110, 55, 44; 22, 11, 10, 5, 4, 2, 1; and
220 is equal to all the aliquot parts of
284, viz. 142, 71, 4, 2, 1.

AMIABLENESS [amabilitas, L.] love­
liness; also friendliness.

AMNIGOLIST [amnicola, L.] one that
dwells by a river.

AMNIGENOUS [amnigenus, L.] born
or bred in, of, or near a river.

AMOMUM [with Botanists] the herb
Our Lady's Rose, or Rose of Jerusalem.

AMORIST [amorosus, L.] an amo­
rous person.

AMOROUSNESS [of amorosus, L.]
lovingness, &c.

AMORPHOUS [of amorphus, L. ἄμορ­
φος, Gr.] without form or shape, ill­
shapen.

AMORTIZATION [in Law] the
act of turning
lands into mortmain, i. e. of alienating
or transferring them to some corpora­
tion, guild or fraternity, and their suc­
cessors. See Mortmain.

AMORTIZEMENT act of turning
lands into mortmain, i. e. of alienating
or transferring them to some corpora­
tion, guild or fraternity, and their suc­
cessors. See Mortmain.

To AMORTIZE [in Law] to make
over lands or tenements to a corpora­
tion, &c.

AMPELODESMOS [of ἄμϖελος and
δέσμος, Gr. a band] an herb that the
Sicilians used to tie their vines.

AMPHIARTHROSIS [of ἀμφὶ and ἄρ­
θρον a joint] a neutral or dubious kind
of articulation, distinguished from the
Diarthrosis, in that it has no apparent
motion, and from the Synarthrosis in
that it is not absolutely devoid of motion.

AMPHIBIOUSNESS [of amphibius, L.
of ἀμφίβιος, Gr.] amphibious nature,
living on land and in water.

AMPHIBRACHIUS [of ὰμφὶ on both
sides and βραχύς, Gr.] a foot in a
verse either Greek or Latin, that has a
short syllable before and after, and a
long one in the middle.

AMPHIDROMIA [ἀμφιδρομία of ἀμ­
φιδρομεῖν, Gr. to run round] a festival
observed in Athens by private families
upon the 5th day after the birth of a
child, it being the custom for the gossips
to run round the fire with the infant in
their arms; and then having delivered it
to the nurse, they were entertained with
feasting and dancing.

AMPHILOGY [ἀμφιλογία, Gr.] an
ambiguity of speech.

AMPHIPROSTYLUS [ἀμφιπρὸςυ­
λος, Gr.] a
term in Architecture, used of those tem­
ples in ancient times which had four
columns or pillars in the front, and the
same number behind.

AMPHIPROSTYLE [ἀμφιπρὸςυ­
λος, Gr.] a
term in Architecture, used of those tem­
ples in ancient times which had four
columns or pillars in the front, and the
same number behind.

AMPHYCTIONS [so called of Amphyc­
tion the son of Helenus, who first insti­
tuted them] magistrates of the supreme
tribunal of Greece, or the parliament of



Greece: being the presidents or the mem­
bers which were sent 
from the seven
principal cities of Greece, who deter­
mined both private and publick disputes.

AMPLENESS [amplitudo, L.] large­
ness of extent.

To AMPLIFICATE [amplificatum, 
L.] to amplify, augment or enlarge.

Eastern AMPLITUDE, is the distance
between the point wherein the star rises
and the true point of east in which the
equator and horizon intersect.

Western AMPLITUDE, is the distance
of the point wherein the sun sets, and
the true point of west in the equinoc­
tial.

AMPLITUDE of the range of a pro­
jectile, is the horizontal line, subtending
the path in which it is moved.

AMPLIVAGOUS [amplivagus, L.]
that wanders wide, or far and near, 
that stretches out far, having a large
scope.

To AMPUTATE [amputare, L.] to
cut off; in gardening, to lop or prune.

AMSDORFIANS [of Amsdorf their
leader] a sest in the sixteenth century
who maintained that good works were
not only unprofitable, but even opposite
and pernicious to salvation.

AMYGDALÆ [with Anatomists] the
almonds of the ears; the same as pa­
risthmiæ and tonsillæ.

AMYGDALINE [amygdalinus, L.] the
same as amygdalicious, i. e. of or pertain­
ing to almonds.

ANA [in Physicians bills] is used to
signify that an equal quantity of each
ingredient is to be taken in compound­
ing the medicine.

ANA [with Schoolmen] as books in
Ana are collections of the memorable
sayings of Persons of wit and learning, 
much of the same kind with what we
usually call table-talk.

AN JOUR and WASTE. See Year
and Day.

ANABAPTISTON. See Abaptiston.

ANABAPTIST [of ἀνὰ and βαπτιζεὶν, 
Gr. i. e. to baptize again] by this name
were call'd John of Leyden Maneer, 
Knipperdoling and other German Enthusi­
asts about the time of the reformation;
they maintain'd: 1. That infants are
not capable of baptism. 2. They reject­
ed all communion with other churches
and oaths. 3. That the godly should
enjoy a monarchy here on this earth, 
that men have free will in spiritual
matters, and that any man may preach
and administer the sacraments.

Some other of their erroneous opini­
ons were, that Christ was not the son of
Mary, nor true God, that there is no
such thing as original sin; but that men
are righteous by their own merits and
sufferings; they also held a community
of goods and Polygamy, and that a man
might divorce his wife, if she differed
in opinion from him.

These and other the like opinions
carried them to rash enterprizes, for
rising in arms under pretence of gospel
liberty they committed many outrages.

But at this day those who are called
by that name in England differ little more
in principles from other protestants, 
than in not baptizing children, as ap­
pears by a confession of their faith, 
published by the representatives of 100
of their congregations, in the year 1698.

ANABASIS [ἀναβάαις of ἀναβαίνω, 
Gr. to ascend] an ascending or getting
up, an ascent or rise.

ANACALYPTERIA [ἀναχαλύπτειν,
Gr. to reveal] a feast kept a day after a
wedding, when the bride put off her
veil, that all might see her face, which
till then was covered.  L.

ANACAMPSEROS [ἀναχάμψερος, 
Gr.] an herb, which being touch'd is
said to be efficacious in reconciling lovers
or friends that are fallen out.

ANACATHARSIS [ἀναχαθάρσις of ἀνὰ, 
above and χαθαίρω, Gr. to purge] a
medicine that purges or discharges na­
ture by some of the upper parts.

ANACHIS [among the Romans] one
of the four Penates or houshold-gods, 
who (they believed) from their birth at­
tended every body; whose names were
Dymon, i. e. power; Tyche, i.e. fortunes;
Heros, i, e. love, and Ananche, i. e. ne­
cessity.

ANACHITES [of ανὰ and χινέω, Gr.
to move] a diamond, a sort of precious
stone, said to have the virtue of driving
away distempers of the mind, and to de­
fend against poison.

ANACHORETA [ἀναχωρετὴς, Gr.] a
monk who retires from company, and
leads a solitary life by himself.

ANACLETERIA [of ἀνα and χλέω, 
Gr. to call] festivals in honour of kings
and princes, when they took upon them
the administration of the state.

ANAGLYPTICE [Ἀναγλυπτιχὴ Gr.]
the art of engraving, chasing or imbos­
sing.

ANAGOGETICAL [anagogeticus, L.]
pertaining to mysteries, mystical, myste­
rious, that has an exalted or uncommon
signification; also that exalts the mind
to divine contemplations.

ANAITIS, a goddess of the Armeni­
ans; the same as Succoth Benoth of the



Babylonians, the Venus of Armenia, who
had a temple erected to her, in which
virgins prostituted themselves before
marriage. See Venus. The like cu­
stom was in Lydia.

ANAISTHESIA [of ἀνα and αἰθησία, 
Gr.] a loss of, or defect of sense, as in
such as have the palsy or are blasted.

ANALEMMA [with Astronomers] an
orthographical projection of the sphere, 
on the plain of the meridian, the eye
being supposed to be at an infinite dis­
tance, and either in the east or west
points of the horizon.

ANALEMMA [Astronomy] an instru­
ment, a kind of astrolabe made either
of brass or wood, consisting of the fur­
niture of the same projection, with an
horizon or cursor fitted to it, used for
finding the sun's rising and setting, &c.

ANALGESY [algesia, L. ἀναλγησία, 
Gr.] an indolency, a being free from
pain and grief.

ANALOGICALNESS [of analogique, 
F. analogicus, L. of αναλογιχὸς Gr.] the
being proportional.

ANALOGOUS [analogus, L.] per­
taining to analogy, answerable in pro­
portion, resembling or bearing relation
to.

ANALOGY [ἀναλογία of ἀνα and λο­
γίζω, Gr.] like reason, proportion, cor­
respondence; relation which several
things in other respects bear to one
another.

ANALOGY [with Grammarians] the
declining of a noun, or the conjugation
of a verb according to its rule or stan­
dard.

ANALYSIS [with Chymists] the de­
compounding of a mixt body, or the re­
ducing any substance into its first prin­
ciples.

ANALYSIS [with Logicians] is the
method of finding out truth, and Syn­
thesis is the method of convincing
others of a truth already found out.
It is the attention the mind gives to
what it knows in a question, which
helps to resolve it, and in which the
analysis principally consists: All the art
lying in extracting a great many truths, 
which lead us to the knowledge of what
we seek after.

ANALYSIS [with Mathematicians] is
the art of discovering the truth or false­
hood of a proposition, by supposing the
question to be always solved and then
examining the consequences, till some
known or eminent truth is found out;
or else the impossibility of the present
proposition is discovered.

ANALYSIS of finite quantities [Mathe­
maticks] that which is called Specious
Arithmetick or Algebra.

ANALYSIS of infinites, is the method
of fluxions or differential calculus called
the New Analysis.

ANALYSIS, a table or syllabus of the
principal heads or articles of a conti­
nued discourse, disposed in their natural
order and dependency.

ANALYTICAL Method [in Logick]
is the method of resolution, shewing the
true way by which the thing was me­
thodically or primarily invented.

ANALYTICALLY [of analytique, F.
analytice, L. ἀνάλυσις, Gr.] by way of
analysis.

ANALYTICKS [ἀναλύτιχα, 
Gr.] a name
commonly given to Algebra, as being
nothing else but a general analysis of
pure mathematicks; or else because it
teaches how to solve questions and de~
monstrate theorems by searching into
the fundamental nature and frame of
the thing; which to that end is as it
were resolved into parts, or taken all
to pieces, and then put together again.

ANALYTICAL ART [ἀναλύτιχα, 
Gr.] a name
commonly given to Algebra, as being
nothing else but a general analysis of
pure mathematicks; or else because it
teaches how to solve questions and de~
monstrate theorems by searching into
the fundamental nature and frame of
the thing; which to that end is as it
were resolved into parts, or taken all
to pieces, and then put together again.

ANAMNESIS [with Rhetoricians] a
figure, when the orator mentions or
calls to mind what is past.

ANAMNETICKS [in Pharmacy] me­
dicines proper to restore a decay'd me­
mory.

ANAMORPHOSIS [of ἀνὰ and μόρφω­
σις, of μορφὴ, Gr. form or shape] a mon­
strous project in perspective and paint­
ing; or the representation of some fi­
gure or image either upon a plane or
curv'd surface in a deform'd shape, 
which at a proper distance shall appear
regular and in proportion.

ANANA [with Botanists] a fine In­
dian fruit commonly called the pine-ap­
ple, because of its likeness to the cone
of a pine. This fruit grows on a plant
like the fig-tree, and is about the size of
an artichoke. It is adorned on the top
with a kind of crown, and small bunch
of red leaves resembling a flame of fire;
the pulp or flesh of it is fibrous, but dis­
solves in the mouth, and has the delici­
ous taste of the peach, the quince, and
the muscadine grape. These are
brought to a very great perfection in
the garden of Sir Matthew Decker.

ANANCÆION [ἀναγχείων, Gr.] a fi­
gure in Rhetorick that makes out the ne­
cessity of a matter.

ANANTOPODOTON [ἀναντοπόδοτον, 
Gr.] a figure in Rhetorick, when an ora­
tion wants some parts.

ANAPÆSTUS [with Grammarians]
a foot or measure in Greek or Latin



verses that have the two first syllables
short, and the last long, as pĩẽtās.

ANAPHORA [ἀνάφορα, Gr.] a rela­
tion, a repetition.  L.

ANAPHORA [with ancient Astrono­
mers] an ascension or rising up of the 12
signs of the zodiack, from the east, by
the daily course of the heavens.

ANAPLEROTICKS [ἀναπληροτιχὰ, 
Gr.] medicines proper to fill up ulcers
and wounds with new flesh.

ANASARCA [ἀνασάρχα of ἀνὰ and
σὰρξ flesh, Gr.] a certain sort of dropsy, 
being a white, soft, yeilding swelling of
some parts or of the whole body, that
dents in when pressed.

ANASTOECHEIOSIS [ἀναστοιχείασις, 
Gr.] a resolution of mixt bodies into
their first principles by chymical opera­
tions.

ANATASIS [ἀνάτασις, Gr.] a stretch­
ing, reaching out, or extension upwards.

ANATASIS [with Surgeons] an ex­
tention of the body towards the upper
parts.

ANATHEMATICALLY [of anatheme
F. anathema, L. ἀνάθιμα, Gr.] in a cur­
sing manner.

ANATOMICALLY [anatomice L. of
ἀνατομιχὸς, Gr.] according to the rules of
anatomy.

ANATRON [ἄνατρον, Gr.] a sort of
salt extracted from the water of the ri­
ver Nile; also a nitrous juice which con­
denses in vaults, arches, and subterra­
neous places; also a volatile salt skim­
med off the composition of glass when
in fusion; also a compound salt made of
quicksilver, allum, vitriol, common salt, 
and nitre.

ANBURY [with Farriers] a sort of
wen or spongy wart full of blood, 
growing in any part of the body of a
horse.

ANCESTOR, a fore-father.  L.

ANCESTOR [in Common Law] the
difference between ancestor and prede­
cessor is this, ancestor is applied to a na­
tural person, as A B and his ancestors, 
and predecessor may be used of any per­
sons that were prior in time as of a cor­
poration or body politick, as a bishop
and his predecessor.

ANCHOR [Hieroglyphically] repre­
sents hope, hope being as it were
the anchor that holds us firm to our
faith in adversity.

To Boat the ANCHOR, to put it into
the boat.

The ANCHOR is foul [Sea Phrase]
is when the cable by the turning of the
ship is hitched about the fluke.

The ANCHOR is a Cock-bell [Sea
Phrase] used when the anchor hangs
right up and down by the ship's side.

The ANCHOR is a Peek [Sea Phrase]
is when it is just under the hause or
hole in the ship's stern, through which
the cable runs out that belongs to it.

To let fail an ANCHOR [Sea
[Phrase]
is to put or let it down into the sea, in
order to make the ship ride.

To drop an ANCHOR [Sea
[Phrase]
is to put or let it down into the sea, in
order to make the ship ride.

The ANCHOR comes home [Sea
Term] used, when it cannot hold the
ship, but that it drives away by the vio­
lence of the wind or tide.

To fetch home the ANCHOR [Sea 
term]
is to weigh or take it up out of the ri­
ver, &c.

To bring home the ANCHOR [Sea 
term]
is to weigh or take it up out of the ri­
ver, &c.

To sboo an ANCHOR [Sea term] is
to case the flook of it with boards, that
it may better take hold in soft ground.

ANCHORAGE [in Law] a duty
paid to the king for the privilege of
casting anchor in a pool or a haven.

ANCHORALIS Processus [with Ana­
tomists] the process 
or shooting forth
of the shoulder bones like a beak, called
Coracoides and Cornicularis.

ANCHORED [in Heral­
dry] as a cross anchored
is so called, because the four
extremities of it resemble
the flook of an anchor.

Image omitted.



ANCHORITE, an hermit, &c. who
leads a solitary life in a desart, to be
farther out of the reach of the temp­
tations of the world, and to be more at
leisure for meditation.

ANCIENTLY [anciennement, F.] in
antient times.

ANCIENTNESS [ancienneté, F.]
oldness.

ANCIENTS [in Gray's Inn] the so­
ciety consists of Antients, Barristers, 
Benchers, and Students under the bar.

St. ANDREW, was taken to be the
patron of Scotland, on account of a vi­
sion before a battle, supposed to be
won by his assistance to the Picts
against the English or Northumbrian
Danes.

ANDREW, as knights of St. Andrew
an order of knighthood established by
Archiacus king of Scotland, A. C. 809.
called also Knights of the Thistle.

ANDRODAMAS [ἀνδροδάμας, of τοῖ
δαμάζειν ἄνδραμας, i. e. of taming men;
Gr.] a kind of hard heavy blood-stone
which is said to bleed when rubbed on
a whetstone; also a precious stone, 
bright as silver, like diamond, in many
squares.



ANDROGYNUS [Astrology] such a
planet as is sometimes hot, and some­
times cold.

ANDROIDES [of Ανδρὸς, of a man,
and ἐ῀ιδος, Gr.] an autometon
in the form of a man, which by means
of certain springs &c. justly contrived
walks, speaks, &c.

There is no unicode for Greek small letter epsilon with psili and perispomeni. The unicode ἐ is for Greek small letter epsilon with psili, and ῀ is for the perispomeni on top of ἐ.



ANDROLEPSY [Ανδρολεψία or ἀνὴρ
a man, and λέψις, of λαμβάνω, Gr. to
take] a custom among the Athenians, by
which, if any Athenian were slain by a
citizen of some other place, and such
refused to deliver up the criminal to
punishment, it was held lawful to take
three inhabitants of such city and pu­
nish the homicide in them.

ANDROMEDA [Astronomy] a nor­
thern constellation consisting of 27
stars.

ANDROTOMY [of ἀνὴρ, gen. ἀνδρῶν, 
and τομὴ a dissection, Gr.] an anatomi­
cal dissection of human bodies.

ANECDOTE, a secret history, such as
relates the secret affairs of kings and
princes; speaking with too much free­
dom or too much sincerity, or the man­
ner and conduct of persons in authority.

ANECDOTON [ἀνέχδοτον, Gr.] a 
thing not given
forth, produced or made publick.

ANEKDOTON [ἀνέχδοτον, Gr.] a 
thing not given
forth, produced or made publick.

ANEMOGRAPHY [of Ἀνεμος, the
wind, and γραϕὴ, Gr. a description] a
treatise or philosophical description of
the winds.

ANEMOMETER [of ἄνεμος the
wind and, μέτρον Gr. measure] an instru­
ment or machine for measuring the
strength of the wind.

ANEMONE [ἀνεμώνη, Gr.] the emony
or wind flower.

ANEURISM [of ἀνευρίνω to dilate, Gr.]
a stretching or bursting of the arteries
so that they beat and swell continually, 
till they sometimes become as large as
an egg; the swelling yields if it be pres­
sed with the finger, but quickly re­
coils.

ANFELDTHYDE [anfelððẏðe
Sax.] a simple
or single accusation. Thus it was among
the Saxons, when the oath of the cri­
minal and two more were sufficient to
discharge him; but his own oath, and
the oath of five more were required
to free him from the Triplex Accusatio.

ANFEALTHIDE [anfelððẏðe
Sax.] a simple
or single accusation. Thus it was among
the Saxons, when the oath of the cri­
minal and two more were sufficient to
discharge him; but his own oath, and
the oath of five more were required
to free him from the Triplex Accusatio.

ANFRACTUOUSNESS [anfractus, 
L.] being full of turnings and wind­
ings.

ANGEIOGRAPHY [of ἀγγεἴον a ves­
sel, and γραϕη a Description, Gr.] a de­
scription of the vessels in the human
body, i. e. the nerves, veins, arteries and
lymphaticks.

ANGEL SHOT, chain shot, being a
cannon bullet cut in two, and the hal­
ves being joined together by a chain.

ANGELICA [Botany] an herb.

ANGELICALNESS [of angelique, F.
angelicus, L.] the being angelical, ange­
lical nature, &c.

ANGERONA [among the Romans, so
called of Angina, the squinsey, as having
cured the Romans of that distemper]
the goddess or patience or silence; her
statue was placed on the altar of plea­
sure.

ANGERONALIA, feasts celebrated to
Angerona the goddess of patience and
silence.

ANGIGLOSSI [of ἀγγὺς and γλώσσα, 
the tongue, Gr.] persons who stammer
in their speech and tongue, especially
such as with great difficulty pronounce
the letters, K, L and R.

ANGIOMONOSPERMOUS Plants. 
such plants as have one seed succeeding
to one sigle flower,  L.

ANGIOSPERMOUS Plants. 
such plants as have one seed succeeding
to one sigle flower,  L.

An ANGLE [angulus, L.] a corner;
also a rod with a line and hook for
fishing.

ANGLE [in Geometry] a space com­
prehended between the meeting of two
lines, which is either greater or less, as
those lines incline towards one another
or stand farther distant asunder; these
angles are either plain or spherical.

A plain ANGLE [in Geometry] is the
distance or opening of
two lines that touch one
another in the same plane
but so as not to make one
straight line, and the lines
that form it are called
legs, as in the figure a­
bove; or it is a space
bounded by the meeting
of two lines which cut
one another on a plane, 
as in the figure, and are
either right-lined, curvilinear, or mix'd, 
the first of which are the angles above.

Image omitted.



Curvilineal ANGLE [Geometry]
or crooked-­
lined angle, is made by
the intersection or mu­
tual cutting one ano­
ther of two crooked
lines, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



Curvilinear ANGLE [Geometry]
or crooked-­
lined angle, is made by
the intersection or mu­
tual cutting one ano­
ther of two crooked
lines, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



Mixt ANGLE [Geome­
try] is made by the meet­
ing of a right line with a
crooked or curved line, 
as in the figure.

Image omitted.





A Spherical ANGLE 
[Geometry] is an angle
made by the meeting of
two angles of great cir­
cles, which intercept or
mutually cut one ano­
ther on the surface of
the globe or sphere, as the figure ABC.

Image omitted.



ANGLES, whether plain or spherical, 
may be considered as right, acute and
obtuse.

A Right ANGLE [Geo­
metry] is an angle made
by a line falling perpen­
dicularly on another, or
that which subtends an
arch of 90 degrees, or a
fourth part of a circle, as
in the figure; all circles being common­
ly divided into 360 parts, called degrees.

Image omitted.



An Acute ANGLE 
[Geometry] is an angle
that is less than a right
angle, or than 90 de­
grees, as in the figure, 
and is so called, because
the angular point is sharp.

Image omitted.



An Obtuse ANGLE 
[Geometry] is one which
has its angular point
blunt or broad, and is
greater than a right one, its angular
point consisting of more than 90 degrees, 
as in the figure A. which is so much
more than 90 degrees, as B is less than
90, both together making a semi-circle
or 180 degrees.

Image omitted.



Right ANGLED Tri­
angle, is one which has
one right angle, as the
angle A in the figure, 
the other two B and C
being both acute, and
making both together but 90 degrees.

Image omitted.



Oblique ANGLE, is a name used in
common to both acute and obtuse an­
gles.

ANGLES have also several other
names according to their different po­
sitions, their relations to the respective
figures they are in, and the lines that
form them, as

Adjacent ANGLES
 [Geometry] which have
one leg common to both
angles, and both taken
together are equal to
two right ones, as in the
figure the angles ABC, CBD CBD, 
DBE; DBE, EBA, are contiguous an­
gles.

Contiguous ANGLES [Geometry] which have
one leg common to both
angles, and both taken
together are equal to
two right ones, as in the
figure the angles ABC, CBD CBD, 
DBE; DBE, EBA, are contiguous an­
gles.

Opposite ANGLES 
[Geometry] are such as
are made by two right
lines crossing each other, 
and which only touch
in the angular point; they are called
vertical on account of their being oppo­
sed ad verticem, or at the top, as the
angles A and B are vertical or opposite
angles, as likewise C and D.

Vertical ANGLES 
[Geometry] are such as
are made by two right
lines crossing each other, 
and which only touch
in the angular point; they are called
vertical on account of their being oppo­
sed ad verticem, or at the top, as the
angles A and B are vertical or opposite
angles, as likewise C and D.

Three images omitted.



An ANGLE also in a 
triangle is said to be op­
posite to the side that 
subtends it, as the angle 
A is opposite to the side
BC, and the angle C to
the side AB, and the angle B to the side
AC, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



Internal ANGLES 
[Geometry] if a line cut 
two others that are pa­ 
rallel, the angles C and 
D are called internal and 
opposite, in respect to 
the external ones A and B, to which they
are respectively equal as in the figure.

Image omitted.



Opposite ANGLES 
[Geometry] if a line cut 
two others that are pa­ 
rallel, the angles C and 
D are called internal and 
opposite, in respect to 
the external ones A and B, to which they
are respectively equal as in the figure.

Image omitted.



Alternate ANGLES [Geom.] are the
angles E and D, and F and C, which are
respectively equal to one another.

EXternal ANGLES [Geometry] are the
angles of any right-lined figure without
it, when all the sides are severally pro­
duced and lengthened; and all being ta­
ken together, are equal to four right
angles.

Internal ANGLES [Geometry] are all
angles made by the sides of any right-­
lined figure within.

ANGLE, at the centre
of a circle, is an angle
whole vertex is at the
center of the circle, and
whose legs are two Ra­
dii of a circle, as in the
figure.

Image omitted.



An ANGLE in the Seg­
ment of a circle, is that
which is concluded be­
tween two chords that
flow from the same
point in the periphery, 
as in the figure.

Image omitted.



A Solid ANGLE [Geometry] is con­
tained under more than two planes or
plain angles, not being in the same
place and meeting in a point.

Equal solid ANGLES [Geometry] are
such as are contained under plain angles, 
equal both in multitude and magnitude.

ANGLE of Contact [Geometry] is that
which a circle or other curve makes



with a tangent at the point of contact.

Horned ANGLE [Geometry] an angle
made by a right line, either a tangent or
a secant, with the periphery of a circle.

Homologous ANGLES 
[Geometry] are such as
are in two figures, and
retain the order from
the first in both figures
as O X.

Image omitted.



ANGLE at the Periphery [Geometry] is comprehend­
ed between the two chords
A B and B D, and stands
on the arch A B.

Image omitted.



ANGLE at the Segment 
[Geometry] is comprehend­
ed between the two chords
A B and B D. and stands
on the arch A B.

Image omitted.



Cissoid ANGLE [Geometry] the inner
angle which is made by two convex
spherical lines intersecting each other.

Pelecoid ANGLE [Geometry] an angle
in the shape or figure of an hatchet.

Sistroid ANGLE [Geometry] an angle
in form of a Sistrum.

ANGLES [in Anatomy] are understood
of the corners of the eye or Canthi, where
the upper eyelid meets with the under.

ANGLE of a Wall [Architecture] is
the point or corner, where the two fa­
ces or sides of a wall meet.

ANGLES [Astrology] certain houses
of a scheme of the heavens, the first house
or horoscope is called the angle
of the East, the seventh the angle of
the West, the fourth house the angle of
the North, the tenth house the angle of
the South.

ANGLE of Longitude [Astronomy] is
the angle which the circle of a star's lon­
gitude makes with the meridian at the
pole of the ecliptick.

ANGLE of Elongation [Astronomy] is
the difference between the true place of
the sun, and the geocentrick place of
the planet.

ANGLE of Commutation [Astronomy]
is the difference between the true place
of the sun, seen from the earth, and the
place of a planet reduced to the ecliptick.

ANGLE of Incidence [in Dioptricks] is
an angle made by an incidentary with a
lens or other refracting surface.

ANGLE of the Circumference [in For­
tification] is the next angle made by the
arch, which is drawn from one gorge
to the other.

ANGLE of the Courtin [in Fortification]
or the angle of the flank BAE is formed
by or contained between the courtain
and the flank in any piece of fortification.

Diminished ANGLE, [in Fortification] is
the angle B C F, which is formed by the
meeting of the outermost sides of the
polygon, and the face of the bastion.

ANGLE of or at the Center [in Fortif.]
is the angle G K F, which is formed by
the concurrence of two strait lines drawn
from the angles of the figure F C.

Image omitted.



ANGLE of the exterior Figure [in
Fortification] is the same as the angle of
the Polygon, and is the angle FCN, form'd
at the point of the bastion C, by the
meeting of the two outermost sides or
bases of the polygon FC and CN.

ANGLE of the interior Figure [in For­
tification] is the angle GHM, which is
formed in H the center of the bastion by
the meeting of the innermost sides of
the figure CR and HM.

ANGLE Flanking [in Fortification] is
the angle which is made by the two ra­
sant lines of defence, viz. the two fa­
ces of the bastion prolonged.

ANGLE flanking upwards [Fortifica­
tion] is the angle GLH formed by the
flanking line and the courtain.

Flanked ANGLE [in Fortification] is
the angle BCS, which is made by the
two faces BC, CS, and is the utmost
part of the bastion, most exposed to the
enemy's batteries, and is therefore cal­
by some the angle of the bastion, or the
point of the bastion.

ANGLE forming the flank [Fortifica­
tion] is that which consists of one flank
and one Demi-gorge; or it is composed
by the flank and that side of the poly­
gon, running from the flank to the angle
of the polygon, and were it extended
would cross the bastion.

ANGLE of the Epaule [Fortifica­
tion] is the
angle ABC, which is formed by the
lines of the face BC and the flank AB.

ANGLE of the shoulder [Fortifica­
tion] is the
angle ABC, which is formed by the
lines of the face BC and the flank AB.

ANGLE of Elevation [in Mechanicks]
an angle comprehended between the
line of a projectile, and a horizontal line.

ANGLE of Direction [Mechanicks] an
angle comprehended between the lines
of direction of two conspiring forces.

ANGLE of Incidence [Mechanicks] an
angle made by the line of direction of



an impinging body in the point of con­
tact.

ANGLE of Reflection [Mechanicks] an
angle made by the line of direction of a
reflected body, in the point of contact
from which it rebounds.

Front ANGLES [Military Affairs] the
two last men of the front rank.

Rear ANGLES [Military Affairs] the
two last men of the rear rank.

ANGLE of the East [in Navigation]
is that point of the compass that the
ship sails upon.

Optick ANGLE, is that which is con­
tained or included between two rays
drawn from the extreme points of an
object to the center of the pupil.

ANGLE of Inclination [Opticks] is
the angle made by a ray of incidence, 
and the axis of incidence.

ANGLE of Reflection [in Opticks] is
an angle formed by the reflected ray, at
the point of reflection, with the other
part of the tangent line.

ANGLE refracted [in Opticks] is an
angle between the refracted ray and the
perpendicular.

ANGLE of Refraction [Opticks] is an
angle made by the ray of incidence, ex­
tended through another medium (as
out of the air into the water) and the
ray of refraction.

Optick ANGLE [in Opticks] is
an angle includ­
ed between two rays, drawn from the
two extreme points in an object to the
center of the pupil, as ABC, which is
comprehended between the rays AB
and BC.

Image omitted.



Visual ANGLE [in Opticks] is
an angle includ­
ed between two rays, drawn from the
two extreme points in an object to the
center of the pupil, as ABC, which is
comprehended between the rays AB
and BC.

Image omitted.



ANGLE [in Sciagraphy, i. e. Dialling]
an angle that is made by the strait line, 
proceeding from the sun to the dial
plane.

ANGLER [of anʒel, Sax.] one who
fishes with an angle.

ANGUIGENOUS [anguigenus, L.] in­
gendred or begotten of serpents.

ANGUINEAL [anguineus, L.] per­
taining to an eel.

ANGUINEAL Hyperbola, an hyper­
bola of an eel-like figure, which cuts
its assymptote with contrary flexions, 
and is produced both ways into contrary
legs.

ANGULARNESS [of angulaire, F. an­
gularis L.] having corners.

ANGULAR Motion [Mechanicks] a
compound sort of motion, wherein the
moveable both slides and revolve at the
same time.

ANGULAR Motion [with Astrono­
mers] is the increase of the distance of
any two planets, revolving round any
body as the common center of motion.

ANGULOSITY [with Philosophers]
the quality of that which has several or
many angles.

ANGUSTNESS [of angustus, L.] nar­
rowness, straitness.

ANGUSTITY [of angustitas, L.]
straitness or narrowness of place; also
straitness of circumstances, poverty, &c.

ANHALTINA [with Physicians] me­
dicines that promote respiration.

ANHELATION, a panting, a diffi­
culty of breathing; shortness of breath.

ANHELOSE [anhelosus, L.] fetching
breath quick and short; puffing and
blowing.

ANIL, the plant from which indigo
is procured.

ANILENESS [anilitas, L.] the being
a very old woman.

ANIMA, the breath, also the prin­
ciple of life in the rational, sensitive or
vegetative soul,  L.

ANIMA Mundi, called by Plato τψυχὴ
τοῦ χόσμου, the soul of the world or of
the universe [with Naturalists] is a cer­
tain pure, ethereal substance or spirit, 
which is diffused through the mass of
the world, which informs, actuates and
unites the divers parts of it into one
great, perfect, organical or vital body. 
The modern Platonists explain the
anima mundi to be a certain ethereal, 
universal spirit; which exists perfectly
pure in the heavens, but pervading ele­
mentary bodies on earth, and intimate­
ly mixing with all the minute atoms of
it, assumes somewhat of their nature, 
and thence becomes of a peculiar kind.
Some again define it to be a certain
ignifick virtue or vivifick heat infused
into the chaos and disseminated through
the whole frame of it, for the conser­
vation, nutrition and vivification of it.

ANIMABLENESS [of animabilis, L.]
the having life.

ANIMADVERSIVENESS [of animus
and advertere, L.] the animadversive fa­
culty.

ANIMAL, i. e. a living creature is
by some defined to be a being, which
besides the power of growing, increa­
sing and producing its like (which ve­
getables also have) is further endowed
with sensation and spontaneous motion.



ANIMALS, there was nothing so re­
markable in the Egyptian religion, as
the preposterous worship that nation
paid to animals, such as the Cat, the
Ichneumon, the Dog, the Ibis, the Wolf, 
the Crocodile, and several others; which
they had in high veneration, as well
dead as living. While they were living
they had lands set apart for the mainte­
nance of each kind; and both men and
women were employ'd in feeding and
attending on them, the children suc­
ceeding their parents in that office, 
which was look'd upon as an high ho­
nour, wearing certain badges or ensigns, 
by which being distinguished at a di­
stance, they were saluted by bending of
the knee and other demonstrations of
respect. To these, and to the deities to
which they were sacred, the inhabitants
of the several cities, where they were
worshipped, offer'd up their prayers, 
and in particular for the recovery of
children from sickness, whose heads they
shaved all over, or in part, and putting
the hair into one balance, and silver
into the other, when the silver over ba­
lanced they gave it to the keepers of the
animals, who therewith provided food
far them, which was usually fish cut in
pieces; but the Ichneumons and Cats were
sometimes fed with bread and milk.
The extravagant worship which the E­
gyptians paid to these deities, as to the
Bulls at Memphis and Heliopolis, the Goat
at Mendes, the Lion at Leontopolis, and
the Crocodile at the lake Mœris, and to
many others at different places, exceeds
all belief. For they were kept in conse­
crated inclosures, and well attended on
by men of high rank, who at a great
expence provided victuals for them, 
which consisted of the greatest dainties.
They were washed in hot baths, anoin­
ted with most precious ointments, and
perfumed with the most odoriferous
scents, they lay on the richest carpets
and other costly furniture, and that they
might want nothing to make their life
as happy as possible, they had the most
beautiful females of the several kinds pro­
vided for them, to which they gave the
title of their concubines. When any of
these animals died, they lamented them
as if they had been their dearest chil­
dren, and frequently laid out more than
they were worth in their funeral. In
the reign of Ptolemy the son of Lagus, the
Apis dying of old age at Memphis, his
keeper bestowed no less than 50 talents
of silver, or almost 13000 crowns over
and above all his substance, in the bury­
ing of him. And it is also related, that
some keepers of those creatures have
squandred away 100000 talants, an im­
mense sum, in the maintenance of them.
The dead bodies of the sacred animals
were wrapped up in fine linnen and car­
ried to be embalmed, and being anoin­
ted with oil of cedar and other aroma­
tick preparations, to preserve them
from putrefaction, were buried in sa­
cred coffins.

ANIMAL Motion, is the same that is
called muscular motion.

ANIMAL Part of Man [with Mora­
lists,  L.] the sensible, fleshy part in op­
position to the rational part, which is
the understanding.

ANIMAL Spirits, a fine subtil juice
or humour in animal bodies, supposed
to be the great instrument of muscular
motion, sensation, &c.

ANIMALNESS [animalitas, L.] the
animal faculty.

ANIMATE [animatus, L.] animated, 
endued with life, in contradistinction to
inanimate or such things as have not life.

ANIMATE Power [Mechanicks] is
us'd to signify a power in a man or brute
in contradistinction to an inanimate one, 
as that of springs, weights, &c.

ANIMATENESS [of animé, F. anima­
tus, L.] the being animated.

ANIMATION, the informing, fur­
nishing or supplying an animal body with
a soul. As a fœtus or child in the womb
is said to be come to its animation, 
when it begins to act like a true living
creature, or after the mother (accord­
ing to the usual expresson) is quick.

ANIME [in Heraldry] is when the
eyes, &c. of any rapacious creature are
born of a different tincture from the
creature it self.

ANIMOSE [animosus, L.] couragious;
also stomachful.

ANIMOSENESS [animosité, F. animo­
sitas, L.] the having an animosity.

AN JOUR and WAST [Law term] a
forfeiture when a man has committed
petty treason and felony, and has lands
held of some common person, which
shall be seized for the king, and remain
in his hands a year and a day, next af­
ter the attainder, and then the trees
shall be pulled up, the houses razed and
pull'd down, and the pasture and mea­
dows ploughed up; except he, to whom
the lands should come by escheat or for­
feiture, redeem it of the king.

ANISCALPTOR, i. e. the Arse­ 
scratcher. [Anatomy] a muscle called also latissimus
dorsi, from its largeness, q. d. the broad­



est of the back; a pair of muscles, a pair of muscles, so 
called from that action that is perform­ 
ed by the help of it, it serving to draw 
the arm backwards and downwards.

ANISCALPTORIS Musculi par
[Anatomy] a muscle called also latissimus
dorsi, from its largeness, q. d. the broad­
est of the back; a pair of muscles, a pair of muscles, so 
called from that action that is perform­ 
ed by the help of it, it serving to draw 
the arm backwards and downwards.

ANKER [at Amsterdam] a liquid mea­
sure, the 4th part of the Aem, contain­
ing two Stekans, each Stekan containing 
sixteen Mingles, the Mingle two Paris 
pints.

ANKRED [Heraldry] a sort of cross
born in coats of arms, the ends of which
are in the shape of the stook of an anchor.

ANNALS, histories or chronicles of
things done, from year to year.  L.

ANNALIST, a writer of annals.

ANNIVERSARY Days [with the an­
cient Anglo Saxons] days at the return of
the year, when people used to pray for
the souls of their friends deceased;
which custom the Romanists still retain.

ANNOISANCE [in Lena] nusance, a
hurt or offence either to a publick
place, as a high way, bridge or com­
mon river, or to a private one by lay­
ing any thing that may breed infection;
by encroaching or the like.

ANNOISANCE, the name of a writ
brought upon this transgression.

ANNOLIS [in America] an animal
about the bigness of a Lizard, whose
skin is of a yellowish colour. It conti­
nually proles about the cottages for 
food in the day time, and lies under 
ground at night, making a loud noise.

ANNUAL Pension [in Law] a writ by 
which the king, having an annual pen­
sion due to him from an abbot or pri­
or for any of his chaplains, used to de­
mand it, &c.

ANNUAL Equation [Astronomy] is 
the equation of the mean motion of 
the sun and moon, and of the apogee 
and nodes.

ANNUALS [with Botanists] plants
that are to be raised year by year; such 
as die in the winter.

ANNUITY [of annuus, L. yearly] a
yearly income or rent that is to be paid 
for term of life; an annuity is different 
from a rent only in this, that the form­
er only charges the granter or his heirs, 
whereas a rent is payable out of land.
Dr. Halley, in his observations on 
the Breslaw bills of mortality, shews 
that it is 80 to 1 a person of 25 years of 
age does not die in a year; that it is 5 
and a half to one that a man of 40 lives
7 years; and that one of 30 may reaso­
nably expect to live 27 or 28 years: So 
great a difference there is between the 
life of man at different ages; that it is 
100 to 1 if one of 20 lives out a year;
and but 38 to 1, that one of 50 does so.
When and from some other observa­
tions he has constructed the following 
tables, shewing the value of annuities 
from every 5th year of life to the 70th.

Image omitted.



ANNULAR [annularis, L.] pertain­
ing to a ring.

ANNULAR Ligament [Anatomy] a
strong ligament encompassng the Carpus
or wrist, after the manner of a bracelet.

ANNULET [in Heraldry]
a small ring, which, being a
mark of distinction, the 5th
brother of any family ought
to bear in his coat of arms.

Image omitted.



ANNULETS [with Architects] are
small square parts, turned about in the
Corinthian capital, under the quarter
round or Echinus; others define an An­
nulet to be a narrower flat moulding,
which is common to other parts of a
column, the bases, &c. as well as the 
capital; and is the same member which
sometimes is called the Fillet, a Listel
a Coincture, a Liste, a Tince, a Square, 
a Rabit, and a Supercilium.

ANNONCIADA, as knights of the
Annunciada, an order of knighthood in
Savoy, instituted in memory of the an­
nunciation of the Virgin Mary, institu­
ted by Amadeus, duke of Savoy, Anno
Dom. 1350.

ANNUNTIATE a denomination 
that is common 
to several orders, both religious and mi­
litary among the Roman Catholicks, so
named on account of the annunciation
of the Virgin Mary.

ANNUNTIADA a denomination 
that is common 
to several orders, both religious and mi­
litary among the Roman Catholicks, so
named on account of the annunciation
of the Virgin Mary.

The Feast of the ANNUNCIATION, Lady-day, the 25th of March.

ANOISANCE [of nuisance, F.] any
injury, damage or
hurt done to a pub­
lick place, bridge, highway, &c. or to
a private one by encroachment, by lay­
ing in it any thing that may breed in­
fection, &c.

NOISANCE [of nuisance, F.] any
injury, damage or
hurt done to a pub­
lick place, bridge, highway, &c. or to
a private one by encroachment, by lay­
ing in it any thing that may breed in­
fection, &c. 

NUSANCE [of nuisance, F.] any
injury, damage or
hurt done to a pub­
lick place, bridge, highway, &c. or to
a private one by encroachment, by lay­
ing in it any thing that may breed in­
fection, &c. 

ANOMALISTICAL Year [Astronomy]
is the space of time wherein the earth
passes through her orbit.

ANOMALY [in Astronomy] the di­
stance of a planet from the Aphelion or



Apogee; or an irregularity in the mo­
tion of a planet, whereby it deviates
from the Aphelion or Apogee.

ANOMALY of a Planet mean or equal 
[in the New Astronomy] is the Area, 
which is contained under a certain line
drawn from the sun to the planet.

Mean ANOMALY of the Sun or Planet 
[with Astronomers] is an arch of the ec­
liptick, between the mean place of it, 
and its apogee. In the modern Astrono­
my it is the time wherein the planet
moves from the Aphelion to the mean
place or point of its orbit.

The true ANOMALY of the Center 
[Astronomy] an arch of the zodiack, 
bounded by the true motion of the cen­
ter; in the new Astronomy it is an arch
of the eccentrick circle, included be­
tween the Aphelion and a right line, 
drawn through the center of the planet
perpendicular to the line of the Apsides.

ANOMALY of the Eccentrick [New
Astronomy] an arch of the eccentrick cir­
cle included between the Aphelion, and
a right line drawn thro' the center of
the planet perpendicular to the line of
the Apsides.

True or equated ANOMALY [Astrono­
my] is the angle at the sun which a pla­
net's distance from the Aphelium appears
under; or it is the angle at the Area ta­
ken proportional to the time in which
the planet moves from the mean place
to its Aphelion.

ANOMEANS [of α and ὁμοῖος simi­
lar or like, q. d. dissimilar, Gr.] a name
by which a sect of pure Arians were
called.

ANSPESADES [of lansa spezzada, 
Ital. i. e. a broken lance] in the French
foot-soldiery, a sort of inferior officers
above common centinels, yet below
corporals.

ANTAGONIST [with Anato­
mists a muscle
that has an opposite situation to another
or a contrary function, as the Abductor
of the Cubitus, which serves to pull the
arm back, and the Abductor that stretch­
es it out.


ANTAGONISTA [with Anato­
mists a muscle
that has an opposite situation to another
or a contrary function, as the Abductor
of the Cubitus, which serves to pull the
arm back, and the Abductor that stretch­
es it out.

ANTANACLASIS [ἀντανάχλασις, of
αντὶ and ἀναχλάω, to strike back again, 
Gr.] a reflecting or beating back.

ANTAPODOSIS [ἀνταπό σιςδο, of ἀν­
τὶ against, ἀπὸ from, and δίδωμι, Gr.
to give] a returning or paying on the
other side, or by turns.

ANTARES [with Astronomers] the
scorpion's heart, a fixt star of the first
magnitude in the constellation Scorpio, 
in longitude 45 degrees 13 minutes, la­
titude 4 deg. 27 min.

ANTARTHRITICKS [of ἀντὶ, and
ἀρθριτιχὸς, Gr.] remedies good against
the gout.

ANTASTHMATICKS [of άντὶ and
ἀσθματιχὸς, Gr.] remedies against the
phthisick or shortness of breath.

ANTECEDENCE [antecedens L.] a
going before, L.

ANTECEDENT Decree, a decree
proceeding some other decree, or some
action of the creature, or the provision
of that action.

ANTECEDENTS of the Ratio [with
Mathematicians] is the first term of com­
parison in a proportion, or that which
is compared to another. Thus if the
ratio or proportion were of B to C, or
18 to 16, B or 8 is the antecedent, and
C or 16 the consequent.

ANTECEDENTIA [Astronomy] when
a planet appears to move westward con­
trary to the order or course of the signs.
it is said to move in Antecedentia.

ANTECHAMBER [of ante came­
ra, L.] an outer
chamber of an apartment, where ser­
vants wait, and strangers stay, till the
person is at leisure to whom they
would speak.

ANTICHAMBER [of ante came­
ra, L.] an outer
chamber of an apartment, where ser­
vants wait, and strangers stay, till the
person is at leisure to whom they
would speak.

ANTEDILUVIAN EARTH, is the
earth that then was, before it was des­
troyed by the flood, and which the in­
genious and learned Dr. Thomas Burnet
conceives to be very different from
ours in form, constitution, figure, and
situation, that it was round, smooth, 
even and uniform.
But Dr Woodward, on the contrary;
in his Natural History of the Earth, un­
dertakes to prove.
1. That the face of the earth was not
as Dr. Burnet imagines, smooth, even
and uniform, but as it now is, unequal
distinguished into mountains and dales
and having a sea, lakes, and rivers;
that the sea was then salt as ours is;
that it was then subject to tides, and
possessed nearly the same space it now
does; that the antediluvian earth was
stocked with animals, metals, minerals, 
&c. that it had the same position with
respest to the sun that our earth now
hath, and that of consequence there
was the same succession of weather, 
and the same vicissitudes of seasons that
are at present.

ANTEJURAMENTUM [in Old
Times] an oath which the accuser was
obliged to take before the trial to pro­
secute the accused, and that the accused
was obliged to make oath on the very
day he was to undergo the ordeal, that
he was innocent of the crimes he was 



charged with. If the accuser failed, 
the criminal was set at liberty; if the
accused, he was supposed to be guilty.

ANTEMUNDANE [of ante and mun­
danus, L.] before the beginning or crea­
tion of the world.

ANTERIOUR, something before
another, especially in respect of place.

ANTEROS [probably ἄντερος, Gr.]
the best sort of amethyst, a precious
stone.

ANTHELMINTHICKS [of ἀντὶ and
ἔλμινθος, Gr. a worm] medicines which
destroy worms in human bodies.

ANTHEM [anthema, Ital. q. of ἀνθυ­
μνὸς, Gr.] a church song, performed in
a cathedral, &c. by the choristers, divi­
ded into two chorus's, who sing alter­
nately.

ANTHESPHORIA [of ἄνθος a flower, 
and φέρω I carry, Gr.] a festival celebra­
ted in Sicily in honour of Proserpine, in
memory of the goddess being forced
away by Pluto, while she was gathering
flowers in the fields.

ANTHESTERIA [άνθεστέρια, Gr.] a
festival celebrated by the Athenians in
honour of Bacchus.

ANTHOLOGION [ἀνθολόγιον, of ἄν­
θος, a flower, and λόγος, Gr.] a church
book; also a breviary or mass book, 
with the offices to Christ, the Virgin
Mary, saints and martyrs.

ANTHOLOGY [ἀνθολογία, of ἄνθος, 
a flower, λόγος, a word, or λέγω, to ga­
ther, Gr.] a treatise of flowers, or a
collection of flowers; also a collection
of Greek epigrams.

St. ANTHONY's Fire. See Erysipelas.

ANTHRACOTHEIOSALENI­
TRUM [of ἄνθραξ, a coal, θεῖον, sul­
phur, ἃλς, salt, and νίτρον, nitre, Gr.] all
the ingredients of gunpowder.

ANTHOPOGRAPHY [of Ἄνθρωπος, 
a man, and γραφὴ, Gr. Description] a
physiological discourse or treatise of all
the component parts of a human body.

ANTHROPOLOGY [in Theology] a
way of speaking of God after the man­
ner of men, by attributing to him hu­
man parts, as hands, eyes, &c.

ANTHROPOMANCY [ἄνθρωπος, 
a man, and παντεία, divination, Gr.] di­
vination performed by inspecting the
viscera of a deceased person.

ANTHROPOMORPHUS [ἀνθρωπο­
μόρφος, Gr.] the mandrake, a kind of
plant.

ANTHROPOPHAGY, the act of eat­
ing man's or human flesh.

ANTHYPNOTICS [of ἀντὶ and ἵπνος, 
Gr. sleep] medicines that prevent sleep.

ANTHYPOCHONDRIACA [of ἀντὶ 
ἰποχονδρία medicines good against
diseases of the hypochondria.

ANTI [in affairs of Literature] pie­
ces written by way of answer to others, 
whose names are commonly annexed to
the Anti.

ANTICHAMBER. See Antechamber.

ANTICHRESIS [in the Civil Law] a
covenant or convention between the
debtor and the creditor, as to a loan of
money upon a mortgage or pawn.

ANTICHRIST [Αντιχριστος, of ἀντὶ
against, and Χριστὸς, Christ, Gr.] a name
which St. Paul. gives by way of emi­
nence to the man of sin and son of per­
dition, who as is prophesied in the sa­
cred scriptures shall appear remarkably
in opposition to Christianity at the latter
end of the world.

The reign of Antichrist is computed
to be three years and a half, during
which time there will be a very hot
persecution. Grotius and Dr. Hammond
suppose the time to be past, and the
character of Antichrist to be fulfilled in
the person of Caligula, emperor of
Rome, Simon Magus and the Gnosticks;
but the more general opinion is that the
Pope is the true Antichrist, and accord­
ing at a council held at Gap in 1603, was
inserted in their confession of faith an
article, whereby the Pope is declared
to be Antichrist.

ANTICHRISTIANITY opposite­
ness to
the doctrine of Christ, or the principles, 
&c. of Christians.

ANTICHRISTIANNESS opposite­
ness to
the doctrine of Christ, or the principles, 
&c. of Christians.

ANTICHTHONES, those people
which inhabit countries opposite to each
other; now the same as Antipodes.

ANTIDIAPHORISTS [of ἀντὶ and
διαφέρω, Gr. to differ] those who are op­
posite to the diaphorists.

ANTIDYSENTERICA [of ἀντὶ and
δισεντεριχὸς, Gr.] medicines that are ef­
ficacious against the dysentery or bloody
flux.

ANTILEGOMENA [ἀντιλεγόμενα, 
Gr.] contradictions.

ANTILOEMICA [of ἀντὶ and λοεμὸς, 
Gr. the pestilence] medicines against the
plague.

ANTILOPE, a mungrel creature, 
engender'd by a hart and a goat.

ANTIMETASTASIS [of ἀντὶ and
μετάστασις, Gr. a mutation] a translating
or changing to the contrary part.

ANTIMONARCHICALNESS [of ἀντὶ
and μοναρχιχὸς, Gr.] the being against
government in a single person.

ANTIMONIALS, preparations of
antimony, or such medicines wherein



antimony is the basis or principal ingre­
diet.

ANTIMONY [antimonium, L.] a mi­
neral which consists of a sulphur like
common brimstone, and of a substance
that comes near that of metals. Alchy­
mists call it the Red Lion, because it
turns red, and also the Philosophers wolf, 
because it consumes all metals except
gold; or, as others define it, a semi­
metal, being a fossil glebe, composed of
some undetermined metal, combined
with a sulphureous and stony substance.

ANTIMONY 
[Chym. Writers]
is expressed by
one of these cha­
racters.

Three images omitted.



Calx of ANTIMONY is a white 
powder pro­
duced of the regulus, distilled with spi­
rits of nitre in a sand furnace.

Ceruse of ANTIMONY is a white 
powder pro­
duced of the regulus, distilled with spi­
rits of nitre in a sand furnace.

Cinnabar of ANTIMONY, is prepared
of a mixture of sulphur, mercury and
antimony, sublimed in a luted bolt head, 
and a naked fire.

Crocus of ANTIMONY See Crocus Metallorum.

Liver of ANTIMONY See Crocus Metallorum. 

Butter of ANTIMONY, a white, 
gummous liquor, prepared either of
crude, or regulus of antimony, and cor­
rosive, sublimate, pulveriz'd, mixt, and
distilled by a gentle heat.

Golden sulphur of ANTIMONY is pre­
pared from the scoria arising in prepa­
ring the regulus, by boiling, filtration, 
and adding distill'd vinegar.

Precipitate of ANTIMONY is pre­
pared from the scoria arising in prepa­
ring the regulus, by boiling, filtration, 
and adding distill'd vinegar.

Magistery of ANTIMONY, is a yel­
lowish powder prepared from crude an­
timony, digested in aqua regia, which
becomes an insipid matter, by many re­
peated ablutions in water.

Crude ANTIMONY, is the native mi­
neral antimony, melted down and cast
in cones: called also Antimony in sub­
stance.

Prepared ANTIMONY, is that which
has past under some chymical process, 
by which the nature and powers of it
have been altered and abated.

Regulus of ANTIMONY, a ponderous, 
metallick powder, which, upon fusing
some of that mineral in its crude state, 
sinks to the bottom, leaving the scoria
or impurities on the top.

Glass of ANTIMONY, is the crude
antimony and calcined by a very vehe­
ment fire in an earthen crucible, till it
leaves off fuming, and then vitrified in
a wind furnace.

Flowers of ANTIMONY, are the vo­
latile parts that stick to the subliming 
pot, after having been pulveriz'd and
sublimed in aludels.

ANTINOMIALS [of ἀντὶ against, 
and νομος, the law, Gr.] a sect who re­
ject the law, as of no force under the
Gospel. They assert that good works 
do not further, nor evil works hinder
salvation; that a child of God cannot
sin; that adultery, drunkenness, mur­
der, &c. are no sins in them; but are
in the wicked. That Abraham's lying
and dissembling was no sin.

That a child of grace having once
arriv'd at an assurance (in his own
mind) of salvation, never doubts after­
wards, and that no man ought to be
troubled in his conscience on account
of sin, nor that any Christian should be
exhorted to perform the duties of Chri­
stianity.

That a hypocrite may have all the
graces that were in Adam before the
fall.

That Christ is the only subject of all
grace, that no Christian believeth or
worketh any good; but that it is Christ
alone who believeth and worketh it.

That God does not love any man for
his holiness; that sanctification is no
evidence of justification.

ANTINOUS [Astronomy] a part of
the constellation, named aquila or the
eagle.

ANTIPATHETICALNESS, the ha­
ving an antipathy, or antipathetical
quality.

ANTIPATHY [antipathia, L. of ἀντι­
παθεία, of ἀντὶ against, and πάθος, the
passion] some say the reason of antipa­
thy between animals is, that by the
sight of such objects certain impressions
are transmitted thro' the fibres of the
nerves into the brains, which convey
the animal spirits into the nerves;
which, upon the blood being rarified
aster another manner than is usual, 
sends into the brains those spirits, which
are adapted to the fomenting or che­
rishing of terror. And again as effluvia
and spirituous steams proceed from the
bodies of all creatures, some of which
disagree with others, they do excite an­
ger and hatred in each other.

ANTIPELARGY [antipelargia, L. of
ἀντιπελαργία of πέλαργος, Gr. a stork, 
because of the gratitude of storks, who
feed their fires or dams when old] a
mutual thankfulness or requital of a be­
nefit; but especially a child's nourishing
a parent in old age.

ANTIPENDIUM [with the Romanists]
a silver skreen, which covers the front



of an altar, which is hanged on with
screws upon a festival day.

ANTIPERISTALTICK, belonging to
antiperistasis.

ANTIPHRASTICALLY [of antiphra­
sis, L. of ἀντιφρασις, Gr.] by way of
Antiphrasis.

ANTIPODES [in Geography] such in­
habitants of the earth, who dwell in
opposite parallels of latitude, and under
the opposite half of the same meridian, 
and walk with their feet directly oppo­
site one to another. The antipodes
have the same length of day and night, 
but at contrary times; when it is noon
with the one, it is midnight with the
other; and the longest day with the one
is the shortest with the other; they
have likewise the same degree of heat
and cold; they have likewise their sum­
mer and winter, the rising and letting
of the stars quite contrary one to ano­
ther.

ANTIPYRETICUM [of ἀντὶ and πι­
ρετὸς a fiery heat] a medicine that allays
the heat of fevers.

ANTIQUATEDNESS [of antiquatus, 
L.] the being grown out of use or date.

ANTIQUE [antiquus, L.] ancient.
Antique is chiefly used by architects, car­
vers, painters, &c. and is apply'd to
such pieces of work as were performed
at the time when those arts were in
the greatest perfection among the Greeks
and Romans, or after the time of Alex­
ander the Great to the irruption of the
Goths, and also the Intaglia's within
that time, and is used in opposition to
Modern.

ANTIQUE, is sometimes used in
contradistinction to Ancient, which lat­
ter is used to signify a less degree of an­
tiquity, when the art was not in its
utmost purity.

ANTIQUO modern, a term used of
old Gothick buildings to distinguish them
from the Roman and Greek ones.

ANTISCION SIGNS [in Astrology]
signs, which with reference to each o­
ther, are equally distant from the two
tropical signs Cancer and Capricorn; so
that when a planet is in such a station
it is said to cast its antiscion, i. e. to
give a virtue or influence to another
star or planet that is in the opposite
sign.

ANTISCORODON [of ἀντὶ and σχὸρ­
οδον, Gr.] a sort of garlick call'd Allum
Cyprium.

ANTISPASTOS [ἀντὶσπαστος, Gr.]
a foot in Greek or Latin verse, which
has the first syllable short, the second
and third long, as Alexander.

ANTISTERNON [of ἀντὶ opposite to
and στέρνον the breast] the back-bone.

ANTISTROPHE, a counter-turn. In
stage-plays among the ancients, a term
us'd to signify the turning of the chorus
or the choir the contrary way; the
Strophe or first turn of the fingers be­
ing on one side of the stage, and the
Antistrophe or counter turn on the other.

ANTISTROPHE [in Lyrick Poetry]
is used of an ode which is generally di­
vided into its Strophe and Antistrophe, 
and is a kind of eccho or replication to
the Strophe.

ANTITACTÆ [of ἀντιτάχτω, to op­
pose or be contrary to a sort or sect
of Gnosticks, who held that God the
Creator of the universe was good and
just; but that one of his creatures had
created evil, and engaged mankind to
follow it, in opposition to God; and
that it is the duty of mankind to op­
pose this author of evil, in order to
avenge God of his enemy.

ANTITHENAR [of ἀντὶ and θέναῥ, 
Gr.] one of the muscles which extend the
thumb; it is also a muscle of the great
toe, arising from the inferior part of the
third Os cuneiforme, and passing oblique­
ly is inserted into Ossa Sessamoidea.

ANTITYPICAL [of antitypum, L.
ἀντιτυπον, Gr.] pertaining to an antitype.

ANTIVENEREALNESS [of ἀντὶ, Gr.
and Venereus, L.] the being useful a­
gainst venereal distempers.

Bes ANTLER, the start or branch
next above the brow antler.

Brow ANTLER, the start or branch
next the head.

ANTOCOW [with Horse-doctors] a
round swelling about half as big as a
man's fist, breaking out in the breast of
a horse directly against his heart.

ANTOECI [of ἀντὶ over against or 
opposite to and οἰχέω, 
Gr. to dwell] a name given by geogra­
phers to those inhabitants of the earth,
who dwell under the same meridian, 
but under opposite parallels; so that
they inhabit in the same zone and the
same climate, but under different poles, 
and have their noon and midnight at the
same time, but at different seasons, it
being summer with the one while it is
winter with the other.

ANTIOECI [of ἀντὶ over against or 
opposite to and οἰχέω, 
Gr. to dwell] a name given by geogra­
phers to those inhabitants of the earth,
who dwell under the same meridian, 
but under opposite parallels; so that
they inhabit in the same zone and the
same climate, but under different poles, 
and have their noon and midnight at the
same time, but at different seasons, it
being summer with the one while it is
winter with the other.

ANT, an emmet, a pismire, a small
insect well known.

ANTS [Hieroglyphically] were used by
the ancients to represent laborious per­
sons, diligent and industrious in their
callings. For ants are very laborious, 
industrious creatures, and also ready to
give assistance to their fellows. And



the Egyptian priests, in order to signify
a country destroy'd by sickness or war, 
put a few ants near the herb Origanum, 
the scent of which they cannot endure.
And it is related of the eastern farmers, 
that in order to preserve their corn
from ants, they were wont to cover it
With Origanum.

ANUBIS [anupta, of a privative and
nubere, to marry, L.] call'd also Isis, a
goddess of the Egyptians, who, the poets
say, was lno, the daughter of Inachus, 
whom Jupiter having lain with, trans­
form'd into a white cow, to skreen her
from the rage and jealousy of his wife
Juno; after her death she was ador'd
by the Egyptians, her hair was preserv'd
as a sacred relick in her temple at
Memphis, she was honour'd as the god­
dess of navigation and the weather.
Her statue was a cow with horns, or, 
as some say, an image with the head of
a dog, holding a palm in one hand, and
a caduce in the other. Her priests were
initiated with blood and water, had
their heads and beards shaven, and wore
all white linnen garments. At the en­
trance of her temple was the statute of
a Sphinx, to signify that she was a my­
sterious goddess. For her sake the E­
gyptians kept in the corner of her tem­
ple a white cow, for which when it dy'd
they all mourned as for a prince, till
another was put in the place of the
dead beast. The same is said of Apis.
See Isis and Ino.

ANVIL [anfilt, Sax.] a massey iron
instrument on which smiths, &c. ham­
mer their work.

ARising ANVIL, an anvil having two
nooks or corners, for rounding any
piece of metal.

ANXIOUSNESS [of anxieté, F. of an­
xius, L.] anxiety.

ANY [aniʒ, Sax.]

APÆRESIS [with Rhetoricians] a fi­
gure when some matter is called in
question, which we willed the judge to
remember.

APAGOREUSIS [ἀπαγόρευσις, Gr.] a
figure in rhetorick called an interdiction
or forbidding,  L.

APATHETICALNESS [of apathia, L.
of ἀπαθία, Gr.] a freedom from pas­
sion, and insensibility of pain.

APATURIA [ἀπατοίρια, Gr.] festivals
held in Athens in honour of Bacchus.
Æthra having made an ordinance, that
the Troezenian virgins should before
marriage offer up their girdles to Pal­
las Apaturia.

APAUME [in Heraldry] signifies an
hand opened or extended, with the full 
palm appearing, and the thumb and fin­
gers at full length,  F.

APE [a&wyn;a, Sax.] a monkey.

APE an animal that of all creatures
comes the nearest to or is most like
the figure of a man.

There are several species of them, 
some with and others without a tail;
some have longer heads or snouts like
a dog, others have a rounder head and
flattish nose; the toes of their hinder
feet are as long as those of their fore­
feet or fingers; they have for the most
part red hair inclining to be greenish;
some are all white, some red upon their
backs, and their breast, belly, and in­
side of their thighs and arms, white or
gray.

These animals have many stratagems
to save and defend themselves. They
live for the most part when wild on the
tops of trees, and leap from branch to
branch with admirable agility.

They have a sort of pouch on both
sides of their jaws where they hide what
food they would keep.

The females produce but one young
one at a birth, which they carry on
their back but take it in their arms like
a women when they suckle it, and of­
fer the teat to it.

The Egyptians us'd to worship them
and so do the Indians at this day.

The inhabitants of Goa dreaded the
killing of an ape or a serpent, believing
them to be spirits created by God to
punish mankind for their sins.

APE [Hieroglyphically] was used by the
Egyptians, frequently to express the vices
of men; and they painted an ape pissing
and covering his excrements, to repre­
sent a dissembler or crasty fellow, that
would conceal the vices and weaknesses
of his person: For this animal is very
careful to hide and bury his excrements.
An ape is also a symbol of an impudent
and wicked fellow, and one who ad­
mires himself.

APECHEMA [of ἀπὸ and ῆχά, i. e. an
Echo, Gr.] a contra-fissure, when a
blow is given on one side, and the frac­
ture made on the other.

APERIENTS [in Medicine] aperient
medicines, aperitives, such as open the
obstructed passages of the smail vessels, 
glands and pores, and by that means
promote a due circulation of the con­
tained juices.

APERIENT Seeds [in Medicines] are
grass, madder, eryngo, capers and cam­
mock, called the lesser; smallage, fen­
nel, asparagus, parsley and butcher's
broom, called the five greater.



APERT [apertus, L.] open.

APERTURE [apertura] the open­
ing of any thing, or
a hole left in some subject, otherwise
solid or contiguous.

APERTION [apertura] the open­
ing of any thing, or 
a hole left in some subject, otherwise
solid or contiguous.

APERTURE [with Geometricians]
the space left between two lines, which
mutually incline towards each other to
form an angle.

APETALOUSNESS [of α priv. and
πέταλον, Gr. a leaf] being without leaves.

APEX [in Geometry] the top of a
cone, or any such like figure, ending in
a sharp point.

APHELON
AFHELIUM 
[Ἀφήλιον of ἀ­
πὸ and ἢλιος, 
the sun, Gr.]
a name giv­
en by astro­
nomers to
that point of
the orbit of
the earth or a planet, in which it is at
the farthest distance from the sun that
can be; thus a planet A in the figure, 
is in its utmost distance or Aphelion, S.

Image omitted.



APHRONITRON [of ἀφρος froth, and
νίτρον, Gr. nitre] a kind of nitre suppo­
sed by the ancients to be spume or the
subtilest and lightest part of it, emerg­
ing at the top.

APHYXIA [of άφυξῶ, Gr. to draw
out] a cessation of a pulse thro' the
whole body, being the highest degree
of swooning next to death.

APHTHARDOCITES [of ἀφθαρτὸς in­
corruptible, and δοχέω, to think] &c. He­
reticks who held that the body of Jesus
Christ was incorruptible and impassible.

APICIAN Art [so called of Apicius a
famous voluptuary] voluptuousness, or
voluptuous cookery.

APIS was a god of the Egyptians.
The head of his image is said to be that
of a bull : or, as some say, the whole
of the image was that of a bull, bear­
ing upon his hide some particular marks.

He was to be the calf of a cow inca­
pable of bearing another, and no other­
wise to be impregnated (as the Egypti­
an, imagined) than by thunder. The
marks which distinguished him from all
others were these : his body was black, 
except one square of white on the fore­
head, and a knot like beetle under his
tongue. Others reckon 29 marks pecu­
liar to this beast. They sacrificed bulls
to him, and were very nice in the
choice; they killed them, flead them, 
struck off their heads, and carried it
with many imprecations to market and 
sold it to some Grecian; but if no such
person were to be found, they threw it
into the river, with this form of exe­
cration, may the evils impending over the
persons now sacrificing, or the Egyptians
in general, fall upon this head. When
the Apis died, and his funeral pomp was
over, the priests who had this office
sought out another with the same marks, 
and when they had found one, the la­ 
mentations immediately ceased; and the
priests led the calf first unto the city of
Nile, where he was fed for 40 days, from
thence he was transported in a vessel
with a gilded cabin to Memphis, as their
god, ana turned into the grove of Vulcan.
The reason they gave for this worship
was, because the soul of Osiris, as they
pretended, migrated into a bull of this
sort, and by a successive transmigration
passed from one to another, as often as
one died and another was found. The
Apis was consulted as an oracle, the
manner of consulting him was by obser­
ving into which chamber of the two
that were prepared for him he entred, 
his going into the one of them being
construed as a good omen; and into the
other as a bad one; or else they offered
him food, and from his accepting or
refusing it, concluded the answer fa­
vourable, or on the contrary. 

And the golden calf which the Israel­
ites made is said to be the image of this
idol Apis; and the manner of their wor­
shipping it was much the same as was
that of Apis, for they mightily rejoyc'd
feasted and danc'd round it. 

Some Hebrew writers relate, that the
generation of those that were so pro­
fane as to worship this image were
stigmatized with yellow beards. 

The greatest solemnities of the Egypt­ 
ians were to the god Apis. This deity
was to live a certain number of years
and at the expiration of them the priests
drowned him in the river Nile, and
all the land mourned and lamented for
his death till there was another ox
found that had the same marks upon
him, and then there was an universal
rejoicing all over the country expres­
sed by all manner of sports and ban­
quets.

APISH [of A&wyn;a, Sax. an ape] given
to mimick, ridiculous.

APISHNESS, mimicalness, &c.

APOBATERION [of ἀποβαὶνω to de­
part, Gr.] a farewell speech or poem
upon a person's going out of his own
country, or some other place, where
he had been kindly entertained.



APOCALYPTICALLY [of ἀποχαλυπ
τιχὸς, Gr.] by way of revelation.

APOCOMETRY [of ἀπὸ and μετρέω, 
Gr. to measure] the art of measuring
things at a distance.

APOCROUSTICKS [apocroustica L.]
Medicines which obstruct the flowing
of the humours into any particular part 
of the body, and repel them that are
beginning to flow.

APOCRYPHALNESS [of ἀπόχρυφὸς,
Gr.] hiddenness, mysteriousness.

APODICTICALLY [of ἀποδειξις, 
Gr.] by the rhetorical figure Apodeixis.

APOGRAPHY [ἀπόγραφον, Gr.] an in­
ventory of goods, a copy or transcript
of some book or writing, a pattern or
draught.

APOLEPSY [Apolesia, L. of Ἀπολεψία, 
Gr. a receiving or recovering] an inter­
cepting or preventing.

APOLLINARIANS [so called of
Apollinaris
of Laodicea, their leader] an antient
sect of Hereticks who denied that Jesus
Christ assumed true flesh; but a strange
kind of flesh, which they fancied existed
from all eternity.

APOLLINARISTS [so called of
Apollinaris
of Laodicea, their leader] an antient
sect of Hereticks who denied that Jesus
Christ assumed true flesh; but a strange
kind of flesh, which they fancied existed
from all eternity.

APOLLINARIAN Games [with the
Romans] solemn games held annually in
honour of Apollo, on account of a show­
er of darts and arrows that (as the­
tradition goes) fell on their enemies, 
who suddenly invaded them, at the first
celebration of these games, and by this
means the Romans being victors, soon
returned to their sports.

APOLLO [according to the poets] was
the son of Jupiter and Latona, born in
the island Delos, which lay under water
floating in the Ægean sea: Juno being
enraged at her husband's amours, had
covenanted with the earth to allow Ino
no other place; but Neptune out of pity
raised it up and fixed it. When Apollo
came of age, remembring to what shifts
and extremities the serpent Python, had
put his mother, he slew him. After
this, Apollo begat Æsculapius who re­
stored Hippolitus to life, for which Jupi­
ter struck him with a thunder-bolt.
Apollo, because he could not be reven­
ged of Jupiter himself, slew the Cyclops
that made the thunder-bolt, for which
Jupiter being incensed, banished him
out of heaven, and deprived him of the
privileges of his divinity for a time:
upon which he entered himself into
the service of Admetus, king of Thessaly, 
and was his shepherd, and thence came
to be esteemed the god of shepherds.
Afterwards falling under another mis­
fortune, by accidentally killing his boy 
Hyacinthus, he fled to Troy, and there
meeting with Neptune, under the like
misfortune, they assisted Laomedon in
building his city, who having perfidi­
ously denied them the reward of their
labours, Neptune in revenue almost
drowned the city, and Apollo sent a
pestilence among the people. But at
length Apollo re-assumed his divinity, 
and became one of the most noted of
all the gods not only by the great num­
ber of the oracles he is said to have gi­
ven in several parts of the world, but
also by the several functions attributed
to him. See Delphos, Cortina, Tripos.

Apollo was one of the most genteel of
the heathen gods, of whom they do not
relate such filthy stories as of the other
They make him the god of wisdom,
physick, musick, learning, &c.

The antients represented him as a
young man, without a beard, and rays
of light about his head, having in one
hand a harp and the three graces, and
in the other a shield and arrows. 

He was also represented with long
curled hair, crowned with laurel, in a
purple robe, a silver bow in his hand, 
placed on a throne of Emeralds.

APOLOGETICALLY [of ἀπολογετι­
χὸς, Gr.] by way of apology.

APOMECOMETRY [of ἀπὸ and με­
τρέω, Gr. to measure] an art of shewing
how to measure things at a distance, or
to find how far they are off from us.

APOPHLEGMATICK Medicine [of
ἀποφλεγματίζειν, to purge the head of
phlegm] medicines to be chewed that
have the faculty to purge the head and
brain of cold phlegmatick humours by
the nose, mouth, &c.

APOPHYGE [ἀποφυγὴ, Gr.] a flight
or escape.

APOPHYGE [Architecture] that part
of a column where it begins to spring
out of its base, and shoot upwards, but
this apophyge originally was really no
more than the ring or ferril antiently
fastened at the extremities of wooden
pillars to keep them from splitting, and
which afterwards was imitated in
stone-work.

APOPLEXY [Ἀποπληξία of Ἀποπλήτ­
τείν, to strike or astonish] a disease
which is a sudden privation of all the
senses, and sensible motions of the body, 
those of the heart and lungs being ex­
cepted, and is attended with the depri­
vation of the principal faculties of the
soul, by reason that the passages of the
brain are stopt, and the course of the
animal spirits hindered.

APORON [Ἀπόρον of α privat. and



πὸρος a passage, Gr.] a problem in the
mathematicks, which, though it is not
impossible, is nevertheless very difficult
to be resolved, and has not actually
been resolved, such as the squaring of
the circle, &c.

APORIA [with Rhetoricians] a figure
where the orator is at a stand what to
do, as, shall I speak out, or be silent?

APOSIOPESIS [Ἀποσιωπησὶς of ἀπο­
σιωπάω, to hold one's peace, Gr.] reti­
cency, silentness.

APOSPHARANIDOSIS [Ἀῶοσφαρανδώ
σις, Gr.] a punishment inflicted by the
Greeks on adulterers, by thrusting a
horse-radish root up the Anus.

APOSPASMA [with Surgeons] the
drawing of one part from another, 
which naturally stuck to it; as when the
skin is separated from a membrane, a
membrane from a muscle, one muscle
from another, &c.

APOSTATICALLY [of apostata, L. of
ἀποστάτης, Gr.] after the manner of an
apostate.

APOSTUME [of ἀποστήμα of ἀφἰστα­
θαι Gr. to depart] a preter-natural tu­
mour or swelling, caused by corrupt
matter collected together in any part
of the body commonly called an Impost­
hume.

APOSTOLICALLY [apostoliquement, 
F. of Ἀποστόλος, Gr.] after the manner
of an apostle.

APOSTOLICALNESS, the being of
apostolical appointment.

APOSYRMA [with Surgeons] a sha­
ving of the skin or of a bone.

APOTACTITÆ [of ἀποτάσσω or 
ἀποτάττω I re­
nounce, Gr.] a sect, who antiently af­
fected to follow the evangelical counsels
of poverty, and the examples of the
apostles and primitive christians, by re­
nouncing all their effects and possessions.

APOTACTICI [of ἀποτάσσω or 
ἀποτάττω I re­
nounce, Gr.] a sect, who antiently af­
fected to follow the evangelical counsels
of poverty, and the examples of the
apostles and primitive christians, by re­
nouncing all their effects and possessions.

APOTELESM [apotelesma, L. Ἀποτε­
λέσμα, Gr.] a declaration of the signifi­
cation of the stars in a nativity; a cal­
culation of a nativity.

APOTELESMATICKS [Apotelesma­
tici, L. of Ἀποτελεσμστιχοὶ of ἀποτελέω, 
Gr. to perfect] mathematicians who cal­
culate nativities by the stars, and hold­
all things subject to the power of the
planets.

APOTHECARIES, 
having separated them­
selves from the an­
cient society of Gro­
cers, grew so much in
favour with king
James I. that he used
to call them his com­
pany, and gave them a charter of in­
corporation, in the fifteenth year of
his reign. Their arms are argent.
Apollo arm'd with a bow and arrow, 
surmounted a Python. Their supporters
two unicorns, the crest a rhinoceros
surmounting a torce and helmet, The
motto, Opifer per orbem dicor.

Image omitted.



APOTHEOSIS [ἀποθείωσις, Gr.] or
a consecration of emperors, the manner
of their performing which was as fol­
lows: when the body of an emperor
had been buried according to the cu­
stom, his effigies of wax was placed at
the entry of the palace, upon a large
bed of ivory, sumptuously adorn'd, and
the physicians visited it for seven days, 
treating it as if it had been alive in a
fit of sickness. In the mean while all
the senate and nobility of Rome were
present in mourning habits. After the
expiration of these seven days, he was
held for dead, and then they removed
him to a publick place, where the ma­
gistrates quitted their offices. 

There the new emperor ascended
upon a high pulpit called Rostra, be­
cause it was adorn'd with the Items of
ships taken from the enemies in sea-­
fights; and thence he made a funeral
oration in praise of the deceased.

When this was ended, they carried
the image of the deceased emperor out
of the city to the field of Mars, where
there was erected a stately pile of aro­
matick wood to burn it; the Roman
gentry having rid round the pile several
times in order, the new emperor with
a torch set fire to the pile of wood; and
then an eagle was let fly from the top
of it, which was imagin'd to carry the
soul of this new God into heaven: when
an empress was thus burnt, they let fly
an eaglet instead of an eagle.

APOTHEOSIS, of an emperor, was
hieroglyphically represented on a me­
dal, by an eagle ascending up to heaven
out of the flame of the funeral pile.

APOTHERAPY [apotherapia, L. of
Ἀποθεραπεία, Gr.] that part of physick
that cures or prevents weariness from
too much labour.

APOTOME [in Mathematicks] 
is the remainder or difference of
two incommensurable quantities, 
an irrational residue as DC, when
from a rational line BD, call'd b, 
you cut off a rational part BC, 
call'd c, only commenfurable in
power to the whole line B D.

Image omitted.



To APPALE [of appalir, F.] to 
daunt, astonish or discourage.



APPANVAGE, See Appennage.

APPARATUS, is used to signify the
utensils pertaining to a machine, as the
apparatus of a Microscope, Air-pump, &c.

APPARATUS [with Surgeons] the
bandages, medicaments and dressings of
a part.

APPARATUS major and minor [with
Lithotomists] the greater and lesser pre­
paration, two different method of cut­
ting for the stone,  L.

High APPARATUS [with Lithoto­
mists] is performed by making an inci­
sion above the groin along the Linea al­
ba, into the fund of the bladder; and 
thro' that they extract the stone.

The small or low APPARATUS, is
performed by thrusting the two fore­
fingers up the fundament till tiny touch
or come against the stone, and with
them drive it to the neck of the blad­
der, and extract it from thence, thro'
an incision in the Perinæum.

APPARENT Heir, one whose title is
clear beyond dispute or contradiction.

APPARENT Conjunction [Astronomy]
is when the right line supposed to be
drawn thro' the centers of two planets
does not pass through the center of the
earth, but thro' the spectator's eye.

APPARENT Horizon [Astronomy] is
that great circle which limits our sight;
or that place where the heavens and
earth seem to us to meet.

APPARENT Colours [according to
the old natural philosophy] those co­
lours that are often seen in clouds, be­
fore the rising or after the setting of the
sun; or those in the rainbow, &c. But
these they will not allow to be true co­
lours, because they are not permanent
or lasting. These are called also em­
phatical colours.

APPARENTNESS [apparentia, L.]
plainness to be seen.

APPARITION [with Astronomers] is
the becoming visible of a star or other
luminary which before was hid.

APPARITOR [in the Univirsity] a
sort of beadle, who carries the mace
before the matters, faculties, &c.

APPARLEMENT [in Common Law]
likelihood, likeness or resemblance, as
apparlement of War.

To APPEACH, the same as to im­
peach, i. e. to accuse one of any crime.

APPEAL [of appellatio, L. whence
appel, F.] the removing a cause from an
inferior judge or court to a superior, in
order to rectify something amiss in a
sentence pass'd by an inferior judge; it
is also an accusation or declaration of
the crime of any person; particularly
the accusing of a murderer by a person 
who is interested in the party murther­
ed.

APPEAL by Bill [in Law] is where
a man of himself gives up his accusati­
on in writing, offering to undergo the
burden of appealing the person therein
named.

APPEAL by Writ [in Law] is when a
writ is purchased out of chancery by one
to another, to the intent that he appeal
a third person of some felony commit­
ted by him, finding pledges that he
shall do it.

APPEARANCE [apparentia, L.] the
exterior surface of a thing; or that
which first strikes the sense or the ima­
gination.

APPEARANCE [in Prospective] is the
representation of a figure, body or the
like object, upon the perspective plain.

APPEARANCES [with Astronomers]
are more usually call'd Phænomena.

To save APPEARANCES, is seemingly
to discharge one's duty, or to acquit
himself of the formalities or externals
of it, so as to save his character and
avoid giving offence or scandal.

APPEASABLE [of appaiser, F.] that
may be pacified.

APPEASABLENESS, capableness of
being pacified.

APPELLATIVELY [of appellatif, F.
appellativus, L.] by way of appellation.

To APPEN'D [appendere, L.] to hang
up or to.

APPENDANT [appendens, L.] hang­
ing to.

APPENDED Remedies [in Medicine]
are such as are outwardly applied by
hanging about the neck.

APPENNAGE the fortune, or 
portion which a
soveraign prince gives to his younger
son or children. The younger sons of
England have no certain appennages, 
but only what the king is pleased to be­
stow upon them; but in France the
king's younger sons have (by virtue of
the law of Appannage) dutchies, coun­
ties, or baronies granted to them and
their heirs, the reversion reserved to
the crown, and all matters of regality, 
as coinage, levying taxes, &c.  F.

APPANNAGE the fortune, or 
portion which a
soveraign prince gives to his younger
son or children. The younger sons of
England have no certain appennages, 
but only what the king is pleased to be­
stow upon them; but in France the
king's younger sons have (by virtue of
the law of Appannage) dutchies, coun­
ties, or baronies granted to them and
their heirs, the reversion reserved to
the crown, and all matters of regality, 
as coinage, levying taxes, &c. F.

APPETIBLENESS [of appetibilis, L.]
worthiness to be desired.

APPETITE [by Philosophers] is de­
fined a desire of enjoying something
wanted, or a complacency in the enjoy­
ment of a thing present. It is distin­
guish'd into voluntary and natural.

Voluntary APPETITE [with School­
men] is the will itself acting under a
competent knowledge or information
of the matter in hand, as the desire of
Happiness.



Natural APPETITE [with Schoolmen]
a sort of instinct, whereby we are me­
chanically pushed on to consult our
own preservation.

APPETITION, an earnest desire, or
eager pursuit after.

APPLICATE [with Geometricians] is
a right line drawn across a curve, so as
to bissect the diameter. In a conick sec­
tion it is called the ordinate or semi or­
dinate.

APPLICATION [with Divines] is
used for the act whereby our Saviour
transfers or makes over to us what he
had purchased by the sanctity of his life
and death.

To APPLY [by Geometricians] is used
in several senses; to fit quantities, the
areas of which are equal; but the fi­
gures different, so that they shall con­
form one to another. Again,

To APPLY, is used for to transfer or
inscribe a line given into a circle or any
other figure, so that it may be fitted or
accommodated there, as that its extre­
mities may touch the circle. And also,
 
To APPLY [with Geometricians] is
used to express division, and thus they
say, applica 8 ad 24, when they would
have 24 divided by 8. And also, for
to multiply by the same writers they
say, thus duc 8 in 12, when they would
have 12 multiplied by 8.

APPOSITION [with Philosophers] an
addition of matter to any body out­
wardly; but it is usually applied to the
encrease of bodies without life; and is
call'd also accretion, and juxta-position.

APPOSITENESS [of appositus, L.]
fitness for the purpose.

APPRAISEMENT, the valuation of
any thing.

APPREHENSIVENESS [of apprehen­
sivus, L.] aptness to apprehend, sensible­
ness.

APPRENTICESHIP, the time of an
apprentice's service.

To APRICATE [apricari, L.] to set
abroad in the sun.

APPROACHABLENESS [of appro­
Cher, F.] easiness of being approached.

APPROPRIATE [appropriatus, 
L.] a term u­
sed by philosophers of something which
is indeed common to several; yet in
some respects is peculiarly attributed.

APPROPRIATED [appropriatus, 
L.] a term u­
sed by philosophers of something which
is indeed common to several; yet in
some respects is peculiarly attributed.

APPROPRIATE [in Law] signifies
a church or benefice, the patronage of
which is annexed to some church dig­
nity, so that the parson receives the
tithes.

APPROPRIATENESS [of approprier, 
F. appropriatum, L.] fitness for some
other thing, &c.

APPROPRIATION, is the appointing
a thing to a particular use. In an Ec­
clesiastical sense it is applying the bene­
fice of a church to the proper and per­
petual use of some religious communiry.

It is where the advowson of a parso­
nage belongs to a bishoprick or religi­
ous house, college, &c. and their suc­
cessors, so that the body is both patron
and parson, and some one of their mem­
bers officiates as vicar.

These appropriations were introdue'd
in the time of William the conqueror:
The Parochial clergy being then gene­
rally Saxons, and the bishops and tem­
poral clergy Normans, they made no
scruple to impoverish the inferior cler­
gy to enrich the monasteries, which
were generally possess'd by the friends
of the conqueror.

Where the churches and tithes were
so appropriated, the vicar had only such
a competency as the bishop or his supe­
rior thought fit to allow.

APPROVABLE [of approver, F. ap­
probare, L.] that may be approved.

APPROVEMENT [approveamentum, 
Law, L.] is used for improvement by
ancient writers.

APPROXIMATION, a coming or
putting near to,  L.

APPROXIMATION [in Natural Ma­
gick] is one of the methods of transplan­
tation or the removing a disease from
one creature to another, or from an
animal to a plant.

APPUI [with Horsemen] is the stay
upon the horse-man's hand, or the reci­
procal sense between the horse's mouth
and the bridle hand; or the horse's
sense of the action of the bridle in the
horseman's hand.

A full APPUI [in Horsemanship] is a
firm stay without resting very heavy, 
and without bearing upon the horse­
man's hand.

A more than full APPUI [with Horse­
men] a term they use of a horse that is
stopt with some force, but still so that
he does not force the horseman's hand.

APRIL [of aperiendo, L. opening, be­
cause the pores of the earth are then
opened] the fourth month from Decem­
ber. The ancients painted this month
like a young man cloathed in green
with a garland of myrtle, and haw­
thorn buds, winged, holding in one
hand primroses and violets, and in the
other the celestial sign Taurus.

APSIDES [of Ἀψὶς, Gr. a vault or
arch] so called because vaulted over, a
kind of private oratories or chappels in
great churches; also called Doxalia or
Doxologia, and is used in the Low-Coun­



tries for a kind of choir or place be­
yond the altar, where the religious sit
and sing the office without being seen
by the people.

APT [aptus, L.] fit, proper, meet, 
convenient, propense, or forwardly in­
clined to.

To APTATE [aptatum, L.] to make
fit.

APYROTOS [ἀπυροτὸς, Gr.] the best
sort of a carbuncle which glows as tho'
burning, yet cannot be hurt by fire.

AQUA, water, rain; also waterish
humour,  L.

AQUA Cælestis [with Chymists] hea­
venly water, i. e. rectify'd wine,  L.

AQUA
Communis
 [in Chy­
mical Wri­
ters] is expressed by these characters,  L.

Image omitted.



AQUA Distillata, distilled Wa­
ter, a water drawn by the distilling any
kind of herbs and drugs,  L.

AQUA Distillata [in Chymi­
cal Writings] is express'd by
this character,  L.

Image omitted.



AQUA omnium florum [with Physici­
ans] i. e. water of all flowers; the wa­
ter distilled from the dung of cows
when they go to grass,  L.

AQUA FORTIS [i. e. Strong Water]
a corrosive liquor serving as a menstru­
um wherewith to dissolve silver, and all
other metals, except gold. It is made
of a mixture of purify'd nitre or salt­
peter, vitriol calcin'd white, and pot­
ter's earth or clay, distilled in a close
reverberatory, the fumes condensing in
the receiver are the Aqua fortis,  L.

AQUA FORTIS [in Chymi­
cal Writers] is expressed by
this character,  L.

Image omitted.



AQUA intercus [with Physicians] the
dropsy,  L.

AQUA Marina, a precious stone of a 
sea-green colour,  L.

AQUA Pericardii [with Physicians]
that liquor or humour that is collected
about the heart, serving to cool it.

AQUA Regia [i. e. Royal Water]
a liquor made by
dissolving sal armoniac in spirit of nitre, 
and so called because it dissolves gold,  L.

AQUA Regialis [i. e. Royal Water]
a liquor made by
dissolving sal armoniac in spirit of nitre, 
and so called because it dissolves gold,  L.

AQUA 
REGA­
LIS [in 
Chymical 
Writings] is expressed by one of these
characters,  L.

Image omitted.



AQUA Secunda [with Surgeons] a li­
quor made of common water, and the
powder or precipitate of silver; it is 
used to cause an escar to fall off in shan­
kers and to consume proud flesh,  L.

AQUA VITA [i. e. water of life] a
sort of cordial liquor formerly made of
brew'd beer strongly hopped, and well
fermented; now it is commonly under­
stood of spirits, geneva, and the like.

AQVA VITÆ [in Chym.
Writers] is expressed by
this charaster.  L.

Image omitted.



AQUABIBE [of aqua,
Water, and bibere to drink,
L.] a water drinker.

AQUÆDUCT [aquæductus, L.] a
conveyance of water by pipes, a con­
duit of water; it is a construstion of stone
or timber made on uneven ground, to
preserve the level of the water, and
convey it by a canal from one place to
another.

AQUÆDUCT [with Anatomists] a
passage or perforation, partly membra­
nous, and partly cartilaginous, leading
out of the bony passage of the internal
ear into the palate.

AQUAGE [aquagium, L.] a water­
course.

AQUARIANS, a sect of Christians
in the primitive church in the second
century who did not use wine; but only
water in the sacrament. The occasion
of this practise is said to have been the
persecution which oblig'd them to meet
secretly in the night, and the better to
avoid a discovery, they made shift with
water instead of wine in the sacrament.
This tho' first began by necessity in
time, grew into a custom; so that it
was deem'd as a duty, and when they
could have used wine with safety, they
rejected it as unlawful.

Tatian is reported to have been the
head of this sect.

AQUARIUS [with Astronomers] a
constellation of the zodiack marked
thus ♒, and consists of 99 stars.

AQUARIUS [the Water Bearer] this
seemes to be called Aquarius from its
form. He stands holding a bason in
one hand, and seems to pour out much
water. Some will have it, that this is
Ganymede, and suppose that it is suffi­
cient ground for that conjecture, be­
cause the picture bears some resem­
blance to one pouring out wine, and
they bring the poet for an evidence, 
that says, that Ganymedes was snatch'd
up to Jupiter to be his cup-bearer, and
was by the gods accounted worthy of
the office on account of his great beau­
ty, and because he gave to men immor­
tality, which was unknown to them
before. That the pouring forth is suppo­



sed to resemble Nectar (which is the
drink of the Gods) and that this is the
resemblance of that drink. The con­
stellatton has two obscure stars on the
head, one great one on each shoulder, 
one on each elbow, one bright one on
the extreme part of his right hand, one
on each pap, one on the left hip, one
on each knee, upon his right leg one;
in all seventeen. The pouring out of
water is on the left hand. It has thirty
stars, of which two are bright, the rest
obscure.

AQUATILES [in Botany] such plants
as grow in water.

AQUEOMERCURIAL, consisting of
water and mercury.

AQUEOUSNESS [of aquositas, L.]
waterishness.

AQUOSENESS [of aquositas, L.]
waterishness.

AQUILA [Astronomy] the eagle, a
constellation consisting of 70 stars, ac­
cording to the British catalogue. This
is the eagle (according to the poets)
that carry'd Ganymedes up to heaven, 
and presented him to Jupiter to be his
cup-bearer, although he was placed
among the stars upon another account, 
i.e. when the gods made a distribution
ot the birds among themselves, Jupiter
chose the eagle; and also because he of
all other birds can fly against the sun, 
and is not oppressed by his rays, and
therefore obtains the first place among
them. It is represented with expanded
wings, as tho' it were flying. Aglaost­
henes relates, that Jupiter was brought
up in Crete, and when he was diligent­
ly fought after there, he was caught up, 
and carried to Naxos, and after he
came to the age of manhood, took upon
him the kingdom of the gods; and that
going from Naxos on the expedition
against the Titans, he had the eagle
for his companion, and it proving for­
tunate to him, he made the eagle sacred, 
and placed it among the stars. And
this is the reason of the honour that it
obtained in heaven. It has four stars, 
the middlemost is a bright one.

AQUOSITY [aquositas, L.] waterish­
ness.

ARABESK [so called from the Arabs, 
who used this kind of ornaments, their
religion forbidding them to make any
images or figures of men or animals] a
term apply'd to such painting, orna­
ments of freezes, &c. which consisted
wholly of inmaginary foliages, plants, 
stalks, &c. without any human or ani­
mal figures.

ARABIA [of ברע Heb. black, or of
וברע, Heb. a thief or robber] the one
on account of their swarthy complex­
ion, and the latter on account of their
thievish disposition. The Arabians hav­
ing in all ages been so addicted to this
vice, that, as Martin del Rio observes, 
it was as usual with the Jews to call a
thief an Arabian, as it was to call a
merchant a Canaanite, and a mathema­
tician a Chaldæan.

ARABICK Figures [so called be­
cause bor­
rowed from the Arabs] are the nume­
ral characters commonly made use of
in large computations, as 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 
6, 7, 8, 9, not used in England till the
11th century.

ARABICK Characters [so called be­
cause bor­
rowed from the Arabs] are the nume­
ral characters commonly made use of
in large computations, as 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 
6, 7, 8, 9, not used in England till the
11th century.

ARABICK [Arabicus, L.] belonging
to the Arabians.

ARABISM, an idiom or manner of
speaking, peculiar to the Arabs or Ara­
bians.

ARÆOMETER [ἀραιὸς, Gr. thin, 
and μίτρον measure, Gr.] an instrumenr
to measure the density or gravity of
fluids.

ARAIGNEE [in Fortification] the
branch, return, or gallery of a mine.

ARAY [probably of arrayer, 
Old French] dress, garb, 
rayment.

ARAYING [probably of arrayer, 
Old French] dress, garb, 
rayment.

ARBITRAL [arbitralis, L.] of or per­
taining to an arbitrator or arbitration.

ARBITRARILY [ex arbitrto, L.] af­
ter one's own will.

ARBITRARINESS [of arbitrarius, 
L.] acting merely according to will and
pleasure.

ARBITRATOR [with Civilians] is
understood differently from an arbiter.

An arbitrator being left wholly to act
according to his own discretion, with­
out solemnity of process 
or course of
judgment; whereas an arbiter is obli­
ged to act according to law and equity.

ARBOR [in Mechanicks] the princi­
pal part of a machine which serves to
sustain the rest; also a spindle or axis
on which a machine turns,  L.

ARBOR Genealogica, i. e. the tree of
consanguinity; is used to signify a line­
age drawn out under the form or re­
semblance of a root, stock, branches, &c.

ARBOR Porphyriana, otherwise cal­
led Scala predicamentalis [with School­
men] a scale of beings, or a figure that
consists of three rows or columns of
words, the middlemost of which con­
tained the series of Genera and species, 
bearing some analogy to the trunk, and



the extreams contain the differences to
the branches of the tree thus. L.

SUBSTANCE
Thinking Extended
BODY
Inaminate Animate
ANIMAL
Irrational Rational.
MAN
This That
PLATO

ARBORARY [arborarius, L.] being­
ing to trees.

ARBORETS, little arbours. Milt.

ARBOREOUS [arboreus, L.] of, or
like, or pertaining trees.

ARCA Cyrographica, a common chest
with three locks and keys, kept by cer­
tain Christians and Jews, wherein all
the contracts, mortgages and obligati­
ons belonging to the Jews, were kept
to prevent fraud, by order of king
Richard the first.

ARCANUM Joviale [with Chymists]
is an amalgama made of equal parts of
tin and mercury, powdered and diges­
ted with good spirit of nitre; the dry
mass being powdered again after the
spirit has been drawn off in a retort, 
and lastly digested in spirit of wine, till
the powder is become tasteless.

ARC BOUTANT [of arc and bouter, 
F. to abut] in Architecture signifies a
flat arch abutting against the reins of a
vault in order to support it, and prevent
its giving way.

ARCH [probably of ἀρχὸς, Gr.] ar­
rant or notorious, as an arch-rogue, an
arch-traytor, an arch-wag.

ARCH-BISHOP [Αρχιεπισχοπος, Gr.]
is the chief or metropolitan bishop of
England who has under him serveral suf­
fragan bishops.

The title of arch bishop was first in­
troduced in the east about the year of
Christ 340, but was at that time only
honorary and was given to all bishops
of great cities.

England has only two archbishops that
of Canterbury and that of York, who are
call'd Primates and Metropolitans. The
bishop of Canterbury had anciently ju­
risdiction over Ireland and was stiled a
patriarch.

He was dignified with some special
token of royalty as to be patron of the
bishoprick of Rochester. To create
knights, coin mony, &c.

He is still accounted the first peer of
England, and next to the royal family;
having the precedence of the dukes and 
all the great officers of the crown.

By the common law of England he en­
joys the power of the probate of wills
and testaments, and granting letters of
administration. And of granting licences
and dispensations in all cases formerly
sued for in the court of Rome and not
repugnant to the law of God.

He holds several courts of judicature, 
as the court of arches and of audience
the prerogative court, and court of pe­
culiars.

The archbishop of York is invested
with the same power in his province
as the archbishop of Canterbury has in
his : He has also the title to the second
degree of peerage, and takes precedence
of all dukes not of the blood royal; and
all officers of state next to the lord
chancellor.

ARCH DEACON [Αρχιδιαχονος of ἀρ­
χὸς and διαχονέω, to minister or serve
Gr.] a church office whose business is to
visit the parishes within a certain district.
It was originally given to the first or
eldest deacon who attended on the bi­
shop; but without any power; but since
the council of Nice, the function is be­
come a dignity, and rais'd above that
of priest, tho' in the primitive times of
christianity it was far otherwise.

For in those times the archdeacon
was the bishops chief minister in all ex­
ternal affairs and particularly the tem­
poralities.

In the 10th century they began to
be esteem'd as having jurisdiction in
their own right or else attach'd to their
office, with a power of delegating it to
others; but this being thought too
much, their power was lessened by in­
creasing their number.

There are in England 60 Archdeacons, 
whose office is every second year to visit
and enquire into the reparations and
moveables of churches, to reform abu­
ses in ecclesiastical affairs, and to bring
the more weighty affairs before the
bishop.

They have also a power to suspend
excommunicate and in many places to
prove wills, and in some places to in­
stitute to benefices.

One branch of their office is to induct, 
all clerks into their benefices within
their jurisdiction, and by the act of uni­
formity they are now oblig'd to be in
priests orders.

Many of them have their courts and
officials as bishops have.

ARCHÆOLOGY [Ἀρχιαλογία of ἀρ­
χαῖος] ancient, and λογος, Gr. speech]



the ancient way of speaking or writ­
ing; also a treatise of antiquity.

ARCHNESS, waggishness, dexterous­
ness in management, crast, crastiness.

ARCHCHANTER, the chief or pre­
sident of the chanters of a church.

ARCH CHYMICK, as arch chymick sun, 
the chief chymist the sun, Milton.

ARCH DRUID, the chief or pontiff
of the ancient Druids.

An ARCH [of arcus, L. a bow] a
bending in form of a bent bow.

ARCH [in Astronomy] as the diurnal
arch of the sun, is part of a circle paral­
lel to the equator, which is described
by the sun in his course between rising
and setting.

ARCH of Direction [in Astronomy] is
an arch of the Zodiack, which a planet
seems to pass over, when the motion of
it is according to the order of the signs.

ARCH of Retrogradation [in Astrono­
my] is an arch of the Zodiack, descri­
bed while a planet is retrograde, mov­
ing contrary to the order of the signs.

ARCH of Vision [Astronomy] is the
depth of the sun below the horizon, at
which a star begins to rise again, 
which before was hid in his rays.

Similar ARCHES [Geometry] are such
as contain the same number of degrees
of unequal circles.

Semicircular ARCHES [Architecture]
are those which make an exact semicir­
cle, and have their centre in the middle
of the chord of the arch.

Scheme ARCHES [Architecture] ar­
ches that are less than a semicircle, and
of consequence are flatter, containing
90, 70 or 60 degrees.

ARCHES of the third and fourth point 
[in Architecture] are such as consist of
two arches of a circle ending in an
angle at the top, and are drawn from
the division of a chord into 3 or 4 parts
at pleasure.

Eliptical ARCHES [Architect.] consist
of a semi-elipsis, and have commonly a
key stone, and chaptrels or imposts, 
they were formerly much in use for
mantle-trees in chimneys.

Strait ARCHES [Architecture] are
arches, the upper and under edges of
which are strait; as they are curved
in others, and also those two edges pa­
rallel, and the ends and joints all point­
ing to a centre; they are used over
windows, doors, &c.

ARCHE [Ἀρ&#x03C7ὴ, Gr.] the beginning, 
an entrance.

ARCHE [in Medicine] the beginning
of a distemper.

ARCHED Legs [with Farriers, &c.]
an imperfection in a horse, when being
in his natural position he has his legs
bent forward, and the whole leg makes
a kind of arch or bow.

ARCHETYPAL World [with the Pla­
tonists] the world as it existed in the
divine mind, or in the idea of God be­ 
fore the creation.

ARCHEUS [of Ἀρχὴ, Gr.] the prin­
ciple of life and vigour in any living
creature; the ancient chymists used by
this term to express some certain prin­
ciple of life and motion; as the cause
of all the effects observable in nature, 
and it has been applied by them to very
different things; some use it to signify
the fire lodged in the centre of the earth, 
and ascribe to it the generation of me­
tals and minerals, and suppose it also to
be the principle of life in vegetables;
others understand by it a certain univer­
sal spirit, which (as they imagine) is
diffused throughout the whole creation, 
and is the active cause of all the phæ­
nomena's of nature; others give it the
name of anima mundi, i. e. the soul of
the world; and some call it the Vulcan
or heat of the earth; they suppose there
is a share of this Archeus in all bodies, 
which when it is corrupted, produces
diseases, which they stile Archeal Dis­
eases.

ARCHIALOGY [archialogia, L. of
ἀοχιαλογία, Gr.] a discourse or treatise
of antiquities.

ARCHIGRAPHY [archigraphia, L. of
a ἀρχιγραφία, Gr.] secretariship.

ARCHIPOTE [archipota, L.] the
chief or master drinker.

ARCHILOQUIAN Verses, a sort of
verses, whereof Archilochus was the
inventor.

ARCH PRIOR, the master of the or­
der of the knights templars.

ARCHISYNAGOGUS [ἀρχισυναγω­
γὸς Gr.] the chief ruler of a synagogue.

ARCHITECTONICK, that builds a
thing up regularly according to the na­
ture and properties of it.

Naval ARCHITECTURE, an art that
teaches the construction of ships, galleys, 
and other floating vessels for the water;
with ports, moles, docks, &c. on the
shore.

Counterfeit ARCHITECTURE, is that
wherein the projectures are painted ei­
ther with black or white, or coloured
after the manner of marble; also called
scene work in the painting of columns, 
&c. that seem to stand out in relievo, 
in theatres.

ARCHITECTURE [in Perspective] a 
sort of building, the members of which 



are of different measures and modules, 
and diminish in proportion to their dis­
tance, to make the building appear longer
and larger to the view than it really is.

ARCHITRAVE [of ἀρχὴ, Gr. chief, 
and trabs, L. a beam] that part of a co­
lumn or order of columns that is above
or lies immediately upon the capital. It
is the lowest member of the frize, and
even of the whole entablature; it is
supposed to represent the principal beam
in timber buildings. It is sometimes
called the Reason-piece, as in portico's, 
cloisters, &c. the Master-piece in chim­
neys, and Hyperthyron over the jambs
of doors or lintels of windows.

ARCHITRAVE Doors [with Archi­
tects] such as have an architrave on the
jambs and over the door, upon the cup
piece, if strait, or if the top be curved
on the arch.

ARCHITRAVE Windows [with Ar­
chitects] are commonly an oges raised
cut of the solid timber, with a list over
it.

ARCHIVAULT [archivolte, F.] the
inner contour of an arch; or a frame
set off with mouldings, running over
the faces of the arch stones, and bearing
upon the imposts.

ARCHONTES [Ἀρχώντες, Gr.] the 
chief magistrates of the city of Athens,
after the kingly government had been
abolished.

ARCTOS MINOR [in Astronomy] the
lesser bear.

ARCTOPHYLAX [Ἀρχτοφύλαξ, of
ἀρχτὸς a constellation called the bear, 
and φίλαξ a keeper] the poets tell us, 
that Arctophylax was the son of Jupiter
and Calistho, an Arcadian, whom Ly­
caon cut in pieces and set before Jupiter
to eat at a banquet; and that Jupiter
overthrew the table, and out of abhor­
rence to Lycaon's cruelty, burnt his house
With a thunderbolt, but joining toge­
ther the Arcadian's divided limbs, pla­
ced him among the stars. Eratosthenes.

ARCTURUS, a star in the constella­
lion of Arctophylax or Bootes; it signi­
fies a bears tail, and so called because it
is near it. It rises the first of September
new stile, and sets the 22 of May; the
vulgar opinion was that it brought hail
and tempest.

The poets feigned that in the day
time this star was a spy upon mankind
and gave intelligence to Jupiter of the
perjury and villany committed in com­
merce and courts of judicature.

ARCUATILE [arcuatilis, L.] bowed
or bent.

ARCUATION [with Gardeners] the
raising of trees by layers.

ARCUATURE [arcuatura, L.]
bowing or bending of an arch.

ARDENTNESS [of ardens, L.] heat;
also eagerness of desire, warmth of af­
fection.

ARDENTLY [ardement, F. ardenter
L.] with warmth or passion.

ARDOR, vehemence, fervency, ear­
nest desire.

ARDUOUSNESS [of arduitas, L.]
difficulty.

AREA [with Gardeners] a bed or
quarter in a garden.

AREA [with Astronomers] a circle
about the moon and some stars other­
wise called Halo,  L.

AREA [in Fortification] the super­
ficial content of any rampart or other
work.

To AREAD, to dedicate to, to in­
form. Milton.

ARENA [sand, so called because the
place was strewed with sand to hide
from the view of the people the blood
spilt in the combat] the pit or space in
the middle or the circus or amphithe­
atre of the Romans, where the gladia­
tors had their combats, and sometimes
it was used for the circus or amphithe­
atre itelf, and sometimes for the cam­
pus of the soldiers and army.

ARENACEOUS [arenaceus, L.] san­
dy, or like sand.

ARENARY [arenarius, L.] of or be­
longing to sand or gravel.

ARENATION [with Physicians] a
sort of dry bath, when the patient sits
with his feet upon hot sand.

AREOMETER [of ἀὴρ the air, and
μετρέω, Gr. to measure] an instrument
usually made of fine thin glass, which
having had as much running quicksilver
put into it, as will serve to keep it up­
right, is sealed up at the top: so that
the stem or neck being divided into de­
grees, the heaviness or lightness of any
liquor tray be found by the vessels
sinking more or less into it.

AREOPAGUS [ἀρειοπάγος of Ἀρης, 
Mars, and πάγος a town; so called from
the god Mars being sentenced there
upon the accusation Neptune brought
against him for killing his son] the
place where the Areopagites or judges
of the Athenians assembled. It was si­
tuated upon an eminence, which was
antiently near the middle of the city,
but at this time it is out of it.

There are still some remains of the
foundations of it visible, in the form of
a semicircle, built with square stones of
a prodigious size, which support a ter­
race or platform of about 140 paces, 
which was the court.



In the midst was the tribunal cut out
of a rock, and all about it were seats
cut out of the stone.

In this place the judges heard causes
in the open air, not having any cover­
ing; not far off were some caves hewn
out of the rock where it is conjectured
the prisoners were kept, who were to
be brought before the judges.

When St. Paul had been preaching at A­
thens against their idolatry, he was carri­
ed hither before the Areopagites; where
telling them he came to declare to them
that unknown God whom they igno­
rantly worshipped, his speech had that
efficacy upon Dionysius one of his jud­
ges, that he became a convert, and the
rest of the Areopagites dismissed him.

AREOSTYLE [ἀρεόστυλη, Gr.] a build­
ing where columns stand a little to thick;
or as others say, at a convenient dis­
tance.

ARETOLOGY [of ἀρετὴ virtue, and
λέγω, Gr. to discourse] that part of mo­
ral philosophy that treats of virtue, its
nature, and means of arriving at it.

ARGEA human figures made up
of rushes, which the
vestal virgins threw away annually into
the river Tiber.

ARGEI human figures made up
of rushes, which the
vestal virgins threw away annually into
the river Tiber.

ARGENT [of argentum, L.] silver.  F.

ARGENT [in Heraldry]
is commonly white; all
such fields being supposed
to be silver, and is one of
the Metals, and charged
with the colours. In en­
graving of armoury, the field argent is
represented by the whiteness of the pa­
per, without any strokes on it, as all o­
ther colours have, as in the margin.

Image omitted.



Argent or white, signifies [of virtues and
spiritual qualities] humility, purity, in­
nocence, felicity, temperance and truth;
[of worthy good qualities] beauty and gen­
teelness of behaviour; [of the planets]
the moon; [of the four elements] the
water; [of precious stones] the pearl
and crystal; [of trees] the palm; [of
flowers] the flower de luce; [of human
constitutionsj the phlegmatick; of
beasts] the ermin, which is all white
without any spot; [of the parts of a
man] the brain, and [of his ages] the
old.

ARGENT also signifies in a woman, 
chastity; in a maid, virginity; in judges, 
justice; and in the rich, humility.

ARGENTATION, gilding, &c. with
silver.  L.

ARGENTINUS [among the Romans]
the deity of silver coin.

ARGILLACEOUS [argillaceus, L.
ἀργιλλος, Gr.] of, or belonging to white
clay.

ARGO, the name of the ship that
carried Jason and the Argonauts to Col­
chos to fetch the golden fleece; the
poets say this ship was placed among
the stars by Minerva; that this was the
first ship that ever was made; that it
was a speaking one, and was the first
that made the sea passable to mankind;
and that it might be a manifest sign to
future generations, the image of it was
placed among the stars, that mariners, 
beholding it as they were sailing, might
be of good cheer, and that its glory
might be immortal in being placed a­
mong the gods.

To ARGUE a priori [with Logicians]
is to prove effects by the causes.  L.

To ARGUE a posteriori [with Logi­
cians] is to prove causes by their ef­
fects,  L.

ARGUMENT [with Painters, &c.]
the persons represented in a landskip, in
contradiction to the country or pros­
pect.

ARGUMENT, a kind of syllabus or
abridgment of the subject of a book.

ARGUMENTAL [argumentalis, L.]
of or belonging to argument.

ARGUMENTATION [Logick] the
art of inventing or framing arguments;
of making inductions or drawing con­
clusions.

ARGUMENTATIVENESS [of ar­
gumentari, L.] convincingness by way
of argument.

ARGUMENTATIVELY [of argu­
mentum, L.] by way of argument.

ARGUS, having a head full of eyes
[Hieroglyphically] represents, this great
world, because the eyes of our creator
are every where, and of all things do, 
as it were, take notice, and are wit­
nesses of our behaviour.

ARGYRASPIDES [of ἀργυρὸς and ἀσ­
πις, Gr. a buckler] soldiers arm'd with
silver bucklers.

ARGYROCOMES [ἀγυροχόμος, Gr.]
a comet of a silver colour, differing ve­
ry little from the solar comet, except
that it is of a brighter colour, and
shines with so great a lustre as to daz­
zle the eyes of beholders.

ARGYRITIS [of ἀγυρίτις, Gr.] the
scum or foam which rises from silver or
lead, that is mixed with silver in the
refining furnace.

ARGYROLYTHOS [of ἀργνύριον silver
and λίθος a stone] talk, a sort of mine­
ral stone.

ARGYROPEA [of ἀργύριον and ποιέω, 
Gr. to make] the art of making silver.

ARIANISM, the principles and doc­
trines of Arius, a heretick in the begin­
ning of the fourth century, he taught



that Christ or the son, was not God con­
substantial with the father; but the
first of created beings &c.
This doctrine spread almost over the
whole church for a few years; but in
the year 521 was condemned by the
council of Nice; but it afterwards spread
itself very much in the east, and in suc­
ceeding times was divided into many
branches and called by many names.

ARIDNESS [ariditas, L.] dryness.

ARIES, a ram,  L.

ARIES [in astronomy] the first sign of
the zodiack, which the sun enters in the
beginning of March; it is described on
globes by the figure of a ram, and is a
constellation of 19 stars, and is common­
ly expressed by this character ♈.

The poets feign that this ram carri­
ed Phryxus and Helle through the sea.
That it was also given to them by their
mother Nephele. It had a golden fleece, 
as Hesiod and Pherecydes write. But
when it carried them over that narrow
sea, the ram threw her into the sea, and
lost his horn. But Helle was saved by
Neptune, who on her begat a son called
Pæon, and Phryxus escaping to the Eu­
xine sea, came to Æetes, to whom he
gave the golden fleece which he placed
in the temple of Jupiter, that the me­
mory of it might be preserved. But he
ascended up among the stars, and is
beheld but obscurely.

To ARIETATE [of arietatum, L.] to
push or but like a ram.

ARISTIFEROUS [aristifer, L.] bear­
ing ears of corn.

ARISTOCRATICALNESS [of aristo­
eratique, Fr. aristocraticus, L. of ριστοἀ­
χρατιχὸς, of ἃριστος the best, and χρατος
dominion, Gr.] the being aristocratical
or governed by the nobility.

ARISTOTELIAN, of or pertaining
to Aristotle.

ARISTOTELIANISM, Aristotle's
philosophy, or the dogma's and opini­
ons of that philosopher, which are con­
tained in his four books De Cœlo, and
his eight books of Physicks.

ARISTOTELIANS, a sect of philoso­
phers, following Aristotle; otherwise
called Peripateticks.

ARITHMETICK [ars arithmetica, L.
of ἀριθμετιχὴ, Gr.] a science which teach­
es the art of counting by number, and
shews all the powers and properties of
numbers, &c.

Theorical ARITHMETICK, is the sci­
ence of the properties, relations, &c. of
numbers considered abstractly with the
reasons and denominations of the seve­
ral rules.

Practical ARITHMETICK, is the
art of computing; that is, from certain
numbers given of finding certain others, 
whole relation to the former is known.

Instrumental ARITHMETICK, is that
where the common rules are perform'd
by the means of instruments contrived
for ease and dispatch, as Nepiers Bones, 
&c.

Logarithmetical ARITHMETICK, is
that which is performed by tables of
logarithms.

Numerous ARITHMETICK, is that
which gives the calculus of numbers, or
indeterminate quantities, by the com­
mon numeral quantities.

Specious ARITHMETICK, is that
which gives the calculus of quantities, 
by using letters of the alphabet instead
of figures.

Decadal ARITHMETICK, is that
which is performed by a series of ten
characters, so that the progression is
from ten to ten.

Dyadic ARITHMETICK, is that
where only two figures 1 and 0 are
used.

Tetractic ARITHMETICK, is that
wherein only the figures 1, 2, 3, are
used.

Vulgar ARITHMETICK, is that
which is conversant about integers and
vulgar fractions.

Sexagesimal ARITHMETICK, is that
which proceeds by sixties or the doctrine
of sexagesimal fractions.

Decimal ARITHMEMICK, is the doc­
trine of decimal fractions.

Political ARITHMETICK, is the ap­
plying of arithmetick to political subjects, 
as the strength and revenues of kings, 
births, burials, the number of inhabi­
tants, &c.

ARITHMETICK of infinites, is the
method of summing up a series of num­
bers, consisting of infinite terms, or of
finding the ratio's thereof.

ARITHMOMANCY, a kind of divi­
nation, or method of foretelling future
events by means of numbers.

ARK [of arcus, L.] a part of a bowed
or curved line or figure.

ARM [figuratively] is used to signify
power, as the secular arm.

ARM [with Gardeners] is used for
a branch, in speaking of cucumbers, 
melons, &c.

To ARM [in the Manage] is said of a
horse when he endeavours to defend
himself against the bit, to prevent obey­
ing or being check'd by it.

ARM [With Geographers] a branch of
a sea or river.

ARMAMENTARY [armamentarium, 
L.] an armoury, or store-house where 



war furniture is kept, a magazine, an
arsenal.

ARMENIAN Stone, a kind of preci­
ous stone, which nearly resembles the
Lapis Lazuli, except that it is softer, 
and intermixed with veins of green in­
stead of gold.

ARMENIAN Bole, a native bole or
earth brought from America, commonly
called bole armoniack.

ARMENIANS [so called of Armenia, 
the country which they anciently inha­
bited] they are of two sects; the one
Catholicks, who have an archbishop in
Persia, and another in Poland; the other
make a peculiar sect, and have two pa­
triarchs in Natolia.

ARMIGEROUS [armiger, L.] a bear­
ing arms or weapons.

ARMILLAR [armillaris, L.] of or
like a hoop or ring.

ARMILLARY Sphere, is when the
greater and lesser circles of the sphere
being made of brass, wood, post-board, 
&c. are put together in their natural
order, and placed in a frame, so as to
represent the true position and motion
of those circles.

ARMILLATED [amillatus, L.]
wearing bracelets.

ARMINIANS, those that embrace
the doctrines of James Arminius, &c.

ARMINIANISM, the doctrine or
principles of Arminius a celebrated pro­
fessor in the university of Leyden and of
the Arminians his followers.

His tenets were that predestination
did not consist in any absolute and in
respective eternal decree of saving
some persons, which God had not then
so much as decreed to create; neither
upon the supposition of creation and
the fall of Adam to save some particular
persons, without any antecedent respect
to our Saviour, as the brethren of Delft
believed; but his scheme of predestina­
tion was, that all those were predesti­
nated to be saved, who being in a lapsed
condition should resign themselves to
the will of Almighty God, believe in
our Saviour, and live up to the terms of
the Gospel.

This doctrine was condemn'd in the
synod of Dort; but is at present tolera­
ted all over Holland.

ARMIPOTENCE [armipotentia, L.]
puissance at arms.

ARMISALII [among the Romans] a
sort of dancers in armour who danced
the Pyrrhick dance, keeping time by
striking their swords and javelins a­
ginst their bucklers.

ARMISONOUS [armisonus, L.] sound­
ing or rustling with arms or armour.

ARMLET, a little arm, as of the sea, 
&c.

ARMOMANCY [of armus, L. a shoul­
der, and μαντεία, Gr. divination] divi­
nation by shoulders of beasts.

ARMONIACK a sort of volatile 
salt, of which there
are two sorts, ancient and modern.

AMMONIACK a sort of volatile 
salt, of which there
are two sorts, ancient and modern.

Volatile Salt ARMONIACK, is made
by subliming it with salt of tartar.

Flowers of Sal ARMONIACK, are
made of it with sea salt decrepitated.

ARMORIST [with Heralds] a person
well skill'd in the knowledge of armory
or coats of arms.

Coat ARMOUR, there being as it
were a kind of sympathy between the
arms and the persons to whom they be­
long, he who uses or bears the arms of
any person, that do not of right belong
to him, seems to affront the person of
the bearer.

ARMOR [in Law] any thing 
that a man either wears
for his defence, or that he takes into
his hand in his fury or rage so strike or
throw at another.

ARMOUR [in Law] any thing 
that a man either wears
for his defence, or that he takes into
his hand in his fury or rage so strike or
throw at another.

The ARMOURERS 
were incorporated in
the beginning of the
reign of Henry VI. the
king himself being
pleased to be free of
their company, their
arms argent on a che­
vron gules, a gantlet be­
tween four swords in saltire, on a chief
sable a buckler argent, charged with a
cross gules, betwixt two helmets of the
first. Their crest is a man demi-armed, 
at all points, surmounting a torce and
helmet. Their motto, Make all sure.

Image omitted.



ARMOURY, a branch of heraldry, 
being the knowledge of coat armour, as
to their blazons and various intend­
ment.

ARMS of Courtesy those arms anci­
ently used in
justs and tournaments, as swords with­
out edge or point, and sometimes wood­
en swords, and also canes; lances not
shod, &c.

ARMS of Parade those arms anci­
ently used in
justs and tournaments, as swords with­
out edge or point, and sometimes wood­
en swords, and also canes; lances not
shod, &c.

Pass of ARMS [among the ancient Ca­
valiers] a kind of combat so named.

ARMS [in Heraldry] so named, be­
cause they are borne chiefly on the
buckler, cuirass, banners, &c. are used
for marks of dignity and honour, being
composed regularly of certain figures
and colours given or authorized by so­
vereign princes to be borne in coats,



shields, banners, &c. for the distinction
of persons, families and states.

Charged ARMS [in Heraldry] are such
as retain their ancient integrity, with
the addition of some new honourable
charge or bearing.

Intire ARMS [in Heraldry] are
such as retain their
primitive purity, integrity, and value, 
without any alterations, diminutions
or abatements.

Full ARMS [in Heraldry] are
such as retain their
primitive purity, integrity, and value, 
without any alterations, diminutions
or abatements.

Vocal ARMS [in Heraldry] inch
wherein the figures bear an allusion to
the name of the family.

ARNOLDISTS, a sect so called of
Arnold of Bresse, who declaim'd against
the great wealth and possessions of the
church, and preached against the bap­
tism and the eucharist.

AROMATICALNESS [aromati­
qué, F. aro­
maticus, L.] spiciness.

AROMATICKNESS [aromati­
qué, F. aro­
maticus, L.] spiciness.

To AROMATIZE [aromatizo, L.]
to spice, to season with spices, to per­
fume.

AROT and MAROT, two of Maho­
met's admonitory angels, whom the Ma­
hometans believe to be the dissuaders of
men from murder, violence and excess.
But these two being invited to supper
by a young lady, drank wine to excess, 
and would have proceeded to dishonesty
with her; and therefore God forbad
wine to the Mahometans; but the lady
resisting their amorous attempts was
turned into the morning star.

AROUND [of a and ront, Dan.] in
around, round about.

ARPAGUS [in ancient Inscriptions] a
child that died in the cradle.

ARQUEBUSS a croc, a sort of small
fire-arm, which carries a ball of about
an ounce and a half.

Dog's ARRACH stinking arrach, 
or mother-wort.

Goat's ARRACH stinking arrach, 
or mother-wort.

ARRAND a message, as a sleeve­ 
less errand, i. e. a tri­
fling message.

ERRAND a message, as a sleeve­ 
less errand, i. e. a tri­
fling message.

ARRANGEMENT, the rangement
or disposition of the parts of the whole
into a certain order.

To ARRAY a Pannel [Law Phrase]
is to rank, order, or set forth a jury
empannelled upon a cause.

To quash an ARRAY [Law Phrase] is
to set aside the pannel of the jury.

Commissioners of ARRAY [of arraia­
tores, F.] certain officers, whose business
it is to take care of the arms of the sol­
diery, and to see that they are duly ac­
couter'd.

ARREARANCES [of arriere, F. be­
hind] are the
remainders of any rents or monies un­
paid at the due time; the remainders of
a debt or reckoning.

ARREARS [of arriere, F. be­
hind] are the
remainders of any rents or monies un­
paid at the due time; the remainders of
a debt or reckoning.

ARREARAGES [in Law] is the re­
mainder of an account or a sum of mo­
ney in the hands of an accountant.

Saving the ARRENTATIONS [Law
Phrase] signifies the reserving a power
to grant licenses to one, who owns lands 
in a forest, to inclose them with a low
hedge and a little ditch, paying an an­
nual rent. Forest Law.

ARREST [arreste, F.] a stop or stay.

ARREST [in Law] a judgment, de­
cree, or final sentence of a court.

ARRESTS [with Farriers] mangey
humours upon the sinews of the hinder­
legs of a horse between the ham and
the pattern.

ARRHABONARII [of ἀῥῥαβὼν, Gr. a
pledge] a sect who held that the eucha­
rist was neither the real flesh and blood
of Christ, not yet the sign of them, only
the pledge or earnest of them.

ARRHEPHORIA [Ἀῤῥηφορία, Gr. of
ἄῤῥητα φέρειν, of bearing mysterious
things] a solemnity in honour of Mi­
nerva, when four select noble virgins
not under seven or above eleven years
of age, apparelled in white, and set forth
with ornaments of gold, had a ball­
court appropriated for their use in the
Acropolis, wherein stood a brazen statue
of Isocrates on horseback. It was the
custom to choose out of these two to
weave a vail for Minerva, which they
began on the 30th day of Panoplion.

ARRIEREBAN [in the French Cu­
stoms] is a general proclamation, where­
by the king summons to the wars all
that hold of him; both his own vassals, 
i. e. the Noblesse, or nobility, and their
vassals.

ARRIER Vassal or Tenant, the vas­
sal or tenant of another vassal or te­
nant.

ARRIERE FEE, a fee dependent on
some other inferior fee.

ARROGANTNESS [arrogantia, L.]
haughtiness, pride, presumption; self­
conceit.

ARROGATION, a claiming to one's
self,  L.

ARRONDIE [in Heraldry] as a Cross
arondie, i. e. rounded. Is a cross, whose
arms are compos'd of sections of a cir­
cle not opposite to each other, so as to
make the arms bulge out thicker in one
part than another; but both the sections
of each arm lying the same ways, so
that the arm is every where of an equal
thickness, and all of them terminating



at the end of the escutcheon, like the
plain cross,  F.

ARROSION, a gnawing,  L.

ARROW [Hieroglyphically] signifies
speed or dispatch.

ARROW-HEAD, a water-plant so
called, because the leaves of it resemble
the head of an arrow.

ARSEFOOT, a kind of water-fowl.

ARSEVERSE [i. e. avertere ignem; for
in the dialect of Tuscany, Arse is used
for avertere and verse signifies ignem, 
i. e. fire, or of arsus of ardeo, L. to burn]
a spell written upon an house to pre­
serve it from being burnt.

ARSENICK, a ponderous mineral
substance, caustick and corrosive to so
great a degree as to be poison. It is
ranked in the class of sulphurs. There
are of it divers sorts, yellow or native, 
red and crystalline.

Native ARSENICK, is either of an
orange or yellow colour, and is by co­
lour men and painters call'd Orpiment, 
it is found in copper mines, from this
sort are made the two others.

One property of Arsenick is that mix­
ing a very small portion of it with any
other metal it renders that metal fria­
ble, and immalleable; for which reason
the refiners fear nothing so much as
Arsenick being mixed among any of
their operations.

ARSENICK [in
Chymical Writers]
is express'd by one
of these charac­
ters.

Image omitted.



Yellow ARSENICK is of a yellow 
colour, chiefly
found in copper mines in a sort of glebes
or stones; it is found to contain a small
portion of gold, but so little, that it will
not quit the cost of separating it; It is
thence called Auripigmentum.

Native ARSENICK is of a yellow 
colour, chiefly
found in copper mines in a sort of glebes
or stones; it is found to contain a small
portion of gold, but so little, that it will
not quit the cost of separating it; It is
thence called Auripigmentum.

Red ARSENICK, the native yellow
arsenick rubified by fire, called Realgal.

White ARSENICK, is drawn from the
yellow by subliming it with a propor­
tion of sea-salt, Crystalline Arsenick.

Caustick Ore of ARSENICK, is a bu­
tyrous liquor prepared of arsenick and
corrosive sublimate; it is like butter of
antimony.

ARSENICAL, of or pertaining to ar­
senick.

ARSENICAL Magnet [with Chymists]
is a preparation of antimony with sul­
phur and white arsenick.

ARSENOGONON [ἀρσεναγόνον, Gr.]
an herb, which being steep'd in wine
and drank, is said to procure the getting
of a male-child.

ARSENOTHELYS [of ἀρσὴν a male
and θήλυς a female] an hermaphrodite
a beast which is both male and female.

ARSIS [ἂρσις of αἲρω, Gr. to lift up]
the raising the voice in pronunciation.

ART [of Ars, L. of αρετὴ virtue, Gr.
or, as others say, from αρος, profit] is
variously defined. The schoolmen de­
fine it to be a habit of the mind opera­
tive or effective, according to right rea­
son; or a habit of the mind prescribing
rules for the production of certain ef­
fects. Others define it a proper dispo­
sal of the things of nature by human
thought and experience, so as to make
them answer the designs and uses of
mankind; as that which is performed
by the wit and industry of man; also a
collection of rules, inventions and ex­
periments, which being observed, give
success to our undertakings in all man­
ner of affairs; or it is that to which be­
longs such things as mere reason
would not have attained to.

St. Anselm's ART, a superstitious art, 
or (pretended) method of curing
wounds, by only touching the linnen
wherewith those wounds had been co­
vered.

A Term of ART, a word that has a
meaning beyond its general or scienti­
fical one.

Transcendent ART. This is also
call'd Raymond Lully's art: an art by
which a man may dispute whole days
on any topick in nature, without under­
minding the lead tittle of the thing in
dispute. This art chiefly consists in dis­
posing the several sorts of beings into
divers scales or climaxes, to be run
down in a descending progression. As
let the subject be what it will, he will
say it is, A being true, good perfect, and
then it is either created or uncreated, 
and so on.

Angelick ART, a method of coming
to the knowledge of any thing desired
by the means of an angel, spirit, or ra­
ther a Demon.

Active ARTS, such as leave an ex­
ternal effect after their operation, as
carving, graving, painting, &c.

Factive ARTS, such as leave no ex­
ternal effect behind them after their o­
peration, as piping, fiddling, dancing.

ARTERY, a hollow fistulous canal of
a conical form, whose use is to receive
the blood from the ventricles of the
heart, and disperse it all over the body, 
for the preservation of life and heat, and
the conveyance of the necessary nutri­
ment. 



It is composed of three coats; the 
first nervous being a thread of fine blood
vessels, for the nourishment of the other
two.

The second muscular, consisting of
spiral fibres, which have a strong elast­
icity, and have either many or few
strata, according to the size of the ar­
tery.

The third and inmost coat is a fine
dense transparent membrane, which
keeps the blood within its channels.

Definite ARTICLE [Grammar] the
article (the) so called, as fixing the sense
of the word it is put before to one in­
dividual thing.

Indefinite ARTICLE [Grammar] the
article (A) so called because it is appli­
ed to names, taken in their more gene­
ral signification.

ARTICLE [with Anatomists] a joint
or juncture of two or more bones of the
body.

ARTICLE [with Arithmeticians] sig­
nifies 10, with all other whole numbers
that may be divided exactly into 10 parts, 
as 20, 30, 40, 50, &c.

ARTICLE of faith [Theology] some
point of christian doctrine, which we
are obliged to believe, as having been
revealed by God himself, &c.

ARTICLE of death, the last pangs or
agony of a dying person.

ARTICULATENESS, distinctness.

ARTIFICIAL ARGUMENT [with
Rhetoricians] all those proofs and con­
siderations that proceed from the ge­
nius, industry or invention of the ora­
tor.

ARTIFICIALNESS [artifice, F. arti­
ficium, L.] artfulness.

ARTILLERIES warlike engines.

ARTILLERY [artillerie, F.] the hea­
vy equipage of war, comprehending all
sorts of great fire arms, with what be­
longs to them, as cannons, mortars, 
&c. the same that is called ordinance.

Park of ARTILLERY [in a Camp]
that place set apart for the artillery or
large fire-arms.

Train of ARTILLERY, a set or num­
ber of pieces of ordnance, mounted on
carriages with all their furniture, fit
for marching.

ARTILLERY, is also used for what is
called Pyrotechnia, or the art of fire­
works, with all the appurtenances of
it.

ARTI-NATURAL, of or pertaining
to nature imitated by art.

To ARTUATE [artuatum, L.] to
divide by joints, to quarter, to dismem­
ber.

ARTOTYRITES [of ἄρτος bread, 
and τυρὸς, Gr. cheese] a sect of hereticks
of the second century, who used bread
and cheese in the eucharist.

ARVAL [arvalis, L.] belonging to
land, land that is sowed.

ARVAL BROTHERS among the
Old Romani] 12 priests, who besides
their office of performing sacrifices, 
were appointed judges of land-marks.

ARULA [with Astronomers] i. e. a lit­
tle altar, a constellation (according to
the poets) this is that by which the gods
swore when Jupiter went his expedi­
tion against Saturn, and gaining their
point, placed it among the stars, in per­
petual remembrance of it; also men are
wont to have this in their drinking clubs
and to perform solemn rites to it; who
engage in societies, they touch it with
their right hands and imagine that to be
a token of remembrance. It has two
stars in the fire-hearth, two on the ba­
sis, in all four. Eratosthenes.

ARUNDINACEOUS [arundinaceus, 
L.] of or belonging to reeds.

ARUNDIINOSE [arundinosus, L.] full
of, or abounding with reeds.

ARUSPICE [aruspicium, L.] a sooth­
saying or divination, by inspection into
the entrails of beasts.

ARUSPICES [of ars inspiciendis, i. e.
inspecting the altars] soothsayers, who
predicted from the entrails of beasts of­
fered in sacrifice, and from the several
circumstances of them divined the will
of their Gods, and what might be hoped
for; the superstition was first invented
by the Hetrurians; but Romulus first in­
stituted a colledge of Aruspices.

ARZEL [with Horsemen] a name or
title they give to a horse, that has a
white mark upon the far-foot behind.
Some are so superstitious as to fancy, 
that by an unavoidable fatality such
horses are unfortunate in battles, and
therefore some cavaliers are so biased
with prejudice, that they do not care to
use them.

AS [in proper names] at the beginning
shews, that the name owes its original
to the Saxon word Æſc, an ash-tree, or
indeed generally any sort of tree, as, 
Ashton, Aston, &c.

ASAPPI [among the Turks] sol­
diers who are most ex­
posed to the first shock of the enemies, 
for this purpose, that being fatigued, 
and their swords blunted by them, the
Spahi's and Iannizaries may fall on, 
and gain the easier conquests; they are
made so little account of, that they are
often made to serve as bridges, for the



cavalry to pass over, in bad roads, and
for fascines to fill up ditches; they
are for the most part natural Turks, and
serve without pay, only for what plun­
der they can get.

ASAPES [among the Turks] sol­
diers who are most ex­
posed to the first shock of the enemies, 
for this purpose, that being fatigued, 
and their swords blunted by them, the
Spahi's and Iannizaries may fall on, 
and gain the easier conquests; they are
made so little account of, that they are
often made to serve as bridges, for the
cavalry to pass over, in bad roads, and
for fascines to fill up ditches; they
are for the most part natural Turks, and
serve without pay, only for what plun­
der they can get.

ASAROTUM [ἀσάρωτον, Gr.] a sort
of pavement in the dining rooms of the
Romans, made of small tiles of several
colours, artfully contrived and inlaid, 
that the room look'd as if it were swept
but that the scraps were left on the
floor.

ASBESTINUM [Ἀσβέστινον of α pri­
vative and σβεννύω, Gr. to extinguish] a
sort of linnen or cloth made of a stone, 
called Caristices, fit to be spun as wool
or flax, of which the antients made
napkins, which when they were foul, 
they cast into the fire, and they became
as they were before; but received no
injury by the fire, and little or no di­
minution. When the Romans burnt
the bodies of their dead, to preserve
their ashes they wrapt them in this sort
of cloth; which transmitted the fire to
the bodies, and preserved the ashes by
themselves.

ASCAUNCE. See Askaunce.

To ASCEND [ascendere, L.] to
get or climb; also to rise or fly up­
wards.

The ASCENDANT [ascendens, L.] as
to gain the ascendant of a person, is to, 
obtain a power over him, &c. to have
an over-ruling or powerful influence
over a person.

ASCENDANT Line [with Gene­
alogists] sig­
nifies such relations as have gone be­
fore us, or those that were or are near­
er the root of the family.

ASCENDENT [with Gene­
alogists] sig­
nifies such relations as have gone be­
fore us, or those that were or are near­
er the root of the family.

ASCENDANT [in Architecture] an
ornament in masonry and joyners work, 
which borders the three sides of doors, 
windows, and chimneys. It differs ac­
cording to the several orders of archi­
tecture, and consists of three parts, the
top, which is called the traverse, and
the two sides, which are called the as­
cendants. The same as Chambranle.

ASCENDING [with Astronomers] sig­
nifies those stars or degrees of the
heavens &c. which are rising above
the horizon in any parallel of the
equator.

ASCENDING Latitude [Astronomy]
the latitude of a planet when going to­
wards the poles.

ASCENDING Node [Astronomy] is that
point of a planet's orbit wherein it pas­
seth the ecliptick to proceed to the
northward.

ASCENDING Signs [Astrology] are
those signs which are upon the ascent
or rise, from the nadir to the zenith.

ASCENDING [by Anatomists] a term
applied to such vessels as carry the
blood upwards, or from the lower to
the higher parts of the body.

ASCENSION, rising, going, or getting
up.  L.

ASCENSION day, a festival observed
in commemoration of the day on which
our Saviour ascended into heaven, 40
days after his resurrection from the
dead, in the sight of 120 of his apostles
and disciples.

The roman catholicks say that the
holy fathers who were in Limbo were
at this time delivered and had a visible
triumph over death and hell. But the
scriptures say that the apostles saw no­
thing but angels in the shape of men
who informed them that the son of man
should one day descend from heaven in
the same manner they had seen him
go up.

There are also some authors who
positively assert that our Saviour left
behind him a visible mark of this glo­
rious fact, by the impression or print of
his feet on that part of mount Olivet
where he stood last.

St. Jerome writes that this mark was
visible in his time, and adds that after a
church had been built upon the spot, it
could not be either cieled or covered on
that part, for which reason so much of
the dome was always left open. And
there have been several others of the
same opinion, as Optatus bishop of Mel­
evis, Paulinus of Nola and others.

Venerable Bede writes, that it was then
remaining about the year 700 but that
at last the Mahometans took away these
miraculous remains and with the same
stone blocked up the eastern door of the
church there built, so that now it is not
to be seen.

ASCENT of fluids [with Philosophers]
is their rising above their own level be­
tween the surfaces of nearly contigu­
ous bodies, or in slender capillary glass
tubes, &c.

ASCETICS [Ἀσχεταὶ, Gr.] persons
who in the primitive times devoted
themselves tho' the exercises of piety and
virtue, in a retired life, and especially
to prayer and mortification.

ASCLEPIADEAN Verse, a sort of
verse either Greek or Latin, and consists
of 4 feet, a spondee a choriambus, and 2
dactyls as Horat. Lib. I Od. I.
Mecænas atavis edite regibus.

ASCOLIA [Ἀσχώλια, Gr.] festivals
which the Attick peasants celebrated



to Bacchus, in which they sacrificed a
buck as the destroyer of their vine, &c.
they made a bottle of the victim's skin, 
and filling it with oil and wine, endea­
voured to leap upon it with one foot, 
and he that first fixed himself upon it, 
had the bottle for his reward.  L.

ASCODROUTES, a sect in the second
century, who rejected the use of all sa­
craments, on this notion, that incorpo­
real things cannot be communicated by
visible and corporeal things.

ASH [Acſe, Sax. aske, Dan.] a tree
well known.

ASH [in proper names] at the begin­
ning generally denotes that the name
was from the ashtree, as Ashby, Ashton, 
&c. See As.

To ASHAME [of ſcamian, Sax.] to
put to shame, to cause to be ashamed.

ASHES [of axan, Sax.] the terrene
or earthy part of wood or other com­
bustible bodies remaining after
they are burnt; in chymical
writers they are express'd by
this character.

Image omitted.



ASHLERING [with Builders] is a
name given to quartering, to tack to in
garrets, in height two and a half or
three foot perpendicular to the floor, 
up to the inside of the rafters.

ASHTAROTH [חודתשע, Heb. or as
the septuagint Αστάρτη, or, as the Phœni­
cians called her, Astroarche] was the
chief goddess of the Sidonians; some
take Luna [the moon] to be meant, and
some Venus.

That Luna is meant is probable, be­
cause the Pagans talked of the sun and
moon as husband and wife, and in Jere­
miah she is called the queen of heaven.

Philo Biblius relates, that this Ashta­
roth having taken upon her the shape
of a bull, travelled all over the world, 
and upon her return landed at Tyre in
Phœnicia, and there consecrated a star, 
that she found in her way, that had
fallen from the sky to the earth; though
some say she was worshipped in the shape
of an ewe. The manner of worshipping
her was after the manner of that of
Venus, by committing fornication in her
temple. It should seem that the Hea­
thens thought, as she had a visible influ­
ence in the generation of children, and
upon the humours and affections of wo­
men, so they ought in her adoration to
perform those actions, unto which she
incited them.

ASHWEED, an herb.

ASIMA [אמישא, Heb.] a deity of
some of the ancient eastern people, who
was worshipped, as some say, under the
image of an ape, or, as others say, of
a goat or a ram. They were wont to
worship the sign in the zodiack called
Aries, and on this account the Egyptians
abhorred the other nations, who killed
those creatures that they adored.

ASINARY [asinarius, L.] of or be­
longing to an ass.

ASK [of the Saxon Æſc] as some
writers say, was the name of the first
man, and thence signifies mankind, as
Æscwine signifies a friend to man, Esc­
wig a couragious man, or a leader of
an army.

To look ASKAUNT i. e. to look 
sideways.

To look ASKAUNSE i. e. to look 
sideways.

ASMATOGRAPHY [of ἄσμα a song
and γράφω, Gr. to write] the composition
of songs.

ASMODÆUS, an evil spirit menti­
oned in the apocryphal writings, a
friend to lechery.

ASOMATOUS [asomatus, L. ἀσἡμα­
τος, Gr.] incorporeal or without a
body.

ASP, the aspen tree, a kind of
white poplar, the leaves of which are
small, and always tremble.

ASPECT aspectus, L.] looks, the
air of one's countenance.

ASPECT [with Astrologers] is when
two planets are joined with or behold
each other; or when they are placed
at such a distance in the zodiack, that
they (as it is said) mutually help or as­
sist one another, or have their virtues
or influences increased or diminished.

ASPECT [with Astronomers] signifies
the situation of the stars or planets in
respect to each other; or certain confi­
gurations or mutual relations between
the planets arising from their situation
in the zodiack.

Partile ASPECTS [Astrol.] are when
planets are distant just such a number of
degrees, as 30, 36, 45, &c.

Platic ASPECTS [Astrol.] are when
the planets do not regard each other
from these very degrees; but the one
exceeds as much as the other wants.

ASPEN Tree. See Asp.

To ASPERATE [asperatum, L.] to
make rough.

ASPERIFOLIOUS [asperifolius, L.]
having rough leaves.

ASPERITY [with Philosophers] the
roughness of the surface of any natural
body; so that some parts of it stick out
so far above the rest, as to hinder the
finger or hand from passing over it easi­
ly and freely.

ASPHALITES [of α and σφάλλω, Gr.
I supplant] the fifth Vertebra of the loins.



ASPHALTOS [ἀσφαλτὸς, Gr.] a sort
of bitumen or pitch gathered off the
lake Asphaltites, a lake in Judea of so
pestilential a quality, that the vapours
that rise out of it kill any birds that fly
over it. This lake is 580 furlongs long, 
and 150 broad, and the river Jordan
falls into it. It is surrounded by hills, 
and is the place where Sodom and Go­
morrha are said to have been situated.

ASPHALTUM, a sort of bituminous
stone found near the ancient Babylon, 
which, mixed with other matters makes
an excellent cement, impenetrable by
water, and incorruptible by air, sup­
posed to be that celebrated mortar of
which the walls of Babylon were built.

Oil of ASPIC [of spica, L. an ear of
corn] is an inflammable oil drawn from
a plant resembling Lavender.

ASPIS [ἀσπὶς, Gr.] an aspic or asp, a
most venemous serpent, whose eyes are
not in the forehead, but in the temples;
one kind of them kills by thirst; another
by sleep; and a third by bleeding; the
parties bitten by them dying either of
thirst, sleeping or bleeding.  L.

ASPS [Hieroglyphically] were used as
an emblem of sacredness; and accord­
ingly the kings of Egypt had them
on their crowns to intimate the sacred­
ness of their persons; that none might
presume or attempt to dishonour or in­
jure them, without expecting a signal
punishment; as tho' they signified that
he that rose up against his prince, did
encounter with a serpent, and was like
to meet with nothing but deadly and
venemous repulses.

ASS [asinus, L. aſal, Sax.] a beast of
burden well known.

An ASS [Hieroglyphically] was used by
the ancients to represent a stupid and ig­
norant fellow, an enemy to piety and
religion.

ASSES Bead,and ASSES Ears, on a hu­
man body represented an ignorant fel­
low, who was unacquainted with the
world. For the Egyptians were wont
to put the heads of animals on human
bodies, to express the inclinations and
dispositions of those persons who were
like those beasts.

ASS-HERD, a keeper or feeder of
asses; also a company of asses.

ASSAY, of silver or gold, is the mel­
ting part of a mass or ingot in a very
strong fire, which being weigh'd before
it was put into the coppel or melting
pot, very exactly and also when it comes
out, the fineness of the whole is judg'd
by this essay; for what is lost by this
part so tried is proportioned to the
whole, which is accordingly pronounc'd
more or less fine as it loses more or less 
in the assay.

ASSAPANICK, a little creature in
America, a sort of flying squirrel.

ASSART [assartum, L.] a tree pulled
up by the roots.

To ASSART [of assartir, F. to make
plain, which Spelman derives of exer­
tum, F.] to pluck up by the roots, to
grub up trees, bushes, &c.

ASSART Rents, rent paid to the
crown for lands assarted.

ASSATION [in Pharmacy] the pre­
paring or dressing of medicaments in
their own juices, without the addition
of any foreign moisture.

An ASSASSIN, an assasinator.

ASSASSINATOR [assassinat, F.] an
assassin.

ASSASSINIANS, a petty government
or body of Mahometan thieves, or mili­
tary knights, who call'd their king the
Ancient of the Mountains, who taught
their youth to assassinate whom they
commanded; they had six cities in their
possession, and were about 40000 in
number, and inhabited Antaradus in
Syria. At the command of their chief
master they would refuse no pain or pe­
ril, but stab any prince he commanded
them. They were subdued and their
king put to death by the Cham of Tartary, 
An. 1357. Hence those that are ready
to execute bloody designs are called As­
sassins.

To go ASSAULT, to grow proud, as
bitches do.

ASSEMBLAGE, an uniting or join­
ing of things together, or the things so
united or joined.  F.

ASSEMBLEE [in Heraldry] a duftail
or more to hold the two parts of the
escutcheon together, where the partition
line is being counter-changed, some of
the metal and some of the colour of the
escutcheon.  F.

ASSEMBLY [assemblée, F.] a con­
course or meeting together of people.

Unlawful ASSEMBLY [in a Law Sense]
is the meeting together of three or more
persons for the committing of an unlaw­
ful act, altho' they do not effect it.

ASSEMBLY [with Military Men] is a
particular beat of the drum or sound of
the trumpet, and is an order for the
soldiers to repair to their colours.

ASSEMBLY [with the Beau monde] a
stated and general meeting of persons of
both sexes, for conversation, gaming, 
gallantry, &c.

Actual ASSENT is a judgment where­
by the mind perceives a thing to be true.



Habitual ASSENT, consists of certain
habits induced in the mind by repeated
arts.

ASSENTATORY [assentatorius, L.]
belonging to a flatterer or flattery.

ASSERTION [with Scholasticks] a
proposition which is advanced, which
the advancer avows to be true, and is
ready to maintain in publick.

ASSESSION, a sitting down, at, or by, 
or together; an assisting.

ASSESSOR [assesseur, F.] one who
sits by and assists another in office and
authority; a judge lateral or assistant
also one who makes the assessment or
rate for the payment of publick taxes;
also an officer in the presbyterien assem­
blies,  L.

ASSESSORY [assessorius, L.] belong­
ing to assistance; sitting at, or by.

Real ASSETS [in Law] are where
a man dies possess'd of lands in fee sim­
ple.

Personal ASSETS [in Law] are where
a man dies possess'd of any personal e­
state.

ASSETS per Descent [in Law] are
where a man enters into bonds, and
dies seized of lands in fee simple, which
descend to his heirs, and are therefore
chargeable as assets in his hands.

ASSETS entre mains [in Law] is when
a man dies indebted, leaving to his ex
editors sufficient wherewith to discharge
his debts and legacies.  F.

ASSEVER [asseveratum, L.] to a­
vouch, to affirm boldly, to avow, to
assure.

ASSIDEANS [a sect among the Jews
divided into כודסה the merciful, and
כוקידצ Heb. the just] the fathers and
predecessors of the Pharisees and Essenes;
they prefered their traditions before
the written word, and set up for a
sanctity and purity that exceeded the
law; but at last fell into the error of the
Sadducees, in denying the resurrection, 
rewards and punishments after this life.

ASSIENTO, a contract between the
kings of Great Britain and Spain, for
furnishing the Spanish West Indies with
negro slaves.

To ASSIGN the Cessor [Law phrase]
to shew how the plaintiff has cessed or
given over.

To ASSIGN Waste [Law phrase] is to
shew especially wherein the waste is
committed.

ASSIGNABLE [of assigner, F.] that
may be assigned.

ASSIMILATENESS [of assimilis, L.]
likeness.

ASSIMILATION, an act whereby
things are render'd similar or like to
one another.  L.

ASSIMILATION [in Philosophy] a
sort of motion by which some bodies are
changed into other bodies, aptly disposed
into a nature like or homogeneous to
their own; the operation of nature, by
which the nutritious juice is rendered
like the substance of that animal body, 
into which it is to be changed and united;
the mutation of the chyle into blood.

ASSISOR, the same as Assessor.

ASSISTATA [with Logicians] argu­
ments or assertions impossible to be
true; as to accuse an infant of adultery;
to say a person holds his peace, and yet
that he is talking.

ASSIZE a writ directed to the she­
riff for the recovery of
possession of things immoveable, of
which a man's self or ancestors have
been disseised.

ASSISE a writ directed to the she­
riff for the recovery of
possession of things immoveable, of
which a man's self or ancestors have
been disseised.

ASSIZE [of Bread, Ale, &c] a statute
or ordinance relating to the price, 
weight, measure or order of several
commodities; also the measure or quan­
tity itself; thus it is said, when wheat, 
&c. is of such a price, the bread shall
be of such assize.

ASSIZE [in Law] a fourfold writ for
the recovering of lands, tenements, &c.
of which one has been dispossessed; also
the jury summoned imon such writs.

To ASSIZE [of assise, F.] to adjust
weights and measures.

ASSIZES, were originally used for
extraordinary sittings of superior jud­
ges in the inferior courts depending on
their jurisdiction, to enquire whether
the subaltern judges and officers did
their duty.

Special ASSIZE, a particular com­
mission granted to several persons, to
take cognizance of some one or two ca­
ses, as a disseizin or the like.

Clerk of the ASSIZE, an officer of the
court who sets down all things judicia­
rily done by the justices of assize in their
circuits.

ASSOCIABLE [of associare, L.] soci­
able.

ASSOCIABLENESS, socialness, fit­
ness or agreeableness for company or
conversation.

ASSOCIATION of ideas [Philosophy]
is where two or more ideas constantly
and immediately suceed one another in
the mind, so that one shall almost infal­
libly produce the other; whether there
be any natural relation between them
or not.

ASSONANCE, an ecchoing.

ASSONANCE [in Rhetorick and Poe­



try] is used where the words of a phrase
or verse have the same found or termi­
nation, and yet make no proper rhyme.

ASSONANT [assonans, L.] agreeing
in sound.

ASSONANT Rhymes [Poetry] a kind
of verses common to the Spaniards, 
where the resemblance of sound serves
instead of natural rhymes.

ASSUMPTION [with Logicians] is
the minor or second proportion in a
categorical syllogism: also a consequence
drawn from the proportions of which
an argument is composed. 

Also a solemnity observed by the
church of Rome in honour of the virgin
Mary, who, they fancy, was taken up
into heaven, soul and body.

ASSUMPTIVE, taken.  L.

ASSUMPTIVE Arms [with Heralds]
are such as a man hath a right to assume
to himself by virtue of some action; as
if a man, who is no gentleman by blood
and has no coat of arms, shall in war
take a lord, &c. prisoner, he is entitled
to bear the shield of such prisoner, and
to enjoy it to him and his heirs.

ASSURANCE, the same as Insurance.

Policy of ASSURANCE, is a contract
whereby one or more persons oblige
themselves to make good any damages
that goods, a house, ship, &c. may sus­
tain by fire, the sea, or pirates, &c.

ASSURER a person who assures.

ASTATI [of α privat. and ἵστημι, Gr.
to stand firm, q. d. unstable] a sect of
hereticks in the 9th century, who revi­
ved the heresy of the Manichees.

ASTERIAS [ἀστερίας, Gr.] a precious
stone that shines like a star.

ASTERISM [Ἀστερισμὸς of ἀστὴρ a star
Gr.] a constellation or cluster of fixed
stars, which on globes is commonly re­
presented by some particular figure of a
living creature, &c. in order to the
more easily distinguishing of their places;
as Aries the ram, Taurus the bull, and
the rest of the signs of the zodiack; as
also Ursa Major and Ursa Minor, the
two bears.

ASTERITES [Ἀστήριτης, Gr.] a pre­
cious stone, a kind of oval, which spar­
kles with beams like a star.

ASTHMATICAL [ἀσθμάτιχὸς, Gr.]
pertaining to or troubled with an asth­
ma; pursy.

ASTONISHINGNESS [ettonement, F.]
surprizing nature or quality.

ASTRÆA, the daughter of Jove and
Themis, the goddess of justice, who came
from heaven to dwell upon the earth;
but the impieties and injustice of that
age forced her to return to heaven, and
became the sign Virgo (or as others
will have it, Libra) so justice fled to
heaven. This goddess was painted by
the antients in a crimson mantle, trim­
ed with silver, a pair of scales in one
hand, and a sword in the other.

ASTRAGAL, [with Architects] a
member or round moulding like a ring
or bracelet; serving as an ornament on
the tops and at the bottoms of columns,
or a ring that incircles the bases, corni­
ces or architraves of pillars, according
to the several orders; the French call it
Talon, and the Italians Tondino.

ASTRAGAL [Ἀστράγαλος, Gr.] the
Astragal is also used to separate the fas­
ciæ of the architrave, in which case it
is wrought in chaplets or beads and
berries. It is also used both above and
below the lists, adjoining immediately
to the square or dye of the pedestal.

ASTRAL Year. See Solar Year.

ASTRAPIAS [ἀστράπιας, Gr.] a pre­
cious stone, whole histre resembles
flashes of lightening.

ASTRARIUS hæres [of astra the
hearth of a chimney] is where the an­
cestor by conveyance hath fet his heir
apparent and his family in a house in
his life time. Old Records.

ASTRIDE [of ſtræde, Sax.] 
astradle, straddling
one leg on one side of a horse, &c.
and the other on the other.

ASTRADDLE [of ſtræde, Sax.] 
astradle, straddling
one leg on one side of a horse, &c.
and the other on the other.

ASTRIGEROUS [astriger, L.] bear­
ing or carrying stars.

ASTRINGINGNESS [of astringens,
L.] bindingness.

ASTROBOLAS, a precious stons
resembling the eye of a fish, taken by
some to be the Asterias.

ASTROGRAPHY [of ἄστρον a star and
γραφὴ Gr. description] a treatise or phi­
losophical description of the stars.

ASTROITES [Ἀστροῖτες, Gr.] a pre­
cious stone, a kind of tecolite; also the
star-stone, so named because it is set off
with little blackish stars on all sides.

ASTROLOGY, an art which takes its
rise from Astronomy, whence astrologers
pretend by observations made on the
aspects of planets, and by knowing their
influences, to relate what is past and
foretel what is to come. 

This art was very much studied by
the antient mathematicians, who some
pretend to have found out, what none
of them now know, the principal se­
crets being lost; bat our modern pre­
tenders to astrology affirm, that every
one has it for himself, exclusive of all
Others.



Natural ASTROLOGY, is the art of
predicting natural effects from the stars
or heavenly bodies; as weather, winds, 
storms, floods, earthquakes, thunder, &c.

ASTRONOMY [Ἀστρονομία, Gr.] a
science which treats concerning the hea­
venly bodies or stars; shewing the mag­
nitudes, order, and distances of them;
measuring and shewing their motions, 
the time and quantities of eclipses, &c.
In a more extended sense it is under­
stood to signify or comprehend the doc­
trine of the system of the world, or the­
ory of the universe and primary laws
of nature; but this seems rather a
branch of Physicks than of the Mathe­
maticks. 

It is very ancient, having been studied
by the Chaldeans new 2000 years before
Alexander took Babylon; the clearness
of their Hemisphere giving them a very
fair opportunity of making observa­
tions, which were improv'd by conti­
nual practice. 

From Chaldea, it was communicated
to the Egyptians, among whom Ptolemy
Philadelphus erected an academy for the
study and improvement of it; in which
Hipparchus made a great proficiency by
observations and discoveries, calculat­
ing and foretelling eclipses for several
ages after. 

From Egypt it came into Greece, and
the Saracens brought a little of it out
of Egypt upon their conquest there, in
the 8th century and from thence it
came into Europe. 

And Alphonsus king of Castile in the
13th century is said to have spent 400000
crowns in composing more correct ta­
bles than had been before known; at
this time well known by the name of
the Alphonsine tables.

About the beginning of the 16th cen­
tury, the old exploded doctrine of the
sun's being the centre of the system and
the earth a planet moving round him, 
was reviv'd by Copernicus! 

He was follow'd by Kepler, and other
great astronomers, who also made very
considerable discoveries; and especially
Galilæo by the help of prospective glas­
ses, which have since been improv'd in­
to Telescopes of various sorts, upon
which many of the new discoveries de­
pend.

Sir. Isaac Newton has also done won­
ders, and there is still room left for fur­
ther discovery, in order to compleat
what has been begun.

ASTRONOMY, the ancients used to
paint Astronomy like a goddess with
a silver crescent on her forehead, cloth­
ed in an azure mantle, and a watchet­
scarf, spangled with golden stars.

ASTRONOMICALLY [astronomique, 
F. of astronomicus, L. of ἀστρονομία, of
ἄστρον and νόμος the law or rule, Gr.]
by astronomy.

ASTROSE [astrosus, L.] born under
an unlucky planet.

ASTRO-THEOLOGY, a demonstra­
tion of the being and attributes of God, 
from the consideration of the heavenly
bodies.

ASUNDER [of aſundran, Sax.] in
two parts.

ASYLUM, a place of refuge for un­
fortunate persons, who either by acci­
dent or unavoidable necessity had com­
mitted things which rendred them ob­
noxious to the law. 

For this purpose God commanded the
Jews to build cities of refuge, and the
posterity of Hercules is reported to have
built one at Athens, to protect them­
selves against such as their father had
irritated. Cadmus is said to have built
one at Thebes and Romulus one on the
mount Palatinus. 

And when Christianity was brought
into England, superstitious veneration
loon follow'd it, and ran so high, that
monasteries, churches, church-yards and
the houses of bishops were made Asy­
lums to all that fled to them, when they
had committed any crime of what na­
ture soever. Of which privilege a very
ill use was made both by the clergy and
laity. The same is still practised in po­
pish countries, but not to the same ex­
travagance as it was in England.

ASYMBOLUS [Ἀσύμβολος, Gr.] one
that goes shot-free without paying his
reckoning.

ASYMPTOTES [Ἀσύμπτοτες of α
priv. σὺν and πτόω, Gr. to fall or coin­
cide, q. d. that do not fall together]
they are lines which continually draw
near to each other; but if they were
continued infinitely, would never meet.
There are several sorts of these, as the
curves of the conchoid or cissoid are the
asymptotes in conick sections.

ASYMPTOTICAL [in Mathematicks]
pertaining to an asymptote.

ASYSTATON [ἀσύστατον, Gr.] re­
pugnant or contradictory, &c.

ASYSTATON [with Logicians] a
trifling inconsistent story, that does not
hang together, but contradicts itself.

AT, in the proper name of places, 
has the same signification as apud with
the Latins, as At-hill, such a place near
or on a hill, At-wood, near or in a



wood, and surnames of persons are fre­
quently taken from places.

ATARAXIA [Ἀταραξία, of ἀτὰρ
and ταξις, Gr. or­
der] a stoical term used to signify that
calmness and tranquillity, and that firm­
ness of judgment, which lets us free
from any agitations or emotions of
mind, proceeding from self opinion; and
that knowledge we imagine our selves
poissess'd of.

ATARAXY [Ἀταραξία, of ἀτὰρ
and ταξις, Gr. or­
der] a stoical term used to signify that
calmness and tranquillity, and that firm­
ness of judgment, which lets us free
from any agitations or emotions of
mind, proceeding from self opinion; and
that knowledge we imagine our selves
poissess'd of.

ATCHIEVEMENT [Heraldry] which
is corruptly called hatchment, is the
coat of arms of a nobleman, gentleman; 
&c. duly marshalled with supporters, 
helmet, wreath and crest, with mantles
and hoods. Such as are hung out on
the fronts of houses, after the death of
noble persons.

ATECHNY [atechnia, L. ἀτεχνία, 
Gr.] unskilfulness, inartificialness.

ATEGAR [of aeran, Sax. to fling or
throw] a weapon, a sort of hand-dart.

AT GAZE [of ʒeſean, Sax. to look
upon] a gazing, staring at, or looking
earnestly.

ATHANASIA [ἀθανασία of α privat.
and θάνατος, Gr. death] immortality.

ATHANATI [ἀθάνατοι, Gr.] immor­
tal] a body of Persian cavalry, consisting
of 10000 men, always compleat, be­
cause when any one of them died, ano­
ther was immediately put in his place.

ATHANOR [רונתלא, of לא Arab, and
רונת, Heb. an oven, others derive it
from ἀθανατοι, Gr. immortal, because
of its durable fire] a large digesting fur­
nace, built with a tower, and so con­
trived as to keep a constant heat for
near a month, &c. or that the heat
may be either increased or slackened at
pleasure, by opening or shutting the re­
gister.

ATHARER [with Astrologers] a term
used of the moon, when it is in the same
degree and minute with the sun.

ATHEISTICALNESS [of athée, F.
of atheia, L. of α privat. and Φεὸς, Gr.
God.] atheistical notions.

ATHENÆUM [Ἀθηναῖον, Gr.] a
place in Athens in Greece, consecrated
to Minerva the goddess of wisdom, 
where the Greek poets used to make an
offering of their works; the Rhetorici­
ans declaimed, and the poets rehearsed
their verses.

ATHEROMA [ἀθήρωμα of ἀθάρη, 
pulse or pap, Gr.] a swelling contained
in its own coat, proceeding from a
thick and tough humour, like sodden
barley; which neither causes pain nor
changes the colour of the skin, nor
yields easily to the touch, nor leaves 
any dent, when it is pressed.

ATHLETICK Crown, one appointed
for the crowning victors at the publick
games.

ATLANTEAN, of or pertaining to
Atlas.

ATLANTICK Sisters [Astron.] the
stars and constellation, called the Pleia­
des or seven stars. Milton.

ATLANTIS, an island spoken of by
Plato and other writers, with extraor­
dinary circumltancas, which the con­
troversy among the moderns concern­
ing it have render'd famous.

ATLAS [of τλῆμι, Gr. to carry] the
first vertebra of the neck, which sup­
ports the head.

ATLAS, an ancient king of Maurita­
nia, who because of his great skill in
astronomy the poets have feign'd him
to bear up or support the heavens, or
whole frame of the world upon his
shoulders; and to have been metamor­
phos'd into a vast mountain of a prodi­
gious height, now call'd Auchisa or
Montes claros. And from him a book
of universal geography, which contains
the maps of the whole world, is called
an Atlas; as if they were view'd from
the top of that celebrated mountain, 
which the ancients esteemed the high­
est in the world; or rather on account
of their containing or holding the
whole world like Atlas.

ATLASSES [in Architecture] figures
or half figures of men, used instead of
columns or pilasters, to support any
member of architecture, as a balcony
&c.

ATMOSPHERE [Ἀτμοσφαῖρα, of ἀτ­
μος a vapour, and σφαὶρα a sphere, Gr.]
that region or space round about the
earth, into which exhalations and va­
pours are raised either by being forced
up by subterraneous fire; or, as others
define it, an appendage of our earth, 
consisting of a thin, fluid, elastick sub­
stance call'd air, surrounding the terra­
queous globe, to a considerable height. 

By atmosphere is generally under­
stood the whole mass of ambient air.
But more accurate writers restrain at­
mosphere to that part of the air next
the earth, which receives vapours and
exhalations, and is terminated by the
refraction of the sun's light.

The higher spaces, altho' perhaps
not wholly without air, are supposed
to be poss'essed by a finer substanre cal­
led Æther, and are thence call'd the
ethereal region.

The Atmosphere insinuates itself into 
all the vacuities of bodies and so becomes



the great spring of most of the mutati­
ons here below, as generation, corrupti­
ons, dissolution, &c.

ATMOSPHERE of consistent bodies 
[according to Mr. Boyle] are effluvia, or
particles of matter which exhale or
steam out from many, or probably all
solid, firm and consistent bodies; as glass, 
stones, and metals, which being rubbed
against one another strongly, emit sensi­
ble and often offensive smels.

ATOCIUM [Ἀτόχιον, Gr.] any medi­
cament that prevents conception or
birth.

ATOMICAL Philosophy, the doctrine
of atoms or the method of accounting
for the origin and formation of all
things from the supposition of atoms
endued with gravity and motion, called
also Epicurean or Cartesian.

ATONIA [ἀτονία, Gr.] a want of
tone or tension, a loosening of the
nerves and sinews; a failing or decay of
strength; infirmity, weakness, faint­
ness.

ATRABILIARIOUSNESS [of atrabi­
liarius, L.] the being affected with a hu­
mour called atra bilis.

ATRA BILIS [with Physicians] a sort
of sulphureous, earthy salt, which
breeds in the body of animals, and is
carried about in the blood, where cau­
sing an undue fermentation, it produces
melancholy, &c.  L.

ATRAMENTOUS [of atramentum, 
L. ink] inky, like ink.

ATROCIOUS [atrox, L.] cruel, bar­
barous.

ATROCIOUSNESS [atrocitas, L.]
heinousness, outrageousness, cruelty.

ATROPOS [ἀτροπος, Gr. i. e. un­
changeable or inexorable] one of the
three destinies, who, as the poets feign
cuts the thread of man's life. See
PARCÆ.

To ATTACH a person to one [in a
figurative Sense] to lay him under an
obligation, and engage him to one's self
by good offices.

ATTACHMENT of Priviledge, is by
virtue of a man's priviledge to call ano­
ther to that court, to which he him­
self belongs, and in respect whereof he
is obliged to answer some action.

ATTACK [Military Art] the general
a assault or onset that is made to gain a
post or upon a body of troops.

To ATTACK in flank [Military term]
is in a siege to attack both sides of the
bastion.

Regular ATTACK, is an attack made
in due form according to the rules of
art, called also Right or Droit.

To gain a place by right ATTACK, is
to gain the place by formal attack and
regular works without a general storm.

ATTAINABLE, that may be attain­
ed.

ATTAINDER by appearance [in
Law] is either by battle, by confession, 
or by Verdict.

ATTAINDER by battle, is when the
party appealed by another rather
chooses to try the truth by combat than
by jury, and is vanquished.

ATTAINDER by confession, is either
by pleading guilty at the bar before the
judges, and not putting himself upon
the trial by the jury; or before the Co­
roner in sanctuary, where in antient
times he was obliged to abjure the
realm.

ATTAINDER by default is when 
a per­
son flies and does not appear, after he
has been five times called into the coun­
ty court, and is at last pronounced out­
lawed.

ATTAINDER by outlawry is when 
a per­
son flies and does not appear, after he
has been five times called into the coun­
ty court, and is at last pronounced out­
lawed.

ATTAINDER by Verdict, is when
the prisoner at the bar pleads not guilty
to the indictment, and is pronounced
guilty by the jury.

ATTAINMENT, an obtaining; also
a thing attained or gotten.

ATTAL Sarisin [q. d. the leavings
of the Sarisins, Sassins or Saxons] the
antient inhabitants and miners of Corn­
wall, did thus call an old deserted mine
given over.

ATTELANÆ [so called of Attelle, 
a city of Tuscany, where they were first
represented] a kind of comick and saty­
rical pieces, represented on the Roman
theatre, not so grave and serious as the
Greek and Latin comedies and tragedies, 
and less ludicrous than the farces on
the English stage.

To ATTEMPERATE [attemperatum, 
L.] to make fit or meet.

ATTENTION of mind [with Mora­
lists] an act of the will, by which it calls
off the understanding from the conside­
ration of other objects, and directs it to
the thing in hand.

ATTENTION as to hearing, is the
straining the Membrana Tympani, so as to
make it more capable of receiving
sounds, and more prepared to catch e­
ven a weak agitation of the air.

ATTENTIVENESS, [attention, F. of
L.] heedful attention.

ATTENUANTIA, attenuating me­
dicines, i. e. such as with their sharp
and viscous particles open the pores of
the body, cut the thick and viscous hu­



mours, so that they can pass easily
through the vessels.

ATTENUATION, a thinning, &c.
the making any fluid thinner or less con­
sistent than it was before. F. of  L.

To ATTICISE [Atticissatum, L.] to
imitate the spsech of the Athenians, espe­
cially in elegancy.

ATTICK [in Architecture] the name
of a basis, which the modern architects
have given to the Dorick pillar.

ATTICK [in Architecture] a kind of
building wherein there is no roof or
covering to be seen; used at Athens.

ATTICK Order [Architecture] a sort
of small order raised upon another
that is larger by way of crowning or
to finifii the building.

ATTICK Base [Architecture] a pecu­
liar kind of base, used by ancient archi­
tects in the Ionick order, and by others
in the Dorick.

ATTICK of a Roof [Architecture] a
sort of parapet to a terrace, platform,
&c.

ATTICK continued [Architecture] is
that which encompasses the whole
pourtour of a building, without any
interruption, following all jetts, the
returns of the pavilions, &c.

ATTICK interposed [Architecture] is
that which is situate between two tall
stories, and sometimes adorned with
columns and pilasters.

ATTICK Salt, a delicate, poignant
sort of wit and humour, peculiar to the
Athenian authors.

ATTICK Muse, an excellent one.

ATTICK Witness, one incapable of
being corrupted.

ATTIRE [with Botanists] the third
part belonging to the flower of a plant, 
of which the two former are the em­
palement and the foliation, and is cal­
led either florid or semiform.

Florid ATTIRE [Botany] is common­
ly call'd thrums, as in the flowers of
Marigolds, Tansey, &c. These Thrums
Dr. Grew calls Suits, which consist of
two, but most commonly of three pie­
ces; the outer part of the suit is the
Floret, the body of which is divided at
the top like the Cowslip flower into
five parts or distinst leaves.

Semiform ATTIRE [Botany] this con­
sists of two parts, i. e. the chives
(which by some are called Stamina) and
Semets or Apices, one upon each attire.

ATTIRE [with Sportsmen] the
branching horns of a buck.

ATTITUDES [in Painting, Statuary, 
&c.] the posture of a figure or statue;
or the disposition of its parts, by which 
we discover the action it is engaged in, 
and the very sentiment supposed to be
in its mind.

ATTORNEY General, is one who
is appointed by general authority to
manage all affairs or suits of the com­
munity.

ATTORNEY General [of the King]
one who manages all law affairs of the
crown, either in criminal prosecutions
or otherwise; especially in matters of
treason, sedition, &c.

ATTORNISHIP, procuration; also
the office of an attorney.

ATTORNMENT [in Law] is
when the te­
nant attourns to or acknowledges a new
lord; or it is a transferring those duties
he ow'd to his former lord to another.

ATTURNMENT [in Law] is
when the te­
nant attourns to or acknowledges a new
lord; or it is a transferring those duties
he ow'd to his former lord to another.

ATTRACTION [in Mechanicks] the
ast of a moving power, whereby a
moveable is brought nearer to the
mover. The power opposite to Attrac­
tion is called Repulsion.

ATTRACTIVE Force [in Physicks]
is a natural power inherent in certain
bodies, whereby they act on other di­
stant bodies, and draw them towards
themselves. This by Peripateticks is
called the Motion of Attraction, and
sometimes Suction. But modern philo­
sophers do generally explode the notion
of attraction, asserting that a body can­
not act where it is not, and that all mo­
tion is performed by mere impulsion.

ATTRACTIVE Power [according to
Sir Isaac Newton] is a power or prin­
ciple whereby all bodies and the parti­
cles of all bodies mutually tend to­
wards each other. Or Attraction is the
effect of such power whereby every
particle of matter tends towards every
other particle.

ATTRACTIVENESS [of attractif, 
F. of attractivus, L.] the drawing or
attracting quality.

ATTRAHENTS [in Physick] attract­
ing or drawing medicines, such as by
their minute particles open the pores
of the body, so as to disperse the hu­
mours, cause the parts to draw blisters
in the skin,  L.

ATTRIBUTE [attributum of attri­
buo, L.] a property which agrees to
some person or thing; or a quality
which determines something to be af­
ter a certain manner.

ATTRIBUTE, a property belonging
to, or peculiar to some person or thing, 
by which he is capable of performing
certain acts; or in a more extended
sense is common to all things of a like
kind, altho' different in quantity or 



extent; as to know and to think is a 
property common both to God and 
man; but is very different in extent;
that of God being to know all things 
and perfectly too, and ours being to 
know but few things, and those too
imperfectly.

ATTRIBUTE [in Heathen Theology]
the Heathens to every attribute appro­
priated a particular deity: As wisdom
to Apollo, power to Jupiter, justice to
Astræa.

ATTRIBUTES [with Divines] cer­
tain properties or glorious excellencies,
ascribed to God, to render us the more 
capable to conceive of him, as that he
is Eternal, infinitely Wise, Good, Almigh­
ty, &c.

ATTRIBUTE [with Logicians] an 
epithet given to any subject, or it is any
predicate thereof; or whatever may
be affirmed or denied of any thing.

Positive ATTRIBUTE, such as gives 
a thing somewhat, as when we say of 
man, that he is animate.

Negative ATTRIBUTE, that which 
denies or takes away somewhat, as 
when we say of a stone, that it is inani­
mate.

Common ATTRIBUTE, is that which 
agrees to several different things as ani­
mal.

Proper ATTRIBUTE, such as agrees 
to one kind only, as Reason to mankind.

ATTRIBUTES communicable of God 
[with Divines] belonging to the divine
faculties of acting, are Power and Do­
minion.

ATTRIBUTES communicable of God 
[belonging to the divine will] are Ju­
stice, Goodness, Faithfulness.

ATTRIBUTES communicable of God 
[belonging to the divine understanding]
are Knowledge, Wisdom, Providence.

ATTRIBUTES incommunicable of 
God, are Simplicity, Unity, Immutabili­
ty, Infiniteness.

ATTRIBUTES [in Painting and 
Sculpture] are symbols added to several 
figures to intimate their particular office
and character; as an eagle to Jupiter,
a peacock to Juno, a caduceus to Mer­
cury, a club to Hercules, and a palm to
Victory.

ATTRITENESS [of attritus, L.] the
being much worn.

ATTRITION [with Divines] a sor­
row or regret for having offended God,
arising from the sense of the odiousness
of sin, and the apprehension of having
incurred the loss of heaven and punish­
ment; or, as others define it, the lowest
degree of repentence, a slight and im­
perfect sorrow for sin.

ATTRITION [in Philosophy] a Tri­
ture or Friction, such a motion of bodies 
against one another, as strikes off some
superficial particles, whereby they be­
come less and less.

To AVAIL [of ad and valere, L. va­
loir, F.] to be profitable, serviceable, 
or advantageous to.

AVAILABLENESS [of valoir, F. of ad and valere, L.] conduciveness, &c.

AVANT, before, forward.

AVARICIOUSNESS, covetuousness.

AVAUNCHERS [with Hunters] the 
second branches of a hart's horn.

AUBADE, morning musick, such as 
is play'd at break of day, before a door
or window, a serenade.

AUBIN [with Horsemen] a broken 
going or pace of a horse, between an 
amble and a gallop.

AUCTION, an increasing,  L.

AUCTORATION, a binding one's 
self an apprentice or servant,  L.

AUDIBLENESS [of audibilis, L.] ca­
pableness of being heard.

AUDIENCE [in Polit. Affairs] the
ceremonies practised at court at the ad­
mitting ambassadors and publick mini­
sters to a hearing.

AUDIENTES catechumens or per­
sons newly instruct­
ed in the mysteries of the Christian reli­
gion, and not yet admitted to be bap­
tiz'd.

AUDITORES catechumens or per­
sons newly instruct­
ed in the mysteries of the Christian reli­
gion, and not yet admitted to be bap­
tiz'd.

To AUDIT an Account, to examine it.

AUDITION, hearing,  L.

AUDITOR [in Law] an officer of 
the king or some other great person,
who yearly examines the accounts of 
under officers accountable, and makes 
up a general book, with the difference 
between their receipts and charges, and 
their allocations or allowances; also an 
allowance paid by each merchant, ac­
cording to his cargo, to a master of a
ship upon special occasions when he suf­
fers damages.

AUDITORY, the seat or bench 
where a magistrate or judge sits to hear
causes.

AVE MARIA [i. e. Hail Mary] a sa­
lutation to the Virgin Mary.

To AVENGE [avenger, F.] to take 
vengeance on an offender.

AVENGERS [according to Cornelius 
Agrippa] the 4th order of angels, whose 
prince is Asmodæus, the executioner of
justice.

AVENTURÆ [in ancient Writings]
voluntary feats or trials of skill at arms,
tournaments or military exercises on 
horseback.



AVENUE [miliary Art] a space left 
for a passage into a camp, garrison or 
quarter; an opening or inlet into any
sort, bastion or other work.

AVER Land, such land as the tenant 
did plough and manure, cum averiis suis,
for the use of a monastory or the lord of 
the soil.

AVERAGE [in Common Law] that 
service which the tenant owes the lord
to be performed by horses or carriages.

AVERAGE [with 
Husbandmen] pas­
ture or fodder for cattle, especially the 
Eddish or grass after mowing or reap­
ing.

AVERIA [of avoir, F. to have, or 
aver, cattle] in law signifies oxen and 
horses for the plough; also sometimes 
any cattle or personal estate, as Catella,
all goods and chattels.

AVERAGE [in Navigation and Com­
merce] signifies the damage which the 
vessel or the goods or loading of it sus­
tains, from the time of its departure to 
its return: and also the charge or con­
tributions towards defraying such dama­
ges; also the quota or proportion 
which each merchant or proprietor in 
the ship or loading, is adjudg'd upon a 
reasonable estimation to contribute to a 
common average; also a small duty,
which those merchants who send goods in another man's ship, pay to the mas­
ter for his care of them over and above 
the freight.

AVERDUPOISE. See Avoirdupoise.

AVERMENT, an assertion of a thing 
to be true, an affirming, &c.

General AVERMENT [in Law] is 
the conclusion of every plea to the writ,
or in bar of replications or other plead­
ings.

Particular AVERMENT [in Law] is 
when the life of a tenant for life, or a 
tenant in tail is averred; and the Aver­
ment contains as well the matter as the 
form.

AVERNI [with ancient Naturalists]
lakes, grottoes, and other places which 
infect the air with poisonous steams and 
vapours.

AVERRUNCI [among the Romans] a certain order of deities whose office
was to avert dangers sand evils.

AVERSION [aversio, L.] a be­
ing averse from, or 
having no inclination for; also a turn­
ing or driving away from.

AVERSENESS [aversio, L.] a be­
ing averse from, or 
having no inclination for; also a turn­
ing or driving away from.

AVERSATION, a hating, abhorring,
refusing; a turning away from.  L.

To AVERT [avertere, L.] to turn a­
way from, to drive or keep back.

AVERTI [in Horsemanship] a French word us'd in the manage, as applied to 
the pace or motion of a horse, that's 
enjoined, regulated and required in les­
sons.

AUGE [with Astronomers] the Apo­
gæum, or that point of the orbit of a 
planet, in which a planet being, is far­
thest distant from the central body, a­
bout which it rolls, and is then slowest 
in its motion.

AUGELOT [with Vine-Dressers] as 
to plant vines à la augelot, is to dig
small trenches in the form of a little
trough, to place there the slips or shoots,
which are afterwards covered with 
earth.  F.

AUGES [Astronomy] two points in a 
planet's orbit, otherwise called Apsides.

AUGMENTATIONS [in Heraldry]
are additional charges frequently given
as a particular mark of honour, and 
generally borne either on escutcheon
or canton.

AUGURAL [auguralis, L.] of or 
belonging to an augur or soothsayer.

To AUGURE [augurare, L.] to pre­
dict, to conjecture or guess.

AUGURS, Augurs were so called ei­
ther of avium gestu the gesture or flying 
of birds, or avium garritu the chirping
and chattering of birds. Romulus the 
founder of Rome was himself a great
proficient in the art of Augury, and as 
he divided the city into three tribes, so 
he appointed three augurs, one for 
each tribe. The principal order of 
their priests, who divinedd by the flight
of birds, their manner was to stand on
an high tower, holding their lituus or 
divining staff in their hand, and with 
that they by a motion as it were, divi­
ding the heaven into several quarters,
made their observations from which of 
these quarters the birds appeared, and 
on that quarter offered sacrifice and 
made prayers, and afterwards gave their
judgment; they were at first but three,
but afterwards were augmented to 15,
their persons were inviolable, and their
character unimpeacheable on any crime
or case whatsoever.

AUGURY, in a restrained sense is us­
ed to signify only the pretended art of 
divination, or foretelling guture events
by the flying, singing, &c. of birds; but 
in the general and more commonly re­
ceived sence it is used of any kind of di­
vination, or foretelling future things,
either by birds, or other animals, the 
elements, the Heavens, water, &c. and 
thus used it takes in astrology, magick,
palmistry, &c.

AUGUST, the eighth month in the



year, so called from the emperor, who
having conquered Egypt, and put an
end to the civil war, entred that month
into his second consulship.

AUGUST, the antients painted August
like a young man, with a fierce coun­
tenance, drest in a flame colour'd robe, 
baving his head adorn'd with a garland
of wheat, and having a basket
of rum­
mer fruits on his arm, and a sickle at
his belt, bearing a victim.

AUGUST, majestick, royal, great, or
pertaining to majesty, royalty, great­
ness, &c. this title was first given to
Octavius Cæsar by the Roman senate
when they conferr'd the sovereign pow­
er on him.

AUGUSTALIA, festivals instituted
in honour of Cæsar Augustus, on the 12th
of October, because in this month he
returned to Rome, adorned with laurels
of victory and conquest, having left all
the provinces of the empire in peace.

AUGUSTNESS [of auguste, F. augus­
tus, L.] royalness, majestiekness, vene­
rableness.

AUGUSTALIS [among the Romans]
a title given to to the pontiff or priest, 
who directed or superintended the games
performed in honour of Augustus.

AVISO, advice, intelligence or ad­
vertisement of something to be made
known.

AVITOUS [avitus, L.] that which
came to us by our ancestors; ancient, 
of long standing.

AUKWARD [æ&wyn;arð, Sax.] unto­
ward or unhandy.

AUKWARDNESS [Æ&wyn;erð, Sax.]
unhandiness, &c.

AULETICK [auleticus, L.] belong­
ing to pipes.

AULICK [in some foreign universi­
ties] an art which a young divine main­
tains upon the admission of a new doc­
tor of divinity.

AULN [in France] a measure, at Rou­
en is equal to an ell English; at Lions, I.
016. at Calais to I. 52, and at Paris to
095.

AUMBRY, a cupboard for victuals.

AUNE a German measure of Rhe­nisb wine, containing 40
gallons English.

AUME a German measure of Rhe­nish wine, containing 40
gallons English.

AUMELET a pancake made of
eggs after the French
way F.

AMELET a pancake made of
eggs after the French
way F,

AUMONER, a distributer of alms, 
an almoner.

AVOIDANCE [in Fact] is by the death
of the incumbent.

AVOIDANCE [in Law] may be by
cession, plurality, deprivation, desig­
nation, &c.

AVOIR DUPOIS [in Law] such
merchandizes as are weigh'd by this
weight, and not by Troy weight.

To AVOW [avouer, F.] to own, 
confess or acknowledge, to grant.

AVOWEE [Law term] he to
whom the right of
advowson of any church belongs, so
that he may present thereto in his own
name; and is distinguish'd from those
who present in another's name, as a
guardian for his ward, &c.

ADVOWEE [Law term] he to
whom the right of
advowson of any church belongs, so
that he may present thereto in his own
name; and is distinguish'd from those
who present in another's name, as a
guardian for his ward, &c.

AVOWSAL, a confession.

AURELIA [with Naturalists] the first
apparent change of the Eruca of and
insect.

AUREOLA [with Romish Schoolmen]
a special reward bestowed on martyrs, 
virgins, doctors and other saints, on ac­
count of their having performed works
of supererogation.

AUREOLA [with Painters, &c.] a
crown of glory with which saints, mar­
tyrs and confessors are adorned, as a
mark of their having obtained victory.

AURICHALCUM
 [in Chymical Writings]
is expressed by one of
these characters

Two images omitted.



AURES, an ancient punishment among
the Saxons, of cutting off the ears of
church-robbers and other felons.

AURICLE [Anat.] the external ear, 
or that part of it that is prominent
from the head.

AURIPIGMEN­
TUM [with Chy­
mical Writers] is
express'd by one of
these characters. 🜽

The unicode for the left-hand side image is found. Two Images of the alchemical symbols are omitted.



AURORA [of aura, L. or αῦρα, Gr.]
the morning twilight, the dawn or break
of day; which begins to appear, when
the sun is come within 18 degrees of the
horizon, and ends when it is risen a­
above it.

AURORA, according to the poets, 
was the daughter of Hyperion and Theia, 
whom Orpheus calls the fore-runner of
the god Titan; because she is that light
that gives notice of the rising of the sun
above our hemisphere. Others say, 
she was the daughter of Titan and the
earth, because to such as sail on the
water or travel on the plain, the light
of the morning seems to rise out of the
earth, and proceeds from the sun, who
immediately follows it. 

Aurora is represented by the poets, as
rising out of the ocean, riding in a gol­
den chariot, having her fingers of a vi­
olet or a rosey or a saffron colour, 
dropping with a gentle dew, by this de­



noting the colours we see in the morn­
ing, caused in the air by the light and
and vapours. Virgil describes as­
cending with horses of a flame colour;
Theocritus with white, with respect more
to the nature of light itself, than to the
vapours which arise with it. 

Aurora is said to be the mother of
the stars and winds, Argestes, Zephyrus, 
Boreas and Notus. The mythologists say
she is the mother of the winds, because
after a calm in the night, the winds rise
in the morning as attendants upon the
sun, by whole heat and light they are
begotten.

AUSPEX, a diviner by birds; the
manner of his performing his divination
was thus; the auspex flood upon a tow­
er with his head covered with a gown
peculiar to his office, which was called
Læna, and turning his face towards the
East, holding a short strait rod in his
hand, only a little turned at one end, 
called Lituus; he marks out the hea­
vens into four quarters, having done
this, he stays and waits for the omen, on
which quarter the birds fly.

AUSPICIA [of avis a bird, and con­
spicio to behold or observe] observations 
and predictions taken from birds.

Some of these auspicia or omens were
taken from the chattering or singing of
birds and others from their flying: The
former they called Oscines, the latter
Præpetes; of the first sort were crows, 
pies, owls, &c. of the second, eagles, 
vultures and the like.

These Auspicia were also taken from
chickens in a coop or pen, and the
manner of divining from them was as
follows: The Auspex or Augur made
his observation early in the morning, 
and commanding a general silence, or­
dered the coop to be opened, and threw
down a handful of corn or crumbs to
them, and by their actions afterwards
took the omens.

If the chickens immediately ran flut­
tering to the meat, if they scatter'd it
with their wings, if they pass'd by it
without taking notice of it, or if they
flew away; they accounted the omen to
be unfortunate, and to portend nothing
but danger or mischance.

But if they leaped immediately out of
the coop, and fell to picking up the meat
so greedily, as to let some of it drop out
of their mouths upon the pavement, 
they looked upon it as a omen of as­
sured happiness and success.

AUSPICIAL [auspicialis, L.] fortu­
nate, happily begun, prosperous, fa­
vourable, lucky.

AUSPICIOUSNESS [of auspice, F.
auspicium, L.] prosperousness, happiness.

AUSTERE Taste [austerus, L.] a taste, 
which leaves some roughness on the
mouth and tongue, as vitriol, &c.

AUSTRAL Signs [Astronomy] are
the six southern signs of the zodiack, 
viz. libra, scorpio, sagittarius, capricor­
nus, aquarius and pisces.

AUTER DROIT [Fr. Law Terin] is
where persons sue or are sued in ano­
ther's right, as executors, administra­
tors. &c.

AUTERFOITS Acquit, a plea by a
criminal that he was heretofore acquit­
ted of the same treason or felony.  F.

AUTHENTICALNESS, genuineness, 
the being supported by good authority.

AUTHENTICKS, the name or title
of the third volume of the Roman civil
law, so termed because it has its autho­
rity from itself; as proceeding from the
mouth of the emperor. It is a tome
of new constitutions appointed by the
emperor Justinian after the code, and
introduced into the body of the law
under one book.

AUTHORITATIVENESS [of autho­
ritas, L.] the acting by authority, autho­
ritative appearance.

AUTOCHTHONES [ἀυτόχθωνες of
ἀυτὸς itself, and χθὼν the earth, Gr.]
the original and first inhabitants of any
country, q. sprung out of the very earth
itself, and particularly the most ancient
people of Athens in Greece were so
named.

AUTOCRASY [ἀυτοχρατία of ἀυτὸς
self, and χράτος power, Gr.] having 
power in himself, supremacy.

AUTOCRATICAL [of ἀτοχρα­
τιχὸς, Gr.]
self-powerful, supreme.

AUTOCRATORIAL [of ἀτοχρα­
τιχὸς, Gr.]
self-powerful, supreme.

AUTO DE FE, i. e. the Act of the
Faith is in Spain, and several other
countries of the Romish faith a pompous
sort of punishment, being the last part
of the inquisition. 

It was formerly call'd a general ser­
mon or discourse upon faith, at which
a great number of persons, sometimes
to the number of a hundred or two
charged with mispersuasions in relation
to the tenets of the Romish church, are
obliged to be present, appearing in a
kind of publick procession, habited in a
frightful manner, and are condemned
to various penances and some of them
to capital punishments.

And in order to render this more 
frequented and solemn, the lords inqui­
sitors usually pitch upon a Sunday or
some festival day, which being publish'd



by their order, all the parish priests of the 
 place or city where the solemnity is 
to be performed, tell the people after 
sermon that in such a church the lord 
inquisitor will make a general discourse 
upon the subject of Faith, and that there 
will be no preaching in any other 
church in that city on that day; and 
that all persons, who shall repair thi­
ther will have the usual indulgence of 
40 days. 

The religious houses have also the
same notice given to them, ordering
the superiors of them not to omit
preaching on that day in their respective
monasteries and to send two or four
friars to hear the inquisitors sermon and
the giving of sentence. 

If at this time any obstinate or relap
sed Heretick is to be delivered over to
the civil magistrate, word is sent by the
bishop and inquisitor to the sheriff or
proper officer of the place, to be ready
with his posse against such a day and hour, 
at such a place, to receive a certain he­
retick or hereticks from the court of
inquisition, and that either the morning
before or on the same day, that he by
the publick cryer, give notice of the
execution, all the town over. 

It is a custom in Spain especially, and
in most of the inquisition courts, to
bring faggots of brambles to the stake, 
the day before this Auto de Fe. 

Also the same day they cause the
heads and beards, of the condemned
persons to be shaven, and in the mor­
ning they are dress'd in the habit pre­
pared for the procession.

They are all clothed in a black vest, 
with breeches down to their heels, but
bare-headed and bare-footed, except
that some notorious criminals wear on
their heads a sort of mitre, as a punish­
ment for having been guilty of bearing
false witness in some very
heinous matter.

Those who have been convicted of
heresy, or strongly suspected of heresy, 
and have professed penitence for it, 
wear a monkish sort of frock, called a
Sambenito, of a saffron or flame colour, 
with a red saint Andrews cross before
and behind; but those convicted of les­
ser faults wear only black. 

Each of them carry in their hands a
smothered torch and have a rope about
their necks; but such as are condemned
to the stake are dress'd in a Samar. 

The prisoners are permitted to sit on
the ground and wait their doom; those
who are to be burnt are put into some
place near at hand, where confessors are 
sent to them to convert them and pre­
pare them for death.

About 4 a clock in the morning the
serviteurs belonging to the inquisition
give bread and figs to all the prisoners, 
and about sun rising at the tolling of the
cathedral bell, all those who undertake
to see the prisoners forth coming at the
end of the procession assemble in the in­
quisition hall, where the inquisitor seats
himself near the gate, and the register
of the office reads over the names of
the criminals; beginning with those
who have been guilty of the smallest
crimes, and ending with those that have
been charged with the greatest.

Then the criminals walk all out one
by one; each of them having an under­
taker, who is security for them that they
shall not slip off in the procession.

In this cavalcade the Dominicans go
first, because the head of their order was
the contriver of the inquisition.

The colours of the inquisition are
likewise born before them flying; and
after these friars follow the prisoners
with their securities. 

The lesser criminals are followed
with a crucifix and when they are come
to the end of their walk, those condemn­
ed to be burnt are brought out. 

Those who escape this punishment
are absolved with certain ceremonies.
and having been first whipp'd with rods
are reconcil'd to the church. 

And after the execution of the stake
is ended, those who having confessed
penitence, and have been reconciled to
the church are carried back to prison, 
and the next day brought into the inqui­
siters consistory, and admonished to go
carefully through the penance enjoined
them, and then are sent away to the
places of their respective sentences. 

Those who are condemned to the
gallies are sent under a guard to the
goal of the civil magistrate; some of
them are whipp'd through the high
streets of the town; others are enjoined
to wear a Sambenito, either every, day
or at least upon sundays and holy-days.

At Goa these persons before they are
released are instructed in the doctrine
and ceremonies of the church of Rome, 
and after that they have a schedule or
paper given them of the particulars of
their penance, and are all sworn to si­
lence, never to discover any thing they
have said, seen or heard, at table or
any other place in the inquisition.

AUTOGRAPHY [autographum. L.
ἀυτογραφὸν of ἀυτος and γράφω, Gr. to
write] the peculiar or own hand wri­



ting of any particular person; also the
original of any treatise or discourse, in
distinction from the copy of it.

AUTOKINESIA [ἀυτοχινησία, of ἀυ­
τὸς and χινέω, to move, Gr.] a free mov­
ing of itself to and fro.

AUTOMATON [ἀυτοματὸν of ἀυτὸς
and μαίομαι or ἀυτοματὸς spontaneous, 
Gr.] a self-moving engine; a machine
which has the principle of motion
within itself, going either by a vice, 
screw, spring or weight; any piece of
mechanism that seems to move of itself
as a clock, jack, watch, &c.

AUTOMATORY [automatoria, L.]
the art or science of making clocks, 
watches, &c. and such machines as move
of themselves.

AUTOTHEIST [of ἀυτὸς and Θεὸς, 
God, Gr.] one who believes God's self­
subsistence.

AUTUMN [autumnus, L.] harvest, 
the time from the sixth of August to the
sixth of November. The Egyptians us'd
to express autumn [Hieroglyphically] by
a serpent distilling venom into the body
of a man.

AUTUMN [with Alchymists] the
time or season when the operation of
the philosophers stone is brought to
maturity.

AUTUMNAL Point with [Astronom.]
is one of the equinoxial points; being
that from which the sun begins to des­
cend towards the north pole.

AUTUMNAL Equinox [Astron.] the
time when the sun is in the autumnal
point.

AUTUMNAL Signs [Astron.] are
those thro' which the sun passes during
the autumn season; they are libra scor­
pius and sagittarius.

AUTURGY [auturgia, L. of ἀυτὸς
self, and εργον, Gr. work] self-working.

AUXILIATION, help, aid, succour.

AUXILIUM [with Physicians] any
medicine that is good against a disease.

To AWAIT [of ache, Teut.] to wait
for, attend upon; also ready to befal one, 
(spoken of ill)

AWFULLNESS, reverentness, terror
bringing quality.

AWN [with Husbandmen] the 
spire or beard of barley, or
other bearded grain; also the beard
that grows out of the husk of corn, or
grass.

ANE [with Husbandmen] the 
spire or beard of barley, or
other bearded grain; also the beard
that grows out of the husk of corn, or
grass.

AX VETCH, an herb.

AXILLA [in Anatomy] the cavity un­
der the upper part of the arm, common­
ly called the arm-pit.  L.

AXINOMANCY [axinomantia, of ἀξι
νομαντεἰα, Gr. of ἀξινὴ a hatchet, and
μαντεέα Gr.] divination by an ax or
hatchet, which they fixed so exastly up­
on a round stake, that neither end might
outpoise or weigh down the other; then
they prayed and repeated the name or
those they suspected, and the person, at
whose name the hatchet made any the
least motion, was pronounced guilty.

AXIOMA [with Logicians] is the
disposing one argument with another, 
where a thing is said to be or not to
be.

AXIOMATICKS [axiomatici, L. of
ἀξιοματιχοὶ, Gr.] persons worthy of some
dignity or publick office.

AXIS, properly signifies a line or long
piece of iron or wood, passing through
the center of a sphere, which is movea­
ble upon the same.

AXIS [with Botanists] (by a metaphor
taken from the axis of a wheel, which
is that smooth part about which it
turns) is the smooth part in the center
of some fruits, about which the other
parts are disposed.

AXIS of the Earth [Geography] is a
right line upon which the earth per­
forms its daily rotation.

AXIS of a planet [Astron.] is aright
line drawn thro' the center of the pla­
net, and about which it revolves.

AXIS of a circle [As­
tron.]
is a strait line passing thro'
the center from one side
to another, and is the
same as diameter.

Image omitted.



AXIS of a sphere [As­
tron.]
is a strait line passing thro'
the center from one side
to another, and is the
same as diameter.

Image omitted.



AXIS [Architecture] is
otherwise called Cathetus.
as, 

AXIS [of the Ionick Capital] is a line
passing perpendicular through the mid­
dle of the eye of the volute.

Spiral AXIS [Architect.] is the axis
of a twisted column, drawn spirally, in
order to trace the circumvolutions
without.

AXIS of a Magnet, is a line passing
through the middle of a magnet length­
wise, in such manner that however the
magnet is divided, the loadstone will be
made into two loadstones, if the division
be according to a plane wherein such
line is found.

AXIS [in Peritrochio] a machine for
the raising of weights consisting of a cy­
lindrical beam, which is the axis lying
horizontally, and supported at each end
by a piece of timber; and somewhere
about it it hath a kind of tympanum or
wheel which is called the peritrochium;
in the circumference of which are made
holes to put in staves (like those of a



windlass or capstan, in order to turn
the axis round the more easily, to raise
the weight by a rope that winds round
the axis.

Image omitted.



AXIS [in Conick
Sections] is a line
that goes thro' the
middle of the figure, 
and cutting all the
ordinates at right
angles.

Image omitted.



Transverse AXIS 
of an Ellipsis or Hy­
perbola] is the axis
A P last defined. It
is also the first or
principal axis, in con­
tradistinction to the
conjugate or secon­
dary axis.

Image omitted.



Conjugate AXIS 
[of an Ellipsis] is
the line F E drawn
from the center of 
the figure C, paral­ 
lel to the ordinate
M N, and perpendicularly to the trans­
verse axis A P.

Image omitted.



Second AXIS 
[of an Ellipsis] is
the line F E drawn
from the center of 
the figure C, paral­ 
lel to the ordinate
M N, and perpendicularly to the trans­
verse axis A P.

Image omitted.



AXIS determinate [in an Hyperbola]
is a right line drawn between the ver­
texes or tops of the opposite sections.

AXIS indeterminate [of an Hyperb.] is
a right line which divides into two
equal parts, and at right angles, an in­
finite number of lines drawn parallel to
one another within the hyperbola.

AXIS [in Mechanicks] as the axis of
a ballance, is the line upon which it
turns or moves.

AXIS of a Conick, is the right line or
side upon which the triangle turns or
makes its motion in forming the cone.

AXIS of a Lens [Opticks] is a right
line passing along the axis of that solid, 
whereof the Lens is a segment.

AXIS of any Glass [Opticks] is a right
line drawn perpendicularly through
the center of the glass, and if it be a
convex glass, thro' the thickest part;
or if it be a concave glass thro' the
thinnest part (which in each of them
is termed the pole of the glass) directly
on the center of the sphere, of which
the glass figure is a segment.

AXUNGIA, a kind of fat, the softest
of any that is in the bodies of animals:
also the swarf or grease in the axle-tree
of a wheel; boar's grease.

AXUNGIA [of Glass] called also the
salt or gall of glass, is a scum which is
taken off from the top of the matter of
glass before it is vitrified.

AZAPES [in the Turkish army] are
the old Missulmen bands more ancient
than the Janizaries themselves, but ve­
ry much despis'd; they are made use of
as Pioneers, and are sometimes merely
a bridge to the horse in marshy grounds, 
and so many fascines to fill up the ditch­
es of a place besieged.

AZEROLE [with Botanists] a kind
of medlar tree, the leaves of which are
like parsley, the flowers grow in clu­
sters, and have several leaves, which
appear rosewise, the fruit is smaller
than a medlar, red, and of an agreeable
taste.

AZIMUTH Dial, one whose style
or gnomon is at right angles to the 
plane of the horizon.

Magnetical AZIMUTH [in Astronomy]
is the apparent distance of the sun from
the north or south point of the com­
pass.

AZONES [of α privative, and Ζώνη,
Gr. a zone or country] with Mytholo­
gists, such gods as were not private di­
vinities, of any particular country, but
were acknowledged as gods in every
country, and were worshipped by every
nation.

AZURE [of azurro, Ital. or azul, Sp.
which signifies blue, or of Lazulus lapis, 
L.] the colour of the sky.

AZURE [in Heraldry] i. e.
blue; this colour, Cuillim
says, consists of much red
and a little white, and re­
presents the colour of the
sky in a clear, sun shiney day, 
and in engraving is express'd by lines
drawn a cross the shield, as in the escut­
cheon. 

This colour signifies justice, chastity, 
humility, loyalty, and eternal felici­
ty; of worldly virtues, beauty, praise, 
meekness, humility, victory, perseve­
rance, riches, vigilance and recreation;
of the planets, Venus and Jupiter; of
metals, tin; of precious stones, the Tur­
ky stone; of the months of the year, 
September; of the days of the week, 



Wednesday, and Friday; of trees, the 
poplar; of flowers, the violet; of four­
footed animals, the cameleon; of fowls, 
the peacock; of human constitutions, 
the sanguine; and of the ages, youth.

Image omitted.



AZYMITES [ἀξυμίτες, Gr.] persons
who communicate of the eucharist with
unleavened bread.


B

BB Roman, Bb Italick, Bb English, 
Βββ Greek, ב Hebrew, are the se­
cond letters of these alphabets.

B, in English words, is not heard or
pronounced after m, as climb, dumb, 
rumb, thumb, &c.

B, is used as an abbreviation of seve­
ral words, as B. A. Baccalaureus Artium, 
a batchelor of arts; B. V. Beata virge, 
i. e. the Blessed Virgin, Sc. Maria.

B [with the Ancients] a numeral, de­
noting 300.

B̅, with a dash, over it signifies 3000.

The dash is placed on top of letter B.



BAAL [in Heb. לעב, signifies lord or
mighty] an idol of the Moabites and
Phænicians, called also Bel, and is
thought to have been the first of idols.

When the scripture mentions Baal
without any other addition, we are to
understand the God, who by the Pagaus
was esteemed the chief Deity, or Jupi­
ter. So that in the language of the
Heathens, Baal imports as much as Je­
hovah and Adonai in the sacred writings.

BAAL BERITH [הירב-לעב, Heb.
i. e. the lord of the covenant] this was
another god of the Phænicians.

BAAL GAD [דנ לעב, i. e. the lord of
a troop] was the God from whose pro­
vidence and will all worldly felicity
did proceed.

BAALIM [בילעב, Heb. i. e. lords]
some learned writers understand by
Baalim the deified souls of men, and
some apply it to the Semones or Semidei, 
i. e. to the half gods of the Pagans. It
is more probable that they worshipped
the sun and stars, of which they did
daily experience their goodness and
power.

BAALPEOR [דועפלעב, Heh. Βεελφε­
γὼρ, Gr.] was an obscene deity of the
Moabites at mount Peor, beyond Jordan.
Some think this to be Jupiter Tonans, 
i. e. Jupiter the tbunderer, others take
it for Saturn or the sun; but others are
of opinion that it was Priapus, the lasci­
vious and obscene deity; for that the
Jews worshipped him after the same
manner, that the Greeks worshipped
Priapus, hy committing fornication in
his temple. And this deity was chiefly
worshipped by women, and therefore
he was named the God of women.

BAALZEBUB [בזבוילעב, Heb. Βααλ­
ζεβυβ, Gr. i. e. the lord of flies] was the
God of Ekron, a city of the Philistines.
Some have been of opinion that the
Israelites gave him this name; because
in the performance of sacrifices that
were offered unto him, his priests were
tormented with swarms of flies; where­
as several of the learned Jewish rab­
bies say, and Scaliger from them, there
was not a fly to be seen in performing
the sacrifices to the true God.

BABEL [לבב, Heb. i. e. confusion] a
huge tower in the land of Shinar in Me­
sopotamia, said to have been built 5146
paces high, having an equal basis; the
passage was round the side, and had
many apartments and rooms for people, 
cattle, horses, carts, &c. inclosed with­
in it. The hands of all or most of the
inhabitants of the earth were employed
in it after the flood, before they were
separated; supposed to be begun by the
order of Nimrod, to secure them against
a second flood. It was render'd famous
upon the account of the confusion of
languages, which caused them to desist
from their attempts.

BABBLE [of  babil, F.] simple talk.

BABBLER [un babillard] a prater, 
&c.

BABBLER, an enemy to good man­
ners, and a profane person [Hierogly­
phically] was represented by a grunting
hog, the filthy disposition of which
caused it to be hated by all the eastern
people, insomuch that it was a great
crime for some priests who waited
upon the altars of their gods, to touch
a hog.

BABYLON, anciently the metropo­
lis of Chaldæa, founded either by Nim­
rod or Belus, and by Ninus and Semira­
mis improv'd, so as to be accounted one
of the seven wonders of the world for
its extraordinary walls and gardens.
The river Euphrates ran through the
middle of the city, the two shores be­
ing joined by a bridge ef stupendous
architecture: Some authors write, that
the city, when in its greatest grandeur, 
was in compass 46 miles. The walls
were built by queen Semiramis so large
and high, that some write they were
200, others 250, and others 300 feet
high; but the most common receiv'd
measure is, that they were fifty cubits
high, and so broad that three chariots
might go upon them without danger.



Diodorus Siculus writes, that they were
300 or 350 stadia in compass, that is, 
above twenty two English miles, and
five stadia high, having pleasant gar­
dens on them.

BACCATED [baccatus, L.] beset
with pearls, also having many berries.

BACCHANALIA, a festival in ho­
nour of Bacchus, celebrated with much
solemnity by the ancient Greeks and
Romans; these feasts were also called
Orgya of Ὀργὴ fury or transport, by
reason of the madness and enthusiasm
that the people seemed to be possess'd
with at the time of their celebration.

BACCHANTES the priestesses and 
priests of Bacchus, 
who celebrated his festivals with cym­
bals, drums, timbrels, noise and shouts, 
running about in a frantick manner, 
crowned with ivy, vine-twigs, &c. and
carrying in their hands a thyrsis or staff
wreathed with the same plants,  L.

BACCHANALS the priestesses and 
priests of Bacchus, 
who celebrated his festivals with cym­
bals, drums, timbrels, noise and shouts, 
running about in a frantick manner, 
crowned with ivy, vine-twigs, &c. and
carrying in their hands a thyrsis or staff
wreathed with the same plants,  L.

BACCHARACH [q. Bacchi ara 
i. e. the altar of
Bacchus] a small town in the lower Pa­
latinate on the Rhine, about 24 miles
west of Metz, famous for excellent
wines call'd by that name.

BACCHARAG [q. Bacchi ara 
i. e. the altar of
Bacchus] a small town in the lower Pa­
latinate on the Rhine, about 24 miles
west of Metz, famous for excellent
wines call'd by that name.

BACCHUS, some derive Bacchus of
דב, a son, and ןוח, Chus, q. d. the son
Chus, and so they will have it that Bac­
chus and Nimrod are the same persons;
but (according to the Heathen theogony, 
he was the son of Jupiter, and the
nymph Semele. The poets relate that
Juno being acquainted with the amours
of her husband Jupiter, out of revenge
to the rival of her bed, disguis'd her­
self, and came to Semele in the form
and habit of an old woman, telling her
that it was for her honour, that Jupi­
ter should visit her in the same manner
that he did his wife Juno, i. e. in his
glory and majesty, with his thunder­
bolts in his hand; advising her the next
time he came to desire the favour of
him. She did so, Jupiter granted her
request, but it prov'd fatal to her, she
being kill'd by that means according to
Juno's desire. But Jupiter immediately
separated the child from his dead mo­
ther, and inserted him into his thigh, 
doing thereby the office of a mother
till the time was expired that he should
be born, and then committed him to
Silenus and the nymphs, to be brought
up by them, or, as others say, to Ceres;
for which good service they are fabled
to have been received up into heaven, 
and to have been turn'd into the stars
called Hyades, 
He is said to have been the inventor
of the use of wine, which he giving
the Indians to drink, they at first thought
he had given them poison, because it
not only made them drunk, but mad
too.
He was usually painted with a mitre
upon his head, or a garland of roses, or
else with a bald pate, which was to in­
timate the effect of the excess of wine.
In the one hand he held a sickle, in the
other a pitcher; he was always repre­
sented young, because the moderate
use of wine warms the blood and keeps
the body in a youthful strength and co­
lour.
His chariot was drawn by tygers, his
habit was the skin of a deer, his scep­
ter was a lance adorn'd with branches
of ivy, and of vine.
His temple was next to that of Miner­
va, the intent of which was to intimate
how useful wine is to revive the spirits, 
and assist the fancy in invention; and
for that reason the ancients sacrificed
the quick-sighted dragon to him; and
the chattering magpye was also conse­
crated to him, because wine makes per­
sons prate. Before his expedition to
India it is reported, that men were sa­
crificed to him; but after that he was
content with other sacrifices; they of­
fering to him also asses and goats, to in­
timate that those that are given to wine
make themselves as sottish as asses, or as
lascivious as goats. The sacrifices were
usually performed to Bacchus in the
evening, and at night; the reason of
which custom seems to be, that he (as
it is reported) carried a torch before
Proserpina, when she was conducted to
be married to Pluto.
His priests were either satyrs or wo­
men, because women are said to have
followed him in great companies in his
travels, crying, singing and dancing
continually, and they were called Bac­
chanals, that express fury and madness.
The greatest solemnities observ'd to
Bacchus, were the Orgya [of ὀργὴ, Gr.
a transport of anger] because their 
frantick women used to cloath them­
selves with skins of tigers or panthers, 
and run up and down with lighted tor­
ches in their hands, their hair hanging
down about their shoulders, shouting
out, Eu Hoe, Evan, Eu Hoe, Bacche, 
which signifies good son.
This name is laid to have been given
him by his father Jupiter, because in the
war with the Giants, he, in the form
of a lion, ran violently upon the first
and tore him to pieces.



The truth of the poets Bacchus is
said to be this. He whom the Latins
call Liber, and the Greeks Dionysius, 
and the Egyptians Osiris, was a king of
Nisa in Arabia Felix, who taught the
people of that, and the neighbouring
countries, the way of ordering vines, 
and preserving bees, and several other
useful arts, made several good laws, 
persuaded the people to do sacrifice to
their gods, for which he was greatly
honoured by several civiliz'd nations.
In honour of him, the Greeks instituted
several festival days, of which the chief
was the Trieteria, Apaturia, Phallica
and Lenæa, in the beginning of the
spring, that he might bless the vines.
The Romans also instituted the Asco­
lia (which see) in honour of Bacchus, 
at that time they carried the statues.
The ancients also painted Bacchus
with short brown curled hair, with a
leopard's skin spotted, or in a green
mantle, with a red flushing, full face, 
and a wreath of vine-branches about
his temples.

BACHELORSHIP [baccalaureat, F.
baccalaureatus, L.] the estate or conditi­
on of a man never married.

BACK, seems to be the same with
Bec, in Dutch Beke, a brook or rivu­
let, and so it is still used in the north of
England.

To BACK a Horse, or mount or ride
him.

To BACK a person or Design, to assist, 
support, abet, and sustain the person
that undertakes it.

BACK STAFF [in Naviga­
tion] an in­
strument by the French, called the En­
glish quadrant, invented by captain Da­
vis: being the simplest and exactest in­
strument hitherto invented for taking the
sun's zenith distance at sea, by the help
of which the altitude is presently known.
It consist of two arches, the arch x
of the least radius contains 60 degrees, 
and that of y having the largest radius
contains three degrees. It has also
three vanes; the vane at h is called the
horizon vane, that at S the shadow vane, 
and the vane at E is called the sight vane.

Image omitted.



BACK QUADRANT [in Naviga­
tion] an in­
strument by the French, called the En­
glish quadrant, invented by captain Da­
vis: being the simplest and exactest in­
strument hitherto invented for taking the
sun's zenith distance at sea, by the help
of which the altitude is presently known.
It consist of two arches, the arch x
of the least radius contains 60 degrees, 
and that of y having the largest radius
contains three degrees. It has also
three vanes; the vane at h is called the
horizon vane, that at S the shadow vane, 
and the vane at E is called the sight vane.

Image omitted.



BACKWARD [bac&wyn;erð, Sax.]
on, at, or towards
the back part; also unwilling, loath to.

BACKWARDS [bac&wyn;erð, Sax.]
on, at, or towards
the back part; also unwilling, loath to.

BACKWARDNESS [bae&wyn;earðneſſe
Sax.] an unreadinese, an unwillingness;
also a defectiveness in proficiency in any
attainment.

BAG [in Traffick] a particular quan­
tity of some sort of commodities, as of
pepper, from 1 to 3 hundred weight, &c.

BAGAVEL [with the citizens 
of Exeter] a cer­
tain tribute or toll granted to the citi­
zens upon all manner of wares brought
to that city to be sold, towards the pa­
ving of the streets, repairing of the
walls, and maintenance of the city.

BETHUGAVEL [with the citizens 
of Exeter] a cer­
tain tribute or toll granted to the citi­
zens upon all manner of wares brought
to that city to be sold, towards the pa­
ving of the streets, repairing of the
walls, and maintenance of the city.

BAGGAGE [of carrying a bag or
knap-sack] a soldier's trull; a camp­
whore; also a sorry wench.

BAGUETTE [with Archit.] a small, 
round moulding less than an astragal, 
sometimes carved and inriched with, 
foliages, ribbands, laurels, &c.

BAIL [in a Forest] a limit or bound, 
according as a forest is divided into the
particular charges of several foresters.

BAILLEE [in Law] the person to
whom the goods of a person bailed are
delivered.

BAILLOR [in Law] the party who
delivers such goods.

BAIRAM [among the Turks] a festi­
val which they celebrate after the fast
of Ramazan for three days together, in
which no work is done; but presents
are sent 
from one to another with ma­
nifestations of joy.
At the celebration of these feasts after
numerous ceremonies, or rather strange
mimickeries in their mosques, they con­
clude with a solemn prayer against the
infidels, to root out Christian princes, 
or to arm them one against another, 
that they may extend the bounds of the
observation of their law.

White BAKERS, this company is of
great antiquity: They
were a company the 1st
of Edward II. had a
new charter I Henry
VII. confirmed by Hen­
ry VIII. and Edward VI.
queen Mary, queen Eli­
zabeth and king James.
Their arms are gules, 
three garbs or on a chief, an arm issu­



ing out of a cloud proper, holding a
pair of scales or, between three garbes
of the first.

Image omitted.



Brown BAKERS 
were incorporated the
19th of king James I.
Their arms are gules, 
a hand issuing out of
the clouds proper, hold­
ing a pair of balance, 
an anchor in a chief, 
barry wavy or and azure on a cheveron
gules, between three garbes.

Image omitted.



BAKER [of bacian, Sax.] a maker of
bread.

BAIVA, a deity of the Laplanders, 
which some take to be the sun, and
others the fire; being worshipped as the
lord of light and heat.

BALANCE [probably of bilanx, 
L. or balance, F.] one
of the six simple powers in Mechanicks, 
used principally for determining the
equality or difference of weight in heavy
bodies; they are of several forms, as
scales, steel-yards, &c.

BALLANCE [probably of bilanx, 
L. or balance, F.] one
of the six simple powers in Mechanicks, 
used principally for determining the
equality or difference of weight in heavy
bodies; they are of several forms, as
scales, steel-yards, &c.

BALANCE [with Astronomers]
called in Latin Libra, 
of which this ♎ is the charasteristick, 
is one of the 12 signs of the Zodiack, 
into which the sun enters at the autum­
nal equinox in September; the constella­
tion consists of eight stars, represented
on a globe by the form of a balance or
pair of scales.

BALLANCE [with Astronomers]
called in Latin Libra, 
of which this ♎ is the charasteristick, 
is one of the 12 signs of the Zodiack, 
into which the sun enters at the autum­
nal equinox in September; the constella­
tion consists of eight stars, represented
on a globe by the form of a balance or
pair of scales.

BALANCE [of the Air] the weight
of that fluid, whereby, according to its
known property; it presseth where it is
least resisted, till it is equally adjusted
in all parts.

To keep a BALANCE [in Politicks] is
effected by making such alliances with
foreign powers as shall either weaken
the stronger or strengthen the weaker;
or to do both, that no power may be
in a capacity of oppressing insulting, or
over-running their neighbours.

To BALLANCE [in Traffick] is to
settle either a particular account of a
person or commodity, or to settle all
the books of accounts, in order to see
whether every thing be regularly and
truly posted in the ledger, and from
thence to find the profit and loss of any
or all the commodities a person deals in, 
and also to know what remains undis­
pos'd of, which when cast up, if no im­
bezzlement has been made, will exactly
correspond with what appears upon
the account.

BALASSIUS, the balass ruby, a pre­
cious stone of a faint red colour.

BALATRONES [balatrones, Hor.] an
ancient name given to wicked and lewd
persons, from Servilius Balatro, a de­
bauch'd libertine, whence probably the
French have derived their Poltroon.

BALD [balð, Sax. probably of bal, 
C. Brit. tho' Minshew rather chooses to
derive it of bald, Teut. quick; because
old men are prone to baldness, &c.] ha­
ving no hair on the head, &c. it also
signifies bold, the same as the Latin au­
dax, and is still so used in the northern
counties of England, and thence comes
Baldwin, and by transposition Winbald, 
i. e. a bold conqueror; Eadbald, happi­
ly bold; Ethelbald, nobly bold.

BALDACUM [with Architects]
an edifice or piece
of architecture in the shape of a canopy
or crown, supported by several pillars, 
as a covering of an altar; also a canopy
carried over the host by the Romanists;
some also use it to signify a shell over
the front door of a house.

BALDAQUIN [with Architects]
an edifice or piece
of architecture in the shape of a canopy
or crown, supported by several pillars, 
as a covering of an altar; also a canopy
carried over the host by the Romanists;
some also use it to signify a shell over
the front door of a house.

BALDNESS [balðneſſe, Sax.] not
having hair; also in regard to speech, 
unpoliteness.

BALK [among Bricklayers] a great
beam, such as is used in building; also a
poll or rafter over an out-house
or barn.
 
BALL [bal, F.] a publick dancing
meeting.

BALLAD [balad, F.] a song.

BALLS [in Heraldry] a common bear­
ing in coats of arms; but always by he­
ralds called by other names, according
to their different colours, as ogresses, 
besants, golps, guzes, hurts, pellets, 
plates, pomeis, orenges, torteauxes;
which see in their proper places.

BALLISTERS [in a Church] an in­
closure of pillars, which rails in the
communion table.

BALLISTICKS [of ballistæ, L. cross­
bows or engines for calling javelins, 
great stones, &c.] the art of making
such engines.

BALLIVA [Old Deeds] a whole coun­
ty under the jurisdiction of a sheriff;
also a hundred with respect to the chief
constable; or a manor, with respect to
the steward.

BALLUSTRADE, a row of ballisters
or small turned pillars, of such a height
as a man may lean his elbow upon them;
fixed upon a terrace walk or top of a
building to divide it into two or more
separate parts.

BALM [with Chymists] an extract of
common salt, made on the following
manner. They first dissolve the salt, 
and having clarified it well, let it in
horse dung for the space of two or three
months, and after this it is distill'd



strongly with a sand heat, which pro­
duces an unctuous substance of a quality 
so preservative that (it is said) the most 
corruptible things being steep'd in it are
preserv'd time out of mind; and that
the dead bodies of the ancients have
been preserv'd by it, without being re­
duced to a mummy.

BALNEARY [balnearius, L.] belong­
ing to baths, &c.

BALNEATORY [balneatorius, L.] be­
longing to a bath or stove.

BALSAM [in Pharmacy] certain li­
quors extracted or drawn from gums and
rosiny substances, as nervous balsam, 
sciatick balsam.

Apoplectick BALSAM, a sweet scented
spirituous substance of the consistence of
an ointment, a perfume.

BALSAMUM [βάλσαμον, Gr. of לעב,
ןוכש, Heb.] the balsam or balm-tree, or 
the juice that drops from it, that is of a
most fragrant scent.  L.

BAM, at the beginning of the names
of places in Great-Britain, denotes the
quality of the place that it either now
or formerly was woody, from the Sax­
on beam, which signifies a piece of tim­
ber, as Bamfield, Bambridge, Bambury.

BAND [Banð, Sax.] an ornament or
cloathing for the neck.

To BAND [Banðen, Sax.] to bandy, 
to gather into, or conspire with a fac­
tion.

Nave BANDS [with Gunners] hoops of 
iron, binding the nave in a gun carriage
at both ends.

BAND, any piece of stuff both long
and narrow, as the swathe bands for
infants.

BAND of Musick, a company or set of 
musicians, united or selected for the per­
formance of a symphony on any extra­ 
ordinary occasion.

BAND of Gentlemen Pensioners, are a
company of gentlemen bearing halberts, 
who attend immediately the king's per­
son on solemn occasions.

BANDELET [with Architects] any
line or flat moulding, as that which
crowns the Dorick architrave; it en­
compasses a pillar quite roundabout like
a ring, is greater than a list, but less
than a plat-band.

BANDOG [of band and dog] a dog
kept in a band or chain; also a mastiff 
or house-dog; also a dog for baiting 
bulls, bears, &c.

BANEFUL, poisonous, destructive.

BANEFULNESS, poisonousness, de­
structiveness.

The BANNER [of Mother Church]
was a cross given to a felon or murder­
er, who having recovered a church or
church-yard before he was apprehended,
could not be taken out thence to take
his trial at law; but having confessed his 
crime before the justice or coroner, and 
abjured the kingdom, was to carry this 
cross in his hand through the highways
till he was got out of the king's domi­
nion, but this privilege and the use of 
sanctuaries was taken away in the 21st of 
king James I.

BANNIANS [a name which in the 
Indian language signifies innocent people,
without guile] a religious sect among the 
Indians, who believe a transmigration of 
souls, and therefore eat no living 
creature, nor will kill even noxious a­
nimals; they are so cautious of having 
communication with other nations, that 
if one of a different religion has drank
out of or touched their cup, they break
it. If one of themselves happens to 
touch another, they wash and purify 
themselves before they eat or drink, or 
enter into their houses: they wear a­
bout the bigness of an egg, which is 
perforated, and has three strings run in
it; this stone, they say, represents their 
great God, and upon this account the 
Indians shew them very great respect.

BANQUET [in Fortification] a foot­
bank of earth, about the height of a foot
and a half, and three broad, raised at
the rampart at the foot of the parapet
for the soldiers to mount on to fire over.

BANQUET [of a Bridle] is that small
part of the branch of a bridle that is
under the eye, which is rounded like a 
small rod, and gathers and joins the ex­
tremities of a bit to the branch, so that 
the banquet is not seen, but is covered 
by the cap, or that part of the bit that
is next the branch.

BANQUET LINE [of a Bridle] is an
imaginary line drawn by bit-makers
along in form of a bit, and prolonged
upwards and downwards to adjust the
designed force or weakness of a branch, 
in order to make it stiff or easy.

A BANTER, a jeering, a rallying by
way of diversion, &c.

BANSTICKLE, a small fish, called a
stickle back.

BAPTISM, signifies a washing, puri­
fying or cleansing with water, a custom 
in use with the Jews, on Proselytes, i. e.
gentiles brought to embrace their reli­
gion, who if he was a male was first
circumcised; and also by those who
had any ways contracted any defilement
or pollution.



BAPTISM [in Sea Language] is a ce­
remony perform'd in merchant ships, 
which pass the tropick or line for the
first time, both upon ships and men. The
Baptism of ships, is only the washing 
them throughout with sea water.

The Baptism of passengers is perform­
ed with many ceremonies; but in per­
forming either of them, the ships crew
are generally made drunk, for the sai­
lors pretend to a customary right to cut
off the beak head of the ship, unless the
captain or master redeem it.
The ceremony is as follows: The
eldest of the ship's crew, who has pass'd
the line or tropick, having dressed him­
self fantastically, with a grotesque cap
on his head, his face black'd, comes
carrying in his hand a waggoner or some
other sea-book, followed by the rest of
the sailors disguised like himself, each
of them bearing in his hand some kitchen
utensil, with drums beating; the leader
places himself very gravely on a seat
prepared on the decks, at the foot of the
main-mast; and each sailor or passenger
swears before this antick magistrate, that
he will see that this ceremony be per­
formed whenever it comes to his turn.
The sailors are commonly heartily
drenched with whole buckets of water
poured upon them; but passengers and
those that will give a little money, are
more favourably treated, being only
sprinkled with a little water; ship boys
are commonly put into a cage and
drench'd at discretion, and are after­
wards obliged to whip one another, 
which they usually do very smartly.

BAPTISTERY [Βαπτιστηριον, Gr.] is ei­
ther the place or vessel in which per­
sons are baptiz'd; in ancient times this
being perform'd by immersion, the per­
sons so initiated went into a river, &c.
and were plunged; but in the time of
Constantine the great, chappels or places
on purpose to baptize in were built in
great cities which was perform'd in the
Eastern, and warm countries by dipping
the persons all over; but in process of
time in the Western and colder countries
sprinkling was substituted in the place of
dipping, which was the original of our
fonts in churches.

Bar [Heraldry] one of
the honourable members of
a court of arms, which is
divided by it into two equal
parts; it goes cross the es­
cutcheon like the fess, but
contains only the 5th part of the field.

Image omitted.



To BAR a vein [with Farriers] is to
strike it or open it above the skin, and
after it has been disengaged, and tied
above and below, to strike between the
ligatures.

BAR GEMEL [in Heral­
dry] is a double bar or bars
that stand by couples, as in
the figure annexed.

Image omitted.



To fall foul of the BAR [with Horse­
men] is when a horse is standing in a
stable, entangles his legs upon the par­
tition-bar that is placed to separated two
horses.

Special BAR [in Law] is that which
is more than ordinary, and falls out in
the case in hand upon some special cir­
cumstance of the fact.

BAR [Sea word] a rock lying before a
harbour, that ships cannot sail over but
upon the flood.

BARATTA, a sort of balsam brought
from the West-Indies. 

BARALLOTS, a sect of hereticks at
Bologne in Italy, who had all things in
common, even their wives and children.

BARB, a horse of the Barbary breed, 
much esteemed for their swift running, 
and therefore are much coveted for
stallions; they being said to retain their
native vigour to the very last. The
owners of them in Barbary preserve the
genealogies of these Barbs, as carefully, 
as we do those of our noble families;
they are said also to be able to out­
run an ostrich, and some of them are
bought at the price of two or 300 
pounds Sterling.

BARBACAN [barbacane, Ital.] a ca­
nal or opening left in a wall for water
to come in and go out at, when build­
ings are erected in places liable to be
over flowed, or to drain the water off a
terrass.

BARBACAN [in Military Affairs] an
aperture or cleft, made in the walls of
a castle or fortress to fire upon the e­
nemy.

BARBARY Falcons, a kind of hawks
commonly taken in Barbary, they mak­
ing their passage through that country;
this bird is less than the Tiercel-gentle, 
but very bold; it is plumed with red
under the wings, and armed with long
talons and stretchers.

BARBE, the armour of the horses of
the ancient knights and soldiers who
were accouter'd at all points.

BARBS, a sort of armour for horses, 
which covered the neck, breast and
crupper.

BARBES [with Husbandmen] a distem­
per in black cattle, known by a super­



fluous piece of flesh on their tongues, 
which sometimes hinders them from
eating their meat.

BARBEE [in Heraldry]
as croix barbée, i. e. barbed-­
cross, being at the extremi­
ties like the barbed-irons
that are used for striking
fish, or other weapons or
instruments commonly called barbed, 
which being struck into any thing can­
not be drawn out again, without cut­
ting a hole to make a passage for the
beards, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



BARBED and CRESTED [in Heral­
dry] is in plain English wattled and
combed, and signifies the combs and
gills of a cock when particulariz'd for
being of a different tincture from the
body.

BARBER Chirurgeons. They were
incorporated by king
Edward IV. but con­
firmed by most kings
and queens since with
enlargements. Their
arms are a cross quar­
tered gules, a lion pas­
sant, gardant Or, in
the first quarter a che­
vron between three, in the second par­
ty per pale argent & vert, a rose crown'd
with an imperial crown, the first as the
fourth, the second as the third.

Image omitted.



BARBICANAGE [Old Rec.] money
given for the maintenance of a barbican
or watch-tower.

BARDS [among the ancient Britons
and Gauls] a sort of poets who describ­
ed and sung in a kind of verse, the no­
ble atchievements of great comman­
ders and noblemen; they laboured to
encourage vertue, and frequently influ­
enced the chiefs on both sides to hear­
ken to a reconciliation, as to the mat­
ters in difference, even when the two
armies were ready to join battle.
In the highlands of Scotland, persons
under this name, are still retained
by the heads of clans to record the ge­
nealogies and memorable actions of
their families.

BARDS [in Cookery] are thin broad
slices of bacon, with which capons, pul­
lets, &c. are covered, in order to be
roasted, baked or stewed, &c.

BARDELLE [with Horsemen] a sort
of saddle made in the shape of a great
saddle, but only of cloth stuffed with
straw, and tyed tight down with pack­
thread, without either wood, lead or
iron.  Ital.

BARENESS [of abarian, Sax. to
make bare] the being bare or naked.

BARNABITES, a sect of religious
or regular priests of the congregation
of St. Paul; their office is to instruct, 
catechise and serve in millions.

BARNACLE [with Mariners] a long
red worm in the sea, that will eat thro'
the planks of a ship if it be not sheathed.

BARNACLES, a small marine ani­
mal found in the western islands of
Scotland, which first appears in the
form of a small shell fish, adhering or
sticking to old rotten wood, of the co­
lour and consistence of a muscle, cross'd
with sutures; it hangs to the timber
by a neck longer than the shell of a
filmy substance, by means of which it
receives its aliment within the shell.

BARNACLES [on the coasts of Nor­
mandy] an animal substance which the
Normans call macreuse of the Duck kind, 
which they eat on fish days, as, if it
were fish; tho' Mr. Ray says it is in rea­
lity a fowl.

BARNACLES [in the Canting Lan­
guage] is also a name given to those
irons or fetters worn by fellons in
jail; also a pair of spectacles.

BARNACLES [with Jockies] the gra­
tuity or reward receiv'd by them for
buying horses for the nobility.

BAROME­
TER [βαρόμε­
τρον, of βάρος and
μέτρον, Gr. mea­
sure] an instru­
ment for estimat­
ing the weight
or pillar of the
atmosphere, and
the several mi­
nute variations
of the weight of
that pillar; by
which variations
the various chan­
ges of the wea­
ther are deter­
mined.
The first in­
ventor of it was
Torricelli, at Flo­
rence in 1643.
From whence fa­
ther Mersenne
brought it into
France the year
following, 1644, 
and Monsieur Pas­
chal tried it in
1646, and gave
an account of it
in a piece printed



in 1647; the uses of this instrument are
to discover the gravitation, of the in­
cumbent atmosphere (one of the no­
blest philosophical discoveries) the
changes of the weather, &c.
The mechanism of the Barometer is
as follows: A glass tube AB, hermeti­
cally seal'd in A, having its diameter
about one tenth of an inch, and its
length at least 13 inches, is filled with
mercury so justly, as not to have any
air over it, nor any bubbles adhering
to the sides of the tube, which is best
done by means of a glass funnel, with
a capillary tube; the orifice of the tube, 
filled after this manner, so as to over­
flow, is closely pressed by the finger, 
so as to exclude any air betwixt it and
the mercury, and thus immerged in a
wooden vessel of a convenient diameter, 
so however as not to touch the bottom
at the distance of 28 inches from the
surface of the mercury, are fix'd two
plates, CE, and DF, divided into two
inches, and these again subdivided in­
to any number of smaller parts: Lastly, 
the tube is inclosed in a wooden frame, 
to prevent its being broke, and the ba­
son open, tho' secured from dust.

Many attempts have been made to
render the changes in the Barometer
more sensible, and so to measure the
atmosphere more accurately; which
has given rise to a great number of Ba­
rometers of different structures. Hence
comes the Wheel Barometer, Diagonal
Barometer, Horizontal Barometer, Pen­
dant Barometer, &c.

A marine BAROMETER, being only
a double Thermometer for conveniency
at sea. See Thermometer.

Observations for the use of the Ba­
rometer.

1. The motion of the mercury in the
tube does not exceed three inches in
its rising and falling.

2. The rising of the mercury gene­
rally presages fair weather, and its
falling foul; as rain, snow, high winds
and storms.

3. The falling of the mercury in ve­
ry hot weather presages thunder.

4. The rising of the mercury in win­
ter, foreshews frost; and if the mercu­
ry falls three or four divisions in frosty
weather, a thaw will certainly follow;
but if the mercury rises in a continued
frost, snow will follow.

5. If soon after the falling of the
mercury foul weather ensues, there
will be but little of it; and on the con­
trary, if the weather proves fair soon
after the mercury has risen, the same
will happen.

6. If the mercury rise much and high
in foul weather, and continues so for
two or three days before the foul wea­
ther is over, then continued fair wea­
ther will ensue.

7. If the mercury falls much and low
in fair weather, and continues so for
two or three days before the rain
comes, then you may expect a great
deal of wet, and very probably high
winds.

8. If the mercury be unsettled in its
motion, it denotes uncertain and chan­
geable weather.

9. As to the words that are graved
near the divisions of the instrument, 
tho' for the most part the alterations
of the weather will agree with them, 
yet they are not so strictly to be mind­
ed, as in the rising and falling of the
mercury according to the foregoing
observations; for if the mercury stands
at much rain, and then rises up to
changeable, it then foreshews fair
weather, although not to continue so
long as it would have done if the mer­
cury were higher; so places which
are more northerly have a greater
alteration of the rise or fall of the mer­
cury, than those that are more sou­
therly.

Image omitted.



Wheel
BAROME­
TER, is a
contrivance
for the ap­
plying an
index to the
common
Barometer,
which in­
dex shews
the varia­
tion of the
altitude of
the mercu­
rial cylin­
der, which
at most
does not ex­
ceed three
inches, which nevertheless may be
made as distinguishable as if it were
three foot or three yards, or as much
more as is desired; the form of it is as
here described.

Image omitted.



BAROCO [with Logicians] one of
the barbarous words by which they ex­
press the syllogistick mood, and in this
mood the first proposition must always
be an universal affirmative; and the
others particular and negative, and the
middle term the attribute to the two
first.



BARON, is a degree of nobility, 
next but inferior to a viscount, but su­
perior to a gentleman, anciently they
were such as had the government of
provinces committed to them, and are
in probability the same with court ba­
rons, and were immediately after the
conquest; they if they would, might
come to parliament, and were probably
the same with our court Barons now, 
and then sat as Peers in the upper house
of parliament, call'd lords; this
dignity at the first wholly depended on
the king's pleasure; but afterwards
they obtained letters patent of the
king, to make the title hereditary to
their male issue, and were called Ba­
rons, either by writ or creation.

BARONS by Writ, were call'd also
Barons by prescription, because they
and their ancestors have continued Ba­
rons, beyond the memory of man, and
have their surnames added to the title
of lord; but those by their patent are
called after the names of their baro­
nies.

BARONS by Tenure, are such as the
bishops, who have baronies annexed
to their bishopricks, and have the title
of lords spiritual, and take their seats
in the house of lords.

BARONETS, by K. James I. in the
year 1611 were created on condition of
defending the province of Ulster in Ire­
land, which was at that time much ha­
rassed by the rebels, with the arms of
which they were allow'd to charge
their coat, and for that purpose they
were to maintain 30 soldiers for the
space of three years, or pay into the
Exchequer a sum sufficient to do it, 
which at eight pence per day, amounts
to the sum of 1095 pounds sterling.

This degree of honour is next to a
Baron, and takes the precedency of all
knights, except knights of the garter, 
and is the lowest degree of honour that
is hereditary.

BARREL of the ear [with Anatomists]
a large cavity behind the tympanum
of the ear, in depth about three or four
lines, in with five or six, covered with
a very fine membrane, on which are
several veins and arteries.

BARRELS of earth [in an Army] a
sort of half hogsheads filled with earth, 
which are used as breast-works for
covering the soldiery; and also to break
the gabions made in the ditch, and also
to roll into breaches.

BARREL of a watch. See Fuzee.

Thundering BARRELS [with Gunners]
barrels filled with bombs, granadoes, 
and other fire-works, to be rolled down
a breach.

BARRENNESS [of unberenð, Sax.]
unfruitfulness, a not bearing.

BARREN SIGNS [with Astrologers]
the signs Gemini, Leo and Virgo, so called
because when the questionis ask'd, whe­
ther such a person shall have children
or not? If one of those signs be upon
the cusp, or first point of the fifth house,
they take it for granted, that the per­
son enquiring shall have none.

BARRICADOES [in regular Fortifi­
cation] are trees cut with six faces, and
crosted with battoons of the length of
half pikes, bound with iron at the feet;
to be set up in passages or breaches, to
keep back either horse or foot.

BARRIERS [in
Fortification] are
great stakes set up
about 10 foot di­
stance one fron
another, and a­
bout 4 or 5 foot
high, having tran­
soms or over­
thwarth rafters to stop such as would
violently force their way in. These
are usually erected in void spaces be­
tween a citadel and the town in half
moons and other works.

Image omitted.



BARRISTERS [of Bar at which they
plead] are pleaders at the bar of a court
of judicature, and are of two sorts, ei­
ther outward or utter, or inner.

Outward BARRISTER one who
after long
study of the law, at least 7 years, is cal­
led to publick practice, and admitted to
plead, standing without the bar.

Utter BARRISTER one who
after long
study of the law, at least 7 years, is cal­
led to publick practice, and admitted to
plead, standing without the bar.

Inner BARRISTER, one who being
a serjeant at law, or else an attorney of
the king or prince, or any of the king's, 
&c. council, are allow'd out of respect
to plead within the bar.

BARROW [bear&wyn;e, Sax. a grove]
whether it stands singly by itself, or is
added to the name of a place, signifies
something relating to a grove; and se­
veral words beginning with bar, seem
to have been anciently writen barrow;
so that Barton seems to be but a con­
traction of Barrow-town, i. e. a town
in or near a grove.

BARRY [in Heraldry] we
understand it to be a shield
divided transverse into 4 or
6, or more equal parts, and
consisting of two or more
tinctures interchangeably
disposed; as in the figure.

Image omitted.



BARROW [beorʒ, Sax.] a little hill



or mount of earth, such as are cast up
in several parts of England, and are
supposed to the Roman burying places.

BARRY BENDY [in He­
raldry] is a shield equally
divided into 4, 6 or more
equal parts, by lines drawn
transverse and diagonal, in­
terchangeably varying the
tinctures of which it consists, as in the
figure.

Image omitted.



BARRY Pily [in Heral­
dry] another particular
way of blazoning or di­
viding a coat armour, 
which is to consist of six
or more pieces, as in the
escutcheon.

Image omitted.



BARS [in horses] the ridges or upper
parts of the gums, between the under
tushes and the grinders.

BARTON, a coop for keeping poul­
try; also a backside, outhouse.
&c.

BARULET [in Heral­
dry] is a 4th part of the
bar, or half of the closet, 
as in the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



BARYCOIA [of βαρὺ dully, and ἀχοἰω, 
Gr. to hear] a dulness, thickness, hard­
ness of hearing.

BARYPHONIA [βαρυφωνία, Gr.] a
difficulty of speaking.

BASALTES [βασἀλτης, Gr.] a sort 
of marble of an iron colour, the hardest
black marble.

BASE [with Gunners] the smallest
piece, of ordinance; 4 foot and a half long
the diameter at the bore 1 inch 1 quar­
ter; it weighs 203 pounds, carries a ball
1 inch 18th diameter, and 5 or 6 ounces
weight.

BASE [in Architecture] the foot of a
pillar which supports it, or that part
which is under the body, and lies upon
the zocle or pedestal.

BASE distinct [in Opticks] is that pre­
cise distance from the pole of a convex
glass, in which the objects, which are
beheld through it, appear distinct, and
well defined; and is the same with what
is called the Focus.

BASE Ring [of a Cannon] is the large
ring next to and just behind the touch-­
hole.

BASE Tenure [Law term] is holding
by villenage or other customary service, 
in distinction from the higher tenure in
capite, or by military service.

BASE, a fish, otherwise called a sea-­
wolf.

BASILICK [βασιλιχὴ, Gr.] a large
hall, having two ranges of pillars, and
two isles or wings with galleries over
them. These Basilicks were at first
made for the palaces of princes, and
afterwards converted into courts of jus­
tice, and at last into churches; whence
a basilick is generally taken for a mag­
nificent church, as the basilick of St.
Peter at Rome.

BASILISK [βασιλίσχος of βασιλεὐς, 
Gr. a king] a kind of serpent called al­
so a cockatrice, having a white spot on
the head, as a sort of diamond or crown;
that rolls not himself up in folds as
others do, but bears his body erect as
far as the middle; this serpent is said to
drive away all others with his hissing, 
to destroy animals and fruits, &c. by
his infectious breath, to burn herbs and
to break stones.

A BASILISK, having the head and
eyes of a hawk [Hieroglyphically] among
the ancient Egyptians was used to repre­
sent the providence of God, because no
other creature is fuller of spirit and vi­
gour. This creature is said to kill at a
distance, only by sending out of its eyes
a secret poison, which it conveys to the
creature with whom it is displeased.

BASILISKS were frequently placed by
the ancients in the presence of their
gods, either at their feet, about their
middle, or winding their tails about
their heads, as a symbol of their im­
mortality, because this serpent is very
long lived.

BASILISK [basilisco, Ital.] a long piece
of ordnance.

BASON [with Anatomists] a round ca­
vity in the form of a tunnel, situate be­
twixt the anterior ventricles of the
brain, and ending at the point of the
glandula pituitaria.

BASONS of a balance, two pieces of
brass or other matter fastened to the
extremities of the strings, the one to
hold the weight, and the other to be
weighed.

BASONS [with grinders of spectacles, 
&c.] are the dishes that they form or
grind convex glasses in, which are diffe­
rent as the focusses of the glasses are at
a greater or nearer distance.

BASONS [with Hatmakers] are iron
moulds, in which they form their wool
or furr into hats.

BASSO Relievo [in Masonry, Carving
Casting, &c.] i. e. Bass or low Relief, or
imbossed work, is when only half the
bodies or figures are represented, or
when the work is low, flat, or but a lit­
tle raised; as when a medal or coin has
its figure or impress low, thin, and



hardly distinguishable from the plane, it
is said that the relief is low and weak;
but when it is much raised, the relief is
said to be bold and strong.

BASS Violin, a musical, wind instru­
ment, of the same form with the violin, 
but much larger.

BASTARD [in Law] one born of a
woman unmarried, so that the father is
not known by the order of the law.

BASTARDY, an inquiry, examinati­
on or trial at law, whether one be a
bastard or not.

BASTILE [in Paris in France] the
name of a prison.

BASTINADO [among the Turks and
Moors] a punishment which is perfor­
med by beating the offender with a stick
or bambo cane and very frequently up
on the soles of their feet.

BASTION [in Fortification] a mass of
earth and sometimes fac'd or lined with 
stone or brick, and sometimes with sods,
which generally advances towards the
campaign, the bounding lines of it being
two faces, two flanks, and two demi-­
gorges. Gr.

Hollow BASTION [Fortification] a
bastion having 
only a rampart and a parapet, ranging
about its flanks and faces; so that a void
space is left towards the center.

Voided BASTION [Fortification] a
bastion having 
only a rampart and a parapet, ranging
about its flanks and faces; so that a void
space is left towards the center.

BASTON [in Architecture] the
same as Torus, a
round member encompassing the base
of a pillar between the Plinth and the
List.

BATTOON [in Architecture] the
same as Torus, a
round member encompassing the base
of a pillar between the Plinth and the
List.

BASTON [in Heraldry] does not
go from side to side as
the bend or scarf does, 
and is in the form of a
truncheon, and a note of
bastardy, and ought not to
be born of any metal, unless
by the bastards of princes;
nor ought it to be removed
till three generations, with
which they bear the coat armour of
their fathers, and when they leave it
off, they must bear some other mark, 
according as the king of arms thinks fit, 
or else he may alter the whole coat.

Image omitted.



BATON [in Heraldry] does not
go from side to side as
the bend or scarf does, 
and is in the form of a
truncheon, and a note of
bastardy, and ought not to
be born of any metal, unless
by the bastards of princes;
nor ought it to be removed
till three generations, with
which they bear the coat armour of
their fathers, and when they leave it
off, they must bear some other mark, 
according as the king of arms thinks fit, 
or else he may alter the whole coat.

Image omitted.



BATOON [in Heraldry] does not
go from side to side as
the bend or scarf does, 
and is in the form of a
truncheon, and a note of
bastardy, and ought not to
be born of any metal, unless
by the bastards of princes;
nor ought it to be removed
till three generations, with
which they bear the coat armour of
their fathers, and when they leave it
off, they must bear some other mark, 
according as the king of arms thinks fit, 
or else he may alter the whole coat.

Image omitted.



BATUNE [in Heraldry] does not
go from side to side as
the bend or scarf does, 
and is in the form of a
truncheon, and a note of
bastardy, and ought not to
be born of any metal, unless
by the bastards of princes;
nor ought it to be removed
till three generations, with
which they bear the coat armour of
their fathers, and when they leave it
off, they must bear some other mark, 
according as the king of arms thinks fit, 
or else he may alter the whole coat.

Image omitted.



BAT, a bird that seldom flies but to­
wards or in the night, nor then neither
unless it be in fine weather; the wings
are a sort of leather or skin, but not
cloathed with feathers, its body some­
thing resembles that of a mouse; it is
said to suckle its young after the man­
ner of 4 footed animals, and does not lay
eggs like a fowl. Its food is flies, insects
and unctuous things, as oil, grease, can­
dles, &c.
It is reported that the Bats in Africa
have some two and others four ears, and
are of different colours, some black, some
white, some ash coloured and some yel­
low and tails as long as mice; they do
not build nests, but bring forth their
young in holes, upon the tops of hou­
ses.
likewise in China they are said to be
as large as pullets, and are delicious
food; and that at Madagascar and in the
Maldive islands they are as large as ra­
vens, and have heads resembling foxes.

BATAVIANS, Hollanders or Dutch
people, who inhabit the Low Countries
called the United Provinces.

BATCHELOR, the original of this
word is much controverted by criticks;
some derive it from Baccalaurea, L. i.e.
Laurel berry, in allusion to the ancient
custom of crowning poets with laurel, 
baccis lauri; others, of baculus or bacillus
L. a staff, because (they say) a staff was
put into the hand of batchelors at their
commencement, as a symbol of their
authority, of their studies being finished, 
and of the liberty they were restored
to. Hence the title of Batchelor of Arts, 
Divinity, Musick, &c.

BATCHELOR [of Bas Chevalier, 
F.] this title was
anciently given to persons who ambiti­
ous to acquire honour by their valour
were superior in quality to esquires;
but not in circumstances to raise a com­
pany of Gens de arms, and therefore ser­
ved in the army under the standard of
Bannerets, being allowed colours of
their own and to lead their vassals.

In the antient constitutions of the
admiralty this title was given to all un­
der the dignity of Barons.

BATCHELOR of Arts [in Oxford] is
one who has taken the first degree in
the liberal arts and sciences, in order to
which he is required to be a student
there 4 years, and in 7 years to be inti­
tied to that of master of arts, and in 14
to be a batchelor of divinity.

BATCHELOR of arts [at Cambridge]
this title there requires only 3 years
study, and 6 to be master of arts, and 13
for batchelor of divinity.

BATCHELORS [in Law] the title re­
quires the person to study 6 years.

BACHELORS [in War] are young sol­
diers, who have signalized themselves in
the first campaign and were presented
with the military or gilt spurs.

BATCHELOR, in ancient times, was
also a title given to a young cavalier, 
who had made his first campaign, and
received the military girdle.



BATCHELOR [of baculus, L. a staff]
a title given to young military men, on
account that the young cavaliers exerci­
sed themselves with staffs and bucklers;
hence they were called Bacculares and
Bacularii, in the time of king Richard
II. by Odorick and Walsingham. Hence

BATCHELORS of Arms, was a title
anciently given to those who came off
victors in their first engagement.

BATCHELOR [is by others derived
of bas chevaliers, F. q. d. knights of the
lower order] See Knights Batchelors, 
in K.

BATE [probably of beaten, Sax. to
beat] strife, contention, as a Make-bate.

BATEMENT [in Carpentry] the waste
of a piece of stuff in forming of it to a 
design'd use.

BATHMIS [with Anatomists] a bone, 
the same as Troclea; a cavity in the bone
of the arm or shoulder on each side one, 
that receives the process of the under­
most and lesser of the two bones of the
cubit, when the whole hand is stretched
out and bent.

BATON [in Archit.] a large ring or
moulding in the base of a column, other­
wise called the Tore.

BATRACHITES [βατραχιτὴς, Gr.] a
stone in colour and shape nearly resem­
bling a green frog.

BATRACHOMYOMACHY [batro­
chomyomachia. L. of βάτραχος a frog, 
μῦς a mouse, and μάχη, a fight] the
battle between the frogs and mice.

BATTAIL [in Common Law] an anci­
ent trial by combat, which the defendant
might chuse in an appeal of murder, 
robbery, or felony, in order to fight a
duel with the accuser or appellant, to
prove whether he was guilty or not.
This practice was founded on this no­
tion, that if the accused person was
guilty, he would be slain or overcome
by the appellant, but if innocent, not;
but this is now wholly laid aside.  F.

BATTEL [bataille, F.] the en­
gagement or general
fight of two armies.

BATTLE [bataille, F.] the en­
gagement or general
fight of two armies.

MAIN BATTLE [Military Term] the
main body of an army, the second of
the three lines, the Van being the first,
and the Rear or Reserve the third.

BATTER [with Builders] a term
used to signify that a wall, a piece of
timber or the like does not stand up­
right, but leans from you-ward; but
when it leans towards you, they say
it over-hangs or hangs over.

BATTERY Master [in an Army] an
officer whose business it is to see to the
raising of batteries, which office is now
suppressed in England, but is still kept
up elsewhere.

BATTERING Rams, were used by
the ancients before the in­
vention of gunpowder, for
battering the walls of pla­
ces besieged. They were
large beams of timber with
great iron horns like those
of a ram at the end, which were slung
to a height proportionable to the wall
to be batter'd, so that they could swing
forward and backward, which was
done by the main strength of a great
many men.

Image omitted.



BATTERY en rouge [Fortification] a
battery used to dismount the enemy's
cannon.

BATTERY [in Law] an act that
tends to the breach of the peace of the
realm, by violently striking or beating
a man, who may therefore indict the
other person to have the action of tres­
pass, or assault and battery.

BATTERY [in Law] is the wrong­
ful beating of a person, upon which the
person thus injured may lay an indict­
ment against the offender, or he may
have an action of trespass; but if the
plaintiff made the first assault, the de­
fendant shall be discharg'd, and the
plaintiff shall be amerc'd to the king for
his false suit.
But all beating is not inditable or
actionable, for a person may justify the
beating of another for an offence, so as
moderately to correct him, as a father
his child, a master his servant, a school 
master his pupil; so likewise if a person
shall attempt to take away my goods, 
I may lay hands upon him; and if he
will not desist, may beat him rather
than let him carry them away.

Menacing or threatening begins the
breach of die peace, assaulting increases
it, and battery accomplishes it.

BATTOLOGIST [βαττόλογος, Gr.]
a vain babbler.

To BAULK [Incert. Etym.] to cross, 
to disappoint.

BAWDINESS, lewdness, obscene dis­
course or action.

BAY of Joists [Archit.] the space be­
twixt two beams.

BAY, a part of a barn at the end
where corn, &c. is laid; thus if a barn
consist of a floor and two heads where
they lay corn, they say a barn of two
Bays.

BAYZ, a sort of woollen cloth, hav­
ing a long nap sometimes fuzzed on one
side, and sometimes not.



BAYS, the making of Bays, Says, Ser­
ges, &c. was brought into England by
the Flemings, who fled hither to avoid
the persecution of the duke of Alva, 
about the fifth year of queen Elizabeth.

BE, a preposition common to the
Teutonic, German, and Saxon, &c. dia­
lect; also now to the English.

To BE [beon, Sax.] to exist.

BEAD [beað, Sax.] a prayer; also a
little round ball of which necklaces are
made.

BEAD-Tree, a certain shrub bearing
white berries.

BEAK [in Architecture] a little fillet
left on the edge of a larmier, which
forms a canal, and makes a kind of pen­
dant.

Chin BEAK [in Architecture] a
moulding the same as the quater round, 
except that its situation is inverted.

BEAKED [in Heraldry] is a term
used to express the beak or bill of a
bird, and when the beak and legs of a
fowl are of a different tincture from the
body, in blazoning, it is common to
say beaked and membred, or armed.

BEAM [beam, Sax.] a ray of light
proceeding from the sun or any other
luminous body.

BEAM [in Heraldry] is used to ex­
press the main horn of a stag or buck.

BEAM, sort or fiery meteor in
shape of a pillar.

BEAM filling [with Architects] the
filling up the vacant space between the
raison and roof with stones or bricks, 
laid betwixt the rafters or the raison, 
and plaster'd on with loom.

BEAN Caper, a fruit.

BEAN Tressil, an herb.

BEAR [bear, bera, Sax.] a wild
beast.

BEAR [in Hieroglyphicks] was used
by the ancient Egyptians to represent a
good proficient, whom time and labour
has brought to perfection; because
bears are said to come into the world
with mishapen parts, and that the dams
do so lick the young, that at last the
eyes, ears, and other members appear.

BEARS are said to search much after
bee-hives; but this, as some are of opi­
nion, is not from a desire of the honey, 
so much as to provoke the bees to sting
their bodies and let out the corrupt
blood that troubles them.

BEAR [bear, Teut.] a thing made
use of to carry a dead corps
Upon.

BIER [bear, Teut.] a thing made
use of to carry a dead corps
Upon.

BEARS [in Astronomy] two constella­
tions called Ursa major and minor.

BEAR's breech, the herb bank ursin.

BEAR's Ears, flowers called Auricula, 
or vulgarly Riccolusses.

BEAR's Foot, an herb called also set­
ter-wort.

The Ship BEARS [spoken as to her
burthen] when she having too lean or
slender a quarter, sinks too deep into
the water, her fraight being light, and
so of consequence can carry but a small
burden.

To BEAR under another Ship's Lee 
[Sea Phrase] is when a ship, which was
to the windward, comes under another
ship's stern, and so gives her wind.

To BEAR up round [Sea Term] is a
direction to let the ship go between her
two flieets, directly before the wind.

To BEAR [spoken of places] to be si­
tuate, as such a cape bears off so and so
from such a cape.

BEAR up the Helm, a direction to the
steersman to let the ship go more at
large before the wind.

To BEARD Wool, is to cut off the
head and neck from the rest of the
fleece.

BEARD [with Botanists] the under­
lip of a labiated flower, and in corn or
grass that hair or bristle which serves to
defend the ear, as in barley.

BEARD [of a Horse] or under-beard, 
is the chuck or that part under the
lower mandible, on the outside, and
above the chin, which bears the curb
of the bridle.

BEARDED Creeper, a sort of herb.

BEARDLESS [bearðleſ, Sax.] ha­
ving no beard.

BEARING [in Geography and Navi­
gation] the situation of one place from
another; that is, with respect to the
degrees of the horizon, which by na­
vigators are divided into 32 equal parts
called points of the compass, therefore
when they have found what point of
the compass will carry them from one
place to another, they call that the
bearing of that place with respect to the
other.

BEARING [in Carpentry] the bearing
of a piece of timber is the space be­
tween the two fixed ends of it, when
it has no other support; which is called
bearing at length : Or between one end
and a post, brick-wall, &c. trimmed
up between the ends to shorten its
bearing.

BEASEL, the upper part of the col­
let of a ring, which encompasses and
fastens the stone.

BEASTLINESS [bestialité, F. bestia­
litas, L.] the being like a beast, bestia­
lity.



To BEAT up and down [Hunting
Phrase] is to run first one way, and
then another.

To BEAT to arms [Military Phrase] is
to beat a drum for soldiers that are dis­
persed to repair to their arms.

To BEAT a march [Military Term] is
to beat a drum to give notice to the
soldiers actually to move.

To BEAT a parley [Military Term] a
signal to demand conference with the
enemy.

To BEAT a retreat [Military Phrase]
is a signal to draw off or retreat from
the enemy.

To BEAT upon the hand [with Horse­
men] is when a horse tosses up his nose, 
and shakes it of a sudden to avoid the
subjection of the bridle.

To BEAT the dust [with Horsemen] is
when a horse at each time or motion
does not take in way or ground enough
with his fore-legs.

BEATERS [with Printers] ink-balls, 
with which they beat the letters in the
chace or form.

BEATIFICATION [with Romanists]
the act whereby the pope declares a
person to be blessed after his death.

BEAU, one who dresses to the top
of the mode and affests to be first in all
fashions, and by his behaviour and
talk shews that all his thoughts are ta­
ken up in trifles.

BEAU monde, the fair sex,  F.

BEAUTIFULNESS, handsomness, 
&c.

To BECALM [Sea Term] used by
sailors when any thing keeps the wind
off a ship, but especially when the
shore does so. Also one ship is said to
becalm another, when she comes up
with her on the weather-side.

To BECKON [of becennan or beac­
nian, Sax.] to make signs by the mo­
tion of the finger, head, &c.

BECOMINGNESS [of be and c&wyn;e­
man, Sax. to please] decency, suitable­
ness either of dress, gesture or man­
ners.

BED [with Gardeners] a piece of made
ground raised above the level of the rest.

BED [with Masons] a course or range
of stones.

BED of Minerals, certain strata or
thicknesses of them disposed other each
other.

BED [of a Mill] the nether mill-stone.

BED-RIDDEN, a term used of a per­
son, who is so weak, by old age or
sickness, as not to be able to rise from
the bed.

BED of a Mortar [with Gunners] is a
solid piece of oak in form of a parallelo­
pepid, hollow'd a little in the middle to
receive the breech and half the trun­
nions.

BED of a gun [with Gunners] apiece
of a plank, laid within the cheeks of a
carriage upon the middle transum, for
the gun to rest on.

To BEDASH [probably of dash, Du.
a blow or stroke, or שור, Meb. to
thresh] to dash or wet by beating water, 
&c. on one.

To BEDEW [of be and ðea&wyn;ian, 
Sax.] to sprinkle or wet with dew.

BED-MOULDING [in Joinery] those
members below a cornice which are
below the coronet or crown. As 'tis
now common for joiners to have their
bed-moulding to consist of these 4 mem­
bers, viz. 1. below an OG. 2. a list.
3. a large boultin, and 4. another list un­
der the coronet. This is what they
call a bed-moulder.

To BEDUNG [of be and ðinʒan, 
Sax.] to dawb or foul with dung.

To BEDUST [of be and ðuſt, Sax.]
to sprinkle or bedawb with dust.

BEE [of bẏ, Sax. a dwelling-place]
added to the end of a name, denotes a
habitation, as Applebee, &c.

A BEE [beo, Sax.] an insect well
known.

BEES [Hieroglyphically] represent a
kingdom or subjects obedient to their
lawful sovereign. For they have a­
mongst them a most ingenious common­
wealth, and a good government; for
they are all obedient to their king, and
never revolt from his authority. They
submit to his sentence, obey his com­
mands, follow his motions and conduct.

BEEF [of bœuf, F. bovis, L.] was
first ordered to be sold by weight in the
reign of king Henry VIII, in the year
1523, half-penny per pound, and
mutton at three farthings.

BEEF alamode [in Cookery] beef well
beaten, larded and stewed with lemon, 
pepper, mushrooms, white-wine, &c.

BEEN [of beon, Sax. to be] as had
been.

BEER [with Weavers] 19 ends of yarn, 
running all together out of the trough, 
all the length of the trough.

BEETLE [for Military uses] a great
sledge or hammer for driving down
of palisadoes, or for ether uses in for­
tification.

BEET Raves a sort of red beets 
whose roots are
used in sallets and garnishing of dishes.

BEET Radishes a sort of red beets 
whose roots are
used in sallets and garnishing of dishes.

To BEGIRT [of be and ʒẏrðan, 
Sax.] to gird about.



To BEGREASE [of be and graisse, F.]
to dawb or smear with grease.

To BEGRIME [of begrimen, Teut.]
to dawb or smear with grime, as the
black of a porridge-pot, chimney, &c.

BEHAVIOUR [of be and habban, 
Sax.] carriage or demeanour, either as
to person or manners.

BEHEADING [of beheafðian, Sax.]
was first used in England, in the year
1072, in the time of William the conque­
ror, Waltheof earl of Huntington being the
first noblemen that was beheaded here.

BEHEL'D [of behealðan, Sax.] look­
ed upon, or did behold.

BEHOLDEN [of be and healðan,
Sax. to hold, q. d.
holding of another] under an obligation
to a person for favours bestowed.

BEHOLDING [of be and healðan,
Sax. to hold, q. d.
holding of another] under an obligation
to a person for favours bestowed.

BEHOOF [of behofan, Sax.] boun­
den duty, obligation, &c.

BEHOOVABLE [of behofan, Sax.
and able] becoming, to be done as a
duty; also profitable, useful.

BEING [in Metaphysicks] is distin­
guished into Complex or Incomplex, Ra­
tional or Real, Actual or Potential.

A positive BEING, is that which has
a real existence in the course of nature.

A Negative BEING, destroys this ex­
istence, and if it destroys it absolutely, 
it is a perfect Negative Being.

A Privative BEING, is that which
only prevents its being in a subject, 
which was capable to receive it.

A Rational BEING [in Metaphysicks] is
the mere product of reason, and has no
existence, but in the mind in Idea; and
ceases to be, when it is not thought upon.

A Real BEING, [in Metaphysicks] is
a Being that is not produced by the
strength of imagination or fancy; but
has a real existence in nature before
any thought or conception of the mind.

An Actual BEING [in Metaphysicks] is
such a Being that actually does exist in
the order of nature, whether it depends
upon any cause in order to produce it, 
as an Infant; or whether it be before
all cause, as God.

A Potential BEING [in Metaphysicks]
is a Being that may be produced by the
power of some agent.

To BELABOUR [of be and laborare, 
L.l to beat or bang soundly.

To BELAM [probably of lamin, Du.
to make lame] to beat or bang soundly.

BELANDE a kind of sea vessel 
having sails and tackle
like a hoy; but broader and flatter, 
seldom above 24 tun, and are used to
carry merchants goods.  F.

BELANDRE a kind of sea vessel 
having sails and tackle
like a hoy; but broader and flatter, 
seldom above 24 tun, and are used to
carry merchants goods. F.

To BELAY [of be and lay] to fasten
any running rope so, that when it is
haled it cannot run out again.

BELEMNITES [of βέλοος, Gr. a dart]
the arrow-head or finger-stone, a kind
of stone of a whitish and sometimes a
gold colour, so named because of its re­
semblance to the point of an arrow.

BELI oculus [i. e. Belus's eye] a kind of
precious stone that resembles an eye.  L.

BEL. See Baal.

BELL flowers [with Florists] a plea­
sant flower, of which there are several
sorts called also blew-bells.

BELL metal, a metal made by a mix­
ture of copper and tin for casting bells.

BELL pear, a pear called also a ground
pear.

BELLIGEROUS [belliger, L.] making
or waging war.

BELIEF [ʒeleafa, Sax.] credit.

BELLEROPHON. The poets tell us
that the winged horse Pegasus carried
Bellerophon, and that he slew the Chi­
mæra of Amisodarus. Now the Chimæra
according to the common notion, had
the fore-parts of a lion, the hinder parts
of a dragon, and the middle parts like
those of a goat. The truth of the fa­
ble is, Bellerophon was an inhabitant of
Phrygia, by birth a Corinthian, a man
of prowess, who having built a long
ship, ravaged the countries that lay near
the sea. And the ship's name was Pe­
gasus. And besides, king Amisodarus
dwelt at the river Xanthus, near to which
there was a very high mountain, call'd
Telmessus, at the fore-part of which there
were two ascents of the city of the Xan­
thians, but the third was backwards from
Caria, and all the rest of it was very
steep. In the middle of which there was
a great chasin of the earth, from whence
fire issued. Behind this mountain there
was also another, called Chimæra, the
ascent of which on the forepart, as those
that live near it report, was inhabited
by a lion, and the hinder part by a dra­
gon, who used to be very mischievous
to the shepherds and fellers of timber.
And Bellerophon coming to that place, 
set the woody mountain on fire, so Tel­
meslus being burnt, the beast perished.
And thence the neighbouring inhabi­
tants related, that Bellerophon, coming
thither with his Pegasus, slew the Chi­
mæra of Amisodarus, from which event
the fable took its rise.

BELLITUDE [bellitudo, L.] fairness, 
fineness.

BELLONA, the goddess of war (whe­
ther she were the wife, sister or daugh­
ter of Mars) with a bloody whip in her
hand; she is represented in armour, with



a terrible countenance, having snakes
instead of hair, clotted together with
blood, holding sometimes a lighted
torch and sometimes a trumpet. Appi­
us Claudius built her a temple at Rome;
before which stood a pillar call'd Bellica, 
from whence the herald threw a spear, 
when he proclaimed war against any
nation.

BELLONARIA, sacrifices offer'd to
Bellona, which her priests offer'd to her
in their own blood, cutting their shoul­
ders, and running about with their
drawn swords as being mad and trans­
ported.

BELLS, are proclaimers of joyful so­
lemnities, and are commonly affixed to
churches; where, besides their use for
the service of god, by calling people to
it, they are by some suppos'd to have vir­
tue to dispel storms and tempests which
some attribute to their breaking of the
air by their sound; but others will have
it to be inherent to their being blessed.
They were first ordained to call peo­
ple together in the year 603.

BELLS [bell, Sax.] the first harmoni­
ous rings of bells that was completed in
England was at Croyland abbey; for
Turketule, abbot of that place, having
caused a bell of prodigious largeness to
be made, which he called Guthlac; E­
gel succeeding him, did about the year
976 add two large ones, called Turke­
tule and Tolvin, and also two little ones
called Pega and Bega, being seven, which
being made of proportional sizes, made
together a most delightful harmony not
to be equal'd in the whole kingdom.
The sound of bells plac'd on a plain
may be heard further than those on hills, 
and those in vallies, farther than on
plains, the reason of which is not dif­
ficult to be assign'd, because the higher
the sonorous body is, the rarer is the
medium (i. e. the air) and consequently
it receives the less impulse, and the ve­
hicle is the less proper to convey it to a
distance.
The city of Nankin in China, has been
famous for its bells, one of which is
12 foot high, and computed to weigh
50000 pounds. And at Pekin, father
Le Compte says, there are seven bells, 
each of which weighs 120000 pounds;
but the sounds of them are very poor, 
being struck with a wooden clapper.

BELLY timber, food, victuals, meat
and drink.

BELLY God, an epicute, a gluttonous
or luxurious person.

BELOMANCY [Βελομαντεία of βέλος
a dart and μαντεία, Gr. divination] a
kind of divining or foretelling future
things by arrows.

BELLONOIDES [of Βελονοιδὲς of βε­
λώνη needle, and εἷδος form] two small
bones issuing from the temples, which
are like needles.

BELTS [in Astron.] two girdles or 
fascia observed in the body of the planet
Jupiter.

BELCULUM [of βελος a dart, and
ελχω to draw, Gr.] an instrument to
draw out the head of an arrow from a
wound.

To BEMIRE [of be and moyer, Du.]
to daub or befoul with mire.

To BEND two cables [Sea language] is
to tie them together, and so to make
their own ends fast upon themselves.

BEND [in Heraldry] is
one of the ten honourable
ordinaries, which contains
a third part of the field
when charged, and a fifth
when plain. When it is
express'd in blazoning Bend, 
without any addition, it is always sup­
posed to be the Bend Dexter: tho' the
word Dexter is generally express'd to
prevent mistakes, because there is also
a Bend Sinister; this Bend Dexter is form­
ed by two lines drawn from the upper
part of the shield on the right hand, to
the lower part on the left diagonally or
athwart. It is supposed to represent a
shoulder-belt or scarf worn over the
shoulder.

Image omitted.



BEND Sinister [in Heral­
dry] is like the former, on­
ly that it comes from the
left side of the shield to the
right, as the Dexter does
from the right to the left, 
as in the figure.

Image omitted.



In BEND [in Blazonry] is a term u­
sed when any thing born in coat-armour
is placed obliquely or athwart, from
the upper corner to the opposite lower, 
as the Bend lies.

Per BEND [in Blazonry] or Party per
Bend, signifies being parted from the
upper corner to the opposite lower by
a diagonal line, and per Bend any addi­
tion signifies the same.

BEND voided [in Heraldry] is when two
strait lines drawn within the Bend, run
nearly parallel to the outward edges
of it.

BENDLETS [in Heraldry]
are the half of a Bend in
breadth, but extending the
whole length, These the
French call Cotises; see the
figure annex'd.

Image omitted.





BENDABLE [of benðan, Sax.] that
may be bended.

BENDS [of a ship] the outermost tim­
bers of the side, to set the feet on in
climbing up, &c.

BENDY [in Blazonry] signifies the
field divided into 4, 6, or more parts 
diagonally, or as is said above in the
Bend, and varying in metal and colour.
It is the general practice in England to
make an even number; but in other
countries they do not regard whether
the number be even or odd.

BENDWITH, an herb.

BENEFACTRESS, a female benefac­
tor.

BENEFACTURE [benefactura, L.] a
good deed.

BENEFICENCE [beneficentia, L.] the
doing of good offices, a delight in doing
good to others, kindness, liberality.

Simple BENEFICES, are such where
the parsons are only obliged to read
prayers, &c.

Sacerdotal BENEFICES, are such
where they are charged with the care
of souls, &c.

BENEFICENCE [say the Moralists] is
the highest and most illustrious strain of
humanity, when a man cut of a pure
inclination that arises either from a na­
tive generosity of soul, or from pity and
compassion to a person in distress, is at 
some pains or charge in bestowing free­
ly upon another what may relieve his
necessity or promote his advantage.
The virtue that answers to benefice
in the giver, is gratitude in the receiver.

BENGAL [of Bengala in the East-In­
dies] a sort of silk, &c.

BENIGNESS [benignitas, L.] sweet­
ness of disposition, goodness, kindness, 
courtesy.

BENIGHTED [of be and nihte, 
Sax.] overtaken by the night or dark­
ness; also darkened, blinded.

BENNET, an herb.

BENT [of benðan, Sax.] prone, in­
clined to be resolved upon; also bowed, 
crooked.

BENUMMEDNESS, a being benum­
med.

BEORN [beorn, Sax. a prince or o­
ther chief man] it is a poetical word, 
and from it proceeds Beornred chief in
counsel, Beornod a princely mind.

BEPIST [of be and pisset, Dan.] wet­
ted with piss.

BEQUEATHMENT, a legacy.

BEREAVEMENT a deprivation, of
being bereaved or deprived of any
thing.

BERECYNTHA [so called of Bere­
cynthus where she was worshipped] she
appears in her greatest magnificence
when she makes her progress through
the cities of Phrygia, riding in a chariot
drawn by lions, her head crowned with
towers, and adorned with all the beau­
teous objects the earth produces, atten­
ded by an hundred cœlestial gods, being
all of them her divine offspring, whence
she is called mater deorum, also Rhea and
Vesta, which see.

BERG [of πύργος, Gr. with the
antient Phrygians πέργ ac­
cording to Mr. Baxter]
signifies a castle of a city
or a mountain fortified with a castle, a
city, any place of habitation.

BORG [of πύργος, Gr. with the
antient Phrygians πέργ ac­
cording to Mr. Baxter]
signifies a castle of a city
or a mountain fortified with a castle, a
city, any place of habitation.

BURG [of πύργος, Gr. with the
antient Phrygians πέργ ac­
cording to Mr. Baxter]
signifies a castle of a city
or a mountain fortified with a castle, a
city, any place of habitation.

BYRG [of πύργος, Gr. with the
antient Phrygians πέργ ac­
cording to Mr. Baxter]
signifies a castle of a city
or a mountain fortified with a castle, a
city, any place of habitation.

BERENICES hair [Astron] a constel­
lation call'd coma Berenices in the north­
ern hemisphere, consisting of stars near
the lion's tail.

BERIA [Old L. records] a flat,
wide plain or heath, and
from hence several large meadows or
open grounds are still call'd Berries or
Beri-fields. Hence the terminations of
many names, as Thornbery or bury.

BEREA [Old L. records] a flat,
wide plain or heath, and
from hence several large meadows or
open grounds are still call'd Berries or
Beri-fields. Hence the terminations of
many names, as Thornbery or bury.

BERLIN, a sort of travelling carri­
age, chair, chariot, &c. such as are used
in Berlin in Prussia.

BERRY, the same as Borough.

BESHREW your heart, i. e. ill luck
attend you.

BESIDES [of be and ſiðe, Sax.] over
and above, more than.

To BESMOAK [of be and ſmacian,
Sax.] to make smoaky or smoaked.

BESPOKE [of be and ſpecan, Sax.]
spoken for; also inchanted.

To BESPAUL [of be and spapen,
Teut.] to spit about or make filthy by
spitting.

To BESPEAK [of be and ſpæcan,
Sax.] to speak for something; to give
order for it to be made; also to in­
chant.

To BESPIT [of be and ſpitan, Sax.]
to spit upon.

To BESPOT [probably of be and
spot, Teut. ignominy] to cause spots
on, &c.

To BESPUTTER [of be and sputare,
L.] to spirt or flirt spittle upon.

BEASTLINESS [beastialitas] the co­
pulation of a man or woman with a
beast; also beastly quality filthiness.

BESTIARII [among the Romans]
those men who combated with wild
beasts.
These were either captives taken in
war, or slaves guilty of crimes; they
were exposed unarmed to the fury of ra­
venous wild beasts, and if they mastered



one, another was immediately sat upon
them; and in the times of persecution, 
christians were thus worried to death, 
to make sport for their heathen perse­
cutors.
Sometimes also young men armed to
show their bravery and dexterity under­
took these encounters and sometimes
with those of their own species, and
some again practised this sport for the
sake of money.

To BESTREW [of ſtre&wyn;ian, Sax.]
to strew, to scatter about.

To BESTRIDE [of be and ſtræðen, 
Sax.] to get astride upon a horse, &c.

BETHOUGHT [of be ðencan, Sax.]
did call to mind.

BEVEL angle, signifies any angle that
is neither 90 nor 45 degrees.

BEVEL [in Heraldry]
signifies broken or open­
ing like a carpenters rule
as in the escutcheon an­
nexed. As he bears ar­
gent a chief Bevele vert
by the name of Beverlis.

Image omitted.



BEVY of Partridges [with Fowlers] 3
in a flock.

BEVY [in a Metaphorical sense] is a
knot or company of persons, as a bevy of
gossips, of knaves, &c.

To BEWILDER [of be and &wyn;ilðer­
nerre, Sax. a wilderness] to scare, to
affright, to put into confusion.

BEY, a governor of a maritime town
or country in the Turkish empire.

BEZANTS [in Heraldry] are
round flat pieces of
bullion without impress.
In form as the figure an­
nexed, and represent the
current coin of Byzantium
now called Constantinople.
These are introduced in
coat armour (as is supposed) by those
who were in the holy war; but since
they shew the rise of honest treasurers, 
recievers of the customs, &c. they are
always of metal, and when blazoned
(according to the custom of foreign
heralds) ought to be expresly said to be
Or or Argent, tho' with us they are al­
ways of gold; but foreigners have them
of silver also.

Image omitted.



BESANTS [in Heraldry] are
round flat pieces of
bullion without impress.
In form as the figure an­
nexed, and represent the
current coin of Byzantium
now called Constantinople.
These are introduced in
coat armour (as is supposed) by those
who were in the holy war; but since
they shew the rise of honest treasurers, 
recievers of the customs, &c. they are
always of metal, and when blazoned
(according to the custom of foreign
heralds) ought to be expresly said to be
Or or Argent, tho' with us they are al­
ways of gold; but foreigners have them
of silver also.

Image omitted.



BEZANTY [in Heraldry] a cross
Bezanty, is a cross made of bezants.

Oriental BEZOAR, is that which
comes from several parts of the East
Indies.

Occidental BEZOAR, is what is
brought from the West Indies from Peru, 
and is found in the belly of several ani­
mals peculiar to that country.

German BEZOAR, is found in the sto­
mach of some cows, especially in the
Chamois and Isard. Some weigh 18
ounces, but it is not of much esteem in
medicine.

BEZOARDICK remedies [in Medecine]
cordial medicines or remedies or anti­
dotes again poison or infectious distem­
pers.

BIANGULOUS [biangulus, L.] having
two corners.

BIB [probably of bibere, L.] a gar­
ment of linnen for the breast of a child.

BIBACITY [bibacitas, L.] great or
hard drinking.

BIBACIOUS [bibax, L.] much given
to drinking.

BIBBER [biberon, F. bibo, L.] a toper
of liquors.

BIBLE [of βιβλος, Gr. i. e. a book]
the collection of the books of the Old
and New Testament, so called by way of
eminence.
The first translation of the books of
the Old Testament was out of the Hebrew
into the Greek, by the 72 interpreters, 
and thence it is called the Septuagint, 
and from the Septuagint it was translated
into Latin, which is called the old Latin
version.
The Latins have various modern ver­
sions; but two that are antient, as that
which is called the Italick, and that of
St. Jerome, which is called the Vulgar;
because it was confirmed by the coun­
cil of Trent for vulgar use.
The psalms were translated into Eng­
lish Saxon by Adelm, bishop of Sherbourn
about the year 709, and Ealfride or Ec­
bert bishop of Lindiffern, translated seve­
ral other parts into the same language
about the year 730, and Venerable Bede
translated the whole about the year 735.
And about the year 1357 John Trevisa
published the whole in English at the
request of Thomas Lord Berkely. In the
year 1534. William Tindal afterwards
translated it, and it was brought to Eng­
land from Antwerp in the 21st year of
the reign of Henry VIII. and then prin­
ted, but being excepted against a revisi­
on and alteration was published in 1538
with a preface by archbishop Cranmer.
In 1549 and in 1551 another translation
was reviewed by several bishops and
from them called the bishops bible, 
It was again translated in the reign
of king James I. about the year 1603, 
the division of the bible into chapters
was in the year 1252.
In 1604 at the Hampton court confe­
rence a new translation was resolved
upon, which was performed in the year



1607, and is what is now generally used 
by all parties in Great Britain.

BIBLIOTAPHIST [of bibliotaphus, 
L. of βιβλιὀταφος of βίβλος a book and
ταφὴ a sepulchre, Gr.] an hider or bu­
rier of books.

BIBLIOTHECA [βιβλιοθήχη Gr. of
βιβλος and θήχη, a repository] a place
where books are kept, a library, a stu­
dy; also the books themselves.  L.

BIBLIOTHECAL [bibliothecalis, L.]
of, or belonging to a library.

BIBLIOTHECARY [bibliothecarius, 
L.] a library-keeper.

BIBULOUS [bibulus, L.] given to
bibbing or drinking much or often; suck­
ing up, as a spunge, the sea sand, &c.

To BICKER [probably of bicre, C.
Brit.] to tilt, to skirmish; also to wran­
gle, to quarrel, &c.

BICORNE, the bone of the tongue
called also hyoides.

BIDENTALES [among the Romans]
priests instituted for the performance
of certain ceremonies on occasion of a
thunderbolt's falling on any place.
They were so callled of Bidental (i. e.
sheep of two years old having teeth on
each side) which they offered in sacri­
fice.

BIFI'D [with Botanists] a leaf, &c.
of a plant, is so called when it is cut or
divided into two parts.  L.

BIFEROUS [biferus, L.] bearing dou­
ble; also bearing fruit twice a year.

BIFIDATED [bifidatus, L.] cut or
cleft into two parts, cloven into two
parts.

BIFOROUS [biforis, L.] that has
double doors.

BIGAMIST [bigamus, L.] one that
hath two wives or husbands at the
same time.

BIGENOUS [bigens and bigenus, L.]
born of parents of two different nati­
ons; also of parents of different kinds.

BIGAT, an ancient Roman coin
stamped with the figure of a chariot
drawn by two horses abreast, in value
equal to the Denarius, or seven pence
half-penny English money.

BIGARRADE, a kind of great o­
range,  F.

To bold by the BIGHT [Sea Phrase] is
to hold by that part of the rope that is
coiled or rolled up.

BIGOT [bigot, F. probably of bep
and gott Germ. or by God, Engl.] a per­
son who stiffly adheres to a party or
prince.

BIGOTTED, become a bigot, zea­
lously and obstinately adhering to a
party or principle in religion.

BIGOTTISM, a stiff adherence to a
party or opinion, though without or 
against reason.

BIJUGOUS [bijugus, L.] yoked / or 
coupled together.

BILINGUOUS [bilinguis, L.] that
can speak two languages; double­
tongued, deceitful.

BILIOUS [biliosus, L.] full of bile or
choler.

BILL of Debt [in Commerce] is the
same as a bond or writing obligatory;
only being drawn in English, it is called
a bill; but when in Latin a bond; or a
bill is a single bond without any condi­
tion annexed, whereas a bond has a pe­
nalty and condition.

BILL of Review. See Review.

BILL [in Parliament] a paper contain­
ing propositions offered to the houses
to be passed by the king, and then pre­
sented to the king to pass into an act or
law.

BILLETS, little Islands.

BILLETS [in Heraldry] (bilettes, F.)
Guillim is of opinion, that
those represent Billets Doux
but most authors take them
for bricks, and say that
many English families set­
tled in France, bear them to
denote their extraction from England, 
where so many bricks are made; but
to this others object, that England has
never been famous in the world for
brick-making, and so it might as well
suit many other countries as England, 
But Columbiere mentions Briquet or
bricks separated from Billets; and says, 
that the difference between them is, 
that Briques are drawn so, as to repre­
sent thickness, whereas the billets have
only a flat superficies, which plainly
intimates, that billets represent 
letters
or folded papers, whether of love or
otherwise.

Image omitted.



BILLETE [in Blazonry] signifies
that the escutcheon is
all over strewed with billets, the num­
ber not ascertained; for if it be, the
number must be expressed, asd their
position, and then the term Billety is
not used.

BILLETY [in Blazonry] signifies
that the escutcheon is
all over strewed with billets, the num­
ber not ascertained; for if it be, the
number must be expressed, asd their
position, and then the term Billety is
not used.

BILLETTY [in Heraldry] a bearing
in form of a long space;
billets were anciently of
pieces of cloth of gold or
silver longer than broad, 
placed at a distance by
way of ornament on
clothes, and afterwards
to coat armour.

Image omitted.



BILLETTED [in Heraldry] charged
with billets, as he bears argent billette, 
F. a cross ingraised, gules as in the es­
cutcheon above.



BILLIARDS [of billard, F. of billa, 
the balls made use of] a game play'd
on an oblong table covered with cloth, 
with ivory balls, which are struck or
driven with sticks made bending on
purpose to drive the balls into holes, 
called hazards, on the edge and cor­
ners of the table.

BILLON [in coinage] a sort of base
metal either of gold or silver, in the
mixture of which copper predominates.

BIMARIAN [bimaris, L.] of or per­
taining to two seas.

BIMEDIAL [with Mathematicians] if
two medial lines
as BC and CD
commensurable
only in power, 
containing a rational rectangle, are
compounded, the whole line BD shall
be irrational, and is called a first bime­
dial line.

Image omitted.



BINARY Arithmetick, an arithme­
tick, in which, instead of the 10 figures
in the common arithmetick, and the
progression from 10 to 10 only two fi­
gures are used, the two figures are
0 and 1, and the cypher multiplies
every thing by 2, as in common arith­
metick by 10. Thus I is 1, 10.2, 11.3, 
100.4, &c.

BINARY Number, one composed of
two units.

BINARY Measure [in Musick] is a
measure wherein you beat equally, or
the time of rising is equal to that of
falling.

BIND WEED, an herb.

BINDING [with Falconers] is a tir­
ing, or when a hawk seizes.

BINN [binne, Sax.] a great chest to
put corn, &c. in.

BINOMIAL Root [in Mathematicks]
is a root composed of two parts joined by
the sign +: Thus x+y or a+b, 
or 3+4 is a Binomial root, consisting
of the sum of two quantities: If it has
three parts as x+y+z, it is called
a Trinomial, and any root consisting of
more than three parts is called a Mul­
tinomial.

BINOMINOUS [binominis, L.] that
hath two names.

BIPAROUS [biparus, L.] that hath
brought forth twice.

BIPEDAL [of bipedalis, L.] of two
foot long, wide &c.

BIPEDALITY [bipedalitas, L.] the
length of two foot.

BIPEDANEOUS [bipedaneus, L.] two
foot thick, deep or hollow within the
ground.

BIPETALOUS [of bis and πέταλον, 
Gr.] consisting of two flower leaves.

BIQUADRATE, i. e. a double qua­
drate or square.

BIRD's Eye, Foot, Tongue, Nest, so
many different kinds of herbs.

The BIRTH of a Mess [on Shipboard]
the proper place for a mess to put their
chests in.

BIRTH-Wort, an herb.

BIRTH [Beor&wyn;e, Sax.] the descent
extraction or original of a person.

BIRTH [Sea Term] is us'd to signify
room or convenience for, either for
sailing or living; hence the phrase;
he has gotten a good birth, which
means he has gotten a good place, for
either convenience or profit.

BIRTHRIGHT [of beor&wyn;e, and
riht, Sax.] the honour or estate be­
longing to the first-born or prior in
birth.

BISCOTIN [Confect.] a confection
made of fine flower, powder'd sugar, 
marmalade, the white of eggs, &c.

BISHOPRICK [of biſcop and ric a
kingdom, Sax.] the province or juris­
diction of a bishop.

BISHOP's Leaves, an herb.

BISHOP's Wort, the plant called also
Catharine's flower.

BISMUTH, otherwise called tin glass, 
is a mineral and semi-metal, compos'd
of the first matter of tin; its substance
is hard, heavy, sharp, and brittle of a
large grain, polish'd white and shining.
It is also call'd Marcasite, on account of
its extraordinary whiteness and beauty.
It contains an Arsenical salt that renders
it very dangerous to be taken inwardly.

BISQUET [probably of bis twice, and
coctus baked] a sort of hard baked bread
or cake.

BISKET [with Confectioners] a 
composition of fine flow­
er, eggs, sugar, &c.

BISQUET [with Confectioners] a 
composition of fine flow­
er, eggs, sugar, &c.

To BISSECT. See Bisect.

BISTER [with Painters, &c.] a co­ 
lour made of the foot of
chimneys boiled, and afterwards diluted
in water, to wash their designs.

BISTRE [with Painters, &c.] a co­ 
lour made of the foot of
chimneys boiled, and afterwards diluted
in water, to wash their designs.

BISUS, or Panis Bisius [ancient
Deeds] a brown loaf, or brown bread.

BISULCOUS [bisculus, L.] cloven­
footed, forked.

BIT, a little piece of any thing.

ABITE [abite, Sax.] any hurt made
by the teeth; also a quantity bitten off
at once; also a cheat, a tricker; also
a sharping trick, &c.

BITT, a piece of silver in Barbadoes
current at seven pence-half-penny.



BITINGNESS [of bitan, Sax.]
sharpness of taste or pungency of words, 
&c.

BITT [with Horsemen] in general
signifies the whole machine of a bridle,
as bit-mouth, the branches, the burb,
the sevil holes, the tranchefil, and the
cross chains; sometimes it is used only
for the bit-mouth in particular.

BITTERNESS [of biten and neſſe, 
Sax.] a particular savour or sensation, 
supposed to result from this, viz. that
all the particles of the bitter body are
broken, blunted and diminished, so
that none of them remain long and ri­
gid; which notion is confirmed by this
experiment, that foods being burnt, 
and their particles much comminuted
and broken by the fire, become bitter.

BITTER End [of a Cable] that part
which is round about the bits when the
ship lies at anchor.

BITUMEN, an inflammable matter
fat, and unctuous, which Naturalists
distinguish into three sorts, hard, soft, 
and liquid or oily; some bitumens are
fossils, others are found floating on
lakes, and others spring out of the
earth like fountains, one kind of it is
a sort of slime, clammy like pitch, and
smelling something like brimstone.
The ancients used it instead of mortar
for building, and also instead of oil for
lamps.

BIVENTER [with Anatomists] the
sixth muscle of the jaw, and last of
those that serve to open it; it is called
Biventer on account of its having as it
were two bellies for its two extremi­
ties, and a tendon in the middle.

BIX-WORT, an herb.

BLACK [blac, Sax.] a colour, is
somewhat opaque and porous, which
imbibing all the light falling on it re­
flects none, and for that reason exhi­
bits no colour.

BLACKNESS [blacneſſe, Sax.]
seems to arise from such a peculiar tex­
ture and situation of the superficial
parts of any black body, that doth as it
were deaden and absorb the light fal­
len upon it, and reflects none or very
little of it outwards to the eye.

BLACK-BIRD, a bird well known.

BLACK Sulphur [with Chymists] 
is expressed by this character.

To BLACKEN [of blacian, Sax.] to
make or grow black; to scandalize, 
&c.

BLACK-SMITH [of blac and Smið, 
Sax.] a worker in iron.

BLADE [blæð, Sax.] a leaf, with
Botanists, the first sprout of a plant that
comes out of the ground, so long as it
is easy to be cropp'd.

BLADE, a bravo, an hector; also a 
spruce fellow, a beau.

To BLADE it, to go flaunting or va­
pouring.

BLAIN [blen, Du. bleʒene, Sax.]
with Surgeons, an angry push, some­
what resembling the small-box, but 
redder and much painfuller, and is one 
of the symptoms of the plague.

BLAIN [in Cattle] a distemper, be­
ing a bladder full of wind and water, 
rising from the root of the tongue, 
which grows large, and will at last
stop the breath of the beast.

BLAMEABLENESS, the deserving
blame.

BLAMELESSNESS, the not deserv­
ing blame.

A BLANCHER [blanschisseur, F.] a
whitener.

BLANCHING [blanchement, F.] a
whitening.

BLANCH-LYON [i. e. white lyon]
the title of one of our pursevants at
arms.

BLANDIMENT [blandimentum, L.] a
thing pleasantly done or spoken.

BLANKNESS, paleness, &c. a be­
ing out of countenance or abashed.

BLANK Verses, verses without
rhimes.

BLAPSIGONIA [βλαψιγονία, Gr.] a
disease in bees when they do not breed, 
or their young ones miscarry.

BLASPHEMATORINESS, blasphe­
mousness.

BLASPHEMER [blasphemateur, F. 
blasphemator, L.] one who speaks blas­
phemy.

BLASPHEMY [βλασφημία, Gr.] an
uttering of reproachful words, tending
to the dishonour of God, &c. vile, base
language.

BLASPHEMOUSNESS [blaspheme, F.
blasphemia, L. βλασφημία, Gr.] blas­
phemy.

BLASTED [of blaſt, Sax.] wither­
ed with the winds; marr'd, spoiled,
destroy'd.

BLASTED Corn, corn that is poor
and thin in the ear, having but little
in it.

BLAZON [in Heraldry] is an obso­
lete word, and a certain author says
signifies the blowing or winding of an
horn, and is introduced into heraldry
from an ancient custom, that the he­
ralds (who were judges at justs and
tournaments) practised of winding an
horn, when they explain'd and record­
ed the atchievements of those knights



that exercised, and by custom the
word has obtain'd to signify description
in heraldry; for to blazon is to describe
the things borne in coat armour as they
ought to be, with their proper signifi­
cations and intendments.

BLAZONRY, signifies the same as
Blazon, of which the most general
rules are,
1. To name the metal or colour of
the field, as or, argent, gules, sable, &c.
2. The manner of the division of the
escutcheon by line, whether it be
down-right or bendwise, &c. and also
the difference of the line, viz. Indented, 
Ingrailed, &c.
3. The charge that is on the field.
4. Name the principal part of the
field first, if there be more than one
occupied by the charge.
5. Name the charge that is in the
chief part of the field first, if there be
more than one kind of charge in it.
6. Use no repetition of words in bla­
zoning the same coat, especially these
words, of, or, and, with.
7. These are three forms of Blazon.
1. By metals and colours for gentle­
men, who have no title of dignity.
2. By precious stones for nobility, as
dukes, earls, &c.
3. By planets, for emperors, kings
and princes; however the French, from
whom we had our heraldry, and all
other nations, reject this variety of
forms, and use none but metals and co­
lours for all degrees.
8. You must observe, that metal
upon metal, and colour upon colour, 
is false heraldry. Yet there is an ex­
ception to this rule, as in the arms of
Jerusalem, which are argent, a cross po­
tent between four crosses or; being metal
upon metal.

BLE [in Botany] the inward bark of
a tree,  F.

To BLEACH [probably of bletsen, 
Teut, blecken, Du. or æblecen, Sax.]
to whiten, to dry in the sun.

BLEAKNESS, coldness of the wind.

BLEAR-eyed, having the external
covering ef the eyes red and turned
outwards.

BLEATING [of blætan, Sax.] the
crying of sheep.

BLEEDING [of bleðan, Sax.] send­
ing or letting out of blood.

BLEPHAROXISTUM [of βλέφαρον
and ξύω, to scrape off, Gr.] an instru­
ment for pulling hairs out of the eye­
lid.

BLESSEDNESS [of bleſtian, Sax.]
felicity, beatitude.

BLEW Mantle a title peculiar to 
one of the pursui­
vants or marshals at arms.

BLUE Mantle a title peculiar to 
one of the pursui­
vants or marshals at arms.

BLIND Vessels [with Chymists] such
as have no opening but on one side.

BLINDS [in Fortification] are bun­
dles of osiers bound at both ends, and
set up between two stakes; also bran­
ches of trees or pieces of wood laid
across upon the trenches to bear up the
bavins or hurdles laid upon earth, 
which serve to cover them, and some­
times canvass, and sometimes planks
erected, to obstruct the enemy's pro­
spect,  F.

BLINDFOLD [of blinð and fealðan, 
Sax.] having the eyes covered.

BLIND Nettle an herb.

BLINDNESS [blinðneððe, Sax.]
want of sight, a privation of the sensa­
tion of sight arising from a total depri­
vation of the organs of it, or an invo­
luntary obstruction of their functions.

BLISFULNESS [of bliſſe and full, 
Sax.] happiness.

To BLISSOM, to leap as a ram does
upon an ewe.

To BLISTER [blupster, Du.] to raise
blisters.

BLITES, a kind of beet, an herb
that has scarce any taste or scent.

BLITHNESS [of bliðeneſ­
ſe, Sax.] a be­
ing very pleasant or merry.

BLITHLY [of be and lif, Sax. life]
briskly, readily, fast, apace.

BLOACH, a pustule, wheal or small
swelling.

BLOCK, a piece of marble as it
comes out of the quarry.

BLOCK [with Falconers] the perch
whereon the hawk is kept.

BLOCK Lands, a piece of land anci­
ently, that which is now called free­
hold land.

Double BLOCKS [in a Ship] are such
as are used when much strength is re­
quired, because they will purchase
with more ease than single blocks, tho'
much slower.

BLOCK and BLOCK [Sea Term] a
phrase us'd when two blocks meet, in
haling any tackle or hallyard, having
such blocks belonging to them.

FISH-BLOCK [in a Ship] is a block
hung in a knot at the end of a davit;
the use of it is to hale up the flooks of
the anchor to a ship's bow.

SNATCH-BLOCK [in a Ship] is a
large block with a shiver in it, and a
notch cut through one of Its cheeks, for
the more ready receiving in of any



rope. It is used for the fall of the
winding tackle.

To BLOCKADE [Military Term] to
stop or shut up all the avenues and pas­
sages, and hinder all intelligence being
sent into or out of town or fort; so
that it may receive no relief.

BLOCKHEAD [of block, Teut. and
heafoð, Sax. the head] a stupid, igno­
rant, fellow, &c.

BLOCKISH [of block, Teut.] igno­
rant stupid.

BLOCKISHNESS, stupidity, &c.

BLOOD [bloð, Sax. and  Dan.] a
warm red liquor or humour circulating
by means of arteries and veins through
every part of the body; by microscopes
the blood appears to consist of little red
globules swimming in an aqueous li­
quor, supposed to be the cruor and se­
rum.

BLOODLESS [bloðleſ, Sax.] having
no blood.

BLOOD-HOUNDS, a kind of hunt­
ing-dogs, so called for their most exqui­
site scent; for tho' the game happen to
be dead, or if wounded it makes its es­
cape from the huntsman, or if it be
kill'd and never so clearly removed
away, yet they will find their way to it.

BLOOD Strange two sorts of herbs.

BLOOD Wort two sorts of herbs.

BLOODINESS [of bloðiʒneſſe, 
Sax.] a being bloody in body; also
bloody-mindedness.

BLOOD-shed, the spilling of blood, 
murder, slaughter.

BLOOD running itch, [with Farriers]
a disease in horses proceeding from an
inflammation of the blood; proceeding
from being hard rid or over-hard la­
bour'd, so that the blood gets between
the skin and the flesh, and if not cured
will turn to a mange.

BLOOD-shotten, a distemper of the
eyes, when the blood vessels are very
much extended, so as to make the eyes
appear red.

BLOOMING [of bloſm of blotſ­
mian, Sax.] blossom­
ing or in blossom.

BLOOMY [of bloſm of blotſ­
mian, Sax.] blossom­
ing or in blossom.

BLOSSOMLESS, without blossoms.

BLOSSOM Colour [in a Horse] is such
as when the hair is white, bat inter­
mix'd all over with sorrel and bay
hairs.

BLOWN [boiling of sugar] is when
the sides of the copper-pan, in which
the sugar has been boiled for a consi­
derable time, is beaten with the skim­
mer; and a person blowing through the
holes of it from one side to the other, 
certain sparks or small bubbles fly out, 
which is an indication, that the sugar
is come to that degree of boiling.

BLUE Mantle, the title of one of our
pursevants at arms.

Turnsole BLUE, a blue used by pain­
ters, by boiling a quarter of a pound of
turnsole in a pint and half of water.

BLUING of Metals [with Gilders] is
the heating any metal till it has assum­
ed a blue colour.

BLUNDERER, one apt to make
mistakes, or to stumble or go carelesly.

BLUNT, having a dull edge or point.

A BLUNT Fellow, one who is sin­
cere and plain in his discourse, not
using fawning or complaisance, but
freely reproving persons for their fol­
lies or vices.

BLUNTISH, something blunt, not
very sharp.

To BLUR, to blot or stain paper
with ink, also to make a house sound
with a trumpet.

To BLURT out, to speak rashly and
inconsiderately.

BLUSH, a redness in the face, pro­
ceeding from modesty.

BLUSHING, a phænomenon in the a­
nimal œconomy excited from a sense
of shame, &c.

BOA, a kind of serpent that follows
herds of cattle, and sucks the dugs of
cows, some of which have grown to
that largeness, that a young child was
found in the belly of one in the time
of the emperor Claudius.

BOA [with Physicians] a disease
wherein red pimples arise in the flesh
like the measles or small pox.  L.

To BOAR [with Horsemen] a horse
is said to boar or bore, 
when he shoots out his nose as high as
he can.

To BORE [with Horsemen] a horse
is said to boar or bore, 
when he shoots out his nose as high as
he can.

To be within BOARD [Sea Term] is to
be within a ship.

To be without BOARD, is to be with­
out the ship.

To throw over BOARD, is to throw
out of the ship into the sea, &c.

To slip by the BOARD, is to slip
down by the ship's side.

To make a BOARD [Sea Phrase]
to turn the
ship up to the windward, sometimes on
one tack and sometimes on another.

To BOARD it up to [Sea Phrase]
to turn the
ship up to the windward, sometimes on
one tack and sometimes on another.

To make a good BOARD [Sea Phrase]
used of a ship when she has advanced
much to the windward at one tack or
turning.

BOARISHNESS [of bariſc and
neſſe, Sax.] swinish disposition.

BOASTFUL, jactantious bragging.
Milton.



Man the BOAT [Sea term] is to put
men into her, that are called the boat's
gang.

To swift the BOAT [Sea language] is
to make fast a rope round about the
boat by the gunwale, and to fasten the
boat rope to it in order to strengthen
the boat to endure her tow.

To trim a BOAT, is to keep her even.

To wind a BOAT, is to turn her head
about.

Royal BOB, the strong water called
Geneva.

BOB-tail [with Archers] is the steel
of an arrow or shaft, that is small breast­
ed and large towards the head.

BOCARDO [with Logicians] the fifth
mode of the third figure. In a syllo­
gism in Bocardo, the first proposition is
particlar and negative, the second uni­
versal, and the middle term the subject
of the two propositions, as
1. Some animal is not man.
2. Every animal is endued with sensa­
tion.
3. Therefore there is something endued
with sensation besides man.

BOCKHORD [boc-horð, Sax.] a
book-hoard, a place where books, wri­
tings, &c. are laid.

BODIES [of boðiʒe, Sax, the sta­
ture or body] women's
stays or bodice.

BODICE [of boðiʒe, Sax, the sta­
ture or body] women's
stays or bodice.

BODKIN [boðekin, probably C. B.]
a long sort of pin on which women
used to roll their hair; and also a sharp
pointed instrument with a handle to
make holes in hard things.

BODKIN Work, a sort of trimming
anciently used for womens gowns, which
was made of tinsel or gold threads, 
purfle.

BODY [boðiʒe, Sax. as defin'd by
Naturalists] a solid, extended, palpable
substance, composed of matter, form, and
privation, according to the Peripateticks.
2. Of an assemblage of hooked heavy
atoms, according to the Corpuscularians
and Epicureans; of a certain quantity of
extension according to Des Cartes; of a
system or association of solid massy, 
hard, impenetrable, moveable particles
ranged or disposed in this or that man­
ner according to Sir Isaac Newton;
whence result bodies of this or that
form, distinguished by this or that name;
others define body to be that which has
extention, resistance, and is capable of
motion.

BODY, with regard to animals, is
us'd in opposition to the soul, viz. for
that part composed of bones, muscles, 
canals, juices, nerves, &c. in which
sense body makes the subject of anatomy.

Regular BODY [in Geometry] one
which has all the angles and sides; as
also all the planes which compose the
surface, alike and equal; of which there
are no more than five kinds, the dode­
caedron confirming of 12 pentagons, the
hexaedron, icosaedron of 20, octaedron of
8 pentagons, and tetraedron of 4 angles
and the cube of 6 squares. These are
called Platonick bodies.

BOEDROMIA [βοηδρομια or βοηδρο­
μεῖν, Gr. i. e. coming to help] an Athe­
nian festival, instituted in memory of
Jou, the son of Xuthus, who came to
the assistance of the Athenians, in the
reign of king Erectheus, when they were
invaded by Eumolphus the son of Nep­
tune.

BOG [some derive it of baagen, Dut.
to bend, because it gives way when it is
trod upon, or quagg, Eng. or rather
ʒ&wyn;æ&wyn;, Sax. and ʒuac, tender, and soft, 
Baxter]
and mush-ground full of water
and mud.

BOGGLE-BOE a bugbear to fright
children.

BOGOMILES [of Bog God, and milia
have merry, in the Bulgarian languages, 
according to Du Cange] a sect who were
Anthropomorphites, and Antitrinitari­
ans, held that the world was created by
evil angels, and that it was the archangel
Gabriel that became incarnate. They
rejected the bocks of Moses, admitted
but 7 books of scripture, and held that
there was no resurrection but repen­
tance.

BOIARS [in Muscovy] certain great
lords of the Czar's court who administer
justice, try causes, and are the ministers
of state.

BOICININGA, an animal [in Ameri­
ca call'd the rattle-snake, whose bite is
deadly, except a speedy remedy be ap­
plied.

BOILING [in Physicks) the agitation
of a fluid body, arising from fire being
applied to it.

BOISTEROUSNESS. tempestuous­
ness, unruliness.

BOLDNESS [baldneſſe, Sax.] un­
dauntedness; also impudence.

BOLE [in Medicine] is used in gene­
ral for several kinds of earth that are
used in Galenical preparations.

BOLLANDISTS, certain Jesuits of
Antwerp, who have been many years, 
and are still employ'd in collecting the
lives of Romish saints with critical notes
for every month in the Roman calender, 
of which they have finished the first 6.



This work was begun in the year
1641.

BOLONIAN Stone [so call'd of Bolog­
na in Italy where found] a weighty, 
grey, soft, sulphureous stone, which is
about the size of a large walnut, which
when it is broken has a kind of crystal
or sparry talk within it. A shoemaker
having found some of these stones at the
foot of mount Palermo calcin'd them, 
hoping to extract silver out of them;
but tho' he was disappointed in this his
expectation, yet he discovered this
strange phænomenon, that when the
stone was exposed to light, it would re­
tain it, and afterwards shine in the
dark.
If these stones after calcination be ex­
pos'd to the light in the air, as in one's
hand out of a window (but not to the
sun-beams) for the space of a minute, 
and carried then into a dark place, they
will appear like kindled coals for some
time without any sensible heat. This
will gradually abate, but may be re­
newed again by being exposed again to
the light of the day as before; and this
quality they will retain for 34 years, 
And when lost it may be renewed again
by recalcination.
And if any figures be drawn on paper
with the white of an egg; and the crust
of this calcined stone powder'd be strew­
ed on it while wet, and afterwards dried
in the shade, and the picture put in a
frame with a glass before it, and be af­
terwards exposed to the light with the
glass cover on, it will at any time shine
if removed into a dark place.

To BOLT into company is to come
suddenly, unexpectedly or rudely into
it.

BOLTER, a cant name for one who
conceals himself in his own house or
some priviledged place, and dares only
peep and not go out from his retreat.

BOLT-HEAD [with Chymists] a long
strait necked glass vessel for distillations, 
which being fitted to the nose of an a­
lembick, or still, is called a reciever; and
when the neck of one is well joined to
the neck of another it is called a double
vessel.

Fend BOLTS [in a Ship] are a 
sort of bolts made
with long and thick heads, and struck in­
to the uttermost wales or bends of the
ship, to save the sides of her from hurts, 
gallings and bruises.

Fender BOLTS [in a Ship] are a 
sort of bolts made
with long and thick heads, and struck in­
to the uttermost wales or bends of the
ship, to save the sides of her from hurts, 
gallings and bruises.

Set BOLTS [in a ship] are a sort bolts
used for forcing the planks and other
works, and to bring them close together.

Ring BOLTS [in a ship] are bolts
made use of for bringing of the planks
and those parts, to which the brechees
and tackle of the ordnance are fastened.

Transum BOLTS [with Gunners] are
bolts which go betwixt the cheeks of a
gun-carriage to strengthen the transums.

Prise BOLTS [with Gunners] large
knobs of iron on the cheek of a carriage, 
which prevent the handspike from sli­
ding, when it is poising up the breech of
a piece.

Traverse BOLTS [with Gunners] two
short bolts, put one into each end of an
English mortar carriage, which serve to
traverse the mortar.

Bracket BOLTS [with Gunners] bolts
which go thro' the cheeks of a mortar, 
and by the help of the coins keep it fix­
ed to the elevation given her.

Rag BOLTS [in a ship] are such as
have jags or barbs on each side to keep
them from flying out of the hole in
which they are.

Clench BOLTS [in a ship] bolts that
are clenched with a riveting hammer, 
at the end where they come through.

Drive BOLTS [in a ship] are long
pieces of iron, which are used to drive
out other bolts, tree nails or the like.

Forelock BOLTS [in a ship] are those
which have a forelock of iron at the end
driven in to keep it from starting
back.

BOLTING [in Grays Inn] a kind of
exercise or arguing cases among the
students.

BOLUS [with Physicians] a medicine
prepared of a consistence somewhat thick­
er than honey; being a quantity that
can be taken on the point of a knife at
one mouthful.

BOLUS Armoniacus, i. e. Bole armo­
niack, a sort of crumbling earth or stone
found in Armenia, used by Physicians and
Painters.

BOLE Armena [with Chymi­
cal Writers] is expressed by this
character.

Image omitted.



BOMBS [Gu­
nnery] large
shells of cast
iron, having
large vents to
receive the
fusees, these
fusees B are
made of wood, 
and drove full
of a composi­
tion made of
meal powder, 
sulphur and salt-petre. After the bomb



has been fill'd with this powder, the
fusee is driven into the vent within an
inch of the head, and pitch'd over to
preserve it; they uncase the fusee
when they put the bomb into the mor­
tar and salt it with meal powder, which
having taken fire by the flash of the pow­
der in the chamber of the mortar, burns
all the time the bomb is in the air, and
the composition in the fusee being spent, 
it fires the powder in the bomb with a
great force, blowing up whatever is a­
bout it, and the great height it goes in
the air, and the force with which it falls, 
makes it go deep into the earth.

Image omitted.



BOMBARDEERS, they are 25 in num­
ber, one chief and 24 under him, esta­
blished in the office of ordnance at a
yearly salary; their employment is a­
bout the mortars, they drive in the fu­
see, fire the bomb, load and fire the
mortars, work with the fireworkers on
all sorts of fireworks.

BOMBYCINE, silk yarn or silken
cloth made of silks, silken.

BONA DEA, a goddess worshipped by
the Greeks and Romans. The Grecians
supposed her to be one of the nurses of
Bacchus, and not to be named. The
Romans supposed her to be the wife of
Faunus a king of Italy, and chief of the
Dryades. Her rites were performed only
by women, and no man admitted, in
token of her chastity.

BONA TOTA [with Botanists] a tree
that grows in most of the Caribbee islands
belonging to America, in height 5 or 6
yards, whose leaves are four foot and
half long, and a foot and half broad;
the fruit of it has a medicinal quality.

BONASUS [Βόνασος, Gr.] a wild
beast that has the head of a bull, and
the body and mane of an horse, which
when hunted, saves himself by his or­
dure, which he throws out in such a­
bundance and so noisome, that the hun­
ters are obliged to leave off the pursuit.

BONDAGE [of bonð, Sax.] servitude, 
slavery.

BOND SOCOME [Common Law] a cu­
stom of the tenants being bound to grind
their corn at the lord's mill.

BOND [in Carpentry] a term used, as
make good bond, signifies fasten two or
more pieces together, either with te­
nanting, or mortising, or dove-tailing.

BONE [with Anatomists] a part of the
body, white, hard and brittle, undis­
tendable and void of sensation; support­
ing and shaping the whole body, cover­
ed with a membrane call'd Periosteum, 
which is extremely sensible; bones are
generally hollow and contain an oily
substance call'd marrow: the texture of
bones consists in thin Lamina or plates, 
lying over one another, and they of
fibres, running lengthways, some to the
extremities; but others not so far, none
of them terminating in a direct end;
but are continued transversly and some­
what arched, the fibres of one side meet­
ing with those of the other; so that
they are continuations of one another
in a sort of long ellipses, not of equal
lengths; but some longer, others shorter.

BONELESS [of banleaſ, Sax.] with­
out bones.

BONHOMMES [i. e. good men] an
order founded by Francis de Paula, cal­
led also Minorites or Friers Minors.

BONITY [bonitas L.] goodness.

The ship has her Course and BONNET
abroad [Sea phrase] is as much as to say, 
she has the bonnet added to her course,
which before she had not.

BONNINESS [of bonus, L.] spruce­
ness, cleverness.

BONYNESS, a being bony or full of
bones.

BOOKISHNESS [of boc and ish, an
adject. termin. and neſſe, Sax.] dispo­
sition to read books much.

BOOMING [Sea term] used of a ship
when she makes all the sail she can, and
is then said to come booming.

BOORISHNESS, clownishness.

BOOTS, the plant Marigold.

BOOTES [βοῖς an ox and ἀθέω to drive, 
i. e. the ox-driver] the name of a nor­
thern constellation, containing 34 stars, 
called also Arctophylax, and in English
King Charles's Wain.

BOOT, a kind of torture for criminals
to extort a confession from them, by
means of a boot or stocking of parch­
ment wetted and put on the leg, and
then brought near the fire, in shrinking
it squeezes violently and causes intole­
rable pain.

BOOT [in Scotland] a sort of rack by
putting an iron bar on the leg of a cri­
minal, and driving an iron peg on his
shin-bone; also four thick strong boards, 
bound round with cords; of which two
are put between the legs of an offender, 
and the two others placed one on one
side and the other on the other, so that
the legs being squeezed by the boards
with cords break the leg. This is now
left off in England, but continues in
Scotland.

BOOTY [butin, F. or of beute, Teut.
or of hute, Du.] prey, spoil, pillage, 
prize.

To play BOOTY, to prevaricate, to
play a losing game, to draw in others to
play.



BORAX 
[Chym.] is ex­
press'd by one
of these characters. 🝃

Three images for the alchemical symbols are omitted. The unicode for the second image is found.



BORDER, Eng. [in
He­
raldry] is an ordinary, so
called because it borders
round, and as it were hems
in the field. The French
heralds reckon this the 9th among their
honourable pieces; but the English he­
ralds don't admit it as such, but only as
a difference, though they do allow of
the Orle its diminutive as such, and is
represented as in the figure.
The Border or Bordure is accounted
a symbol of protection, favour and
reward, and is bestow'd by kings on such
as they have a value for, as a sure de­
fence against their enemies.

Image omitted.



BORDURE, Fr. [in
He­
raldry] is an ordinary, so
called because it borders
round, and as it were hems
in the field. The French
heralds reckon this the 9th among their
honourable pieces; but the English he­
ralds don't admit it as such, but only as
a difference, though they do allow of
the Orle its diminutive as such, and is
represented as in the figure.
The Border or Bordure is accounted
a symbol of protection, favour and
reward, and is bestow'd by kings on such
as they have a value for, as a sure de­
fence against their enemies.

Image omitted.



BORDER [with Printers] an orna­
ment of flowers, scrolls, &c. set about
the edges of small compositions.

BORDER [with Florists] are the mid­
dle leaves that stand about the thrum of
flowers.

BORDELLO [of borð, Sax.] at first
was used to signify any small cottage, 
some of which being become infamous
by being made common ale-houses and
Bawdy-houses, and harbours for strum­
pets; by transposition was made brothel
for bordel, and used to signify a stew or
bawdy-house: On the south bank of the
river of Thames, westwards of the bridge, 
and next to the bear-garden, was some­
times the bordello or stews, a place so
called of certain stews or houses privileg­
ed there for incontinent men to repair
to incontinent women, for which privi­
lege there was an act of parliament
made in the reign of king Henry II. in
which these were some of the orders:
That no stew-holder, or his wife, should
hinder any single woman from going
and coming freely at all times when
she list; nor to keep any woman at
board; but that she should board abroad
at her pleasure: That they should take
no more for the woman's chamber than
14d. a week. That they should not
keep open their doors on holy-days.
That no single woman should be kept a­
gainst her will. That they should not
receive any woman of religion, nor any
man's wife. That no single woman take
money to lie with any, but she may lie
with him all night till the morrow. That
no stew-holder keep any woman that
hath the perilous infirmity of burning;
nor sell bread, ale, flesh, fish, wood, coal, 
or any victuals, &c., these stew-hou­
ses were permitted in the time of king
Henry VI. but were inhibited in the
reign of king henry VII. and the doors
shut up; but set open again; but were
put down in the time of king Henry VIII.
in the year 1546.

BORE tree, a kind of shrub.

BOREASMOI [Βορεάσμοι, Gr.] an A­
thenian festival in honour of Boreas [i. e.
the north wind] who had an altar in
Attica, and was thought to bear some
relation to the Athenians, having mar­
ried Orithya, the daughter of Erectheus;
for which reason, when in a sea-fight, 
a great many of their enemies ships were
destroy'd by a north wind, the Athenians
imputed it to the kindness Boreas had
for his wife's native country.

BORITH [הירב, Heb.] an herb or
sort of soap which fullers use in scouring
cloths.

BORYPTES, a gem or jewel of a black
colour, with spots of red and white.

BORROWER [of borʒian, Sax.] one
who borrows.

BOSKY, half or quite fuddled.

BOSPHORUS [Βόσφορος, of οῖςβ an ox
and πορεία a passage, q. d. a passage pa­
sable by oxen, or of φέρω to bear, from
the poetical fable that Ino being trans­
formed into a cow, passed this strait] a
strait or narrow neck of the sea, which
separates two continents; by which
means a gulf and a sea or two seas have
a communication one with another.

BOSCAGE [in Architecture] a large 
rough, unwroughtstone
laid in a building with design to be 
afterwards carved with a coat of arms, 
&c. also rustick work.

BOSSAGE [in Architecture] a large 
rough, unwroughtstone
laid in a building with design to be 
afterwards carved with a coat of arms, 
&c. also rustick work.

BOSSAGE [with Architects] is a term
used of any stone that has a projecture, 
and is laid in its place in a building un­
cut, to be afterwards carved into mould­
ings, capitals, &c. also that which is
called a rustick work, and consists of
stones, seeming to advance beyond the
nakedness of a building, by reason of
indentures or channels left in the join­
ings.

BOSSE [probably of bosse, F.] a con­
duit built after the manner of a gor­
bellied or tun-bellied figure.

BOSTRYCHITES [of βόστρυχος, Gr. a
bush of hair] a gem or jewel represent­
ing a lock or bush of a woman's hair.

BOTANOMANCY [βοτανομαντεία of
βοτανὴ an herb and μαντεία, Gr. divina­
tion] a divination by herbs, and especi­
ally by those of sage or the fig tree.
The persons that consulted, wrote their
own names and their questions upon
leaves, which they exposed to the wind,



and as many of the letters as remained
in their own places were taken up, and
being joined together, were accounted
an answer to the question.

BOTANO SOPHISTS [of βοτανὴ an
herb and σοφιστἠς a sophister, Gr.] a bo­
tanist or one skill'd in herbs.

BOTHRION [βοθριον of βόθρος, a
ditch, Gr.] a kind of hollow, narrow
and hard ulcer in the tunica cornea; also
the socket of the teeth.

To BOTTOM off [a Drinking term]
to drink the last draught of a pot of drink, 
or the last glass of a bottle of wine.

BOTTOMLESS [of botan, and leaſ,
Sax.] having no bottom.

BOTTOMRY [so called from the bot­
tom of the Ship] is a sort of usury that
is founded upon the safe return of a ship, 
from the voyage to the place where her
cargo is consign'd: As follows; the ma­
ster, purser, mate or other person takes
up a certain sum of money at 20, 30, 40
or more per Cent, to be paid at the safe
return of the ship, but if the ship be ta­
ken by enemies, or pirates, or founders
at sea, the lender loses 
his money.

BOTONE [in Heraldry]
as a cross Botone] terminates
at each end in three buds, 
knots or buttons, resem­
bling in some measure the
three leaved grass; by some
French authors also called Croix Treffle,
as in the figure.

Image omitted.



BOVILLON [with Farriers] is a lump
of flesh or excrescence growing either
upon or just by the frush, which makes
the frush shoot out like a pump, which
is called the flesh blowing upon the frush, 
and makes a horse halt.  F.

BOULDER Walls [Architect.] certain
walls built of round flints or pebbles, 
laid on a strong mortar; used where
the sea has a beach cast up, &c.

BOULETE [with Horsemen] a term
used of a horse, when the fetlock or
partem joint bends forward, and out of
its natural situation,  F.

BOULTINE [with Architects] a con­
vex moulding, whose convexity is but
a 14th of the circle, and is placed next
below the plinth in the Tuscan and Do­
rick capital.

A BOUNCE, a sudden noise, as of
gunpowder, &c. also a boast.

To BOUNCE, to brag, to vapour or
speak boastingly; also to make a crack
with a very loud noise, as gun-powder.

BOUNDEN [of bonð, Sax.] pertain­
ing to obligation, &c.

BOUNDLESSNESS [of bonðleaſ,
Sax.] having no bounds or limits.

BOUNTEOUSNESS [of bonté, F. of
bonitas, L.] a giving plenteously.

BOUNTIFULNESS, fulness of boun­
ty, liberality.

To BOURGEON [bourgeonner, F.] to
bud, to shoot, to put forth buds.

BOUT [of behten. Sax. to beat]
stroke, blow, attempt, trial.

BOUT [with Horsemen] a term used
of a horse, when he is over-done, and
quite spent with fatigue.

BOW [boʒa of bẏʒan, Sax. to bend]
an instrument for shooting arrows.

BOW [with Mathematicians] an in­
strument formerly used in navigation
to take the height of the Sun.

BOW [with Shipwrights] a beam of
wood or brass, with three long screws
that direct a lath of wood or steel to
any part, commonly used to make
draughts of ships, &c.

A bold BOW [of a Ship] is a broad
bow.

BOW Pieces [in a Ship] are the pie­
ces of ordnance at her bow.

BOW Anchors anchors that are
carried in the ship's
bower.

BOWERS anchors that are
carried in the ship's
bower.

To BOWEL [of boyeau, F. or botu­
lus, L. a pudding] to take out the bo­
wels.

BOWER [of bur of bure, Sax. a
parlour] an arbour made or covered
with greens interwoven.

To BOWL [Jouer à la boule, F.] to
play with bowls in a bowling-green, 
&c.

A BOWL [bolla, Sax. boule, F.] a
vessel or cup of wood, metal or ear­
then ware to drink out of.

Check the BOW-LINE [Sea terms]
which im­
port, let it
be more slack.

Ease the BOW-LINE [Sea terms]
which im­
port, let it
be more slack.

Run up the BOW-LINE [Sea terms]
which im­
port, let it
be more slack.

To BOWLT a Coney [Hunting term
of bouter, F.] to start or put up a coney.

BOWSING upon the tack [with Sai­
lors] signifies haling upon the tack.

BOWYERS, this
company was incorpo­
rated Anno 1622; but
had been a fraternity
long before; and the
company doubtless
more eminent when
the long-bow was
more in use, before the invention of
gun-powder. Their arms are argent
upon a chevron between three floats, as
many mullets.

Image omitted.



BOX [box-treo&wyn;, Sax.] the box-­
tree, or box-wood.



BOX [in Traffick] certain different
quantities and weights of certain com­
modities.

BOX and needle [with Mathematici­
ans] a small compass applied to a theo­
dolite or other such instrument used in
surveying, &c. to find out how any
place is situated, by the point of a need­
le, touched with a loadstone's pointing
towards the North.

BOY [prob. of παῖς, Gr. but Minsevus
derives it of bube, Teut.] a male child, 
a lad.

BOYISHNESS, the acting like a boy.

BRABBLER [of brabbelen, Du.] a
wrangler, a brawler.

BRABANT, so called of Brabo, a no­
ble Roman, and relation to Julius Cæsar
who attended him in his Gallick expe­
dition. A dutchy. The people of Ant­
werp tell you a story of a giant that was
vanquished by Brabo, that had a castle
where Antwerp is now built, who used
to cut of the hands of all that he took, 
and throw them into the Scheld, whom
Brabo served in the same manner.

BRACE [a Hunting term] a couple
or pair, as of bucks, dogs, foxes, hares,
&c.

BRACE [at Milan] a measure equal
to 13d lls English.

BRACE [at Venice] a measure equal
to 2, 96 ells English.

To BRACE the Yard [Sea phrase] is
to bring the yard to either side.

BRACED [in Heraldry]
the intermingling of 3
cheveronels, as Azure a
chief or and 3 cheveron­
els, braced in the base of
the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



BRACHELETS [Old Records] hounds
or beagles of the smaller and lower kind.

BRACHIOLUM [with Mathematici­
ans] a member of an instrument used
upon astrolabes, &c. and usually made
of brass, with several joints, that the
end or point may be set to any degree
of the astrolabe, sometimes called a
creeping Index.

BRACHMANS so called of Brach­
man or Bramba,
the prescriber of
their rights or laws] priests or learned
men in East-India, anciently a sort of
philosophers, which from their going
naked were called gymnosophists, and
were to the Indians, as the Chaldees to
the Assyrians, and the Magi to the Per­
sians, and the Druids to the antient
Britains and Gauls. They were had in
great veneration by the people, living
for the most part austere and solitary
lives in caves and deserts, feeding upon
herbs, being poorly apparelled, and for
a time abstaining from all carnal plea­
sures; their opinions were, that the god
Achari or Wistnu created the world by
the administration of three perfect
beings, whom he had first made for that
design: These three are Bramba, i. e. 
penetration, by this he created the uni­
verse; by Brescue, i. e. existing in all
things, he preserves it; and by Mehad­
dia, i. e. the great lord, he will destroy
it. They pretend to have recieved
four books from Brama, in which books
all knowledge is comprehended, and
they hold the Metempsychosis or trans­
migration of souls, thro' several human
bodies and beasts, before they can ar­
rive at pleasure, and being purely spiri­
tual; and for this reason they teach, that
it is not lawful to kill, and eat any thing
that is killed, and none of their tribes
do eat any, but their soldiers; they also
hold the flesh of cows and peacocks as
sacred, and therefore they abstain from
it, and build hospitals for lame and de­
cayed beasts, and buy birds of the Ma­
hometans to set them at liberty. By their
austere lives, great fastings, teaching the
people, and expounding the mysteries
of their religion to them, they have
gotten a great awe over the people, all
over the Indies, and especially upon the
Malabar coasts, and the brides are com­
mitted to the Bramens to be blessed by
them that the marriage may be happy.

BRAMENS so called of Brach­
man or Bramba,
the prescriber of
their rights or laws] priests or learned
men in East-India, anciently a sort of
philosophers, which from their going
naked were called gymnosophists, and
were to the Indians, as the Chaldees to
the Assyrians, and the Magi to the Per­
sians, and the Druids to the antient
Britains and Gauls. They were had in
great veneration by the people, living
for the most part austere and solitary
lives in caves and deserts, feeding upon
herbs, being poorly apparelled, and for
a time abstaining from all carnal plea­
sures; their opinions were, that the god
Achari or Wistnu created the world by
the administration of three perfect
beings, whom he had first made for that
design: These three are Bramba, i. e. 
penetration, by this he created the uni­
verse; by Brescue, i. e. existing in all
things, he preserves it; and by Mehad­
dia, i. e. the great lord, he will destroy
it. They pretend to have recieved
four books from Brama, in which books
all knowledge is comprehended, and
they hold the Metempsychosis or trans­
migration of souls, thro' several human
bodies and beasts, before they can ar­
rive at pleasure, and being purely spiri­
tual; and for this reason they teach, that
it is not lawful to kill, and eat any thing
that is killed, and none of their tribes
do eat any, but their soldiers; they also
hold the flesh of cows and peacocks as
sacred, and therefore they abstain from
it, and build hospitals for lame and de­
cayed beasts, and buy birds of the Ma­
hometans to set them at liberty. By their
austere lives, great fastings, teaching the
people, and expounding the mysteries
of their religion to them, they have
gotten a great awe over the people, all
over the Indies, and especially upon the
Malabar coasts, and the brides are com­
mitted to the Bramens to be blessed by
them that the marriage may be happy.

BRAMINS so called of Brach­
man or Bramba,
the prescriber of
their rights or laws] priests or learned
men in East-India, anciently a sort of
philosophers, which from their going
naked were called gymnosophists, and
were to the Indians, as the Chaldees to
the Assyrians, and the Magi to the Per­
sians, and the Druids to the antient
Britains and Gauls. They were had in
great veneration by the people, living
for the most part austere and solitary
lives in caves and deserts, feeding upon
herbs, being poorly apparelled, and for
a time abstaining from all carnal plea­
sures; their opinions were, that the god
Achari or Wistnu created the world by
the administration of three perfect
beings, whom he had first made for that
design: These three are Bramba, i. e. 
penetration, by this he created the uni­
verse; by Brescue, i. e. existing in all
things, he preserves it; and by Mehad­
dia, i. e. the great lord, he will destroy
it. They pretend to have recieved
four books from Brama, in which books
all knowledge is comprehended, and
they hold the Metempsychosis or trans­
migration of souls, thro' several human
bodies and beasts, before they can ar­
rive at pleasure, and being purely spiri­
tual; and for this reason they teach, that
it is not lawful to kill, and eat any thing
that is killed, and none of their tribes
do eat any, but their soldiers; they also
hold the flesh of cows and peacocks as
sacred, and therefore they abstain from
it, and build hospitals for lame and de­
cayed beasts, and buy birds of the Ma­
hometans to set them at liberty. By their
austere lives, great fastings, teaching the
people, and expounding the mysteries
of their religion to them, they have
gotten a great awe over the people, all
over the Indies, and especially upon the
Malabar coasts, and the brides are com­
mitted to the Bramens to be blessed by
them that the marriage may be happy.

BRACKISHNESS [of brack Du. salt]
saltishness.

BRADS, a sort of slender nails with­
out heads.

BRAIN [metaphorically] is used for
wit and judgment.

BRAINLESS [of breyne, Du. bræ­
ʒen, Sax. the brain] witless.

BRAIN-SICK, crazy-headed; also fic­
kle, unconstant.

BRAISES [in Cookery] meat dressed a
la braize, is either meat broiled upon the
coals, or else baked in a campaign oven
between two fires, one above and the
other below.

BRAN [of born, Sax. a river] at the
beginning or end of the names of places, 
denotes it to be a place at or near a ri­
ver, as Branford.

BRANCH [by Botanists] is defined to
be the division of a stalk of a plant; in
trees it is called a bough.

A fruit BRANCH [with Gardeners]
that which shoots out of the cut of the
preceding year, and is naturally of a
considerable thickness.



A BRANCH half wood [with Garde­
ners] is one that is too gross for a fruit
branch, and too slender for a wood
branch.

Spurious wood BRANCHES [with Gar­
deners] are such as come otherwise than
from the cuts of the preceding year;
because branches should never come, 
but from those of the last cut.

BRANCHED [in Heraldry] denotes
any thing spread into branches.

BRANCHES [with Architects] the
arches of Gothick vaults, which arches
transversing from one angle to another, 
diagonal-wise form, a cross between
the other arches which make the sides
of the square, of which the arches are
diagonals.

BRANCHINESS, the fulness or
spreading of branches.

BRANDEUM, a little bit of cloth
wherewith the bodies of saints and
martyrs have been touch'd, put in a
box, and shewn as a relick to such as
desire it; or a piece of a Corporal, on
which the eucharist or host had been
laid. This superstition was introduced
as early as the year 600.

BRANK Ursin. See Branca Ursina.

BRASMATIAS, a kind of earth­
quake, when the earth moves directly
upwards.

BRASS [Bræſ, Sax.] a compound or
factitious metal, made by mixing melted
copper with Lapis calaminaris.

Corinthian BRASS, is a metal that is
contended to have been a composition
of brass, gold and silver all run toge­
ther, of which the famous Greek sta­
tuaries, and founders made some of
their celebrated pieces of antiquity;
and some will have it that this compo­
sition happened by the conflagration of
the city of Corinth.

BRASSICOURT [with Horsemen] 
an horse whose
fore legs are bended naturally.

BRACHICOURT [with Horsemen] 
an horse whose
fore legs are bended naturally.

BRASSINESS [of bræſineſſe, Sax.]
a being brassy.

A BRAVE [un faux brave, F.] a 
bully, a hectoring blade, 
a swaggering fellow.

A BRAVO [un faux brave, F.] a 
bully, a hectoring blade, 
a swaggering fellow.

To BRAVE it [braver, F.] to act the
bravo, to dare, to hector, to affront.

BRAVERIES of braveries, F.] brave
actons, noble exploits.

BRAURONIA [βραυρωνία, Gr.] an
Athenian festival, celebrated to Diana, 
called Brauronia, of Brauron an Athenian
borough, where was the famous statue
of this goddess, which was brought
from Scythia Tauria, by Iphigenia. The
victim offered in sacrifice was a goat, 
and certain men sung one of Homer's
Iliads. The most remarkable persons
at this solemnity were young virgins, 
about ten years of age, habited in yel­
low gowns, and consecrated to Diana.
These were called Ἄρχτοι, i. e. bears, 
for the following reason. There was
a bear among the Phlauidæ, the inha­
bitants of a borough of Attica, which
was so far divested of its natural fierce­
ness, that it became so tame and tract­
able, that they usually admitted it to
eat and play with them, and it did them
no harm; but a young maid once un­
luckily happened to be too familiar
with it, the bear tore her to pieces, 
and was afterwards slain by the virgin's
brethren. After this a dreadful pesti­
lence happen'd in Attica; as a remedy
of which, they were advised by advised
by an oracle to appease the anger of
Diana for the bear, by consecrating
virgins to her in memory of it. The
Athenians punctually executed this com­
mand, and enacted a law, that no vir­
gin should be married till she had per­
formed this ceremony.

BRAWNINESS [of brawn, of bar
and run, Sax.] sinewiness, hardness
and strongness.

BRAY, in the ancient Gaulish lan­
guage, signifies wet or marshy ground, 
and is found in many French names of
places, as Follunbray, Guibray, Vanbray, 
&c.

BRAY [in Falconry] a pannel or
piece of leather slit to bind up the
wings of an hawk.

BRAZED [in Heraldry] as three che­
verons brazed, i. e. one clasping ano­
ther, it is derived of the French word
bras, which signifies an arm; mens
arms being often folded one within a­
nother.

BRAZENNESS [of Brass] appearing
like brass; also impudence.

To clear a BREACH, is to remove
the rubbish out of it.

BREADTH [braðnẏſſe, Sax.]
broadness, wideness.

A BREAK, a turning bankrupt, a be­
ing or pretending to be insolvent.

To BREAK a Horse in trotting [with
Horsemen] is to make him tight upon
the hand by trotting, in order to make
him fit for a gallop.

To BREAM a ship. See To Broom.

BREAST [breoſt, Sax.] a promi­
nent fleshy part on the outside of the
Thorax of a human body, whose use in
women is to separate the milk; and it
is also one of the three venters or hol­



low spaces in an animal body which
contains the heart and lungs.

To BREATHE [prob. of braðian, 
Sax.] to receive and discharge the air
as above.

BREATHABLE [of braðian, Sax.]
that may be breathed or drawn into the
lungs by breathing, as a breathable air.

BREATHLESS, void of breath, dead.

BREDWITE [Breað &wyn;ite, Sax.] an
imposition of amerciaments or fines for
defaults in the assize of bread.

To BREECH, to whip.

BREED [with Horsemen] a place
where mares for breed and stallions are
kept, in order to raise a stud.

BREEDING [of breðan, Sax.] pro­
ducing, nourishing; also education.

BREEZ [brezza, It. brise, F.] a fresh
gale of wind, blowing from the sea or
land alternately, for some certain hours
or the day or night, only sensible near
the coast.

BREGMA [βρέγμα, of βρέχω to wa­
ter, because those parts are generally
observed to be moist] the forepart of
the head; or, as some say, the fore­
head bone, or the side and shelving
bone of the Cranium, on each side of the
Sagittal Suture.

BREPHOTROPHY [brephotrophia, L.
of βρεφοτροφία, of βρεφὸς a babe, and τροφὴ,
Gr. nourishment] an hospital for or­
phans.

BREVIER, a small sort of printing-­
letter, the same as this book.

BREWERS were in­
corporated Anno 1424.
The VIth year of Hen­
ry VI. And confirm'd
the second of queen
Elizabeth, their arms
are Gules, on a che­
vron argent between
three saltires of garbs, or as many
tuns fable.
Their hall is situate on the northside
of Addle-street.

Image omitted.



BRIAREUS, the poets tell us that
Briareus had an hundred hands, but
the truth of this fable is this; Briareus
Cottus, and Gygel dwelt in a city of
Orestias, called Hecatonchriæ (ἑχατον­
χείρια, i. e. an hundred hands) hence it
was a common saying, that they having
an hundred hands, coming to the assi­
stance of the gods, drove the Titans
out of Olympus.

BRIBERY [in Law] is when any
man belonging to a court of justice, or
great officer takes any fee, gift or re­
ward for doing his office, of any person
except the king only.

BRICK [with Chemi­
cal Writers] is express'd
by this character.

Image omitted.



BRICKBAT [prob. of
Bricke, Du. or brẏc, Sax. and batu, 
Fr. beaten or broken off] a broken
brick.

BRICK KILN [of Bricke, Du. and
Cẏln, Sax.] a place for burning bricks.

BRICKLAYERS 
were incorporated An­
no 1586. Their ar­
morial ensigns are A­
zure, a chevron or, 
between a Flower de
Lys argent, enters two
brickaxes in chief and
a bundle of lathes in
base or crest and armed, holding a brick­
ax, Or. Their motto, In God is all our
trust.

Image omitted.



To BRICOLE [bricoler, F.] to give a
bricole, to pass a ball, to toss it side­
ways.

Flying BRIDGES [in an Army] are
boats with planks and necessaries for
joining and making a bridge in a very
short time, being two small bridges laid
over one another, in such manner that
the uppermost stretches or runs out by
certain cords running thro' pullies pla­
ced along the sides of the under bridge, 
which push it forwards, till the end of
it reach to the place it is designed to be
fixed in. It is also made of large boats
with planks laid over them, and other
necessaries.

BRIDGE of Communication [in Forti­
fication] is a bridge made over a river, 
hy means of which, two armies or two
forts, that are separated by the river, 
have a free communication one with
the other.

BRIDGE [with Gunners] the two pie­
ces of timber which go between the
two transums of a gun-carriage, on
which the bed rests.

BRIDGES [in Heraldry] may intimate
that the bearers have formerly obtain'd
them for their arms, either for having
built bridges for the service of the pub­
lick, or an allusion to the name, as of
Trowbridge.

Floating BRIDGE [Milit. Art] a bridge
made in form of a work, in fortification
call'd a redoubt, consisting of two boats
covered with planks, which are solidly
fram'd, so as to bear either horse or
canon.

To swallow the BRIDLE [with 
Horsemen]
are terms used of a horse that has too
wide a mouth and too narrow a bit­



mouth, so that the bit rises too high, 
and gathers or furls the lips, and mis­
places it self above that place of the
barrs, where the pressure should be, by
which means the curb is misplaced and
shov'd too high.

To drink the BRIDLE [with 
Horsemen]
are terms used of a horse that has too
wide a mouth and too narrow a bit­
mouth, so that the bit rises too high, 
and gathers or furls the lips, and mis­
places it self above that place of the
barrs, where the pressure should be, by
which means the curb is misplaced and
shov'd too high.

BRIDLE Hand [in Horsemanship] the
left hand.

BRIEF, letters patent, or licence to
any sufferer by fire, &c. for collecting
the charitable benevolence of the peo­
ple for any private or publick loss.

Apostolical BRIEF, a letter which the
pope sends to princes and other magi­
strates concerning any publick affairs.
They are so call'd because very short, 
written without any preface or pream­
ble, by which they are distinguished from
Bulls which are large and always writ­
ten on parchment, whereas briefs are
written on paper, and sealed with red
wax, the seal of the fisherman or St.
Peter in a boat.

BRIEFNESS [of brief or brevité, F, 
brevis or brevitas, L.] brevity.

BRIEZE [brise Fr. brezza, Ital.] a
chilly or cool wind.

BRIGAND, a highwaymen, a rob­
ber; also a vagabond.

BRILLANT, glittering, sparkling, 
bright, shining,  Fr.

BRILLANT [with Horsemen] a brisk, 
high mettled, stately horse, that has a
rais'd neck, a high motion, excellent
haunches, upon which he rises tho' ne­
ver so little put on.

BRIMO [of βριμασθαι, Gr.] because
she was believed to send nocturnal ter­
rors] a name of Hecate, so call'd from
the hideous shrieks she is said to have
made when Mars, Apollo, or Mercury, 
meeting her in the woods, would have
ravished her.
She is said to have found out the use
of herbs, but the search she made was
chiefly after such herbs as were perni­
cious, and especially the Aconitum or
Wolfs-bane, with which she poison'd her
father Persa, and so got the kingdom of
Colchos from him, then she married her
uncle Alea, and had Circe by him, who
delighted in mischief, who likewise poi­
soned her father and succeeded in his do­
minions; she also had another daughter
Medea, who applied what skill she had
attain'd in herbs to the use and preser­
vation of mankind. See Hecate.

BRIMSTONE Flour, a plant.

BRIMSTONY, [dawb'd with, or of the
nature of brimstone.

BRINDED variegated, or being
of divers colours.

BRINDLED variegated, or being
of divers colours.

BRING UP [with Bricklayers] to raise
or build, as bring up the wall.

To BRING in a horse [with Horsemen]
is to keep down the nose of a horse
that bores, and tones his nose up to the
wind.

BRININESS [of brẏneneſſe, Sax.]
saltness like the sea.

BRIONY. See Bryony.

BRISKNESS [prob. of frisich, Teut.]
liveliness, sprightliness.

BRISK, [in Blazonry] a French term, 
which signifies broken, and in their way
of Blazon implies an ordinary, that
has some part of it broken off.

BRISTLY [of briſtl, Sax.] having
or full of bristles.

To BRISTLE [briſtlian, Sax.] to
erect the hairs on the back like an en­
raged boar.

BRISURE [in Blazonry] is in French
derived from briser, F. to break, because
they seem to break the principal figure, 
what the English express by differences, 
and is us'd to distinguish between the
elder and the younger brothers and ba­
stards in a coat of arms, as a label, half
moon, &c.

BRITTLENESS [of Britenð, Sax.]
aptness to break.

To give a BROAD Side [Sea Language]
is to discharge all the great guns that
are on one side of the ship at once.

BROCKET's Sister a hind of the
third year.

BROCOLI, an Italian plant of the
colly-flower kind.  Ital.

BROGUE on the Tongue [prob. of the
Irish Brogues, a sort of shoes, and at first
was applied most usually to them who
are very tenacious of their Irish idioms, 
&c.] is a defect incident to most foreign­
ers in pronouncing the English tongue
or other acquired language, either with
the accent, idiom, phrase, or air of
their own tongue.

BROIDERER [un brodeur, F.] an em­
broiderer.

BROKEN [of bracan, Sax. to break]
parted by breaking.

Pawn BROKERS, are such as lend
money to necessitous people upon pawns;
also such as buy and sell old houshold
goods are called brokers.

Stock BROKERS, are such as buy and
sell shares of joint stocks of a company
or corporation for other persons, as
the Bank, South-Sea, East-India com­
pany, &c.

BRONCHANT [in Blazonry] is a
French term, and signifies surmounting
or appearing, as bronchant sur le tout, is
standing out or showing itself over all.
As when an escutcheon is semé, or strew­



ed all over with fleurs de lis, or the like, 
and over them a beast or other things, 
that seems to cover so many of those
things, that the escutcheon is supposed
to be strewed with all over; but that
they are hid by that other bearing
which stands before them.

BRONTES [of βροντή, Gr. thunder]
one of the Cyclops or Vulcan's journey­
men, who made thunderbolts for Jupi­
ter.

BRONTIAS [of βροντή, Gr.] a sort of
precious done, supposed to fall by thun­
der.

BRONTOLOGY [Βροντολογία, of
βροντή and λογος discourse Gr.] a trea­
tise or discourse of thunder.

BROOK-LIME [of brook-lim, Sax.]
an herb.

A BROTHEL [Bordel, F.] a brothel-­
house. See Bordello.

BROTHERHOOD, a society of bre­
thren.

BROUILLER [with Horsemen] a word
used in the French riding academies, to
signify that a horse plunges, traverses, 
and appears in disorder, when he is put
to any manage.

BROW Post [with Carpenters] an o­
verthwart or cross beam.

BROWNNESS [of Brun, Sax.] the
being of a brown colour.

A BRUISE [of brẏſe, Sax.] a con­
tusion.

BRUISE WORT, an herb.

BRUMAL [brumalis, L.] pertaining
to winter.

BRUMALIA [of Bruma, L. winter, 
or of Bromius the name of Bacchus] a
feast of Bacchus; celebrated by the Ro­
mans for thirty days, beginning on the
24th of November, and ending the 26th
of December.

BRUN or BOURN [of bruna, Sax. a
river or fountain] intimates the place to
be called from a river or fountain as
Burnburn.

BRUSHWOOD, small wood or small
sticks for fewel.

BRUTISHNESS [brutalitas, L.] beast­
liness, inhumanity, savageness.

BUABIN [in Tonquin] a certain tu­
telar deity of buildings, whom the Indi­
ans propitiate with sacrifices, and gilded
papers filled with magical charms, 
which they burn before him.

BUB [of bibere, L.] drink.

BUBBLING, a rising or swelling up
in bubbles; also a chowsing or cheat­
ing.

BUBBLES [in Commerce] a name gi­
ven to certain projects in the year
1720, of raising money on
funds.

BUBBLES [in Physicks] little round
drops or vessicles of any fluid, filled with
air, and formed on its surface upon the
addition of more of the fluid, as in rain­
ing, or in its substance upon a vigo­
rous intestine commotion of its parts.

BUBONA [among the Romans] the
tutelar goddess of greater cattle.

BUCCANIERS is said to be deri­
ved from the in­
habitants of the Caribbee islands, who
used to cut the prisoners taken in war
in pieces, and lay them on hurdles of
Brazil wood erected on sticks, with
fire underneath, and when so broiled or
roasted to eat them, and this manner of
dressing was called Boucaning. Hence
our Buccaniers took their name, in that
they hunting dressed their meat after
their manner. Certain pirates in the
West-Indies, free booters, rovers, that
used at first to go a pirating on the
Spaniards only; also the ungovernable
rabble of Jamaica.

BOUCANIERS is said to be deri­
ved from the in­
habitants of the Caribbee islands, who
used to cut the prisoners taken in war
in pieces, and lay them on hurdles of
Brazil wood erected on sticks, with
fire underneath, and when so broiled or
roasted to eat them, and this manner of
dressing was called Boucaning. Hence
our Buccaniers took their name, in that
they hunting dressed their meat after
their manner. Certain pirates in the
West-Indies, free booters, rovers, that
used at first to go a pirating on the
Spaniards only; also the ungovernable
rabble of Jamaica.

BUCEPHALUS [of βῦς an ox and
χέφαλος the head, i. e. bulls head] the
horse of Alexander the Great, so called
on account of having the mark of a bull's
head upon his shoulder: when he had
his saddle on and harness, he would suf­
fer none but Alexander to ride him, 
and would as it were kneel down to
take him up, and being wounded in the
battle with Porus, he carried the king
to a place of safety: and immediately
dropt down dead. Alexander built a
magnificent tomb for him, and founded
a city in his memory, calling it Buce­
phalia, in the place where he first fell, 
which is supposed to be now called La­
hor, the capital of Pengab in Indostan
or Rauci, now a fine populous city.

BUCKANNEER. See Bucanniers.

BUCKLER Thorn, an herb.

BUCKSOM [of bucca Sax.] a male
deer, on account of their lust in rutting
time propense or forward to amour, 
amorous, wanton, &c.

BUCKSOMNESS, propensity to a­
mour, &c.

To BUGGER [bougeronner, F.] to co­
pulate with a beast: also with a man
or woman after an unnatural manner.

BUGGERER [bougre F.] one who
copulates beastlily.

BUGLE [of bucula, L. an heifer] a
kind of wild ox.

BUGLES, a sort of glass beads.

Regular BUILDING, is one whose
plan is square, its opposite sides are e­
qual, and its parts disposed by symmetry.

Irregular BUILDING, that which is
not contained within equal and paral­



lel lines, and whose parts have not a 
just relation one to the other in the ele­
vation.

Insulated BUILDING, one which is
not attached, or contigous to any other, 
or is encompassed with a square, as the
Monument, St. Paul's, &c.

Engaged BUILDING, one compassed
and has no front towards any street, or
publick place, or communication but
by a narrow passage.

Interred BUILDINGS such, the a­ 
rea of which
is below the level or surface of the
place on which it stands, and of which
the lowest courses of stone are hidden.

Sunk BUILDINGS such, the a­ 
rea of which
is below the level or surface of the
place on which it stands, and of which
the lowest courses of stone are hidden.

BULBACEOUS [bulbaceus, L.] full
of little round heads in the root.

BULBS [with Florists] the round spi­
red beards of flowers.

BULGED [spoken of a ship] when she
has struck off some of her timber upon
a rock or anchor, and springs a leak.

To break BULK [Sea term] is to take
out part of the ship's cargo or lading out
of the hold.

BULK head afore [in a ship] a partiti­
on between the fore castle and grating
in the ship's head.

BULKINESS [of buce, Sax.] bigness.

BULL [of Bulla L. a bubble, &c.] an
instrument or writing, sent from the
chancery of Rome, much the same as an
edict, letters patents, &c. of secular
princes; if they are letters of grace and
favour, they have a lead hung to them
on silk threads; if of justice and execu­
tory on a silken cord.

BULL or Bulla Cæna domini, a bull of
excommunication and anathema read on
Holy Thursday against all that the Papists 
call Hereticks, after which the pope
throws a torch as his thunder. Those
crimes which are condemned by this
bull are not to be absolved by any but
the pope.

BULLATED [bullatus L.] garnished
with studs.

BULL FINCH, a bird.

BULL Weed an herb.

BULLARY, a salt house, salt pit, or
other place where salt is boiled.

BULLEN. stalks of hemp pilled.

Red hot BULLETS [in the Art of War]
bullets heated red hot in a forge, and
then put into a piece of ordnance, that
has had a good stopple or turf first ram­
med down it, to be discharged into a
besieged town to fire the houses, &c.

BULRUSH [bull-riſc, Sax.] a plant.

BULLY, a vapouring, hectoring fel­
low, who pretends to be a champion
and ready to fight any one and upon any
little occasion; also one who attends
strumpets and night walkers, pretending
to be the husband of any of them and
threatning, in order to extort money
from them, any person, that shall happen
to be caught in their snares.

To BUMBASTE [of bum and baste, 
i. e. to beat] to beat or bang.

BUMBAST words or stile, a high
flown unintelligible way of expression;
jargon.

BUMP, a rising or swelling, a stand­
out of a thing beyond the level sur­
face.

BUMICELLI [among the Africans] a
sect of Mahometans, said to be great sor­
cerers, who pretend to fight against the
devil, and frequently run about covered
with blood and bruises in a terrible fright.
Sometimes they counterfeit a combat
with him at noon-day, for the space of
two or three hours, and that in the pre­
sence of numbers of people, using darts, 
javelins, and scimeters, &c. laying about
them in a desperate manner, till they
fall down on the ground, as oppressed
by blows. And having rested a little, 
recover their spirits and walk off.

To BUNG, to stop with a bung.

BUNGLINGNESS, the awkwardness
of doing a thing, &c.

The BUNT holds much leeward-wind 
[Sea term] i. e. the middle of the sail
hangs too much to leeward.

BUOYANT [of boye, F.] buoying or
bearing up.

BUR, a broad ring of iron, behind
the hand or the place made for the hand
on the spears that were used by knights
or esquires formerly in tilting, which
bur was brought to rest when the tilter
charged his spear, and served there to
secure it and make it more easy.

BURDEN [of bourdon, F. a staff or a
pipe in the form of a staff] in some mu­
sical instruments the drone or the base, 
and the pipe that plays it; hence that
part of a song that is repeated at the end
of every stanza, is called the burden of
it.

BURDEN [of a ship] so many ton
weight as she will stow or carry, in quan­
tity, of goods.

BURDENSOMNESS [byrðenſom­
neſſe, Sax.] heaviness, or troublesom­
ness to bear.

BUREAU [bureau, F.] a cabinet 
chest of drawers or
scrutore for depositing papers of ac­
counts; also a bouffet for setting plate, 
China-ware, &c.

BURG [of berg, Teut. a mountain]
signifies a city, town, castle or camp, be­



cause anciently towns were built upon
hills. Hence, our histories inform us
that the inhabitants have often removed
their towns from hills, on which they
have been first built, into vallies, where
they now stand, for the better conveni­
ency of water. Of which Salisbury, for­
merly called Salesburg, is a remarkable
instance.

BURGONET [in Heraldry] probably
so called from the Burgundians wearing
it. A sort of steel cap formerly worn
by foot soldiers in battle.  F.

BURGERSHIP [burh-ſcipe, Sax. 
the dignity or pri­
vilege of a burger.

BURGESSHIP [burh-ſcipe, Sax. 
the dignity or pri­
vilege of a burger.

BURGH [burʒ, Sax.] a borough, a
large village, a commonalty; anciently
a town having a wall or some enclosure
about it.

BURIAL [of bẏriʒian, Sax.] a fune­
ral solemnity or interment.

BURYABLE [probably of byriʒ­
neſſe, Sax.] that may be fit to be buri­
ed.

BURIN, a graver or engraving tool.

To BURL, to dress cloths, as fullers
do.

BURLESK [of burlesco, Ital.] a
kind of poetry, 
merely jocular, and bordering on ridi­
cule, is a sort of verse proper for lam­
poon; but it is a manner of versifying
harder to be acquired than that which
is most harmonious and beautiful. The
more the feet hobble in most places, the
more perfect is the measure; as for har­
mony, that is little minded in burles­
que.

BURLESQUE [of burlesco, Ital.] a
kind of poetry, 
merely jocular, and bordering on ridi­
cule, is a sort of verse proper for lam­
poon; but it is a manner of versifying
harder to be acquired than that which
is most harmonious and beautiful. The
more the feet hobble in most places, the
more perfect is the measure; as for har­
mony, that is little minded in burles­
que.

BURLESKED, turned into burlesque.

BURLINESS [q. boor, likeness] big­
ness, largeness of body, &c.

BURN [in a Medicinal Sense] a soluti­
tion of the continuity of a body, made
by the impression of fire; also a mark
remaining upon the thing burnt.

A BURN [Surgery] an impression of
fire made upon a part, in which there
remains much heat with blisters and
sometimes an escar, according as the
fire has more or less effect.

BURN [burna, Sax. a river or foun­
tain] at the beginning or end of a word, 
signifies the place from a river or foun­
tain, as Burnham.

Thorny BURNET, a kind of shrub.

BURNING the dead. Tho' the cus­
tom of burying the dead was the most
ancient, yet that of burning succeeded
very early, and is said to have been
introduced by Hercules. And it appears
that burning the dead was used by the
Greeks, in the time of the Trojan war.

The philosophers were divided in
their opinions concerning burning:
Those who were of opinion, that hu­
man bodies were compounded of water, 
earth, or the four elements, were for
having them buried or committed to
the earth. But Heraclitus and his fol­
lowers, imagining fire to be the first
principle of all things, esteemed burn­
ing as the most proper; for every one
thought it the most reasonable method, 
and the most agreeable to nature, so to
dispose of bodies, as they might soonest
be reduced to their first principles.

Eustachius assigned two reasons why
burning came to be of so general use in
Greece. The first is, because bodies
were thought to be unclean after the
departure of the soul, and therefore
were purified by fire; and the second, 
that the soul, being separated from the
gross unactive matter, might be at li­
berty to take its flight to the heavenly
mansions. The manner of burning the
bodies was thus; the body was placed
upon the top of a pile, but was rarely
burnt without company; for besides the
various animals they threw upon the
pile, persons of quality were seldom
burnt without a number of slaves and
captives; they also poured into the fire
all sorts of precious ointments and per­
fumes; and they also covered the body
with the fat of beasts, that it might con­
sume the sooner; for it was looked up­
on as a singular blessing to be quickly
reduced to ashes.

It was also the custom to throw into
the fire the arms of those that were sol­
diers, and the garments that the decea­
sed had worn while living; and the A­
thenians were very profuse, in so much
that some of their law-givers were for­
ced to restrain them by severe penalties
from defrauding the living by their li­
berality to the dead. The funeral pile
was commonly lighted by some of the
deceased's nearest relations, who made
prayers and vows to the winds to assist
the flame, that the body might quickly
be reduced to ashes.

At the funerals of generals and great
officers, the soldiers with the rest of the
company made a solemn procession three
times round the pile, to express their
respect to the deceased; during the time
the pile was burning, the friends of the
deceased person stood by, pouring forth
libations of wine, and calling upon the
deceased. When the pile had burnt
down and the flame had ceased, they
extinguished the remains of the fire
with wine, which having done, they



collected the bones and ashes. The
bones were sometimes washed with
wine and anointed with oil.

To distinguish the reliques of the bo­
dy from those of the beasts and men
burnt with it, this was done by placing
the body of the person in the middle of
the pile; whereas the men and the
beasts burnt with it, lay on the sides.
These bones and ashes thus collected, 
they put into urns, made either of
wood, stone, earth, silver or gold, ac­
cording to the quality of the person de­
ceased.

BURNING of Women, it was the cus­
tom of the ancient Britain;, that when
any great man died [if their was any
occasion to be suspicious as to the man­
ner of his death] his relations made en­
quiry among his wives concerning it, 
and if any of them were found guilty, 
they were punished with fire and other
torments.

BURNING [with Philosophers] is de­
fined to be the action of fire upon some
pabulum or fuel, whereby the minute or
very small parts of it are torn from each
other, put into a violent motion, and
assuming the nature of fire itself, fly off
in orbem, &c.

BURNING, a name formerly given
to an infectious disease, gotten in the
stews, by conversing with lewd women;
supposed to be the same with that now
called the Pox.

BURNING Glass, a machine so
wrought, that the rays of the sun are
collected into a point, and by that
means the force and effect of them are
heightened to that degree, so as to burn
such objects as it is placed against.

BURREL Fly, an insect.

BURREL Shot [with Gunners] small
bullets, nails, stones, pieces of old iron, 
&c. put into cases, to be discharged out
of the ordnance or murdering pieces;
case shot.

BURSARS, youths in Scotland, sent
once a year as exhibitioners to the uni­
versities, by each presbytery; by whom
they are allowed at the rate of 100 l.
Scots for four years.

To BURST [of burſtan, Sax.] to
break asunder.

BURT-WORT, an herb.

EURSTNESS, a being broken asun­
der.

BUSHINESS [buisson, F. a bush] the
being bushy.

BUSINESS [of bẏſʒian, Sax.] em­
ployment, work, &c.

BUSS, [buss, Du.] a small ship or sea
vessel, used by the Dutch for the her­
ring fishery.

BUST [busto, Ital.] a term in sculp­
ture used for the figure or portrait of a
person in relievo; shewing only the
head, shoulders and stomach, the arms
seeming to have been lopt off, usually
placed on a pedestal.

BUST [bustum, L.] a pyramid or pile
of wood, whereon anciently the bodies
of the dead were placed in order to be
burnt.

BUSTAL [bustalis, L.] of, or belong­
ing to graves or tombs.

BUSTROPHE [of βοῖς an ox, and
στροφὴ, Gr. a turning, q. d. the turning of
oxen in ploughing ground] a term used
to express a manner of writing of the
ancient Romans, which was as it were
in furrows, the first line began at the
left hand, and ended at the right, and
the second line began at the right, and
proceeded to the left, so that the whole
bore a representation to the furrows of 
ploughed land.

BUSTUARII [among the Romans] a
kind of gladiators who fought about the
bustum or funeral pile of a person de­
ceas'd in the ceremony of his obsequies.

BUTCHERS, this company was not
incorporated till the
3d of king James I.
then they were made
a corporation by the
name of matter, war­
dens, and commonal­
ty of the art and my­
stery of Butchers; yet
the fraternity is an­
cient; their arms azure, two axes sal­
tirewise argent between three bulls
heads cowped, attired or, a boars head
gules, betwixt two garbes vert.

Image omitted.



BUTCHER-ROW [boucherie, F.] a
row of butchers-shops, shambles.

BUTCHERLINESS, butcherly na­
ture or action.

BUTLERSHIP [of bouteillier, F.] the
office of a butler.

BUTSECARL [buteſcarl, Sax.]
a boatswain or ma­
riner.

BUTESCARL [buteſcarl, Sax.]
a boatswain or ma­
riner.

To BUTT [buttare, Ital. botten, Du.
bouter, F.] to push at or against with the
horn, as bulls, goats, &c.

A BUTT [Sea word] the end of any
plank which joins to another on the
outside of the ship under water.

Broad BUTTOCK [of a ship] one
built broad at the transums.

Narrow BUTTOCK [of a ship] one
built narrow at the transums.

To BUTTON [boutonner F.] to fas­
en with buttons.



BUXEOUS [buxeus, L.] of or like
box.

A BUZZING [bourdonnement, F.] a
humming noise like that of bees.

BY [bi, Sax.] with; as by which; al­
so whilst, as by day.

BY the BY, privately.

BY-BLOW, a merry-begotten child, 
a bastard.

BY-ENDS, selfish ends or designs.

BYZANTINE [of Byzantium, i. e.
Constantinople] belonging to Constanti­
nople.


C

Cc, Roman, C, c, Italick, C, c, Eng­
lish, are the third letters; and Κ, 
χ, Greek, the tenth; and כ, Hebrew, the
eleventh of their respective alphabets.

C [in English] before the vowels a, o
and u, is generally produced, or long, 
as cap, corpse, cup, &c.

C [in English] before e, i, ee, ie and
y, is sounded like s; as Cellar, city, ex­
ceed, cieling, Cyprus.

C [in English] generally goes before
k, when a vowel preceeds, and there
is no consonant before k; as back, beck, 
thick, lock, muck; but if a vowel follows
k, the c is not set before it; as cake, 
peke, strike, stroke, duke.

C [in the titles of books, inscriptions
on tombs, under statues, &c] is an ab­
breviation of centum, Latin, 100, and
is repeated for each hundred, as CCCC, 
400.

When c stands before the vowels, 
a, o, u, it sounds like k, but before e and
i like s; the old grammarians were in­
clined to throw away q, and to use c
and u instead of it, and the French sub­
stitute qu instead of c, as in Politique, 
&c.

CABALA [הלבק receiving of לבק he
received] a traditional or mysterious
doctrine among the ancient Jews, 
which they say was delivered by word
of mouth to Moses, and by him to the
fathers, and so transmitted from gene­
ration to generation; and at length
about the time of their captivity in Ba­
bylon, collected into a body called the
Mishnaoth, which, with the commen­
taries and glosses of their doctors and
rabbies, compose the work called the
Talmud, being seven volumes in Folio.

GABALA [by Christians] is taken for
the use or rather abuse, which magici­
ans made of some part of the passages
of scripture, and all the words, magic
figures, letters, numbers, charms, &c.
and also the Hermetical science, are com­
prized or understood under this name
Cabala.

CABALISTS, Rabbins who sung the
Cabala, particularly drawing consequen­
ces from the combinations of particular
words, letters and numbers; pretending
from thence to discover future events, 
as well as to penetrate into the sense of
many obscure and (to them) difficult
passages of scripture.

The Cabalists have a multitude of
names, which they dignify with the ti­
tle of sacred, and make use of in their
invocations of spirits, and fancy they
receive great light from them; these
they pretend have been handed down
from generation to generation without
the use of letters, they being strictly
forbid to write them down.

They have also an artificial Cabala.
See Gemara, Notaricon and Femura.

CABALLINE aloes [of caballinus, L.]
a coarser sort of aloes used in medicines
for horses.

CABALLUS [according to the Poets]
the winged horse Pegasus, who as he
flew to mount Helicon, by a blow of his
hoof, caused a great fountain to rise out
of a rock, which was thence called Hip­
pocrene. This fountain was consecra­
ted to Apollo and the Muses; and thence
it is, that it is feigned, that the poets
drank of that water, to make their
poems to be more admired and impro­
ved.

CABBAGE [with Tailors, &c.] a cant
word us'd to signify any thing of cloth, 
stuff or other materials left after the
making of any garment, retain'd by
them.

CABIRIA, feasts held by the Greeks
of the island of Lemnos and Thebes, in
honour of some Samothracian deities, 
called Cabires.

Pay more CABLE [with Sailors] is to
let it more out from the ship, that the
boat that carries the anchor may the
more easily drop it into the sea.

The CABLE is well laid [Sea Term]
signifies it is well wrought or made.

Veer more CABLE [with Mariners]
signifies to put more out.

Shot of a CABLE [with Sailors] is
two cables spliced or fastened together.

Sheet Anchor CABLE [of a Ship] is
the largest cable that belongs to it.

CABLEE [in Heraldry] as a Cross
Cablée, is a cross made of two ends of a
ship's cable.

CABLE's length [with Sailors] is 120
fathom.



CABLE Flutes [with Architects] flutes
that are filled up with pieces resembling
cables.

CACAO, a nut about the size of a
common almond, produc'd by a tree
in the West-Indies, the fruit is inclosed
in a pod in the size and figure of a cu­
cumber, containing from 10 to 30 or 40
seeds of a violet colour and dry like
acorns, each covered with a rind, which
being taken off, it divides into five or
six parts; in the middle of which is a
kernel with a tender bud, of which
with the addition of a wholsome drug
call'd Vanilla, is made the cake by us
call'd chocolate.

These trees growing in a very hot
soil, and being tender, are planted un­
der the shade of others which are called
their mothers.

CACHINNATION, a great and un­
measurable laughter,  L.

CACHOU, an aromatick drug, rec­
kon'd among perfumes, called also Terra
Japonica.

To CACK [cacare, L.] to ease the
body by going to stool.

CACKLER, a prater, a tell-tale, a
noisy person; also a humorous word
for a capon or fowl.

CACOLOGY [of χαχὸς and λόγος a
word] an evil speaking.

CACOPHAGY [χαχοφαγία, Gr.] a de­
vouring.

CACOPHYXY [cacophyxia, L. of χα­
χὸς and φυξὴ the pulse, Gr.] a bad pulse.

CACOPHRAGY [with Physicians] an
indisposition of body, particularly in
those parts that convey the nourishment.

CACORHYTHMUS [of χαχὸς bad,
ῥυθμὸς the pulse, Gr.] an unequal pulse.

CACOSISTATA [with Logicians] ar­
guments proposed between two persons, 
that will serve as well for the one as
other; as, you ought to forgive him because
be is a child ― No, for that reason
I will beat him, that he may be better here­
after.

CACOTECHNY [cacotechnia, L. of
χαχός and τεχνή, Gr. art] a hurtful art
or invention.

CACOTYCHE [with Astrologers i. e.
bad fortune] the sixth house of an astro­
logical figure.

CACOSPHYXIA [χαχοσφυξια, Gr.] a
bad pulse.

CACOZELUM [a term used by Rhe­
toricians] when a speech is faulty by
impropriety of words, want of cohe­
rence, redundancy, obscurity, &c.

CADENCE [with Horsemen] is an e­
qual measure or proportion observed by
a horse in all his motions, when he is
thoroughly managed, and works justly
at gallop terra a terra, and the airs; so
that his motions or times have an equal
regard to one another, that one does
not embrace or take in more ground
than the other, and that the horse ob­
serves his ground regularly.

CADENCE [in Dancing] is when the
steps follow the notes and measures of
the musick.

CADENCE [with Orators] when the
sounds end agreeably to the ear.

CADENCE, in verse and prose, is for­
med by the difference of time in pro­
nouncing; this is more distinguishable in
the Greek and Latin tongues, than in
the living languages; but there can be
no verse where cadence does not shine, 
if there be any poetry without it.

CADENCE [with Poets] a certain
measure of verse, varying as the verse
varies.

CADENT [cadens, L.] falling down.

CADENT houses [with Astrologers]
are the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth
of a scheme or figure of the heavens;
they being those that are next from the
angles.

CADI [among the Turks, &c] a ma­
gistrate, a sort of justice of the peace.

CADIZADELITE, a kind of stoick
sect among the Mahometans, who affect
an extraordinary gravity in word and
action. They avoid feasting and diver­
sion. Those of them that inhabit on
the frontiers of Hungary, &c. agree in
many thing with the Christians. They
read the bible in the Sclavonick transla­
tion, as well as the Alcoran; and hold
that Mahomet was the holy spirit, who
descended on the apostles in the day of
pentecost.

CADMIA [χαδμια, Gr.] a mineral
whereof there are two sorts, natural
and artificial.

Natural CADMIA, is either that
which contains metallick parts and is
called Cobalt, or that which contains
none, called Lapis calaminaris.

Artificial CADMIA, is prepared from
copper in furnaces, and is of five sorts.
The first is called Botrytis, being in form
of a bunch of grapes; the second Ostri­
citis, because it resembles a sea shell;
the third Placetis, because it resembles
a crust; the fourth Caprillis; and the
fifth Calamites, which hangs round iron
rods, with which they stir the copper in
the furnace.

CADMITES, a precious stone having
blue specks in it.

CADMUS [according to the Poets]
was the king of Thebes, the son of Age­



nor, king of the Phœnicians, and grandson
to Epaphus. Jupiter having carried away
Europa his sister, his father sent him to
many parts of the world to seek her out
with a command never to appear before
him, till he had found her. But Cadmus
having made many tedious voyages, and
not being able to learn what was become
of her, went to Delphos to consult the
oracle of Apollo, to know what was best
for him to do, and recieved his answer, 
that, as some say, an ox, and, as others
say, a cow should meet him, which he
was to follow, and there he should build
a city, and settle an habitation. Accor­
dingly an ox met him in a province of
Greece, which was for that reason called
Bœotia. Cadmus, in order to obtain the
assistance of heaven in the affair of buil­
ing the city, designed to sacrifice the ox
to the goddess Minerva; and in older
thereto, he sent his followeres to the
next fountain, called Dirce, to fetch
water, but a terrible dragon there sur­
prizing them, devoured them alive.

Upon this the goddess Minerva advis'd
Cadmus to slay the dragon, and having
gotten the teeth out of his head, to sow
them in the earth. He did so, and se­
veral companies of armed men sprung
up, fell a lighting and destroy'd one ano­
ther all but live, which being left alive, 
assisted Cadmus in building his city, and
furnishing it with inhabitants.

The city they built was in Bœotia, 
and called Thebes, where he reigned
many years, and had several children
by his wife Harmonia, Polydorus, Ino
and Semele, the mother of Bacchus and
Agave, who, being transported with
fury in the company of the Menades, 
killed her own son Pentheus, who had
by his speech discovered a dislike of the
ceremonies of this god.

Cadmus is said to have lived to see all
his posterity fall into extreme misery;
and himself and wife were banished into
Illyria or Sclavonia, where, according as
they desired, they were transformed in­
to serpents.

Ulpian says, that Cadmus was but the
cook of Agenor, king of Tyre or Sidon, 
who ran away from his prince, on ac­
count of some ill deed, in company with
one Harmonia, a noted trumpet; but
yet laid the foundation of Thebes.

Herodotus says, that he brought 16
letters into Greece, and taught the peo­
ple the art of writing.

CADRITES, a kind of religious among
the Mahometans, who live a kind of mo­
nastick life. On Friday nights they pass
the greatest part of the night in running
round, holding each other's hands, in­
cessantly crying out llhai, i. e. living, 
one of the names of God. In the mean
time one of their number plays on the
flute. They are allow'd to quit their
monastick life and marry, if they please;
but upon condition of wearing black but­
tons on their garments to distinguish 'em.

CADUCEUS, a staff or white wand,
which heralds or ambassadors carried
when they went to treat of peace.  L.

CADUCEUS, the wand or rod that
Apollo gave to Mercury, in exchange for
the seven-stringed harp. The poets to
this rod ascribe the virtue of appeasing
differences; and also two other proper­
ties, as conducting souls to Hell, and de­
livering them from thence, and to cause
and disturb sleep. But as to the first of
its virtues or properties, Mythologies
say, that it means no more than the
power of eloquence, which satisfies the
mind, composes the heart, and brings
men first to reason, and then to peace.

CÆLOSTOMY χοιλοστομια of χοῖλος
hollow, and στόμα the mouth, Gr.] is
when the word is as it were obscured or
pent within the mouth, as in a cave, 
and is heard in the recess.

CÆRULEOUS  [cæruleus, L.] of a
blue, azure colour, like the sky.

CÆSURA [in Greek and Latin poe­
try] a figure when there remains an odd
syllable after a foot, and that syllable
ends the word. The figure is so neces­
sary, that few verses can be made to
run smooth without it, and it is four­
fold; Triemimeris, Penthemimeris, Heph­
themimeris and Ennemimeris.

CAIMACAM [in the Ottoman empirej
a lieutenant, an officer of great dignity, 
of which there are three. One attends
the Grand Signior, another the Grand
Vizier, and the third is governour of
Constantinople.

CAINITES [so called of wicked Cain]
a sect of Hereticks, in the second Century
a branch of the Gnosticks.

Some of their tenets were, that the
way to obtain Salvation was to try all
manner of things, and to indulge their
lusts by committing all kinds of wicked
actions. They gave barbarous names
to a great number of Angels, to each
of which they ascrib'd some particular
sin; and when they were going about
to do any wicked act, they invoked that
Angel that they fancied presided over it.

They held Cain, Corah, Dathan, A­
biram, the Sodomites; hut especially Ju­
das in great veneration, account of his
treachery having occasioned the death
of Jesus Christ.



They are said to have compos'd a
book intitled St. Paul's Ascension to Hea­
ven, full of blasphemous and horrid ex­
pressions.

CAISSON a covered waggon or car­
riage for provisions and ammunition for
an army.

CAISSON 
[Gunnery] a
wooden
chest, con­
taining four
or six combs;
or filled on­
ly with pow­
der which the besieged bury under
ground, in order to blow up a work
that the besiegers are like to be masters
of. Thus after the bonnet has been
blown up by the mine, they lodge a
Caisson under the ruins of it, and when
the enemy has made a lodgment there, 
they fire the Caisson by the help of a sau­
ciss, and blow up that post a second time.

Image omitted.



CALADE [with Horsemen] is the de­
scent or sloping declivity of a rising ma­
nage ground; being a small entrance up­
on which a horse is rid several times
down, being put to a short gallop, with
his fore-hams in the air, to make him
learn to ply or bend his haunches; and
for his stop upon the aids of the calves
of the legs, the stay of the bridle and
cavesson seasonably.

CALAMELANOUS, sweet mercury.

CALAMINE, the same as Lapis Cala­
minaris.

CALAMITOUSNESS, fulness of ca­
lamity.

CALCINATION [of Flints, &c.] is
performed by heating them red hot, and
then casting them whilst so into cold
water or vinegar; which being done
four or five times, they will be very
friable and easily powdered.

CALCINATION [of Lead] is per­
formed by melting the lead in an ear­
then pan unglazed, keeping it stirring
over the fire with a spatula, till it is
reduced into a powder.

CALCINATION [of Tin] is perform­
ed by putting the metal into a large ear­
then pan unglazed in a great fire, stir­
ring it from time to time for 36 hours, 
then taking it off, and letting it cool.

CALCINATORY, a vessel to calcine
metals in.

To CALCINE [in Chymical
Writers] is express'd by this
character.

Image omitted.



CALCOGRAPHIST [of χαλχογραφος, 
of χάλχος brass, and γράφω to engrave, 
Gr.] an engraver in brass.

CALCULI [Anatomy] little stones in
the bladder and kidneys.  L.

CALCULOSE [calculosus, L.] full of
stones or gravel.

CALCULATORY, pertaining to cal­
culation.

CALEFACTORY [of calefactus, L.]
warming, heating.

CALEFACTORINESS [of calefactio, 
L.] warmth, a being made hot.

CALENDAR [is derived of Calendæ, 
L. i. e. the first days of every month] it
is an annual book commonly called an
Almanack wherein the days of the month, 
the festivals, the sign the sun is in, the
sun's rising and setting, the changing of
the moon, &c. are exhibited.

There have been several corrections
and reformations of the calendar, the
first was made by Numa Pompilius, and
this was afterwards much improv'd by 
Julius Cæsar, and thence was called the
Julian account, which is still retained
in England and some other places, and
is called the Old Stile.

It was again reform'd by pope Gre­
gory XIII. which account he command­
ed to be received, and it is in most Ro­
man catholick countries, and is called the
Gregorian calendar, and by us New Stile, 
and it now begins eleven days before
the old.

To CALENDER [calendrier, F.] to
press, smooth, and set a gloss upon lin­
nen, &c. also the engine itself.

CALENDS [of χαλέω, Gr. to call] the
first days of every month among the
Romans, who anciently counted their
months by the motion of the moon; had
a priest appointed, whose business it was
to observe the times of the new moon, 
and when he had seen it, gave notice
to the president over the sacrifices, who
called the people together, and declar­
ed to them how they were to reckon
the days until the Nones, pronouncing
the word χαλέω five times, if the Nones
happen'd on the fifth day, or seven times
if they happened on the seventh day of
the month.

CALIBRED [with Gunners] measured
with calibre compasses.

CALIDUCTS [caliductus, L.] pipes or
canals to convey heat, disposed along the
walls of houses and rooms, to convey
heat to several remote parts of the
house from one common furnace.

CALIGINOUSNESS, darkness, ful­
ness of obscurity.

CALIPH, the first ecclesiastical digni­
ty among the Saracens, or the name of a
soveraign dignity among the Mahome­
tans, vested with absolute power over



every thing, relating both to religion
and policy.

CALIXTINS [among the Roman Ca­
tholicks] a name given to such of them
as communicate of the sacraments in
both kinds, and also to those of the
sentiments of Calixtus.

CALKIN Irons [with Shipwrights] a
sort of iron chizzels, which are used to
drive the oakum, being well laid over
with hot pitch, into the seams between
the planks.

CALLIBER [with Architects] the
bulk, thickness, vo­
lume or diameter of any round thing.

CALLIBRE [with Architects] the
bulk, thickness, vo­
lume or diameter of any round thing.

CALLIBLEPHARUM [of χἀλλος, 
beauty, and βλέφαρα the eye-brows, Gr.]
a medicament with which women use 
to make their eye-brows black, to ren­
der them more beautiful.

CALLICREAS [χαλλχρέας Gr.]
[with Anatom.] a glandulous substance
in the mesentery, lying near the bot­
tom of the stomach: in a hog it is cal­
led the sweetbread, in beasts the burr, 
L. See Pancreas.

CALLICREON [χαλλιχρέον, Gr.
[with Anatom.] a glandulous substance
in the mesentery, lying near the bot­
tom of the stomach: in a hog it is cal­
led the sweetbread, in beasts the burr, 
L. See Pancreas.

CALLIDNESS [calliditas, L.] crafti­
ness, cunningness.

CALLILOGY [callilogia, L. of χαλλι­
λογία Gr.] an elegancy of diction.

CALLIPPICK PERIOD, a series of 76
years, invented by Calippus the mathe­
matician, at the expiration of which he
supposed the new and full moons to re­
turn or fall again on the same day of
the solar year; but this has been found
to be a mistake for in 553 years, they
happen too late by one whole day; this
period commenc'd at the end of June
in the 3d year of the 112 Olympiad, which
answers to the 419 of Nabonassar in the
4384 of the Julian period, the 4724 of
the world and 330 before the birth of
Christ, and the year 424 of the building
of Rome, and in the same year that Da­
rius was vanquish'd by Alexander and
slain by Bessus.

CALVINISM, the doctrine or prin­
ciples of John Calvin and his adherents, 
who hold that Predestination and repro­
bation were prior or before the presci­
ence or foreknowledge of good or evil
works, and that they do depend merely
upon the will of God, without any re­
gard to the merits of mankind.

They likewise maintain that God
gives to those whom he has predominat­
ed a faith which they cannot lose, a ne­
cessitating grace, which takes away the
freedom of will, and that he imputes no
sin to those that are thus predestinated
or elected.

Also that the righteous cannot do any
good work by reason of original sin
with which they are contaminated, and
that men are justified by faith.

CALLOUSNESS [callositas, L.] hard­
ness, brawniness.

CALMNESS [of calme, F.] stillness, 
composure of mind.

CALOTTE, cap or coif of hair.

CALOTTE [with Architects] a
round cavity or depressure in form of
a cap, lathed and plaistered, to lessen
the rising of a moderate chapel, &c.
which else would be too high for other
pieces of the apartment.

CALTROPS [coltræppe, Sax. chau­
ssetrape, F. See Chausse-traps.

CALQUING [with Painters] is
where the backside
of any design is covered with a black or
red colour, and the strokes or lines are
traced through on a copper plate, wall, 
or any other matter.

CALKING [with Painters] is
where the backside
of any design is covered with a black or
red colour, and the strokes or lines are­
traced through on a copper plate, wall, 
or any other matter.

CALVARY [in Heraldry]
as a cross calvary, is set on
steps to represent the cross
on which our Saviour suf­
fered on mount Calvary, as
here annexed.

Image omitted.



CALVES SNOUT, a kind of herb.

CALVITY [calvitas, L.] baldness of
the head.

CALUMET, or Pipe of Peace [among
the Virginian Indians] is a
large tobacco-pipe, made of
red, black, or white mar­
ble; the head is finely po­
lished, and the quill which is
commonly two foot and a
half long, is made of a pret­
ty strong reed or cane, adorn­ 
ed with feathers of all co­
lours, interlaid with locks of
womens hair: They tye to
it two wings of the most cu­
rious birds they can find, 
which makes their calumet
something resemble Mercury's wand.
This pipe is a pass and safe-conduct a­
mong the allies of the nation who has
given it, and in all embassies the am­
bassador carries it as the symbol of
peace; and they are generally persuad­
ed that a great misfortune would befall
them if they violated the publick faith
of the calumet.

All their enterprises, declarations of
war, or conclusions of peace, as well
as all the rest of their ceremonies, are
confirmed with this Calumet; they fill
that pipe with the best tobacco they
have, and then present it to those with
whom they have concluded any great



affair, and then smoke out of the same
after them.

Image omitted.



CALUMNY [called by the Greeks
Διαβολὴ, whence comes the Latin Dia­
bolus, and Devil in English, the father
of all calumny] an Athenian deity, in
honour of whom they built a temple.
Lucian tells us, that Apelles, being ac­
cused by a painter for having conspired
against Ptolemy, having cleared himself
of the accusation, Ptolemy, to make him
amends, gave him 100 talents, and de­
livered his accuser into his hands to do
what he pleased with him: Upon this,
Apelles, to be revenged on Calumny, 
painted a prince with large ears sitting
upon a throne, with Suspicion and Ig­
norance near him; the prince sitting
thus in state, and reaching forth his
hand a great way off to Calumny, which
he represented having a face very bright
and sparkling, with extraordinary
charms and incitements, and advancing
towards the prince, holding a torch in
her left hand, and by her right drag­
ging an innocent young man by the
hair, he holding up his hands to heaven
and imploring aid. Before Calumny was
painted Envy, with a pale countenance
and squinting eyes, which served to set
off Calumny, and make her appear the
more acceptable. After her comes Re­
pentance, represented by the figure of a
lady in a mourning habit, with her gar­
ments rent, and turning her head to­
wards a figure resembling Truth, weep­
ing for sorrow and shame.

This picture Apelles gave to Ptolemy, 
and it was esteemed the best piece in
the whole world.

The moral of this picture is, that Ca­
lumny worries and afflicts Innocence, 
which by means of a foolish or malici­
ous Credulity, proceeding from Ignorance
or Suspicion is received. The Calum­
niator dresses up, and orders all things
by the assistance of imposture, and by
flattery insinuates himself into the good
opinion of the hearer; but Truth ap­
pearing sooner or later, discovers the
malice of Falshood, and so there is
nothing left to Calumny for her labour, 
but a bitter repentance.

CALX, chalk, burnt lime, mortar.

CALX [in Chymical Writers] is ex­
press'd by this character C.

CALX [in Chymistry] a kind of ashes, 
or fine friable powder, which remains
of metals, minerals, &c. after they
have undergone the violence of the fire
for a long time, and have lost all their
humid parts.

CAMAIEU [of camechuia, with the Asians, who so call the Onyx when
they find it preparing another colour, 
q. d. a second stone] a stone on which
is found various figures and representa­
tions of landskips.

CAMAIEU [some derive it of χαμαὶ, 
Gr. low, because Basso Relievo's are
commonly expressed by it] so painters
call such paintings in which there is but
one colour, and where the lights and
shadows are made on a ground of gold
or azure.

CAMARADE [of camera, L. a
chamber] a cham­
ber fellow, a fellow-soldier, an inti­
mate companion,  F.

COMRADE [of camera, L. a
chamber] a cham­
ber fellow, a fellow-soldier, an inti­
mate companion,  F.

CAMEL [camelus, L. of χάμηλος, 
Gr.] a strong beast fit only for bearing
burthens, which they are said to be a­
ble to carry (some of them) 7 or 8 hun­
dred weight or half a tun; some of them
have 2 bunches on their backs like a
saddle and are fit both for being ridden
by men or carrying burthens; there are
also a third sort of these which are
both lesser and leaner than these, called
Dromedaries, used by the great men of
the Arabians, &c. as horses to ride on, 
and it is reported that they can travel
10 or 12 days without food.

As for the management of these beasts, 
it is usual as soon as one is foaled, to tie
his 4 feet under his belly, to lay a car­
pet on his back and stones on the borders
of it to keep him from rising for 20 days, 
in order to render his joints flexible and
easy to bend.

Their feet are large and solid, but
not hard. In the spring of the year they
shed their hair, and their skins become
quite naked, during which time they
are much tormented by flies, to remedy
which they belabour their bodies, dress­
ing them with a switch instead of a cur­
ry comb, and dull their hides, as we
do carpets; when they travel the drivers
follow them whistling and singing.

CAMEL [Hieroglyphically] was used to
intimate filial reverence, because it has
that respect for  its parents, that it
refuses copulation with them: It is also
used to signify a rich man and a good
subject, that submits to the command of
his superior, being an animal very
strong, laborious and docile.

CAMELEON [of χαμαιλέων, or χαμαί
on the ground, and λέων a lion, Gr.] a
little creature resembling a lizard; but
that the head of it is bigger or broader, 
it is a quadrupede, having on each foot
three toes; and along tail, by which it
will fasten it self upon trees, as well as
by its feet. It frequents the rocks, lives



upon flies, gnats, &c. and lays eggs;
the common colour of it is a whitish
grey, but if it be exposed to the sun, or set
upon other colours, some parts of the
skin change their colour after a pleasant
manner.

CAMELINE [camelinus, L.] of or be­
longing to a camel.

CAMEL's HAY, a sort of sweet-smel­
ling rush, growing in the Eastern coun­
tries.

CAMELOPARDALIS [χαμηλοπάρ­
δαλις, of
χάμηλος a camel, and πάρδαλις a pan­
ther, Gr.] a beast that has the shape of
a camel, and is spotted like a panther, 
L.

CAMELOPARDUS [χαμηλοπάρ­
δαλις, of
χάμηλος a camel, and πάρδαλις a pan­
ther, Gr.] a beast that has the shape of
a camel, and is spotted like a panther, 
L.

CAMERATED [cameratus, L.] vault­
ed, cieled, arched.

CAMERA OBSCURA [in Opticks] a
room darken'd every where, but only
at one little hole, in which a glass is
fixed to convey the rays of objects to a
frame of paper or white cloth behind it.

CAMES [with Glasiers] the small slen­
der rods of cast lead, of which they make
their milled lead for joining the panes
or quarrels of glass.

CAMLET [prob. of zambelot, a term
used in the Levant for stuff made of goat's
hair] a sort of stuff made of camel's hair, 
silks, &c. mix'd.

CAMPAIGN OVEN, a portable oven
made of copper, of a convenient length
and about 3 or 4 inches high, and being
raised on feet, so that fire may be kin­
dled underneath, and on the cover or
lid of it are ledges to hold fire also.

CAMPANOLOGY [of campana, L. a
bell and λόγος a discourse] a treatise
concerning the ringing of bells.

CAMPECHIO Wood, a sort of wood so
called from Campeachy in America, the
place of its growth; commonly called
log-wood, used by dyers; the heart of
the tree is that only which is used, it is
at first of a red colour; but afterwards
turns black, and if steeped in water
gives it so strong a tincture of that co­
lour, that it may serve instead of ink;
it is very weighty, burns freely and pro­
duces a clear lasting flame.

CAMPESTRIAN [campestris, L.] be­
longing to a plain field or champion
country.

CAMPHOR [camphora, L.] the
gum or rosin of a
tree called Capur, much like a walnut-­
tree, that grows on some mountains
near the sea in the East-Indies, and also
in the island Borneo: and to such a de­
gree of largeness: that an hundred men
may stand under the shade of it. This
gum after tempests and earth quakes
flows in great abundance.

CAMPHIRE [camphora, L.] the
gum or rosin of a
tree called Capur, much like a walnut-­
tree, that grows on some mountains
near the sea in the East-Indies, and also
in the island Borneo: and to such a de­
gree of largeness: that an hundred men
may stand under the shade of it. This
gum after tempests and earth quakes
flows in great abundance.

CAMPHORATED [camphoratus, L.]
mixed with camphire.

ROSE CAMPION, a kind of Lychnis
or batchelor's-button.

CAMPUS Martii [in ancient cus­
toms] an anni­
versary assembly of our ancestors on
May day, where they confederated toge­
ther to defend the kingdom against fo­
reigners and all enemies.

CAMPUS Mati [in ancient cus­
toms] an anni­
versary assembly of our ancestors on
May day, where they confederated toge­
ther to defend the kingdom against fo­
reigners and all enemies.

CANAL of a Larmier [in Architecture]
the hollow platfond or soffit of a cor­
nice which makes the pendant mou­
chette.

CANAL of the Volute [Archit.] this
is the face of the circumvolutions, in­
closed by a list in the Ionic capital.

CANALICULATED [canaliculatus, 
L.] channelled, made like a pipe or
gutter.

CANARIES, so called of canes dogs, 
because many dogs were found in it
when first discovered. Islands in the
Atlantick sea, anciently call'd the For­
tunate Islands, from whence comes the
Canary wines.

CANARY Bird, an excellent singing
bird of a green colour, formerly bred
in the Canaries and no where else.

CANARY Grass, an herb.

CANCELLING [some derive it from χιγχλίζω, Gr. to encompass or pale a
thing round] in the Civil Law, is an act
whereby a person consents that some
former act be rendred null and void.

CANCER, a crab fish.

CANCER [with Astronom.] one of the
twelve signs of the zodiack, which the
sun enters in the month of June; the
charasterick of it with Astrologers &c. is
this ♋, and is represented on the celest­
ial globe by the figure of a crab-fish.

CANCER, or Aselli and Præsepe, Can­
cer is said to have been placed among
the stars by the good offices of Juno, be­
cause when Hercules had conquered the
Hydra and was assisted by Iolaus, Cancer
alone leaping out of the lake, bit Hercu­
les on the foot, as Panyasis relates in
Heraclea. But Juno doing Cancer great
honour, put him into the number of
the twelve signs. There are in this
constellation twelve stars which the
Greeks call ὄνοι, i. e. asses, which Bacchus
placed among the stars; they have also
adjoining to them Præsepe, i. e. the
manger.

Tropick of CANCER [with Astrono­
mers] an imaginary line in the heavens, 
parallel to the equinoctial, thro' the
beginning of which line the sun passes



in June, and makes our longest day; it
is called the northern tropick.

Ulcerated CANCER [with Surgeons]
is a cancer when it has grown larger
than a primative one, and has been o­
pened.

Blind CANCER [with Surgeons] 
is a primative
cancer, before
it is grown large and opened, which is
one that comes of itself, and appears at
first about the bigness of a pea, causing
an internal, continual and pricking
pain.

Latent CANCER is a primative
cancer, before
it is grown large and opened, which is
one that comes of itself, and appears at
first about the bigness of a pea, causing
an internal, continual and pricking
pain.

Occult CANCER is a primative
cancer, before
it is grown large and opened, which is
one that comes of itself, and appears at
first about the bigness of a pea, causing
an internal, continual and pricking
pain.

To CANCERATE [canceratum, L.]
to spread abroad cancerously, L.

CANCERATION, a spreading abroad
cancerously,  L.

CANCEROUSNESS [of cancer, L.]
the being cancerated.

CANDID [candidus, L.] sincere or
upright, favourable, kind, courteous;
free, open.

CANDIDNESS [of candidus, L. can­
dide, F.] sincerity.

CANDLE [candela, L.] a long roll or
cylinder made of tallow, wax, &c. for
giving light.

CANDY Alexander, a kind of herb.

CANE [of Genoa] for silk is 9 palms, 
100 of which make 26 yards English.

CANE [of Genoa] for linen and wool­
len, is 10 palms, which make 2, 7-8
yards English.

CANE [of Leghorn] is 4 braces, which
make 2 ells English, and 8 braces is 5
yards English.

CANE [of Marseilles] is 2 yards and
half English.

CANE [of Messina] is 2 yards and half
English.

CANE [of Rome] contains 8 palms,
and 30 canes is 55 ells and half English.

CANEPHORA [of χανηφόρος, Gr.] a
young maid who in the ancient sacrifi­
ces bore a basket, wherein was con­
tained all things necessary for the sa­
crifice.

CANEPHORIA [χανηφορία, Gr.] a
ceremony among the Athenians, which
made part of a festival, which the maids
celebrated on the eve of their marriage
day.

CANICULARES DIES [with Astrono­
mers] the dog-days, commonly called
Dies caniculares, L. are days wherein
the dog-star rises and sets with the sun:
during which time the weather is sultry
and hot: These Dog-days begin about
the 24th of July, and end the 28th of
August.

CANIFORM [caniformis, L.] shaped
like a dog.

CANK Heath, i. e. the heath of the
people call'd Ceangi.

CANNABACEOUS [cannabaceus ,L.
cannabinus, L. of χαννάβινος, Gr.] of hemp or hempen.

CANNABINE [cannabaceus ,L.
cannabinus, L. of χαννάβινος, Gr.] of hemp or hempen.

CANNÆ [in Anatomy] the two fossil
bones of the leg, viz. the tibia and fi­
bula.

CANNISTER of Tea [canistrum, 
L.] a quantity of tea
from 75 to 100 pound weight.

CANISTER of tea [canistrum, 
L.] a quantity of tea
from 75 to 100 pound weight. 

Tea CANNISTER, a small vessel of
silver, tin, &c. to hold tea.

CANNON [canon, F.] a piece of ord­
nance, or great gun. The first that
was used was on the coast of Denmark, 
in the year 1304, and afterwards be­
came common in the wars between the
Genoese and the Venetians, in the year
1380; and in 1386 were used in England, 
the first being discharged at the siege of
Barwick.

CANOE, a little vessel or boat used
by the Indians, made all of one piece of
the trunk of a tree hollowed.

Pascal CANON, a table of the mo­
veable feasts, shewing the day of Easter, 
and the other feasts depending upon it
for a cycle of 19 years.

Natural CANON [Trigonometry] is the
canon of sines, tangents and secants ta­
ken together.

Artificial CANON, is the canon of
artificial sines, tangents, &c. i. e. co­
sines, cotangents, &c.

CANON [canonicus, L. canoniste, F.]
a professor or doctor of the canon law.

CANONESS [with the Romanists] a
maid who enjoys a prebend, affected by
the foundation for maids, without be­
ing obliged to renounce the world, or
make any vows.

CANONS Regular, are canons who
still live in community, and who, to
the prastise of their rules, have added
the profession of vows.

CANONS Secular, are lay-canons, 
such among the laity as out of honour
and respect have been admitted into
some chapters of canons.

CANONRY, the benefice fill'd sup­
ply'd by a canon.

CANOPUS, a fabulous god of the E­
gyptians, much adored by the common
people.

CANOPUS, was the pilot of Osiris's
ship, whose soul after his death is said
to have migrated into the fixed star of
that name, which is one of the first
magnitude, but not visible in Europe.
This god became famous for the victo­
ry obtain'd by him over the Chaldean
god Fire; the story of which in brief is



this. The Chaldeans carried about
their god to combat with those of other
provinces, all which it easily overcame
and destroy'd, none of their images be­
ing able to resist the force of fire; till
at length the priest of Canopus devis'd
this artifice; he took an earthen water­
pot full of holes, which he stopped up
with wax, and having filled it, painted
it over, and plac'd the head of an old
image upon it, and produc'd it as a god.
In the conflict the wax being soon mel­
ted, the water rushed out at the holes
and quickly extinguish'd the fire. In
memory of this victory Canopus is usu­
ally represented in the manner just de­
scrib'd, without arms, and having scarce
any feet to be seen.

CANOROUSNESS [of canorus, L.]
loudness, shrilness.

To CANT [with Carpenters] is used
for to turn, as when a piece of timber
comes the wrong way, they say cant it, 
i. e. turn it about.

CANTALIVER Cornice, is a cornice
with cantalivers or modilions under it.

CANTAR [in Arabia] is 15 fracel­
loes every fracelloe being 25 pounds 12
ounces.

CANTAR [at Constantinople] is 120
pound English.

CANTAR [at Messina] about 127
pound English.

CANTAR [in Spain] wine measure, 
is about 2 gallons.

CANTAR [in Turkey in Asia] 100 ro­
telloes, about 418 pounds averdupoize.

CANTAR [at Tunis] 114 pound.

To CANTO, a division in an heroick
poem, like books or chapters in prose.

CANTO [in Musick] a song or the
treble part of it.

CANTON [in Heraldry]
signifies a corner,  F. and is
one of the nine ordinaries, 
and of great esteem, and is
expressed as in the escut­
cheon here annexed.

Image omitted.



CANTONED [in Architecture] is
when the corner of a building is adorn­
ed with a pilaster, an angular column, 
rustick quoins, or any thing that pro­
jects beyond the naked of a wall.

CANTONEE [Heraldry] is used by
the French, to express the position of
such things as are borne with a cross, 
&c. between them.

CANTOS [in Musick] is the counter
tenor.

CANVASS [among the French] is a
word, used to signify the model or first
words, whereon a piece of musick or air
is composed and given to a poet to re­
gulate and compleat.

CANUTUS, is said by some writers
to be the greatest king that England e­
ver had, being king of all England, 
Scotland, Denmark, Sweden and Norway.

The CAP, was anciently a symbol of
liberty, for when the Romans made
their slaves freemen they gave them
a cap. And the Jews in Italy are ob­
lig'd to wear a yellow cap, for distinc­
tion, and at Lucca one of an orange co­
lour.

CAP [in Universities] intimates liber­
ty, for when the cap is given to stu­
dents, they are no longer under the
rod of their superiors.

The CAP, is also made a mark of in­
famy, and bankrupts in France are for
ever after their failure oblig'd to wear, 
a green cap.

To CAP [Sea Term] used of a ship, in
the trials of the running or setting of
currents.

CAPABLENESS [capacitas, L.] abi­
lity, sufficiency, skill, reach of wit.

CAPACIOUSNESS [of capacitas, L.]
largeness, ability to receive.

CAPACITY [in a Logical Sense] an
aptitude, faculty or disposition to retain
or hold any thing.

CAPE [i.e. take] a judicial writ re­
lating to plea of lands or tenements, 
and is of two sorts, viz. Grand-cape and
Petit-cape, both which take hold of
things immoveable, and differ chiefly in
this, that Grand-cape lies before ap­
pearance, and Petit-cape after it.

A CAPER [probably of caper, L. a
goat, a mischievous creature, or of ca­
pio, L. to take] a privateer or pirate ship. 

A CAPER [of caper, L. a goat, a fris­
ky creature] an agile or brisk and high
leap in dancing.

To CAPER [of caprissare, L.] to cut
a caper, to leap briskly, high and wan­
tonly.

CAPERATED [caperatus, L.] wrink­
led like a goat's horn.

CAPIAGA [among the Turks] an of­
ficer or grand-master of the gates of
the Seraglio, is the first dignity among
the white Eunuchs; and no body is per­
mitted to go either into or out of the
Grand Signiors apartments without his
leave. He is always near his person
and has the privilege to wear the tur­
ban in the Seraglio, and to go every
where on horseback. He attends the
Grand Signior to the Sultana's apart­
ments; but is not permitted to go far­
ther than the door; it is likewise his
office to introduce embassadors to au­
dience.

CAPILLAMENTS of the Nerves, are



the fine filaments or fibres, whereof the
nerves are composed.

CAPILLARINESS [of capillaris. L.
capillaire, F.] hairiness, likeness to hairs.

CAPILLARY [capillaris, L.] pertain­
ing to, or like hair.

CAPILLARY Tubes [in Physicks] are
little pipes, whose canals are the nar­
rowest that possibly can be, or such
whose diameter does not exceed that of
a common hair.

CAPISTRATED [capistratus, L.]
muzzled, bridled.

CAPITAL Line [in Fortification] is a
right line drawn from the angle of the
polygon to the point of the bastion, or
from the point of the bastion to the
middle of the gorge.

CAPITAL Letters [with Printers] are
the initial letters, wherewith titles, &c.
are composed, and all periods, verses, 
&c. commence; all proper names of
persons, places, terms of arts, sciences
and dignities begin.

CAPITAL [in Architecture] is a prin­
cipal and essential part of an order of
columns or pilasters; and is different in
different orders, and is that which
chiefly distinguishes and characterises
the orders.

The Corinthian CAPITAL, is much
the richest, it has no Ovolo, and its
abacus is very different from those of
the Dorick, Ionick and Tuscan. It has
its faces circular, hollowed inwards, ha­
ving a rose in the middle of each sweep.
It has only a brim, and a vase instead
of an ovolo and annulets; the neck be­
ing much lengthen'd and inrich'd with
a double row of eight leaves in each, 
bending their heads downwards, small
stalks arising between, from whence
the volutes spring; but they resemble
not those of the Ionick capital, which
are 16 in this instead of 4 in the Ionick, 
on each side 4 under the 4 horns of the
abacus, where the 4 volutes meet in a
small leaf, which turns backwards to­
wards the corner of the abacus. These
leaves are divided, each making three
ranges of lesser leaves, whereof they
are composed; again each lesser leaf is
sometimes parted into three called lau­
rel leaves, but generally into 5 called
olive leaves. The middle leaf, which
bends down, is parted into eleven. In
the middle, over the leaves, is a flow­
er, shooting out between the stems and
volutes like the rose in the abacus.
The height of this capital is two 2-3ds
modules, and its projecture one 2-8ths.

The Tuscan CAPITAL, is the most
simple and unadorn'd. Its members or
parts are no more than three; an aba­
cus, and under this an ovolo or quar­
ter-round, and under that a neck or
collarine.

Composite CAPITAL, takes its name
from its being composed of members
borrowed from the capitals of other co­
lumns.

From the Dorick, it takes a quarter-­
round or ovolo; from the Ionick, an
astragal under this, together with vo­
lutes or scrolls; from the Corinthian, a
double row of leaves, and in most other
things resembles the Corinthian, gene­
rally consisting of the same members
and the same proportion.

There is a flower in the middle of the
abacus, and leaves which run upwards
under the horns, as in the Corinthian.
It has flowers instead of stalks in the
Corinthian, lying close to the vase or
bell, which twist themselves round to­
wards the middle of the face of the ca­
pital, is two modules 1-3d, and its pro­
jecture one module 2-3ds, as in the Co­
rinthian.

The Dorick CAPITAL, besides an a­
bacus and an ovolo, and a neck in com­
mon with the Tuscan, has 3 annulets
or little square members underneath
the ovolo, instead of the astragal in the
Tuscan, and over the abacus, a talon, 
cima or ogee with a fillet. The height
of this capital is one module, and its
projecture 37 minutes and an half.

The Ionick CAPITAL, is composed of
three parts, an abacus which consists of
an ogee and a fillet; and under this a
rind which produces the volutes or
scrolls, which is the most essential part
of this capital. The astragal, which is
under that ovolo, belongs to the shaft, 
and the middle part is called a rind or
bark, because of its bearing some re­
semblance to the bark of a tree laid on
a vase, the brim of which is repre­
sented by the ovolo, and seems to have
been shrunk up in drying, and to have
twisted into the volutes; the ovolo is
adorn'd with eggs so called from their
oval form. The height of this capital
some reckon 18 minutes, its projecture
one module 7-10ths.

Angular CAPITAL [in Architecture]
is that which bears the return of ths
entablature at the corner of a projec­
ture of a frontispiece.

CAPITAL of a Balluster [in Archi­
tecture] that part that crowns the
balluster, something resembling the Io­
nick capitals.

CAPITAL of a Triglyph [Architecture]
a platband over the tringlyph.



CAPITAL of a Niche [Architecture] 
sort of small canopy over a shallow
niche covering a statue.

CAPITAL Stock [in trade, &c.] is
the stock or fund of a trading company, 
or the sum of money they jointly con­
tribute to be employed in trade.

CAPITAL City, the principal city of
a kingdom.

CAPITALNESS [of capitalis, L. ca­
pital, f.] the being great, chief.

CAPITATED PLANTS (with Bota­
nists] are such plants whole flowers are
composed of many edged and hollow
little flowers, and Mr. Ray calls them
by this name, because thair scaly calix
most commonly swells out into a large
and round belly, containing within it the
pappous seed, as Carduus, Centaury, &c.

GAPITE [in Law] a tenure by which
a person held of the king immediately, 
as of his crown, either by knight's ser­
vice or soccage; and not of any honour, 
castle or manour belonging to it. But
by a statute 12 Charles II. all such tenures
are abolished.

CAPITOL, the Capitol at Rome was
consecrated to Jupiter Imperator, was
built upon the Tarpeian mountain; was
a very famous structure, the richest and
most noted in all Italy.

It was beautified with the statues and
images of idol gods with the crowns of
victory, and spoils of the nations which
the Romans had conquered.

It was erected by Tarquinius Priscus
and Servius Tullius, two kings of Rome, 
and afterwards enlarged by following
generations.

CAPNOMANCY [χάπνος, smoke and 
μαντεία divination] a divining or sooth­
saying by smoke, arising from an altar
where incense and poppy seed is burnt;
the rule was, when the smoke was thin
and light, and rose straight up, it was a
good omen; when the contrary, an ill
one.

CAPON [in a Figurative sense] an
effeminate fellow, so called by way of
derision.

CAPON'S Tail, an herb.

CAPRÆ SALTANTES [with Mete­
orologists] a fiery metaphor or exhala­
tion, which sometimes appears in the
atmosphere, and is not fired in a strait
line, but with windings and inflections
in and out,  L.

CAPRICE pieces of poetry, painting and musick
where the force of imagination goes
beyond the rules of art.

CAPRICHIO pieces of poetry, painting and musick
where the force of imagination goes
beyond the rules of art.

CAPRICIOUSNESS [of caprice, prob.
of caper, L. a goat] fantasticalness, &c.

CAPRICORN [with Astronomers] one of the signs of the zodiack, marked
thus ♑, represented on globes in the
form of a horned goat; the sun enters
this sign in the midst of winter, about
the 11th of December.

CAPRIGENOUS [caprigenus, L.] born 
of a goat, or goat kind.

CAPRIOLE, a caper or leap in dan­
cing, a goat leap.  F.

CAPRIPEDE [capripes, L.] having
feet like a goat.

CAPRIZANT Pulse [pulsus caprizans, 
L.] an uneven or leaping pulse.

CAPROTINA, a name given by the
Roman to the goddess Juno, and the
Nones of July, which they celebrated as
a festival upon the following occasion.
The Gauls having quitted Rome, the
neighbouring people, knowing the
weakness of the city, took occasion to
make themselves masters of it. Lucius
dictator of the Fidenates, sends a herald
to the senators of Rome, to tell them that
he would preserve the remains of the
city of Rome, if they would send him
their wives and daughters. The sena­
tors apprehending their total ruin was
at hand, were in great perplexity what
course to take; upon this a she-slave, 
named Phelotes, proposed an expedient, 
and assembling all her fellow she-slaves, 
dressed in their mistresses fine cloaths, 
went to the camp of the Fidenates, and
being recieved by the general, were dis­
tributed among his officers and soldiers;
and they invited them to drink, and al­
lured them so to do till they were drunk;
which being affected, upon a signal gi­
ven, the Romans fell upon the Fidenates
and put them all to the sword; and in
commemoration of their deliverance, 
called the day Nonæ Caprotinæ.

CAPSQUA
RES, a term
in Gunnery gi­
ven to that
strong plate
of iron which
comes over
the trunnions of a gun, and keeps her
in her carriage; it is fasten'd by a hinge
to the prize-plate that it may list up
and down; it forms a piece of an arch
in the middle to receive a third part of
the trunnions, for two thirds are let in­
to the carriage, and the other end is
fastened to two iron wedges, which are
called the Forelocks and Keys.

Image omitted.



Main CAPSTAN is the machine or
capstan placed behind the main-mast.

Jeer CAPSTAN, is the machine pla­
ced between the main-mast and the fore­



mast; it is made use of to heave upon
the jeer-rope or upon the Viol, and to
hold off by, when the anchor is weigh­
ing.

Come out CAPSTAN [Sea term]
is us'd when
the mariners would have the cable that
they heave by slacked.

Launch the CAPSTAN [Sea term]
is us'd when
the mariners would have the cable that
they heave by slacked.

Paul the CAPSTAN [Sea term] signi­
fies to, stop it with the pawl to keep it
from recoiling or turning backwards.

Man the CAPSTAN [Sea term] is to
place so many men at it, as can stand to
heave and turn it about.

Spindle of a CAPSTAN, is the main
body of it.

Whelps of a CAPSTAN, are short pie­
ces of wood made faste to it, to hinder, 
the cable from coming too nigh in turn­
ing it about.

CAPSULA CORDIS [with Anatomists]
the same that encompasses the heart, the
same as Pericardium, L.

CAPSULA [with Chymists] an earthen
vessel in form of a pan, wherein things, 
which are to undergo a violent opera­
tion by fire are put.

CAPSULAR [capsularis L.] pertain­
ing to a coffer, chest or casket.

Lieutenant CAPTAIN, the captain's
second, or the officer who commands
the company under the captain and in
his absence.

CAPTAIN [of a merchant-ship] the
master of it, who has the command or
direction of the ship, crew, lading, &c.

CAPTAINSHIP, the dignity or office
of a captain.

CAPTATION, a catching at, ambiti­
on; as Captation of popular favour.  L.

CAPTIOUSNESS [of captiosus, L.
captieux, F.] aptness to take exception
or to find fault.

CAPUCHON [in Heraldry] signifies
a hood, and differs from chaperon, in
that it is not open as the other is, but
is all closed every way.  F.

CAPUT mortuum [in Chymical Writers]
is expressed by this character. (')

CAR, a kind of rolling throne, used
in triumphs, and the splendid entry of
princes.

CAR, is a contraction of Kaer, Brit.
and signifies a city, as Carlisle, Carleon.

CAR, signifies a low, watery place, 
where elders grow; or a pool; as Car­
drew.

CARACOL. [with Architects] a stair­
case in a helix or spiral form.

CARACOL [with Horsemen] is an
oblique piste or tread, traced out in
semi-rounds, changing from one hand
to another, without observing a regular
ground. Sometimes in an army, when
the horse advance to charge the enemy, 
they ride up in caracol, with a design to
perplex them and put them into doubt, 
whether they design to charge them in
front or flank.

CARACOL [with the Spaniards] sig­
nifies a motion, which a squadron of
horse makes, when in an engagement;
as soon as the first rank has fired their
pistols, wheeling one to the right, and
the other to the left, along the wings of
the body to the rear to give place to the
next rank to fire, and so on.

To CARACOLE [with Horsemen] is
to go in the form of half-rounds.

CARAITES [of ורק of ארק Heb. to
read] a jewish sect so called on account
of their close adherence to the text, and
letter of the scriptures of the old testa­
ment and their rejecting all those books
which are not in the old jewish canon, 
and require an implicit faith in them;
without examining whether any arti­
cle of the law be true or false.

They neither wear phylacteries, nor
frontlets, on their foreheads, nor affix
sentences of the mosaick law written in
parchment, over the doors or on the
ports of their houses.

They call their brethren the rest of
the Jews bridled asses, when they see
them in the synagogues with their front­
lets on their foreheads.

They deny that the oral law was de­
livered by Moses, and reject the Cabala
or traditions; and have the talmud in
abhorrence. They out do even the rab­
bins themselves in a strict and rigorous
observance of the Sabbath, and are very
strict as to the prohibited degrees of
marriage.

CARAMEL [with Confectioners] the
sixth and last degree of boiling of sugar
when if a little of it be taken up with
the tip of the finger and put between
the teeth, it will break and crackle
without sticking to it at all; also a curi­
ous sort of sugar work.

CARANNA, a hard and brittle resi­
nous gum, brought from the West Indies, 
and of an aromatick flavour.

CARAT of Gold, is properly the
weight of 24 grains; or one scruple 24
carats make one ounce. If the gold be
so fine that in purifying it, it loses no­
thing or but very little, it is said to be
gold of 24 carats; if it loses one carat
it is said to be gold of 23 carats, &c.

CARAVANSERASKIER, the director
steward, or intendant of a caravensera.

CARAWAYS, a plant.

CARBUNCLE [with Surgeons] a fiery



botch or plague sore, with a black crust
or scab, which falling off leaves a deep
and dangerous ulcer, called also An­
thrax.

CARBUNCLE [in Heral­
dry] one of the precious
stones. It was represented
by the ancients in an escut­
cheon, as in this annexed, 
designed thereby to express
the beams or rays that issue from the
center which is the transcendent lustre
of the stone.

Image omitted.



CARBUNCULOSE [carbunculosus, L.]
full of sores.

CARCANET [of carcan, F.] a chain
for the neck.

CARCASS [with Carpenters] the tim­
ber work (as it were the skeleton of a 
house) before it is lathed and plastered.

CARCASE [carcasse, F. q. d. caro
cassa vita, i. e. flesh
without life] a dead body.

CARCASS [carcasse, F. q. d. caro
cassa vita, i. e. flesh
without life] a dead body. 

CARCASSES, a sort of oval form,
made with
ribs of i­
ron, and
afterwards
filled with
a composi­
tion of me­
al powder, 
salt-petre, 
broken glass, shavings of horn, pitch, tur­
pentine, linseed oil, and afterwards
coated over with a pitch cloth, and being
primed with meal powder and quick
match, is fired out of a mortar, in order
to set houses on fire: There is also ano­
ther sort for sea service, which is the
same as a bomb, only that it hath 5
holes in it all primed with powder and
quick match, and being discharged out
of the mortar, burns violently out of
the holes. See Bomb.

Image omitted.



CARCELLAGE [of carcer, L. a pri­
son] the fees that prisoners pay before
they can be discharged.

CARD [Charta, L.] a sea chart.

CARDINALS, eminent dignitaries in
the Romish church, who were at first no
more than incumbents of a parish; but
have now obtain'd the title of ecclesia­
stical princes; they constitute the popes
council, and are about 70 in number, and
with him concert all affairs that con­
cern the church.

The Pope is chosen out of the num­
ber, and by the cardinals: They had the
red cap given them by Pope Innocent
IV. at the council held at Lyons in the
year 1243 and the scarlet habit by Pope
Paul II, in the year 1464; and Pope Gre­
gory XIV. bestow'd the red cap upon
the regular cardinals, who before wore
only a hat. And Pope Urban VIII.
gave them the title of Eminence; whereas
before they were only stiled the most
illustrious.

Their dress is a Sattane, a Rochet, a
Mantelet or short purple Mantle over
their Rochet. The Mozette and a pa­
pal cape over the Rochet on publick and
solemn occasions.

The regular cardinals do not wear
silk, nor any other colour than that of
their order; but they all wear the red
hat and cap.

CARDINAL Points [in Cosmography]
are the four intersections of the hori­
zon with the meridian and the prime
vertical circle.

CARDINAL's Flower [with Florists]
a flower that is very red, like a cardi­
nal's robe, a sort of bell-flower or
throat-wort.

CARDINAL Winds, those winds that
blow from the 4 cardinal points of the
compass.

CARDINAL Virtues [with Moralists]
are Prudence, Temperance, Justice and
Fortitude; so called by Ethick writers
from cardo, L. a hinge; because they
consider them as hinges, upon which
all other virtues turn.

CARDINALSHIP [cardinalat, F.] the
dignity of a cardinal.

CARDINAL WINDS, the East, West, 
North and South.

CARDO [with Anatomists] the second
vertebra of the neck, so termed because
the head turns upon it.

To CARE [carian, Sax.] to take
heed, &c.

CAREFULNESS [carefulnẏſſe, 
Sax.] heedfulness, wariness, caution;
also anxiousness.

To CAREEN a Ship [of carina, L. a
keel, cariner, F.] is to fit or trim the
sides or bottom, to caulk her seams, or
to mend any fault she has under water;
a ship is said to be brought to a careen, 
when the greatest part of her lading
being taken out, she is made so light, 
that by means of another lower vessel
laid near her, she may be brought
down to one side, to the 3d, 4th or 5th
strake, as low as occasion requires, and
there kept by ballast to be calked, trim­
med, &c.

A half CAREEN, is when they can­
not come at the bottom of the ship, and
so can only careen half of it,  F.

CAREENAGE, a careening place;
also the pay for careening,  F.

CARIATIDES. See Caryatides.



CARINATED [with Botanists] bend­
ing or crooked, like the keel of a ship, 
carina, L. so the leaves of the Asphode­
lus are said to be.

CARKINGNESS, anxiousness, care­
fulness.

An old CARLE [either of cerl, C.
Brit, or ceorl, Sax. a churl] an old do­
ting, covetous hunks, a surly niggard.

CARLISHNESS, churlishness.

CARMA [with the Romans] a god­
dess, whom as they ima­
gined, presided over the inward parts, 
and occasioned a good habit and consti­
tution of body.

CARNA [with the Romans] a god­
dess, whom as they ima­
gined, presided over the inward parts, 
and occasioned a good habit and consti­
tution of body.

CARMELUS, the god of mount Car­
mel in Judea. Tacitus makes mention
of him, and relates how his priest fore­
told Vespasian that he should be emperor.

CARMELITES [so call'd from mount
Carmel in the land of Judea] an order
of Mendicants in the Romish church, who
were at first under very severe disci­
pline; but this was afterwards modera­
ted; upon which they divided one part, 
following the ancient severities and
the other embracing the more mild al­
lowances, they pretend that Elijah and
Elias were the founder of their order, 
and that Pythagoras and the ancient
Druids, &c. were professors of their or­
der; they go bare foot.

CARMENTALIA, feast days in ho­
nour of Carmenta, the mother of Evan­
der.

CARMINE, a red colour, very vi­
vid, made of the cochineal mestique.

CARMINANT [with Physicians] car­
minative medicines, i. e. such as are
efficacious in dispersing and driving cut
wind,  L.

CARNA a Heathen deity, to
whom they ascribed the
preservation of the inward parts of
men.

CARNEA a Heathen deity, to
whom they ascribed the
preservation of the inward parts of
men.

CARNADOE, a Spanish coin, of
which 6 make a marveid, and 54 mar­
veids a ryal, equal in value to 6d. Eng­
lish.

CARNALNESS [carnalitas, L.] flesh­
liness, a being; given to fleshly lusts.

CARNEOL, a sort of precious stone;
also a kind of herb.

To CARNIFICATE [carnificatum, 
L.] to quarter, to cut in pieces as a
hangman.

CARNOUSNESS, fleshiness, fulness
of flesh.

CARO [with Anat.] the flesh of ani­
mals, which they define to be a similar, 
fibrous, bloody, soft and thick part, 
which together with the bones is the
main prop of the body.

CAROLINES, the four books com­
posed by the order of Charlemaign to
refute the 2d council of Nice.

CAROLINE [of Naples] a coin equal
to a Julio.

CAROS [χάρος, Gr.] a lethargy or
deep sleep, in which the person affected, 
being pulled, pinched, or called, scarce
discovers any sign of feeling or hearing;
This distemper is without a fever, be­
ing in decree greater than a lethargy, 
but less than an apoplexy.

CAROTINESS [of Carot, a red root]
being red haired.

CAROTIDES [χαρωτιδες, Gr.] two
arteries of the neck, one on each side, 
serving to convey the blood from the
Aorta to the brain; so called, because
when they are stopt, they presently in­
cline the person to sleep.

CARP Stone, a stone of a triangular
form, sound in the palate of a carp.

CARPENTERS 
were incorporated An­
no 1476. Their arms
are argent, a cheveron
ingrayl'd between 3
pair of compasses point­
ing towards the base
and a little extended.
Their hall is situated on the north side
of London-wall, over against Bethlehem.

Image omitted.



CARPOBALSAMUM [χαρποβάλσα­
μον, Gr.] the fruit of the Balm or Balsam
tree, very much like that of the turpen­
tine, in shape, size and colour.

CARPUS [with Anatomists]the wrist
consisting of eight bones, with which the
cubit or elbow is joined to the hand,  L.

Block CARRIAGES [with Gunners] a
sort of strong carts for carrying mortars
and their beds from one place to another.

Trunk CARRIAGES [with Gunners]
are two short planks of wood, borne by
two axle-trees having four wooden
trucks or wheels, about a foot and a
half, or two foot diameter; for carrying
mortars or guns upon a battery, where
their own carriages can't go.

CARRIER [in the Manage] a place
inclosed with a barrier, wherein they
run at the ring.

CARRIER [in Falconry] a flight or
tour of the bird, 120 yards; if it mount
more, it is called a double carrier.

CARRIER [carriere, F.] one who
conducts or drives waggons from coun­
try to town, &c.

CARRIERING [of carriere, F.] a run­
ning or passing full speed. Milton.

CARROUSEL, a magnificent festival, 
made upon occasion of some publick re­
joycing, consisting of a calvacade or so­



lemn riding on horse-back of great per­
sonages, richly array'd, courses of cha­
riots and horses, publick shews, games, 
&c.  L.

To CARRY a bone [Sea term] is said
of a ship, when she makes the water
foam before her.

TO CARRY well [with Horsemen] is
a term used of a horse, whose neck is
raised or arched, and who holds his
head high, without constraint, firm and
well placed.

To CARRY low [with Horsemen] is a
term used of a horse, that has naturally
a short, ill-shaped neck, and lowers his
head too much.

CARTE BLANCHE, a blank paper, 
seldom used but in this phrase, to send
one a carte blanche, signed to fill up
with what conditions he pleases.

CARTHUSIANS [of chartreux, F.] a
religious order of the Romish church, 
founded about the year 1084 by Bruno
of Cologn and canon of Rheims, who re­
tired from the converse of the world to
a place call'd Chartereuse in Dauphiné in
France.

They were without rules till Basil, 
VII. general of this order formed some
constitutions out of the customs they
had before observ'd, and obtain'd a con­
firmation of them from the Pope.

They abstain from flesh even in sick­
ness, keep an almost constant silence, 
and are strict in fasting, wear a hair
shirt next their skin and confine them­
selves closely to their convent.

CARTILAGE [by Anat.] is defined to
be a similar, white part of an animal
body, which is harder and drier than a
ligament, but softer than a bone, the
use of it is to render the articulation or
jointing of the bones more esy, and de­
fends several parts from outward inju­
ries.

CARTON [in Painting] a design 
made on strong paper, 
to be afterwards calked through; and
transferred on the fresh plaister of a wall
to be painted in fresco; a pattern for
working in tapstry, Mosaick, &c. the
Cartoons of Raphael Urban at Hampton-­
Court, are said to be for tapstry, design'd
for patterns.

CARTOON [in Painting] a design 
made on strong paper, 
to be afterwards calked through; and
transferred on the fresh plaister of a wall
to be painted in fresco; a pattern for
working in tapstry, Mosaick, &c. the
Cartoons of Raphael Urban at Hampton-­
Court, are said to be for tapstry, design'd
for patterns.

CARTOUSE [cartoccio, Ital.] an 
ornament in Archi­
tecture, Sculpture, &c. representing a
scroll of paper; it is most commonly a
flat member with wavings, on which is
some inscription or device, cypher, or­
nament of armory, &c.

CARTOUCH [cartoccio, Ital.] an 
ornament in Archi­
tecture, Sculpture, &c. representing a
scroll of paper; it is most commonly a
flat member with wavings, on which is
some inscription or device, cypher, or­
nament of armory, &c.

CARTULAIRES, papers wherein
the contracts, sales, exchanges, privile­
ges immunities, exemptions and other
acts that belong to the churches and
monasteries are collected and preserved.

CARTOUZES [with 
Architects] much the
same as modilions, ex­
cept that these are set
under the cornish in
wainscotting, and those
under the cornish at the
eves of a house, they
are sometimes called
Dentiles or teeth.

Image omitted.



CARYATIDES [q. d. women of Carya
in Peloponnesus, who being taken cap­
tive by the Greeks, after all the male
inhabitants had been put to the sword.
and the city burnt, were carried in
triumph, for having treacherously join­
ed with the Persians against their own
country] in architecture they are an or­
der of pillars shaped like the bodies of
women with their arms cut off, clothed
in a robe reaching down to their feet, 
and set to support the entablature.

CARYOCASTINUM [with Apotheca­
ries] an electuary so denominated from
its ingredients, viz. Cloves and Costos,
which is chiefly used for the gout and
pains in the limbs.

CARYOPHYLLEOUS, of or like a
gilly-flower.

To CASE a Hare, to flea and take out
the bowels.

CASE-HARDENED, obdurate, har­
dened in impiety.

CASE-HARDENING, a method of
making the outside of iron hard by a
particular method of putting it into a
case of loam, mixt with dried hoofs, 
salt, vinegar, &c. and heating it red
hot in the forge, and afterwards quench­
ing it in water.

CASE-HARDENEDNESS, obduracy,
impudence, &c.

CASE of glass [of Normandy] consist­
ing of 120 foot.

CASE of conscience, a question or scru­
ple about some matter of religion, which
the person that is dissatisfied, is desirous
to have resolved.

CASES reserved [with Romanists] sins
of consequence, the absolution of which
are reserved for the superiors or their
vicars.

CASES [in Gram.] they are six in
number, viz. the Nominative, Genitive
Dative, Accusative, Vocative, and Ab­
lative, which see in their proper places
alphabetically.

BREAST CASKETS [in a Ship] the
longest of the caskets, in the middle of
the yard just between the ties.



CASS-WEED [with Botanists] a kind
of herb.

CASSIOPEIA, Sophocles a writer of
tragedies says in Andromeda, that Cassi­
opeia vied in beauty with the Nereids, 
and on that account fell into a calamity;
for Neptune sending a whale, laid the
land waste; for which reason Cassiopeia
is justly placed before Cetus the whale, 
and she is pictured sitting on a seat or
chair.

CASSONADE cask sugar, sugar
put up into casks or
chests, after the first purification.

CASTONADE cask sugar, sugar
put up into casks or
chests, after the first purification.

CAST of the Country [with Miners] the
colour of the earth.

To CAST a hawk to the perch [Falc.]
to put her upon it.

CASTELLAN [in the West-Indies] a
piece of money in value some thing more
than a ducat.

CASTER [of castrum a camp, or cas­
tellum, L. a camp or castle] set at the
end of a name of a place, intimates
there had in that place been a camp, 
castle, &c. of the Romans.

To CASTIGATE [castigatum, L.] to
chastise.

CASTING of Timber-work [with Buil­
ders] is when a house being plaister'd
all over on the outside with mortar, it
is struck wet by a ruler, with a corner
of a trowel, &c. to make it look like
joints of free stone.

CASTING [in Foundery] is the run­
ning of melted metal into a mould pre­
pared for that purpose.

CASTING [with Joiners] wood is
said to cast or warp, when it shoots or
shrinks by moisture, air, sun, &c.

To CASTLE, a term used at chess­
play.

Prow CASTLE [in a Ship] is the rise
or elevation of the prow over the up­
permost deck towards the mizzen.

Stern CASTLE [in a Ship] the whole
elevation that runs on the stern over
the last deck, where the officers cabins
and places of assembly are.

CASTLES [in Heraldry] are emblems
of grandeur and magnificence; they also
denote sanctuary and safety; they are
given for arms to such as have reduced
them by main force, or have been the
first that mounted their walls, either by
open assault or by escalade; also to one
that has defeated some enemy or taken
some prisoner of note, who bore them
in his banner or shield.

CASTOR, an amphibious animal, cal­
led also a Beaver, living both on land
and in the water. It is of a white or
ash colour, has very sharp teeth, the
fore-feet resemble those of a dog, and
the hindermost those of a goose, hav­
ing on each five toes. The Ameri­
cans eat the flesh of these animals for
food, and make use of their skins for
clothes; and we their furr for making
hats, what some have reported that
when this creature is pursued he bites
off his testicles, is said by others to be a
mistake, and that what is sold by the
apothecaries is only some glands found
near his flank and share.

CASTOR and Pollux [according to
the Poets] were the offspring of Jupiter
and Læda, queen of Tyndarus, king of
Oebalia, in the manner following. Ju­
piter having an intimate familiarity with
Læda, she brought forth two large eggs, 
of that which was of Jupiter came Pol­
lux and Helena, and from that which
was of Tyndarus proceeded Castor and
Clytemnestra.

The two brothers Castor and Pollux, 
had such an entire love one for the
other, that they always performed their
undertakings together, and were, as it
were, inseparable; tho' Pollux only was
immortal by the privilege of his birth, 
as proceeding from Jupiter: but Pollux
having so entire a love for his brother
Castor, he prevailed upon Jupiter to ad­
mit him into the number of his sons.
And Jupiter made Castor partaker of
immortality with Pollux, so that they
were both to live successively one after
another, till the time that they were
both translated to the signs of the zodi­
ack, where they represent the constel­
lation call'd Gemini.

But they did not attain this honour
before they had merited it by many glo­
rious actions; for Theseus having carried
away their sister Helena, they forced
him to restore her, and clear'd the coast
of all the pirates that infested the sea;
and for this reason they were accounted
and adored among the deities of the sea;
and the Heathens sacrificed unto them
white lambs.

The Romans imagining that they re­
ceived assistance from them in a battle a­
gainst the Latins, near the lake Regillus, 
therefore built them a stately temple;
and commonly swore by their namas.
The oath that women swore was Æca­
stor, i. e. Ædes Castoris, the temple of
Castor; and the men's oath was Ædepol, 
i. e. Ædes Pollucis, the temple of Pollux.

Ths Locrenses affirm'd that they saw
them leading their army against the
Crotonians, riding upon white horses, 
with caps on their heads, and lances in



their hands: and from this they are thus
represented in painting and sculpture.

Homer relates, that Castor and Pollux
were companions with Jason in fetching
back the golden fleece, in which expedi­
tion they shewed their courage and skill
in arms; and that being overtaken by a
violent tempest in the voyage, they saw
two flames of fire lighting on the heads
of Castor and Pollux, which proved to
be happy omens or foretokens of their
safety. And hence came the ancient
custom of mariners, that when meteors
or the dry exhalations of the earth, be­
ing inflamed in the air, appeared about
their ships in a storm, they call'd them
Castor and Pollux when two fires or
lights appear; and Helena, when but
one: and when there are two fires ap­
pear at sea together, they prognosticate
and expect safety, and an ensuing calm;
but if but one, they prepare themselves
for the extremity of a violent storm;
supposing Helena as dangerous to sailors, 
as she was to Troy.

CASTRATURE [castratura, L.] a
castration or gelding.

CASTREL [with Falconer] a kind 
of hawk, which in
shape does very much resemble a Lan­
ner; but as to size is like the Hobby. The
game proper to it is the Growse, a fowl
common in the north of England, and
elsewhere.

CASTRIL [with Falconer] a kind 
of hawk, which in
shape does very much resemble a Lan­
ner; but as to size is like the Hobby. The
game proper to it is the Growse, a fowl
common in the north of England, and
elsewhere.

CASUALNESS [of casualis, L.] acci­
dentalness.

CASUISTICAL, of or pertaining to
a casuist, &c.

CAT-MINT [Botany] a plant which
cats much delight to eat.

CATS-FOOT [Botany] an herb, o­
therwise called Alehoof.

CAT-PEAR, a pear in shape like a
hen's egg, which ripens in October.

CATS-TAILS [Botany] a sort of long, 
round substance, which in winter-time
grows upon nut trees, pine-trees, &c.
also a kind of reed which bears a spike
like the tail of a cat; which some call
reed-mice.

CATS, Naturalists have made this
observation, that cats see best as the sun
approaches, and that then their eye sight
decays as it goes down in the evening.
With the ancient Egyptians, a cat was
the hieroglyphick of the moon; and on
that account cats were so highly honour­
ed among them, as to receive their sa­
crifices and devotions, and had stately
temples erected in their honour.

The CAT was rever'd as an emblem
of the moon, for its various spots, fruit­
fulness and activity in the night. In
case of fire, there was generally great
lamentations among the Egyptians, on
account of their cats, and they took
greater care to preserve their cats than
their houses. In whatever house a cat
died, all the family shav'd their eye­
brows. If a man kill'd a cat he was to
die without mercy; the enraged multi­
tude hurring away the unfortunate per­
son to certain death, sometimes with­
out any formal process or trial. For
this reason, if any one, by chance found
one of these creatures dead, he stood at
a convenient distance from it, and with
great lamentation protested he found it
dead. Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus
relate, that a Roman happening acciden­
tally to kill a cat, the mob immediately
gathered about the house where he was, 
and neither the entreaties of some prin­
cipal men sent by the king, nor the
fear of the Romans, with whom they
were then negotiating a peace, could
save the man's life.

CAT [in Heraldry] is an emblem of
liberty, because it naturally hates to be
shut up, and therefore the Burgundians, 
&c. bore a cat in their banners, to inti­
mate that they could not endure servi­
tude. It is a bold and daring creature,
and also cruel to its enemy, and never
gives over till it has destroy'd it if possi­
ble. It is also watchful, dexterous, 
swift, pliable, and has such good nerves, 
that if it falls from a place never so high
it still alights on its feet, and therefore
may denote those who have so much
foresight, that whatsoever befals them
they are still upon their guard. In coat
armour they must always be represented
full-fac'd, and not shewing one side of it, 
but both their eyes and both their ears.
Argent three cats in pale sable is the coat
of the family of Keat of Devonshire.

CAT ACAUSTICKS [of χατὰ and χαυ­
στιχα, Gr.] causticks by reflection.

CATACAUSTICK Curve [in Catop­
tricks] a curve or crooked line, which
is formed by joining the points of con­
course of several refracted rays.

CATAFALCO, a decoration of ar­
chitecture, sculpture or painting, rais'd
on a scaffold of timber to shew a coffin
or tomb in a funeral solemnity.

CATADIOPTRICAL Telescope [with
Astronomers] is the same as a rejecting
telescope.

CATAGMA [with Surgeons] the
breaking of bones, or a separation of
continuity of the hard parts of the body, 
which is performed by means of some
hard instrument.



CATALEPSIS [χαταλεψις, Gr.] com­
prehension.

CATALEPSIS [with Physicians] a dis­
ease very much like an apoplexy, by
means of which, all the animal functions
are abolished; but yet so, that the fa­
culty of breathing remains, and the pa­
tient returns to the same habit of body
that he had before he was seiz'd with
the distemper. Gr.

CATAPELTA [among the Ancients]
an instrument of punishment. It consist­
ed in a kind of press composed of planks, 
between which the criminal was crush'd.

CATASARCA [χατασάρχα, Gr.] a
kind of dropsy, the same as Anasarca.

CATASCHASMOS [of χατὰ and σχά­
ζω, Gr. to scarify] a scarification.

CATATASIS [Anatomy] an extension
or stretching out of an animal body to­
wards the lower parts.

CATASTASIS [χατάστασις, Gr.] the
third part of the ancient Drama; being
that wherein tbe intrigue or action set
on foot in the Epitasis is supported, car­
ried on, and ripen'd till it be ripe for
the unravelling in the catastrophe.

CATATHUMPTON an humorous word, us'd
by some by way of ridicule, to signify a
strong or mighty argument.

KATATHUMPTON an humorous word, us'd
by some by way of ridicule, to signify a
strong or mighty argument.

CATATYPOSIS [χατατυπώσις, Gr.] a
figure in rhetorick, when one thing is
done by the example of another.  L.

CATCHES [in a Clock] those parts that
hold by hooking and catching hold of.

CATECHETICALLY [of catechisme, 
F. of catechismus, L. of χατηχισμὸς, Gr.]
by way of question and answer, &c.

CATECHUMENS [Καταχούμενοι, Gr.]
in the ancient Christian church were
Jews and Gentiles, who were instructed
and prepared to receive the ordinance
of baptism. These persons were in­
structed by persons appointed by the
church for that service; and also had a
particular place in it called the Place of
the Catechumens. When these had been
instructed some time, they were admit­
ted to hear sermons, and then were cal­
led Audientes; and afterwards were al­
lowed to be present, and concerned in
some parts of the prayers, and then were
called Orantes and Genuflectentes; and
there was also a fourth degree of Cate­
chumens, who were such as desired bap­
tism, and were called Competentes.

CATEGOREMATICAL Word [with
Logicians] is a word that signifies some­
thing of it self; as a man, a horse, an
animal.

CATEGORICAL Syllogism [with Lo­
gicians] is a syllogism wherein both
proportions are categorical or positive;
as for example.
Every vice is odious.
Drunkenness is a vice;
Therefore drunkenness is odious.

CATEGORY [χατηγορία of χαταγο­
ρέω, Gr. to accuse] an accusation; a term
in Logick for order or rank, predica­
ment.

CATEGORIES [of χατεγόρημα, Gr.]
are reckon'd by Logicians 10, substance, 
quantity, quality, relation, acting, suffer­
ing, where, when, situation, having.

CATENATION, chaining.  L.

CATERPILLER [in a Figurative sense]
an envious person that does mischief
without provocation.

CATHARTICALNESS [of catharti­
cus, L. of χαθαιρω, Gr. to purge] purging
quality.

CATHERPLUGS, the same as Ca­
tharpings.

CATHETUS of Obliquation [in Catop­
tricks] a right line drawn perpendicular
to the speculum in the point of incidence
or reflection.

CATHETUS [Geom.] a line of a tri­
angle that falls perpendicularly; the
bottom being called the base, and the
other leg the hypothenuse.  L.

CATHOLICALNESS [of catholicus, 
L. catholique, F. of χαθὸλιχος, Gr.] being of
a catholick spirit, universalness.

CATHYPNIA [of χαθυπνόω, Gr. to
sleep sound] a deep or profound sleep, 
such as persons are in by taking opiates, 
or in a lethargy.

CATOPSIS [χατόψις, Gr.] the science
of reflex vision; the part of the science
of Opticks, which shews after what
manner objects may be seen by reflecti­
on; and explains the reason of it.

CATOPTRICAL Cistula, a machine
or apparatus, whereby little bodies are
represented large; and near ones ex­
tremely wide and diffus'd through a vast
space, and other agreeable phænomena;
by means of mirrors disposed by the
laws of catoptricks in the concavity of a
kind of chest.

CATOPTRICAL Dial, one which
exhibits objects by reflecting rays.

CATOPTRICAL Telescope, a teles­
cope that exhibits objects by reflection.

CATOTHERICA [in Physick] medi­
cines which purge the reigns and liver
from vicious juices by urine.

CATT HOOK [in a Ship] a hook to
raise or hoise up the anchor from the
top of the fore-castle.

CATTA [of Bantam] thin plates of
lead on a firing, 200 of which make
a fata, which is in value 3 farthings
English.



CATTEE [of Bantam] 200 7-8ths
ounces English.

CATTEE [of China] 16 tail, about
20 ounces 3-4ths averdupois.

CATTEE [of Japan] about 21 oun­
ces averdupois.

CATTEE [of Siam] 26 tail, or 1 and
1-2 ounce Lisbon.

CATTEE [of Summatra] 22 ounces
averdupois.

CATULITION, a going a sault, or
being proud as bitches.

CATULOTICA [of χατουλόω, Gr. to
skin over] medicines which cicatrize
wounds.

CAVA VENA [in Anatomy] i. e. the
hollow vein, the largest vein in the bo­
dy, descending from the heart. It is so
named from its large cavity, and into
it, as into a common channel, all the
lesser veins, except the Pulmonaris, emp­
ty themselves.

To CAVALCADE, to skirmish as
they march, and firing at one another
by way of diversion.

CAVATENESS [of cavatus, L.] 
hollowness.

CAVOUSNESS [of cavatus, L.] 
hollowness.

CAUDA LUCIDA [with Astrono­
mers] the lion's-tail, a fixed star of the
first magnitude,  L.

CAVERNATED [cavernatus, L.]
made in caverns.

CAVERNOSA CORPORA clitoris 
[Anat.] are 2 nervous or spongy bodies
like those of the penis; having their
origin from the lower part of the os pu­
bis on each side, and united together, 
constitute the body of the clitoris.

CAVERNOSUM corpus urethræ; [A­
nat.] a third spongious body of the Pe­
nis; so called because the Urethra or
urinary passage of the Penis is inclosed
therewith.

CAVERNOUSNESS [of cavernosus, 
L.] fulness of holes.

CAVESSON [with Horsemen] is a
sort of note-band, sometimes of iron, 
sometimes of leather or wood, some­
times flat, and sometimes hollow or
twisted, which is clapt upon a horse's
nose to wring it, to forward the sup­
pling and breaking of the horse.

CAVIARY [caviero, Ital.] a sort
of eatable made of the
roes of several sorts of fish pickled; but
especially of the spawn of sturgeons ta­
ken in the river Volga in Muscovy, which
both in colour and substance looks
much like green soap.

CAVEER [caviero, Ital.] a sort
of eatable made of the
roes of several sorts of fish pickled; but
especially of the spawn of sturgeons ta­
ken in the river Volga in Muscovy, which
both in colour and substance looks
much like green soap.

CAVERS [among Miners] thieves
who steal ores out of the mines.

CAVILLATION [with School-men]
a sophistical and false argument; a
particular manner of disputing, ground­
ed on nothing but quirks and contenti­
ous niceties.

Greater CAVITIES of the Body [with
Anat.] the head for the brain, the
chest for the lungs, &c. the lower bel­
ly for the liver, spleen and other bowels.

Lesser CAVITIES of the Body [with
Anat.] the ventricles of the heart and
brain; also the hollow parts of bones.

CAUFF, a chest with holes at the
top, to keep fish alive in the water.

CAULEDON [with Surgeons] a term
used for the breaking of a bone across, 
when the parts of it are separated so, 
that they will not lie strait,  L.

CAULICOLES [with Architects] 
are 8 lesser caules
or stalks, springing out of the 4 princi­
pal caules or stalks.

CAULICULI [with Architects] 
are 8 lesser caules
or stalks, springing out of the 4 princi­
pal caules or stalks.

CAUSALTY [with Tin-miners] the
earth, or stony matter which is sepa­
rated from the tin ore in the stamping
mill, &c. by washing before it is dryed
and goes to the crazing mill.

CAUSE [causa, L.] cause is that which
produces an effect, or that by which a
thing is. Causes are divided into four
kinds.

Efficient CAUSE, is that which pro­
duces another cause; also an external
cause from which any thing derives its
being or essence by a real action. There
are several of these species.

A distant CAUSE, so is a grandfather
in respect to his grandson.

An equivocal CAUSE, is that which
is of a different kind and denomination
from its effect; as God, with respect
to his creatures.

An instrumental CAUSE, the instru­
ment with which a piece of work is
done.

An intellectual CAUSE, a man with
respect to what he does with judgment.

A free CAUSE, such is a man who
walks.

A natural CAUSE, the sun.

A necessary CAUSE, the fire that
burns wood.

A proper CAUSE, as the sun of light;
so also the sun giving light to a cham­
ber, the window is but the conditional
cause, without which the effect would
not have been; conditio sine qua non.

The Physical CAUSE, is that which
produces a sensible corporeal effect; as
the sun is the cause of heat; also a fire
which burns a house.

The moral CAUSE, the man who sets
it on fire; also that which produces a
real effect, but in things immaterial, as
repentance is the cause of forgiveness.



A total CAUSE, is that which produ­
ces the whole effect, as God in creating
Adam, because nothing concurred with
him in it.

Partial CAUSE, is that which con­
curs with some other in producing the
effect, as the father and mother of a
child, because both the one and the o­
ther were necessarily concerned in the
generation of it.

Accidental CAUSE, as the sun that
kills a man by its heat, because he was
ill disposed before.

Productive CAUSE, is the mother of
her child.

A preserving CAUSE, as the nurse of
her child.

An universal CAUSE, is that which
by the extent of its power may produce
all effects, as a father in respect to his
children, because they are like him in
nature.

Universal CAUSE, the air that enters
an organ, is so of the harmony of that
organ.

A particular CAUSE, is that which
can only produce a single effect; or a
certain kind of effects.

The particular CAUSE of the harmony
of an organ, is the disposition of each
pipe, and he who plays.
These are all distinctions that some
Logicians make of the efficient cause.

The final CAUSE [among Logicians] is
the end for which a thing is, or the
motive which induced a man to act.
This again is distinguished into princi­
pal ends and accessary ends which are
considered, only as over and above.

CAUSE [in Metaphysicks] is an active
principle, influencing the thing caused.

Internal CAUSE, is that which par­
takes of the essence of the thing caused, 
viz. Matter and Form.

External CAUSE, is that which has
an outward influence, viz. Efficient and
Final.

The material CAUSE [among Logici­
ans] is that out of which things are
formed; as silver is the matter of a sil­
ver cup.

The formal CAUSE [with Logicians]
is that which makes a thing what it is, 
and distinguishes it from others; as
a stool, a table, &c.

First CAUSE, that which acts by its­
self and from its own proper force and
virtue; as God is the first cause.

Second CAUSES, are such as derive
the power or faculty of acting from a
first cause.

CAUSODES [χαυσόδης, Gr.] a conti­
nual burning Fever.

CAUSTICK Stone [with Surgeons] a
composition of several ingredients, for
burning or eating holes in the part to
which it is applied.

CAUSTICK Curve [in the higher
Geometry] a curve formed by the con­
course or co-incidence of the rays of
light reflected or refracted from some
other curve.

CAUSTICKNESS [of causticus, L.
caustique, F. of χαυστιχος of χαίω, Gr.
to burn] caustick quality.

Silver CAUTERY [so call'd, because
made of silver, dissolved in three times
the weight of spirit of nitre, and pre­
pared according to art] this is accoun­
ted the best sort of cautery, and will
continue for ever, if it be not exposed
to the air, and is otherwise called the
infernal stone.

CAUTIOUSNESS [of cautio, L.] wa­
riness, circumspectness.

CEASELESS, without ceasing. Mil­
ton.

CECA [in Corduba in Spain] a reli­
gious house, from whence the Spaniards
have framed this proverb to go from
Ceca to Mcca, i. e. to turn Turk or Ma­
hometan.

CECROPS, who reigned in Athens, 
and had himself the honour to be called
Jupiter, was the first mortal that ac­
knowledged Jupiter by the name of
Supreme, and taught his subjects, that
no sort of cruelty ought to approach
the divine altars, and that nothing that
had life ought to be sacrificed; but ra­
ther cakes of their country corn, since
that clemency and beneficence best a­
greed with the divine nature.

CEDRATED [cedratus, L.] anointed
with juice or oil of cedar-trees.

CEDRIUM, the oil or liquor that is­
sues out of the cedar-tree, with which
the ancients used to anoint books and
other things to preserve them from
moths, worms and rottenness; the Egyp­
tians used it for the embalming of dead
bodies.

CEILING [with Architects] the upper
part or roof of a lower room; or a lay
or covering of plaister over laths, nail­
ed on the bottom of the joists that bear
the floor of an upper room, &c.

CELANDINE [Celidonia, L. χελιδονια
of χελλιδονες, Gr. swallows] the herb o­
therwise called swallow-wort, on ac­
count of a tradition that swallows make
use of it as a medicine for the eye-sight.

CELE [χηλή, Gr.] a tumour or swelling
in any part of the body, especially in
the groin.



CELEBRATEDNESS [celebritas, L.
celebrité, F.]
famousness,
renownedness.

CELEBRATENESS [celebritas, L.
celebrité, F.]
famousness,
renownedness.

CELEBRIOUSNESS [celebritas, L.
celebrité, F.]
famousness,
renownedness.

CELERRIMI descensus linea [with
Mathematicians] is the curve of the
swiftest descent of any natural body;
or that curved or crooked line, in which
an heavy body, descending by its own
gravity or weight, would move from
one given point to another, in the short­
est space of time.

CELESTIALNESS [of cælestis, L.]
heavenliness.

CELIAC Passion [of χοιλία, Gr. the
belly] a kind of flux of the belly, where
in the food does not indeed pass perfect­
ly crude, but half digested.

CELIBATENESS [of cælibatus L. 
celibat, F.] bat­
chelorship.

CELIBATESHIP [of cælibatus L. 
celibat, F.] bat­
chelorship.

CELICOLI [i. e. Heaven-w
orshippers]
certain vagabonds condemned in the re­
scripts of the emperor Honorius amongst
heathens and hereticks, A. D. 408.

CELL [some derive it of אלב Heb. a
prison, or where any thing is shut up]
a cot, a privy chamber, a partition in a
monastery, where a monk lies, &c.  L.

CELLS [in Rome] the apartments or
rooms in which the cardinals are kept
apart one from another, during the time
of the election of a new pope.

CELLS [with Botanists] the hollow
parts of husks or pods of plants contain­
ing the seed.

CELLS [cella, L.] the little divisions
or apartments in honey combs, where
the young bees, &c. are distributed.

CELLULÆ adiposæ [anatomy] the
loculi or little cells wherein the fat of
bodies that are in good habit is contain­
ed L.

CELOTOMIA [of χήλη a rupture, and
τομή, Gr. a cutting] the operation of
the Hernia.

CELSA [a barbarous term of Para­
celsus] a small collection of vagrant spi­
rits that endeavour to make their exit
by their continual motion at any part
of the body.

CEMENT Royal, a particular manner
of purifying gold, by laying over it beds
of hard parte, made of a composition of
one part of Sal Armoniack, and two of
common salt, and four of potters earth
or brick-dust, the whole being moisten­
ed well with urine.

CEMENT [in Chymical Writers] is ex­
pressed by this character Z.

CENOTAPH [χενοτάφιον, Gr.] an em­
pty tomb, set up in honour of the dead;
especially when the body is buried in
another country.

CENSORS [in antient Rome] magistra­
tes whose office was to reform man­
ners, and to value estates and tax them
accordingly; to inspect the management
of private families, in relation to edu­
cation and expenses; they were two in
number chosen both at the same time, 
one of a noble or patrician family, and
the other of a common or plebean fa­
mily; and continued in their office five
years.

This office became in time to be in so
great reputation, that none were chosen
into it, till they had gone through the
most considerable in the republick.

The state of Venice has a like officer
at this day; Censors is also a title given
to those persons appointed by the state
to license books.

CENSORIOUSNESS [of censorius, L.]
aptness to censure.

CENSURABLENESS, liableness to be
censured.

CENSURAL Book, a register of tax­
ations.

CENTAURS [with Astron.] a southern
constellation represented on a globe in
that form, and consisting of 40 stars.

CENTAURS [of χεντεῖν τήν αὔραν, be­
cause Ixion begot them on a cloud; or
as others say, of χεντεῖν to prick or push
and ταῦρος an ox] monsters, half men
and half horses, which, according to
the poets, were the sons of Ixion or the
night.

Pliny affirms, that he saw one of these
monsters embalmed at Rome, and Plu­
tarch avers the same in his feast of the
7 sages; but Palæphatus is of opinion the
fable was invented upon this, that when
Ixion reigned in Thessaly, a herd of bulls
on mount Pelius run mad, and rendered
the rest of the mountain inaccessible;
the bull also coming down on the cul­
tivated lands, shook down the trees and
fruit, and were very injurious to the
labouring beasts. Upon which, Ixion
issued out a proclamation, that he would
give a great reward to any one that
should rid the place of these bulls. Up­
on which, certain young men dwelling
at the foot of the mountain in a village
called Nephele, contrived to teach horses.
For before that time riding upon horses
was unknown, and they were only used
in chariots, &c. These young men
mounting the horses, rode up towards
the bulls, and making an incursion into
the middle of the herd, wounded them
with darts, and when the bulls run at
them they fled from them, for the horses
were too swift for the bulls. And when
the bulls made a stand, they turned back



and attack'd them again, and by this
means killed them; and thence they
were called centaurs, because they at­
tacked the bulls with sharp pointed in­
struments. Upon this, these centaurs
having recieved their money of Ixion
for the exploit they had done, and so
becoming wealthy, they grew arrogant, 
boasting and contumelious, and commit­
ted many disorders. Palæphatus.

CENTENARIOUS [centenarius, L.]
belonging to 100 years.

CENTENARY [centenarius, L.] of or
pertaining to an hundred.

CENTICIPITOUS [centiceps of cen­
tum and caput, L.] having 100 heads.

CENTIFIDOUS [centifidus, L.] divi­
ded into 100 parts or ways.

CENTIFOLIOUS [centifolius, L.] ha­
ving or producing 100 leaves.

CENTIPEDE [centipes, L.] a worm.
&c. having an hundred or many feet.

CENTNAR [at Lubeck] is 8 lispounds
and a lispound is 28 pounds.

CENTO, a patch'd garment, made up
of divers shreds.  L.

CENTO, a poem composed of several
pieces, pick'd up and down out of the
works of other persons.

CENTRAL Fire [with Chymists] that
fire which they imagine to be in the
center of the earth, the fumes and
vapour of which make the metals and
minerals, and ripens and brings them
to perfection.

CENTRE of a sphere, is a point from
which all the lines drawn to the surface
are equal.

CENTRE of a dial, is that point where
the axis of the world intersects the
plane of the dial; and so in those dials
that have centers, it is that point, 
wherein all the hour lines meet. If the
dial plane be parallel to the axis of the
earth, it will have no center at all; but
all the hour lines will be parallel to the
stile and to one another.

CENTRE of a conick section, is the
point where all the diameters concur.

CENTRE of an Hyperbola, is a point
in the middle of the Transverse axis, 
which is without figure, and common
to the opposite section.

CENTRE common of the gravity of two
bodies [Geometry] is a point in a right
line, which joins their centres together, 
and so placed in that line, that their
distances from it shall be reciprocally
as the weight of those bodies is. And
if another body shall be set in the same
right line, so that its distance from any
point in it be reciprocally as the weight
of both the former bodies taken toge­
ther, that point will be the common
centre of gravity of all three, &c.

CENTRE of Oscillation, the centre of
the swing of a pendulum; so that if the
pin of the pendulum, fastened above, be
taken for the centre of the circle, whole
circumference divides the ball or bob in­
to two equal parts, the middle point of
the arch, so dividing the ball, is the cen­
tre of Oscillation.

CENTRE of a parallelogram, the point
wherein its diagonals intersect.

CENTRE of a bastion, a point in the
middle of the gorge of the bastion, 
whence the capital line commences.

CENTRE of a batallion, the middle of
a batallion, where there is usually a
square space left.

CENTRE of Attraclion [in the New
Astronomy] that point to which the re­
volving planet or comet is attracted or
impelled by the force or impetus of
gravity.

CENTRE of Percussion [with Philoso­
phers] is that point of a body in motion
wherein all the forces of that body are
considered as united in one.

CENTRE of a curve of the highest kind, 
is the point where two diameters con­
cur.

To CENTRE, to meet as it were in
a point.

CENTRE-FISH, a kind of sea-fish.

CENTRIFUGAL Force [with Mathe­
maticians] is the endeavour of any thing
to fly off from the center in a tangent.
For all moving bodies endeavour after
a rectilinear motion, because that is the
easiest, shortest, and most simple. And
if ever they move in any curve, there
must be something that draws them
from their rectilinear motion, and de­
tains them in the orbit, whenever the
centripetal force ceases, the moving bo­
dy wouid strait go off in a tangent to
the curve in that very point, and so
would get still farther from the center
or focus of the motion.

CENTRIPETAL Force [with Philo­
sophers] is that force by which any body
moving round another, is drawn down
or tends towards the center of its orbit;
and is much the same with gravity.

CENTROBARIC Method [in Mecha­
nicks] a certain method of determining
the quantity of a surface or solid by
means of the center of gravity of it.

CENTRUM Phonicum [in Acousticks]
is the place where the speaker stands in
polysyllabical echoes.

CENTRUM Phonicampticum, is the
place or object that returns the voice in
an echo.



CENTUMGEMINOUS [centumgemi­
nus, L.] an hundred-fold.

CENTUMVIRAL, of or pertaining
to the centumvirate.

To CENTUPLICATE [centuplica­
tum, of centum and plico, L. to fold] to
fold or double an hundred-fold.

CENTURIÆ [among the Roman peo­
ple] certain parties consisting each of
100 men. Thus divided by Servius
Tullius the sixth king of Rome, who di­
vided the people into six classes. The
first class had 30 centuries, and they
were the richest of all; the second, 
third and fourth consisted each of 20
centuries, and the sixth class was coun­
ted but one century, and comprehended
all the meaner sort of people.

CEPHALALGICS [χιφαλαλγιχὰ, Gr.]
medicines good for the head-ach.

CEPHALALGY [cephalalgia, of χεφα­
λαλγία, of χεφαλὴ the head and ἄλγος
pain, Gr.] any pain in the head; but
some appropriate it chiefly to a fresh
head-ach; one that proceeds from in­
temperance or an ill disposition of the
parts.

CEPHALIGA [with Anatomists] the
cephalick vein, is the outermost vein
that creeps along the arm, between the
skin and muscles, it is called the Cepha­
lick Vein from χεφαλὴ, Gr. a head, be­
caufe the ancients used to open it rather
than any other for diseases in the head;
but since the discovery of the circula­
tion of the blood, it is accounted equal, 
whether the blood be taken from the
Cephalica, Mediana or Basilica, L.

CEPHALICKS, medicines good for
distempers in the head.

CEPHALOMANCY [cephalomantia, 
L. of χεφαλομαντεία, Gr. of χέφαλος the
head, and μαντεία divination] a divina­
ion by the head of an ass, which they
broiled on the coals, and after having
muttered a few prayers, they repeated
the persons names or the crime, in case
only one was suspected, at which if the
jaws made any motion, and the teeth
chattered against one another, they
thought the person that had done the ill
deed sufficiently discovered.

CERATED [ceratus, L.] covered
with wax.

CERATOIDES tunica [with Anato­
mists] the horny coat of the eye.

CERBERUS. The poets tell us that
Cerberus was a dog that had three
heads. Was born of Typhon and E­
chidna.

They also tell us, that Hercules drag­
ged this dog out of hell. Geryon had
great dogs to keep his cattle, one of
which was Cerberus, the other Orus in
the city of Tricaria, [i. e. three heads]
before he drove away the oxen. One
Molossus, a Mycenean, would have
begg'd this of Eurystheus; but he refu­
sing to let him have him, he prevails
upon the herdsmen; they shut up the
dog in a cave in Laconica near Tœnarus, 
and put to him some bitches in order
for a breed. Eurystheus sends Hercules
to find out this dog, and he having
wandered over all Peloponnese, at last
found out the cave where the dog was
hid, and going down into the cave
brought out the dog; and thence they
gave it out, that Hercules went down
into hell through the cave, and brought
the dog from thence. Palephatus.

CERCELE [in Heraldry) 
as a Cross Cercele, is a cross
which opening at the end
turns round both ways, like
a ram's horn, as in the fi­
gure annexed.

Image omitted.



CERCLET [in Heraldry] signifies
within a circle or diadem, or having a
diadem.

CEREAL [cerealis, L.] pertaining to
Ceres, or bread corn; to sustenance, or
food.

CEREALIA, solemn feasts to Ceres.
In the festival of Ceres, her worshippers
ran up and down with lighted torches
in their hands, because that she is relat­
ed to have ran about the world in this
manner to seek for her daughter Proser­
pina.

The inhabitants of Eleusis in Greece
appointed this ceremony, which was
to be acted only by women, who in the
temple of Ceres acted a Thousand shame­
ful pranks, and because Ceres did not
reveal her secrets, nor discover her de­
sign, until she heard of the welfare of
her daughter, it was not lawful to de­
clare what was acted in her temple dur­
ing the festival.

CEREBRATED [cerebratus, L.] hav­
ing his brains beat out.

CEREBROSE [cerebrosus, L.] brain­
sick, mad-brained, wilful, stubborn.

CEREBROSITY, brain-sickness.

CEREMONIALNESS [of ceremonialis, 
L. ceremoniel, F.] the being ceremonial.

CEREMONIOUSNESS [of ceremoni­
eux, F.] fulness or fondness of ceremo­
nies.

CERES, according to the poets, was
the daughter of Saturn and Ops, whose
daughter Pluto having stolen, she, desir­
ous to find her, lighted torches at Mount
Ætna, resolving to seek her night and
day throughout all the earth.



Ovid says, that Ceres was the first
that tilled the ground, and furnished
mankind with corn for food, and by
laws taught them justice, and the man­
ner of living in society, which before
they were strangers to.

CERES and Vesta. They seem to be
no other than the earth itself; for the
ancients call her Ἑστίαν, i. e. Vesta, διά
τὸ ἑστάναι, i. e. because it stands; or be­
cause the universal world leans and bears
upon it, as on a certain foundation.

And in as much as she is said to pro­
duce corn, she very properly bears a
garland, heavy with the ears of corn.

Triptolemus, of Eleusina, is storied to
have sown bread-corn all over the orb
of the earth, at the time he was carried
in Ceres's chariot, which was drawn by
flying dragons: for this man was the
first of the ancients that took a survey
of all things; and God having endowed
him with a large share of knowledge, 
he came at last to understand how bar­
ley was to be managed, how separated
from the chaff and to be beaten or ground.

Eleusis was a place where the use of
barley was first found out, and Ceres
taking her name from the place, was
called Eleusinia.

Pluto is said to have stolen away Pro­
serpina, the daughter of Ceres. The
foundation of this fiction is, that the
seeds of bread-corn are for some time
hid in the earth. In the spring time they
sacrifice to her a turf and the grass, with
much mirth and rejoycing, seeing all
things to grow green, and to afford
great hopes of fertility. Hence Pluto, 
i. e. riches, is supposed to be the son of
Ceres.

And they very properly offer to Ceres
sows with pig, on account of the ferti­
lity of the earth, the easy conception
and perfect maturity.

CERNULIA, a festival of Bacchus, 
in which they danced on one foot upon
blown bladders, that by falling down
they might cause laughter.  L.

CEROGRAPHY [cerographia, L. of
χηρογραφία, Gr.] a painting or writing in
wax.

CEROMANCY [ceromantia, L. of χη­
ρομαντεία, of χῆρος and μαντεία, Gr. di­
vination] divination by wax. The
manner was thus: they melted wax
over a vessel of water, letting it drop
within three definite spaces, and obser­
ved the figure, situation, distance and
concretion of the drops.

CEROMATICK [ceromaticus, L.] a­
nointed with Ceroma.

CERTAINNESS [certitudo, L.] full
assurance, sureness.

CERTITUDE [certitudo, L.] is pro­
perly a quality of the judgment or the
mind, importing an adhesion of the
mind to the proposition we affirm; or
the strength wherewith we adhere to it.

CERTITUDE Metaphysical, is that
which arises from a metaphysical evi­
dence; such a one as a geometrician
has of the truth of this proposition, 
that the 3 angles of a triangle are equal
to two right ones.

CERTITUDE Moral, such a cer­
titude as is founded on moral evidence, 
such as that a criminal has, who hears
his sentence read.

CERTITUDE Physical, is that which
arises from physical evidence, such as a
person that has fire in his hand, when
he feels it burn, or sees it blaze.

CERVICAL, belonging to the neck.

CERVIX [Anatomy] the hinder part
of the neck.

CESSATION [of Arms] is when a
governour of a place besieged, finding
himself reduced to the last extremity, 
so that he must either surrender, or
himself, garrison, and inhabitants
would be sacrific'd, or at least lie at the
mercy of the enemy, erects a white
flag on the breach, or beats a Chamade
for a capitulation, at which both par­
ties cease firing, and all other acts of
hostility cease, till the proposals made
are heard, and either agreed to or re­
jected.

CESSION [in the Civil Law] a vo­
luntary and legal surrender of effects
to creditors, to avoid an imprison­
ment.

CESSMENT, an assessment, a tax.

CESTUS [χέστος, Gr.] a marriage-­
girdle, that of old times the bride used
to wear, and the bridegroom unloosed
on the wedding-night; also a leathern
gauntlet garnished with lead, used by
combatants, or in the exercises of the
Athletæ; also the girdle of Venus and
Juno, according to the poets.

CETUS [Astronomy] a southern con­
stellation, consisting of 23 stars.

CEVADO, or Cobit [of India] the
shorter for silk and linnen 27 inches
English.

CEVADO lesser [of Agra Delli] con­
tains 32 inches.

CEVADO lesser [at Cambaia] 35 in­
ches.

CEVADO lesser [at Surat] 35 inches.

CH have a particular sound in English
words, as arch, march, rich, roch, tench, 
perch, ditch, Dutch, change, charge, &c.

CH, in some words of a Greek deriva­
tion, is sounded as before, as archbishop, 



architecture, &c. In some others it is
sounded like K, as Archangel, &c.

CH, in words of a Hebrew derivation,
is most commonly sounded as K, Cham,
Rachab, Michael, Nebuchadnezzar; but
in some it is sounded as in English, as
Chittim, Rachel, &c.

CHACE, the gutter of a cross-bow.

A good CHACE [Sea Term] a ship is
said to have a good chace, when she is
built so forward on or a stern, as to
carry many guns, to shoot right forward
or backward.

Foot in CHACE [Sea Term] to lie with
a ship's forefoot in the chace, is to sail
the nearest course to meet her, and to
cross her in her way.

To CHACK [with Horsemen] a term
used of a horse that beats upon the
hand, when his head is not steady;
but he tosses up his nose, and shakes
it all of a sudden, to avoid the subjecti­
on of the bridle.

To CHAFE [among Mariners] a rope
is said to chafe, when it galls or frets
by rubbing against any rough or hard
thing; as the cable is chafed in the hawse,
signifies it is fretted, or begins to wear
out there.

CHAFER, an insect, a kind of beetle.

CHAFF-WEED, a sort of herb.

CHAFFERS [Old Law] wares or
merchandizes.

CHAGRIN, commonly called shag-­
green, a sort of grained leather chiefly
used for the covers of pocket-books,
letter-cases, &c.

CHAIR [in a Metaphorical
Sense] is used of the
president or chief man, of an assembly ei­
ther publick or private, as in the house of
commons, they say speak to the Chair
i.e. to the speaker who sits in the Chair;
so also of a lord-mayor of London, as
those aldermen who have serv'd the of­
fice of mayor are said to have pass'd the
Chair; and those who have not are said
to be below the Chair.

CHAIR-MAN, [in a Metaphorical
Sense] is used of the
president or chief man, of an assembly ei­
ther publick or private, as in the house of
commons, they say speak to the Chair
i.e. to the speaker who sits in the Chair;
so also of a lord-mayor of London, as
those aldermen who have serv'd the of­
fice of mayor are said to have pass'd the
Chair; and those who have not are said
to be below the Chair.

CHAINS [in a Figurative sense] signify
bonds, bondage or slavery.

CHALAZA [χάλαζα, Gr. hail] the
treadle of an egg, which are something
longish bodies more concrete than the
white, knotty; have some sort of light,
as hail, whence they take their name;
because the Chalaza (for there are two
of them) consist as it were of so many
hail stones, separated from one another
by that white. Every egg (as has been
said) has two of them, one in the acute,
and the other in the obtuse end; one of
them is bigger than the other, and fur­
ther from the yolk; the other is less,
and extends itself from the yolk towards
the acute end of the egg; the greater is
composed of two or three knots, like so
many hail-stones, which are moderate­
ly distant from each other, the less in
order to succeed the greater.

CHALAZA [of χάλαζα, Gr.] a
little swelling in the
eye-lids like a hail-stone.

CHALAZION [of χάλαζα, Gr.] a
little swelling in the
eye-lids like a hail-stone.

CHALAZOPHYLACES [of χάλαζα
hail and φυλάσσω to preserve, Gr.] cer­
tain priests among the Grecians, who
pretended to divert hail and tempests, 
by sacrificing a lamb or a chicken; of
if they had not these, by cutting their
finger, and appealing the anger of the
gods by their blood.

CHALCIDICK [of χαλχὸς brass
and, διχη justice]
a magnificent hall belonging to a tribu­
nal or court of justice.

CHALCIDICUS [of χαλχὸς brass
and, διχη justice]
a magnificent hall belonging to a tribu­
nal or court of justice.

CHALCITIS [χαλχιτις Gr.] brass, or
the stone out of which brass is tried;
also red vitriol.

CHALCOSMARAGDUS [χαλχοσμα­
ραγδος, Gr.] the bastard emerald.

CHADRON. See Chaldron.

Principal CHALLENGE is what 
is allow­
ed by law, without cause alledged or
further examination, and the prisoner
may except against 21, and in cases of
high treason 35.

Peremptory CHALLENGE is what 
is allow­
ed by law, without cause alledged or
further examination, and the prisoner
may except against 21, and in cases of
high treason 35.

CHALLENGE upon reason, is when
the prisoner does alledge some reason
for his exception, and such as is suffici­
ent, if it be true.

CHALCEDONIUS [with Jewellers]
a defect in some precious stones, when
they find white spots or stains in them
like those of the Chalcedony.

CHALYBEATE [of chalybs, L. steel]
of or pertaining to steel, or that is of
the temper or quality of steel.

CHALYBEATE Crystals of Tartar 
[with Chemists] See Cream of Tartar.

CHAM, the title of the emperor or
soveraign prince of Tartary.

CHAMÆLEON [Χαμαιλέων of χαμαι
the ground, and λέων, Gr. a lion] a little
beast like a lizard, which for the most
part lives on the air or flies &c. See
Chameleon.

Bottled CHAMBER [of a Mortar
piece] that part where the powder lies, 
being globical, with a neck for its com­
munication with the cylinder.

CHAMBER [of a Mine] the place
where the powder is confined, and is
generally of a cubical form.

Powder CHAMBER [on a Battery] a
place sunk into the ground, for holding
the powder or bombs, &c. where they



may be out of danger, and preserved
from rain.

CHAMELEON [in Hieroglyphicks] re­
presents an hypocrite and a time-server, 
one that is of any religion, and takes
any impression that will serve his present
turn; for it is related of this creature
that it can change itself into any colour
but white and red.

CHAMFER 
[Architecture] a small 
furrow or gutter on
a pillar, an ornament consisting of half
a Scotia.

CHAMFRET [Architecture] a small 
furrow or gutter on
a pillar, an ornament consisting of half
a Scotia.

CHAMFERED [Botany] the stalks of
some plants are said to be chamfered.
when they have impressions upon them
like furrows.

CHAMFERING [in Carpentry, 
&c.] is the cut­
ting the edge or end of any thing aslope
or bevel.

CHAMFRAINING [in Carpentry, 
&c.] is the cut­
ting the edge or end of any thing aslope
or bevel.

CHAMOYS' Leather, commonly cal­
led shammy, the skin of a kind of a
wild-goat.

CHAMOS [שוזכה, Heb.] an idol of the Moabites, which, 
according to the opinion of some, was
the same with Baal-Phegor or Priapus;
but others take it to be Bacchus.

CHEMOSH [שוזכה, Heb.] an idol of the Moabites, which, 
according to the opinion of some, was
the same with Baal-Phegor or Priapus;
but others take it to be Bacchus.

CHAMPIAN [champagne, F.] open
plain, even, not enclosed; as a cham­
pion country.

CHANCE, hazard or fortune: a term
we apply to events to denote that they
happen without any necessary cause.  F.

CHANCE [Metaphysicks] many things
happen by chance in the world, with re­
gard to second causes; but nothing at all
happens by chance in respect to the first
cause (God) who disposes and preordains
all things from all eternity. For chance
and fortune are only to be said properly, 
in respect to him that is ignorant of the
intention of the director. And in asmuch
as the divine intention is hid from man
till the thing is done; therefore the same
with respect to man, is said to happen
by chance; but not in respect to the
first cause.

CHANCE, is also used for the man­
ner of deciding things, the conduct or
direction, whereof is left at large, and
not reducible to any determinate rules
or measures, or where there is no ground
or pretence, as at cards, dice, &c.

CHANCELLOR [cancellarius, L.
whence cancelier, F.] an officer supposed
originally to have been a notary or
scribe under the emperor, and named
cancellarius, because he sat behind a
lettice, to avoid being pressed upon by
the people.

CHANCELLORS, there are also a
chancellor of the order of the Garter, a
chancellor of an university, a chancellor
of the first fruits, of a diocess, &c.

A CHANCELLOR [of an University]
seals the diploma's or letters of decrees, 
provision, &c. given in the university.

CHANCELLOR [of Oxford] is their
magistrate, whom the students them­
selves elect; his office is to govern the
university durante vita, to preserve and
defend the rights and privileges of it, to
call together assemblies, and to do jus­
tice among the members under his juris­
diction.

Vice CHANCELLOR [of Oxford] is
nominated annually by the chancellor, 
and elected by the university in convoca­
tion, to supply the absence of the chan­
cellor.

Pro-Vice-CHANCELLORS, four per­
sons chosen out of the heads of colleges, 
by the vice-chancellor, to one of which
he deputes his power in his absence.

CHANCELLOR [of Cambridge] much
the same with the chancellor of Oxford, 
saving that he does not hold his office
durante vita, but may be elected every
three years.

Vice CHANCELLOR [of Cambridge] is
annually chosen by the senate out of two
persons nominated by the heads of col­
leges and halls.

CHANCELLOR [of the order of Gar­
ter] an officer who seals the commissions
of the chapter and assembly of the
knights, keeps the register, and delivers
the acts under the seal of the order.

CHANCELLORSHIP [of cancellarius,
L. cancelier, F.] the office or dignity of
a chancellor.

CHANCERY-Court, was first ordain­
ed by William the Conqueror, who also
appointed or instituted the courts of
justice, which always removed with
his court.

CHAN­
DELEER 
[Gunnery]
a frame
of wood
of 2 large
planks of
six or se­
ven foot
asunder, 
but paral­
lel, on each of which is raised two pieces of
wood perpendicularly, between which
fascines are laid, which form a parapet;
they are made moveable from place to
place, according as there shall be occa­
sion, in order to cover workmen.

Image omitted.





CHANFRAIN BLANC [with Horse­
men] is a white mark upon a horse, de­
scending from the forehead almost to
the nose,  F.

CHANFRIN [with Horsemen] is the
forepart of a horse's head, extending
from under the ears along the interval, 
between the eye-brows down to the
nose.

CHANGEABLENESS [of changeant, 
F.] liableness or aptness to change.

CHANNEL [in Architecture] a chan­
nel in the Ionick chapiter is a part that
lies somewhat hollow under the abacus, 
and open upon the echinus, and has its
contours or turnings on each side to
make the voluta's or scrolls.

CHANNEL of the Larmier, is the sof­
fit of a cornice which makes the pen­
dant mouchette.

CHANNEL of the Volute [in the Io­
nick Capital] is the face of its circum­
volution.

CHANT [cantus, L.] the vocal mu­
sick of churches.

CHANTLATE [in Architecture] a
piece of wood fasten'd near the ends of
the rafters, and projecting beyond the
wall for supporting 2 or 3 rows of tile, 
to prevent the rain-water from trick­
ing down the sides of the wall.

CHAOLOGY [of χαὸς and λέγω, Gr.]
history or description of the chaos.

CHAOMANCY [of χαὸς and μαντεία, 
Gr. divination] the skill of prognostica­
ting by observations made on the air.

CHAOTIC [of χαὸς, Gr.] of or be­
longing to a chaos, a dark and rude
mass of matter, or an irregular system
of the elements, and all sorts of parti­
cles mixt and jumbled together; out of
which they suppose the world to have
been formed at first; also a confused
or disorderly heap of things.

A CHAP, a hiatus or opening.

A CHAP [of ceapan, Sax.] a chap­
man.

CHAPEAU, a cap or hat.  F.

CHAPEAU [in Heraldry] a cap of
state of velvet, of a scarlet colour, lin­
ed with ermines, worn by dukes. The
crest of noblemen's coats of arms is
born on this cap as on a wreath, and is
parted by it from the helmet; which
no crest must immediately touch.

CHAPELETS [with Horsemen] a cou­
ple of stirrup leathers, each of them
mounted with a stirrup, and joining at
top in a sort of leather buckle, called
the head of the chapelet, by which be­
ing adjusted to the rider's length and
bore, they are made fast to the saddle.

CHAPERON [of a Bit-mouth] a name
which horsemen give to scatch-mouths, 
and all others that are not canon-­
mouths, and signifies the end of the
bit that joins to the branch, just by the
blanket.

CHAPITERS with Mouldings [Archi­
tecture] are those which have no orna­
ments, as the Tuscan and Dorick.

CHAPITERS with Sculptures [Archi­
tecture] are those which are set off with
leaves and carved works, the finest of
which is that of the Corinthian order.

CHAPLAINSHIP, the office of a chap­
lain.

CHAPLAIN [in a Law sense]
is one who at­
tends upon the king or other person of
quality, in order to instruct him and
his family in matters of religion.

CHAPELLAINE [in a Law sense]
is one who at­
tends upon the king or other person of
quality, in order to instruct him and
his family in matters of religion.

CHAPMANRY [of ceapman and
ric, Sax. a king­
dom] the employment or dealings of a
chapman, or buyer or seller.

CHAPMANSHIP [of ceapman and
ric, Sax. a king­
dom] the employment or dealings of a
chapman, or buyer or seller.

CHAPPAR [in Persia] a courier or
messenger belonging to the Sophi, who
carries dispatches or messages from
court to court, and from the provinces
to the emperor's court, who is provid­
ed with a horse by the emperor's ma­
ster of the horse, on which he rides till
he grows weary, and then siezes on the
first horse he meets, if he likes it, and
returns his own to one who is sent after
him to carry it back; and the owner
of the second is obliged to send after
him till he takes a third, who must do
the like till he has finished his journey.

CHAPPE [in Heraldry] sig­
nifies cloathed, and is repre­
sented by dividing the chief
by lines drawn from the
centre, at the upper edge
to angles below into 3 parts.
The sections on the sides being of a dif­
ferent metal or colour from the rest, 
as in the figure annex'd. Some call it a
Chief Party per Bend Dexter or Sinister, 
or both.

Image omitted.



CHAPPERONNE [Heral­
dry] signifies hooded, of 
chapperonne an hood, which 
covers the head, such as fri­
ars wear, with as much
hanging down as covers the
shoulders, and part of the arms closed
every way, as in the figure annex'd.

Image omitted.



CHAPPEROONS are those little
shields containing
death's-heads, and other funeral devi­
ces, placed on the foreheads of horses
that draw hearses at funerals. The
reason of their being so called, is be­
cause these devices were anciently fa­



stened to the Chapperonnes, that those
horses used to wear with their other
coverings of state.

CHAPTER, a community of clergy­
men or ecclesiasticks, who serve a ca­
thedral or collegiate church.

CHAPTER [in Military Affairs] an
assembly or meeting of officers for the
regulation of their affairs.

CHAPTER [Architecture] the top or
head of a pillar.

CHAPTRELS [Architecture] the same
as imposts, i. e. those parts on which
the feet of arches stand.

CHAR [in the British tongue] is used
for Caer, which signifies a city, and be­
ing adjoin'd to the names of places, sig­
nifies the city of that place.

To CHAR, to make charcoal of wood
of oak, alder, lime-tree, &c. by cut­
ting it into convenient lengths, and pi­
ling it up in the form of a pyramid in
a deep pit, made in the ground for that
purpose, having a little hole to put in
the fire.

CHARACTER [of χαραχτὴρ, Gr.] a
certain manner of air or assemblage of
qualities, which result from several
particular marks, which distinguish a
thing from any other, so as it may be
thereby known, as we say the charac­
ter of Alexander, Cicero, &c.

CHARACTER [with Poets] is the re­
sult of the manners, or that which is
proper to each person, by which he is
singular in his manners, and distinguish­
able from others.

CHARACTER [with Romish Divines]
a certain indelible mark or impression, 
which is left behind them by certain
sacraments in those that receive them.

CHARACTER, is also used for cer­
tain visible qualities which claim reve­
rence or respect from those that are
vested with them, as the character of a
bishop, an ambassador, &c.

Nominal CHARACTERS, are those
properly called letters, which serve to
express the names of things.

Real CHARACTERS, are such as
express things and ideas instead of
names.

Emblematical CHARACTERS, are
such as not only express the things
themselves; but in some measure per­
sonate them and exhibit their form;
such as the Egyptian hieroglyphicks.

CHARACTERISTICK triangle of a
Curve [in the higher Geometry] is a rec­
tilinear right-angled triangle, whose
hypothenuse is a part of the curve, not
sensibly different from a right line.

CHARACTERISTICALNESS [of cha­
racteristicus, L. characteristique, F. of
χαραχτὴρ, Gr.] having characteristicks
or being characteristical.

CHARBON [with Horsemen] is that
little black spot or mark which remains
after a large spot in the cavity of the
corner teeth of an horse, about the 7th
or 8th year, when the cavity fills, and
the tooth being smooth and equal is
said to be rased.

CHARGE [charge, F.] a burden or
load; also management or care; also
office, employ or trust; also an accusa­
tion, impeachment; also an engage­
ment, fight or onset.

CHARGE [with Painters] an exagge­
rated representation of a person in
which the likeness is preserved, but at
the same time ridiculed, called also
over-charge.

CHARGEABLENESS [of caritas, or
cher dear, or charger, F.] costliness, 
dearness.

CHARGED [Heraldry] signifies the
figures represented on an escutcheon, 
by which the bearers are distinguished
one from another. Too many charges
in an escutcheon are not accounted so
honourable as fewer.

CHARINESS [of cher, F. carus, L.]
choiceness, sparingness, tenderness.

CHARIOCK, a kind of herb.

CHARITATIVE [in Canon Law] as
charitative subsidy, aid, &c. a moderate
allowance granted by a country to a
bishop, to bear his expences to a council.

CHARITES [Χαρίτες, i. e. the graces
Aglaia, Thalia and Euphrosyne, the daugh­
ters of Jupiter and Autonoe, or of Jupi­
ter and Eurynome. One of these was
painted with her back towards us, and
her face fromward, as proceeding from
us; and the other two with their faces
towards us, to denote that for one be­
nefit done we should receive double
thanks; they were painted naked, to
intimate that good offices should be
done without dissembling and hypocri­
sy; they were represented young, to
signify that the remembrance of bene­
fits should never wax old; and also
laughing, to signify that we should do
good to others with chearfulness and
alacrity. They are represented linked
together arm in arm, to instruct us that
one kindness should provoke another, so
that the knot and bond of love should
be indissoluble. The poets tell us, that
they used to wash themselves in the
fountain Acidalius, because benefits, 
gifts and good turns ought to be sincere
and pure, and not base, sordid and coun­
terfeit.



CHARITY [charitas, L.] the ancients
used to paint the virtue charity, as a
goddess in yellow robes, sitting in an
ivory chair, having on her head a tire
of gold set with precious stones.

CHARITY, is the love of our brethren
or a kind of brotherly affection one to­
wards another. The rule and standard
that this habit is to be examined and
regulated by among Christians, is the
love we bear to ourselves, or that Christ
bore to us; that is, it must be unfeigned, 
constant, and out of no other design but
their happiness.

CHARLOCK, a kind of herb.

CHARMS [charmes, F.] certain verses
or expressions, which by some are sup­
posed to have a bewitching power; also
certain particular graces in writing, as
the charms of Eloquence, of Poetry, &c.

CHARMING [of charmant, F.] enga­
ging, alluring, delighting.

CHARMINGNESS, charming, de­
lighting quality.

CHARON [according to the Poets]
was the son of Erebus and the night;
and the ferry-man of Pluto, who in an
old weather-beaten boat did convey the
souls of the deceased to him over the
rivers Cocytus, Periphlegethon, Acheron
and Styx.

Charon is storied to be covetous of
money, and therefore would carry none
over without a piece of silver, a half­
penny, which the ghosts were wont to
carry between their lips, being put there
by their surviving relations. And altho'
it was not granted, that any who were
not dead or unburied, should be admit­
ted into Charon's boat; yet Æneas, for
his piety, and Hercules and Theseus by
their valour, and Orpheus by his musick
obtained the priviledge to pass too and
fro in it.

There is an isle in the middle of the
lake Mœris in Egypt. The inhabitants
at present call this lake the lake of Cha­
ron; concerning whom they tell the fol­
lowing story; that he being a person of
mean extraction, and resolved to get
money by any means, he planted him­
self by this lake and exacted of every
corps, that was ferried over, a certain
sum of mony: tho' he did this without
any authority from the prince, yet he
carried on the imposition for several
years, till refusing passage to the dead
body of the king's son, till the usual sum
was paid him, the cheat was discovered;
however, he made the king so sensible
of the great advantage it would be to
him to continue this duty by his royal
authority, that he ordered it to be con­
stantly paid for the future, appointing
Charon his first minister, and confirming
him in his old imployment, which he
made the first post in the kingdom.
And Charon got such vast riches in it, 
that he became powerful enough to assas­
sinate the king and mount the throne in
his stead. This story has a great cor­
respondence with what the antients say
of Charon.

The original of this fable is supposed
to be this; Osiris, king of Egypt, was one
who took extraordinary care of the dead, 
causing them to be buried in several
places made on purpose near Memphis, 
to encourage virtue and a good life;
for persons were appointed to enquire
into every man's actions; and if the de­
ceased had not lived well, he was to be
cast into a place of shame and punish­
ment; but if he had lived virtuously, he
was to be interred in pleasant fields, beau­
tified and flourishing with all manner
of flowers. And by this means Osiris
did awe his subjects into a submission
and obedience to his laws.

This place was near the city Memphis
in Egypt and encompassed several times
with the river Nile: Hence the poets
take their four rivers of hell, Acheron, 
Styx, Cocytus and Phlegethon, 

An old fellow used to convey the dead
bodies over these four compassings of
the Nile; and thence comes the poets
Charon.

The heathens did believe that Charon
would never suffer the souls whose
bodies had laid long unburied, to pass
in his boat to rest in the Elysian fields;
but that they were tossed up and down
during the space of 100 years, upon the
banks of the river Acheron.

Therefore it was looked upon a cruel­
ty beyond expression, to deny burial to
the dead; and therefore all great com­
manders were very careful after a bat­
tle to interr the bodies of their soldiers
that had been slain.

He is represented as a very old man, 
fat and nasty, with a grey beard, long
and bushy, with sore fiery eyes, and
clothed in rags that will scarce hang up­
on his shoulders; of a rough, saucy tem­
per, making no distinction between prin­
ces and peasants, rich or poor; the
beautiful and deformed were all alike
to him.

CHARTS Hydrographick are sheets
of large
paper, on
which several parts of the land and sea
are described, with their respective
coasts, harbours, sounds flats, shelves, 



sands, rocks, &c. together with the
longitude and latitude of each place, 
and the points of the compass.

CHARTS Marine are sheets
of large
paper, on
which several parts of the land and sea
are described, with their respective
coasts, harbours, sounds flats, shelves, 
sands, rocks, &c. together with the
longitude and latitude of each place, 
and the points of the compass.

Sea CHARTS are sheets
of large
paper, on
which several parts of the land and sea
are described, with their respective
coasts, harbours, sounds flats, shelves, 
sands, rocks, &c. together with the
longitude and latitude of each place, 
and the points of the compass.

CHARTS, are maps of some part or
parts of the sea and the coasts belonging
thereto, in which are set down islands, 
shoals, mountains, rocks, quick-sands, 
&c. of these there are several sorts, as
besides Mercators chart;

There are the Globular Charts, where­
in the meridians incline and the paral­
lel are both equidistant and curvilinear, 
and the rumbs spirals.

The Plain Chart, is one wherein the
meridians and parallels are represen­
ted by right lines, parallel and perpen­
dicular to each other.

The Reduced Chart in which the me­
ridians are represented by right lines
converging towards the poles, and the
parallels by right lines parallel to one
another, but at unequal distances; this
last comes nearer the truth than the
Plain Chart See. Mercators Chart.

CHARTEL [cartel, F.] a letter of
defiance or challenge to a duel, used in
ancient times, when combats were al­
lowed for the determination of difficult
controversies in law.

CHARTERS, were first confirmed by
the broad seal in the time of king Ed­
ward the confessor, who was the first
king of England that made use of that
large and stately impression.

CHARYBDIS, a rock in the straights
of Sicily. The poets relate that this
Charybdis was a woman of a savage na­
ture, who set upon all passengers to rob
them. And she having stolen Hercules's
oxen, Jupiter killed her with his thun­
der-bolts, and turned her into a furi­
ous monster, and cast her into a gulph
that bears her name.

CHASE [Sea term] the ship chased.

To CHASE [with Goldsmiths, &c.] is
to work plate after a particular manner, 
called chased-work.

CHASER [Sea term] the ship in pur­
suit of the chase.

Stern CHASE [Sea term] is when the
chased is right a head with the chaser.

To lie with the ship's fore foot in the
CHASE [Sea term] is to sail the nearest
way to meet her, and so to cross her in
her way.

A ship of a good forward CHASE [Sea
term] a ship that is built forward on a
stern, that she may carry many guns, to
shoot right forwards or backwards; cal­
led also a ship of a good stern chase.

CHASE Guns [of a ship] are such whose
ports are either in the head (and then
they are used in chasing of others) or in
the stern, and are used only when they
are chased or pursued by others.

CHASEABLE, that may be chased or
hunted.

CHAST Wood, a plant or herb.

CHASTISEMENTS [with Horsemen]
are corrections of the severe and rigo­
rous effects of the aids; for when the
aids are given with severity, they become
punishments.

CHASTNESS [castitas, L.] a chri­
stian moral virtue
in abstaining from unlawful pleasures
of the flesh, and using lawful ones with
moderation.

CHASTITY [castitas, L.] a chri­
stian moral virtue
in abstaining from unlawful pleasures
of the flesh, and using lawful ones with
moderation.

CHAUNTRY. See Chantry.

CHAUSSE TRAPS [in
Mil. Affairs] machines
of iron, having four
points of about three or
four inches long, so made
that which ever way
they fall, there is still a
point up, and they are
to be thrown upon breaches, or in pas­
ses where the horse are to march, to
annoy them by runing into their feet
and clamming them.

Image omitted.



CHAUSSE trop haut [with Horsemen]
a white footed horse, when the white
marks run too high upon his legs.  F.

CHAUSSE [in Heraldry] signifies shod,
and in Blazon denotes a Section in base, 
the line by which it is formed proceed­
ing from the extremity of the base, and
descending to the side of the escutcheon
which it meets about the
Fesse-point; as if a chief had
shoes, the same being a di­
vision made in it by lines
drawn from the center of
the lower line of the chief, 
to the middle parts of the
sides thereof, and so is said to represent
shoes, as a manche is said to represent
sleeves, as in the figure annex'd.

Image omitted.



CHEAP [of ceapan, Sax. to buy or
sell] denotes the place's name, to which
it is added, to be or have been a mar­
ket town or place, as Cheapside, Eastcheap
Westcheap, &c.

CHEAP [of ceapan, Sax.] sold for a
small price.

CHEARFULNESS [of chere, F. of
χαιρη, Gr.]
light-heartedness.

CHEARINESS [[of chere, F. of
χαιρη, Gr.]
light-heartedness.

CHECKY [in Heraldry] is one of the
most noble and most ancient
figures that are used in ar­
mory, and a certain author
says, ought to be given to
none but valiant warriors, 
in token of their nobility.



For the chess-board represents a field
of battle, and the pawns and men on
both sides represent the soldiers of two
armies, which move, attack, advance or
retire, according to the two gamesters
that are their generals, see the figure
annexed. This figure is always com­
posed of metal and colour, and some
authors would have it reckoned among
the several sorts of furs.

Image omitted.



CHEATINGNESS [of cerra, Sax.]
defraud or defrauding quality.

CHECK, [echec, F.] loss, fatal blow, 
misfortune.

CHELONITES [of χελεδὼη, Gr. a swal­
low] a stone found in the bellies of
young swallow, good against the falling
sickness.

CHEMIA [από τοῖ χύω, Gr.] the same
as Chymia.

CHEMICE, the art of casting figures
in metals.

CHEMIN, des rondes [in Fortificat.] the
way of the rounds, a space between the
rampart and the lower parapet, for the
rounds to go about. See False bray.

CHEMISE a shirt or shift, a lining or
casing with stone.  F.

CHEMISE [with Masons] the solidity
of a wall from the Telus or slope, to
the stone-row,  F.

CHEMOSIS, a swelling of the white
coat of the eye, called albuginea tunica, 
that makes the black of it appear hollow, 
and is a violent inflamation with ex­
treme pain, the eye-lids being turned
inside out.

CHERISHER [of cherir, F.] one who
cherishes.

CHERSONESE [in Geography] a pen­
insula, a tract of land almost encompas­
sed with the sea.

CHERVIL, an herb.

To CHERWIT, to cry like a par­
tridge.

CHESS, a game performed with little
round pieces of wood, on a board divi­
ded into 64 squares, where art and saga­
city are so indispensibly requisite, that
chance seems to have no place; and a
person never loses but by his own fault.
Each side has 8 men and as many pawns, 
which are to be moved and shifted ac­
cording to certain laws and rules of
that game.

CHEST foundering. See foundering.

CHEVALER [with Horsemen] is when
a horse with passaging upon a walk or
trot, his far fore-leg crosses or overlaps
the other fore-leg every time or mo­
tion.  F.

CHEVAL [Mil. Aff.]
a sort of
turnpikes being spars of wood, about 10
or 12 foot long, and a foot diameter,
cut into 6 faces and bored through;
each hole is armed with a short spike, 
shod with iron at each end about an
inch diameter, 6 foot long and 6 inches
distant one from another; so that it
points out every way, and used in stop­
ping small overtures or open places, or
placed in breaches, also a defence against
horse.

Image omitted.



CHEVAUX DE FRIZE [Mil. Aff.]
a sort of
turnpikes being spars of wood, about 10
or 12 foot long, and a foot diameter,
cut into 6 faces and bored through;
each hole is armed with a short spike, 
shod with iron at each end about an
inch diameter, 6 foot long and 6 inches
distant one from another; so that it
points out every way, and used in stop­
ping small overtures or open places, or
placed in breaches, also a defence against
horse.

Image omitted.



CHENELLE [in Heraldry]
signifies streaming, i. e. a
stream of light darting from
a comet or blazing star, 
vulgarly called the beard, 
according to the figure an­
nexed.

Image omitted.



CHEVRETTE 
[in Mil. Aff.] an en­
gine for raising guns
or mortars into
their carriages; it
is made of 2 pieces
of wood about 4
foot long standing
upright upon a
third which is
square; they are a­
bout a foot asunder
and parallel, being
pierced with holes
exactly opposite to
one another, with
a bolt of iron being
put thro' these holes, higher or lower
at pleasure, which serves, with a hand­
spike, which takes its poise over this
bolt, to raise the gun or mortar.

Image omitted.


CHEVRON [in Heral­
dry] is an 
ordinary formed of a two­
fold line, spire-wise or py­
ramidical, the foundation
being in the dexter and sinister base
points of the escutcheon, and the acute
point of the spire near to the top of the
escutcheon, as in the figure annexed.

This ordinary resembles a pair of
barge couples or rafters, such as carpen­
ters set on the highest part of a house
for supporting the roof, and betokens



the atchieving some business of moment, 
or furnishing some chargeable or me­
morable work.

Some say it represents Protection, 
others say Constancy; some the spurs
of knights, others the head-dress of
priestesses, &c.

Image omitted.


CHEVERON [in Heral­
dry] is an 
ordinary formed of a two­
fold line, spire-wise or py­
ramidical, the foundation
being in the dexter and sinister base
points of the escutcheon, and the acute
point of the spire near to the top of the
escutcheon, as in the figure annexed.

This ordinary resembles a pair of
barge couples or rafters, such as carpen­
ters set on the highest part of a house
for supporting the roof, and betokens
the atchieving some business of moment, 
or furnishing some chargeable or me­
morable work.

Some say it represents Protection, 
others say Constancy; some the spurs
of knights, others the head-dress of
priestesses, &c.

Image omitted.



Per CHEVRON [in Heraldry] or Party
per Chevron, is when the field is divided
only by two single lines, rising from the
two base points and meeting in a point
above, as the chevron does.

CHEVRON abaiss'd [Heraldry] is
when its point does not approach the
head of the chief, nor reach farther
than tha middle of the coat.

CHEVRON broke, is when one branch
is separated into two pieces.

CHEVRON cloven, is when the upper
point is taken off, so that the two pieces
only touch at one of the angles.

CHEVRON couched, is when the
point is turned downwards on one side
of the escutcheon.

CHEVRON divided, is when the bran­
ches are of several metals, or when
metal is opposed to colour.

CHEVRON inverted, is when the
point is towards the point of the coat, 
and its branches towards the chief.

CHEVRON mutilated, is when it does
not touch the extremes of the coat.

CHEVRONED [in Heraldry] is when
it is filled with an equal number of
chevrons.

Counter-CHEVRONED [in Heraldry]
is when a chevron is so divided, that
colour is opposed to metal.

CHEVRONEL [in Heral­
dry] is the diminutive of
chevron, and as such con­
tains only one half of the
chevron, as in the figure
annexed.

Image omitted.



CHEVRONNE signifies the parting
of the shield several
times chevron wise, as in the figure
above.

Image omitted.



CHEVRONNY signifies the parting
of the shield several
times chevron wise, as in the figure
above.

Image omitted.

 

CHICANE [of cicum the skin of
a pomegranate, ac­
cording to Menage; whence the Spani­
ards derive their chico, little, slender;
chicane, being conversant about trifling
things] in Law it is an abuse of judicia­
ry proceedings, either with design to
delay the cause, or to impose on the
judge or the contrary party, a wrang­
ling, crafty manner of pleading a cause
with tricks, quirks and fetches, the per­
plexing or splitting a cause, pettifogging.

CHICANERY [of cicum the skin of
a pomegranate, ac­
cording to Menage; whence the Spani­
ards derive their chico, little, slender;
chicane, being conversant about trifling
things] in Law it is an abuse of judicia­
ry proceedings, either with design to
delay the cause, or to impose on the
judge or the contrary party, a wrang­
ling, crafty manner of pleading a cause
with tricks, quirks and fetches, the per­
plexing or splitting a cause, pettifogging.
 

CHICANE [in the Schools] is
used to import vain
sophisms, subtleties and distinctions, with
design to obscure truth and protract
disputes.

CHIEF [chef, F.] first, principal, so­
veraign.

CHIEF [in Mil. Affairs] a commander
in chief, a general.

CHIDING [of ciðan, Sax.] rebuke, 
&c.

A CHIEF [in Heraldry, chef, F.] is an
honourable ordinary, and that which
takes up the upper part of the escutcheon, 
and represents a man's head, and the
ornaments us'd on it both by ancients
and moderns.

The Chief, as all other honourable
ordinaries do, must rake up just one
third part of the escutcheon, especially
if they be alone in the shield; but if
there be no more of them they must be
lessened in proportion to their number, 
and the same, when they are cantoned, 
attended and bordered upon some other
figures.

In CHIEF, signifies any
thing born in the chief part
or top of the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



A CHIEF Chevron'd, headed or paled, 
is when it has a Chevron, Pale or Bend
contiguous to it, and of the same colour
with itself.

A CHIEF supported, is when the two
thirds at the top are of the colour of the
field, and that at bottom of a different
colour.

CHIEFLY [of chef, F.] principally.

CHILDINGNESS [cilð, Sax. a child]
the frequent bearing children.

CHILDISHNESS [cilðiſcneſ, Sax.]
simplicity, unexperiencedness.

CHILIASTS [of χίλιας Gr. a thou­
sand] a sect of Christians call'd also Mil­
lenaries, suppos'd to have taken their
rise in the second century, being intro­
duc'd by Papias bishop of Hieropolis, dis­
ciple to St. John the Evangelist, which
opinion seems to have proceeded from
his making use of some passes of the
Revelations.

The ancient adherents are charg'd
with believing that the saints shall live
a 1000 years upon earth after the ge­
neral or last judgment, and enjoy all
manner of innocent satisfaction.

The modern millenaries refine upon
their predecessors, and say that the satis­
faction they shall enjoy in that state, 
shall be rational and angelical; not
tainted with any Epicurean sensuality.

As to the time of this Thousand years
reign, tho' the notion seems to be fa­



voured by several texts of scripture,
yet the abettors of it disagree. Dr. Bur­
net is of opinion that the world shall be
first destroy'd, and that a new paradi­
siacal earth shall be form'd out of the
ashes of the old one, where the saints
shall converse together for 1000 years, 
and then be translated to a higher sta­
tion. On the contrary, others suppose
that it will both begin and end before
the general conflagration.

CHIMÆRA [χίμαιρα, Gr.] a monster
feigned to have the head of a lion, the
belly of a goat, and the tail of a serpent, 
also a mere whimsy, a castle in the air, 
an idle fancy.

CHIMÆRA [χίμαιρα, Gr.] a vulcano
or mountain of Lycia, that vomited
fire, the truth of the fable is, the top
of it being inhabited by lions, the mid­
dle, abounding with pastures, by goats, 
and at the bottom by serpents: This
gave place to the fable, that Chimæra
was a monster that vomited flames, had
the head and breast of a lion, the belly
of a goat, and the tail of a dragon, and
because Bellerophon rendered this moun­
tain habitable, he is said to have slain
the Chimæra. Others say this Chimæra
was a mountain opposite to the sun, 
which causing reflections and fervid
heats in the summer-time, being disper­
sed through the fields, made the fruits
wither, and that Bellerophon perceiving
what was the cause of this mischief, cut
away part of the precipice that most of
all reflected. Pliny says the fire thereof
would kindle with water, and be extin­
guished by nothing but earth or dung.

CHIMERICALNESS [of chimerique, 
F. of chimera, L. χίμαιρα, Gr.] imagi­
nariness, whimsicalness.

CHIME [prob. of gamme, F.] a tune
set upon bells or in a clock; a kind of
periodical musick, produced at certain
seasons of the day, by a particular appa­
ratus added to a clock.

A CHIP, a bit chipt off from wood.

CHIP [from cy&wyn;pan, Sax. to buy and
sell] shews that the place, to which it
is added, either is or was a market
town, as Chipnam, Chippenham, &c.

CHIPPING [of cẏ&wyn;pan or ceapan, 
Sax. to buy or sell] signifies the place, 
to the name of which it is added, to be
or have been a market-town or place, 
as Chippin-Norton, Chipping-Wicomb, 
&c.

CHIROGRAPH [χειρόγραφον, of χεὶρ
a hand, and γράφω to write, Gr.] a
hand-writing, a bond or bill of one's
own hand.

CHIRON [of όδιὰ τῶν χειρῶν θεραπεί­
ας ποιὼν, q. d. healing by the assistance
of the hands] according to the poets
was the son of Saturn and Phillyra, and
they tell us, that he keeping company
with Phillyra, his wife Ops came and
surprised them, whereupon he trans­
formed himself into a horse; and that
Phillyra conceived by him and brought
forth a creature, whose upper part
was a man, and the lower part a horse.
This Chiron was an excellent physician,
and taught Æsculapius physick, Apollo,
musick, and Hercules astronomy. This
seems to be Chiron, that dwelling in
mount Pelius, is said to have excelled
all mortals in justice, and to whom
Hercules came for love's sake, and con­
versing in his cave, worshipped Pan;
and he was the only one of the Centaurs
that he did not slay, but heard with at­
tention, as Atesthenes Socraticus writes
in his Hercules: And when these had
lived together some time, an arrow fal­
ling out of Hercules's quiver upon the
Centaur's foot wounded it, and he after­
wards died, and because of his piety
and also this misfortune, by the bene­
ficence of Jupiter he was placed among
the gods. He has a little beast in his
right hand, near the little altar, that
he seems to have a mind to sacrifice,
and this is a strong argument of his
piety.

CHIRONOMY [chironomia, L. of χει­
ρονόμία, of χεὶρ the hand, and νόμος law,
Gr.] a gesture with the hand either in
orators or dancers, &c.

CHIROTONIA [χειροτονία, Gr.] the
imposition of hands in conferring any
priestly orders.

CHIRRICHOTE, a word used by the
Spaniards in derision of the French, who
pronounce Chirri for kyry.

CHIRURGERY [χειρουργία, of χεὶρ a
hand, and ἒργον work, Gr.] is the third
branch of the curative part of medicine,
and teaches how sundry diseases of the
body of man may be cured by manual
operation. It is by some divided into
5 parts: 1. Synthesis, a setting together
of things that are separated. 2. Diære­
sis, a separating of things that were
continued before. 3. Diorthosis, a cor­
recting of things squeezed together;
4. Exæresis, a taking away of what is
superfluous. 5. Anaplerosis, a filling up
that which was deficient; it is vulgarly
pronounced and written Surgery.

CHLEUASMUS [of χλευάζω, Gr. to
jeer] a laughing to scorn, a mocking, a
jeering or scoffing, a rhetorical figure
used to that purpose.



To CHOCK to give a person a light
touch with the fingers
under the chin, as a token of kindness;
also to play at pitching money, &c. in­
to a hole.

To CHUCK to give a person a light
touch with the fingers
under the chin, as a token of kindness;
also to play at pitching money, &c. in­
to a hole.

CHOLERICKNESS [of cholericus, L.
of χολέρα, Gr.] passionateness, being trou­
bled with choler.

CHONDROS [with Anatomists] a car­
tilage or gristle, the most earthy and so­
lid part of the body, next to a bone.

CHONDROSYNDESMOS [χονδροσύν­
δεσμος, Gr.] a cartilaginous ligament, 
or the joining of bones together by
means of a cartilage or gristle.

A CHOP, a cut; also a cutting of a
loin of mutton.

CHORD [chorda, L. of χορδὴ, Gr.] a
right line in Geometry, 
which joins the 2 ends of
any arch of a circle, other­
wise called a subtense, or
it is one right line that
cuts a circle into 2 parts, as
in the figure.

Image omitted.



CHORDA [χόρδη, Gr.] a bowel, a
gut; also the string of a musical instru­
ment made of a gut.

CHORDAPSUS [χορδαψὸς, Gr.] gri­
ping or wringing pains of the small
guts; so that, they being twisted, or
their peristaltick or worm-like motion
being inverted, the ordure is thrown
up at the mouth only. This distemper
is also called by the names of Ileus, Ili­
aca Passio, Volvulus and Miserere mei.

CHORDATA Gonorrhæa [with Sur­
geons] a malady, when, together with
the effusion of the Semen, the Urethra or
urinary passage is bent like a bow with
pain.  L.

CHOREPISCOPI [of χῶρος the coun­
try, and ἐπίοχοπος a bishop] rural bi­
shops anciently appointed by the prime
diocesan.

CHOROGRAPHICALLY [of χόρος a
country, and γράφω to describe] accord­
ing to the art of chorography.

CHOROIDES Plexus [of χόριον, and
εἱδος form, Gr.] the folding of the ca­
rotid artery in the brain, in which is
the glandula pinealis; also the uvea tu­
nica, which makes the apple of the eye.

CHOROMETRY [χορομετρία of χόρος
a country, and μετρέω, Gr. to measure]
the art of surveying.

CHOSE in action [Law Term] a thing
that has not a body; being only a right;
as an annuity, a covenant, a bond, &c.
Chose in action may also be called Chose
in suspence, as having no real existence, 
and not being properly in possession.

CHOSE local [Law Term] a thing fix­
ed to a place, as a mill, &c.

CHOSE in suspence [Law Term] is so
called as having no real existence, and
not being properly in possession. See
Chose transitory.

CHRISMATORY, a vessel in which 
the chrism is kept.

CHRISOM [of χρίσμα, Gr.] an unc­
tion of infants, an ancient custom of an­
nointing children as soon as they were
born, with some aromatick unguent, 
and putting on their heads a cloth
dawbed with it, it was worn till they
accounted them strong enough to en­
dure baptism, which being performed, 
it was left off. Hence in the Bills of
Mortality such infants who die before
baptism are called chrisoms.

CHRISOM the face cloth
or piece of lin­
nen laid upon the head of a child that
was newly baptized, which of old time
was a customary due to the priest of the
parish.

CHRYSOM CLOTH the face cloth
or piece of lin­
nen laid upon the head of a child that
was newly baptized, which of old time
was a customary due to the priest of the
parish. 

CHRISTICOLIST [christicola, L.] a
worshipper of Christ, a Christian.

CHRISTMASS, in the primitive ea­
stern church Christmass and the Epi­
phany were accounted but one and the
same feast, and even till this time the
church universally observes a continual
festival within these limits.

When Dioclesian emperor of Rome
kept his court at Nicomedia, being in­
form'd that a great number of Christians
were assembled in order to celebrate
Chhrist's nativity, he commanded the
doors to be shut, and the church where­
in they were assembled to be set on fire;
and so destroy'd both the building and
the people together.

CHRISTOLYTES [of χρίστος and
λύω to resolve, Gr.] Hereticks, so called
from their destroying Christ, by main­
taining that he descended into hell, body
and soul, and that he left both there, 
ascending into heaven with his divinity
alone.

CHROMATISM [with Physicians] the
natural tincture or colour of the blood, 
spittle, urine, &c.

CHROMATOGRAPHY [χρωματυγρα­
φία of χρῶμα colour, and γράφω, Gr. to
describe] a treatise of colours; also the
art of painting in colours.

CHROMATOPOIA [χρωματοποεΐα, 
Gr.] the art of making colours.

CHRONICK [chronicus, L. of χρονιχὸς
Gr.] of or pertaining to time, or that
is of long continuance.

CHRONICALNESS [of chronicus, L.
chronique, F. of χρόνος, Gr. time] the
being of long continuance.



To CHRONICLE [chroniquer, F.] to
write or enter down in such an history.

CHRONODIX [χρόνος and δειχνυμι, 
Gr. to shew] a sort of dial or instrument
to shew the parting away of time.

CHRONOLOGICALLY [of χρὸνος
time, and λέγω, to say] according to
chronology.

CHRONOMETRUM [χρὸνος and μέ­
τρος, Gr.], the same as a pendulum to
measure time with.

CHRONOS [χρόνος Gr. time] is said
to have been the son of Cœlus, and that
not improperly, since it is evident that
the motions of the heavens measure
forth to us the duration of time.

He is generally describ'd as an old man
bare headed, with all the infirmities of
age in his forehead, eyes and counte­
nance, his shoulders bowed, and he just
able to hold a sickle, and sometimes a
key in his right hand, and a serpent
biting his own tail in his left.

All these allude to time, as disclosing
and revealing all secrets, impairing and
devouring all things, still consuming, 
and yet renewing it self by a perpetual
circulation.

Sometimes he is described with six
wings and feet of wool, to shew that
time passes softly, yet it will be found
to be very swift in its progress.

CHRONOSCOPE [of χρὸνος time, and
σχόπος a mark] the same as a pendulum
to measure time.

CHRYSALIS [with Naturalists] pro­
perly the same as Aurelia, the same as
the Nympha of butterflies and moths.

CHRYSOLITHOS [χρυσόλιθος, Gr.]
a precious stone of a transparent gold
colour with green; a chrysolite.

CHRYSOSPASTUS [χρυσόσπαστος,
Gr.] a precious stone, sprinkled as it
were with gold sand.

CHRYSORCHIS [with Physicians] an
absconding of the testicles in the belly.

CHRYSTAL. See Crystal.

CHRYSTAL [in Heraldry] is in bla­
zonry by precious stones sometimes al­
lowed a place among them, tho' it is
not properly one; and is used instead of
argent or silver, and most frequently
pearl.

CHRYSTALLINUS humour [of χρύ­
σταλλος of χρυσὸς gold, Gr.] the transpa­
rent humour of the eye.

CHUBBEDNESS [of cob, Sax.] the
having full cheeks.

CHUBMESSAHITES, a Mahometan
sect, who believe that Jesus Christ is God
and the true Messiah, the Redeemer of
the world, but without rendring him
any publick or declared worship.

CHUFFINESS, clownishness, surli­
ness.

CHURCH Militant, the assemblies of
the faithful throughout the earth.

CHURCH Triumphant, the church or
company of the faithful already in glory.

CHURCHES, in ancient times were
built as far from other buildings as they
conveniently could be, and surrounded
with courts, gardens or buildings ap­
pertaining to the church; the outermost
part of which was the porch, from
whence there was a passage into a cloy­
ster or square court, with covered gal­
leries round it, supported with pillars, 
under which the poor stood to receive
alms.

In the middle of this court was a foun­
tain, where people wash'd their hands
and faces, before they went to prayers;
at the farther end of the cloyster was a
double porch with three doors, entran­
ces into the body of the church, on the
outside of which and near it slood two
small edifices call'd baptistry and Vestry.

The body of the church was divided
into three parts, by two rows of pil­
lars; at the farther end eastward was
the altar and behind it the Presbyterium
or sanctuary where the priests with the
bishop in the middle of them were dur­
ing divine service, the bishops chair be­
ing placed at the farthest end of the
church; and before the altar was a bal­
lustrade; at the entry into this chancel
stood the desk or pulpit raised, with
steps to go up to it, here the lessons
were read.

The altar or table was made of very
rich materials as of silver, gold, &c. with
various decorations, and frequently
placed over the tomb of some martyr.

Greek CHURCHES the churches of
all those coun­
tries, formerly subject to the Greek and
Eastern empire.

Eastern CHURCHES the churches of
all those coun­
tries, formerly subject to the Greek and
Eastern empire.

Latin or Westem CHURCHES, com­
prehends all the churches of France, 
Spain, Italy, Africa, the North, and all
other churches where the Latins carried
their language.

Simple CHURCH, one which has only
a nave and a choir, with isles; that
which has a row of porticoes in form, 
with vaulted galleries, and has a chapel
in its pourtour.

CHURCH in a Greek Cross, one the
length of whose cross is equal to that of
the nave, in which form most of the
Greek churches are built.

CHURCH Service, the common-pray­
er, collects, &c. used in the church.



CHURCH Service, was first sung in
English in the time of king Edw. VI. in
the year 1548, who pursuing the refor­
mation his father had begun, command­
ed it so to be.

CHUSABLE [of ceoſan, Sax. or choi­
sir, F. to chuse] deserving to be, or that
may be chosen.

CHYLE [with Naturalists] is a white
juice in the stomach and bowels, which
proceeds from a light and easy dissolu­
tion and fermentation of the victuals.
This juice mingling and fermenting
with the gall and pancreatick juice, first
passes the lacteal Veins, &c. and at last
is incorporated with the blood.

CHYME [χυμὴ, Gr.] the same as
chyle, though some distinguish between
chyle and chyme, and restrain chyme to
the mass of food while in the stomach, 
before it is sufficiently comminuted and
liquified to pass the Pylorus into the
Duodenum, and from thence into the
lacteals to be further dilated and impreg­
nated with the pancreate juice, where
it becomes chyle.

CHYMIA [of χύω, to melt, Gr.] is a
resolution of mixt bodies into their ele­
ment; and again, when it can be done, 
coagulation or redintegration of the
same elements into the bodies, which
they constituted before; there are two
parts of it, solution and coagulation; by
the addition of the Arabick particle al, 
it is called Alchymy.

CHYMICO-STATICAL, of or per­
taining to chymistry and staticks, as
Chemicostatical experiments.

CICATRISIVE [with Physicians] de­
siccative, and tending to form a ci­
catrix.

CICATRIX [with Surgeons] a scar of
a wound.

CICELY or sweet Cicely [with Bota­
nists] an herb.

CILIA [Anatomy] the eye-brows or
eye-lids.  L.

CIMA [with Architects] a moulding
something like an S, what is now called
an O. G.

CIMATIUM [with Architects] an 
O. G. with the hol­
low downwards, part of the ornament
of the Dorick capital; it stands just above
the square, or hath a fillet over it.

CIMATUM [with Architects] an 
O. G. with the hol­
low downwards, part of the ornament
of the Dorick capital; it stands just above
the square, or hath a fillet over it.

CINCTURE [in Architecture] a ring, 
list or orlop at the top and bottom of a
column, dividing the shaft at one end
from the base, and at the bottom from
the capital.

CINERITIOUSNESS [of cineritius, 
L.] ashiness, likeness to ashes.

CINNABAR, a mineral stone, red, 
heavy and brillant, found for the most
part in mines of quicksilver.

This is the common vermilion when
ground up with spirit of wine and u­
rine. There are mines of this mineral
only.

It is properly quick-silver petrify'd, as
appears by the chymical operations
whereby a pound of good cinnabar will
yield 14 ounces.

CINNABAR [in
Chymical Writings]
express'd by these 
characters.

Image omitted.



CINNABAR Native, is a mineral
which while it is in the lump, is of a
brownish colour; but when pulverized, 
is of a very high red colour, and called
vermilion.

CINNABAR Artificial [with Chymists]
is a composition of brimstone and quick­
silver sublimed together.

CINQUAIN [Military term] is an an­
cient order of battle, by drawing up
five battalions so as to make eight lines, 
viz. van, main body and rear in manner
following, the 2d and 4th battalions
form the van, the 1st and 5th the main
body, and the 3d the rear guard or bo­
dy of reserve.  F.

CINQUEFOILS [in Heraldry] are five
leaved grass, and signify Vert or Green.

CINQUE PORT, a sort of fishing net, 
so named from the five entrances into
it; being very convenient to be us'd in
any river or pond either of swift or
standing water.

CIPHER [with a single Key] is one
in which the same character is constant­
ly used to express the same word or let­
ter.

CIPHER [with a double Key] is one in
which the alphabet or key is changed
in each line or in each word, and
wherein are inserted characters of no
significancy, to amuse or perplex the
meaning.

CIPPUS [with Architects] a pillar, 
with an inscription or a grave-stone,  L.

CIPPUS [with Antiquaries] a little, 
low column erected in great roads or
other places, with an inscription to di­
rect the way to travellers, or to pre­
serve the memory of something re­
markable.

CIPPUS [in Antiquity] a wooden in­
strument, wherewith criminals and
slaves were punished.

CIRCE [according to the Poets] the
daughter of Sol and Persis, and very
skilful in the nature of herbs. A fa­
mous witch, whom the poets often
made mention of, who having poisoned



her husband the king of Sarmatæ, was
therefore banished by her subjects, and
in her exile, coming to Italy, she turned
Scylla into a sea monster, and trans­
formed the companions of Ulysses into
divers sorts of beasts, Mythologists sup­
pose Circe to be a lively representation
of sensual pleasures, which turn men of
the best accomplishments into beasts.

CIRCLES of Excursion, are circles
parallel to the ecliptick, and at such a
distance from it, that the excursions of
the planet towards the poles of the ec­
liptick may be included within it; which
are fixed at 10 degrees.

CIRCLES of Altitude, otherwise called
Almicanters, are circles parallel to the
horizon, having their common pole in
the zenith, and still diminishing as they
approach the zenith.

CIRCLES of Latitude, are great cir­
cles parallel to the plane of the eclip­
tick passing through the poles of it, and
through every star and planet.

Horary CIRCLES [in Dialling] are the
lines which shew the hours on dials, 
tho' these are not drawn circular, but
nearly strait.

Diurnal CIRCLES [Astronomy] are
immoveable circles supposed to be de­
scrib'd by the several stars and other
points of the heavens in their diurnal
rotation round the earth.

Polar CIRCLES [Astronomy] are im­
moveable circles parallel to the equa­
tor, and at a distance from the poles
equal to the greatest declination of the
ecliptick.

Parallel CIRCLES, are such as are de­
scribed with the same point as a pole
in the superficies of a sphere, the great­
est of all these parallels is a great cir­
cle, and the nearer they are to one of
their poles, the less they are.

Vertical CIRCLES [in Astronomy] are
great circles in the heavens, intersecting
one another in the Zenith and Nadir, 
and consequently are at right angles
with the horizon.

CIRCLE of the heavens [Hieroglyphi­
cally] was adored by the ancient Egyp­
tians as an expression of the Divine Ma­
jesty. The roundness of the elements
being a resemblance of his power and
perfections; the light of his wisdom, 
and celestial heat of the tenderness of
his love.

CIRCLE [in Physicks] is understood
among the Schoolmen of the vicissitude
of generations arising one out of ano­
ther.

CIRCLE [in Logick] the fault of an
argument that supposes the principal it
should prove and afterwards proves the
principal by the  thing it seemed to
have proved.

Formal CIRCLE [in Logick] is that
which in two reciprocal syllogisms begs
the medium, which is the next cause of
the greater extreme.

The material CIRCLE [inm Logick]
consists of two syllogisms, the former
whereof proves the cause by the effect;
and the latter, the effect by the cause.

CIRCOS [χίρχος, Gr.] a dilatation or
swelling of the veins crooking or wind­
ing, and arising in one or more parts of
the body so much that the veins threat­
en a rupture.

CIRCUIT, the circuits of the judges
were first appointed by king Henry II, 
who in the 21st year of his reign divi­
ded the whole kingdom into six circuits, 
appointing three judges to every circuit, 
who should twice every year ride to­
gether, and hear and determine causes;
which custom is full observed, tho' there
is some alteration in the number of the
judges, and shires of the circuits.

CIRCULAR Letters, letters directed
to several persons who have the same
interest in the same affair.

CIRCULAR Sailing, is that which is
performed in the arch of a great cir­
cle.

CIRCULARITY, circularness.

CIRCULAR Lines [with Mathemati­
cians] are such straight lines as are di­
vided in the divisions made in the arch
of a circle, such as lines, tangents se­
cants, &c.

CIRCULAR Velocity [in the New
Astronomy] a term signifying that velo­
city of any planet or revolving body, 
that is measured by the arch of a circle.

CIRCULARNESS [of circularis L. cir­
culaire, F.] roundness.

CIRCULUS [with Chymists] a round
instrument made of iron for the cutting
off the neck of glass vessels. The ope­
ration is performed thus. The instru­
ment being heated, is applied to the
glass vessel, and is kept there till it
grows hot, and then with some drops of
cold water, or a cold blast upon it, it
flies in pieces. And this is the way
they cut off the necks of retorts and cu­
curbits.

CIRCULUS decennovennalis [with As­
tronomers] the golden number, or a pe­
riod or revolution of 19 years, invented
to make the lunar year agree with the
solar; so that at the end of it the new
moons happen in the same months, and
on the same days of the month, and the
moon begins again her course with the



sun. This is called Circulus Metonicus, 
from Meton the inventor of it, and some­
times Ennedecateris.

CIRCUMADJACENT [of circum a­
bout and adjacens, L. lying near] lying
near, all round about, encompassing near
at hand.

CIRCUMAMBIENTNESS, the en­
compassing round.

To CIRCUMAMBULATE [circum­
ambulatam, L.] to walk round about.

CIRCUMCELLIANS, Hereticks in
Africa, a branch of the Donatists a sect
of frenzical Christians in the time of St.
Austin, who ranged about from place
to place under a pretence of reforming
publick manners and redressing griev­
ances; they set slaves at liberty with­
out the consent of their masters; for­
gave debts that were none of their own
and committed many other the like ex­
travagancies and insolences.

When they first entred upon the com­
mission of these disorders, they carried
only staves, to which they gave the name
of staves of Israel, marching under
the command of 2 chiefs Maxides and
Tafer; but afterwards they made use of
all kinds of weapons against the ortho­
dox.

Out of a mistaken zeal for martyr­
dom they destroyed themselves by some­
times cutting their own throats, as
others by leaping into the fire, and
throwing themselves down from pre­
cipices; upon which the bishops not
being able to restrain them themselves, 
applied to the magistrates.

CIRCUMDUCTILE [circumductilis, 
L.] easy to be led about.

CIRCUMERRATION, a wandering
about.  L.

The CIRCUMFERENCE of every cir­
cle [among Geometricians] is supposed to
be divided into 360 equal parts, called
degrees, supposed to be divided into 60
equal parts, call'd minutes.

CIRCUMFLUOUSNESS [of circum­
fluus, L.] the flowing round about.

CIRCUMFUSED [circumfusus, L.]
poured or shed round about.

CIRCUMLOCUTION, a circuit or
round of words, used either when a pro­
per term is not at hand to express a
thing naturally and immediately by, or
when a person chooses not to do it out
of respect, &c.

CIRCUMPOSITION, a laying round
about.  L.

CIRCUMPOSITION [in Gardening] a
kind of laying, when the mould is born
up to the bough, which is to be taken
off by an old hat, root or strong piece of
old coarse cloth.

CIRCUMPULSION, the thrusting
forward of bodies; which are moved
by those that lie round them.

CIRCUMRASION [with Botanists] a
scraping or taking off the bark round
about.

To CIRCUMSCARIFICATE [circum­
scarificatum, L.] to scarify round about.

To be CIRCUMSCRIBED locally [with
Philosophers] is said of a body, when it
has a certain and determinate Ubi, or
Place, with respect to the circumambient 
or encompassing bodies. It is the same
as to be in place circumscriptiveiy.

CIRCUMSCRIBED Hyperbola [with
Mathematicians] an Hyperbola that cuts
its own Asymptotes, and contains the parts
cut off within its own proper space.

CIRCUMSCRIBEDNESS [of circum
and scriptus, L.] the being circumscribed.

CUMCUMSPECTNESS [circumspection, 
F.] circumspection.

CIRCUMSPECTIVELY, as a thing is
said to be in a place circumspectively, 
when it has a certain or determinate Ubi
or Place, with respect to the circumam­
bient or encompassing bodies.

CIRCUMSTANCES, the incidents of
an event, or the particularities that
accompany an action.

CIRCUMSTANCES [with Moralists]
such things, that tho' they are not es­
sential to any action, do yet some way, 
effect it.

CIRCUMSTANCES properly moral [in
Ethicks] are such as do really influence
our actions, and render them more
good or evil than they would be with­
out such circumitances. Which wri­
ters in Ethicks sum up in in this verse.
Quis, quid, quibus auxiliis, cur, quo­
modo, quando.

CIRCUMSTANCES purely physical [in
Ethicks] such as do not connect any mo­
ral good or evil with the action; as if a
person kills another, whether he kill
him with the right hand or the left.

CIRCUMSTANTIALITY the
qua­
lity of that which is circumstantial.

CIRCUMSTANTIALNESS the
qua­
lity of that which is circumstantial.

To CIRCUMVALLATE [circumval­
lare, L.] to intrench round about.

CIRCUMVECTION, a carrying a­
bout.  L.

To CIRCUMVOLVE [circumvolvere, 
L.] to roll or wheel round.

CIRCUMVOLUTIONS [in Archi­
tecture] the turns of the spiral line of
the Ionick volute.

CIRCUS [in Rome] a spacious place
between the mounts Palatine and Aven­
tine, invironed with buildings in the
form of a circle, for the exhibition of



publick plays; round it was the amphi­
theatre, in which were galleries and
boxes for the spectators to sit or stand
in. This was first begun to be built by
Tarquinius Priscus; but was afterwards
adorn'd and rendred more stately and
beautiful by the emperors Claudius, 
Caligula and Heliogabalus, being imbel­
lish'd with marble round buts, round
which the coursers ran; there were al­
so pillars and obelisks adorned with hi­
eroglyphicks; the emperor Claudius
caused most of the obelisks to be gilt
with gold; and Caligula paved it with
vermillion stone soldered with gold.
Heliogabalus added the filings of gold and
silver; the galleries were adorned with
the images of their gods and the richest
spoils of their enemies.

CIRSOS [χίρσος, Gr.] a crooked swol­
len vein, a sort of swelling, when a
vein, by reason of the softness of its coat
is stretched out with much thick blood, 
and seems as if it would burst.

CISLEU [ולסיב Heb] is the 9 month
of the jewish ecclesiastical year, and the
third in the civil or political year, and
answers pretty near to our November.

The Jews observe the 7th day of this
month as a solemn fast in commemora­
tion of king Jehojakims cutting the book
of Jeremiah's prophecy with a knife, 
and throwing it into the fire which was
on the hearth.

They also observe the 15 day of this
month on account of Antiochus Epi­
phanes profaning the temple of Jerusa­
lem by setting up the statue of Jupiter
Olymphus in it.

On the 25th Judas Maccabæus purifi­
ed the temple and dedicated it anew.

CITIZENSHIP, the dignity and pri­
vilege of a citizen.

CITRINE [of citrinus, L.] of or per­
taining to, or of the colour of a pome­
citron.

CITTA [with Physicians] a fault in
the appetite, as when young women
long for things that are not fit to be
eaten, as chalk, coals, &c. the green­
sickness.

CIVICK [civicus, L.] belonging to a
city.

CIVICK Crown, a garland
that was given by the Ro­
mans to a brave soldier, who
had saved the life of a fel­
low-citizen, or rescued him
after he had been taken pri­
soner. This crown was made of oaken
leaves with the acorns on them, if they
could be had, because that tree was de­
dicated to Jupiter, who was esteem'd
the protector of cities and their inhabi­
tants.

Image omitted.



CIVIL, a term opposite to criminal
or ecclesiastical.

CIVIL [civilis, L.] courteous, kind, 
well-bred.

CIVIL, in its general sense is some­
thing that respects the policy, publick
good or repose of the citizens, city or
state.

CIVIL War, a war carried on between
two factions in the same kingdom or
state.

CIVILNESS [civilité, F. civilitas, L.]
civility.

CIVILISATION [Law term] a law, 
act of justice, or judgment which ren­
ders a criminal process, civil.

CLAIMABLE, that may be claimed.

CLAIR OBSCURE [claroscuro, Ital.]
a term used in painting, for the art of
distributing to advantage the lights and
shadows of a picture, both in the casting
of the eye, and the effect of the whole
piece.

CLAMOROUSNESS [of clamor, L.]
noisiness.

CLAMP, a little piece of wood in the
fashion of a wheel; used instead of a
pulley in a mortice.

CLAMPING [with Joiners] a parti­
cular manner of letting boards one into
another to keep them from warping.

CLAMPONIER [with Horsemen] a
long jointed horse, one whose pasterns
are long, slender, and over-pliant.

A CLANG [clangor, L.] the sound of
a trumpet.

A CLAP [clapoir, F.] a swelling in
the groin and privities.

A CLAP, a noise by hitting against.

A CLAP Trap, a name given to the
rant and rhimes that dramatick poets, to
please the actors, let them go off with;
as much as to say, a trap to catch a clap, 
by way of applause from the spectators
at a play.

CLAPPING [of clappan, Sax.] a stri­
king together of the hands, &c.

CLARINE [in French Heraldry] is a
term used to express a collar of bells
round the neck of any beast.

CLARION [clario, L.] a sort of shrill
trumpet.

CLARION [in Heraldry]
see the figure.

Image omitted.



CLASHING, a noise of two swords,
&c. one hitting against another; also a
disagreement.



A CLATTER [of cleaður, Sax.] a
rattling noise.

CLARISONUS [clarisonus, L.] sound­
ing loud or shrill.

CLARITUDE [claritudo, L.] clear­
ness, splendour, brightness.

CLAUDICATION, a halting or go­
ing lame,  L.

CLAVIS, a key; also the direction
to the opening and decyphering a cy­
pher, or any secret writing.

CLAVUS [with Oculists] a little
hard swelling in the corner of the eye.

CLAVUS [with Physicians] the same
as Clavis.

CLEANLINESS [clæanlicneſſe, 
Sax.] cleanness.

CLEAR-Vision [in Opticks] is caused
by a great quantity of rays in the same
pencil, inlightening the correspondent
points of the image strongly and vigo­
rously.

CLEARNESS [clarté, F. claritas, L.]
a being clear.

CLECHE [in He­
raldry] as
a Cross Cletchée; some say it
is an ordinary pierced
throughout, i. e. when the
whole figure is so perfora­
ted, that the chief substance is lost, and
nothing is visible but the very edges:
But Colombiere says, it is a cross, spread­
ing from the center towards the extre­
mities, which are very wide, and then
end in an angle, in the middle of the
extremity, by lines drawn from the
two points that make the breadth, till
they come to join, as represented in the
figure annexed.

Image omitted.



CLETCHEE [in He­
raldry] as
a Cross Cletchée; some say it
is an ordinary pierced
throughout, i. e. when the
whole figure is so perfora­
ted, that the chief substance is lost, and
nothing is visible but the very edges:
But Colombiere says, it is a cross, spread­
ing from the center towards the extre­
mities, which are very wide, and then
end in an angle, in the middle of the
extremity, by lines drawn from the
two points that make the breadth, till
they come to join, as represented in the
figure annexed.

Image omitted.



CLEDONISM [of χληδὼν a rumour, 
and avis a bird] a sort of divination a­
mong the ancients, supposed to be much
the same as Ornithomancy.

CLEIDES [in Anatomy] the clavicles
or channel bone, joined on each side to
the top of the breast, and to the shoul­
der-blade, the neck or throat-bone.

CLEMENCY [clementia, L.] was es­
teem'd as a goddess, and the Roman se­
nate ordered a temple to be dedicated
to her after the death of Julius Cæsar.
The poets describe her as the guardian
of the world, she is represented holding
a branch of laurel, and a spear, to shew
that gentleness and pity belong'd princi­
pally to victorious warriors.

CLEMENTNESS [clemence, F. cle­
mentia, L.] gentleness, courtesy.

CLEMENTINE, one who has been
9 years a superior, and afterwards cea­
ses to be so, and becomes a private
monk under a superior.

CLEMENTINES [so call'd of Clemens
Romanus] certain spurious works ascrib'd
to that author, full of apocryphal pieces, 
fables and mistakes; also the decretals
of Pope Clement V.

CLERGY, comprehends the whole
body of priests, divines or ecclesiasticks
or what nation or people soever.

Anciently the Christian clergy were
divided into 3 orders, viz. Priests, Dea­
cons, and inferior Clerks; each of them
having his president or chief; the arch­
priest was chief of the first order; the
Arch-deacon of the second, and the Dean
of the third. 

In the church of Rome there are 2
sorts or kinds, viz. Regular and Secular.

The Regular comprehends all the re­
ligious, either male or female; who
make vows of a monastick life.

The Secular comprehends all those
ecclesiasticks that don't make monastick
vows.

The Roman Caotholic clergy forms a
monarchical state under the pope, who
is the head of it.

The clergy or England had formerly
many priviledges, some of which are
now abridg'd; but yet they still enjoy
some considerable ones; as their being
exempt from serving all offices but
their own, their goods paying no toll in
fairs nor markets, and many other ad­
vantages.

CLERGY [in Law] the appeal of a
clerk or clergy, or his appeal to an in­
dictment; for in ancient times a clergy­
man being convicted of felony before a
secular judge, was allowed the privi­
lege to pray his clergy; that is, to pray
that he might be delivered to his ordi­
nary to clear himself; but this privilege
afterwards was allowed to all persons
convicted of such felony, as this benefit
was granted for. This privilege was, 
that if the prisoner being set to read a
verse or two in a Latin book, in a Go­
thick black character, commonly called
a neck-verse, and the ordinary of New­
gate answered to the court, Legit ut cle­
ricus, i. e. he reads like a clerk or scho­
lar, he was only burnt in the hand, and
then set free; but by a late act of par­
liament the clergy, or benefit of the cler­
gy, has been taken away in most cases, 
except Bigamy and Manslaughter.

CLERK Convict, is one who prays
his clergy before judgment.

CLERICAL Crown, anciently a round
list of hair shav'd off around the head.

CLERK [of the Acts belonging to the
Navy] an officer, who receives and en­
ters the commissions and warrants of



the lord admiral, and registers the acts
and orders of the commissioners of the
navy.

CLERK [of Assize] an officer who
writes all things judicially done by the
justices of assize in their circuit.

CLERK of the Check [in the King's
Court] an officer who has the check and
controllment of the yeomen of the
guard, and all other ordinary yeomen
or ushers belonging to the king, &c.
either giving leave or allowing their
absence or attendance, or diminishing
their wages for the same.

CLERK, of the Closet, a divine, other­
wise called Confessor to his Majesty, his
office is to attend at the king's right hand
during divine service, to resolve all
doubts concerning spiritual matters, to
wait on the king in his private orato­
ry, &c.

CLERK [of the Crown] an officer of
the court of King's-Bench, who frames
and records all indictments against trai­
tors, felons and other offenders there
arraigned upon any publick crime.

CLERK of the Crown [in the court of
Chancery] an officer who continually
attends upon the Lord Chancellor, or
Lord Keeper, either in his proper per­
son or deputy, upon special matters of
state: Also all general pardons upon
grants of them at the king's coronation;
or at a parliament; the writs of parlia­
ment, &c. are returned into his office;
he also makes special pardons and writs
of execution upon bond of statute staple
forfeited.

CLERK of the Errors [in the King's-­
Bench] an officer who transcribes and
certifies the records of such causes in
that court, into the exchequer, if the
cause or action were by bill.

CLERK of the Essoigns [in the court
of Common Pleas] an officer who keeps
the Essoign Roll, provides the parchment, 
cuts it into rolls, delivers it the pro­
per officers and receives them again
when written.

CLERK of the Estreats [in the office
of the Exchequer] an officer who re­
ceives the estreats out of the Lord Trea­
surer's Remembrancer's-Office, and writes
them out to be levy'd for the king.

CLERK of the Hamper [in the Chan­
cery] an of­
ficer who receives all money due to the
king's majesty for the seals of charters, 
patents, commissions and writs; and
likewise sees due to the officers for en­
rolling and examining the same. He is
obliged to attend on the Lord Chancellor, 
or Lord Keeper, in term-time daily, and
at all times of sealing.

CLERK of the Hanapar [in the Chan­
cery] an of­
ficer who receives all money due to the
king's majesty for the seals of charters, 
patents, commissions and writs; and
likewise sees due to the officers for en­
rolling and examining the same. He is
obliged to attend on the Lord Chancellor, 
or Lord Keeper, in term-time daily, and
at all times of sealing.

CLERK of the Juries [in the
court of
Common Pleas] an offixer who makes out
the writs called Habeas Corpora, and
Distringas, for the appearance of the
jury either in the court or at the assizes, 
after that the jury is impannelled or re­
turned upon the Venire facias.

CLERK of the Curata Writs [in the
court of
Common Pleas] an offixer who makes out
the writs called Habeas Corpora, and
Distringas, for the appearance of the
jury either in the court or at the assizes, 
after that the jury is impannelled or re­
turned upon the Venire facias. 

CLERK or Martial [of the King's
House] an officer who attends the mar­
shal in his court, and records all his
proceedings.

CLERK of the Market [of the King's
House] an officer whose duty is to take
charge of the king's measures, and to
keep the standards of them; that is, ex­
amples of all the measures that ought
to be throughout the land.

CLERK of the Nichils [in the Exche­
quer] an officer who makes a roll of all
such sums as are nichiled by the sheriff
upon their estreats of green wax and
delivers them into the office of the
Lord Treasurer's Remembrancer, in order
to have execution done upon them for
the king.

CLERK [of the Parliament] one who
records all things done in the court of
parliament, and engrosses them fairly
into parchment rolls, for the better
preserving them to posterity. There
are 2 of these, one of the House of Lords, 
and the other of the Commons.

CLERK of the Outlawries [in the
court of Common Pleas] an officer who is
deputy to the king's attorney general, 
for making out the writs of Capias Utle­
gatum.

CLERK of the Peace [belonging to the
Sessions of the Peace] an officer who in 
the sessions reads the indictments, en­
rolls the acts, draws the process, &c.

CLERK of the Pell [in the Exchequer]
an officer who enters tellers bills into a
parchment-roll called Pellis Receptorum, 
and also makes another roll of payment
called Pellis Exituum, in which he enters
down by what warrant the money was
paid.

CLERK of the Petty Bag [in Chancery]
of these officers there are 3, and the
master of the rolls is their chief: Their
office is to record the return of all in­
quisitions out of every shire; all liveries
granted in the court of wards, all ouster
les mains, to make all patents for custo­
mers, gaugers, controllers, &c. sum­
mons for the nobility and burgesses to
parliament; commissions to knights of
the shire for seizing of susidies, &c.

CLERK of the Pipe [in the Exchequer]
an officer who receives all the accounts



and debts due to the king, being drawn
out of the remembrancer's office, and
enters them down into the great roll, 
and writes summons to sheriffs to levy
the said debts.

CLERK of the Pleas [in the Exchequer]
is an officer in whose office the officers
of the court upon special privileges be­
longing to them ought to sue or be sued
upon any action.

CLERK [of the Privy Seal] of these
officers there are four who attend the
Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, or the
principal secretary, if there be no privy
seal; and also to make out privy seats
upon any special occasion of his majesty's
affairs.

CLERK [of the Sewers] an officer be­
longing to the commissioners of sewers, 
who is to write down all things that
they do by virtue of their commission.

CLERK [of the Signet] an officer who
continually attends upon the principal
secretary of state, and has the custody
of the privy signet, which is as well for
sealing his majesty's private letters, and
also such grants as pass his majesty's
hand by bills signed; of these there are
four.

CLERK of the King's silver [in the
court of Common Pleas] an officer who
receives all the fines, after they have
been with the custos brevium, &c.

CLERK of the Treasury [in the court
of Common Pleas] an officer who has the
charge of keeping the records of Nisi
prius, has the fees due for all searches, 
the certifying of all records into the
king's bench, when writs of error are
brought; makes out writs of superse­
deas de non molestando.

CLERK [of the King's great Wardrobe]
another of the king's house that keeps
an account in writing of all things be­
longing to the king's wardrobe.

CLERK of the Warrants [in the court
of Common Pleas] an officer who enters
all warrants of attorney for plaintiff
and defendant, and enrolls all deeds of
indentures of bargain and sale, acknow­
ledged in court or before any judge of
the court.

CLERKS, the com­
pany of clerks called
Parish Clerks, is anci­
ent, and stand register­
ed in the books of
Guild-hall. They were
incorporated the 17th
of Henry III. Their
arms are azure, a flow­
er-de-luce or, on a chief gules, a leo­
pard's head betwixt two books or:
Their crest an arm extended, surmoun­
ted on a torce and helmet holding a
singing book open.

Image omitted.



CLERK of the Supersedeas, an officer
of the court of Common Pleas, who
makes out writs of Super fedeas (upon
the defendant's appearing to the exi­
gent) whereby the sheriff is forbid to
return the exigent.

CLEROMANCY [of χλῆρος and μαν­
τεια divination] a soothsaying or for­
tune-telling by lots, by throwing of dice
or little bones, and observing the points
or marks turn'd up.

CLEVE at the beginning or end
of the proper name of a
place, denotes it to be a
rock or side of a hill, as Cleveland, Clif­
ton, Stancliff.

CLIF at the beginning or end
of the proper name of a
place, denotes it to be a
rock or side of a hill, as Cleveland, Clif­
ton, Stancliff.

CLIVE at the beginning or end
of the proper name of a
place, denotes it to be a
rock or side of a hill, as Cleveland, Clif­
ton, Stancliff.

CLEVER fellow, one that has a knack
at doing or devising any thing.

To have a great CLEW [Sea Term]
said of a sail, when it comes goaring or
sloping off by degrees, and is broader at
the clew than at the earing, which is
the end of the bolt-rope, in which the
sail is sowed.

To spread a great CLEW [Sea Term]
is said of a ship that has a very long
yard, and so takes up much canvass in
her sails.

CLIFF [in Musick] a certain character
or mark placed on one side of the lines, 
from the seat of which the proper pla­
ces of all other notes in any tune or
song are discovered by proving the said
notes from thence, according to the scale
of the Gammut, in which are contained
three septenaries of letters, G. A. B. C.
D. E. P. Which letters set at the begin­
ning of every rule and space, serve to
express as many cliffs or keys; but only
four of these are used, and placed at
the beginning of the staves of every
lesson.

F Faut CLIFF [in Musick] is the first
cliff, and is marked thus  being only proper for the bass or lower part.

C Sol Faut CLIFF [in Musick Books]
is marked thus , and is the second cliff,
and is peculiar to the inner or middle
parts, as the tenor or counter-tenor.

G Sol Reut CLIFF [in Musick Books]
is the third cliff, and is thus marked ;
on the lowest line but one, which be­
longs only to the treble or highest parts.



B CLIFF is applied to all
parts indifferent­
ly, its property being only to shew
when notes are to be sung or play'd flat, 
or when sharp. The B--fa or B-flat
is distinguished by this character (♭), 
and the B--mi or B--sharp is thus ex­
pressed .

B Fa Berrii CLIFF is applied to all
parts indifferent­
ly, its property being only to shew
when notes are to be sung or play'd flat, 
or when sharp. The B--fa or B-flat
is distinguished by this character (♭), 
and the B--mi or B--sharp is thus ex­
pressed . 

CLIFT [with Horsemen] is a deficien­
cy in the new, soft and rough, uneven
hoof, that grows on horses feet upon
the hoof-cast.

CLIME [with Astronomers] for
the distinction of pla­
ces and different temperature of air, ac­
cording to their situation, the whole
globe is divided into 48 climates, 24 nor­
thern, 24 southern, according to the in­
crease of half an hour in the longest
day in summer.

CLIMATE [with Astronomers] for
the distinction of pla­
ces and different temperature of air, ac­
cording to their situation, the whole
globe is divided into 48 climates, 24 nor­
thern, 24 southern, according to the in­
crease of half an hour in the longest
day in summer. 

Virginian CLIMBER [with Botanists]
a shrub, the Virginian ivy.

CLINCH, a smart and witty expre­
ssion.

CLINIC [of χλίνη a bed] it is now
used for a quack or nurse who pretends
to have learnt the method of curing
diseases by attending on the sick.

CLINICE [of χλίνη, Gr.] that part of
physick that respects bed-rid people.

CLINKERS, those bricks that by
having much nitre or salt-petre in them
(and lying next the fire in the clamp or
kiln) by the violence of the fire run and
are glazed over.

CLIO [of χλείω, Gr. to celebrate] one
of the 9 muses, accounted the president
of history. The poets make her the
daughter of Jupiter and Mnemosyne, i. e.
memory. To indicate the qualificati­
ons necessary for an historian.

She is represented in painting, &c. as
a young maiden crown'd with laurel, 
holding a trumpet in her right hand, 
and a book in her left with Thucydïdes
name in it.

CLOAK TWITCHERS, a set of
thieves reckoned the 33d order of those
villains, who stand at the corners of turn­
lings, as alleys, lanes, &c. to snatch
cloaks, hats, wigs, &c.

CLODDINESS [cluððineſſe, Sax.]
being full of clods.

CLOD Salt [at the Salt Works] a cake
that sticks to the bottom of a pan, and
is taken out once in 24 hours.

To CLOD [of cluð, Sax. or klot, Du.]
to gather into clods or lumps.

CLOF [of clouʒh, Sax. a fis­
sure or open passage in
the side of a mountain]
being added to the name of a place, in­
timates it to have been such a sort of a 
place, as Cloughton.

CLOUGH [of clouʒh, Sax. a fis­
sure or open passage in
the side of a mountain]
being added to the name of a place, in­
timates it to have been such a sort of a 
place, as Cloughton. 

CLOW [of clouʒh, Sax. a fis­
sure or open passage in
the side of a mountain]
being added to the name of a place, in­
timates it to have been such a sort of a 
place, as Cloughton. 

CLOG [in a Figurative Sense] a load, 
a let, a hindrance.

CLOGGINESS a being apt to
clog or hinder.

CLOGGINGNESS a being apt to
clog or hinder.
 
CLOISTER [in Monasteries] a square
gallery with a little flower garden in
the middle; these were in former
times us'd as schoois for the instruction
of youth and were many of them well
endow'd, and allow'd several privileges, 
and among others they were allow'd
to be a sort of sanctuaries to such as re­
tired to them for shelter.

To CLOISTER up [cloitrer, F.] princes
anciently esteem'd cloisters as safe pri­
sons, and therefore the Greek emperors
used to confine in them sons that were
rebellious or those they suspected: Nor
are there wanting in history instances
of childrens confining their fathers in
them.

To CLOSE [clẏſan, Sax.] to conclude
or end; to agree with; also spoken of a
wound, to tend to healing.

CLOSE [in Heraldry] signifies any
thing closed or inclosed, and is used to
signify the close bearing of the wings of
such birds as are generally addicted to
flight, as the eagle, falcon, &c. but it
is not used of the peacock, dunghill-­
cock, &c. It is also used of horse-bar­
nacles or bits, when they are not ex­
tended, as they are usually born, as
a barnacle-close; and also of an helmet, 
as an helmet-close, i. e. with the visor
down.

To CLOSE a passade justly [with Horse­
men] is when a horse ends a passade
with a demivolt in good order, well
narrowed and bounded, and terminates
upon the same line, upon which he
parted; so that he is still in a condition
to part from the hand handsomly, at
the very last time or motion of his de­
mivolt.

CLOSENESS [of clẏſan, Sax. to close]
the being close.

CLOT [cluð, Sax.] a clod or lump.

CLOTTED, in clods or lumps.

CLOTH [Sea Term] a ship is said to
spread much cloth, when she has broad
sails.

CLOTH-WORKERS
 were incorporated the
22d of king Henry VIII.
Anno 1530. And is
the 12th company of
the city of London, 
Their arms are sable, 
a chevron ermin in
chief, two crabbets ar­
gent, in beisel or beazel or. Their



supporters are two griffins, their crest
a ram on a torce and helmet; their
motto, My trust is in God alone. Their
hall is on the east side of Mincing lane.

Image omitted.



CLOTHIER [of claðan, Sax. to
clothe] a clothworker.

CLOUDS [whence they take their
name is not certainly determined; Som­
nerus derives them of cluð, Sax. a lump
or clod, q. d. clodded vapours; but
Minshew of claudere, L. to shut up, be­
cause they shut up the sun from us.] It
is a question among philosophers, whe­
ther clouds or thick fogs are compound­
ed alike, or whether there is some­
thing more in the clouds than there is
in thick fogs: Some are of opinion, 
that the clouds are grosser than all fogs, 
and that they are composed of flakes of
snow, rather than particles of water, 
such as fogs are made of. Others again
are of opinion, that the clouds are only
a close sort of fogs: And indeed those
fogs that hang upon the tops of very
high hills, appear to people that are on
plains to be all one with the clouds;
tho' those that are at them perceive
nothing but a thick fog. Clouds then
are formed of vapours raised from wa­
ter or moisture, or those exhalations
that ascend from the earth, and are no
other than small bubbles detached from
the waters by the power of the solar or
subterraneous heat, or both. And be­
ing lighter than the atmosphere, are
buoy'd up thereby till they become of
an equal weight therewith in some of
its regions aloft in the air, or nearer to
the earth.

The clouds then are higher than
fogs, and hang in the air, and are car­
ried about in it by the winds. They
are also of various figures; sometimes
so thin, that the sun's rays pass thro'
them; they also appear of several co­
lours as white, red, &c. and also some­
times of very dark colours.

As to the hanging in the air, it seems
a matter of some difficulty to account
for that; because all watery particles, of
which clouds consist, are heavier than
air, so that were there nothing to hin­
der, they would fall to the earth. But
there are two things that are supposed
to bear them up. The first is the
winds, which blow from all parts under
the region of the clouds, and do with
them bear about many lighter sorts of
bodies; especially if those bodies con­
tain but a small quantity of solid matter
under a broad superficies. Thus it is
commonly seen how easily boys paper­
kites are kept up by the wind when
they are mounted pretty high, and in
like manner the particles of water very
much rarefied may easily be suspended
at that height. 2dly, Their new exhala­
tions perpetually fuming out of the earth
and by their motion upwards hinder
the clouds from falling or descending, 
unless the density of the clouds prepon­
derates. And so we see, that the va­
pour of the fire carries lighter bodies
up the chimneys; nay, the smoke of a
fire in a chimney is able to turn a thin
plate of iron, that is artfully placed in
it, so strongly, as to turn about a spit and
roast a piece of meat of a considerable
weight.

As to the colours of the clouds they
are varied according to the situation of
the sun, and way of reflecting its light
in respect to us. The density of the
clouds proceeds from the closeness of
the vaporous particles one to another, 
and their thinness from the distance of
those particles one from another, of
which there are several causes. When
they are very thin, they leave so many
interstices, that the rays of the sun dart
thro' them in many places, but are in­
tercepted in others.

As to the figures or forms of the clouds
all their variety arises from their plenty
of vapours, and the influence of the sun
and wind. Fcr it is impossible for them
to be variously condensed, rarefied and
carried about in the air, and their fi­
gures not to be changed.

Clouds are suspended in the air, be­
cause they consist of water rarefied by
the heat of the sun into steam, which
steam being lighter than air is carried up
by it into the colder regions, where it is
again condensed into water, and from
that into ice and snow, which becoming
too heavy for the air to support, breaks
into pieces, and descends by their supe­
rior weight.

And clouds swim in the air as ships
at sea; for the air being thicker near the
earth, and the particles of a cloud but
thin, they are easily born up; but, accor­
ding to the greater or lesser weight of a
cloud, and setting of the wind it sinks
or rises.

When the particles of the clouds are 
so thick that they can no longer be kept
up by the resistence of the air, then are
they condensed into water and fall
down into rain. See Condensation and
Vapour.

CLOUDY, over cast with clouds; also
looking morosely.

CLOVEN [of cleofan, Sax.] cleft, 
divided.



CLOUTERLINESS [prob. of clut, 
Sax. a clout] ill-shapedness, bungling­
less.

CLOWNS Treacle, garlick.

CLOWNISHNESS [of colonus, L.]
rustick behavi­
our.

CLOWNERY [of colonus, L.]
rustick behavi­
our. 

A CLUB [club, Teut. clubbe, Sax.] a
large or thick stick; also a company or
society of persons who meet together
to drink, &c.

CLUMPERED, clotted together in
little lumps.

CLUMSINESS, shortness and thick­
ness.

CLUSTERING, producing clusters. 
Milton.

CLUTCHES, the hands clutched; also
safe possession or clinched, as in one's
clutches.

CLUTCH-fisted, having great clumsy
hands.

CLYPEIFORMIS [with Meteorolo­
gists] a sort of comet resembling a shield
in form.  L.

CLEMODACTYLUS [with Anato­
mists] a muscle, otherwise called Exten­
sor internodii digitorum.

COACH [on board a flag-ship] the
council chamber.

COACH-MAKERS, 
are of a late incorpo­
tion. They have for
their armorial ensigns
azure a chevron be­
tween 3 coaches or.
The crest is Phœbus
drawn in a chariot
all of the 2d, and the
supporters 2 horses argent armed or.
Their motto Post nubila Phœbus. Their
hall is that of the Scriveners.

Image omitted.



COADJUTRIX, a she-helper with a­
nother.  L.

COÆTANEOUS [coætaneus, L.]
which lives in the same age with one.

COÆTERNAL [coæternus, L.] coe­
ternal, equally eternal with another.

COÆVOUS [coævus, L.] of the same
age with another.

COAGULATION [in Chymical Wri­
ters] is expressed by these characters,
H E.

COAGULUM, what ever serves to
join things together.  L.

COALTERN [coalternus, L.] reci­
procal, mutual, by turns.

COAT [cotta, Ital. cotte, F.] a gar­
ment wore commonly uppermost; also
the outside of fruit: also a thin covering
laid or done over as a covering of fine
mould, &c.

COAT [of cot, Sax. an hut or cottage
&c.] denotes that the place, to which
it is added, was denominated from a
cottage, &c. in that place.

COB, a foreign coin, the same as a
Piaster.

COBALES, a sort of Dæmons in hu­
man shape, who were called Satyrs, and
said to be attendants to Bacchus. Some
relate, that there are at this day many
of them in Sarmatia, who hide them­
selves in houses, and are ready to do any
offices, for the people that entertain
them, that are to be expected from the
best of servants.

COBALTUM [in medicine] a sort of
a mineral of a blackish colour, and a
caustick quality; it consists of silver and
arsenick, and is as it were, the mother
of it.

COBBLINGNESS [of kobler, Dan.]
bunglingness.

COCH, [in Doctors Bills] stands for
cochleare, i. e. a spoonful.

COCHINEEL Worm, an insect engen­
dred in the fruit of a shrub five or six
foot high, called Toona; there are whole
plantations in Guatimala, and other parts
of the Spanish West Indies; on the top of
the fruit grows a red flower, which, 
when mature, falls on the fruit, which
opening discovers a clift two or three
inches diameter. The fruit then appears
full of little red insects, having wings of
a surprizing smallness. The Indians
spread a cloth under the tree, and shake
it with poles, till the insects are forced
to quit their lodging, and fly about the
tree, but not being able to do it long, 
they tumble down dead into the cloth.

COCHLEA 
[in Mechan­
icks] a screw
one of the
six mechani­
cal powers;
it is a strait
cylinder
furrowed spi­
ral wise; if
the furrowed
surface be
convex, the
screw is said
to be both a
male and a
female screw.
Where mo­
tion is to be generated, the male and
female screw are always joined; that
is, whenever the screw is to be used
as a simple engine or mechanical
power, when joined with an axis in
Peritrochio, there is no occasion for a



female; but in that case it becomes
part of a compound engine.

Image omitted.



COCHINEEL Grain, is a red berry
growing in America, found in a fruit, 
resembling that of the cochineel-tree or
tonna, the first shoots produce a yellow
flower; the point whereof, when ripe, 
opens with a cleft of three or four in­
ches. This fruit is full of kernels or
grains, which fall at the least agitation
which the Indians carefully gather up, 
eight or ten of these fruits yields about
an ounce of grain.

This berry yeilds a dye almost as
beautiful as that of the insect, and is so
like, that a person may easily be decei­
ved in them.

COCHLEA [Architecture] a winding
stair-case.

COCK [with Heralds] Guillim says of
the cock, that as some account the eagle
the queen, and swallow or wagtail the
lady, so may I term this the knight a­
mong birds; being both of noble cou­
rage, and always prepared for the bat­
tle, having his comb for an helmet, his
sharp and hooked bill for a falcheon, to
flash and wound his enemy, and a com­
plete soldier, armed cap-a-pe; he has
his legs armed with spurs, giving an
example to the valiant soldier to expel
danger by fight and not by flight.

The Cock, say others, is the emblem
of strife, of quarrels, of haughtiness and
of victory, because he rather chooses to
die than yeild, and therefore is called
the bird of Mars.

The Cock crows when he is conque­
ror, and gives notice of his conquest.
If he be vanquished, he shuns the light
and society of men.

The antients dedicated the cock to
Apollo, because he gives notice of his
approach and break of day. They also
dedicated him to Mercury, as being the
emblem of watchfulness, summoning
men to their business by his crowing.
The cock is generally placed on the tops
of steeples, and called the weather-cock, 
to intimate to prelates, that they are to
watch over their flocks. The Cock is
the herald of the day and the centinel
of the night, and is born in coat-armour
by many families. The Gauls took the
cock for their first standard, and wore it
on their helmets for a crest.

A COCK [Hieroglyphically] signified a
noble disposition of mind there being
no bird of a more generous and undaun­
ted courage at the sight of imminent
danger.

COCK-FIGHTING, the original of
this sport is said to be derived from the
Athenians, on the following occasion:
When Themistocles was marching his
army against the Persians, he by the
way espying two cocks fighting, caused
his army to behold them, and made the
following speech to them: Behold these
do not fight for their houshold-gods, for the
monuments of their ancestors, nor for glo­
ry, nor for liberty, nor for the safety of
their children; but only because the one will
not give way to the other. This so en­
couraged the Grecians, that they fought
strenuously and obtained the victory
over the Persians; upon which cock-­
fighting was by a particular law ordain­ 
ed to be annually practised by the Athe­
nians, and hence was the original of this
sport in England derived.

COCK-HORSE [of coc, in the lan­
guage of the Brigantines, high] a high
horse.

COCKAROUSE [among the Virginian
Indians] is one that has the honour to be
of the king's council with relation to
the affairs of the government, and has
a great share in the administration, and
must all pass through the Huskanau be­
fore they can arrive at this honour or
be of the number of the great men.
See Huskanau.

COCKS-COMB [Botany] the herb al­
so called yellow rattle-grass.

COCK-LOFT (probably of coc high, 
and ננ Heb. a roof] an upper loft or
garret.

COCKS [with Mariners] are small
square pieces of brass with holes in them, 
which are put into the middle of large, 
wooden shivers, to prevent them from
splitting and galling by the pin of the
block or pulley on which they turn.

COCKISH [of cock] uppish.

COCKISHNESS, uppishness.

COCQUET, a beau, a gallant, an a­
moroso or general lover; also a wan­
ton maiden, who keeps several lovers
in suspence.  F.

COCYTUS [χωχυτὸς of τοῖ χωχύειν, Gr.
to lament] this is one of the rivers of
hell, which (according to the poets)
flows out of Styx, and is so called from
the lamentation the dead make for their
past miscarriages, and the dread they
have of future punishments, which they
will soon find after they have pass'd
over the flaming streams of Phlegethon.

CODDY [coððiʒ, Sax.] having pods
or shells, as peas, beans, &c.

CODE [of codex a book, of caudex
the trunk or timber of a tree, because
the books of the ancients were made of
wood, and their leaves were something
like our table books] a volume or book.



CODE [among Lawyers] a certain
book or volume of the ancient Roman
law. In old time, the pleas and an­
swers of the lawyers were in loose
scrolls or sheets of parchment or pa­
per. These the emperor Justinian hav­
ing collected and compiled into a book, 
called it Codex, and ever since this book
by way of eminence has been called the
Code, and is accounted the second vo­
lume of the Roman civil law, and con­
tains twelve books.

The matter of it, especially as to the
first eight books, is pretty near the
same with the Digests; but in these
things it differs, first, as to the stile, 
which is not so pure; 2. Its method is
not so accurate as that of the Digests;
3. in that it discusses matters of more
common use; where is the more ab­
struse and subtle questions of the law
are discuss'd in the Digests, and there
are the opinions of the ancient lawyers
upon them, and so contains more po­
lite, fine witty arguing, than of use to
the generality of mankind.

And for this reason Justinian com­
pos'd the code, because he found the
Digests in many places too fine and sub­
tle for common use, and also very de­
fective and imperfect, as not deciding
many cases that did daily occur.

This Code was compiled from the
answers and determinations of 50 em­
perors and their councils, many of
which were learned and skilful lawyers, 
as the famous Papinianus and some
others, from the time of the emperor
Adrian to Justinian's own time. And
in this Code there are abundance of
things fully and distinctly determined, 
which before were either omitted or
too briefly handled.

The Theodosian CODE, is of good use
to explain the other Code, which cannot
well be understood without it. This
was held in great esteem, and was used
in the western parts of Europe for se­
veral hundred years, as Mr. Selden re­
lates, after that law was in a manner
disused and forgotten; but now the
Theodosian Code is also grown much out
of use.

CODOSCELÆ [according to Fallopi­
us] venereal buboes in the groin.

COE [with Miners] a small hut built
over the mouth of the shaft of a mine
where they work, to screen themselves
from the weather; also in other places
for lodging their tools, clothes or other
necessaries.

COECUM [Anatomy] the blind gut, 
the first of the thick intestines, so called
because made like a sack, having but
one aperture, which serves it for both
entrance and exit.  L.

COEFFICIENCY [of coefficiens, L.]
the causing or bringing to pass together
with another.

COEFFICIENTS [in Algebra] are
numbers prefix'd to letters or species
into which they are supposed to be mul­
tiplied; and therefore with such let­
ters or with the quantities represented
by them, they make a rectangle pro­
duct, or coefficient production; whence
the name, thus 6ab implies that the
quantities represented by ab are multi­
plied into the efficient 6, and that out
of these 2 the rectangle or product 6ab
is formed.

COELIA [χοιλία, Gr. Anat.] signifies
any kind of original cavity in an ani­
mal body; and hence diseases seated in
the cavities or venters of the body, are
called Cœliac Affections.

COELIACK [of χοιλία, Gr. the belly]
of or belonging to the belly.

COELIGENOUS [cœligena, L.] hea­
ven born.

COELUM, Heaven [with Anatomists]
the cavity of the eye towards the cor­
ner.  L.

COELUS [according to the Pagan
Theology] was the ancientest, the great
grandfather (or first) of all the gods [in
the Greek called Οἰρανὸς] he had two
sons, Titan was the elder, and Saturn
the younger; the last of which com­
mitted a most impious action, by cutting
off his privy parts with a scythe, to de­
prive him of the power of begetting, 
and threw his genitals into the sea, 
where, by the continual agitation of the
the waves, it finding a favourable
womb among the froth, they say the
goddess Venus was produced out of the
bleeding genitals.

Hesiod says, his wife Vesta brought
forth many sons and daughters, the
names of which were Codu, Japetus, 
Theia, Hyperion, Themis, Mnemosyme, 
Phœbe, Tethys, Saturnus, Giges, Titan, 
Brontes; &c. to the number of 45. Of
these Apollodorus says, Cœlus married
Terra (the Earth) and had by her three
sorts of children, i. e. the giants with
100 hands and 50 heads, called Briareus, 
Gyas and Cœus; 2. the Cyclops and the
Titans, of whom Saturn was the young­
est.

Lastantius says, that Cœlus was some
potent and aspiring prince, who affect­
ing to be a god, called himself the son
of the ambient sky: And after him Sa­
turn thought it no less glory to be the



son of Heaven, whose vast concavity
contains all things immortal, as well as
those liable to corruption. And that
the supreme power was conferr'd on
him for his singular prudence and poli­
cy; that his dethroning happen'd in
the 32d year of his reign, and that he
was buried in Oceania (supposed to be
Crete) near the town called Aularia.

COENOTAPHIUM [of χένος emp­
ty and τάφος ,
a sepulchre] an empty tomb or monu­
nument erected in honour of some illu­
strious person deceased, who perishing
in shipwreck, battle or the like, his bo­
dy could not be found to be deposited
in it.

CENOTAPHIUM [[of χένος emp­
ty and τάφος ,
a sepulchre] an empty tomb or monu­
nument erected in honour of some illu­
strious person deceased, who perishing
in shipwreck, battle or the like, his bo­
dy could not be found to be deposited
in it.

COEQUALITY [of coequalis, L.] 
a being equal
with.

COEQUANESS [of coequalis, L.] 
a being equal
with.

COERCIVENESS [of coercere, L.]
compulsiveness.

COERCION, a restraining, a keep­
ing in good order or decorum.

COESSENTIALNESS [of con and
essentia, L.]
the being of the same essence with.

COESSENTIALITY [of con and
essentia, L.]
the being of the same essence with.

COETANEOUSNESS [of con and
ætas] the being of, the same age with.

COETERNALNESS [of coeternel;
F.] the being
eternal with.

COETERNITY [of coeternel;
F.] the being
eternal with.

COEVALITY, the being of the same
age or duration.

COEUR [in Heraldry] as
Party en coeur, signifies a
short line of partition in
pale in the centre of the es­
cutcheon, which extends
but a little way, much short
of top and bottom, and is there met
by other lines, which form an irregu­
lar partition of the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



COEXISTENCE [of con and existen­
tia, L.] the existing at the same time
with,

COFFER [with Architects] the low­
ermost part of a cornice, or a square
depressure or sinking in each interval, 
between the modillions of the Corinthian
cornice, usually filled with a rose, pome­
granate or other inrichment.

COFFIN [of a Horse] is the whole
hoof of the foot above the coronet, in­
cluding the coffin bone, the sole and
the frush.

COFFIN-BONE [of a Horse] is a
small spungy bone, inclosed in the mid­
dle of the hoof, and possessing the whole
form of the foot.

COFFIN of Paper, a triangular piece, 
such as grocers put up pepper, &c. in
form of a cone.

COGS, the teeth of a mill-wheel; al­
so a sort of boat used on the river Hum­
ber.

COGENCY [of cogens, L.] the
being cogent or
compelling.

COGENTNESS of cogens, L.] the
being cogent or
compelling. 

COGITATION [with the Cartesians]
whatever a man experiences in him­
self, and of which he is conscious; as
all the operations of the understanding, 
will, imagination and senses.

COGNATION, kindred, affinity, al­
liance.

COGNIZANCE [connoissance, F. cog­
nitio, L.] knowledge.

COGNISANCE, a badge of arms on
a serving man, or waterman's sleeve, 
shewing that he belongs to a particular
master or society.

COGNIZABLE [of connoisable, F. of
cognoscere, L.] that may be known; also
that may be liable to the censure of the
law.

COGRITAL Line [Fortification] a line
drawn from the angle of the centre to
that of the bastion.

COHABITANT, one who inhabits
with another.

COHABITANCE [of cohabitare, L.]
a cohabiting or dwelling with.

COHERENT Discourses, are such dis­
courses in which there is a connexion
and agreement between their parts.

COHERENT Propositions, such that
have some relation or agreement the
one with the other.

COHESIVENESS [of cohærere, L.] co­
hesive quality.

COINCIDENCE [coincidentia,
L.] a falling
or jumping together.

COINCIDENTNESS [coincidentia,
L.] a falling
or jumping together.

COINS [with Printers] certain
small wedges used to fa­
sten the whole composure of letters in
the chase or frame.

QUOINES [with Printers] certain
small wedges used to fa­
sten the whole composure of letters in
the chase or frame.

COKER, a boat-man or waterman.

COKERS, fishermens boats.

To COLAPHIZE [colaphizo, L. of
χολαφίζω, Gr.] to buffet.

COLARIN [in Architecture] the little
frize of the capital of the Dorick and
Tuscan column, placed between the a­
stragal and the annulets, also the
orlo or ring on the top of the shaft of
the column next to the capital.

COLDNESS [cealðneſſe, Sax.] the
being cold or quality of cold.

COLDNESS Potential, is a relative
quality, which plants, &c. are supposed
to have. Thus a plant is said to be cold
in the second or third degree; not that
it is actually cold to the touch; but in
its effects or operations, if taken in­
wardly.



COLIR [in China] an officer who is
inspector of every court or tribunal of
the empire, and altho' he is not of the
number, may assist at all assemblies, the
proceedings of which are communicated
to him.

He gives private intelligence to the
court, and even upon occasion accuses
the Mandarins of their faults; both as
to their private life and publick offices;
so that even the princes of the blood
stand in fear of these Colirs.

COLLAR Beam [in Carpentry] a beam
framed cross, betwixt two principal
rafters.

COLLATERAL [in Geography] any
place, country, &c. situate by the side
of another.

COLLATERAL Points [in Cosmogra­
phy] are the intermediate points, or
those between the cardinal points.

Primary COLLATERAL Points, are
such as are removed by an equal angle
on each side, from 2 cardinal points.

Secondary COLLATERAL Points, are
either those which are equally distant
from a cardinal and first primary; or
equally distant from some cardinal or
primary, and first secondary.

COLLATERAL Descent, is springing
out of the side of the whole blood, as
grandfather's brother, &c.

COLLATERALS [in Genealogy] are
such relations as proceed from the same
stock but not in the same line of ascen­
dants or descendants; but being as it
were aside of each other. Thus uncles, 
aunts, nieces, cousins, are collaterals, 
or in the collateral line.

COLLATION [in a Logical Sense] a 
comparing one thing well with another.

COLLATION [in Common Law] the
comparison or representation of a copy
to its original, to see whether they are
alike; also the report or act of the of­
ficers who made the comparison.

COLLECTION [with Logicians] an
inference or conclusion.

COLLECTION of Light [with Astro­
logers] is when four principal significa­
tors behold not one the other; but both
of them cast their several aspects to a
more momentary planet than them­
selves, whom they each of them receive
in some of their essential dignities; so
that the planet, which does thus collect
their lights, signifies in their judgment
the accomplishing of a business in hand
between two persons by the mediation
of a third.

COLLEGATARY [Civil Law] a per­
son to whom a legacy is left in com­
mon with one or more persons.

COLLEGIANS [in Holland] a religi­
ous sect who hold assemblies the first
sunday in every month, where every
one has the liberty of praying, ex­
pounding the scripture, &c. They
have no stated ministers, they baptize
by dipping or plunging, they meet twice
a year at Rinsburg a village two miles
from Leyden, where they admit all that 
come, without regarding what sect or
opinion he is of.

COLLERED [in Heraldry] signifies
wearing a collar, as a dog collered, &c.

COLLET [of a Ring] that part of it
in which the stone is set, the Bezil.

COLLIERIES, coal-mines.

COLLIGATION, a gathering or ty­
ing up together.  L.

COLLINEATION, a levelling at, or
aiming to hit the mark.  L.

COLLIQUANT [colliquans, L.] con­
suming, wasting.

To COLLIQUATE [colliquatum, L.]
to melt, consume or waste.

COLLIQUATIVENESS [of colliqua­
tivus, L.] wastingness, consumingness.

COLLIQUEFACTION, a melting
down.  L.

To COLLOCATE [of collocatum, L.]
to place, to set, to appoint to a place.

COLLOCUTION, a talking toge­
ther.  L.

COLLYRIDIANS [of χολλυρα, Gr. a
cake] a sect who out of an extravagant
devotion to the Virgin Mary, met on a
certain day in the year to celebrate a
solemn feast, and render divine honour
as a goddess, eating a cake, which they
offer'd in her name.

COLON [with Anat.] is one of the
thick guts, and the largest of all, being
in length about eight or nine hands
breadth, and full of little cells, some­
times stuffed with wind and other mat­
ters, which cause pains of the colic.

COLONADE [Architecture] a range
of pillars running quite round a building
and standing within the walls of it, or
a portico of pillars, such as before St.
Peter's church at Rome.

Polystile COLONADE, is one whose
number of columns is too great to be
taken in by the eye at a single view.

COLONEL Lieutenant, one who com­
mands a regiment of guards, whereof
the king, prince or other person of the
first eminence is colonel.

Lieutenant COLONEL, is the second
officer in the regiment, who is the cap­
tains and commands in the absence of
the colonel.



Lieutenant COLONEL of horse or 
dragoons, is the first captain of the regi­
ment.

COLOPHONIA [with Chymists, of
χολοφὼν, Gr.] the top of a thing, the
chief, the end,  L. the caput mortuum, 
or gross substance of turpentine, the
more liquid part being distilled into oil.

COLOPHONIA resina, a kind of rosin
issuing out of the pine-tree.

COLORBASIANS [of Colorbasius their
chief] a branch of the Gnosticks, who
improv'd on the visions of the Gnosticks
that preceded them.

COLORIFICK [colorificus, L.] mak­
ing colour, colouring.

COLORISATION [in Pharmacy]
the changes of
colour which bodies undergo, by the va­
rious operations either of nature or art, 
as by calcinations, coctions, &c.

COLORATION [in Pharmacy]
the changes of
colour which bodies undergo, by the va­
rious operations either of nature or art, 
as by calcinations, coctions, &c. 

COLOSS. See Colossus.

COLOSSEUM [at Rome] an amphi­
theatre built by the emperor Vespasian, 
capacious enough to contain 100000
spectators to sit round the Area, i. e. the
place where the beasts were let loose, 
and was the place where St. Ignatius
was exposed to the lions.

COLOSSUS, a statue of prodigious
size, as that of Apollo or the Sun in the
harbour of the island Rhodes. That at
Rhodes was made by Chares of Asia the
lesser, and was the work of 12 years, 
and was dedicated to the Sun. It cost
about 44000 pounds English money. It
was placed at the entrance of the har­
bour of the city, with the right foot
standing on one side of the land, and the
left on the other. The tallest ships with
their masts sailed into the haven be­
tween the legs of it, and when it was
thrown down to the ground by an earth­
quake, few men were able to embrace
the little finger of this prodigious sta­
tue, the brass of which it was made
loaded 900 camels.

COLOUR, is defined to be the diffe­
rent modifications of the rays of light, 
which excite in us the sensation, by
which we distinguish things, and call
them red, yellow, green, blue, &c.

COLOUR [color, L.] is a quality in­
herent to natural bodies, which are said
to be so and so coloured: as others de­
fine colour, an accident that happens to
them by the reflexion of light; also
complexion, looks; also pretence or
shew.

COLOUR [in Heraldry] colours are
generally red, black, blue and purple, 
which are called as follows: the red is
called gules; the blue, azure; the black, 
sable; the green, vert or sinople; and the
purple, purpure, tenny or tawney, and
sanguine sometimes, but this is not com­
mon, and these colours are sometimes
otherwise express'd; gules is called Mars;
azure, Jupiter; sable, Saturn; vert, Ve­
nus; purpure, Mercury; tenny, the Dra­
gon's head: and sanguine, the Dragon's
tail.

In precious stones gules is called ruby;
azure, sapphire; sable, diamant; vert, 
emeraud; purple, amethyst; tenny, hya­
cynth; and sanguine, sardonix.

COLOUR [in Philosophy] a property
inherent in light, whereby, according
to the different sizes or magnitudes of
its parts, it excites different vibrations
in the fibres of the optick nerve; which
being propagated to the sensorium, affect
the mind with different sensations.

COLOUR of Office [Law Phrase] an
evil or unjust act done by the counte­
nance of office or authority.

COLOURING [with Painters] the
manner of applying and conducting the
colours of a picture; or the mixture of
lights and shadows form'd by the vari­
ous colours employ'd in a painting.

Emphatical COLOURS [according to
the ancient Natural Philosophy] are (as
they term them) those apparent colours
frequently seen in the clouds, before
sun-rising or after its setting; the co­
lours that appear in the rainbow, &c.
these they will not allow to be true
colours, because they are not permanent
or lasting.

Field COLOURS, are small flags of a­
bout a foot and half square, carried a­
long with the quartermaster general, 
for marking out the ground of the squa­
drons and battalions.

COLOURABLENESS, plausibleness.

COLTSFOOT [Botany] an herb
good in distempers of the lungs, &c.

COLTER [cultor, Sax.] a piece of
iron belonging to a plough, that cuts
the ground.

COLUBRINE [colubrinus, L.] of or
belonging to a serpent; also wily, crafty.

COLLUMBINE [columbinus, L.] of, 
like or pertaining to a pigeon.

COLUMN [columna, L.] a round
pillar to bear up or beautify a build­
ing; or for a monument of some nota­
ble event.

COLUMN [in Architecture] in a
strict sense is that long, round cylinder, 
or part of a pillar, which is called
the shaft or trunk, and contains the bo­
dy of it from the spire to the base,



or from the astragal of the base to
the chapiters.

Tuscan COLUMN, is the shortest and
most simple of all the columns, its
height, according to Scamozzi, is 15 mo­
dules, to Vitruvius, &c. 14.

Doric COLUMN, is something more
delicate, its height from 14 to 15 mo­
dules, and is adorned with flutings.

Corinthian COLUMN, is the richest
and most delicate of all, its height is 19
modules, its capital is adorned with
two rows of leaves and with caulicoles, 
from whence volutes do spring out.

Ionick COLUMN, is more delicate
than the Doric, its height is 17 or 18
modules, it is distinguished from the
rest by the volutes in its capital, and
by its base.

Composite COLUMN, its height is 19
and a half or 20 modules, it has two
rows of leaves in its capital like the
Corinthian, and angular volutes like the
Ionic.

COLUMNS [Mil. Art] is a long file
or row of troops, or of the baggage of
an army in its march.

COLUMN [with Printers] is a part of
a page divided by a line, as the pages
in this book are into two columns, and
others into three, four, &c.

Cylindrical COLUMN, a column that
has neither swelling nor diminution.

Attic COLUMN, a pilaster insulated, 
having four equal faces or sides and of
the highest proportion.

Angular COLUMN, is an insulated
column, placed in the coin or corner
of a portico, or inserted into the cor­
ner of a building.

Doubled COLUMN, is an assemblage
of two columns, joined in such a man­
ner as that the two shafts penetrate each
other with a third of their diameter.

Fusible COLUMN, is a column made
of some metal or matter cast.

Hydraulick COLUMN, a column from
the top of which a jet d'eau proceeds, to
which the capital serves as a bason, 
whence the water descends by a little
pipe, which turns spirally around the
shaft.

Moulded COLUMN, is one made by
impastation of gravel and flints of divers 
colours, bound together with a cement, 
which grows perfectly hard and receives
a polish like marble.

Transparent COLUMN, a column
made of some transparent alabaster, 
&c.

Water COLUMN, one whose shaft is
form'd of a large jet d'eau, which spout­
ing out water forcibly from the base
drives it within the tambour of the ca­
pital, which is made hollow, thence
falling down again it has the effect of a
liquid crystal column.

COLUMN of Joinery, is made of
strong timber boards, joined, glued and
pinned together, is hollow turned in
the lath and usually fluted.

Incrustated COLUMN, is made of se­
veral ribs or thin shells of fine marble
or other rare stone, cemented upon a
mold of stone, brick or the like.

Astronomical COLUMN, a kind of ob­
servatory in form of an high tower, 
built hollow, and with a spiral ascent
to an armillary sphere, placed at the
top for taking observations of the cour­
ses of the heavenly bodies.

Carolitick COLUMN, is one that is
adorned with foliages or leaves or bran­
ches turned spirally around the shaft;
or in crowns and festoons.

Diminished COLUMN, is one that
begins to taper or diminish from the
base in imitation of trees.

Cantoned COLUMNS, are such as are
engaged in the four corners of a square
pillar, to support four springs of an
arch.

Coupled COLUMNS, are such as are
disposed by two and two, so as almost
to touch each other at their bases and
capitals.

Chronological COLUMNS, are such as
bear some historical inscription, digested
according to the order of time.

Geminated COLUMN, a column whose
shaft is formed of three similar and
equal sides or ribs of stone, fitted within
one another, and fastened at the bottom
with iron pins, and at the  top with
cramp irons.

COLUMN of Masonry, is made of
rough stone well laid and coloured with
plaster, or of bricks moulded triangu­
lar-wise and covered with stuc.

COLUMN with Tambours, is one
whose shaft is formed of several courses
of stone or blocks of marble less high
than the diameter of the column.

COLUMN in Truncheons, consists of
three, four or five pieces of stone or
metal, differing from the tambours, be­
ing higher than the diameter of the
column.

Fluted COLUMN, is one whose shaft
is adorned with flutes or channellings, 
either from top to bottom, or only two
thirds of its height.

Fluted COLUMN enrich'd, a column
whose flutings are filled up with orna­
ments of foliages, rinds, ribbands, &c.
instead of cables.



Cabled COLUMNS, are such as have
projectures in form of cables in the na­
ked of the shaft, each cable having an
effect opposite to a fluting, and accom­
panied with a little list on each side.

Cabled and fluted COLUMN, one
whose flutes are filled up with cables, 
reeds or staves, beginning from the
bottom of the shaft and reaching one
third of its height.

Colossal COLUMN, a column of an
enormous size, too large to enter any
ordonnance of architecture.

Gothick COLUMN, a round pillar that
is either too short for its bulk, or too
slender for its height.

Hermetick COLUMN, a sort of pila­
ster in manner of a Terminus, having
the head of a man instead of a capital.

Historical COLUMN, is one whose
shaft is adorned with a basso relievo, run­
ning in a spiral line its whole length, 
and containing the history of some
great personage.

Hollow COLUMN, is one that has a
spiral stair-case on the inside for the
conveniency of ascending to the top.

Indicative COLUMN, one which
serves to shew the tides, &c. along the
sea-coasts.

Itinerary COLUMN, a column erected
in the cross ways in large roads, having
several faces, which by the inscriptions
serve to shew the different routs.

Lactary COLUMN, a column in the
herb-market at Rome, having a cavity
in its pedestal where young children
were put, being abandoned by their pa­
rents either out of poverty or inhuma­
nity.

Legal COLUMN, a column whereon
the fundamental laws of the state were
engraven.

Limitrophous COLUMN, one that
shews the bounds and limits of a coun­
try conquered.

Luminous COLUMN, a kind of co­
lumn formed on a cylindrical frame, 
mounted and covered over with oiled
paper, &c. so that lights being disposed
in ranks over each other, the whole
appears to be on fire.

Manubiary COLUMN [of manubiæ, 
L. spoils of an enemy] a column ador­
ned with trophies in imitation of trees, 
on which the ancients hung the spoils
of the enemy.

Median COLUMN, are two columns
in the middle of a porch, whose inter­
columniations are larger than the
rest.

Phosphorical COLUMN, a hollow co­
lumn, or a light-house built on a rock
or the tip of a mole, to serve as a lan­
tern to the port.

Memorial COLUMN, a column rai­
sed on account of any remarkable
event.

Massive COLUMN, one that is too
short for the order whose capital it
bears.

Rostral COLUMN, a column adorned
with beaks or prows of ships, and gal­
leys with anchors and grapnels; erected
to preserve the memory of some nota­
ble sea-fight.

Sepulchral COLUMN, a column erect­
ed on a tomb or sepulchre, with an in­ 
scription on its base.

Statuary COLUMN, one which sup­
ports a statue.

Symbolical COLUMN, a column re­
presenting some particular country by
some attribute peculiar to it, as the
Fleur-de-lis for France.

Grouped COLUMNS, are such as are
placed on the same pedestal or socle, ei­
ther by 3 and 3, or by 4 and 4.

Gnomonick COLUMN, a cylinder on
which the hour of the day is represent­
ed by the shadow of a style.

Nich'd COLUMN, is one whose shaft
enters with half its diameter into a
wall, which is hollowed for its recep­
tion.

Pastoral COLUMN, one the shaft of
which is formed in imitation of the
trunk of a tree, with barks and knots.

Polygonous COLUMN, one that has
several sides or faces.

Oval COLUMN, one whose shaft has
a flatness; the plan of it being made o­
val to reduce the projecture.

Funeral COLUMN, one which bears
an urn, in which the ashes of some de­
ceased Hero are supposed to be inclosed;
and the shaft of which is sometimes
overspread with tears or flames, which
are symbols of sorrow and immortality.

Inserted COLUMN, is one that is at­
tach'd to a wall by a third or fourth
part of its diameter.

Insulated COLUMN, one that stands
free and detach'd on all sides from any
other body.

Serpentine COLUMN, a column form­
ed of 3 serpents twisted together, the
heads of which serve as a capital.

Swelled COLUMN, is one which has
a bulging or swelling in proportion to
the height of the shaft.

Twisted COLUMN, is one whose shaft
is twisted round in manner of a screw, 
with six circumvolutions, and is for the
most part of the Corinthian order.



Twisted, fluted COLUMN, is a column
whose flutes follow the contour of the
shaft in a spiral line throughout the
whole length.

COLUMN twisted and inriched, is a
column of which one third of its shaft
is fluted, and the rest adorned with
branches and other inrichments.

Triumphal COLUMN [among the An­
cients] a column erected in honour of
an Hero; of which the joints of the
stones or courses were adorn'd with as
many crowns as he had made military
expeditions.

Zophorick COLUMN [of ξωοφόρος,
Gr. bearing living creatures] a statuary
column, on which the figure of some
animal is placed.

COM [of the British word Kum, 
which signifies low] at the
beginning of the name of a
place, intimates that the place stands
low, as Comton or Compton.

COMB [of the British word Kum, 
which signifies low] at the
beginning of the name of a
place, intimates that the place stands
low, as Comton or Compton.

COMP [of the British word Kum, 
which signifies low] at the
beginning of the name of a
place, intimates that the place stands
low, as Comton or Compton.

COMBINATION of Quantities, the
many several ways that may be taken
in any number of quantities, without
having any respect to their places.

COMBINATION [in Arithmetick] is
the art of finding how many different
ways a certain given number of things
may be varied, or taken by 1, and 1, 2
and 3, &c. And thus the combinations
of the 24 letters of the alphabet, first
taken 2 by 2, and 3 by 3, and so on, 
has been calculated to be 139, 172, 428, 
888, 725, 999, 425, 128, 493, 402, 200 139
millions of millions of millions; and so
on.

COMBINATION [in Law] is the en­
tering of several persons into a conspi­
racy, to put in practice some unlawful
design.

COMBUST Way [with Astrologers] is
the space of the half of Libra, and all
Scorpio, so called upon account of seve­
ral violent and ill-boding stars, that, as
they pretend, are fixed there; so that
they account it unfortunate, and wea­
kening to any planet that happens to be
in it.

COMBUSTIBLENESS [of combustibi­
lis, L.] aptness to take fire or burn.

COMEDIOGRAPHY [of χομηδία and
γραφὴ, Gr. a description or writing] the
writing of comedies.

COMEDY [of χόμη a village, and ὠδὴ
a song; because comedies were first act­
ed in country villages] is an agreeable
representation of the actions of human
life. It is reckoned part of the great
poetry on account of its end, which is
instruction as well as pleasure. For men
will sooner be laugh'd out of their fol­
lies than beat out of them; and there­
fore comedy will arrive at the end of
dramatick poetry sooner than tragedy.
The three unities of action, time and
place are requisite in this, and therefore
whatever action is compound, whatever
time above what is necessary for the re­
presentation, whatever scene is remov­
ed from one street to another, or one
house to another, break the rules, or
are against nature.

That which distinguishes our comick
poetry from all others, and gives it the
advantage over both the ancients and
moderns, is humour, which Mr. Dryden, 
thus defines.

It is the ridiculous extravagance of
conversation, wherein one man differs
from all others.

Some have fancied that the excel­
lence of comedy consists in the wit of it;
others confine it to the intrigue, and
turns of incidents; and others to the hu­
mours. But indeed the excellence lies
in the just mixture of the whole.

COMELINLESS, gracefulness, beaute­
ousness.

COMET [in Heraldry] as Guillim
says, is not of an orbicular
form as other celestial na­
tures are; but protracts its
light at length like a beard, 
or rather dilates it in
length like an hairy bush, 
and thence grows taper-wise like the
tail of a fox. That it contracts its mat­
ter or substance from a slimy exhala­
tion, and was not originally in the crea­
tion; nor is number'd among natural
things mentioned in the history of Ge­
nesis; but is something preternatural, 
and is placed with heavenly bodies, be­
cause they seem to be of their kind.
Many are of opinion, that they prog­
nosticate dreadful and horrible events
of things to come; but others hold that
they are as much stars as any other, 
and only draw nearer to us at the time
they appear, and do not forebode any
accidents whatsoever. The figure an­
nexed is azure, a comet or blazing-star
streaming in bend or.

Image omitted.



COMETS [cometa, L. of χομήτης, Gr.
so called because of their figure which
seems to be as it were hairy] are an im­
perfect substance, which consists of a
thick fat vapour, that is supposed to be
enkindled in the upper region of the
air; they seem hairy or to shed hairs, 
especially on that side which is opposite
to the sun, but after a various manner:
Some drag a tail after them, and are
called Crinita; others have a long



beard, and are called Barbata; others
appear something in the shape of a rose, 
having those hairs scattered round
them; others are in the shape of a
sword, and are called Ensiformis. Co­
mets compass the whole earth in the
space of 24 hours, and are never of
very long appearance. The comet of
the longed continuance that ever was
in the world, was in the time of Nero, 
which was visible for six months.

COMFORTABLE, bringing or pro­
ducing comfort, refreshing.

COMFORTABLENESS [of comfort, 
F.] pleasantness, refreshing quality.

COMFORTLESS, being without
comfort.

COMFORTLESNESS, the being with­
out comfort.

COMICALLY [of comique, F. comice, 
L.] pleasantly, with mirth, &c.

COMICALNESS, pleasantness, &c.

COMITIA [among the Romans] an
assembly, either in the comitium or cam­
pus Martius, for the election of magis­
trates or consulting of other important
affairs of the state.

Front COMMANDING Ground [in
Fortification] is a height or eminence
opposite to the face of the post, and
plays upon the front of it.

Reverse COMMANDING Ground, is
an eminence that can play upon the
back of any post.

Enfilade COMMANDING Ground 
is an eminence, which with its shot
sweeps or scours all the length of a
strait line.

Court in COMMANDING Ground 
is an eminence, which with its shot
sweeps or scours all the length of a
strait line.

COMMATERIALITY, the quality
of being of the same matter, &c. with
another.

COMMEMORABLE [commemorabilis, 
L.] worthy to be mentioned or remem­
bered.

To COMMENCE a horse [with Horse­
men] is to initiate him in the manage, 
or to put him to the first lessons in or­
der to break him.

COMMENDABLENESS [of commen­
dabilis, L.] worthy to be commended.

COMMENDAM [in Law] when a
king makes a parson a bishop, his bene­
fice is resigned by the promotion; but
if he is impowered by the king to re­
tain his benefice, then he still continues
to be parson of it, and is said to hold it
in Commendam.

COMMENSURABLE Magnitudes [in
Geometry] are such as may be measured
by one and the same common measure.

COMMENSURATENESS, the quali­
ty of the being of the same er equal
measure.

COMMENTARIES [with Historians]
are histories written by those persons
who had the greatest hand or share in
the actions there related, as Cæsar's
Commentaries.

COMMENTARIES, also are such as
set forth a naked continuance of the e­
vents and actions, without the motives
and designs, the councils, speeches, occa­
sions and pretexts, with other passages.

COMMENTITIOUSNESS [of com­
mentitius, L.] counterfeitness, forged­
ness.

COMMERCIAL [of commerce, F. of
commercium, L.] of or pertaining to com­
merce or traffick.

COMMINATORY [of comminari, L.]
of or pertaining to threatning.

COMMINUTION [with Surgeons] is
when a bone is broken into many small
parts.

COMMISSARY of stores, [in Military
affairs] an officer of the artillery who
has the charge of all the stores.

COMMISSARY of horses [in Military
Affairs] an officer belonging to the ar­
tillery, who has the inspection of the
artillery horses to see them mustered, and
send such orders as he receives from
the commanding officer of the artillery, 
by some of the conductors of horses, of
which he is allowed a certain number
for his assistants.

COMMISSION [commissio, L.] the au­
thority or power, by virtue of which
one person transacts business for ano­
ther, which is done usually, by deed or
writing duly executed.

COMMISSION [in Trade] signifies
both the power of acting for another, 
and also the premium or reward he is to
have for his so doing, which is usually
one half, 1, 2, 3 or more per Cent.

COMMISSION, a warrant for an of­
fice or place; a charge to buy or to do
any act for another.

COMMISSION, commission-money, 
the wages or reward of a factor.

COMMITMENT [of commetre, F.
committere, L.] a being committed or
ordered to prison; also the doing an un­
decent or illegal action.

COMMODATE [Civil Law] the loan
or free concession of any thing movea­
ble or immoveable for a limited time, 
on condition to restore the same indivi­
dual at the expiration of that time.

COMMODIOUSLY [commodement, F.
commode, L.] advantageously, conveni­
ently.

COMMON [communis, L.] that which
belongs to all alike; own'd or allow'd
by all and not affected to this more than
that.



COMMON [with Grammarians] that
gender of nouns that is equally appli­
cable to both sexes, male and female.

COMMON [in Geometry] is applied to
an angle line or the like, which belong
equally to two figures, or makes a ne­
cessary part of both.

COMMON [according to the Law de­
finition] that sort of water, the use of
which is common to a particular town
or lordship; also as common of pasture
for feeding cattle; common of fishing, &c.
common of turbary, i. e. a liberty of dig­
ging turf.

COMMON [in gross] a liberty to have
common alone, that is, without any
land or tenement in another man's land
to himself for life, or to him and his
heirs.

COM­
MON
Salt [in
Chymical
Writers] is expressed by these charac­
ters.

Image omitted.



COMMON Council [in London] was
first constituted in the reign of king John, 
who ordained that 35 of the most sub­
stantial citizens should be chosen, and
he also gave the city the liberty to choose
a new mayor and sheriffs every year, 
which before held their places daring
life.

COMMON appendant a liberty
of com­
mon appertaining to, or depending on
such a freehold, which common must be
taken with beast commonable, as horses, 
oxen, &c. and not of goats, geese, and
hogs.

COMMON appurtenant a liberty
of com­
mon appertaining to, or depending on
such a freehold, which common must be
taken with beast commonable, as horses, 
oxen, &c. and not of goats, geese, and
hogs.

COMMON Law [of England] had its
original from Edward the confessor, 
who out of the Danish, Saxon, and Mer­
cian laws, collected one universal and
general law about the year 1045.

COMMON Places [among Rhetorici­
ans] are general advertisements, which
help those that consult them to remem­
ber all the ways by which a subject may
be considered. Tho' there are many
more ways by which a thing may be
considered; yet the authors of topicks
have settled sixteen common places;
which are, the Genus, the Difference, 
the Definition, the Division or Distribu­
tion, the Etymology, the Conjugation, the
Similitudes, the Dissimilitudes, the Con­
traries, the Opposites, the Camparison, 
the Antecedents, the Adjuncts, the Con­
sequents, the Effect, and the Cause. These
are sufficient to furnish with ample
matter for a discourse, and to make the
invention of a barren understanding
fruitful.

COMMON Ray [in Opticks] is a right
line drawn from the point of concourse
of the two optical axes, thro' the mid­
dle of the right line, which passes by
the centre of the apple of the eye.

COMMONALTY [in Law] are the
middle sort of king's subjects, such of
the commons, who being raised above
the peasants, arrive at having the ma­
nagement of offices, and are one degree
inferior to burgesses.

COMMUNIBUS annis, signifies the
same thing in regard to time, as commu­
nibus locis does to places, taking the years
one with another.

COMMUNIBUS locis, a term often
used by writers for some medium or
mean relation between several places, 
as taking one place with another.

COMMUNICABLENESS [communi­
cabilis, L.] easiness to be communicated
or to communicate.

COMMUNICABILITY [in Metaphy­
sicks] is when one being may partake
of another.

COMMUNICATION, the act of com­
municating intercourse, converse, con­
ference; also the act of imparting a
thing to another, or making him a
sharer therein.

COMMUNICATION [with Rhetori­
cians] is when the orator argues with
his auditory, and demands their opi­
nion, as Gentlemen, suppose yourselves in
the same case, what measures would you
have taken but those that I took? what
would you have done upon the like occa­
sion?

COMMUNICATION of Idioms [with
Divines] signifies the communication of
the attributes of one nature in Christ
Jesus to that of another.

COMMUNICATIVENESS [of com­
municative, F. of  L.] aptness to commu­
nicate.

COMMUNITY [in Law] sometimes
signifies the joint property in effects be­
tween a husband and wife.

Tacit COMMUNITY a community
contracted between a man and woman
by the mere mingling of their effects, 
provided they have lived together the
space of a year and a day.

COMMUNITY continued, is that
which subsists between two persons join­
ed in marriage, and the minor children
of that marriage, when the survivor
has not made an inventory of the effects
in possession during marriage.

COMMUTABLE [commutabilis, L.]
that may be easily altered or changed.

COMMUTATION [in Astronomy] 
the angle of commutation is the distance



between the sun's true place, seen from
the earth, and the place of a planet re­
duced to the ecliptick.

COMMUTATIVE Justice, is that
justice that ought to be observed and
done in buying and selling, borrowing
and lending, performing covenants, &c.

COMMUTATIVELY [of commutatif
F. of  L.] by way of exchange.

COMPACTNESS [of compacté, F.
compactus, L.] closeness together.

COMPANION of the garter, a knight
of that noble order.

COMPANIONSHIP [of compagnon, 
F.] accompanying with, the being of the
same company.

Independent COMPANY, a company
of foot or troop of horse not embodied
in a regiment.

COMPARABLENESS [of comparabi­
lis, L. and ness] the being comparable
to.

COMPARATIVE Anatomy, is that
branch of it that considers the same
parts of different animals with relation
to the different structure and formation
which is most suited to the manner of
living, and the necessities of every
creature.

COMPARISON of Ideas, is an act of
the mind by which it compares its ideas
one with another, as to extent, degree, 
time, place, and other circumstances.

COMPARISON [with Rhetoricians] 
comparisons differ from similitudes only 
in this, that comparisons are more warm
of the two. Note, that in comparisons, 
it is necessary that that there be an 
exact agreement between all the parts 
of a comparison and the subject that is 
treated of; for several things are taken 
in for no other reason but to render the
comparison more lively.

COMPARISON parallel, the relation
of two persons or things considered as
opposed or set before each other in or­
der to find out wherein they agree or
differ.

COMPARTIMENT [Gardening]
a bed, border
or knot; a design composed of several
different figures, disposed with symme­
try to adorn a parterre, platfond, &c.

COMPARTMENT [Gardening]
a bed, border
or knot; a design composed of several
different figures, disposed with symme­
try to adorn a parterre, platfond, &c.

COMPARTMENTS [in Heraldry]
partitions, as also quarterings of the es­
cutcheon, according to the number of
coats that are to be in it, the several di­
visions made in it, when the arms of se­
veral families are born altogether by
one, either on account of marriages or
otherwise. See Party.

COMPARTMENT [in Joinery, &c.]
a symmetrical disposition of figures to
adorn pannels, &c. the squares of a
cieling, &c.

COMPARTIMENT of Tiles, an ar­
rangement of white and red tiles var­
nished for the decoration of the cover­
ing of a roof.

COMPARTITION [in Architecture]
the useful and graceful distribution of
the whole ground plot of a building, 
into rooms of reception or entertain­
ment, office, &c.

Beam COMPASSES, a mathematical
instrument made of wood or brass, with
sliding sockets, to carry several shifting
points, in order to draw circles of very
long radii, of use in large projections, 
and for drawing the furniture on wall-­
dials.

COMPASS Callipers [with Gunners] is
an instrument for disparting a piece of
ordnance. It resembles two semicircles
having a handle and a joint like a pair
of compasses; but the points are blunt, 
and may be opened at pleasure.

COMPASS, or an instrument
of great use in
Dialling, Navigation, Surveying and se­
veral other parts of the mathematicks.
It consists of a circle drawn on a round
piece of paste-board, which is called
the fly; this circle is divided into 4 qua­
drants, which represent the four prin­
cipal points or cardinal winds, East, 
West, North, and South; and each of
these quadrants or quarters are again
subdivided into eight other equal parts;
which in all makes 32 points of the
compass, called rumbs. This card or
paste-board hangs horizontally on a pin
set upright, and under it is fixed a nee­
dle of iron wire, touched with a load­
stone, which keeps the fly or point of
the north-pole always towards the
north, and by this means directs the
steersman how to keep the ship in her
course.

Mariners COMPASS an instrument
of great use in
Dialling, Navigation, Surveying and se­
veral other parts of the mathematicks.
It consists of a circle drawn on a round
piece of paste-board, which is called
the fly; this circle is divided into 4 qua­
drants, which represent the four prin­
cipal points or cardinal winds, East, 
West, North, and South; and each of
these quadrants or quarters are again
subdivided into eight other equal parts;
which in all makes 32 points of the
compass, called rumbs. This card or
paste-board hangs horizontally on a pin
set upright, and under it is fixed a nee­
dle of iron wire, touched with a load­
stone, which keeps the fly or point of
the north-pole always towards the
north, and by this means directs the
steersman how to keep the ship in her
course.

Meridional COMPASS, is the common
compass before described.

Dark COMPASS, is the same as the
other; but that the fly has the points
marked with black and white, without
any other colours, and is so called be­
cause most convenient for steering by
candle light.

Hair COMPASSES, compasses so con­
trived on the inside as to take an extent
to a hair's breadth.

German COMPASSES, those whose
legs are a little bent outwards towards
the top, so that when shut the points
only meet.

Spring COMPASSES, are dividers
made of hardened steel, the head ar­



ched, which by its spring opens the
compasses, the opening being directed
by a circular screw, fastened to one leg
and let through the other worked with
a nut.

Trissecting COMPASSES, compasses
for the trissecting of angles geometri­
cally.

Draught COMPASSES, a pair of com­
passes with several moveable points, 
used in making fine draughts or maps, 
charts, &c.also in Architecture, Dial­
ling, Fortification.

Fly of the COMPASS, is the round
piece of pasteboard (call'd also the card)
on which the points of the compass are
drawn.

Variation COMPASS, is a compass the
use of which is to shew how much the
common compass varies from the ex­
act points of north and south.

COMPASSIONATENESS [of compas­
sion, F. of  L.] fellow-feeling, &c.

COMPATIBLENESS [compatabilité,
F.] agreeableness.

COMPELLABLE, that may be for­
ced.

COMPENDIARIOUS [compendiarius, 
L.] brief, short, abridg'd.

COMPENDIOSITY [compendiositas, 
L.] compendiousness.

COMPETENCE [competentia, L.]
a sufficient estate, 
stock of learning, &c.

COMPETENCY [competentia, L.]
a sufficient estate, 
stock of learning, &c. 

COMPETENTNESS [of competentia, 
L.] sufficientness, &c.

COMPETIBLENESS [of competit, L.]
suitableness, &c.

COMPITALITIA, feasts held among
the ancients in honour of the Lares.

COMPLACENTNESS, [of complacen­
tia, L.] a being pleased with.

COMPLAISANTNESS, the same as
complaisance.

COMPLEMENT [in Heraldry] signi­
fies the full moon.

COMPLEMENT [with Astronomers]
the distance of a liar from the zenith, 
or the arch that is comprehended be­
tween the place of a star above the ho­
rizon and the zenith.

COMPLE­
MENTS [in a
Parallelogram]
are the 2 lesser
parallelograms
A and B, which
are made by drawing two right lines
parallel to each side of the figure thro'
a given point in the diagonal. See the
figure.

Image omitted.



COMPLEMENTAL [of complemen­
um, L.] of or pertaining to comple­
ment.

COMPLEX Diseases, distempers that
cannot be separated, as a pleurisy and
fever.

A COMPLEX Proposition [with Logi­
cians] is that which has at least one of
its terms complex, or such an one as
contains several members, as causal
proportions.

CCMPLEXNESS [of complexus, L.]
a being compounded of divers things.

CCMPLEXIO [with Rhetorical­
ans] a rhetorical
figure, which is the same as Simploce, 
which see.  L.

COMPLICATIO [with Rhetorical­
ans] a rhetorical
figure, which is the same as Simploce, 
which see.  L. 

To COMPLICATE [complicatum, L.]
to fold or wrap up together.

COMPLICATEDNESS [of complic­
tio, L.] a being folded together.

COMPLOSION, a striking or shaking
together.

COMPONE [in Heraldry]
signifies compounded, and is
also called Gobone: See the
escutcheon.

Image omitted.



COMPONENT [componens, L.] com­
posing, making up, constituting, as com­
ponent parts, parts that make up the
whole.

To be COMPOS Mentis, in a right
mind, having a sound mind and not de­
lirious.

COMPOSED Bastion [in Fortification]
is when the two sides of the inner po­
lygon are very unequal, which makes
the gorges also very unequal.

COMPOSEDNESS [of composer, F.]
quietness of mind, &c.

COMPOSITES [in Pharmacy] medi­
cines compounded of several simple
ones; as electuaries, ointments, opiates, 
syrups, &c.

CQMPOSITION [in Metaphysicks] is
an unity that is divisible.

COMPOSITE Number [with Arith­
meticians] a compound number, or a
number which may be divided by some
number less than the composite itself, 
but greater than unity; as 4, 6, 8, 9, 
10, &c.

COMPOSITION Entitative [with
Schoolmen] is between things of the
same nature, e. g. two or more drops
or water.

COMPOSITION Essential [with
Schoolmen] is when things of different
kinds are joined, and thus constitute
new things or essences, different from
any of the parts; and thus they say
from the matter and the form of wood
arises wood, whose essence is very dif­
ferent from either of these ingredients
taken separately.



COMPOSITION [with Orators] is
the proper order of the parts of the dis­
course adhering to each other.

COMPOSITION [with Logicians] is
a method of reasoning, wherein a per­
son proceeds from some general self-­
evident truth to particular and singular
ones.

COMPOSITION [with Grammarians]
the joining of 2 words together, or the
prefixing a particle to another word, 
to augment, diminish or change its signi­
fication.

COMPOSSIBILITY, capableness of
existing together.

COMPOSSIBLE [of con and possibilis, 
L.] capable of existing together.

COMPOUND [compositus, L.] that
which is made up or composed of diffe­
rent parts.

COMPOUND Quantities [in Algebra]
are such as are joined together by the
signs + and --, and are either expressed
by the same letters unequally repeated, 
or by more letters than one, as b d -- b
and a -- b -- c are compound quantities.

A COMPOUND Leaf [with Bot.] is
divided into several parts, each of which
resembles a single leaf.

COMPOUNDABLE, that may be
compounded.

COMPREHENSION of an idea [a­
mong Logicians] is the comprehension
of the attributes it contains in itself, 
and which cannot be taken away with­
out destroying it, as the comprehension
of the idea of a triangle includes exten­
sion, figure, 3 lines and 3 angles, &c.

COMPREHENSION [in Metaphysicks]
is an act of the mind, whereby it ap­
prehends or knows any object which is
presented to it on all sides, on which
it is capable of being apprehended or
known.

COMPREHENSION [with Rhetori­
cians] a trope or figure whereby the
name of a whole is put for part, or that
of a part for the whole; or a definite
number or thing for an indefinite.

COMPREHENSIVENESS, aptness to
comprehend, or to be comprehended.

COMPRESSIBLENESS [compressibili­
té, F.] capableness to be pressed close.

To COMPROMISE [in a figurative
sense] to put to the hazard of being cen­
sured.

COMPULSIVE, of a restraining na­
ture.

COMPULSIVENESS [of compulsio, 
L.] compelling quality.

COMPUTABLE [computabilis, L.]
that may be counted or reckoned.

COMPUTATION [in Common Law]
signifies the true and indifferent con­
struction of time, so that neither party
shall wrong the other, or that the de­
termination of time referred to shall
neither be taken the one way or the
other; but shall be computed according
to the censure of the law.

COMUS [among the Ancients] the
God of banquetting.

CONATUS [in a Body of Motion] is
that disposition or aptitude to go on in
a right line, if not prevented by other
causes; it is the same as attraction or
gravitation, in matter without motion.

CONCAMERATION, a vaulting or
arching.  L.

CONCATENATION of Causes [with
Philosophers] a term used to express
that an effect is the result of a long
chain of causes linked to, or depending
one upon another.

CONCATENATENESS [of concate­
natio, L.] the being chained together.

CONCAVE [concavus, L.] hollow on
the inside or vaulted like an oven; also
hollowness; i. e. the inside of a hollow
body, especially if it be circular.

CONCAVE Glasses, are such as are
ground hollow, and are usually of a
spherical or round figure; though they
may be of any other, as parabolical, 
&c.

CONCAVENESS [concavitas, L.] the
hollowness of the inside of a round
body.

CONCAVO CONCAVE, concave on
both sides.

Plano-CONCAVE, concave on the
one side, and plain on the other.

CONCAVO-convex, concave on one
side, and convex on the other.

Convexo-CONCAVE, as when the
one or the other surface is a portion of
a less sphere.

CONCEALEDNESS [of concelare, L.]
hiddenness.

CONCEITEDNESS [of concipere, L.]
a being self-opinionated.

CONCEIVABLENESS, easiness to be
conceived.

CONCEIVING [with Logicians] is
the simple view that we have of the
things which present themselves to the
mind; as if we imagine the sun, a tree, 
a globe, a square, a thought, a being, 
without forming any particular judg­
ment. This is the first of the four
principal operations of the mind.

CONCENTRATION [with Natura­
lists] the highest degree of mixture, as
when 2 or more particles or atoms of
the mixture touch, by receiving and
thrusting one into the other, or by



Reception and Intrusion one into the
other; and this Dr. Grew makes to be
the case of all fixed bodies, which are
without taste or smell, whose constitu­
tion is so firm, till that the particles are
as it were unprimed from each other
they cannot affect either of those senses.

CONCEPTION [with Logicians] is
an act of the mind or the product of it, 
as thought, notion, or principle; the
simple idea or apprehension that a per­
son has of any thing without proceeding
to affirm or deny any matter or point
relating to it.

Immaculate CONCEPTION of the holy
Virgin [with Roman Catholicks] a feast
held on the 8th of December, in regard
to the Virgin Mary's being conceived
and born immaculate.

CONCERT, agreement between per­
sons in action, &c.

CONCESSIO [with Rhet.] a figure, the
same as Synchoresis.  L.

CONCESSIONARY [of concession, F.
of  L.] by way of grant or allowance.

CONCHILIS, the same as conchoid.

CONCHOI'D [of χόγχη, Gr. a shell-­
fish] is the name of a curve line invent­
ed by Nichomedes: It is a curve which
always approaches nearer to a strait
line, to which it inclines; but never
meets, it is described thus, 

Draw the
right line Q Q 
and another
perpendicular
to it in E;
draw the right
lines G M, G
M, cutting Q
Q, and make
Q M = Q N =
A E = E E, the
curves where­
in the points
M M are, is
the first conchoid, and those where the
points N N are found, the second con­
choid.

Image omitted.



To CONCILIATE [concillare, L.] to
reconcile; also to procure.

CONCILIATORY [conciliatorius, L.]
of reconciliation.

CONCINNATENESS [concinnitas, L.]
decency, fitness, &c.

CONCINNOUS [concinnus, L.] fit, 
agreeable, &c.

CONCINNOUS Intervals [in Musick]
are such as are fit for musick, next to
and in combination with concords.

CONCISENESS [of concis, F. conci­
sus, L.] briefness.

CONCITATION, a provoking, stir­
ring up or pricking forward.  L.

CONCLAVE, a closet or inner room, 
that shuts up under lock and key.  L.

CONCLUSION [in Oratory] consists
of two parts, the Recapitulation or Enu­
meration and the Passions.

CONCLUSIVENESS [of conclusivus,
L.] the drawing of consequences.

CONCOCTION, a boiling together.
L.

CONCOMITANCY, an accompany­
ing together with.

CONCORD [in Gram.] that part of
Syntax or construction, whereby the
words of a sentence agree among them­
selves, whereby verbs are put in the
same number and person with nouns, 
&c.

Simple CONCORDS, are those whose
extremes are at a distance, less than the
sum of any other 2 concords.

Compound CONCORDS, are equal to
any 2 or more concords.

Imperfect CONCORDS [in Musick]
are the 3d and 8th, with all their
octaves.

CONCORDANCY [concordantia, L.]
agreement.

CONCORDANT Verses, such as have
in them several words in common, but
by the addition of other words have a
quite different meaning; as, 
Et Cants in Sylva Venatur Et
omnia Servat.
Et Cants in Sylva Venatur Et
omnia Vastat.
Et Cants in Sylva Nutritur Et
omnia Servat.
Et Lupus in Sylva Venatur Et
omnia Servat.
Et Lupus in Sylva Venatur Et
omnia Vastat.
Et Lupus in Sylva Nutritur Et
omnia Servat.

CONCORDAT [In the Canon Law]
a covenant or agreement in some bene­
ficiary matter; as relating to a resigna­
tion, permutation, or other ecclesiasti­
cal cause.

CONCORPORAL [concorporalis, L.]
of the same body or company.

Natural CONCRETE [with Philoso­
phers] as antimony is a natural concrete, 
which has been compounded in the
bowels of the earth.

Factitious CONCRETE [with Philoso­
phers] a concrete compounded by art, as
soap is a factitious Concrete, or a body
mixed together by art.

CONCRETENESS [of concrescere, L.]
being grown together, &c.

CONCUBINE, is sometimes used for
a real, legitimate and only wife, and
distinguished by no other circumstance
but a disparity of birth and condition
to her husband.

CONCUPISCIBLENESS, fitness or
readiness to desire or be desired earnest­
ly, &c.

CONCURRENTNESS [of concurrens, 
L.] agreeableness to or with some other.



CONCUSSION, a publick extortion, 
when any officer or magistrate pillages
the people by threats, or pretence of
authority.  L.

CONCUSSIVE [of concussus, L.] sha­
king or jumbling together.

CONDEMNABLENESS, worthiness
to be condemned.

To CONDENSATE [with Philoso­
phers] is to bring the parts of a natural
body into less compass; the term oppo­
site to condensate, is to rarefy.

CONDENSATION [with Philoso­
phers] is when a natural body takes up
less space, or is confined within less
dimensions than it had before.

CONDENSER, a pneumatick engine, 
whereby an unusual quantity of air may
be crowded into a given space.

CONDENSENESS [of condensitas, L.]
thickness, closeness, hardness.

CONDERS [of a Ship] those who
cond or give direction to the steersman
for guiding or governing of a ship.

CONDIGNESS [of condignus, L.] the
being according to merit.

CONDISCIPLE [condiscipulus, L.] a
school-fellow, a fellow-student.

CONDITE [conditus, L.] seasoned, 
pickled.

CONDITION [in a Legal Sense] a
bridle or restraint annexed to a thing, 
so that by the non-performance of it, 
the party shall receive prejudice and loss;
but by the performance, benefit and
advantage.

CONDITION [in Deed] is that which
is knit and annexed by express words to
the feoffment, deed or grant either in
writing or without.

CONDITION implied, is when a man
grants to another an office of bailiff, 
steward, &c. though there be no con­
dition in the grant, yet the law makes
one covertly.

CONDITIO sine qua non [in Philoso­
phy] a term used in speaking of some
accident or circumstance, which is not
essential to the thing, but yet is neces­
sary to the production of it.

CONDITIONAL Propositions [with
Logicians] are propositions that consist
of two parts joined together by the par­
ticle if, of which the first proposition,
that includes the condition, is called the
antecedens, the other the consequent.
Thus if the body of a man be material, it
is mortal, which is a continual proposi­
tion, in which the clause, if the body of
a man be material, is the antecedent, and
the other is mortal, is the consequent.

CONDITIONALNESS [conditio­
nalitas, L.]
the being conditional.

CONDITIONALITY [conditio­
nalitas, L.]
the being conditional.

CONDOLEMENT [of condolere, L.]
an expression of feeling a sympathy at
the affliction of others.

CONDORMANTES [of con together
and dormire, L. to sleep] a religious sect
in Germany, so called of their lying all
together, men and women, young and
old.

CONDOR [in Peru in America] a
strange and monstrous
bird, some of which are said to be five
or six ells long, from one end of the
wing to the other; they have very hard
and sharp beaks, that will pierce a hide, 
and two of them will kill and devour a
bull: Their feathers are black and
white like a magpye, having a crest on
the head in the shape of a razor. It is
a very furious bird, and several Spani­
ards have been killed by them, and the
ancient natives are said to have wor­
shipped this bird as one of their deities;
when these birds fly, they make a ter­
rible noise.

CONTUR [in Peru in America] a
strange and monstrous
bird, some of which are said to be five
or six ells long, from one end of the
wing to the other; they have very hard
and sharp beaks, that will pierce a hide, 
and two of them will kill and devour a
bull: Their feathers are black and
white like a magpye, having a crest on
the head in the shape of a razor. It is
a very furious bird, and several Spani­
ards have been killed by them, and the
ancient natives are said to have wor­
shipped this bird as one of their deities;
when these birds fly, they make a ter­
rible noise.

CONDUCTS, sewers or gutters to
convey away the suillage of a house.

CONDUPLICATION, a doubling, a
folding together.  L.

CONDYLUS [χονδύλος, Gr.] a joint, 
a little round eminence, or protube­
rance at the extremity of a bone.

CONE [conus, L. of χῶνος
Gr.] a geometrical solid figure
consisting of strait lines that
arise from a circular base, and
growing narrower by degrees, 
end in a point at the top, di­
rectly over the center of the
base. The manner of producing this 
figure may be imagined by the turning 
the plane of a right lined triangle, 
round the perpendicular leg or Axis, so 
that if the leg be equal to the base, the 
solid produced will be a right Cone; if it
be less, it will be an acute-angled Cone, 
and if greater, an obtuse-angled Cone;
as in the figure.

Image omitted.



Right CONE [with Geo.] a cone is
said so to be, with respect to the posi­
tion of its axis, i. e. when it is not per­
pendicular to the horizon, it is called
an oblique cone.

A Scalenous CONE,
 is when one side of
it is longer than the
other, as in the fi­
gure.

Image omitted.



CONE of Rays [in Opticks] are all
those rays which fall from any point, 
as suppose A in a subject on the surface
of any glass, as B, C, D, having the



vertex in A, and the glass for its base, 
such is the cone B, C, D, A.

Image omitted.



CONE [with Botanists] signifies not
only such dry, squammous fruits as are
properly of a conick figure; as the fir
and pine-fruits; but also any fruit
composed of several parts of a lignous
substance, adhering together, and sepa­
rating when ripe, as the cypress.

CONE cone, Sax. an account
or reckon­
ing when a young woman, at the age
of 14 or 15, is in law accounted to be
of a competent age to keep Cone and key
of a house, i. e. to take upon her the ma­
nagement of houshold affairs.

COLNE colne, Sax. an account
or reckon­
ing when a young woman, at the age
of 14 or 15, is in law accounted to be
of a competent age to keep Cone and key
of a house, i. e. to take upon her the ma­
nagement of houshold affairs.

CONFABULATORY [of confabulare, 
L.] pertaining to talking together.

CONFARREATION [among the Ro­
mans] a ceremony used in the marriage
of those persons whose children were
destined to the honour of the priesthood.
This was the most sacred of the three
manners of contracting marriage a­
mongst them. The ceremony of which
was this, the Pontifex maximus and Fla­
men dialis joined and contracted the
man and woman by making them eat of
the same cake of salt bread.

CONFECTION. See Confect.

CONFESSION [with Rhetoricians] is
a figure by which the person acknow­
ledges his fault, to engage him whom
he addresses to pardon him.

CONFESSIONAL a place in church­
es under the main altar, where they
anciently deposited the bodies of decea­
sed saints, martyrs and confessors.

CONFIDENTNESS [confidentia, L.]
confidence.

CONFINITY [confinitas, L.] nearness
of place.

CONFIRMATION [with Rhetorici­
ans] is the third part of an oration, 
wherein the orator undertakes to prove
by reasons, authorities, laws, &c. the
truth of the proportion advanced in
his oration.

CONFISCATION, a forfeiting of, or
a legal adjudication, or taking the for­
feitures of goods, &c. to the fisc or
treasury, for the king's use.  L.

CONFLATILE [conflatilis, L.] cast
or molten.

CONFLATION, a casting or melting
of metal.  L.

CONFLEXURE [conflexura, L.] a
bending together.

CONFLICTING, struggling, engag­
ing, fighting with. Milton.

CONFLUXIBLENESS, aptness to flow
together.

CONFORMABLENESS [of confor­
mité, F.
conformitas, L.] agreeableness in form.

CONFORMNESS [of confor­
mité, F.
conformitas, L.] agreeableness in form.

COMFORMATIO Membrorum [with
Rhetoricians] is when things, to which
nature has deny'd speech, are brought
in speaking.  L.

CONFORMATION, the shaping, fa­
shioning, or ordering of a thing; also
the particular texture and consistence of
the parts of a body, and their dispositi­
on to make a whole.

CONFORMATION [in the art of
Physick] an essential property of health
or sickness.

CONFORMNESS [of conformis, L.]
conformity, agreeableness.

CONFOUNDED [confoundu, F.] put
into confusion, &c.

CONFOUNDEDNESS, confusedness, 
the being in confusion.

CONFRAIRY [q. confratria, L.] a
fraternity, brotherhood, or society uni­
ted together, especially upon a religi­
ous account.

CONFRONTATION, the action of
setting two people in opposition to each
other, to discover the truth of some fact
which they relate differently.

CONFRONTE [in Heraldry] signifies
facing or fronting one another.

To CONFUSE [confusum, Sup. of con­
fundere, L.] to mingle, perplex, or put
out of order.

CONFUSEDNESS [confusion, F. of  L.]
a being in confusion.

CONFUSION [in a Metaphysical
sense] as opposed to order, is a pertur­
bation of which confusion consists, ex.
gr. when things prior in nature do not
precede, or posterior do not follow.

CONFUSION [with Logicians] is op­
posed to distinctness or perspicuity.

CONFUSION [in a Physical sense] is
a sort of union or mixture by mere con­
tiguity, as that between fluids of a con­
trary nature, as oil, vinegar, &c.

CONFUTATIO [with Rhetor.] a part
of a narration, wherein the orator se­
conds his own arguments, and strength­
ens his cause by refelling and destroy­
ing the opposite arguments of his anta­
gonist.

CONGE [with Architects] a mould­
ing either in form of a quarter round



or of a cavetto, which serves to sepa­
rate two members one from another.

CONGES [with Architects] the rings
or ferrels anciently used about the ends
of wooden pillars to keep them from
splitting, and afterwards imitated in
stone-work.

CONGENEROUSNESS [of congener, 
L.] the being of the same kind.

CONGENERATED [congeneratus, 
L.] begotten together.

CONGENERS [congeneres, L.] of the
same generation or kind.

CONGENIALNESS, the likeness of
one kind to or with another,

CONGENITURE [congenitura, L.]
the birth of things at the same time.

CONGER [of congrus, L.] a socie­
ty of booksellors, to the
number of 10 or more, who unite into
a sort of company, and contribute a
joint stock for the printing of books: so
called, because as a large conger eel is
said to devour the small fry, so this uni­
ted body overpowers young and single
traders, who have neither so much
money to support the charge, nor so
united an interest to dispose of books
printed; tho' (according to tradition)
the foregoing was the original of the
name conger, yet to be a little more com­
plisant, you may derive it of congruere, 
L. i. e. to agree together; or si licet in
parvis magnis exemplis uti, of congressus
congress. Utrum horum mavis accipe.

CONGRE [of congrus, L.] a socie­
ty of booksellors, to the
number of 10 or more, who unite into
a sort of company, and contribute a
joint stock for the printing of books: so
called, because as a large conger eel is
said to devour the small fry, so this uni­
ted body overpowers young and single
traders, who have neither so much
money to support the charge, nor so
united an interest to dispose of books
printed; tho' (according to tradition)
the foregoing was the original of the
name conger, yet to be a little more com­
plisant, you may derive it of congruere, 
L. i. e. to agree together; or si licet in
parvis magnis exemplis uti, of congressus
congress. Utrum horum mavis accipe.

CONGESTIBLE [of congesto, L.] that
may be heaped up or gotten together.

CONGESTION, a heaping or gather­
ing together. F. of  L.

CONGLOBATED [conglobatus, L.]
heaped or gathered round together.

CONGLOBATELY [of conglobatio, 
L.] in a round mass or lump, &c.

CONGLUTINATION [with Physi­
cians] a joining of bodies by means of
their oily, sticky and clammy parts.

CONGLUTINATIVE [of conglutina­
re, L.] gluing, sticking, or fastened to­
gether.

CONGRATULANT [congratulans, 
L.] congratulating. Milton.

CONGRATULATORY [of congratu­
lator, L.] of or belonging to congratu­
lation.

CONGREGATION [with some Philo­
sophers] the least degree of mixture, in
which the parts of the mixed body are
inconsistent, or do not adhere to or
touch each other but in a point; which
properly, they say, is peculiar to the
particles of water and all other fluids.

CONGRESS, an assembly, or the
meeting together of the deputies or ple­
nipotentaries of several princes to treat
about a peace or any other affair of
importance.

CONGRESS [congressus, L.] an essay
or trial made by appointment of a
judge in the presence of surgeons and
matrons, to prove whether a man be
impotent or not, in order to dissolve a
marriage.

CONGRUENCE [congruentia, L.
congruitas, L.]
agreeableness, conformity, suitableness;
it is properly said of a theme or dis­
course in which there is no fault com­
mitted contrary to the rules of gram­
mar.

CONGRUITY [congruentia, L.
congruitas, L.]
agreeableness, conformity, suitableness;
it is properly said of a theme or dis­
course in which there is no fault com­
mitted contrary to the rules of gram­
mar.

CONGRUITY [with Schoolmen] is a
suitableness or relation between things
whereby we come to a knowledge of
what is to come to pass therein.

CONGRUITY [with Geometricians] is
a term applied to figures, lines, &c.
which exactly correspond when laid over
one another, as having the same terms
or bounds.

CONIC Section, is a figure which is
made by the solidity of a cone, being
supposed to be cut by a plane.

If the section be made by the axis, or
thro' the vertex, the figure arising in a
triangle. If the section be made by a
parallel to the base of the corner, or
succentrarily posited, the figure produced
is a circle.

If the section be made parallel to one
side of the cone, it will be an ellipsis.

If the section be made thro' one side
of the cone, thro' the base, and not pa­
rallel to the other side of the cone, it
will be an Hyperbola.

CONICALNESS [of conicus, L.] the
being in the form of a cone.

CONJECTURABLE [of conjecturo, 
L.] that may be conjectured or guessed.

To CONJOBBLE, to chat together.

CONJOINT Degrees [in Musick] are
two notes, which immediately follow
each other in the order of the scale, as
Ut and Re.

CONJOINT Tetrachords [in Musick]
are 2 tetrachords, where the same chord
is the highest of the one, and the lowest
of the other.

CONJOINTLY [of conjoint, F. con­
juncte, L.] unitedly.

CONJUGALLY [of conjugal, F. of
con with and jugum a yoke, L.] after the
manner of man and wife.

CONJUGATED [conjugatus, L.] cou­
pled or yoked together.

CONJUGATION [with Anatomists]
is understood of a pair of nerves, or two
nerves arising together and serving for
the same operation, sensation or mo­
tion.  L.



CONJUNCTNESS [of conjonction, F.
of  L.] the being close jointed.

CONJURATION, a plot or conspi­
racy, secret cabal or league to do any
publick harm, as to subvert the govern­
ment, attempt the life of the prince, 
&c.

CONJURATION [in Common Law]
is in a more especial manner taken to
intend a personal conference with the
devil or evil spirits, either to compass
some design, or to attain the knowledge
of some secret; magick words, charac­
ters or ceremonies, whereby evil spi­
rits, tempests, &c. are supposed to be
raised and driven away.

To CONJURE [conjurare, L.] to
charge upon the sacredness of an oath;
to desire earnestly, to intreat with the
greatest importunity; also to conspire
or plot together.

To CONJURE [conjurer, F. of  L.] to
practise conjuration, or the raising, &c.
of spirits.

A CONN, a blow with the fist clutch­
ed.

CONNASCENCE [of con and nascens, 
L.] the being born together with ano­
ther.

CONNATURALITY, a being of the
same nature with some other.

CONNIVENCE [conniventia, L.] a
feigning not to see, a winking at a fault, 
a passing it by without punishment.

CONNOISEUR [of connoître, F.] to
know] a person well skilled in any
thing.

CONOID Elliptical [in Geometry] is
a solid figure, made from the plain of
a semi-ellipsis turned about one of its
axes.

CONOID Parabolical [in Geometry]
is a solid made by the turning of a pa­
rabola upon its axis.

CONOIDES [with Anatomists] a par­
ticular gland or kernel in the brain, 
the same with Conarium, or Glandula
Pinealis.

CONQUERABLE [of conquerant, F.]
that may be conquered.

CONSANGUINOUS [of consanguine­
us, L.] a kin by blood.

CONSCIENCE [conscientia, L.] a se­
cret testimony or judgment of the soul, 
whereby it gives approbation to things
it does that are naturally good, and re­
proaches itself for those that are evil.

CONSCIENTIOUSNESS [of consci­
entieux, F.] the having a good consci­
ence.

CONSCIONABLENESS [of conscien­
tia, L.] agreeableness to conscience.

CONSECRATION of Emperors, took
its original from the deification of Ro­
mulus, which Herodian describes as fol­
lows.

The emperors, who leave either sons
or designed successors at their death, 
are consecrated after this manner, and
are said to be enroll'd among the num­
ber of the gods. On this occasion the
whole city maintains a publick grief
mix'd as it were with the solemnity of a
festival. The true body is buried in a 
sumptuous funeral, according to the or­
dinary method. But they take care to
have an image of the emperor made in
wax done to the life, and this they ex­
pose to publick view, just at the entrance
of the palace gate, on a stately bed of
ivory, cover'd with rich garments of
embroidered work of cloth of gold.
The image lies there all pale, as if un­
der a dangerous indisposition, the whole
senate dress'd in black sit the greatest
part of the day round the bed on the
left hand, and the aged matrons, who
either on account of their parents or
husbands are reputed noble, on the right
hand. They wear no jewels, or gold, 
or other ornaments; but are attired in
close white vests. This ceremony con­
tinues seven days together, the Physici­
ans being admitted every day to the bed­
side, and declaring the patient conti­
nually to grow worse and worse. At
last, when they suppose him to be dead, 
a select company of young gentlemen
of the senatorian order take up the bed
upon their shoulders, and carry it thro'
the via sacra, or the holy way, into the
old forum, the place where the Roman
magistrates used to lay down their offi­
ces. On both sides there are raised gal­
leries with seats one above another, 
one side being fill'd with boys nobly de­
fended, and of the most eminent patri­
cian families; the other with a like set of
ladies of quality; who both together sing
hymns and pæans composed in very
mournful and passionate airs, to the
praise of the deceased. When these are
over, they take up the bed again and
carry it into the Campus Martius, where
in the widest part of the field is erect­
ed a four square pile, intirely com­
posed of large planks in shape of a pa­
vilion, and exactly regular and equal
in dimensions. This in the inside is
filled with dry chips, but without is
adorned with coverlids of cloth of gold, 
and beautified with pictures and curious
figures in ivory. Above this is placed
another frame of wood, less, but set off
with the like ornaments with little por­
tico's. Over this is placed a third and



fourth pile, each less than that whereon 
it stands; and so others perhaps till they
come to the least of all, which forms
the top. The figure of the structure ta­
ken all together may be compared to
those watch-towers which are to be seen
in harbours of note, and by the fire on
their top direct the course of ships into
the haven. After this, hoisting up the
body into the second frame of building, 
they get together a vast quantity of all
manner of sweet odours and perfumes, 
whether of fruits, herbs or gums, and 
pour them in heaps all about it: There
being no nation, city, or indeed any e­
minent men, who do not rival one ano­
ther in paying these last presents to
their prince. When the place is quite
filled with a huge pile of spices and
drugs, the whole order of knights ride
in a solemn procession round the struc­
ture, and imitate the motions of the
Pyrrhic dance. Chariots too in a very
regular and decent manner are drove
round the pile, the drivers being cloth­
ed in purple, and bearing the images of
all the illustrious Romans, renowned 
either for their councils, or administra­
tion at home, or their memorable at­
chievements in war. The pomp being
finished, the successor takes a torch in
his hand and puts it to the frame, and
at the same time the whole company
assist in lighting it in several places;
when on a sudden the chips and drugs
catching fire, the whole pile is quickly
consumed. At last from the highest and
smallest frame of wood an eagle is let
loose, which, ascending with the flames
towards the sky, is supposed to carry
the prince's soul to heaven.

CONSECTARY [consectarium, L.]
that which follows upon the demonstra­
tion of an argument; a consequence
drawn from a proposition that went be­
fore; also an addition, inference or de­
duction, and is the same as corollary.

CONSECTARY [in Geometry] is some
consequent truth which is gained from
some demonstration.

CONSECUTIVELY [in School Philo­
sophy] is a term used in opposition to
antecedently, and sometimes effectively
or causally.

CONSENT [Anatomy] is the mutual
sympathy or correspondence between
the several parts of the body; as when
one nerve is affected with the hurt that
is received by another: as when the
inflammation of the Pleura is communi­
cated to the lungs.

CONSENT [among Moralists] is our
simple approbation of means, as we
judge them proper for our work; and
those means, when they are placed
within our reach and power, employ
the two acts of the will, called Eliciti
and Imperati, which see.

CONSENT [with Physicians] is the
depending of one distemper upon ano­
ther, as a difficulty of breathing is said
to proceed by content from a pleurisy;
and when so, it ceases immediately up­
on the removal of the diseases on which
it depends.

CONSENTANEOUSNESS, agreea­
bleness, suitableness.

CONSEQUENT of a Ratio [with Ma­
themat.] is the latter of the two terms
of proportion or the term between
which and the antecedent the compari­
son is made, as in the reason of propor­
tion of the number 4 to 6, 6 is the con­
sequent with which the antecedent 4 is
compared, or if the proportion were a
magnitude or quantity, as B to C, C is
said to be the consequent.

CONSEQUENTLY [consequem­
ment, F. con­
sequenter, L.] by consequence.

CONSEQUENTIALLY [consequem­
ment, F. con­
sequenter, L.] by consequence.

CONSEQUENTIALNESS [of conse­
quentia, L.] the following by way of
consequence, or the being of conse­
quence.

CONSERVATOR, a keeper or main­
tainer, a protector or defender, an of­
ficer established for the security and pre­
servation of the privileges granted some
cities, bodies, communities, &c.

CONSERVATOR [in Law] an umpire
chosen or appointed to compose diffe­
rences between two parties.

CONSERVATORS [in Catholick Uni­
versities] are two persons; viz. the con­
servator of the royal privileges or those
granted by the king; who takes cogni­
sance of all causes between the regents
students, &c. and the conservator of
the apostolical privileges or those grant­
ed by the pope, who takes cognisance
of ecclesiastical affairs.

CONSERVATORY [of conservator, 
L.] of a preserving quality.

CONSIDERABLENESS [of considera­
ble, F.] the deserving notice, &c.

CONSIDERATENESS [consideration, 
F. of  L.] deliberation, considerate tem­
per.

CONSIDERATENESS, considering
and deliberating faculty.

CONSIGNMENT [in a Legal Sense]
is the putting a sum of money, &c.
into sure hands until the decision of a
controversy or law-suit that hinders
the delivery of the said trust.



CONSISTENCE [in Physick] is that
state of a body, wherein its component
particles are so connected or entangled
among themselves, as not to separate
or recede from each other.

CONSISTENTNESS [of consistence,
F. consisten­
tia, L.] agreeableness, &c.

CONSISTENCY [of consistence,
F. consisten­
tia, L.] agreeableness, &c.

CONSISTORY [of Rome] the princi­
pal court or tribunal belonging to the
Pope, held with much splendor and so­
lemnity.

In this court the pope presides, seated
on a chair of cloth of gold, placed upon
a throne, covered with scarlet, dress'd
in his pontifical habit.

The cardinal priests and bishops are
seated on his right hand, and the cardi­
nal deacons on his left. The other 
prelates, protonotaries, auditors of the 
Rota and other officers sit on the steps
of the throne, and the other courtiers
sit on the ground, embassadors on the
right, and the fiscal advocates or those
for the exchequer and consistory behind
the cardinal bishops. And here it is
that causes are pleaded before his holi­
ness.

Besides this there is also a secret con­
sistory held in a private chamber, call'd
the chamber of pope Gay, where the
popes throne is only 2 steps high. To
this none but the cardinals are admitted.
The bulls for bishopricks and abbies
are not pass'd, till they have passed this
consistory. Here the cardinals votes are
taken at every debate.

CONSOCIATED [consociatus, L.] 
joined together in mutual society.

CONSOLABLENESS [of consolabilis,
L.] capableness of being comforted.

CONSOLATION [with Rhetor.] one
of the places whereby the orator en­
deavours to temper and asswage the
grief and concern of another.

CONSOLATORINESS, aptness to
give comfort.

CONSOLE [in Archi­
tecture] an ornament
cut upon the key of an
arch, a sort of bracket
or shoulder piece, hav­
ing a projecture and
serving to support a
cornice and bear up fi­
gures, bulls and vases.

Image omitted.



To CONSOLIDATE [with Surgeons]
a term used concerning broken bones, 
or wounds as the posts begin to consoli­
date, i. e. to join together in one piece, 
as they were before the fracture, or the so­
lution of the continuity.

CONSOLIDATIVES [with Surgeons]
healing medicines to close up a scar.

CONSONANTNESS, [of consonance, F.
consonantia, L.] conformity, agreeable­
ness to or with.

CONSONOUS [consonus, L.] of the
same tune or sound, agreeing in sound;
also agreeable, very like.

CONSPECTABLE [conspicabilis, L.]
easy to be seen.

CONSPICUITY [conspicuitas, 
L.] plainness
or easiness to be seen.

CONSPICUOUSNES [conspicuitas, 
L.] plainness
or easiness to be seen.
 
CONSPIRING Powers [in Mechanicks]
are all such as act in a direction not op­
posite to one another.

CONSTABLESHIP [of conêtable, F.
or constabulus, L. and ship, Eng. office]
the office of a constable, which is to
take care that the peace be duly kept
within his district, and has also the
power to take up and carry offenders
before the justices, and those who are
committed by them to prison.

CONSTELLATED [of constellatio, 
L.] formed into a constellation.

CONSTERNATED [consternatus, L.]
put into sudden fear.

To CONSTIPATE [with Physicians]
to bind or make costive.

CONSTIPATION, a crowding or
thrusting close together.

CONSTITUENCE [of constituens, 
L.] that of which a thing is coomposed.

CONSTITUTION, the temper of
the body or a natural disposition; the
temperament of the body, or that dispo­
sition of the whole, arising from the qua­
lity and proportion of its parts.

Apostolical CONSTITUTIONS, are a
collection of regulations attributed to
the apostles, and supposed to have been
collected by St. Clement, whose name
they bear.

CONSTITUTIVENESS, constitutive
quality.

CONSTRAININGNESS, compelling
nature or quality.

CONSTRICTION, a binding fast, or
tying hard, drawing the parts of a thing
closer together.  L.

To CONSTRUCT [constructum, L.]
to build, to frame; also to contrive.

CONSTRUCTION [in Geometry] is
the drawing such lines of a figure, as
are necessary beforehand, in order to
render the demonstration more plain
and undeniable.

CONSTRUCTIVENESS, the estate
of a thing, as to its capacity of produc­
ing a construction.

CONSTRUCTIVE, that tends to con­
struction, that may be framed or made.



To CONSTUPRATE [constuprare, L.]
to deflower a woman.

CONSUALIA [among the Romans]
certain feasts and games appointed by
Romulus, when he stole the Sabine vir­
gins in honour of Consus, the god of
counsels.

CONSUBSTANTIALITY [con­
sub­
stantialitas, L.] a being of the same sub­
stance.

CONSUBSTANTIALNESS [con­
sub­
stantialitas, L.] a being of the same sub­
stance.

To CONSUBSTANTIATE [of con 
and substantia, L.] to make of the same
substance.

CONSUBSTANTIATION, the ren­
dering a body of the same nature or
substance with some other.

This term is commonly apply'd to
the Eucharist and is different from
Transubstantiation in this, that those
who hold Transubstantiation believe the
bread and wine, receiv'd at the sacra­
ment, is the same numerical and iden­
tical body and blood, which Christ in
his human Mate possess'd; but those
who hold the doctrine of consubstantia­
tion are of opinion that the bread and
wine are as really bread and wine after
consecration as it was before; but that
in the consecration it is become as effi­
cacious to the salvation of mankind, as
the very body of Christ which suffered
on the cross.

CONSULTER [qui consulte, F. consul­
tor, L.] one who asks counsel.

CONSUMPTIVENESS [of consump­
tio, L.]
wasting condition or quality.

CONSUMTIVENESS [of consump­
tio, L.]
wasting condition or quality.

CONTACTION. [contactus, L.] a
touching.

CONTAGIOSE [contagiosus, L.]
full of contagion, 
infectious, apt to infect.

CONTAGIOUS [contagiosus, L.]
full of contagion, 
infectious, apt to infect.

CONTAGIOUSNESS [of contagieux, 
F. contagiosus, L.] infectiousness.

CONTAMINATED [contaminatus, 
L.] defiled, polluted.

COMTEMERATED [contemeratus, 
L.] violated.

CONTEMPLATION, an act of the
mind, whereby it applies itself to consi­
der of, reflect on, &c. any thing.

CONTEMPLABLE [contemplabilis, 
L.] that may be meditated on; openly
to be seen.

CONTEMPORARINESS [of contem­
porarius, L.] the being at the same time.

CONTEMPLATIVENESS [of contem­
plativus, L.] addictedness to contempla­
tion.

CONTEMPORAL [contemporalis, L.]
of the same time.

CONTEMPORANEOUS [contempora­
neus, L.] living both at the same time;
or in the same age.

CONTEMPTIBILITY [contemptibili­
tas, L.] contemptibleness.

CONTEMPTIBLENESS [of con­
temptibi­
lis, L.] deservingness to be despised, 
meanness, vileness.

CONTEMTIBLENESS [of con­
temptibi­
lis, L.] deservingness to be despised, 
meanness, vileness. 

CONTEMPTUOUSNESS [of con­
temptuo­
sus, L.] scornfulness.

CONTEMTUOUSNESS [of con­
temptuo­
sus, L.] scornfulness.
 
CONTENEMENT [Old Law] the
countenance, credit or reputation a per­
son has with and by reason of his free­
hold; according to Spelman, &c. it sig­
nifies what is necessary for the support
and maintenance of men according to
their several qualities, conditions or
states of life.

CONTENTED [contentus, L.] satis­
fied.

CONTENTEDNESS [contentement, 
F. contentatio, L.] satisfaction of mind.

CONTENTFUL, full of content;
also appeasing.

CONTENTIOUSNESS [of contenti­
eux, F. contentiosus, L.] contentious hu­
mour.

CONTENTLESS, discontented, un­
satisfied.

CONTERRANEOUS [conterraneus, 
L.] of the same country.

CONTERMINOUS [conterminus, L.]
bordering near or upon.

CONTESTABLENESS, liableness to
be contested.

CONTESTED [contesté, F. contesta­
tus, L.] disputed.

CONTINENTNESS [continence, F. 
continentia, L.] continency.

CONTINGENTNESS [contingence, F.
contingentia, L.] contingency.

CONTINGENT, the quota of money, 
&c. that falls to any person upon a di­
vision.

Future CONTINGENT [with Logici­
ans] a conditional proposition that may
or may not happen according as circum­
stances fall.

CONTINUALNESS [of continuel, F.
continuus, L.] the being continual.

CONTINUANCE of a Writ or Action, 
is from one term to another, in a case
where the Sheriff has not returned or
executed a former writ, issued out in
the said action.

CONTINUATIVE, causing continu­
ance.

CONTINUATOR, one who conti­
nues or carries on an affair.

CONTINUED Thorough Bass [in Mu­
sick] is that which continues to play



constantly, both during the recitatives, 
and to sustain the chorus.

CONTINUED proportion Arithme­
tick] is that where the consequent of
the first Ratio is the same with the an­
tecedent of the second, as 3, 6, 4, 8.

CONTINUITY [Mathematical] is
merely imaginary and fictitious, in that
it supposes real or physical parts where
there are none.

CONTINUITY Physical, is strictly
that state of 2 or more parts or parti­
cles, whereby they appear to adhere
or constitute one uninterrupted quan­
tity or continuum.

CONTINUOUS Body, a body whose
parts are no way divided.

CONTINUUM. See Continued quan­
tity.

CONTORE, a counting-table or
scriptore.

CONTORTED [contortus, L.]
wreathed.

CONTORTEDNESS, wreathedness.

CONTOUR [in Architecture] the out­
line of any member, as that of a base, 
a cornice, &c.  F.

CONTOUR [in Painting, &c.] the
out-line or that which terminates and
defines a figure, it makes what we call
the draught or design.

CONTOURNE [in Heral­
dry] signifies a beast standing
or running with his face to
the sinister side of the escut­
cheon; being always sup­
posed to look to the right;
if not otherwise express'd, as in the es­
cutcheon annexed.

Image omitted.



CONTOURNIATED [with Antiqua­
ries] a term used of a sort of medallions
struck with a kind of hollowness all
round, leaving a circle on each side; the
figures having scarce any relievo, if
compared with true medallions.

Good CONTRACT [in Law] a cove­
nant or agreement with a lawful cause
or consideration, as when a sum of mo­
ney is given for the lease of a manour, 
&c. or where one thing is given for
another, which is called Quid pro quo.

Bad or nude CONTRACT [in Law]
where a man promises to pay 10 shil­
lings, and afterwards refuses to do it.
No action will be against him to recover
it, because the promise was no contract, 
but a bare promise, but if any thing, 
tho' but the value of two pence, had
been given for the 10 shillings, it had
been a good contract.

CONTRACTILE Force, is us'd of
such a body which when extended has
a property of drawing itself up again
to the same dimension, that it was in
before the extension.

CONTRACTION [in Physicks] is the
diminishing the extent or dimensions of
a body; or a bringing of its parts; clo­
ser to each other; upon which it be­
comes heavier, harder, &c.

CONTRACTION [in Grammar] the
reduction of two vowels or syllables in­
to one.

CONTRACTION [Anatomy] the
shrinking up of a fibre or an assemblage
of fibres, when extended.

CONTRADICTION, a species of di­
rect opposition, wherein one thing is
directly opposed to another. F. of  L.]

CONTRADICTIOUSNESS [of con­
tradic­
tio, L.] aptness, &c. to contradict.

CONTRADICTORINESS [of con­
tradic­
tio, L.] aptness, &c. to contradict.

CONTRA Harmonical Proportion [in
Musick] that relation of three terms, 
wherein the difference of the first and
second is to the difference of the second
and third, as the third is to the first.

CONTRANITENCY [of contra and
nitens, L.] a resisting against opposition.

CONTRAPOSITION, a putting a­
gainst,  L.

CONTRAPOSITION [with Logici­
ans] an altering of the whole subject in­
to the whole predicate; and e contra, 
retaining both the same quantity and
the same quality; but altering the
terms from Finite to Infinite; as every
is an animal; therefore every thing 
that is an animal is not a man.

CONTRARIETY [contrarietas, L.]
opposition, disagreement.

CONTRARIES [with Logicians] is
when one thing is opposed to another, 
as light to darkness, sight to blindness.

CONTRARINESS [contrarieté, F.
contrarietas, L.] contrariety.

CONTRARY [contrarius, L.] oppo­
site things are said to be contrary, the
natures or qualities of which are abso­
lutely different, and which destroy one
another.

CONTRAST [contrasté, F.] a diffe­
rence, an opposition.  L.

CONTRAST [in Painting, &c.] signi­
fies an opposition or difference of peti­
tion, attitude, &c. of two or more fi­
gures to make a variety in the design, 
as when in a group of three figures one
appears before, another behind, the
other sideways.

To CONTRAST [with Architects] is
the avoiding the repetition of the same
thing in order to please by variety.

Well CONTRASTED Figures [in
Painting and Sculpture] are such as
lively and express the motion proper to



the design of the whole piece, or of any
particular group.

CONTRAVENTION, a contraven­
ing, infringement, &c. a failure in a
man of performing or discharging his
word, obligation, duty or the laws and
customs of the place; sometimes it is
used to signify the non-execution of an
ordinance or edict, supposed to be only
the effect of negligence or ignorance.

CONTRAYERVA, a plant in the
West-Indies much used with others in
counter-poisons, and which distillers
with us use in strong waters.

CONTRECHANGED [in
Heraldry] or as it is most
commonly written counter­
changed, is used when any
field or charge is divided or
parted by any line or lines
of partition, consisting all interchangea­
bly of the same tinctures, as in the es­
cutcheon annexed.

Image omitted.



CONTRE BANDE [in Heraldry] is in
French, what we call Bendy of six per
Bend sinister counter-changed.

CONTRE-BARRE [in Heraldry] is
with the French the same as our Bendy
sinister per Bend counter-changed.

CONTRE-CHEVRONNE [in Heral­
dry] signifies a shield parted by some lines
of partition.  F.

CONTRE-COMPONE 
[in Heraldry] or Counter
componne, is when the fi­
gure is compounded in two
panes, as in the esscutcheon
annexed.

Image omitted.



CONTRE-ERMINE [in
Heraldry] signifies contrary
to ermine, being a black
field with white spots, as
ermin is a white field with
black spots; and some writers call this
ermines; see escutcheon.

Image omitted.



CONTRE-ESCARTELE [in Heraldry]
signifies counter-quartered, and denotes
the escutcheon, after being quartered, 
to have each quarter again divided into
two, so that there may be said (tho'
improperly) to be eight quarters, or
divisions.  F.

CONTREESPALIER [in Horticulture]
a palisade or pole-hedge.

CONTREFACE [in Heraldry] signi­
fies what we call Barry per Pale coun­
ter-changed.

CONTRE-PALLE [in Heraldry] is
when an escutcheon is divided into 12
pales, parte per Fesse, the two colours
being counter-changed so, that the up­
per are of one colour or metal, and the
lower of another.  F.

CONTRE-POTENCE 
[in Heraldry] or potent
counter. Potent is counted
a furr as well as vare and
ermine; but composed of 
such pieces as represent the
tops of crutches, called in French poten­
ces, and in old English potents, and some
have called it Vary Cuppe and Vary Tas­
se, as in the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



CONTRE-POINTE [in
Heraldry] is when two chev­
rons in one escutcheon meet
in the points, the one rising
as usual from the base and
the other inverted setting
from the chief, so that they are counter
or opposite one to the other in the
points, as in the figure. They may be
also counter-pointed the other way, i.e.
when they are founded upon the sides
of the shield, and the points meet that
way, which we call counter-pointed in
Fesse, and the French, Contre-pointe in
Fasce.

Image omitted.



CONTREQUEUE d'hironde [in For­
tification] i. e. the counter swallow-tail,
is an outwork in the form of a single
tenail, being wider next the place or
at the gorge than at the head or to­
wards the country; and in this it is
contrary to the swallow tail, or queuë
d'hironde, this last being widest at the
head.  F.

CONTREVAIRE [in He­
raldry] is represented as in
the escutcheon annexed.

Image omitted.



CONTRIBUTOR [contribuant, F.]
one that gives or does towards the do­
ing of something.  L.

CONTRIBUTORY [qui contribuë, F.
contributorius, L.] belonging to contri­
bution.

CONTRITENESS, a true and sincere
sorrow for sin, proceeding from love
to God more than fear of punishment.
F. of  L.

CONTRIVEMENT, device, ingenu­
ity in contriving.  F.

CONTROLLERSHIP, the office of a
controller.

CONTROLMENT [of controller, F.]
controlling.

CONTROVERSIALNESS, controver­
ted nature or circumstances.

CONTROVERSIOUS [controversio­
sus, L.] full of controversy.

CONTUMACIOUSNESS [contumace, 
F. contumacia, L.] stubborness.

CONTUMELIOUSNESS [of contume­
liosus, L.] reproachfulness.



CONTUSED [of contusus, L.] bruised.

CONVENIENTNESS [convenientia, 
L.] convenience.

CONVENTICLE [conventiculum, L.]
a little private assembly for religious
exercises, a name first given to the
meetings of John Wicliff, more than 300
years ago, but since to the meetings of
the Nonconformists.

CONVENTION, a treaty, contract or
agreement between two or more parties.

CONVERGENT [convergens, L.]
bowing or bend­
ding together.

CONVERGING [convergens, L.]
bowing or bend­
ding together. 

CONVERGENT Lines [in Geometry]
are such as continually approximate, or
whose distances become less and less.

CONVERGING Rays [in Opticks]
are those
rays that issue
from divers
points of an ob­
ject, and incline
towards one a­
nother, till at
last they meet
and cross, and
then become
diverging rays, 
as the rays A M B M are converging to
the point M, and then diverge and run
off from each other in the lines MC MD.

Image omitted.



CONVERGENT Rays [in Opticks]
are those
rays that issue
from divers
points of an ob­
ject, and incline
towards one a­
nother, till at
last they meet
and cross, and
then become
diverging rays, 
as the rays A M B M are converging to
the point M, and then diverge and run
off from each other in the lines MC MD.

Image omitted.



CONVERGING Hyperbola [Mathem.]
is one whose concave legs bend in to­
wards one another, and run both the
same way.

CONVERGING Series [in Mathe­
maticks] a method of approximation still
nearer and nearer towards the true root
of any number or equation, even tho'
it be impossible to find out any such true
roots in numbers.

CONVERSABLENESS [of converser, 
F. conversari, L.] easiness of being con­
versed with, sociableness.

CONVERSE [in Geometry] a proposi­
tion is said to be the converse of ano­
ther, when after drawing a conclusion
from something first supposed, we pro­
ceed to suppose what had been before
concluded, and to draw from it what
had been supposed.

CONVERSION [in Milit. Affairs] is
when soldiers are ordered to present
their arms to the enemy, who attack
them in flank, whereas they are suppo­
sed to be before in the front.

COONVERSION of Equations [with
Algebraists] a particular manner of
changing an equation, which is com­
monly done when the quantity sought or
any membe or degree of it is a fraction;
the manner of doing it is by multiplying
the whole number by the denominator
of the fractional part, and then omitting
the denominators, the equation is con­
tinued in the numerators only; as sup­
pose
a --b = aa + cc / d + h + b, then mul­
tiply all by d and it will stand thus
da -- dh = aa + cc + dh + db.

CONVERSION of Ratio's [with A­
rithmeticians] is the comparing the an­
tecedent with the difference of the an­
tecedent and consequent in two equal
ratio's or proportions. As if there be
the same ratio of 3 to 4 as of 9 to 12, it
is concluded, there is the same ratio of
3 to 2, as of 9 to 6.

CONVERSION [with Rhetoricians] a
figure the same as Apostrophe or the
changing the subject into the place of
the predicate, and e contra; but always
retaining the same quantity of propo­
rtions, as every living creature is an ani­
mal, every animal is a living creature.

CONVERSIVE, sociable, &c.

CONVERSLY [in Mathematicks]
translatively; as when two right lines
are supposed to be parallel and another
crosses them, it may be demonstrated
that the alternate angles are equal, the
lines which are crossed, must be parallel.

CONVERTIBLENESS [of conver­
tible, F. con­
vertibilis L.] possibility, &c. of being
changed or turned.

CONVERTIBILITY [of conver­
tible, F. con­
vertibilis L.] possibility, &c. of being
changed or turned. 

CONVEX Glasses, are such as are op­
posite to Concave, thicker in the middle
than at the edges; or, properly speak­
ing, when their surface rises up regu­
larly above the plain of the base; and e
contra, those glasses are said to be
concave, when the surface sinks down
regularly, or with a regular crooked­
ness below it; so that the same glass or
other thing is oftentimes convex on the
outside and concave within.

CONVEX Lens, is either convex on
both sides, and called convexo-convex, or
it is plain on one side, and convex on
the other, and is called Plano-convex.

CONVEXITY [convexitas, L.] the
exterior surface of a convex; i. e. a
gibbous and globular thing, in opposi­
tion to concavity or the inner surface
which is hollow or depressed.

CONVEXNESS [convexé, F. convexi­
tas, L.] convexity.

CONVICTION, full proof,  F. of  L.

CONVINCINGNESS [of convin­
cere, L.] con­
vincing or condemning quality.

CONVICTIVENESS [of convin­
cere, L.] con­
vincing or condemning quality.



To CONVOCATE [convocare, L.] to
fall together.

CONVOCATION [of convocare, L. to
call together] is a general assembly or
synod of all the clergy in the nation, 
convened by the kings writs to consult
about the affairs of the church.

The king directs his writ to the arch­
bishop of each province, requiring him
to summons all the bishops, deans, arch­
deacons, &c. Upon this the archbishop
directs his mandate to his dean provin­
cial, first citing him peremptorily, then
willing him in like manner to cite the
bishops, &c. directing him that one
proctor from a cathedral and collegiate
church and two for the body of the in­
ferior clergy of each diocess is sufficient.

The convocation is divided into two
bodies called the upper and lower: The
upper for Canterbury consists of 22 bi­
shops, of which the archbishop is presi­
dent, and the lower house of 32 deans;
24 prebendaries, 54 arch-deacons and
44 clerks.

Matters are first proposed, in the up­
per house and afterwards communica­
ted to the lower.

All the members of both houses have
the same privileges for themselves and
menial servants, as the members of par­
liament have.

CONUSANCE, cognisance, know­
ledge.

CONVULSED [convulsus, L.] drawn
or pulled together.

CONVULSIVE [convulsivus, L.] per­
taining to convulsions; a term applied
by physicians to those motions, which
naturally mould depend on the will;
but which become unvoluntary by some
external cause.

CONVULSIVE Motions [with Physi­
cians] are sudden and swift convulsions
and shakings, that cease and return a­
gain by turns.

CONVULSION, a pulling or draw­
ing together; also a distortion,  L.

COOKS, were incor­
porated in the year 1481
and confirm'd by queen
Elizabeth, and after­
wards by king James
II. Their armorial en­
signs are, argent a chev­
ron ingrayl'd sable be­
tween three columbines, the crest a
pheasant standing on a mount (upon a
helmet and torse) the supporters a buck
and doe, each vulned with an arrow
all proper. The motto, Vulnerati non
victi.

Their hall is on the east side of Alders­
gate-street near Little-Britain.

Image omitted.



COOLNESS [cealðneſſe, Sax.] cool
quality.

To COOL up [of cofa, Sax.] to put
up in a pen.

COOPERATIVE [of cooperari, L.
working together with.

COOPERS, were in­
corporated anno 1530 in
the 16th of Henry VII.
by the name of Master
and Wardens or Keepers
of the commonality of
the freeman of the my­
stery of Coopers in Lon­
don and the suburbs of the same city.
Their arms are party per pale Gules, 
and or a chevron between three hoops, 
in a chief azure. Their supporters
two camels, their crest an eagle wing­
ed, surmounted on a torce and helmet.

Image omitted.



COORDINATION [in Physicks] in
respect of causes, is an order of causes, 
wherein several of the same kind, or­
der and tendency concur to the produc­
tion of the same effect.

COORDINATELY [of con and ordi­
natus, L.] in equal order.

COORDINATENESS, equality of or­
der, rank or decree.

COPARTNERSHIP [of con and par­
ticeps, L.] a being partners together.

COP at the beginning of a name 
signifies a top of an hill, as
Copeland.

COPE at the beginning of a name 
signifies a top of an hill, as
Copeland.

COPAYVAE Balsamum a sort of gum, 
which distils like turpentine from a cer­
tain tree in Brasil.

COPE [in Doomsday Book] an hill.

COPE [cop, Sax.] a tribute paid to
the king out of the lead mines in Wicks­
worth in Derbyshire.

COPERNICAN System [so called of
Nicholus Copernicus the inventor or fra­



ther reviver of it] is a system of the
world, wherein the sun is supposed at
rest, and the planets with the earth to
describe ellipses round him. The hea­
vens and stars are here supposed at rest;
and that diurnal motion they seem to
have from East to West is reputed to be
the earth's motion from West to East.

The sun being found to be a body
more than 300 times bigger than our
earth, it seemed preposterous that so
mighty a body of fire would whirl
round so large a circle as this sphere, 
according to the Ptolemaick system in so
short a time as 24 hours (when, accord­
ing to its computed distance he must move
7570 miles in a minute) It was there­
fore more reasonable to believe that the
earth was seated in the sphere that Pto­
lemy had placed the sun in, and that the
sun was placed in the center; for by
that means, if the earth but turn round
upon its own axis in 24 hours, every
side of it is turned to the sun, and con­
sequently a day and a night is afforded
to all its inhabitants, without the ne­
cessity of the sun's or earth's making so
vast a journey as the circle of its sphere
requires. He therefore placed the sun
in the center, with no other motion than
turning round upon its own axis, which
it performs in 27 days and a half. He
also supposes the sun to be surrounded
with a vast space of Æther, of many
millions of miles extent, which is called
its Vortex, which Æther is carried
round with the sun; and because the
planets float in it, they also are carried
in a continual circuit from West to East
round the sun in certain periodical times
according to their nearness or distance
from the sun. The earth is one of these
planets and has another attending her, 
viz. the moon; for that planet belongs
to us only, being in a continual circuit
round this earth, and with it carried
on in the annual circuit that the earth
makes round the sun. The use of it
being to reflect the sun beams to us at
such times as he is gone from us. The
other planets have the like concomi­
tants. Jupiter has four, and Saturn
five, as is supposed for the same rea­
son; and because those planets are so
much farther distant from the sun than
we are, they have of consequence oc­
casion for more moons than we have.
It is certain by ocular demonstration, 
that there are four little planets, called
Satellites, which are in continual circuit
round about Jupiter, and are so regular
in their motions that the eclipses of
them are calculated, and thereby a 
great help found out to the correcting
of the maps. See the above scheme.

Image omitted.



COPERNICUS, an instrument con­
trived by Mr. Whiston for the calculati­
on and shewing of eclipses, and the
motions of the planets. It consists of
several concentrical circles of wood, 
upon which are marked numbers taken
out of the astronomical tables, answer­
ing to the several purposes above men­
tioned and which come very near to
exactness.

COPING [in Architecture] the top of
a building or the brow of a wall, made
sloping to carry off the wet.

COPIOUSNESS [of copieux, F. copi­
osus, L.] plentifulness.

COPPER [cuprum, L. kopper, Du.] a
red metal. The specifick gravity of cop­
per comes next to that of silver; being
to that of gold as 8 to 19, to that of
water as 8 to 1, and to that of silver as
8 to 10. It is the most elastick and so­
norous of all metals.

COPPER [in Chymical Writings] 
is expressed by this character.

Image omitted.



Burnt COPPER [in Chy­
mical Writings] is expres­
sed by these characters.

Image omitted.



COPROCRITICA [of χόπρος of dung, and
secretus of secerno, L.] medicines which
purge away the excrement of the
guts.

COPTIC language, the ancient lan­
guage of the Egyptians, mixed with much
Greek, and in the Greek characters.

To COPULATE [copulare, L.] to
join together.

To COQUET [coqueter, F.] to be a
coquet or general lover.

CORACOBRACHIÆUS [of χόραξ and
brachium, L. an arm] a muscle arising
from the end of the Processus coracoides
of the shoulder-blade, and is inserted to
the middle part of the Os humeri. This
muscle moves the arm upwards and
turns it somewhat obliquely outwards.

CORACOHYOIDÆUS [with Anato­
mists of χόραξ and εῖδος, Gr. form] mus­
cles which take their rise from the pro­
cess of the shoulder-blade, called cora­
coides, and go as far as the bones hyoides, 
the use of them is to move obliquely
downwards.

CORAL [coralium, L. of χοράλιον, Gr.]
a shoot from a rock, that recieves the
form of a plant, it grows under deep
hollow rocks in many places in the Me­
diterranean sea and elsewhere, and is, 
while growing, of several colours, as
white, red, black and sky-blue; and some
is of two colours red and black, some
is found green, ash-coloured, yellow and



brown; the ends of the branches
are said to be plainly nothing but
wood, tho' the other parts are coral;
from whence it has been concluded that
it is formed by a petrefying juice, and
that like fruit it is not red till ripe.

CORAL-WORT [of coralium, L.] an
herb.

CORBAN, a sort of vow among the
Jews to be uncharitable, whereby the
person put himself under an execration
if he assisted his friend and neighbour, 
nay even in the most pressing necessity, 
was not excepted.

Sometimes it signifies an offering, gift
or present made to God or his temple;
the Jews sometimes swore by Corban
or the thing given or dedicated; which
practice was condemned by our Saviour
Christ.

Sometimes it is used to signify the se­
parating or dedicating a persons self to
perform particular religious offices; at
other times it is used for the treasury
or place where the gifts or offerings
were kept.

CORBELS [in Fortification] small
baskets filled with earth, and placed up­
on the parapets, &c. having port holes
left between to fire upon the enemy un­
der covert.

CORBEILLES [in Architecture] a
piece of carved work in form of a bas­
ket full of flowers and fruits for finish­
ing some ornament.

CORDEAU [in Fortification] a line di­
vided into fathoms, feet, &c. for mark­
ing of outworks upon the ground.

CORDED [in Heraldry]
as a cross-corded, is a cross
wound about with cords, 
but yet so that the cords do
not hide all the cross, as in
the figure annexed.

Image omitted.



CORDOVAN Leather [so called of
Cordova in Spain] a sort of leather
made of goat-skins.

CORDWAINERS, 
[Cordonniers, F. which
Menagius derives of
Cordovan a kind of
leather brought from
Cordova in Spain, of
which they formerly
made the upper lea­
ther of their shoes.

The French workmen, who prepare
the leather are called Cordouanniers.

There are in Paris two societies, who
bear the title of Freres Cordonniers, Bro­
thers Shoemakers; established by au­
thority about the middle of the XVIIth
century, the one under the protection
of St. Crispin, and the other of St. 
Crispanus, two saints who had former­
ly honoured the profession.

They live in community, under the
direction of fixed statutes and officers, 
the produce of the shoes they make goes
into the common stock to furnish neces­
saries for their support, and the surplu­
sage goes to be distributed among the
poor.

Image omitted.



CORINTHIAN Order [in Architect.]
so called because columns were first
made of that proportion at Corinth. It
is the noblest, most delicate and rich of
all others. Its capital is adorned with
two rows of leaves, between which a­
rise little stalks or Caulicoles, whereof
the volutes are formed that support the
abacus, and which are in number sixteen, 
the height of the pillars contains nine of
their diameters.

CORNEA Luna, a tough, tasteless mass, 
almost like horn, made by pouring spi­
rit of salt or strong brine of salt and
water on chrystals of silver prepared, 
or by dissolving silver in aqua fortis or
spirit of nitre.

CORNEA oculi tunica, [with Anato­
mists] the second coat of the eye, other­
wise called Sclerotes, and tunica dura, 
which proceeds from a membrane or
skin in the brain, called dura meninx, be­
ing transparent forward, in order to send
forth the visible species, and containing
the aqueous matter.  L.

To CORN, to season with salt lightly.

CORNED [ʒecorneð, Sax.] seasoned
with salt.

CORNER Teeth [of a Horse] are the
4 teeth which are placed between the
middle teeth and the tushes; being two
above and two below on each side the 
jaw, which put forth whan a horse is
4 years and an half old.

CORNER-Wise [of cornel, Brit.] by
way of corners.

CORNET [with Chymists] a paper
head in form of a cone to cover a chy­
mical vessel.

CORNET [of paper] a piece of paper
wound about in the shape of a horn, 
such as grocers, &c. wrap up small
quantities of wares in.

CORNICE [with Architects] the crest
or flourishing works at the upper end of
a pillar, which differs according to the
several orders.

CORNICE [with Joiners] an orna­
ment set round the top of a room, &c.

Architrave CORNICE [Architecture]
is that immediately contiguous to the
architrave, the frize being retrenched.



Coving CORNICE, one which has a
great casemate or hollow in it; common­
ly lath'd and plastered upon compass
sprockets or brackets.

Cantaliver CORNICE, one that has
cantalivers underneath it.

Modilion CORNICE, a cornice with
modilions under it.

Mutilated CORNICE, is one whose
projecture is cut or interrupted, to the
right of the larmier, or reduced into a
platband with a cimaise.

CORNICULATE [corniculatus, L.]
horned or having horns.

CORNIGENOUS [cornigenus, L.] of
that kind that has horns.

CORNU Ammonis, an extraordinary
kind of stone which in vinegar, juice of
lemons, &c. has a motion like that of
an animal.  L.

CORNUCOPIA [i. e. the plentiful
horn] a horn out of which (as the poets
feign) proceeded all things that could
be wished for in abundance, by a privi­
lege that Jupiter granted his nurse, 
who they supposed to be the goat Amal­
thea.

Some interpret the moral of the fable
to be, a little territory not unlike a
bull's horn, exceeding fruitful, which
king Ammon gave to his daughter Amal­
thea.

CORNUCOPIA [in Painting, &c.] is
represented by the figure of a large
horn, or a woman holding it, out of
the wide end of which issue out flowers, 
fruits, &c.

CORNUTE [with Chymists] a still or
luted mattrass, having a crooked neck
covered with earth or loam an inch
thick, to which is joined a receiver, set
in water, to draw spirits or oils out of
woods, minerals, and other things
which require a strong heat.

CORODIES, allowances from some
monasteries to bishops.

COROLLARY [with Mathematicians]
is an useful consequence drawn from
something that has been advanced be­
fore; as viz. that a triangle that has 3
sides equal, has also 2 angles equal; and
this consequence should be inferred, 
that a triangle, all whose 3 sides are
equal, has also its 3 angles equal.

CORONA, or the flat crown [in Archi­
tecture] a member in a Dorick gate, 
made by so extraordinary an enlarge­
ment of the drip or larmier, that it has
6 times more breadth than the projec­
ture.

CORONA Borealis [with Astronomers]
a northern constellation consisting of
about 20 stars.  L.

CORONA Meridionalis [with Astrono­
mers] a southern constellation of 13
stars.

CORONA [on Globes] this is said to
be Ariadne's crown, which Bacchus pla­
ced among the stars, when the gods
celebrated his marriage in the island
Dia. For the new bride was crowned
with this, having been first presented by
the Hours and Venus. It was the work
of Vulcan, made of most fine gold, and
jewels of India; and had so great a lus­
tre, that by the help of it Theseus is said
to have been delivered out of the laby­
rinth. This crown has 9 stars in the
circuit, of which 3 are bright, placed at
the serpent's head near the bears.

CORONAL, belonging to a crown.

CORONALE [with Anatomists] the
coronal bone or forehead-bone.  L.

CORONARY Garden, a flower-gar­
den.

CORONET of a horse. See Cornet.

CORONIS [in Architecture] the cor­
nice or top ornament of a pillar or o­
ther member of a building.

CORPORAL of a Ship, an officer
whose business it is to look to all the
small shot and arms, to keep them
clean with due proportions of match, 
&c. and to exercise the musketeers on
ship-board.

CORPORALNESS [corporalitas,
L.] bodili­
ness, bodily
substance.

CORPORATENESS [corporalitas,
L.] bodili­
ness, bodily
substance.

CORPOREALNESS [corporalitas,
L.] bodili­
ness, bodily
substance.

CORPORATION [Common Law] a
company of men united and joined to­
gether into one fellowship, of which
one is the head, and the rest are the bo­
dy, having a charter from the king,
empowering them to have a common
seal, and to be able by their common
consent to grant or receive in law any
thing within the compass of their char­
ter.

CORPORATION Spiritual, and of
dead Persons in Law, was a corporation
established by the king and pope, con­
sisting of an abbot and convent.

CORPOREOUS [corporeus, L.] that
is of or belonging to a bodily substance.

CORPORIFICATION, a making in­
to a body.

CORPS [with Architects] a term sig­
nifying any part that projects or advan­
ces beyond the naked of a wall, and
which serves as a ground for some de­
coration.

CORPULENCY [corpulentia, 
L.] bigness, 
bulkiness or grossness of body.

CORPULENTNESS [corpulentia, 
L.] bigness, 
bulkiness or grossness of body.



CORPUS [q. d. corruptus, because it
is subject to corruption] the bulk, or ma­
terial part of animals, vegetables, &c.

CORPUSCLES [with Natural Philoso­
phers] those minute parts or particles, 
or physical atoms of a body, by which it
is not meant the elementary parts, nor
those principles, which chymists call hy­
postatical; but such particles, whether of
a simple or compounded nature, the
parts of which will not be dissolved, 
disjoined or dissipated by ordinary de­
grees of heat.

CORPUSCULAR Philosophy, a me­
thod of philosophizing, that claims the
greatest antiquity, which attempts to
explain things, and give an account of
the Phænomena and appearances of na­
ture by the figure, situation, motion, 
rest, &c. of the corpuscles or very
small particles of matter, according to
the principles of the philosophers, Leu­
cippus, Epicurus, Democritus, &c.

CORPUSCULARIAN, one who holds
the corpuscular principles.

CORPUSCULARITY [of corpusculum, 
L.] corpuscular quality.

CORRECTIO [with Rhetoricians] is
a figure, when the orator unsays what
he has already said, and says something
more fit in the stead of it. The same
as Epanorthosis.

CORRECTNESS [of correctus, L.]
the being correct.

CORRECTOR, one who corrects or
amends.  L.

CORRECTORIUM [in the Medici­
nal Art] any thing that serves to correct
or improve medicines.

CORRELATIVENESS [of correla­
tiva, L.] the having a mutual relation
one to another.

CORRESPONDENCY [correspon­
dence, F.] a holding a mutual intelli­
gence, commerce and familiarity with;
also an answering, fitting, agreeing, or
the proportion of one thing with ano­
ther.

CORRESPONDENTNESS, suitable
quality.

CORROSIBLENESS [in Chymistry]
the faculty or liableness of being cor­
roded.

CORROSION [in Medicine] an eating
away by any salt humour or corrosive
medicine.

CORROSIVENESS, a quality that
some liquors, called menstruums, have of
dissolving bodies.

CORRUGATED [corrugatus, L.]
wrinkled.

CORRUPTIBILITY [in Meta­
physicks] a
liableness to be corrupted, a power not
to be.

CORRUPTIBLENESS [in Meta­
physicks] a
liableness to be corrupted, a power not
to be. 

CORRUPTIBILITY from within, is
when a thing contains within itself, the
principles of its own destruction.

CORRUPTIBILITY from without, is
when a thing is liable to be destroy'd by
some external principle.

CORRUPTIBLENESS [corruptibilité, 
F. corruptibilitas, L.] corruptibility.

CORRUPTICOLÆ, a sect of here­
ticks, who hold that the body of Jesus
Christ was corruptible.

CORRUPTION of Blood [in Law] is
an infection that happens to the blood, 
issue and estate of a man attainted of
treason and felony, whereby he forfeits
all to the king or other lord of the fee, 
and both he and his children are ren­
dered ignoble; and besides, his issue
cannot be heir to him, or to any other
ancestor of whom he might have claim­
ed by him.

CORRUPTNESS, badness, naughti­
ness.

CORTES, the states or the assembly
of the states in Madrid.

CORTEX Winterianus, a kind of cin­
namon, first brought from the Indies by
one captain Winter.

CORTICAL part of the brain [with
Anatomists] the external barky substance
of the brain, full of turnings and wind­
ings on the outside, it is covered with
a thin skin of an ash and grisly colour.
The use of it is thought to be to breed
the animal spirits, and many anatomists
do there place the seat of memory and
sleep.

CORTICATED [corticatus, L.] ha­
ving the bark pulled off.

CORTICOUSNESS [of corticosus, L.]
fulness of, or likeness, &c. to bark.

CORVETS [in Horsemanship] are
leaps of an indifferent height, made by
a horse in raising first his fore-legs in
the air, and making the hinder feet fol­
low with an equal cadence, so that his
haunches go down together, after the
fore feet have touched the earth in con­
tinual and regular reprizes.

CORUSCATIONS [coruscationes, of
coruscare, L. to lighten, &c.] flashes
that may be caused by an exhalation
spread under one cloud only, which by
motion, running downwards, is set on
fire, and flasheth much after the same
manner as a torch newly put out, and
yet smoaking, which is by some vio­
lence and sudden motion again enkind­
led.

The CORYBANTES [of χορύπτειν, Gr.
to wag the head in dancing, or q. χρύβαν­



της of χρύπτω, Gr. to hide, of the sound­
ing the tympany to drown the noise of
Jupiter's crying being heard by his fa­
ther Saturn] the priests of Cybele were
Phrygians, and being most of them eu­
nuchs, were therefore called Semiviri:
Phryges their chief priest was called Ar­
chi-gallus, who was likewise an eunuch.

They performed their solemnities
with a furious noise of drums, trumpets, 
beating on brass and musical instru­
ments.

They were called Jupiter's life-guard;
because they brought him up. For Ti­
tan the eldest son of Cœlus, having re­
signed the kingdom of the world to Sa­
turn his younger brother, to hold the
scepter for life, upon condition that he
should never suffer any male children to
live, that the empire should after his
decease return to Titan's posterity, Sa­
turn was used to devour all his male
children as soon as they were born;
but his wife Cybele being brought to bed
of twins, Jupiter and Juno, she caused
little Jupiter to be conveyed away and
put into the hands of the Corybautes to
be brought up, and let Saturn her hus­
band know of none but Juno. The
Corybantes, to prevent the discovery of
Jupiter by his crying, invented a new
sport, which was to leap and beat the
ground in a certain measure called dac­
tyle. And holding in their hands little
brass bucklers, and in their dancing, 
when they met one another, they struck
on them in a certain order; the noise
or which drowned the crying of Jupiter, 
so that it could not be heard by Saturn.
Poetical.

CORYMBIATED [corymbiatus, L.]
set about with berries.

CORYMBUS [with Botanists] is the
extremity of a stalk or branch, divided
into several pedicles, in such manner as
to form a spherical figure, as in the
garden Angelica; or it is used to signify
a compound discous flower, the seeds of
which are not pappous, or do not fly
away in down, as Corn-Marigold, Dai­
sies, &c.

COSCINOMANCY [χοσχινομαντεία,
Gr. of χόσχινον a
sieve, and μαντεία, divination] divina­
tion by a sieve, to find out persons un­
known, and also to discover the secrets
of those who were known. The man­
ner of performing it was as follows.
The sieve being suspended, the diviner
rehearsed a formula of words, and then
taking it between two fingers only re­
peated the name of the parties suspect­
ed, and when at the mention of any
name the sieve turns, trembles or
shakes, that person is suspected as guilty
of the evil, concerning which the en­
quiry is made. The sieve was also
sometimes suspended by a thread, or
fixed to the points of a pair of shears, 
having room left to turn, and then the
names of persons suspected were rehear­
sed. After this manner it is still practi­
sed in some parts of England.

COSKINOMANCY [χοσχινομαντεία,
Gr. of χόσχινον a
sieve, and μαντεία, divination] divina­
tion by a sieve, to find out persons un­
known, and also to discover the secrets
of those who were known. The man­
ner of performing it was as follows.
The sieve being suspended, the diviner
rehearsed a formula of words, and then
taking it between two fingers only re­
peated the name of the parties suspect­
ed, and when at the mention of any
name the sieve turns, trembles or
shakes, that person is suspected as guilty
of the evil, concerning which the en­
quiry is made. The sieve was also
sometimes suspended by a thread, or
fixed to the points of a pair of shears, 
having room left to turn, and then the
names of persons suspected were rehear­
sed. After this manner it is still practi­
sed in some parts of England.

To COSEN, to defraud, to cheat.

COSENAGE, cheating, defrauding.

COSMOGENY [χωσμογενία of χόσμος
the world, and γενεὰ, Gr. generation]
the creation or original of the world.

COSMOLABE [of χόσμος and λαβεῖν, 
Gr. to take] an ancient mathematical
instrument for measuring distances both
in heaven and earth.

COSMOPOLITAN [of χόσμος and
πολίτης, Gr. a citizen] a citizen of the
world; one who has no fixed living or
place of abode.

COSSACKS, a warlike people of
Asia, who at first liv'd by plun­
dering the Turkish gallies and people of
Natolia; but were afterwards form'd
into a regular army by Stephen Batori
in the year 1576. to defend the fron­
tiers of Russia and Podolia from the in­
cursions of the Tartars.

COSSE as Cossick Numbers. This
was the old name of the
art of Algebra, and is derived from casa, 
Ital. for res or the root, for the Italians
called Algebra, Regula Rei & Census, 
i. e. the rule of the root and the square.

COSSICK as Cossick Numbers. This
was the old name of the
art of Algebra, and is derived from casa, 
Ital. for res or the root, for the Italians
called Algebra, Regula Rei & Census, 
i. e. the rule of the root and the square.

COSSICK Numbers [with some Alge­
braists] are the powers or numbers, as
the roots, the square, the cube, &c.

COSSET, a lamb, colt, calf, &c. fal­
len and brought up by hand without the
dam.

To COST [constare, L.] to be purcha­
sed for a price.

COSTÆ, the ribs, or those bones
which with other bones make the thorax
or chest, being joined backwards with
the vertebra's of the back, and forward
with the cartilages or gristles of the
sternum; they are 12 in number on each
side.

COSTAL [of costæ, L.] belonging to
the Costæ.

COSTIVENESS, a being bound in the
belly.

COSTLY, of great price.

COSTLINESS, the costing a great
price.

COSTMARY, an herb.

COSTONS, chards of artichokes.

COT [of cot, Sax. a little house,
cottage or hut] added to the



name of a place, intimate that the place
was denominated from such a thing; as
Cotehill, Cotswold in Gloucestershire, &c.

COTE [of cot, Sax. a little house,
cottage or hut] added to the
name of a place, intimate that the place
was denominated from such a thing; as
Cotehill, Cotswold in Gloucestershire, &c.

COTEMPORARY [of con and tempo­
rarius, L.] of, belonging to, or being at
the same time.

COTYLEDON [in Anatomy] the ca­
vity of the huckle bone, that as appoint­
ed to receive the head of the thigh-­
bone.

COTYLEDONES [Anatomy] certain
glandules that are in some creatures, but
not in women; they are disposed up and
down the chorion or outermost mem­
branes which cover the fœtus: their use
is to separate the nutricious juice from
the womb for the nourishment of the
fœtus. They are called Cotyledones from
the resemblance they bear to the leaves
of the herb called Cotyla or penny wort;
also the gaping meetings of the veins
in the womb.

COTYTTIA [χοτυττία, Gr.] a noctur­
nal festival celebrated in honour of Co­
tytto the goddess of wantonness. It was
celebrated by the Grecians with such rites
as were most acceptable to the goddess, 
who was thought to be delighted with
nothing so much as lewdness and debau­
chery.

To COUCH [with Writers, &c] to
comprehend or comprise.

COUCH [with Painters] a lay or im­
pression of colour, whether in oil or
water, wherewith the painter covers
his canvas; or it is the ground bed or
basis on which any colour lies.

COUCHANT [Heraldry]
signifies lying down, couch­
ing, or along; but with the
head listed up; spoken of a
beast so born in an escut­
cheon, and the holding up
the head distinguishes a heart couchant
from dormant, as in the escutcheon an­
nexed.  F.

Image omitted.



COUCHE [in Heraldry] denotes any
thing lying along, as a Chevron couché, 
signifies a Chevron lying sideways, with
the two ends on the sides of the shield
which would properly rest on the base.

COUCHED [of coucher, F.] compri­
sed or concealed in.

COUDEES [in Fortification] are lines
that return back from the end of the
trenches, and run almost parallel with
the place attacked. P.

COVEING [in Architecture] a term
used of houses that are built projecting
forth over the ground-plot, and that is
turned with a quadrant of a circle (or
semi-arch) of timber, which is lathed
and plaistered, under which people may
walk dry.

COVENANT, the name of a writ
that lies for the breach of covenants.

COVENANT Personal, is where a
man agrees with another to do him
some work or service, &c.

COVENANT real, is that by which a
man obliges or ties himself to pass a
thing that is real, as lands or tenements, 
to levy a fine, &c.

COVENT [in Law] the society or
members of an abbey or priory.

COVENTRY Bells [with Florists] a
kind of flower.

COVERLICT [couvrelict, F.] a cover­
ing for a bed.

COVERT [among Hunters] a thicket
or shady place for deer or other beasts;
a shelter or hiding place.

COVERTNESS [of couvert, F.] hid­
denness.

COUNCIL [in Church History] is a
synod or assembly of prelates and doc­
tors met for the regulating of matters
relating to the doctrine or discipline of
the church.

A Provincial COUNCIL, is an assem­
bly of the prelates of a province, under
the metropolitan.

A National COUNCIL, is an assembly
of the prelates of a nation under their
primate or patriarch.

An Oecumenial COUNCIL is an as­
sembly
of all the prelates in Christendom.

A General COUNCIL is an as­
sembly
of all the prelates in Christendom.

A COUNCIL of War, is an assembly
of the principal officers of an army or
fleet, occasionally called by the general
or admiral to consider of the present
state of things and concert measures for
their conduct, with respect to sieges, 
retreats, engagements, &c.

COUNSEL [among Moralists] is when
a man endeavours by reasons taken from
the nature of a thing to induce another
person to some performance or omission, 
having, at least as to the present busi­
ness, no power over that person, so that
he can lay no direct obligation on him;
but must leave it to his pleasure and
choice, whether he will do it or not.

COUNTER [of a Horse] is that part
of the fore-hand of a horse, that lies
between the shoulder and under the neck.

COUNTER-time [with Horseaten] is
the defence or resistance of a horse, that
interrupts his cadence and the measure
of his manage.

COUNTER marked [with Horsemen] is
when the teeth of a horse are made
hollow artificially by a graver in imita­
tion of the eye of a bean, in order to
make the horse appear not to be above
six years old.



COUNTER-mark of a Medal, is a
mark added to it a considerable time af­
ter it had been struck.

To COUNTER-DRAW [with Pain­
ters] is to copy a design by the help of
an oiled paper, or any transparent mat­
ter, by tracing the strokes appearing
through with a pencil.

COUNTER-Proof [with Rolling-press
Printers] a print taken from another just
printed, which has pass'd through the
press and gives the figure inverted.

To COUNTER-prove [at the Rolling­
press] is to pass a design in black lead or
red chalk thro' the press after they have
been first moisten'd with a spunge, both
that and the paper on which the coun­
ter-proof is to be taken.

COUNTER-light [with Architects] a
light opposite to any thing, which makes
it appear to a disadvantage.

COUNTER distinction, a distinction
with respect to the opposite side.

COUNTER-chevroned [in Heraldry] a
shield Chevronny, or parted by some line
of partition.

COUNTER Compound
 [in Heraldry] is when a bor­
der is compounded of two
ranks of panes; or rows of
checkers of different colours set check­
erwise.

Image omitted.



COUNTER Compone
 [in Heraldry] is when a bor­
der is compounded of two
ranks of panes; or rows of
checkers of different colours set check­
erwise.

Image omitted.



COUNTER Compony
 [in Heraldry] is when a bor­
der is compounded of two
ranks of panes; or rows of
checkers of different colours set check­
erwise.

Image omitted.



COUNTER Barry [in Heraldry] is
used by the French for what we call Ben­
dy sinister per Bend countercharged.

COUNTER-pointed [in Heraldry] is
when two chevrons in one escutcheon
meet in the points.

COUNTER quartered [in Heraldry]
denotes the escutcheon being quartered, 
to have each quarter again divided into
two.

COUNTER-LATH [with Builders] a
lath that is laid in length between the
rafters.

COUNTERPASSANT [in
Heraldry] is said when there
are two lions or other beasts
on the same escutcheon, the
one passing or walking one
way, and the other another, 
so that they look the direct opposite ways.

Image omitted.



COUNTER trench [in Fortif.] a trench
made against the besiegers and which of
consequence has its parapet turned to­
wards them.

COUNTER-gage [in Carpentry] a me­
thod used in measuring the joints, by
transferring the breadth of a mortoise
to the place in the timber where the te­
non is to be, in order to make them fit
together.

COUNTER-vallation [in Fortif.] a
counter-line or ditch made round a place
besieged, to prevent the sallies and ex­
cursions of the garrison.

COUNTERPOISE [with Horsemen]
is the balance of the body or the liberty
of the action and seat of a horseman, 
acquired by practising in the manage, 
so that in all the motions the horse
makes, the horseman does not incline
his body more to one side than the other, 
but continues in the middle of the saddle, 
bearing equally on the stirrups, in or­
der to give the horse the seasonable and
proper aids.

COUNTER-scuffle, a falling out of
friends one with another; also a scuffle
among prisoners in the counter.

COUNTING house, an apartment or
closet where merchants enter down and
keep their accounts.

COUNTLESS, numberless, innumera­
ble.

COUPED [in Heraldry] is that ho­
nourable partition which
we call Party per Fesse, or a line drawn
across the escutcheon from side to side at
right angles, by some supposed to denote
a belt; by others a cut received in bat­
tle across the shield.  F.

COUPEE [in Heraldry] is that ho­
nourable partition which
we call Party per Fesse, or a line drawn
across the escutcheon from side to side at
right angles, by some supposed to denote
a belt; by others a cut received in bat­
tle across the shield. F.

COUPE [Heraldry] from
the French Coupe cut, signi­
fies the head or any limb of
an animal cut off from the
trunk, smooth, distinguish­
ing it from that which is
called erased, that is, forcibly torn off,
and therefore is ragged and uneven, as
in the figure.

Image omitted.



COUPED, also denotes crosses, bars, 
bends, chevrons, &c. as do not touch
the sides of the escutcheon, but are as
it were cut off from them.

COUPEE [in Dancing] a motion
wherein one leg is a little bent, and
suspended from the ground, and the
other makes a motion forwards.

COUPLET, a division of an hymn, 
ode, song, &c. wherein an equal num­
ber or an equal measure of verses are
found in each part.

COURAGEOUSNESS [of courageux,
F.] courage, boldness.

COURANT [in Heraldry]
running, as a buck courant, 
signifies a buck in a running
posture, as in the figure
annexed; and the like of
any other animal.

Image omitted.



COURANT, a term used to express
the present time, as the year 1736 is the
courant year, the 20th courant is the 20th
day of the month now running.



Price COURANT of any Merchandise, 
is the known and common price given
for it.

COURANT Coin, common and passa­
ble money.

COURSE [with Architects] a conti­
nued range of bricks or stones of the
same height throughout the length of
the work.

COURSE of Plinths [in Masonry] is ths
continuity of a plinth of stone, &c. in
the face of a building.

Civil COURSE, the collection of the
Roman laws compiled by order Justi­
nian.

Canonical COURSE, the collection of
the Canon law made by Gratianus.

COURSE, is often used for the time
ordinarily spent in learning a science, as
a course of studies, anatomy, philoso­
phy, &c.

To go under a pair of COURSES [Sea
phrase] is when a ship sails under the
main sail and fore sail, without lacing
on any bonnets or tops.

COURSEY [in a Galley] a space or
passage about a foot and a half broad, 
on both sides of which slaves are placed.

COURT of Delegates, a court where
delegates or commissioners are appoin­
ted by the king's commission to sit in the
court of Chancery or elsewhere, upon an
appeal made to it. This is granted in
three cases; first, when the sentence is
given by the archbishop or his official in
an ecclesiastical cause; secondly, when a
sentence is given in an ecclesiastical cause
in places exempt; thirdly, when a sen­
tence given is in the admiralty court, 
in suits civil or marine, by order of the
civil law.

COURTAUD [with Horsemen] a crop
or cropped horse, a bob-tail.

COURTAUD [with Musicians] a short
bassoon.

COURTAUD [with Gunners] a short
kind of ordnance used at sea.

COURTEOUSNESS [courtoisie, F.]
courteous behaviour.

COURTLINESS [of cour, F. curia, L.
a court] court-like behaviour.

To COUSEN [cousiner, F.] to defraud
or cheat.

COUSINET [with Architects] a cu­
shion is the stone which crowns a pie­
droit or pier, or that lies immediately
over the capital of the impost, and un­
der the sweep; also the ornament in 
the Ionic capital between the Abacus and
Echinus, or quarter-round, serving to 
form the Volutes.

COUSIN, a title of honour which
the king bestows to peers or nobles, 
foreign princes of the blood, &c.

Paternal COUSINS, are such as issued
from relations on the father's side.

Maternal COUSINS, those issuing from
the mother's side.

COUSINET [in Masonry, &c.] the
first stone, whence a vault or arch com­
mences.

COUSU [in Heraldry] is the same as
Rempli, and signifies a piece of another
colour or metal placed on the ordinary, 
as it were sewed on. This is generally
of colour upon colour, or metal upon
metal, contrary to the general rule of
heraldry; and therefore this word is
used, according to the signification of the
French word, to distinguish that the
piece is not properly upon the field, but
in the nature of a thing sewed on.  F.

COUVERT [in Heraldry] denotes
something like a piece of hanging, or
pavilion falling over the top of a chief
or other ordinary, so as not to hide, but
only to be a covering to it.

COWARDLINESS [of Cow and aerd, 
nature, Teut, or Cowardise, F.] want of
courage.

COX-BONES a vulgar and odd un­
intelligible oath.

COX-NOONS a vulgar and odd un­
intelligible oath.

COX-COMICAL [probably of the
Comb or Crest of a cock] conceited.

COXENDIX [with Anatomists] is the
same with Coxa and os Ischium and is
the third and lower of the nameless
bones called Ossa innominata, and has a
large cavity or hollow called Acetabulum
Coxendicis, that receives the head of the
thigh bone: The circumference of this
hollow being tipped with a gristle cal­
led its supercilium.  L.

COYNESS [not improbably of quoi, 
F. why] shiness, seeming modesty.

CRAB [crabba, Sax. krabbe, Dan.]
a sea shell-fish; also a wild apple.

A CRAB Fish [in Hieroglyphicks] was
used by the Egyptians, to signify holy
mysteries that were brought to light, 
because it lives in holes under the
rocks; and also it was the symbol of an
unconstant person, because it does not
always go in the same manner, but
sometimes forwards and sometimes back­
wards.

To be CRAB, to be cross-grained, sour
or surly.

CRAB [with Shipwrights] an engine
with 3 claws for launching of ships, or
heaving them into the dock.

To CRACKLE [of craquer, F. of krac­
cken, Dut.] to make a crackling noise.

CRACKT boiling of Sugar [with Con­
fectioners] a boiling of Sugar to such a
degree, that if you dip the tip of your



finger into cold water, and thrust it into
the boiling sugar, and then immediate­
ly into the water again, rubbing the su­
gar off with the other fingers, it will
break, making a crackling noise.

CRADLE [of a Lobster] the belly.

CRADLE Scythe (with Husbandmen] a
scythe with a wooden frame fixt to it
for moving corn, and the better laying
it in order.

CRAFTINESS [cresst, Brit, cræft, 
Sax.] cunningness.

CRAGGEDNESS [probably of
kraig, Brit. the
top of a rock] fulness of crags.

CRAGGINESS [probably of
kraig, Brit. the
top of a rock] fulness of crags.

CRAMP [with Falconers] a disease
happening to hawks in their soarage, it
lies in their wings and proceeds from
cold.

CRAMP [of crampe, Dan. the cramp]
puzzling.

CRAMPONNEE [in He­
raldy] as a cross Cramponnée
so called, has a cramp at
each end, or square piece
coming from it; that from 
the arm in chief towards
the sinister angle, and from the arm
in base towards the dexter side, and that
from the dexter arm upwards, as in the
escutcheon.

Image omitted.



CRANE [kran, Teut, cræn, Sax.]
a fowl with a long neck, bill and legs.

A CRANE [in Hieroglyphicks] repre­
sents democracy. It is said of them, that
when any of their company fall upon
one, as the mob are apt to do in nations, 
&c. they will strive to injure him, who
has the unhappiness to have an ill re­
port. It is said, that when cranes fly
together, they represent the Greek Δ;
and from this their form of flight in
company, Palamedes took the letter Δ.

CRANE [in America] a fowl of an hi­
deous form, having a bag under the
neck, which will contain two gallons of
water.

A CRANK [in Mechanicks] a machine
resembling an elbow, excepting that it
is in a square form, projecting out of an
axis or spindle, which by its rotation
serves to raise or lower the pistons of
engines for raising water.

CRANK-Sided [Sea term] a ship is
said to be crank-sided when she cannot
bear her sails, or can bear but a small
sail, for fear of being overset.

CRANKNESS, briskness, liveliness.

CRASH, a great noise; also a quarel, 
a scuffle.

CRASIS [in Pharmacy] a convenient
mixture of qualities, either simple or
compound; simple when one quality ex­
ceeds the rest, as hot, cold, moist, dry, &c.

CRASSITY [crassitas, L.] fatness, 
thickness, grossness.  L.

CRAVINGNESS, an earnest or eager
desire after.

To CRAWL, to creep along slowly.

CRAZINESS [prob. of χράσις, Gr.]
weakness, indisposition of body or mind.

CRAYON, a small pencil of any sort
of colouring stuff made up in a paste and
dried, to be used for drawing and paint­
ing in dry colours, either upon paper
or parchment.

To CREAM, to skim off cream.

CREAMY [of cremor, L.] having or
full of cream.

CREAT [with Horsemen] an usher to
a riding master, or gentleman educated
in an academy of horsemanship, with in­
tent to qualify himself for teaching the
art of riding the horse.

CREATABLE, capable of being crea­
ted.

CREATE [creatus, L.] created, 
made, framed, form­
ed.

CREATED [creatus, L.] created, 
made, framed, form­
ed. 

CREBRITUDE [crebritudo, L.] fre­
quency, oftenness.

CREDIBLENESS [credibilité, F.] pro­
bableness, likelihood; also reputable­
ness.

CREDITABLE [croyable, F.] true;
also reputable.

CREDIT [in Traffick] a mutual loan
of merchandizes, &c. on the reputation
of the honesty and solvability of the per­
son negociating; also the course which
papers or bills, &c. of commerce have
in negociating the actions of a company
as the Bank, South-Sea, &c. which is
said to rise when they are received and
sold at prices above par, or the standard
of their first appointment.

CREDIT [in Ancient Writers] a right
which lords had over their vassals, to
oblige them to lend money for a certain
time.

Letters of CREDIT [in Commerce] are
letters given by a merchant, &c. to such
persons as he can trust to take money
of his correspondent.

CREDITIVES, credentials.

CREED [among Christians] is a sum­
mary of the principal articles of the
christian faith; of which 3 are allowed
by the canons of the church, viz. that
called the Apostles Creed, which not­
withstanding it bears their names is ge­
nerally supposed to have been composed
long after their time; the Athanasian 
Creed, and the Nicene Creed.



To CREEK [prob. of schryger, Dan.]
to make a noise as a door does when
its hinges are rusty.

CRENELLE [in Heral­
dry] or embattled in English
from the French word Cren, 
signifying a notch or inter­
val, is used when any ho­
nourable ordinary is drawn
like the battlements on a wall to defend
men from the enemies shot; that is
the wall arising at small intervals, so as
to cover them, and lower at those in­
tervals; and the use of it is taken from
such walls, either for having been the
first at mounting them, or the chiefest in
defending them; as in the figure.

Image omitted.



To CREPITATE [crepitatum, L.]
to make a noise often, to crack.

CREPITUS, [a fart, L.] also a certain
deity worshipped by the Egyptians un­
der an obscene figure, which is to be
seen in some curious collections of an­
tiquity.

CRESCENT [in Heral­
dry] is the half moon, with
the horns turned upwards.
It is used either as an ho­
nourable bearing, or a dif­
ference to distinguish be­
tween elder and younger families; this
being assigned to the second son, and to
those that descend from him. See the
Figure.

Image omitted.



CRESTS [in Heraldry] seem to take
their name of Crista, the comb or tuft
on the head of a cock, peacock, heath­
cock, &c. and as these occupy the high­
est part of the heads of birds, so do these
cognizances. Crests are seated upon the
most eminent part of the helmet; but
yet so that they admit an interposition
of some escrol, wreath, chapeau, crown
&c. Heralds say, they were taken from
great men and prime commanders in
former times wearing on the top of
their helmets the figures of animals or
other things, as well to appear formi­
dable to their enemies as to be known
by their own soldiers, that they might
stick to them in battle, and rally about
them, if dispersed.

It appears that crests were very anci­
ent, Alexander the Great wore a ram's
head for his crest, and Julius Cæsar a
star, and the Christians in their first re­
ligious wars were wont to wear a cross
darting forth rays, for their crest.

Those former crests were made of ei­
ther leather stiffened, or of paste-board
painted and varnished, to be proof a­
gainst rain; and sometimes of thin
iron.

Those crests were taken for some
particular cause or motive, and accor­
dingly they had some mysterious signifi­
cation to express some remarkable acti­
on or other notable thing, appertaining
to their family or country, as Julius
Cæsar's star, to denote that he descended
from Venus.

Esquires who had no notable com­
mand, were not permitted to wear such
crests on their helmets; but a only steel
crest, from which hung down feathers
or scrolls upon their armour.

CRETACEOUS [cretaceus, L.] of or
belonging to chalk.

CRETOSITY [cretositas, L.] chalki­
ness.

CREUX [in Sculpture] a hollow ca­
vity, out of which something has been
scooped or digged.

CRIANCE [with Falconers] a line
of fine strong even
pack-thread fastened to the leath of a
hawk when he is first lured.  F.

CRIANTS [with Falconers] a line
of fine strong even
pack-thread fastened to the leath of a
hawk when he is first lured. F.

CRICOARYTÆNOIDES [of χρίχοσ,
a ring, ἀρὐω to drink, or ἀρυτὴς a sort of
cup to drink out of, and είδος form]
certain muscles which arise from the
cartilage called Cricoides, and are inser­
ted into the Arytenoides, which while
they draw sideways and outwardly, the
Rimula of the Larynx, is widened.

CRIMINALNESS [of criminel, F.
criminalis, L.] guiltiness of a crime.

CRIMINATION, a blaming or accu­
sing.  L.

CRIMINATORY [criminatorius, L.]
full of accusations or crimes.

CRIMNOIDES [with Physicians]
urine with thick
sediments at the bottom like bran.

CRIMNODES [with Physicians]
urine with thick
sediments at the bottom like bran.

CRIMPLING [probably q. crippling]
as to go crimpling, i. e. as if the feet
were tender.

CRIMP, a dealer in coals, or an agent
or factor for merchants or matters of
ships who trade in coals or are concern­
ed in the coalery.

CRINATED [crinatus, L.] having
long locks.

CRINIGEROUS  [criniger, L.] wear­
ing hair or long locks.

CRINONES [of crinis, L. hair] a sort
of worms sometimes found under the
skin in children, resembling short thick
hairs or bristles.

Imperfect CRISIS for the better [with
Physicians] is a crisis which does not
quite take away the disease, but enables
the patient to bear it better.

Imperfect CRISIS for the worse [with
Physicians] is when the disease becomes
more violent and dangerous.



CRISPED [crispatus, L.] curled; also
made friable or brittle.

CRISPNESS, brittleness, aptness to
crumble or break.

CRISPITUDE [crispitudo, L.] curled­
ness.

CRISTATED, [cristatus, L.] having
a crest or comb.

CRISTÆ [with Physicians] excrescen­
ces of flesh growing about the funda­
ment, the roots of which are often chapt
and cleft.

CRITHE [with Physicians] a little
oblong push or swelling growing to the
eye-brows where the hairs are, so cal­
led from its resembling a barley-corn.

CRITHOMANCY [of χριθή barley, 
and μαντεία, Gr. divination] a kind of
divination performed by considering the
dough or matter of the cakes offered in
sacrifice, and meal strewed over the vic­
tims that were to be killed.

CRITICALLY [en critiquant, F. criti­
co more, L.] like a critick; also in the
very nick of time.

CRITICALNESS, an aptness to judge
and censure mens actions, words or
writings.

CROCODILE [of χροχοδείλος, of χρο­
χὸν saffron, and δειλῶν fearing, Gr. be­
cause it abhors the smell and flower of
saffron] an amphibious, cruel, voraci­
ous animal, in shape almost like a lizard, 
but much larger. It is found principally
in the river Nile in Egypt.

It is covered with very hard scales, 
which are not to be pierced without
great difficulty; excepting under the
belly, where the skin is tender. It has
a wide throat with teeth sharp and sepa­
rated, which enter one within another;
of these it has several rows. It is very
low upon its feet and crawls almost up­
on the earth. It runs with great swift­
ness; but does not easily turn it self.
It lives a long time and is said to grow
continually till its death. There have
been some of 15 or 18 cubits length.

The crocodiles lay their eggs on the
ground or in the sand, near the water
side, their eggs are like goose eggs and
sometimes there are 60 of them. They
cover them in the sand that the heat of
the sun may contribute to hatch them;
when their bowels are taken out or they
are wounded they smell very agreeably.

There are several ways of taking
them, sometimes they are caught with
great hooks, baited with hogs flesh, with
which they are much delighted: At
other times they are taken in pits co­
vered with boughs and earth, into
which when they fall they are not able
to get out.

It is reported that the Ichneumon or
Indian rat, which is about the bigness
of a tame cat, breaks the crocodiles eggs
as often as it finds them on shore, and
that it will get into the belly of the cro­
codile, while it is sleeping with its
throat open, and by gnawing it's entrails
will kill it.

Its sight is very piercing when upon
the land; but in the water it sees but
dimly. It is said to spand the four win­
ter months under water, without eating
any thing.

The Egyptians paid divine honours
to this animal, especially the inha­
bitants of Arsinoe and the neighbour­
hood of Thebes and the lake Mæris, but
the people of Teutyra and Elephantis, 
kill'd and eat them.

The Egyptians worshipped God under
the form of a crocodile, because it is a
creature which is said to be the only
one without a tongue; and so they
imagined it hieroglyphically to repre­
sent God, beholding all things both in
heaven and earth with a profound si­
lence.

The CROCODILE was worshipped
by the Egyptians, because one of these
creatures is said to have sav'd Menas, an
ancient king of Egypt, from being wor­
ried by his own dogs, which pursued
him to the lake Mæris, where a croco­
dile took him on his back and carried
him to the other side of the lake. Tho'
the crocodile seems to be one of the last
animals to whom mankind could be
tempted to pay adoration, yet, that it
might be done with safety, one of those
creatures was trained up to be tame and
familiar, for the purpose; and had his
ears adorned with strings of jewels and
gold, and his fore-feet with chains. He
was fed with consecrated provisions at
the publick charge; and when strangers
went to see him, they also carried him
a present of a cake, dressed meat and
wine, which was offered to him by the
priests, one opening his mouth and the
other feeding him. When he died, his
body was embalmed and buried in a
sacred coffin at Arsinoe.

CROCODILE, bearing on the head the
feather of an Ibis [Hieroglyphically] repre­
sented a slothful man; because the bird
Ibis is said to have a secret power on
the crocodile, so that if the body of this
serpent be stroaked with it, tho' it be in
its nature cruel and rapacious, it loseth
its former dispositions, and becomes ex­
treme slothful and idle for a time.

CROCODILITES [with Rhetoricians]
a captious and sophistical kind of argu­



mentation, so ordered as to seduce the
unwary, and draw them speciously into
a snare.

CROCODILINE [crocodilinus, L. of
χροχοδείλινος, Gr.] like a crocodile; also
sophistical.

CROCUS Martis [in Chy­
mical Writers] is expressed
by these characters.

Image omitted.



CROCUS of Copper [in
Chymical Writers] is expres­
sed by this character.

Image omitted.



CROFT, a slip of ground adjoining to
an house, which is called toft; so for­
merly they used this saying of a very
poor man, he had ne toft ne croft, i. e.
he had neither house nor land.

CROISADE, a name given to a Chris­
tian expedition against Infidels, for con­
quering the Holy Land, because those
that engaged in the expedition wore a
cross on their bosoms, and bore a cross
in their standards. There were at se­
veral times 8 croisades, the first was
begun at the solicitation of the patriarch
of Jerusalem, in the year 1095; the 2d
in 1144 under Lewis VII; the 3d in
1188 by Henry II. of England, and Philip
Augustus of France; the 4th in 1195 by
pope Celestin III. and the emperor Henry
VI.; the 5th and 6th was published in
1198 and 1213 by pope Innocent III; the
7th was undertaken by St. Louis about
the year 1245; and the last was in the
year 1268.

CROISIERS, a religious order, or a
congregation of regular canons.

CROISIER [of croix, F.] a shep­
herd's crook, a symbol
of pastoral authority; being a staff of
gold or silver, crooked at the top, car­
ried before bishops and abbots, and held
in the hand when they give benedictions.

CROIZIER [of croix, F.] a shep­
herd's crook, a symbol
of pastoral authority; being a staff of
gold or silver, crooked at the top, car­
ried before bishops and abbots, and held
in the hand when they give benedictions. 

CROISSANTE [in Heraldry] as la
croix croissante, F. is a cross crescented, 
i. e. having a crescent or half-moon fixt
at either end.

CRONEL is the iron at the end
of a tilting spear, ha­
ving a socket for the
end of the staff to go into, and termina­
ting in three points.

CRONET is the iron at the end
of a tilting spear, ha­
ving a socket for the
end of the staff to go into, and termina­
ting in three points.

CORONET is the iron at the end
of a tilting spear, ha­
ving a socket for the
end of the staff to go into, and termina­
ting in three points.

CROOKEDNESS [of kroek, a curl of
the hair] bendingness.

CROP-SICK, sick at the stomach.

CROSLET [in Heraldry]
as a Cross Croslet, is a cross
crossed again at a small dis­
tance from each of the ends, 
as in the figure.

Image omitted.



CROSS [crux, L. croix, F.] a gibbet
on which the ancients used to hang their
slaves and malefactors, who were either
tied thereto with ropes, or nailed with
nails; who having their bones broken
to dispatch them the sooner, always
died upon it.

A CROSS [with Heralds]
is an ordinary composed of
4 lines, two of which are
perpendicular, and the o­
ther two transverse, that
meet by couples in 4 right
angles, and contains one fifth of the
shield, as in the figure. Crosses are of
various sorts.

Image omitted.



To make a CROSS in Corvets [with
Horse­
men] is to make a sort of leap or air with
one breath forwards and backwards, as
in the figure of a cross.

To make a CROSS in Balotades [with 
Horse­
men] is to make a sort of leap or air with
one breath forwards and backwards, as
in the figure of a cross.

CROSS-TREE yard [in a Ship] is a
yard standing square just under the miz­
zen-top, and is fastened below to fit the
mizzen-top-sail.

CROUCHING [of crocher, F.] bow­
ing down, stooping.

CROUPADES [with Horsemen] are
leaps of a horse that are higher than 
corvets, which keep the fore and hind-­
quarters of a horse in an equal height, 
so that he trusses his hind legs under his
belly without yerking or shewing his
shoos.

To gain the CROUPE [in Horsemanship]
is one horseman's making a demi-tour
upon another, in order to take him
upon the croup.

Without slipping the CROUP [in Horse­
manship] a term which signifies without
trasversing, without letting the croup
go out of the volte or the tread of the
gallop.

A CROW [cra&wyn;e, Sax.] a bird well
known.

A CROW [Hieroglyphically] represents
a soothsayer, because it is dedicated to
Apollo the god of soothsaying and pro­
phecy. When crows are put together
they signify discord and war.

CROW-NET, a net to catch wild
fowl in.

Two CROWS [Hieroglyphically] being
put together, signified discord and war, 
and were generally accounted unhappy
birds, and the foretellers of misfortunes.
This bird was dedicated to Apollo, the
god of prophecy and soothsaying, and so
it was the symbol of a soothsayer, and
as some say in later times of an impo­
stor; because those that pretend to fore­
tel future events by such means, must
play the impostor.



CROWNS [in Heraldry] horns were
the original of crowns, the ancients, 
both Jews and Gentiles, look'd upon
horns as a token of supreme power, and
we find in the sacred scripture the horn
mentioned as a token of royal dignity, 
and the Hebrew word ןדק, signified both
a horn and a crown.

The more ancient knights and warri­
ers wore horns for their crests; but in
process of time, the horns being made
to represent cuckolds, great men left
them off, and wore crowns instead of
them.

The most ancient kings wore only
wreaths of white and purple in the form
of Turkish turbants, as the token of re­
gality, or else circles of gold with points
rising from them, like some of our pre­
sent coronets. The first Roman empe­
rors wore no other than crowns and
garlands of laurel, which betokened
victory, because the people of Rome ab­
horred all signs of regality. Domitian
was the first that wore a crest of gold, 
and that as pretending to be a god. We
are told by Aurelius Victor that the em­
peror Aurelian made himself an imperial
crown, adorned with jewels of great
value, and was followed therein by all
his successors.

At this time there are not only crowns
for kings or emperors;
but coronets for prin­
ces, dukes, marquisses, 
earls, viscounts, ba­
rons, which see under
their proper articles;
the English crown is in
the form represented
in the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



The English CROWN is adorn'd with
4 crosses, in the manner of those of
Malta, between which are Flower-de-­
lis's. It is cover'd with 4 diadems, 
which meet at a little globe supporting a
cross.

Papal CROWN is composed of a Ti­
ara, and a triple crown encompassing the
Tiara, having 2 pendants like the mi­
tres of bishops. These three crowns
represent the pretended triple capacity
of the pope, viz. as high priest, su­
preme judge and sole legislator of the
Christians.

Imperial CROWN, is a Bonnet or Ti­
ara with a semi circle of gold, support­
ing a globe with a cross at top.

The French CROWN is a circle of 8
Flower-de-lis's, encompass'd with 6 dia­
dems, bearing at top a double Flower-­
de-lis, which is the crest of France.

The Spanish CROWN is adorn'd with
large indented leaves, covered with dia­
dems bordering on a globe surmounted
with a cross.

CROWN [in a Figurative Sense] sig­
nifies kingdom, empire or dominion.

CROWN Thistle [with Botanists] a
plant called Frier's Crown-thistle.

Radiated CROWN one which has
12 points.

Pointed CROWN one which has
12 points.

Pearled CROWNS crowns with
pearls or
leaves of
smallage, &c.

Flowered CROWNS crowns with
pearls or
leaves of
smallage, &c.

Parsley, &c. CROWNS crowns with
pearls or
leaves of
smallage, &c.

CROWN [with Geometricians] a
plane included between two parallel or
excentrick perimeters of circles that
are unequal, generated by the motion
of some part of a right line round a
centre, the moving part not being con­
tiguous to the centre.

CROWN'D [in Horsemanship] a horse
is said to be crown'd, when he is so
hurt or wounded in the knee by a fall or
any other accident, that the hair sheds
and falls off without growing again.

CROWNING [with Architects] any
thing that terminates or finishes a deco­
ration of architecture; as a cornish, a
pediment, acroteria, &c.

CROWNS of Colours [with Meteoro­
logists] certain coloured rings which ap­
pear like Halo's but of the colours of
the rainbow, and at a less distance than
the common Halo's about the bodies of
the sun and moon.

CRUCIAL Incision [with Chirurgeons]
an incision or cut in some fleshy parts
in the form of a cross.

CRUCIBLE [in Chymi­
cal Writ.] is express'd by
these characters.

Image omitted.



CRUCIGEROUS [cruciger, L.] bear­
ing a cross.

CRUDE [crudus, L.] that has not had
the degree of coction, i. e. heat requi­
site to prepare it for eating or some
other purpose.

CRUDE Humours [with Physi.] are such
humours as want that preparation and
elaboration which they ordinarily re­
ceive from digestion.

CRUDELITY [crudelitas, L.] cruelty.

CRUDENESS [crudité, F. cruditas, 
L.] rawness.

CRUDITY [with Physicians] may be
defined to be that estate of a disease, 
in which the morbifick matter is of
such bulk, figure, cohesion, mobility or
inactivity, which create or increase the
disease.

CRUELNESS [crudelitas, L. cruauté,
F.] barbarousness, fierceness, hard heart­



edness, ill usage, rigour, unmerciful
temper.

CRUMBLINGNESS [of accrumian, 
Sax.] aptness to crumble.

CRUMMY [of cruma, Sax.] soft as
bread; also full of crumbs.

CRUMPLED [of crump, Sax.] full
of crumples or creases.

CRUSE [cruche, F. krus, Du.] a phial
for oil or vinegar.

CRUSTACEOUS Shell-fishes, are
fishes covered with shells, which are
made up of several joints, such as lob­
sters, crabs, cray-fish, &c.

CRUSTACEOUS Shells, are gene­
rally softer than testaceous ones, which
are intirely of one piece, and are much
harder, thicker and stronger than crus­
taceous ones, as scallops, oysters, coc­
kles, &c.

CRUSTACEOUSNESS [crusta, L. a
shell.] hardness, like or being covered
with a shell, as shell-fish.

CRUSTINESS [of crouteux, F. crusto­
sus, L.] hardness of bread; also pettish­
ness of temper.

CRY de Guerre, a general cry through
out an army, upon its approach to bat­
tle, with which the assailants animate
their friends, and endeavour to discou­
rage their enemies; the true cry of
war was originally no other than con­
fused shouts made by the soldiers to
express their alacrity and readiness to
engage.

When the Christian religion pre­
vail'd, the European nations having
chosen a tutelar Saint, made him their
cry of war, thus the English anciently
us'd to call upon St. George as their pa­
tron Saint, this being now look'd upon
as superstitious, it is at present reduced
only to Huzza's. The Cry of France is
Monjoye St. Denys, or as others say Moult
Joye St. Denys, he being chosen for the
patron saint of France, which was first
taken up by Clovis the first Christian
king of France. The cry of the Spani­
ards is Santiago, i. e. St. James the pa­
tron saint of Spain. This Cry de Guerre
is not only used at the first engaging
of armies; but when they have been
broken and dispersed, in order to their
knowing where the remains of their
party are in order to their rallying
again.

CRYPHAGENITUS [χρυφᾶ or χρυφα­
γένετος, Gr. secretly born] was a god
of Thebes in Phrygia, whom they ac­
counted immortal. Herodotus relates, 
that the Thebans were the only people
in all Egypt that refused to admit the
extravagant superstitious of other ci­
ties, and that they would never give
divine honour to mortal gods. It is
probable, that this singularity might
proceed from some impressions the Is­
raelites had left among them. For the
city of Thebes was next neighbour to
the land of Goshen.

CRYPTICK [crypticus, L. of χρυπτι­
χὸς, Gr.] hidden, secret, hid under
ground.

CRYSTAL [in Chymical Writings] is
expressed by this character, ♆.

CRYSTAL mineral, is salt-petre pre­
pared with sulphur, the salt-petre be­
ing put in a crucible and set in a fur­
nace, and when it is in fusion, a small
quantity of flour of sulphur is added
at several times, the quantity of two
drams of sulphur to eight ounces of salt-­
petre.

CRYSTALLOMANCY [of χρυστάλλος
and μαντεία, Gr.] a sort of divination or
foretelling future events by means of a
mirror or looking-glass.

CRYSTALS of Copper [with Chymists]
is a solution of copper in spirit of nitre, 
evaporated and crystallized to gain the
salt; those crystals are used as causticks, 
but will dissolve if exposed to the air.

CRYSTALS of Venus [with Chymists]
common verdegrease dissolved in distil­
led vinegar, and set in a cool place to
crystallize.

CRYSTALS of Allum, is allum puri­
fied and reduced into crystals in the same
manner as tartar; the crystals are qua­
drangular and brilliant like diamonds.

CRYSTALS of Tartar, is tartar pu­
rified and dissolved, and again coagula­
ted in form of crystals. To do this, 
they boil the tartar in water, skim it
and strain it, and when it is cool, little, 
white, shining crystals are formed at the
edges, and also a pellicle or cream
swimming at the top.

CRYSTALS of Tartar chalybeated, is
when the tartar is impregnated with
the most dissoluble parts of iron.

CRYSTALS of Tartar emetick, is when
it is charged with the sulphureous parts
of antimony to make it vomitive.

CRYSTALS of Mars, is iron reduced
into salts by an acid liquor.

CUBA [among the Romans] a deity
suppos'd to rock infants in their cradles.

CUBATORY [cubatorium, L.] a dor­
miter or dormitory.

CUBE, is a figure compre­
hended under six equal sides,
each being a geometrical
square, the same as a die, as
in the figure.

Image omitted.





CUBE Square [in Geometry] is the bi­
quadrate or 4th power, which is produ­
ced by the root or side being thrice
multiplied into itself; thus taking 3 for
the side, 9 is the square, 27 the cube­
square or biquadrate.

CUBIC [χυβιχὸς, Gr.] of or pertain­
ing to or having the figure of a cube.

CUBUS CUBI, the 9th power, or a
number multiplied 8 times into itself.

CUCURBITA a cupping-glass
or hollow vessel
made of tin, &c. used commonly in ba­
gnio's, they apply it to the body either
with or without scarification, to divert
or drive the blood into some other
part; or if it be corrupt, to evacuate
it or let it out.

CUCURBITULA a cupping-glass
or hollow vessel
made of tin, &c. used commonly in ba­
gnio's, they apply it to the body either
with or without scarification, to divert
or drive the blood into some other
part; or if it be corrupt, to evacuate
it or let it out.

CUCURRITA cœca a cupping
vessel used
without scarification, and is commonly
applied or set on to the most fleshy
parts, where there is no danger of hurt­
ing the large vessels and nerves,  L.

CUCURBITA ventosa a cupping
vessel used
without scarification, and is commonly
applied or set on to the most fleshy
parts, where there is no danger of hurt­
ing the large vessels and nerves,  L.

CUCURBIT [in Chy­
mical Writings] is ex­
pressed by these charac­
ters.

Image omitted.



CUCURBITE [with Chy­
mists] a vessel of glass, &c. for
distillations and rectifications,
usually by them called a body,
in this form.

Image omitted.



CUCURBITACEOUS Plants, such as
resemble a gourd.

CUD-WEED [with Botanists] a 
plant whose leaves
are made use of instead of cotton, and
thence it is called cotton-weed.

CUD-WORT [with Botanists] a 
plant whose leaves
are made use of instead of cotton, and
thence it is called cotton-weed.

CUL DE LAMP [Architecture] seve­
ral decorations in masonry, &c. in
vaults and cielings to finish the bottom
of works, and somewhat wreathed in
the manner of a testudo.  F.

CUL DE FOUR [Masonry] a sort of
low spherical vault like an oven.  F.

CUL DE FOUR of a Niche [Masonry]
the arched vault of a niche on a plan
that is circular.

CULDEES, a sect of religious people, 
anciently in Scone in Scotland, &c. so
called à colendo Deum, i. e. from their
worshipping God.

CULINARY Fire [according to Boor­
have] a portion of pure elementary or
solar fire, attracted by the oily or sulphu­
reous parts of the fuel, with such velo­
city that it moves the same, agitates
and whirls them violently about, and
by degrees breaks and attenuates them, 
renders them volatile, and disperses
them into air.

CULLENDER. See Colander.

CULLIAGE a custom of the lords
lying the first night
with their vassal's brides.

CULLAGE a custom of the lords
lying the first night
with their vassal's brides. 

CULMIFEROUS [of culmus and fero, 
L.] bearing stems and stalks.

CULMINANT [culminans, L.] rising
up to the top or height, culminating.

CULMINATION, an ascending or
coming to the top.

CULPABLENESS [culpabilitas, L.]
blame-worthi­
ness, guiltiness, faultiness.

CULPABILITY [culpabilitas, L.]
blame-worthi­
ness, guiltiness, faultiness. 

CULPATION, a blaming, a finding
fault.  L.

CULVENAGE, faint-heartedness;
turning tail to run away.

CULVERIN [couleuvrine, F. of colu­
ber, L. a snake] a piece of ordnance of
several sizes.

CULVERIN of the least size [with
Gunners] a piece of ordnance of 5 inches
diameter at the bore, weight about
4000 pound, carries a ball of 4 inches
3 quarters diameter, and 14 pound
weight, and requires a charge of 10
pound of powder.

CULVERIN Ordinary [with Gunners]
is a larger gun of about 5000 pound
weight, is 5 inches 1 quarter diameter
at the bore, carries a ball of 17 pound
5 ounces weight, and 5 inches diameter, 
and requires a charge of 11 pound 6
ounces of powder.

CULVERIN Extraordinary [with
Gunners] a large piece of ordnance in
length about 13 foot, weighing 8000
pound, the diameter at the bore being
5 inches and a half, carries a shot of 5
inches 1 quarter diameter, and 20 pound
weight, and requires a charge of 12
pounds and a half of powder.

CULVER-TAILING [with Ship­
wrights] is the fastening or letting one
timber into another, so that they can­
not slip out, as the carlings into the
beams of a ship.

CUMBRANCES, incumbrances.

CUMBROUS, cumbersom. Milton.

CUMBERSOMNESS [prob. of cumu­
lus, L. an heap or kummern, Teut.] un­
weildiness.

CUMIN [χύμινον, Gr.] an herb like
fennel, but less; the seed of which is
good in colicks, &c.

CUNCTIPOTENT [cunctipotens, L.]
all powerful.

CUNCTITENENT [cunctitenens, L.]
holding or possessing all things.

CUNEATED [cuneatus, L.] made in
form of a wedge.

CUNNING [Sea Term] directing,
as the cunning of a



ship is the directing the person at helm
how to steer her.

CONDING [Sea Term] directing,
as the cunning of a
ship is the directing the person at helm
how to steer her.

CUNNINGNESS [cunninʒneſſe, 
Sax.] craftiness, &c.

CUPID [cupido, L.] the fabulous god
of love; painters, &c. represent him
like a boy naked, and having wings, 
carrying a quiver on his shoulder, and
holding a torch in one hand, and a bow
with darts in the other, to give despe­
rate wounds to the hearts of lovers;
but with a veil cast over his eyes to in­
timate that love is blind.

As there were two Venus's, so there
were two Cupids, the first named EROS, 
the son of Jupiter and Venus, the encou­
rager of a celestial love, which imprints
that spirit in nature itself, from whence
arises the harmony of the elements, and
the copulation of animals: The other
Cupid was named ANTEROS, the son of
Venus and Mars, a vulgar deity, whose
followers are drunkenness, sorrow and
contention: He is likewise the deity
that revenges slighted love.

They are both of them represented
as boys, naked, winged and blinded, 
arm'd with a bow, arrows and a torch:
They have two darts of different na­
tures, one golden which procures love, 
and the other leaden which causes ha­
tred.

Cupid is also painted crown'd with
roses, holding a rose in one hand and a 
dolphin in the other: Sometimes stand­
ing close by fortune; sometimes be­
tween Hercules and Mercury, to intimate
that love is most prevalent when it is
attended on by eloquence and valour.

CUPULO [in Architecture] an arched
room or turret, standing on the very
top of a dome or great building in form
either of a circle or polygon; other­
wise called a lanthorn.

CURABLENESS [of curare, L. to
heal and ness] capableness of cure.

To give a leap upon the CURB [with
Horsemen] is in a leap first to shorten
the curb by laying one of the mails or
S like joints of the chain over the rest.

A CURB [with Farriers] is a hard
and callous tumour running on the in­
side of a horse's hoof, i. e. on that part
of the hoof that is opposite to the leg of
the same side.

CURE [with Falconers] a remedy
which they give their hawks in form of
little balls or pellets of hemp, cotton
or feathers, to imbibe or drink up
their phlegm.

CURETES, are said to be descended
of the Dactyli, who were priests of the
goddess Vesta. They first taught men
how to manage flocks of sheep, and to
tame and breed up herds of other cattle, 
to gather honey, to live in societies to
hunt, cast darts, use swords, targets and
helmets, of which they were said to be
the inventers.

To these Curetes, Rhea is said to have
committed the care of Jupiter, to
preserve him from his father Saturn;
and they by dancing in armour and
clashing their weapons to the sound of
pipes, drums and cymbals, made such
a noise as drowned the cry of this in­
fant god.

CURIOUSNESS [curiositas, L.] over­
much care; a passion or desire of seeing
or knowing; also delicateness or nice­
ness; a rarity or curious thing.

CURRENTNESS [of currens, L.] cur­
rency, having a free course.

CURRENTS [with Navigators] are
impetuous motions of the waters, which
in certain latitudes run and set on par­
ticular points of the compass: And usu­
ally their force is conformable to the
course of the moon, so as to be more
rapid or strong when she is at the
change or full, and the weaker when
she is in the wane.

CURRIERS were in­
corporated anno 1438, 
in the 12th of K. Hen­
ry I. and bear for their
armorial ensigns; sa­
ble, a cross engrail'd
or between 4 pair of
shares in saltire argent.
The crest 2 arms, the
hands holding a shave, the supporters
a buck or and a goat argent. The motto, 
Spes nostra Deus.

Their hall is situate near the West-­
end of London-wall.

Image omitted.



CURRISH [of kirren, Teut. to grin]
cur-like, doggish, churlish, surly, ill-na­
tured.

CURRISHNESS [probably of Cur, a
mongril-dog] doggishness, snarling.

CURSEDNESS [of curſe, Sax.] the
being deserving of a curse, vileness, &c.

CURSOR, a little brass ruler, repre­
senting the horizon; a ruler or label.
L.

CURSORINESS [of cursorius, L.]
hastiness, running over slightly.

CURTATE Distance [with Astrono­
mers] is the distance of a planet's place
from the sun reduced to the ecliptick.

CURTESY of England. See Courtesy.

CURTLASS [q. d. curtailed or curt
axe] a short sword, a kind of hanger.

Rectification of a CURVE, is the find­
ing of a right line equal to a curve.



Quadrature of a CURVE, is the find­
ing out of the area or space included by
a curve; or the assigning of a quadran­
gle equal to a curvilineal space.

Family of CURVES, an assemblage or
collection of several curves of different
kinds, all which are defined by the
same equation of an indeterminate de­
gree; but differently according to the
diversity of their kind.

CUSPIDATED Hyperbola [with
Math.] a kind of Hyperbola, whose 2
parts concur and terminate in the an­
gle of contact.

CUSTOM, was first paid in England
in the reign of Henry VI. when the par­
liament settled a duty in the year 1425
of 12d. in the pound upon all merchan­
dizes imported or exported, this custom
was settled but for 3 years, and in the
ast was a proviso, that the king should
not make a grant to any person, nor
that it should be any president for the
like to be done; but yet all the kings
since his time have had it for life.

General CUSTOM [in Law] is a cus­
tom which is allowed throughout the
whole kingdom of England.

Particular CUSTOM [in Law] is that
which belongs to this or that particular
as gavel kind to Kent, or such as that
of a lordship, city or town.

CUSTOM [with Tradesmen] the
practise or business of a shop.

CUSTOMABLENESS [of coûtume
F.] custo­
mariness, liableness to pay custom.

CUSTOMARINESS [of coûtume
F.] custo­
mariness, liableness to pay custom.

To CUT the round [in Horseman­
ship] is to change the hand, when a horse works
upon volts of one tread; so that divi­
ding the volte in two, he turns and parts
upon a right line to recommence ano­
ther volte.

To CUT the Volte [in Horseman­
ship] is to change the hand, when a horse works
upon volts of one tread; so that divi­
ding the volte in two, he turns and parts
upon a right line to recommence ano­
ther volte.

CUT and LONG-TAIL, all together
universally.

CUTE [acutus, L.] sharp, quick-wit­
ted.

CUTIS [in Anatomy] the inner skin, 
which lies under the cuticle or scarf
skin, is thickish, also full of pores. It
consists of several filament of the veins, 
arteries, nerves and fibres, interwoven
one with another and full of glandules,
lympheducts, &c.

CUTTING [with Painters] is the
playing one strong lively colour on ano­
ther without any shade or softening.

CUTTING [with Horsemen] is when
the feet of a horse interfere; or when
the beats off the skin of the pastern joint
of one foot with another.

CUTTLE Fish, a sea fish, which
throwing out a black juice like ink, lies
hid in the water in that obscurity, and
so escapes the fisher.

CUTLERS were first
incorporated Anno 1413
by Henry VI. confirm'd
by several of our kings 
since, and by K. James,
I. Their arms are Gules
6 daggers in 3 saltire
crosses argent, handled
and hilted or pointing
towards the chief The
supporters 2 elephants argent, the crest
a third, with a castle on his back or.

Their hall is on the south side of Cloke
lane.

Image omitted.



CUZ, a name or title among Printers
given to one who submits to the per­
formance of some jocular ceremonies;
after which, and a drinking bout, he is
entitled to some peculiar privileges in
the chapel or printing-house.

CYBELE [according to the Pagan
Theology] was the wife of Saturn. She
was also called Dyndimene, Berecynthia
and the grand-mother; not only because
she was the mother of the gods, but be­
cause she was the goddess of the earth.
And for that reason the Latins called her
Ops and the Greeks Rhea, she was also
called Vesta. She is sometimes taken for
fire, and sometimes for the earth.

She was also called Syria Dea, because
she was born in Syria.

She was represented with towers on
her head, sitting in a chariot drawn by li­
ons and a great number of trees and ani­
mals round about her. Her solemn fes­
tivals were called Megalesia, and were
held every fourth month. Her priests
were called Gallantes or Galli, and the
chief of them Archbigallus because they
were chosen out of Gallo Greciæ, a pro­
vince of Asia Minor, joining to Phrygia;
they were also called Corybantes, and in
their celebration of her rites acted the
part of madmen with their drums, trum­
pets and such other instruments, singings, 
howlings, cutting themselves desperate­
ly and all that they met.

Those Gauls that had planted them­
selves in Phygia, in these Magalesia rais­
ed themselves to such a pitch of fury by
the forementioned instruments, &c. that
they became really mad, and in wan­
tonness often wounded one another
with swords and other weapons, and at
the conclusion washed their bodies and
wounds in some river dedicated to this
goddess.

Cybele was the daughter of Menoe, a
king of Phrysia, and upon some distaste



that her father had taken against her
mother, was thrown into a wood to be
devoured by the wild beasts. But being
happily found by a shepherd, he brought
her home, and bred her up as his own.

She was extraordinary beautiful, and
as she grew to years of understanding
became very famous for her skill in
musick, and curing the diseases of in­
fants; so that the king acknowledged
her for his daughter, and granted her a
train according to her quality.

She afterwards fell in love with a
young man named Atys; but he not ob­
taining liberty to marry her, she was
got with child by him, for which Atys
was condemned to die, which caused
her to run mad for grief, and leaving
her father's court, she run up and down
the country with a pipe and drum in
her hand.

After her death the Phrygians, being
afflicted with scarcity of corn and divers
diseases, upon consulting the oracle, 
they were advised to worship Cybele, as
a goddess, in order to get themselves
extricated out of those calamities.

The Romans had no great knowledge
of this goddess till Hannibal with his ar­
my was in the bowels of Italy, and the
senate of Rome being terrified with seve­
eral prodigious accidents that happened at
that time, they sent to consult the books
of the Sibyls, and being informed that
the Carthaginians might be expelled Ita­
ly, if the Mater Idea came to Rome, they
sent ambassadors to Attalus king of
Phrygia, to intreat him to send them
the stone statue of this goddess, which
was in the town Pessinunte. It being
brought to Rome, all the dames in the
city went out to meet and welcome it as
far as the mouth of the Tiber; and the
next year they erected a temple for
her.

The pine-tree and the box were con­
secrated to this goddess.

CYCLOID [in Geometry] is a curve
as BCD described by the point a in the
periphery of a circle, while the circle
rolls along a right line; as BD from the
point B where the curve begins, to the
point D where it ends: this is also cal­
led a trochloid.

Image omitted.



CYCLOPS [χύχλοωψ, q. d. having a
round eye, Gr.] the first inhabitants of
Sicily, men of a gigantick size, as ap­
peared by bones found in several tombs;
they were very savage, and frequented
chiefly the neighbourhood of mount
Ætna, whence the poets took occasion
to represent them as Vulcan's workmen, 
whom he employed to make thunder­
bolts for Jupiter.

CYCLUS [χύχλος, Gr.] a circle or
round; a cycle, as of the sun, moon, 
&c.  L.

CYGNUS, a swan. The poets tell
us, that Jupiter lov'd Nemesis under that
form (for she turned herself into all
forms that she might preserve her vir­
ginity) and last of all into the form of
a swan. Whereupon Jupiter took up­
on him the form of this bird, and flew
to Rhammus in Attica, and there trod
Nemesis. She laid an egg, from whence
Helena was produced, as the poet re­
lates. Moreover Jupiter, because he did
not put off the form of the swan, but
flew back to heaven under that form, 
made the form of a swan among the
stars, that he had assumed when he
flew.

CYLINDER [with Surgeons &c.] a
roll of plaister.

CYLINDRICALNESS [of cylindre, F.
cylindrus, L. of χυλίνδρος, Gr.] the being
of a cylindrical form.

CYLINDRO-METRIC Scale, an in­
strument for measuring of cylindrical
dimensions.

CYLINDRUS [with Physicians] a
plaister made oblong, which some phy­
sicians call Magdaleo.

CYMATIUM [χυμάτιον, Gr.] a little
wave.

CYMATIUM [with Architects] a
member or moulding of the cornice, 
whose profile is waved, i. e. concave at
the top and convex at the bottom.

Doric CYMATIUM [Architecture] is
a cavetto, or a cavity less than a semi-­
circle, havine its projecture subduple its
height.

Lesbian CYMATIUM, is a concavo-­
convex member, having its projecture
subduple its height.

Tuscan CYMATIUM, consists of an
ovolo or quarter round.

CYNANCHE [χυνάγχη, of χύων a dog, 
and ἀγχη pain Gr.] a squinancy or quin­
sey, an inflammation of the inner mus­
cles of the throat, attended with a diffi­
culty of breathing and continual fever;
a disease that dogs are frequently trou­
bled with.

CYNICALNESS [of cynique, F. cynicus
L. of χυνος, Gr. a dog] churlishness, 
moroseness.



A CYNOCEPHALUS [Hieroglyphical­
ly] was by the ancient Egyptians used to
represent the moon, and signifyed the
different motions of that planet by the
different motions of that animal. To
signify the rising and increase of the
moon, they painted it standing upright
upon his hindermost feet, and to shew
the decrease, it was represented lying
upon its back as if dead. And Natura­
lists have made this observation, that
apes do sympathize with the moon, and
on this account some of them were
nourished by the learned Egyptians, in
order to discover more easily and ful'y
the mysteries relating to the moon at the
time of its conjunction with and oppo­
sition to the sun.

A CYNOCEPHALUS riding upon a
fish in a river, did hieroglyphically re­
present a priest or a man whose office
obliged him to attendance on the ser­
vice of the gods. The Egyptian priests
abstained from eating all kinds of fish, 
and thence some are of opinion that
this hieroglyphick intimated abstinence, 
which is therefore recommended to
priests, &c. but others rather that the
river is a symbol of the soul and plea­
sures of the body, which ought to be
opposed and overcome by those who
would offer acceptable sacrifice to Al­
mighty God, and be worthy of that di­
vine office of the priesthood.

CYPHONISM, a sort of torture or
punishment used by the ancients, which
some suppose to be the smearing the bo­
dy over with honey, and exposing the
person bound to flies, wasps, &c.

CYPRESS [cupressus, L. χυπαρίσσος, 
Gr.] a tree which the ancients account­
ing an emblem of death, used to adorn
their sepulchres with it.

CYPRESS [so called from the islands
of Cyprus, from whence they were first
brought] a sort of stuff, partly silk, and
partly hair, with which formerly hoods
and other vestments for women were
made.

CYPRUS [with Botanists] a shrub or
bush much like privet with the flowers
of which the inhabitants of the isle of
Cyprus used to make sweet-oil; also the
drug called camphire.  L.

CYRENIACI [from Aristippus of Cy­
rene] a sect of philosophers who held
that man was born for pleasures, and
that virtue was only so far laudable as
it conduced thereto.

CYSTICA [with Physicians] medi­
cines good for diseases in the bladder.

CYSTICK [χύστις, Gr.] a bladder, es­
pecially that out of which the urine
and gall comes.

CYSTIS [χύστις, Gr.] a bladder.

CYSTIS [with Surgeons] a bag or
skin which contains the matter of an
imposthume.

CYZICENES [of the island Cyzico]
magnificent banqueting houses among
the Greeks, always exposed to the
north, and commonly opening upon
gardens.


D

Dd Roman, D d Italick, D d English,
D ð Saxon, Δ δ Greek, ד Hebrew, 
are the fourth letters of their respective
alphabets.

D, is pronounced in most or all Eng­
lish words except Wednesday.

D in Latin numbers signifies 500, and
a dash over it as D̅, 5000.

D. D [in Inscriptions] frequently
stands for Dedicavit Deo, i. e. he has
dedicated to God, or for Dono Dedit, 
i. e. he presented.  L.

D. D. D. [in Inscriptions] stands often
for Dignum Deo Donum dedit, i. e. he
offered an acceptable present to God,  L.

D. D. D. Q. [in Inscriptions] stands
for Dat, dicat, dedicatque, i. e. he
gives, sets apart, and dedicates.  L.

D. D. Q. S. [in Inscriptions] stands for
Diis Deabusque Sacrum, i. e. consecrated
to the gods and goddesses.  L.

D. N. [in Inscriptions] stands for
Domini Nostri, i. e. of our Lord.  L.

DABITIS [with Logicians] one of
the moods of syllogisms.

DABBLER [of Dabberen, Du.] one
that splashes or stirs water about; also
one slightly furnished with an art, &c. 
as a Dabbler in Politicks, &c.

DACTYLIOMANCY [of δαχτύλιος a
ring, and μαντεία Gr. divination] they
hold a ring suspended by a fine thread
over a round table, on the edge of which
was made divers marks with the twen­
ty four letters of the alphabet. The
ring in its vibration stopping at certain
letters, they joining these together, 
composed the answer for what they
sought for. But the operation was pre­
ceded by a great many superstitious
ceremonies.

DACTYLOGY [of δαχτυλος, a fin­
ger, and λογὸς, Gr. speech] a conver­
sing by signs made by the fingers.

DACTYLONOMY [of δάχτυλος a
finger, and νόμος law, Gr.] the art of
numbering on the finger: The rule is
this; the left thumb is reckoned 1, the
index 2, and so on to the right thumb



which is the 10th, and denoted by the
cypher o.

DAD [tad, C. Br. dadda, Ital.]
a name by which young
children, call their fathers.

DADDA [tad, C. Br. dadda, Ital.]
a name by which young
children, call their fathers.

DADUCHI [of δὰς an unctuous and
resinous wood of which the ancients
made torches, and ἔχω to hold or have]
torch-bearers; priests of Cybele, who
ran about the temple with lighted tor­
ches in their hands.

DÆDALUS [δαιδαλος, i. e. artifi­
cial, of τοῖ δαιδάλλειν to do artificially, 
or of δαίω to know] an Athenian arti­
ficer, the son of Micion, said to have
lived A. M. 2874, about the time that
Gideon judged Israel. To him is attri­
buted the invention of the saw and ax, 
the plummet, augre, glue, and cement;
and he is said to have made statutes
with machinery, that the eyes would
move as tho' living. Being accused for
the death of Perdix, his nephew, he
fled into Crete, and there made a laby­
rinth for Minos, into which Minos
put him and his son Icarus, as the poets
say, for making a cow of wood, into
which Pasiphae being put, was lain
with by a bull; see Pasiphae. The
grounds of which fable is, Dædalus was
privy to the adultery of Pasiphae the
wife of Minos with his servant Taurus.
They tell us likewise, that being priso­
ner in the labyrinth, he desired to have
feathers and wax, in order to make a
curious present for the king; but with
them made wings for himself and his
son Iacrus, and flew away out of prison,
and got away by ship from Crete to Sar­
dinia, and from thence to Cuma, where
he built a temple for Apollo; but his
son Icarus soared so high, that the
beams of the sun melted the wax, and
so he fell into the Icarian sea. The
moral of which is, that he escaped with
some discontented persons from Crete
in ships, and Minos pursuing them hard, 
Icarus's ship was split upon a rock, but
Dædalus oversailed the king, and arri­
ved safe in Sicily, sailing swifter because
he had then invented sail-cloths, where
as none before him knew any speedier
way of sailing than by the help of oars.

The poets tell us, that Dædalus made
walking statues; but the truth of the
fable is, the carvers and statuaries of
that time made their statues with their
feet in a standing posture; but Dædalus made
his statues with one of the feet
extended and before the other, as in a
walking posture.

DÆDALEAN [Dædaleus, L. of δαί­
δαλος of δαιδάλλω, I do artificially, Gr.]
cunning, witty, artificial, ingenious.

DÆMON [δαίμων, either of δαἰξεσθαι
to administer; because supposed to at­
tend on, and to minister to men; or, as
others say, of δαίειν, i. e. χαίειν, because
of an æthereal substance; or of δαίεω
to know. Gr.] a devil, a spirit either
good or bad; some Heathen writers use
it to signify the devil or an evil spirit.

A DÆMONIACK [dæmoniacus, L. of
δαιμονιαχὸς, Gr.] one possessed with a
devil, furious, mad.

DAGON [ןונד of נד, Heb. a fish] an 
idol of the Philistines that upwards was
of a human shape, but downwards re­
sembled that of a fish, having scales and
a finny tail turning upwards. Some
imagine it to have been the image of
Neptune or a Triton.

DAIDALA [of δαίδαλα, Gr.] certain
statues, made as follows: The Plateans,
&c. having assembled in a grove, ex­
posed pieces of sodden flesh to the open
air, and carefully observing whether
the crows that prey'd upon them di­
rected their flight, hewed down all those
trees, and formed them into statues.

DAIDALA, a festival of the Grecians, 
wherein a statue adorned in woman's
apparel was accompanied by a woman
in habit of a bride-maid, followed by
a long train Of Bœotians to the top of
mount Citheron, upon which was a
wooden altar erected, furnished with a
great store of combustible matter, they
offered on it a bull to Jupiter, and all
the Daidala's were thrown into it and
consumed together.

The original of this custom was this,
Jupiter and Juno having had a quarrel,
she parted from him into Eubœa,
whence Jupiter, by all his arts and per­
suasions not being able to engage her
to return to him, dressed up a statue
in woman's apparel, and placing it in a
chariot gave it out that it was Platea,
to whom he was contracted in order to
marriage. Juno hearing this, posted in
all haste to meet the chariot, and being
well pleased at the contrivance, became
reconciled to her husband.

DAILY [ðæʒlice, Sax.] every day, 
day by day.

DAINTINESS [of dain, obs. F.] deli­
cacy, niceness in eating, &c.

DAIRY [of dayeria of day, or ðæʒ,
Sax. which at first signified the daily
yield of milch-cows, or profit made of
them, or others of derriere, F. behind, 
q. a house backwards] a place where
milk and milk-meats are made and kept.

DAMAGES [in Common Law] the
hindrances that the plaintiff or deman­



dant hath suffered by means of the
wrong done to him by the defendant.

To DAMAGE [dommager, F.] to do
hurt, to prejudice.

DAMAGE clear [Law Term] a duty
formerly paid to the prothonotaries and
other clerks, being a third, sixth or
tenth part of the damage recovered, 
upon a trial in any court of justice; but
was disannulled the 17th of Charles II.

DAMAGE Feasant [q. d. doing hurt
or mischief] a term used when the
beasts of a stranger get into another
man's ground, and feed there, spoiling
grass or corn, in which case the owner
of the ground may distrain or impound
them, as well in the night as in the day.

DAMAGEABLE [dommageable, F.]
prejudicial, hurtful.

DAMASKEENING [so called of Da­
mascus in Syria] the art of adorning
steel, iron, &c. by making incisions in
them, and filling them up with wire of
gold or silver, as in sword-blades, locks
of pistols, &c.

DAMIANISTS, an ancient sect, a
branch of the Acephali, who deny'd the
trinity, affirming that there could be no
such thing as a distinction of persons in
one nature.

DAMNABILITY [damnabilitas, L.]
damnableness, capableness of condem­
nation.

DAMNATORY [damnatorius, L.]
condemning, or that is condemned.

DAMNIFICK [damnificus, L.] that
bringeth damage or hurt, endamaging.

DAMNABLENESS [damnable, F. dam­
nabilis, L.] damning impiety, horrible­
ness.

DAMPISHNESS moistness, wet­
ness.

DAMPNESS moistness, wet­
ness.

DAMPS [in Mines] are noxious ex­
halations, which sometimes suffocate
those that work in them, and are other­
wise prejudicial, they are distinguished
into 4 sorts.

1. The Peas-Bloom DAMP [at the
mines at the Peak in Derbyshire] this
damp is supposed to proceed from the
multitude of the red trefoil flowers, 
called honeysuckles, with which the
lime-stone meadows do there abound.
It takes its name from the likeness to
the smell of peas blossoms. It is said
always to come in the summer-time, 
but is not mortal.

2. The fulminating DAMPS, these are
found frequently in cole-mines, but
very seldom, if at all, in lead-mines, 
if the vapour of these sort of damps is
touched by the flame of a candle, it im­
mediately catches fire, and has all the
effects of lightening or fired gun-pow­
der.

3. The common DAMPS, affect persons
with shortness of breath and difficulty
of breathing; but are seldom injurious
any farther, if the persons affected with
it do not swoon, which if they do, 
though they are not quite suffocated, 
are yet tormented with very violent
convulsions on their recovery. The
coming of these sort of damps is known
by the flame of the candles becoming
round, and growing lesser and lesser
till it go quite out. The method of
curing those that swoon, is by laying
them on their bellies with their mouth
to a hole dug in the ground, and if that
does not recover them, they fill them
full of ale, and if that fails, they look
upon their case desperate.

4. The Globe DAMP, this by miners is
supposed to gather from the steam of the
bodies and the candles, which ascend­
ing up into the highest part of the vault, 
do there condense, and in time a film
grows over it, which corrupts and be­
comes pestilential. It appears of a
round form about the bigness of a foot­
ball, hanging in the highest part of the
roof, of such passages of the mine, as
branch out from the main grove. It is
covered with a skin about the thickness
of cobweb. If this skin be broken by a
splinter or any other accident, the damp
presently flies out and suffocates all that
are near it, the workmen have a way
of breaking it at a distance by the help
of a stick and a long rope, which being
done, they afterwards purify the place
with fire.

DAMSEL, a sort of utensil put into
beds to warm the feet of old men.

DANAIDES [in the ancient Mytho­
logy] the daughters of Danaus the ninth
king of Argos and brother of Ægyptus.
They were 50 in number, and espous'd
to the 50 sons of their uncle Ægyptus.
Danaus fearing the accomplishment of
an oracle which had foretold that he
should be expell'd his kingdom by a son-­
in-law, persuaded his daughters to
murder each of them their husbands on
the wedding night, which they perform­
ed all but Hypermnestra, who spared her
husband Lynceus. In vengeance for this
crime of the 49 Danaides the poets have
condemn'd them to hell, to be continu­
ally employ'd in filling a cask bored full
of holes at the bottom. The Danaides
are also sometimes call'd Belides from
their grandfather Belus.

DANCHE [in Heraldry] the same as
indented.



DANCETTE [in Heral­
dry] a term used, when the
out-line of any bordure or
ordinary is notched in and
out very largely, and is the
same as indented; only that
it is deeper and wider.
There is also a bend called
a Double Dancette, as he bears azure, a
bend, double dancette. See the escut­
cheon.

Image omitted.



DANE-LAGE [Dane-leaʒ, Sax.] the
laws that were in force in England, du­
ring the time of the Danish government, 
which took place chiefly in 15 counties, 
York, Derby, Nottingham, Middlesex, Nor­
folk, Cambridge and Huntington, Leice­
ster, Lincoln, Northampton, Hertford, 
Essex, Suffolk, Cambridgeshire and Hun­
tingdon.

DANGER a payment of money
anciently made by
the forest-tenants to their lords, that
they might have leave to plow and sow
in the time of pannage or mast-feeding, 
it is otherwise called lief or lef-silver.

DANGERIUM a payment of money
anciently made by
the forest-tenants to their lords, that
they might have leave to plow and sow
in the time of pannage or mast-feeding, 
it is otherwise called lief or lef-silver. 

DANGEROUSNESS [of dangereux, 
F.] hazardousness.

DANGLING [q. d. down and hang­
ing] hanging down, pendulous.

The DANK, the moisture or seat of
dankness or wetness.

DANKISH, a little moist or wet.

DANKISHNESS, moistness.

DANTELLE [in Heraldry] in English
commonly call'd Dancette, is only a lar­
ger sort of indenting than that which
we call by that name.

DAPHNEPHORIA [Δαφνηφορία, Gr.] a
festival observed every 9 years by the
Bœotians, on account of a victory ob­
tain'd by the aid of Apollo: the manner
of the festival was thus, a beautiful boy
having a crown of gold on his head, &c.
sumptuously apparelled, carried an olive-­
bough adorned with garlands of laurel
and various sorts of flowers, on the top
of which was a globe of brass, from
which hung other lesser globes; about
the middle was a purple crown, and a
smaller globe and other ornaments.
The upper globe was an emblem of the
sun, by whom they meant Apollo; the
lesser globes the stars; and 365 crowns
in number represented the days in a
year. This boy was followed by a
choir of virgins with branches in their
hands to Apollo's temple, where they
sung hymns to the god.

DAPHNOPHAGl [of δωφνίτις and φα­
γεῖν, Gr. to eat] certain prophets or
diviners in ancient times, that pretend­
ed to be inspired after the eating of bay-­
leaves.

DAPPLED Bay Horse, is a bay horse
that has marks of a dark bay.

DAPPLED Black Horse, is a black
horse that in his black skin or hair has
spots or marks, which are yet blacker
and more shining than the rest of the
skin.

DARDANARIUS, an usurer, a mo­
nopolist, such as caus'd a scarcity and
dearness of provisions, and particularly
of corns by buying them up and hoard­
ing them, to raise their value in order
to sell them at an extravagant price.

DARINGNESS [ðearſcippe of ðdear­
ran, Sax.] adventurousness, boldness.

DARK Tent, a portable camera obscu­
ra, made not unlike to a desk, and fit­
ted with optick glasses, to take prospects
of landskips, buildings, fortifications, 
&c.

DARKNESS [ðeorcneſſe, Sax.]
want of light, obscurity, hiddenness.

DARKLING, obscuring, making dark.
Milton.

DARKSOMNESS, obscureness dar­
kishness.

To DARN [probably of ðẏrnan, Sax.
to hide] to sew cross-wise in imitation
of what is woven.

DARREIN [of dernier, F. last] a Law
term.

DASTARDLY, cowardly, faint-hear­
tedly.

DASTARDY, cowardliness.

DATIVE Tutelage [Civil Law] a tu­
telage of a minor appointed by a ma­
gistrate.

A la DAUBE [Cookery] a particular
way of dressing a leg of veal.  F.

DAVID's Staff [with Navigators] an
instrument consisting of two triangles
joined together, each having its base
arch'd, and containing a quadrant of 90
degrees between them in the circle of
their bases.

DAVIDISTS [so called of one David
George, a glasier or painter of Ghent] an
heretical sect about the year 1535, who
were his adherents. He declared that
he himself was the true Messiah, and
that he was sent to earth to fill heaven, 
which was quite empty for want of peo­
ple. He rejected marriage, denied the
resurrection, and laugh'd at self-denial
and held divers other errors.

DAUNTED [domi, F. domitus, L. ta­
med] disheartened.

DAUNTLESNESS, a being without
fear or discouragement.

DAUPHIN, the next heir to the
crown of France, which is supposed to
have proceeded from the name, the
Dauphins of Viennois, who were sove­



raigns of the province Dauphine in 
France, having taken the Dolphin for
their arms; the last of those princes
having no issue, gave his dominions to
the crown of France, upon condition
that the heir of the crown should be
called Dauphin, and ever after bear a
dolphin for his arms.

DAWNING, the beginning of the
day.

DAY, as to the beginning of the day, 
we in England begin the natural day at
12 a clock at night, which custom we
seem to have borrowed from the Egyp­
tians, or Romans, who began it at that
time. The Jews, Chaldeans and Babylo­
nians begin their religious natural day
at sun-set, and thus do the Italians, Bo­
hemians and Polanders. The Jews, Chal­
deans and Babylonians began their day at
sun-rising, and so do the Persians; but
the Arabians from noon.

DAY Civil or Political is divided into
the following parts. 1. After midnight.
2. The cock's crow. 3. The space be­
tween the first cock's crow and break of
day. 4. The dawn of the morning. 5.
Morning. 6. Noon or mid-day. 7. The
afternoon. 8. Sun-set. 9. Twilight. 10.
The evening. 11. Candle time. 12. Bed-­
time. 13. The dead of the night.

To be dismissed without DAY [Law
term] is to be absolutely discharged the
court.

To have a DAY by the Roll [Law term]
to have a day of appearance assign'd.

DAY Werg of Land [among the An­
cients] as much land as could be plough'd
up in one day's work; or, as it is still
called by farmers, one journey.

DEACINATED [deacinatus, L.] clean­
sed from the kernels.

DEACONSHIP [of diaconus, L. and
ship an English termination for office]
the office or dignity of a deacon.

To DEADEN [of ðeað, Sax.] to take
away from the force of a weight, blow, 
&c.

DEAD Water [with Mariners] is the
eddy water that is next behind the stern
of the ship, which is so termed, because
it does not pass away so swiftly, as that
water does that runs by her sides; so
that when a ship has a great eddy fol­
lowing her stern, they say she makes
much dead water.

DEADLY [of ðeaðlic, Sax.] causing
death.

DEAFISH, something hard of hear­
ing.

DEAFNESS [ðeafneſſe Sax.] hard­
ness or want of the sense of hearing.

DEALING [ðælinʒ, Sax.] trading;
also distributing.

DEALER [of ðælan, Sax. to divide] a
trader, buyer or seller.

DEAMENA [with the Romans] a god­
dess supposed to preside over menstru­
ous women.

DEAR [ðeor, Sax.] costing a great
price; also indeared.

DEARNESS [of ðeorneſſe Sax.]
costliness, &c.

DEARTICULATION. See Diar­
throsis.

To DEARTUATE [deartuatum, L.]
to disjoint, quarter or cut in pieces; to
dismember.

DEATH [ðeað, Sax.] a privation of
life, which is considered in the separa­
tion of the soul from the body.

DEATH-WATCH a small insect.

Mr. Allen, in the Philosophical Trans­
actions, relates, that it is a small insect
or beetle 516ths of an inch long, of a
dark brown colour spotted; having pel­
lucid wings under the vagina, a large
cap or helmet on the head and two An­
tennæ proceeding from beneath the eyes, 
and doing the office of Proboscides. The
part it beats withal, as he observ'd, 
was the extreme edge of the face, 
which he calls the upper lip, the mouth
being protracted by this bony part, and
lying underneath out of view. Mr.
Derham confirms this account; but that
instead of ticking with the upper lip, he 
observ'd the insect to draw its mouth
back and beat with its fore-head. He
had two, a male and a female, which
he kept alive in a box several months, 
and could bring one of them to beat
when he would, by imitating its beating.
By his ticking noise, he could frequently
invite the male to get upon the other in
way of coition, and thence he concludes
that ticking or pulsation to be the way
that these insects woo one another.

There is also another of these ticking
insects different from the first, which
will beat some hours together without
intermission, and his strokes are more
leisurely and like those of a watch.
whereas the former only beats 6 or 8
strokes and leaves off. This latter is a
small grey insect, much like a louse, and
is very common in all parts of the house
in the summer months. It is very nim­
ble in running to shelter, and shy of
beating when disturb'd. The ticking of
this as well as the other he judges to be 
the wooing act.

DEATH [with Physicians] is defined a
total stoppage of the circulation of the
blood, and the cessatian of the animal
and vital functions, which follow there­
upon, as respiration, sensation, &c.



DEATHLESS [ðeaðleaſ, Sax.] im­
mortal.

DEATHLESNESS [ðeaðleaſneſſ,
Sax.] immortality.

DEBACCHATION, a raging or mad­
ness.  L.

DEBARRED [of debarré, F.] hinder­
ed or kept from.

DEBASEMENT [abaissement, F.] a
being brought low.

DEBATABLE [of debate, F.] that
may be disputed.

To DEBATE [debâtre, F.] to dispute, 
to argue deliberately on a matter.

DEBAUCHED [debauché, F.] lewd,
incontinent.

A DEBAUCHE [un debauché, F.] a
riotous person.

DEBENTURE [in the Exchequer and
King's-house] a writing given to the ser­
vants for the payment of their wages.

Essential DEBILITIES of a planet [in
Astrology] is when a planet is in its de­
triment, fall or peregrine.

Accidental DEBILITIES of a planet 
[with Astrologers] is when a planet is in
the 6th 8th or 12th houses; or combust, 
&c. so that by each of these circum­
stances it is said to be more or less
afflicted, and to have so many or so few
debilities.

DEBILITY [with Physicians] a weak­
ness that proceeds from swooning, fain­
ting, hunger, or some other indispositi­
on; or it is a relaxation of the solids, 
which induces weakness and fainting.

DEBOISTNESS, debauchedness, &c.

DEBONNAIRITY [debonaireté,
F.] good hu­
mour, courteousness, affability, &c.

DEBONNAIRNESS [debonaireté,
F.] good hu­
mour, courteousness, affability, &c. 

Chirographary DEBT, is a debt due by
virtue of a note or writing under one's
hand, and not proved in a court of ju­
dicature.

Hypothecary DEBT, a debt which is
due by virtue of some contract or con­
demnation.

Predicatory DEBT, is a debt which a­
rises from alienation of lands, &c. the
whole purchase of which has not been
paid.

Priviledged DEBT, is a debt that must
be satisfied before all others, as a king's
tax, &c.

Regular DECAGON [in Fortification]
a fortified town that has ten sides and
as many angles, or ten bastions; the an­
gles of which are all equal one to ano­
ther.

DECAPILLATED [decapillatus, L.]
having the hair pulled or fallen off.

DECAPITE [Heraldry] signifies that
the beast has the head cut off smooth,
and is different from erazed, which is
when the head is as it were torn off, 
leaving the neck ragged.  F.

DECASTYLE [decastylus, L. of δε­
άϛυλος, Gr.] that has ten pillars.

DECEASED [decedé, F. decessus, L.]
dead.

DECEITFULNESS [of deceptio, L.]
false dealing, deceiving, &c.

DECEIVABLENESS [of deceptibilis, 
L.] deceitful quality.

DECEIVED [with Horsemen] a horse
is said to be deceived upon a demivolt
of one or two treads; when working as
for instance, to the right, and not having
yet furnished above half the demivolt, 
he is pressed one time or motion for­
wards with the inner leg, and then is
put to a reprize upon the left, in the
same cadence.

DECEMBER [of decem, L. ten] the
last month in our year beginning at
January, or the 10th beginning at March.
The time when the sun enters the tro­
pick of Capricorn making our shortest
day.

In Romulus's year it was the 10th
month and consecrated to Saturn; upon
the 5th of this month the ancient Romans
observed the festivals called Faunalia, 
on the 17 the Saturnalia; on the 22d the
Laralia and on the last the Ludi Juve­
niles and the peasants observed the festi­
val of the goddess Vacuna, they having
gathered their fruits of the land and
sown their coin.

DECEMBER [Hieroglyphically] was
represented by a man with a horrid as­
pect, clad in a shagged rug; with three or
four night-caps upon his head, and o­
ver them a Turkish turbant; his nose red
and beard hung with icicles; at his back
a bundle of holly and ivy, holding in
furred mittins a goat.

DECEMVIRAL Laws, the laws of
the 12 tables.

DECEMVIRI [among the Romans]
the magistrates elected to govern the
commonwealth; instead of consuls;
these had an absolute power; but abu­
sing it, they were banished, and their
estates confiscated.

DECENTNESS [decence, F. decen­
tia, L.] comeliness, 
seemliness.

DECENCY [decence, F. decen­
tia, L.] comeliness, 
seemliness.

DECEPTIBLE [deceptilis, L.] easy to
be deceived.

DECEPTIVE [deceptivus, L.] deceiv­
ing, deceitful.

DECERPTIBLE [of decerpere, L.]
that may be cropped off.

DECESSION [decessio, L.] a depart­
ing or going away,



DECIDUOUSNESS [of deciduus, L.]
aptness to fall.

DECIMATION [in the time of the
civil wars in England] the sequestring
the tenth part of a man's estimation.

DECIRCINATION [of decircinare, 
L.] a drawing a circle with a pair of
compasses.

DECISIVENESS [of decisif, F.] deci­
sive property.

Half DECK [in a great ship] a deck
which reaches from the main-mast to
the stern.

Quarter DECK, reaches from the
steerage aloft to the master's round
house.

Spare DECK [in a ship] is the upper­
most deck of all that lies between the
main mast and the missen; and is also
called the Orlope.

To raise a DECK [Sea term] is to put
it up higher.

To sink a DECK [Sea term] is to lay
it lower.

DECLARABLE [declarabilis, L.] that
may be declared.

North or South DECLINATION of
any Star or point of Heaven [with Astro­
nomers] is the distance of the star, &c.
from the equator, accordingly as it de­
clines northwards or southward.

True or Real DECLINATION of a 
Planet [with Astronomers] is the distance
of its true place from the equator.

Circle of DECLINATION [Astronomy]
a great circle of the sphere, passing thro'
the poles of the world.

Parallax of the DECLINATION [As­
tronomy] is an arch of the circle of Decli­
nation, whereby the parallax of the alti­
tude increases or diminishes the decli­
nation of the star.

Refraction of the DECLINATION [As­
tronomy] an arch of the circle of the
Declination, whereby the Declination of
a star is increased or diminished by means
of the refraction.

DECLINING [declinans, L.] leaning
or bowing downwards or moving from.

DECLIVOUS [declivis, L.] steep
downwards.

To DECOCT [decoctum, L.] to seeth
or boil well.

DECOCTIBLE [decoctibilis, L.] easy
to be sodden or boiled.

DECOCTIVE [decoctivus, L.] easily
sodden.

DECOCTURE [decoctura, L.] a de­
coction, a broth or liquor wherein things
have been boiled.

DECOLORATION, a staining or mar­
ring the colour.

DECOMPOUND [decompositum, L. un 
decompose, F.] a word composed of more
than two words, as indisposition.

DECOMPOSITION [with Apotheca­
ries] is the reduction of a body into the
parts or principals that it is composed or
consists of.

DECORAMENT [decoramentum, L.]
an ornament, an adorning.

DECORATED [decoratus, L. decore, 
F.] beautified, adorned.

DECORATIONS [with Architects]
ornaments in churches and other publick
edifices, or other things that inrich a
building, triumphal arch, &c.

DECOROUS [decorosus, L.] fair
and lovely, beauti­
ful, graceful, comely.

DECOROSE [decorosus, L.] fair
and lovely, beauti­
ful, graceful, comely.

To DECORTICATE [decorticare, 
L.] to peel or pull off the bark of trees.

DECORUM [in Architecture] is the
suiting and proportioning all the parts
of a building, so as will best become the
situation and design, i. e. different pros­
pects are to be chosen for several parts
of a building, according to the nature
of the place, &c. and must be different
dispositions and proportions for a pa­
lace to that of a church.

DECOUPLE [in Heraldry] signifies
uncoupled; i. e. parted or severed, as a
Chevron decouplers a chevron that wants
so much of it towards the point, that
the two ends stand at a distance one from
another, being parted and uncoupled.  F.

DECOURS [in Heraldry] See 
Decrement.

DECRESSANT [in Heraldry] See 
Decrement.

DECREATION, a depriving of being, 
an annihilation of what has been crea­
ted.

DECREMENT [in Blazonry] is used
to signify the wane of the moon, from
the full to the new, and then faces to
the left side of the escutcheon.

DECREMENT [in Heraldry] the
wane or decrease of the moon.

DECREPID [decrepitus, L. decrepit, 
F.] worn out with age, so as to walk
stooping, &c.

To DECREPITATE [of de and cre­
pitatim, L.] to reduce to powder, that
makes a crackling noise.

DECRETAL, a rescript or letter of a
pope, whereby some point or question
in the ecclesiastical law, is solved or de­
termined.  F.

DECUMBITURE [of decumbere, L.
to lie down] a lying down; a being seiz­
ed with a disease, so as to be forced to
take to the bed.

DECURIO [among the Romans] the
chief or commander of a decury, both
in the army and in the colledge, or as­
sembly of the people L.



DECURTATION, the cutting or
making short.

DECUSSATION, a cutting a-cross,
or in the form of a letter X or star­
wise.

DECUSSORIUM [with Surgeons] an
instrument with which the skin called
Dura Mater being pressed upwards is
joined to the skull, so that the corrupt
matter gathered between the skull and
Dura Mater may be let out at a hole
made with a trepan.  L.

DEDECORATED [dedecoratus, L.]
dishonoured, disgraced.

DEDECOROUS [dedecorus, L.] un­
comely, unseemely, dishonest.

DEDICATION Day, the festival of
the dedication of a church, anciently
observed in every parish with solemni­
ty and good cheer, most of the ancient
annual fairs were kept on that day, and
they first arose from the concourse of
people on the forementioned occasions.

DEDITITIOUS [dedititius, L.] yeild­
ing or delivering himself up into the
power of another.

DEDUCIBLENESS [of deducibilis, 
L.] capableness of being deducted.

DEED Indented [in Law] an Indenture, 
a writing cut into dents or notches on
the top or side, which consists of two
or more parts; and in which it is ex­
pressed that the parties concerned have
interchangeably or severally set their
hands and seals to every part of it.

DEED Poll is a single plain deed
unindented, shewing
that only one of the parties has
put his hand and seal to it, for the pur­
pose therein mentioned.

Polled DEED is a single plain deed
unindented, shewing
that only one of the parties has
put his hand and seal to it, for the pur­
pose therein mentioned. 

DEEPNESS [ðeopneſſe, Sax.]
depth.

DEESIS [δέησις, Gr.] a beseeching or
intreating.

DEESIS [with Rhetoricians] a figure
frequently used in oratory or poetry, on
occasion either of earned intreaty or
calling to witness; as Lydia, dic, per
omnes te deos oro.

DEFAIT [In Heraldry] a beast whose
head is cut of smooth.  F.

DEFATIGABLENESS [of defatigabi­
lis, L.] aptness to be tired.

To DEFAULT [of defaute, of faute, 
F.] to render a person liable to some
forfeit, fine, amercement or punishment, 
by omitting to do something enjoined, 
or committing something forbid.

DEFAULT [in Common Law] an of­
fence in omitting to do what ought to
be done.

DEFECTIVENESS [of defectivus, L. 
defectuosité, F.] faultiness, imperfection.

Line of DEFENCE Fichant [in For­
tis.] is a right line drawn from the point
or vertex of the bastion to the concourse
of the opposite flank with the cour­
tine.

Line of DEFENCE Rasant [in Fortif.]
is the face of the bastion continued to
the courtine.

DEFENCES [in Heraldry] are the
weapons of any beast, as the horns of a
stag, the paws of a lion, the tusks of a
wild boar, &c.

To be in a posture of DEFENCE, is to
be provided and in readiness to oppose
an enemy.

DEPENDABLE [of defendere, L. de­
fendre, F.] that may be defended.

DEFENDERS, in ancient times, dig­
nitaries in church and state to take care
of the preservation of the publick weal, 
to protect the poor and helpless, and
maintain the interest and causes of the
church.

DEFENSIBLENESS [of defensus, L.]
capableness of being defended.

DEFENSITIVES [with Surgeons]
bandages, plasters, or the like, used in
curing wounds, to moderate the vio­
lence of the pain, impression of the
external air, &c.

DEFENSIVE [defensif, F.] that
which serves to
defend, proper for defence.

DEFENSITIVE [defensif, F.] that
which serves to
defend, proper for defence.

DEFENSIVES [with Physici­
ans, &c.] me­
dicines outwardly applied to prevent
an inflammation.

DEFENSATIVES [with Physici­
ans, &c.] me­
dicines outwardly applied to prevent
an inflammation. 

DEFERENTS [with Anatomists] those
vessels of the body appointed for the
conveyance of humours from one part
to another.

DEFICIENCY [of deficientia,
L.] defect, com­
ing short, want, failing.

DEFICIENTNESS [of deficientia,
L.] defect, com­
ing short, want, failing. 

DEFICIENT Hyperbola, a curve of
that denomination, having only one
asymptote and two hyperbolical legs, 
running out infinitely towards the sides
of the asymptote, but the contrary
ways.

DEFICIENT Numbers [in Arithme­
tick] are numbers, all whose parts ad­
ded together, amount to less than the
integer, whose parts they are, as 8, 
whose parts 1, 2 and 4 make but 7, and
so the parts of 16 make but 15, &c.

To DEFILE, is to reduce an army
to a small front, to march thro' a nar­
row place.

DEFINITENESS [of definitus, L. de­
fini, F.] certainty, limitedness.

DEFINITION, a short and plain de­
scription of a thing, with its nature and



principal properties; also a decision or
determination of an affair; or it is an
exact description, explaining a thing by
spiritual attributes.

Three things are necessary to make
a definition good.

1. It must be universal, i. e. it must
contain the whole thing desired.

2. It must be proper, it must agree
with the thing defined.

3. It must be, clearer than the thing
defined, i. e. it ought to render the
idea of it more plain and distinct, and
make us (as much as can be) to under­
stand the nature of it, and be service­
able to us to give a reason of its prin­
cipal properties.

DEFINITION [with Logicians] an
unfolding the essence or being of a
thing, by its kind and difference.

DEFINITIVENESS [of definitif, F.
definitivus, L.] decisiveness, &c.

To DEFLAGRATE [deflagratum, L.]
to inkindle and burn off in a crucible, a
mixture of salt or some mineral body
with a sulphureous one, in order to pu­
rify the salt, or to make a Regulus of a
mineral.

DEFLEXURE [deflexura, L.] a ben­
ding downwards, a turning aside or out
of the way.

DEFLECTION [of the rays of light] a
bending downwards, a turning aside, a
property different both from reflection
and Refraction, the same which is called
Inflection by Sir Isaac Newton.

DEFINITOR [in several Romish reli­
gious orders] an assessor or counsellor
to a general or superior. He takes
place next to the superior when in the
convent, and the precedence of him
when out of it; but as to the monastick
life (tho' not in any thing else) he is
subject to the superior of the convent he
lives in.

DEFLORATION ravishing; the
taking away a
woman's virginity; also the taking away
the beauty and lustre of a thing.

DEFLOWERING ravishing; the
taking away a
woman's virginity; also the taking away
the beauty and lustre of a thing. 

DEFLOWERMENT [defloratio, L.]
the act of deflowering a virgin; also
the suffering of that act.

DEFLUOUS [defluus, L.] flowing, 
down, falling, shedding.

DEFLUVIUM [among Botanists] a
disease in trees, whereby they lose their
bark. This distemper proceeds from
a sharp humour that dissolves the glue, 
by means of which the bark is fastened
to the wood; and some times it is occa­
sioned by too great drought.  L.

DEFORMEDNESS [deformitas, L.]
ugliness, ill-favouredness; a displeasing
or painful idea, which is excited in the
mind on account of some object that
wants that uniformity which constitutes
beauty.

DEFRAYMENT [of defrayer, F.] the
payment of expences.

DEFRICATION, a rubbing.  F.

DEFTARDAR, the treasurer of the
revenues of the Turkish and Persian em­
pire.

DEGENERATED [spoken of Plants]
grown wild.

DEGENERATENESS [degeneratio,
L.] degeneracy, a being grown wild,
out of kind, &c.

DEGENERATION, the act of fail­
ing or declining from a more perfect
or valuable kind or condition to a less;
a deviation from the virtue of ancestors.

DEGLUTINATED [deglutinatus, L.]
unglued.

DEGLUTITION, a swallowing
down; that action in living creatures
by which that which is chew'd in the
mouth, or any liquor, descends into the
stomach by the motion and contraction
of the fibres of the gullet.

DEGRADATION, a degrading, the
act of depriving or stripping a person
for ever of a dignity or degree of ho­
nour, &c.

DEGRADED [in Heral­
dry, of gradus, L. a step] as
a cross degraded is one that
has steps at each end, as in
the figure.

Image omitted.



To DEGRAVATE [degravatum, L.]
to make heavy, to burden.

DEGREE [degré, F.] step; also any
state or condition, that is as it were as­
cending and descending.

DEGREE [with Astron.] is the 360th
part of the circumference of any circle;
a degree is divided into 60 parts called
Minutes, and each Minute into 60 parts
called Seconds, and so into Thirds, &c.
The space of one degree in the hea­
vens is accounted to answer to 6o miles
on earth.

DEGREE [in Fortif.] is a small part
of an arch of a circle (the circle con­
taining 360 degrees) which serves for
the measuring the content of the angle,
so an angle is said to be of 10, 20, 30, 
40, 50 or 60 degrees, &c.

DEGREES of Fire [with Chymists] are
accounted four. The first is the most
gentle heat of all, made only by two
or three coals; the 2d a degree of heat
just to warm the vessel sensibly, made
by four or five coals, and so that a man
may endure his hand upon it for some



time; the 3d is when there is heat suf­
ficient to make a vessel containing five
or six quarts of water boil; the 4th de­
gree is as great a heat as can possibly
be made in a furnace: But all these de­
grees of heat admit of some variations, 
according to the peculiar circumstances
of the operations, furnace, vessels, 
quantity of matter to be heated, &c.

DEJECTEDNESS [dejectio, L.] a
casting down, a
lowness of spirits.

DEJECTION. [dejectio, L.] a
casting down, a
lowness of spirits. 

DEJECTION [with Astrol.] is said of
the planets, when in their detriment, 
i. e. when they have lost their force or
influence by reason of being in oppo­
lition to some others, which check and
counter-act them.

DEJECTION [with Physicians] the
art of ejecting or evacuating the excre­
ments by means of the peristaltick mo­
tion of the guts.

DEI JUDICIUM [i. e. the judgment
of God, so called, because it was ac­
counted an appeal to God for the justice
of a cause; and that the decision was
according to the appointment of divine
providence] the old Saxon manner of
trial by Ordeal.

DEINCLINERS [in Dialling] such
dials as both decline and incline, or re­
cline at the same time.

DEIPAROUS [deiparus, L. of deus, 
a God, and pario to bring forth, L.]
that beareth or bringeth forth a god.

DEISTICAL [of deiste, F. of deus, 
L.] of deism or Deists.

DEISTICALNESS [of deiste, F. deus, 
L.] deistical principles.

DEISTS [of Deus, L. God] a sect a­
mong the Christians of most or all deno­
minations, who believe there is one
God, a providence, the immortality of
the soul, virtue and vice, rewards and
punishments; but reject revelation, and
believe no more than what natural
light discovers to them, and believe no
other article of the Christian religion
or any other.

DEITIES [deitas, L. Φεότης, Gr.] of
these the Greeks had a great number, 
and also the Romans of gods, goddesses, 
and demi-gods, even to the number of
several thousands, having a deity for
every thing. This multiplicity of dei­
ties was for the satisfaction of the igno­
rant people, who could not comprehend
how one and the same deity could be
diffused through all the parts of the uni­
verse; and therefore many gods were
devised. The chief of these were Ju­
piter the god of thunder, Juno of riches, 
Venus of beauty, Mars of war, Minerva
of wisdom, Apollo of physick, Mercury
of eloquence, Neptune of the sea, Saturn
of time, Bacchus of wine, Diana of
hunting, Vesta of earth, Victoria of vic­
tory, Cupid of love, Nemes of revenge, 
the Furies of punishment, the Parcæ of
destiny, Fortuna of fortune, the Indige­
tes, and the Virtues to whom were
erected temples, as Peace, Concord, 
&c. the Semones or half men, &c. and
each god had his particular sacrifice;
as the bull to one, the ram to another, 
&c. to each of these was assigned his
particular bird; as the eagle to Jupiter, 
the raven to Apollo, &c.

They had also their particular trees, 
Jupiter had the oak, and Apollo the lau­
rel, &c.

They had also proper creatures to
draw their chariots; as Jupiter, Sol, 
&c. horses, Juno peacocks, &c.

They had also their particular arms;
as Jupiter had a thunder-bolt, Mars a
sword, Saturn a scythe, Minerva her
lance, Mercury his caduceus, Bacchus
his thyrsus, Hercules his club, and Vulcan
his tongs.

DEIVIRILE [among School Divines]
is a term used to signify something both
divine and human, of Deus God, and
Virlis pertaining to man.

DELACRYMATION, a falling down
of the humours, the waterishness of the
eyes, or a weeping much.  L.

DELACTATION, a weaning from
the breast.

DELAPSED [delapsus, L.] sliding or
slidden down.  L.

DELASSATION, a tiring or weary­
ing.  L.

DELECTABLENESS, delightfulness, 
pleasantness.

DELECTANEOUS [delectaneus, L.]
delightsome, pleasant.

DELEGATES, are commissioners of
appeal, appointed by the king under the
great seal in cases of appeals from the
ecclesiastical court.

To DELE [of delere, L.] to
blot out.

To DELETE [of delere, L.] to
blot out.

DELETERIUM [prob. of δελέω, Gr.
to hurt] any thing that is of a deadly
poisonous or mischievous quality.

DELF [of ðelfan, Sax. to delve or
dig] a mine or quarry.

DELF [in Heraldry]
a square born
in the middle of an escut­
cheon supposed to repre­
sent a square sod or turf;
Delf tenne an abatement of
honour belonging to one that has re­
vok'd his challenge or eaten his words.

Image omitted.



DELFE [in Heraldry]
a square born
in the middle of an escut­
cheon supposed to repre­
sent a square sod or turf;
Delf tenne an abatement of
honour belonging to one that has re­
vok'd his challenge or eaten his words.

Image omitted.





DELIA, certain festivals anciently
celebrated by the Athenians in honour
of Apollo, who was sirnamed Delius.

DELIASTS, the persons appointed to
perform the ceremonies of this festival, 
were certain citizens deputed to go on
an embassy or rather pilgrimage to the
temple of Apollo, at Delos. They were
crown'd with Laurel, the whole depu­
tation set out in 5 vessels, carrying with
them all things necessary for the feast
and sacrifices. After the sacrifice a
number of young men and maids danc'd
round the altar, a dance in which by
their various motions and directions, 
they represented the turnings and wind­
ings of the labyrinth. During the time
of the performance of these ceremonies
no criminal might be executed, and
hence by reason of the Delia, they wait­
ed 30 days to give the poison to Socra­
tes.

DELIACAL Problem, a famous pro­
blem among the ancient mathemati­
cians about doubling the cube.

DELIBATED [delibatus, L.] tasted.

DELIBERATIVE Rhetorick, is that
which is employed in proving a thing, 
or convincing an assembly of it, in or­
der to induce them to put it in execu­
tion.

DELIBRATION, a pilling or taking
off the bark.  L.

DELICATENESS [deliciæ, delicatesse, 
F.] daintiness, niceness, tenderness.

DELICATUDE [delicatudo, L.] de­
liciousness.

DELICIOUSNESS [of deliciosus, L.]
sweetness of taste, &c.

DELICIOSITY [deliciositas, L.] deli­
ciousness.

DELICIOSE [deliciosus, L.] very de­
licious or sweet.

DELIGHTFULNESS [of deliciæ,
L. delice, 
F. and fulneſſe, Sax.] very pleasant.

DELIGHTSOMNESS [of deliciæ,
L. delice, 
F. and fulneſſe, Sax.] very pleasant. 

DELINEATED [delineatus, L.]
drawn as with the out lines, pour­
tray'd, represented by draught or pic­
ture.

DELINIMENT [delinimentum, L.] a
mitigating or asswaging.

DELIQUIUM animi, a fainting a­
way or swooning.  L.

DELIRAMENT [deliramentum, L.] a
dotage or doting.

DELIRIOUS [of delirium, L. delire, 
F.] doting or being light-headed.

DELIVERER [of delivrer, F. libera­
tor, L.] one who frees from.

DELITIGATION, a striving, a chid­
ing, a contending.  L.

DELPHIN [in Astronomy] a nor­
thern constellation consisting of ten
stars.

DELPHOS, a city in Bæotia, which
was supposed to be in the middle of
the world, because (as it is storied)
when Jupiter sent forth two eagles at
the same time, the one from the East, 
and the other from the West, they both
met at that place exactly.

There was the most celebrated and
richest temple in Greece; for all nations
vy'd with one another in lending ex­
traordinary presents thither. Crœsus
the rich king of Lydia, gave 1000 ingots
of gold to make an altar there, and Pha­
larts the tyrant of Agrigentum, made a
present of a brazen bull, a master­
piece of art.

The answers which Apollo gave here
were supposed to be receiv'd by him
from Jupiter; they were delivered by
a virgin call'd Pythia, who was plac'd
upon a stool with 3 feet, call'd Cortina, 
from the skin of Python, with which it
was said to be covered. See Pythia, 
Python, Cortina and Tripos.

DELTOIDES [of Δ the Greek δέλτα, 
and εἷδος shape] a triangular muscle
arising from the clavicula, from the up­
per process of the shoulder blade; as
also from the process of the same, cal­
led spiniforme, and is fasten'd to the
middle of the shoulder-bone, which it
lists directly upwards, &c.

DELTOTON [δελτωτὸν, Gr.] a con­
stellation or cluster of 6 stars, in form
resembling the letter Δ, called other­
wise Triangulus septentrionalis.

DELUGE [diluvium, L.] an inunda­
tion or overflowing of the earth either
in part or the whole by water.

There are divers deluges mentioned
in ancient history, both sacred and pro­
fane.

The Deucalidonean DELUGE, which
is famous, happen'd in Greece in the
year before Christ 1529, being the third
year before the coming of the Israelites
out of Egypt, according to the compu­
tation of Petavius. This deluge only
overflow'd Thessaly.

The Ogygian DELUGE, happen'd 300
years before that of Deucalion, and
1796 before the birth of Christ, ac­
cording to Petavius. This only ravaged
Attica. These are frequently taken no­
tice of by Greek authors, by the names
of the former and latter deluge.

There have been also several parti­
cular inundations or deluges in several
places, as those of the Netherlands, 
which in 1227 overwhelm'd and cover'd
with sea all that part now called the



gulph Dollart in the united provinces.
And in 1421 all that part between Bra­
bant and Holland.

But the most memorable is that called
the universal Deluge in Noah's time, 
which according to the chronologers
happened Anno Mundi 1656, answering
to the year before Christ 2293.

DELUMBATION, a beating or break­
ing of the loins,  L.

DEMAIN that land which a man
holds originally of him­
self, which the Civili­
ans call Dominicum, and is opposed to
Feodum or fee, which signifies land held
of a superior lord. Indeed (the land
of the Crown only accepted) there is
no land that is not held of some supe­
rior; because all, either mediately or
immediately, do depend on the crown;
so that when a man, in pleading, would
intimate that his land is his own, he
pleads that he was seized or possessed
thereof in his demain as of fee; and by
this he means, that tho' his land be to
him and his heirs for ever; yet it is
not true demain, but depends upon a
superior lord.

DEMEAN that land which a man
holds originally of him­
self, which the Civili­
ans call Dominicum, and is opposed to
Feodum or fee, which signifies land held
of a superior lord. Indeed (the land
of the Crown only accepted) there is
no land that is not held of some supe­
rior; because all, either mediately or
immediately, do depend on the crown;
so that when a man, in pleading, would
intimate that his land is his own, he
pleads that he was seized or possessed
thereof in his demain as of fee; and by
this he means, that tho' his land be to
him and his heirs for ever; yet it is
not true demain, but depends upon a
superior lord.

DEMESN that land which a man
holds originally of him­
self, which the Civili­
ans call Dominicum, and is opposed to
Feodum or fee, which signifies land held
of a superior lord. Indeed (the land
of the Crown only accepted) there is
no land that is not held of some supe­
rior; because all, either mediately or
immediately, do depend on the crown;
so that when a man, in pleading, would
intimate that his land is his own, he
pleads that he was seized or possessed
thereof in his demain as of fee; and by
this he means, that tho' his land be to
him and his heirs for ever; yet it is
not true demain, but depends upon a
superior lord.

DEMAND [in Law] a claim or calling
upon a person for any thing due.

DEMEMBREE [in Heraldry] is when
an animal is dismembred, i. e. his limbs
torn off from his body.

DEMERSED [demersus, L.] plunged, 
drowned.

DEMI Bastion [in Fortification] a ba­
stion that has only one face and one
flank.

DEMI Canon of the least size [with
Gunners] a great gun, carrying a ball of
6 inches diameter, and 30 pound weight, 
requires a charge of 24 pound of pow­
der, and will carry a ball point blank
156 paces. This gun weighs 5400
pounds; is in length from 10 to 11 feet, 
and the diameter at the bore is 6 inches
one fourth.

DEMI Cannon Ordinary [with Gunners]
carries a ball 6 inches 16th diameter, 
and 32 pound weight; requires a charge
of 17 pound and half of powder, weighs
5600 pound; is in length 12 foot; the
diameter at the bore 6 inches and a half, 
and carries a ball 161 paces.

DEMI Canon Extraordinary [with
Gunners] carries a ball of 6 inches 38ths
diameter, and 36 pound weight; re­
quires a charge of 18 pound of powder;
weighs 6000 pound; is in length 13
foot; the diameter at the bore is six
inches 34ths, and carries a ball upon a
point blank 180 paces.

DEMI-CULVERLNE [of demi and
coulevrine, F.] a piece of ordnance of se­
veral sorts.

DEMI-CULVERINE Ordinary [with
Gunners] is in weight 2700 pound, is 10
foot long; diameter at the bore 4 in­ 
ches and half; requires a charge of 7
pound, 4 ounces of powder; the ball is
4 inches 1-4th diameter, and in weight
10 pound 11 ounces; and shoots upon a
point blank 175 paces.

DEMI-CULVERINE of the least size, 
is a piece of ordnance, in weight 3000
pound; in length from 9 to 10 foot, the
diameter at the bore 4 inches 1-4th;
requires a charge of 6 pound 1-4th
powder; carries a ball of 9 pound
weight, and 4 inches 1-4th diameter, 
will shoot upon a point blank 174 paces.

DEMI-CULVERINE Extraordinary a
piece of ordnance of 3000 pound weight, 
is 10 foot 1-3d long, 4 inches 3-4ths di­
ameter at the bore, requires a charge
of 8 pound and a half of powder, and a
ball of 4 inches and a half diameter, 
and 12 pound 11 ounces weight, and
will shoot upon a point blank 178 paces.

DEMI-DITONE [with Musicians] the
same as Tierce Minor.

DEMI-GORGE [in Fortif.] is half the
gorge or entrance into the bastion, but
not taken from angle to angle, where
the bastion joins the courtin, but from
the angle at the flank to the centre of
the bastion, or the angle that the cour­
tins would make, if they were thus
lengthened to meet in the bastion.

DEMI-HAQUE, a sort of gun. See
Haque.

DEMI-LUNE, a half moon.  F.

DEMI-SANG [Law term] of the half
blood; as when a man has issue by his
wife, either a son or daughter, and up­
on the death of his wife he marries a­
nother, and has also a son or daughter
by her; these sons or daughters are
commonly called half-brothers, or half-­
sisters, or of the half-blood.  F.

DEMIURGIC [demiurgicus, L. δημι­
υργιχὸς of δῆμος the publick and ἐργον,
Gr. work] of or pertaining to a creator.

DEMONIACS, a sect who believe
that the devils shall be saved at the end
of the world.

DEMONS [Δαίμωνα, according to
some of δάζεσθαι to distribute, to admi­
nister, others of δειμάινω to make afraid, 
others of δαεῖν, Gr. to know] were cer­
tain spirits or genii, who are reported
to have appeared to men, either to
serve them or do them hurt. The
Chaldæans were the first that entertain'd
the notion of them, and from them it
spread to the other nations, as the E­



gyptians, &c. the first of whose demons
was Mercury or Theut. The notion of
them was carried from Egypt into
Greece by Pythagoras and Thales. And
Plato falling in with the notions of de­
mons, explain'd it more fully and di­
stinctly than any of the philosophers be­
fore him had done. By demons he un­
derstood spirits inferior to gods, and
yet superior to men; which inhabited
the middle region of the air and kept
up the communication between them, 
carrying the offerings and prayers of
men to the gods, and bringing the will
of gods to men; but he allow'd of none
but good and beneficent ones. But his
disciples afterwards, not being able to
account for or give the reason of evil, 
adopted another sort of Demons, who
were maleficent and enemies to man­
kind. The Israelites also, by their
commerce with the Chaldæans, receiv'd
the notion of Demons; but by Demon
they did not understand the devil or a
wicked spirit, nor was it used in that
sense but by the Evangelists and some
modern Jews. The Phenicians call'd
them םילעב Baalim, their supreme
Being was עב Baal or ךלמ Moloch.

DEMONSTRABLENESS, plainness
or easiness to be demonstrated, capa­
bleness of demonstration.

DEMONSTRATION [with Philoso­
phers] a syllogism in form, containing
a clear and invincible truth of a pro­
position.

DEMONSTRATION [with Logici­
ans] an argument so convincing that
the conclusion must necessarily be infal­
lible.

A Positive DEMONSTRATION, is
one which proceeding by affirmative
and evident propositions, dependent on
each other, ends in the thing to be de­
monstrated.

A Negative DEMONSTRATION, is
whereby a thing is shewn to be such
from some absurdity that would follow, 
if it were otherwise.

A DEMONSTRATION a Priore, one
whereby an effect is proved from a cause;
or a conclusion by something previous, 
either a cause or an antecedent.

A DEMONSTRATION a Posteriore, 
is one whereby either a cause is proved
from an effect, or a conclusion by some­
thing posterior, either an effect or a
consequent.

A Geometrical DEMONSTRATION, 
one framed from reasoning drawn from
the elements of Euclid.

A Mechanical DEMONSTRATION, 
is one whose reasonings are drawn
from rules of mechanicks.

DEMONSTRATION [with Mathe­
maticians] a chain of arguments depend­
ing one upon another, and originally
founded on first and self-evident princi­
ples, or plain propositions raised and
proved from them; so that in the con­
clusion it ends in the invincible proof
of the thing to be demonstrated.

DEMONSTRATIVE [with Rhetori­
cians] one of the genera or kinds of elo­
quence, used in the composing pane­
gyricks, invectives, &c.

DEMONSTRATIVENESS, aptness
for demonstration.

DEMONSTRATORY [demonstrato­
rius, L.] belonging to demonstration.

DEMURENESS, reservedness, affect­
ed gravity.

To DEMURR [demeurer, F. of demo­
rari, L.] to put in doubts or objections
in a suit; to delay or put off a further
hearing. In Chancery, a defendant de­
murrs to a plaintiff's bill, by affirming;
that it is defective in such or such a
point, and demands the judgment of
the court upon it, if he shall be obliged
to make any farther or other answer
to it.

DEMI [in Blazonry] is
used to signify
one half, as demy lion.

Image omitted.



DEMY [in Blazonry] is
used to signify
one half, as demy lion.

Image omitted.



DEN [in Old Records] a low place
and is added to the names of several
towns and villages in the same sense, 
as Tenderden in Kent, &c.

DENARII DE CHARITATE, Whit­ 
sun-farthings, an ancient customary ob­
lation to the cathedral about Whitsun­
tide, when the priest of the parist, and
many of the parishioners went to visit
the mother-church.

DENARIUS, a Roman silver coin, 
marked with the letter X, it being in
value 10 asses, or about 7 pence half-­
penny English.  L.

DENARIUS DEI [i. e. God's Penny]
earnest money; so termed, because in
ancient times, the money that was laid
down to bind any bargain or agreement, 
was given to God, i. e. either to the
church or poor.  L.

DENARRABLE [denarrabilis, L.]
that may be related.

DENARRATION, a narration.  L.

DENCHEE [in Heraldry] a term
applied to the ordina­
ries in a shield when they are edged
with teeth or indented.

DENCHED [in Heraldry] a term
applied to the ordina­
ries in a shield when they are edged
with teeth or indented. 



DENTRITES [of δένδρον, Gr.] a sort
of whitish or ash-colour'd stones, which
are seen on trees, shrubs, &c.

DENDROPHORIA [Δενδροφορία, Gr.]
a ceremony performed in the sacrifices
of Bacchus, Cybele, &c. of carrying trees
through a city.

The pine-tree which was carried in
a procession, was afterwards planted in
memory of that under which Atys the
favourite of the goddess Cybele, muti­
lated himself; they also crowned the
branches of this tree in imitation of Cy­
bele's doing the same; and they covered
its trunk with wool, in imitation of
the goddess's having covered the breast
of Atys with the same.

DENEB [with Astronomers] a star cal­
led otherwise Cauda lucida, or the lion's
tail.

DENSATION, a making thick.

DENSENESS [densitas, L.] a quali­
ty belonging to compact bodies; thick­
ness, a property of bodies whereby
they contain such a quantity of matter
under such a bulk.

DENTALS [Dentales, L.] such let­
ters in pronouncing which the teeth
are absolutely necessary, are by Gram­
marians so called.

DENTALIS Lapis [in Pharmacy] a
kind of shell, which being pulveriz'd, 
is us'd in medicaments as an excellent
Alkali.

DENTARPAGA [of dens, L. a tooth, 
and ἀρπάζα, Gr.] a surgeon's instrument
for drawing teeth.

DENTATED [dentatus, L.] having
teeth.

DENTICULATED [denticulatus, L.]
having teeth, or jagged.

DENTED [of dentatus, L.] having
notches like teeth.

DENTILOQUIST [dentiloquus, L.]
one that speaketh through the teeth.

DENTILOQUY [dentiloquium, L.] a
speaking through the teeth.

DENUDATED [denudatus, L.] made
naked or bare.

DENUMERATION, a present pay­
ing down of money.

DENUNTIATED [denunciatus, L.]denounced.

To DEOBSTRUCT [with Physicians]
is to remove obstructions or stoppages;
to open the pores of the body.

DEODAND [Deodandum, q. dandum
Deo, i. e. to be devoted to God, to atone
for the violent death of man by misad­
venture; as if a man were killed by
the accidental fall of a tree, or run
over by a cart-wheel; then the tree or
cart-wheel, or cart and horses, is to be
sold, and the money to be given to the
poor.

DEOPPILATIVES [in Pharmacy]
medicines which soften, resolve and re­
move obstructions.

To DEPAUPERATE [depauperatum, 
L.] to impoverish or make poor.

DEPECULATOR, one that robs the
commonwealth; or imbezzles the pub­
lick treasure.

DEPENCILLED [of de and pene­
cillus, L. pencil]
designed or drawn out with a pencil.

DEPENSILLED [of de and pene­
cillus, L. pencil]
designed or drawn out with a pencil. 

To DEPHLEGMATE [in Chymistry]
is to clear any thing from phlegm or
water: as a spirit is said to be well de­
phlegmated, when it is made pure by
being rectified and distilled over again, 
and either wholly, or as much as may
be, cleared of all water and phlegm.

DEPHLEGM'D. See to dephlegmate.

DEPLORABLENESS, lamentable­
ness.

DEPLUMATED [deplumatus, L.] ha­
ving the feathers taken off.

DEPLUMED [deplumé, F.] depluma­
ted.

DEPORT, deportment, behaviour.
Milton.

DEPORTATION [among the Ro­
mans] a sort of banishment, by which
some island or other was assigned for
the banished person to abide in, with a
prohibition not to stir out upon pain
of death.  L.

To DEPOSE [depositum, of deponere, 
L.] to lay a thing down or to pledge it
as a security for the performance of a
contract; also to sequester or strip a
person of his dignity. It is different
from abdication in this that abdication
is taken to be the voluntary act of the
person who possesses the office or digni­
ty; but deposition is an obliging him
to quit it by force; it is pretty much
the same with deprivation and degra­
dation; but the latter indeed is usually
attended with more formality and cere­
monies.

DEPOST [depositum, L.] the thing
put into the hands of another to keep.

DEPOSIT [depositum, L. depôt F.]
a pledge.

DEPOSITIO [with Grammarians] the
ending of the dimensions of a Latin or
Greek verse; so as to find out, whether
it be perfect, redundant or deficient.  L.

DEPOSITUM, a pledge left in the
hands of another, or in a place; also a
wager.  L.

Simple DEPOSITUM [in Law] is ei­



ther necessary or voluntary, necessary as
in case of Fire, Shipwreck, &c.

Voluntary DEPOSITUM that which
is committed by choice.

Judiciary DEPOSITUM, is when a
thing, the right of which is contested
between 2 or more persons, is depo­
sited in the hands of a third person, by
the decree of the judge.

DEPRECATION [in Rhetorick] a fi­
gure whereby the orator invokes the
aid of some person or thing, or prays
for some evil or punishment to befal
him, who speaks falsely, either himself
or his adversary.

DEPRECIATED [depreciatus, L.] cri­
ed down in price or undervalued.

To DEPREHEND [deprehendere, L.]
to catch or sieze unawares.

DEPREHENSIBLENESS, capable­
ness of being caught or understood.

DEPRIMENS [with Anatomists] one
of the strait muscles, which moves the
globe or ball of the eye, which serves
to pull it downwards; it is also called
humilis.  L.

DEPRETIATED [depretiatus, L.]
lessened in the price, undervalued, vi­
lified.

DEPRETIATION, an undervaluing,
a lessening the esteem or value, &c.  L.

DEPRIVATION [in the Cannon
Law] the act of divesting or taking a­
way a spiritual promotion or dignity.

DEPRIVATION a beneficio, is when
for some great crime a minister is whol­
ly and for ever deprived of his benefice
or living.

DEPRIVATION ab officio, is when a
minister is for ever deprived of his of­
fice.

To DEPUCELATE [depuceler, F.]
to deflower, to bereave of virginity.

DEPULSORY [depulsorius, L.] put­
ting away, averting.

To DEPURATE [depuratum, L.] to
purify, to separate the pure from the
impure part of any thing.

DEPURED, purified, defecated, clear­
ed from dregs.

DEPUTY [in the sense of the Law]
one who executes any office, &c. in the
right of another man; for whose mis­
demeanour or forfeiture, the person for
whom he acts shall lose his office.

DERAIGNMENT [with Civilians] a
discharge of a profession; a term some­
times applied to such religious persons, 
who forsook their orders.

DERELICT Lands, such lands as are
forsaken by the sea.

DERISORY [derisorius, L.] ridiculous
also to be laughed at.

DERIVATION [of de and rivus, a
river or stream, L.] properly a draining
of water or turning its course.

DERMATODES [of δέρμα the skin, 
Gr.] an epithet given to the exterior
membrane that invests the brain, skin­
like.

DEROGATIVE [derogativus, L.] de­
rogatory, detracting from the worth of.

DEROGATORINESS, tendency to
derogate.

DERVICES [שיזדד, a beggar,
Heb.] among the Turks
a sort of monks who profess extreme
poverty, and lead a very austere life.
The Dervises, called also Mevelavites, 
of one Mevelava their founder, affect a
great deal of modesty, humility, patience
and charity; they always go bare-legg'd
and open breasted, and the better to inure
themselves to patience, frequently burn
themselves with red hot irons. They
have meetings on Tuesdays and Fridays, 
at which the superior of their house is
present; at which meeting one of them
plays all the while on a flute (which instru­
ment they highly esteem as consecrated by
Jacob and the Old Testament shepherds
that sung the praises of God upon it)
the rest dance, turning their bodies
round with an incredible swiftness, ha­
ving inured themselves to this exercise
from their youth. This they do in
memory of their patriarch Mevelava, 
who, they say, turned round continually
for the space of four days, without any
food or refreshment, after which he
fell into an extasy, and received wonder­
ful revelations for the establishment of
their order. The greatest part of these
Dervises are Chaldeans, who apply them­
selves to legerdemain, postures, &c. to
amuse the people, others practise sorce­
ry and magick, and all of them drink, 
wine, brandy, and other strong liquors
contrary to the principles of Mahomet;
and this they do to make them gay, as
their order requires.

DERVISES [שיזדד, a beggar,
Heb.] among the Turks
a sort of monks who profess extreme
poverty, and lead a very austere life.
The Dervises, called also Mevelavites, 
of one Mevelava their founder, affect a
great deal of modesty, humility, patience
and charity; they always go bare-legg'd
and open breasted, and the better to inure
themselves to patience, frequently burn
themselves with red hot irons. They
have meetings on Tuesdays and Fridays, 
at which the superior of their house is
present; at which meeting one of them
plays all the while on a flute (which instru­
ment they highly esteem as consecrated by
Jacob and the Old Testament shepherds
that sung the praises of God upon it)
the rest dance, turning their bodies
round with an incredible swiftness, ha­
ving inured themselves to this exercise
from their youth. This they do in
memory of their patriarch Mevelava, 
who, they say, turned round continually
for the space of four days, without any
food or refreshment, after which he
fell into an extasy, and received wonder­
ful revelations for the establishment of
their order. The greatest part of these
Dervises are Chaldeans, who apply them­
selves to legerdemain, postures, &c. to
amuse the people, others practise sorce­
ry and magick, and all of them drink, 
wine, brandy, and other strong liquors
contrary to the principles of Mahomet;
and this they do to make them gay, as
their order requires.
 
DESCANT [in a metaphorical sense] a
continued discourse or comment, a large
paraphrase on any subject.

DESCENDING [descendens, L.] fal­
ling or moving from below down­
wards.

DESCENDING latitude [Astron.] is the
latitude of a planet in its return from
the nodes to the equator.

DESCENSIONAL Difference [Astron.] 
is the difference between the right and
oblique ascension of the same star.

Lineal DESCENT, is that which is
convey'd down in a right line from the
grandfather to the father, and from the



father to the son, and from the son to the
grandson.

Collateral DESCENT, is that which
springs out of the side of the line or blood
as from a man to his brother, nephew,
&c.

DESCENT [in Mechanicks] is the
motion or tendency of a body towards
the center of the earth, either directly
or obliquely.

DESCENT into a moat or ditch [in
Fortification] is a deep digging into the
earth of the covered way, in the form
of a trench; the top of which is covered
with planks or wattles bound close to­
gether, and well loaded with earth, to
secure the soldiers against fire, in their
passage into the moat or ditch.

DESCENT [in Blazonry] is a term
used to signify coming down; as a lion
in descent, is a lion coming down, i. e.
with his heels up towards one of the
points, as tho' he were leaping down
from some high place.

To DESCRIBE [describere, L.] to
write out or set down in writing.

To DESCRIBE [in Language] is to ex­
plain.

To DESCRIBE [in Drawing, Painting
&c.] to draw the form of a thing, to
represent.

DESCRIPTION, as to its outward
appearance, resembles a definition, it is
a superficial, inaccurate definition of a
thing, giving a sort of knowledge there­
of; from some accidents and circum­
stances peculiar to it, which determine
it enough to give an idea, which may
distinguish it from other things, but
without explaining its nature or es­
sence.

DESCRIPTS [with Botanick Writers]
such plants as are described.

DESECRATION, an unhallowing, a
prophaning.

A DESART [desertum, L.] a wilder­
ness, a large wild part of a country, a
solitary, lonesome place.

DESERTLESS, without merit, unde­
serving.

DESHACHE [in Blazonry] is a term
used by French heralds, to signify that
the beast has his limbs separated from
his body, in such manner that they re­
main upon the escutcheon, with only a
small separation from their natural
places.  F.

DESICCATIVE Medicines, those that
are of a drying quality.

A DESICCATIVE [with Physicians] a
drying plaister or ointment.

To DESIDE [desidere, L.] to sink or
fall down.

DESIDIOSE [desidiosus, L.] idle,
slothful, lazy, slug­
gish.

DESIDIOUS [desidiosus, L.] idle,
slothful, lazy, slug­
gish.

DESIGN, respecting Arts and Sciences
denotes the thought, plan, geometrical
representation, &c.

DESIGN [in Painting] the first draught
or sketch of a picture or in general; is
the thought that the artist had about
any great piece; whether the contours
or outlines be only drawn, or whether
the piece has the shadows or the co­
lours; so that if there appears much
skill or judgment, it is common to say, 
the Design is great and noble.

DESIGN [in Painting] is also used to
signify the just measures, the proporti­
ons and outward forms, which those
objects ought to have, which are drawn
in imitation of nature, and may be cal­
led a just imitation of nature.

DESIGNATION, an appointment, de­
signation, nomination; also the mark­
ing the abutments and boundings of an
estate.

DESIPIENCE [with Physicians] the
dotage or raving of a sick person.

DESIPIENT [desipiens, L.] foolish, 
doating.

DESIRABLENESS, worthiness to be
desired.

DESIRE [desir, F. desiderium, L.] un­
easiness of mind on account of the ab­
sence of any thing, the present enjoy­
ment of which would afford pleasure,
and delight; longing, wishing; also en­
treaty or request.

DESIROUSNESS, earnestness, desire.

DESOLATENESS, solitariness, un­
comfortableness; also a lying waste.

DESOLATORY [desalotorius, L.]
making desolate, belonging to desolati­
on; comfortless.

DESPAIR [desparatio, L. desespoir, 
F.] the reflection of the mind upon the
unattainableness of some good, which is
the cause of different effects in the minds
of men, sometimes causing pain and un­
easiness, and sometimes unconcerned­
ness.

DESPAIRINGNESS [desparatio, L.] a
being without hopes.

DESPARATENESS [of desperare, L.]
hopelesness; also daringness, furious­
ness.

DESPISABLE [despicabilis, L.] the
same as Despicable.

DESPISABLENESS [of despicere, L.
to look down upon] deservingness to
be despised.

DESPOINA [of δεσποτη, Gr. a lady]
a name of Prosperine, she being the



queen of the dead, who were all said to
be received under her dominion.

DESPONSATED [desponsatus, L.] af­
fianced, espoused, betrothed.

A DESPOTICAL Government, a go­
vernment when a prince having gain'd
an absolute power over his people, is
no longer guided or controll'd by the
laws of his country, but governs solely
by his will and pleasure.

DESPOTICALNESS, arbitrariness.

DESPOTISM, despotick government.

DESPOUILLE [in Blazonry] is used
to signify the whole case or skin of a
beast, with the head, feet, tail, and all
appurtenances; so as being filled up, is
like the whole creature.  F.

To DESPUMATE [despumatum, L.]
to scum or clarify liquor.

DESQUAMATED [desquamatus, L.]
scaled, having the scales taken off.

DESSERT [desserte, F.] the last course
at table; a service of fruits and sweet­
meats.

DESTILLATION, an extraction of
the most unctuous parts which are ra­
refied into vapour or smoke, as it were
by fire.

DESTINATED [destinatus, L.
destiné, F.] ap­
pointed, determined, ordained condem­
ned to.

DESTINATE [destinatus, L.
destiné, F.] ap­
pointed, determined, ordained condem­
ned to.

DESTINY [with Pagan Philosophers]
was a secret or invisible power or virtue
which with incomprehensible wisdom
conducts what to mankind appears irre­
gular and fortuitous, which comes
much to the same, that with us is cal­
led God.

DESTITUTENESS, a being forsaken
or left without.

DESTRUCTIBILITY, a capableness
of being destroyed.

DESTRUCTIVENESS, destroying
nature, &c.

DESUDATORY [desudatorium, L.]
an hot-house or bagnio.

DESUETE [desuetus, L.] out of use.

DESULTORES persons of agility
of body, who us'd
to leap from one horse to another, at
the horse-races in the Circensian games.

DESULTORII persons of agility
of body, who us'd
to leap from one horse to another, at
the horse-races in the Circensian games.
 
DESULTORINESS, the skipping
from one thing to another.

DESULTURE [desultura, L.] a vault­
ing from one horse to another.

DETACHED Pieces [in Fortif.] are
demi-lunes, horn-works or crown-works, 
and even bastions, when separated, and
at a distance from the body of the
place.

DETERGENT [detergens, L.] wiping
off, cleansing, scowring.

DETERGENTS [in Physicks] such
medicines, which mundify, cleanse and
carry off viscid and glutinous humours
that adhere to the body.

DETERMINABLENESS, capableness
of being determined or decided.

DETERMINATENESS, definiteness, 
positiveness.

DETERMINATION [in Physicks] the
disposition or tendency of a body to­
wards one way.

DETERMINATION [with Philoso­
phers] the action by which the cause is
limited or restrained to act, or not to
act, this or that, or in this or that man­
ner.

Effective DETERMINATION [with
Schoolmen] is such as proceeds from an
efficient cause, as when an artist deter­
mines an instrument to a certain action, 
or from the Form, as that determines the
indifferency of the matter; and thus our
senses are said to be determinations, to
have ideas upon the presence of exter­
nal objects.

Moral DETERMINATION, is one
which proceeds from a cause which ope­
rates morally, i. e. by commanding, per­
suading, or advising some effect.

Physical DETERMINATION, is an act
where God excites and applies a second
cause to act antecedently to all the ope­
rations of the creature.

To DETERMINE [determinare, of de
and terminus, properly to set or appoint
bounds] to judge or decide a matter in
controversy or question; to put an end
to a matter; to incline, to dispose, to re­
solve, purpose or design.

DETERSIVENESS, cleansing qua­
lity.

Action of DETINUE [in Law] is when
a man is sued to deliver up his trust.

DETRACTIVE, apt to detract.

DETRACTIVENESS, detracting qua­
lity or humour.

DETRANCHED [in Blazonry] is used
to signify a line bend-wise, that comes
not from every angle, but either from
some part of the upper edge, and fal­
ling from thence diagonally or athwart, 
or in the same manner from part of the
side; but always from the right side.  F.

DETRIMENTALNESS, prejudicial­
ness.

DETRIMENTOUS [detrimentosus, 
L.] causing damage or loss; hurtful.

DETRUNCATED [detruncatus, L.]
cut or chopped off; beheaded.

DETURBATION, a casting or throw­
ing down from on high; also a troubling
or disturbing.  L.



DEUCALION, the son of Prometheus
who married Pyrrha, the daughter of
Epimetheus; The poets tell us that
while he reigned in Thessaly, there hap­
pened an universal flood that drowned
the world but only he and his wife, 
who got into a ship, and were carried
to the top of mount Parnassus, and
stay'd there till the dry land appeared;
and when the flood was gone, he con­
sulted the oracle of Themis, how man­
kind might be repair'd, and was an­
swered, if he cast his great mother's
bones behind his back: Whereupon he
took stones, the bones of his great mo­
ther the earth, and threw them over his
shoulders, and they became men, and
Pyrrha, she cast stones over her shoul­
ders backwards, and they became wo­
men. The truth is, this deluge came
only in Greece and Italy, but the poets
feigned all things to have happened af­
ter Deucalion's flood, as they did after
the inundation in the days of Noah. And
as to their being saved on mount Par­
assus, they only climed to the top of it, 
and were there safe above the waters, 
and after the flood taught the people
more civility than they had before;
this deluge happened A. M. 2440, and
784 years after that in Noah's time.

DEVERGENCE [devergentia, L.] a
devexity or declivity, by which any
thing tends or declines downward.

DEVEX [devexus, L.] hollow like a
valley; bowed down, bending.

DEVEXION, devexity, bendingness
or shelvingness.  L.

DEVEXNESS [devexitas, L.] bend­
ingness, shelving downwards.

To DEVIATE [with Grammarians]
is when a word varies from the sense
of its primitive or original.

DEVICE [of dividere, L. because
it divides or distinguishes
persons, &c.] is either a representa­
tion, an emblem or an hieroglyphick,
expressing something that is to be kept
in mind, such as the Egyptians used in­
stead of writing, which of late have a 
motto added to them, to explain the
signification, which otherwise would
be dark or unintelligible; as king Lewis
XIV. of France, had for his device, the
sun in his glory, with this motto, Nec
pluribus impar, intimating, that he was
able to cope with many enemies.

DEVISE [of dividere, L. because
it divides or distinguishes
persons, &c.] is either a representa­
tion, an emblem or an hieroglyphick,
expressing something that is to be kept
in mind, such as the Egyptians used in­
stead of writing, which of late have a 
motto added to them, to explain the
signification, which otherwise would
be dark or unintelligible; as king Lewis
XIV. of France, had for his device, the
sun in his glory, with this motto, Nec
pluribus impar, intimating, that he was
able to cope with many enemies.

DEVICE, in a restrained sense, is
understood to signify an
emblem, or a representation of some
natural body, with a motto or sentence
applied in a figurative sense, to the ad­
vantage of some person.

DEVISE in a restrained sense, is
understood to signify an
emblem, or a representation of some
natural body, with a motto or sentence
applied in a figurative sense, to the ad­
vantage of some person.

DEVIL on the Neck, a kind of rack
or torturing engine, anciently in use a­
mong the Papists, to extort a confession
from Protestants or Lollards. This ma­
chine was made of several irons which
applied to the neck and legs wrung or
wrenched them together in so violent
a manner, that the more the person
stirred, the straiter he was pressed by
them, and in the space of 3 or 4 hours
his back and body would be broken in
pieces.

Sea DEVIL, a monstrous creature on
the coast of America, having black horns
like a ram, a terrible aspect, a bunch on
the head, resembling a hedge-hog, tush­
es like a boar, and a forked tail; and
the flesh of a poisonous quality.

DEVIL's Milk, an herb, a sort of
Spurge.

DEVILSHIP, the devil's dignity or
Person.

DEVIOUSNESS [of devius, L.] swer­
vingness, aptness to go out of the way.

DEVIRGINATED [devirginatus, L.]
deflowered.

DEVISCERATED [devisceratus, L.]
imbowelled, having the bowels taken
out.

To DEVITIATE [devitiatum, L.] to
corrupt or marr; to deflower.

DEVOCATION, a calling down,  L.

DEVOID [of de and vuidé, F.] emp­
ty of.

To DEVOLATE [devolatum, L.] to
fly away or down.

DEVOLATION, a devouring or con­
suming.  L.

DEVOTED [devotus, L.] set apart for
holy life; attached, strongly inclined to.

DEVOTION. The Heathens who
admitted a plurality of deities and be­
liev'd them to be subordinate in power
to one another, made use of enchant­
ments and devotings to bring mischief
upon their enemies.

They sometimes call'd forth the tu­
telar deities of cities, that they might
thereby deprive their enemies of their
protection and defence.

It is said, for example that the Syrians
chained the statue of Apollo, and fastened
him to the altar of Hercules the tutelar
deity of their city, left he should forsake
them and retire out of the city.

The Romans, says Macrobius, being
persuaded that every city had its tutelar
deity, used certain verses to call them
forth, believing it importable to make
themselves matters of the town without
it, and even when they had it in their
power to take the place; they always
thought it would be a great crime to



take the gods captives with it; for this
reason the Romans always kept the real
and concealed name of their cities very
private, this being very different from
that they generally gave them among
the people, as likewise the name of the
tutelary god of their cities.

Pliny informs us that the secret name
of Rome was Valentia and that Valerius
Soranus was severely punish'd for re­
vealing it.

The form made use of in calling forth
the tutelary god of any city was as fol­
loweth: "If it be god or goddess under
whose guard are the city and people
of Carthage; I beseech thee, O great
God, who hast taken this town and
people under thy tuition; I conjure
and intreat thee graciously to aban­
don the city and people of Carthage, 
to forsake all their dwellings, temples
and sacred places, to cast them off, to
inspire them with fear, terror and
forgetfulness, and to retire to Rome
among our people; let our habita­
tions, our temples, our things sacred
and our city be more agreeable to
thee; demonstrate to us that thou
art my protector, the protector of the
Roman people and of my soldiers. If
thou dost this, I engage myself by a
solemn vow to found temples and in­
stitute games in honour of thee.

As to the devoting hostile or besieged
places, Macrobius gives us an example.
Dis Pater (this was Pluto) Jupiter, 
ye Manes or by what other name ye
will be call'd, I earnestly beseech
you to spread fear and terror in the
army I shall mention to you, and
throughout the city of Carthage.

May ye look upon all as devoted
and accursed, may ye deprive them
of light, and remove at a distance
from this country all those who
shall bear arms against us and shall
attack our legions and our armies;
may all their armies, fields, cities, 
heads and lives be compriz'd within
this wish, as far as they may be com­ 
priz'd in it by the most solemn de­
voting. Wherefore I devote them, 
I charge them with all the mischief, 
that may happen to myself, our 
magistrates, the Roman people, our
armies and our legions; that ye may
preserve me myself and those who
employ me, the empires legions, and
our army which is concern'd in this
war.

If you please to do these things, as
I know and understand them, I pro­
mise you O earth mother of all things
and you great Jupiter, a sacrifice of
three sheep.

The Tuscans call'd forth the thunder,
when they thought they had occasion
for it, Numa Pompilius is said to have
done so often with success. Tullius Hos­
tilius attempting it without making use
of the accustomed rights was himself
struck with thunder.

DEVOURINGNESS [of devoratio, 
L.] devouring nature, &c.

DEVOUTNESS, fulness of devotion.

DEUTEROCANONICAL [of δεύτε­
ρος and χανονιχὸς, Gr.] a name that
school divines give to certain books of
the sacred scripture that were added
after the rest, as the book of Esther, &c.

DEVUIDER [in Riding Academies] is
a term that is applied to a horse, that
working upon vaults, makes his shoul­
ders go too fast for the croup to follow, 
so that instead of going upon two
treads, as he ought, he endeavours to
go only upon one.

DEWY, having dew on it, wet with
dew.

DEXTER, right, on the right hand
or right side.  L.

DEXTRA, the right hand.  L.

DEXTER Base [in Heral­
dry] is the right side of the
base, as letter G in the fi­
gure.

Image omitted.



DEXTER Chief [in He­
raldry] is the angle on the
right hand of the chief, as
letter A in the figure.

Image omitted.



DEXTER Point [with Heralds] the
right side point in an escutcheon.

Image omitted.



DEXTROCHERE [by Heralds] a
term applied to
the right arm painted on a shield.

DESTROCHERE [by Heralds] a
term applied to
the right arm painted on a shield.

DIABOLICALNESS [of diabolicus,
L. diabolique, F. διάβολιχος of διαβὰλ­
λω, Gr. to destroy] devilish nature.

DIABOTANUM [of διὰ and βοτάνη,
Gr.] a plaster made of herbs.

DIACALAMINTHES, a compound
medicine, whose principal ingredient is
Calamint.  L.

DIACALCITEOS [in Surgury] a pla­
ster applied after the amputation of a
cancer.

DIACAPPARIS, a medicine whose
principal ingredient is capers.  L.

DIACAPREGIAS, a medicine made
of goats dung.  L.

DIACARTHAMUM, a medicine so
called, one of whose principal ingredi­
ents is Carthamum.  L.



DIACARYON, a medicine made of
the juice of green walnuts and honey.
 L.

DIACASSIA, a medicine made of
Cassia.  L.

DIACASTORIUM, a medicine made
of Castor.  L.

DIACATHOLICON [of διὰ and χα­
θολιχὸς, Gr. universal] an universal me­
dicine.

DIACATOTHIA [in the Civil Law]
a tenure or holding of lands by fee-­
farm.

DIACHYLUM, a kind of plaster
made of the mucilages or pappy juice
of certain fruits, seeds or roots.

DIACINNAMOMUM, a medicine
made of Cinnamon.

DIACITONIUM, a medicine made 
of Citonia.

DIACLASIS [of διαχλάω, Gr. to
break off] a fracture.

DIACONICON [of διάχονος, Gr.]
the sacristy, the place in or near ancient
churches, where the vestments and
church plate were reposited.

DIACOPE [diacopus, L. of διάχοπος,
Gr.] a cutting or dividing asunder.

DIACOPE [with Surgeons] a deep
wound; especially one made in the
scull with a large instrument.

DIACOPE [with Rhetoricians] the
same as Diastole.

DIACORALLION, a medicine made
chiefly of Coral.

DIACORUM, a medicine made of
acorns.  L.

DIACOSTUM, a medicine made of
Costus.  L.

DIACRISIS [διάχρισις, Gr.] a sepa­
rating, severing or dividing.

DIACROCUMA, a medicine made
chiefly of saffron.  L.

DIACROMMYON [of διὰ and χρόμ­
μυον Gr.] a medicine made of onions.

DIACUMINUM, a composition made
of cummin.  L.

DIACYDONITES [of διὰ τῶν χυδω­
νίων Gr.] such medicines in which quin­
ces are an ingredient.

DIACYDONIUM [διὰ τῶν χυδωνίων
Gr.] a confection made of the pulp of
quinces and sugar, commonly called
marmalade.  L.

DIADAMASCENUM, a composition
of damascens.  L.

DIADEMATED [diadematus, L.]
wearing a diadem, crown or turbant.

DIADOCHUS [διαδοχος, Gr.] a pre­
cious stone like a beril.

DIÆRESIS [in Printing] is a vowel
mark'd with two tittles or points, as on
ë, ï or ü, to signify that it is sounded by
itself, and not joined to another so as
to make a diphthong; as aëra by the
points over the ë is distinguished from
æra.

DIÆRESIS [with Anatomists] is a con­
suming or eating out the vessels, so that
some certain passages are made by some
sharp fretting matter, which naturally
should not have been; also when some
real ones are widen'd more than ordi­
nary, so that the humours run out
which ought to be contained in the
vessels.

DIÆTA [δίαιτα of διατάσθαι, Gr. to
make use of a certain order of food]
diet, food, a particular way or manner
of life.  L.

DIAGALANGA, medicine made of
galangal.

DIAGLAUCION [διαγλαυχίων, Gr.]
a medicine for the eyes made of the
herb Glaucium.  L.

DIAGLYPHICE [διαγλυφιχὴ, Gr.] the
art of cutting or making hollow or con­
cave figures in metal.

DIAGNOSIS [of διαγινώσχω, Gr. to
know] a discerning or knowing one
from another, a judging of.  L.

DIAGNOSIS [with Physicians] a
knowledge or judgment of the appa­
rent signs of a distemper, or a skill by
which the present condition of a distem­
per is perceived, and this is threefold, 
viz. a right judgment of the part affect­
ed; 2. of the disease itself; 3. of its
cause.

DIAGONAL [with
Geo­
metricians] a line, drawn a­
cross any figure from angle
to angle; sometimes called
the diameter diagonal; and
sometimes it signifies a parti­
cular parallelogram, or long
square that has one common angle and
diagonal line, with the principal paral­
lelogram.

Image omitted.



DIAGONAL Line [with
Geo­
metricians] a line, drawn a­
cross any figure from angle
to angle; sometimes called
the diameter diagonal; and
sometimes it signifies a parti­
cular parallelogram, or long
square that has one common angle and
diagonal line, with the principal paral­
lelogram.

Image omitted.



DIAGONAL Scale, and the Plain
Scale, serve to represent any numbers
and measures whatever, the parts of
which are equal to one another; thus
gunners make use of a scale, or take
the dimension of a piece of ordnance, 
Engravers have a scale or rule to make
a draught of a fortification on paper, 
&c.

DIAGRAM [in Geometry] a scheme
or figure made with lines or circles, for
laying down an explanation or de­
monstration of any proposition or figure
or properties belonging thereto.

DIAGRAPHICE [διαγραφιχὴ, Gr.] the
art of painting or carving on box.  L.



DIAGRYDIUM Scammony, or the
plant or root of scammony prepared by
boiling it in a hollowed quince or with
the juice of a quince, or lemon, or pale
roses.

DIAHYSSOPUM, a medicine made
up of hyssop.

DIAIRIS, a medicine made of the
plant Iris. L,

DIAL PLANES, are plain boards, 
plates or surfaces on which hour lines
are drawn for any latitude, and are di­
stinguished according to the respect they
bear to the horizon of the place where
they are made, and are according to
their position or situation, parallel, per­
pendicular or oblique.

Primary DIALS, are either horizontal
dials or vertical dials.

Moon DIALS, such as shew the hour
of the night by the means of the light
or shadow of the moon projected there
on by an index.

Mural DIALS, such as are placed a­
gainst walls.

Equinoctial DIAL, is one described on
the equinoctial plane, or a plane paral­
lel to the horizon.

Vertical DIAL, is one drawn on the
plane of a vertical circle.

Polar DIAL, is one described on a
plane passing through the poles of the
world and the east and west points of
the horizon.

DILEMMA [with Physicians] a space
between two fevers.  L.

DIALLING [with Miners] is the using
a compass and long line to know which
way the load or vein of oar inclines, 
or where to sink an air-shaft.

DIALLING Line graduated lines
placed on ru­
lers, &c. to expedite the making of sun-­
dials.

DIALLING Scales graduated lines
placed on ru­
lers, &c. to expedite the making of sun
dials. 

DIALACCA, a medicine made of
Lacca or Gum-lac.

DIALTHEA [διαλθαία, Gr.] an un­
guent, the chief ingredient of which is
Althæa.

DIALYSIS [διάλυσις, Gr.] a figure in
Rhetorick when two points are placed
by Grammarians over two vowels in one
word, which would otherwise make a
diphthong; but are by this character
(‥) pointed into two.

DIAMASTIGOSIS [διαμαστιγώσις, of 
μαστιγὼν, i. e. whipping, Gr.] a solemni­
ty in honour of Diana, as follows. Cer­
tain boys were carried to the altar of
the goddess, and there severely whipp'd, 
and left the officer should out of com­
passion remit any thing of the rigour of
it, the priestess of Diana stood by all the
time, holding in her hand the image of
the goddess, which was of itself very
light; but (as they relate) if the boys
were spared, grew so weighty, that
the priestess was scarce able to support
it; and left the boys should faint under
the correction, or do any thing unwor­
thy of the Laconian education, their
parents were present to exhort them
to undergo it patiently, and with great
constancy; and so great was the brave­
ry and resolution of the boys, that tho'
they were lash'd till the blood gush'd
out, and sometimes to death, yet a cry
or groan was seldom or never heard to
proceed from any of them. Those that
dy'd under the ceremony were buried
with garlands on their heads, in token
of joy or victory, and had the honour
of a publick funeral.

DIAMETER of a Column [in Archi­
tecture] is that taken just above the
bases.

DIAMETER of the swelling [in Ar­
chitecture] is that taken at the height of
one third from the base.

DIAMETER of the Diminution [Ar­
chitecture] is that taken from the top of
the shafts.

DIAMETRICALLY [diametrique­
ment, F. of διάμετρος, Gr.] directly.

DIAMOND [adamas, L. of ἀδαμας,
Gr. diamant, F.] the hardest, most spark­
ling, and most valuable of all precious
stones. The goodness of a diamond
consists in three things, 1. Its lustre or
water. 2. Its weight or bigness, 3. Its
hardness. The Great Mogul of India
has a diamond that weighs 269 3-4ths
carats, valued at 11 millions, 723 thou­
sand, 278 pounds, 14 shillings and 9
pence.

Facet DIAMOND, is one cut in faces
both at top and bottom, and whose ta­
ble or principal place at the top is flat.

Rose DIAMOND, is one that is quite
flat underneath; but whose upper part
is cut in divers little faces, usually tri­
angles, the upper part of which termi­
nates in a point.

A rough DIAMOND, is one just as it
comes out of the mines that has not yet
been cut.

A Table DIAMOND, is one which
has a large square face at the top en­
compassed with four lesser.

Temple DIAMONDS [so called of the
Temple in Paris in France, where they
are made] are a sort of factitious dia­
monds, of no great value, but us'd
much in the habits of the actors upon
the stage.



DIAMORON, a confection made of
mulberries.

Simple DIAMORUM [of διὰ and mo­
rum, L. a mulberry] a medicinal compo­
sition made of mulberry juice and sugar.

Compound DIAMORUM [in Pharmacy]
is made of mulberry juice, sapa, ver­
juice, myrrh and saffron.

DIAMOSCHUM, a medicinal pow­
der whose chief ingredient is musk.

DIANA, or the Moon, was repre­
sented with three heads, the one of a
dog, the second of a horse, the third
of a man, to shew the different effects
of the moon, in heaven, on earth, and
in hell, or in the bosom of the earth.

Diana had three names, as Luna the
moon in heaven, Diana on earth, and
Proserpina in hell; as Diana she was
accounted the goddess of woods and
mountains, and of huntsmen, and there­
fore was painted armed with bows and
arrows, attended with sixty maids or
nymphs; she was accounted also the
goddess of child-bearing, virginity and
dancing. She was also painted with
yellow hair, a grass green mantle trim­
med with silver, buskins of silver, with
a golden bow and quiver of painted co­
lours, with a crescent or new moon on
her head. She is sometimes drawn
hunting a stag, and at other times sit­
ting cross-leg'd, denoting her virginity;
with her bow and arrows in a quiver
of painted colours, in a silver chariot, 
drawn by two white stags; and some­
times by two horses, one black and the
other white. On her shoulders were
two wings, to express her swiftness, 
and in her hands were a lion and a leo­
pard. The ancient Britons ador'd Di­
ana, who is said to have had a temple
in the place where St. Paul's church
now stands. She had various temples;
but that at Ephesus was accounted one
of the wonders of the world, it was 200
years in building, being 423 foot long, 
and 220 broad, supported with 127 pil­
lars of marble 70 foot high, 27 of
which were curiously engraven, and all
the rest of polished marble.

DIANA, was adored at Ephesus under
another form.

Her statue was covered with breasts, 
from head to foot, and sometimes her
bosom only, and her belly were cover­
ed with them, and all besides was a
kind of pedestal adorn'd with stags heads
and those of dogs and oxen described
with half their bodies.

The breasts were an emblem of her
fertility and shew'd that she was a nurse
to men and beasts.

The heads of dogs and stags intimat­
ed that she was the goddess of hunting.

She was worshipped in Palestine, in
the time of Isaiah and Jeremiah the
prophets, under the name of Meni, 
i. e. the goddess of months or the
moon.

Bread and liquors were offered to her
upon altars at the corners of the streets
in the beginning of every month, she
was likewise adored under the name of
the queen of Heaven, and cakes were
offered to her upon the platforms on
the tops of houses at the corners of the
streets, &c. Jer. 7. and 18. 11. 13. 44.
17. 18. Ezek. 16. 25.

DIANGEOPOLYSPERMOUS [of
δὶς, ἀγγεῖον, πολὺ and σπέρμα, Gr.] hav­
ing two seed vessals containing many
seeds.

DIANISUM a medicine made of ani­
seeds.  L.

DIANUCUM [Pharmacy] a kind of
Rob, made of the juice of green walnuts
and sugar boiled to the consistence of
honey.

DIAOLIBANUM, a medicine made
of Olibanum.

DIAPALMA, a kind of salve.  L.

DIAPAPAVER, a medicine made of
poppies.  L.

DIAPASMA [διαπάσμα, of διαπάσ­
σω, Gr.] a composition of powders, with
which the ancients us'd to dry their bo­
dies from sweat at their coming out of
the baths.

DIAPASON [of διὰ and πασῶν, all, 
Gr.] a chord in musick including all
tones, and is the same with what is
commonly called an octave or eighth;
because there is but seven tone notes, 
and then the eighth is the same again
with the first. It is the most perfect
concord, and the terms of it are as two
to one.

DIAPASONDIAEX [with Musicians]
a sort of concord, either as 10 to 3 or
as 16 to 5.

DIAPASONDIAPENTE, a com­
pound consonance in the triple ratio, 
or as 3 to 9.

DIAPASONDIATESSARON a com­
pounded concord, sounded to the pro­
portion of 8 to 3.

DIAPASONDITONE, a concord, 
the terms of which are in proportion
of 5 to 2.

DIAPASONSEMIDITONE, a con­
cord, the terms of which are in propor­
tion of 12 to 5.

DIAPEDIASIS [with Anatom.] a
breaking of the blood vessels; a sweat­
ing or bursting out of the blood thro'



the veins which is caused by their thin­
ness.

DIAPENTE [δνάπεντε, i. e. of five
Gr.] a physical composition made up of
five ingredients, viz. myrrh, gentian, 
birth-wort, shavings of ivory and bay­
berries: also the liquor called punch.

DIAPENTE [in Musick] the second of
the concords; the terms of which are as
3 to 2, otherwise called a perfect fifth, 
and makes up an octave with the Dia­
tessaron.

DIAPRE [in Heraldry]
a dividing of
a field into planes or com­
partments after the manner
of fret-work, and filling
them with figures of various forms, as
in the figure annexed.

Image omitted.



DIAPER [in Heraldry]
a dividing of
a field into planes or com­
partments after the manner
of fret-work, and filling
them with figures of various forms, as
in the figure annexed.

Image omitted.

 

DIAPHANEITY [diaphaneté, F. of διαφα­
νεια, Gr.] the property of a diaphanous
body, i. e. one that is transparent like
glass; the humours of the eye; the
Tunica Cornea, &c. The pores of dia­
phanous bodies, are so ranged and dis­
posed, that the beams of light can pass
thro' them freely every way.

DIAPHANOUSNESS [diaphaneté, F. of διαφα­
νεια, Gr.] the property of a diaphanous
body, i. e. one that is transparent like
glass; the humours of the eye; the
Tunica Cornea, &c. The pores of dia­
phanous bodies, are so ranged and dis­
posed, that the beams of light can pass
thro' them freely every way. 

DIAPHOENICON, an electuary
whose chief ingredient is dates.  L.

DIAPHONICKS [of διαφονέω, Gr.] a
science that explains the properties of
refracted sounds, as they pass through
different mediums.

DIAPHONIA [with Rhetor.] a figure
when a word repeated is used in a sig­
nification different from what it was at
first.

DIAPHORETICK [διαφορητιχὸς, Gr.]
dicussive, that disolves by sweat, &c.

DIAPHORETICALNESS, a property
to cause sweat.

DIAPHRAGM [diaphragma, L. of
διαφράγμα, of διαφράττω to inclose, Gr.]
a fence or hedge set between.

DIAPHRAGMATICK Artery [Anat.]
one that issues from the trunk of the
Aorta, and goes from thence to the
Diaphragma.

DIAPOMPHOLYGOS [of διά, and
πόμφολυξ, Gr. the recrement of brass] an
unguent of which that is an ingredi­
ent.

DIAPRUNUM, an electuary made of
damask prunes, &c.

DIAPYETICKS, medicines promo­
ting the suppuration of swellings, and
causing them to run with matter, or
ripening or breaking sores. &c.

DIAPHTHORA [διαφθοῤα, Gr.] cor­
ruption of any part.

DIARRHODON [in Pharmacy] a name
given to several compositions wherein
red roses are an ingredient.

DIASATYRION, an electuary where­
of the chief ingredient is Satyrion or
Rag-wort.

DIASEBESTEN [in Pharmacy] an e­
lectuary wherein Sebestes are the basis.

DIASENNA, a composition made of
Senna.

DIASPOLETICUM, a medicine made
of Cummin.

DIASTEM [in Antient Musick] a
name given to a simple interval, in con­
tradiction to a compound interval which
they call a system.

DIASTOLE [with Rhet.] a figure, 
when between two words some other
word, and sometimes two words, are
put between two words of the kind; as, 
Dii mea vota, Dii audire Lyce, Horace, 
Duc age, duc ad nos &c. This figure is
by the Latins called Separatio.

DIASTREMMA [of διαστρέφω, Gr.] to
turn aside] a distortion or laxation.

DIATASIS [of διατείνω, Gr. to stretch
out] a distension of any sort particularly
of a limb in case of a fracture.

DIATERETICA [διατήρησις, Gr.] the
art of preserving health.

DIATERESIS [of διατὴρησις, Gr.] a
good constitution of the bones, when
they are apt to move easily and strongly, 
such as the arms, hands, &c.

DIATHAMERON, a compound of
dates.

DIATONICK [of διά and τόνος, Gr.]
as diatonick musick, which see.

DIATURBITH, an electuary of Tur­
bith.

DIAXYLALOES, a medicine made of
the wood of aloes.  L.

DICACIOUSNESS [dicacitas, L.] tal­
kativeness; also buffoonery, drollery.

DICE [διχή, Gr. equity] one of the
attendants upon Jupiter (according to
the heathen theology) the other was AI­
DOS, reverence, intimating that justice
in a prince will ever command reverence
in, and obedience from his subjects.

DICHOPHYA [of δίχα double, and
φύω Gr. to grow] a fault in the hairs
when they split.

DICHORÆUS [διχόρειος, Gr. i. e.
compounded of two choreus's] a foot in
verse, either Greek or Latin, which con­
sists of four syllables, of which the first
and third are long, and the second and
fourth short, as Comprobare.

DICHOTOMIST [of διχοτομία, Gr.]
one who divides a thing into two parts.

DICÆOLOGY [διχαιολογία, Gr.] a
pleading one's cause, and advocating
for.



DICOTYLEDON [with Botanists] a
term used of plants, which spring with
two seed leaves opposite to each other, 
as the generality of plants have.

DICTATION, a pronouncing or dic­
tating of any thing to another man to
be written by him.

DICTATOR a person who directs
another what to write.

DICTATOR [with the antient Ro­
mans] a magistrate elected in the great
emergencies of the state, whose office
held 6 months and no longer, during
which time he acted like an absolute
monarch, so that from his sentence there
lay no appeal, not even in cases of life
and death.

Application was never made to this
magistrate but in cases that were difficult
and dangerous, when affairs could not
well be managed the usual way.

There were 24 axes borne before the
dictator, whereas a consul had but 12.

DICTATORSHIP [dictatura, L.] the
office and dignity of a dictator.

DICTATORY [dictatorius, L.] per­
taining to a dictator, or dictating.

DICTATRIX, a she-dictator or indi­
ter, &c.  L.

DICTYOIDES [of δίχτυον a net, and
εῖδος shape, Gr.] a muscle, &c. in form
resembling a net.

DIDACTICALLY [of didactique, F.
didacticus, L. of διδαχτιχος of διδάσχω,
Gr. to teach] instructively.

DIDYMOITOKIA [διδυμοιτοχία of
διδυμοι twins and τοχέω, Gr. to bring
forth] a bearing twins.

DE DIE IN DIEM, from day to day.
 L.

DIERESIS [διαιρησις of διαρέω Gr.] the
making, two syllables into one.

DIERESIS [with Surgeons] a separa­
tion of parts which are unnaturally
joined together and are an hindrance
to a cure.

DIERESIS [with Anatomists, &c] a
 consumpition of the canals or vessels
of an animal body, either by having
some passages made that should not have
been, or by the dilation of the natural
passages beyond their natural state, by
which the juices which should be con­
tained in them extravase or run over.

DIES a day.  L.

DIES comitiales [among the Romans]
days of meeting of the people, marked
in the almanack or calendar with the
letter C.

DIES comperendini [among the Romans]
days of adjournment, being in number
20, which were granted by the prætor or
judge to the parties, after a hearing on
both sides, either to inform more fully, 
or to clear themselves.

DIES fasti [among the Romans] plead­
ing days, during which the prætor might
hold a court, and administer justice.  L.

DIES festi [among the Romans] holy
days, upon which the people were ei­
ther employed in offering sacrifices, or
else following their diversions.

DIES intercisi [among the Ro­
mans] part of
which was spent in the performance of
sacred rites, and the other part in the
adminstration of justice, and were mar­
ked in their calender with the letters
E.N.

DIES interocisi [among the Ro­
mans] part of
which was spent in the performance of
sacred rites, and the other part in the
adminstration of justice, and were mar­
ked in their calender with the letters
E.N.

DIES Justi [among the Romans] 30
days, commonly granted to enemies, af­
ter the proclamation of war against them
before the expiration of which time, 
they did not enter their territories, or
proceed to any act of hostility.

DIES Nesasti [among the Romans] days
counted unlucky, on which they heard
no law matters, nor called any assem­
blies of the people.

DIES Plæliares [among the Romans]
certain days, during which it was per­
mitted to engage an enemy.  L.

DIES non Prœliares [among the Ro­
mans] unlucky
or unfortunate days, on which they
avoided fighting a battle, on account of
some loss they had suffered on those
days.  L.

DIES atri [among the Ro­
mans] unlucky
or unfortunate days, on which they
avoided fighting a battle, on account of
some loss they had suffered on those
days.  L.

DIES Senatorii [among the Romans]
days on which the senate assembled a­
bout the affairs of the commonwealth.

DIES Stati [Law term] the last day of
adjournment in law suits.  L.

DIESPITER [as some think of dies
pater, L. i. e. the father of the day; or
as others of διός the gen. of ζεὺς or δέὺ
i. e. father Jupiter] a name given to Ju­
piter.

DIETETICK, pertaining to a regular
or prescribed diet.

DIETICAL [of diæta, L. διαιτα, Gr.]
appertaining to a prescribed food, or a
method of eating and drinking.

DIFFERENCE [with Logicians] is an
essential attribute, which belongs to any
specie, which is not found in the Genus, 
and is the universal idea of that species.
As for example, body and spirit or soul in
human nature, are two species of sub­
stance, which in their ideas do contain
something more than is in that sub­
stance; for in a body is found impenetra­
bility and extension, in a soul or spirit the
power of cogitation, of thinking and
reasoning; and thence the difference of



a body is impenetrable extension, and
the difference of a spirit is cogitation.

DIFFERENCES [in Heraldry] are cer­
tain additaments to coats of armour, 
whereby something is added and alter'd
to distinguish the younger families from
the elder; or to shew how far they re­
move from the principal house. These
differences are 9, viz. the Label, the
Crescent, the Mullet, the Martlet, the
Annulet, the Flower de-lis, the Rose, the
Eight-foil, and the Cross-moline; all
which see in their places.

Antient DIFFERENCES [in Coat Ar­
mour] were bordures of all kinds.

Modern DIFFERENCES [in Coat Ar­
mour] are the crescent, file, or label, mul­
let, martlet, &c.

DIFFERENTIAL of any quantity, is
the fluxion of that quantity.

DIFFERENTIAL Quantity [in the
higher Geometry] an infinitely small quan­
tity, or particle of a quantity so small as
to be incommensurable thereto, or less
than an assignable one.

DIFFERENTIAL calculus [Geo.] a
method of differencing quantities, that is
of finding a differential or that infinitely
small quantity, which taken an infinite
number of times is equal to a given quan­
tity.

DIFFERENTIAL [in the doctrine of
Logarithms] the doctrine of tangents.

DIFFERENTIO-DIFFERENTIAL
calculus, is a method of differencing
differential quantities, as the sign of a
differential is the letter d, that of a dif­
ferential of d x, is d d x, and the diffe­
rential of d d x, d d d x or d 2 x, d 3 x, 
&c.

A DIFFERENTIAL [of the first pow­
er or degree] is that of an ordinary
quantity, as d x.

A DIFFERENTIAL [of the second
power] is an infinitesimal or a differen­
tial quantity of the first degree, as d d x
or d x d x, or d x a, &c.

A DIFFERENTIAL [of the third
power, &c.] is an infinitesimal or a
differential quantity of the second pow­
er, as d d d x, or d x 3, &c.

DIFFERENTNESS [of differentia, 
L.] difference.

DIFFICULTNESS [difficulté, F. of
difficultas, L.] hardness to be perform­
ed, trouble, a difficult case, point or 
question.

To DIFFIDE [diffidere, L.] to mis­
trust, to doubt, to despair.

DIFFIDENTNESS [of diffidentia,
L.] distrust, suspiciousness.

To DIFFIND [diffindere, L.] to cut 
or cleave asunder.

DIFFISSION, a cleaving asunder.

DIFFLUENCY [diffluentia, L.] a
flowing abroad, or divers ways.

DIFFLUENT [diffluens, L.] loose
and ready to fall asunder.

DIFFLUOUS [diffluus, L.] flowing
forth; abroad or several ways.

To DIFFUND [diffundere, L.] to
pour out, to scatter abroad; also to
diffuse or spread abroad.

DIFFUSEDNESS [of diffusus, L.] the
being poured forth.

DIFFUSE [diffusus, L.] diffusive.

DIFFUSION, a pouring out; a
spreading abroad.  L.

DIFFUSION [with Philosophers] is
the dispersing the subtil effluvia's of
bodies into a kind of atmosphere quite
round them; as for example, the mag­
netical particles are diffused every
where round about the earth in parts
adjacent to it. And the light is diffused
by the rays of the sun, issuing all round
from that wonderful body of fire.

To DIGEST [with Surgeons] to bring
to maturity, to ripen.

DIGESTIBLENESS, easiness to be 
digested.

DIGESTIVENESS [of digestivus, L.]
digestive faculty.

DIGESTIVES [in Physicks] are such
medicines as cause digestion, by strength­
ening and increasing the tone of the sto­
mach.

DIGITATED [in Botany] a term
apply'd to the leaves of plants which
are either composed of many simple
leaves, set together upon one foot-stalk, 
as in the Cinque-foil, Vetches, &c. or
else, when there are many deep gashes
or cuts in the leaf, as in those of Straw­
berries, Hops, &c.

To DIGITIZE, to point with the
finger.

DIGITS [in Arithmetick] are any
whole number under ten, as 1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, are called digits.  L.

DIGLYPH [Architecture] a kind of
imperfect triglyph, console or the like, 
with only 2 channels or engravings.

DIGNIFIEDNESS [of dignus worthy, 
and fio, L. to make] dignity.

DIIPOLIA [Διιπολεία of διι Jupiter, 
and πολιεῖ, protector of the city, Gr.]
an Athenian festival, on which it was
customary to place sacrifice-cakes on a
brazen table, and to drive a number of
oxen round them, of which if any eat of
the cakes he was slaughtered; and
thence sometimes the feast was called
βουφόνια, i. e. ox-slaughter. The origi­
nal of this custom was, that on one of
Jupiter's festivals, a hungry ox hap­



pened to eat one of the consecrated
cakes, whereupon the priest killed the
prophane beast. On the days of this
festival, it was accounted a capital crime
to kill an ox, and therefore the priest
that killed the ox, was forced to save
himself by a timely flight, and the Athe­
nians in his stead, took the bloody axe
and arraigned it, and (as Pausanias re­
lates) brought it in not guilty; but
Ælian says, that both priest and people, 
who were present at the solemnity, 
were accused as being accessory to the
fact; but were acquitted, and the axe
condemn'd.

DILATABLENESS, capableness of
being widened.

DILATATION [in Physicks] a mo­
tion in the parts of a body whereby it
expands itself to a greater bulk than
usual. This is by some confounded
with rarefaction, which is erroneous in
this that rarefaction is an expansion of
a body caused by heat; whereas dila­
tation is effected by its own elasticity, 
when it has been compressed by a great­
er bulk than usual.

DILATATORIUM [with Surgeons)
an instrument to open any part, as the
mouth, womb or fundament.  L.

DILIGENTNESS [diligentia, L.]
great care, carefulness.

DILUENTIA [with Physicians] me­
dicines, &c. good to dilute and thin the
blood.  L.

DILUTE [in Botanick Writers] faint­
ly; dilutius, more faintly.  L.

DILUTED [dilutus, L.] tempered
with water, made thin, &c.

DILUTENESS, faintness, weakness, 
spoken of Colours.

DIMINISHED Interval [in Musick] a
deficient interval, or one which is short
of its just quantity by a lesser semitone.

DIMINUTIONS [with Heralds] a
Latin term for what we commonly call
differences and the French brisures.

DIMINUTION [with Musicians] is
when there are a number of words
which are to make tones, and several
quick motions in the space of a cadence;
several quavers and semiquavers corres­
ponding to a crochet or minim.

DIMINUTION [with Rhetoricians]
is the augmenting and exaggerating
what they are about to say, by an ex­
pression that seems to weaken and di­
minish it.

DIMOCRITÆ [of διὰ and μείρω, Gr.
to divide] a name given to the sect of
Apollinarists, who held that the word
only assum'd a human body, without
taking a reasonable soul like to ours;
but at length being convinc'd of their
error, they allowed he did assume a
soul, but without understanding; the
word supplying the want of that facul­
ty. And from this notion of separat­
ing the soul from the understanding
they had this denomination.

DIONYSIA [Διονυσια, Gr. of Διόνυ­
σιος Bacchus] festivals in honour of
Bacchus, in some of which it was custo­
mary for the worshippers in garments
and actions to imitate the poetical ficti­
ons concerning Bacchus. They dress'd
themselves in fawn's skins, fine linen, 
and mitres; carried thyrsi, pipes, flutes, 
drums and rattles; and crowned them­
selves with garlands of trees sacred to
Bacchus, as ivy, vine, &c. Some imitated
Silenus, Pan, and the satyrs, exposing
themselves in comical dresses, and used
antic motions; some rode upon asses, 
others drove goats to the slaughter. And
thus both sexes ran about hills, deserts, 
and other places, wagging their heads, 
dancing in ridiculous postures, filling
the air with hideous noises and yelling, 
personating distracted persons, and cal­
ling out upon Bacchus.

On one of these solemnities, some
carried sacred vessels; after which a
number of honourable virgins followed, 
carrying golden baskets filled with all
manner of fruit; which was the myste­
rious part of the solemnity.

DIONYSIAS [διονύσιας, Gr.] a pre­
cious stone having red spots, accounted
efficacious for preventing drunkenness.

DIONYSIONYMPHAS [of διονύσια
and νυμφὴ Gr.] a certain herb supposed
to resist drunkenness.

DIONYSISCI, [of Dionysius a name of
Bacchus, who was frequently described
by the ancients with horns] such per­
sons who have bony prominences on
their temples.

DIPETALOUS Flower [with Bota­
nists] is that which has two flower
leaves, as Inchanters Night-shade.

DIPSAS, a serpent so named [Hiero­
glyphically] was put to signify an unsa­
tiable desire and greediness after any
thing; because 'tis related, that its bite
causeth such a thirst, that nothing is
able to allay it.

DIPHRYGES [in Pharmacy] the sco­
ria, sediment, or calx of melted copper, 
gathered in the furnace when the me­
tal is run out.

DIPTYCHA [δίπτυχα, Gr. of δὶς
and πτύξω, future of
ϖτύσσω, Gr. to plait or fold, q. d. a book
folded into 2 leaves] a publick register
wherein were written the names of
the consuls and other magistrates a­
mong the heathens, and of bishops and
defunct, as well as the surviving bre­
thren among the Christians.

DYPTYCHA [δίπτυχα, Gr. of δὶς
and πτύξω, future of
ϖτύσσω, Gr. to plait or fold, q. d. a book
folded into 2 leaves] a publick register
wherein were written the names of



the consuls and other magistrates a­
mong the heathens, and of bishops and
defunct, as well as the surviving bre­
thren among the Christians.

Sacred DIPTYCHS [in the Greek
church] a double catalogue, in one of
which was written the names of the li­
ving, and the other those of the dead, 
which were to be rehearsed during the
office.

The Diptychs were a sort of tables or
tablets, alike in figure to the two tables
of stone, on one of which were written
the names of the deceased, on the other
the names of the living, for whom
prayers were to be offered.

In these were enter'd the names of
bishops who had govern'd their flocks
well, and they were never expunged
out of the same, unless they were con­
victed of heresy or some other gross
crime. In the Diptychs were likewise
enter'd the names of those that had
done any signal service to the church, 
whether they were living and dead, and
mention was made of them in the li­
turgy.

DIPYRENOUS [with Botanists]
which has two seeds or kernels, as li­
gustrum, privet.

DIRÆ [according to the Poets] the
furies of Hell, having fiery eyes, a fierce
countenance, their heads dress'd with
snakes, holding in their hands iron
chains, scourges and burning torches, 
to punish the guilty.

DIREFULNESS [of dirus, L. and
fulneſſe, Sax.] dreadfulness.

DIRENESS [of dirus and neſſe, 
Sax.] dreadfulness.

DIRECT [in Opticks] Direct Vision
is that perform'd by direct rays: In con­
tradistinction to vision by refracted or
reflected rays.

DIRECT Vision, is the subject of Op­
ticks, which prescribes the laws and
rules thereof.

DIRECT [in matters of Genealogy] is
understood of the principal line for the
line of ascendants and descendents in
contradistinction to the collateral line.

Angle of DIRECTION [Mechanicks]
is that comprehended between the lines
of direction of two conspiring powers.

DIRECTION [of the Loadstone] is
that property whereby the magnet al­
ways presents one of its sides towards
one of the poles of the world, and the
opposite side to the other pole.

Magnetical DIRECTION, the tenden­
cy or turning of the earth, and all mag­
netical bodies to certain points.

DIRECTNESS [of directus, L.] strait­
ness of way.

DIRECTOR [with Surgeons] a hol­
low instrument used to guide the inci­
sion knife.

DIRECTORY, a sort of regulation
for religious worship drawn up by the
assembly of divines by order of the par­
liament in 1644. The design of which
was, that the ministers might not be
wholly at a loss in their devotions, af­
ter the Common Prayer had been put
down.

This gave some general hints, which
were to be us'd at discretion, for the
directory prescribed no form of prayer, 
nor of external worship, nor requir'd
the people to make any responses, but
Amen.

DIRGE [probably of dyrken, Teut.
to command or praise] a song of lamen­
tations sung at funerals.

To DISABLE [of dis negat. and able
of habilis, L.] to render unable.

DISADVANTAGEOUSNESS preju­
dicialness, &c.

DISAFFECTEDNESS. disaffection.

DISAGREEABLENESS, disagreeable
quality.

DISALLOWABLENESS, the not be­
ing allowable.

To DISARM [with Horsemen] as to
disarm the lips of a horse, is to keep
them subject, and out from above the
bars, when they are so large as to cover
the bars, and prevent the pressure or
appui of the mouth, by bearing up the
bit, and so hindering the horse from
feeling the effects of it upon the bars.

DISASTROUSNESS [of disastre, F.]
unluckiness, unfortunateness.

To DISBARK [debarquer, F.] to dis­
embark, to come or bring out of a ship.

DISBUDDING of Trees [with Garde­
ners] is the taking away the branches
or sprigs that are newly put forth, that
are ill-placed, &c.

DISBURTHENING Fruit-trees, is the
taking off the too great number of
leaves and fruit, that those which re­
main may grow the larger.

DISCERNIBLE, that may be discern­
ed or perceived.

DISCERNIBLENESS, visibleness.

DISCERNING, an act of the mind, 
whereby it distinguishes between ideas.

DISCERNMENT [discernement, F.]
the discerning faculty, discretion, judg­
ment.

DISCERPIBLENESS, capableness or
aptness to be pull'd in pieces.

DISCOIDAL [of discus, L.] in the
form of a disk or quoit.

DISCOIDES [with Botonists] a term
used when the middle part of the flower



is compounded of small hollow flowers, 
and the whole formed into a sort of flat­
tish knob, a little rising in the middle, 
like a discus or quoit of the ancients.
Of these some have downy seed, as
Star-wort, Groundsel, Helychrysum, &c.

DISCOIDES [of δίσχος a quoit, and
εἶδος shape, Gr.] an epithet given to
the chrystalline humour of the eye.

DISCOMMENDABLENESS [of dis
neg. and commendabilis, L.] undeserv­
ingness.

DISCOMPOSEDNESS [of decomposé, 
F. of dis neg. and compositus, L.] dis­
quiet of mind.

To DISCONCERT [deconcerter, F.]
to disturb, to disorder, to put out of
countenance, to break the measures.

DISCONSOLATENESS of dis and
consolatio, L.] being without consola­
tion.

DISCONTENTMENT [of dis and
contentement, F.] discontentedness.

DISCONTINUEDNESS [of dis and continuatio, L.] an interruption or break­
ing off.

DISCONTINUITY, a discontinu­
ance.

DISCONTINUOUS [of dis and con­
tinuus, L.] not continued, parted or left
off in the middle or elsewhere.

DISCORDANCY disagreeable­
ness, jarring.

DISCORDANTNESS disagreeable­
ness, jarring.

DISCOVERABLE [of decouvrir, F.]
that may be discovered.

DISCOVERY [in the Drama] a man­
ner of unravelling a plot or fable, very
frequent in comedies, tragedies and ro­
mances, wherein by some unforeseen
accident a discovery is made of the
name, fortune, quality and other cir­
cumstances of a person unknown.

DISCOUNT [in Traffick] is the set­
ting off or abatement of what the inte­
rest comes to at the time when the
money becomes due, on consideration
of present payment.

DISCOURSIVE, discursive. Milton.

Apple of DISCORD, a phrase us'd to
signify the subject or occasion of some
misunderstanding between persons. It
is borrowed from the mythology of the
poets, who feign that at the wedding
Peleus and Thetis, the goddess of
Discord threw an apple, on which were
written these words, To the Fairest,
which caus's a dissension between Juno,
Pallas and Venus, each pretending a title
to it. This apple was afterwards a­
warded to Venus by Paris, the goddesses
having all made him the arbitrator.

DISCOUS Flower [with Florists] is a
compound flower, having a disk of flo­
rets.

A naked DISCOUS Flower [with Flo­
rists] is that which has a disk without
any rays, as in tansy, &c.

A Radiate DISCOUS Flower [with
Florists] is that which has its disk
encompassed with a ray, as is in the
sun-flower.

DISCREPANCY [discrepantia, L.] dis­
agreement.

DISCRETE Proportions [in Arithme­
tick] is when the ratio or reason be­
tween two pairs of numbers is the
same, but there is not the same propor­
tion between all the four numbers;
thus if the numbers 6, 8, ∷ 3, 4, be
considered, the ratio between the first
pair 6 and 8, is the same as that be­
tween 3 and 4, and therefore these num­
bers are proportional; but it is only
discretely or disjunctly, for 6 is not to
8 as 8 is to 3, i. e. the proportion is
broken off between 8 and 3, and is not
continued all along, as in these follow­
ing which are continued proportionals, 
viz. 3, 6, 12, 24.

DISCRETE Quantity, is such as is not
continued and joined together, as Num­
ber, whose parts being distinct cannot
be united into one continuum; for in a
continuum there are no actual determi­
nate parts before division, but they are
potentially infinite.

DISCRIMINABLE [of discrimino, L.]
that may be discriminated or distin­
guished from some other thing.

DISCRIMINATENESS, distinguish­
ingness, distinctness.

DISCURSIVE [discursorius, L.]
given to ramble up
and down.

DISCURSORY discursorius, L.]
given to ramble up
and down. 

DISCUSSIVENESS, dissolving or dis­
persing quality.

DISDAINFUL [of dedain, F. and full, 
Sax.] scornful, &c.

DISDAINFULNESS, scornfulness.

DISDIAPASON Diatessaron, a com­
pound concord in the proportion of 16
to 3.

DISDIAPASON Ditone, a compound
consonance in the proportion of 10 to 2.

DISDIAPASON Semi-ditone, a com­
pound concord in the proportion of 24
to 5.

DISEASEDNESS [of des-aisé, F. and
neſſe, Sax.] the having a disease.

To DISENCUMBER [of dis and en­
combrer, F.] to free or rid from encum­
brances.

DISESPOUSED [of dis and espousé, 
F.] discharged from espousals, divorced.

DISESTIMATION, disesteem, dis­
respect.



To DISFURNISH [of dis and fournir, 
F.] to unfurnish.

To DISGORGE [with Farriers] is to
discuss or disperse an inflammation or
swelling.

DISGRACEFUL, bringing disgrace, 
scandalous, reproachful.

DISGRACEFULNESS [of disgrace, F.
and fulneſſe, Sax.] reproach, disho­
nourableness.

DISGUSTFUL [of degoût, F. and full]
unrelishable, causing displeasure.

DISHONOURABLE [deshonnorable, 
F.] disparaging, disgraceful.

DISHONOURABLENESS, dishonou­
rable quality.

DISIDEMONY [δεισιδαιμονία, of
δείδω to fear, and
δαίμον, a dæmon or god] superstition, a
worshipping God out of fear.

DISIDÆMONY [δεισιδαιμονία, of
δείδω to fear, and
δαίμον, a dæmon or god] superstition, a
worshipping God out of fear. 

DISINCORPORATE [of dis and in­
corporare, L.] to disunite or separate
from being one body or corporation.

DISINGENUOUSNESS [of dis and
ingenuitas, L.] want of ingenuity, dissi­
mulation, unsincerity.

DISINTERESSEDNESS, a being free
from self-interestedness.

DISJUNCTIVE [disjunctivus, L.] se­
parating.

DISK [with Florists] is a body of flo­
rets collected together, and forming as
it were a plain surface.

DISLIKE [of dis and like] distaste, 
displeasure, &c.

DISLOYALNESS [deloyauté, F.] an
act committed against fidelity and law;
unfaithfulness, perfidiousness; com­
monly used with respect to one's sove­
raign prince; false dealing, villany.

DISMANTLED [demantelé, F.] hav­
ing the walls pulled down.

DISMAY, terror, amazement, asto­
nishment, fright.

DISORIENTATED [of dis negative
and Oriens the East] turned from the
East.

To DISMISS a Cause [in the Court of
Chancery] is to put it quite out of the
court, without any further hearing.

DISOBLIGINGNESS [action desobli­
geante, F.] displeasing behaviour, &c.

DISPASSIONATE [of dis and passi­
onné, F.] free from passion. Milton.

DISPATCHFUL [of depeché, F.]
quick, making dispatch.

DISPENSATION, by non obstante. If
any statute tends to restrain some Pre­
rogative incident to the person of the
king, as to the right of pardoning, &c.
which are inseparable from the king;
by a clause of non obstante he may dis­
pense with it; was disannulled by stat.
1 W & M.

DISPENSATION [of a Law] is that
which suspends the obligation of a law
it self, and is distinct from the equity
of it, and from the inequitable con­
struction of it; for equity is only the
correction of a law, that is too general
or universal.

DISPERMOS [with Botanists] is a
term used of plants, which bear 2 seeds
after each flower, as Rubia, Madder, 
Pastina, a Parsnip, &c.

DISPERSEDNESS [dispersio, L.] dis­
persion, being in a dispersed state.

DISPERSION [in Dioptricks] the point
of dispersion, is a point from which
refracted rays begin to diverge, when
their refraction renders them diver­
gent.

DISPHENDONOMENA [of διασ­
φενδονάο­
μαι Gr.] a punishment anciently in use
among the Persians, in which they
drew down the tops of two trees to­
gether, and bound the offender to each
of them by the legs, the trees being
unbound, by their force violently tore
the offender in pieces.

DIASPHENDONOMENA [of διασ­
φενδονάο­
μαι Gr.] a punishment anciently in use
among the Persians, in which they
drew down the tops of two trees to­
gether, and bound the offender to each
of them by the legs, the trees being
unbound, by their force violently tore
the offender in pieces. 

DISPLANTING Scoop, an instrument
to take up plants with earth about them.

DISPLAYED [in Blazon­
ry] is a term used of birds, 
and respects the position of
their bodies, as an eagle
display'd, is an eagle dis­
panded or spread out as in
the figure.

Image omitted.



DISPLEASANT [deplaisant, F.] un­
pleasant, displeasing.

DISPLEASEDNESS [deplaisir, F.] af­
front, discourtesy, shrewd turn; dis­
content, dissatisfaction, anger.

To DISPLODE [displodere, L.] to dis­
charge with a loud noise, as a gun.

To DISPOIL [dispoliare, L.] to rob, 
rifle or spoil.

DISPONDÆUS [in Grammar] the foot
of a Latin verse consisting of four sylla­
bles, and those all long, as concludentes;
it being a composition of 2 spondees.

DISPORTING, sporting, diverting, 
playing. Milton.

DISPOSITION [in Rhetorick] is the
distribution of things or arguments in­
vented or found out in their proper or­
der.

DISPOSSESSION [of deposseder, F.
dis and possidere, L.] a being put out of
possession.

DISPROFITABLE [of dis and profi­
table, F.] unprofitable.

DISPROPORTIONABLE, [of dis,
and pro­
portiona­



tus, L. and proportionel, F.] bearing no
proportion to, unequal.

DISPROPORTIONAL [of dis,
and pro­
portiona­
tus, L. and proportionel, F.] bearing no
proportion to, unequal.

DISPROPORTIONATE [of dis,
and pro­
portiona­
tus, L. and proportionel, F.] bearing no
proportion to, unequal.

DISPROPORTIONABLENESS 
 [of
dis­
pro­
portionné, F. and ness, Eng.] the being
not proportionable.

DISPROPORTIONALNESS [of
dis­
pro­
portionné, F. and ness, Eng.] the being
not proportionable.

DISPROPORTIONATENESS [of
dis­
pro­
portionné, F. and ness, Eng.] the being
not proportionable.

DISPUTABLENESS, liableness to be
disputed.

DISPUTATIOUS, prone to dispute.

To DISQUALIFY [of dis neg. and
qualifier, F.] to render unqualified.

DISQUIETNESS, unquietness.

DISQUISITION, a particular in­
quiry into the nature, kind and cir­
cumstances of any problem, question
or topick.

DISRANKED [of dis and rang, F.]
put out of the ranks, disordered.

DISREGARDFUL, negligent, heed­
less, careless.

DISREPUTABLE [of dis and reputa­
tio, L.] not reputable.

DISSATISFACTORINESS, unsatis­
fyingness, &c.

DISSECTION [with Anatomists] the
cutting up or anatomizing the bodies of
animals.

DISSENTANEOUSNESS, disagree­
ableness.

DISSEPIMENT [with Botonists] a
middle partition, whereby the cavity
of the fruit is divided into sorts or cases
or boxes.

DISSERVICEABLENESS, unservi­
ceableness, prejudice, injuriousness, &c.

DISSHEVELLED [dechevelé, F.] ha­
ving the hair hanging loose about the
shoulders.

DISSIMULABLE [dissimulabilis, L.]
that may be dissembled.

DISSIMULATION [Hieroglyphically]
was painted like a lady wearing a vi­
zard of two faces, in a long robe of a
changeable colour, and in her right
hand a magpye.

DISSIMULANCE [dissimulantia, L.]
dissembling.

DISSOLUBLENESS [of dissolubilis, 
L.] capableness of being dissolved.

DISSOLUTION [in Physicks] a dis­
continuation or analysis of the structure
of a mix'd body; whereby what was
one and contiguous is divided into little
parts either homogeneous or hetero­
geneous.

DISSUASIVENESS [of dissuasif, F.]
dissuasive quality, efficacy, &c.

Point of DISTANCE [in Prospective]
a right line drawn from the eye to
the principal point.

Curtate DISTANCE [Astronomy] is the
distance of the planet's place from the
sun, reduced to the ecliptick.

DISTANCE of the Eye [in Prospective]
is a line drawn from the foot of the
line of altitude of the eye, to the point
where a line drawn at right angles to it, 
will intersect the object.

DISTANTNESS, distance, a being
distant from.

DISTASTFUL [of dis, taste and full]
disagreeable to the taste, &c.

DISTASTFULNESS, disagreeable­
ness to the taste.

DISTEMPER, a redness. Milton.

DISTEMPEREDNESS [of dis, tem­
pertes, L. and ness] a being diseased.

DISTILLERS com­
pany. Their armorial
ensigns are azure a fess
wavy argent between a
sun drawing up a cloud, 
distilling drops of rain
proper and a distillatory
double armed or with
2 worms and 2 bolt re­
ceivers argent, the crest an helmet and
torce, a barley garb wreathed about
with a vine branch fruited all proper.
The supporters a Russian and an Indian
in their respective habits. The motto,
Drop as rain, and distil as dew.

Image omitted.



DISTINCT Notion or Idea [accord­
to Mr. Leibnitz] is when a person
can enumerate marks and characters e­
nough whereby to recollect a thing.

DISTINCTNESS [of distinctus, L.
and ness] the being distinct.

DISTRACTION [in Surgery the act
of pulling a fibre, membrane, &c. be­
yond its natural extent, and what is so
pulled or extended is said to be distrac­
ted.

DISTRAINT, a seizure.

DISTRESS [distresse, F.] the act of
distraining goods.

DISTRESS [in Law] signifies the
siezing of a persons goods. A distress
may be made any where intra-feodum, 
except in a church-yard or high-way;
but then it must be something, the pro­
perty of which is in some person or o­
ther, and therefore whatsoever is of
Feræ-naturæ, i. e. wild by nature, as
Bucks, Conies, Dogs, &c. cannot be di­
strained; nor any working tools or
utensils in trade, nor any thing, which
cannot be returned in as good condition
as it was taken; nor any thing affixed
to the free-hold.

A distress must not be made in the
night time except for damage feasant.

Real DISTRESS, is made upon immo­
veable goods.



Grand distress, is a distress made upon
a man's whole estate real and personal, 
or on all the goods and chattles of a
man within the county.

Personal DISTRESS, is upon movea­
ble goods.

Finite DISTRESS, is that limited by
law.

Infinite DISTRESS, is without limi­
tation.

DISTRESSEDNESS [probably of bis
twice, and stringere, L. to bind close 
&c.] being in distress.

To DISTRIBUTE [in Printing] is to
take a form asunder, to separate the
letters and to dispose them in the cases
again, each in its proper cell.

DISTRIBUTIO [in Rhetorick] a fi­
gure, when its peculiar property is ap­
plied to every thing; as robbery to the
hands; wantonness to the eyes, &c.  L.

DISTRIBUTION [with Architects]
is dividing and dispensing the several
parts and pieces, which compose the
plan of the building.

Manual DISTRIBUTION cer­
tain
small sums of money appointed by the
donors, &c. to be distributed to such of
the canons of a chapter as are actually
present and assisting at certain obits and
offices.

Quotidian DISTRIBUTIONS cer­
tain
small sums of money appointed by the
donors, &c. to be distributed to such of
the canons of a chapter as are actually
present and assisting at certain obits and
offices.

DISTRIBUTIVELY [of distributive, 
L.] by way of distribution.

DISTRICHIASIS [διςτριχίασις, Gr.] a
double row of hairs on the eye-lids.

DISTRUSTFULNESS, aptness to be
distrustful.

To DISTURB [disturbare, L.] to
interrupt, to hinder or let; to cross, 
trouble or vex, to disorder or put into
confusion.

DISTURBANCE [disturbatio, L.]
trouble, vexation; disorder, tumult, up­
roar.

To DISVELOP [developer, F.] to
open, unwrap or unfold.

DISVELOPED [in Blazonry] is a term
used to signify displayed; and so with
heralds those colours that in an army
are called flying colours or displayed, 
are said to be disveloped.

To DISUNITE [with Horsemen] a
horse is said to disunite, that drags his
haunches, or that gallops false.

DITRIGLYPH [Architect.] the space
between two triglyphs.

DIVAL [in Heraldry] a term used by
those who blazon by herbs and flowers
(instead of colours and metals) for
Night-shade.

DIVALIA, a feast held by the Romans
in honour of the goddess Angerona. On
this festival the pontifices performed sa­
crifices in the temple of Volupia or the
goddess of joy and pleasure, the same as
Angerona, and which was supposed to
drive away all sorrows and chagrins of
life.

DIVAN [in the Arabick lang. signifi­
es an Estrade or Sofa in the Turkish dia­
lect] it is used not only for a council
chamber or court wherein justice is ad­
ministred to the eastern nations; but is
used also for a hall in private houses.
The Chinese have Divans on purpose
for ceremonies, their customs do not
allow of the receiving of visits in the
inner parts of the house but only in the
entry.

DIVAN Begui [in Persia] one of the
ministers of state who is the controller
of justice. There are Divan Beguis, not
only at court and in the capital, but
also in the provinces, and other cities
in the empire. They are not confined
by any other law or rule in the admi­
nistration of justice but the Alcoran, and
that too he interprets as he pleases.
He only takes cognizance of criminal
cases.

DIVAPORATION, an evaporating
or exhaling.  L.

DIVERSION [with Physicians] the
turning of the course or flux of humours
from one part to another by such ap­
plications as are proper.

DIVERSION [in the art of war] is
when an enemy is attacked in any one
place where he is weak and unprovided, 
with design to make him call his forces
from another place where the general
is going to make an irruption.

DIVERTING, pleasant, delightful, a­
greeable.

DIVERTINGNESS [qualité divertis­
sante, F.] diverting quality.

DIVERTISEMENT [divertissement, 
F.] diversion, pastime, sport, plea­
sure.

DIVEST [of di priv. and vestire, L.
to clothe] to strip off, to unclothe a per­
son, to deprive or take away dignity, 
office, &c.

DIVIDABLE, divisible, capable of
being divided.

DIVIDEND [in Law proceedings] a
dividing of fees and perquisites between
officers, arising by writs, &c.

DIVIDEND [in Companies] is the share
of a proprietor in the sum of money to
be divided among the proprieters, as
profit gained by or interest upon the
stock in proportion to his part thereof.

DIVINATION, There were several
sorts of divinations by water, fire, earth,



air, by the flight of birds and their sing­
ing; by lots, dreams and by the Wind.
As for divination by water, of this we
have an instance in Joseph's cup.

The observations on thunder, light­
ning and meteors may be referr'd to divi­
nations by fire or pyromancy; as also the
operations of the Magi about the fire
which they kept up in their enclosures
or temples call'd Piratheia. Into these
says Strabo 1. 15. they enter every day
and there continue for an hour, practi­
sing enchantments, having a bundle of
small rods in their hands and wearing
bonnets and tiaras of hair so large that
they fall down to their lips.

Divination by the EARTH or Geoman­
cy is common among the Persians, they
impute the invention of it to Edris who
is the same with the patriarch Enoch or
the prophet Daniel.

It consists of making several points
upon a table, prepared for this purpose
which they call Rami, these points dis­
posed in a certain number or many une­
qual lines are likewise described with a
pen on paper: he who takes upon him
to divine by the help of this art is call'd
Rummal. He derives his pretended
knowledge of futurity from the combi­
nation of these points and lines.

Divination by the WAND, mentioned
Ezekiel 21, 22. Strabo speaks of wands or
rods, which the Magi held in their hands
during the religious ceremonies per­
formed by them about their sacred fire.

DIVINELY [divinement, F. divinitus, 
L.] after a divine manner.

DIVINENESS [of divinitas, L. divi­
nite, F.] divine quality.

DIVINIPOTENT [divinipotens, L.]
powerful in divine things.

The Heathen DIVINITIES, may be
reduced to three classes.
Theological DIVINITIES, i. e. such as
represent the divine nature under di­
vers attributes; as Jupiter denotes the
absolute power of god, and Juno his
justice.
Physical DIVINITIES, thus Æolus
represents that power in nature, where­
by vapour, and exhalations are collected
to form winds.
Moral DIVINITIES, thus the Furies, 
Alecto, Mœgara and Tisiphone, are only
the secret reproaches and stings of con­
science.

DIVISIBILITY [divisibilit&eacuté, F.
of  L.] a being
divisible or capable of being divided in­
to several parts, either actually or men­
tally; a passive power or property in
quantity whereby it becomes separable
either actually or at least mentally.

DIVISIBLENESS [divisibilit&eacuté, F.
of  L.] a being
divisible or capable of being divided in­
to several parts, either actually or men­
tally; a passive power or property in
quantity whereby it becomes separable
either actually or at least mentally.

DIVISION [of a mode] divides a qua­
lity into its degrees. Philosophers as
well as physicians suppose 8 degrees in
any quality. Hence when a quality is
said to be in the 8th degree, it denotes
that it cannot be any farther intend­
ed or heightened.

DIVISION [in Marit. Affairs] the
third part of a naval army or fleet, or
of one of the squadrons thereof under
a general officer.

Common DIVISOR. See Common.

Just DIVISOR [in Arithmetick and
Geometry] such number or quantity as
will divide a given number or quantity, 
so as to leave no remainder; so that if
the number 6 be given 1, 2, and 3 will
be the just divisors of it.

DIVORCE [divortium, L.] is with us
of 2 kinds.
1. The first is stiled Divortium a men­
sâ & thore, in which case they are only
separated as to bed and board, and the
wife is allowed a maintenance out of
the estate of her husband.
2. The second is stiled divortium a
vinculo matrimonii in which case the wo­
man recieves her fortune back again, 
and both parties are set free from all
obligations to one another.

DIURETICALNESS, diuretick qua­
lity.

DIURNALNESS [of diurnalis, L.] the
happening daily.

DIURNAL Circle, is an immoveable
circle, in which any star or point in the
surface in the mundane sphere moves
by a diurnal motion.

DIURNALIS [in Law] as much land
as can be ploughed in a day by an ox.

DIURNARY [in the Greek empire]
an officer who wrote down in a book for
that purpose whatever the prince did, 
ordered and regulated, &c. every day.

DOCED a musical instrument
commonly called a
dulcimer.

DOUCET a musical instrument
commonly called a
dulcimer.

DOCK [in Law] a means or
expedient for cutting
off an estate in tail, in lands or tene­
ments; that the owner may be able to
sell, give or bequeath them.

DOCKING [in Law] a means or
expedient for cutting
off an estate in tail, in lands or tene­
ments; that the owner may be able to
sell, give or bequeath them.

DOCTILOQUOUS [doctiloquus, L.]
speaking learnedly.

DOCTORSHIP [of doctor, L. and ship
of ſcip, Sax.] the office or dignity of a
doctor.

DOCUMENT [in Law] a proof gi­
ven of any fact asserted; but chiefly with
regard to ancient matters.

DOCUMENTAL, of or pertaining to
instruction, &c.



DODECADACTYLON [of δωδέχα
twelve and δάχτυλος, Gr. a finger]
the duodenum, so called, because it was
supposed to be twelve fingers length.

DODECAGON [of δω­
δεχα and γωνία, Gr. a cor­
ner] in Geometry, a figure
with twelve sides and as
many angles as in the fi­
gure.

Image omitted.



DODECAGON [In Fortification] a
place fortified with twelve bastions.

DODONÆUS, a title of Jupiter, given
him from Dodona a mountain of Chaonia
in the region of the Molossi, near which
was a grove of oaks sacred to him, and
esteemed the most ancient oracle of
Greece. But how these oracles were
delivered is a controversy, whether by
2 doves that spoke, or by the leaves of
the oaks themselves, which are stori­
ed to have been vocal.

A DOG with a diadem on his head [Hi­
eroglyphically] represented a law-giver
and a diligent prince; because the na­
ture of a dog teacheth us watchfulness, 
diligence and care in our employments, 
obedience and love to our superiors, and
faithfulness to our trust. A man with
a dog's head, is the representation of
an impudent fellow.

A DOG [Hieroglyphically] with the
Egyptians, having his tail lifted up signi­
fied victory and courage; and on the con­
trary, holding the tail between his legs
signify'd flight and fear.

A DOG held in a slip, is the emblem
of a soldier the slip denoting the oath
and obligation soldiers are under to
obey.

DOGS, are the most tame, familiar, 
loving and grateful to their masters of
all irrationel creatures, and have all
the good qualities that belong to a ser­
vant, as fidelity, affection, and obedi­
ence; and therefore the ancient Romans
represented their Lares or houshold
gods by dogs.

DOGS, are bold or resolute, especi­
ally in revenging the wrong offered to
their master; and with respect to their
watchfulness and zeal in defending and
keeping the houses and goods of their
benefactors, they may be compared to
those who are intrusted by their princes
with the government of the most im­
portant places.

They may also represent brave war­
riors, who have driven the enemy out
of the borders of their country; for
we see they are jealous and implacable
against other beasts that will come into
the house they have charge of.

Knights of the DOG and COCK, a
French order of knighthood founded by
king Philip I. upon the occasion of the
duke of Montmorency's coming to court
with a collar full of stags heads, and
having the image of a dog, as the em­
blem of Fidelity, hanging at it.

DOGE [of the republicks of Venice
and Genoa] a principal magistrate; the
office is elective and at Venice is for
life, but at Genoa for two years only;
his children and brothers are excluded
from the principal offices of state, and
are not allow'd to receive any benefices
from the court of Rome, except the
cardinalship, which is only a titular
honour, not having any jurisdiction an­
nexed to it.

He is not allow'd to lay down his of­
fice for his ease, and when he dies the
state does not go in mourning for him, 
and after his death his conduct is very
strictly examined into by 3 inquisitors
and 5 correctors.

He is chief of all councils, and rises
to none but to foreign embassadors; but
when he comes into the council all the
senators and magistrates rise in honour
to him.

The mony of the republick is coined
in his name, but bears neither his effigie
nor arms; but with those of the re­
publick.

All credentials run in his name; but
he does not sign them; this being done
by the secretary of state.

He receives ambassadors, who direct
their dispatches to him; but he is not
allow'd to open them but in the pre­
sence of the counsellors.

And tho' indeed he was formerly in
a manner an absolute prince, yet now
his power has been so retrench'd that
he can do but little of himself, not
even go out of Venice without the con­
currence of the senate.

DOGGEDNESS, churlishness, crab­
bed temper.

DOGGISH, crabbed, currish, surly, 
&c.

DOGMATICAL Medicine, the rati­
onal method of practising physick, such
as Hippocrates and Galen used. And
thence all those physicians who upon
the principles of school-philosophy re­
ject all medicinal virtues, which they
think not reducible to manifest quali­
ties, are called dogmatical physicians,  L.

DOGMATICI those physicians that
confirm their experience by reason.

DOGMES [of δόγμα, Gr.] opinions.

DOLIMAN, a long setanne worn by
the Turks, hanging down to the feet,



with narrow sleeves buttoned at the
wrist.

DOLOUR [dolor, L.] pain, grief, 
sorrow, affliction, torment, anguish.

DOLOSITY [dolositas, L.] hidden
malice.

The DOLPHIN [Hieroglyphically] has
been used to signify a king or emperor
of the sea, because they say this fish is
kind to men, swift in swimming, and
grateful to benefactors.

The DOLPHIN [in Astronomy] is said
to be placed among the stars for this
cause; Neptune had a mind to have Am­
phitrite for his wife; she for modesty
fled to Atlas, being desirous to preserve
her virginity, and, as others had done, 
hid herself. Neptune sent a great many
to her thither to court her for him, 
and among others, Delphinus; and he
loitering about the Atlantick islands, 
happened to meet with her, and by his
persuasions brought her to Neptune, 
who having received her, granted the
greatest honours in the sea to Delphinus
[the Dolphin] and devoted him to him­
self, and placed his effigies among the
stars; and they that have a mind to
oblige Neptune, represent him in effigy
holding a dolphin in his hand, a testi­
mony of his gratitude and benevolence.

DOLPHIN, is reckoned the king of
fishes, as the lion is of beasts, and ma­
ny fabulous stories are told of him.

As that the dolphin is so much ad­
mired and beloved by other fishes, that
they follow him about as their leader
and chief; nay, they go so far as to af­
firm, that when he meets with a
whale, he runs down into his belly, and
turning round comes out again.

Others say, that the female dolphin
has dugs and gives suck to her young, 
to whom she is most loving; that they
have fallen in love with young men, 
have been very familiar with, and dy'd
for grief of the loss of them.

That they out-swim all fishes, and
when in pursuit of any one are drawn
too near the shore, their motion is so
rapid, that they often dash themselves
in pieces against the rocks. That they
observe great order, placing all the
young ones in the van, next to them all
their females, and in the rear the
males, that they may keep the others in
view, and be always in a readiness to
defend them.

These and many more conceits are
written by grave authors, whence some
will have the dolphin to be the emblem
politick prince, who governs his
people with prudence; and others make
him the hieroglyphick of naval power.

But to pass all these conceits, the
greatest honour done to the Dolphin, is
being born by the eldest son of the king
of France; and there is good reason that
that proceeded not from the excellency
of the fish, but from the name only: For
the Dauphins of Viennois, sovereigns of
the province of Dauphine in France, the
last of those princes having no issue, 
gave his dominions to the crown of
France, upon condition that the heir of
the crown should be called Dauphin, 
and ever bear a dolphin for his arms, 
which they have accordingly done ever
since, and so nice in preserving that
bearing to themselves, as never to per­
mit any other subject to bear it. But it
is not so in England, the fishmongers
company bearing dolphins in their coat, 
and several families bear them in their
arms.

DOMAIN, the inheritance, estate, 
habitation or possession of any one.

DOMES-Day-Book, a book prefer­
red and still remaining in the exchequer, 
fair and legible; it is a survey of the
several counties, hundreds, tithings, 
&c. of England, made in the time of Wil­
liam the Conqueror about the year 1086, 
design'd as a register, by which sentence
may be given as to the tenures of estates, 
and a decision may be made of that no­
ted question, whether lands be ancient
demesn or not.

This book consists of 2 volumes a
greater and a lesser. The greater com­
prehends all the counties of England
except Northumberland, Cumberland, 
Westmoreland, Durham and part of Lan­
cashire which were never survey'd.
The lesser volume contains the survey
of Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk.

DOMESTICK Navigation, is coasting
or sailing along the shore, in which the
lead and compass are the chief instru­
ments.

DOMESTICKNESS [of domesticus L.
domestique, F.] domestick quality, or
pertaining to the house or home.

DOMIDUCA, a title of Juno, so cal­
led on account of her office of attending
or assisting in bringing the bride home
to the bridegroom.

DOMIFICATION [with Astrolo­
gers] the divid­
ing or distributing the heavens into 12
houses, in order to erect an horoscope.

DOMIFYING [with Astrolo­
gers] the divid­
ing or distributing the heavens into 12
houses, in order to erect an horoscope.

DOMINA, a title given to honour­
able women, who anciently held a ba­
rony in their own right; Ant. Writ.
Domina, a lady, a mistress.  L.



DOMINANT [dominans, L.] ruling, 
governing.

DOMINEERING, lordly behaviour
or speech.

DOMINICA in Ramis Palmarum, palm
sunday, so called from the palm-bran­
ches and green boughs formerly distri­
buted on that day in commemoration
of our lord's riding to Jerusalem.

DOMINUS, this word prefixed to a
man's name, in old time, usually denot­
ed him a clergyman, and sometimes a
gentleman or lord of a manour.  L.

DON in the ancient British sig­
nified a river.

DAUN in the ancient British sig­
nified a river.

DON, DEN in ancient British also
signified a castle.

DIN, DON in ancient British also
signified a castle.

DONABLE [donabilis, L.] that may
be given.

DORIA's Wounds-wort, an herb so
nam'd from one captain Doria, who used
it in curing his wounded soldiers, or, 
as others say, of Dorus, king of Achaia, 
who first built a temple of the Doric
order, and dedicated it to Juno. This
order, after its invention, was reduced
to the proportion and beauty of a man;
and hence as the length of the foot of
a man, may be judged to be a 6th part
of its height, they made the Dorick co­
lumn including the capital, 6 diame­
ters high, and afterwards augmented it
to 7, and at length to 8. Its frize is in­
riched with triglyphs, drops and me­
topes, its capital has no volutes, but
admits of a cymatium. The moderns
use this order in strong buildings, as in
the gates of cities and citadels, the out­
sides of churches and, other massy works, 
where delicacy of ornament would not
be suitable.

DORMANT [in Heral­
dry] signifies sleeping; thus
a lion, or any other beast
lying along in a sleepy po­
sture, with the head resting
on the fore paws, is said to
be dormant, and is distinguished from
Couchant, which though the beast lies
along, yet holds up his head. See the
figure.

Image omitted.



DORMAN Window [Architecture] a
window made in the roof of an house.

DORNICK [of Deornick of Tour­
nay in Flanders, where
first made] a sort of stuff used for cur­
tains, hangings and carpets.

DORNIX [of Deornick of Tour­
nay in Flanders, where
first made] a sort of stuff used for cur­
tains, hangings and carpets.

DOTATION, an endowing.  L.

DOTINGNESS [of doten, Du.] folly, 
childishness, by reason of age.

DOUBLE [in Law] the duplicates of
letters patents.

DOUBLE Pellitory, a sort of herb.

DOUBLE founted, having two
springs.

To DOUBLE the Reins [with Horse­
men] a horse is said so to do, when he
leaps several times together to throw
his rider.

DOUBLES, the same as letters pa­
tents.

DOUBLE Fitchée [in He­
raldry] as a Cross double
Fitchee, is when the extre­
mities are pointed at each
angle, i. e. each extremity
having two points, in distin­
ction from the Cross Fitchée, which is
sharpened away only at one point. See
the figure.

Image omitted.



DOUBLE Horizontal Dial, a dial hav­
ing a double stile, one to shew the
hour on the outward circle, and the
other to shew the same in the stereo­
graphick projection, drawn on the same
plane.

DOUBTING, is the act of with­
holding a full assent from any propo­
sition, on suspicion that we are not fully
apprized of the merits thereof; or
from our not being able peremptorily
to decide between the reasons for and
against it.

DOUBTFULNESS [of doute, F. full
and ness] dubiousness.

DOUBTLESS [sans doute, F.] with­
out doubt.

DOUCINE [in Architecture] an orna­
ment of the highest part of a cornice or
a moulding cut in form of a wave, half
concave, and half convex.  F.

DOVE, is an emblem of simplicity, 
innocence, purity, goodness, peace and
divine love, and represents the Holy
Ghost. Having no gall, it is the symbol
of a true and faithful Christian, who is
oblig'd to forgive injuries, bear adver­
sity patiently, and never to suffer the
sun to go down upon his anger; but to
do good to those that despitefully use
him.

DOVE's foot, an herb.

DOWABLE [in Law] having a right
to be, or capable of being endowed.

DOWRY Bill [among the Jews] the
bridegroom at the time of marriage
gave his wife a dowry bill.

DOWN, a soft, woolly substance, 
growing on the tops of thistles, &c.

DOWNWARD [ðune&wyn;earð, Sax.]
towards the lower part.

To DOXOLOGIZE [of Δόξος glory
and λέγειν to say, Gr.] to say the hymn
called Gloria Patri, &c.

DOXOLOGY [doxologia, L. doxolo­
gie, F. of δοξολογία, of Δόξος, glory and



λήγειν to say, Gr.] a verse or short hymn
of praise appointed anciently in the
church to be said after the prayers and
claims in divine service, as the Gloria
Patri, &c. Also the conclusion of the
Lord's Prayer, viz. For thine is the
kingdom, the power and glory, &c. The
Gloria Patri is said to have been com­
posed by the first council of Nice, in
acknowledgment of the Trinity, in
opposition to the heresies of those times,
and that St. Jerom added, As it was in
the beginning, &c.

A DRABLER [in a Ship] a small
sail set on the bonnet as the bonnet is
on the course, and only used when the
course and bonnet is not deep enough
to clothe the mast.

DRACONITES [δραχονιτὴς, Gr.] a
precious stone, said to be taken out of
the brain of a dragon.

DRACONTICK Month [with Astron.]
the space of time in which the moon
going from her ascending node called
Caput draconis, i. e. the dragon's head, 
returns to the same.

DRAGOMAN [ןוכנדות, Chald.] an
interpreter in the eastern countries, 
whose office is to facilitate commerce
between the Orientals and Occidentals.

DRAGON [ðraca, Sax.] a kind of
serpent that with age grows to a mon­
strous bigness.

Dragons may be justly supposed to be
imaginary monsters, viz. dragons with
wings, a long tail and legs; but whe­
ther there be any such dragons in na­
ture or not, it is certain there are in
Heraldry, as appears by the family of
Southland in Kent, which bears Or a
dragon rampant with wings inverted
vert, on a chief gule, 3 spears heads
argent.

DRAGON Wort, the herb Serpentary
or Viper's-bugloss.

DRAGONNE [in Heraldry] signifies
the lower part of the beast to be a dra­
gon, as a Lion dragonné, signifies the
upper half of a lion, and the other half
going off like the hinder part of a dragon.

Knights of the Order of the DRAGON, 
an order of knighthood founded by Si­
gismund emperor of Germany, anno 1417.
upon the condemnation of John Hus
and Jerom of Prague.

DRAMA [δρᾶμα, Gr.] a play, ei­
ther comedy or tragedy, is a composi­
tion either in prose or verse, that con­
sists not in the bare recitation; but in
the actual representation of an action.
Our Drama's are Tragedies, Comedies
and Farces: for those grotesk entertain­
ments which have been lately intro­
duced and brought on the stage, scarce
deserve the name of Drama's or dra­
matick performances.

DRAPERS, were in­
corporated anno 1438.
in the reign of King
Henry VI. Their ar­
morial ensigns are 3
clouds radiated proper, 
each adorned with a
treble crown Or. The
crest on a helmet and
torce a ram, lodg'd as the second attir­
ed. The supporters 2 lions as the last
pellettée. The motto, To God only he
Honour and Glory. Their hall is in
Throckmorton-street.

Image omitted.



DRASTICK [of δράστιχος, Gr. active, 
brisk] a purge that operates quickly
and briskly.

DRAUGHT [in Trade] the overpluss
or deficiency of the turn of a pair of
scales, to the advantage or disadvantage
of buyer or seller.

DRAW BOY [with Weavers] a lad
who pulls up the leashes of a weaver's
loom which makes the raised figures in
silk or stuff.

DREADFUL [ðraelig;ðfull, Sax.] cau­
sing dread.

DREAMINGNESS, slothfulness, act­
ing as if in a dream.

DREAR [ðrẏriʒ, Sax.] dreary.

DREERINESS [ðrẏriʒneſſe, Sax.]
dismalness.

DREGGINESS [ðreſteneſſe, 
Sax.] full of dregs.

DRENGAGE [in Law] the tenure by
which Drenges held their lands.

DRIFT [with Miners] a channel or
passage, cut out of one part of the mine, 
to lead to or from another, thereby to
carry on the whole more effectually by
proper communications for air, to draw
water, ore, soil, &c.

To go a DRIFT, a boat is said so to
do, when it is carried by the stream, 
and has no body in it to row or steer it.

DRIPS [with Builders] a sort of steps
on flat roofs to walk upon, the roof is
not quite flat, but a little raised in the
middle, and those steps or drips lie each
a little inclining to the horizon, a way
of building much used in Italy.

DROFDENNE [ðrofðenne, Sax.] a
thicket of wood in a valley, a grove or
woody place, where cattle were kept.

DROMEDARY [dromedaire, F. dro­
meda, L. δρόμας of δρέμω, Gr. to run]
a beast resembling a camel; but smaller
and slenderer, having 2 bunches on its
back, which supply the place of a saddle.
They are said to be able to endure a



great deal of fatigue and so swift as to
travel 100 miles a day, they have no
fore-teeth nor hoof; but their feet are
covered with a thick, fleshy skin.

DRONE, a musical instrument, called
also a bassoon.

DROPS [in Architecture] are an orna­
ment in the pillars of the Dorick order
underneath the triglyphs, representing
drops or little bells.

DROPSICALNESS [of hydropicus, L.
hydropique, F. of ὑδροπιχὸς, Gr.] having
a dropsy.

DROUGHTINESS [of ðruʒoðiʒ
and neſſe] thirstiness.

DROUTH [ðruʒoð, Sax.] thirst.
Milton.

DROWSY [probably of droosen, Du.
to slumber always] sleepy, sluggish,

DRUIDS [derhuiden, Brit. i. e. very
wise men, or of Δρυάδες, of δρὺς, Gr. an
oak] certain Magi, or priests in France, 
that built in the city of Orleans a college
in the year 1140. These were of old
one of the two estates of France, to
whom was committed the care of pro­
viding sacrifices, of prescribing laws for
their worship, of the deciding the con­
troversies amongst the people, concern­
ing the bounds of their grounds, and
such like.

They had also the tutoring of young
children, who commonly remained un­
der their tuition for 20 years. They
taught them many verses which they
caused them to learn by heart, without
the assistance of any writing; and those
who had not been instructed by these
Druids, were not esteem'd sufficiently
qualify'd to manage the affairs of state.
At the end of the year, their custom
was to go with great reverence, and
gather branches and leaves of oak and
misletoe, to make a present to Jupiter, 
inviting all people to this ceremony by
these words, which they caused to be
proclaimed, Come to the oak branches the
new year.

They had oaks in great estimation, 
and all that grew on them, especially
misletoe, which they worshipped as a
thing sent unto them from heaven.
The manner of their sacrifices is related
as follows. They caused meat to be
prepared under an oak where misletoe
grew, and two white bulls to be
brought out, having their horns bound, 
i. e. first set to the plough; then the
priest, array'd in white, climb'd up a
tree, and having a bill of gold in his
hand, threshed off the misletoe; then
offered the sacrifice, praying that the
gift might be prosperous to the recei­
vers; supposing the beast that was bar­
ren, if it drunk of the misletoe, would
be very fruitful, and that it was a re­
medy against all poison.

In their general assemblies they are
said to have practised that which Pliny
relates of the storks, which usually tear
in pieces the last that comes to their
meeting, to oblige the rest to be more
diligent. They are reported to have
been very cruel, and ordinarily mur­
der'd men upon the altars of their
gods; and also in their schools, for it is
related of one of their doctors, named
Herophilus, that he taught anatomy o­
ver the bodies of living men at times to
the number of 700.

It is supposed the French borrowed
this superstition from Britain; and Ta­
citus says that they were first in Britain.

Suetonius says, their worship was
prohibited by Augustus, and the pro­
session quite abolish'd by Claudius Cæsar.

DRUM of the Ear [Anatomy] a mem­
brane of the cavity of the ear.

DRUNK [ðruncen, Sax.] fuddled, in­
toxicated with drink.

DRUNKARD [ðrincore, of ðrin­
can and aerd nature, or of ðruncen­
ʒeorn, Sax.] a drinker to excess,

To DRUNKEN [ðruncnian, Sax.] to
drink to excess.

DRUNKENNESS [of ðruncinẏſſe,
Sax.] excessive drinking.

Drunkenness, physically considered, 
consists in a preternatural compression
of the brain, and a discomposure of its
fibres occasioned by the fumes or spiri­
tuous parts of liquors.

DRUNKENNESS [by Naturalists] is
thus accounted for. An immoderate
quantity of wine being receiv'd into the
stomach, being there heated, undergoes
a kind of effervescence; more or less 
as the liquor abounds more or less with
a sulphur. By this action or efferves­
cence it becomes attenuated and rari­
fied, so that the grosser parts being
left behind, the finer are fitted to pene­
trate and shoot through the veins to
the brain, or are convey'd thro' the
veins to the heart; whence after a fur­
ther heat and rarefaction they are sent
thro' the carotid arteries, &c. to the
brain. Hence necessarily arises a reple­
tion of the meninges of the brain, and
a compression of the fibres of the brain
itself, from the fresh stock of rarefied
sulphur, continually exploded into
them: Hence also an obstruction of the
pores and passages of the brain; a fre­
quent and disorderly pulsation of the
fibres and other symptoms.



DRY Bodies [with Philosophers] are
such whose pores contained between
their confirmed parts are not filled with
any visible liquor.

DRY Rent [in Law] a rent reserved
without clause of distress.

DRYADES [Δρύαδες, of δρὺς an oak
or any tree, Gr.] were nymphs of the
woods, which the ancients imagined to
inhabit the woods and groves to hide
themselves under the bark of the oak;
the ancients had a notion that they had
their peculiar trees with which they
were refreshed when the rain descend­
ed gently on them, and griev'd when
the winter depriv'd them of their
leaves, and were sensible of their blows
and wounds.

There are stories of several of these
Dryades that have done favours to those
that have preserved their trees, and of
others that have destroyed those who
hurt them. They were usually painted
of a brown or tawney complexion, hair
thick like moss, and their garments of
a dark green.

DRYNESS [of ðriʒʒeneſſe, Sax.
or of droogh, Du.] want of moisture.

DUALITY [of dualitas, L.] a being
two.

DUBITABLE [dubitabilis, L.] doubt­
ful.

DUBIOUSNESS [of dubius, L.] doubt­
fulness.

DUCAL Coronet, has on­
ly flowers raised above the
circle, which none of an
inferior rank can have, 
nor may they mix flowers
with the crosses, which only belongs f
to the prince. See the figure.

Image omitted.



DUCKING at the Main Yard [with
Sailors] is when at sea a malefactor
having a rope fastened under his arms
about his waste, and under his breech, 
is hoisted up to the end of the yard, 
and let fall from thence violently two
or three times into the sea.

Dry DUCKING, is a punishment by
hanging the offender by a cord a few
yards above the surface of the water, 
and publishing the punishment by the
discharge of a cannon.

DUCKING [at Marseilles and Bourbon
in France] a punishment inflicted on
vagrants that are condemn'd to the
Cale, (as they call it) which is to be
shut up in an iron cage, fastened to the
yard of a chaloup and duck'd in the
river.

At Thoulouse in France the same pu­
nishment is inflicted on persons guilty of
blasphemy. In England Ducking is a
punishment that the mob inflicts on
pick-pockets.

DUCKING STOOL, a sort of wood­
en or iron chair hung over a river or
some watery place, in which scolding
women were wont to be fastened and
let down into the water.

DUCTABILITY [ductabilitas, L.]
easiness of being drawn out.

DUCTILNESS, [of ductilis, L.] ducti­
lity, easiness to be drawn out in length.

DUELLISTS [according to Mr.
Boyle] the two principles of those chy­
mical philosophers, who pretend to ex­
plicate all the phenomena in nature, 
from the doctrine of alkali and acid.

DUET [in Musick] a song or air com­
pos'd for 2 voices.

DUKE, several counties and towns
in England give titles to dukes, tho' often­
times it happens, that but a small part
of their estate lies in that county, &c.

DUKES [duces, L. of ducendo, lead­
ing] are so called of being leaders of ar­
mies, and generals to kings and empe­
rors, and anciently enjoy'd the title no
longer than they had the command: but
in process of time great estates were an­
nexed to the titles, and so the dignity be­
came hereditary. But this was earlier in
other nations than in England. And the
first duke created in England was Edward
called the Black Prince, who was eldest
son to king Edward III. and was created
duke of Cornwal, which gives the title
of prince of Wales. The manner of
creating a duke is as follows.

He having his hood and surcoat on, is
led betwixt a duke and a marquiss, 
going before with his sword, and before
him, one with the robe and mantle on
his arms: the mantle is of crimson vel­
vet, guarded about the shoulders with 4
guards of ermine.

On the right hand an earl bears the
cap of state, of the same as the mantle
and double ermine; but not indented as
those of the royal blood are. The cap
within a coronet of gold adorned with
leaves without pearls. On the left hand
another bears a rod or verge.

All the said peers are to be in their
robes, and thus they conduct him into
the presence-chamber, where having
made obeisance 3 times to the king sit­
ting in his chair, the person to be in­
vested kneels down.

Then Garter king at arms delivers
the patent to the king, who returns it
to be read aloud, and when he comes to
the word Investimus, the king puts the
ducal mantle upon him that is to be
made a duke, and at the words Gladio



cincturamus girds on his sword; at the
words cappæ & circuit aurei impositionem
the king likewise puts on his head the
cap and coronet of gold; and at these
words, virgæ aureæ traditionem, gives the
rod or verge of gold into his hand.

Then the rest of the said charter be­
ing read, wherein he is declared duke, 
the king gives him the said charter or
patent to be kept.

A duke may have in all places out of
the king or prince's presence a cloth of
estate hanging down within half a yard
of the ground, as may his dutchess, who
may also have her train borne by a baro­
ness; and no earl without permission
from him is to wash with a duke.

The eldest sons of dukes are by the
courtesy of England stiled marquises, and
their younger sons lords, with the addi­
tion of their christian names, as lord
Thomas, lord John, and take place of vis­
counts; but not so privileged by the laws
of the land.

A Duke has the title of grace, and be­
ing writ unto is stiled, most high, potent, 
and noble prince.

Dukes of the blood royal are stiled most
high, most mighty and illustrious princes.

DUKE-DUKE, a grandee of the house
of Sylva, who has that title on account
ef his having several dukedoms.

DULCIFLUOUS [dulcifluus, L.] flow­
ing sweetly.

DULCIMER a musical instrument
something like a harpsicord; but that
whereas in making the strings of the lat­
ter sound by pushing down the keys, &c.
the strings of the former are struck with
small iron or brass pins.

DULCOROUS [of dulcis, L.] sweet
in taste.

DULNESS [of dwl, Brit, a block-head, 
ðole, Sax.] heaviness, sluggishness.

DUMAL [dumalis, L.] pertaining to
briars, &c.

DUMBNESS [ðumbnẏſſe, Sax.] a
want of the use of speech.

DUMOSITY [dumositas, L.] fulness
of briars, &c.

DUN [ðuna, Sax.] a mountain or
high open place; so that the
names of those towns that end in dun or
don were either built on hills or open
places, as Ashdon, &c.

DON [ðuna, Sax.] a mountain or
high open place; so that the
names of those towns that end in dun or
don were either built on hills or open
places, as Ashdon, &c. 

DUNMOW, there was an ancient
custom in the priory, that if any person
from any part of England would come
thither, and humbly kneel at the church
door before the convent, and solemn­
ly take the ensuing oath, he might de­
mand a flitch or gammon of bacon, 
which should be freely given him.

You shall swear by the custom of your confession
That you never made any nuptial trans­
gression.
Since you were married man and wife, 
By houshold brawls or a contentious strife;
Or otherwise, in bed or at board, 
Offended each other in deed or in word;
Or since the parish clerk said amen, 
Wished yourselves unmarried again;
Or in a twelvemonth and a day
Repented not in thought any way;
But continued true and in desire, 
As when you joined hands in holy quire.
If to these conditions without all fear, 
Of your own accord you will freely swear
A gammon of bacon you shall receive, 
And bear it hence with love and good leave;
For this is our custom at Dunmow well known, 
Though the sport be our's, the bacon's
your own.

DUNSICAL, block-headed, dull, stu­
pid.

DUNNINESS, hardness of hearing.

DUNSETS [Old Rec.] those who
dwell on hills or mountains.

DUO [in Musick Books] a song or
composition to be performed in 2 parts
only; the one sung and the other play'd
on an instrument; or by two voices a­
lone.

To DUPE one [of duper, F.] to bubble, 
to cheat, to gull, to impose upon, to put
upon, &c.

DUPLE Ratio [in Mathem.] is where
the antecedent term is double the con­
sequent or where the exponent of the
ratio is 2: thus 6: 3 is in a duple Ratio.

Sub DUPLE Ratio, is where the con­
sequent term is double the antecedent, 
or the exponent of the ratio is one half;
thus 3: 6 is in a sub-duple ratio.

DUPLICATE Proportion [in Arith­
metick]
ought to be well distinguished from dou­
ble. In a series of geometrical propor­
tions, the first term to the third is said
to be in a duplicate ratio of the first to
second; or as its square is to the square
of the second: thus in the 2, 4, 8, 16, 
the ratio of 2 to 8 is duplicate of that 2
to 4; or as the figure of 2 to the square
of 4, wherefore duplicate ratio is
the proportion of squares, as triplicate
is of cubes; and the ratio of 2 to 8 is
said to be compounded of that 2 to 4, 
and of 4 to 8.

DUPLICATE Ratio [in Arith­
metick]
ought to be well distinguished from dou­
ble. In a series of geometrical propor­
tions, the first term to the third is said
to be in a duplicate ratio of the first to
second; or as its square is to the square
of the second: thus in the 2, 4, 8, 16, 
the ratio of 2 to 8 is duplicate of that 2
to 4; or as the figure of 2 to the square
of 4, wherefore duplicate ratio is
the proportion of squares, as triplicate
is of cubes; and the ratio of 2 to 8 is
said to be compounded of that 2 to 4, 
and of 4 to 8. 

DUPLICATION [in Arithmetic] the
multiplying by 2.

DUPLICATION, a doubling, the
folding of any thing back on itself.



DUPLICATURE [duplicatura, L.] a
doubling.

DURABLENESS, lastingness.

DURA Mater [in Anatomy] a strong
thin membrane which lies or covers all
the inner cavity of the Cranium, and in­
cludes the whole brain, being itself li­
ned on its inner or concave side, with the
Pia mater, or Meninx Tenuis.

DURABILITY [of durabilis, L.] du­
rableness, lastingness.

DURATION, an idea that we get by
attending to the fleeting, and perpetual­
ly perishing parts of succession.  L.

DURATION [in Philosophy] is two­
fold, imaginary or real.

Imaginary DURATION, is that which
is only framed by the working of fancy, 
when there is not any such things in na­
ture, as when the Romanists imagine that
the continuance of some in purgatory is
long, and that of others short.

Real DURATION, is also distinguish­
ed into extrinsical permanent, &c.

Extrinsical DURATION, is the mak­
ing a compariion between duration and
something else, making that thing to be
the measure of it. So time is divided
into years months and days, this is called
duration, though improperly.

Permanent DURATION [in Metaphy­
sicks] is such, the parts of whole essence
are not in flux, as eternity.

Successive DURATION, is a duration
the parts of whose essence are in a con­
tinual flux, as time.

To be in DURESS [in Law] is to be
illegally detained prisoner, in the hands
of a bailiff or serjeant, and threatned
with or hardly used; in which case, 
whatever contracts he shall make are
void in law, upon his pleading he was
forced to do so for fear, or to free him
from his illegal imprisonment.

To dye in DURESS, is when tho' legal­
ly imprisoned, to dye by reason of ille­
gal, hard and cruel usage of the jailor, 
for which the jailor upon proof is to
suffer death.

DUSTINESS [ðustineſſe, Sax.]
the condition of a thing covered or soil­
ed with or consisting of dust.

DUSTY [ðusziʒ, Sax.] covered or
fouled with dust, &c.

DUTCH, the Dutch are thus satyri­
zed.
1. They rob God of his honour.
2. The king of his due.
3. The fish of their quarters.
4. And burn up the earth before the
day of judgment.
The ground of these are
1. Because they tolerate all religions.
2. Because they revolted from the
king of Spain, when he was about
to set up an inquisition among them.
3. Because they have taken in part of
the sea in making their towns, by strong
banks, piles. &c.
4. Because they burn, much turf, peet
&c.

DUTCHESS [duchesse, F.] the wife of
a duke.

DUTEOUS, dutiful. Milton.

DUUMVIRI Sacrorum [among the
Romans] two magistrates instituted by
Tarquinius Superbus. They were a sort
of priests appointed to take care of
and consult some books he found, that
he thought were written by the sibyl
of Cumæ,  L.

DUUMVIRI Municipales, [among
the Romans] were the same magistrates
in free towns, that the consuls were in
Rome; who were sworn to serve the city
faithfully, and were allowed to wear
the robe called Prætexta. L.

DUUMVIRI Navales [among the
Romans] were the magistrates appoin­
ted to take care of their fleet; to fit out
ships and pay the sailors.  L.

DUUMVIRI Capitales [among the Ro­
mans] were judges in criminal causes;
but it was lawful to appeal from them
to the people.  L.

DYE [in Architecture] is the middle
of the pedestal, or that part which lies
between the base and the cornice, fre­
quently made in the form of a cube or
dye; also a cube of stone placed under
the feet of a statue, and under its pe­
destal to raise it and shew it the more.

DYERS were incor­
porated by Henry VI.
their arms are sable, 
a chevron engrail'd be­
tween 3 madder bags
argent, banded and cor­
ded or. They are the
13th company, their
supporters two lions
crowned or. The motto, Da gloriam
Deo. They had a hall before the fire
in 1666; but it not having been erected
since, they now meet at Salters Hall.

Image omitted.



DYNASTIES, superiors, the ancient
Romans made two orders of Gods. The
first were Dii majorum gentium, which
they call the gods of the first order.
The second were Dii minorum gentium, 
or Demi-gods. The Dii majorum gen­
tium were 12 in number, and to them
application was made only on extraor­
dinary occasions: And the Dii minorum
gentium were invoked in the affairs of
smaller moment.



DYNASTIES [with the ancient Egypti­
ans] were a race of demi-gods, heroes
or kings, who governed successively in
Egypt from Menes the first, that had
the name of Pharaoh, to the 30th dyna­
sty which, they pretend, lasted 36525
years and ended with Nectanebo who
was vanquished by Artaxerxes Occhus
king of Persia, A. M. 3704. and driven
into Ethiopia.

DYPTYCHA [δίπτυχα, Gr.] a sort
of publick register
among the ancients of the names of ma­
gistrates among the Heathens, and of bi­
shops and defunct, &c. among the
Christians.

DIPTUCHA [δίπτυχα, Gr.] a sort
of publick register
among the ancients of the names of ma­
gistrates among the Heathens, and of bi­
shops and defunct, &c. among the
Christians. 

DYRGE [as some fay, of dyrken,
Teut. to praise] a mourn­
ful ditty or song over the dead, a lauda­
tory song.

DIRGE [as some fay, of dyrken,
Teut. to praise] a mourn­
ful ditty or song over the dead, a lauda­
tory song.

DYSCINESIA [δυσχινησία, of δὺς and
χἰνησις, Gr. motion] an inability or di­
fficulty in moving.

DYSTRICHIASIS [of δὺς and τριχί­
ασις, Gr.] a continual defluxion of tears
from the pricking of hairs in the eye­
lids which grow under the natural
hairs.


E

E e Roman; E e Italick; E e English;
E e Saxon; Ε ε Greek, are the fifth
letters in order of their respective al­
phabets.

E, called e final, serves to lengthen the
foregoing vowel, and distinguish several
English words, as fire, fir, sire, fir, &c.
but in foreign words it makes a syllable, 
as epitome, &c.

E numerically signifies 250.

EA at the end of names, either
of persons or places, is either
from the Saxon iʒ an island, as Ramsey, 
&c. or from Ea, Sax. water, or from
leaʒ, Sax. a field.

EAE at the end of names, either
of persons or places, is either
from the Saxon iʒ an island, as Ramsey, 
&c. or from Ea, Sax. water, or from
leaʒ, Sax. a field. 

EAD [a contraction of Eaðiʒ, Sax.
happy] at the beginning of many names, 
is now contracted to Ed, as Edward, 
Edmund, Edwin, &c.

EADEM, the same, of the feminine
gender, as semper eadem, always the
same.  L.

EAGERNESS [Eaʒorneſſe, Sax.]
tartness, sharpness in taste; also ear­
nestness, vehemence, being sharp set, 
&c.

EAGLE [aigle, F. of aquila, L.] has
a long hook'd beak; yellow, scaly legs;
thick crooked talons, and a short tail.
Its plumage is chesnut, brown, ruddy and
white. Its beak, black at the tip; and
in the middle blue; tho' in some yel­
low; is said to be the most swift, most
strong, most laborious, most generous, 
most bold, and more able to endure the
most sharp cold than any other bird, 
and for these reasons both the ancients
and moderns have made it the emblem
of Majesty.

And being accounted one of the most
noble bearings in armory, is not to be
given by kings of arms to any, but
those who far exceed others in bra­
very, generosity, and other good quali­
ties.

An EAGLE display'd [in Heraldry] sig­
nifies an eagle with two heads, and
the Imperial Eagle has been so repre­
sented ever since the Roman empire
was divided into the eastern and wes­
tern.

An EAGLE Expanded [in Heraldry]
i. e. with its wings and tail spread a­
broad, commonly call'd a spread eagle, 
is so represented, became that is the na­
tural posture of the bird, when it faces
the sun to recover its vigour.

An EAGLE displayd, denotes indu­
strious exercise, and [Hieroglyphically]
signifies a man of action who is always
employ'd in some important affair.

The EAGLE is a noble bird, and
[Hieroglyphically] represented a brave
disposition that contemned the difficul­
ties of the world and the disgraces of
fortune, and also an understanding em­
ploy'd in the search of some sublime
mysteries.

An EAGLE [Hieraglyphically] also re­
presented prosperity, majesty, and libe­
rality. Munster says, that the eagle
freely gives of its prey to the birds that
come round about it, when it has
caught any thing.  L.

EAGLE STONE, a stone said to be
sometimes found in the nest of an eagle, 
and very effectual in forwarding or pre­
venting the delivery of women in la­
bour; according as it is apply'd above
or below the womb.

EAGLET [aiglette, F.] a young or
small eagle. The eagle is said to prove
her eaglets in the brightness of the sun;
if they shut their eye-lids, she disowns
them.

EALHORDA [ealhorða, Sax.] the
privilege of assizing and selling beer.

To EAN [eacnian, Sax.] to bring
forth young, spoken of an ewe or fe­
male sheep.

EAR [ear, Sax. ore, Dan.] the instru­
ment or organ of hearing in an animal



body, also the handle of several sorts
of vessels for liquors, &c.

EARING [of Earian, Sax.] a gather­
ing of ears of corn.

EARL [Eorl, eorla, Dan. of Eor ho­
nour, and Eðel noble, Sax.] a title of
nobility between a marquis and a vis­
count, and is a title more ancient with
us than those either of dukes or mar­
quisses, and the first earl created in
England, was Hugh de Pusaz, earl of
Northumberland, by K. Richard I.

EARL's Coronet, has no
flowers raised above the
circle like that of a duke
or marquis, but only points
rising, and a pearl on each
of them; see the figure.

Image omitted.



EARLINESS [of ær, Sax. before
now] soonness in time.

EARNESTNESS [eorneſtneſſe, 
Sax.] vehement or strong desire or en­
deavour.

EARTH [Eorð, Sax. terre, F. terra, 
L. Ιὴ, Gr. צדא, Heb.] the opinion of
the ancients concerning the figure of the
earth, was very different from what is
now believed; some held it to be a
large hollow vessel; others that it was
an immense plain, supported with pil­
lars like a table. And these opinions
are so stiffly maintain'd by some of the
fathers (particularly Lactantius and
Augustin) and so firmly believed, even
for mere than 600 years after Christ, 
that pope Gregory excommunicated and
deposed Vigilius, bishop of Strasburg, for
asserting the Antipodes. And many of
the philosophers believ'd it to be a cone
or high mountain, by which they ac­
counted for the disappearance of the
sun at night. But the moderns have
discovered the body of the earth and
water to be a globe, which may be
proved by these plain and undeniable
arguments.

1. It plainly appears that the earth
is globular from the eclipses of the
moon; for the shadow of the earth, be­
ing always round, the earth that is the
body that intercepts the beams of the
sun, and is the undisputed cause of such
eclipse, must of necessity be of a round
form.

2. The nearer any person approaches
to either of the poles, the stars nearest
to the pole are the more elevated from
the horizon towards the zenith; and
on the contrary, the farther a person
moves from the poles, the same stars
seem to withdraw from him till they
quite disappear. Again, they rise and
set sooner to one that travels to the
East, than they do to one that travels
to the West; insomuch that if a person
should spend a whole year in going
round the earth to the East, he would
gain a day; whereas on the contrary
in journeying the same westward, he
would lose a day. And this is actually
seen between the Portuguese in Macao, 
an island on the south of China, and the
Spaniards in the Philippine islands; the
sunday of the Portuguese being the sa­
turday of the Spaniards; occasioned by
the one's sailing thither eastward, and
the other westward; for the Portuguese
sailing from Europe to the East-lndies, 
and thence to Macao; and the Spaniards
passing westward from Europe to Ame­
rica, and thence to the Philippine islands, 
between them both, they have travelled
round the earth.

3. That the world is round, is de­
monstrated by the voyages that have
been made quite round it; for if a ship
setting out from England, and sailing
continually westward, shall at last come
to the East-Indies, and so home to Eng­
land again, it is a plain demonstration
it is a globe and not a flat, a cube, a
cone, or any other form. And these
navigations have of late years been fre­
quently made, which puts the matter
out of all doubt.

EARTHEN [of Eorðen, Sax.] made
of earth.

EARTHLINESS [of Eorðʒelic­
neſſe, Sax.] earthly quality.

EARTHLY minded [of Eorð and
ʒeminðe, Sax. the mind] minding
earthly things.

EARTHQUAKE [of Eorð earth, 
and c&wyn;acian, Sax. to quake] a violent
shock or concussion of the earth, or
some parts of it, caused by fire or hot
vapours pent up in the bowels or hol­
low parts of it, which force a passage, 
and frequently produce dreadful effects, 
as the destruction of whole cities, the
swallowing up, or overturning moun­
tains, &c.

Naturalists, some of them, ascribe
Earthquakes to water, others to fire, 
and all of them with some reason. Nay,

1. The earth itself may be the cause
of its own shaking, when the roots or
basis of some large mass being dissolved
or worn away by a fluid underneath, it
sinks into the same, and by its weight
causes a tremor, produces a noise, and
frequently an inundation of water.

2. The subterraneous waters may oc­
casion Earthquakes by their cutting out
new courses, &c. or the water being
heated or rarify'd by the subterraneous



fires, may emit fumes, blasts, &c. and
may cause great concussions.

3. The air may be the cause of earth­
quakes; for the air being a collection of
fumes and vapours raised from the earth
and water, if it be pent up in too nar­
row viscera of the earth, either the
subterraneous heat, or its own native
one, rarifying and expanding it, the force
wherewith it endeavours to escape, 
may cause a shaking of the earth.

4. Fire is a principal cause of earth­
quakes; both as it produces the subter­
raneous air or vapours before-mention­
ed; and as this aura, air or spirit, from
the different matter and composition of
which, sulphur, bitumen, and other
inflammable matters do arise, takes fire, 
by either some other fire it meets with­
al, or from its collision against hard bo­
dies, or by its being intermix'd with
other fluids; by which means bursting
out into a larger compass, the space
becomes too narrow for it, and so pres­
sing against it on all sides, it causes a
shaking of the contiguous parts, till
having made it self a passage, it spreads
itself in a volcano.

There being much sulphur and bitu­
men, and such like combustible matter
in many places of the bowels of the
earth, it is no hard matter to imagine
how it should enkindle, which tho' it
may be done several ways, I shall in­
stance but in one. Since the earth con­
tains such different matters in it, it may
be easily imagined that there are ca­
verns in some places, which are filled
with no other matter but gross airs, 
and sulphureous or bituminous vapours, 
and it may so happen that a flint shall
drop from the arch of the cavern to
another flint below, and strike fire out
of it, which shall either enflame the
vapour, or the sulphureous and bitu­
minous matter thereabouts, which
when they have once taken fire, keep­
ing it in very long, they communicate
it to other bodies of a like nature, and
when these get vent, they burst out in
very violent eruptions, as has been seen
in Ætna, Vesuvius, and other places.

But when it so happens that in vast
caverns the vapours and thicker matter
take fire all at once, the air in such a
motion cannot rarify and disperse, but
it must give a sudden concussion to the
upper part of the caverns, and make
all the ground above it tremble, and
cause an earthquake; and the deeper
the mine lies, and the larger the quan­
tity of matter is, which takes fire at
one time, the more violent and exten­
sive is the earthquake.

But if the cavern happens to be near
the surface of the earth, there are ma­
ny times eruptions of fire that consume
the bowels of it, so that the ground
sinks in; and where the opening is wide
enough, trees and houses are swallow'd
up in it, as it happened in Jamaica in
the year 1692.

And this is not bare conjecture, but
is confirmed by experience, for the
great eruptions of the famous burning
mountains are always attended with an
earthquake in the neighbourhood, as
they in Naples and the places therea­
bouts have experienced.

EASE the Bow-line [Sea term] sig­
nify let them
be more slack.

EASE the Sheet [Sea term] sig­
nify let them
be more slack. 

EASEL PIECES [with Painters] are
such small pieces either portraits or
land-skips, as are painted on the pain­
ter's easel (which is a frame on which
the strained canvass is placed) so called
in distinction from those larger pictures
that are drawn on the walls or ceilings
of rooms, &c.

EASINESS [of aise, F. ease, and the
term ness] facility; also soft or mild
quality or temper.

EASTER [of Earten, Sax.] an idol
or goddess of the Saxons, in honour of
whom sacrifices were offered about that
time of the year, a festival observ'd by
the church in commemoration of our
Saviour's Resurrection.

It is kept on the first Sunday after the
full moon, after the vernal equinox.

The primitive church differed in their
opinions as to the time of the celebra­
ting this festival; some contending that
as the act was past, the time ought to
be fixt; the others that as the Jewish
passover was in commemoration of a
past fact, and yet as God had appointed
the time of observation to be movea­
ble, this festival which we observe in­
stead of that ought to be moveable
also and keep even time with the Jew­
ish passover, &c. The contention a­
bout this matter rose so high that the
differing parties excommunicated each
other, and instead of commemorating
the great mercy receiv'd, destroy'd and
cut one another's throats.

EBB [ebba, Sax. ebbe, Dan.] the go­
ing out of the tide, which is distinguish­
ed into several degrees, as quarter Ebb, 
half Ebb, three quarters Ebb, and low
or dead water.

EBB [in a figurative Sense] is used to
signify the lowest pitch of fortune or
condition in the world.



EBENUS [םינבה, Heb.] the eben­
tree, an Indian and Æthiopian tree that
bears neither leaves nor fruits; the
wood of which (called Ebony) is as
black as jet, and very hard, and so hea­
vy, that the least slip of it will sink in
water.

To EBULLIATE [ebulliare, L.] to
bubble out.

EBULLITION, any inward violent
motion of the parts of a fluid, caused by
the struggling of particles of different
qualities  F. of  L.

EBRILLADE [in Horsemanship] is a
check of a bridle, which is given to the
horse by a jerk of one rein, when he
refuses to turn.  F.

ECAVESSADE [with Horsemen] sig­
nifies jerk of the cavesson.  F.

ECBOLIA [of ἐχβἀλλω to cast
out, Gr.] medicines
that facilitate deli­
very to women in hard labour; also
those that cause abortion.  L.

ECBOLINA [of ἐχβἀλλω to cast
out, Gr.] medicines
that facilitate deli­
very to women in hard labour; also
those that cause abortion.  L.

ECBOLADES [of ἐχβἀλλω to cast
out, Gr.] medicines
that facilitate deli­
very to women in hard labour; also
those that cause abortion.  L. 

ECCATHARTICKS [ἐχχαθαρτιχὰ of
ἐχχαθαίρω to purge out, Gr.] purging
medicines.

ECCE HOMO, i. e. behold the man
[with Painters] a name given to a paint­
ing, wherein our Saviour is represent­
ed in a purple robe with a crown of
thorns on his head, and a reed in his
hand; such as he was presented before
Pilate by the Jews.

ECCENTRICAL [ἐχχεντριχὸς, Gr.]
that has not the same center.

ECCENTRICK Circles [with Astrono­
mers] are such circles that have not the
same center, of which kind several or­
bits were invented by the ancients to
solve the appearances of the heavenly
bodies.

ECCENTRICK Equation [in the Old
Astronomy is the same with the Prostha­
phæresis, and is equal to the difference
the sun's or planet's real or apparent
places, counted on an arch of the e­
cliptick.

ECCENTRICITY [in the Ptolemaick
Astronomy] is that circle which the sun
is supposed to move in about our earth,
which hath not the earth exactly
for its center.

ECCHO. See Echo.

ECCLESIANS [in Church History]
upon any misunderstanding between the
emperors and the dignified clergy and
others of the Christian church, the ad­
herents to the emperor called those who
stuck to their interests and privileges of
the church Ecclesiani, i. e. high-church­
men.

ECCLESIARCH [ecclesiarcha, L. εχ­
χλησιαρχὴς Gr.] the ruler or head of a 
church.

ECCLESIASTICALLY [ἐχχλησιαστι­
χως, Gr.] according to the manner of the 
church.

ECCLISIS [ἐχχλισις of ἐχχλίνω, Gr. to
turn from] a dislocation or luxation of
the joints of an animal body.

ECCOPE [with Surgeons] a dividing
of a fleshy part, and cutting off that
which is gangren'd, canker'd or the
like; also an amputation of an excre­
scence; also a kind of fracture or solu­
tion of the continuity of the skull, by
a simple incision.

ECCOPROTICKS [eccoprotica, L. εχ­
χοπροτιχὰ, Gr.] medicines of a lenitive
or asswaging quality.

ECCRIMOCRITICKS [eccrimocriti­
ca, L.] signs for making a judgment of
distempers, from particular excretions
or discharges of humours.

ECHAPE [with Horsemen] a horse
gotten between a stallion and a mare
of a different breed, and different coun­
tries.  F.

ECHARPE [in Gunnery] as to batter
en echarpe, signifies to batter obliquely
or sideways.  F.

ECHINOPHTHALMIA [of ὲχίνος, 
a sea hedge-hog, and ὀφθαλμία a disease
in the eyes] an imperfection of the eyes, 
when the eye lids are set with hairs, as
the Echinus is with prickles.

ECHINUS [in Architecture] a mem­
ber or ornament taking its name from
the roughness of its carving, resem­
bling the prickly rind of a chesnut]
first placed on the top of the Ionick
capital; but now used in cornices of the
Ionick, Corinthian and Composit orders, 
consisting of anchors, carts, and ovals
or eggs, carved. The same that the
English call quarter round, the French
ove, and the Italians ovolo.

ECHITES [of ἐχις, a viper Gr.] a
precious stone, of a darkish green colour, 
somewhat resembling a viper; also an
herb, a kind of Clivers.

ECHO [Ἠχὼ, Gr.] the resounding
of the voice.

ECHO [with Architects] is applied to
certain kinds of vaults and arches most
commonly of elliptical or parabolical
figures, used to redouble sounds, and
produce artificial sounds.

Single ECHO, is that which returns
the voice but once.

Tonical ECHO, an echo which will
not return the voice, but when modu­
lated into some peculiar musical note.

Polysyllabical ECHO, an echo that
returns many syllables, words and sen­
tences.



ECHO, according to the poets, was
the wife or mistress of the god Pan; but
afterwards was enamour'd with Nar­
cissus; but being slighted by him, retir­
ed to the grotto's and hollow places of
the mountains, where she pin'd away
till she had nothing left but her voice.
Juno is said to have inflicted this pu­
nishment upon her for her talkativeness, 
that she should never repeat more than
the last word of any thing that should
be asked her; because when Jupiter
was with the nymphs [his mistresses]
she would hold the jealous goddess in
discourse, till they had escaped her.

Manifold ECHO an Echo which
returns syllables
and words, the same oftentimes repeat­
ed.

Tautological ECHO an Echo which
returns syllables
and words, the same oftentimes repeat­
ed.

ECHO [in Poetry] a kind of composi­
tion wherein the last words or syllables
of each verse contain some meaning, 
which being repeated apart, answers
to some question or other matter con­
tained in the verse, as in Legendo Cice­
rone ― one ὀνὴ, Ass.

ECHOMETRE [of ἦχος sound, and
μέτρον, measure] a scale or rule divided
on it, which serves to measure the du­
ration or length of sounds, and to find
their intervals and ratio's.

ECHYMOSIS [ἐχχύμοσις of ἐχ τῶν
χυμῶν, Gr. humours] a disease of the
eye, wherein the blood extravased by
some blow or contusion upon the arri­
val between the cutis and the flesh or
muscles stops there without any appear­
ance of a wound.

ECLECTICI [of ἐχλέγω, Gr. to chuse]
ancient philosophers, who without at­
taching themselves to any particular
sect, took what they judged good and
solid from each.

ECLEGMA [ἐχλείγμα of ἐχ and λείχω, 
Gr. to lick] a tincture or lohoch, a kind
of medicine to be licked or sucked in;
being a liquid composition, thicker than
a syrup, but thinner than an electuary.
L.

ECLIPSE is a privation of light, either
of the sun or moon, by reason of the
interpolation of some opake body be­
tween them, or between them and the
eye.

As for the eclipse of the Sun (so cal­
led by vulgar error) is properly speaking
an eclipse of the Earth and not the sun
because it is the earth and not the sun
that is deprived of light.

The duration of an Eclipse is the time
between its immersion and emersion.

The Immersion is the time when the
disk of the body eclipsed, begins to be
hid.

The Emersion is the time when it be­
gins to appear again.

Eclipses happen only at the time of
the full moon, and not at every full
moon, by reason of the obliquity of
the moons way with respect to the sun;
but only in those full moons, which
happen in or very near the Nodes.

Eclipses are either total, partial or
annular.

A total Eclipse is when the whole disk
of the body is deprived of light.
A Partial Eclipse is when only a part
of it is deprived of light or darkened.
Annular Eclipses are such as are only
of the sun, and happen when the moon
is in her apogee, and thence appearing
much less than the sun and is most vi­
sible when the sun is in his perigee; the
cusp of the shadow of the moon at such
time not reaching the earth, she becomes
in a central conjunction with the sun;
but not being large enough to cover
his disk, his whole rimb or edge appears
like a lucid ring.

The ancients look'd upon eclipses as
presages of most sad disasters upon which
account they apply'd themselves to the
study of astrology.

Central ECLIPSE of the moon [with
Astronomers] is when not only the intire
body of the moon is covered by the
shadow; but also the center of the moon
passes through the center of that circle, 
which is made by a plane cutting the
cone of the earth's shadow at right an­
gles, with the axis, or with that line, 
which joins the centers of the sun and
the earth.

Lunar ECLIPSE, is the taking of the
sun's light from the moon, occasioned
by the interposition of the body of the
earth between the moon and the sun.

Solar ECLIPSE, is when it happens
that we are deprived of light by the in­
terposition or coming in of the moon's
body between it and our sight.

ECLIPSIS [with Physicians] a failing
of the spirits, a fainting or swooning a­
way, a qualm.  L.

ECLIPTICK. [Linea Ecliptica, L.] a
great circle on the sphere of the world, 
described by the centre of the sun in its
annual progress; it is also called the sun's
way and the sun's orbit, because he ne­
ver deviates from it in his annual motion
from east to west. It is placed oblique­
ly to the equator, making an angle with
it of 23 degrees 30 minutes, and dividing
it into 2 equal parts in the points. Aries
and Libra. It is called ecliptick because
all eclipses happen in or near the nodes
or intersections of the ecliptick.



ECLIPTICK Bounds, a space of about
15 degrees from the Nodes of the eclip­
tick, whithin which if the moon be at
any time of her opposition to or in con­
junction with the sun, there may be an
eclipse.

The north or ascending Nodes is cal­
led the dragon's head and the south or
descending Node the dragon's tail.

ECLOGUE, a pastoral composition
(called from Pastor L. a shepherd) where­
in shepherds are introduced as talking
one with another, such as the Bucolicks
of Virgil and the Idylls of Theocritus;
which names tho' originally signified the
same thing, yet custom has made a dis­
tinction between them, giving the name
of eclogues to those wherein shepherds
are introduced speaking, Idylls to such
as are written in a plain, simple, natural
stile, and supposing the persons conver­
sing to be shepherds.

ECLOGUE [with some authors] is ap­
plied to other pieces besides poetical
ones, and an extract or collection.

ECLOGARIUS, a learned man, who
has made abundance of extracts from
authors.

ECOUTE [with Horsemen] a listening
pace or motion. A horse is said to be
ecouté, when he rides well upon the hand
and heels, compactly put upon his
haunches, and hears and listens to the
heels or spurs, and continues duly ba­
lanced between the heels without
throwing to either side.  F.

ECPHONESIS [Ἐχφωνησις, Gr.] an
exclamation.

ECPHYSESIS [with Surgeons] any
process or knob that is joined with, or
adheres to a bone.

ECPYCTICA [Εχπυχτιχά, Gr.] medi­
cines of a thickening quality.

ECTHLYPSIS [with Grammarians]
the cutting off a vowel or consonant, es­
pecially the letter (m) in Latin or Greek
verse, at the end of a word, when the
next word begins with a vowel, or (b)
as div incido for divum incido, βούλομ, ἐγὠ
for βουλομαι ἐγὠ.

ECTYLOTICKS [ἐχτυλοτιχά, of ἐχ
and τύλος, Gr. callus] remedies proper
to consume and eat of callus's, warts
and other escrescences found on the
flesh.

ECZEMATA [ἐχζέματα, Gr.] fiery
red and burning pimples, which are
painful, but do not run with matter.  L.

EDACIOUSNESS, a great eating.

EDACIOUS [edax, L.] given to eat
much, ravenous.

EDDY Tide, the same as eddy; a turn­
ing round in a stream.

EDEN [ןדע זנ, Heb. the garden of E­
den, i. e. the garden of pleasure] this
terrestrial paradise ministers perpetual
business to all interpreters of Genesis.
Elias Tisbites was so bold as to say the
garden of pleasure was still in being, 
and that doubtless many went thither, 
and the passage lay open, but that being
charmed with the beauties and content­
ments of the place, they never return­
ed. Psellus says the Chaldean paradise
was nothing else but a choir of virtues, 
the four rivers signifying the four cardi­
nal virtues. Some place it in the air un­
der the circle of the moon, and tell us
the four rivers fall down from thence, 
and running all under the ocean, rise
up in those places where they are now
found. Some place it in Mesopotamia, 
and others elsewhere, and conceive the
four rivers to be Tigris, Euphrates, Nilus
and Ganges, but neither geographers nor
travellers could ever yet find it out.

EDENTATED [edentatus, L.] made
or become toothless.

EDER [eðer, Sax.] an hedge.

To EDGE in with a ship [Sea term] is
said of a chase that is making up to it.

EDGLESS [Eeʒlæſ, Sax.] without
an edge.

EDIBLENESS [of edibilis, and ness]
capableness of being eaten.

EDILE [among the Romans] an officer
appointed to oversee the buildings pub­
lick and private.

EDILES, magistrates in Rome of
which there were 2, much like our
mayors of cities. They had the super­
intendance of publick and private build­
ings; as aqueducts, baths, bridges, roads, 
&c. They also took cognizance of
weights and measures and regulated the
markets as to the price of provisions, 
&c. They examined comedies before
they were acted; and frequently they
treated the people with games at their
own expence.

To EDULCORATE [in Chymistry]
to make sweet, to sweeten, to purge a­
ny thing of its salts, &c. by repeating
washing in cold water.

EDULIA [among the Romans] a god­
dess who gave the infants meat.

EFFABLENESS [of effabilis and ness]
capableness of being spoken.

EFFARE [in Heraldry] a beast
reared on its hinder
legs as tho' it were frighted or irrita­
ted.  L.

EFFRAIE [in Heraldry] a beast
reared on its hinder
legs as tho' it were frighted or irrita­
ted.  L. 

EFFECT [Hieroglyphically] to repre­
sent an evil effect out of a good cause
well designed, the Egyptians used to put
a bird called Ibis, and a basilick together



because they were of opinion, that the
basilick often proceeded from the egg of
an Ibis. And therefore they were wont
to break all those eggs wherever they
found them, left they should encrease
the number of those venemous serpents.

EFFECTS of the hand [Horseman­
ship] are the aids or motions of the hand
which serve to conduct the horse, which
are 4, i. e. four ways of using the bri­
dle, viz. to push a horse forwards, or
give him head, or hold him in, and to
turn the hand either to the right or
left.

EFFECTION [with Geometricians]
the problems or practices; which when
they may be deduced from or founded
on some geometrical propositions are
called the Geometrical Effects thereto
pertaining.

EFFECTIVENESS [of effectivus, 
L. and ness] effective quality.

EFFECTUALNESS [of effectualis, 
L. and ness] efficiency, the being tho­
roughly accomplished.

EFFELLONIE [in
French Heraldry] a term
used by Columbiere for
a lion rampant in the
posture of standing, but
that the 2 fore-paws
are together of an e­
qual height, and the
hinder feet also close together, like a
dog leaping as they do in the true ram­
pant; as in the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



EFFERVESCENCE [with Physi­
cians] an in­
ward motion of the particles of different
natures and qualities tending to sudden
destruction.

EFFERVESCENCY [with Physi­
cians] an in­
ward motion of the particles of different
natures and qualities tending to sudden
destruction. 

EFFERVESCENCE [in Physicks] is
not applied to any ebullitions or moti­
ons produced by fire; but only to those
that result from the mixture of bodies
of different natures, or at least an agi­
tation of parts resembling an ebulition
or boiling produced by fire.

EFFERVESCENT [effervescens, L.]
growing very hot, boiling over, &c.

EFFICIENTNESS [efficientia, L.] the
power or faculty to do a thing.

Equivocal EFFICIENT Cause, as the
producing a frog, $amp;c.

Moral EFFICIENT Cause, as the advi­
ser is the cause or war, a murder, &c.

Natural EFFICIENT Cause, is that
which not only acts without precept in
opposition to artificial; but also from
within and according to its own incli­
nation, in opposition to violent, as fire
acts when it warms.

Physical EFFICIENT Cause, as a horse
which produces a horse.

Spontaneous EFFICIENT Cause, as a
dog eating.

Universal EFFICIENT Cause, which
in various circumstances produces ef­
fects, as God is of the Sun.

Univocal EFFICIENT Cause, which
produces an effect like itself, as a horse
begets a horse.

EFFICIENTS [in Arithmetick] the
numbers given for an operation of
multiplication, i. e. the multiplicand and
the multiplier.

EFFIGY, the stamp or impression of
a coin representing the prince's head
who caused it to be struck.

EFFLATION, a belching or break­
ing wind,  L.

EFFLUENTNESS [effluentia, L.] an
efflux, a blowing or running out.

Corpuscular EFFLUVIA'S, in many
bodies in the extreme subtilty and fine­
ness of them are transcendently re­
markable; as being able for a long
time together to produce sensible ef­
fects; without any apparent or the least
considerable diminution of the bulk or
weight of the body which sends them
forth.

EFFORMATION [of ex and forma­
tio, L.] a being formed or made out of
some matter.

EFFULGENT [effulgens, L.] shining
out.

EFFULGID [effulgidus, L.] bright, 
shining, clear.

To EFFUND [effundere, L.] to pour
out.

EFFUTITIOUS [effutitius, L.] that
which hath no signification, but only
serves to fill up room.

EGERMINATION, a budding or
springing forth.  L.

Cow's EGG, a kind of Bezoar, fre­
quently found in the stomach of a cow.

EGREGIOUS [egregius, L. i. e. cho­
sen out of the flock] notorious or mani­
fest.

EGREGIOUSNESS, choiceness, rare­
ness, remarkableness &c.

EGRESSIO [with Rhetoricians] a fi­
gure when the same sound or words is
twice repeated in several or in the same
sentence, in an inverted order; as,
Nec sine sole suo lux, nec sine luce
sua sol.

EGUISCE [in Heraldry] as a Cross
Eguisce, is a cross that is like two an­
gles with the ends cut off, so as to termi­
nate in points, yet not like the Cross
Fitchée; see Aiguisce.

EGYPTIANS [in our Statutes] a
counterfeit kind of rogues, and their
doxies or whores, being English or Welsh



people, who disguise themselves in odd
and uncouth habits, smearing their
faces and bodies, and framing to them­
selves an unknown canting language,
wander up and down the country; and
under the pretence of telling fortunes
and curing diseases, &c. abuse the ig­
norant common people, tricking them 
of their money, and live by that toge­
ther with filching, pilfering, stealing, &c.

EJACULATION [a casting-forth or
darting afar off] a short prayer poured
forth from the bottom of the heart,
with fervent devotion.  L.

EJACULATION [in Physick] the act
of emitting the Semen.

EJACULATION [in Pyrotechny] the
expulsion of a ball or bullet or bomb
out of a musket, cannon, mortar, &c.

EJECTITIOUS [ejectitius, L.] cast
out.

An EIGHT, a plantation of osiers
and willows.

EIGHTFOIL [in Heraldry] grass bear­
ing eight leaves. This Sylvanus Morgan
gives as the difference of the eighth
branch of a family from the main stock.

ELABORATE [elaboratus, L.] done
with pains; wrought and composed
perfectly and curiously.

ELABORATION, the working or
performing any thing with pains and 
exactness.  L.

ELANGUID [elanguidus, L.] faint,
weak.

ELAPHEBOLIUM [ἐλαφηβόλος, Gr.
i. e. the huntress] feasts consecrated to
Diana, in the month Elaphebolion or Fe­
bruary, wherein a cake made in form
of a deer was offered to her. The in­
stitution of the festival was upon this
occasion. The Thessalians having re­
duc'd the inhabitants of Phocis to the
last extremity, and they disdaining to
submit to them, Diaphantus proposed
that a vast pile of combustible matter
should be erected, upon which they
should place their wives, children, and
all their riches; and in case they were
defeated, set all on fire together, that
nothing might come into the hands of 
their enemeies. The women being sum­
moned to a publick assembly, this was 
proposed to them, at which being met
in a full body, they immediately gave
their unanimous consent, applauding
Diaphantus, and decreeing him a crown
for his noble contrivance. They after­
wards engaged their enemy with great
fury and resolution, and intirely de­
feated them.

ELAPIDATED [elapidatus, L.] clear­
ed of stones.

To ELAPSE [elapsum, L.] to slide a
way easily.

ELAQUEATION, a disentangling,
disentanglement.

Perfectly ELASTICAL, a body is said
to be so, when with the same force as
that which press'd upon it (though for
a while it yielded to the stroke) it af­
terwards recovers its former place.
And in this sense, an elastick body is
distinguished from a soft body; i. e. one
that being press'd yields to the stroke,
loses its former figure, and cannot re­
cover it again.

ELASTICK Body, is that which by 
being struck or stretched has its figure
altered; but endeavours by its own
force to resume the same; or it is a
springy body, which when compress'd,
condens'd and the like, makes an effort
to set itself at liberty, and to repel the
body that constrained it; such is a
sword blade, a bow, &c. which are
easily bent; but presently return to
their former figure and extension.

Natural ELASTICK Bodies, the prin­
cipal are air, spunges, the branches of
trees, wool, cotton, feathers, &c.

Artificial ELASTICK Bodies, are
steel-bows, sword-blades, &c.

ELATRATION, a barking out.  L.

ELBOICK [of Elbow Elboʒa, Sax.]
a sentence or verse of a rude or rustling
quality, as it were hunching or pushing
with the elbow.

ELDERS [among the Jews] were
the most considerable persons for age,
experience and wisdom.

ELDERS [among the primitive Chri­
stians] were those of the first rank in
the church.

ELDERS [with the modern Presbyte­
rians] those persons of the particular
congregations who inspect matters of
religion and discipline, take care of the
poor, provide the bread and wine for
the sacrament, collect mony to defray
the expences of the church, &c. and the
minister himself is also call'd the Elder.

ELDERSHIP [of ælðer, Sax. and
ſcip] the dignity of an elder.

ELECAMPANNE [enula campana, L.]
the herb otherwise called horse-heal,
good for the lungs.

ELECTION [in Law] is when a per­
son is left to his own free-will, to take
or do either one thing or another
which he pleases.

ELECTION [in Theology] the choice
which God of his good pleasures makes
of angels or men for the designs of mer­
cy and grace.



ELECTION [in Pharmacy] is that
part of it, that teaches how to chuse
simple medicaments, drugs, &c. and to
distinguish the good from the bad.

ELECTORAL Crown [in Heraldry]
the electors of the empire of Germany
wear a scarlet cap turn'd up with er­
mine, closed with a demicircle of gold,
all covered with pearls; on the top is
a globe with a cross all of gold.

ELECTRICA [with Physicians]
drawing medicines,  L.

ELECTRICK, pertaining to electri­
city.

ELECTRICALNESS [of έλῆχτρον, Gr.]
amber] attractive quality, i. e. that force
or property in some bodies, whereby
they attract or draw small and high bo­
dies to themselves; it is different from
Magnetism in this, that the former at­
tracts most kinds of bodies; but the lat­
ter only iron.

ELEEMOSYNA Caruccarum [an anci­
ent Custom] a penny which King Ethel­
red ordered to be paid for every plough
in England towards the support of the
poor.

ELEEMOSYNÆ [Old Rec.] possessions
belonging to churches.

ELEGANCE in the general, is a man­
ner of saying things with choice, polite­
ness and agreeableness: With Choice,
in going out of the common way:
With Politeness, in giving the thing a 
turn which strikes people of a delicate
taste; and with agreeableness, in giving
it a relish throughout, which hits every
body.

ELEGANTNESS [elegantia, L.] ele­
gancy.

ELEGANCE [with Rhetoricians]
is the choice of rich
and happy expressions, which also shew
an easiness, which easiness consists in
making use of natural expressions, and
avoiding such as seem affected, and dis­
cover the pains the orator was at to
find them.

ELEGANCY [with Rhetoricians]
is the choice of rich
and happy expressions, which also shew
an easiness, which easiness consists in
making use of natural expressions, and
avoiding such as seem affected, and dis­
cover the pains the orator was at to
find them.

ELEGY [elegie, F. elegia, L. ἐλεγεία,
Gr. of ἐλέον commiseration, and λεγεῖν
to say] a kind of poem invented to com­
plain of misfortunes of any kind what­
soever; but especially to mourn the
death of friends, or the cruelty of a 
mistress. In an elegy the passions of
grief, despair, &c. ought to predomi­
nate; the measure ought to be heroick
verse, as the most solemn. The num­
bers and sentiments should be soft and
sweet. Point should be intirely discard­
ed, as being contrary to passion.

ELEMENTARIES [as some Writers
pretend] a kind of perfect beings which
inhabit the elements, and are only known
by what they call the philosophers and
sages, and according to these people's
notion, the element of fire must be inha­
bited by Salamanders, water by Nymphs
and Oridians, earth by Gnomes and Gno­
monides, and the air by Sylphs and Syl­
phides.

ELEMENTARINESS [of elementa­
rius, L. elementaire, F.] elementary
quality.

ELEMENTARY Principles [with Na­
turalists] are the simple particles of a 
natural mix'd body, or those very small
parts out of which such a body is made
up, and into which it may be resolved.

ELEMENTATED, made up or com­
posed of the element or elements.

ELEMENTS of Language [with
Grammarians] the letters of the alpha­
bet.

ELEMENTS [in Divinity] the bread
and wine prepared for the sacrament
of the Lord's supper.

ELEMENTS, the agreement of the
elements in generation of creatures
[Hieroglyphically] was represented by 
the Egyptians by an otter or an ostrich,
because they subsist in and by two ele­
ments.

The four ELEMENTS suspended in 
the air, were represented [Hieroglyphi­
cally] by Juno hang'd up by Jupiter in
the sky with weights at her feet.

Gum ELEMI, a transparent resin of a
whitish colour intermixt with yellow,
something resembling wax, a pretty
brisk bitter, tho' not disagreeable taste,
and a smell something like fennel.

ELEPHANT, the largest of all four-­
footed animals, of so great strength of
body, that he will kill a horse with one
blow of his trunk, which is a long car­
tilaginous tube, with which he also
feeds himself. He is also docile, cun­
ning and faithful, and so sagacious that
there are numerous instances of his do­
ing many things, that may seem to be
beyond the capacity of a brute, and of
a nature so gentle and mild, that he ne­
ver fights, unless he be provoked, that
the weakest and most tame animals may
play before him without danger.

He has 2 teeth of 6 or 8 foot long of
a vast weight standing out on each side
of his trunk which are ivory. He feeds
on grass, herbs or plants.

An ELEPHANT was [by the Anci­
ents] made an emblem of a king, be­
cause they were of opinion that he
could not bow his knee, and also be­
cause his long teeth, being accounted



his horns, betokened sovereignty and
dominion.

An ELEPHANT [Hieroglyphically] by
the Egyptians, was also used to denote
a wealthy man, who can live of him­
self without being beholden to his
neighbour. They also used sometimes
only his trunk to signify the same; be­
cause an Elephant's trunk serves him
for all uses, as to carry meat and drink
to his mouth, to tear the branches of
trees, to beat down enemies; and in
short, he has such command of it, that
it is as useful as a hand, and supplies
all his wants.

Knights of the ELEPHANT, an order
of knighthood in Denmark.

Knights DE L'EPI, i. e. of the Ear of
Corn, or of the Ermine, an order of
knight hood, in Armorica or Bretagne
in France, establish'd by K. Francis I.

Knights DE L'ETOILE, or of the
Star, an order of French knighthood;
the companions of this order have this
motto, Monstrant regibus astra viam, i. e.
the stars shew the way to kings.

ELEPHANTIASIS Arabum [with
Physicians] a swelling in the legs and
feet, a-kin to the Varix, proceeding
from phlegmatick and melancholy blood, 
so that the feet resemble those of an e­
lephant in shape and thickness.

ELEPHANTINI Libri [with the Ro­
mans] the actions of the princes, and
the proceedings, acts, &c. of the se­
nate.

ELEVATED [in Heraldry] signifies
rear'd up or turned upwards, as parti­
cularly wings elevated, signifies the
points of them turned upwards, which
is the true flying posture.

ELEVATEDNESS [of elevation, L.]
exaltedness, a being lift up, &c.

ELEVATION [in Architecture] a
draught or description of the face or
principal side of a building, called also
the Upright.

ELEVATION [in the Romish Church]
is apply'd to that part of the mass
where the priest hoists or raises the
host above his head for the people to
adore it.

An ELEVE [of elever, F. to raise] a
pupil or scholar educated under any
one.

ELEVEN, the number 11 has this
property, that being multiplied by 2, 4, 
5, 6, 7, 8, it will always end and begin
with like numbers, as 11 multiply'd by
n, makes 22, by 4, 44, by 5, 55, by 6, 66,
by 7, 77, by 8, 88.

FLEUSINIA [ἐλευσινία, Gr.] the mys­
steries of the goddess Ceres, or the reli­
gious ceremonies performed in honour
of her; so named from Eleusis a mari­
time town of the Athenians, in which
was a temple of that goddess; no men
were admitted to these mysteries, but
only women. The matrons who were
initiated in these rites, were such as re­
solv'd to preserve a perpetual chastity;
at the beginning of the festivals there
was a feast for some days together; but
wine was banished from the altar;
throughout the whole mysteries there
was a profound silence, and it was a
crime to publish any thing concerning
them; none were suffered to see the
statue of the goddess except her priests;
nor durst any persons, who were not
admitted to these rites enquire into
them, much less be present at them;
the assembly used lighted torches, and
many exclamations for Proserpina. But
the women are said to have taken a­
mong themselves immodest liberties.

ELEUTHERIA [ἐλευθέρια, Gr.] cer­
tain festivals solemnized every fifth year
in honour of Jupiter Eleutherius (i. e.
the protector of liberty) these festivals
were instituted by the Greeks after the
signal defeat of 300000 Persians, under
Mardonius, Xerxes's general.

ELICIT [in Ethicks] signify acts im­
mediately produced by the will, and
terminated by the same power. Such
is willing, nilling, loving, hating, &c.
such acts are denominated elicit, by
reason that being before in the power
of the will they are now brought forth
into act.

ELEGIBILITY as a Bull of Eli­
gibility, a bull
granted by the pope to certain persons
to qualify them to be chosen or invested
with an office or dignity.

ELIGIBLENESS as a Bull of Eli­
gibility, a bull
granted by the pope to certain persons
to qualify them to be chosen or invested
with an office or dignity. 

ELIMATE [elimatum, L.] to file, to
polish, to smooth.

ELINGUATION, a cutting out the
tongue.  L.

ELIPTOIDES [Mathemat.] an infinite
ellipsis.

ELIXIR [with Alchymists] the pow­
der of projection or philosopher's stone.

Grand ELIXIR, an universal medi­
cine that will cure all diseases.

ELIXIVIATED [in Chymistry] clear­
ed from the lixivium or lye.

ELK [Elc, Sax. alce, L. of ἀλχὴ, Gr.
strength] a strong, swift beast, as tall as
a horse, and in shape like an hart, bear­
ing two very large horns bending to­
wards the back, and as the elephant;
having no joints in his fore-legs, with
which he fights, and not with his
horns; they sleep leaning against trees;



they are found in the forests of Prussia
and elsewhere.

ELK [Old Records] a kind of yew to
make bows of.

ELL [eln, Sax. aulne, F. ulna, L.] a
measure containing the English, ell 3 foot
9 inches; the Flemish, 2 foot 5 inches.

ELLEBORINE, the herb Neesewort, 
Sanicle.  L. Plin.

ELLIPSIS [with Rhetoricians] a figure
wherein some part of a discourse is left
out or retrenched, used by a person
who is in so violent a passion, that he
cannot speak all that he would say, his
tongue being too slow to keep pace with
his passion.

ELLIPTICAL Space, is the area
contain'd within the circumference of
a curve.

ELLIPTICAL Conoid, is the same
with the Spheroid.

ELLIPTOIDES [of ἐλλεψις and εῖδος
Gr. form] an infinite ellipsis i. e. an el­
lipsis defin'd by the equation a y m +
= b x m (a-x) n, wherein m-_ > 1.
and ṉ > 1.

A Cubical ELLIPTOID as a 3 = ḇ x 2
(a-x)

Biquadrate ELLIPTOID, or of the
third order wherein a y 4 = b x-_ 2
(a-x) 2 called also surdesolidal Elliptoid.

ELOCUTION, the chusing and adapt­
ing words and sentences to the things
or sentiments to be expressed, Cicero.

ELOCUTION [with Rhetoricians]
consists in apt expressions, and a beau­
tiful order of placing of words, to
which may be added an harmonious
ear to form a musical cadence, which
has no small effect upon the operations
of the mind.

ELONGATA [in Law] a return of
the sheriff, that cattle are not to be
found or are remov'd so far that he
cannot make deliverance, &c.

ELONGATION [with Surgeons] a
kind of imperfect disjointing, when the
ligament of a joint is stretch'd and ex­
tended, but not so that the bone goes
quite out of its place.

ELOQUENT [eloquens, L.] that has
a gift or good grace in speaking; well
spoken.  F.

An ELOQUENT Man [Hieroglyphical­
ly] was represented by a parrot, because
no other bird can better express itself.

ELOQUENTNESS [eloquentia, L.]
eloquence.

ELUMBATED [elumbatus, L.] made
lame in his loins.

ELUSCATION, blear-eyedness or
purblindness.  L.

ELUSION, the act of evading or
rendering a thing vain or of no effect:
a dexterous getting clear or escaping
out of an affair, a difficulty, an embar­
ras.  L.

ELUSORINESS [of elusorius, L.] apt­
ness to elude, shustling quality.

ELUXATED [eluxatus, L.] wrench­
ed, sprained, put out of joint.

ELYSIAN, belonging to the Elysian
fields.

ELYSIAN Fields [of τὴς λύσεως, Gr.
i. e. solution, i. e. the putting off the
chains of the body] a certain paradise of
delightful groves and smiling meadows, 
into which, the heathens held, that the
souls of good men passed after death;
the Ægyptians plac'd them about Mem­
phis; the Phoenicians in Spain, and in
the Fortunate Islands; some in Italy, 
where Æneas went to see his father
Anchises: others say the isle of the He­
roes was in the Black Sea, where A­
chilles and other great men dwell after
their death, and receive the reward of
their virtues; others say, they were in
a place inaccessable to men, and that
the entrance was guarded by storms, 
and thunder; but Plutarch places them
in the moon; but whatever variation
there may be as to their situation, they
all agree that in these Elysian fields, 
there was a perpetual spring, gentle
breezes, a pure and temperate air, stars
and sun peculiar to themselves; that
their plants and flowers being always in
their bloom and perfection, continually
sent forth a grateful odour; that the
ear was delighted with a perpetual har­
mony either of birds or musicians; that
the souls there celebrated a perpetual
festival, with merriment and dancing;
that old age, care, covetousness and
ambition being banished from their
thoughts, they had nothing to do but
regale themselves with their compani­
ons, amidst the enjoyments of youth and
beauty; and pass their time in racing, 
arms and other exercises, that they
were delighted with when living; that
at the end of a certain number of years
they return'd into the world again, to
live in other bodies, and that they
might be content to undergo the trou­
bles of a second life, before they left
these Elysian Fields, they drank a draught
of the river Lethe, whose waters had
the virtue to make them forget the mi­
series of a former life, and whatever
pleasures they had enjoy'd in these hap­
py mansions.



ELYTROIDES [of ἐλυτροειδὴς, ἐλυ­
τρὸν a sheath, and εῖδος, Gr. form] the
second proper coat, which immediately
wraps up or covers the testicles, and
is called vaginalis, or the vaginal tu­
nicle.

EMANANT [emanans, L.] issuing or 
flowing from.

EMANCIPATION [in the Roman 
Law] the setting of a son free from the 
subjection of his father, which was so 
difficult a matter, that (they tell us) be­
fore a son could be set free from such a 
subjection, he should be sold (imagina­ 
rily) three times by his natural father 
to another man, which man the law­
yers call Pater fiduciarius, i. e. a father 
in trust, and after this he was to be 
bought again by the natural father, and 
on his manumitting of him he became 
free; and this imaginary sale was cal­ 
led Mancipatio.

EMARGINATED [with Botanists] 
cut in or indented after a manner in 
the form of a heart, or having the 
margin hollowed inwards.

EMAUX de l'Escu [in Heraldry] the 
metal and colour of a shield or escut­
cheon.  F.

EMBALMING, after the first lamen­
tation was over, the embalmers shew'd 
the relations of the deceas'd several
models or patterns in wood painted, 
together with a bill of charges of each 
preparation, and ask'd them which they
would chuse; for there were different
ways of preparing dead bodies for bu­
rial. One was very expensive and came
to a talent of silver, or 258l. 6s. 8d. the
second one fourth of that sum, and the
third very mean, costing but a little.
This preliminary being settled, the em­
balmers took the body home, and first
drew out the brains through the no­
strils, with a crooked instrument of
iron, and fill'd the vacancy with cer­
tain medicaments; then one mark'd
out on the left side of the belly, how
far the incision was to be made: then
another with a sharp Ethiopick stone, 
cut open the body as far as the law or­
dain'd, and immediately ran away as
fast as he could, all that were present
pursuing htm, throwing stones at him, 
to turn the execration upon him, for
they thought it a very heinous crime
to wound or offer violence to a dead
body. But the embaimers were highly
esteemed and respected, conversing with
the priest, being with them admitted, 
as persons of sanctity, into the more
sacred parts of the temples. When
these came to dress the body, one of
them thrusts his hand into the wound
and draws out all the intestines, except
the heart and kidneys; another clean­
ses all the entrails, washing them with
wine of palms and aromatick odours;
then the belly is fill'd with pounded
myrrh, cassia, and other odoriferous
drugs, (frankincense only excepted)
and the incision being sewed up the
body is carefully anointed with oil of
cedar and other things for above 80
days, or else laid in nitre for 70 days:
after which they washed the whole bo­
dy, and bound fillets of white linen
round every part, covering it with gum, 
which the Egyptians us'd instead of glue:
and all this is done without disfiguring
the body, so that the very hair remains
on the eye-brows and eye-lids, and the
resemblance of the countenance is pre­
serv'd and easy to be known. The em­
balmers having done their parts, the
relations receive the corps, and put it
into a wooden coffin shaped like a man, 
which they set upright against a wall of
the edifice design'd for that purpose.
For several of the Egyptians kept their
dead at home in magnificent apartments, 
and by this means they had the plea­
sure of seeing their ancestors, who
died many ages before they were born.
 
EMBAMMA [Ἑμβάμμα, Gr.] any
sort of medicament, or sauce, good to
create appetite.

EMBARCADERE [on the coasts of
America] a place that serves some inland
city for a port or place of shipping.

EMBARGO, a stop or arrest of ships, 
a restraint or prohibition imposed by a
sovereign on merchant-ships, to pre­
vent their going out of port for a time
limited, and sometimes their coming in.

To EMBASE. See To Imbase.

EMBAT­
TELED [in
Heraldry] is
when the out­
line of any ordinary resembles the battle­
ments of a wall, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



EMBRING Days, the same as Ember
Days.

EMBEZZLEMENT, a spoiling or
wasting.

EMBLEMATICALNESS [ἔμβλημα, 
Gr.] emblematical quality, enigmatical
quality.

EMBLEMENTS [of emblavence de
bled, i. e. corn sprung or put out above
ground] signifies properly the profits of
lands sown; also the profits that arise
naturally from the ground, as grass, 
fruits, &c.



EMBOLISMIC, intercalary.

EMBOLUS [with Natural Philoso­
phers] the sucker of the pump or syringe
which when the sucker of the pipe of
the syringe is close stopt, cannot be drawn
up without the greatest difficulty, and
having been forced up by main strength
and being let go, will return again with
great violence.

EMBOSSING, the art of forming or
fashioning works in relievo, whether
they be cast or moulded or cut with a
chissel.

To EMBRACE a volt [in Horseman­
ship] a horse is said so to do, when in
working upon volts he makes a good
way every time with his fore-legs.

EMBRACEMENT [embrassment, F.]
an embracing or that which embraces.

EMBREWED [in Heraldry] dipt in
blood, a term used of spear heads which
have their points so.

EMBROCATION [of ἐμβροχή of
ἐμβρἐχω, Gr. to soak in] a soaking or
steeping.

EMBROCHE [ἐμβροχή, Gr.] a kind of
decoction or lotion, wherewith the part
affected having been first bathed is after­
wards bound up with linnen cloths
dipt in it.  L.

To EMBROIDER [of em and broder, 
F.] to work embroidery.

EMBROIDERER [of em and brodeur
F.] such a worker.

EMBROIDERERS 
were incorporated a­ 
bout Anno 1561. Their I
armorial ensigns are
palee of six, argent and
sable on a fess gules be­
tween 2 lions of Eng­
land, 2 broches saltire­
ways between as many
trundles or; the supporter 2 lions or,

Image is omitted.



EMBROIDERY [broderie, F.] the
working flowers, &c. with a needle on
cloth, &c.

An EMBROIL [embrouillement, F.] an
embarrassment, perplexity, trouble.

EMBRYO [with Botanists] the most
tender fœtus or bud of a plant, whose
parts are forcibly disposed to display.

EMBRYO [Hieroglyphically] was by
the ancients represented by a frog.

EMBRYONATE of or pertaining to
an embryo; also that is yet but in em­
bryo.

EMBRYORESTES [of ἔμβρυον
and ῥήσσω, G.
to break]
a surgeon's instrument, with which
they break the bones of a dead child, 
that it may the more easily be extracted
out of the womb.

EMBRYOTHLASTES [of ἐμβρυοθ λάστης
of ἐμβρυον and θλάω, Gr. to break]
a surgeon's instrument, with which
they break the bones of a dead child, 
that it may the more easily be extracted
out of the womb.

EMBUSCATUM Marmor [i. e. bos­
cage or bushy marble] a sort of marble
digged out of mount Sinai in Jerusalem, 
of colour white, inclining to yellow, 
which has this surprizing property, 
that which way soever it be cut, it re­
presents shrubs and bushes curiously
wrought by nature and of a blackish
colour, which, if the stone be set over
the fire, soon disappears.

To EMEMBRATE [emembrare, L.]
to geld.

EMENDABLE [emendabilis, L.] that
may be mended.

EMERALD [in Heraldry] a precious
stone of a beautiful green, and there­
fore substituted instead of vert, by those
that blazon the arms of dukes, earls, &c.

To EMERGE [emergere, L.] to rise
up out of the water, &c. to come out, 
to appear.

EMERGENCE [of emergere, L.] a
thing that happens suddenly; an unex­
pected circumstance of affairs.

EMERGENT Year [in Chronology]
is the Epocha or date wherein we begin
to account our time, as the birth of
our Saviour.

EMERGENTNESS [of emergens, L.]
emergency, casualness.

EMERSE [emersus, L.] risen up or out
of.

EMERSION, properly an issuing or
coming out from under water.

EMERSION [with Philosophers] the
rising of any solid above the surface of
a fluid specifically lighter than itself, into
which it had been violently immerged
or thrust.

EMERY a metalline stony substance
found in most or all mines, that yeild
metal, but more especially in those of
gold, silver and copper.

The use of it is that being mixed
with oil it cleans and polishes any iron
ware, marble, &c.

There are 3 sorts of it, viz. Spanish, 
Red and Common. The Spanish is found
in the gold mines of the West-Indies;
the second in the copper mines and the
third in the iron mines, which last is
most generally used; it is of a brownish
red colour, and is so very hard that it is
very difficult to reduce it to a powder.

EMINENCE a title of honour gi­
ven to cardinals as
being more honourable than excellency.
This title was conferred upon them by



a decree of pope Urban VIII. in the year
1638.

EMINENCY a title of honour gi­
ven to cardinals as
being more honourable than excellency.
This title was conferred upon them by
a decree of pope Urban VIII. in the year
1638.

EMINENTIAL equation [in Algebra]
a term used in investigation of the areas
of curvilineal figures, so called because
it is an artificial equation, which con­
tains another equation eminently.

EMINENTER [Academical term]
is used in the same sense with virtualiter
in contradistinction to formaliter, i. e.
when a thing possesses any thing in a
higher manner than a formal possession.

EMIR [among the Turks] a title gi­
ven to the descendants or relations of
Mahomet, who are in great esteem, and
who are the only persons who have the
privilege of wearing the green Turban, 
it is sometimes added to other words
and then signifies a principal officer.

EMMENALOGIA [of ἐμμηνία and
λόγος, Gr.] a treatise of the Emmenia.

EMMENIA [of ἐμμηνία, Gr.] womens
monthly courses.

EMMET, an ant or pismire, by rea­
son of its great pains it takes to lay up
its winter stores of provision in the sum­
mer time, makes it generally taken for
the emblem of industry.

EMISSARY of a gland [Anatomy] is
the common conduit, canal or pelvis, in
which all the little secretory canals of
a gland do terminate.

EMISSARY [emisarius, L. emissaire, 
F.] a scout, a spy, &c. a trusty able dex­
terous person, sent under-hand to sound
the sentiments and designs of another;
to make some proposals to him, or to
watch actions and motions, to spread re­
ports, to favour a contrary party in or­
der to make advantages of all.

EMISSION, the act of throwing or
driving a thing out, or sending forth, 
particularly a fluid from within out­
wards.

EMISSITIOUS [emissitius, L.] cast
out.

EMMENALOGIA [of ἔμμηνια and
λόγος, Gr. discourse] a discourse or
treatise concerning womens menses.

EMMUSELLE [in Heraldry] muzzled.

EMODULATION a singing in mea­
sure and proportion.  L.

EMOLLIMENT [emollimentum, L.]
an assuaging or softening.

EMOLLITION, the same as emolli­
ment.

EMOLUMENT [emolumentum, L.]
properly gain arising from the grist of a
corn-mill; also profit gotten by labour
and cost.

EMPALEMENT [with Florists] or
flower-cup, is those green leaves, which
cover the petals or the utmost part of
the flower of a plant, which encom­
passes the foliation of the attire, being
designed to be a guard and band to the
flower, where it is weak and tender;
and for that reason those plants which
have flowers, with a firm and strong ba­
sis, as tulips, &c. have no empalement.

To EMPANNEL [of em and pannel]
to set down the names of the jury-men
in a schedule of parchment or roll of
paper by the sheriff, after he has sum­
moned them to appear for the perfor­
mance of the service required of them.

EMPARLANCE [of parler, F. to
speak] a petition or motion made in
court for a pause or day of respite, to
consider what is best to be done; or for
the defendant to put in his answer to
the plaintiff's declaration.

EMPASTING [in Painting] the lay­
ing on of colour thick and bold.

EMPEROR [with the old Romans] the
common name of their general; but es­
pecially of a general, who after having
obtain'd some notable victory, was first
saluted Imperator by the soldiery; which
was frequently confirm'd afterwards by
the senate; but in process of time it
came to be apply'd to absolute monarchs
only.

In Europe it is principally us'd of the
principal magistrate, as of Germany and
Russia or Muscovy; and is commonly
suppos'd to give them the precedence
of kings and all other sovereigns, and
that they have the right of conferring
the regal dignity, and advancing duke­
doms into kingdoms, as was done by
Leopold the emperor, as to the kingdom
of Prussia; and in ancient times the
kings both of England and France, bore
the titles of Imperatores, i. e. of em­
perors.

EMPHASIS [in Rhetorick] a figure
when a tacit signification is given to
words, or when more is signified than
expressed.

EMPHATICALNESS [of ἐμφατιχός
Gr.] emphatical quality.

EMPHRACTICKS [ἐμφραξις, Gr.] me­
dicines that by their clamminess stop
the pores of the skin.

EMPHYSODES Febris [with Physici­
ans] a vehement heat in fevers, which
causes pustules and inflammation in the
mouth.  L.

EMPHYSTEMA [with Surgeons] a
kind of swelling, wherein wind is con­
tained, with a little skinny phlegm.

EMPHYTEUTA 
a tenant that
rents land on
condition to plant it.

EMPHYTEUTESS 
a tenant that
rents land on
condition to plant it.



EMPHYTEUSIS [in the Civil Law]
a contract made by consent, but created
by the Roman law, and not the law of
nations; by which houses or lands shall
be improved, and that a small yearly
rent shall be paid to the proprietor.

EMPHYTEUTICK [of ἐμφύτευσις, Gr.]
set out to farm.

EMPHYTON Thermon [with Natu­
ralists] the calor innatus or innate heat, 
which they suppose to be produced in
a Fœtus in the womb from the Semen of
the parents, which afterwards decays
and ceases by degrees, when respiration
is begun, and the Fætus subsists of itself.
This heat is by some naturalists stiled
an innate and natural spirit, which they
suppose to consist of 3 parts, viz. of a
primogenial moisture, an innate spirit and
heat.  L.

EMPIRE [of imperium, L.] is pro­
perly any large extent of country under
the jurisdiction of a single person.
Germany was in the year 800 advanc'd
to the dignity of an empire by pope
Leo III. who plac'd the crown upon the
head of Charlemaign, together with the
title of emperor.

EMPIRICA Medicina, quacking or
pretending to the cure of diseases by
guess, without considering the nature of
the disease, or of the medicines made
use of for its cure; but depending in­
tirely on the authority of experienc'd
medicines.

EMPIRICALNESS, quackishness.

EMPLASTICK [emplasticus, L of ἐμ­
πλαστιχὸς, Gr.] clammy, sticking, closing, 
healing.

EMPLASTRUM [ἐμπλαστρὸν of ἐμ­
πλάττω or ἐμπλάσσω, Gr. to put in a
mass or do over] a plaister or salve, a
medicine of a stiff, glutinous consistence, 
composed of divers simple ingredients
spread on leather, linen, &c. and ap­
plied externally.

EMPLASTERED [of ἐμπλασσω, Gr.]
done or daubed over with plaster or
plasters.

EMPLECTON opus [in Architecture]
a work knit and couched together;
properly when the stones of a building
are so laid, that their front and back-­
part are smooth, but their inside rough
or unhewn, that they may take the
better hold one of another.  L. of Gr.

EMPLOY [employ, F.] busi­
ness, occupation, 
&c.

EMPLOYMENT [employ, F.] busi­
ness, occupation, 
&c. 

EMPRESS, the wife of an emperor.

EMPROSTHOTONIA [ἐμπροσθοτο­
νία of ἐμπροσθεν before, and τείνω to
stretch, Gr.] a convulsion of the neck,
which draws the head forwards.

EMPTIO venditio [in Civil Law]
that contract by consent only, which
we call buying and selling, whereby
the seller is bound to deliver the goods, 
and the buyer to pay the price of them
according to the bargain.

EMPTINESS [æmtineſſe, Sax.]
vacuity, being void.

EMPTITIOUS [emptitius, L.] that
which may be bought, saleable.

EMPTIVE [emptivus, L.] bought or
hired.

EMPYREUMATICAL, of or per­
taining to an empyreuma.

EMRODS, the same as Hæmorrhoids, 
which see.

EMULATOR, one that strives to
equal or excel another; also one that
envies another's excellence.

EMULGENT Arteries [with Anato­
mists] two large arteries, which arise
from the descending trunk of the Aorta, 
and are inserted to the kidneys, and
carry the blood with the humour call'd
serum to them.

EMULGENT Veins [with Anatomists]
two veins arising from the Vena cava, 
and inserted to the kidney, which bring
back the blood, &c. after the serum is
separated from it by the kidneys.

EMULOUS [æmulus, L.] striving to
excel; also envious.

EMULOUSNESS [æmulatio, L.] emu­
lation.

ENACH [in the practick of Scotland]
satisfaction for any crime or fault.,

ENALLAGE [ἐναλλαγή of ἐναλλάττειν,
Gr. to change] a changing.

ENALLAGE [with Rhetoricians] a
figure whereby we change and invert
the order of the terms in a discourse
against the common rules of language.

ENALLAGE [with Grammarians] a
change either of a pronoun or a verb, 
as when a possessive is put for a relative, 
suus for ejus, or when one mood or
tense is put for another.

ENALURON [in Heraldry] a bordure
charged with martlets or any other kind
of birds; but Mackenzy justly condemns
it, and says it signifies in Orle or form
of a bordure, and is applicable as well
to the bearing any thing in that form.

To ENAMOUR [of en and amor, L.]
to engage the love and affections of a
person.

ENANGIOMONOSPERMOUS [of ἐν, 
άγγεῖον a vessel, μόνος alone, and σπέρμα, 
seed, Gr.] a term used of a plant that
has but one single seed in its seed vessel.

ENCAUSTES [ἐγχαυστὴς, Gr.] an e­
nammeller, that engraves with fire.  L.



To ENCAMP [of in and camper, F.]
to form a camp.

ENCANTHUS [in Surgery] a tumour
of the Caruncula lacrymalis, in the great
canthus in the angle of the eye.

ENCELADUS [ἐγχελάδος, Gr. i. e.
tumultuous] a huge giant, who (as the
poets feign) was the largest of those
that conspired against Jupiter, who struck
him down with thunder, and threw
mount Ætna upon him, where he
breathes out flames, and (as they say)
by his turning himself or shifting sides
causes earthquakes.

ENCEPHALI [of ἐν in, and χεφαλὴ, 
Gr. the head] worms generated in the
head.

ENCEPPE [in Heraldry] signifies fet­
tered, chained or girt about the middle, 
as is usual with monkeys.  F.

To ENCHANT. See Inchant..

ENCHEIRESIS [of Ἐγχειρεσις, Gr.] a
taking in hand to perform, an attempt.

ECHIRESIS [ἐγχειρήσις, Gr.] the
act of undertaking, a letting about any
thing.  L.

ENCHIRIDION [ἐνχειρίδιον of ἐν and
χεὶρ Gr. the hand] a manual or small
volume that may be carried about in
one's hand; a pocket-book.

ENCIENTE [in Fortification] a wall
or rampart, surrounding a place some­
times composed of bastions and curtains
either faced or lined with brick or
stone, or only made of earth.

To ENCIRCLE. See to incircle.

ENCLAVE [with Heralds] where
one thing is let into another; especially
where the juncture is square.

ENCLITICKS [with Grammarians]
conjunctions, so called because they in­
cline or cast back the accent to the syl­
lable before going, as que, ne, ve, in
Latin, which are joined to the end of
other words, as indoctusque pilæ,discive
trochiæ, quiescit, Hor.

ENCLOSURE [cloture, F.] a place
enclosed or encompassed with a ditch, 
hedge, &c.

ENCRAIN [with Horsemen] a horse
wither-wrung, or spoiled in the wi­
thers. O.  F.

To ENCREASE. See Increase.

ENCYCLOPÆDIA [encyclopædia, L.
of ἐγχυχλοπαιδέια of ἐν in, χόχλος a cir­
cle, and παιδεία, Gr. learning] a circle
or chain of all sciences and arts.

ENDABLE [of enð, Sax. and able]
that may be ended.

To ENDAMMAGE [endommager, F.]
to do damage, to hurt.

ENDENCHE [in Heraldry] is ap­
plied to a fess, a
pale, and other triangular pieces; when
divided alternately between two diffe­
rent colours. See indented.

ENDENTED [in Heraldry] is ap­
plied to a fess, a
pale, and other triangular pieces; when
divided alternately between two diffe­
rent colours. See indented.

ENDENIZONED [of dinaison, F.
Minshew] enfranchised, admitted or ta­
ken into the number of denizens or
freemen.

ENDITEMENT, is much the same
in common law, as accusatio is in the
civil. See Indictment.

ENDIVE [indivia, L.] an herb.

ENDLESS [of entleſſe, Sax.] with­
out end.

ENDMOST, with the end foremost.

ENDORSE [in Heraldry]
is an ordinary, containing
an eighth part of a pale;
some say that it shews, that
the same coat has been
sometimes four coats, and
afterwards joined together in one es­
cutcheon, for some mystery of arms, as
in the escutcheon he bears azure en en­
dorse argent.

Image omitted.



ENDORSED [in He­
raldry] is when 2 lions
are borne in an escut­
cheon rampant, and turn
ing their backs to each
other.

Image omitted.



ENDYMION, according to the po­
ets, the son of Æthlius and grandson of
Jupiter, who having taken him up to
heaven he attempted to violate the
chastity of Juno, whereupon Jupiter
cast him into a perpetual sleep, or, as
others write, for 30 years. Diana be­
came enamour'd with him, and hid him
from the sight of Jupiter in a cave of
Latmos; and not being able to enjoy
him by day, quitted heaven a-nights, 
and had many children by him.

He was in reality a just king of Elis, 
and a famous astronomer, who studied
the motions of the moon, and therefore
passed the nights in retired places to
observe her with less interruption.

Some of the ancients imagined that
the moon was a round and bright island
hanging in the air, and that it was in­
habited by Genii or Dæmons, who came
down to deliver oracles, and that Endy­
mion was the king of it.

ENENTHIUS a certain deity of
the Phænicians.
 
ENENTHSEIR a certain deity of
the Phænicians.

ENERGETICAL Particles [with Phi­
losophers] i. e. such particles or bodies
which are eminently active, and produce
manifest operations of different natures, 
according to the various circumstances
or motions of those bodies or particles.



ENERGETICALNESS [of ἐνεργετιχός,
Gr.] energy.

ENERGUMENUS [with Divines] a
term used to signify a person possessed
with the devil or an evil spirit.

ENERVATEDNESS [of enervatus, 
L.] enfeebledness.

ENEYA [in the practick of Scotland]
the principal part of an inheritance, 
which descends to the eldest son.

ENFANS Perdues [q. d. lost children]
the soldiers who march at the head of
a body of forces, appointed to sustain
them, in order to make an attack, begin
an assault, &c.

ENGINE [in a figurative sense] an
artifice, contrivance or device.  F.

ENGINEERY the art of an engi­
neer.

ENGLAND [Enʒelonð or Enʒelen­
lonð, Sax.] before called Britain, took
its name of the Angels, Angli or Angeli
(as they were called by Tacitus) who
were part of the Suevi, a branch of the
Cimbri; and so of the same original with
the Saxons. Goropius Becanus derives
their name from Angelen or Anglen fish-­
hooks, because they inhabited near the
sea-shore; but this seems both forced
and trifling. Others, as Cambden, Ver­
stegan, &c. derive it from angulus an an­
gle, corner or narrow neck of land, their
ancient country near Sleswick. Mr.
Sammes deduces it from ang or eng, 
which in the Teut. signifies a narrow
or straight place, and hereupon con­
cludes that the Angeli or Angli were so
called because they inhabited the strait
passages in the mountainous parts of
Germany, and to confirm it, alledges that
Angleven in Pomerania was so named
from the angles that are situated in such
narrow passes. Others derive the name
from Ingo and Engo, a son of Woden, the
great progenitor of the English Saxon
kings. The posterity of which Ingo were
called Inglingar or Inglins, who seems
to have been made by his father king
of that part of the Suevi, which after­
wards from their first king called them­
selves Inglish or Inglins; and it is cer­
tain, that the Byzantine historians, Ni­
cetas and Codinus, called the Angli Ἲγγλι­
νος, i. e. Inglini or Inglins.

England is the best and largest part of
the island called Great-Britain, which
is divided into 3 principal parts, viz.
England Scotland and Wales, which last
the most southern is parted from Scot­
land by the river Tweed and Solway and
from part of Wales by the river Dee.

With relation to other countries it is
bounded eastward by the German Ocean,
which separates it from the low coun­
tries; southward by the channel, which
divides it from France: and westward
by the Irish sea or St. George's channel, 
which parts it from Ireland; being in
length from north to south, viz. from
Berwick upon Tweed to Portsmouth in
Hampshire 320 miles; and in breadth
from Dover to the lands end from east
to well 230 miles; and as to its latitude
lies between 50 and 57 degrees of north
latitude. The longest day in the north­
ern parts is upwards of 17 hours.

The name of Britain was given it by
a special proclamation of Egbert, the
first sole monarch of England since the
Heptarchy.

In the reign of king Alfred about 800
years ago, it was first divided into shires
and counties, which are now 40 in num­
her, viz. 18 maritime and 22 inland,
most of which take their names from
their respective chief towns.

The country is generally flat and open, 
not overgrown with wild and unwhol­
some forests, nor over topped with
dreadful high mountains; no country
is freer from hurtful and ravenous beasts,
venemous serpents, and noisom flies and
vermine.

It is well watered with the rivers
Thames, Medmay, Severn, Ouse, Trent, 
Humber, Dee, Tine and Tweed. 

For food no country is more plentiful
either of corn or pasture for man or
beast, nor of great and small cattle,
both for meat and labour, and the sea
and rivers yields great abundance of
excellent fish; for cloths they have the
best of woollen manufactures, vast quan­
tities of which are exported all over the
world; the timber especially for ship­
ping the best in the world; its vegeta­
ble and mineral productions are not only
sufficient for its own use; but it exports
more lead than all Europe besides.

The air indeed is for the most part
gross and impregnated with the saltness
of the sea, from whence arise the great­
est inconveniencies the place is subject
to.

The weather is changeable and irre­
gular; but for the most part cloudy and
rainy, especially at the fall of the leaf
and winter.

ENGLAND, is by some thus characte­
rized, viz. a paradise to women, a pur­
gatory for men, but a hell for horses.

ENGONASI [εγγόνασις, Gr.] a
bowing of the knee]
(a northern constellation, consisting of a­
bout 48 stars, so called from the figure
represented on the celestial globe) of



Hercules bearing upon his right knee, 
and endeavouring to bruise a dragons
head with his left foot.

ENGONASIS [εγγόνασις, Gr.] a
bowing of the knee]
(a northern constellation, consisting of a­
bout 48 stars, so called from the figure
represented on the celestial globe) of
Hercules bearing upon his right knee, 
and endeavouring to bruise a dragons
head with his left foot. 

ENGRAIL'D [in He­
raldry] is
derived from gresle, F. hail,
and signifies that the hail
has fallen upon and broken
off the edges, leaving them
ragged, or with half rounds struck out
of them, and differs from indented,
which are straight lines, whereas in these
the breaches are circular. See the es­
cutcheon.

Image omitted.



ENGRESLE [in He­
raldry] is
derived from gresle, F. hail,
and signifies that the hail
has fallen upon and broken
off the edges, leaving them
ragged, or with half rounds struck out
of them, and differs from indented,
which are straight lines, whereas in these
the breaches are circular. See the es­
cutcheon.

Image omitted.



ENGRAVING, the art of working up
on stones or metals, so as to make any
figures or representations of men, beasts
flowers, plants, &c.

The ancients were very famous for
this art upon precious stones, corneli­
ans, crystals, &c. as still is to be seen
on many exquisite pieces of workman­
ship now remaining in the cabinets of
the curious; but this art lay buried for
many centuries, till the revival of sculp­
ture and painting in Italy.

Then engraving on precious stones
began to appear again; but came not
to perfection till the beginning of the
15th century, when one John de Cornig­
livele of Florence rendred himself famous
for engraving cornelians curiously.
The engraving on wood and copper
was not found out in Europe unless to
a very mean degree till after the inven­
tion of printing, being brought to a to­
tolerable perfection by Albert Durer and
Lucas.

ENGUICHE [in Heraldry] signifies
the great mouth of a hunting horn, hav­
ing a rim of a different colour from the
horn itself.  F.

ENGYSCOPE [engiscopium, L. of εγ­
γύς near and σχοπιάζω, Gr. to behold] an
instrument for the viewing of small bo­
dies the more distmctly; so called, because
it brings the eye much nearer to them, 
so as to cause them to appear, as hav­
ing larger parts and dimensions; the
same as a microscope.

ENHARMONIC Musick, a particular
manner of turning the voice, and dispo­
sing the intervals with such art, that the
melody becomes more moving. The
last of the three kinds of musick used by
the ancients, and abounding in Dieses or
Sharps. See Cromatick and Diatonick.

ENHARMONICAL Diesis [in Musick]
is the difference between the greater 
and lesser semi-tone.

ENIGMATICALLY [of αίνιγματιχός,
Gr.] ny way of riddle.

To ENLARGE a horse [with Horse­
men] is to make him go large; that is to
embrace more ground than he covered.
This is done when a horse works upon
a round, or upon volts, and approaches
too near the centre.

ENMANCHE [in Heral­
dry] is derived from manche, 
F. a sleeve, and is when the
chief has lines drawn from
the upper edge of the chief
on the sides, to about half
the breadth of the chief, signifying that
it had sleeves on it.

Image omitted.



ENNEALOGY [ennealogia, L. έννε­
αλογία, Gr.] a speaking or treating of
nine points; also an oration or treatise
divided into nine parts or chapters.

ENNEAPETALCUS [of έννεα nine
and πέταλον, Gr. a flower leaf] having
nine flower-leaves.

ENNEEMERIS [ἐννεημερὶς, Gr.] a
grammatical figure in Latin and Greek
verse, which is a Cæsura after the fourth
foot in the ninth syllable of the verse, 
which odd syllable ending the word, 
helps to make the next foot with the
following word, as in this verse.
Ille latus niveum molli fultus hyacintho.
In which all the four branches of the Cæ­
sura are found, as Triememeris, Penthe­
memeris, Hepthimemeris and Ennememeris.

ENNOBLEMENT, a making noble;
also a being ennobled or made noble.

ENORMOUSNESS [enormitas, L.]
heinousness.

ENORTHROSIS [of ἐνόρθρωσις, or
rather ἐνάρθρωσις, Gr.] a kind of loose
joining of the bones.

ENRAGEDNESS, a great rage.

ENRICHMENT [of enrichir, the be­
ing made rich.

ENROLMENT [of s'enroller, F.] an
enrolling, &c.

ENS [in a Philosophical sense] a be­
ing, whatever has any kind of exis­
tence.

ENS [in Metaphysicks] is applied in
its most general sense to every thing
that the mind any way apprehends; and
whereof it affirms or denies, proves or
disproves any thing.

ENS Rationis [with Schoolmen] an i­
maginary thing or creature of the brain
which exists no where but in the under­
standing or imagination.  L.

ENS Primum [the first or chief essence
according to the Paracelsians] the most
efficacious part of any natural mixt body,
either animal, mineral or vegetable, which
they pretend to be able to separate
from them, and by them to perform won­
derful things for the renewing and res­
toring of youth.  L.



ENS Veneris [the being or essence of
Venus, i. e. copper] a sublimation of e­
qual parts of Cyprus Vitriol calcined to
a dark colour, and Sal Armoniack into a
yellow flour.  L.

ENS [in Physicks] in a less general
sense, signifies something that exists
some way farther than in being con­
ceiv'd or being capable of being per­
ceiv'd in the mind, which is called Ens
Positivum or Reale.

ENS [in Pharmacy, &c.] a term used
of some things that are pretended to
contain all the qualities or virtues of 
the ingredient they are drawn from 
in a little room.

ENS, in its proper or retrained
sense, is that to which there are real
attributes belonging, or that which
has reality not only in the intellect, 
but in itself.

To ENSAIN [with Falconers] to
purge a hawk or falcon from her glut
and grease.

ENSEMBLE, together, or with one
another.  F.

Tout ENSEMBLE [in Architecture] of
a building, the whole work and com­
position considered together, and not in
parts.

ENSHRINED [of en and Scrin, Sax.
escrin, F. scrinium, L. a desk or coffer]
preserved in a shrine or coffer, as a ho­
ly or sacred thing.

ENSTALMENT [of en and ſtẏl­
lan, or ſtal, Sax.] a creation of a
knight of the garter, &c. or the cere­
mony of it.

ENTABLAMENT [in Architec­
ture] Vitruvius
and Vignola called it Ornament; it signi­
fies the Architrave, Freeze and Cornice
together. Others call it Trabeation, 
and it is different in different orders.
The words are borrowed from Tabu­
latum in Latin i. e. cieling, because the
freeze is supposed to be formed by the
end of the Joists, which bears upon the
Architrave. It is also used for the last
row of stones on the top of the wall of
a building, whereon the timber and
the covering rest.

ENTABLATURE [in Architec­
ture] Vitruvius
and Vignola called it Ornament; it signi­
fies the Architrave, Freeze and Cornice
together. Others call it Trabeation, 
and it is different in different orders.
The words are borrowed from Tabu­
latum in Latin i. e. cieling, because the
freeze is supposed to be formed by the
end of the Joists, which bears upon the
Architrave. It is also used for the last
row of stones on the top of the wall of
a building, whereon the timber and
the covering rest.

ENTABLER [in Horsemanship] a
word used in the academies, &c. ap­
ply'd to a horse whose croup goes be­
fore his shoulders in working upon
vaults: for in regular manage one half
of the shoulders ought to go before the
croup.

ENTE [in Heraldry] grafted or in­
grafted, this is, says a certain author, 
the fourth grand quarter of his majesty
king George's royal ensign, which he
thus blazons, Brunswick and Lunen­
burgh, impaled with ancient Saxony enté
en point, F.

ENTE en Rond [in Heraldry] signifies
indented round, with this difference, 
that indented is formed of strait lines in
and out, but this is made of rounds in
and out after the same manner.

ENTELECHIA [ἐντελεχία, of ἐντελὴς
and ἐχω, Gr. to have] the human mind
or soul so called by Aristotle, as being the
perfection of nature, and principle of
motion. The ancient commentators
on Aristotle interpreted ἐντελεχία by
actus, L. meaning by that a kind of sub­
stantial form, by which action is produ­
ced in the body. But the moderns un­
derstood by ἐντελεχία a sort of continued
and perpetual motion and fit modifica­
tion of matter, which qualifies the
whole to be able to perform such acts
as are proper to it.

To ENTER [in Carpentry] is to set
the tenon of a piece of timber into the
mortise of another.

To ENTER a ship [Sea Term] to board
her.

ENTERFERING [spoken of Horses]
an imperfection which causes them to
go narrow behind with the hinder feet, 
so that they fret one foot against ano­
ther, whence a hard, mattery scab arises
which makes them go lame.

ENTEROCELICK [enterocelicus, L.]
troubled with the rupture called Ente­
rocele.

ENTERO EPIPLOMPHALOS [of ἔν­
τερον, ἐπὶ and ὀμφαλὸς, Gr. the navel] a
kind of Exomphalos, the same as Ente­
romphalos.

ENTERO Hydromphalos [of ἔν
τερον,
ὓδωρ, and όμφαλὸς, Gr.] a kind of Exom­
phalos, wherein, besides a displacing
and bunching out of the intestine, there
is a deal of watery humours collected
along with it.

ENTERPLEADER [in Civil Law] is
called Cognitio præjudicialis.

To ENTERR [enterrer, F.] to interr, 
to bury.

To ENTHALAMIZE [enthalamizare, 
L.] to bring a bridegroom and bride to
their bride-chamber.

ENTHEATED [entheatus, L. ἔν and
θεος, Gr.] inspired by God.

To ENTHRAL. See to Inthral.

ENTHUSIASM [enthusiasmus, L. of
ἐνθυσιασμὸς, of ἐνθυσιάζω, Gr. to inspire]
a prophetick or poetick rage or fury,
which transports the mind, raises and
enflames the imagination, and makes it
and express things extraordinary
and surprising. But the word is gene­



rally apply'd to those persons who
pretend to have divine revelation to
support some ridiculous or absurd no­
tions in religious affairs, and thereby
discards reason and scripture revelation,
substituting in the room thereof the
groundless fancies and whimsical ima­
ginations of either a designed imposture
or a distempered brain; using some­
times extravagant words and gestures.

ENTHUSIASTICALLY [of ἐνθυσι­
αστιχος, Gr.] in an enthusiastical manner.

ENTHYMEM [enthymema, L. ἐνθυ­
μήμα, of ἐνθυμέομαι, Gr. to conceive in
the mind] a conception or idea of the
mind.

ENTHYMEM [with Rhetoricians] is
when the concluding sentence consists
of contraries.

ENTICING, alluring, drawing in.

ENTIER [with Horsemen] a sort of
resty horse that refuses to turn, and is
so far from following or observing the
hand, that he resists it.  F.

ENTIERTY [entierité, F.] (Law
Word) intireness or the whole, as di­
stinguished from moiety or half.  F.

ENTITATIVE [entitativus, L.]
when a thing is taken according to its
essence, form or being.

ENTITATIVE, implies an abstrac­
tion or retrenchment of all the circum­
stances from a thing under consider­
tion.

ENTITY [in the School Philosophy] a
physical Ens or being, considered ac­
cording to what it is in its physical ca­
pacity.

ENTOYER [in Heraldry] is used
by some to signify a
bordure charged intirely with things
without life.  F.

ENTOIRE [in Heraldry] is used
by some to signify a
bordure charged intirely with things
without life. F.

ENTORSES, wrenches of the pa­
sterns in horses.  F.

ENTRANCE [of intrare, L.] entry
or going in, admittance; also a door,
passage, &c.

ENTRANSD, being in a trance.

ENTRAVES, two entravons joined
by an iron chain, 7 or 8 inches long.  F.

ENTRAVONS, locks for horses pas­
terns, being pieces of leather two fin­
gers broad, turned up and stuff'd on
the inside, to prevent hurting the pa­
stern.

ENTREPAS [with Horsemen] a bro­
ken pace or going of a horse, and pro­
perly a broken amble, that is neither
walk nor trot, but has something of an
amble.  F.

ENTRESOLE [in Architecture] a
kind of little story, contriv'd occasio­
nally at the top of the first story, for
the conveniency of a wardrobe, &c.
It is also called Mezanzine.

ENTRY [with Merchants] the set­
ting down the particulars of trade in
the books of accounts.

ENTRY, a solemn reception or cere­
mony performed by kings, princes or
aambassadors, upon their first entring a
city, or upon their return from some
successful expedition, by way of tri­
umph.

To ENUCLEATE [enucleatum, L.] to
take out the kernel.

ENUDATION, a making naked or
plain, laying open, &c.  L.

ENVIRONNE [in Heraldry] signifies
a figure of a lion or any other thing, en­
compassed about with other things.  F.

An ENVIRONMENT, an encompas­
sing round.

ENVIOUSNESS [of invidiosus, or in­
vidia, L.] envy, envious nature.

ENUMERABLE [enumerabilis, L.]
numerable.

ENUMERATION [with Rhetori­
cans] a part of the peroration, wherein
the orator, collecting the scattered
heads of what has been delivered,
throughout the whole, makes a brief
and artful rehearsal or recapitulation
thereof.

ENUNCIATIVE [enunciativus, L.]
that may be shewed, uttered or pro­
nounced.

ENUNCIATIVELY [enunciative, L.]
declaratively.

ENVOY, a person deputed or sent
on purpose to negotiate some particular
affair with a foreign prince or state, but
is not accounted so honourable, as an
ambassador. Those who are sent from
England, France, &c. to Genoa, the
princes of Germany, &c. go only in qua­
lity of envoys and not of ambassadors,
but are usually persons of lower rank.
They are of 2 sorts ordinary and extra­
ordinary, they are both intitled to all
the privileges of ambassadors; but the
same ceremonies are not performed to
them. Those who are appointed to
stay any considerable time at the place
to which they are sent, are termed re­
sidents.

ENURNY [in Heraldry] signifies a
bordure charged with beasts, &c.

To ENVY [invidere, L.] to grudge or
be uneasy at the good fortune of others.

ENVY [invidia, L. envie, F.] an un­
easiness of grief, arising from beholding 
the good qualities or prosperity of o­
thers.

ENVY [Hieroglyphically] an envious
person was represented by the water-­



serpent Hydra, because of its proceed­
ing from corruption and mud; intima­
ting, that persons that entertain this
ungrateful passion in their breasts, are
of such a sordid disposition, that they
seem to be made up of mud and base­
ness.

Envy was painted by the ancients in a
garment of discoloured green colour,
full of eyes.

To ENWORTHY [of en and &wyn;ẏrð,
Sex.] to render one's self worthy of,
illustrious or noble.

To ENWRAP [of en and h&wyn;eorfian,
Sax.] to wrap up in.

ENYSTRON [of ἀνύω, Gr. to perfect]
the last or 4th ventricle in animals that
chew the cud, which compleats the
digestion.

EODERBRICE [of Eoðor a hedge,
and brice, Sax. a breaking] a hedge-­
breaking.

EONS [αἰωνες, Gr. ages] a title
which Valentine a heresi­
arch of the second century gave to the
productions of his προων, Proon or first
deity.

&AEONES [αἰωνες, Gr. ages] a title
which Valentine a heresi­
arch of the second century gave to the
productions of his προων, Proon or first
deity.

EPACMASTICA [of ἐπαχμαστιχὸς,
Gr.] a fever which grows continually
stronger.

EPAINETICK Poem [of ἐπαινος, Gr.
praise] comprehends the Hymn, the E­
pithalamium, the Genethliacon, or what
else tend to the praise and congratula­
tion of the Divine Persons or persons
eminent upon earth.

EPANADIPLOSIS [ἐπαναδίπλωσις of
ἐπαναδιπλόω, Gr.] a redoubling.  L.

EPANADIPLOSIS [with Rhetoricians]
is a figure, when they begin and end a 
sentence with the same words, as Kind
to his friends, and to his enemies kind.
In Latin this figure is called Inclusio.

EPANADIPLOSIS [with Physicians]
frequent redoublings or returns of fe­
vers.

EPANALEPSIS [ἐπανάληψις of ἐπα­
ναλαμβάνω, Gr. to repeat] a repetition.

EPANALEPSIS [with Rhetoricians] a
figure, in which the same word is re­
peated for enforcement-sake, especial­
ly after a long parenthesis; as, it is ma­
nifest they have erred, it is manifest.

EPANAPHORA [ἐπανάφορα of ἐπα­
ναφέρω, Gr. I refer] i. e. reference.

EPANAPHORA [with Rhetoricians] a
figure, when the same word begins se­
veral sentences or clauses; as, hic gelidi
fontes, hic mollia prata, hic nemus.

EPANODOS [ἐπάνοδος, of ἐπὶ and
ἄνόδος, Gr. ascent] a return.

EPANODOS [in Rhetorick] a figure,
when the same sound or word is twice
repeated in several sentences, or in the
same sentence; as
Neither the Light without its Sun,
Nor yet the Sun without its Light.

EPANORTHOSIS [ἐπανόρθωσις of ἐ­
πανορθόω, Gr. to correct] correction or
amendment, a restoring to the former
state.

EPAPHÆRESIS [ἐπαφαιρησις, of ἐπὶ
over and above, and ἀφαιρέω, Gr. to take
away] a cutting or clipping over again.
L.

EPAPHÆRESIS [with Physicians] a
repeated blood letting, or any repeated
evacuation.

EPARER [in Horsemanship] a word
used in the manage to signify the fling­
ing of a horse, or his yerking and strik­
ing out his hind legs.  F.

EPAULEMENT [in Fortification]
a shouldering-piece.  F.

EPEXEGESIS [ἐπεξήγησις, Gr.] a
plainer interpretation of that, which
was mentioned.

EPHAH [הפזא, Heb.] an Hebrew mea­
sure of capacity of two sorts; the com­
mon and that of the Sanctuary; The
common contains 60 pounds of water,
averdupois weight; The Epha of the
Sanctuary was one third larger.

EPHEBITY [ἐφήβια, Gr.] the age of
a strippling at the entrance of the 15th
year.

EPHEMERES, birds or creatures that
live but one day, and therfore hiero­
glyphically represented the shortness of 
man's life.

EPHEMERIDIAN, of or pertaining
to an ephemeris.

EPHEMERINE [ephemerinus, L.
ἐφημερινος, Gr.] be­
longing to a journal, register or day-­
book.

EPHEMERIAN [ephemerinus, L.
ἐφημερινος, Gr.] be­
longing to a journal, register or day-­
book.

EPHEMERIS [ἐφήμερις, Gr.] a register
or day-book, a journal.

EPHEMERIS [with Astrologers, &c.]
a journal containing observations relat­
ing to the heavenly bodies, especially
shewing their places at noon.

EPHEMERON [ἐφήμερον, of ἐπὶ
and ὴμέρα, Gr.] a
kind of plant that dies the same day it
springs, a may-lily, meadow-saffron, a
liricon-fancy.  L.

EPHEMERIUM [ἐφήμερον, of ἐπὶ
and ὴμέρα, Gr.] a
kind of plant that dies the same day it
springs, a may-lily, meadow-saffron, a
liricon-fancy. 

EPHÆSTIA [ἐφαιστεία, Gr.] festivals
held in the city of Thebes in honour of
Tiresias, who is said to have had a suc­
cessive mixture of man and woman;
and therefore at that time they attired
a person first in a masculine, and then
in a feminine habit.

EPHETÆ, certain judges at Athens,
who try'd causes of manslaughter, who



were 50 in number, and were to be as
many years old.

EPHIALTES [ἐφιάλτης, Gr.] a dis­
ease called the night-mare, chiefly af­
fecting persons asleep, and lying on
their backs, who fancy their wind-pipe
and breast is oppress'd by some weight, 
and imagine that some spectre or de­
mon stops their breath.

EPHOD [דזפא, Heb.] a. garment worn
by the priests of the Jews, which were
of two sorts; the first was made of
gold and twisted silk of purple scarlet, 
and fine linen with broider'd work, 
&c. this only was worn by the high
priest, when he officiated; it covered
the back and the breast, and on the
shoulders were set two onyx stones, in
which were engraven the names of the
12 sons of Jacob, the 6 eldest on the
right, and the 6 youngest on the left, 
that when he went into the Sanctum
Sanctorum he might be put in remem­
brance to pray for the 12 tribes. There
are others of linen for the inferior
priests, &c.

EPHORI [among the Lacedemonians]
magistrates set up by Theopompus king
Sparta to be a curb upon the regal
power. These are said to have been
nine in number; others say five. They
gave sentence upon thrones, all other
magistrates being inferior to them, even
the kings of Sparta were obliged to
appear at their summons, when char­
ged with male administration.

EPIBATERION [ἐϖιβατήριον of ἐϖι­
βαίνω I return] a speech or a copy of
verses, returning thanks to the gods for
a safe return from a long journey or
voyage, made by some person of figure
at an entertainment made for his friends.

EPIBOLE [ἐπιβολὴ, Gr.] a casting or
putting in.
 
EPIBOLE [with Rhetoricians] a figure
wherein the repetition of the same
word at the beginning of several sen­
tences has respect to the matter; where­
in the figure Epanalepsis it has re­
gard chiefly to the stile.

EPICENE Gender [in Grammar] a
gender which contains both sexes under
one termination, whether masculine or
feminine.

EPICK [ἐπιχὸς of ἔπος, Gr.] a verse
pertaining to consisting of hexameter
or heroick verse.

EPICK Poem, is a discourse invented
with art, to form the manners of men
by instruction, designed under the alle­
gories of some important action, which
is related in verse, after a probable,
diverting and wonderful manner. Bos­
sa thus defines it; and it agrees very
well with our idea of an epick poem.
Tho' Aristotle says epick poetry makes
use of discourses in verse and prose, and
M. Dacier agrees with him; but we in
England have all our poetry in verse at
least, if not in rhime. And we rank
discourses in prose, altho' there may be
the texture of a fiction in them, among
what we call fables, and allow nothing
to be epick poetry, but what is in verse.
See Heroick Poem.

Epick poesy is not confined to observe
unities of time and place. Aristotle says
it has no settled time, and in that it
differs from the Dramatick. And as to
unity of place, that need not be obser­
ved, because the poem is real, as an hi­
story, which may be left off by the rea­
der at pleasure.

EPICLINTÆ [ἐπιχλίντα of ἐπιχλίνω, 
Gr. to incline] earthquakes that move
sidelong.

EPICUREAN Philosophy, in this a­
toms, space and gravity are laid down
as the principles of all things. Epicu­
rus held that the universe consisted of
atoms or corpuscles of various forms, 
magnitudes and weights, which having
been dispersed at random through the
immense inane or space, fortuitously con­
curred into innumerable systems or
worlds which were thus formed, and
afterwards from time to time increa­
sed, and dissolved again without any
certain cause or design; without the in­
tervention of any deity, or the inten­
dance of any providence.

EPICUREANISM, the doctrine of
philosophy of Epicurus; also the prac­
tise of an epicure or voluptuous person;
gluttony.

EPICUREANS, an ancient sect of
philosophers adherents to the principles
of Epicurus; who have been much ex­
claim'd against for the badness of their
morals; but several authors both anci­
ent and modern have endeavoured to
vindicate them from this aspersion; by
shewing that those that kept close to the
doctrine of their master did not place
their Summum Bonum or greatest happi­
ness but in the pure pleasure of the mind, 
which results from the practice of vir­
tue.

Epicurean Sophists, were indeed a sect
of men pretending to be of this sect, 
who made their happiness to consist in
the gratification of the sensual appetite.

EPIDEMIA [ἐπίδημία, Gr.] a catch­
ing or contagious disease communicable
from one to another, as the plague, 
pox, &c.



EPIDEMICALNESS [ἐπιδεμιχός, Gr.]
universality of infection, &c.

EPIDESMUS [with Surgeons] a liga­
ture, bandage or swathe for a wound
or sore.

EPIDIDYMIS [ἐπιδίδυμις, Gr.] a bo­
dy of vessels, the figure of which re­
sembles crooked veins, swollen with
ill-blood; the greater globe or bunch
of which is fastened to the back of the
testicles, and lesser to the vessel that
carries the semen.  L.

EPIGASTRICK Veins, the flank veins.

EPIGASTRION [ἐπιγάστριον, Gr.] the
fore-part of the abdomen or lower belly.
The upper part of which is called the
hypochondrium, the middle umbilicalis, 
and the lower hypogastrium.  L.

EPIGRAM [Επιγραμμα, Gr.] a sort of
little poem ending with a conceit or
point of wit; when it is long it grows
flat, and seldom thrives above 2 or 3 cou­
plets: It was at first an inscription put
on the bases or pedestals of statues or
on trophies; but in time it began to be
used in a more lax sense for a short and
smart poetical performance, either lau­
datory; or satyrical it is accounted the
lowest piece of poetry, because its subtle­
ty and fineness rather turns upon words
than the thoughts, and so may be look'd
upon but as a sort of punning.

EPILEPSY [ἐπιληψία of ἐϖιλαμβάνω,
to invade or sieze upon, Gr.] this disease
is a convulsion of the whole body, 
which hinders or puts a stop to all ani­
mal actions, and proceeds from a disor­
der in the brain.

EPILOGUE [epilogus, L. of ἐπίλογος
of ἐπι and λόγος, Gr.] in Dramatick
Poetry, a speech addressed to the audi­
ence when the play is ended; usually
containing some reflections on some in­
cidents in the play, and particularly
those of the part in the play acted by
the actor who speaks it.

EPILOGUE [in Rhetorick] is the con­
clusion of an oration or recapitulation, 
wherein the orator sums up or recapi­
tulates the substance of his discourse, 
that it may be kept fresh in the minds
of his auditors, who are frequently
confused in their thoughts by the num­
ber and variety of the things they hear.

EPILOIMICA [ἐπιλοιμιχὰ, of ἐπὶ
and λοιμὸς, Gr. a pestilence] medicines
good against a pestilence or plague.

EPIMONE [with Rhetoricians] a fi­
gure by which the same cause is conti­
nued and persisted in, much in one 
form of speech; also a repetition of
the same word to move affection, as
thus, thus it pleased him, &c.

EPIPAROXISM [of ἐπὶ and παροξισ­
μός, Gr. a fit] a term which physicians
use when a patient is seized with more
fits in a fever than are usual.

EPIPHONEMA [ἐπιφώνημα of ἐπιφω­
νέω, Gr. to call upon] is an exclamation
containing some sentence of more than
ordinary sense, which is placed at the
end of a discourse. It is like the last
blow, where two persons have been
fighting, and gives the auditory a close
and lively reflection on the subject that
has been treated on. Virgil gives us an
example of an Epiphonema.
― Tantæne animis cælestibus iræ!
What so great wrath in heavenly minds!

EPIPHORA [ἐπίφορά, Gr.] an attack
or onset.

EPIPHORA [with Rhetoricians] a fi­
gure in which a word is repeated at the 
end of several sentences; but it differs
from Epistrophe, in that it has respect
chiefly to the matter.

EPIPHORA [with Physicians] a vio­
lent flowing of humours into any part, 
especially the watering or dropping of
the eyes; occasioned by a thin rheum, 
which is commonly called involuntary
weeping, and continually flows from the
corners of the eyes; also the fall of wa­
ter into the cods, as in some kind of
ruptures.

EPIPHYSES Vermiformes [Anatomy]
two eminences of the Cerebellum, shaped
like worms which keep open the pas­
sage from the third to the fourth ven­
tricle.  L.

EPIPLOCE [with Rhetoricians] a fi­
gure expressing a gradual rising of one
clause of a sentence out of another, 
much after the manner of a climax, as,
he having taken his house, he brought out
his family, and having brought them out, 
slew them.

EPIPLOICK, of or belonging to the
Epiploon.

EPIPLOIDES [ἐπίπλοεῖδες, of ἐπί­
πλοον, and ὲιδος, Gr. form] a term ap­
plied to the arteries and veins distri­
buted through the substance of the Epi­
ploon or caul.

EPIPLOON [ἐπίπλοον, Gr.] the caul, 
a cover spread over the bowels in the
shape of a net, and abounding with
blood-vessels, whose use is to cherish
the stomach and guts with its fat.

EPIPLOSARCOMPHALOS [of ἐπί­
πλοον, σάρξ flesh, and ὂμφαλος the navel, 
Gr.] a sort of tumour of the exomphalos
kind.

EPIRES, a great interpreter of the
gods among the Egyptians. He was paint­
ed with the head of a hawk.



EPISCOPAL [episcopalis, L.] of or
pertaining to a bishop or episcopacy.

EPISCOPALIANS, those of the epis­
copal party, and are retainers to the
church of England. A name given to
those who kept to the doctrine of the
church of England, and the government
of the church by bishops as it was before
the reformation; they retain the greatest
part of the canon law, the decretals of
the popes, the liturgy, &c. more strict
than the Catholicks themselves in many
places do; but in matters of faith they
agree with the Catonists.

EPISODE [ἐϖισόδιον, Gr.] an entrance
or coming in.

EPISODE [with Poets &c.] a separate
action or relation tackt to the principal
subject to furnish the work with a varie­
ty of events, or to give a pleasing diver­
sity.

EPISODICAL, of or belonging to an
episode.

EPISODIC, said of a poetical fable
when it is swelled with unnecessary in­
cidents; and its episodes are not necessa­
rily nor properly connected with each
other.

EPISTEMONARCH [of ἐπιστήμα sci­
ence and αρχή, Gr. dominion] a dignity
in the Greek church, whose office was to
watch over the doctrines of the church
in everything relating to the faith, and
to inspect and survey them as a censor.

EPISTOLOGRAPHICK [of ἐπιστολή, an
epistle, and γραφιχὸς of γραφω, Gr. to
write] of or pertaining to the character
letters, &c. in written hand, as Epistolo­
graphick character.

EPISTROPHÆUS [of επιστροφή, of επί
upon, and στρέφω to turn, Gr.] the first
Vertebra of the neck, that turns round
upon the axis or second.

EPISTROPHE [ἐϖιστροφή, Gr.] a turn­
ing or alteration, a going back.  L.

EPISTROPHE [with Rhetoricians] a
figure wherein several sentences end in
the same word, as ambition seeks to be
the best, after that to be equal with
the best, then to be chief and above the
best.

EPISTYLIUM [ἐϖιστύλιον, Gr.] that
which is now called an Architrave, which
is the first member of the Entablature
and is usually broken into 2 or 3 divisi­
ons termed Fasciæ, i. e. swathes, fillets,
bands or lifts.

EPITAPH [ἐϖιτάφιον of ἐπὶ τῶ ταφῶ,
i. e. upon a tomb or monument] which,
says a certain author, should remember
the name of the deceased and his proge­
ny truly; his country and quality brief­
ly; his life and virtues modestly, and his 
end christianly, exhorting rather to ex­
amples than vain-glory.

EPITASIS [in Physick] the increase
or growth and heightening of a dis­
ease, or a paroxism of a disease, espe­
cially of a fever.

EPITHEMA [ἐπίθημα, Gr.] a me­
dicine applied to the more noble parts
of the body; also an outward applica­
tion generally of a liquid form like a
fomentation.

EPITHYME [ἐπιθυμία, Gr.] a medi­
cinal plant of a very extraordinary na­
ture and figure. Its seed is very small,
from which arise long threads like
hairs, which soon perish as well as the
root, unless they meet with some
neighbouring plant both to sustain and
feed them. It grows indifferently on
all kinds of herbs, and writers attri­
bute to them the virtues of the plants
they grow on; but those most used in
medicine are such as grow on thyme.

EPITHETS [with Grammarians] are
adjectives or words put to substantives, 
expressing their natures or qualities, as
a generous spirit, a violent rage, where
the words generous and violent are the
epithets expressing the qualities of the
mind and passion.

To EPITOMIZE, to make an a­
bridgement or to reduce into a lesser
compass.

EPITOMIZER [of Ἐπιτομὴ, Gr.]
an abridger.

EPITRITUS [ἐπίτριτος, Gr.] a foot
of a Latin verse, consisting of 4 sylla­
bles, where the first syllable is short, 
and all the rest long, as Salutantes; the
2d is made out of a Trochæus and Spon­
dæus, where the first syllable is long, 
and the 2d short, and the 2 last is long
as concitati; the 3d is compounded of a
Spondæus and an Iambus, where the 2
first syllables are long, the 3d short, 
and the last long, as Communicantes; the
4th consists of a Spondæns and a Tro­
chæus, where the 3 first syllables are
long and the last short, as incantare.

EPITROCHASMUS [with Rhetori­
cians] a figure, wherein the orator
runs hastily over several things, either
for brevity sake, as Cæsar invaded the
borders, took the city and pursued
Pompey; or else to amaze those he
speaks to; as Stand still, Sirs; What
brought you this way; Who are you that
appear in arms? Whither are you march­
ing?

EPITROPE [ἐπιτροπὴ of ἐπιτρέπω, Gr.
to grant] permission, a committing of
an affair to one's management.



EPITROPE [with Rhetoricians] is a
figure, when the orator grants what he
may freely deny, in order to obtain
what he demands. This figure is some­
times used to move an enemy, and set
before his view the horror of his cru­
elty. To this end he is invited to do
all the mischief he can.

EPITROPUS [ἐπίτροπος of ἐπιτρο­
πεύω, Gr. to administer] a kind of judge, 
or rather arbitrator, which the Greek
Christians under the dominion of the
Turks elect in the several cities, to ter­
minate the differences that rise among
them, and avoid carrying them before
the Turkish magistrate.

EPIZEUGMENON. See Diezeugme­
non.

EPIZEUXIS [ἐπιζεύξις, Gr.] a join­
ing together.

EPLOYE [in Heraldry] display'd, as
aigle eployé, is an eagle displayed, which
is not always to have two heads. But
as in the escutcheon. See Displayed
in D.

EPNEUMATOSIS [ἐπνευμάτοσις,
Gr.] expiration, the act or faculty of
breathing out.  L.

EPOCH [ἐποχὴ of ἐποχεῖν, Gr. to
sustain or stop] a chro­
nological term for a fixt point of time, 
whence the years are number'd or ac­
counted; or a solemn date of time
counted from some memorable action, 
as the creation of the world.

EPOCHA [ἐποχὴ of ἐποχεῖν, Gr. to
sustain or stop] a chro­
nological term for a fixt point of time, 
whence the years are number'd or ac­
counted; or a solemn date of time
counted from some memorable action, 
as the creation of the world. 

EPOCHA of Christ, is the common
epocha throughout Europe, commen­
cing from the nativity of our Saviour
December 25, or rather according to the
vulgar account from his circumcision
the 1st of January; but in England from
the incarnation or annunciation of the
Virgin Mary on the 25th of March.

EPOCHA of the Creation, according to
the computation of the Jews, is the
year of the Julian period 953, answer­
ing to the year before Christ, 3761, and
commences on the 7th of October.

Dioclesian EPOCHA, or the Epocha
of Martyrs, is the year of the Julian pe­
riod 4997, answering to the year of
Christ 283. It is so called from the
great number of Christians who suffer­
ed martyrdom under the reign of that
emperor.

EPODE [Ἐποδὸς, of ἐπὶ after and
ὠδαὶ, Gr. songs] one of the number of
that sort of Lyrick poetry, of which the
odes of Pindar consist. The other two
being Strophe and Antistrophe, which an­
swer each other in every ode, whereas
one epode answers to another in seve­
ral odes.

The epode was sung by the priests
standing still before the altar, after all
the turns and returns of the Strophe
and Antistrophe.

EPOPEA [in Poetry] is strictly the
history, action or fable, which makes
the subject of an Epick poem.

EPULATION, a feasting or ban­
queting.  L.

EPULOSITY [epulositas, L.] great
banqueting.

EQUABLENESS [æquabilitas, L.] ca­
pableness of being made equal.

EQUAL Angles [Geometry] are those
whose sides incline alike to each other, 
or that are measured by similar parts
of their circles.

EQUAL Circles, are such whose dia­
meters are equal.

EQUAL Figures, are those whose
areas are equal, whether the figures
be similar or not.

EQUAL Hyperbola's, are those whose
ordinates to their determinate axes are
equal to each other, taken at equal di­
stances from their vertices.

EQUAL Solids, are those which com­
prehend and contain each as much as
the other, or whose solidities and ca­
pacities are equal.

EQUAL Arithmetical Ratio's, are such
wherein the difference of the two less
terms is equal to the difference of the
two greater.

EQUALNESS [æqualitas, L.] a be­
ing equal or like, a likeness, agreeable­
ness.

Circle of EQUALITY [Astron.] a cir­
cle used in the Ptolemaick system, to ac­
count for the eccentricity of the planets, 
and reduce them to a calculus with the
greater ease; this is called also the
Circle of the Equant.

Proportion of EQUALITY evenly ran­
ged, is such wherein two terms in a
rank or series are proportional to as
many terms of another rank, compared
to each other in the same order, i. e.
the first of one rank to the first of ano­
ther, the second to the second, and so on, 
called in Latin, Proportio ex æquo ordi­
nata.

Proportion of EQUALITY evenly dis­
turbed, is such wherein more than two
terms of a rank are proportional to as
many terms of another rank, compared
to each other in a different, interrupt­
ed or disturbed order, viz. the first of
one rank to the second of another, the
second to the third, &c. called in Latin, 
Proportio ex æquo perturbata.



EQUALITY [Emblematically] was re­
presented by a lady lighting two torches
at once.

EQUALITY [with Mathematicians]
the exact agreement of two things in
respect to quantity.

EQUALITY [with Algebraists] is a
companion of two quantities which are
equal both really and representatively, 
i. e. equal in both effects and letters.

EQUANIMOUSNESS [æquanimitas, 
L.] evenness of mind, contentedness; a
calm and quiet temper upon all events
of fortune, either good or bad.

EQUANT [in Astronomy] a circle
imagined by astronomers in the plane
of the deferent or eccentrick, for the
regulating and adjusting certain moti­
ons of the planets.

EQUATOR [æquator, L.] the equi­
noctial line, and the same that by mari­
ners is called the line by way of excel­
lency, a great moveable circle of the
sphere equally distant from the two
poles of the world, or that divides the
heaven or globe of the universe into
two equal parts north and south.

EQUERY [ecuyer, F.] an officer
who has the care and
management of the horses of a king or
prince; also a grand stable for horses
furnished with all conveniences; also
the lodgings or apartments of the e­
querries or grooms.

EQUERRY [ecuyer, F.] an officer
who has the care and
management of the horses of a king or
prince; also a grand stable for horses
furnished with all conveniences; also
the lodgings or apartments of the e­
querries or grooms.

EQUIDIFFERENT [Arithmetick] if
in a series of three quantities there be
the same difference between the first
and second as between the second and
third, they are said to be continually
equidifferent: thus 3, 6, 9, are conti­
nually equidifferent.

EQUIDISTANCE [of æquus,
and distan­
tia, L.] the being equally distant.

EQUIDISTANTNESS [of æquus,
and distan­
tia, L.] the being equally distant.

EQUILATERAL Hyperbola, one
whose asymptotes do always intersect
each other at right angles in the cen­
tre. If the transverse diameter of any
hyperbola be equal to its Parameter,
then all the other diameters will also
be equal to their Parameters.

EQUINOCTIAL Points [Astron.] are
the two points where the equator and
ecliptick intersect each other.

EQUINOCTIAL Colure, is that pas­
sing through the equinoctial points.

EQUIPOISE [equipoids, F.] an equal
weight.

EQUIPOLLENTNESS, the same as
equipollence.

EQUIPONDERANT [of æque and 
ponderans, L.] equally ballancing or poi­
sing.

EQUIPONDEROUSNESS [æquipon­
dium, L.] the being of equal weight.

EQUIPPED [equippé, F.] furnished, 
accouter'd, &c.

EQUIRIA, certain games celebrated
at Rome in the month of March, with
horse-races, like our justs and tourna­
ments, in honour of Mars in Mars's
fields.

EQUITABLENESS [of equitable, F.]
righteousness, justness, reasonableness.

EQUITY [æquitas, L.] the virtue of
treating all men according to the rules
of right reason and justice.

EQUITY and Justice [Hieroglyphical­
ly] was represented by a swallow, be­
cause that bird distributes its meat e­
qually to its young ones.

EQUITY [Hieroglyphically] is also
represented by a pair of scales or bal­
lance.

EQUITY [in a Law Sense] has a dou­
ble and contrary meaning, for one en­
larges and adds to the letter of the law, 
extending the words of it to cases un­
expressed, yet having the same reason;
whereas the other abridges and takes
from it; so that the latter is defined to
be a correction of the law, generally
made in that part wherein it fails.

EQUIVOCA Equivocantia, words
common to several things in a very dif­
ferent signification, i. e. to several things
which have a similar essence, corres­
ponding to the similar denomination;
as taurus a bull, and taurus the constel­
lation, and mount Taurus.

EQUIVOCALNESS [of æquivocus, 
L.] equivocal quality, or being of the
same name but different quality.

EQUUS [with Astronomers] a constel­
lation, the former part of the horse as 
far as the navel, is the only part to be
seen, Aratus writes that he was the
same that opened the fountain in Helicon
with his hoof, which is called Hippocre­
ne. But some will have him to be
Pegasus, who flew to the stars before
the fall of Bellerophon. Which seems
to others to be incredible, because he
has no wings; therefore Euripides will
have him to be Menalippe, the daugh­
ter of Chiron, who was debauched by
Æolus and being with child fled into
the mountains; and being about to be
delivered there, her father came in
search after her. She being taken, that
she might not be known, pray'd that she
might be transformed; upon which she
was turned into a mare. And upon
the account of her own piety and her
father's, Diana placed her among the
stars; and for that reason she remains



invisible to the centaur (for he is be­
liev'd to be Chiron) the posterior [low­
er] parts of the body of this figure, be­
cause of the modesty of the womanish
sex, are not seen.

ERADICATIVE Cure [in Medicine]
is such an one as takes away the cause
or roots out a distemper; in opposition
to Palliative Cure, which relieves for a
time; but not reaching the cause of the
disorder, does not prevent its return.

ERATO [is represented in Painting, 
&c.] as a young virgin, of gay humour, 
crowned with myrtle and roses, holding
a harp in her right hand, and a bow in
the other, with a little winged cupid by
her side, armed with a bow and arrows.

ERASED [in Heraldry]
signifies any thing plucked
or torn off from that part, 
to which it was fixed by na­
ture, as a boar's head e­
ras'd; see the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



ERE [ære, Sax.] before that, rather
than.

EREMITA [of ἔρημος, Gr. a wilder­
ness] an hermit, a dweller in the wil­
derness.  L.

EREMITICALNESS, the leading the
life of an hermit.

EREPT [ereptus, L.] snatched away.

ERGOT [with Horsemen] a stub like
a piece of soft horn, about the size of a
chestnut, placed behind and below the
pastern joint of a horse, and is common­
ly hid under the tuft of the fetlock. See
Disergot.

ERIDANUS [Astr.] a southern con­
stellation consisting of 28 stars. This
arises from Orion's left foot. It is called
Eridanus from Aratus by Eratosthenes, 
but he has produced no reasons why.
Others, and with greater probability, 
take it to be the Nile, which only flows
from the South. It is illustrated with
many stars; there is under it a star cal­
led Canopus, which reaches pretty near
to Argus's coach-pole, and indeed no
star is lower than this, for which rea­
son it is called Perigæum.

ERMENSEWL [Ermenſe&wyn;l, Sax.]
an idol of the Germans, Saxons and Bri­
tons, accounted a favourer of the poor;
he was represented as a great man, 
among heaps of flowers; upon his head
he supported a cock, upon his breast a
bear, and in his right hand he held a
banner display'd.

ERMINE [probably so called of Ar­
menia, as having been brought from
thence] a very rich furr of a weesel or
field-mouse, worn by princes or per­
sons of quality. This animal is milk 
white, and so far from being spotted as
it is represented in heraldry, that it is
reported of it, that it will rather be
kill'd or taken, than fully its whiteness, 
nor is there any animal whose skins
naturally answers to that represented
in Heraldry. And Furriers to add to the
beauty of those of their furrs used in
lining garments to sew bits of the black
tails of these animals on the white skins
to add to their beauty.

ERMINE [in Heraldry] is
white furs with black spots, 
or, as the heralds term it, 
argent and sable, which is
made by sewing bits of the
black tails of these creatures upon the
white skins to add to the beauty. Er­
mine is used for the lining the garments
of great persons.

Image omitted.



ERMINEE [in Heraldry]
as a cross-ermine is a cross
composed of 4 ermine spots
placed in the form of a cross.
See the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



ERMINES [in heraldry]
or rather Contre-Ermine, the
counter or reverse of er­
mine, which is black pow­
dered with white, as in the
escutcheon.

Image omitted.



ERMINITES [with Heralds] little
ermines, or rather a white field pow­
der'd with black, every spot having a
little red oar on it. But others say, it
signifies a yellow field powdered with
black.

ERN [of Ern, Sax. a solitary place]
places names which end in ern signify a
melancholy situation.

ERNES [of ernde, Teut. harvest, or
erden, to cut or mow corn] the loose
scatter'd ears of corn that are left on the
ground after the binding or cocking it.

To ERODE [erodere, L.] to gnaw off
or eat out or about.

ERODENTIA [with Surgeons] medi­
cines that by their sharp particles gnaw
and prey upon the flesh.  L.

EROS and ANTEROS [among the
Romans] two Cupids being an emblem
of mutual love, they being represented
striving one with another, which should
have the branch of a palm-tree that
was between them; thereby intima­
ting that contention should be between
friends to deserve the palm or honour
of excelling in love and friendship.

EROTEMA [with Rhetoricians] a
figure when by asking
questions, the matter is aggravated, as
were you not there? did you not say
you had so done?

EROTESIS [with Rhetoricians] a
figure when by asking
questions, the matter is aggravated, as
were you not there? did you not say
you had so done?



EROTEMATICK [erotematicus, L.]
demanding, questioning.

EROTICK [of Ἔρως, Gr. Cupid] a
term applied to any thing that has re­
lation to love.

ERRABLE [errabilis, L.] that may
err.

ERRANTNESS [of errans, L.] wan­
dering faculty.

ERRATICALNESS [of erraticus, L.]
wandring faculty.

ERRATION, a straying, a wandring
out of the way.  L.

ERRHINA, medicines that purge
the brain and head, by bringing down
the superfluous pituit or phegm lying
about the Meninges of the brain.

ERRONEOUSNESS [of erroneus, L.]
error or fulness of error.

ERROR [error, L.] mistake of the
mind in giving assent to
a proposition that is not true; oversight, 
folly.

ERROUR [error, L.] mistake of the
mind in giving assent to
a proposition that is not true; oversight, 
folly.

ERROUR [in Law] a fault in plead­
ing or in the process; whence the writ
brought for remedy of this oversight, is
called a Writ of Errour.

ERUBESCENCE [erubescentia, L.] a
blushing for shame; an uneasiness of
mind by which it is hinder'd from do­
ing ill or fear of loss of reputation.

ERUBESCENT [erubescens, L.] wax­
ing red, blushing.

ERUDITELY [erudite, L.] learnedly.

ERUGINEOUS [æruginosus, L.]
partaking of or
like to the rust of brass or copper.

ÆRUGINOUS [æruginosus, L.]
partaking of or
like to the rust of brass or copper.

ERUGATION, a taking away of
wrinkles.  L.

To ERUNCATE [eruncatum, L.] to
pull up weeds.

ERUPT [eruptus, L.] broken
or burst out.

ERUPTED [eruptus, L.] broken
or burst out.

ERYNGIUM [ἐρύγγιον, Gr.] the herb
Eringo, Seaholm or Sea-holly,  L.

ERYNNES, were called ἐρευνητῆρες
i. e. the searchers into those men who
have committed the most heinous of­
fences. Their names are Megæra, Ti­
siphone, and Alecto. Megæra is so cal­
led, as tho' μεγαίροντος, i. e. having in
hatred, τιννυμένου i. e. avenging or τι­
μωρουμένου, i. e. punishment of men be­
cause of murders; and this ἀλήχτως, 
without delay and incessantly. These
goddesses are altogether venerable, 
for a notable benevolence to human
kind, in causing mutual good-will be­
tween man and man. But they are
horrible in their aspect, and chastise
the impious with scourges and flaming
torches; their hair is wreathed with
serpents, that they may strike terror
to murderers, who suffer the punish­
ments due to their impious crimes;
they are storied to have their residence
in [infernum] hell, because the causes
of those evils that invade men are in
obscurity; nor can the wicked provide
against them, so as to guard against
them, or hinder their falling into those
dangers. Phurnutius.

ERYSIPELAS [Ἐρυσίπελας, of τὸ ἐρύ­
εθαι εϖὶ τὸ ϖέλας, because it draws the
neighbouring parts to itself; or as o­
thers, of ἐρ θρύπελος, of ἔρυθρος red and
ϖελος black, from the variety of colours]
a swelling of a bright yellow colour, 
inclining to red, usually attended with
a pricking pain, but not beating, and a
symptomatical fever.

ERYSIPELATODES [Ἐρυσιπελατόδης
Gr.] a swelling like the Erysipelas, but
the skin being of a dark colour.  L.

ESCALOP Shells [with Heralds] are
frequent in coat-armour, and some are
of opinion that shells are a proper
bearing for those who have made long
voyages at sea, or have born considera­
ble commands there, and obtained vic­
tory over enemies.

ESCAMBIC [with Merchants] a li­
cence granted for the making over a bill
of exchange to a person beyond sea.  Ital.

ESCAR [ἐσχάρα, or ἐσχάρα, Gr.
a crust, eschara, L.] a
crust, shell or scab brought over an ul­
cer, or raised with a searing iron.

ESCHAR [ἐσχάρα, or ἐσχάρα, Gr.
a crust, eschara, L.] a
crust, shell or scab brought over an ul­
cer, or raised with a searing iron.

ESCHAROTICKS [of ἐσχαρόω to skin
or crust over] plasters, searing-irons, 
actual fire, &c. which bring a sore to
an escar or crust.

ESCARTELE [in Heraldry] quarter­
ed.

ESCHEAT, the place or circuit with­
in which either the king or other lord
has escheats of his tenants.

ESCHEVIN [in France and Holland]
a magistrate in a city
to take care of their common concerns, 
the good order, decoration and conve­
niency of the city.

ECHEVIM [in France and Holland]
a magistrate in a city
to take care of their common concerns, 
the good order, decoration and conve­
niency of the city. 

ESCHYNOMENOUS Plant [of αἰσχύ­
νομας, Gr. I am ashamed] sensitive plants, 
such as shrink in and contract their
leaves upon touching them.

ESCHRAKITES [of the Arabick קדש
scharak in the 4th conjugation קדשא
Ascharak, to shine or glitter like the sun, 
q. d. illuminated] a sort of Mahometan
Platonists, who place their summum bo­
num or chiefest good and happiness in
the contemplation of the Divine Maje­
sty; despising the gross imaginations of
the Alcoran concerning Paradise. They
are very careful in shunning vice, pre­



serve an equal and easy temper, love
musick, and divert themselves with com­
posing hymns or spiritual songs.

ESCLAIRCISMENT [of esclaircir, F.]
the clearing a thing, the rendring it
more evident or clear.  F.

ESCLATTE [in Heraldry] signifies a
thing forcibly blown away, and there­
fore a bend or other partition esclatte, 
represents it torn or broken like a piece
of a ruinated wall, irregular or not le­
velled; or else it may represent a shield
that has been shattered with the stroke
of a battle-ax or some weapon of a like
sort, but not cut with a sword.  F.

ESCLOPPE [in Heraldry] signifies a
sort of indenture or cut made upon a
bend, so that the colours counterchange, 
by running one into another, in only
one point of each.  F.

ESCORT, a convoy or company of
armed men attending some person or
thing in a journey or voyage to defend
or secure it from insults.  F.

To ESCORT, to convoy, &c.

ESCOUADE [Milit. term] the third
part of a foot-company, so divided for
the more convenient mounting of
guards, &c.  F.

ESCRITOIR. See Scrutoire.

ESCROL [with Heralds] a long slip
as it were of parchment or paper, on
which there is generally a motto.

ESCU, a French crown of 6o sols or
3 livres.

ESCULENT [esculentus, L.] that may
be eaten.

The ESCURIAL in Spain, about 7
miles north from Madrid, call'd also
the monastery of St. Lawrence, is a
most sumptuous edifice built by K. Phi­
lip II, the front of which towards the
west is adorn'd with 3 stately gates, the
middlemost of which leads into a most
magnificent temple; the gate on the
right hand leads into divers offices ap­
pertaining to the monastery; that on
the left into schools and out-houses.

At the 4 corners are 4 turrets, and
towards the north is a royal palace. It
contains in all 37 courts and cloisters, 
11000 windows, 800 pillars, and hath a
library containing 18000 books.

The revenues of this monastery a­
mount to 30000 crowns per annum, and
it is grown into an adage, that it is
worth a journey into Spain to see that
alone and return.

ESCUTCHEON [of scu­
tum, L. a shield, escu, F.]
and we from them taking
away the E and putting to
an English termination eon,
and the letters ch by Epen­
thesis make escutcheon. The Latins
derive their scutum from the Greek σχυ­
τὸς leather, because their shields com­
monly were covered with leather. So
that escutcheon signifies as much as
shield, which tho' they were anciently
of several forms, yet now those in
coat armour are generally represented
square, only rounded off at bottom as
in the figure.

Image omitted.



ESCUTCHEON, heralds
give names to several points
or places; thus the point D
they call the dexter chief, 
C is the middle chief, S the
sinister chief point, H is
called the Honour point, F the Fess
point, N is called the Nombril point, 
A the dexter Base, and O the middle, 
and P the Base point. See the escut­
cheon.

Image omitted.



ESCUTCHEON of Pretence, such an
one on which a man carries the coat of
his wife being an heiress, and having
issue by her.

ESPECIAL [specialis, L. special, F.]
chief, singular, particular.

ESPECIALLY [specialement, F. speci­
aliter, L.] in an especial manner.

ESPLANADE [in Fortification] a part
serving the counterscarp or covered
way for a parapet; being a declivity or
slope of earth commencing from the
top of the counterscarp, and losing itself
insensibly in the level of the campaign.
It is now chiefly taken for the void space
between the glacis of a citadel and the
first house in a town.

ESQUIRE [escuyer, F. escudero, Span.
armiger, L. q. d. an armour-bearer] so
that the title esquire imports a person
who carried the arms of some great
man. Some now reckon six sorts of es­
quires.
1. The eldest sons of viscounts and
lords.
2. The younger sons of all noblemen.
3. The esquires of the king's body.
4. The oldest sons of knights. 5. Those
to whom the king himself gives arms, 
and makes esquires by giving them arms
(which anciently was done by putting a
collar of SS about their neck, and a pair
of white spurs on their heels) 6. Those
who bear any publick office in the king­
dom, as high-sheriff, justices of the peace
&c.

Serjeants at law, counsellers at law, 
majors of towns, batchelors of divinity, 
law, physick, are reputed esquires, Tho'
none of them are really so.

ESQUISSE [of Schizzo, Ital. a splash, 
and so an esquisse of a painting only sig­



nifies splashes or dabs of colours in pain­
ting] a term in painting which signifies
the first sketch or draught of a picture;
the first thought of a design drawn has­
tily with a crayon, or in colours on pa­
per, canvass or the like, in order to be
finished and painted or engraven after­
wards.

ESSAY [in Coinage, &c.] is a
proof or trial made by
the test of the fineness or
purity of the gold or silver to be used in
coining money.

ASSAY [in Coinage, &c.] is a
proof or trial made by
the test of the fineness or
purity of the gold or silver to be used in
coining money. 

SAY [in Coinage, &c.] is a
proof or trial made by
the test of the fineness or
purity of the gold or silver to be used in
coining money.

ESSE [in School Philosophy] is used in
the same sense with essence, principally
for that which is really and actually ex­
isting.

ESSENCE of a circle [with Geometri­
cians] the essence of a circle is, that the
radii or semidiameters of it be all equal;
the essence of a square is, that it have 4
right angles, and as many equal right
angled sides.

ESSENCE [in Metaphysicks] signifies
the same as being. Some distinguish be­
tween them, in that being has the same
respect to essence, that the concrete has to
its abstract. But as it is taken by Meta­
physicians in its most abstracted nature, 
it must be the same as being.

ESSENES [among the Jews] a strict
sect, who lived abstemiously and drank
nothing but water, denied themselves of
all pleasures, and among the rest those
of marriage, they wore white garments, 
professed a community of goods, allow­
ed not oaths, shewed a particular reve­
rence to their elders, and sacrificed only
inanimate things; and were above all
other Jews so strict in the observation
of the sabbath, that they prepared their
food on the proceeding eve, and would
not on the sabbath remove any thing
out of its place, nor neither ease or sup­
ply nature unless very much pressed.
 
Another sort of them did allow of
marriage for the sake of procreation;
but not till they had slayed 3 years to
try whether or not the woman was
healthy and fit to bear children; but ne­
ver lay with their wives after concep­
tion, to make it appear that it was more
from a desire to benefit the common­
wealth than to satisfy lust. They were
distinguished into Practicks and Theo­
ricks. The Practicks lived in cities and
the Theoricks in solitary places; the
former employing themselves in han­
dy-crafts and the latter in meditation.

ESSENTIA, essence.  L.

ESSENTIA Quinta [with Chymists]
quintessence, i. e. the 5th essence, a
medicine made of the most powerfully
working and acting particles of its in­
gredients.  L.

ESSENTIAL [essentialis, L.]some­
thing that is necessary to constitute a
thing, or that has such a connection with
the nature and reason of a thing, that
it is found or supposed where-ever the
thing itself is.

ESSENTIAL Property [of every right
lined triangle] is to have the sum of its
3 angles equal to 2 right angles.

ESSENTIALLY [essentialiter; L. essen­
tiellement, F.] in an essential manner.

ESSENTIALNESS [essentia, L. essence, 
F.] essential quality,

ESSENTIAL Oils [with Chymists] are
such as are really in a plant, and drawn
from it by distillation in an alembick in
water; in contradistinction to those
made by Insolation.

ESSENTIATED composed or made
up of essentials; or made or brought into
essences, as essentiated spirits.

ESSOIN de malo villæ [in Law] is
when the defendant is in court the first
day; but going away without pleading
falls sick, and sends two Essoiners, who
protest that he is detained by sickness in
such a Village, that he cannot come,  L.

ESSORANT [in Heraldry] a term
used of a bird, standing on the ground
with the wings expanded, as though it
had been wet, and were drying itself,

ESTATE Conditional [in Law] is one
that has a conditional annexed to it; al­
though it be not specified in writing.

ESTEEM [in Ethicks] simply so cal­
led, is the bare good opinion of good
men, which flows from the observance
or the law of nature and our duty; and
the Moralists say, that we ought as far
as in us lies to endeavour to procure and
preserve it, became the want of it may
lay open an occasion to a thousand mis­
chiefs and inconveniences.

ESTETE [in Heraldry] is used by the
French to signify a beast, whose head has
been as it were torn of by force, and
consequently the neck left rough and
rugged, in contradistinction to diffait
and decapité, where the neck is left
smooth, as if the head had been cut off.

ESTIMABLENESS [of æstimabilis, L.
estimable, F.] worthiness of value.

ESTIMATION of the Judgment [with
Divines] consists of a due valuation of
those excellencies that are in the divine
nature, whereby God is accounted the
supreme being in Genere Boni: from
whom all created goodness is derived,
and in conformity to whom it is to be
measured.



ESTIVAL occident [with Astrono­
mers] the summer-west or north-west;
that point of the horizon, where the
sun sets, when he is in the tropick of
Cancer and the days are longest.

ESTIVAL orient [with Astronomers]
the summer-east or north-east; that
point of the horizon where the sun rises
when it is in the tropick of cancer.

ESTIVAL Solstice [with Astronomers]
the summer solstice, whan the sun en­
tring the tropick of Cancer on the 11th
of June, and makes the longest day and
the shortest night.

ESTOILLEE [in Heraldry] as a Cross
Estoilleé signifies a star with only 4 long
rays in form of a cross, and so broad in
the centre, and ending in sharp points.

ESTRAC [with Horsemen) a horse
that is light-bodied, lank-bellied, thin-­
flanked, and narrow-chested.

ESTRADE, a publick high-way or
road.  F.

Batteurs d'ESTRADE [Military term]
scouts of horse sent out to get intelli­
gence of the dispositions of the enemy
and what is like to fall out in the way.

Batre d'ESTRADE, to go out upon
such an expedition.  F.

ESTRADE, the one half of an alcove
or bed-chamber, raised with a floor, 
and richly furnished and adorned for
reception of persons of distinction.

ESTRANGEL, the Estrangelus cha­
racter, a particular species or form of
Syriack letter, serving as capitals.

ESTRANGEMENT, a drawing away
the affections, &c.

ESTRAPADE [in Horsemanship] is the
defence of a horse that will not obey;
who, to rid himself of his rider, rises
mightily before, and while his fore-hand
is yet in the air, furiously yerks out his
hind-legs, striking higher than his head
was before, and during the counter­
time rather goes back than forward.  F.

ESTREG-BOARDS, boards either of
deal, fir, &c. brought out of the east­
ern countries.

ESTREPAMENT [Old Law] an im­
poverishing or making of lands barren
by continual ploughing and sowing with­
out due manuring, rest and other hus­
bandry.

ESTREPAMENT a writ to for­
bid the making
such waste, during a law suit between
two parties.

ESTREPEMENT a writ to for­
bid the making
such waste, during a law suit between
two parties.

To ESTREPE [estropier, F.] to make
spoil in lands and woods.

ESURIENT [esuriens, L.] hungering
being hungry.

ETAPE, or publick store house for
goods, a staple town,  F.

ETAPE [Military Affairs] an allow­
ance of provisions or forage for soldiers, 
during the time of their march thro' a
country, to or from winter quarters.  F.

ETAPIER, one who contracts with a
country or territory for furnishing of
troops with provisions and forage in
their march thro' a country.

ETERNALISTS, such as believe the
eternity of the world.

ETERNALNESS [of eternité, F.
æternitas, L.] the being eternal.

ETERNITY [Hieroglyphically] was
by the ancients represented by a cedar-­
tree. Eternity as a goddess was painted
or carved like a fair lady, having 3 heads, 
signifying time past, present and to come;
in her left hand a circle signifying that
she hath neither beginning nor end, and
pointing with her fore-finger of her
right-hand to heaven.

ETHELING [noble or excelling] a
title peculiar to the prince or next heir
to the crown among the English Saxons.

ETHEREAL [with Chymists] a very
fine rectified oil.

ETHEREALNESS [of æthereus, L.]
of an ethereal quality.

ETHNOPHRONES [of ἔθνος heathen
and φρὴν, Gr. thought, sentiment] a sect
of hereticks of the 2d century, who pro­
fess'd christianity, but joined thereto
all the superstitions and follies of paga­
nism, as judiciary astrology, sortileges, 
auguries, &c.

ETHOLOGICAL [of ἠθολογία, Gr.]
pertaining to discourses and treatises of
Ethicks or Morality.

ETHOLOGIST [ethologus, L. ἠθόλο­
γος, Gr.] a mimick, one who expresses
other people's manners by voice or
gesture.

ETOILE [in Fortification] a small
sort of work of 4, 5, or 6, or more
points, a star redoubt.

ETYMOLOGICALLY [of ἐτυμολό­
γος, Gr.] by way of etymology.

EVACUANTS [in Physick] medi­
cines proper to expel or carry off any
ill, peccant or redundant humours in
the animal body, by the proper way of
emunctories.

EVAGATION, a roving or wan­
dering out.  L.

EVANESCENT [evanescens, L.] va­
nishing or perishing.

EVANGELIC [evangelicus, L.
ἐυαγγελιχὸς, Gr.]
gospel like, pertaining to the gospel.

EVANGELICK [evangelicus, L.
ἐυαγγελιχὸς, Gr.]
gospel like, pertaining to the gospel.

EVANGELICA [among the Ancients]
processions and prayers made for glad
tidings received.  L.



EVANGELICALNESS [of ἐυαγγελι­
χὸς, G.] the having evangelical quality.

EVANID Colours [with Philosophers]
such colours as are not of a very long
continuance, as those of clouds before
and after sun-set, the rainbow, &c.
which are called emphatical and fanta­
stical colours.

EVANIDNESS [of evanidus, L.] fa­
ding quality.

EVASIVENESS [of evasivus, L.]
evading quality.

EVATES, a branch or division of
our old philosophers, the Druids. Stra­
bo distributes the philosophers among
the Britons and Gauls into 3 sects, Bards, 
Evates and Druids. The Bards he takes
to be poets and musicians, the Evates
priests and naturalists, the Druids mo­
ralists as well as naturalists.

EUCHARIST, a sacrament instituted
by our Saviour at his last supper. The
consecration of the bread and wine is
done by the bishops and priests, who
only according to the present Church
discipline have authority. In the pri­
mitive times the deacons used to distri­
bute this sacrament to the congrega­
tion; and the Catechumens and Peni­
tents were not permitted at the conse­
cration of it.

The Communion was receiv'd in
both kinds, both in the Latin and Greek
church 'till the 12th century; about
which time the Roman church refus'd
the cup to the Laity; but the Greek
church continued the ancient custom.

In ancient times both eastern and
western churches consecrated leavened
bread; but the Romans now use unlea­
vened bread; and the Greeks still use
leavened.

EUCHITES [ἐυχετες of ἐυχὴ, Gr.
prayer] an ancient sect of hereticks, 
thus denominated on account of their
praying without ceasing; imagining that
prayer alone was sufficient to save them.

EUCHOLOGY [ἐυχολογία of ἐυχὴ and 
λέγω, Gr. to discourse] a treatise or dis­
course of prayer.

EUDÆMON [ἐυδαιμον, Gr.] a good
genius or spirit.

EUDÆMON [with Astrologers] the
fourth house of a figure of the heavens, 
so called on account of its good and pro­
sperous significations, as attainment of
hopes, store of friends, &c.

EUDÆMONY [eudemonia, L. of ἐυ­
δαιμώνια, Gr.] happiness.

EVE and TREVE [in the practice of
Scotland] servants whose predecessors
have been servants to any person and
his predecessors.

EVE-CHIER, an insect, a chier-worm.

EVECTION of the Moon [with Astro­
nomers] is an equality in her motion, 
by which, at or near her quarters, she
is not in that line which passes through
the center of the earth to the sun, as
she is at her conjunction, opposition, 
or syzygies.

EVENNESS [æfeneſſe, Sax.] plain­
ness, smoothness, &c.

EVENTILATED [eventilatus, L.]
winnowed; also thoroughly examined
or sifted.

EVENTUALLY, casually, by chance.

EVERGETES [ἐυεργέτης of εἶ well, 
and ἔργον, Gr. work] a benefactor; a
title given to several princes or kings of
Syria and Egypt, who succeeded Alexan­
der.

EVERLASTING [of æfre and læſ­
tunʒ, Sax.] enduring for ever.

EVERLASTINGNESS, durable na­
ture.

EVERSION [in Rhetorick] the same
figure as Epanodos,  L.

To EVERT [evertere, L.] to turn
upside down, to overthrow, &c.

EVESTIGATED [evestigatus, L.]
searched out by the footsteps.

EVESTIGATION, a seeking for, 
searching after, tracing or finding out.

EUEXIA [ἐυεξια, Gr.] a good sound
habit of body,  L.

EUGEOS [ἐυγείν, of εἶ and γαῖα, 
Gr. the earth] the
womb, so termed by way of allusion to
fruitful ground.  L.

EUGEUM [ἐυγείν, of εἶ and γαῖα, 
Gr. the earth] the
womb, so termed by way of allusion to
fruitful ground.  L.

To EVICT [evincere, evictum, L.] to
convince by force of argument, &c.

EVIDENCE [evidentia, L.] clearness, 
perspicuity, plainness, demonstration;
a quality of things whereby they be­
come visible or apparent to the eyes, 
either of the body or the mind. Evi­
dence is the essential and infallible cha­
racter or criterion of truth, and is that
in effect which with us constitutes the
truth.

Formal EVIDENCE, is the act of the
intellect as considered as clear and di­
stinct.

Objective EVIDENCE, consists in the
clearness and perspicuity of the object;
or it is the object itself so constituted, 
as that it may be clearly and distinctly
known.

Physical EVIDENCE, is so far as na­
tural sense and reason, pointing out
any thing, convinces one thereof.

Metaphysical EVIDENCE, is when we
enter so fully and clearly into the es­
sence of any thing, that nothing can be
clearer.



Moral EVIDENCE, a thing is said to
be morally evident, so far as we have a
distinct notion and knowledge thereof
by unexceptional witnesses.

EVIDENTNESS [evidentia, L. and
ness] plainness to be seen.

To EVIGILATE [evigilatum, L.] to
watch diligently, to study hard.

Natural EVIL, is the want of some­
thing to the bene esse, or perfection of a
thing, or to its answering all its pur­
poses, such are the defects of the body, 
blindness, lameness, &c. hunger, dis­
eases, &c.

Moral EVIL, a deviation from right
reason, and consequently from the will
and intendment of God the legislator, 
who gave the rule.

EVILNESS [Efelneſſe, Sax.] evil
nature or quality.

EVIRATED [eviratus, L.] gelded.

EVIRATION, a gelding, unman­
ning; also a making effeminate.  L.

To EVIRTUATE [of e neg. and vir­
tus, L.] to take away or deprive of the
virtue.

EVITABLENESS [of evitabilis, L.]
possibleness of being avoided.

EULOGIES [in the Greek Church]
little bits of bread consecrated, i. e. the
eucharist sent to persons who were not
present at the communion.

EUMENIDES [Ἐυμενιδες, Gr.] the
daughters of Acheron and Nox (as the
poets feign) Tisiphone, Megæra and A­
lecto, the furies of hell, who were, by
the ancient heathens, accounted the
executioners of the vengeance of the
gods on wicked men. They are descri­
bed with snakes instead of hair, and
eyes sparkling like lightening; a filthy
froth issuing out of their mouth as a
sign of their outrageous nature. They
carried iron chains and whips in one
hand, and flaming torches in the other, 
which gave a dismal light, but such as
could discover crimes, and kindle a
flame in the breast of the guilty, not
to be extinguished; their feet were
of brass, because their motions are
sometimes slow, but sure and steddy.

They are said to be attendants in the
porch of Pluto's palace, who appointed
them to be punishers of such as took
false oaths, or oppress'd the poor; they
also attended at Jupiter's throne, and
therefore they had wings to support
their swift passage through the air, 
when they struck terror, and carried
such punishmeuts and calamities as the
gods commanded to be inflicted upon
mortals, whether they were famine, 
wars or pestilence.

They are said to delight in the gloo­
miness of the night; and to have their
dwelling in a dark cavern near the ri­
ver Styx, and were always hovering
about persons who had ill designs, and
made use of wicked counsels and indi­
rect practices.

They were worshipped in divers pla­
ces, had a temple at Athens, and their
priests were the judges that sat at Areo­
pagus. Their sacrifices were perform­
ed in the night and amidst a profound
silence, and a black ewe lamb was offer­
ed to them.

Some Mythologies are of opinion, 
that Tisiphone punished the sins that pro­
ceeded from Hatred and Anger; Megæra 
those from Envy, and Alecto such as ac­
company the insatiable pursuit of Ri­
ches and Pleasure.

They are called Eumenides, because
they will be appeased by those that are
supplicants to them: Furies from that
madness that attends guilty persons up­
on the consciousness of their villanies;
and Erinnyes from the indignation and
commotions they raise in the mind by
their severity.

EUNOMIANS, a sect of hereticks in
the 4th century, who held that faith
alone was acceptable without good
works.

EUNOMY [eunomia, L. ἐυνομία, Gr.]
a constitution or ordination of good
laws.

EUNOMIOEUTYCHIANS [of ἐυνο­
μία, Gr. and Eutychus] a sect of here­
ticks said to be the same with the Euty­
chians.

EVOCATION [with Grammarians]
a figure of construction, a reducing of
the third person to the first or second, 
as Ego tuæ deliciæ istuc veniam.

EVODES [with Physicians] is
when the ordure or ex­
crements have a sweet smell.

EVOSMIA [with Physicians] is
when the ordure or ex­
crements have a sweet smell. 

EVOLATICK [evolaticus, L.] flying
abroad.

EVOLATION, a flying abroad.  L.

EVOLVENT [with Geometricians] a
curve resulting from the evolution of a
curve, in contradistinction to the Evo­
lute.

EVOLUTE, the first curve supposed
to be opened or evolved, which in
opening describes other curves.

EVOLUTION [Geometry] the un­
folding or opening of a curve, and mak­
ing it form an evolute.

EUPEPTICKS [of ἐυπεψία, Gr.] me­
dicines, or other things that promote
concoction.



EUPETALUS [εὐπέταλος, Gr.] a
precious stone of four colours, viz. fie­
ry, blue, vermilion and green; also a
kind of laurel.

EUPHONICAL [ἐυφωνία, Gr.] hav­
ing a graceful sound.

EUPHORBIUM [ἐυφόρβιον, Gr.] the
Lybian Ferula, a tree or shrub first found
by king Juba, and so called after Eu­
phorbus his physician.  L.

EURIPIDES, a famous tragick poet, 
a native of Salamine, he flourish'd in the
reign of Archelaus king of Macedon who
had him in great honour; he after­
wards left Athens because they preferr'd
the comick poets before him. He wrote
75 tragedies but was victor at only 5.
There are now but 19 of them left.
Some call'd him the woman hater; he
was torn to pieces by dogs and his
bones were buried by the command of
Archelaus at Pella.

EURIPUS [of εὖ easily, and ῥίπτεοθαι, 
Gr. to be precipitated] the word ori­
ginally is the name of a certain streight
in the sea between Bœotia and the Ne­
gropont, where the currents are so
strong, that the sea is said to ebb and
flow 7 times in a day; but it is now by
Hydrographers used for any streight
where the water is in great motion and
agitation.

EUROPA [Εὐρυῶπη, Gr. i. e. having
broad eyes, or of the Chaldee אדיה
אפא, i.e. fair face; or of אפדא, (signi­
fying both a bull and a ship] the daugh­
ter of Agenor, king of Phœnicia, whom
as the poets feign) Jupiter, in the shape
of a bull, ravish'd and carried over on
his back through the sea to Crete; some
think that the truth of this fiction is,
that the ship wherein she was carried,
was Tauriformis, i. e. like a bull; others,
that the name of the master of the ship
was Taurus; and others, that Taurus, or
a bull, was the sign of the ship; others,
that she was stolen away by a company
of men, who earned the picture of a
bull in their flag.

EURITHMY [in Painting, Sculpture,
&c.] a certain majesty, elegance and ea­
siness appearing in the composition of
divers members of a body or painting,
resulting from the fine proportion
thereof.

EURITHMY [with Architects] an
exact proportion between all parts of a
building, as to length, breadth and
height of each room in a fabrick.

EUROPEAN, of or pertaining to Eu­
rope.

EUSEBIANS, a sect of Arians, so
called on account of the favour shewn
them or Eusebius, bishop of Cæsarea.

EUSEBES [of ἐυσεβία, Gr.] religious, 
godly; also a stone on which, in the
temple of Hercules at Tyre, a seat was
made where Dæmon's us'd to appear.

EUSEMIA [with Physicians] a crisis
or judgment of a disease excellently
well made.

EUSTATHIANS [so called from Eu­
stathius their author] a sect of hereticks
in the IV century, adherents to the no­
tions of Eustathius, who excluded mar­
ried people from salvation, whereupon
many married women forsook their
own husbands; he prohibited his fol­
lowers from praying in their houses,
and oblig'd them to quit all they had
as incompatible with the hopes of hea­
ven.

EUSTYLOS [with Architects] a
building, where the intercolumniati­
ons, or spaces between each pillar, are
just 2 diameters and a quarter of the
pillar, except those in the middle of
the face before and behind, which are
3 diameters distant one from the other.

EUTERPE [of εὖ well, and τέρπειν, 
Gr. to delight, because she invented the
pipe] the inventress, of the mathema­
ticks and playing on the pipe. The
ancients painted or carved Euterpe
crowned with a garland of flowers, 
holding in each hand sundry wind-in­
struments.

EUTHYMY [euthymia, L. of ἐυθυμία, 
Gr.] quietness of mind, tranquillity, 
heart's ease.

EUTYCHIANS [so called from Eu­
tychus a monk of Constantinople, who
contending against Nestorius fell into a
new heresy, affirming Christ to be one
thing and the word another. He deny'd
that the flesh of Christ was like ours, 
but affirm'd that his body was celestial
and pass'd thro' the virgin as thro' a
channel; that there were 2 natures in
Christ before the hypostatical union;
and after it but one, compounded of
both and thence he concluded that the
divinity of Jesus Christ did both suffer
and dye.

He was condemn'd in a synod at Con­
stantinople by Flavianus the bishop, but
hereupon appealing to the emperor and
by the assistance of Dioseurus bishop of
Alexandria, he obtained a synod, which
was call'd the assembly of Thieves and
Robbers, wherein his opinions were
approv'd; but were condemned again
by the 2d occumenical council held at
Chalcedon in the year 451.] a sect of he­
reticks, who held that the λόγος or
word brought his body down with him
from heaven, and deny'd that the body



of Jesus Christ was consubstantial with
ours.

EVULGATION, a publishing a­
broad.  L.

EVULSED [evulsus, L.] plucked or
pulled away from.

EWBRICE [of æ&wyn; marriage, and
brice, Sax. breaking] adultery.

EWRY, an office in the king's house­
hold, where they take care of the linen
for the king's own table, lay the cloth, 
and serve up water in silver ewers after
dinner.

EXACERATED [exaceratus, L.]
winnowed, cleansed from chaff.

EXACERBATED [exacerbatus, L.]
provoked or vexed afresh.

EXACERVATION a heaping up
together.  L.

EXACINATION, a taking the ker­
nels out of grapes and other fruit.

EXACTITUDE, exactness, nicety.  F.

EXACUATION, the making of a
thing sharp or pointed.

EXÆSTUATION, a boiling or
seething, fury or rage.  L.

EXAGGERATION [in Rhetorick] a
figure whereby the orator enlarges or
heightens things, making them appear
more than they really are, whether as
to goodness, badness or other qualities.

EXAGGERATION [in Painting] a
method of representing things, wherein
they are charged too much, or marked
too strong; whether in respect of de­
sign or colouring.

EXAGONIAL [exagonius, L. of ἐξα­
γώνιος, Gr.] of, like, or belonging to
an Exagon. See Hexagon.

EXALTATION [in Natural Philoso­
phy] is the act or operation of elevating, 
purifying, subtilizing or perfecting any
natural body, its principles and parts;
as also the quality or disposition which
bodies acquire by this operation.

EXALTATION of the Cross, a festi­
val of the church held on the 14th day
of September, as is generally suppos'd, 
in memory of the emperor Heraclius's
bringing back the true cross of our Sa­
viour on his shoulders to mount Calva­
ry, from which it had been carried a­
way 14 years by Cosroe, king of Persia.
at his taking Jerusalem, under the reign
of the emperor Phocas.

EXALTEDNESS, a being exalted, 
high or listed up, height of promotion.

EXAMPLE [with Rhetoricians] is de­
fined to be an imperfect kind of induc­
tion or argumentation, whereby it is
proved, that a thing which has hap­
pened on some other occasions, will
happen again on the present one; from
the similitude of the cases.

EXANIMATED [exanimatus, L.]
dismay'd, dishearten'd, depriv'd of life.

EXANTHEMATA [ἔξανθἠματα, 
Gr.] certain wheals, pushes or break­
ings out in the skin of the head like
those that appear on the body.

EXANTHEMATALOGIA [ἔξανθη­
ματαλογία, of ἔξανθἠματα and λέγω, Gr.]
an account or treatise of eruptive fe­
vers, the measles and small pox.

EXASPERATEDNESS [of exaspera­
tus, L.] incensedness, the being exaspe­
rated.

EXATURATED [exaturatus, L.]
satisfied, filled with food, &c.

EXAUSPICATION, an unlucky be­
ginning of a thing.  L.

EXCÆCATION, a blinding or mak­
ing blind.

EXCALCEATED [excalceatus, L.]
having the shoos taken off, bare-footed.

EXCALFACTORY [excalfactorius,
L.] heating, making very hot.

EXCANDESCENCE [excandescentia, 
L.] great heat or wrath, violent heat, 
of distempers.

EXCARNATED [excarnatus, L.] be­
come lean, nothing but skin and bone.

EXCELLENTNESS [excellentia, L.]
excellency.

EXCELCISMUS [ἐξελχυσμὸς, Gr.] a
breaking of bones from the surface
downwards.  L.

EXCELSITUDE [excelsitudo, L.]
highness.

EXCELSE [excelsus, L.] high, lofty, 
&c.

EXCENTRICALNESS [excentri­
cité F. ex­
centricitas, L.] the quality of eccentrick
position.

EXCENTRICITY [excentri­
cité F. ex­
centricitas, L.] the quality of eccentrick
position. 

Dilatory EXCEPTION [in Law] is
one intended to defer or prevent the
thing from coming to an issue.

Peremptory EXCEPTION [in Law]
proper and pertinent allegations, found­
ed on some prescription that stands for
the defendant, as want of age or other
quality in the person, &c.

Declinatory EXCEPTION, whereby
the authority of the judge or court is
disallowed.

EXCEPTIONS [in Grammar] are cer­
tain distinctions of words which differ
in the manner of their declining from
some general rule.

EXCEPTIONABLENESS [of exceptio, 
L. able and ness] liableness to be excep­
ted against.

EXCEPTIOUS, captious, prone to
be offended.



EXCEPTIVE, serving to except; of
or belonging to exceptions.

EXCEREBROSE [excerebrosus, L.]
brain-sick, wanting brains.

EXCEREBRATED [excerebratus, L.]
having his brains beat out; wanting
brains, witless.

To EXCERN [excernere, L.] to
search or sift out.

EXCESSIVENESS [of excessif, F. and
ness] exceedingness, the going beyond
bounds.

EXCHANGE [in a Law Sense] is
when one man being seized or possess'd
of certain land, and another being sei­
zed of other land, they exchange their
lands by deed indented, or otherwise.
so that each of them shall have other
lands so exchanged, in fee, fee tail, or
for term of life: such exchange is good
without livery or seisin.

EXCHANGE [in a Law Sense] is also
used to signify the compensation or sa­
tisfaction which must be made by the
warrantor or the warrantee, value for
value, if the land warranted be reco­
vered from the warrantee.

EXCHEQUER, one of the law courts
erected by William the conqueror and
formed on the model of that in Nor­
mandy, set up by Rollo; it was call'd
exchequer from a party-coloured or
checkered cloth which covered the
board.

The authority of this court was so
great, that no man might contradict a
sentence pronounc'd here. In this court
were transacted the affairs of all the
baronies in England, and all such
as held in Capite, and many o­
ther causes. The common pleas were
usually held in this court until the 28
Edward I.

From the time of the conquest down
to that time the great barons of the
realm both ecclesiastical and secular
were generally the only judges of this
court, the chief Justiciary being presi­
dent; but afterwards canonists and o­
ther inferior lay persons learned in the
law were admitted to the board, who
were thence called barons, because
they sat in the place of those who had
real dignity.

Black Book of EXCHEQUER, a book
composed in the reign or king Henry II.
A.D. 1105, which is in the custody of
the two chamberlains of the Exchequer.

This book contains a description of
the English court at that time, its offi­
cers, ranks, privileges, power, jurisdic­
tion, wages, perquisites; also the re­
venues of the crown in money, grain
and cattle.

By this book it appears that as much
bread might be bought for a shilling as
would serve 100 men a whole day; that
the price of a fat bullock was about
12 shillings, a sheep 4 shillings, &c:

EXCHEQUERED [of l'exchequiere, 
F.] put into, or cited to answer to an
accusation exhibited in the Exchequer-­
court, &c.

To EXCIDE [excidere, L.] to fall or
slip out of.

EXCINERATED [excineratus, L.]
having the ashes taken away.

EXCISE, a duty or imposition laid
on Beer, Ale, Cider, Vinegar, Soap, &c.
This duty was first granted to K.
Charles II. during his life, and has been
continued throughout England and
Wales ever since, and has been aug­
mented by several Parliaments since, 
and extended to Scotland.

The excise is one of the greatest
branches of the revenue, and has been
formerly farmed out, but now is ma­
nag'd by 7 commissioners for the king, 
who sit at the general excise office in
the old Jury, London, and receive the
whole product of the excise upon Malt, 
Beer, Ale, &c. that is collected all over
England, and pay it into the exchequer.

They are allow'd a salary of 800 l. per
annum each, and are sworn not to ac­
cept any fee or reward, from any per­
son but the king only.

From these commissioners there lies
an appeal to 5 others, call'd commissio­
ners of appeal; the number of clerks, 
collectors &c. is very numerous and
the charge of their salaries has been
computed at about 300000 l. per annum.

EXCISION [among the Jews] a cut­
ting off from the community of that
people, a punishment mentioned in
scripture, and frequently inflicted by
God for crimes of an extraordinary
guilt.

The Rabbins reckon three sorts of
Excision; one which destroys only the
body; another only the soul, and a
third both soul and body, and seems to
be very much like annihilation, which
they explain thus; The first is an un­
timely death, the second by Leviticus
18. 29. where it is said, even the souls
that commit them shall be cut off from
among the people; and the third by
the expression; the soul shall be utterly
cut off his iniquity shall be upon him.
Thus they make the soul mortal or im­
mortal according to the misbehaviour
of the people. The Jews pretend to
reckon up 36 sins, which when presum­
tuously committed are punishable with
excision.



EXCISION [with Surgeons] a cutting
off any member, or part of the body.
F. of  L.

EXCITED [excitatus, L. excité, F.]
stirred up, egged on, encouraged, quick­
ened.

EXCLAMATION [with Rhet.] a fi­
gure, wherein by raising the voice and
using an interjection either expresly or
understood, an uncommon warmth and
passion of mind is express'd; as O hea­
vens! O earth! to you O men I call!

EXCLAMATIVE of or pertaining
to exclamation.

EXCLAMATORY [exclamatorius, 
L.] pertaining to exclamation.

EXCLUSIONERS [in the time of
king Charles II.] a name given to those
members of parliament that were for
excluding the duke of York from the
crown.

EXCLUSIONS [with Mathematicians]
a method of coming at the solution of
problems [in Numerical cases) by previ­
ously ejecting or excluding out of our
consideration such numbers, which are
of no use in solving the question, and
whereby of consequence the process
may be regularly and judiciously abbre­
viated.

EXCLUSIVENESS [of exclusivus, L.]
exclusive quality.

EXCOMMUNICATION in the pri­
mitive Christian Church was of two
kinds. The first medicinal, which ex­
cluded those under sentence for a time, 
or till they were likely to die; and the
mortal pronounced against hereticks or
impenitents.

It was a general rule that a person
sentenc'd by Provincial or Diocesan au­
thority, was not to be received into
any church; but this law which was
at first good and wholesome, was after­
wards converted into priest-craft and
profit; one patriarch, council or bishop
often undoing what the other had done;
and that purely for the carrying on
some secular design, without any re­
gard had either to innocence or guilt, 
and without any other design than to
gain power over the party or people
they were pleased to excommunicate.

Of this we are furnished by history
with numerous instances in the time of
the papal usurpation here in England, 
as well as other countries. When the
pope and king quarrelled, a whole na­
tion (and particularly our own several
times) has been laid under an interdict
and excommunication; which is con­
trary to the ancient discipline; which
never drew the Spiritual sword but
upon spiritual occasions: nor did this
censure extend to any civil forfeiture;
whatever belonged to a person excom­
municated, as a man, a husband, a father, 
a master, a citizen or a king by the
law of nature or nations, or the consti­
tutions of his country remains un­
touch'd.

However in time religion so influenc'd
law that the empire, if the excommu­
nicated did not procure absolution with­
in a limited time, they were liable to
imprisonment and forfeiture and in En­
gland, if it was not within 40 days the
excommunication was return'd into the
exchequer, and a writ de excommunicato
capiendo awarded. But since the refor­
mation or especially since the Revolu­
tion very few instances of the execution
of this arbitrary power have appeared.

EXCOMMUNICATION [among the 
ancient Pagans] was an excluding or de­
barring men from the participation of
the sacred mysteries of their worship
and a cutting them off from communica­
ting with men of the same religion.

EXCREMENTITIOUSNESS [of ex­
crementitius, L.] the being full of, or of
the nature of excrements.

EXCRESCENT [excrescens, L.] grow­
ing out of another.

EXCRETORY [in Anatomy] certain
small ducts or vessels making part of the
composition or structure of the glands
are called Excretory Ducts, &c.

EXCRUCIABLE [excruciabilis, L.]
worthy to be tormented.

EXCRUCIATED [excruciatus, L.]
tormented or put in pain.

EXCULPATED [exculpatus, L.] car­
ved or engraved.

EXCUSABLENESS [excusabilis, L.]
that whereby a thing is excusable, or
meritoriousness of being excused.

EXCUSSABLE [excussabilis, L.] that
may be shaken or thrown off.

EXCUTIENT [excutiens, L.] shaken
off.

EXEAT [i. e. let him go out] a term
used in church discipline for a permission
which a bishop grants to a priest to go
out of his diocese.  L.

EXECRABLENESS [execrabilis, L.]
accursedness, impiousness.

EXECRATED [exaceratus, L.] accur­
sed.

Final EXECUTION [in Law] is that
which makes money for the defendant's
goods, and extendeth his lands and de­
livers them to the plaintiff.

Military EXECUTION, is the pillage
or plundering of a country by the ene­
my's army.



EXEDRÆ [ἐξἐδρα, Gr.] places where
the ancient philosophers, sophists, and
rhetoricians, &c. used to hold their con­
ferences and disputes.

EXEGESIS [with Rhetoricians] a fi­
gure wherein that which the orator has
delivered darkly; he afterwards renders
more clear and intelligible in the same
sentence, as Time at the same instant
seemed both long and short; long in the
protraction of a man's desires, and short
in the pleasure of calling to mind.

EXEGETES [ἐξηγητὴς of ἐξηγοῖμαι, 
Gr. to explain] persons among the A­
thenians learned in the laws of the
Juris-consulti, whom the judges used to
consult in capital cases.

EXEGETICALNESS [of ἐξηγοῖμαι, 
Gr. to explain] explanatoriousness.

EXELCISMUS [with Surgeons] a 
breaking of bones from the surface
downwards.

EXEMPLAR [exemplaire, F.] a per­
son or thing containing an example to
follow or eschew, a samplar.  L.

EXEMPLARINESS [exemplarius, L.
exemplaire, F.] fitness or worthiness to
be an example.

EXEMPLIFICATION, a demonstra­
ting a thing by an example; also a copy
of an original writing.  L.

EXEMPLIFIED [exemplificatus, L.]
cleared, proved or confirmed by an ex­
ample or instance; also copied out
from a deed or writing.

To EXERCISE [exercere, L.] to har­
rass or tire.

EXERGASIA [with Rhetoricians] a
figure, when one thing is often repeat­
ed in different terms, as the object of
thoughts, the entertainment of his dis­
course, and the contentment of his heart.

EXERGUE [of ἐξ and ἔργον, Gr.
the work] a term a­
mong Medallists used to signify the little
space left around or without the work
or figures of a medal, for an inscription, 
cypher, device, date, &c. to be placed
there.

EXERGUM [of ἐξ and ἔργον, Gr.
the work] a term a­
mong Medallists used to signify the little
space left around or without the work
or figures of a medal, for an inscription, 
cypher, device, date, &c. to be placed
there.

EXFOLIATED [s'exfolié, F. of ex
and folium, L. a leaf] scaled, risen up
as leaves, scales, or splinters of a broken
bone do.

EXFOLIATION [Surgery] a rising
up in leaves and splinters as a broken
bone does.  L.

EXFOLIATIVE Trepan, one proper
to scrape, and at the same time to
pierce a bone, and so to exfoliate or
raise several leaves or flakes one after
another.

EXGURGITATION, a casting or
voiding up.  F. of  L.

EXHALANT [exhalans, L.] sending
out an exhalation.

EXHALATION, a fume or vapour
which is raised up from the surface of
the earth, either by the heat of the
sun, or subterraneous fire, of which
meteors, as mists, fogs, rain, snow, 
hail, &c. are produced. F. of  L.

EXHALATION [with Chymists] an
operation, by means of which the more
airy, volatile parts of things are raised
and dispersed by heat.

EXHAUSTED Receiver [in Experi­
mental Philosophy] a glass or other vessel
applied on the plate of the air pump,
and the air extracted out of the same
by the working of the engine.

EXHAUSTIONS [in Mathematicks]
a way of proving the equality of two
magnitudes by a reductio ad absurdum;
shewing that if one be supposed either
greater or less than the other, there
will arise a contradistinction.

EXHEREDATION [Civil Law] a fa­
ther's excluding his son from inheriting
his estate.

EXHERESIS [exhæresis, L. of ἐξαίρε­
σις, Gr.] a chirurgical operation, where
by something foreign, useless, and even
pernicious, is taken from a human bo­
dy.

EXHIBENT [exhibens, L.] exhibiting.

EXHUMATION, the act of digging
up a body interred in holy ground, by
the authority of the judge.

To EXICCATE [exiccare, L.] to dry
up.

EXIGENCE, need, occasion; that
which a thing requires or is suitable
thereto.

EXIGENCY a pinch or straight;
an expedient or oc­
casion.

EXIGENCE a pinch or straight;
an expedient or oc­
casion.

EXIGENTER an officer of the 
court of Common-­
Pleas, who makes out exigents and
proclamations in all actions in which
process of outlawry lies.

EXIGENDARY an officer of the 
court of Common­
Pleas, who makes out exigents and
proclamations in all actions in which
process of outlawry lies.

EXIGUOUSNESS [exiguitas, L.] lit­
tleness, smallness.

EXILE [exilium, L.] the place, or
suffering of banishment.

EXILIUM [Old Law] a waste or
destruction of lands, houses, woods, &c.
also a prejudice done to an estate, by
altering the condition or tenure of it, 
either by ejecting, advancing, &c.

EXIMIOUSNESS [eximietas, L.]
excellency, no­
tableness, &c. excellentness.

EXIMIETY [eximietas, L.]
excellency, no­
tableness, &c. excellentness.

EXISTENCE [existence, F. of existen­
tia, L.] that whereby a thing has an ac­
tual essence, or that whereby a thing is



said to be defined by Naturalists to be
that which any thing is formally and in­
trinsically, altho' separated from its cau­
ses; so that the difference between exis­
tence and essence is, that existence is
the manner of the thing, and essence is
the thing itself.

To make his EXIT, to go off the stage
as an actor; also to die.

EXITIABLE [exitiabilis, L.] hurtful, 
destructive.

EXODIARY [in the Roman Tragedy]
a droll or mimic, who appeared on the
stage when the tragedy was ended, and
performed the Exodium.

EXOLETE [exoletus, L.] faded or
withered, as flowers, &c.

EXOMOLOGESIS [ἐξομολογήσις, Gr.]
confession in an ecclesiastical sense.

EXONCHOMA [of ἐξ out, and ὄγχος
a swelling, Gr.] any large prominent
tumour.

EXORABLENESS, easiness to be en­
treated.

EXORBITANCE [of ex and orbita,
L. a path] a thing done out of measure, 
square or rule, an irregularity, an un­
reasonableness.

EXORCISM, certain prayers former­
ly used to dispossess devils; this custom
was in use in the primitive times of
Christianity, being practised by Christ
and his disciples; they being so well as­
sured of their prayers upon these occasi­
ons, that they publickly offered to ven­
ture their lives upon the success.

The church of Rome also do at this
time make considerable gain of exor­
cisms, imposing upon the credulity of
their blind adorers.

EXORCISM [of ἐξορχισμος, Gr.] a lay­
ing or casting out spirits; prayers or
conjurations, wherewith to exorcise, 
i. e. to drive out devils from persons
possessed, to purify creatures unclean, 
or preserve from danger.

EXORTIVE [exortivus, L.] pertain­
ing to the rising of the sun, or the east.

EXOSSATED [exossatus, L.] having
the bones pulled out.

EXOSTOSIS [ἐξόστωσις of ἐξ and όστέον,
Gr. a bone] the bunching or swelling
of a bone out of its natural place, occa­
sioned by the settling of a corrupt hu­
mour in its proper substance.  L. of
 Gr.

EXOTICALNESS, outlandishness.

EXOTICAL [exoticus, L.] brought
out of another country.

EXOTICKS [exoticæ, L.] foreign
plants.

EXPANSIBLE [of expandere, L.] ca­
pable of being expanded, spread wide
or display'd.

EXPANSILE [of expansus, L.] of or
pertaining to expansion.

EXPANSION [in a Metaphysical sense]
the idea we frame in our minds of last­
ing distance, whose parts exist toge­
ther.

EXPATIATING [expatians, L.] run­
ning abroad, launching out into dis­
course, spreading far and wide.

EXPECTABLE [expectabilis, L.] to
be wished or looked for.

EXPECTANT Fee [in Com. Law]
land given to a man, and to the heirs
of his body, the remainder to him and
his heirs, in which case there is a fee-­
simple expectant after the fee-tail.

EXPEDIENCE, fitness, necessariness
to be done.

EXPEDIENTNESS [of expediens, L.]
fitness, convenientness.

EXPEDITATION [in Forest Law] the
cutting out the balls of a dog's fore-feet
for the preservation of the game.

EXPEDITIOUSNESS [of expeditio, 
L.] quickness of dispatch.

EXPENSIVENESS [of expendere, L.]
costliness, freeness in spending.

EXPERIMENT [experimentum, L.]
essay, trial, proof; trial of the effect or
result of certain applications and moti­
ons of natural bodies, in order to dis­
cover something of the laws and natures
thereof, &c.

EXPERTNESS [of expertus, L.]rea­
diness, skilfulness, &c.

EXPETIBLENESS [of expetibilis, L.]
desirableness,

EXPIATORINESS [of expiatorius, L.]
expiating quality.

EXPLANATORINESS, explicative
quality.

EXPLETIVENESS [of expletivus, L.]
expletive or filling up quality.

EXPLICABLENESS [of explicabilis, 
L.] capableness of being explained.

EXPLICITNESS [of explicitus, L.]
expresness, plainness.

To EXPLODE [of explodere, L.] to
drive out with noise, as with clapping
of the hands, &c. to hiss out, to dislike
absolutely.

EXPLORATED [exploratus, L.] tho­
roughly viewed.

EXPLORATORY [exploratorius, L.]
pertaining to searching or espying.

EXPLOSION, an exploding, a casting
off, the action of a thing that drives a­
nother out of its place, that before it
possessed.

EXPLOSION [with Naturalists] an
action of the animal spirits, whereby
the nerves are suddenly drawn together
when some particles of a different kind



are mixed with the spirits, by which
they are violently expanded or spread
forth, or driven into confusion, like the
parts of fired gun-powder; also a vio­
lent expansion of the parts of air, gun­
powder, or any fluid that occasions a
crackling sound.

EXPOLITION [in Rhetorick] a fi­
gure whereby the same thing is ex­
plained in different phrases, in order
to shew it more fully.

EXPONENTIAL [of exponens, L.]
expounding, laying open to view.

EXPONENTIAL Curves [with Ma­
thematicians] are such curves as partake
both of the nature of Algebraick and
transcendent ones. They partake of
the Algebraick, because they consist of
a finite number of terms, tho' those
terms themselves are in themselves in­
determinate, and they are in some sort
transcendental, because they cannot be
constructed Algebraically.

EXPONENTIAL Equations [with Ma­
themat.] are the same that are called
Geometrick irrationals, by Sir Isaac
Newton, and sometimes are called
Transcendentals.

EXPONENTIAL Quantities [in Ma­
thematicks] are such quantities whose
exponents are indeterminate, variable
or flowing, and are of several degrees
and orders; as when the Exponent is a
simple indeterminate quantity, it is called
an Exponential of the first or lowest de­
gree. When the Exponent itself is an
Essential of the first degree, then the
quantity is an Exponential of the second
degree.

EXPORTER [exportator, L.] a mer­
chant, &c. that sends goods into other
countries.

EXPOSITION [in Rhetorick] a figure, 
whereby the same thing is explained in
different phrases or expressions, in or­
der to shew more clearly.

EX POST [Law] a term used of a
thing done after the time.

EXPOSTULATOR, one who rea­
sons by way of complaint of wrong
done.  L.

EXPOSURE [in Gardening] the
aspect or situation
of a garden wall, building, or the like, 
with respect to the sun, winds, &c.

EXPOSITION [in Gardening] the
aspect or situation
of a garden wall, building, or the like, 
with respect to the sun, winds, &c. 

To EXPRESS [expressum, sup. of ex­
primere, L.] to pourtray or represent.

EXPRESSION, a thing uttered or
spoken.  L.

EXPRESSION [in Painting] the natu­
ral and lively representation of the sub­
ject, or of the several objects intended
to be shewn.

EXPUGNABLE [expugnabilis, L.]
that may be overcome or won by as­
sault.

EXPULSION [in Medicine] the act
of driving a thing out by violence from
the place it was in.

EXPURGATION [in Astronomy] is
a term used by some authors for the
state and action of the sun, wherein, 
having been eclipsed and hidden by the
interposition of the moon, it begins to
appear again; others call it emersion.

EXQUISITENESS, fitness, excellent­
ness, curiousness, exactness, artificial­
ness.

EXQUISITITIOUS [exquisititius, L.]
not natural, but procured by art.

EXSANGUINOUSNESS [of ex and
sanguineus, L.] the quality of being
without blood.

EXSCRIPT [exscriptum, L.] a copy, 
an extract or draught.

EXSIBILATION, a hissing out or
of the stage.  L.

EXSICCATION, a drying up.  L.

EXSICCATIVES [of exsiccare, L.]
medicaments that are of a drying qua­
lity.

EXSUCCOUS [exsuccus, L.] dry, 
without moisture.

EXTA, the bowels or intrails of an
animal body.

EXTASY [extasis, L. of ἐχστασις,
Gr.] a rupture or re­
moval of the mind out of its natural
state and situation; a depravation or
defect of the judgment and imagina­
tion, common to melancholy and di­
stracted persons, or a transport where­
by a person is hurried out of himself, 
and his senses suspended; a trance, a
swoon.

EXTACY [extasis, L. of ἐχστασις,
Gr.] a rupture or re­
moval of the mind out of its natural
state and situation; a depravation or
defect of the judgment and imagina­
tion, common to melancholy and di­
stracted persons, or a transport where­
by a person is hurried out of himself, 
and his senses suspended; a trance, a
swoon. 

EXTATICALNESS [of ἐχστατιχὸς, Gr.]
extatical quality; or the being in extasy.

EXTEMPORALITY [extemporalitas, 
L.] a promptness or readiness to speak
without premeditation or study.

EXTEMPORANEOUS [extempora­
neus, L.] extemporal, sudden.

EXTEMPORINESS, the being ex­
tempory or sudden, without premedi­
tation.

To EXTEND [extendere, L.] to
stretch out, to make longer, to reach
or go far.

To EXTEND [in a Legal Sense] is
to value the lands and tenements of
one bound by statute, &c. and hath
forfeited his bond, to such an indiffe­
rent rate, that by the yearly rent, the
obligator may in time be fully paid his
debt.



To EXTEND a Horse, signifies to
make him go large.

EXTENSIBLENESS [of extensibilis, 
L.] capableness of being extended or
carried on to the utmost height.

EXTENSOR, [i. e. a stretcher out] a
name common to divers muscles, which
serve to extend or stretch out the parts;
and particularly the hands and feet.  L.

EXTENSIBLE, that may be stretch­
ed out large and wide.

EXTENSIVENESS, largeness, 
stretching out wide.

EXTENT [extentus, L.] extended.

The EXTENT of a Thing [extentum, 
L.] the extension, or reach of a thing
in length, breadth, depth, compass, 
space, &c.

EXTENT of an Idea [among Logici­
ans] is the subject to which that idea
agrees; which is also called the inferior
of a general term, which with respect
to them is called superior, as the idea
of a triangle in general extends to all
the divers kinds of triangles.

EXTERMINATED [exterminatus, 
L.] driven or cast out of the bounds, ut­
terly destroyed, rooted out or cut off.

EXTERGENT [extergens, L.] wiping
away, cleansing.

EXTERIOR Polygon [in Fortification]
the out-lines of the works drawn from
one outmost angle to another; or the
distance of one outward bastion to the
point of another, reckoned quite round
the work.

EXTERIOR Talus [in Fortification] is
the slope allowed the work on the out­
side from the place, and towards the
campaign and field.

EXTERNAL Angles [in Geometry]
are the angles of any right-lined fi­
gure without it, when all the sides
are severally produced, and they are, 
all taken together, equal to 4 right an­
gles.

EXTERNAL Digestives [with Surge­
ons] are such as ripen a swelling, and
breed good and laudable matter in a
wound, and prepare it for mundifica­
tion.

EXTERNALNESS [of externus, L.]
the being without, or the property of
being outward.

EXTERRANEOUS [exterraneus, L.]
foreign, or of another country.

EXTERSORY [extersorius, L.] rub­
bing, cleansing.

To EXSTIL [exstillo, L.] to drop or
distil out of.

EXTINCTION [with Chymists] is the
quenching of red hot minerals in some
liquor, to abate their sharpness, or to
impart their virtue to that liquor.  F.
of  L.

EXTINCTNESS [of extinctus, L.]
the being extinguished or extinct.

EXTISPICES [of exta entrails, and
inspicere, L. to inspect] the same a­
ruspices; which see.

EXTRA-CONSTELLATED [extra
constellatus, L.] put or placed out of a
constellation.

EXTRACTION [in Genealogy] is the
line, stem, branch or family that one is
descended from.

EXTRACTION of the biquadrate root 
[in Arithmetick] is the untwisting or o­
pening of a given number to find ano­
ther number, which being multiplied
by itself, and the product also being
multiplied by itself, may produce the
number first given.

EXTRACTORY [extractorius, L.]
that hath the nature or power to draw
out.

EXTRAGENEITY [of extrageneus,
L.] the being of a foreign kind.

EXTRAJUDICIAL [of extra and ju­
dicialis, L.] done out of the ordinary
course of law, as when judgment is
given in a court, in which the cause is
not depending, or where the judge has
no jurisdiction.

EXTRANATURAL [of extra and
naturalis] beyond the common course
of nature.

EXTRAORDINARINESS [of extre­
ordinarius, L.] extraordinary quality.

EXTRAPAROCHIALNESS [of extra 
and parochia, L.] the being out of the
parish.

EXTRAVAGANTNESS [of extra­
vagans, L. extravagance, F.] extrava­
gancy.

EXTRAVASATION [with Anato­
mists. &c.] a getting out of its proper
vessels, as the blood and humours, 
when by some accident they flow be­
sides the veins and arteries.  L.

An EXTREME [extremum, L.] the
utmost bound of a thing, that which
finishes or terminates it; an excess.

EXTREMES [in logick] are the two
extreme terms of the conclusion of a
proposition, viz. the predicate and the
subject.

EXTREMELY [extremement, F.] ve­
ry greatly, &c.

EXTREMENESS [extremitas, L.] ex­
tremity; also greatness, &c.

EXTRICATION, a disentanglement.
L.

EXTRINSICK [extrinsecus, L.] that
is on the outline, outward, or from
without.



EXTRINSECALNESS [of extrinsecus, 
L.] the being on the outside.

To EXTRUCT [extructum, L.] to
build or set up.

EXTUBEROUS [of ex and tuber, L.
a swelling] swelling or bunching out.

EXTUBEROUSNESS [of extubera­
tus, L.] the swelling or bunching out of
the body.

EXUBERANCY [exuberantia, L.] an
over flowing, over-abounding; a super-­
abundance, great plenty.

EXUBERANTNESS [exuberantia, L.]
an over-abounding; a super-abundance, 
great plenty.

EXULCERATED [exulceratus, L.]
grown to an ulcer.

EXULCERATION [with Surgeons] a
solution of continuity, which proceeds
from some gnawing matter, and in
those parts of the body that are soft, 
is attended with a loss of their quan­
tity.  L.

EXULCERATORY [exulceratorius, 
L.] that causeth ulcers.

To EXUNGULATE [exungulatum, 
L.] to pull off the hoofs; also to cut off
the wide part from rose leaves.

EXUPERABLENESS [of exuperabi­
lis, L.] liableness, or possibility of being
overcome.

EXUPERANT [exuperans, L.] ex­
ceeding.

EXUPERANCE [exuperantia, L.] ex­
cellence, pre-eminence.

EYE [eaʒ Sax. ang. Teut. oeil, F. o­
culus, L.] the admirable organ and in­
strument of sight, by which the soul
sees or perceives objects either nearer
or farther off, &c.

The form of the eye is for the most
part globous or somewhat of the sphe­
roidal form, which is accounted the
most commodious optical form, as be­
ing the fittest to contain the humours
within, and to receive the images of
opticks from without; the humours
being thereby laid commodiously toge­
ther to perform the office of refraction;
and the Retina, and every other part
neatly adapted regularly to receive the
images from without and to convey
them accordingly to the common sen­
sory of the brain.

EYE [with Physicians] a hole or aper­
ture.

EYE [with Printers] is sometimes
used for the thickness of the types or
characters used in printing; or more
strictly, the graving in relievo on the
top or face of the letter.

EYE of a Bean [with Horsemen] a black
speck or mark in the cavity of the cor&shy
ner teeth of a horse, when he is about
the age of 5 and a half, and remains
till 7 or 8.

An EYE wide open [Hieroglyphically]
represented wisdom and justice.

EYE [with Jewellers] the lustre and
brilliant of pearls and precious stones, 
more usually call'd the water.

Bull's EYE [in Astronomy] a star of
the first magnitude in the constellation
Taurus.

Cat's EYE, a precious stone, call'd
also Oculus Solis or the sun's eye.

Hare's EYE [with Physicians] a disease
arising from the contraction of the up­
per eye-lid, which hinders it from co­
vering its part of the eye.

Goat's EYE [with Oculists] a white
speck on the cornea.

Bullock's EYE [in Architecture] a lit­
tle sky-light in the covering or roof, 
intended to illuminate a granary or the
like.

EYE-BROW [Archit.] the same as
lift or fillet.

EYE of the Volute [Archit.] the centre
of the volute, or that point where the
Helix or spiral, of which it is formed, 
commences; or else it is the little cir­
cle in the middle of the volutes, where­
in are found the 13 centres for describ­
ing the circumvolutions thereof.

EYE of an Anchor, a hole wherein
the ring is put into the shank.

EYE of the Strap [with Sailors] the
compass or ring which is left of the
strap-rope, to which any block or pul­
ley is fastened.

EYELESS, wanting or not having
eyes.


F

Ff, Roman, Ff, Italick, Ff, English,
are the 6th letters of their res­
pective alphabets. The Greeks and He­
brews have no letter that answers ex­
actly to the letter F; but those that
come the nearest to it, are the Φφ, phi, 
Gr. and פ, phe, Hebrew.

Some reckon the letter F a mute, 
and others a semi-vowel. Suetonius
says the emperor Claudius invented this
letter and 2 others, and that it had the
force of V consonant and was written
inverted Ⅎ.

F, still keeps its force, and when it
is the last letter of a word is always
doubled, as staff, stiff, muff, &c.

F [in Old Latin Numbers] signified 40.

F̅ with a dash at top, signified 40000.

The dash is placed on top of letter F.






F [in Musick] is one of the signed
clefs or keys placed at the beginning of
one of the lines of a piece of musick.

F. S. A. [in Physical Prescriptions]
stands for fiat secundum artem, L. i. e.
let it be done according to art.

FABACEOUS [fabaceus, L.] of or
belonging to a bean.

FABARIA [with Botanists] orpine
or live-long.  L.

FABII, an ancient and notable fa­
mily in Rome of long standing, digni­
fied with 7 dictatorships, 5 offices of
master of the horse, 7 censorships, 
48 consulships with consular power, 5
princes of the senate, 13 triumphs, 
and 2 ovations.

To FABLE [dire des fables, F. fabu­
lare, L.] to tell stories or fables.

FABLE, an innocent, diverting and
amusing story, which under the disguise
of beasts, trees, &c. discoursing together, 
hieroglyphically contains a moral in­
struction for the regulating our beha­
vour in the several stations of life; also
the name fable is sometimes used for a
down right lie or forgery, invented to
deceive or amuse persons, that they may
not be able to come at or find out the
truth.

FABLE [of an Epick poem] is the
principal part or soul of it. The first
thing a good poet ought to think on in
forming a fable, is the instruction he
would give by the moral. This moral
is to be afterwards reduced into action:
and this action, which is presented by
the recital, mud be universal, imitated, 
feigned, and the allegory of a moral
truth. See Action.

Rational FABLES, are relations of
things supposed to have been said and
done by men, and which might possibly
have been said and done by men, tho'
really they were not the same as para­
bles, such as that of Dives and Lazarus, 
&c.

Moral FABLES, are those wherein
beasts are introduced as speakers or ac­
tors; also trees, &c. these are the
same as apologues.

Mixt FABLES, are those which are
composed of both sorts rational and mo­
ral, wherein men and brutes are intro­
duced conversing together.

FABLER [fabulator, L.] an inventor
or maker of fables.

FABRIC [fabrica, L.] a building or
any thing that is framed.

To FABRICATE [fabrifacere, L.]
to frame, erect, build, &c.

FABULATION, the moralizing of
fables.

FABULATOR, an inventer, writer
or teller of stories, fables, novels, &c.

FABULINUS, a deity, who as the
Romans imagined, presided over infants
at their first beginning to speak.

FABULOUSNESS [fabulositas, L.]
fullness of fables, feignedness, falseness.

FACADE, the out-side or fore-front
of a great building.  F.

FACE [facies, L.] the visage or coun­
tenance of any living creature, but es­
pecially of mankind, by the several ap­
pearances of which, the disposition, in­
clination and passions that particular
persons are inclined to or are acted by
may be very rationally made a judgment
of, without the information of the party
himself; which is called Physiognomy, 
which see.

To FACE, to look toward such a side, 
or to turn to it; also to line, as to face
a pair of sleeves, &c.

FACE prolonged [in Fortification] is
that part of the line of defence razant, 
which is betwixt the angle of the shoul­
der and the curtain; or the line of defence
razant, diminished by the length of a
face.

FACE of a gun, is the superficies of
the metal, at the extremity of the muz­
zle.

FACE of a stone, is the surface or plane
of a stone, which is to lie in the front of
the work.

FACET [with Jewellers, &c] a lit­
tle side of a body of a diamond, &c. cut
into a great number of angles.

FACETIOUSNESS [of facetieux, F. of
facetus, or facetiæ, L.] merry discourse, 
or pleasantness and wittiness in words.

FACEA's [in Architecture] cor­
ruptly pronounced by
workmen for fasciæ's, the broad lists or
fillets commonly made in architraves, 
and in the corners of pedestals.

FACIAS [in Architecture] cor­
ruptly pronounced by
workmen for fasciæ's, the broad lists or
fillets commonly made in architraves, 
and in the corners of pedestals. 

FACILENESS [facilitas, L.] easiness, 
readiness to grant or do any thing; also
a courteousness, &c.

FACINOROUSNESS [facinorosus, L.]
villany, wickedness.

FACTION [among the old Romans]
combatants who fought in chariots in
the Circus, who were distinguished by
their different colours, green, blue, red
and white; to which Domitian added
two others; one in a coat embroidered
with gold, a second wearing scarlet, 
which did not last a century; both em­
perors and people had generally a great­
er inclination to some particular colour
than the red; but upon a quarrel
happening in the reign of Justinian be­
tween the blue and green, where 40000



were killed on both sides the name fac­
tion was abolished,

FACTIOUSNESS [esprit factieux, F.
factiosus, L.] factious humour, inclina­
bleness to be factious or seditious.

FACTITIOUSNESS [la qualité arti­
ficielle, F. of factitius, L.] counterfeit­
ness.

FACTORSHIP, the office or employ­
ment of a factor.

FACTORY, a place usually in foreign
countries where a number of factors
reside to negociate the affairs of traffick
for merchants; it is commonly used of
settlements by great companies or cor­
porations, in the East-Indies, Africa, the
Mediterranean, &c.

The greatest and noblest factory in the
world is that of the English at Smyrna, 
where there are generally 80, 90 or 100
factors, most of them gentlemen of good
families.

A factory is a sort of seminary of
merchants, and as by the laws of London
and custom of England an apprenticeship
of 7 years is to be served to be entitled
to trade to the Levant, it is usual to con­
tract with the master, that after the ex­
piration of 3 years, the apprentice shall
be sent to Smyrna, where they have not
only the management of the concerns of
their matter with a plentiful allowance;
but are likewise permitted to trade for
themselves.

FACTUM [in Arithmetick] the pro­
duct of two quantities multiplied by
each other.

FACULTIES [of faculté, F. facul­
tas, L.] powers, abilities, talents, vir­
tues, &c.

FACULTY [facultas, L.] is used of
the divers parts or members of an uni­
versity, divided according to the arts
and sciences professed or taught in it, and
are usually divided into 4 parts, 
viz. humanity and philosophy, theolo­
gy, medicine and jurisprudence; in our
universities the members or students
commence batchelor, master and doctor
in each faculty.

Faculty is sometimes used absolutely
for what is principally studied or taught
in that place, as the faculty of London
and Montpelier is physick; of Paris the­
ology.

FACULTY a body of doctors in any
science; as the faculties of Divinity and
Physick, Humanity, or Philosophy and Ju­
risprudence.

FADING [of vadens, L. or se vadant, 
F.] decaying as a flower, losing its colour,
beauty, &c. perishing, languishing.

FADOM [fæðm, Sax.] a measure 
of 6 foot. See Pathom.

FADY [of vadens, L.] seeming to
fade, appearing faded, or decaying in
colour.

FÆCAL Matter [in Medicine] the fæ­
ces or great excrements of a man void­
ed by stool. L,

FÆCULÆ, small dregs or flying lees;
also the dust that sinks in the pressing
of some plants, as in Arum, Briony, &c.
also a sort of white powder made of cer­
tain green roots, washed and prepared, 
which if beaten together with a little
water and strained, will sink to the bot­
tom of the vessel, and is to be afterwards
lightly dried.

FAGONA [in Anatomy] a conglome­
rated gland, called also Thymus.

FAGGOT [fagot, F.] a bundle of
sticks or wood for fuel.

FAGOT [fagot, F.] a bundle of
sticks or wood for fuel.

FAGOTTED [of fagot, F.] tied up
in a bundle; also bound hand and foot.

To FAIGN [feindre, F. of fingere,
to make a shew of, 
to pretend.

To FEIGN [feindre, F. of fingere,
to make a shew of, 
to pretend. 

To FAIL in the world, to break, to
turn bankrupt.

FAILING [of faillant, F. fallens, L.]
disappointing, frustrating, doing amiss, 
offending.

FAILLIS [in French Heraldry] a term
used to denote some failure or fraction
in an ordinary, as if it were broken or
a splinter taken from it.

FAINT action [in Law] is such an
one, as tho' the words of the writ are
true, yet for certain causes there is no
title to recover thereby; whereas in a
false action the words of the writ are
false.

FAINT-HEARTED [of faner and vain
F. of vanus, L. and heort, Sax.] void
of courage, cowardliness.

FAINT-HEARTEDNESS, want of
courage, cowardliness.

FAINTNESS, weakness, lowness or
sinking of the animal spirits; feebleness;
(spoken of colours)not deep or strong.

FAINTS [with Distillers] are all that
runs after the proof is fallen off, where
the proportion of water is much great­
er, than the totally inflammable spirit.

FAIR [of foire F.] a publick mar­
ket, kept in some places once or twice
a year on certain days.

In ancient times Christians upon any
extraordinary solemnity, particularly
the anniversary dedication of a church, 
tradesmen used to bring and sell their
wares, even in the church-yards, espe­
cially upon the festival of the dedicati­
on; as at Westminster on St. Peter's day, 
at London on St. Bartholomew's, at Dur­
ham on St. Cuthbert's day, &c.



But riots and disturbance often hap­
pening, by reason of the great numbers
of people assembled together, the kings
of England granted the privilege of
holding fairs for various causes to par­
ticular places, by his royal charter.

These charters were at first only
granted to towns and places of strength, 
or where there was some magistrate or
person of power, to keep the people
in order.

In process of time several circumstan­
ces of favour were added to these char­
ters, the people having the protection
of a holiday, and were allowed to be
free from arrests on account of any diffe­
rence between them and other persons, 
that did not happen in or at the fair.

They had likewise a jurisdiction gran­ 
ted them to do justice to those who re­
sorted thither, and therefore the most
inconsiderable fair with us has a court
belonging to it, which takes notice of
all manner of causes and disorders com­
mitted upon the place. This court is
called Pie-pouder, as much as to say dusty
foot; justice being to be done any in­
jured person, before the dust of the fair
was off his feet.

FAIRS, some are free, others charged
with tolls and impositions.

To such fairs as are made free Fairs
all traders, whether natives or foreign­
ers, are allowed to enter the kingdom, 
and that under the kings protection both
in coming and returning, they and their
agents, with their goods, &c. also their
persons and goods are extempted from
all duties, impositions, tolls and servi­
tudes, and that merchants going to or
coming from the fair, shall not be arres­
ted or their goods stopp'd.

The king only has the power of grant­
ing fairs of any kind.

There are in Europe several of these
free fairs, as those of Franckfort and
Leipsick in Germany, of St. Germain in
Paris, of Lyons and Guebray in France, of
Beauclaire in Languedoc, of Novi in the
Milaneze, of Riga and Archangel; and in
America are the fairs of Porto bello, Vera
crux and Havanna.

FAIRING [of une foire, F.] a gift or
present bought at a fair or annual mar­
ket.

FAIRIES [some derive the name of
ferhð, Sax. a spirit, and others from
feé or phee, F. a terrible elf; but Skinner
of faran, Sax. to go or gad about; and
Minshew from daerlick, Dut. terrible]
a kind of Genii or imaginary deities, a
sort of little diminutive elves or spirits
in human shape, fabled to haunt houses
in companies to dance and revel in the
night-time; and according to the tales
of old women in old time, play a thou­
sand freakish pranks; some suppose them
to be an intermediate kind of beings;
neither gods nor angels, nor men nor
devils. They are of oriental extraction
and the notion of them seems to have
been first introduced by the Persians
and Arabs, whose history and religion
abounds with tales of fairies and dra­
gons. The Persians call them Peri; and
the Arabs Ginn; who suppose them to
inhabit a peculiar country, which they
call Ginnistan, and we Fairy land.

FAIRY Cirele an appearance pret­
ty frequently seen in
the fields, &c. being a kind of round, 
supposed by the vulgar to be traced by
fairies in their dances.

There are two sorts of these rings or
circles; one of them is about 7 or 8
yards in diameter, being a round bare
path about a foot in breadth, having
green grass in the middle; the other is
of different sizes, being encompassed
with a circumference of grass, much
fresher and greener than that in the
middle.

The philosophers supposed these rings
to be made by lightening, and this opi­
nion seems to be confirmed, in that they
are most frequently found after storms, 
and the colour and brittleness of the
grass roots is a further confirmation.

The second kind of circle they sup­
pose to arise originally from the first,
in that the grass that had been burnt
up by lightening, usually grows more
plentifully afterwards; some authors say
that these fairy rings were formed by 
ants; these insects being sometimes found
travelling in troops therein.

FAIRY Ring an appearance pret­
ty frequently seen in
the fields, &c. being a kind of round, 
supposed by the vulgar to be traced by
fairies in their dances.

There are two sorts of these rings or
circles; one of them is about 7 or 8
yards in diameter, being a round bare
path about a foot in breadth, having
green grass in the middle; the other is
of different sizes, being encompassed
with a circumference of grass, much
fresher and greener than that in the
middle.

The philosophers supposed these rings
to be made by lightening, and this opi­
nion seems to be confirmed, in that they
are most frequently found after storms, 
and the colour and brittleness of the
grass roots is a further confirmation.

The second kind of circle they sup­
pose to arise originally from the first,
in that the grass that had been burnt
up by lightening, usually grows more
plentifully afterwards; some authors say
that these fairy rings were formed by 
ants; these insects being sometimes found
travelling in troops therein.

FAIT [in Common Law] a deed or
writing sealed and delivered, to testify
and prove the agreement of the parties, 
whose deed it is, and consists of 3 prin­
cipal points, writing, sealing and deli­
very.  F.

FAITH [in Sculpture, Painting, &c.]
is represented as a woman clad in white
rayment, holding a cup of gold.

FAITH [with Philosophers] is that as­
sent we give to a proposition advanced
by another, the truth of which propo­
sition we don't immediately perceive
from our own reason or experience, 
but believe it discovered and known by
the other; or faith is a judgment or
assent of the mind, the motive whereof
is not any intrinsick evidence, but the
authority or testimony of some other
person, who reveals or relates it.



Human FAITH [with Moralists] is an
assent to every thing that is credible, 
merely upon the testimony of men.

Christian FAITH, may be reduced to
this one article, a believing in God, in
the unity of whose essence there is a
trinity of persons.

Divine FAITH [according to the
Theologists] is an assent to something, as
credible upon the testimony of God.

Implicit FAITH, is that whereby we 
give our assent to a proposition, advan­
ced by another, of whose knowledge
and veracity we have no certain and
evident reason or proof, this is called
a blind faith.

Scientifical FAITH is that by which
we give our as­
sent to a proposition, advanced by one
who can neither deceive nor be decei­
ved.

Seeing FAITH is that by which
we give our as­
sent to a proposition, advanced by one
who can neither deceive nor be decei­
ved.

Ecclesiastical FAITH, the assent that
orthodox persons give to certain events, 
decided by the church, and proposed to
be believ'd of all.

Confession of FAITH, a Creed or For­
mula, containing all those articles, the
belief whereof is accounted necessary to
salvation.

FAITHFULNESS [fidelitas, L. fide­
lité, F.] trustiness, sincerity, honesty.

FAITHFULNESS [in God] is a com­
municable attribute, and means an ex­
act correspondence between his word
and his mind, and of consequence be­
tween his word and the truth and rea­
lity of things; especially in regard to
any promises he has made, in which
there is an obligation of justice added
to his word.

FAITHLESNESS, unbelievingness;
also insincerity.

FAKIRS a sort of dervices or
Mahometan religious
men, who travel the country and live
on alms. Monsieur Herbelot reckons 20
hundred thousand Fakirs in the Indies, 
800000 of them being Mahometan ones, 
and 1200000 idolatrous ones: They
travel sometimes singly and sometimes
in companies. When they travel in
companies they have a superior who is
distinguished by his habit.

Each Fakir carries a horn, which he
blows when he arrives at any place, 
and when he departs from it; and also
a scraper or trowel to scrape the earth
in the place where he either sits or lies
down. When they go in companies, 
the alms they receive is equally distri­
buted among them, and what remains
at night they give to the poor, never
reserving any thing for the morrow.

There are several species of them;
but the most remarkable of them are
the penitents.

The penitent Fakirs make a shew of
great mortification and penance, which
consists in very odd observances, as v. g.
some remain for several years night
and day in several uneasy postures:
Some keep their arms lift up to heaven
so long that they cannot let them down
if they would: Some never sitting or
lying down to sleep, but bear them­
selves up by a rope hung down for that
purpose: Others roll themselves naked
on thorns: Some bury themselves in a
ditch or pit for 10 days, without eating
or drinking; others lay fire on the scalf 
of their head till they have burnt it to
the bone; some retire to mosques, and
live on alms, devoting themselves to
the study of the law, and reading the
alcoran.

FAQUIRS a sort of dervices or
Mahometan religious
men, who travel the country and live
on alms. Monsieur Herbelot reckons 20
hundred thousand Fakirs in the Indies, 
800000 of them being Mahometan ones, 
and 1200000 idolatrous ones: They
travel sometimes singly and sometimes
in companies. When they travel in
companies they have a superior who is
distinguished by his habit.

Each Fakir carries a horn, which he
blows when he arrives at any place, 
and when he departs from it; and also
a scraper or trowel to scrape the earth
in the place where he either sits or lies
down. When they go in companies, 
the alms they receive is equally distri­
buted among them, and what remains
at night they give to the poor, never
reserving any thing for the morrow.

There are several species of them;
but the most remarkable of them are
the penitents.

The penitent Fakirs make a shew of
great mortification and penance, which
consists in very odd observances, as v. g.
some remain for several years night
and day in several uneasy postures:
Some keep their arms lift up to heaven
so long that they cannot let them down
if they would: Some never sitting or
lying down to sleep, but bear them­
selves up by a rope hung down for that
purpose: Others roll themselves naked
on thorns: Some bury themselves in a
ditch or pit for 10 days, without eating
or drinking; others lay fire on the scalf 
of their head till they have burnt it to
the bone; some retire to mosques, and
live on alms, devoting themselves to
the study of the law, and reading the
alcoran.

FAKE [Sea term] one circle or roll
of a cable or rope quoiled
up round.

FACK [Sea term] one circle or roll
of a cable or rope quoiled
up round.

FALANGOSIS [with Oculists] a cer­
tain disease about the eyes.

FALCADE [in Horsemanship] a horse
is said to make falcades, when he
throws himself upon his haunches two
or three times, as in very quick cor­
vets, which is done in forming a stop, 
and half stop; so that a falcade is the
action of the haunches, and of the legs, 
which bend very low, as in corvets, 
when a stop or half stop is made.

FALCON, a bird of prey of the hawk
kind, superior to all others for good­
ness, courage, docility, gentleness and
nobleness of nature, used in sporting
both on the fist and the lure; its feet
are yellow, head black, and back spot­
ted, it flies chiefly at the large game, 
as the wild goose, kite, crow, &c.

FALCON [in Gunnery] a small piece
of cannon, whose diameter at the bore
is 2 inches and a quarter, is in length
6 foot, and in weight 400 pound. Its
charge of powder is a pound and a
quarter, the ball 2 inches and 1-8th di­
ameter, and in weight 1 pound 5 ounces, 
and its point blank-shot 90 paces.

FALCONET [with Gunners] is a
small gun, about 2 inches diameter at
the bore.

FALCONRY [fauconnerie, F. of fal­
conarius, of falco, L.] the art of keeping, 
training and managing hawks, and
training up birds of prey.

FALL [with Sailors] is that part of
a rope of a tackle, which is haled upon.

FALL [with Shipwrights] a ship is
said to have a fall or several falls, when



one part of the deck is raised higher, 
or some parts have risings more than
others.

To FALL off [Sea term] is when a
ship under sail, keeps not so near the
wind as she should do, they say, she
falls off.

FALL not off [Sea phrase] a word of
command from him that cons the ship, 
and signifies as much as keep the ship
near the wind.

Land FALL [Sea term] as a good
Land fall, is when a ship makes or sees
the land she expected, or according to
her reckoning.

FALLACILOQUENT [of fallacilo­
quens, L.] speaking deceitfully.

FALLACIOUSNESS [fallacia, L.]
deceitfulness; deceiving quality, &c.

FALLACY [with Logicians] a pro­
position framed with an intention to de­
ceive, and otherwise termed a Sophism.

FALLIBILITY [of fallibilis, L.]
liableness to fail
or err, deceivableness.

FALIBLENESS [of fallibilis, L.]
liableness to fail
or err, deceivableness. 

FALLING Evil [in Horses] a distem­
per.

FALMOTE [folcmote,
Sax.] either
the county court or sheriffs turn; also
a general meeting of the people, to
consult about and order state-affairs.
Old Records.

FALCHESMOUTH [folcmote,
Sax.] either
the county court or sheriffs turn; also
a general meeting of the people, to
consult about and order state-affairs.
Old Records. 

FALSE Alarum [with Military Men]
is sometimes occasioned by a fearful or
negligent centinel, and sometime design­
edly to try the readiness of the guards. 

FALSE Arms [in Heraldry] are those
wherein the fundamental rules of the
art are not observed, as if metal be put
on metal, and colour upon colour.

FALSE Flower [in Botany] a flower
which does not seem to produce any
fruit, as those of the hazel, mulberry, 
&c. also a flower that does not rise from
any embryo, or that does not knit, as
those of the melon, cucumber, &c.

FALSE Diamond, one that is counter­
feited with glass.

FALSEHOOD [falsitas, L. fausseté F.
and the English termination hood] fal­
sity; falseness; false quality.

FALSIFIC [falsificus, L.] mak­
ing false, falsifying, 
dealing falsely, &c.

FALSIFICK [falsificus, L.] mak­
ing false, falsifying, 
dealing falsely, &c.

FALSIFYING [falsificans, L. falsifi­
cant, F.] rendering or proving false, a­
dulterating; counterfeiting.

FALSILOQUENCE [falsiloquentia, 
L.] deceitful speech.

FALSITY [falsitas, L. fausseté, 
F.] falshood, un­
trueness; counterfeitness, &c.

FALSENESS [falsitas, L. fausseté, 
F.] falshood, un­
trueness; counterfeitness, &c.

FALTERING [of falteren, Du.]
stumbling in going; stammering in
speech; slackening or failing in the
performance of any thing.

FALX [with Anatomists] one of the
processes made by the doubling of the
membrane of the scull, called dura Ma­
ter, which divides the brain into right
and left parts, and separates it from the
Cerebellum. It is so called from its re­
semblance to a sickle or reaping-hook.

FAME [fama, L.] report, relation;
renown, glory, reputation. Moralists
say fame is to be pursued as far as it re­
dounds from worthy actions, that are
agreeable to reason and promoting the
good of human society, and as it opens
a wider field to such generous under­
takings.

FAME [in Painting, &c.] is repre­
sented in the figure of a lady or angel
blowing a trumpet, clothed in a thin
and light garment imbroidered with
eyes and ears.

FAMELICOSE [famelicosus, L.] of­
ten or very hungry.

FAMES Caninus [with Physicians] a
canine appetite, or extreme hunger.

FAMILIARNESS [familiaritas, L.
familiarité, F.] familiar disposition, fa­
miliar way or friendship; intimate cor­
respondence.

FAMILIARLY [familierement, F. fa­
miliariter, L.] after a familiar manner.

FAMILISTS, a sect whose tenets
were, that none were of the number of
the elect; but those that were admitted
into their society; and that all others
were reprobates and consigned over to
damnation; that it was lawful for them
to swear falsely before a magistrate for
their own convenience, &c.

These tenets were imported from
Holland into England about the year
1580, and the professors of them under a
great pretence to and shew of sanctity
gain'd upon the affections of many
common people.

FAMILY of Curves [Algebra] a con­
geries of several curves of different or­
ders or kinds, all which are defin'd by
the same indeterminate equation, but
in a different manner, according to
their different orders.

FAMISHMENT [famine, F. fames, 
L.] famine, a being hunger-starved.

FAMOUS [famosus, L.] renowned, 
celebrated by same or common report.

FAMOUSNESS [famositas, L.] re­
nownedness, great reputation.

To FAN [vaner, F. vannare, L.] to
winnow corn; also to cool with a fan,
as women, &c. do.



FANATIO [Old Customs] the fawn­
ing time of deer, or fence month.

FANCIFUL [fantasque, F. phanta­
sticus, L. of φανταστιχὸς, Gr.] imaginary, 
conceited.

FANCIFULNESS [of fantasie, F. phan­
tasia, L. φαντασία, Gr. the fancy] aptness
to be fanciful or imaginative without
sufficient ground or reason, capricious­
ness.

FANGLED, as new-fangled [proba­
bly of evangelia of ἐυαγγέλια, Gr. gospels, 
q. d. new gospels] novel, upstart, &c.

FANTASTICALNESS [humeur fan­
tasque, F. mores phantastici, L.] fantasti­
cal, fanciful or whimsical humour or
disposition.

FANTASTICAL Colours. See Em­
phatical colours.

FAQUES, certain counterfeit devo­
to's or hermits in the East-Indies, who
voluntarily undergo most severe and
almost incredible penances.

FARCE, a mock comedy or droll.
Farce descends to Grimace and Buffoonry
of the most ordinary sort, and being
wholly composed of ridicule and the
like, never exceeds her stint of 3 acts;
whereas comedy and tragedy contain
5. For comedy being generally ex­
press'd in a common and fleeting man­
ner, is allow'd 2500 lines, i. e. 500 to
each act; and tragedy, because of its
heroicks, is allowed 2000 lines. The
difference between Farce and Comedy is, 
that Farce disallows of all laws, or ra­
ther sets them aside upon occasion, the
design of it being only to please and
make merry, and sticks at nothing that
may contribute thereto, however wild
and extravagant; whereas Comedy keeps
to nature and probability, and in order
to that, is confined to certain laws, uni­
ties, &c. prescribed by the ancient cri­
ticks.

To FARCE [farcir, F. farcire, L.] to
stuff or cram.

FARCY [in Horses] is a disease, or
a poison or corruption, that infects
their blood, and appears in swellings
like strings along the veins in knots, 
and even in ulcers.

FARD, a sort of paint used by women
for beautifying their faces; also dis­
guise, pretence or dissimulation,  F.

FARE [of waeren, Du.] cheer, diet, 
victuals, &c.

FARE [pharos, L. φάρος, Gr.] a
watch-tower at sea, as the Fare of
Messina.

FARINA, the flower or powder of
some grain or pulse, sifted from the
bran.  L.

FARINA fœcundans [with Botanists]
a fine dust prepared in the male-flower
of plants, which being afterwards shed
on the female, does the office of sperm
or semen by impregnating it.  L.

FARING [of faran, Sax. to travel]
as way-faring, travelling.

FARING [of waeren, Du. to be well]
living, enjoying, eating, &c.

To FARM [feormian, Sax. to afford
a livelihood, prendre à ferme, F.] to cul­
tivate land, to hire a farm, &c.

FARMABLE, that may be let out to
farm.

FARNESS [feorneſſe, Sax.] dis­
tance, length of way.

FARRIERS company 
were incorporated, 
they say, very early, 
and are a master, 3
wardens, 24 assistants, 
and 39 on the livery.
Their armorial en­
signs are 3 horse shoos.
They have no hall, but
meet at the George in Iron-monger
Lane.

Image omitted.



FAR-ROE BUCK, a roe-buck in its
fifth year,

FARTHER [furðor, Sax.] a great­
er way off, at greater distance.

FARTHEST [furðeſt, Sax.] most
remote, at the greatest distance.

FASCES, bundles of rods, &c. car­
ried before the Roman magistrates.
These fasces were bundles of rods
bound round on the helve of an hatchet, 
the head of the hatchet appearing at the
top of them; these intimated that some
offenders were to be chastised with mil­
der punishments, i. e. with rods; and
that others, when there was no reme­
dy, were to be cut off with the hatchet.
These were carried before the consuls
and other supreme magistrates.

FASCIA, a swathe or swaddling
band; also a swathe or long bandage
used by Surgeons.

FASCIA [in Architecture] one of
the bands that make up the archi­
trave, being three in number; also a
range of stones that divide the stories
in building.  L.

FASHIONABLENESS [of façon, F.]
modishness.

FASTERMANS men of repute
and substance, or
rather bond's men, pledges, sureties, 
who in the time of the Saxons were to
answer for one another's peaceable be­
haviour.

FASTING men men of repute
and substance, or
rather bond's men, pledges, sureties, 
who in the time of the Saxons were to
answer for one another's peaceable be­
haviour. 

FASTI, the Roman calendar, in which
were set down all days of feasts, plead­



ings, games, ceremonies and other pub­
lick business throughout the year.  L.

FASTIDIOUS [fastidiosus, L. fasti­
dieux, F.] disdainful, proud, haughty, 
scornful.

FASTIDIOUSNESS [of fastidieux, F.
fastidiosus, L.] disdainfulness.

FASTNESS [feſtinẏſſe of faſt­
nian, Sax.] swiftness; also firmness.

FATALNESS [fatalitas, L. fatalité, 
F.] unavoidableness, disasterousness.

FATE [fatum, of fando, L. speak­
ing] it primarily implies the same with
effatum, a word or decree pronounced
by God, or a fix'd sentence whereby
the Deity has prescribed the order of
things, and allotted every person what
shall befal him. The Greeks call it
Εἰμὰρ and Εἰμαρήνη, as tho' Εἰρμὸς a
chain or necessary series of things indis­
solubly linked together; and the mo­
derns call it providence.

Astrological FATE a necessity of things
and events arising from the influence
and position of the heavenly bodies, 
which give laws (as they say) both to
the elements and mix'd bodies, and to
the wills of men.

Stoical FATE, is by Cicero defined to
be an order or series of causes, where
in cause being linked to cause, each
produces other, and thus all things
flow from one prime cause. Chrysip­
pus calls it a natural, invariable suc­
cession of all things ab æterno, each in­
volving other.

The FATES [fata, L.] the destinies
according to the poets, the three fatal
sisters, Clotho, Lachesis and Atropos;
which see.

Adoptive FATHER is one who takes
the children of some other person, and
owns them for his own.

Natural FATHER is one who has
illegitimate children.

Putative FATHER is he who is only
the reputed or supposed father.

To FATHER a thing upon one, i. e.
to lay the blame or crime to his charge.

FATHERLESNESS, the state and
condition of being without a father.

FATHERLINESS [faðerlicneſſe, 
Sax.] the disposition of a father; fa­
therly affection.

FATHERS [by way of emphasis] the
bishops of the primitive church; also
archbishops and bishops of the present
church; also persons venerable for their
age; also superiors of convents or mo­
nasteries.

FATHIMITES [among the Turks]
the descendants of Mahomet by Fathima.

FATIDIC [fatidicus, L. fatidique, F.]
foretelling or declaring fate or destiny,
or what has been decreed by the fates, 
or has been pre-ordained.

FATIDICS [fatidici of fatum di­
cere, L.] destiny-rea­
ders, fortune-tellers.

FATIDICKS [fatidici of fatum di­
cere, L.] destiny-rea­
ders, fortune-tellers.

FATIFEROUS [fatiser, L.] bringing
on fate, bringing destruction.

FATIGABLENESS [of fatigare, L.]
liableness or capableness of being wea­
ried, fatigued or tired.

FATILOQUIST [fatiloquus, L.] a
destiny reader, a sooth-sayer.

FATNESS [fatneſſe, Sax.] a be­
ing fat: grossness in body, &c.

FATUARII [so called of Fatua the
wife of the deity Faunus, who, as the
Romans imagined, inspired men with
the knowledge of futurity] such per­
sons who seeming to be inspired, fore­
told future things.

FAUCEUS [with Anatomists] the up­
per part of the gullet.

FAVISSA [with Antiquaries] a hole, 
pit or vault under ground, wherein
some rarity or thing of great value
was kept.

FAULTINESS [plein des fautes, F.]
badness, the being faulty or blameable,

FAULTLESS [sans faute, F.] with­
out fault; not deserving blame.

FAULTLESNESS, a being free from
faults.

FAULTY [plein de fautes, F.] that
is bad, or has a fault or full of faults.

FAUNA, a certain goddess of the
Romans, to whom the matrons sacrifi­
ced in the night-time and very pri­
vately; and it was not lawful for any
man so much as to look into her temple;
upon pain of death, because that Fauna,
when she lived, was so chaste, that she
always kept herself in her chamber, 
and never would look upon any man
but her husband. Her husband Faunus
is said to have plac'd her in the number
of the Gods, to make her some amends, 
because he had beaten her to death
with myrtle rods for being drunk, 
therefore no myrtle was brought near
her temple, and when the women
drank, they call'd it milk and not wine.

FAUNALIA [among the Romans]
feasts held in December in honour of
Faunus, during which the country peo­
ple leaving work, diverted themselves
with dancing and other merriments.

FAUNI the sons of Faunus and Fauna
they had horns on their head and poin­
ted ears and tails. They were crown­
ed with branches of Pine-tree; they
had hoofs, and their lower parts were
like goats.



FAUNI, wild beasts of the nature of
apes, having 4 paws, but using the
hindmost only. Their faces are made
almost like a man's, the forepart is
without hair, the hinder part abounds
with it.

Some of these are found in the Indies,
and in the province of Angola. One of
these animals is said to have been
brought to Holland some years ago
where it liv'd some time.

St Jerome relates that in the time of
Constantine of them was carried to
Alexandria, where it pined and died
very soon of melancholy. It was em­
balmed and brought to the emperor
who was then at Antioch.

Plutarch relates that after the defeat
of Mithridates one of them was carried
to Sylla.

But there are other Fauns, which
are the country deities of the heathens,
described with horns upon their heads
and with the feet of goats.

The Fauns and deities of the woods
and groves, were not known among
the Greeks; but by the Latins only, who
kept their festival upon the 5th of De­
cember and sacrificed a goat to them in
the meadows with great rejoicings of
all the villages round about.

Faunes among the Romans was the
same thing as Pan with the Greeks, at
least the Fauns were companions to
Pan.

Notwithstanding they were honoured
as demi-gods, it was nevertheless be­
lieved that they died after a certain
time.

They are represented exactly like
satyrs, sometimes in a human shape with
the tail only of a horse or goat, and
sometimes with the ears of a goat and
horns.

Lastly they are almost always con­
founded with the satyrs, both being
painted alike.

It is very probable that the ancients,
who honoured Fauns, Sylvans, &c. both
spoke and thought of them as they did
of Tritons, Nymphs and Nereids. They
imagined that there were certain Genii,
who ranged in woods, fields and de­ 
serts, in rhe sea and water, and super­
stition afterwards framed such bodies
for them as it pleased, as our painters
give such as they think fit to angels and
demons, to virtues, vices, towns, pro­
vinces, to the gods of rivers and god­
desses of fountains.

FAUNUS, was the son of Picus a
king of the Latins, whom they made
god of the fields; because he was the
inventor of many things necessary for
husbandry, they accounted him the fa­
ther of the other Fauni. He was look'd
upon as that wild god, whose voice
was heard by night and frighted peo­
ple. This Faunus reigned in Italy, 
Anno Mundi 2691, in the last year of
Gideon the judge of Israel, was cotem­
porary with Pandion king of Athens;
he introduced religion among the peo­
ple of Italy, who before that time had
little reverence for the deities, if the
human sacrifices which he instituted to
Saturn may be called religion.

The FAVOUR of God's Providence [in
Hieroglyphicks] was represented by the
ancients by a great star in the air; be­
cause it is often clouded with adversity, 
and never shines long upon us without
interruption.

FAVOUR, is opposed to rigour, es­
pecially in matters of justice.

FAVOURABLENESS [of favorabilis, 
L.] easiness, moderateness, temperate­
ness, goodness.

FAVOURER [fauteur, F. fautor, L.]
one who countenances or encourages,
&c.

FAUSSEBRAY [in Fortification] a
small rampart about 3 or 4 fathoms
wide, bordered with a parapet and bau­
quette, the use of which is to defend
the foss.

FAUSTITAS the goddess of good
luck or publick felicity, had many altars,
was represented on a throne with Mer­
cury's wand in one hand, and a horn of
plenty in the other, was worshipped
for the increase of cattle.  L.

FAWNING [of fanðian, Sax.] flat­
tering, soothing behaviour.

FAYLING of Record [Law term] is
when an action is brought against one
who pleads any matter or record, and
avers to prove it by record, and fails to
bring it into court, or brings such an
one as is no bar to the action.

FAYNT Pleader [Law term] is a false, 
covinous or collusory manner of plead­
ing, to the deceit of a third person.

FF [in Musick Books] stands for forte
forte, and denotes very loud.

FEALTY [fidelitas, L. fidelité, F.] fi­
delity, loyalty.

FEALTY [feodelitas, L.] an oath
taken at the admittance of every tenant
to be true to the lord of which beholds
his land.

General FEALTY, that which is to be
perform'd by every subject to his prince.

Special FEALTY is what is perform­
ed by tenants to their landlord. The
forms are, a freeman doing Fealty



holds his right hand upon a book, and
says thus, Hear you, my lord W. that
J. R. shall be to you both faithful and true, 
and owe my fealty to you, for the land I
hold of you, on the terms assign'd. So
help me God and all his saints.

A villain doing Fealty puts his right
hand over the book, and says thus;
Hear you, my Lord W. that J. R. from
this day forth to you shall be true and 
faithful, and shall owe you fealty for the
land I hold of you in villenage, and shall
be justified by you in body and goods. So
help me God and all his saints.

FEARFUL [ferhtful, Sax.] ap­
prehensive of evil.

A FEARFUL and timorous man [Hie­
roglyphically] was represented by the
ancients by a wolf; because it is re­
ported that this beast will startle at the
least thing, and altho' it does not want
courage to encounter an enemy, yet it
is afraid of a stone.

FEARFULLY [ferhtfullic, Sax.]
after a terrifying manner.

FEARFULNESS [ferhtulneſſe,
Sax.] apprehensive of evil.

FEARLESS [ferhtleaſ, Sax.] void
of fear or apprehension of evil, bold, 
daring.

FEARLESLY [ferhtleaſlic, Sax.]
without fear, undauntedly, courage­
ously.

FEARLESNESS [ferhtleaſneſſe, 
Sax.] an apprehensiveness of danger or
death.

FEASIBLENESS [of faisible, F. and
ness] easiness to be done or performed.

To FEAST [festum adornare, L.] to
make a feast; to eat at a feast or festi­
val.

FEASTING, eating or drinking at or
entertaining with a feast.

Immoveable FEASTS, are those that
are celebrated the same day of the
as Christmas-day, the Circumcision, Epi­
phany, Candlemass, Lady-day, All-Saints,
the several days of the Apostles, &c.

Moveable FEASTS, are those that are
not confin'd to the same day of the year;
the principal of which is Easter, which
gives law to the rest, as Palm Sunday, 
Good-Friday, Ash-Wednesday, Sexagesima
Ascension day, Pentecost and Trinity Sun­
day.

FEATHER [with Horsemen] is a cer­
tain sort of natural frizzling of the hair
in horses, which in some places rises
above the lying hair, and there repre­
sents the figure of the top of an ear of
corn.

To FEATHER [of feaðar, Sax.] to
scrape together, to furnish, as to feather
one's nest.

FEATHER-boiling [with Confectio­
ners] is the boiling of sugar so often or
so long, that blowing thro' the holes of
the skimmer, or shaking a spatula with a
back stroke, thick and large bubbles fly
up on high, it is become feathered; and 
when after frequent trials those bubbles
are perceived to be thicker and in great­
er quantity, so that they stick together
and form as it were a flying flake, then
they say the sugar is greatly feather'd.

A Roman FEATHER [with Horsemen]
a feather upon the neck of a horse, 
which is a row of hair turned back and
raised, which just by the mane forms a
mark like the blade or a sword.

FEATHERLESNESS [feaðer;leaſ­
neſſ, Sax.] the being without feathers
or unsledged.

FEATLY oddly, after an unusual or
uncouth manner.

FEATNESS, odness, uncouthness.

FEASING [with Sailors] the ravel­
ling out any great rope or cable at the
ends.

FEBRICITATION, an inclining to
an ague.  L.

FEBRICULOSITY [febriculositas, L.]
the same as febricitation.

FEBRICULOSE [febriculosus, L.]
that hath or is subject to a high fever.

FECIALES [among the Romans] cer­
tain state-priests, who were to assist in
treaties of peace. It was not lawful to
conclude any business of peace or war,
until they had pronounced it just: And
when they intended to go to war with
any nation, the Pater Patratus, who was
the chief of them, was sent to declare it, 
and when they concluded a peace, they
carried with them some grass out of
Rome, and when they met the other par­
ties, the Pater patratus caused a hog to
to be placed at his feet, and with a great
stone knock'd it on the head, swearing
and wishing that Jupiter would thus
punish him, or that people, that intend­
ed any mischief or deceit by the treaty,
or that should first violate their oaths,
and break the agreement by any publick
acts of hostility.

FECULA [in Pharmacy] a white, 
mealy substance or powder, which sub­
sides and gathers at the bottom of the
juices or liquors of divers roots.

FECULENCE [fæculentia, L.] dreg­
giness, or being full of dregs and lees.

FECUNDNESS [fœcunditas, F.] fer­
tility, fruitfulness.

The word "fœcunditas" is Latin rather than French.



To FECUNDIFY [fæcundum facere,
L.] to render fruitful.

FEDERAL Holiness [with Divines] i. e.
covenant holiness, such as is attributed



to young children born of christian pa­
rents and newly baptized, as being in­
cluded within the covenant of grace.

FEDERALNESS [of fæderalis, L.] the
appertaining to a covenant.

To FEE [of feak, Sax. a fief] a re­
ward, wages, &c.

FEE (as Spelman defines it) is a right
which the vassal has in land, or some
immoveable thing of his lord's, to use
the same, and take the profits of it here­
ditarily, rendring to his lord such feudal
duties and services as belong to milita­
ry tenure; the mere propriety of the soil
always remaining to the lord.

FEE absolute in an estate, &c. of which
a person is possessed in those general
words, To us and our heirs for ever.

FEE Conditional, is that whereof a
person is possessed in these words, To us
and our heirs.

FEEBLENESS [foiblesse, F.] weakness, 
languidness.

FEED, pasture. Milton.

To FEEL a horse on the hand [with
Horsemen], is to observe that the will of
the horse is in their hand; that he tastes
the bridle and has a good Appui in obey­
ing the bit.

To FEEL a horse upon the haunches [in
horsemanship] is to observe that he plies
or bends them, which is contrary to
leaning or throwing upon the shoul­
ders.

FEELINGLY [of felan, Sax.] sensi­
ble, after a feeling manner.

FEELING, or touching, is one of the
external senses, whereby we get the
ideas of solid, hard, soft, rough, smooth, 
hot, cold, wet, dry, or other tangible
qualities; as also of distance, itching
titillation, pain, &c.

Some have gone so far as to reduce
all the other senses to this, affirming that
before we have any internal knowledge
our several organs are externally struck, 
which excites the respective ideas of
scent, hearing, &c.

FEET [fotaſ, Sax.] parts of an a­
nimal body; also a measure, in length
12 inches.

FEET [in Poetry] the French and Ita­
lian poets are unacquainted with feet
and quantity; and some have weakly
imagined that the English have none;
but we find by a very little alteration, 
that the harmony of the sweetest verse
is spoiled; and that plainly shews, that
the measure of feet and quantity, being
truly observed, makes the musick, as
may be perceived in what follows.

When man on many multiplied his kind.
When man multiplied his kind on many.

FEIGNING [feinant, F. fingens, L.]
making a shew of, counterfeiting, &c.

A FEINT [in Musick] a semi-tone, 
the same that is called Diesis.

A FEINT [in Rhetorick] a figure
whereby the orator touches on some­
thing, in making a shew of passing it o­
ver in silence.

To FEIST [fiſtan, Sax.] to let a fart
without a noise.

To FELICITATE [felicitare, L.] to
make or render happy.

FELICITOUS [fælix, L.] happy.

FELICITOUSNESS [of felicitas, L.]
happiness, happy circumstances,

FELICITY, the Goddess [in Painting,
&c.] was represented as a lady sitting on
an imperial throne, holding in one hand
a Caduceus, and in the other a cornucopia, 
clad in a purple vestment trimmed with
silver.

FELL Wort, an herb.

FELLNESS [of fellnẏſſe, Sax.]
fierceness.

FELLOWS [in Fortification] are 6
pieces of wood, each of which form an
arch of a circle and those joined alto­
gether by duledges, make an intire cir­
cle with 12 spokes, which make the
wheel of a gun-carriage.

FELLOWSHIP agreement, harmo­
ny; also the place, dignity or profit a
member of a colledge in the university
enjoys.

FELO DE SE [in Law] one who com­
mits felony by laying violent hands upon
himself; a self-murderer, such an one is
to be interred without Christian burial, 
with a stake drove thro' his corps, and
to forfeit his goods.

FELONIOUS [en felon, F. of felona, 
L.] after a felonious manner.

FELONIOUSNESS, felonious quality
or circumstances.

FELTS, i. e. felt hats, were first made
in England by Spaniards and Dutchmen in
the beginning of the reign of king Henry
VIII.

FELUCCA, a little vessel with 6 oars, 
not covered over, and much us'd in the
Mediterranean, it is in size about that
of a sloop or chaloup. It may bear its
helm on both sides, which is likewise
shifted from behind forwards occasion­
ally.

FEN [with Geographers] a moorish, 
quaggy, watery ground. Fens are of 2
kinds, the first so mixed with earth and
water, as not to bear a man treading
on them, which neither receive nor
send forth rivers; the second are ponds
or collations of water, with pieces of
dry land raised here and there above the



surface of it; and these are oftentimes
the heads or springs of rivers.

A FENCE [in the Canting language]
one who buys stollen goods of thieves, 
and disposes of them.

FENCER [of defendre, F.] a sword-­
player, &c.

Simple FENCING, is what is per­
formed directly and simply on the same
line.

Compound FENCING, includes all the
possible arts and inventions to deceive
the enemy, and cause him to leave un­
guarded the place that is designed to be
attacked.

FENDUEN Pal [in Heraldry] signifies
a cross cloven down from top to bottom
and the parts set at some distance from
one another.

FENESTRA Rotunda [Anatomy] a
hole in the barrel of the ear that leads
to the cochlea, and is covered by a fine
membrane closed in the rift of the hole,
L.

FENNISH [fenniʒ, Sax.] full of, 
or abounding with
fens.

FENNY [fenniʒ, Sax.] full of, 
or abounding with
fens.

FEODUM laicum [Old Records] a lay-­
fee, or land held in fee from a lay-lord, 
by common services, in opposition to
the ecclesiastical holding in frank almoine.
 L.

FEODUM Militis [Old Rec.] or
knights fee, which
by the usual computation is 480 acres;
24 acres making a virgate, 4 virgates a
hide, and 5 hides a knight's fee.  L.

FEODUM militare, [Old Rec.] or
knights fee, which
by the usual computation is 480 acres;
24 acres making a virgate, 4 virgates a
hide, and 5 hides a knight's fee.  L.

FEOFFMENT [Common Law] the
gift or grant of honours, castles, ma­
nours, messuages, lands or other corpo­
real or immoveable things of the like
nature to another in fee-simple, i. e. to
him and his heirs forever, by the deli­
very of seisin, and the possession of the
thing given, whether the gift be made
by deed or writing.

FER de Fourchette [in He­
raldry] or Croix a fer de
Fourchette, i. e. a cross with
forked irons at each end, 
representing a sort of iron
firmer used by musketeers, 
to rest their muskets on;
and in this it differs from the cross Four­
chée, that the ends of that turn are for­
ked, but this has that sort of fork fix'd
upon the square end. See the figure.

Image omitted.



FER de Mouline [in He­
raldry] is the same as the
Cross Milrine, or Ink Milrine, 
and is as much as to say, 
the iron of a mill, i. e. the
piece of iron that upholds
the mill, as in the figure annexed.

Image omitted.



FERALIA [of ferendis epulis, L. i. e.
of carrying victuals] festivals held in
February, and dedicated to the Manes, 
in which they carried victuals to the
urns and supulchres of their deceased
relations.

FERIAL Days, holy-days, or days
on which the ancient Romans abstained
from work.

FERINE [ferinus, L.] of or like
wild beasts.

FERIO [with Logicians] a mood, 
when the first proposition of a catego­
rical syllogism is an universal negative, 
the second a particular negative.

FERISON [with Logicians] a term
when the propositions are answerable
to ferio, as no severity is pleasant, some
severity is necessary, therefore something
that is necessary is not pleasant.

FERME a ferme [in Riding Acade­
mies] a term used to signify in the same
place, without stirring or parting.

FERMENT [in Physicks] any kind
of body, which being applied to ano­
ther, produces a fermentation therein, 
as the acid in leaven, &c. See Fermen­
tation.

To be in a FERMENT, to be discom­
posed or warm in mind.

To FERMENT [fermentare, L.] to
rise or puff up as leaven or yeast does;
to work as beer or other liquors do, so
as to clear itself from dregs and impuri­
ties.

FERMENTATION, an intestine mo­
tion or commotion of the small insen­
sible particles of a mixt body, arising
without any apparent mechanical cause, 
as when leaven or yeast ferments.

FERMENTATION [with Physicians]
any gentle motion of the parts of the
blood or juice, that is occasioned by
something that helps to clarify, exalt
and render them more subtil; so as to
reduce them to a healthful and natural
state.

FERMENTATION [with Chymists]
a kind of ebullition or bubbling up, rai­
sed by the spirits that endeavour to get
out of a mixt body; so that meeting
with gross earthy parts, which oppose
their passage, they swell and render the
liquor thin, till they find their way.

FERONIA, was worshipped as the
goddess of Groves, Orchards, and such
Trees as bear Fruit. It is related, that
when the Lacedæmonians were offended
at the rigour of Lycurgus's laws, they
resolv'd many of them to seek out for
some new habitation, and after a long
and dangerous voyage at sea, they ar­



rived in a part of Italy, where to shew
gratitude for their preservation, 
they built a temple in a grove situated
under the hill Soracte to the goddess Fe­
ronia, on account of their bearing pa­
tiently all that had happened to them
in their passage. The priests, and such
as were inspired by this goddess, are
said to walk bare-foot upon burning
coals without hurt, which spectacle
every year brought together a great
number of spectators. Servants were
made free in her temple, and received
the cap which was the badge of their
liberty; for which they worshipped her
as their protectress.

FERRET, a little 4 footed animal
about the size of a weasle, with a long
snout and thick tail, it has but 4 teeth, 
but with these it bites mortally; but
being muzzled it is put into coney-bur­
roughs to force rabbits out of their holes
into gins and traps, placed at the
mouths of the holes.

FERRUGINOUSNESS [of ferrugine­
us, L.] being like, or of the nature or
rusty iron.

FERRURE, a shooing of horses.  F.

To FERRY [probably of faran. to
pass over, or of ferri, L. to be carried]
a place in a river where persons, hor­
ses, coaches, &c. are carried over.

FERTILNESS [fertilitas, L.] fruit­
fulness, plentifulness.

To FERTILIZE [fertiliser, F.] to
make fertile, fruitful or plentiful.

FERVID [fervidus, L.] hot, full of
heat or fervour, vehement, eager.

FERVIDITY [ferviditas, L.] fer­
vency, great heat, 
eagerness.

FERVIDNESS [ferviditas, L.] fer­
vency, great heat, 
eagerness.

FERULÆ [with Surgeons] splents or
light chips made of line paper glued to
gether, or leather, &c. for binding up,
loosened or disjointed bones, after they
have been set again.  L.

FERVOR of the Matrix, a disease
when the intire substance of the womb
is extream hot; attended with a pain
and heaviness of the loins, a loathing, 
suppression of urine or the like; at the
same time the patient being very desi­
rous of copulation, though by reason
of pain at the same time she fears it.

A FESSE [in Heraldry]
is one of the nine honour­
able ordinaries, and consists
of lines drawn directly cross
the escutcheon, from side to
side and takes up the third
part of it between the honour point
and the nombril. It represents a waist
belt, or girdle of honour. See the fi­
gure.

Image omitted.



FESCENNINE Verses [by same de­
rived of fascium, L. a charm, they tak­
ing such songs to be proper to drive
away witches, or prevent their inchant­
ments] a sort of satyrical verses full of
open, wanton and obscene expressions, 
sung or rehears'd by the company at
marriages.

Party per FESSE signifies parted a­
cross the middle of the shield from side
to side, through the fess-point.

FESS-Point [in Heraldry] is the exact
center of the escutcheon, and is so cal­
led because the point through the fess-­
line is drawn from the two sides, and
accordingly divides it into two equal
parts, when the escutcheon is parted
per fess, as is represented by letter E, 
in the escutcheon. See escutcheon.

FESSE-ways [in Heralds] or in fesse,
signifies those things that are borne af­
ter the manner of a fesse, that is, in a
rank across the middle of the shield.

FESTIVOUSNESS [of festivus, L.]
pleasantness, wittiness, jocularness.

FES­
TOONS [in 
Architec­
ture the
French call
them Fes­
toons, prob.
of Festus, L.
merry, jovial, being usually applied on
festival occasions] an ornament of car­
ved work in manner of wreaths or gar­
land (hanging down) of flowers or
leaves twisted together, thickest at the
middle, and suspended by the two ex­
tremes, whence it hangs down perpen­
dicularly as in the figure.

Image omitted.



FETCH [in Trade] an over-reaching
or charging more than should be.

FETCH, a deception or gloss upon a
matter, a subtil come over, or sound­
ing of a persons intentions, inclinations, 
&c. by asking questions seeming not to
relate to the matter in hand.

FETCH him up [Sea Phrase] signifies
give chase, or pursue a ship.

FETIDNESS [of fœtidus, L.] stink­
ingness, ill-favour.

FEUDAL [in Old Records] of or
belonging to a feud or
fee.

FEODAL [in Old Records] of or
belonging to a feud or
fee.

FEUDATORY, a vassal or person
who holds of a sovereign in fee, i. e.
on condition of yielding fealty and ho­
mage or other service.

FEUDS [with Civilians] a volume of
the civil law, so called, because it con­
tains the customs and services, which a
vassal does to his soveraign prince or



lord, for the lands or fees that he holds
of him.

An Essential FEVER, is one, the pri­
mary cause of which is in the blood it­
self, and does not arise as an effect or
symptom from any other disease in the
solids or other parts.

A Symptomatical FEVER, is one which
arises as an accident or symptom of
some disorder that is antecedent to it.

Diary FEVER, is that which or­
dinarily does not last longer than 24
hours.

A Hectickk FEVER [of ἕχτιχοσ of ἕξις,
Gr. habitude] is one that is slow and
durable, extenuating and emaciating
the body by insensible degrees.

Putrid FEVER, one arising from the
discharge of putrid, purulent matrter
from some morbid part, as an ulcer in
the lungs.

Burning FEVER a very acute fe­
ver, attended
with a vehement heat, intolerable
thirst, a dry cough, a delirium and
other violent symptoms.

Ardent FEVER a very acute fe­
ver, attended
with a vehement heat, intolerable
thirst, a dry cough, a delirium and
other violent symptoms.

A Colliquative FEVER, one wherein
the whole body is consumed and ema­
ciated in a short time, the solid parts
and the fat, &c. are melted down, 
and carried off by a Diarrhœa, Sweat, 
Urine, &c.

A Quotidian FEVER, is one where
the paroxism returns every day.

A double Quotidian FEVER, is one the
paroxism of which comes twice in 24
hours.

Tertian FEVER, one which returns
every other day, and is of 2 kinds, legi­
timate and spurious.

A legitimate Tertian FEVER is one
that lasts only 12 hours, and is followed
by an absolute intermission.

A spurious Tertian FEVER, holds lon­
ger than 12 hours, and sometimes 18 or
20 hours.

A double Tertian FEVER, is one that
returns twice every other day.

A Quartan FEVER, is one which re­
turns only every 4th day.

A double Quartan FEVER, is one
which has 2 paroxisms every 4th day.

A Triple Quartan FEVER, is one that
has 3 paroxisms every 4th day.

Eruptive FEVERS, are such as, be­
sides the symptoms common to other
fevers, have their crisis attended with
cutaneous eruptions.

Pestilential FEVERS, are such as are
acute, contagious and mortal.

Petechial FEVERS, are a malignant
kind of fevers, wherein, besides the
other fevers on the 4th day, or oftner
on the 7th day, there appear petechiæ
or red spots like flea-bites on the breast, 
shoulders and abdomen.

FEVERISH, having the symptoms of
a fever; or inclinable to a fever.

FEVERISHNESS, feverish symptoms;
or inclinableness to a fever.

FEVILLANTINES [in Cookery] 
small tarts filled with sweet-meats.  F.

FEUILLE Mort [q. d. dead Leaf] the
colour called fillemot.

FEUILLE DE SCIE [with some
French heralds] a term used to express
that an ordinary that has a Fesse or a
Pale, is indented only on one side, be­
cause then it looks like a saw, as the
French word denotes, signifying the plate
of a saw.

FEWNESS [fea&wyn;neſſe, Sax.] small­
ness of number.

F FAUT [in the scale of Musick] the
seventh or last note of the 3 septenaries
of the Gamut.

FIBRA, a fibre, a similar part of the
animal body called also a filament.

FIBRES [in Anatomy] are long
slender threads, which be­
ing variously interwoven or wound up, 
form the various solid parts of an ani­
mal body, or they are round, oblong
vessels in an animal, by which the spi­
rits are convey'd to all parts of the bo­
dy, so that the fibres are the stamen or
matter of an animal.

FIBERS [in Anatomy] are long
slender threads, which be­
ing variously interwoven or wound up, 
form the various solid parts of an ani­
mal body, or they are round, oblong
vessels in an animal, by which the spi­
rits are convey'd to all parts of the bo­
dy, so that the fibres are the stamen or
matter of an animal.

FIBERS [in Botany] threads or hair­
like strings in plants, roots, &c.

The FIBRES are by Anatomists distin­
guished into 4 kinds, as carnous or fleshy,
nervous, tendinous, and osseous or bony;
which again are divided, according as
they are situated, into
Direct longitudinal FIBRES, those are
such as proceed in right-lines.
 
Transverse FIBRES, are such as go a­
cross the longitudinal ones.

Oblique FIBRES, are such as cross or
intersect them at unequal angles.

Muscular FIBRES, are such whereof
the muscles or fleshy parts of the body
are composed, these are called motive
fibres.

Nervous FIBRES, are those minute
threads whereof the nerves are compo­
sed, these are also called sensitive fibres.

FIBULA, a button.  L.

FIBULÆUS [Anatomy] a muscle of
the leg called Peronæus primus.  L.

FIBULA [with ancient Surgeons] a
sort of material or bandage for the clos­
sing up wounds, concerning which au­
thors differ. Guido says, that these fi­
bula's were made of iron circles, as it
were semicircles crooked backwards on



both sides, the hooks whereof being
fastened on both sides to the gaping
wound, answered exactly one another.
Celsus says, that fibulas, were made of a
needle full of soft untwisted silk or
thread, wherewith they sewed the lips
of the gaping wound together.

FIBULA [with Anatomists] the lesser
and outer bone of the leg, the focile
minus. Hippocrates uses the word for
that part only of the bone that forms
the outer ancle, perhaps because they
used to buckle their shoes in that place.

FICKLENESS, inconstancy, variable­
ness, wavering in mind, changeable
humour.

FICTILENESS [of fictilis, L.] earthi­
ness, or the being made of earth, as
earthen vessels, of the quality of earth.

FICTITIOUSNESS [of fictitius, L.]
feignedness, counterfeitness, fabulous­
ness.

FIDDLING [of fidlen, Teut.] play­
ing upon a fiddle; also doing or acting
triflingly.

FIDEJUSSOR [in Civil Law] a sure­
ty, one who is a pledge and surety for
another, especially in a pecuniary affair.

FIDELITY [fidelitas, L. fidelité, F.]
faithfulness, integrity, honesty.

FIDELITY [Hieroglyphically] was re­
presented by an elephant.

FIDES [Publick Faith] had a temple
instituted to her by Numa, with sacri­
fices that were always performed with­
out blood. She was clothed with white
robes, drawn in a chariot, with her
right hand open, to intimate her can­
dour and sincerity.

FIDUCIAL [fiducialis, L.] trusty, 
sure.

FIDUCIARY [fiduciarias, L.] trusty, 
sure; also taken upon trust, so as to
see restored again.

FIE [fi! F. vah! L.] an interjection
denoting disapprobation on account of
absurdity, obscenity, &c.

FIELD Officers [in an Army] are such
as have the power and command over
a whole regiment, viz. Colonel, Lieute­
nant Colonel and Major; but those whose
commands reach no farther than a
troop, are not field-officers.

FIELD of a Painting, the ground of
it.

FIELD Works [in Fortif.] are works
thrown up by an army in the besieging
of a fortress; or by the besieged in de­
fence of the place.

FIERABRAS [i. e. fierce at arms]
an hector or bully.  F.

FIERCENESS [ferocitas, L. ferocité, 
F.] curstness, sternness, bestial fury.

FIERINESS [fẏricʒneſſ, Sax.] fi­
ery or furious nature or quality.

FIERY [fẏricʒ, Sax.] hot, furious, 
hasty, &c.

FIFE, a county in Scotland, &c.

FIFE [fifre, F.] a sort of wind mu­
sick, a small pipe.

FIFTEEN [fiften, Sax.] XV, 15.

FIFTHLY [fiftlic, Sax.] Vthly, 
5thly.

FIFTIETH [fifttiʒ, Sax.] Lth.
50th.

FIG [in a Horse] is a kind of wart on
the frush, and sometimes all over his
body; it makes an evacuation of stinking
and nasty humours that are hard to cure.

FIGARY [q. d. vagary, of vagari to
rove and ramble up and down] a roving
or roaming about; also a caprice or
whimsey.

FIGHTER [of fẏht of feohtan,
Sax.] one who fights.

Running FIGHTS [at Sea] are where
the enemies ship does not stand the bat­
tle, but is continually chas'd.

FIGURAL Numbers are such
numbers
as do ordinarily represent some geome­
trical figure, and are always considered
in relation thereto, being either lineary, 
superficial or solid.

FIGURATIVE Numbers are such
numbers
as do ordinarily represent some geome­
trical figure, and are always considered
in relation thereto, being either lineary, 
superficial or solid.

FIGURANCE [figurantia, L.] an
expressing, figuring, or drawing forms
or shapes, &c.

FIGURATE Desciant [with Mus.] is
that wherein discords are intermix'd
with the concords, call'd also florid des­
cant, and may aptly be termed the rhe­
torical part of musick, inasmuch as here
are brought in all the variety of points, 
syncopes, figures, and whatever else is
capable of affording an ornament to
the composition.

FIGURATE counterpoint [in Mus.]
that wherein there is a mixture of dis­
cords along with the concords.

FIGURATION, a fashioning, a re­
semblance, a shape; also a chimerical
vision.  L.

FIGURATION [with Rhetoricians]
a figure in which there is a representa­
tion of the manners and passions of
men, either to their praise or reproach.

FIGURATIVE [figurativus, L.] of
or pertaining to, or spoken by way of
figure, or that reaches under some ob­
scure resemblance.

FIGURATIVE Stile. is one which
abounds in figures.

FIGURATIVELY [figurement, F.
figurative, L.] after a figurative man­
ner, or spoken by way of figure.



FIGURE [in Theology] the mysteries
represented or delivered obscurely to
us under certain types in the Old Tes­
tament.

FIGURE [with Grammar.] an ex­
pression which deviates from the com­
mon and natural rules of grammar; ei­
ther for the sake of elegancy or brevity, 
as when any word is left to be supplied
by the reader, &c.

Regular FIGURE, is one which is e­
quilateral and equiangular.

Irregular FIGURE, is that which is
not both.

FIGURE [in Conicks] is the rectan­
gle made under the latus rectum and
transversum in the Hyperbola.

FIGURE [in Architecture] sculpture, 
representation of things made on solid
matter.

FIGURE [in Painting, Drawing, &c.]
the lines and colours which form the
representation of a man or any thing
else.

FIGURE [in Heraldry] a bearing in
a shield representing or resembling an
human face, as the sun, an angel.

FIGURE [in Astrology] a description
or draught of the state and disposition
of the heavens, at a certain hour con­
taining the places of the planets and
stars, mark'd down in a figure of 12
triangles.

FIGURE [in Geomancy] is applied
to the extremes of points, lines or num­
bers thrown or cast at random; on the
combinations or variations whereof the
pretenders to this art found their divi­
nations.

FIGURE [in Dancing] the several
steps which the dancers make in order
and cadence, which mark divers figures
on the floor.

FIGURE [in Rhetorick] is when a
word is used to signify a thing which is
not proper to it, and which use has ap­
ply'd to something else; then that man­
ner of expression is figurative; or fi­
gures are manners of expression distinct
from those that are natural and com­
mon.

FIGURES [in Rhetorick] are not to
be looked upon only as certain terms
invented by Rhetoricians for the orna­
ment of their discourse. God has not
denied to the soul what he has granted
to the body; as the body knows how
to repel injuries, so the soul can defend
itself as well, and it is not by nature
immoveable, when it is attack'd; all
the figures which the soul makes use of
in discourse, when it is moved, have
the same effect as the postures of the
body. Figures in discourse are as pro­
per to defend the mind, as postures are
to defend the body in corporeal attacks.

Theatrical FIGURES [among Rheto­
ricians] are such as bad orators affect
when they measure their words, and
give them a cadence to tickle the ears;
tho' they figure their discourses, yet it
is with such figures, which being com­
pared to those that are strong and per­
swasive, are like the postures in a dance
to those in a battle. The art and af­
fectation that appears in a painted dis­
course, says a certain author, are not
the character of a soul truly touch'd
with the things it speaks off, but under
no concern at all.

FIGURES of Discourse, are extraor­
dinary ways of speaking very different
from the common and natural.

FIGURES of Words [among Rhetori­
cians] are quite different from figures
of discourse; for figures of discourse
are produced chiefly by the agitations
of the soul; figures of words are the
calmness and study of the mind. A fi­
gure of words consists sometimes in the
repetition of the same word, the same
letter, and the same sound, which, tho'
it is often disagreeable, yet never shocks
when the repetition is made with art.
This repetition is made sometimes in
the beginning of sentences, sometimes
in the middle, and sometimes in the
end of sentences.

FIGURED [figuré, F. figuratus, L.]
represented, having figures or forms
drawn upon it.

FILCHER [un filon, F.] a private
thief.

FILE [in Heraldry] is represented in
the form annexed, though
sometimes of more, and
sometimes of fewer points.
It is sometimes borne as a
charge in coat armour;
but it is usually the mark
and distinction which the elder brother
bears in his coat, during his father's
life.

Image omitted.



FILET [with Botanists] is used to
signify those threads that are usually
found in the middle of flowers, as the
Lily. Tulip, &c.

FILIALNESS [of filiatio, L.] sonship.

FILLET [filum, L. fillet, F.] the
fleshy part of the leg of a calf, sheep, 
&c. adjoining to the loin.

FILLET [in Heraldry] a kind of
orle or bordure, containing only a third
or fourth part of the breadth of the
common bordure.



FILLET [in Anat.] the extremity of
the membranous ligament under the
tongue, more commonly called the Fræ­
num or bridle.

FILLETS [with Painters] a little
rule or riglet of leaf-gold drawn over
certain mouldings, or on the edge of
frames, pannels, &c.

FILLETED [of filet, F. of filum, L.
a thread] having a fillet or fillets.

FILLIGRANE [of filum and granum, 
L.] a kind of inrichment on gold and
silver, delicately wrought in manner of
little threads or grains, or both inter­
mix'd.

To FILLIP [probably q. fly up] to
throw up a piece of money with one's
finger and nail; also to hit with the
same method.

FILMINESS [of film, Sax.] filmy
quality, or abounding with films or
thin skins.

FILMY [filmic, Sax. probably of
velamen, L.] having or being full of
films.

FILTERED [filtre, F. of filtrum,
a strainer, L.] strain­
ed through a paper, cloth, &c.

FILTRATED [filtre, F. of filtrum,
a strainer, L.] strain­
ed through a paper, cloth, &c.

FILTHILY [of filðilic, Sax.] after
a filthy manner.

FILTHINESS [filðineſſe, Sax.]
dirtiness, impurity, obsceneness, nasti­
ness. &c.

FILTHY [filðic, Sax.] dirty, base, 
impure, nasty, obscene.

FILTRATION [in Chymical
Writers] is expressed by this
character.

Image omitted.



FIMBRIATED [in He­
raldry] signifies that an or­
dinary is edged round
with another of a different
colour, as thus; He bear­
eth Or, a Cross, Patee
Gules, fimbriated Sable.

Image omitted.



FINABLENESS [of finis, L. an end]
liableness to be fined, or to pay a fine
or amercement.

A FINAL [with Carvers] an emblem
of the end of life, being an inrichment
placed on monuments, viz. a boy with­
out wings, holding in his hand an ex­
tinguished torch with the flame end
fix'd on a death's head at the boy's feet.

FINAL Letters [in the Hebrew tongue]
ך ם ן ף ץ, Caph, Mem, Nun, Phe, 
Tzade, which every where but at the
ends of words, are written כ מ נ פ צ.

FINALLY [finalement, F. finaliter, 
L.] in the last place, in the end.

FINDIBLENESS [of findibilis, L.] 
capableness of being cleft.

FINENESS [finesse, L.] spruceness, 
gayness in cloaths; also thinness and
smallness of threads in cloth, &c.

FINES for Alienation [Law term]
were certain fines paid to the king by
his tenants in chief, for licence to alien
or make over their lands to others.

A FINE Executed [in Law] is such, 
which of its own force gives a present
possession (at least in Law) to a Cogni­ 
zee, so that he needs no writ of habere
facias seisinam, for executing the same
but may enter.

A FINE Executory [in Law] is such
as of its own force does not execute the
possession in the Cognizee.

A single FINE [in Law] one by
which nothing is granted or rendered
back again by the cognizees to the cog­
nizors or any of them.

A double FINE, contains a grant and
render back either of some rent, com­
mon, or other thing out of the land, 
&c. to all or some of the cognizors for
some estate, limiting thereby the re­
mainders to strangers, not named in
the writ or covenant.

FINE Drawing, a rentering, a fine
and imperceptible sewing up the parts
of a cloth, &c. torn or rent in the
dressing, wearing, &c.

FINESSE, fineness, that peculiar de­
licacy perceiv'd in works of the mind;
also the nicest, most secret or sublime
parts of any art or science.  F.

FINICALNESS [prob. of fin or finesse, 
F.] affectedness in dress.

FINISHER [celui qui finit, F. finitor, 
L.] one who finishes, ends, or makes
compleat.

FINISHING [with Architects] is fre­
quently applied to a Crowning, Croter, 
&c. raised over a piece of building to
terminate, compleat or finish it.

FINITENESS [of finitus, L.] bound­
edness, determinateness.

FINITEUR [in Italian riding Aca­
demies] a term used importing the end
of a career or course.

FINITIVE [finitivus, L.] defining.

FIRE [fẏre, Sax. πὺρ, Gr.]

FIRE [with Naturalists] is by some
defined to be a company of particles of
the third element, moved with the most
rapid motion imaginable; or a lucid
and fluid body, consisting of earthy par­
ticles, most swiftly moved by the mat­
ter of the first element, upon which
they swim, as it were.

Fire is not only propagated several
ways, where there is none. 1. By col­
lecting the sun's rays in a convex glass, 
which will set fire to that point on



which the rays fall, provided it to be
a combustible matter, i. e. such as will
burn. 2. By striking flints one against
the other or against steel. 3. By rub­
bing wood or iron, or any other solid
body, a great while together and very
hard, at last it will take fire; also by
winding cords about a stick, and swiftly
twitching them this way and that way, 
will set them on fire. Some hard canes
struck with a tobacco-pipe, will force
out fire.

As to the effects of fire, they are va­
rious as the matter that feeds it. If fire
be set to wood or looser materials, 
they begin to flame; but to excite a
flame, both the fire and combustible
matter must have the advantage of a
reasonable free air, or else the fire is
choaked and goes out. And tho' a
place is not wholly without air, yet if
that air have no communication with
the open air, so as to go backward and
forward thro' some passage, the mate­
rials set on fire must go out; whereas
fire in an open place will continue to
burn till all the fewel is spent. A light­
ed candle quickly goes out in a glass so
well stopt that no air can come into it.

FIRE [according to the ancient Philo­
sophers] was accounted an element in
nature, created with the quality of
heating, burning or destroying what­
ever had too great a mixture of it; but
according to the modern Philosophy, it is
defin'd to be only the effect of a violent
or rapid motion, excited in or upon
the consuming body, so that whatever
heats, warms or burns, is call'd fire.

FIRE [Metaphorically] is us'd to sig­
nify courage, spirit, metal, vivacity or
briskness in mankind, or animals; and
at other times it is us'd of the matter
of fire, as coals, wood and other com­
bustibles, by the name of firing.

FIRE [among the Heathens] was and
is by some worshipped as a deity, or at
least the Sun, the fountain of heat, &c.
and in imitation of it, they kept con­
tinual fire burning upon their altars.

Greek FIRE, a composition of com­
bustible matter compounded by one
Callinicus an engineer of Heliopolis in
Syria in the 7th century, in order to de­
stroy the Saracens ships which was by
that means effected by the admiral of
the emperor Pogonatus's fleet, and 30000
men destroy'd.

The ingredients of this composition
or fire were Sulphur, Naphthe, Pitch, 
Gums, Bitumen and other drugs; and
the property of it was that it would
burn briskest in water; and would dif­
fuse it self on all sides, according to the
impression given it. It was not to be
quench'd by any thing but oil or a mix­
ture of vinegar, urine and sand. In the
using of it it was blown out of long
tubes of copper or shot it out of cross
bows or other springy instruments,

FIRE of London, a dreadful confla­
gration in the year 1666, which began
the second of September, in Pudding-­
lane, and in three days space consumed
78 parish-churches, 5 chapels, and be­
sides halls and the Exchanges, 13200
houses; the whole loss valued at 9900000
pounds sterling.

FIRE, as to give the fire to a horse, is
to apply the firing-iron red hot to some
preternatural swelling, in order to dis­
cuss it.

FIRE [in Coat Armour] may signify
persons, who being ambitious of ho­
nour, have performed brave actions
with an ardant courage, and their
thoughts, aspiring as the fire, continu­
ally ascend upwards: tho' there are
but few coats in England that bear fire;
yet there are many in France and Ger­
many that do.

FIRE Ships, are ships charged with
artificial fire-works, who having the
wind of an enemy's ship, grapple her
and set her on fire.

FIRE-POTS [with Engineers] are
small earthen pots, into which is put a
grenade filled with powder, and cover­
ed with a piece of parchment and two
matches laid across lighted, which is
to be thrown by a handle of match, to
burn what they design to set fire to.

FIRE BARE [of fẏre bearan, 
Sax.] a sort of bea­
con to be set on the highest hill in e­
very hundred throughout the kingdom
of England.

FIRE BOOT [of fẏre bearan, 
Sax.] a sort of bea­
con to be set on the highest hill in e­
very hundred throughout the kingdom
of England.

Elementary FIRE is such as it exists
in itself, and which
we properly call fire, of itself it is im­
perceptible, and only discovers itself by
certain effects which it produces in
bodies.

Pure FIRE is such as it exists
in itself, and which
we properly call fire, of itself it is im­
perceptible, and only discovers itself by
certain effects which it produces in
bodies.

Common FIRE is that which exists
in ignited bodies, or
is excited by the former in combustible
matter.

Culinary FIRE is that which exists
in ignited bodies, or
is excited by the former in combustible
matter.

Potential FIRE, is that contained in
caustick medicines.

FIRE [in Chymical Writers] is expres­
sed by this character, &DELT;.

FIRE-Workers, labourers or under-­
officers to the fire-master.

Wheel FIRE [with Chymists] one that
is lighted all round a crucible or other
vessel to heat it all alike.



Olympick FIRE, is that of the sun, 
collected in the focus of a burning mir­
rour.

Actual FIRE [with Surgeons] is a hot
iron.

FIRE Master [in our Train of Artillery]
an officer who gives directions, and the
proportions of the ingredients for all
the compositions of fire-works.

FIRE Stone, a stone used about chim­
neys or fire-hearths, which receives, 
retains, and also emits heat.

FIRE-Eater, a sort of charlatan, or
one who pretends to eat fire before
spectators at shews.

FIRE-Works, are preparations made
of gun-powder, sulphur, and other in­
flammable ingredients on occasion of
publick rejoicings, &c.

Wild-FIRE, a sort of artificial or fac­
titious fire, which will burn even un­
der water; and also with greater vio­
lence than out of it.

Walking FIRE, a Jack in a Lanthorn, 
or Will in a Wisp.

St. Anthony's FIRE, a certain disease.

Degrees of FIRE, [with Chymists] are 5.

The first degree is equal to the natural
heat of a human body, or rather that of
a hen hatching her eggs.

The second degree, is such as gives a
person pain, but does not destroy or con­
sume the parts, as that of a scorching 
sun.

The third Degree, is that of boiling
water which separates and destroys the 
parts of bodies.

The fourth Degree, is that which .
melts metals and destroys every thing
else.

The fifth Degree, is that whereby
gold is made to emit fumes and evapo­
rate.

FIRKIN-Man, one who buys small
beer of the brewer, and sells it again
to his customers.

FIRMA [in the Practick in Scotland]
a duty which the tenant pays to his
landlord.

FIRMAN [in India, or the Mogul's
country] a passport or permit granted
to foreign vessels to trade within their
jurisdiction.

FIRMARY, a farmer's right to the
lands and tenements let to him, ad fir­
mam, Law term.

FIRME [Old Rec.] a farm or land and
tenements, hired at a certain rate.

FIRMNESS [in a Philosophical Sense]
according to Mr. Boyle, consists, in that
the particles which compose such bodies
as are commonly called firm or solid,
pretty gross and are either so
much at rest, or so entangled one with
another, that there is a mutual cohesion
or sticking together of their parts, so
that they cannot flow from, slide over, 
or spread themselves every way from
one another, as the parts of fluid bo­
dies can, or it is defined to be a consi­
stence or that state of a body, wherein
its sensible parts are so united together, 
that a motion of one part induces a mo­
tion of the rest.

FIRST Fruits, the profits of spiritual
livings for one year, which in old time
were given to the Pope throughout
Christendom, but here in England, tran­
slated to the king, by stat. 26 of Henry
VIII. and queen Anne in the third year
of her reign, granted that whole re­
venue to settle a fund for the augmen­
tation of the poor clergy.

FIRST Fruits [among the Jews]
were the first produce of ripe corn, and
other fruits, also of man or beasts, 
which they were commanded to offer
to God to sanctify and procure a bles­
sing on the rest of the product.

FIRST Fruits [among the ancient E­
gyptians] the first corn, &c. that was
cut, which they were wont to offer and
howl about the sheaves, and to invoke
their goddess Isis, at whole festivals
they carried about baskets of wheat and
barley in procession.

The Romans offered their first fruits
to their deity Janus, and the Athenians
to their deities of the first ripe corn.
The Hyperboreans used to offer the
choicest of their first fruits to Delian
Apollo, by the hands of virgins of the
best character.

FISC [fiscus, L.] the treasury of a
prince or state; or that to which all
things due to the publick do fall.

FISH [Hieroglyphically] was by the an­
cient Egyptians painted to represent any
thing that was abominable to the gods;
because their priests never used them
in their sacrifices.

FISHES [Emblematically] represent
silence, because they having no tongues
can't form any voice; and thence pro­
ceeds the old proverb, as mute as a fish.
They are also an emblem of watchful­
ness because they either sleep not at
all, or but very little.

FISHES [in Blazonry] according to
their different postures are to be ex­
press'd as follows: All fishes that are
borne in an escutcheon traverse, in bla­
zoning must be terminated Naiant, i. e.
swimming, because that is their posture
when they swim.



Fishes that are represented directly
upright in an escutcheon, must be bla­
zoned Hauriant, i. e. drawing or suck­
ing; because they frequently put their
heads above water to take in the air.

Fishes that are born feeding, are in
blazonry to be termed devouring; be­
cause they swallow all whole without
chewing.

Green FISH, is what has been lately
salted and still remains moist.

Red FISH, is some fresh fish broiled on
a gridiron, then fry'd in oil, and after­
wards barrelled up in some proper
liquor.

Oviparous FISHES, such as produce
their kind by eggs or spawn.

Viviparous FISHES, such as produce
their kind alive.

Fluviatile FISHES, river fish.

Cetaceous FISHES, those of the whale-­
kind.

Cartilaginous FISHES, such as have
many cartilages or gristles, as thorn­
backs, &c.

Spinous FISHES, such as have prickles, 
as thornbacks, &c.

FISH-MONGER [fiſc-manʒere, 
Sax.] a seller of fish.

FISH-MONGERS, they were former­
ly two companies, the
Stock-fish and Salt-fish-­
mongers, who united
Anno 1536. They are
6 wardens (the first of
which is called the
prime warden) 28 as­
sistants, and 222 upon
the livery; their fine
is about 14 l. They are the 4th of the
12 companies. Their armorial ensigns
are azure, 3 dolphins naiant in pale, be­
tween 2 pair of lucies salterwise proper
crowned or, on a chief gules, 6 keys in
3 saltires (the ward end upwards) as
the crowns. The crest on a helmet
and torse 2 arms supporting an imperial
crown upon the second. The suppor­
ters a merman and maid, the first arm­
ed, the latter with a mirror in her left
hand proper. The motto, All worship
be to God alone.

Image omitted.



FISSILE [fissilis, L.] that may be
cleft.

FISSILENESS [of fisiilis, L.] aptness
to be cleaved.

FISKING, running about here and
there, flirting from place to place.

FISTULATED [fistulatus, L.] hav­
ing a fistula.

FISTY Cuffs, blows with the fist.

A FIT [q. d. a fight] it being a con­
flict between nature and the disease.

To FIT [befittan, Sax.] to agree
with, be sizeable to, to beseem.

FITCHEE [in Heraldry]
a cross-fitchee signifies a
cross that ends in a sharp
point, fit to be fixed in the
ground, and is supposed to
have taken its use from the
Christians in ancient times
carrying crosses with them, which
they fixed in the ground whenever
they settled any where. See the figure.

Image omitted.



FITS of easy Reflection of the Rays of
Light [in Opticks] the disposition of the
rays to be reflected at any time. Sir
Isaac Newton.

FITS of easy Transmission [in Opticks]
the disposition of the rays of light to be
transmitted. Sir Isaac Newton.

FIVE [fif, Sax.] V, or 5.

FIVE, the number or figure 5 is
call'd Hermaphrodite, it is composed of 2, 
the female and 3 the male; it is also
called the first of all numbers. It is al­
so called a circular number, because the
circle turns to the point from whence
it begins; for 5 multiplied by itself, ends
always in 5, as 5 times 5 makes 25, and
that again by 5 makes 125, &c.

FIVE-FOLD [fif-fealð, Sax.] five
times as much.

FIVE-FOOT, a sort of sea-insect, cal­
led also a star fish.

FIVE leav'd Grass [in Heraldry] cin­
quefoil is used by such as would intro­
duce a blazon by herbs and flowers in­ 
stead of metals and colours.

To FIX [fixum, sup. of figere, L. fix­
er, F.] to fallen; to set, to appoint.

To FIX [in Chymical Wri­
tings] is expressed by the 
character annexed.

Image omitted.



FIXED [fixus, L. fixé, F.] fastened, 
settled; set, appointed.

FIXED Signs [with Astrologers] are
Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius; so
called, because the sun passes them re­
spectively in the middle of each quarter, 
when that particular season is more fix­
ed and settled, than under the sign that
begins or ends it.

FIXEDNESS to a Thing, close appli­
cation, attachment, &c.

FIXEDNESS [with Chymists] a quali­
ty opposite to volatility.

FIXT Bodies [in the general] are such
as neither fire nor any corrosive has
such effect on as to reduce or resolve
them into their component elements, 
i. e. absolutely to destroy them.



FIXT Bodies [with Chymists] such as
bear the violence of the fire without e­
vaporating.

FIZZLING [vesses, F.] a breaking
wind backwards without noise.

FLABBINESS [probably of labilis, L.
wet things being commonly so] limber­
ness, softness and moistness; opposite to
stiffness.

FLACCIDITY [of flaccidus, L.
flasque, F.] flag­
gingness, limberness, weakness aptness, 
to hang down.

FLACCIDNESS [of flaccidus, L.
flasque, F.] flag­
gingness, limberness, weakness aptness, 
to hang down.
 
FLACCIDITY [in Physick] a disorder
of the fibres or solid parts of the body, 
opposite to rigidity or stiffness.

FLAGS are ensigns or tokens of roy­
alty and for distinction of nations, &c.
as to their form, all ensigns of war were
said to be extended on cross staves; but
the Saracens upon their siezing on the
kingdom of Spain had their flags made
pointed or triangular.

The pirates of Algiers and all along
the coasts of Barbary bear a 6 cornered
flag. It is gules charged with a moresks
head, coifed with its turban, &c.

The French flag is blue charged with
a white cross and the arms of France.

Merchants ships usually bear their
flags on the mizzen mast with the arms
of the city they belong to.

FLAG Royal [of England] or standard
royal ought to be yellow (viz. or) as
some say; or, as others, argent or white.
It is charged with a quartered escut­
cheon of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland. This is never carried but by
the soveraign prince himself, his high
admiral or commission.

Another FLAG Royal [of England] is
quarterly, the first and fourth quarter
counter-quartered. In which the first
and fourth azure, 3 flower-de-luces or.
The royal arms of France, quartered
with the imperial ensigns of England, 
which are in the second and third gules, 
8 lions passant, gardant in pale; or in the
second place within a double tressure
counter flower de luce, Or, a lion ram­
pant gules, for the royal arms of Scot­
land. In the second place, azure an Irish
harp Or, stringed argent for the royal
ensigns of Ireland.

But sometimes there is an alteration, 
as in setting the English arms before the
French and the like.

Union FLAG [of England] is gules
charged with these words. 

FOR THE PROTESTANT RELI­
GION AND FOR THE LIBERTY OF
ENGLAND.

FLAG [of the admiral of England] is red, charged with an anchor argent,
set in palé, entangled in, and wound a­
bout with a cable of the same.

Jack FLAG [of England] is blue, 
charged with a saltire argent, and a cross
gules, brodered argent.

FLAG [of an English Merchantship] is
red, with a Frank quarter argent, char­
ged with a cross gules.

FLAGS, are the colours that the ad­
mirals of a fleet carry on their tops and
are marks of distinction, both of officers
and nations.

An Admiral carries his flag on the
main top or top of the main-mast; the
vice Admiral carries his on the fore-top, 
and the rear Admiral his on the mizzen-­
top.

When they are to hold a council of
war at sea; if it be to be held on board
the admiral, the flag hangs in the main-­
shrowds; if on board the vice-admiral, 
in the fore-shrowds, and if on board the
rear admiral, in the mizzen-shrowds.

Commanders of squadrons carry their
flags on the mizzen-mast when in the
body of a fleet, and on the main-mast
when they command a party. It is to
be opened 2 thirds of its height, and
terminate in a point.

To lower a FLAG is to take it in or
pull it down up­
on the cap. And this is a respect due
from all ships or fleets, that are inferi­
or, either in respect of right of sove­
reignty, place, &c. and signifies an ac­
knowledgement and submission, when
they happen to meet with any that are
justly their superiors; it is also a signal
of yeilding.

And in the case of soveraignty in the
narrow seas of Britain, it has been long
claim'd and made good by our kings, 
that if any ship of any nation, meeting
with an admiral of England, shall not
acknowledge his soveraignty, by this
fignal of taking in her flags, she may and
is to be treated as an enemy.

To strike a FLAG is to take it in or
pull it down up­
on the cap. And this is a respect due
from all ships or fleets, that are inferi­
or, either in respect of right of sove­
reignty, place, &c. and signifies an ac­
knowledgement and submission, when
they happen to meet with any that are
justly their superiors; it is also a signal
of yeilding.

And in the case of soveraignty in the
narrow seas of Britain, it has been long
claim'd and made good by our kings, 
that if any ship of any nation, meeting
with an admiral of England, shall not
acknowledge his soveraignty, by this
fignal of taking in her flags, she may and
is to be treated as an enemy.

To heave out a FLAG, is to put it a­
board.

FLAG Officers, are those who com­
mand the several squadrons of a fleet, as
admirals, vice-admirals, and rear-ad­
mirals.

FLAGS [with Falconers] the feathers
in the wings of an hawk, next the prin­
cipal ones.

FLAGGING [fleoʒan, Sax. or flag­
geren, Du.] hanging down, growing
limber, weak or feeble.

FLAGGY [of fleoʒan, Sax.] limber, 
&c. also full of flags or river-grass.



FLAGITIOSITY [flagitiositas, 
L.] outrage­
ous wickedness.

FLAGITIOUSNESS [flagitiositas, 
L.] outrage­
ous wickedness.

FLAGRANT [flagrans, L.] very hot, 
eager or earnest; also notorious, infa­
mous; also evident, manifest.

FLAGRANTLY [flagranter, L.] ear­
nestly, ardently; also notoriously, mani­
festly, &c.

FLAGRANTNESS [flagrantia, L.]
flamingness, glitteringness, ardentness
of desire, earnestness; also notorious­
ness.

FLAGRATION, a flaming, burning, 
glittering, an ardent desire.  L.

To FLARE [probably of flare, L. to
blow] to sweal or melt away as a can­
dle does.

FLAKINESS, the having flakes; flaky
quality.

FLAKY [probably of floccus, L. a lock
of wool] in flakes or thin slices.

FLAMBEAU, a torch mads of wax.
F.

FLAME [in a figurative sense] an ar­
dent affection or passion; also a raging
anger; confusion.

FLAMET a large wild fowl 
of the size of a
wild goose, the legs and wings of which
are very long, and its scent so exquisite
and fight so quick, that it is difficult to
be shot; so that the fowlers are forced
to get the wind of them, and to creep
along covered with an ox-hide till
they come within gun-shot.

FLAMMANT a large wild fowl 
of the size of a
wild goose, the legs and wings of which
are very long, and its scent so exquisite
and fight so quick, that it is difficult to
be shot; so that the fowlers are forced
to get the wind of them, and to creep
along covered with an ox-hide till
they come within gun-shot.

FLAMEN [so called of filamen, a wool­
len thread that was usually tied about
their temples] a sort of priests among
the Romans, instituted by Numa Pompilius, 
who fearing that in process of time, 
kings who did also exercise the office of
priests, might in time come to neglect
the service of the gods, by reason of the
weight of state affairs, he established to
every god one, to supply the king's
place. And these Flamens bore the name
of the gods to whom they were conse­
crated, Jupiter's were called Flamen Dia­
lis, and the chief of Mars' was Flamen
Martialis, and that of Romulus Quirinalis
&c. Jupiter's was the most honourable, 
therefore he was permitted to wear a
white hat, and a purple gown called
Trabea, which was the cloathing only
of kings and augurs in performing their
office.

These were usually chosen out of the
Patricii or noblemen, and were so high­
ly esteemed, that whatever malefactor
could escape to them, especially to the
Flamen Dialis, could not be punished that
day; He was allowed a robe of state,
and a rolling carr. No person was per­
mitted to fetch fire out of his house, 
unless it was for offering sacrifice, nor
none but a freeman might be his bar­
ber nor with any other instrument than
cross scizzars; none could be elected to
this office but married men, and upon
the death of his wife he quitted his sa­
cerdotal function.

Besides these great Flamens there
were in the succeeding times there
were others of less note, so that in
process of time every deity had its par­
ticular Flamen.

After the Romans had put an end to
kingly government, and after the expul­
sion of, they elected a certain priest, 
whom they preferred before the Flamen
Dialis; but judg'd him inferior to the
chief priest and stiled him Rex Sacro­
rum.

The Flamen Dialis presided over all
the rest, had his lictor or officer, was
clad in royal robes and was carried in
an ivory chair. If any criminal came
into his house or cast himself at his
feet he had power to pardon him, and
to deliver him out of the hands of
justice.

It was his business to pronounce a
blessing upon their arms and officiated
in chief, but had no civil office, that
all his time might be devoted to the
worship of God; his cap was made of
a white sheep's skin, sacrificed to Jupi­
ter, to whom he sacrificed one every
month, and on the top of his cap he
wore an olive branch.

He was elected in a general assembly, 
but the rest in other assemblies, who
were consecrated by this great pontiff.

FLAMING [flammans, L.] blazing; 
also notorious.

FLAMINGLY, notoriously, egre­
giously.

FLAMMIGEROUS [flammigerus, L.]
bearing or procuring flames.

FLAMMIVOMOUS [flammivomus, 
L.] that vomits or throws out flames.

FLANCH [in He­
raldry] is
an ordinary, which is a
segment of a circular su­
perficies, which is ever
borne double, as in the es­
cutcheon annexed.

Image omitted.



FLANQUE [in He­
raldry] is
an ordinary, which is a
segment of a circular su­
perficies, which is ever
borne double, as in the es­
cutcheon annexed.

Image omitted.



FLANK [flanc, F.] a side.

To FLANK [flanquer, F.] to strength­
en or defend a side; also to attack an
army on the flank or side.

FLANK [in Fortification] is that part
of the rampart that joins the face and
the courtine, comprehended between



the angle of the courtine, and the angle
of the shoulder, &c. and is the princi­
pal defence of a place.

FLANK oblique [in Fortification]
that part of the
courtin, where the men can see to
scowr the face of the opposite bastion;
being the distance between the lines
fichant and razant.

Second FLANK [in Fortification]
that part of the
courtin, where the men can see to
scowr the face of the opposite bastion;
being the distance between the lines
fichant and razant.

FLANK retired [in Fortification] is
one of the plat­
forms of the Casemate, and is some­
times called the covered flank. This
is generally called the Casemate, when
there is only one platform retired to­
wards the capital of the bastion, and
covered by the Orillon.

Low FLANK [in Fortification] is
one of the plat­
forms of the Casemate, and is some­
times called the covered flank. This
is generally called the Casemate, when
there is only one platform retired to­
wards the capital of the bastion, and
covered by the Orillon.

FLANKED Flank [in Heraldry] the
same as Party per Saltire; that is, when
the field is divided into 4 parts after the
manner of an X.

FLANKS [in the Manage] the sides
of a horse's buttocks.

To FLAP [probably of flabbe, Du.
or flabella, L.] to flap or strike with the
hand, or to fly flap as butcher's do.

A FLAP, a blow or stroke with the
open hand, or some broad thing.

FLAPPING [probably of flaccescens, 
L.] hanging down with limberness.

FLARING, staring in the face; also
open, exposed, &c. also wasting or con­
suming wastfully, as a candle.

FLASHINESS [not improbably of
flaccidus, L.] unfavouriness in taste;
also want of solidity or substance in
discourse.

A FLASK [flasque, F.] a case for gun
powder.

A FLASK [in Gunnery] a bed in the
carriage of a piece of ordnance.

FLASK [in Heraldry] a
bearing, more properly
called flaunch, it is an or­
dinary made by an arched
line drawn downwards to
the base point; and is al­
ways borne double.

Image omitted.



FLAT insipid, unsavoury, having
lost its brisk, pungent taste.

FLAT in the fore-sail [See term]
means, hale in the fore-sail by the
sheet, as near the ship's side as possible;
this is done when a ship will not fall
off from the wind.

FLATLY plainly, positively.

FLATS [in Musick] a kind of addi­
tional notes, as (♭) contrived together
with sharps (♯) to remedy the defects
of musical instruments.

FLATNESS [of plat, F. according to
Menagius of patulus, open, spreading]
planeness, broadness, spreadingness.

FLATTERER [un flateur, F. of flater, 
F.] one that praises more than is de­
served, a cajoler, &c.

FLATULENTNESS [of flatulentus, 
L.] windiness, flatulency.

FLATOUSNESS [flatuosité, F.] win­
diness, windy quality.

FLAUNTING [probably of vaunt, v­
mut, in Fl.] giving one's self airs, tak­
ing state upon one, gawdy and stately
in apparel.

FLAVOURING, the giving any
thing a flavour or good scent.

FLAVOURLESS, not having any
flavour or good scent.

FLAVOURY [probably of favour, Sp­
f mutato in Fl.] palatable, having a good
relish, spoken of wine, &c.

FLAW [probably of flo, Sax. frag­
ment or flaw, Brit. a segment, or
flean, Sax. the white of the eye] a
defect in precious stones, metal, &c.
also a little skin that grows at the root
of one's nails.

FLAWY having flaws.

FLAXEN [of fleax, Sax.] made of
flax.

To FLAY. See To Flea.

FLEERING [of leering, Dan.] look­
ing disdainfully or saucily.

FLEET [of flean, Sax. to fly] swift.

FLEET [fleot, Sax.] a place where
the tides comes up.

FLEETING [of flean, Sax. to fly, 
or ulieten, Du. or flietten, Teut.] pas­
sing away continually as time, &c.
moving away continually from place
to place.

FLEETNESS, fleeting quality; also
swiftness.

FLEGM. See Phlegm.

FLEGMATICKNESS [of flegmatique, 
F. phlegmaticus, L. of φλεγματιχὸς, Gr.]
being troubled with flegm, flegmatick
quality.

FLEMISH [of flẏma, Sax.] belong­
ing to the Flemings or Dutch.

Musculous FLESH such as is the
substance of 
heart and other
parts.

Fibrous FLESH such as is the
substance of 
heart and other
parts. 

Fistular FLESH such as is the
substance of 
heart and other
parts. 

Parenchymous FLESH, such as that of
the lungs, liver and spleen, was thought
to be by the ancients; but this has been
found to be erroneous.

Viscerous FLESH, such as that of the
stomach and guts.

Glandulous FLESH, such as that of the
tonsils, the pancreas, the breasts, &c.

Spurious FLESH, as that of the lips, 
gums, the glans of the penis, &c. so
called, because it is of a constitution
different from all the rest.



FLESHINESS [of fleſc, Sax.] fulness
of flesh, having much flesh.

FLESHLESS [fleſcleaſ, Sax.] hav­
ing no flesh.

FLESHLINESS [flæſclineſſe, Sax.]
carnal disposition, addictedness to the
pleasures of the flesh.

FLESHY [flæſicʒ, Sax.] having
much flesh.

FLETCHERS com­
pany. It's probable
was as ancient as the
Bowyers as to their in­
corporation. They
are governed by 2
wardens, 10 assistants, 
and 18 on the livery.
Their ensigns armorial
or seal are a cheveron between 3 ar­
rows.

Image omitted.



FLEURONS [in Cookery] fine tarts
or puffs of pastry-work, for garnishing
dishes.

FLEXANIMOUS [flexanimus, L.] of
a flexible mind, easy to be overcome
by persuasion or entreaty.

FLEXANIMOUSNESS [of flexanimus, 
L.] flexibleness of mind or disposition.

FLEXIBILITY [flexibilitat, L.
flexibilité, F.]
pliableness, aptness to bend or yield.

FLEXIBLENESS [flexibilitat, L.
flexibilité, F.]
pliableness, aptness to bend or yield.

FLICKERING [of fliccerian, Sax.]
fluttering with the wings, as a bird;
also fleering and laughing scornfully.

FLIE [of a Mariner's Compass] that
part on which the 32 winds are drawn, 
and to which the needle is fastened un­
derneath.

FLIGHT [in melting lead ore] a sub­
stance which flies away in the smoak.

FLIGHT of a Stair-case, the stairs
from one landing-place to another.

Capon's FLIGHT, a compass of ground, 
such as a capon might fly over, due to
the eldest of several brothers in divid­
ing the father's effects, when there is
no principal manour in a lordship.

FLIMSINESS, limberness, thinness, 
without sufficient stiffness or substance.

FLINCHING, drawing back from, 
by reason of apprehension of danger;
also a flirting the nail of the middle fin­
ger slapped from the thumb.

FLINDERS, small and thin pieces, 
shivers, &c.

To FLING like a Cow [spoken of Hor­
ses] is to raise only one leg, and to give
a blow with it.

FLINGING [with Horsemen] is the
fiery action of an unruly horse, or a
kicking with the hind-legs.

FLINT [flint, Sax.] a certain idol
of the ancient Britons, so called because
he stood in a flinty place.

FLINTY [of flinticʒ, Sax.] full of
flints, or of the nature of flint.

FLIPPANTNESS, nimble-tongued­
ness, briskness, jocundness.

FLIRTING, throwing out ever and
anon; also bantering or jeering by
flirts.

FLOAT [in Weaving] is when some
threads break, so that the shoot or
warp is not bound down close or tight, 
but lies up loose.

FLOATING [flotant, F. fluctuans, 
L.] swimming to and fro upon the wa­
ter.

To FLOCK, to assemble together, to
come in flocks, great numbers or com­
panies.

FLOOD [with Watermen] is when the
tide begins to come up, or the water to
rise, which they call young-flood; the
next full-tide, or still, or high water.

Young FLOOD, the time when the
water begins to rise in the river.

FLORA [of flores, L. flowers] a no­
table harlot, who having amassed to­
gether great wealth, gave all her estate
to the people of Rome, upon condition
that they would honour her birth-day
with plays. The senate, to wipe off
the infamy of her life, created her the
goddess of flowers, and did sacrifice to
her, that she might bless the hopeful
increase of flowers and fruits; and the
Floralia were instituted in honour of
her.

FLORA is painted in a mantle of di­
vers colours with a garland of flowers.

FLORALIA, a feast and sports in ho­
nour of Flora, who left a certain sum
of money for the celebration of her
birth-day. These games were cele­
brated with obscenities and debauche­
ries; not only with the most licentious
discourses, but the courtesans being
called together by the sound of a trum­
pet, made their appearance naked, and
entertained the people with abominable
shews and postures.

The Romans being ashamed of their
original, gave her the name of Chloris
of χλόος, Gr. greenness, and gave it out
that she was married to the wind Ze­
phyrus, from whom by way of dowry
she received power over the flowers, 
and therefore she must be first appeas'd
with sports and plays performed in ho­
nour of her, before the fruits of the
earth would prosper. Hence some sup­
pose our dancing on May-day to have
had its original.

FLORAL Games [in France] a cere­
mony beginning on May-day with a



solemn mass, musick, &c. the corpo­
ration attend, and poems are rehears'd
every day; the magistracy give a mag­
nificent treat, and adjudge the prizes
which are the rewards of 3 different
compositions, viz. a Poem, an Eclogue
and an Ode, which are a Violet, an Eg­
lantine and a Pansy of gold, each a cubit
high, worth 15 pistoles apiece.

FLORY dry'd and beaten to powder;
a blue colour used in painting.

FLOREN is both an imaginary
and a real Coin; the
real is of different values, according to
the place where and the metal whereof
it is made; the silver Holland's floren
is in value about 1s. 10d. ½ penny ster­
ling, those of Genoa, &c. about 8 pence
farthing sterling; pieces of 3 Florins are
call'd Ducatoons.

As a mony of account, the Florin is
used by the Dutch, German and Italian
merchants and bankers in keeping their
books, and making out their accounts;
but valued and subdivided variously.

FLORIN. is both an imaginary
and a real Coin; the
real is of different values, according to
the place where and the metal whereof
it is made; the silver Holland's floren
is in value about 1s. 10d. ½ penny ster­
ling, those of Genoa, &c. about 8 pence
farthing sterling; pieces of 3 Florins are
call'd Ducatoons.

As a mony of account, the Florin is
used by the Dutch, German and Italian
merchants and bankers in keeping their
books, and making out their accounts;
but valued and subdivided variously.

FLOREN, a gold coin made in the
time of king Edward III.

FLORET [with Botanists] is a
little tube expanded
at the top, usually into 5 segments, and
sitting upon the embryon of a single
seed. From the inner part of the floret
arise fine chives, which arising to the
inner part of the floret together form
a sheath; from the embryon of the
sheath arises a bifid, reflexed stile, 
which passes through the sheath.

FLOURISH [with Botanists] is a
little tube expanded
at the top, usually into 5 segments, and
sitting upon the embryon of a single
seed. From the inner part of the floret
arise fine chives, which arising to the
inner part of the floret together form
a sheath; from the embryon of the
sheath arises a bifid, reflexed stile, 
which passes through the sheath. 

FLORICOMOUS [floricomus, L.] ha­
ving the top full of or adorned with
flowers.

FLORID descant [in Musick] See Fi­
gurative descant.

FLORIDNESS [of floridus, L.] ful­
ness of rhetorical flowers; great elo­
quence.

FLORIFEROUSNESS, flower-bring­
ing or bearing quality.

FLORILEGIUM, a collection of
choice pieces, containing the finest and
choicest of their kind.  L.

FLORINIANS [so called of Florinus
a priest, who had been the disciple of
Polycarp] a sect of hereticks of the se­
cond century. They held that God
was the author of evi1, and the Gno­
stick doctrine of two principles. That
the resurrection was in effect a new ge­
neration, and that Jesus Christ was not
born of a virgin, and are said to have
deny'd the resurrection and a future
judgment.

FLORULENTNESS [of florulentus, 
L.] flowering or blossoming quality.

FLOTA [with the Spaniards] the
plate fleet, which they send every year
to Mexico or some other part of the
West-Indies.

FLORY [in Heraldry]
or Fleure de lisse, or as it is
commonly written Flower
de Luce, as a cross flory, is
a cross with flower de lu­
ces at the ends, as in the
figure.

Image omitted.



FLOTAGES, are such things as are
floating on the surface of the sea or
great rivers.

FLOUR [fleur de farine, F. flos fa­
rinæ, L.] the fine part of ground corn.

To FLOUR, to sprinkle with flour.

FLOURISHING [fleurant, F. flo­
rens, L.] being in the prime, prosper­
ing, being in vogue or esteem.

FLOUTING, mocking, jeering with
scorn or disdain.

It FLOWS Tide and Half Tide, i. e. It
will be half flood by the shore, before
it begins to flow in the channel.

FLOWER de Luce [Fleur de Lis, F.]
i. e. the flower of light, it is supposed
to be the lily, the Lys is an emblem of
the Trinity, by reason of its 3 bran­
ches, which also signify wisdom, faith
and prowess.

FLOWER [among Botanists] is va­
riously understood. Some mean by it
those fine oloured leaves, which are
called the petals, others restrain it to
signify the organs of generation, the
proper signification of it seems to be the
organs of generation with their cover­
ings.

To FLOWER [florere, L. fleurir, 
F.] to produce or bear flowers; also to
mantle, as drink, &c.

Amentaceous FLOWER [flos amenta­
ceus, L.] such as hang pendulous like
the Juli or Catkins, Tournef.

Apetalous FLOWER [flos apetalus, 
L.] is such as want the fine-coloured
leaves called Petala.

Campaniform FLOWER [flos campa­
niformis, L.] such a flower as is in the
shape of a bell.

Caryophylleous FLOWER [flos Caryo­
phylleus, L.] a flower in the shape of a
gilliflower or carnation.

Composit FLOWER [flos compositus]
a compound flower, which consists of
many Flosculi, all making but one flow­
er, is either discous or discoidal; that is, 
whose Flosculi are set together so close, 
thick and even, as to make the surface
of the flower plain and flat, which
therefore, because of its compound
form, will be like a discus; which disk



is sometimes radiated when there are
a row of Petala standing round in the
disk like the points of a star, as in the
Matricaria, Chamæmelum, &c. and some­
times naked, having no such radiating
leaves round the limb of its disk, as in
the Tanacetum.

Corniculated FLOWERS. [Flores cor­
niculati, L.] are such hollow flowers, 
as have on their upper part a kind of
spur or little horn, as the Linaria, Del­
phinium, &c. and the Corniculum or
Calcar is always impervious at the top
or point.

Cucurbitaceous FLOWER, is one that
resembles the flower of the gourd, or
has the same conformation with it.

Cruciform FLOWER [flos cruciformis, 
L.] a flower that represents the form
of a cross.

Discous FLOWERS are those
whose Flos­
culi or little flowers are set together so
close, thick and even, as to make the
surface of the flower plain and flat;
which therefore, because of its round
form, will be like a discus or quoit.

Discodial FLOWERS are those
whose Flos­
culi or little flowers are set together so
close, thick and even, as to make the
surface of the flower plain and flat;
which therefore, because of its round
form, will be like a discus or quoit.
 
Fistular FLOWER [flos fistularis, L.]
a flower compounded of many long
hollow flowers like pipes, all divided
into large jags at the ends.

Fecund FLOWERS [flos fœcundus, L.]
a fruitful flower.

Flosculous FLOWER [flos flosculosus, 
L.] a flower composed of many little
flowers.

Imperfect FLOWERS [flores imper­
fecti, L.] such as want some of the parts
which compose a perfect flower, either
Petala, Stamina, Apex or Stylus.

Infundibuliform FLOWER [flos infun­
dibuliformis] a flower that resembles a
funnel in shape.

Labiated FLOWER [flos labiatus, L.]
is such as either has but one lip only, 
as in the far greater part of labiated
flowers, and are called also Galeated, 
Galericulate and Cucullate, which see
above.

Liliaceous FLOWER [flos liliaceus, 
L.] a flower of a lily form.

Umbelliferous FLOWER, is one which
has several leaves doubled, and disposed
after the manner of a rose, and the
Calix becomes a fruit of 2 seeds.

Monopetalous FLOWER [flos monope­
talus, L.] is such as has the body of the
flower all of one intire leaf, tho' some­
times cut or divided a little way into
seeming Petala or leaves, as in borage, 
bugloss, &c.

Menopetalous anomalous FLOWER 
[flos monopetalus anomalus, L.] an irre­
gular monopetalous flower.

Papilionaceus FLOWER [flos papili­
onaceus, L.] is a flower that represents
something of the Papilio or Butterfly, 
with its wings display'd. In these the
flower-leaves or Petala are always of a
difform figure, being 4 in number, and
joined together at the extremities; such
are the flowers of those plants that are
of the leguminous kinds, as Peas, 
Vetches, &c.

Verticillate FLOWERS, are such as
are ranged in stories, rings or rays
along the stems, such as those of hoar­
hound, clary, &c.

FLOWERS [with Chymists] are the
finest and most subtil parts or fine mealy
matter of dry bodies, raised by fire
into the head and a ludels; and adher­
ing to them in the form of a fine pow­
der or dust.

Perfect FLOWERS [flores perfecti, 
L.] are such as have a Petala, Stamen, 
Apex and Stylus; and whatever flower
wants any of these is accounted imper­
fect. These are divided into simple or
compound, which are not composed of
other smaller ones, and which usually
have but one single stile; and com­
pounded, which consist of many Flos­
culi, all making but one flower.

Personated FLOWER [flos personatus, 
L.] a flower that somewhat resembles
a mouth, as the Snap-dragon, Toad flax, 
&c.

Planifolious FLOWER [flos planifo­
lius, L.] such as is composed of plain
flowers set together in circular rows
round the centre, and whose face is
usually indented, notched, uneven and
jagged, as the Hierarchia, Sonchia, &c.

Polypetalous FLOWER [flos polypeta­
lus, L.] such as has distinct Petala, and
those falling off singly and not altoge­
ther, as the seeming Petala, of the mo­
nopetalous always do: both monopeta­
lous and polypetalous are either uni­
form or difform; the former have their
right and left-hand parts, and the for­
ward and backward parts alike; but
the difform have no such regularity.

Polypetalous anomalous FLOWER 
[flos polypetalus anomalus, L.] an irregu­
lar polypetalous flower.

Leguminous FLOWER, the flower of
leguminous plants which bear some re­
semblance to a flying butter-fly, and
thence are called Papilionaceous.

Radiated FLOWER [flos radiatus, 
L.] a flower whose leaves grow in the
manner of rays, as the Heliotropium or
Sun-flower.



Spicated FLOWER [flos spicatus, L.]
when the flowers grow thick together
length-ways at the top of the stalk, as
an ear of corn.

Stamineous FLOWER [Flos stamineus, 
a flower that only consists of the Calix
with small threads, &c.

Sterile FLOWER [Flos sterilis, L.] i. e.
barren flower.

Rotated FLOWER [Flos rotatus, L.]
such whose flower-leaves grow like the
spokes of a wheel.

Rosaceous FLOWER [Flos rosaceus, 
L.] a flower whose leaves grow in the
form of a rose, as the Ranunculus, &c.

Semifistular FLOWER [flos semifistu­
laris, L.] is such an one whose upper
part resembles a pipe cut obliquely, as
in the Aristolochia, &c.

Galeated FLOWER [flos galea­
tus L.] a
flower that resembles an helmet or hat.
In this flower the upper top is turned
upwards, and so turns the convex part
downwards as in the Chamæcissas, &c.
but most usually the upper lip is convex
above, and turns the hollow part down
to its fellow below, and so represents a
monk's hood, and thence is called cu­
cullate, as the flowers of the Lamium
and most verticiliate plants.

Galericulate FLOWER [flos galea­
tus L.] a
flower that resembles an helmet or hat.
In this flower the upper top is turned
upwards, and so turns the convex part
downwards as in the Chamæcissas, &c.
but most usually the upper lip is convex
above, and turns the hollow part down
to its fellow below, and so represents a
monk's hood, and thence is called cu­
cullate, as the flowers of the Lamium
and most verticiliate plants. 

FLOWERINESS, fulness or plente­
ousness of flowers.

FLOWERING [fleurant, F. flores
producens, L.] producing or opening
into flowers; also mantling as drink.

FLOWERS [in Architecture] repre­
sentations of some imaginary flowers, 
by way of crowning or finishing on the
top of a dome.

FLOWERS [in Rhetorick] are figures
and ornaments of discourse.

FLOWERS [in the Animal Oeconomy]
are women's Menses.

FLOWERS [in Heraldry] have been
introduc'd among other bearings, per­
haps, because of them chaplets have
been formerly made to adorn the heads
of men esteem'd for their virtues or me­
ritorious actions.

FLOWING [of fleoran, Sax. fluens, 
L.] running in a stream as water; a­
bounding.

FLUCTIFRAGOUS [fluctifragus, 
L.] wave-breaking.

FLUCTIGEROUS [fluctiger, L.]
born by the waves.

FLUCTISONOUS [fluctisonus, L.]
sounding or roaring with waves or
billows.

FLUCTIVAGOUS [fluctivagus, L.]
floating or tossed on the waves.

FLUCTUATING [fluctuans, L.]
floating; also wavering in mind.

FLUELLIN, an herb, called also
Speed-well.

FLUIDITY, is when the parts of
any body being very fine and small, are
so disposed by motion and figure, that
they can easily slide over one another's
surfaces, all manner of ways.

FLUIDITY, stands in direct opposi­
tion to firmness or solidity; and is distin­
guished from liquidity and humidity, in
that humidity implies wetting and ad­
hering; thus melted metals, air, æther
and even smoak and flame it self are
fluid bodies, but not liquid ones, their
parts being actually dry, and not leav­
ing any sense of moisture.

FLUTES [in Botany] used in
describing the stems
and fruits of certain plants, which have
furrows analogous to those of columns.

FLUTINGS [in Botany] used in
describing the stems
and fruits of certain plants, which have
furrows analogous to those of columns.

FLUTES [in Architecture] hollows
made in the body of a column or pillar.

FLUTES [in Pillars of the Corinthian, 
Composite, Dorick and Ionick Orders] are
commonly made all along the body of
the pillars from 00 to 24 flutes in each
column, each figure being hollowed in
exactly a quarter of a circle.

FLUTES [in the Dorick Order] join
together without any interspace.

FLUTES [in the Composite, Corin­
thian and Ionick columns] have a list
running between every 2 of them.

FLUTTERING [of floteran, Sax.]
making a quick motion with the wings, 
in trying to fly, as young birds.

FLUVIATICK [fluviaticus, L.] that
is in or of the river.

FLUVIATILE [fluviatilis, L.] be­
longing to a river.

FLUX [in Physick] an extraordinary
issue or evacuation of some humour.

FLUX [in Hydrography] a regular
periodical motion of the sea, happen­
ing twice in 24 hours, wherein the
water is raised, and driven violently
against the shores.

FLUXIBLENESS, capableness of be­
ing made to flow, or rendered fluid.

FLUXING, a method of curing the
venereal disease by raising a salivation
in the patient.

FLUXION, a flowing,  F. of  L.

FLUXIONS [with Mathematicians] is
the arithmetick or analysis of infinitely
small, variable quantities; or the me­
thod of finding an infinitesimal or in­
finitely small quantity, which being
taken an infinite number of times, be­
comes equal to a given quantity.

FLUXUS Chylosus [with Physicians] a
purging, when the meat is thrown out,



and does not produce any of that hu­
mour called chyle.  L.

A FLY [fleʒe, Sax.] an insect.

To FLY the Heels [with Horsemen] a
term used of a horse; when he obeys
the spur.

Let FLY the Sheets [Sea phrase] a
word of command in case of a gust of
wind, left a ship should overset, or
spend her top-sails and masts to have
the sheet go again, and then the sail
will hold no wind.

FLYERS [in Architecture] such stairs
as go strait, but are of an oblong square, 
and do not wind round, and whose
steps are not made tapering; but the
fore and the backpart of each stair, and
the ends respectively are parallel one to
the other, the second of these flyers
stands parallel behind the first, and the
third behind the second, and so of the
rest, if one flight carry them not to
the intended height; then there is a
broad half pace, whence they begin to
fly again as at the first.

FLYING bridge, is made of two small
bridges laid one upon another, so that
the uppermost, by the help of ropes
and pullies, is forced forward till the
end of it points to the place designed.

FLYING fish, a fish like a herring, 
that has wings like a bat, which to a­
void being made a prey by the greater
fish, will rise 20 foot above water, and
fly an 100 paces, and then drop into
the sea.

FLYING tiger, an insect in America
spotted like a tiger, that has six wings, 
and as many feet; it feeds on flies, and
a nights sits on trees and sings.

FLYNT, an idol of the ancient Ger­
mans and Saxons, so called on account
of his standing on a great flint stone.
This idol was made like the image of
death and naked, save only a sheet a­
bout him, holding in his right hand a
torch, or as it was then called a fire­
blaze, on his head a lion rested his
two fore-feet standing with one of his
hinder feet upon his left shoulder, and
with the other on his hand, which to
support he lifts up as high as his
shoulder.

FOCILS [Anatomy] the two bones of
the leg and of the arm below the elbow, 
Ulna and Radius, Tibia the Major and
Tibia the Minor.

FOCUS, a fire hearth.  L.

FOCUS [with Anatomists] a certain
place in the mesentery and other parts, 
from whence the original of fevers
were derived by the ancients.

FOCUS [in Geometry and Conick sec­
tions] is applied to certain points in the
Parabola, Ellipsis and Hyperbola, where­
in the rays reflected from all parts of
the curve do concur or meet.

Virtual 
FOCUS, is
the same
as a point
of diver­
gence in a 
concave-­
glass as the point A in the following fi­
gure.

Image omitted.



FODDER [prob. of feeder, Teut.
a burden] a weight of
lead containing 8 pigs, every pig weigh­
ing 3 stone and a half, reckoned at 2600
pound in the book of rates, 22 hundred
and an half at the mines, 19 hundred and
a half by the London plummers.

FOTHER [prob. of feeder, Teut.
a burden] a weight of
lead containing 8 pigs, every pig weigh­
ing 3 stone and a half, reckoned at 2600
pound in the book of rates, 22 hundred
and an half at the mines, 19 hundred and
a half by the London plummers. 

FOECUNDITY [fæcunditas, L.] fruit­
fulness.

FOEDERAL [fæderalis, L.] belonging
to a covenant.

FOENERATION usury.  L.

FOEMINA [with Chymists] sulphur.

FOETIFEROUS [fætifer, L.] fruit­
ful, or bringing fruit.

FOETIFICATION, a bringing forth 
fruit.  L.

FOETIFICK [fætificus, L.] making
fruitful.

FOETORS arise from stagnant, extra­
vasated, corrupted or poisonous hu­
mours; as also from any thing capable
of attenuating and volatilizing the oil
and salts.

FOETOR [with Physicians] stinking
or fœtid effluvia proceeding from the
body or any parts of it, as a stinking
breath, proceeding from filthiness about
the teeth and gums.

FOETUS [of fovendo, L. cherishing
or as others of φοιτᾶν, Gr. coire, or ra­
ther fetus of feo L. to produce according
to Vossius] the child while yet contain­
ed in the womb of the mother, but par­
ticularly after it is perfectly formed, till
which time it is properly called Embryo;
also the young of other animals in ge­
neral; but in the same state.

FOG [of foʒ, Sax.] a mist.

FOGS [by Naturalists] are said to con­
sist of aqueous particles rarefied; as is
plain, in that they mightily bedew every
thing that lies open to them. It may
be observed in a hot day, when there
is no wind stirring, that such a compa­
ny of vapours rise out of moist ground
as make thick fogs, which are some­
times higher and sometimes lower, as
the multitude and motion of the vapours
happen to be. These fogs rise out of



all places mountainous or campaign, and
continue till they be dispelled by wind
or heat; but they continue longer in
lowest grounds, because those places are
fullest of moisture, and are not so much
exposed to the winds: but when the
wind rises upon them, wherever they be, 
they are dissipated and driven away till
we see no more of them. So likewise
the heat of the sun, putting them into
a brisker motion, either dissipates them
by rarefaction, or raises them higher, 
and forms them into clouds.

And whereas sometimes fogs stink, it
is not because they come from stinking
water, but because the vapours are
mixt with sulphureous exhalations
which smell so.

FOGGINESS [foʒʒicneſſe, Sax.]
foggy quality, or being foggy.

FOGGY [of foʒʒicʒ, Sax.] misty, 
&c.

FOIN [of prob. of poindre, F. to
prick] a pass in fencing.

FOLDING [fealðian, Sax.] doubling
up, &c. also including in a sheep-fold.

FOLIAGE, a cluster or assemblage
of leaves, branches, flowers, &c.

FOLIACLES, the keys or buds of
maples.

FOLLOWER [of folŦian, Sax. to
follow] one who follows or waits upon.

FOLLY [folie, F.] foolishness, sim­
plicity; defect of understanding; a draw­
ing false conclusions from just princi­
ples, by which it is distinguished from
madness, which is a drawing just con­
clusions from false principles. Mr. Lock.

FOMENTATION [of foveo, L. to
cherish] the external application of any
warm liquid medicine.

Simple FOMENTATION, one made
with lukewarm milk, water, oil, oxi­
crate or other proper liquor and with
other ingredients.

Compound FOMENTATIONS, are de­
coctions of herbs, roots, flowers, seeds
in water or other proper liquor and
with other ingredients.

FOMENTED [fomentatus, L. fomenté, 
F.] abetted encouraged, nourished, set
on foot, broached, cherished.

FONCEAU, is the bottom or end of
a cannon bit-mouth, i. e. the part of the
bit that pins it to the banquet.

FONDANT [in Heraldry] signifies
stooping for a prey.  F.

FONDNESS [probably of funðian, 
Sax. to endeavour to gape after] over­
great, affectionateness, love, indulgence;
and foolishness.

FONT [prob. of fonder, F. of fundere, 
L.] as a font or rather fount of letters,
a name given by Letter-founders and
Printers to a set of letters of one size, 
both great and small with the stops, 
points &c. to enable them to compose
and print a work in that character, 
sometimes called English, Pica, Long-­
Primer, Brevier, &c.

FONT, [of Fons, L. a fountain] a bap­
tistry or place partitioned off in a church, 
or a large bason of marble, &c. in
which water is kept to baptize infants.

FONTANALIA [among the Ro­
mans] the feast
of fountains, celebrated with garlands
of flowers, lamps, &c.  L.

FONTINALIA [among the Ro­
mans] the feast
of fountains, celebrated with garlands
of flowers, lamps, &c.  L. 

FONTIGENOUS [fontigena, L.]
growing or breeding about wells.

FOOL [fol, F. folle, It.] an ideot or
person uncapable of distinguishing be­
tween right or wrong; also an indiscrete, 
passionate, irregular person, one who
acts contrary to that sense and reason
he is endowed with.

To FOOL [of fol, F.] to make a fool
of, to deceive, bubble, play upon, &c.

A FOOL [Hieroglyphicilly] was re­
presented by a sheep, because no beast is
counted more simple.

FOOLERY [folie, F. foolish or silly
actions or sayings.

FOOL-hardiness [of fol and hardiesse, 
F.] rashness, temerity, a thoughtless
venturesomeness.

FOOL-hardy [of fol and hardi, F.] rash, 
temerarious, unthoughtfully daring, 
or venturesome.

FOOLISH [fou, F.] silly, wanting
reason, impertinent, trifling.

FOOLISHNESS [folie, F.] ignorance, 
silliness, want of reason, discretion ex­
perience, &c.

FOOT [Fortif.] the sixth part of a fa­
thom, and the fifth of a geometrical
space.

FOOT of verse [with Grammarians]
a certain number of syllables, 2, 3 or
more, which serve for the measuring of
such a verse. Among the Greeks and
Latins those of 2 syllables are the Spon­
dee, Trochee, Iambus, &c. those of 3, 
the Dactyl, Anapest, Moloss, Tribrach, 
&c. those of 4. the Coriambus, Metritus, 
&c.

FOOT Pace [in Architecture] is a part
of a pair of stairs, on which after four
or six steps, you arrive to a broad place, 
where you may take two or three pa­
ces before you ascend another step, 
thereby to ease the legs in attending
the rest of the steps. Some call it a half-­
pace.

Fat-FOOT [with Horsemen] a term
used of a horse, whose hoof is so thin



and weak, that unless the nails be dri­
ven very short, he is in danger of being
pricked in the shooing.

FOOT-husks [in Botany] are short
heads out of which flowers grow.

To put a horse upon a good FOOT. See
to Gallop.

To FOOT it, to walk or travel on
foot.

FOOTMANSHIP, the performance, 
quality or capacity of a footman.

To be on the same FOOT with another, 
to be under the same circumstances.

FOP, a whimsical foolish empty fel­
low, one whose mind is totally taken up
with modes and fashions and by the ef­
feminateness of his behaviour, comes
nearer to a woman than a man.

FOP-doodle, a silly vain, empty, per­
son; also superstitious, vain ceremo­
nies in religious worship.

FOPPISH, vainly affected, fantastical
in dress, speech, behaviour.

FOPPISHNESS, vain affection, over­
nicety and starchness in apparel, de­
meanour, language, &c.

FORAGE [fourrage, F.] food, &c. for
horses; provision of hay, straw, oats, 
&c.

To FORAGE [fourrager, F.] to go
out a foraging, or to get forage.

FORAGER [fourrageur, F.] one that
goes to get provision for horses.

FORBEARANCE [of forbæran, 
Sax.] a letting alone; putting off for a
time; giving over, leaving off, &c.

FORBORN [of forbæran, Sax.]
let alone for a time, &c.

FORCE [with Gram.] something that
stands in lieu of, or has the same effect
of another.

Simple FORCE [in Law] is that which
hath no other crime adjoined to it; as
if one enters another man's possession, 
but does no manner of unlawful act.

FORCED [forcé, F.] constrained, ob­
liged by force; ravished; also taken as
a city, &c. by force, storm, &c.

FORCIBLENESS [force, F.] violence;
forcible or forcing quality.

FORCELESS, without force, weak, 
feeble.

FORD [forða, Sax.] a shallow place
in a river, that may be waded through, 
or passed in a ferry-boat, by pushing it
along with a pole stuck in the ground.

FORDABLENESS, capableness of be­
ing forded or passed over, as above.

FORDICIDIA [of forda, a cow with
calf, and cædere, to slay] a Roman festi­
val celebrated to the god Tellus.

To FORE-appoint [of fore, Sax. be­
fore, and appointer, F.] to appoint be­
fore-hand,

FORE-armed [of fore, Sax. and armé,
F. of armatus, L.] ready armed or pre­
pared against beforehand.

To FORE-BODE [fore-boðian, 
Sax.] to signify or portend before­
hand, to presage.

FORE-CAST [of fore, Sax. and
kaster, Dan] contrivance beforehand.

To FORE-CLOSE [of fore and clẏ­
ran, Sax. or forclorre, F.] to shut be­
forehand, &c. [in Law] to bar, to ex­
clude.

To FORE-DEEM [of fore-ðeman, 
Sax.] to think, judge or determine be­
fore.

FORE-DOOR [fore-ðora, Sax.] a
door in the fore-part of a house.

FORE-FEET [fore-fotaſ, Sax.]
the foremost feet of a four-footed ani­
mal.

FORE-FINGER [fore-finger, 
Sax.] the foremost or first finger.

FOREIGNER, an outlandish person;
also one that is not free of a city, cor­
poration, &c.

To FOREJUDGE [of fore, Sax.
and juger, F. of judicare, L.] to judge
beforehand.

FORE-FRONT [of fore, Sax. and
frons, L.] a forehead.

FOREHEAD [fore-heafoð, Sax.]
the upper part of the face.

To FORE-KNOW [of fore cna&wyn;an, 
Sax.] to know before-hand.

FORE-KNOWLEDGE, a knowing
before.

FORE-MAN [fore-Man, Sax.] the
president or chief man of a company, 
&c.

FORE Mast-men [on Ship-board] are
those that take in the top-sails, sling
the yards, furl the sails, bend, trice, and
take their turn at the helm.

FORME [in Heraldry] as a Cross­
formé or formy, is a cross
narrow in the center and broad at the
extremities, the same that is commonly
called Patée or Pattée.

FORMY [in Heraldry] as a Cross­
formé or formy, is a cross
narrow in the center and broad at the
extremities, the same that is commonly
called Patée or Pattée.

FORE-MOST [foremæſt, Sax.]
the first.

FORE-NOON [fore-noon, Sax.]
that part of the day betwixt morning
and noon.

To FORE-ORDAIN [of fore and
ordonner, F. or ordinare, L.] to ordain
before, to predestinate.

FORE-PART [of fore, Sax. and
part, F.] the first or preceding part.

To FORE-SAY [forſæʒen, Sax.]
to speak or say before.

To FORE-SHEW [fore-ſcea&wyn;ian, 
Sax.] to shew, signify or betoken be­
forehand.



To FORE-SHORTEN [fore-aſce­
ortian, Sax.] to shorten at the fore-­
end.

FOREST [of ferarum statio, L. the
residence of wild beasts] a compass of
ground, partly pasture and partly
woody, set apart by law for the feed­
ing of wild beasts, and other particular
uses.

FOREST [in a Law Sense] is a cer­
tain compass of woody land and pasture
ground, privileged for wild beasts and
fowls of forest, chase and warren, to
rest and abide in under the king's pro­
tection, and for his diversion, bounded
with unmoveable bounds, marks, meers
and boundaries, which are to be known
either by matter of record or prescrip­
tion; stock'd with wild beasts of venery
or chase, and with great coverts of
vert for pasture, &c. for these wild
beasts.

The way of making a track of ground
a forest is as follows: There are cer­
tain commissioners appointed under the
great seal, to view the ground design'd
for a forest, and to fence it round;
they make a report of this in chancery, 
upon which the king causes it to be
proclaim'd throughout the country
where the land lies, that it is a forest, 
and from that time to be govern'd by
the forest law, prohibiting all persons
from hunting therein without his leave.

For the preservation and continua­
tion of which place for the vert and
venison, there are certain peculiar
laws, privileges and officers; as

1. No person can be owner of a forest
but the king.

2. No person can act in the forest
courts; but such as are appointed by
the king's commission.

3. None but the king's officers can do
any thing relating to a forest.

There are in England 68 forests, 13
chases, and above 780 parks.

The ancients had a great reverence
for forests, imagining a great many of
their Gods resided there; from whence
and the natural gloom and silence of
the place, inspiring well-meaning, and
giving opportunity to designing men, 
the greatest part of the superstition
that has been and is in the world, took
its rise. The Heathens and idolatrous
Jews chose such places to sacrifice in to
their false deities.

FORESTER [forêtier, F.] a forest
keeper, an officer who is sworn and ap­
pointed by the king's letters patents to
walk the forest and to watch the vert
and venison; and to attaint and present
all offences against both, within his own
bailiwick or walk.

FORE-TASTE [of fore. Sax. and
tater, F. or tasten, Teut, or prob. of
taſtan, Sax.] a taste beforehand.

FORE-TEETH [fore-toðaf, Sax.]
the teeth which grow before.

To FORETELL [fore-tællan, Sax.]
to tell of a matter before it happens, 
to predict.

To FORE-THINK [fore-ðinkan, 
Sax.] to think beforehand.

FORE-THOUGHT [fore-ðoht,
Sax.] a thinking beforehand.

FORTITUDE [fortitudo, L.] is one
of the 4 cardinal virtues, and which by
Moralists is defined to be a constant pur­
pose of mind to undergo dangers, pain, 
labour, &c. with calmness and sere­
nity, whenever we think them to be
best; and its chief rules are to under­
take and to endure. Yet by undertaking
is not meant fool-hardiness, running
rashly into dangers; but the knowledge
of undergoing an action to overcome a
danger, weighing it well before it be
undertaken. Moralists also divide it
into 4 species, viz. Magnanimity, Mag­
nificence, Constancy and Patience, as to
private evils, such as imprisonment, 
poverty, &c.

To FORETOKEN [fore-tacnian, 
Sax.] to signify beforehand by some
signs or tokens.

FORETOP [fore-top, Sax.] the
uppermost or highest forepart of any
thing.

To FORE-WARN [fore &wyn;ærnian, 
Sax.] to give warning of beforehand.

A FORE-WIND [fore &wyn;inð, Sax.] a
wind that blows right forward.

FORFEITABLENESS [of forfait, F.]
liableness or capableness of being for­
feited.

FORFANG [of fore, and ſanʒen, 
Sax.] a taking beforehand, the taking
up of provisions in fairs or markets be­
fore the king's purveyors are served.

FORFEITED [forfait, F.] lost by
some default or omission.

FORFEITURE [forfaiture, F.] a
trespass; the penalty of the transgres­
sion of a law.

FORFEITURE is the act either of
committing or omitting something that
is liable to a mulct, fine, or loss of some
priviledge, &c. also the thing or fine it­
self so forfeited.

FORFEITURES [among the ancient
Romans] fell to the emperor's exchequer
by a law made in the reign of Augustus
Cæsar to augment the publick revenue
which contained.



1. That all persons who lived single
should be incapable of receiving any le­
gacy, provided they did not marry with­
in the time assigned by the law, in which
case whatsoever was bequeathed to them
by will, should be estreated in the exche­
quer.

2. Those who had no children should
lose one half of what was left them by
will.

3. All that was given by will to any
person that died during the life of the
testator or after his death before the
will was opened.

4. Every heir who neglected to re­
venge the death of him whose estate he
inherited forfeited his estate to the pub­
lick.

FORGETFUL [forʒẏtfull, Sax.]
apt to forget.

FORGETFULNESS [forʒytful­
neſſe, Sax.] aptness or readiness to
forget, deficiency of memory.

FORICULUS [among the Romans] a
deity, who, as they fancied, had the
guardianship and tuition of their doors, 
as Cardinia had of the hinges, and Li­
mentius of the thresholds.

FORKED [of forc, Sax.] having
sharp points like a fork.

FORKEDNESS, the being pointed as
a fork.

FORLET Land, such land in the
bishoprick of Hereford, which was
granted upon lease, for the term, dum
episcopus in episcopatu steterit, that the
successor might have it for his present
income.

FORLORNLY [forlorenlic, Sax.]
after a forsaken, comfortless manner.

FORLORNNESS [forlornneſſe, 
Sax.] destitution, desolateness, com­
fortlesness, &c.

FORM [forma, L. forme, F.] fashion, 
figure, shape, manner.

FORM [with Philosophers] is the
manner of being peculiar to each body, 
or that which constitutes it such a par­
ticular body, and distinguishes it from
every other body; or it is the second
principle in philosophy, which being
joined to matter, composes all natural
bodies.

FORM [in Metaphysicks] signifies the
same as Being, and is by its form as
well as its Essence, what it is; yet
there is in this term this respect invol­
ved, that philosophers do more gene­
rally apply it to particular and deter­
minate Beings.

FORM, is an internal cause, by which
a material being is constituted what it is.

FORM and FIGURE [with Logicians]
is the exterior determination of quali­
ties, as being round, spherical, square,
cubical, &c.

Essential FORMS, are those forms
whereby the several species of bodies
become each what they are, and are
distinguished from all others, as a ham­
mer, a knife, &c.

Accidental FORMS, are such as are
really inherent in bodies; but in such
manner that the body may exist in all
its perfections without them, as white­
ness in a wall.

Syllogistick FORM, is the just disposi­
tion both of the terms in respect both
of predicate and subject, and of the pro­
positions in respect to quantity and qua­
lity.

Simple FORMS, are those of simple
bodies, i. e. of such as have but few
properties.

Natural FORMS, are those which are
inherent in bodies, without any thing
contributed thereto on the part of man,
as the form of marble.

Artificial FORMS, are those which
arise from human industry, as a statue.

FORM of Corporeity [according to the
Scotists] is that which constitutes body
in the general essence of body.

FORM [in Theology] is one of the es­
sential parts of the sacraments, being
that which gives them their sacramen­
tal esse.

FORM [in Mechanicks] a kind of
mould, whereon a thing is fastened or
wrought.

Printer's FORM, a frame composed
of divers pages of composed letters, to
be printed off by the press-men.

FORM [in a moral Sense] a manner
of being or doing a thing according to
rule.

FORM [in Law] certain established
rules to be observed in processes or ju­
diciary proceedings.

FORMS, long seats or benches to sit
on.

FORMA Pauperis [Law phrase] is
when any person has cause of suit, and
is so poor, that he cannot dispend the
usual charges of suing at law or equity.

FORMABLE, capable of being form­
ed.

FORMALITY [formalitas, L.] a form
in law, ceremony or outward shew;
also preciseness, affectation.

FORMALLY [avec formalité, F. for­
maliter, L.] in form, according to form; 
with formality or ceremony.

FORMALLY [with Schoolmen] is
used in various senses.



1. Formally is used really in opposi­
tion to objectively: As a thing is said to
be formally such, when it is such in the
proper notion of the thing spoken of.

2. Formally is used in opposition to
virtually and eminently, in speaking of
the manner, wherein a thing is con­
tained in another.

3. Formally is used in the same sense
with adequately and totally: Thus a syl­
logism taken formally requires 3 propo­
sitions.

4. Formally is understood of the sub­
ject, when a predicate is therein on ac­
count of some form: Thus white for­
mally taken diffuses the light; q. d.
whiteness the form inherent in this
subject, is the cause why the subject dis­
perses the light.

5. Formally has also place in supposi­
tions: A word being formally supposed.
when it is taken for the thing it was in­
tended to signify; as man is an animal.

6 Formally is sometimes used for quid­
ditatively; thus man formerly taken is
a reasonable animal.

FORMALNESS [formalitas, L. for­
malité, F.] ceremony, affectation.

FORMEDON [in the Descender] a
writ that lies for the recovery of lands, 
&c. given to one and the heirs of his
body, and to a man and his wife, being
cousin to the donor in frank Marriage, 
and afterwards alienated by the donee:
For after his decease, his heirs may
have this writ against the tenant or al­
liance.

FORMEDON [in the Reverter] a writ
which lies for the donor or his heirs, 
where land intailed to certain persons
and their issue, with condition that for
want of such issue, it shall revert to the
donor and his heirs, against him to
whom the donee alienated after the
issue extinct, to which it was entailed.

FORMEDON [in the Remainder] a
writ which lies where a man gives lands
in tail, the remainder to another in
tail; and afterwards the former tenant
in tail dieth without issue of his body, 
and a stranger abateth; then he in the
remainder may have his writ.

FORMER [of formæſt, Sax.] the
preceding.

FORMERLY in fore time, in anci­
ent times.

FORMING [formans, L.] the art of
giving form or birth to any thing.

FORMIDABLY [of formidabilis, L.]
dreadfully, terribly.

FORMIDABLENESS [qualité formi­
dable, F.] terribleness.

FORMLESS [of sans forme, F.] ha­
ving no form, shapeless.

FORMLESNESS, the having no
form, shapelesness.

FORMOSE [formosus, L.] handsome, 
beautiful, comely.

FORMULA [in Law] a rule or mo­
del, an ordinance or certain terms pre­
scribed and decreed by authority for the
form or manner of an act or instru­
ment, &c.

FORMULA [in Theology, &c.] a pro­
fession of faith; a formulary.

FORNICALIA [among the Romans]
the feast of ovens, kept in commemo­
ration of those ancient ovens, in which
wheat was baked before the way of
grinding corn, and making bread was
found out.

To FORNICATE [fornicari, L.] to
commit fornication.

FORNICATION [in Architecture] an
arching or vaulting, so called of For­
nix.  L.

FORNIX, an arch or vault.  L.

FORSWORN [forſ&wyn;erian, Sax.]
one that hath taken a false oath, per­
jured.

FORTH-COMING [of forð and
coman, Sax.] ready to be produced or
brought forth.

Ancient FORTIFICATION was
walls of defence made of trunks of
trees, &c. mixed with earth to secure
them against the assaults of an enemy.
These in time were alter'd for walls of
stone, with little walls or parapets rai­
sed on the top of the other, behind
which they made use of their darts in
security, the parapets being cut into
loop-holes, and these walls are flanked
by round or square towers.

Artificial FORTIFICATION, is
works raised by the engineers, to
strengthen the natural situation of a
place by repairing it and supplying its
defects; such as ravelings, horn-works, 
half moons, redoubts, &c.

Natural FORTIFICATION, consists
in a place being strong by nature, as be­
ing situated on a hill or in a marsh, or
any other way, that makes it of difficult 
access; whether by rivers, marshes, 
strong defiles or the like.

Offensive FORTIFICATION, has re­
gard to the several ways of annoying
an enemy, and is the particular con­
cern of the general of an army, who
designs to lay siege to some town; it
consists in knowing how to take hold
of all advantages in the manner of car­
rying on a siege, &c.

Defensive FORTIFICATION, has re­
spect to the precaution and industry by



which a weak party opposes a stronger, 
and particularly concerns governours
of places, who knowing the strength
and weakness of the place intrusted to
them, ought to endeavour to secure it
from surprizes, &c.

FORTIFIED [fortifié, F.] made
strong, strengthened with fortifications.

FORTINS are field-forts or small
fortresses or sconces, 
the flanked angles of which are gene­
rally distant 120 fathom one from ano­
ther; they are different in their extent
and figure according to the nature and
situation of the ground; some of them
having whole bastions, and others only
demi-bastions; the use of them is only
temporary, and are either to defend the
line of circumvallation, or to guard
some passage or dangerous post.

FORLINS are field-forts or small
fortresses or sconces, 
the flanked angles of which are gene­
rally distant 120 fathom one from ano­
ther; they are different in their extent
and figure according to the nature and
situation of the ground; some of them
having whole bastions, and others only
demi-bastions; the use of them is only
temporary, and are either to defend the
line of circumvallation, or to guard
some passage or dangerous post. 

FORTUITOUSNESS [of fortuitus, 
L. fortuit, F.] casualness, accidental­
ness.

FORTUNATE Islands, a place fa­
mous among the ancients, on account
of golden apples, fancied to grow in
them; or, as Varro says, for sheep with
golden fleeces. Ancient geographers
describe them as situate without the
straits of Gibraltar in the Atlantick oce­
an; but the moderns take them to be
the Canary islands, on account of their
great temperature and fertility.

FORTUNATELY [fortunaté, L.]
happily, prosperously, successfully.

FORTUNATENESS [fortunatio, L.]
luckiness, successfulness, prosperous­
ness.

FORTUNE [τύχη, Gr.] was not
known in the earlier ages; we do not
find in Homer or Hesiod any mention of
her, the name not being then invented.

In after-days it was introduced as a
machine, and made to serve divers pur­
poses in Theology, &c.

Men taking notice of a world of evils
and disorders which happened, and not
daring directly to complain of provi­
dence, and withal being willing to ex­
cuse themselves from being the authors
of their own misfortunes, had recourse
to the notion of Fortune, upon whom
they might vent all their resentments
with impunity.

Plutarch observes, that before the
name of Fortune had got into the world:
men perceiving a certain arbitrary
cause, which disposs'd of matters in an
irresistible manner, called it God; but
observing that the same cause did seem
sometimes to act at random, and with­
out any rule or order at all, the su­
preme Being came to be divested of the
attribute, and Fortune or Destiny ac­
knowledged in its stead.

It is not easy to determine what the
ancients meant by Fortune.

The Romans meant by it some principle
of fortuity, whereby things came to
pass, without being necessitated there­
to; but it seems as if they never pre­
cisely thought what and whence that
principle was.

Whence the philosophers did often
intimate, that men only fram'd the
phantom Fortune to hide their igno­
rance, and that they called whatever
befel a man, without his knowing the
reason why, Fortune.

Juvenal affirms, that it was men that
made a deity of Fortune.

Sed te, nos facimus, fortuna, deam, &c.

So then according to the sentiments
of the heathens, Fortune was no more
than the arrival of things in a sudden.
and unexpected manner, without any
apparent cause or reason. So that for­
tune in a philosophical sense is what is
vulgarly call'd Chance.

But Fortune in a religious sense had a
farther force, for she had many altars
and temples erected to her.

This intimates that the heathens had
personify'd, and even deify'd their
chance, and conceiv'd her as a sort of
goddess, who disposed of the fate of
men at her pleasure.

Hence it may be infer'd that the an­
cients at one time took Fortune for a
peremptory cause bent upon doing
good to some and injury to others; and
sometimes for a blind, inconstant cause, 
without any view or determination at
all.

Fortune, is fabled to be the daughter
of Oceanus, and the servant of the gods.
They fancied she had in her possession
and at her disposal the honours, riches
and happiness of life; that she gave
them and took them away at her plea­
sure; but that she was blind and very
unconstant; that she held a wheel in 
her hand; that she turned without
ceasing, railing men sometimes to the
top of the wheel, and sometimes casting
them down, so that there was nothing
settled or secure, that did concern her;
she was universally adored, and great
princes had her image in gold kept safe
with them in their dwelling, that she
might be always favourable to them.

She was represented in a chariot
dragged by four blind horses; under
her feet was a globe, and in her right
hand she held the helm of a ship, and in
the left a cornucopia, or horn of plenty.



She had many images, statues and tem­
ples erected to her, and the Romans a­
dored no deity more than Fortuna. At
her right hand a youth named favor, 
play'd upon a wheel to intimate how
soon her favours might fly away from
us: There were at Rome two images of
her that were remarkable, Fortuna cal­
va and Fortuna vitrea, which were both
very significant.

She had also several temples erected
to her honour. One to Fortuna primi­
genia, the other to Fortuna mascula
which was near to the temple of Venus, 
and also Fortuna muliebris, There was
also Fortuna privata and Fortuna obse­
quens, and also Fortuna barbata; there
were several other Fortunes, who had
temples.

When Fortune was not favourable to
them, they were wont to load her with
curses and imprecations.

Fortune was also painted as a naked
lady standing upon a globe or ball, ha­
ving an ensign or foil over-shadowing
her.

FORUM, a place of negotiation or
merchandizing among the Romans, an­
swering to our market-place; also the
place where a governour of a province
sat to give judgment; also a publick
standing place in the city of Rome, 
where causes were judicially try'd, and
orations deliver'd to the people; it is
also sometimes used by the casuists for
jurisdiction.

FORWARDNESS [for&wyn;earðneſ­
ſe, Sax.] promptness, readiness, ea­
gerness, &c.

FOSS [fossa, L.] a trench, moat,
ditch or pit.

FOSS [with Anatomists] a kind of ca­
vity in a bone, with a large aperture, 
but no exit or perforation.

FOSSA, a ditch in which in ancient
times women committing felony were
drowned.

FOSS-WAY, one of the four prin­
cipal high-ways, of England made by
the Romans, and so called on account of
its being ditch'd in on both sides; or
because in some places it was never
perfected; but left as a great ditch. It
leads from Cornwall through Devonshire, 
by Coventry, Leicester, Newark, &c.
and to Lincoln.

FOSSIL-WOOD, trees dug deep out
of the ground, suppos'd to have lain
there ever since the universal deluge.

Native FOSSILS [by Mineralists] are
strictly defined to be sensible bodies,
generated and growing in and of the
earth, whose constituent parts are so
simple and homogenous, that there is
no apparent distinction of vessels and
juices between the part and the whole.

Compound FOSSILS [with Miners] are
such as may be divided into different
and dissimilar parts.

Adventitious FOSSILS [in Minera­
logy] are the
subterraneous exuvia of sea and land
animals; and even vegetables, as shells, 
bones, teeth, leaves, which are found
in plenty in divers parts of the earth.

Simple FOSSILS, are all metals, 
salts, both common and precious; also
earths.

A FOSTERING [of foſtrian, Sax.]
a nourishing, a cherishing, a bringing
up.

FOTHER [of foðre, Sax.] any sort
of meat for cattle.

FOUGHT [of feotan, Sax.] did
fight.

FOUGHTEN, that had been fought.
Milton.

The Anchor is FOUL [Sea term] sig­
nifies the cable is got about the flook.

The Ship makes FOUL Water [Sea
term] is when a ship under sail comes
into shole water, so as to raise the sand.

To be FOUL on each other, is when
ships come so close, as to entangle their
rigging, and do one another damage.

The Rope is FOUL [Sea term] signi­
fies the rope is entangled in itself, or
hinder'd by another, so that it cannot
run or be haled.

FOUL Ship, is one that has been
long untrimmed, so that grass, weeds, 
periwincles or barnacles stick or grow
to her sides under water.

FOULDS, folds. Milton.

FOULLY [faulice of faul, Sax.] 
filthily; also unfairly, fraudulently, 
basely.

FOULNESS [fẏlneſſe, Sax.] filthi­
ness, uncleanness; also unfairness, un­
justness.

FOUND [of finðan, Sax.] did find, 
was found.

FOUNDERS were
incorporated an. 1614, 
and are a master, 2
wardens, 24 assistants,
and 96 on the livery, 
&c. the livery fine is
6 l. Their armorial
ensigns are Azure, an
ewer between two pil­
lars Or. Their crest, a furnace, flames, 
and therein a pair of tongs held by 2
hands all proper.

Image omitted.



FOUNDATION, a donation or le­
gacy either of money or lands, for



the maintenance or support of some
community, hospital, school, lecture
or other work of piety.

To FOUNDER [ad fundum fubmer­
gere, L. couler à fond, F.] See Founder­
ing.

FOUNDERING, sinking, a ship is said
to founder, when by a great leak or a
great sea breaking in upon her, she
takes in so much water, that she cannot
be freed from it; so that she will neither
veer nor steer; but lies like a log, and
not being able to swim long, will at
last sink.

FOUNDERING [in Horses] is an uni­
versal rheumatism, or a defluxion of
humours upon the sinews of the legs, 
which causes so great a stiffness in them, 
that they lose their wonted motion.

FOUNDERING [in the Body] befals
a horse by eating too much provender
suddenly, when too hot; as also by
drinking too much upon travelling
when hot, and riding him after it.

FOUNDERINGS, clods of earth, 
rocks, &c. that fall down from moun­
tains or any other precipices.

FOUNDRY the art of melting
and casting all sorts
of metals, particularly brass, iron, &c.

FOUNDERY the art of melting
and casting all sorts
of metals, particularly brass, iron, &c. 

FOUNT [of fons, L.] a fountain.
Milton.

FOUNT [of fundere, L.] a set of
printing letters or types.

FOUNTAIN [fontaine, F.] an artifi­
cial spring of (or well to contain) wa­
ter in a garden; whither the water is
brought in pipes of lead, &c. and com­
monly made to spout out of the mouths
or other parts of images.

Arch'd FOUNTAIN, one whose ba­
son and jet are placed perpendicularly
under an arch.

Bason FOUNTAIN, a bason having
a jet, spout or perhaps a statue, &c. in
the middle.

Cover'd FOUNTAIN, a kind of pavi­
lion built of stone, inclosing a reservoir, 
and spouting forth the water at a pipe
or cock.

Cup FOUNTAIN, one which besides
a bason has a cup supported on a pede­
stal, &c. and receiving a jet or spout
of water rising out of the middle of it.

Marine FOUNTAIN, a fountain com­
posed of aquatick figures, as sea divi­
nities, naiades, tritons, dolphins, &c.

Naval FOUNTAIN, one made in the
form of a ship or galley.

Open FOUNTAIN, is any spouting
fountain, with a bason, cup or other
ornaments.

Rustick FOUNTAIN, a fountain a­
dorned or inriched with rock-work,
shell-work, petrifactions, &c.

Satyrical FOUNTAIN, a rustick foun­
tain in manner of a grotto, adorned
with satyrs, sylvans, fauns, &c.

Statuary FOUNTAIN, one which be­
ing open and insulated is adorned with
one or more statues.

Symbolical FOUNTAIN, one whose
principal ornaments are the attributes, 
arms or cognisances of the owner or
erector.

Pyramidal FOUNTAIN, one that is
composed of several basons or cups rai­
sed in stones over each other, each less
than the other to the top, supported by
a hollow shaft or stem.

Spouting FOUNTAIN, any fountain
whose water is darted forth impetuously
through one or more jets or ajutages, 
and returns in rains, net-folds or the
like.

Spring FOUNTAIN, a kind of plain
spout or stream of water, issuing out
of a stone or hole in the wall, without
any decoration.

FOUNTAINS [fontes, L. fontaines, 
F.] are of two sorts, such as dry up in
the winter, and such as flow always:
Most are of opinion that the former
are produced by the rain. Those per­
petual springs may be defined to be col­
lections of waters running down from
the higher to the lower parts of the
earth. Out of a great number of such
fountains, rivers are gathered which
carry the waters into the sea.

Some have imagined, that the per­
petual ones are derived from the sea, 
and that there are subterraneous tubes
in the earth, through which the sea-­
water is conveyed to the fountains. But
this opinion is liable to these two dif­
ficulties, how it is possible for the sea-­
water to be carried to the tops of the
highest mountains, since by all experi­
ments in Hydrostaticks it appears, that
the surface of any water contained in
any vessel always lies even, so that it is
impossible for any one part of the sur­
face to be higher than another; except
it be made so by some external force.
2. How it come to pass that fountain-­
water is not salt.

Others again dislike this hypothesis, 
and that for several reasons, and assign
rain as the cause of fountains; but if
rain were the only cause, whence can
it be, that those fountains are never
dry in the time of the greatest drought, 
when there has been no rain for a long
time? and therefore others to rain add
vapours; which being by the heat of



the sun exhaled in vast quantities (as
the learned Mr. Edmund Halley has
proved) and they being carried over
the low land by the wind to the ridges
of mountains, where they presently
precipitate, and gliding down by the
crannies of stone, and part of the va­
pours entering into the caverns of the
hills, the water thereof gathers as in
an alembick in the basons of stone it
finds; which being once filled, all the
overplus of water runs over by the
lowest place, and breaking out by the
sides of the hills, forms single springs, 
and many of these running down the
valleys between the ridges of the hills, 
and coming to unite, form little rivu­
lets or brooks; and many of these meet­
ing again in one common valley, and
gaining the plain ground, being grown
less rapid, become a river; and many
of these being united to one common
channel, make the largest rivers, as the
Thames, the Rhine, the Danube, &c.

FOUR [quatuor, L. quatre, F.] IV. 4.
this figure is called the cube's base, a
cube or square having a foot or base, of
4 angles; and the cube among solid bo­
dies is accounted the most excellent and
perfect, representing firmness, continu­
ance and virtue. The figure in its parts
make up 10, being considered two times
and a half, and also in this manner, 1, 
2, 3, 4, make 10. It is the number of
letters in the Hebrew name הוהי and
thence by divines called Tetragrammaton
or name of 4 letters; and many other
nations have given to God a name of 4
letters, as the Assyrians Adad, the E­
gyptians Amun, the Persians Syre, the
Greek Θεός, the Latins Deus, and thence
the French Dieu.

FOUR Corners [with Horsemen] to
work a horse upon 4 corners, as in
imagination to divide the volt or round
into 4 quarters; and when he has done
so upon each of these quarters, the horse
makes a round or two at trot or gallop
and when he has done so upon each
quarter, he is said to have made the
four quarters.

FOURCHEE [in Heral­
dry] as a Cross Fourchee, is
one that is forked at the
ends, that has its forks com­
pos'd of straight lines, and
blunt ends, as if cut off, as in the figure.
F.

Image omitted. 



FOURNEAU, a powder chamber, or
chamber of a mine; a hole or cavity
made under a work. The top of which
is sometimes cut into several points like
chimneys, to make more passages for the
powder, that it may have its effects on
several sides at the same time.  F.

FOWL [fuʒel, Sax, fuyl, Dan.] a
bird.

FOX [fox, Sax. fucks, Dan.] a four-­
footed animal, of the size of a middling
dog, accounted the most subtil and cun­
ning of all beasts, runs swiftly and uses
a great many turnings and windings to
avoid his pursuers; he has a large bushy
tail, and is of a rank, strong smell; a beast
of chace.

A FOX [emblematically] may very pro­
perly denote a prudent commander, 
who to gain victories with less expence
of blood rather chooses to prevail in his
enterprizes by conduct and stratagem, 
than by downright dint of the soldier's
courage.

A FOX [Hieroglyphically] was used to
represent a sly, subtil fellow, full of
wicked intentions; because that animal
is notable on account of its craftiness.

A FOX [in Coat Armour] may re­
present those that have done signal ser­
vice to their prince and country, by
the administration of justice; or upon
embassies or such like negotiations, 
where wit and dexterity is of more use
than strength or valour.

FOXES Evil [with Physicians] a dis­
ease when the hair falls off from the
head by the roots; a shedding of the
hair, caus'd by the Lues Venerea or o­
therwise.

FRACTION [in Arithmet.] a broken
number, being a proportionable part
of any integer or whole thing.

Vulgar FRACTION, is one always
expressed by 2 numbers, the one written
over the other with a line between, as
⅓.

Decimal FRACTION, is one that has
for its denomination 1, with cypher or
cyphers, as ⅕ 10/100 400/0000 commonly
for brevity sake is set down thus, .5 .10

FRACTIOUS [of fractus or fractio.
L.] quarrelsome, peevish.

FRACTIOUSNESS, quarrelsome
temper, aptness to take offence, pee­
vishness.

FRACTURED [of fractura, L. frac­
ture, F. of fractus, L. broken] crackt, 
broken.

FRAGILENESS [fragilitas, L. fragi­
lité, F.] brittleness, weakness.

FRAGRANCE [fragrantia, L.] sweet­
ness of smell.

FRAGRANTNESS [fragrantia, L.]
fragrancy.

FRAIL [fragilis, L.] weak of nature, 
feeble; also brittle.



FRAILTY [fragilitas, L. fragi­
lité, F.] weakness of
nature, brittleness, frailty.

FRAILNESS [fragilitas, L. fragi­
lité, F.] weakness of
nature, brittleness, frailty.

FRAISES [in Military affairs] are
pieces of wood of 6 or 7 foot long
planted under the Cordon, in places which
are not faced with stone or brick, they
are planted at the base of a Parapet, 
being let about half way into the Ram­
part; they are not laid parallel to the
Base of the Rampart, but a little sloping
downwards with their point, that men
cannot stand on them, their chiefest use
is to hinder the garrison from deserting
which would be easy without them, es­
pecially in places with dry moats. They
likewise prevent surprizes and escalades
See the figure following.

Image omitted. 



To FRAIZE a Battalion, is to line it
every way round with pikes, that if they
should be charged with a body of horse
the pikes being presented may cover the
musketeers from the shock of the horse
and serve as a barricade.

FRAME-WORK­
KNITTERS were in­
corporated about the
year 1664, they are a
master, 2 wardens, 18
assistants; but no live­
ry. Their arms on a
seal (for I find them
not in colours) are.
On a chevron between 2 combs, and as
many leads of needles in chief, and an
iron jack, lead-sinker in Base; a main
spring between 2 small springs; all which
parts belong to a Frame. Their hall is
situated in Red-Cross-Street.

Image omitted. 



FRAME [with Painters] a kind of
chassy or square composed of 4 long pie­
ces or slips of wood joined together, the
intermediate space of which is divided
by little strings or threads into a great
number of little squares, like the mashes
of a net used in reducing figures from
great to small, or from small to great.

To be out of FRAME, to be disor­
dered or discomposed in body or mind.

FRAMPOLE Fence [in the manour
of Writtle in Essex] a privilege belong­
ing to the inhabitants, to have the wood
that grows on the fence, and as many
trees or poles as a man can reach from
the top of the ditch with the helve of
an axe, for the repairing of his fence.

FRANCHISE of Quarters [at Rome] a
certain space or district wherein the 
houses of embassadors of the European
princes are, and where they retire, 
where they cannot be arrested, nor pro­
secuted at law.

To FRANCHISE [affranchir] to grant
liberty, privileges, freedoms, immuni­
ties, &c.

FRANGIBLENESS [frangibilitas, L.
of frangere, to break] capableness or ea­
siness to be broken.

FRANGIPANE, an exquisite kind of
perfume, frequently given to the leather
wherewith gloves, &c. are made.

To FRANK Letters, to order them to
be carried without paying the postage.

FRANKLY [franchement, F.] freely, 
plainly, sincerely.

FRANKNESS [franchise, F.] freeness, 
open-heartedness, sincerity.

FRANTICKNESS [phrenesis, L. fre­
nesie, F. of φρέγεσις, Gr.] frensicalness, 
craziness, madness.

FRATERNALLY [fraternellement, 
F.] after the manner of or like a bro­
ther.

FRATERNITY of arms, an alliance
or association in arms, in ancient times
concluded between two knights, who
thereby agreed to go together, share
their fortunes, and mutually assist each
other against all the world.

FRATRAGE, a partition among
brothers or coheirs, coming to the same
inheritence or succession; also that part
of the inheritance that comes to the
youngest brothers.

FRAUDULENT [fraudulentus, L.]
deceitful, cheating, knavish, &c.

FRAUDULENTNESS [fraude, F. of
fraudulentus, L.] deceitfulness, guileful­
ness, knavishness.

FRAYGHT [of fracht, Teut.] fraight­
ed, i. e. full laden.

FREAKISHNESS, capriciousness;
maggottiness, &c.

FRECKLED [q. d. speckled] ha­
ving many small red­
dish spots in the skin.

FRECKLY [q. d. speckled] ha­
ving many small red­
dish spots in the skin. 

FRECKLES, a sort of small, hard, 
dusky buboes or pustules arising on the
skin of the face or hands, and mostly in
persons of the fairest and finest skins.



FREE-BORN [of freah-beor&wyn;e, 
Sax.] born in freedom, with a right to
privileges and immunities.

To FREE [sea term] when a ship's
pump throws out more water, than she
leaks into her, it is said to free her.

To FREE [a boat] is to bale or lade
out the water.

FREE State, a republick governed by
magistrates elected by the free suffrages
of the inhabitants.

FREEDOM of the Will, a state or fa­
culty of the mind, wherein all the mo­
tions of the will are in our power; and
we are enabled to determine on this or
that; to do good or evil without any
force or constraint from any foreign
cause whatsoever.

FREEDOM of Contradiction [with
Schoolmen] is that whereby we are at
our choice to will or nill; to love or 
not love, &c.

FREEDOM of Contrariety [with 
Schoolmen] is that whereby we are at
our own choice to do good or evil; to
be virtuous or vicious, to make a horse
or a lion.

FREEDOM of a City, &c. a right of 
exercising a trade or employment, &c.
in a city or town corporate, and a being
elected to the dignities and offices of it.

FREE-STONE, a sort of a stone that
works up like alabaster; used in build­
ing, and dug up in many parts of En­
gland.

FREENESS [frheneſſe, Sax.] a
being free; also liberality.

FREEZING [in Physiology] congela­
tion, is the fixing of a fluid; or the
depriving it of its natural mobility, by
the action of cold; or the act of con­
verting a fluid substance into a firm, 
coherent, rigid one, called ice.

To FREEZ [frẏſan, Sax.] to con­
geal into ice.

FREEZ [in Architecture] is that part
of the entablature of columns between
the Architrave and Corniche.

Tuscan FREEZ, Vitruvius makes it
flat and plain, the highest 30 minutes, 
the lesser 35. Scammozzi makes it plain, 
and 42, and Palladio convex or swelling, 
and in height but 26 minutes.

Dorivk FREEZ, both Vitruvius and
Vignola make this freez flat, only car­
ved with triglyphs and metopes, and
the height of it 30 or 45 minutes, and
Scammozzi and Palladio 45 minutes.

Ionick FREEZ, Vitruvius makes this
freez flat, but commonly carved with a­
canthus leaves, lions and men, &c.
and in height 30 minutes, Vignola 45, 
Scammozzi 28, and Palladio convex or
swelling, but 27 minutes.

Corinthian FREEZ, Vitruvius makes
this like the Ionick, and in height 30
minutes 2 thirds; Vignola the same but
45 minutes, Scammozzi and Palladio the
same; but the former 31 and 3 fourths, 
and the latter 28 minutes in height.

Composit FREEZ, Vitruvius makes
that freez flat; but beset with cartouses
and carved between every cartouse, 
and in height 52 minutes and a half;
Vignola the same, but 45 minutes;
Scammozzi but 32 minutes, Palladio
convex or swelling, but in height 32
minutes.

A Convex FREEZ are those
whose pro­
file is a curve.

A Pulvinated FREES are those
whose pro­
file is a curve.

Flourished FREEZE, is one inriched
with rings of imaginary foliages.

Historical FREEZE, is one adorned
with bass relievo's, representing histo­
ries, sacrifices, &c.

Marine FREEZE, one representing
sea-horses, Tritons, and other things
pertaining to the sea, as shells of fishes, 
baths, grotto's, &c.

Rustick FREEZE, is one whose cour­
ses are rusticated or imbossed.

Symbolical FREEZE, one adorned
with things pertaining to religion, as
the Apparatus of sacrifices, &c.

FRENDENT [frendens, L.] gnashing
the teeth.

FRENDLESS Man [with the English
Saxons] an out lawed man.

FRENZICAL [phrenitis, L. of φρενῖτες, 
Gr. frenesie, F.] a sort of madness or
dotage.

FREQUENCY [frequentia,
L.] oftenness;
usualness; commonness.

FREQUENTNESS [frequentia,
L.] oftenness;
usualness; commonness.

FRESCO, a way of painting or plais­
tering (or rather both) upon walls to
endure the weather, and representing
birds, beasts, herbs, fruit, &c. in relief.
It is done with a compost of the pow­
der of old rubbish stones, mixt with
burnt flint (or lime) and water, with
which the wall is plaistered a good
thickness, and painted with colours
ground with lime-water, milk or whey, 
and laid on the plaister while it is wet, 
by which means they incorporate with
the plaister, so as never to wash out.

This was the ancient Grecian way of
painting, and afterwards used by the
Romans; there have been several whole
towns of this work in Germany, and ex­
cellently well done, but now they are
ruined by the wars.

There are 3 chambers in the pope's
palace at Rome, done in fresco by Ra­



phael Urbin and Julio Romano, and like­
wise a most excellent fresco work at
Fontainbleau in France, which was the
work of Bolameo, Martin Rouse a Flo­
rentine, and others, containing the con­
tinued travels of Ulysses in 60 pieces.

FRESH the Hawse [Sea phrase] or
veer out more cable, is when part of a
cable that lies in the hawse, is fretted or
chased, and it is required that more
cable be veered out, that so another
part of it may rest in the hawse.

To FRESHEN [rendre frais, F.] to
make fresh that which has been salted;
or that which is grown faint or disco­
loured.

FRESHNESS [of fraicheur, F.] new­
ness; a not being salted; also the being
refreshed from tiredness; also coolness
of air.

FRET, an agitation or disturbance of
the mind caused by some disappointment
or miscarriage of an affair.

FRET [in Musick] a string tied round
the finger-board of an instrument to
shew the proper distance upon the string
that each note should be struck at.

To FRET, to vex, tease, or perplex
one's self or another person, at or about
any thing that happens to cross ones in­
clination.

FRETFULNESS, peevishness.

A FRET, a fume or heat of passion.

FRET or FRETTE [in
Heraldry] is supposed by
some to be called so, be­
cause its pieces seem to
fret one another by their
alternate superposition.
Some are of opinion it re­
presents the true lovers knot. It is re­
presented as in the figure.

Image omitted. 



FRET [in Architect.] is a knot
or ornament that con­
sists of two lists, or small fillets, vari­
ously interlaced or interwoven, and
running at parallel distances equal to
their breadth, every turn of which and
intersection must be at right angles; they
were used by the ancients on flat mem­
bers, as the faces of the Corona or eaves
of cornices, under the roofs, soffits, &c.
as in the following figure.

Image omitted. 



FRETTE [in Architect.] is a knot
or ornament that con­
sists of two lists, or small fillets, vari­
ously interlaced or interwoven, and
running at parallel distances equal to
their breadth, every turn of which and
intersection must be at right angles; they
were used by the ancients on flat mem­
bers, as the faces of the Corona or eaves
of cornices, under the roofs, soffits, &c.
as in the following figure.

Image omitted. 



FRET-WORK, a sort of plaisterer's
work so called.

FRET-WORK [so called of frette, 
L.] it signified the timber work of a
roof, and is an instrument of frets used to
fill up and enrich flat empty spaces; prin­
cipally used in roofs which are fret­
ted over with plaister-work.

FRETS [with Miners] openings made
in the banks of rivers made by land
floods.

FRIABLENESS [friabilitas, L.] brit­
tleness, aptness to crumble in small par­
tides.

Friableness is supposed to arise from
that friable do not consist wholly of dry
parts, irregularly combined and which
are readily separated, as having nothing
glutinous, & to bind them together.

FRICATION [with Physicians] a
rubbing or chasing
any part of the body, either dry with the
hand or linnen-cloths, or moist with
oils, ointments, waters, &c.

FRICTION [with Physicians] a
rubbing or chasing
any part of the body, either dry with the
hand or linnen-cloths, or moist with
oils, ointments, waters, &c.

FRICTION [in Mechanicks] is the
resistance that a moving body meets
withal from the surface whereon it
moves.

FRIDEGAST, a certain idol of the
ancient Britons.

FRITHSTOW [friðſto&wyn; of frið, 
peace, and ſto&wyn;, Sax. a place] a seat, 
chair, or place of peace.

FRIENDLINESS [freonðlicneſſe,
Sax.] kindness or kind behaviour, good
nature, tenderness, courteousness; the
return of mutual benevolence, a readi­
ness to help a person as far as is in one's
power, and comports with self preser­
vation, &c. It is the very cement of
society.

FRIENDSHIP [of freonð and ship, 
Sax.] the quality or kindness of a friend.

FRIENDSHIP was by the ancients
made a goddess, and represented by the
figure of a young woman in a plain
white morning gown, with her left side
bare, and her right hand pointing to
her heart, with these words in letters of
gold Far and near; she was also bare head­
ed, only adorned with a garland of
pomegranate flowers, out of which grew
4 pomegranates, with these words upon
them Winter and Summer; and the bot­
tom of her gown is broidered with these
words, Life and Death. She is also
grasping with her left hand a young elm
with a vine twisted about it.

FRIERS [fratres, L. freres, F. i. e.
brethren] monks or religious persons, of
which there are 4 principal orders. 1.
The Friers minors or Franciscans or grey
friers. 2. The Augustins. 3. The Do­



minicans or Black Friers. 4. The Carme­
lites or White Friers.

FRIERY [confraire, F.l a society
of friers; also their clois­
ter or habitation.

FRIARY [confraire, F.l a society
of friers; also their clois­
ter or habitation.

FRIGA [Friʒa, Sax.] a goddess of
the ancient Britons, Saxons, Germans, 
&c. whom they adored to obtain plenty
and earthly blessings and prosperity in
affairs. The idol represented both sexes
as well man as woman, and as a her­
maphrodite, is said to have both the
members of a man and the members of
a woman. A certain author writes that
it stood on the right hand of the great
god Theramis or Thor, sitting or lying
in a great hall, and Woden the god of
war on the left. She was pictured with
a sword in one hand and a bow in the
other, to intitate that women as well
as men should in time of need be ready
to fight. She was reputed the god of
peace and plenty, and also the causer of
love and amity. From this goddess our
Friday is supposed to have taken its
name. See the figure.

Image omitted. 



A FRIGID Stile, is a low jejune man­
ner of diction, wanting force, warmth
of imagination, figures of speech, &c.

FRIGIDNESS [frigiditas, L.] coldness
impotency.

To FRIGHTEN [frihtan, Sax.
fricter, Dan.] to put into a fright, to
terrify.

FRIGHTFUL [frihtful, Sax.] cau­
sing fright or terror, also apt to be put
into a fright.

FRIGHTFULNESS [frihtfulneſ­
ſe, Sax.] aptness to be affrighted; also
terribleness of aspect.

FRINGE [frange, F.] a sort of orna­
ment.

To FRINGE [franger, F.] to garnish
with fringes.

FRISKINESS, skittishness, wantonness
in skipping and flirting to and fro, &c.

FRISKY [probably of frisque, F. brisk
of frizzare, Ital.] leaping and jumping
up and down.

FRITHGILD [in ancient Records] the
same as is now called a gild, fraternity
or company.

FRITILLARY [with Botanists] a
flower that is very finely chequered and
resembles the shape of a dice-box, from
whence it has its name.  L.

FRIVOLOUSNESS [of frivolus, L.
frivolé, F.] triflingness, insignificantness, 
vainness.

FRIZE. See Freeze.

FRIZZLING [of frisé, F.] curled or
crisped.

A FRIZZLING [frisure, F.] a curl­
ing or crisping, properly of the hair.

FROLICKSOME, disposed to play, or
full of merry pranks, whimsies, &c.

FROLICKSOMENESS, the playing
of merry pranks, whimsies, &c.

FRONT [in Prospective] the ortho­
graphical projection of an object upon
a parallel plane.

FRONT of a Battalion, is the first
rank of file leaders; it is also called the
face or head of a battalion.

FRONT of a Squadron, is the first
rank of troopers.

FRONT of an Army, is the first row
of tents in the first line, which [in the
Horse] are the quarter-masters tents, 
and [in the Foot] those of serjeants.

FRONT [of a Place] is the face of a
place, or the Tenaille, i. e. all that is
contained between the flanked angles of
two neighbouring bastions, viz. the
two faces, the two flanks and the cur­
tain.

To FRONT every way [Military
Phrase] is when men are faced to all
sides.

FRONTAL [in Architethtre] a little
fronton or pediment, sometimes placed
over a little door or window.



FRONTALES [in Anatomy] two mus­
cles, one on each side of the forehead;
commonly supposed to spring from the
scull; but now known to arise from the
occipital muscles; or the frontales and
occipitales are rather one continued di­
gastrick muscle on each, moving the scalp
and skin of the forehead and eye-brows.

FRONTATED [in Botany] signifies
that the petatum or leaf of a flower grow­
ing broader and broader, and at last per­
haps terminates in a right line.

FRONTIER, the border, confine or
boundary of a kingdom or province, 
which the enemies find in the front when
they are about to enter the same.

FRONTLETS [with the Jews]
square
pieces of leather, including 4
pieces of parchment, upon which are
written 4 passes of the Mosaic law, and
which they wear on their foreheads at
some certain parts of their devotion.

FROST [froſt, Sax. and  Dan.] an
excessive cold state of the weather, 
whereby the motion and fluidity of li­
quors is suspended; or that state of the
air, &c. whereby fluids are converted
into ice. A hoar-frost is generated, 
when the vapours near the earth are
congealed by the coldness of the night, 
which only happens in winter, when
cold predominates, so that the difference
between dew and hoar-frost is, that
mists do turn to dew, if they consist of
drops of water; but into hoar-frost, when
they consist of vapours that are congeal­
ed in their passage down to the earth.
Frost contracts metals, or rather the
cold effects it; but on the contrary it
dilates fluids; for a 12 foot tube of iron
lost 2 lines in length, being exposed to
the air in a frosty night; but liquids
are swelled and dilated by frost nearly
one tenth of their bulk, and by that
means bursts not only vessels of glass
and earth, but even of wood or iron
or other metals, as has been found by
many experiments.

FROSTED, done or made in imita­
tion of frost.

FROSTINESS [froſtiʒneſſe, 
Sax.] frosty quality.

FROTHINESS, fulness of froth, 
frothy quality; the want of solidity and
substance; lightness, emptiness, windi­
ness.

FROTHY, having or full of froth, 
empty, vain, trifling; not substantial
nor solid, light, &c.

FROWARDLY [fram&wyn;earðlice, 
Sax.] in a forward manner.

FROWARDNESS [fram&wyn;earð­
neſſe, Sax.] peevishness, fretfulness, 
surliness.

FROWEY [with Carpenters] timber
is said to be frowey, when it is evenly
tempered all the way, and works freely
without tearing.

FROWNING [sourcils froncez, F.]
knitting the brows, wrinkling the fore­
head.

FROWNINGLY, with an air of dis­
pleasure, &c.

FROZEN [of froſt, Sax. frost, 
Dan.] congealed with frost.

FROZENNESS, congealedness by
frost or cold air.

FRUGALNESS [frugalitas, L. fru­
galité, F.] thriftiness, sparingness in ex­
pences.

FRUGIFEROUSNESS, fruit-bearing­
ness, fertility.

FRUGIVOROUSNESS [of frugivorus, L.] fruit-devouring quality or faculty.

FRUIT [fructus, L.] in its general
sense includes whatsoever the earth
produces for the nourishment and sup­
port of human kind and animals.  F.

FRUIT [with Botanists] is defined to
be that, which succeeds to each flower, 
whether it consists of one or more seeds;
some restrain the word fruit, to signify
only that which is esculent.

Natural FRUITS, are such as the
earth produces of its own accord, with­
out any culture.

FRUITS of Industry, are such as tho'
they are natural require some culture
to bring them to perfection.

Civil FRUITS [in Law] are rents, 
salaries, wages.

FRUITS [in the Canon Law] denotes
every thing, whereof the revenue of a
benefice consists, as glebe, tithes, rents, 
offerings, &c.

FRUITAGE [of fruit, F.] all kinds
of edible fruits.

FRUITERERS com­
pany were first incor­
porated Anno 1604, 
and consist of a master, 
2 wardens, about 17
assistants; and 39 on
the livery. Their
armorial ensigns are
azure. The tree of
paradise between Adam and Eve all pro­
per. They have no hall, but sometimes
meet at the Parish Clerks in Wood-street.

Image omitted. 



FRUITFUL [of fruit, F. and full, 
Sax. &c.] fertile.

FRUITFUL Signs [with Astrologers]
are Gemini, Cancer and Pisces, so called, 
because if the moon and principal sig­
nificators be in any of those signs and
strong, they doubt not but the enquir­
ing party will have children.



FRUITFULNESS [of fruit, F. and
fulneſſe, Sax] fertility.

FRUITFULNESS [in Hieroglyphicks]
is represented by an olive tree.

FRUITFULNESS [in Sculpture, &c.]
was represented by a lady sitting upon
a bed, with two little infants hanging
about her neck.

FRUITION [by Moralists] is defined
to be the rest or delight of the will in
the end obtained.

FRUITLESS [of fruit and leaſ, Sax.]
unprofitableness.

To FRUSTRATE [frustrare, L.] to
make void, to deceive, to disappoint.

FRUSTRATIVE of or belonging 
to frustration;
also apt to frustrate.

FRUSTRATORY of or belonging 
to frustration;
also apt to frustrate.

FRUTESCENT [frutescens, L.]
growing shrubby, becoming a shrub.

FUCATED [fucatus, L.] painted, 
coloured.

FUCATION, a disguising, a cloaking.

FUCUS, a paint for the face to heigh­
ten the complexion.

FUEL [probably of feu, F. fire] fi­
ring, as wood, coals or any matter fit
for burning for culinary or other uses.

FUELIST, a maker of charcoal, 
small-coal, &c.

FUGACIOUSNESS [fugacitas, L.]
aptness to fly away.

FUGA vacui [in ancient Philosophy]
a principle whereby various effects
were produc'd arising from an aversion
(which they suppos'd) in nature to a
vacuum. But most of these phænomena
modern philosophers have demonstrated
to arise from the gravity and pressure
of the air.

FUGALIA, festivals observ'd by the
ancient Romans on account of the ex­
pulsion of their kings. From which
pattern the English seem to have taken
their Hock-Tide, and having cleared
the lands of their insolent neighbours
the Danes, instituted the annual sports
of Hock-Tide, consisting of such pastimes, 
as throwing at cocks.

FULGENTNESS [of fulgentia, L.]
shiningness, brightnest, fulgidity.

To FULL Cloth [fullare, L. fouler, F.]
to mill it in order to thicken it.

FULLERY, a work house or place
where cloth is fulled.

FULLY [fullice, Sax.] to the full.

FULNESS [fẏlneſſe, Sax.] plen­
ty.

FULMINATING legion, a legion in
the Roman army of Marcus Aurelius who
were Christian soldiers, who in the war
against the Sarmatæ, Marcomanni &c.
saved the whole army, ready to p'erish 
with thirst by their prayers, procuring
a very plentiful shower, with thunder, 
lightening and hail.

FULMINATION [in the Romanish Ca­
non Law] is the sentence of a bishop or
other ecclesiastick, appointed by the
pope, whereby it is decreed that some
bull sent from the pope shall be exe­
cuted; it is also the execution or de­
nunciation of a sentence of anathema
made in publick with due solemnity.

FULMINEOUS [fulmineus, L.] of
or belonging to thunder.

FULSOMNESS [q. d. foulsomness, i.e.
somewhat foul and neſſe, Sax.] loath­
somness, nastiness, &c.

FUMED [fumatus, L.] smoaked, fu­
med.

To FUME [fumare, L. fumer, F.] to
smoak or steam.

FUMETORY, an herb.

FUMIDNESS, smoakiness; the be­
ing smoaky.

FUMIFICK [fumificus, L.] making
smoak, perfuming.

FUMIGATION, a perfuming with
the smoak of sweet wood or other mat­
ter, either for qualifying the air, or
fumes of Mercury.

FUMIGATION [with Surgeons] a sa­
livation raised by Mercury.

FUMIGATION [with Chymists] a fu­
migating or smoaking, an erosion or
eating away of metals by smoke or va­
pour.

FUMOUS [fumosus, L. fumeux, F.]
smoaky.

FUMOSITY [fumositas, L.] smoak­
iness.

FUN, sport, game, banter, &c.

To FUN one; to sooth, cajole, coaks, 
wheedle.

Animal FUNCTION, is that without
which we cannot perceive, will, re­
member, &c. such are feeling, seeing, 
imagining, judging, passions, voluntary mo­
tions, &c.

FUNCTION [in a Physical sense] is
tha same as action; an effective motion
produced in any part of an animal by
the proper aptitude or fitness of such a
part for the uses appointed by the au­
thor of nature.

Natural FUNCTIONS, are those
which change the food, &c. so as to
assimilate it to our own nature; such
are the viscera or bowels, and the ves­
sels that receive, retain, secern, &c.
the humours.

Vital FUNCTIONS, are those neces­
sary to life; and without which it can
not subsist, as the action of the heart, 
brain, lungs, &c.



FUND of the Eye [Anat.] the part
possessed by the Choroeides and Retina.

FUNDAMENTALLY according to
fundamental principles.

FUNDAMENTALNESS, fundamen­
tal quality; chiefness, principalness.

FUNEBRAL Staves, torches, links, 
flam beaux.

FUNEBREOUS [funebris, L. funebre, 
F.] belonging to a funeral, doleful, 
mournful.

FUNERALS. The primitive Chris­
tians buried their dead after the Jewish
manner, first washing, then embalming
them they wrapt up the corps in fine
linnen or silk, and sometimes put them
on rich habits; they laid them forth
three days, during which time they
constantly attended the dead body, and
passed the time in watching and praying
by it; then they carried it to the grave
with torches or flambeaux, singing
psalms and hymns to the praise of God, 
and expressing their hopes of the resur­
rection.

They frequently put into the grave
several things, either as marks of ho­
nour to the deceased, or to preserve
his memory, as the badges of his dig­
nity; the instrument and acts of his
martyrdom, an epitaph, or at least his
name; and sometimes they threw in me­
dals, laurel leaves, some crosses and the
Gospel; they had a religious ambition
to be buried under the bodies of the
martyrs, which introduc'd the custom
of burying in churches and church­
yards, and of erecting tombs or monu­
ments over them; it being the ancient
custom always to bury without the
walls of the city.

The primitive Christians likewise, 
are said, to recommend the dead in
their prayers, received the communion
and held their Agapæ, i. e. Love Feasts, 
and distributed alms to the poor.

At the end of the year they made a
fresh commemoration for them, and so
from year to year, besides the standing
commemoration for the dead, always
joined with the Eucharist.

The old Romans after they had closed
the eyes of the deceased, call'd aloud
to him several times, to discover if he
was not fallen into a trance or some
such lethargical distemper; after this
they wash'd the corps with warm wa­
ter, and rubbed it with perfumes; then
they cloth'd it in a sort of white gown, 
and brought it to the door, and laid it
with the feet to the street, sticking
branches of cypress before the house.
This ceremony lasted seven days, and
on the eighth they carried forth the
corps to the place where it was to be
burnt.

Persons of fortune were generally
carried on a bier or coffin by relations;
and at the funerals of emperors and
consuls, the senators and magistrates of
the republick did this office; but the
common people were carried by Ves­
pillones or common bearers.

When persons of blood and eminent
for their posts in the government, or
for remarkable actions, were brought
to the pile; the distinctions of their
quality were carried before the corps
as the fasces, sword, mace, their an­
cestors in wax-work, the plunder they
had gained from the enemies; the civil,
mural, &c. crowns, which they had
deserv'd, or whatever might add to
their figure and reputation.

FUNERAL Oration, a sermon or
discourse pronounced in praise of a per­
son deceased, at the ceremony of his
funeral.

FUNERARY [funerarius, L.] per­
taining to funerals.

FUNGOUSNESS [of fungosus, L.l
spunginess.

FUNGOUS Flesh, a spongious excres­
cence, called proud flesh, frequently
growing on the lips of wounds, &c.

FUNGUS, a fleshy tumour or ex­
crescence, very spongious, soft and
pale, arising on the membranes, ten­
dons and other nervous parts in conse­
quence of ulcers, wounds, &c.

FUNICULAR Hypothesis [in Mecha­
nicks] an hypothesis produced by one
Francis Linus against the spring and
weight of the air, so as to explain the
rising and falling of quicksilver in a
weather-glass or barometer, by means
of a funiculus or little string at the top,
or a very fine thin substance, which is
continually drawing itself up, or is
stre'tched out more or less, according
to the different temperature of the out­
ward air.

FURACIOUS [furax, L.] thievish, 
inclined to steal.

FURACIOUSNESS [furacitas, L.]
thievishness, &c.

FURFURACEOUS [furfuraceus, L.]
branny, made of bran.

The FURIES [furiæ, L.] according
to the poets, are the daughters of Nox
(night) and Acheron one of the rivers
of Hell. Infernal deities, supposed to
enter and possess men; to torment and
punish them. Their names are Alecto, 
Megæra, and Tisiphone, who live in
Pluto's dominions, and are his rods to



scourge guilty and sinful souls. Some
interpret them to be the prickings and
gripings of guilty conferences. Euri­
pides calls them the 3 evils of the mind, 
Anger, Avarice and Concupiscence. And
thence,

Alecto has her name from Ἄλεχτος, 
Gr. never ceasing, from the titillation
or pleasures, of which she is the aven­
ger.

Megæra [of μεγαίρω, Gr. I hate or
envy] being the punisher of the envi­
ous, &c.

Tisiphone has her name of τίσις re­
venge and ϕόνος Gr. murder; because
she avenges this wickedness that is com­
mitted by anger.

They are termed the daughters of
night, on account of the ignorance of
mortals, who prefer short pleasures to
eternal ones. See Eumenides.

They are represented with eyes in­
flamed, their heads twisted round with
snakes, with whips and burning tor­
ches in their hands.

FURIOUSNESS [furiositas, L.] fu­
rious mood or quality.

FURLED [freslé, F.] tied up as sails.

FURRING [with Architects] is the
making good the rafters feet in the cor­
nice, that is, when rafters are cut with
a knee, these furrings are pieces that
go strait along with the rafter from the
top of the knee to the cornice.

FURRING a Ship, a laying on double
planks on the sides of a ship, after she
is built, called Plank upon Plank, or
more properly the ripping off the planks
and putting new timbers on the former
timbers, and also other planks upon them
to make a ship bear the better sail.

FURTHERANCE, a promotion, an
help, &c.

FURTHERMORE [furðor-mare, 
Sax.] and besides what has been said, &c.

FURTHERMOST [furðormæſt, 
Sax.] the most distant.

FURTHEST [furðæſt, Sax.] the
most distant.

FUSAROLE [with Architects] a
moulding or ornament placed imme­
diately under the echinum in the Dorick,
Ionick and Composite capitals.

FUSCATION, a darkening or cloud­
ing.  L.

FUSIBLE [fusilis, L.] that may be
melted.  F.

FUSIL [in Coat Ar­
mour] is a spin­
die, and differs from the lo­
zenge, in that it is longer, 
and the lower part more
acute and sharp than the other, i, e. the
collateral or middle parts. See the fi­
gure.

Image omitted. 



FUSEE [in Coat Ar­
mour] is a spin­
die, and differs from the lo­
zenge, in that it is longer, 
and the lower part more
acute and sharp than the other, i, e. the
collateral or middle parts. See the fi­
gure.

Image omitted. 



FUSIBLENESS [of fusibilité, F. of
fusilis, L.] aptness or readiness to flow
or melt, that quality in metals or mi­
nerals that disposes them for fusion.

FUSILIS [in Heraldry]
signifies a
field or an ordinary intire­
ly covered over with fusils.
See the figure.

Image omitted. 



FUSILE [in Heraldry]
signifies a
field or an ordinary intire­
ly covered over with fusils.
See the figure.

Image omitted. 



FUSTIAN Language,  an affected
rumbling stile or bombast way of writ­
ing; used by mean writers to make
themselves appear persons of learning
and parts to the ignorant.

FUSTICK a sort of wood im­
ported from the An­
tille islands in the West-Indies, very
useful in dying a beautiful gold colour;
and is also used in dying black, there is
also another sort brought from Italy, 
Provence, &c. used in dying a dark
brown or coffee colour.

FUSTOCK a sort of wood im­
ported from the An­
tille islands in the West-Indies, very
useful in dying a beautiful gold colour;
and is also used in dying black, there is
also another sort brought from Italy, 
Provence, &c. used in dying a dark
brown or coffee colour.

FUSTI-LUGS, a dirty drab, a slut­
tish woman that smells rank.

FUSTINESS, rankness in smell, 
mustiness.

FUSURE [fusura, L.] a flowing or
melting of metals.

FUTILENESS [futilitas, L. futilité, 
F.] blabbing, filliness, lightness, vanity.

FUTURITION, the act of genera­
tion.  L.

FUZEE [in Horses] two dangerous
splents, joining above and downwards.


G

Gg, Roman; Gg, Italick; Gg En­ 
glish, are the 7th letters of the
alphabet; Ιγ, Greek, and ג, Hebrew, 
are the third letters of their alphabets.

G, in Latin Numbers, signified 400.

G̅ with a dash at top signified 40000.

The letter G in English has a double
sound, a hard, as gold, gorge, gore, &c.
and a hard and soft sound in gorgeous, 
as if it were written gorjeous; but when
a, e, i, or u follow the latter sound, 
instead of g must be j consonant; as
Jama, Jane, jem, jewel, John, Jude.

G is not heard in phlegm, sign, cam­
paign, reign, design, feign.

Gh sounds like ff in laugh, cough; nor
is it sounded in nigh, night, might, caught, 
bought, sought, thought, &c.

The dash is placed on top of letter G.



GABBARA [of דבג, Heb. Syr. and
Arab. a man] a name by which the E­
gyptians called the dead bodies, which



they kept by them instead of burying
them; especially such of their friends
as died with the reputation of great
piety and holiness, or as martyrs, by
which means they suppos'd they did
them more honour than if they buried
them; they wrapped them up in seve­
ral fine linen cloths with balms and
spices.

GABEL [gabelle, F. ʒafel, Sax.
which some derive of לבק, he received, 
or הלבק, a receipt, Heb. others of Ga­
bella or Gablum, corrupt Latin for tri­
bute; others from Gavel, an unjust
law] an excise in France upon salt, 
which writers say, raises the king as
much money as all the mines of Chili, 
Peru, Potosi, and all the rest of America
yields to the king of Spain. The whole
commerce of salt for the inland con­
sumption lying wholly in the king's
hands, who sells and distributes all of
it to his farmers and officers appointed
for that purpose. In our Ancient Re­
cords, &c. it is taken to signify a rent, 
custom, duty or service yielded or done
to the king or to some other lord.

GABIONS, are bas­
kets of five or six foot
high, and four or five
broad, equally wide
at top and bottom;
they are made of pie­
ces of willow of about
6 foot long, stuck in
the ground in a circle, 
which they work round
with small branches, 
leaves and all, and af­
terwards fill them with earth, to make
a cover or parapet betwixt them and
the enemy; they are sometimes used
in making batteries.

Image omitted. 



GADDING [probably of gaen, Du.
to go, or ganging, Scotch] rambling
roving, ranging, straggling about.

GAFFELETS. See Gablocks.

GAFFER [ʒod, good and faðer a
father Sax.] a country appellation for a
man.

GAFFOLD-Land, land that pays a
certain custom or tribute, called Gaffold
Gold.

GAGATES [so called of Gagas a city
of Lysia in Asia, where it was plenty]
a sort of stone, which, when rubbed
smells like brimstone, and that will take
fire immediately.

Mort GAGE, is that which is left in
the hands of the proprietor, so that he
reaps the fruits of it; in opposition to
vif-gage, where the fruits or revenues
are reaped by the creditor and reckoned
as part of the debt paid.

To GAGE Deliverance [Law term] to
give security that a thing shall be deli­
vered; the same as to wage deliverance.

A GAGE [with Joiners] is an instru­
ment made to strike a line truly paral­
lel to the straight side of any board.

GAGGED [prob, of ʒeaʒl, Sax. the
cheek-bone] having an instrument or
piece of wood put into the mouth to keep
it from shutting.

GAGGLING, the noise made by a
goose.

GAINESS [gaieté, F.] chearfulness, 
of temper; also gallantry or fineness in
apparel.

GAILLARD, brisk, merry, blithe, 
jolly, pleasant, light-hearted, chearful.

GAINFUL [of gain, F. and full, Sax.]
profitable, advantageous.

GAINFULNESS, profitableness, ad­
vantageousness.

GAINLY cleverly, handily, dexte­
rously.

GAINNESS, handiness, dexterity.

GAIT [probably of ʒanʒan, Sax, to
go] a particular motion or air of walk­
ing, &c.

GAIN-STANDING [of ʒean-ſtan­
ðan, Sax.] resisting, opposing; resistance, 
opposition.

GALACTITES [γαλαχτίτής, Gr.] a
precious stone, so called because it is as
white as milk; also a sort of earth cal­
led Milk-marle.

GALACTOPOTE [galoctopota, L. of
γαλαχτοπότης, Gr.] a milk-drinker.

GALACTOPHAGIST [galactophagus
L. of γαλαχτοφαγος, Gr.] a milk-eater, a
milk sop.

GALATEA [the Sea Nymph] was by
the ancients painted as a beautiful young
virgin, with her hair carelesly falling
about her shoulders like silver threads,
and a fair pearl hanging at her ear, 
holding in her hand, and viewing a
spunge made of sea froth.

GALAXY [γαλαξίας of γαλα, Gr.
milk] a long white luminous tract, 
which seems to encompass the Heavens
like a swathe, scarf or girdle; easily
perceivable in a clear night, when the
moon does not shine.

Before the invention of telescopes, 
the learned were divided in their opi­
nions about what it was; Aristotle and
others affirming it to be a collection of
vapours; but it is now found by obser­
vation to be an innumerable company
of stars, not visible to the naked eye.

GALBANUM, a gum issuing from the
incision in the root of the ferulaceous



plant, called ferula Galbanifera, L. grow­
ing in Arabia, &c.

Loom GALE [Sea Phrase] is when the
wind blows gently, so that the ship may
bear her top sails a trip.

A fresh GALE [Sea Phrase] is used
of the wind when
it is very high.

A stiff GALE [Sea Phrase] is used
of the wind when
it is very high.

To GALE away [Sea Phrase] is said
of a ship that sails faster than another, 
finding more wind than the other in fair
weather, when there is but little wind.

GALEA [with Physicians] a pain in
the head; so called, because it takes in
the whole head like an helmet.

GALEA [with Anatomists] a term used
of the head of an infant that is newly
born, when it is covered with part of
the membrane or skin called Amneos.

GALEAS a heavy, low built vessel, 
with both sails and oars; it carries three
masts; but they cannot be lowered as
in a galley, viz. Main-mast, Fore-mast, 
and Misen-mast. It has 32 seats for
rowers, and 6 or 7 slaves to each. It
carries 3 tire of guns at the head; the
lowermost has 2 pieces of 36 pounders
each; the second 2 pieces of 24 pounders
each; the third 2 pieces of 18 pounders
each. At the stern there are 2 tire of
guns, each of 3 pieces, and each piece
18 pounders.

GALEATUS, a, um [in Botan. Writ.]
hooded, whose upper part resembles a
kind of helmet or hood, as in the flower
of sage, &c.

GALENICAL of or pertaining to
Galen the physician, 
as Galenical Physick, that which is found­
ed upon the practice of Galen.

GALENICK of or pertaining to
Galen the physician, 
as Galenical Physick, that which is found­
ed upon the practice of Galen." 

GALENITES [of Galen, a physician
of Amsterdam] a sect of the Mennonites, 
who are all for moderation in religion, 
and think it unlawful to debar any
from their assemblies, who lead a
pious life, and own the scriptures to
be the word of God. Some of them
are call'd in Holland Collegiates, be­
cause they meet privately, and any one
in their assemblies may pray, speak, 
expound the scriptures and sing.

Those that are truly Collegiates are
Trinitarians, and never receive the sa­
crament of the Eucharist in their col­
lege; but resort twice a year from all
parts of Holland to Rhinsberg, a village
about two miles from Leyden; and
there receive the sacrament, which the
first that sits at the table may distribute
to the rest; and no sect is deny'd ad­
mission, not even the Roman Catholicks, 
if they will come.

GALEONS those Spanish ships
that are sent to Vera
Cruz in New Spain, and if they are em­
ployed to any other part, they are not
called by that name.

GALLIONS those Spanish ships
that are sent to Vera
Cruz in New Spain, and if they are em­
ployed to any other part, they are not
called by that name.

GALERICULATED [galericulatus, 
L.] having brims like or resembling an
hat.

GALL-Bladder, a membranous re­
ceptacle, in figure resembling a pear, si­
tuate at the lower margin of the liver, 
in which the humour called Gall is
contained.

A GALLANT Man, one somewhat
gayer, brighter, and more agreeable
than men in common are.

To GALLANT a Woman, to court
her in the way of a gallant; also to
lead her.

GALLERY for passing a Moat, is a
covered walk made of strong beams, 
and covered
over-head
with planks, 
and loaded
with earth;
it was for­
merly used
for putting
the miner to
the foot of
the rampart:
sometimes
the Gallery
is covered 
over with raw hides, to defend it from
the artificial fires of the besieged. The
Gallery ought to be very strong, of dou­
ble planks on that side towards the
stank, to make it musquet-proof. It is
made in the camp, and brought along
the trenches in pieces, to be join'd toge­
ther in the foss; it ought to be eight
foot high, and ten or twelve wide;
the beams ought to be half a foot thick, 
and two or three foot asunder; the
planks or boards nailed on each side, 
and filled with earth or planks in the
middle; the covering to rise with a
ridge, that what is thrown upon it by
the besiegers with a design to burn it, 
may roll off. See the figure.

Image omitted. 



GALLERY [with Architects] a cover­
ed place in a house, much longer than
broad, and which is usually on the
wings of the building, serving to walk
in; also a little isle or walk, serving
as a common passage to several rooms
placed in a line or row.

GALLEY, is a low built vessel, that
has both sails and oars, and commonly
carries two masts, viz. a main-mast and
a fore-mast, that may be struck or low­



ered at pleasure. They are generally
about 130 foot long, and 18 foot broad
in the middle. They have usually
from 25 to 30 benches of oars and 4 or
5 slaves to each bench, who are com­
monly persons who have offended a­
gainst the state.

GALLEY-Men, merchants of Genoa, 
which anciently arrived in England in
gallies, landing their goods at a key
near the Custom-House; thence called
Galley-Key.

GALLEY [with Printers] a wooden
frame into which the compositor emp­
ties his composing-stick as often as it is
filled.

GALLEY-Slave, a person condemned
to row in the galleys.

GALLEY-Worm, an hairy insect whose
legs on each side resemble the oars of
a galley.

Condemnation to the GALLEYS [in
France] a penalty imposed on criminals
and delinquents, whereby they are ad­
judged to serve the king or state as
slaves on board the galleys; either for
their life time, or for a limited time.

GALLI, the priests of Cybele the
mother of the god's according to the
pagan theogony, were so named from
the river Gallus in Phrygia, of which they
were wont to drink before they began
their sacrifices; because the water of
that river is said to infuse a sort of
frenzy or madness into them, which
they pretended to be divine; they ce­
lebrated their festivals by running about
like persons in a frenzy, using merry, 
but extravagant postures and striking
upon little brazen drums; and because
the goddess was to be served by none
but eunuchs, castrated themselves.

GALLIARDISE [galliardise, F.]
gaiety, frolicksomeness.

GALLIMATHIAS, a dark perplexed
discourse, where several things are
huddled together, so as to make an in­
conceivable jargon, hence prob. our
Gallimaufry.

GALLION a sort of ship or large
galley, having four
decks, and only using sails; in which
the Spaniards in war time, convey their
bullion and plate from Peru in the West-­
Indies.

GALLEON a sort of ship or large
galley, having four
decks, and only using sails; in which
the Spaniards in war time, convey their
bullion and plate from Peru in the West-­
Indies.

GALLIOT, is a little galley, or a
sort of brigantine, built very slight and
fit for chase. It carries but one mast, 
and two or three pattereroes: It can
both sail and row, and has sixteen or
twenty seats for the rowers, with one
man to each oar. All the seamen on
board it are also soldiers, and each has
a musket lying ready when he quits his
oar.

GALLOWSES, contrivances made
of cloth, and hooks and eyes, worn
over the shoulders by men to keep their
breeches up.

GALLOWAY [prob. of gallopade, F.
a small gallop] an easy gentle pad-nag.

GALLOW-Grass, an herb.

GALLOW-Clappers [of ʒalʒa, a
gallows, and clappan, Sax.] thieves.

GALLS, commonly call'd Aleppo Galls, 
are a sort of vegetable or excrescences
something resembling nuts but of a 
round, which grow upon the hardest
species of oaks, and used in making
ink, dying black, &c. which altho' they
are as hard as shells, are nothing but
the cases of insects that are bred in
them, and which when grown to ma­
turity gnaw their way out, which cau­
ses those little holes we fee in them.

GAMA the first or gravest 
note in the modern
scale of musick.

GAMMOT the first or gravest 
note in the modern
scale of musick.

GAMBEZON, a kind of coat or doub­
let of canvas, anciently worn by mili­
tary men under their cuirass, to make
it sit easy and hinder it from hurting
the body.

To GAMBOL [gambader, F.] to shew
tricks by tumbling, and such like exer­
cises, wantonly.

GAMESOM [of ʒamian and ſom,
Sax.] full of play, wanton, frolicksome, 
&c.

GAMELIA [γαμήλια of γάμος, Gr.
marriage] festivals celebrated to Juno, 
as the protectress of marriage, in the
month Gamelion or January.

GAMESOMNESS [of ʒamenunʒ, 
ſom and neſſe, Sax.] wantonness, 
frolicksomeness, &c.

GAMESTER [ʒameſtre, Sax.] one
that plays at games.

GAMMER [of ʒoð good, and Mo­
ðer, Sax. a mother, or of grand and
mere. F.] a country appellation for a
woman.

GAMMOT, gamesomeness, banter.

GANCH, a sort of punishment with
the Turks, of throwing a malefactor
from a high place, so as to be catched
by hooks or spikes, and to hang on
them.

To go a GANDERING [of ʒanðra, 
Sax.] to go a whoring in the month
that the wife lies in.

GANEFISH, a sort of fish.

GANGS [with Seamen] are the seve­
ral companies belonging to a ship, and



employ'd in executing their several
watches, works, &c. as the Boat swain's
Gang, &c.

To GANGRENE [se gangrener, F.
gangrænum corripere, L. of γάγγρος inde
γάγγραινα, Gr.] to contract a cadaverous
corruption, attended with a stench, 
blackness and mortification.

GANTLET [with Surgeons] a sort
of bandage for the hand.

GANYMEDE, a catamite or barda­
chio, the name takes it rise from what
the poets tell us of a beautiful young
Trojan (the son of Tros) a shepherd, whom
Jupiter ravished or carried off by his
eagle, or rather by himself under the
from of an eagle as he was hunting on
mount Ida near Troy, and made him his
cup-bearer in the room of Hebe, whom
he displaced, for having made a false
step and spilling his nectar.

Xenophon says, he was a young man
of great discretion, prudence and coun­
sel, not without an external beauty, 
agreeable to his inward virtues; he was
therefore by the gods thought not un­
worthy of becoming their companion.
That Jupiter took their advice, and sent
his faithful minister the eagle, who found
him just leaving his flock of sheep, and
going to hunt on mount Ida, and brought
him in his talons unhurt into the celes­
tial regions, where being placed among
the stars, and turned into the sign Aqua­
rius, he attends upon Jupiter at his
banquets with flowing cups of nectar.

Mythologists apply the stories of Gany­
mede and Hebe physically: That Hebe is
the daughter of Juno, because of the
happy temperature of the air, all sorts
of trees and herbs produce their buds
and flowers, and consequently appear
in youth and beauty; but when Hebe
slips, that is when the flowers fade, and
the leaves drop, then it is fit that she
should be remov'd. Ganymede there­
fore, which is the winter, then takes
place, and is not without his peculiar
use and agreeableness; since that, with­
out the prudent provision he makes in
the bowels of the earth, the spring
might in vain be expected.

Now the winter being attended with
frequent rains, it is not improper that
Ganymede should be thought to be turn­
ed into the sign Aquarius.

GAOLER, the keeper of a jail, a
prison-keeper.

GAPING [ʒapeunʒ, Sax.] opening
wide.

GAPE seed, flaring, gaping, loiter­
ing, idling in going on an errand.

GARBE [in Heraldry] a
sheaf, of gerbe, F. a sheaf
of any kind of grain. The
garbe represents summer, as
the bunch of grapes does
autumn, flowers the spring, 
and a tree withered and without leaves, 
winter.

Image omitted.



GARBEL, a plank near the keel of
a ship, called also a gar-board.

GARBLING [prob. of garbolare, Ital.
or garbeller, O. F.] cleansing of spices
from dross, &c.

GARD [garde, F.] protection or 
defence; especially the
life-guard, or yeomen of the guard to
a prince; also the hilt of a sword or
hem of a garment.

GUARD [garde, F.] protection or 
defence; especially the
life-guard, or yeomen of the guard to
a prince; also the hilt of a sword or
hem of a garment. 

GARD [in a Law Sense] guardianship
or management of children under age;
also of idiots.

GARDANT [in Heraldry] 
denotes any beast full fac'd,
looking right forward. See 
the Escutcheon.

Image omitted.



GARDIAN [gardian of garder, F. to
keep, take care of, &c.] one that has a
custody or charge of any person or
thing; especially of the bringing up
such as are not of age and discretion
to manage their own affairs, as children
or idiots.

GARDIAN of the Spiritualities, he to
whom the spiritual jurisdiction or go­
vernment of any diocese is committed, 
during the vacancy of a bishop's See.

GARDIAN of the Cinque-Ports, a
principal magistrate of the havens in
the East part of England, i. e. of the five
ports or harbours. See Cinque-Ports.

A GARGLE, a wash for the mouth, 
&c.

GARISHNESS, gayness, glaringness, 
gorgiousness in attire, showiness.

GARLAND, an ornament for the
head in the nature or form of a ring or
crown made of flowers, boughs or other
decorations among the Pagans. The
poets, priests and even the victims that
were to be sacrificed were crowned with
garlands; and in England it is now a
custom to dress may-poles with garlands
at Wakes; and the London milk-maids
dress up their milk-pails with flowers, 
plate and ribbons, and go a dancing at
the doors of their customers the 4 first
days of May.

GARNISH [in Cookery] the adorning
of dishes.

GARNISHER [celui qui garnit, F.]
he that adorns, sets off, &c.



GARRETEER, one who lives in a
garret or upper room of a house.

To GARRISON [mettre garnison, F.]
to furnish a garrison with soldiers.

GARRULOUSNESS [of garrulitas, 
L.] talkativeness, pratingness.

GARTER [jarettiere, F.] a bandage
for the leg.

GARTER, the most noble order of the
garter was instituted in the year 1350, 
by King Edward the III. as some say on
account of his many signal victories, par­
ticularly one, wherein it is said the king's
garter was used for the token. But
others say on the following account, 
that the king dancing one night with
his queen and other ladies, took up a
garter which one of them had dropt;
whereat some of the lords present smi­
ling, the king said, that he would make
that garter of high reputation; and soon
after erected the order of the Blue Gar­
ter, with this motto, Honi soit qui maly
pense, i. e. Evil to him that evil thinks.
The latter of these motives is most ge­
nerally believed to have been the ground
of the institution of this order of knight­
hood. However both these motives
might concur to the same end; and it
has ever since been esteemed a great ad­
dition of honour bestowed on the noblest
person of the English nation, and many
foreign princes have thought themselves
honoured in being admitted into it.
The number of the knights is 26, inclu­
ding the king, and that is one thing that
enhances the value of it, that never any
more are admitted, whereas all or most
other orders have been so freely bes­
towed, that they have lost much of their
esteem by it. The famous warrior St.
George of Cappadocia, is made the patron
of this order; and every knight of it is
to wear as his badge, the image of St.
George on horseback, trampling on a
dragon, with his spear ready to pierce
him, the whole garnished with precious
stones appendant to a blue ribbon about
their necks; because that saint is said
to have slain such a monster, that in
his days ravaged the country.

They are also obliged to wear a gar­
ter on the left leg, set with pearls and
precious stones. having this motto, Honi
soit qui mal y pense, i. e. Shame to him that
evil thinks; without which two orna­
ments they are never to appear abroad;
and also king Charles the Ist. ordained, 
that every knight should always wear a
star of silver, embroidered on his cloak
or coat, with the escutcheon of St. George
within the garter, in the centre of it.
See St. George.

To GARTER [attacher les jartieres, 
F.] to tie or bind with a garter.

GASCONADE, a boasting or vaunting
of something very improbable; so ter­
med from the Gascoons, a people of Gas­
cony in France, said to be much addict­
ed to bragging and rhodomontade.

GASE-HOUND [agasæus, L.] a dog
that hunts by sight, so as to make excel­
lent sport with the fox and hare.

GASTLINESS [ʒaſtʒelicneſſe, of
ʒaʒt, a ghost] ghostlikeness, frightful­
ness of aspect.

GASTRICK Juice, the juice of the
stomach.

GASTROLATER [of γαστήρ and λα­
τρέυω, Gr. to worship] a glutton, a belly-­
god.

GASTRILOQUOUS [of γαστήρ, Gr.
the belly, and loqui L. to speak] speaking
out of the belly.

GATE [with Hunters] a term used
when they endeavour to find a hare by
his slot, &c.

GATE of the sea [with Sailors] is
when two ships
lie aboard one another in a wave or
billow, and by that means became rib
broken.

Sea GATE [with Sailors] is
when two ships
lie aboard one another in a wave or
billow, and by that means became rib
broken.

A GATHERING [ʒaðerunʒe, Sax.]
a collection; also what is collected at
one time.

GAUDINESS [of gaudium, L.] affect­
ed, gayness in apparel; shewiness.

GAVEL [ʒafel, Sax.] tribute, toll, 
or custom; yearly rent, payment or re­
venue.

GAVEL-kind [of ʒife eal cẏn, Sax.
i. e. given to all the kin] William the
conquerer, after passing thro' Kent to­
wards Dover, was suddenly surrounded
by the Kentish man, each of them bear­
ing a bough in his hand; but soon throw­
ing down their branches, they discove­
red their arms, proffering to give him
battle, if he would not let them enjoy
their ancient liberties and customs of
Gavel kind, &c. which he, then com­
pelled by his ill circumstances, swore
to do; and now they only of all Eng­
land, enjoy the ancient English liber­
ties.

Gavel-kind, signifies in law a custom, 
whereby the land of the father was
equally divided at his death among all
his sons, or the land of the brother at his
death, equally divided among all his
brethren, if he have no issue of his
own. This custom, with some diffe­
rence is still observed in Urchenfield in
Herefordshire, and elsewhere; and all
Gavel-kind land in Wales are made de­
scendable to his heirs, according to the



common law. In Gavelkind tho' the fa­
ther be hanged, the son shall inherit;
for their custom is, the Father to the
Bough, the Son to the Plough.

GAUNTNESS, leanness, the having
soft flesh.

GAYNESS, airiness, briskness, merri­
ness, &c.

GAZING [of ʒerean, Sax. or άγἀ­
ξωμαι Gr. to admire, according to Min­
shew] staring looking about, or earnest­
ly.

GAZETTE [some derive it of Gazet­
ta, a coin anciently current at Venice, 
the common price of the first news pa­
pers printed there; others from 
Izgad, Heb. a messenger] a news-paper
or book.

GAZONS are
sods or pieces of
fresh earth co­
vered with grass
about a foot
long, and half a
foot broad, cut
in form of a
wedge, to line the Parapet; if the earth
be fat and full of herbs, it is the better;
they are made so, that their solidity
makes a triangle; to the end, that being
mixt and beat with the rest of the earth
of the rampart, they may easily settle
together, and incorporate in a mass with
the rest of the rampart. The first bed
of Gazons is fixed with pegs of wood;
the second bed ought to be laid to bind
the former, that is, over the joints of
it, and so continued till the rampart is
finished; betwixt these beds there is
usually sown all sorts of binding herbs
to strengthen the rampart.

Image omitted.



In his GEERS [of ʒearcunʒe, Sax.
preparation] in order, furnished, dressed, 
ready prepared to act.

GEESE [of ʒoſ, Sax.] fowls well
known.

GELABLE [gelabilis, L.] capable of
being frozen or concealed.

GELIDNESS [geliditas, L.] coldness, 
frozenness.

GELDABLE [of gaelder, Dan.] capa­
ble of being gelded.

GELDED [of ʒẏlte, Sax, or gaelder,
Dan.] having the testicles or stones cut
out.

GELDING [ʒẏlte, Sax. or gaelder, 
Dan.] a gelded horse.

GELOSCOPY [of γέλως laughter, and
σχοπέω, Gr. to view or consider] a sort
of divination performed by means of
laughter; or a divining any person's qua­
lities or character, by observation of the
answer of his laughing.

GEMARA, the second part of the Ba­
bylonish Talmud of the Jews.

GEMATRIA [אידתמנ, Heb.] the first
kind of arithmetical cabala, in use among
the cabalistical Jews. An arithmetical
or geometrical manner of explaining
words; the first consists in taking the
numerical value of each letter in a word
or phrase, and giving it the sense of some
other word, whose numeral letters ta­
ken after the same manner make the
same sum.

GEMELLIPAROUS [gemellipara, L.]
bearing twins.

GEMELLUS [with Anatomists] a mus­
cle of the elbow, so called from its dou­
ble rise, viz. from the upper part of the
shoulder blade inwardly, and from the
upward back part of the shoulder-bone.

GEMINI [with Astronomers] twins
one of the signs of the zodiack, Castor
and Pollux, the sons of Jupiter and Le­
da. These are called Dioscuri, for they
were born and brought up in the land
of Laconia, where they chiefly shewed
themselves, and outdid all men in bro­
therly love. For they neither conten­
ded for command nor any thing else.
Jupiter therefore, that he might make
the memory of their unanimity immor­
tal, called them Gemini, i. e. Twins, and
assigned them a place among the stars.

To GEMM [of gemma, L.] to put forth
buds.

GEMONIÆ Scalæ, a place at Rome, 
to which the bodies of malefactors that
were executed, were dragged and
thrown down. It was in the Aventine, 
near the temple of Juno Argiva.

GEMOTE [ʒemot, Sax.] a court
holden on any occasion.

GENS-D'ARMES, these were formerly
only the French king's guards; but now
the companies of the King's guards de
Corps, among which the musqueteers
and light horse are reckoned. There is
a company of about 250 gentlemen of
which the king himself is the captain, 
one of his principal noblemen Lieute­
nant Captain, who are particularly cal­
led the Gens d'armes, who when the king
marches with all his houshold troops
close the march.

GENDER of Nouns [among Gramma­
rians] is founded on the difference of two
sexes male and female, and they are cal­
led from the Latins masculine and femi­
nine, and few languages have any more
genders but these two; but the Greeks
and Latins have another gender, which
the Latins call Neuter, that is as much
as to say Neither (masculine or feminine)
as Homo a man is masculine, and Mulier



a woman, is feminine, and Saxum a stone, 
is neuter.

This Gender is in Latin distinguished
by the articles hic, hæc and hoc, but it is
a difficult thing to distinguish the Gen­
der in the English tongue; and there is
scarce any language in the world but
the English tongue, that does not admit
of a difference of gender in its articles
or nouns; all the distinction that it has
consists in the pronouns, he, she, &c.
The adjectives of either Gender in the
English tongue have no difference in their
termination. As for instance, as the
adjectives good and white have no differ­
ence in the termination, whereas the La­
tins have bonus, bona, bonum, and the
French have bon masculine, and belle, 
feminine for good, and the Latins have
albus, alba, album, for white, and the
French blanc and blanchée.

GENDER [with Geometricians] geo­
metrical lines are distinguish'd into
genders, classes, or orders, according
to the number of the dimensions of an
equation, expressing that relation be­
tween the ordinates and the abscissæ.

GENERABLENESS, capableness of
being generated.

GENERALNESS, the generality, or
being general.

GENERANT [generans, L.] beget­
ting, generating, or bringing forth.

GENERATION [with Schoolmen] a
total change or conversion of a body
into a new one which contains no sen­
sible part or mark of its former state.

GENERATION [with Philosophers]
is defined to be a real action, whereby
a living creature begets another like it
of the same kind.

GENERATIVENESS [of generatif,
F. generativus, L.] generative or be­
getting quality or faculty.

GENEROSA [Law Term] a gentle­
woman, so that if a gentlewoman be
termed spinster in any original writ, 
appeal or indictment, she may abate or
quash the same.  L.

GENEROSITY [generositas, L.
generosité, F.]
generous disposition, bountifulness.

GENEROUSNESS [generositas, L.
generosité, F.]
generous disposition, bountifulness.

GENESIS [with Geometricians] the
forming of any plain or solid figure by
the motion of some line or surface is
called the Describent, and that accord­
ing to which the motion is made is cal­
led the Dirigent. Thus a right line
moved parallel to itself, is said to gene­
rate a Parallelogram, and a Parallelogram
turned about one of its sides as an axis, 
generates a Cylinder.

GENET [with Horsemen] a Turkish
bit, the curb of which is all of one
piece, and made like a large ring, and
made above the liberty of the tongue.

To ride with the legs a Genette, 
i. e. in the Genet or Spanish fashion, 
that is so short, that the spurs bear
upon the horse's flank.

GENETHLIACI [γενεθλιαχοὶ, Gr.] a­
strologers, persons who erect horosco­
pes, or pretend to tell persons what
shall befal them by means of the planet
which presided at their nativity.  L.

GENETHLIALOGY [genethlialogia, 
L. γενεθλιαλογία, Gr.] a casting of nati­
vities.

GENIAL [genialis, L.] a term ap­
ply'd by the ancients to certain deities, 
who (as they imagined) presided over
the affairs of generation.

GENIALES Dii, the four elements, 
the twelve signs, and the sun and moon
so called by the ancients.

GENALITY festivalness, merri­ 
ness at meat.

GENIALNESS festivalness, merri­ 
ness at meat.

GENII [of gignendo or generando, be­
getting, i. e. suggesting unto us thoughts]
the Heathens imagined that every per­
son was born with two Genii, proper
to him or her; these were also named
Dæmones; the one was good and favour­
able, and perswaded to honesty and vir­
tue, and in recompence of it procured
to him all manner of good things pro­
per to his estate; and the other was the
evil Genius, who was the cause of wick­
edness and mishap. That these Genii
were born and dy'd with them; that
they were of a middle nature between
gods and men; that they partook of
immortality from the one, and passions
from the other; and having bodies
fram'd of an aerial matter, inhabited
the vast region of the air, and acted as
mediators between God and men, and
were interpreters and agents of the
gods, communicated the wills of the
gods to men; they believed that the
good Genii rejoic'd at the good, and
were afflicted at the ill fortune of their
wards; that the evil Genii took a plea­
sure in persecuting men, and bringing
them evil tidings, which last were cal­
led Larvæ and Lemures. That they
very rarely appear'd to men, and when­
ever the former did, it was in favour of
some extraordinary virtue, &c.

And they also imagined, that king­
doms, cities and places had their pecu­
liar Genius's. The Genius of the Roman
state was painted with a Cornucopia in
one hand, and a dish full in the other, 
which was stretched forth on an altar.



The Heathens thought the Genii to be
of a middle nature between God and
men, and therefore imagined them to
be the sons of Jupiter and Terra.

They also reckoned all the stars into
the number of the Genii, and therefore
worshipped them, as the Jews did, in
the quality of angels. They painted
them in a different manner; sometimes
as a serpent, sometimes as boys and
girls, or as old men, but always with a
garland of palm-tree on their heads, 
whence this tree was called Arbor Ge­
nialis.

In some ancient medals, the Genius
of the emperor of Rome, was painted
as a man with a large dish of all sorts
of flowers in one hand, and a scourge
in the other, to express both rewards
and punishments.

They esteemed it unlawful to kill
any creature to their Genius on their
birth-day, because they thought it un­
decent to take away lives of creatures
on the same day that they received
their own.

The usual offerings to the Genii were
wine and flowers, incense and parched
corn. As men had their Genii, the wo­
men had their Junones, Goddesses, that
they imagined watch'd over and pro­
tected them. Brutus is said to have
seen his evil Genius in a monstrous and
horrid shape, the night before his fight, 
who being asked what he was, said, I
am thy evil Genius, Brutus, thou shalt
see me at Philippi; Brutus not at all dis­
composed, answered, I will see thee.
The next day he lost the battle, and
was slain at Philippi.

The Romans us'd to swear by the Ge­
nius of their emperor's, and pretended
to do it with a great deal of conscienci­
ousness and solemnity; and the punish­
ment of perjury in this case was very
ignominious; and Christians were of­
ten put to death for refusing this oath.

GENIOGRAPHY, considers or treats
of the nature of angels and intelligen­
ces.

GENITAL Bodies, the beginning of
all things, the elements.

GENITAL [in Medicine] something
relating to genitals.

GENITALS [Genitalia, L.] the
privy parts of a
male; viz. the spermatick vessels, the
Testes, and the Penis.

GENITORES [Genitalia, L.] the
privy parts of a
male; viz. the spermatick vessels, the
Testes, and the Penis.

GENITES such persons among the 
Jews, who descended
from Abraham, without any mixture of
foreign blood; or such who issued from
parents, who, during the Babylonish cap­
tivity, had not married with any Gen­
tile family.

GENITEI such persons among the 
Jews, who descended
from Abraham, without any mixture of
foreign blood; or such who issued from
parents, who, during the Babylonish cap­
tivity, had not married with any Gen­
tile family.

GENITIN [q. Junetin of June] is a
kind of apple that is earliest ripe of any
others.

GENITURA, a name by some given
to the semen, both of the male and
female.  L.

GENIUS is fabled to be the son of
Jupiter and Terra of human shape; was
thought to be that spirit of nature
which begets all things, assists at all ge­
nerations, and protects whatever is pro­
duc'd; and all things were agreeable to
him that tended to mirth and pleasure.

GENIUS [among the Ancients] was
used to signify a spirit either good or
evil; which they supposed did attend
upon every person; they also allow'd
Genii to each province, country, town, 
&c. also a man's natural disposition, 
inclination, &c.

GENIUS, the force or faculty of the
soul, considered as it thinks and judges;
also a natural talent or disposition to
one thing more than to another.

GENNET, an animal not much un­
like a cat, as well for bigness as shape;
but the nose and snout is long and slen­
der like a weesel: It is extraordinary
light and swift; and the skin as fine and
soft as down. There are two sorts of
them, the most common is grey, mot­
tled or full of black spots, the other as
black as jet, and as glossy as the finest
velvet, but speckled with red, and their
smell is much like that of a Civit-cat.

GENTNESS [of gentilis, L.] neat­
ness, spruceness, fineness in dress.

GENTLENESS, meekness, mildness, 
tameness, civility, &c.

GENTLY, softly, mildly, tamely, 
meekly, tenderly.

GENTLEMAN [gentilhomme, F. ge­
nerosus, L.] is properly, according to
the ancient notion, one of perfect
blood, who had four descents of genti­
lity both by his father and mother, 
viz. whose father's grandfather, his
great grandfather, his grandfather, and
his father on both sides were all gen­
tlemen.

Gentlemen have their beginning ei­
ther from blood, as before, as they are
born of parents of worth; or for hav­
ing done something in peace or war, 
for which they are worthy to bear
arms, and be accounted gentlemen.

Formerly such gentlemen had many
privileges, as first, that if one gentle­
man detracted from another, combat
was allow'd; but if a peasant or mean
person did so, he had a remedy in law.



2. In crimes of an equal nature a
gentleman was punished more favour­
ably than a peasant, &c.

3. Gentlemen might expert a peculiar
honour and respect to be paid them by
mean persons.

4. The evidence of a gentleman was
accounted more authentick than that
of a peasant.

5. In chusing of magistrates, &c. the
vote of a gentleman was preferr'd be­
fore that of an ignoble person.

6. A gentleman was to be excused
from services, impositions and duties.

7. A gentleman condemned to death, 
was not to be hanged but beheaded;
nor was his examination to be taken
with torture.

8. It was a punishable crime to take
down the coat armour of a gentleman, 
to deface his monument, or to offer vi­
olence to the ensign of any noble per­
son deceased.

9. A gentleman was not to accept a
challenge from a peasant; because
there was not a parity in their condi­
tions.

The ancient Saxons admitted none to
the degree of gentlemen that liv'd by
trades or buying or selling; except
merchants and those that follow husban­
dry; which was always esteem'd a cre­
ditable way of livelihood, and prefer­
able to trading to sea.

The reason why those that are stu­
dents in the inns of court are esteem'd
gentlemen is, because anciently none
but the sons of gentlemen were admit­
ted into them.

But the students of law, grooms of
his majesty's palace, sons of peasants
made priests or canons; or those that
have receiv'd dignity in the schools, or
borne offices in the city, tho' they are
stiled gentlemen, yet they have no right
to the coat armour.

If a man be a gentleman by office
only, and lose that office, then he also
loses his gentility.

In our days all are accounted gentle­
men that have money; and if he has
no coat of arms, the king of arms can
sell him one.

GENTLEMANLY like a gen­
tleman, after
the manner of a gentleman.

GENTLEMANLIKE like a gen­
tleman, after
the manner of a gentleman.

GENTLEMEN of the Chapel, officers
in number thirty two, whose duty and
attendance is in the royal chapel; of
which twelve are priests, and the other
twelve are call'd Clerk; of the Chapel, 
who assist in the performance of divine
service.

GENTLEMANRY 
[of gentilitas, q. d. bona
gente, L. Man, Sax. and ry or ſcip, 
Sax. termination] the dignity of a gen­
tleman.

GENTLEMANSHIP 
[of gentilitas, q. d. bona
gente, L. Man, Sax. and ry or ſcip, 
Sax. termination] the dignity of a gen­
tleman.

GENTLEWOMANSHIP, the dignity
of a gentlewoman.

GENUINENESS [of genuinus, L.
and neſſe, Sax.] naturalness, true­
ness, realness, as to what it is said or
taken to be, or appears to be.

GENUS [among Logicians] is the
first of the universal ideas. And is 
when the idea is so common, that it
extends to other ideas, which are also
universal, as the Quadrilater is Genus
with respect to the Parallelogram and
Trapezia; Substance is Genus with re­
spect to Substance extended, which is
called Body, and the substance which
thinks, which is called Mind.

GENUS Summum [with Logicians] is
that which holds the uppermost class
in its predicament; or it is that which
may be divided into several species, 
each whereof is a genus in respect to
other species placed below.  L.

Subaltern GENUS [with Logicians] is
that, which being a Medium between
the highest genus and the lowest species, 
is sometimes considered as a genus, and
sometimes as a species.  L.

GENUS Remotum [with Logicians] is
when there is another genus between it
and its species.  L.

GENUS Proximum [in Logick] the
next or nearest genus, is where the
species is immediately under it, as man
under animal.  L.

GENUS [in Algebra] this art by the
ancients was distributed into two genera, 
logistick and specious.

GENUS [with Anat.] an assemblage
or system of similar parts, distributed
throughout the body, as the genus ner­
vosum, the nerves so considered.

GENUS [in Botany] is a system or
assemblage of plants agreeing in some
one common character, in respect to
the structure of certain parts, where­
by they are distinguish'd from all plants.

GENUS [in Musick] a certain man­
ner of subdividing the principles of
melody, i. e. the consonant intervals
into their concinnous parts.

GENUS [with Rhetoricians] is distri­
buted into demonstrative, deliberative and
judiciary.

The Demonstrative GENUS or Kind, to this belongs Panegyricks, Genethliacks, 
Epithalamiums, funeral Harangues, &c.

Deliberative GENUS or kind, to this
belong persuasions, dissusions, commen­
dations, &c.



Judiciary GENUS or kind, to this
belong accusations, defences.

GEOCENTRICK [of γῆ the earth, 
and χέντρον, Gr. a centre] the earth be­
ing supposed to be the centre.

GEOCENTRICALLY, according to
that system of the world, that supposes
the earth to be the centre of the uni­
verse.

GEODÆTICAL [of γῆ and δαέω, Gr.
to measure] pertaining to surveying.

GEODÆTICALLY, by way of sur­
vey of the earth.

GEOGRAPHICALLY, according to
the art of geography.

GEOMANCY [γεωμαντεία of γῆ and
μαντεία, Gr. divination] a kind of divi­
nation performed by a number of little
points or dots made on paper at ran­
dom; and considering the various fi­
gures and lines which those points re­
present, and thence forming a judg­
ment of futurity, and deciding any
question proposed.

GEOMANTICALLY, according to
the science of geomancy.

GEOMETRICALLY [of geometrice, 
L. geometriquement, F. γεομετριχος, Gr.]
according to the geometrical art.

GEOMETRICAL Line, is that
wherein the relation of the abscissæ to
the semi-ordinates may be expressed by
an algebraick equation.

GEOMETRICAL Proportion, is a si­
militude or identity of ratio's, as 8, 
4, 30 and 15 are in geometrical pro­
portion.

GEOMETRICAL Progression, a series
of quantities in continued geometrical
proportion, i. e. increasing in the same
ratio, as 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, and so on.

GEOMETRICAL Construction of an
Equation, is the contriving and drawing
lines and figures, whereby to demon­
strate the equation, theorem or canon
to be geometrically true.

GEOMETRY [γεομετρία of γῆ the
earth, and μετρέω, Gr. to measure] geo­
metry originally signified the art of
measuring the earth, or any distances
or dimensions on or within it; but it is
now used for the science of quantity, 
extension or magnitude abstractedly
considered, without any regard to matter.

It is very probable that it had its first
rise in Egypt, where the river Nile
every year overflowing the country, 
and leaving it covered with mud, laid
men under a necessity to distinguish
their lands one from another by the
consideration of their figure; and to
be able also to measure the quantity of
it, so that each man after the fall of
the waters might have his portion of
ground allotted and laid out to him.
After which, it is very likely, a far­
ther contemplation of those draughts
and figures, helped them to discover
many excellent and wonderful pro­
perties belonging to them, which spe­
culation continually was improving, 
and still is to this day.

Out of Egypt Thales brought it into
Greece, and there it received its chiefest
perfection. For the geometry of the
ancients was contain'd within narrow
bounds, and extended only to right
lines and curves of the first kind or
order; whereas new lines of infinite
orders are received into geometry, 
which orders are defined by equations, 
involving the ordinates and abscisses of
curves.

The subject of Geometry is the length, 
breadth and height of all things. It is
divided into Speculative and Practical.
The former treats of the properties
of lines and figures, such as Euclid's Ele­
ments, Apollonius's Conicks, &c. and the
latter shews how to apply these specu­
lations to use in life.

Geometry may also be divided into
these three subordinate parts. Altime­
try, which is the art of measuring
strait lines. Planimetry, or the art of
measuring of surfaces. Stereometry, the
art of measuring solids or bodies.

Geometry is painted as a lady with a
sallow face, clad in a green mantle, 
fringed with silver, and holding a silver
wand in her right hand.

GEOMETRY, is the science or doc­
trine of extension or extended things, 
viz. lines, surfaces and solids, which
discovers the magnitudes or greatness
of things precisely, with their capaci­
ties, &c.

Theoretical GEOMETRY,  is a science
which treats of magnitude or continued
quantity, with its properties considered 
abstractedly, without any relation to
material beings, it contemplates the
property of continuity, and demon­
strates the truth of general proportions, 
called Theorems.

Practical GEOMETRY, is the me­
thod of applying theoretical to practice;
as the measuring of land or solid bo­
dies, navigation, fortification, dialling.

Elementary GEOMETRY is that
which is employ'd in the consideration
of right lines and plain surfaces and
solids generated from them.

GEOPONICS [γεωπονιχά, of γῆ the
earth, and πόνος, Gr. labour] books
treating of husbandry.



GEORGE [of Ιεωργὸς, Gr. an husband­
man] a proper name of men; the most
noted of that name was George of Cap­
padocia, a tribune or colonel under the
emperor Dioclesian, who is said to have
killed a huge serpent in Africa, to whom
a virgin was exposed to be devoured.
This champion by some is taken for
our St. George, the patron saint of En­
gland, of whose chivalry and exploits
so many romantick stories are told.

St. GEORGE, the patron of England, 
some say, was a famous warrior of Cap­
padocia, who, after he had exercis'd
his valour in the wars, laid down his
life for the Christian faith, on which
account he was honoured of all the
Christian world, and many churches
were erected in honour of him, and he
became at length to be the patron saint
of England. This St. George, accord­
ing to the legend, did many brave ex­
ploits in his life-time, and after his 
death is said to have appeared several
times in the wars undertaken against
the infidels in the Holy Land, and to
have fought on the side of the Christi­
ans. And the devotion of Justinian, 
introduc'd him into the calendar; and
that of Robert de Oily, built him a
church in the castle at Oxford; and
king Edward III built him a chapel at
Windsor. However, Gelasius, bishop of
Rome, condemn'd the legend of St.
George as heretical and ridiculous; and 
the synod of Ariminum declared the suf­
ferings of George apocryphal, in that 
it was set forth by hereticks.

Neither the time or place of his
martyrdom are agreed on by writers.
Venerable Bede says, that the 9th of
the Calends of May, or the 23d of April
was the birth day of George the martyr, 
who was eminent for miracles, and
suffered under Dacianus, a potent king
of Persia, that reigned over seventy
kings; but no such person as this Daci­
anus is to be found in history. But
Bede adds, that his sufferings are reck­
oned among the apocryphal writings.

As for the Arian martyr, the perse­
cutor of St. Athanasius, and the usur­
per of the Alexandrian see, pope Zacha­
ry, built a church for him, and placed
the head of George there, tho' the body
had been intirely burnt to ashes 400
years before. And it seems as if this
eminent martyr was not known in the
world till 300 years after his death.
William of Malmsbury makes the place
of his martyrdom at Rama, if (as he
says) we may give credit to same;
and William of Tyre says, he found a 
resting-place at Lydda, so that nothing
of certainty is to be come at concerning
this renowned saint; and especially his
story of killing the dragon, which some
understand allegorically, to mean fight­
ing against the dragon of heresy, &c.
And indeed this allegory of fighting
with and killing the dragon hath been
taken up by other nations, which had
no particular relation to any George, as
the order of the Dragon, instituted by
the emperor Sigismund, among the
Hungarians, on account of his successes
in battles against the Turks, the dragons
of schism and heresy that devoured re­
ligion. And since we cannot find out
patron St. George, I shall conclude the
enquiry with the following lines:

St. George to save a maid the Dragon slew, 
A pretty tale, if all that's told be true:
Some say there are no Dragons, and 'tis said,
There was no George; I wish there was
a Maid.

GEOSCOPY [of γῆ and σχοπέω, Gr.
to view] a knowledge of the nature and
qualities of the earth or soil, obtained
by viewing and considering it.

GEOTICK [of γῆ the earth, Gr.] a
sort of magick performed by the assi­
stance of a Dæmon, the same as Geomancy.

A GERMAIN, a kind of long and
pretty large pear.

GERMAN [germanus, L.] come of
the stock.

Cousin GERMANS, are cousins in the
first or nearest degree, being the chil­
dren of brother or sister.

GEROCOMICA, physick prescribing
diet for old men.

GERONTES [of γέρων, Gr. an old
man] magistrates in Greece, the same at
Sparta that the Areopagites were at
Athens.

GERUNDS, in the English Tongue, 
Gerunds and participles are the same in
termination, and have no other distinc­
tion but the Particle and the Noun-sub­
stantive, which always follow and pre­
cede the one the other: As loving is
both a participle and a gerund, as a 
loving Man, loving is here a participle;
in loving him, loving is a gerund.

GERYON [γηρύων, Gr. i. e. the baw­
ler] as the poets tell us, this Geryon was
a monstrous giant that had three heads.
But the truth of the matter is, there
was a city in the Euxine sea, called Tri­
carenia, Τριχαρηνία, Gr. i. e. three heads]
where Geryon dwelt in great reputation, 
and abounding in wealth, and, among
the rest, had an admirable herd of



oxen: Hercules coming to drive them
away slew Geryon who opposed him;
and they that saw him drive away the
oxen, admired at it, and to those that
enquired concerning the matter, they
answered, that Hercules had driven a­
way the oxen of Tricarenian Geryon;
from which some imagine that Geryon
had three heads: And this gave birth
to the fiction. Palæphatus.

GESTUOSITY [gestuositas, L.] apish­
ness in gestures.

GETTINGS [of ʒetan, Sax. to get]
acquisitions; things gotten by labour, 
traffick, &c.

GHASTLINESS, ghostliness, fright­
ful aspect.

GHASTLY [ʒaſtlic, Sax.] like a
ghost.

GHOSTLINESS [ʒaſtʒelic and
neſſe, Sax.] likeness to a ghost; also
spiritualness, in opposition to carnalness.

A GIANT [ʒiʒant, Sax. gigas, L.
of γίγας, Gr. geant, F.] a person of a
large and uncommon size and stature.

Of the Giants that were sown.

It is related that Cadmus, after he
had slain the dragon in Lerna, taking
away his teeth, sowed them in his own
land, and that from them armed men
sprung up. But the truth is, Cadmus, 
by birth a Phœnician, had, among other
things (as kings are wont to have)
many elephants teeth; and being about
to undertake an expedition with his
brother Phanix, to fight for the king­
dom: Draco being a king of Thebes, 
and the son of Mars, he being slain, 
Cadmus seiz'd on the kingdom. Draco's
friends made war against him, and his
children also rose up against him; who
being inferior, having made spoil of
Cadmus's wealth and elephants teeth, 
returned home, and one was dispers'd
one way, and another another; some
to Attica, some to Peloponnesus, some
to Phocis, and others to Locris: From
which places they issuing out, made
war against Thebes, and were stout
warriours, after they had carried off
Cadmus's elephants teeth, and fled away, 
the Thebans said that Cadmus had brought
this calamity upon them, by slaying
Draco, from whose teeth being sown, 
many stout and brave warriours sprung
up against them. And this was the
original of that fiction. Palæphatus.

GIANTS, are persons of a very
large and uncommon size and stature;
the giants spoken of in the scripture
are differently understood by expositors;
some have imagined that they were
only persons of a very large bulk and
stature of which there were whole
nations, and not a single person pick'd
out of a great number; others suppose
them to have been a warlike, fierce, 
cruel and barbarous people who were
prone to depredations, and that the
monstrous and gigantick stature ascri­
bed to them is to be understood not
literally but according to the hyperbo­
lically way of expression used by the
eastern nations.

GIANTESS [une geante, F.] a gigan­
tick woman.

GIBBEROSITY [gibberositas, L.]
crump-shoulderedness, crookedness in
the back.

GIBLE-Gabble, prating, nonsensical
foolish talk.

GIBBOUSNESS [gibbositas, L.] the
bunchingness or sticking out most com­
monly on the back.

GIBBOUS solid [with Mathematici­
ans] is that which is comprehended of
gibbous superficies, and is either a
sphere or various. A sphere is a gib­
bous body absolutely round and globu­
lar.

A various GIBBOUS Body, is a body
which is comprehended by various su­
perficies, and a circular base, and is
either a cone or a cylinder.

GIDDINESS [ʒiððicʒneſſe, Sax.]
inconsiderateness, rashness; also verti­
ginousness.

GIFTED [of ʒift, Sax.] endowed, 
qualified, furnished with gifts or en­
dowments, as a gifted brother.

A GIG, a wanton woman; also a
horn-top for boys to whip.

GIGANTICKNESS [of γιγάντιχος, 
Gr.] giant-like size.

GIGGLING [probably of ʒeaʒliſc, 
Sax. gichelen, Du.] laughing out, wan­
tonly, childishly or sillily.

GILD [of ʒilðan, Sax. to pay] a con­
tribution; also a society or fraternity.
In popish times there were many gilds
in most parish churches, by the contri­
butions of several persons, who con­
tributed so much annually for the main­
tenance of a priest to say so many mas­
ses, &c. on such certain days, and for
themselves particularly, and also for
wax-tapers and other necessaries in that
service. These gilds were by several
princes in the popish times endow'd
with particular privileges set forth in
various charters. And in old law it
signified a mulct or fine for an offence.
This practice is said to have taken its
rise from the Danish kings who when
they had the government of England, 
ordered that every freeman of 14 years



of age should find sureties for his keep­
ing the peace, or be sent to prison;
upon which neighbours to the number
of 10 entred into an association and be­
came sureties for each other, and for
defraying any charge that such an asso­
ciation might expose them to, they
raised a common stock. This came af­
terwards to be applied to any society, 
civil or religious.

To GILD [of ʒẏlðan, Sax.] to wash
plate, or do over with gold, &c.

GILDER, one who does over with
gold, &c.

GILGUL HAMMETHIM [לונלנ
כוהומד, Heb. i. e. the rolling of the
dead] the Jews have a tradition, that
at the coming of the Messiah all the Is­
raelites, in whatsoever part of the
world buried, shall rise in the Holy
Land, and that they shall roll thither
from their tombs under ground.

GIMP, a sort of mohair thread co­
vered with the same, or a twist for se­
veral works formerly in use.

GIN [a contraction of Genevre, F.] a
spirit made of juniper-berries.

GINGERNESS, tenderness, niceness.

GINGLING [q. d. tingling, probably
of tinnitus, L.] a noise like that of bells, 
&c. also chiming in sound.

GINSENG [in Tartary] a wonderful
plant; which in effect makes the whole
Materia Medica for people of condition, 
being too dear for the common people.

GIRASOL [of girare and sol, L.] the
sun-stone, a precious stone of a whi­
tish, shining colour, which when placed
towards the sun, sends forth a golden
lustre.

GIRDERS [in Architecture] the lar­
gest pieces of timber in a floor, whose
ends are usually fastened into the sum­
mers or breast-summers, and the joists
are usually framed into the girders.

Queen's GIRDLE [in France] an anci­
ent duty or tax intended for the main­
tenance of the queen's houshold at the
rate of 3 deniers upon every muid of
wine, and 6 upon each Queue at Paris.

Christians of the GIRDLE, the Chris­
tians of Asia, and particularly those of
Syria and Mesopotamia, who are almost
all Nestorians or Jacobites; are so call'd
on account of their wearing a broad
leathern girdle by the order of Mota­
vachel, 10th califf of the Abassines. A.C.
856.

GIRDLER [of ʒẏrðle, Sax. a gir­
dle] a maker of girdles, but now chief­
ly a maker of bridles for horses, &c.

GIRLE [Hunting Term] a roe-buck of
2 years old.

GIRDLERS, were
incorporated August 6.
anno 1448. They are
a master, 3 wardens, 
24 assistants and 84 li­
very-men, &c. Their
armorial ensigns are
per Fess azure and or a
pale counter-changed, 
each piece of the 1st, charged with a
gridiron of the 2d. The crest is the
demy-effigy of St. Laurence, holding in
his right hand a gridiron, in the left a
book, the first of the colour, the latter
of the metal aforesaid. The motto, 
Give thanks to God. Their hall is in
Basinghall-street.

Image omitted.



GIRLISH, like a girl, after the man­
ner of a girl.

GIRLISHNESS, girlish disposition or
behaviour.

GIRNING, grinning.

GIRON [in Heraldry] a gore or
triangular figure, having
a long sharp point like the step of a
stair-case, and ending in the centre of
the escutcheon.

GUIRON [in Heraldry] a gore or
triangular figure, having
a long sharp point like the step of a
stair-case, and ending in the centre of
the escutcheon.

GIRONNE [of giran,
F. a lap]
as if you suppose one sit­
ting, his knees being posi­
ted somewhat asunder, and
a traverse line being ima­
gined drawn from one to
the other, that with the two thighs
make a giron, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



GIRONNY [of giran,
F. a lap]
as if you suppose one sit­
ting, his knees being posi­
ted somewhat asunder, and
a traverse line being ima­
gined drawn from one to
the other, that with the two thighs
make a giron, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



GIVEN [of ʒifan, Sax.] bestowed, 
afforded, produced.

GIVEN to, propense or addicted to.

GIZZARD. See Ghizzard.

GLABRITY [glabritas, L.] smooth­
ness, bareness of hair.

GLACIS of a Cornish, [in Architec­
ture] an easy, imperceptible slope in the
cymaise of a cornish, to promote the
descent and draining off the water.

GLADNESS [ʒlaðneſſe, Sax.] joy, 
mirth.

GLADSOM [ʒlaðſome, Sax.] mer­
ry, joyous.

GLADIATORS [among the Romans]
sword-players, who fought in the Cir­
censian games, and at the funerals of
great men, one against another, even
to the loss of their lives; either to di­
vert the people, or to pacify the ghosts
of their kindred. These exercises in
the amphitheatres were very extrava­
gant, for according to the greatness of
him that gave these pastimes to the peo­
ple, there were to be seen many hun­
dred combatants appearing upon the
sand one after another. And some em­



perors gave 1000, others 10000 fen­
cers.

These fencers were for the most part
slaves, who were sent to fencing-­
masters to be instructed and prepared
for this exercise.

Some of them fought only with a na­
ked sword in the right hand and a buck­
ler in the left, others appeared com­
pleatly armed; some march'd to the
encounter blindfold, others fought with
a trident and a net to entangle their
adversary, and if any was caught in the
net, it was not possible to escape death.

He that overcame was wont to kill
his adversary, if the spectators did not
save his life with a bended thumb lifted
up, by which they made known their
pleasure; and when they opened the
thumb strait, it was a sign of condem­
nation.

Sometimes decay'd noblemen to ob­
tain the emperors favour would engage
in these combats. He who came off
conqueror, if a freeman was crowned
with a branch of a palm-tree, or if he
were a slave was presented with a
wand call'd rudis, in token of his being
made a freeman.

Nero the emperor ordered 400 sena­
tors and 610 Roman knights to fight for
his diversion.

Theodoret king of the Ostrogoths in
Italy utterly abolished these gladiatory
exercises Anno Christi 500.

For the training up persons for these
exercises there were schools erected, 
where captives, fugitives, servants and
notorious offenders, were instructed in
order for these divertisements.

GLANDS [glandes, L. and F.] flesh-­
kernels, a sort of substance in an ani­
mal body of a peculiar nature, the use
of which is to separate the fluids or
some particular humour from the mass
of blood.

Conglomerate GLAND an irregular
assmblage
of several simple glands, ty'd together
and wrapt up under one common mem­
brane.

Compound GLAND an irregular
assmblage
of several simple glands, ty'd together
and wrapt up under one common mem­
brane.

Vascular GLANDS, are only clusters
of little vessels, which unite together
from the canal or excretory duct, 
through which their secreted juice is
discharged.

Vesicular GLANDS, are assemblages
of vesiculæ, communicating with each
other, and all terminating in two or
three larger vessels by the prolongation
pf which the excretory duct is form'd.

GLANDULA [with Anatomists] a 
kernel in the flesh,
a soft, fat, spungy substance of a pecu­
liar nature, serving to strengthen the
vessels, to suck up superfluous humours
and to moisten other parts.

GLANDULE [with Anatomists] a 
kernel in the flesh,
a soft, fat, spungy substance of a pecu­
liar nature, serving to strengthen the
vessels, to suck up superfluous humours
and to moisten other parts.

GLANDULA Guidonis [Anat.]a kind
of swelling like a glandula, soft, move­
able without roots, and separate from
the parts about it.

GLANDULÆ Sebacea [with Anato­
mists] a large number of glands lying
under the skin of the auricula of the
ear, and which, because they separate
a greasy matter, are so called by Valsal­
va, the first discoverer.  L.

GLANDULÆ Myrtiformes [with Ana­
tomist] the contraction of the fibres of
the broken hymen upon the first coi­
tion.  L.

GLANDULE [glandula, L.] a ker­
nel in the flesh.

GLANDULES Adventitious [with
Surgeons] are those kernels which are
sometimes under the arm-holes, in the
neck, as the king's-evil, &c.

Perpetual GLANDULES [with Sur­
geons, &c.]
are the Pancreas or sweet-bread, the
Glandula pinealis, &c.

Natural GLANDULES [with Sur­
geons, &c.]
are the Pancreas or sweet-bread, the
Glandula pinealis, &c.

GLANDULOSA Tunica Intestinorum 
[with Anatomists] small glandules, or
kernels, of which the innermost coat
of the intestines or guts is full; whose
use is to soak in the strained juice call'd
chyle, and to distribute it to the lacteal
veins,  L.

GLANDULOSA Corpora [with Anat.]
two glandules or kernels, lying under
the seminal bladders, near the common
passage of the semen and urine, which
they serve to lubricate or make slippe­
ry; also affording a kind of vehicle to
the seminal matter.  L.

GLANDULOUSNESS, fullness of
glandules.

GLANDULOUS [glandulosus, L.]
full of kernels; also full of mast.

GLANDULOUS Flesh [with Anat.]
is such flesh as that of the almonds of
the ears, breasts, sweet-breads, &c.

GLARING [prob. of esclairant, F.]
dazling, blazing out; apparent.

GLASIERS were in­
corporated in the reign
of queen Elizabeth.
They consist of one
master, 2 wardens, 21
assistants 75 livery
men, &c. the fine for
which is 3 l. 6 s. 8 d.
Their arms are argent
2 grossing irons salterways between 4
closing nails sable on a chief Gules, a
lion of England; crest a lion's head eras'd



or between two wings Azure, suppor­
ters 2 fiscals (or Boys) each holding a
torch proper. The motto, Lucem
tuam da nobis, O Deus, they have no
hall since the fire, but meet at Lorimers
hall.

Image omitted.



To GLASE [of ʒlæſ, Sax. glass] to
do over with glass; also to set a gloss
upon linen, silk, &c. also to make glass
lights for windows.

GLASS [ʒlæſ, Sax.] an artificial
transparent substance, said to have been
first invented by the inhabitants of Si­
don; the first maker of it in Rome was in
Tiberius's time. It was first brought to
England in the year 662, by Renault, a
foreign bishop.

In Anno 1610, the Sophy emperor of
Persia, sent to the king of Spain six glasses
that were malleable, i. e. would not
break by being hammered.

An artist in Rome, in the time of Ti­
berius, made vessels of such a temper, 
that being thrown on the ground, they
did not break, but only bruise, which
the author with a hammer smoothed
and straightened again before the em­
peror; but the emperor is said to have
put him to death for fear glass should
detract from gold or silver; and they
should lose their repute.

GLASS is a transparent, brittle, fac­
titious body, made of fine sand and ashes
of Kaly and Fern; the ashes of which
herbs are most proper, because they a­
bound with abundance of fixt salts, 
which are very porous or spongy; or of
a sort of stone called Tarso, found in some
parts of Italy, these ashes being put into
a violent fire, their corners are consum­
ed by it, and by this means the surface
of their parts are made so smooth and
even, that they touch in more points
than they did before, and afford a free
passage to the beams of light, and can­
not be rendered dark and opaque with­
out the mixture of some foreign mat­
ter.

Chymists affirm that glass is the ulti­
mate process of all productions wrought
by fire and that all bodies in the universe
may be reduced to glass.

Glass is also made of flints and other
such like materials.

GLASS Drops or Bubbles, are small
parcels of coarse green glass taken out
of a pot in fusion at the end of an iron
pipe, and being exceeding hot, are dropt
into a vessel of cold water, and let to
lie there rill they are cold. These are
called Prince Rupert's Drops, and do ex­
hibit this surprising phænomenon, that
as soon as you break off the least bit
from the stem or piked end of them
the whole bulk of the drop, or great
part of it flies into small atoms or dust
with a brisk noise.

GLASS of Antimony [with Chymists]
the most fixt and hardest matter of that
mineral, that is found at the bottom of
the crucible cleared from the fæces or
dregs.

Jealous GLASS, a sort of wrinkled
window glass, of such a quality, that a
person cannot distinctly see what is done
on the other side of it, but yet admits
the light to pass thro' it. It is cast in
a mould, and is composed all over its
surface with oblong circular figures, in
 the form of a weaver's shuttle, con­
cave on one side and convex on the
other.

Hour GLASSES were first made by the
Sicilians.

GLASSY [ʒlæſſicʒ, Sax.] of the
nature of, or like glass.

GLAVERING, fawning, flattering.

GLAUCUS [according to the Poets]
was a fisherman, who being a fishing, 
as he caught the fish he threw them on
the bank, and they had no sooner tasted
of an herb but they leapt into the sea
again; which Glaucus perceiving, tasted
of the herb himself, and presently leapt
into sea, and became one of the gods of
the sea: Palæphatus tells us, that the
reality of the fiction is, Glaucus was a
fisherman of Anthedon, and an excellenr
swimmer, whom the inhabitants of the
city, seeing him plunge himself (dive)
under water, and by and by to rise in
another place, and not having seen him
for some days afterwards, till at length
he shewed himself to them, and some
of his domesticks asking him where he
had been all that time, he inventing a
lye, reply'd he had been in the sea. And
at the same time having caught fishes
and put them in a certain place, when
the citizens wanted fish, and no other
fisherman durst venture to go a fishing
on account of the tempest that then ra­
ged, he bid the citizens ask for what fish
they pleas'd and he would procure them
for them: which he doing, they gave it
out that Glaucus was a sea-god. But
at length in swimming he was kill'd by
a sea monster, whereupon he never be­
ing seen to come out of the sea again, 
they gave it out that he dwelt in it, and
had his residence there.

GLAYMOUSNESS, muddiness, clam­
miness.

GLAZED [of ʒlaſen, Sax.] done
with glass; also having a gloss set upon
it.



GLEAMING [ʒleomian, Sax.] shin­
ing or casting forth beams of light.

GLEANING [prob. of glanant, F.] ga­
thering ears of corn after reaping.

GLEBOSE [glebosus, L. of gleba] full
of clods.

GLEBOUSNESS [glebositas, L.]
fulness of clods.

GLEBOSITY [glebositas, L.]
fulness of clods.

GLEEFULNESS, fulness of joy, mirth
&c.

GLIBNESS [prob. of ʒliðenð and
neſſe, Sax.] slipperiness.

GLITTERING [ʒlitenunʒ, Sax.]
shining, bright sparkling.

GLOARINESS [gloeren, Du.] fulness
of gloar fat.

GLOARY, a fulsome fat.

GLOBATED [globatus, L.] made
round or like a ball.

GLOBE [Hieroglyphica1ly] represented
the world. On this globe were delinea­
ted the signs of the zodiack, the signs
and a multitude of stars, and was sup­
ported on the back of a man upon his
knees, which were covered with his
long garment; intimating that the world
was upheld by the power of God, who
seems to be covered to the lower ranks
of creatures, with divers emblems and
dark shadows.

Terrestrial GLOBE, is one which has
all the lines and principal places of the
earth, set on it after the manner that
geographers have invented for the more
easy shewing or finding the bearing and
distance of places, the length and short­
ness of days in every climate, kingdom
and particular places, and various other
matters.

The Celestial GLOBE has describ'd on
it the general lines or circles, which
astronomers have imagined in the hea­
vens, and then in the proper places of
those lines and circles, the several con­
stellations, &c. are set down according
to the general systems or observations
of particular persons, by which may be
known what and when any star or num­
ber of stars, are above the horizon of
the place where a person is, and the
time of eclipses, &c.

They are made some solid of wood, 
others hollow of brass, &c. but most
commonly of paste-board and paper
plaistered over, and set into frames
with horizons and brass meridians, &c.

GLOBOSENESS [globositas, L.] round­ 
ness in form, globular form.

GLOBULAR [globularis, L.] round 
like a globe.

GLOBULAR Chart, is the represen­
tation of the surface, or some part of
the surface of the terraqueous globe
upon a plain, wherein the parallels of
latitude are circles nearly concentrick;
the meridians curves bending towards
the poles, and the rhumb lines also
curves.

GLOBULARNESS [of globularis, L.]
the same as globoseness.

GLOMERATED [glomeratus, L.]
wound round in a bottom, as yarn, &c.

GLOMEROUS [glomerosus, L.] round
like a bottom of thread, yarn, &c.

GLOOMINESS [of ʒlomunʒ, Sax.]
duskiness, darkness, cloudiness.

GLORIA PATRI i. e. glory be to the
father. A set form of praise to the
holy Trinity, appointed by the church
to be repeated after many parts of the
liturgy, and particularly the psalms; so
called because when the offices are
performed in Latin, those are the two
first words of that Hymn, Conclusion or
Doxology, as it is frequently called.
There have been great contests about
the antiquity, manner of wording and
other particulars of this hymn; some
contending that it was used in the
apostles time; but tis generally allowed
to have remained as a token of Ortho­
doxy, ever since it was appointed by
pope Damasus.

GLORIA in Excelsis, [i. e. Glory in
the highest] a kind of hymn also rehear­
sed in the divine office.  L.

GLORIOUSNESS [l'estat glorieux, 
F.] glorious estate, quality, &c.

GLORY [in a Stage Play] is a repre­
sentation of heaven.

A GLOSS [glossa, L. γλώσσημα, Gr.]
a comment, exposition or interpretation;
also a literal translation or interpretati­
on of an author in another language, 
word for word; also a shiningness or
lustre set upon silk, cloth, stuff, &c.

GLOSSING upon [of glossare, L. glos­
ser, F.] commenting briefly upon.

GLOSSINESS [of glessen, Teut.] shi­
ningness, shewiness.

GLOSSOCATOCHOS [of γλὢσσα, the
tongue, and χατέχω, Gr. to repress] an
instrument to repress the tongue.

GLOSSOCOMON [of γλὢσσα and χο­
μέω Gr. to guard] a cradle for a broken
leg or thigh.

GLOSSOGRAPHICAL, according to
the art of glossography.

To throw the GLOVE, a practise or
ceremony anciently used, being a chal­
lenge to a single combat.

GLOVER [ʒlofere, Sax.] a maker
of gloves.

GLOZING [of ʒleſunʒ, Sax.] flat­
tering, colloguing, &c.



GLOVERS, they
were incorporated a
master, 4 wardens, 
and assistants not ex­
ceeding 24, and the li­
very are 12 l. Their
arms party per fess
Sable and Argent, a
pale counterchang'd
on every piece of the first, a ram sprin­
gant of the second. Their hall is in
Beech-lane.

Image omitted.



GLUINESS [of glutinosus, L.] sticky
quality.

GLUISH [glutinosus, L.] sticking, 
clammy, gluey nature or quality.

GLUTINAMENT, paste or gluish
matter,  L.

GLUTINATIVENESS [of glutina­
tio, L. or glutineux, F.] gluey quality.

GLUTINOUSNESS [of glutineus, L.]
gluish or sticking quality.

GLUTTON [a certain animal said
to be found in Lithuania, Muscovy, and
other northern countries] this glutto­
nous beast stuffs itself with carrion, till
its paunch sticks out like a drum, and
then getting in between two trees, &c.
it presses out the ordure backwards and
forwards, and afterwards returns to
the carcass to gorge itself again.

GLUEY [glutinosus, L.] sticking, or
like glue.

GLYGONIAN Verse, a verse consist­
ing of two feet and a syllable; or as
others say, of three feet, a spondee and
two dactyls, or rather a spondee, cho­
riambus and a Pyrrhic.

GLYPHICE [Ιλυφιχὴ of γλύφω, Gr. to
carve or engrave] the art of carving, 
cutting or casting the images or re­
semblances of natural things in metal.

To GNASH [prob of ʒnæʒan, Sax.
to gnaw] to grate or make a great
noise with the teeth.

GNOMES, a name which the Caba­
lists give to a sort of invisible people, 
who, as they fancy, inhabit the inward
parts of the earth, and fill it to its cen­
tre. They are represented to be very
small of stature, tractable and friendly
to men; they are made the guardians
of mines, quarries and hidden treasures.

GNOMON [in Parallelograms] a fi­
gure made of
the two com­
plements, to­
gether with
either of the
parallelograms
about the fi­
gure; as in this parallelogram, the
Gnomon is N added to A, A added to B,
or N added to G, added to D, added to
E.

Image omitted.



GNOMONICAL [of Ινομονιχὸς, of
Ινώμων, Gr. the stile-pin or cock of a
dial] belonging to a dial, or the art of
dialling or Gnomonicks.

GNOSIMACHI [Ινωσίμαχὸι, Gr. q. d.
enemies of wisdom or knowledge] a
sect of hereticks, who were professed
enemies to all studied knowledge in di­
vinity.

GNOSTICKS [Ινωστιχοὶ of γινώσχω, Gr.
to know] a sect so denominated upon
their pretending to extraordinary illu­
minations and knowledge; one main
branch of which consisted in their pre­
tended genealogies or attributes of the
deity, in which they differed among
themselves, as much as they did from
others; they held that there were two
principles, the one good, who was the
author of all good, the other evil, who
was the author of all evil, they be­
liev'd the soul to be of the same sub­
stance with God, and deny'd the divinity
of Christ, only allowing that God dwelt
in him.

They maintain'd that the most unlaw­
ful pleasures of the body were good,
and polluted their meetings in the night
with all manner of lewdness.

They pretended also to believe that
Jesus Christ was not the son of him
who gave the law, but of some other
unknown deity, and many other whim­
sical and romantick notions.

They had several apocryphal books, 
which they accounted to be divine, such
as the revelations of Adam, the history
of Noria the wife of Noah, and the
like.

GOA, the arched fig-tree; a tree in
some parts of Asia, of one of which
comes a whole wood; for the boughs
reaching to the ground take root.

To GOAD [of ʒoað, Sax.] to prick
with a goad.

GOAL [geole, F.] a prison or jail.

GOALER [geolier, F.] the keeper
of a jail or prison.

GOAT, is the emblem of lascivious­
ness and wantonness, and represents an
harlot, because the goat does much
mischief with its teeth, gnawing and
destroying trees and plants, and so a
harlot does no less harm to men by al­
luring them with her mouth to their
ruin.

The GOAT, the most lustful of all
creatures, was the hieroglyphick of
that violent impulse, by which men
are urg'd to propagate their species, 
and in honouring this animal the Egyp­



tians testified their gratitude to the gods
for the populousness of their country.

A GOAT is used in coat armour;
but it is hard to guess what induc'd
them that took them for their arms, 
unless it were to denote that they had
subdu'd their passions, or that they had
conquer'd some enemy who was subject
to the viciousness of goats.

A wild GOAT [Hieroglyphically] was
used to represent a very sober man, 
because this animal lives in desert
places not frequented, drinks seldom, 
and will subsist a long time without
water.

GOAT's-Bread, Goat's Beard, Goat's-­
Marjoram, Goat's-Rue; several sorts of
herbs.

GOAT's Thorn, a shrub.

GOATISH [ʒæticʒ, Sax.] of the
nature of or like a goat.

GOBELINS, a noted house in Paris, 
in the suburbs of St. Marcel, formerly
possess'd by famous wool-diers, the
chief of which was call'd Giles Gobe­
lin, who liv'd in the reign of K. Fran­
cis I. and is said to have found out the
secret of dying Scarlet, which from
him was called Scarlet of the Gobelins.

The house and river that runs by it
was also call'd by the same name, and
was purchas'd by Lewis XIV. for a
manufactory of all manner of curious
works, for adorning the several palaces
of the kingdom, under the direction of
Monsieur Colbert; as weavers of tape­
stry, goldsmiths, carvers, statuaries, 
&c. who have produc'd extraordinary
pieces, especially in Tapestry, from the
designs of the famous Le Brun, who
drew for them by the appointment
of the king.

GOBBLING [of gober, F.] eating
voraciously, swallowing down hastily.

GOBONE [in Heraldry] See
Compone.

GOBONATED [in Heraldry] See
Compone.

GOD [God, Sax.] the divine Being.

GOD [Hieroglyphically] was by the
ancient Egyptians represented by the
body of a man, cover'd with a long
garment, bearing on the top of the
head an hawk; by the excellency, cou­
rage, nimbleness and good qualities of
this bird, shadowing out the incompa­
rable perfections of its creator.

The Egyptian priests did also repre­
sent God, by a man sitting upon his
heels, with all his lower parts covered, 
to intimate, that he hath hid the secret
of his divine nature, in his works that
appear to our eyes.

GODDESS [ʒoðeſſe, Sax.] a she-­
deity.

GODS and goddesses of the Romans 
were many; the multiplication of dei­
ties is supposed to be for the satisfying
the minds of the ignorant people, who
could not comprehend how one and
the same deity could be diffus'd through­
out all the parts of the universe.

The chief of the gods of the Romans
were Jupiter, the god of thunder, his
wife Juno, the goddess of riches; Mi­
nerva, the goddess of wisdom; Venus,
the goddess of beauty; Mars, of war;
Mercury of eloquence; Apollo of phy­
sick; Neptune of the sea; Vesta of the
earth; Ceres of bread-corn; Diana of
hunting; Saturn of time; Janus of
husbandry; Sol, the sun; Luna, the
moon; Bacchus of wine; Victoria of
victory; Cupid of love; Nemesis of re­
venge, &c.

Besides their many other deities, all
the perfections and virtues of the soul
were adored as so many deities, viz.
Mens, the mind; Virtus, virtue; Honos,
honour; Pietas, piety, &c. And they
had particular divinities over every
part of a man's life.

The young babes were under the
protection of the following deities, viz.
Opis, Nascio, Vaticanus, Levana, Cuni­
na, goddesses that look'd to the child in
the cradle; Rumina, that assisted it in
sucking.

Potina, Educo, Ossilago, Fabulinus, Car­
nea, Juventus, Orbona, Libentina, Anculi­
dii were honoured by servants.

New married couples had several dei­
ties, as Jugatinus, that joined them to­
gether; Domiducus, he that led the
bride home; Maturna Dea, Virginensis, 
Cinxia, Mutinus, Deus pater, Subigus, 
Dea mater, Prema, Viriplaca Dea, who
all had their several offices appointed
them in marriages.

The women had also the following
goddesses of child-bearing, viz. Mena
Dea, Juno, Fluonia and Lucina, Partun­
da, Latona, Egeria, Bona Dea, Magna
Genata, &c.

They had also Muria, the goddess of
laziness.

Strenua Dea, the goddess of strength
and valour.

Stimula Dea, the goddess that prompts
men to labour.

Agonius Deus, a god who bless'd their
undertakings.

Dea Horta, a goddess that persuaded
to any business.

Catius Deus, a god that made them
careful.

Volumnus Deus, the god of their wills.



Adeana and Abeona, goddesses of their
coming in and going out.

Victoria, the goddess of victory.

Pellonia, a goddess that was very ac­
tive in driving away enemies.

Fessonia Dea, a goddess who helped
those that were weary.

Averruncus Deus, the god that averted
all evil.

Angeronia, the goddess of silence.

Laverna, a goddess who gave thieves
success in their robberies, and unto
whom they offered sacrifices. Thieves
were under her protection, divided
their spoil in her wood, where she had
a temple erected.

Nænia Dea, Libitina, &c. the god­
desses of funerals.

The Romans also had gods and god­
desses of the fields, besides a multiplicity
of nymphs and satyrs; as Jugaticus, the
god of the mountains; Pan, was a god
of the field; Sylvanus, the god of cattle;
Priapus, of the gardens; Feronia, of
the woods.

Palea, was the goddess of fodder and
of shepherds.

Flora, the goddess of flowers.

Pomona, the goddess of apples and
such like fruit.

Tutullina, a goddess who had an eye
over corn.

Robigus, a god that preserved their
coin from mildew.

Populonia Fulgara goddesses that defended
their corn from thunder.

Pilumnus, a god of bakers.

Picumnus, a god that taught men to
improve the ground with dung.

Bubona, the goddess of oxen.

Hippona, the goddess of horses.

Mellona, the goddess of bees.

Rusina, a goddess of the country.

Terminus, a god of limits.

The Romans had increased the num­
ber of their deities to several thousands, 
every affection of the mind and disease
of the body was honoured as a deity, 
viz. Pavor and Pallor, Cloacina, Redi­
culus, Tempestas, Febris, Fugia, Fornax, 
Caca, Vicepota, Volturnus, &c.

And as the Romans enlarged their do­
minions, they admitted all the gods and
goddesses of other nations into their city, 
as Sanctus or Deus Fidius, the god of the
Sabines; Jo or Jus and Osiris, goddesses
of the Egyptians; all the other gods of
the Grecians, Illyrians, Gauls, Spaniards, 
Germans and Asiatick people, were
brought to Rome, and there worshipped.

When Tiberius heard of the miracles
of our Saviour, by the information of
Pilate, he desired the senate, that Jesus
Christ might be introduced amongst the
number of their deities; but they did
not consent to it; either because the
place of his nativity was generally hated
by all nations; or rather because he
could not be rightly worshipped there
where there was such a multiplicity of
idle gods.

GODLESS [ʒoðleaſ, Sax.] without
god, impious, wicked.

GODLINESS [ʒoðlicneſſe, Sax.]
pious or religious quality or disposition.

GOD-Father [ʒoð-faðer, Sax.] a
man that is surety for a child in baptism.

GOD-Fathers [of Duels] in ancient
times were a kind of advocates chosen
by the parties, to represent the reasons
of their combat to the judge.

GOD-Mother [ʒoð-moðer, Sax.] a
woman that is surety for a child at bap­
tism.

GOD-Child [ʒoð-cylð, Sax.] the
child for whom sureties undertake.

GOD-Son [ʒoð-ſuna, Sax.] a man-­
child, for whom sureties have under­
taken.

GOD-Daughter [ʒoð-tahtor, Sax.]
a woman-child, for whom sponsors
have answered in baptism.

GOLD [ʒolð, Sax.] is the richest and
heaviest metal, and the most solid or least
porous; it is supposed to be composed
of a more pure and red subtile Sulphur, 
and pure Mercury, but the freest from
sulphur of all others, which is the cause
of its extraordinary ductility, as appears
from the operation of the wire-drawers
and gold-beaters, for if but one thou­
sandth part of sulphur be mixt with any
mass of gold it loses its malleability.

Its extraordinary fixity appears from
its being able to resist the greatest
force of any artificial fire; but there
are burning glasses which collect the
heat of the sun so intensely that it vola­
tilizes therein, consisting of particles
so thin, and so firmly interwoven,
that it is scarce possible to separate
them one from another. The parts
being so closely connected, that it will
not suffer any diminution or loss by
fire. It is not subject to rust, and being
heated or melted, preserves its heat
longer than any other metal, and in
weight is ten times heavier than earth,
and there is seven times as much matter
in a piece of gold, as in one of glass of
the same magnitude.

It is of so durable a nature, that no
body can be extended so much as gold,
one ounce of it being (as is reported)
capable of being beat out into 750 leaves,
each four fingers breadth square; nay,



some affirm, that one ounce of it may
be beaten out so, as to cover ten acres
of ground; and by wire-drawers it is
extended to that length, that one ounce
will afford a thread of 230400 foot
long,

The ancient Phænicians, who were
famous merchants, and scarce knew any
other god besides their gold, painted
their idols with large purses at their
sides full of money.

GOLDEN [ʒolðen, Sax.] of gold.

GOLDEN Age [according to the Poets]
the reign of Saturn. The happiness of
which times was so magnified by them
as to be called the Golden Age. They
say, there was no cccasion then for
ploughing or sowing; but that the earth
then produced whatever might contri­
bute to use or pleasure; all things being
common to all, with abundance of super­
fluity beyond the profusest wishes; so
there could be no differences or conten­
tions; but a perfect harmony in the af­
fections of all persons who were good
and just out of their own inclinations
and tempers; that care, want, punish­
ment, wars, diseases, old age, were
things unheard of; but that persons af­
ter the length of days were dissolved
in a pleasing sort of sleep, and wasted to
the mansions of the gods, and to regions
of eternal love and happiness.

GOLDEN Fleece, the story is this;
Athamas king of Thebes, had Phrixus
and Helle by a wife called Nephele; but
he afterwards took another wife called
Ino, who fell in love with Phrixus; but
she being neglected by him, fell into an
extreme aversion to him, and there hap­
penning a great dearth of corn, she per­
suaded Athamas that it would not be re­
medied till Phrixus or Helle was sacri­
ficed. But as they stood at the altar, 
Nephele (i. e. a cloud) took them away, 
and gave them a golden ram that she
had received from Mercury, which car­
ried them thro' the air to Colchis, where
they were kindly recieved by king
Æta. That there he sacrificed the ram
to Jupiter, and hung up the skin in the
grove of Mars. From whence it was
carried away by Jason and the Argo­
nauts.

GOLDILOCKS [ʒolði.loccaſ, Sax.]
a flower.

GOLD-Finder [of ʒolð and finðan, 
Sax.] one who empties privies or houses
of easement.

GOLD-Pleasure, the name of an herb.

GOLDEN Ring, a worm that gnaws
the vine, and wraps itself up in its
leaves.

GOLDEN-Rod, the name of an herb.

GOLDEN-Rule, [is so called by way
of excellency] which is either single or
compound, direct or inverse. The sin­
gle Golden-Rule, is when three numbers
or terms are proposed, and a fourth
proportional to them is demanded; as
the question following: if four horses
eat eighteen bushels of corn in a certain
number of days, what will eight horses
require in the same time, viz. thirty-fix
bushel.

The compound Golden-Rule, is when
5 terms are propounded, in order to
find out a sixth, as if four horses eat
eight bushels of corn in three months, 
how much will serve eight, for nine
months.

The Golden-Rule direct, is when the
sense or tenour of the question requires
the fourth number sought, to bear such
proportion to the second, as the third
has to the first: So in the first question, 
as eight is the double of four, so ought
the fourth number to be the double of
eighteen, i. e. thirty-six.

The Golden Rule inverse, is when the
fourth term required ought to proceed
from the second term, according to the
same rate or proportion, that the first
proceeds from the third; as for example;
if four horses do require a certain quan­
tity of corn six days, how many days
will the same quantity serve eight horses
Here four is half eight, so ought the
fourth term required to be half six.
This is called also the Rule of three in­
direct or backward.

Burnish'd GOLD, is gold smooth'd and
polished with a steel instrument called a
burnisher.

Million of GOLD, a phrase used to sig­
nify a million of crowns.

Mosaick GOLD, gold applied in pan­
nels on a proper ground, distributed in­
to squares, lozenges and other compart­
ments, part whereof is shadowed to raise
or heighten the rest.

Fine GOLD, is that which is refined
and purged by fire, of all its impurities
and all alloys.

Shell GOLD, is that used by the illu­
miners, and with which persons may
write in gold with a common pen. It
is made of leaves of gold reduced to an
impalpable powder, by grinding on a
marble.

Virgin GOLD is gold just taken out of
the mines, before it hath passed under
any action of fire, or other preparation.
It is said to be so very pale and so soft, 
that it may be moulded into any figure
with the hand, and that it will take the



impression of a seal like warm wax, to
harden which and to heighten its colour
they mix emery with it.

Standard GOLD, is that
which has 22 parts pure gold
and 2 parts copper, chymists
who characterize metals by
the names of the planets call it Sol and
its symbol or character is this.

Image omitted.



A Tun of GOLD, with the Dutch, is
in value 100000 florens; a tun of gold, 
at 4 l. the ounce, amounts to 96000 l.

GOLD-Foil [of feuille, a leaf] leaf-­
t;old.

GOLDSMITHS, 
they were incorpora­
ted in the 16th of king
Richard II. Anno 1322.
They are 4 wardens, 
about 90 assistants, 
294 on the livery.
Their livery fine is
11 l. 5 s. They are the
5th of the 12 companies. Their patron
is St. Dunstan. Their arms are gules, 
a leopard's head Or, quartered with
azure, a covered cup between 2 bucklers
of the third; crest a dainty lady holding
in her right hand a balance (with her
arms extended proper) in the left a
touch stone of the 3d. The supporters
2 unicorns or. Their hall is in Foster-­
lane.

Image omitted.



GOLGOTHA [of אתלוגלוג, Heb.]
some think so cal­
led from its form, others because the
first man's head was buried there, others
because criminals were executed there;
it is commonly known by the name of
mount Calvary. Our Saviour was cru­
cified and buried there in a garden be­
longing to Joseph of Arimathea.

The emperor Adrian when he rebuilt
Jerusalem gave it the name of Ælia, he
filled up Christ's tomb and placed over
it figures of the most infamous idols;
but the empress Helena caused it to be
cleansed and built a magnificent church
over it.

GOLGOLTHA [of אתלוגלוג, Heb.]
some think so cal­
led from its form, others because the
first man's head was buried there, others
because criminals were executed there;
it is commonly known by the name of
mount Calvary. Our Saviour was cru­
cified and buried there in a garden be­
longing to Joseph of Arimathea.

The emperor Adrian when he rebuilt
Jerusalem gave it the name of Ælia, he
filled up Christ's tomb and placed over
it figures of the most infamous idols;
but the empress Helena caused it to be
cleansed and built a magnificent church
over it.

GOLPES [in Heraldry] little balls or
roundelets of a purple colour.

GONAMBUSH [in Brasil] a bird not
much bigger than a fly, with shining
wings, that sings so sweetly that it is
not much inferior to a nightingale.

GONFALON the church banner
carried in the pope's
army; also a kind of round tent, born
as a canopy at the head of the processions
of the principal churches in Rome, in
case of rain, its verge or banner serving
for a shelter.

GONFANON the church banner
carried in the pope's
army; also a kind of round tent, born
as a canopy at the head of the processions
of the principal churches in Rome, in
case of rain, its verge or banner serving
for a shelter.

GOOD [ʒoð, Sax.] beneficial, &c.

GOODNESS, good quality, &c.

GOODLINESS [Goðlicneſſe, Sax.]
goodly appearance, quality, nature, &c.

GOOD-LACK! an interjection or
admiration.

GOODNESS, is whatever tends or
conduces to preserve or improve na­
ture or society; in opposition to evil, 
which tends to destroy or impair it.

GOOD [in Metaphysicks] is the essen­
tial perfection and integrity of a thing, 
whereby it has every thing that be­
longs to its nature.

Natural GOOD is that whereby a
thing possesses all
things necessary to its bene esse, i. e. to
its well being or second perfections;
and to the performance of its functions
and uses.

Physical GOOD is that whereby a
thing possesses all
things necessary to its bene esse, i. e. to
its well being or second perfections;
and to the performance of its functions
and uses.

Moral GOOD is the agreement of
a thinking, reasona­
ble being, and of the habits, acts and
inclinations of it, with the dictates of
right reason, and the will of the Crea­
tor, as discovered by natural right.

Ethick GOOD is the agreement of
a thinking, reasona­
ble being, and of the habits, acts and
inclinations of it, with the dictates of
right reason, and the will of the Crea­
tor, as discovered by natural right.

Relative GOOD, such as is in foods, 
which may be good for one and bad
for another.

GOODY [q. d. ʒoð&wyn;ife, Sax. i. e.
good-wife] a common appellation of a
woman.

Adventitious GOODS [in Law] are
such as arise otherwise than by succes­
sion from father or mother, or from
ancestor to descendant.

Dotal GOODS, are such as accrue
from a dowry, and which the husband
is not allowed to alienate.

Paraphernal GOODS [in Law] are
those which the wife gives the husband
to enjoy, on condition of withdrawing
them when she pleases.

Provectitious GOODS [in Law] are
such as arise by direct succession.

Receptitious GOODS [in Law] are
such as the wife might reserve a full or
intire property of to herself, and enjoy
them independent of her husband, in
distinction from Dotal and Paraphernal.

Vacant GOODS [in Law] are those
abandoned and left at large, either be­
cause the heir renounces them, or be­
cause the deceased has no heir.

GOOSE [ʒoſ, Sax.] a fowl well
known.

A GOOSE [Hieroglyphically] was by
the Egyptians pictured to signify a sea­
sonable silence, because it is reported of
that fowl, that when it flies over moun­
tains where eagles resort, knowing
their natural inability to keep silence, 
they take a stone into their bill, which
hinders them from making a noise, and



when they are out of danger they let it
fall.

GOOSE-BERRIES [Goſ-berian, 
Sax.] a sort of berries well known, pro­
bably so call'd because us'd as sauce for
green geese.

Winchester GOOSE, a swelling in the
thigh.

GORCE [Georiſ, Sax.] furz, a
shrub.

GORCE [Georiſ, Sax.] furz, a
shrub.

GORE [Gore, Sax.] corrupt or clot­
ed blood.

GORE [in Heraldry] is
one of the abatements of
honour, and is a figure
consisting of two lines
drawn one from the sinister
chief, and the other in the
sinister base, both meeting
in an acute angle in the middle of the
fesse point; and Guillim says, denotes a
coward.

Image omitted.



GORGE of a Ravelin, is the space con­
tained between the two ends of their
faces next the place.

GORGE of a Chimney, is that part be­
tween the chambranle and the crown­
ing of the mantle.

GORGED [of gorger, F.] filled, glut­
ted, crammed, &c.

GORGED [with Farriers] swelled.

GORGERIN, a part of the ancient
armour, being that which covered the
throat.

GORGEOUSNESS, sumptuousness, 
costliness, splendidness.

GORGONS [according to the Poets]
came of the same parents as Medusa.
They are said to be of two sorts; some
of them were old woman and grey
when they were born, and therefore
were called Grææ; they dwelt in Scy­
thia, and had one eye and one tooth in
common amongst them, these they made
use of when any of them went abroad;
and at other times they were laid up in
a coffer. These Grææ had 3 sisters
call'd Gorgons, whose heads were co­
vered with curling snakes, they had
tusks like boars, brazen hands and gol­
den wings, they dwelt not far from
the Hesperides in the western parts of
Iberia, they us'd to turn all persons into
stones that they look'd on; these were
said at length to have been thrown into
hell to become the tormentors of wick­
ed persons.

GOSSIP [of Goð God, and ſẏb, Sax.
a kinsman or kinswoman, q. d. a rela­
tion in God, a sponsor in baptism]
hence a prating, talkative woman, 
that goes about from house to house, 
telling or hearing gossiping stories.

GOSSIPING, a spending the time
idly, in gadding from place to place to
hear or tell news or tales concerning
persons or things.

GOTHICK Building, a manner of
building brought into use after those
barbarous people, the Goths and Van­
dals made their irruptions into Italy;
who demolished the greatest parts of
the ancient Roman architecture, as also
the Moors and Arabs did the Grecian;
and instead of these admirable and
regular orders and modes of building, 
introduc'd a licentious and fantastical
mode, wild and chimerical, whose pro­
files are incorrect, which, although it
was sometimes adorn'd with expensive
and costly carvings; but lamentable
imagery, has not that augustness, beauty
and just symmetry, which the ancient
Greeks and Roman fabricks had: Howe­
ver, it is often found very strong, and
appears rich and pompous, as particu­
larly in several English cathedrals.

Ancient GOTHICK Architecture, is
that which the Goths brought with them
from the north in the sixth century.
Those edifices built after this manner
are exceeding massive, heavy and coarse.

Modern GOTHICK Architecture, is
light, delicate and rich to an extreme, 
full of whimsical and impertinent orna­
ments, as Westminster-Abbey, Coventry-­
Cross, &c.

GOTHICK Character, is pretty
much like the Roman, only full of
angles, turns and bendings, especially
at the beginnings and endings of the
letters.

GOTHICK Column [in Architecture]
is any round pillar in a Gothick building, 
that is either too small or too thick for
its height.

GOTHS, an ancient people of Gothia, 
an island in the Baltic-Sea, eighteen
miles in length, situated by Denmark and
not far from Norway, subject to the
crown of Sweden. The first of them
came out of Scythia, in the northern
part of Europe. From Gothia or Goth­ 
land they rambled into Germany, where
an hundred thousand of them were
slain before the year of Christ 314. But
not long after they brought into sub­
jection and barbarism a great part of
the Christian world, and possess'd them­
selves of a part of Italy, now call'd
Lombardy, whence they were called
Lombards.

GOUD the plant called woad, used
by dyers in making a yel­
low colour.

GAUD the plant called woad, used
by dyers in making a yel­
low colour.



GOTTEN [ʒtan, Sax. to get]
procured, possessed of, &c.

GOVERNABLENESS [of gouverner, 
F.] capableness, also disposition to be
governed or ruled.

GOUST [goute, F. gusto, It. gustus, 
L.] taste.

GOUT WORT, the herb Gerard, 
Ash-weed and Jump-about.

GOUTINESS [of la goute, F. or
gouteux] the state or condition of a
gouty person.

GRABATARII [of γράβατος, Gr. a
hanging bed or couch] such persons
which anciently deferr'd the receiving
baptism till they came to be on their
death-bed.

Natural GRACE, the gift of being, of
life, of such and such faculties, of pre­
servation, &c.

Supernatural GRACE, a gift from a­
bove, conferred on intelligent beings
in order to salvation.

Actual GRACE, is that grace which
is given to us by God, for the special
performance of some particular good
thing, as to enable us to resist a temp­
tation.

Habitual GRACE, is that which re­
sides statedly in us, is fixed in the soul, 
and remains till some egregious wilful
sin erases it.

Justifying GRACE, is that which
makes men appear righteous and inno­
cent before God.

Sanctifying GRACE, is that which
renders men holy and devoted to God.

Efficacious GRACE, is such as has the 
effect.

Sufficient GRACE, is such, as tho' it
has not the effect, yet might have had it.

Expectative GRACES, are a sort of
reversionary benefices, disposed of be­
fore they become vacant.

GRACE [in the Formula of patents of
princes] which usually begins A B by
the grace of God. It is also a title for
princes of an inferior rank, and parti­
cularly dukes and arch-bishops, until
the time of King James I. the kings of
England were address'd to by that title;
but now are address'd by the title of
majesty only.

Days of GRACE [in Commerce] are a
certain number of days, that the cu­ 
stoms of particular nations, countries
or cities allows for the payment of a
bill of exchange, after the time agreed 
on for the payment of the bill is expi­
red, which in England is 3 days, at Rome
5, at Roterdam 6, at Paris 10, at Ham­
burgh 12, at Antwerp 14.

ACT of GRACE, is an act of parlia­
ment or law for the relief of insolvent
debtors, in order to set them free from
any restraint they at the present may
lie under, by way of imprisonment, 
&c. upon their compliance with the
conditions specified in the said act, and
which the creditor is depriv'd of any
power to prevent.

Reversionary GRACES [in common
Law] are what are comonly call'd pro­
visions, and sometimes benefices pro­
mised or granted before they are va­
cant.

GRACES [in the Heathen Theology]
were a set of fabulous deities, three in
number, who attended on Venus, sup­
posed to be the daughters of Jupiter, 
their names Aglaia, Thalia and Euphro­
syne, or else Pasithae, Euphrosyne and
Ægiale.

Some will have them to be the bene­
ficent daughters of Jupiter; and to have
been born of Enrydomene, who possessed
ample fortunes. And some say that
Juno was mother of the Graces. For
the Graces are the most noble and
illustrious of all the goddesses.

They are represented young and
beautiful, and with fine hair and smiling
countenances: they have wings upon
their feet, and sometimes are repre­
sented naked; if they are clothed, it is
with fine, thin stuff and loose flowing
garments; they always hold one ano­
ther by the hand, intimating that among
friends there should be a perpetual in­
tercourse of kindness and assistance.

This picture, according to Mytholo­
gists, shews that favours are always a­
greeable for their novelty, and for the
dispatch in doing them; that the me­
mory of them should always last fresh
and delightful; that they should be
without disguise or dissimulation, and
always free and unconstrained.

The nakedness of them intimates, 
that even poor persons, who have no
wealth at all, may be able by their ser­
vices to gratify persons in some things.
Some think that by their being repre­
sented naked is intimated, that we
ought to be ready to do good offices.
 
Some will have the Graces to be but
two; others three. They that make
them two, do it because some ought to
do good offices, and others ought to be
grateful to them of whom they receive
them. They are feign'd to be three,
because he that has had experience of
being made amends for a kindness done,
ought not to leave off doing good offices;



but it is his duty to be doing again, and
continually doing good offices.

The Graces are called χάρετες, of the τῆς
χαρᾶς, joy; because those who are be­
neficent are of a chearful countenance, 
and their beneficence makes them that
receive it chearful.

They are represented handsome, both
because they are beautiful in them­
selves, and in that they add a lustre to
the beauty of those that exercise libe­
rality, and are prone to do good offices.

The Graces are said to accompany the
Muses and Mercury as well as Venus;
for where learning, eloquence and love
are conjoined, there will never be
wanting true joy, health and content­
ment; and where goodwill, concord
and bounty meet, there Thalia, with a
flourishing estate; Aglaia with splendor
and glory, and Euphrosyne, with true
joy and comfort will be always present.

GRACEFULNESS [of grace, F. and
fulneſſe, Sax.] comeliness, decency, 
becomingness.

GRACELESNESS, graceless or wick­
ed nature or disposition.

GRACILENESS, slenderness, lean­
ness.

GRACILENT [gracilentus, L.] slen­
der.

GRACIOUSNESS [of graciosus, L.
gracieux, F.] gracious disposition.

GRADATION [Architect.] an artful
disposition of several parts, as it were
by steps or degrees, after the manner
of an amphitheatre.

GRADATION [with Chymists] a kind
of process belonging to metals, &c.
and is the raising or exalting them to a
higher degree of purity and goodness, 
so as both to increase their weight, co­
lour, consistence, &c.

GRADATION [with Logicians] an
argument consisting of four or more
propositions, so disposed, as that the
attribute of the first is the subject of the
second, and the attribute of the second
the subject of the third; and so on.

GRADUALNESS [of graduel, F.
gradualis, L.] gradual procedure, going
on step by step.

GRÆÆ. See Gorgons.

GRADUATED [graduatus, L.] hav­
ing taken, or on whom is conferred a
degree in the university.

GRADUATION [with Mathematici­
ans] the art of graduating, or dividing
any thing into degrees.

GRAFT [greflé, F.]a scion of a tree,
&c. to be ingraffed into another stock.

To GRAFT [greffer, F.] to inoculate
or graft a scion of one tree into the
stock of another.

GRAIN [granum. L. graine, F.] any
fruit or seed growing in a Spica or ear, 
as wheat, &c. also a minute body or
parcel of a body pulveriz'd, as a grain
of Salt, Sand, &c.

GRAIN, the figure or representation
of grains on leather, stones, &c. as Mo­
rocco leather, &c.

GRAIN [with Apothecaries] 20 grains
make a scruple ℈, 3 scruples a dram ʒ, 
8 drams an ounce ℥.

GRAINING Board [with Curriers] a
board made with nicks or teeth like a
saw, used in graining leather.

GRAMINIFOLIOUS [of gramen, 
grass, and folium, L. a leaf] having
grass-like leaves.

GRAMINEOUSNESS [of gramineus, 
L.] grassiness, or being full of grass.

GRAMMA [Γράμμα, Gr. a letter]
hence comes Grammar, because it shews
in the first place how to form articulate
sounds, which are represented by let­
ters.

GRAMMAR, an art of adjusting
words according to the idiom and flex­
ion of any language, so that they may
agree together in the most regular, clear
and intelligible manner; from whence
it will be easy to conclude that the sci­
ence as such is the same all over the
world; and that the difference between
the grammar or system of one language
and another is purely accidental, the
essence being universally the same.

GRAMMARIANS, persons skilled in
the art of grammar and the present
state of learning; it is frequently us'd
to signify such as spend their time, 
thoughts and pains upon the niceties
and particularities of particular words
and phrases; by which means not duly
attending to the sense and intention of
the speaker or writer, renders both
himself and the person whom he com­
ments upon ridiculous.

The term grammarian is now almost
confin'd to the little teachers of parti­
cular systems of the Latin and Greek
tongues, whose general ignorance of
almost all the other polite and useful
parts of learning has brought the art
tho' in itself commendable into con­
tempt by their captions and ill adapted
criticisms: Anciently the title of Gram­
marians was given to the most eminent
in all parts of literature.

GRANDAME [of grand and dame] a
grandmother.

GRAMMICK [grammicus, L. of
Γράμμη, Gr. a line] made by lines; de­
monstrated by lines.



GRANDEVOUSNESS [grandævitas, 
L.] greatness of age.

GRAND-DAUGHTER [of grand and
ðahtor, Sax.] a son or daughter's
daughter.

GRANDEE, a peer or nobleman of
Spain, especially such to whom the
king has given licence to be covered in
his presence, of which there are seve­
ral sorts. Some for life only by the
king's saying be covered; others are
Grandees by descent made by the king's
saying be covered for thy self and Heirs, 
which is much more honourable.

GRAND-FATHER [grand, F. of  L.
and faðer, Sax.] a father's or mother's
father.

GRAND-MOTHER [grand and Mo­
ðer, Sax.] a mother's or father's mo­
ther.

GRANDIFICK [grandificus, L.] do­
ing great things.

GRANDISONOUS [grandisonus, L.]
that maketh a great sound.

GRANIFEROUS Seed-pods [in Bota­
ny] such pods as bear small seeds like
grains.

GRANULATION [with Chymists] an
operation performed on metals, by
dropping them melted thro' an iron co­
lander, &c. into cold water, that it
may congeal or harden into grains.

GRANULOUS Root [with Botanists]
is a kind of grumous root with small
knobs, each resembling a grain of
wheat, as in white Saxifrage.

GRAPES [in a Horse] arrests or man­
gy tumours in his legs.

To GRAPPLE [with Horsemen] is
when a horse lifts up one or both his
legs at once, and raises them with pre­
cipitation, as if he were a curvet­
ing.

GRASSINESS [of ʒræſ and neſſe, 
Sax.] the having, or fulness of grass.

GRASSY [ʒræſicʒ, Sax.] ful1 of,
or having grass.

GRATE [crates, L.] part of chimney
furniture, conveniency for a fire; also
a sort of iron, lattice-work, &c.

GRATED [graté, F.] fretted or made
small by rubbing on a grater; also
vexed, galled, fretted; also done with
grate-work.

GRATEFULNESS [gratitude, F. of
gratitudo, L.] grateful disposition or
temper.

GRATIA Dei [i. e. the Grace of God]
a plaster made of wax, rosin, suet, tur­
pentine, mastick and frankincense.  L.

GRATICULATION, the dividing a
draught or design into squares in order
to reduce it.

GRATIFICK [gratificus, L.] grate­
ful, thankful.

GRATIOUSNESS [gratiositas, L. 
gratieuseté, F.] grace, favour, civility, 
kindness.

GRATITUDE [gratitudo, L.] thank­
fulness, grateful disposition or carriage.
It is a virtue in the receiver of a bene­
fit, by which he demonstrates, that the
kindness was acceptable to him, and
upon that score entertains a hearty
respect for the author of it, seeking all
occasions to requite him.  F.

GRATUITOUSNESS, free bestow­
ment, without expectation of reward
or recompence.

GRAVE [in Grammar] an accent op­
pos'd to acute, thus (`).

GRAVEDINOUSNESS [of gravidi­
nosus, L.] drowsiness; heavy-headed­
ness.

GRAVELLINESS [of gravier or la
gravelle, F.] fulness of gravel.

GRAVEN [of ʒrafan, Sax. gravé, 
F.] engraven.

GRAVENESS [gravitas, L. gravité, 
F.] a severe, compos'd, quiet counte­
nance; soberness.

GRAVITATING weighing or pres­
sing downwards.

GRAVITATION [with Philosophers]
is the exercise of gravity, or a pressure
that a body, by the force of its gravity, 
exerts on another body under it.

GRAVITY [gravitas, L. gravité, F.]
is that force by which bodies are car­
ried or tend towards the centre of the
earth, or the natural tendency of one
body towards another; also the mutu­
al tendency of each body and each par­
ticle of a body towards all others.

GRAVITY [Mechanicks] the Conatus
or tendency of bodies towards the cen­
tre of the earth.

Accelerate GRAVITY is the force of
gravity considered as growing greater, 
the nearer it is to the attracting body
or point.

Relative GRAVITY, is the excess of
gravity in any body above the speci­
fick gravity of a fluid it is in.

GRAVITY [in Hydrostaticks] the laws
of bodies gravitating in fluids.

GRAVITY [in Musick] an affection
of sound, whereby it becomes denomi­
nated grave, low or flat.

GRAVY, the juice of meat.

GRAYNESS [of ʒraʒ, Sax. graa, 
Dan. gris, F.] ash-colouredness.

GRAZIER [either of ʒraf, Sax. or
graisser, or engraisser, F. to fatten] one
who fattens cattle for sale.



GRAZING, [of ʒraſ, Sax. grass]
feeding on grass.

GRAZING [of escraser, or escrasant
razer, F.] glancing, passing lightly over
a thing.

GREASE [with Farriers] a swelling
and gourdiness of legs.

GREASINESS [of graissé, F.] greasy
condition.

GREASY [couvert de graisse, F.] daw­
bed with grease.

To GREATEN to make great, to
amplify, to enlarge, to augment.

GREATNESS, largeness, mightiness, 
nobleness.

GREE [in Law] will, allowance, li­
king.

GREE [in Heraldry] degree or step,

To make GREE to parties [in Law] is
to give them satisfaction for injury
done.

GREEDINESS [ʒreðiʒneſſe, Sax.]
a greedy, covetous, eager appetite or
desire after.

GREEKS, the natives of Greece, a
people once famous for courage and
learning, so that they were resorted to
from most parts of Europe, &c. for in­ 
struction in arts and sciences, they being
either the inventors or improvers of
most arts, &c. The Roman noblemen
us'd to send their children to Athens, 
the principal city of Greece for Educa­
tion; but at present being under the
subjection of the Turks; being cowed
or over-awed by them, they are so far
degenerated from what they formerly
were, that not only the laity, but even
the priests are so wretchedly ignorant, 
that it is no uncommon thing for them
to abjure the Christian religion and em­
brace mahometanism, that they may
have the more quiet enjoyment of the
conveniencies of life, and so that were
it not for the Christian festivals which
they observe with great veneration, it
may be doubted whether the Christian
religion had not long before this time, 
been eradicated out of the coun­
try.

The priests or prelates of the Greeks, 
differ in their habits from those of the
church of Rome, the Patriarch wears a
dalmatick or long gown with sleeves all
embroidered, and upon his head a regal
crown instead of a mitre.

The bishops wear a cap like the crown
of a hat, without brims down to their
ears.

The priests wear Albes, Stoles, and
Copes and not surplices or square caps;
and all the ecclesiasticks generally wear
their hair long. They carry a small
ebony staff in their hand, tipp'd with
ivory or mother of pearl.

In the sacrament they use unleavened
bread and administer in both kinds.

They admit of no images in Bass
Relief or embossed work; but use paint­
ings and scriptures in copper or silver;
they do not use musick in their churches.

Their monks or Caloyers, who are
generally of the order of St. Chrysostom
lead very austere lives; especially those
of mount Athos: they use the septua­
gint translation of the bible, and tho'
they do not assert a purgatory, yet they
pray for the dead, that God would have
mercy upon them at the general judg­
ment.

They do not own the authority of
the pope; but observe many holy-days;
and 4 solemn fasts or lents in the year, 
wherein they abstain from flesh, butter
and eggs, but permit the free use of
fish, oil and wine.

Mountain GREEN, a sort of greenish
powder, found in little grains like sand
in some mountains in Hungary, &c.

GREEN Hide, is a skin not yet curried;
but as it is just taken off from the car­
case of a beast.

GREENISH, inclinable to, or of a
faint green.

GREENISHNESS, a faint greenness.

GREENNESS [ʒreneſſe, Sax.]
green colour or quality.

GREETING [of ʒretan, Sax.] sa­
luting, salutation.

GREGAROUS Birds, such as do not
live solitary; but associate in flights or
coveys, a great many together in com­
pany.

GREGORIAN Year a new account
of time or year, the new account or
new stile, established upon the refor­
mation of the calendar, by pope Gre­
gory XIII. A. D. 1582. according to which
the year consists of 565 days, 5 hours, 
49 minutes and 12 seconds; whereas, 
according to the old stile, or Julian ac­
count of Julius Cæsar, the year did consist
of 365 days, 6 hours, whereby 10 days
being taken out of the month of October, 
the days of their months go always 10
days before ours; as for instance, their
11th day is our first, Which new stile
or account is used in most parts of Eu­
rope.

GREGORIAN Calendar, is one which
shews the new and full moon, with the
time of Easter and the moveable feasts
that depend upon it, by means of epacts
disposed through the several months of
the Gregorian year, and is different from
the Julian calender, in both the form



the year, and that it uses epacts instead
of golden numbers.

GREGORIAN Epocha, is the epocha, 
or time whence the Gregorian calendar
or computation took place.

GREVE [ʒerefa, Sax.] a denomi­
nation of power and authority, signify­
ing as much as count.

GREW [of ʒro&wyn;an, Sax.] did grow.

GRIEF [grief, F. or gravis, L. hea­
vy] sorrow of heart, trouble of mind.

GRIEVANCE [of grief, F. of gravis, 
L.] an injury, loss, or any thing that
causes grief.

GRIEVOUSNESS [grief, F.] heavi­
ness, burdensomness, afflictedness.

GRIFFIN [griffon, F.] a fabulous
creature, half an eagle, 
and half a lion, to express strength and
swiftness joined together, and extraor­
dinary vigilancy to preserve things with
which they are intrusted. The heathen
naturalists persuade the ignorant that
these creatures guarded the gold mines
with incredible watchfulness and reso­
lution, that none might come at them.
They really exist no where but in
painting or sculpture, tho' the poets
feign, that Apollo had his chariot drawn
by them.

GRIFFON [griffon, F.] a fabulous
creature, half an eagle, 
and half a lion, to express strength and
swiftness joined together, and extraor­
dinary vigilancy to preserve things with
which they are intrusted. The heathen
naturalists persuade the ignorant that
these creatures guarded the gold mines
with incredible watchfulness and reso­
lution, that none might come at them.
They really exist no where but in
painting or sculpture, tho' the poets
feign, that Apollo had his chariot drawn
by them.

To GRILL Oisters, the same as scollo­
ping of them.

GRIMNESS [of ʒrim, Sax.] seve­
rity or crabbedness of countenance.

GRIME [grime, Du.] smut or dawb
with soot.

GRINDER [ʒrinðere, Sax.] one
who grinds.

GRINDING [of ʒrinðan, Sax.] shar­
pening by grinding on a grindstone;
also breaking small with a mill.

GRIND-STONE [ʒrinðſtan, Sax.]
a round stone for grinding or sharpening
iron tools.

GRINGOLEE [in Heral­
dry] as a cross Gringolée, is
a cross made in the same
manner as the cross Ancree
or Anchored, with this dif­
ference, that those that
should represent the flooks of the an­
chors at the end, are the heads of the
stakes, which turn both ways as the
flooks do. See the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



An Old GRIPE [ʒripe, Sax.] an old
usurer.

GRIPE-STICK [with Surgeons] a
stick used in cutting off an arm.

GRIPINGNESS [of ʒripan, Sax.]
griping quality.

GRISLINESS [of ʒriſlicneſſe, 
Sax.] hideousness, frightful aspect, ug­
liness.

GRISTLINESS [of ʒriſtle, Sax.]
fulness of gristles.

GRITTINESS [of gret, groot, Brit.
ʒretta, Sax.] fulness of grit or dust
of stones, &c.

GRIZLED [prob. of gris, F. grey]
variegated with strakes, &c. of different
colours, as black and white intermixt, 
&c.

GRIZLINESS, grizly colour, or be­
ing grizly.

GROANING [of ʒranian, Sax.]
fetching deep or bitter sighs, &c.

GROCERS were in­
corporated Anno 1344.
by the name of Gro­
cers, having been for­
merly call'd Pepperers. 
They are governed by
a master, 4 wardens, 
70 assistants, and there
are about 277 on the livery; the livery
fine is 20 l. they are the second of the
12 companies, of which company there
have been 108 Lord-Mayors.

Their armorial ensigns are Argent, a
cheveron Gules, between 6 cloves in
chief, and 3 in base Sable, crest on a hel­
met and torse, a camel trippant proper, 
bridled of the 2d, supporters 2 griffins
per fess Gules and Or. The motto, 
God grant Grace.

Image omitted.



GROMWELS, most servile persons
on ship-board.

GROOM [of grom, Du. a Boy, &c.]
formerly a servant in some mean sta­
tion, lads sent on errands or lacqueys.;
but now it is usually taken for one who
looks after horses.

GROOVE [prob. of ʒrafan, Sax.
to engrave] a hollow channel cut in
stone, wood, &c.

GROOVE [with Miners] a deep hole
or pit sunk in the ground to search for
minerals.

GROSS [in the Sense of the Law] ab­
solute or independent; as Advowson in
Gross, is distinguished from Advowson
Appendant.

GROSS, as a Villain in Gross, a servile
tenant, who was not appendant or an­
nexed to the land or manour, and to go
along with the tenure, as an appurte­
nance of it; but was like the other
personal goods and chattels his lord;
at his lord's free pleasure and disposal.

GROSSNESS [of grossiereté, F. gros­
sitas, L.] thickness, fatness, dulness, 
baseness, &c.

GROT [grotte, F.] a hole in
the ground, a cavern
or den in a mountain or rock; also a



little artificial edifice made in a garden, 
in imitation of a natural grotto.

GROTTO [grotte, F.] a hole in
the ground, a cavern
or den in a mountain or rock; also a
little artificial edifice made in a garden, 
in imitation of a natural grotto.

GROTESK [grotesca, It. grotesque, 
F.] figures in painting or carving, re­
presenting odd or preposterous things;
a sort of antique work.

GROTESKS, little fanciful orna­
ments of animals, compounded of fishes,
foliages, fruits, &c.

GROVE [ʒrove, Sax.] a small
wood or place set with trees.

The GROVE of Dodona, which some
place in Thessaly, and others in Epirus, 
was constituted by Dodonim the son of
Javan, captain of a colony sent to inha­
bit those parts. Here was a temple
erected to Jupiter, hence called Dodo­
næus, near which temple was a sacred
grove full of oaks or beeches, in which
the Dryades, Fauni and Satyrs were
thought to inhabit; and, as is said, 
were frequently seen dancing under
the shade of the trees. Those oaks or
beeches are storied to have been endued
with a human voice and prophetical
spirit. The reason of which fiction, 
some think, was this, that the prophets
when they gave answers, placed them­
selves in one of these trees; and so the
oracle was thought to be uttered by the
oak, which was only pronounced from
its hollow stock, or from among its
branches. And whereas mention is
made of the brazen kettles of this ora­
cle, Dæmon in Suidas reports, they were
so artificially placed about the temple, 
that one being struck, the sound was
communicated to all the rest. Others
describe the matter thus: That there
were two pillars, on one of which
was placed a kettle, on the other a
boy holding a whip in his hand with
lashes of brass, which, being struck a­
gainst the kettle, by the violence of the
wind caused a continual sound.

GROULING [of groellen, Teut.]
grumbling, muttering.

GROUND [of ʒrinðan, Sax.] made
or broken small in a mill, &c. also
sharpened on a stone, &c.

GROUND Ivy [ʒrunð-ifiʒ, Sax.]
an herb.

GROUND Pine, the name of a plant.

GROUND Plates [with Architects]
the outmost pieces of timber lying on
or near the ground, and framed into
one another with mortices and tenons
of the joists, the summer and girders, 
and sometimes the trimmers for the
stair-case; and chimney-way, and the
binding joists.

To GROUND, to set or lay a thing
on the ground; to lay a ground-work;
to take for a foundation; to raise an
argument upon.

GROUNDED [of ʒrunð, Sax.] foun­
ded, built or resting upon, sustained by.

GROUNDLESS [ʒrunðleaſ, Sax.]
without ground, foundation or reason.

GROUND Timbers [in a Ship] are the
timbers which lie on her keel, and are
fastened to it with bolts through the
keelson.

GROUND [in Painting] is the sur­
face, upon which the figures and other
objects are raised or represented.

GROUP [in Painting and Sculpture]
an assemblage or knot of two or more
figures of men, beasts, fruits, or the
like, which have some apparent relation
one to the other.

GROUP [in regard to the Design] are
combinations of divers figures, which
have relation to each other; either on
account of the action, or of their proxi­
mity, or of the effect they have.

GROUP [in Musick] is one of the
kinds of diminutions of long notes, 
which in the working forms a sort of
group, knot, bush, &c. a group com­
monly consists of four crotchets, qua­
vers, &c. tied together.

GROUP [in Architecture] a term us'd
of columns, as they say, a group of co­
lumns, when there are three or four
columns joined together on the same
pedestal.

GROUP [in regard of the clair ob­
scure] are bodies of figures, wherein the
lights and shadows are diffused in such
manner, that they strike the eye toge­
ther, and naturally lead it to consider
them in one view.

GROUT-HEAD [ʒrut-heafoð, 
Sax.] a great head.

GROWING [of ʒro&wyn;an, Sax.] en­
creasing, thriving, waxing larger, &c.

GROWLING [prob. of grollen, 
Teut.] snarling, making a noise like a
dog.

GROWTH [ʒro&wyn;ðe, Sax.] increase, 
progress.

To GRUB up [groben, Teut.] to delve
or dig up the roots of trees, &c.

GRUBS [with Physicians] a kind of
white, unctuous, little pimples or tu­
mours, rising on the face, chiefly on
the Alæ of the nose.

GRUDGING [of gruger, F.] thinking
much, envying.

GRUFNESS, surliness, churlishness
sour looks, &c.

GRUMBLING [of grommeler, F.
grommelen, Du.] muttering between
the teeth, signifying displeasure, tho'
unwilling to declare the cause.



GRUMNESS [of ʒrim, Sax.] crab­
bedness, fierceness of countenance.

GRUMOUSNESS [of grumus, L.] ful­
ness of clods or lumps, grumosity.

GRUNTING [grunniens, L. gruntʒen, 
Teut.] making a noise like a hog.

GRUPPA [in Painting, Sculpture, &c.]
a cluster or crowd of figures, as cheru­
bims heads, &c. so close that the whole
figures of them cannot be discerned.

GRUS, a Crane [among the Ancients]
a dance perform'd annually by the A­
thenians round the temple of Apollo on
the day of Delia. The motions and
figures of this dance were very intricate
and variously interwoven, some of them
being intended to express the windings
of the labyrinth wherein Theseus held
the Minotaur.

GUARANTEE [in Law] he whom
the warranter undertakes to indemnify
or secure from damage.

GUARANTY, the office or duty of
a guarantee.

Quarter GUARD [in a Camp] a small
guard, commanded by a subaltern offi­
cer, and posted about an hundred yards
before every battalion.

Grand GUARD [in a Camp] consists in
three or four squadrons of horse, com­
manded by a field officer, and posted
before the camp on the right and left
wing, towards the enemy, for the se­
curity of the camp.

Standard GUARD, a small guard of
foot, which a regiment of horse mounts
in their front, under a corporal.

To GUARD [garder, F.] to defend
or keep from, to ward off danger.

GUARD [in Fencing] an action or
posture proper to defend or screen the
body from the efforts or attacks of an
enemy's sword.

GUARD-Cock. See Gardecaut.

GUARDS [with Astronomers] a name
sometimes apply'd to the two stars near­
est the pole, being in the hind-part of
the chariot at the tail of the little boar.

GUARDIAN [in Law] one who is
intrusted with the education, tuition, 
&c. of such as are not of sufficient dis­
cretion to guide themselves and their
own affairs, as children and idiots.

GUARDIANSHIP [of garder, F. to
defend, &c.] the office of a guardian.

To swallow a GUDGEON, to bear, 
put up or pass by an affront.

GUDGEONS, a sort of rudder-irons, 
being the eyes drove into the stern-post, 
into which the hooks call'd pintles go
to hang on the rudder.

GUELPHS, a famed faction in Italy,
which drenched that country with blood
by a war of many years continuance, 
by opposing another faction call'd the
Gibellines. The former faction is said
to have taken its name from Welf or
Welfo the 6th brother from Henry duke
of Bavaria, from whom the emperor
Conrade III. having taken the dukedom
of Bavaria, he assisted by Roger king of
Sicily and others, made war against
Conrade.

GUERDONLESS, unrewarded.

GUERITE, 
is a sort of
small tower
of stone or
wood, gene­
rally on the
point of a Ba­
stion, or on
the angles of
the shoulder, 
to hold a Cen­
tinel, who is
to take care
of the foss, and to watch to hinder sur­
prizes; some call Echangette those that
are made of wood, and are of a square
form, for the Guerites of stone are
roundish, and are built half without
the wall, and terminate at a point be­
low, which ought to be at the Cordon, 
that the Centinel may discover along
the Faces, Flanks and Courtins, and all
along the Foss; they ought to be about
six foot high, and their breadth three
and a half.

Image omitted.



GUERKINS, a sort of pickled cu­
cumbers.

GUESTS [ʒieſt or ʒeſt, Sax. and
Dan.] people invited to an entertain­
ment.

GUGGLING [prob. of gorgogliare, 
Ital.] making a noise, as liquor pouring
out of a bottle that has a narrow neck.

GUIDON, a kind of flag or standard
borne by the king's life-guard; being
broad at one extreme and almost poin­
ted at the other, and slit or divided into
two. Also the officer who bears it,

GUILDHALDA Teutonicorum, a title
of the fraternity or society of Easterling
merchants in London, commonly call'd
the Steel-yard in Thames-street.

GUILD-merchant, a certain liberty
or privilege, whereby merchants are
enabled to hold certain pleas of land
within their own precincts.

GUILE [probably of guiller, O. F. or
beʒalian, Sax. to bewitch] fraud, de­
ceit.

GUILEFULNESS, fraudulentness, 
deceitfulness, craftiness, wiliness.



GUILELESS, free from guile or de­
ceit.

GUILELESNESS, clearness of, or
the being intirely free from guile or
deceit.

GUILT, guiltiness, consciousness of
having commited a fault, crime, &c.

GUILTINESS [probably of Gilð a
tax, &c. of Gilðan, Sax. to pay a tax, 
&c. q. d. liable to make an amends or
pay for a fault committed] culpableness, 
liableness to suffer for a crime proved
to have been committed.

GUILTLESS, free from crime, in­
nocent.

GUILTLESNESS, innocency.

GULE [Architect.] the neck or
narrowest part of the low­
est capital of a pillar; or wavy mem­
ber, whose contour resembles the letter
S, called an Ogee.

GULA [Architect.] the neck or
narrowest part of the low­
est capital of a pillar; or wavy mem­
ber, whose contour resembles the letter
S, called an Ogee.

GULES [either of דולוג, Heb. a
piece of red cloth, Machenzi or לוג
Arab, a red rose. Menestrier.

GULES [in Heraldry] sig­
nifies the red colour, in
engraving it is made by
perpendicular lines from
the top of the escutcheon
to the bottom. It is said
to represent fire, which is the chiefest, 
lightsomest and clearest of the elements.
Morgan says, it denotes the power of
the Almighty; and of virtues, martial
prowess, boldness and hardiness; with
Or (Gold) a desire of conquest, and with
Argent (Silver) a depressing the envious, 
and revenging the innocent. See the
figure.

Of spiritual virtues Gules denotes
Justice, Charity, and ardent Love of
God and our neighbour. Of wordly vir­
tues, Valour, Nobility, Hardiness and
Magnanimity, Of vices, Cruelty, Cho­
ler, Murder, Slaughter. Of planets, 
Mars. Of precious stones, the Ruby.
Of metal, Copper. Of trees, the Cedar.
Of flowers, the Piony, the Clove Gilli­
flower and the Pink. Of birds, the
Pelican. Of the ages of men, the
Manly. Of the months of the year, 
March and July. Of the days of the
week, Tuesday.

Image omitted.



GULF [golfe, F.] a depth in the sea
that cannot be fathomed, a whirlpool.

CULLING [guiler, F.] deceiving, 
cheating, defrauding, duping.

GULLERIES, cheating tricks.

GULLET [gula, L. goulet, F.] the
wind-pipe.

GULLY-gut, a punch-belly.

To GULLY [gorgogliari, Ital.] to 
make a noise, as li­
quor poured out of a bottle.

To GOGLE [gorgogliari, Ital.] to 
make a noise, as li­
quor poured out of a bottle.

GULOSITY [gulositas, L.] gluttony.

A GULP [of golpen, Du.] as much
liquor as goes down the throat at one
swallow.

To GUM [gommer, F.] to dawb with
gum.

GUMMINESS [of gummosus, L. gom­
meux, F. gummi, L. gomme, F.] gummy
nature or quality.

GUMMY [gummosus, L. gommeux, F.]
full of gum.

GUNNEL [of a Ship] the gun-wall.

GUNSTER, one that goes a shooting
with a gun or fowling-piece.

GUNTER's Line [so call'd of Mr.
Gunter, formerly geometry-professor of
Gresham college] call'd also the line of
numbers, is the logarithms laid off upon
strait lines; the use of which is for
performing arithmetical operations, by
means of a pair of compasses, or even
without, by sliding two of these lines
of numbers by each other.

GUNTER's Quadrant, a quadrant of
Wood, Brass, &c. being partly of Ste­
reographical projection upon the plain
of the equinoctial, the eye being in one
of the poles where the tropick, eclip­
tick and horizon are arches of circles;
but the hour circles are all curves, 
drawn by means of the several alti­
tudes of the sun, for some particular
latitude, every day in the year. The
use of it is to find the hour of the day, 
sun's azimuth, &c.

GUNTER's Scale, that which sailors
call the Gunter, is a large plain scale, 
with the lines of artificial fines and tan­
gents upon it, laid off by strait lines, 
and so contriv'd to a line of numbers
that is on it, that by the help of this
scale and pair of compasses, all the
cases of trigonometry, both plain and
spherical, may, to a tolerable exact­
ness be solv'd, and of consequence all
questions in Navigation, Dialling, &c.
may be wrought by it.

GUNS and POWDER, were invented
and found out by Bartholdus Swartz, a
Franciscan Frier, about the year 1380, 
temp. K. Richard II. by his mixing salt­
petre and some other ingredients in a
mortar, on which he had plac'd a stone, 
and having occasion to light a candle
in striking fire a spark fell into the
mortar, and the composition blew up
with great violence and noise. This
gave a handle for the invention of guns, 
and the first that used them were the
Venetians against the inhabitants of
Geneva.



Gun-powder was had from foreign
parts, and at dear rates, till queen E­
lizabeth order'd it to be made in England.

GUSHING [of ʒeotunʒ, Sax. 
pouring or running out suddenly and 
with force.

GUSSET [gousset, F.] a triangular
small piece of cloth, used in shirts, 
smocks, &c.

GUSSET [in Heraldry] is formed by
a line drawn either from
the dexter or sinister chief
points, and falling perpen­
dicularly down to the
extreme base, as in the
escutcheon: Or thus, it
proceeds from the dexter or sinister an­
gle of the chief, descending diagonally
to the chief point, and from thence
another line falls perpendicularly upon
the base. Mr. Gullim calls it one of
the whimsical abatements of honour, 
for a person who is either lascivious, 
effeminate, or a sot, or all of them.

Image is omitted.



GUSTFUL [of gustus, L. taste, and
full] palatable, having a good relish.

To GUT, to take out the guts, to
empty.

GUTLING [of Guts] stuffing the guts, 
eating much or often.

GUTTATED [guttatus, L.] spotted
with spots or speckles like drops.

GUTTÆ, drops.

To GUTTER, to sweal or run as a
candle.

To GUTTLE [of gut, F.] to eat
much.

GUTTURALNESS [of guttur, L. the
throat] the being pronounced in the
throat; spoken of letters.

GUTTUS [with Antiquaries] a sort
of vase used in the Roman sacrifices, to
take wine and sprinkle it guttatim, i. e.
drop by drop upon the victim.  L.

GUTTY [in Heraldry] signifies drops, 
and they being represented in coat ar­
mour of several colours, the colour
should be mentioned in blazon.

GUT-Wort, an herb.

GUVE de ronde [in Fortif.] is the same
as single tenaille.

GUY-Rope [in a Ship] a rope made
fast to the foremast at one end, and is
reeved thro' a single block siezed to the
pennant of the winding tackle, and then
again veered thro' another, siezed to
the foremast. The use of which is to
hale forward the pennant of the wind­
ing tackle.

To GYBE, to joke upon, banter, jeer, 
flout, &c.

GYMNASIUM [γυμνάσιον, Gr.] a
place of exercise in any art or science, a 
school.

GYMNASTICE [γυμναστιχή, Gr.] the
Gymnastick art, or the art of performing
the exercises of the body.

GYMNASTICK [of gymnasticus, L.
γυμναστιχός of γυμνάξω, Gr. to exercise]
of or pertaining to exercise.

GYMNIC [γυμνιχός, Gr.] pertaining
to the exercises of the body.

GYMNODISPERMOUS Plants [of
γυμνός naked, δις two, and σπέρμα, Gr.]
such as bear two naked seeds inclosed in
a calx, without any seed vessel.

GYMNOPÆDIA [γυμνοπαιδια, Gr.] a
kind of dance in use among the Lacedæ­
monians, performed by young persons
dancing naked, during the time of the
sacrifices, and singing a song in honour
of Apollo.

GYMNOPOLYSPERMOUS Plants [of
γύμνος, πολὺ, many, and σπέρμα, Gr.]
such as have many naked seeds inclosed
in a calx, without any seed vessel.

GYMNOSOPHISTS [γυμνοσρφισταὶ of
γυμνος naked, and σρφιστὴς a sophist] a
sect of philosophers among the Greeks, 
Africans and Indians who went naked, or
at most wore no more cloaths than mo­
desty required.

Those in Africa inhabited a moun­
tain in Ethiopia, not far from the river
Nile; but without the accommodations
of either house or cell to defend them
against the inclemency of the climate.

They did not form themselves into
societies, nor offered sacrifices in com­
mon as others did; but each keeping in
his particular place of retirement, studi­
ed by himself; if any African had
killed another by mischance, he applied
to some of them for absolution, and sub­
mitted to the penance he enjoined, with­
out the performance of which it was
held unlawful for him to return home.

Their food was the natural producti­
on of the earth, without any culture;
they are said to have invented and im­
proved many arts and sciences; but more
especially Astronomy and Physick, upon
which cases they were often resorted to
for their advice, not only by the com­
mon people, but also by princes and other
great personages, upon the most difficult
matters.

Every day at dinner they examined
their disciples, how they had spent the
morning, and if any one could not give
an account that he had been employed
in discharging some good office, the prac­
tice of some virtue, or had made an im­
provement in some sort of learning, he
was to have no dinner.

GYMNOSPERMOUS Plants [of γυμ­
νός naked, and σπέρμα, seed, Gr.] such 



fruit as bear a naked seed inclosed by the
calx only, without any seed vessel.

GYMNOTETRASPERMOUS Plants 
[of γυμνός, τετρα four, and σπέρμα, Gr.]
such as have four naked seeds inclosed
in a calx without any seed vessel.

GYNÆCIUM [γυναιχεῖον, Gr.] the wo­
mens appartment, or a separated place
where the women kept themselves reti­
red and out of the sight of men.

GYNÆCOCRATUMENIANS [of
γυνή and χρατοίμενος overcome] an anci­
ent people of Sarmatia Europæa, said to
be so called, because after they had been
overcome by the Amazons, they were
obliged to have venereal commerce with
them.

GYNÆCOMASTON [γυναιχομαστόν, 
Gr.] a tumour or swelling in the flesh
or breasts of women.

GYNÆCOMYSTAX [ofγυνή a wo­
man, and μύσταξ, Gr. a beard] the hair
growing on the upper part of a woman's
privities.

GYPSUM Parget, white lime, plaister;
also a sort of plaister-stone, white and
soft like alabaster, which being lightly
burnt, serves to make the chalk called
plaister of Paris.

GYPSY [q. Ægyptii, L. Egyptians]
strolling beggars, who pretend to tell
fortunes.

GYROMANCY [of gyrare, L. and μαν­
τεία, Gr. divination] a kind of divination
by walking round in a circle.


H

Hh, Roman; Hh, Italick; Hh, Eng­
lish; ה, Hebrew, is expressed only
by (̔) a note of aspiration in Greek.

H, is not accounted properly a letter, 
but a note of aspiration before a vowel;
and among the poets it sometimes ob­
tains a power of a consonant. In Latin
it never comes before a consonant;
but always before one of the five vowels
and y; as habeo, hebes, hiatus, homo, hu­
mus, hydra, &c. but in English it does, 
as bought taught, &c. Criticks have
contended whether h be a letter or not
saying it is no more than a mere aspira­
tion or breathing; but in English it is as
much a letter as any other consonant.
In the beginning of words it is always
followed by a vowel, and in the end it
is often followed by a consonant; when
ever it follows p it is pronounced toge­
ther with it and sounded like f.

H̅ with a dash at the top [with the
Ancients] signified 200000.

The dash is placed on top of letter H.



HABDALA. [הלדבה of לדב, Heb.
i. e. he separated] a ceremony practised
by the Jews every sabbath-day in the
evening. It is thus; towards the close
of the sabbath when the stars begin to
appear, each master of a family lights a
torch or at least a lamp with two wicks.
A little box of spices is prepared or a
glass of wine taken, then singing or re­
hearsing a prayer, and blessing the wine
and the spices, they all smell them, and
after they have performed a few cere­
monies about the torch, or lamps, they
cast a little of the consecrated wine into
the flame; every one tastes, and thus
they break up, wishing one another a
good week.

HABERDASHERS, 
were incorporated a
brotherhood of St. Ca­
tharine their patroness
Anno 1447, and were
confirmed in the 17th
of Henry the VII. Anno
1501, and named Mer­
chant Haberdashers.
They are a master, 4 wardens, 90 on
the court of assistants, 329 on the livery.
The livery fine is 25 l. They bear for
their arms barry nebule of 6 argent and
azure on a bend gules, a lion passant guar­
dant or. Crest on a helmet and torse 2
arms supporting a laurel proper and is­
suing out of a cloud argent. Their sup­
porters 2 Indian goats argent, attired and
hoofed or. Their motto, Serve and
obey.

They are the 8th of the 12 companies.
There have been 22 lord-mayors free
of this company. Their hall is in Mai­
den-Lane.

Image omitted.



HABITUDE [habitus, L.] an aptitude
or disposition either of mind or body, 
acquired by a frequent repetition of
the same act.

HABIT [in Metaphysicks] is a quality
that is superadded to a natural power, 
that makes it very readily and easily
perform its operations.

HABIT [with Logicians] one of the
ten predicaments.

The HABITABLE, the earth. Milton.

HABITABLENESS, a being capable
of being inhabited.

HABITED [habité, F.] attired, dres­
sed; also accustomed.

HABITUAL Grace [with Divines]
is that which is conveyed to persons by
baptism, and afterwards augmented and
improved by the eucharist and other
means.

To HABITUATE [s'babiter, F. of
habitus, L.] to accustom to.



HABITUDE [with Schoolmen] signi­
fies the respect or relation that one thing
bears to another.

HABITUDE [with Philosophers] is
used for what we popularly call habit, 
viz. a certain disposition or aptitude for
the performing or suffering certain things
contracted by reiterated acts of the same
kind.

HABITUS [in Metaphysicks] is the
application of a body to that which is
near it.

HÆCCASITY [with Chymists] the
same specifick essence or active princi­
ple by which a medicine operates.

HÆMATOMPHALOCELE [of αῖμα
blood, ὄμαφαλος a navel, and χἠλη a tu­
mour, Gr.]a swelling of the navel tur­
gid with blood.

HÆMORROUS [ἀιμορροις, Gr.] the
hemorrhoid serpent; so called, because
those that are bitten by it, blood issues
out of all the passages of their body.

HÆMORRHOIDES [ἁιμοῤῤοις of αῖμα
and ῤεω, to flow, Gr.] swelling inflamma­
tions in the fundament, the emerods or
piles, a distemper proceeding from
abundance of melancholy blood, by
which the veins of the fundament being
stretched, often send forth blood or
matter.

HÆMOSTATICKS  [of ἆιμα blood, 
and στατιχὸς Gr. causing to stop] medi­
cines which stanch blood.

HAGIOGRAPHA [ἁγιόγραφα, of ἅγιος
holy, and γράφω, to write, Gr.] the
canonical books of holy scripture.

This name took its rise from the cus­
tom of the synagogues, which made a
three-fold division of the books of the
old testament, viz. the Law, the Pro­
phets and the Hagiographa, which last
contains the books of Psalms, Proverbs, 
Job, Ezra, Chronicles, Solomon's Song, 
Ruth, Ecclesiastes and Esther; to which
the Jews add also Daniel and the La­
mentations, not reckoning them among
the prophets.

HAGIOGRAPHER [άγιογράφος, Gr.]
a writer of holy things.

HA-HA [in Gardens] a small canal
of water.

HAICTITES [among the Mahome­
tans] a sect, who believe Jesus Christ
to have been eternal, to have assumed
a real body of flesh, and that he shall
come to judge the world at the last day, 
and reign 40 years on earth with the
same body he had when he suffered
crucifixion; and that he having de­
stroy'd antichrist the world shall be at
an end.

HAIL [of hæʒele, Sax.] a meteor 
formed of flocks of snow, which being
melted by warm air, and afterwards
meating with cold air, is congealed and
turns to hail, whose stones are of a
different figure, according to the solu­
tion of the flocks, and fall rudely by
reason of their weight.

HAIR. The Jews (it is said) were
forbid to cut their hair round, because
the Ammonites, Arabians, Edomites and
Moabites wore theirs so in imitation of
Bacchus.

The ancient Gauls accounted it an
honour to have long hair, and there­
fore when Julius Cæsar had conquered
them, he obliged them to cut off their
hair as a token of submission: And af­
terwards those who forfook the com­
mon way of life, and betook themselves
to cloisters, had their heads shaven as
a sign they had bid adieu to all worldly
ornaments, and made a vow of perpe­
tual obedience to their superiors.

Long hair was also a particular mark
and privilege of the kings and princes
of the blood of the royal family of
France, which they wore curled and ar­
tificially dress'd; and if a son of France
had his hair cut, it was a publick de­
claration that he was excluded the
crown.

But in process of time this custom
changed into another quite contrary, 
and every one was forbid wearing long
hair, under the penalty of excommuni­
cation.

HAIRINESS [hearicʒneſſe, Sax.]
being hairy.

HAIRY [hearicʒ, Sax.] having, or
covered with hair.

HALE [of heal, Sax.] healthful, &c.

Front HALF Files [with Military Men]
the three foremost men of a battalion.

Rear HALF Files, the three hinder­
most men of a battalion.

HALF Mark, a noble, six shillings
and eight pence.

HALF-Pence, half-pence and farthings
were first ordered to be made round by
king Edward I. in the year 1280, for
before that time, the penny had a dou­
ble cross, with a crease, so that it might
be easily broken in the middle to make
half-pence, or into four quarters to
make farthings.

Knights of the HALF Moon or Cres­
cent, an order of knighthood, created
by Rene, duke of Anjou, when he con­
quered Sicily, with this motto, Los, i. e
Praise.

HALIOGRAPHER [of ἅλς the sea, 
and γράφω, to describe, Gr.] a describer
of the sea, an hydrographer.



HALL [with Archit.] a large room
at the entrance of a fine house, &c.

To HALTER [of hæaltre, Sax.] to
put a rope, &c. about the neck.

HALTER Cast [with Farriers] an ex­
coriation of the pattern, caused by the
halter of an horse being intangled about
the foot, upon the horse's endeavouring
to rub his neck with his hinder foot.

HALYMOTE [haliʒ-ʒemore, Sax.]
the meeting of the tenants of one hall
or manour; a court baron; also an as­
sembly of citizens in their publick hall, 
so termed in some places in Hereford­
shire; it may also signify an ecclesiasti­
cal or holy court.

HAM [ham, Sax.] either at the be­
ginning or end of a name or place is
derived from a house, farm or village.

HAMADRYADES [ἀμαδρύαδες of ἄμα
and δρὺς, Gr. an oak] nymphs feigned
to have inhabited the woods and mea­
dows among the flowers and green pa­
stures, and were thought to be born
and die with the trees, over which they
had the charge.

They are represented as well shaped, 
beautiful and charming virgins, distin­
guished (according to Orpheus) into se­
veral ranks; some of which were ce­
lestial, which were thought by the an­
cients to be souls or intellects which
govern the spheres, and these they
called the Muses, who dispersed the in­
fluences of the stars upon the earth:
Some were terrestrial, as the nurses of
Ceres and Bacchus; the Naiades delight­
ing in waters; the Napææ in meadows
and flowers, the Liminades in lakes, 
the Ephydriades in fountains, in which
they used to hide themselves. These
Nymphs denote the power of moisture
which diffuses it self thro' every thing, 
and how the nature of water contributes
to the procreation of all things, and to
the nourishment of Ceres and Bacchus;
that is, of whatever conduces to the ne­
cessary support or pleasure of human
life.

HAMAXOBIANS [of ὢμαξα a car, 
and βίος Gr. life] a nation or people
who lived wholly in chariots.

To HAMMER [of hamer, Sax.] to
knock with a hammer.

HANCES [in Architecture] the ends
of elliptical arches, which are areas of
a smaller circle than the scheme.

HAND [in Falconry] is used for the
foot of an hawk.

HAND [in the Manage] is used in di­
vision of the horse into parts, in res­
pect to the rider's hand, as

Spear HAND, the right hand.

Bridle HAND, the left hand.

To keep the Horse upon the HAND [in
Horsemanship] is to feel him in the stay
upon the hand, and to be always pre­
pared to avoid any surprize or disap­
pointment from the horse.

To rest well upon the HAND [with
Horsemen] is said of a horse that never
refuses, but always obeys and answers
the effects of the hand.

To yield the HAND [with Horsemen]
signifies to slacken the bridle.

HAND [with Horsemen] the measure
of the fist clinch'd, i. e. four inches.

To sustain the HAND [with Horsemen]
is to pull a bridle in.

To force the HAND [with Horsemen]
is said of a horse when he does not
fear the bridle, but runs away in spite
of the horseman.

To make a horse part from the HAND is to
put on at full speed.

To suffer a horse to slip from the HAND is to
put on at full speed.

Fore-HAND [of a Horse] is the fore-­
parts of him, as head, neck, and fore-­
quarters.

Hind-HAND [of a Horse] all the
parts except those before-mentioned.

A HAND [Hieroglyphically] denotes
power, equity, fidelity, justice.

HANDED-Root [with Botanists] is a
kind of tuberous root, divided as it
were into several fingers, as in some
species of Orchis.

HAND [in Painting, &c.] the manner
or style of this or that matter.

HAND of Justice, a scepter or battoon
about a cubit long, having an ivory
hand at the extremity of it, used as an
attribute of kings, with which they are
painted in their royal robes, or on their
coronation-day.

Joining of HANDS, is a symbol of
friendship and union.

Clapping of HANDS, is the general
token of applause.

HANDICRAFT [of hanðicræft, 
Sax.] a working trade.

HANDLING [with Cock-Fighters] is
the meusuring the girth of a fighting
cock's body, by the grasp of the hand
and fingers.

HANDSOMNESS, comeliness, beauty.

HANDINESS, readinels or aptness
for business.

HANGER [of hanʒan, Sax. to hang]
a broad, crooked, short sword.

HANG-Man [of hanʒan and Man, 
Sax. hanger, Dan.] an executioner.

HANGING, Drawing and Quartering, 
is not found in history till the 26th year
of the reign of king Henry III. when
one William Marise, son of an Irish no­



bleman, was hang'd, beheaded and
quartered for high treason.

Anciently the bodies of felons, who
were executed, were not allowed to be
buried, but hung on the gallows, till the
parliament in the time of king Edward
II. ordered that they should be buried.
As to hanging in chains, this practice
doth not seem to be used in England, 
till the time of king Richard II. when
some of the rebels, in Wat Tyler's riot, 
having been taken down from the gal­
lows at St. Albans, he commanded the
bailiffs to cause chains to be made, and
hang the bodies in them on the same
gallows, there to remain as long as one
piece would stick by another.

HANK, a tie, obligation, &c.

HANSE Towns, certain free towns of
Germany and the north, bordering on
the sea, being anciently infested with
Barbarians, for their better defence en­
tered into a mutual league, and gave
themselves that name, either from the
sea on which they bordered, or from
their faith, which to one another they
had plighted (with their hand hansa)
or from the same word, which in their
old language signified a league, society
or association.

This famous association is supposed
to have begun at Bremen on the Weser
in the year 1164, or as others say in
1260, immediately after the incursions
and piracies of the Danes, Normans, 
&c. at the first it consisted only of towns
on the Baltick sea; but its strength and
reputation increasing there was scarce
any trading city in Europe, but desir'd
to be admitted into it, so that in process
of time it consisted of 66 cities; and at
length they grew so formidable as to
proclaim war against Waldemar king of
Denmark about the year 1348; and
against Erick in 1428 with 40 ships and
12000 regular troops, besides seamen;
this gave umbrage to several princes, 
who gave orders to several merchants
of their respective kingdoms to with­
draw their effects, and by that means
broke up the greatest part of the
strength of the association.

A great many towns in Germany still
retain the name of Hanse towns, tho'
they are no longer governed by those
laws.

HANS in Kelder [i. e. jack in the cel­
lar Du.] a child in the belly of the mo­
ther.

HAP, fortune, chance.

HAPLESS [of happy and less, neg.]
unhappy, unfortunate.

HAPPINESS [probably of happus, 
Brit.] felicity, blessedness.

HARANGUE [harangue, F. derived,
as some think, of ara, L. an altar] be­
came harangues were made before al­
tars.

An HARANGUE, a publick oration
or speech, a tedious or troublesome dis­
course; a too pompous, prolix or un­
seasonable discourse or declamation.

HARBOURLESS [of hereberʒa and
leaſ, Sax.] without, or having no har­
bour.

HARDISH [of hearðicʒ, Sax.] some­
thing hard.

HARDSHIP [of hearð, Sax. and ship]
hard case, circumstances and sufferings.

HARD Horse, is one that is insensible
of whip or spur.

HARDNESS [hearðneſſe, Sax.]
hard quality; that quality whereby the
parts cohere firmly together, so as to
resist the touch.

HARDINESS [of hardiesse, F.] bold­
ness, stoutness.

A HARE [Emblematically] denotes vi­
gilancy, quick hearing, wantonness, 
fear, fruitfulness and solitude.

HARIOTABLE [of hareʒat, Sax.]
liable to pay hariots.

HARIOT-Service [Law term] is
when a man holds land by paying ha­
riots at the time of his death.

HARLEQUIN [of Harlequino, a nick­
name given to a famous Italian come­
dian, on account of his frequenting the
house of one Mons. Harlay in Paris] a
buffoon, a merry-andrew, a jack-pud­
ding.

HARLOTRY [either of Arlotta, con­
cubine of Robert, father to William the
conqueror; or Arlotta, Ital. a proud
whore, q. d whoreletry, or little whore­
dom] the practice of whores or harlots.

HARMFUL [hearmful, Sax.] hurt­
ful, mischievous.

HARMLESS [hearmleſſe, Sax.]
innocent, not apt to do harm.

HARMLESNESS harmless disposition
or quality.

HARMONICA [in Musick] a term
given by the ancients to that part which
considers the difference and proportion
of sounds, with respect to acute and
grave.

HARMONICAL Arithmetick, is so
much of the theory and doctrine of num­
bers, as relates to the making the com­
parisons, reductions, &c. of musical in­
tervals, which are express'd by numbers, 
in order to the finding out the mutual
relations, compositions and resolutions.

HARMONICAL Proportion [in Mu­
sick] three or four quantities are said



to be in an harmonical Proportion; when
in the former case, the difference of
the first and second shall be to the diffe­
rence of the second and third, as the
first is to the third; and the latter, the
difference of the first and second to the
difference of the third and fourth, as
the first is to the fourth.

If there are three quantities in an
harmonical Proportion, the difference be­
tween the second and twice the first, is
to the first as the second is to the third;
also the first and last is to twice the
first, as the last is to the middle one.

If there are four quantities in an bar­
monical Proportion, the difference be­
tween the second and twice the first, is
to the first as the third to the fourth.

HARMONICAL Series, is a series of
many numbers in continued harmoni­
cal proportion.

HARMONICAL Composition, in a ge­
neral sense, includes the composition
both of harmony and melody.

HARMONICAL Interval, is an inter­
val or difference of two sounds, which
are agreeable to the ear, whether in
consonance or succession.

HARMONICAL Sounds, such sounds as
always make a certain determinate num­
ber of vibrations in the time that some
other fundamental sound, to which they
are referred, make one vibration.

HARMONIOUSNESS [of ἁρμονία, Gr.
harmonia, L.] agreeableness in sound, or
musical proportion.

HARMONY [in Architect.] an agree­
able relation between the parts of a
building.

HARMONY [in Painting] is a term
used both in the ordonnance and compo­
sition, and in the colours of a picture:
In the ordonnance it signifies the union or
connection between the figures, with
respect to the subject of the piece.

Simple HARMONY [in Musick] is
that, where there is no concord to the
fundamental, above an octave.

Compound HARMONY, is that, where
to the simple harmony of one octave, 
that of another octave is added.

HARMONY of the Spheres [with 
Philoso­
phers] a kind of musick, suppose'd to be
produced by the sweetly tuned motions
of the stars and planets. They attri­
bute this harmony to the various and
proportionate impressions of the hea­
venly globes upon one another, which, 
by acting under proper intervals, form
a harmony. For, as they thought it
not possible that such large bodies, mov­
ing with great rapidity, should be silent,
and that the atmosphere continually
impelled by them must yield a set of
sounds proportionate to the impulsions
it receives, and they not running all in
the same circuit, nor with the same ve­
locity, different tones must arise from
this diversity of motions; which being
all directed by the hand of the Almigh­
ty, do form an admirable symphony or
concert.

HARMONY Celestial [with 
Philoso­
phers] a kind of musick, suppose'd to be
produced by the sweetly tuned motions
of the stars and planets. They attri­
bute this harmony to the various and
proportionate impressions of the hea­
venly globes upon one another, which, 
by acting under proper intervals, form
a harmony. For, as they thought it
not possible that such large bodies, mov­
ing with great rapidity, should be silent,
and that the atmosphere continually
impelled by them must yield a set of
sounds proportionate to the impulsions
it receives, and they not running all in
the same circuit, nor with the same ve­
locity, different tones must arise from
this diversity of motions; which being
all directed by the hand of the Almigh­
ty, do form an admirable symphony or
concert.

HARO a custom among the Nor­
mans, much the same, if
not the original of the Hue and Cry after
offenders. The reason of the name and
practice is said to be this: There was
once a duke of Normandy, call'd Rollo, 
a man of great justice and severity a­
gainst offenders; and thereupon, when
they follow'd any one upon the pursuit, 
they cry'd Ha Roll, q. d. Ah-Rollo, where
art thou that are wont to redress these
grievances. Upon this occasion, those
that were within hearing, were either
to make a pursuit or pay a fine.

HAROL a custom among the Nor­
mans, much the same, if
not the original of the Hue and Cry after
offenders. The reason of the name and
practice is said to be this: There was
once a duke of Normandy, call'd Rollo, 
a man of great justice and severity a­
gainst offenders; and thereupon, when
they follow'd any one upon the pursuit, 
they cry'd Ha Roll, q. d. Ah-Rollo, where
art thou that are wont to redress these
grievances. Upon this occasion, those
that were within hearing, were either
to make a pursuit or pay a fine.

HARPYES [Ἁρπύια of ἁρπάξω, Gr. to
seize violently] three fabulous mon­
sters, call'd Aello, Ocypete and Celæno, 
who, according to the fictions of the
poets, have the faces of virgins, the
ears of bears, the bodies of vultures, 
crooked hands and feet, with sharp ta­
lons. They are put hieroglyphically, 
to signify extortioners, griping usurers, 
and covetous milers.

They tell us, that the Harpyes were
wont to spoil Phineus's victuals. And
some have the notion that they were
certain wild monstrous fowls, which
were wont to carry away Phineus's din­
ner off from the table. But the matter
was thus, Phineus was a king of Pæonia,
who grew blind in his old age; and
after the death of all his sons, his daugh­
ters Pyria and Erasia, wasted and made
away with all their father's substance;
and hence the poets tell us, that phineus
was miserable, who was thus perplex'd
by Harpyes; but Tethus and Calais two
famous men, and sons of Bereas his
neighbours were helpful to him, drove
his daughters away, gathered his sub­
stance together again, and appointed a
certain Thracian to be his steward.

HARPOCRATES [among the Egyp­
tians] was esteemed the god of silence
and the son of Isis; and his statue stood
near the image of Serapis, with a fin­
ger on his lips, and a wolf's skin full of
eyes about his shoulders.

HARSHNESS, sharpness in taste; se­
verity.

HART [heort, Sax.] a stag in the
sixth year.



HART Evil [with Farriers] the stag-­
evil, a rheum or defluxion, that falls
upon the jaws and other parts of the
fore-head of a horse, which hinders
him from eating.

HART-Wort, Hart's-Fodder, Hart's-­
Tongue, several herbs.

HARVEST-Work [hæfoſt-&wyn;erc, 
Sax.] the gathering in the fruits or har­
vest.

To HASP [hæſpian, Sax.] to fasten
with a hasp.

To make HASTE [haesten, Du. hâter, 
F.] to be expeditious; to quicken, press
or urge on.

HASTINESS [of haste, Du. haté, F.]
quickness, urgency.

HATCH, a vessel or place to lay grain
in; also a trap to catch weesels.

HATCHING, the act whereby fecun­
dated eggs, after seasonable incubation, 
exclude their young.

HATRED [of hatian, Sax. to hate, 
and reð, counsel, &c.] ill-will.

HATEFUL [hateful, Sax.] deserv­
ing hate, odious.

HATEFULNESS, odious quality.

HATMAKERS 
company an ancient
company, are a master
and 4 wardens, 21 assi­
stants; but no livery:
Their armorial en­
signs are a dexter
hand, and hat. They
have no hall since the
fire; but now meet at Pewterers hall.

Image omitted.



HATTOCK, a shock of corn contain­
ing 12 sheafs, or, as others say, 3 sheafs
laid together.

HAUGHTY [hautain, F.] proud, lof­
ty, elated.

HAUNCH [of a Horse, &c.] is the hip, 
or that part of the hind-quarter, that
extends from the reins or back to the
hough or ham.

To draw the HAUNCHES [with Horse­
men] is to change the leading-foot in
galloping.

A HAUNTER [of hanteur, F.] one
that goes often to, or frequents a place,
&c.

To make HAVOCK [of hafoc, Sax.
an hawk, being a bird of prey] to make
waste, destroy, &c.

HAURIANT [hauriens, L.] drawing
in.

HAURIANT [in Heral­
dry] is a term peculiarly
applied to fishes; and de­
notes their being rais'd di­
rectly upright, as in the fi­
gure.

Image omitted.



HAUTGOUTS [haut gout, F.] high
relishes.

A HAWK [Hieroglyphically] was by
the ancients put to signify the sun, being
an emblem of its powerful influences
in the world. Some have observed of
this bird, that it can stedfastly behold
the sun, and its bones will attract gold
(the metal of the sun) as the loadstone
does iron. They also represented Al­
mighty God by the body of a man co­
vered with a long garment, bearing
on the top of the head a Hawk; because
the excellence, courage, nimbleness and
good qualities of this bird, did shadow
out the incomparable perfections of its
Creator. And because the Hawk is a
bird of a long life, it was an emblem of
natural life; it was also put to signify a
prudent, valorous, jult and brave man.

HAWK, the hawk was deified by the
Egyptians, because one of these birds in
ancient times is said to have brought a
book to the priests of Thebes, tied round
with a scarlet thread, containing the
rites and ceremonies which were to be
observ'd in the worship of their gods;
for which reason the sacred scribes
wore a scarlet fillet, with a hawks fea­
ther on their head.

HAWKERS, were anciently fraudu­
lent persons, who went about from
place to place, buying brass, pewter, 
&c. which ought to be uttered in open
market; now pedlars, who go about
the town or country selling wares.

Thwarts the HAWSE [Sea Term] the
same as rides upon the hawse, i. e.
when a ship lies athwart with her stern
just before the hawse of another ship.

To dance the HAY, to dance in a ring.

HAYS [with Astrologers] a certain
dignity or strengthening of a planer, by
being in a sign of its own sex; and a
part of the world agreeable to its own
nature; as when a masculine and diur­
nal planet is in the masculine sign in the
day time, and above the earth; or a fe­
minine, nocturnal planet in the night
time in a feminine sign, and under the
earth.

HAZARD, also a term used at Tennis,
when a ball does not rebound as usual, 
so that no judgment can be made of it.

HAZARDOUSNESS [of hazardeux, 
F.] dangerousness.

HEAD of a Man [Hieroglyphically] sig­
nified sound judgment and wisdom; ha­
ving the hair cut off, violent grief or
bondage; if growing, liberty.

The HEAD of an infant, an old man,
a hawk, a fish and a river-horse, all to­
gether [Hieroglyphically] intimated the



condition of man in this world. The
Infant signifies his birth; that with
grey Hairs, his death; that of a Hawk,
God's love to man; the Fish, death and
burial; and the River-horse, the irre­
sistible power of death, that spares no
body.

HEAD [with Anat.] the extremity of 
a bone; also the extreme of a muscle,
that is inserted into the staple bone;
also the head of a muscle which is a 
tendon.

HEAD [in Mechanick Arts] the upper
part of inanimate and artificial bodies,
as the head of a nail, &c.

HEAD [in Painting, Carving, &c.]
the picture or representation of that
part of a human body.

HEAD [with Architects] an ornament
of sculpture or carved work, often ser­
ving as the key of an arch, platband,
&c.

HEADS [with Bricklayers] a term by
which they mean half in length, but to
the full breadth of a tile. These they 
use to lay at the eyes of a house.

HEAD of a work [in Fortification] the
front of it nearest to the enemy, and
farthest from the body of the place.

Moor's HEAD [spoken of a Horse]
who has a black head and feet, and his
body of a roan colour.

Moor's Head [in Engineery] a kind
of bomb or grenado shot out of a can­
non.

Moor's Head [with Chymists] a cover
or cap of an alembick, having a long
neck for the conveyance of the vapours
into a vessel that serves as a refrigera­
tory.

A HEAD of earth was made at Ox­
ford, A. D. 1387, in the reign of king
Richard II. which at a time appointed
spoke these words, Caput desecetur, the
head shall be cut off. Caput elevabitur,
the head shall be lifted up. Pedes ele­
vabuntur super Caput, the feet shall be
lifted up above the head.

HEADINESS [of heafðiʒ, Sax.]
strong quality in liquors; also obstinacy,
stubbornness, rashness.

HEAD-STRONGNESS, obstinacy,
stubbornness.

HEALING [with Bricklayers] the
covering of the roof of any building,
either Lead, Slate, Tiles, &c.

HEALING [of hælan, Sax.] sanative,
making sound.

HEALTH [of hwyl, Brit. hæl, Sax.]
soundness in body, a due temperament
or constitution of the severeal parts,
whereof an animal body is composed,
both in respect of quality and quantity,
or mind.

HEALTHFULNESS [healfulneſ­
ſe, Sax.] soundness of constitution, &c.

HEALTHINESS [of hwyl, Brit. hæl­
ðiʒ, Sax.] healthfulness, the same as 
Health; or it may be defined to be that
state of the body whereby it is fitted to
discharge the natural functions easily,
perfectly, and durably.

HEALTHLESS [hæl-leaſ, Sax.]
wanting health.

HEALTHY [hælðiʒ, Sax.] having
health.

HEARING [hẏrunʒ, Sax.] is that
sensation whereby from a due motion
of the small fibres of the auditory nerves
impress'd upon the ears, and convey'd
to the brain or common sensory, the
soul perceives sounds and judges of
them.

HEARKENER [of heorcnian, Sax.
to hearken] a hearer or listener.

HEART [heort, Sax.] the seat of
life in an animal body, &c. A muscu­
lous part in the animal body, situated
in the Thorax; wherein the veins all
terminate, and from which all the ar­
teries arise; and which by its alternate
contraction and dilatation is the chief
instrument of the circulation of the 
blood, and the principle of vital action.

HEARTS [in Coat armour] did anci­
ently denote the valour or sincerity of
the bearer, when arms were the re­
ward of virtue; but since they are be­
come common to all persons that have
wealth instead of worth.

A HEART placed on a chafing-dish
of burning coals, there remaining with­
out receiving any prejudice; was by the
Egyptians put hieroglyphically to repre­
sent the perpetuity and duration of the 
heavens, thereby intimating, how the 
world and heavens subsist intire, not­
withstanding that those powerful ele­
ments and beings do struggle together,
and dispute the place one with another.

HEART of the Sun [with Astrol.] the
same as Cazimi.

A HEART upon the lips of a man
 [Hieroglyphically] was by the ancients
put to represent the truth.

Three HEARTS concentred [Hiero­
glyphically] represent confederacy and
courage.

HEARTINESS, healthfulness, sound­
ness of constitution, sincerity, cordial­
ness.

Two HEARTS [with Horsemen] a
horse is said to have two hearts that
works in the manage with constraint,
and irresolution, and can't be bought
to consent to it.



HEARTLESS [heartleſſe, Sax.]
wanting courage or hope, despairing.

HEAT [in a hot body] has been com­
monly considered as an inherent qua­
lity in bodies, and thence call'd one of 
the primary ones and opposite to 
cold; but the experience of modern
philosophers hath determined that it is
only the agitation of the parts of that
body, and the fire contained in it; by
which agitation a motion is produced
in our bodies, exciting the idea of heat
in our minds; and heat in respect of us
is only that idea or sensation in our
mind; and in the hot body is nothing
but motion that occasions it: And Heat
(say our philosophers) is no more in
the fire that burns our finger, than
pain in the needle that pricks it. No
heat is sensible to us, unless the body,
that acts upon our organs of sense, has
a greater degree of heat than that of
our organs; for if it be faint and weak,
it is said to be cold.

That heat is the result of motion ap­
pears plain from the following experi­
ment. Let a grind-stone be turned
swiftly about by the handle, without any
water in the trough, and apply to it a
piece of iron of a moderate thickness
according to the diameter of the stone,
and in a very few turns of the stone,
the iron, so far of it as touched the stone
will be red hot, as if it had been heated
in a Smith's forge.

Actual HEAT [in Physick] is that
which is an effect of real elementary
fire.

Potential HEAT is that which is found
in wine, pepper, and several chymical
preparations; as brandy, oil of turpen­
tine, &c.

HEAT [in Geography] is diversified
according to the different climes, seasons
&c. and arises from the different angles
under which the same rays strike upon
the surface of the earth; For it is shewn
by Mechanicks, that a moving body
striking perpendicular upon another,
acts with its whole force; and that a
body that strikes directly, by how much
more it deviates from the perpendicular
acts with the less force.

HEATS [of Horse-Races] the exerci­
ses that are given them by way of pre­
paration.

HEATHY [of hæðicʒ, Sax.] being
full of the shrub called heath.

HEATHENISH, after the manner of
heathens.

HEATHENISHNESS, heathenish man­
ner, nature or disposition.

HEATHENISM [of hæðen, Sax.] the
principles or practices of heathens.

HEAVEN [with Astron. called also the
ethereal or starry Heaven] is that im­
mense region wherein the stars, planets
and comets are disposed.

HEAVEN [Hieroglyphically] was paint­
ed as a beautiful young man with a
sceptre in his right hand, the sun and
moon on his breast, a crown upon his
head, in a garment adorned with innu­
merable stars, trailing on the ground,
and an urn full of fire in his left hand,
sending up a great flame with a burning
heart in the middle.

The youthful face of the heavens in­
timates their immutability, constancy,
and in corruptibility, that never fails to
decay. The scepter and crown imply
the dominion and power, that the celes­
tial globes exercise upon the inferior
beings. The sun and moon in the breast
point at the two beautiful luminaries
that shine in the firmament, and are the
immediate causes under God of life and
motion, and the means by which he pro­
duces so many wonders in the world.
The pot full of flames with a burning
heart that never consumes, intimates
that the almighty power of God restrains
the enmity and seeming discord of the
elements, from producing a confusion,
&c.

The relation between heaven and 
earth [Hieroglyphically] was expressed by
a man with his hands tied with a chain
that was let down from the clouds, be­
cause there is nothing here below, tho'
never so great and powerful, but is held
by a secret chain, by which the divine
providence can turn and wind it at plea­
sure.

HEAVINESS [heafiʒneſſe, Sax.]
weightiness, sadness of mind.

HEBDOMADARY [of Ἒβδομας,
Gr. a week] the
hebdomary or week's-man, a canon or
prebendary in a cathedral church, who
took care of the choir offices of it for
his week.

HEBDOMADEER [of Ἒβδομας,
Gr. a week] the
hebdomary or week's-man, a canon or
prebendary in a cathedral church, who
took care of the choir offices of it for
his week.

HEBE [Ἢβὴ, Gr.] the goddess of
youth (according to the poets) was the
daughter of Iuno, without a father, for
Iuno being invited to a banquet by Ap­
pollo, eat lettices, and so conceived and
bare Hebe, who being beautiful, Jupiter
made her his cup-bearer; but in wait­
ing on him at a banquet, Hebe happen­
ed to fall down, and her garments fal­
ling abroad, she was seen uncovered,
for which she was put out of her office,
and Ganymedes was put in her room.
This allegory is thus expounded: When
Juno (i. e. the Air) is warmed with the



hot rays of Apollo (i. e. the sun) she that
before was barren, begins to conceive
and bring forth Hebe (i. e. the spring) and
herbs and men: she ministers duly to
Jupiter, till at the end of summer Jupi­
ter casts her out and takes in Ganymedes
or the winter and watry sign Aquarius.

HEBETATION, a making dull or
blunt.  L.

HEBREW [הידבע, Heb.] of or per­
taining to the Hebrew language.

HECATE [supposed to be so called of
ἑχατή, Gr. an hundred] either because
an hundred victims at a time used to
be offered to her; or else because by her
edicts, they that die and are not buried, 
wander 100 years upon the banks of
the river Styx] a goddess of the heathens, 
to whom the poets give three names
as Luna in heaven, Diana on earth, and
Proserpina in hell.

HECATOMB [of Ἑχατόν βοῖς i. e. an
hundred oxen; or as others, of Ἑχατόν
βάσεις, i. e. πόδες an hundred feet]
Eustathius says, an hecatomb signifies a
sacrifice of an hundred oxen; but it is
generally taken for an hundred animals
of any sort. Those that derive it from
Ἑχατόν βάσεις, make it consist of 25 ani­
mals. Others are of opinion, that he­
catomb is only a finite number put for
an indefinite, and so signifies no more
than a great many.

HECATOMBÆON [Ἑχατομβαίον of
Ἑχατὸν, an hundred, and βοίς Gr. an ox, 
because an hundred oxen were then of­
fered in sacrifice to Jupiter] the month
of June.

HECATOMPHONIA [of Ἑχατόν, an
hundred, and φωνεύω, Gr. to slay] a sacri­
fice offered by the Messenians, by such as
had slain an hundred enemies in battle.

HECTICA FFBRIS, [of ἒξις, Gr. ha­
bit] a continual slow fever, as tho' it was
riveted in the constitution.

HEDERACEOUS [hederaceus, L.] of
or belonging to ivy.

HEDERAL Crown [among the Ro­
mans] a crown of ivy, worn in publick
feastings and rejoycings.

HEDGE-HOG-trefoil, an herb.

HEDGE-HOG [Hieroglyphically] was
pictured to represent a cunning time-­
server, because this creature has always
two or three holes, whether it retreats;
and when the wind is cold and boist­
erous at one hole, it creeps to the other.

HEDGE-HOG [heʒʒe hoʒ, Sax.] a
quadrupede all over defended with sharp
thorns.

To HEED [heðan, Sax.] to beware,
to mind, to observe.

HEEDFUL [heðful, Sax.] careful,
wary, &c.

HEEDFULNESS, wariness, watchful­
ness, &c.

HEEDLESS [of heaðleaſ, Sax.] care­
less, &c.

HEEDLESNESS, want of heed.

HEGIRA [among the Mahometans]
signifies persecution for the sake of reli­
gion, and is with them the epocha or
beginning of their present computation
of time, which takes its date from the
flight of Mahomet from the city of Mec­
cha, which according to us begins in the
622 year of Christ, when Mahomet after
he had conquered all Medina, so
rouzed the principal men of Mecca, 
that they raised a considerable army and
opposed him, and forced him to flee, 
which was on friday the 15 of July, 
Anno Christi 622.

HEICETES a sect of Hereticks in
the VIIth century, who
made a profession of a monastick life;
but in imitation of Moses and the pro­
phets Miriam and the Israelites, who
praised God with singing and instruments
of musick, after their deliverance at the
Red-Sea; they practised the like, and
endeavoured to draw women to them
to make a profession of a monastick life, 
and assist in their mirth.

EICETES a sect of Hereticks in
the VIIth century, who
made a profession of a monastick life;
but in imitation of Moses and the pro­
phets Miriam and the Israelites, who
praised God with singing and instruments
of musick, after their deliverance at the
Red-Sea; they practised the like, and
endeavoured to draw women to them
to make a profession of a monastick life, 
and assist in their mirth.

HEIGHT [of haut, F. or heah, Sax.
high] talness. The height of a well
proportioned man, is equal to the dis­
tance from one end of the finger of one
hand to the other, when his arms are
extended as wide as may be.

HEIGHTS [in the Military Art] the emi­
nences round a fortified place, on which
the besiegers usually post themselves.

HEIR Apparent, is he on whom the
succession is so settled that it cannot be
set aside, without altering the laws of
succession.

HEIR Presumptive, the next relation
or heir at law to a person; who is to in­
herit from him ab intestato, and who 'tis
presumed will be heir, nothing but a
contrary disposition in the testator being
able to prevent him.

HEIR [in Com. Law] one who succeeds
by right of blood to any man's lands or
tenements in fee.

HEIRDOM, heirship, or the right and
title of an heir or heiress.

HELICA [of ῆλιος, Gr. the sun] sa­
crifices and other solemnities performed
in honour of the sun.

HEUCOID Parabola [with Mathem­
aticians] is a parabolick spiral or a
curve, that arises from the supposition
of the axis of the common Apollonian
parabola, being bent round into the
periphery of a circle, and is a line then



passing thro' the extremities of theordi
nates, which do now converge towards
the center of the said circle.

HELICOMETES [of ἥλιος the sun, 
and χωμήτης, Gr. a comet] a phenome­
non sometimes seen at the setting of the
sun.

HELICOSOPHY [of ἥλιξ the sun, 
and σοφια, Gr. wisdom] is the art of de­
lienating all sort of spiral lines in plano.

HELIOCENTRICK Place of a Planet 
[in Astronomy] is that point of the eclip­
tick, to which the planet, supposed to
be seen from the sun, is referred, and
is the same as the longitude of the pla­
net seen from the sun.

HELIOGRAPHICK [of ἥλιος the sun, 
and γραφιχὸς, Gr. descriptive] belonging
to the description of the sun.

HELIOGRAPHY [ἡλιογραφία of ἥλιος
and γράφω, Gr. to describe] a description
of the sun.

HELIOSCOPE [ἡλιοσχόπιον of ἥλιος,
the sun, and σχοπεῖν, Gr. to view] is a
sort of telescope, fitted so as to look on
the body of the sun without offending
the eye, which is done by making the
object and eye glasses of it, of either
red or green glass.

HELIX [in Architecture] the Cauli­
coles or little volutes under the capital
of the Corinthian order. A kind of ivy
whose stalk is twisted like the vine.

HELL [Helle, Sax. הואש, Heb.] is
commonly understood to be a place of
eternal punishment for the wicked af­
ter this life, and in this sense is the di­
rect opposite to Heaven; the ancients
entertain'd different notions of this
state, and the heathen and poetical my­
thology have dress'd it up so ridiculous­
ly as to render it rather contemptible
than credible.

Hell is us'd in an allusive sense; for
no more than a state or condition of
servitude, uneasiness or great fatigue, 
as it is said England is a Paradise to wo­
men, a Purgatory to men, but a Hell to
horses.

The grave is also call'd Hell, and so
is the hollow under a tailor's shop-­
board, also a coachman is call'd a hell-­
driver, a whore a hell-cat, &c.

HELLISH, of the nature of Hell, e­
gregiously wicked.

HELM of the State, the chief place of
government in a nation, &c.

HELM [with Chymists] the head of a
still or alembick, so call'd for its bear­
ing some resemblance to an helmet.

To bring a thing over the HELM [with
Chymists] is to force it by fire up to the
top of the vessel, so that it may distil
down by the beak of the head into the
receiver.

HELMET [with Heralds] is account­
ed the noblest part of a coat-armour, 
for which there were anciently esta­
blished rules, but at present, many wear
rather what they fancy than what they
have a right to.

The Helmet of a knight (say some) is
to stand right forward, and the beaver
a little open.

The Helmets of esquires and gentle­
men, are to be in profile and close.

Noblemen, under the degree of a
duke, have their Helmet in profile, and
open with bars.

Monarchs, princes and dukes, have
the Helmet right forward, and open, 
with many bars.

Helmets turned right forward, are
supposed to denote giving orders with
absolute authority.

Helmets turned side-ways are suppo­
sed to intimate hearkening to the com­
mands of superiors.

HELMINTHAGOGICK [of ἕλμινθης,
a worm, and ἀγωγὸς of ἕγω, Gr. to draw
or lead out] expelling worms.

HELPFUL [of helpful, Sax.] assist­ 
ing.

HELPFULNESS, aiding or assisting
quality.

HELPLESS [of helpleaſ, Sax.] de­
stitute of help,

HELPLESNESS, destituteness of help.

HELPS [in the Manage] are seven, 
the Voice, Rod, Bit or Snaffle, the Calves
of the Legs, the Stirrups, the Spur and
the Ground.

HELVETICK, of or pertaining to
the Helvetii, i. e. the Switzers or Swiss
Cantons.

HELVIDIANS [so called of Helvidius]
their distinguishing tenet was, that Ma­
ry the mother of Jesus was not, a vir­
gin, but had other children by Joseph.

HEM, an oven in which Lapis Cala­
minaris is baked.

HEMEROBIOUS [of ἡμέρα a day, and
βίος Gr. life] that lives but one day.

HEMERODROMI [of ἡμεροδρόμος,
of ἡμέρα a day, and δρομος, Gr. a
course] centinels or guards among the
ancients appointed for the security and
preservation of cities and other places
by walking round the city every morn­
ing, and patrolling all day round to see
that no enemy was nigh the place.

HEMICYCLE [in Architecture] a vault
in a cradle form, also arches and
frames, or sweeps of vaults consisting of
a perfect semi-circle.



HEMISPHEROIDAL [Geometry]
something approaching the figure of an
hemisphere; but is not justly so.

HEMLOCK [heamleac, Sax.] a nar­
cotick plant used in physick.

HEMMED in [of hemmen, Teut.]
inclosed, surrounded.

HEMORRHOIDS [ἀιμοῤῥοιδες, of
ἆιμα blood, and ῥέω Gr. to flow] a dis­
ease in the fundament, commonly called
the piles.

HENCEFORTH [heononforð, Sax.]
from this time.

HEN-HEARTED, timorous, cow­
ardly.

HEN-PECKED, cowed, kept under
by a woman.

HEPATICK Aloes, the finest sort of
aloes, so called of its being in colour
something like that of the liver.

HEPATOSCOPIA [of ἕπατος, of the
liver, and σχοπέω, Gr. to view] a sort
of divination by inspecting the entrails
of beasts.

HEPTACAPSULAR [of ἑπτὰ and
capsula, L.] having seven seed vessels.

HEPTACHORD Verses [of ἑπτἀ se­
ven, and χορδὴ Gr. string] verses sung
or play'd on seven chords, i.e. in seven
different tones or notes, and probably
on an instrument of seven strings.

HEPTAGONAL Numbers, a sort of
polygonal numbers, wherein the dif­
ference of the terms of the correspond­
ing arithmetical progression is five.

HEPTAMERON [of ἑπτα and ἡμέρα, 
Gr. a day] a book or treatise of the
transactions of seven days.

HEPTATEUCH [ἑπτάτευχος of ἑπτὰ
and τευχος, Gr. a work or book] a vo­
lume consisting of seven parts.

HEPHTHEMIMERIS [ἑφθημιμερης
of ἑπτὰ seven, and ἡμισύσ a half, an
μέρος Gr. a part] a verse in Greek and
Latin poetry, consisting of three feet
and a syllable, i. e. of seven half feet.

HERACLEONITES [so called of He­
racleon their leader] hereticks of the
feet of the Gnostickt.

HERALD [of here an army, and
healt a champion] because it was his
office to charge or challenge unto battle
or combat.

HERALDRY [l'art heraldique, F. ars
heraldica, L.] a science which consists
in the knowledge of what relates to
royal solemnities, cavalcades and cere­
monies, at coronations, instalments, 
creation of peers, funerals, marriages, 
and all other publick solemnities; and
also all that appertains to the bearing
of coat armour, assigning those that
belong to all persons, regulating their
right and precedency in point of ho­
nour, restraining those from bearing
coat armour that have not a just claim
to them, &c.

HERALDS, officers of a prince or
sovereign state at first form'd them into
a college and endow'd them with pri­
vileges, and Edward VI. declar'd them
free from all subsidies, taxes and other:
offices, Philip and Mary enlarg'd these
privileges and confirm'd them by letters
patents, in which their title and order
stands thus, Garter principal king at
arms. Clarencieux king at arms by
south Trent and Norroy king at arms
by north Trent.

Their office is to declare war and to
proclaim peace, to summon places to
surrender, to assist at the ceremonies
of coronations, christenings, weddings
and funerals of princes, at the general
meeting of states, the renewal of leagues
royal feasts, publick shews and tourna­
ments, entries of kings and queens, 
and all such publick actions of state.

Garter was instituted by Henry V and
his office principally respected the cere­
monies and solemnities, which con­
cern the most noble order of the Gar­
ter, and to marshal the funerals of the
knights of the Garter; the title of
king added to their character, usually
meant no more but the principal or
chief of the college or company, who
in many ceremonies where he repre­
sented the king's person, used to wear
a crown, for which reason he was al­
ways a knight.

Clarencieux was instituted by Edward
IV. and his office is to regulate all
such solemn funerals of all degrees un­
der peers, as happened on the south of
Trent.

Formerly there were but two of
them in England, Clarencieux, and Nor­
roy, but now there are 3, and under
these are 5 others and 4 poursevants:
In Scotland the chief herald is call'd
Lion king at arms, and he has several
under him.

HERALDS Colledge, a corporation es­
tablished by king Richard III. consisting
of kings of arms, heralds and pursuivants, 
who are employed to be messengers of
war and peace; to martial and order
coronations, funerals, interviews, of
kings, cavalcades, &c. also to take
care of the coats of arms and genealo­
gies of nobility and gentry, &c.

HERB [with Botanists] is defined to
be a plant that is not woody, and loses
that part which appears above ground
every year, as Parsley, &c.



HERB Christopher, Paris, Robert, two
Pence, several sorts of herbs.

HERBACEOUS [herbaceus, L.] be­
longing to herbs or grass.

HERBA [in French Academies] a re­
ward, or some good stuff given to a
horse that has worked well in the ma­
nage.

HERBAL, the method of preparing
an herbal is as follows; gather flowers, 
leaves, &c. when perfectly ripe, and
in their true colours, spread them on
brown paper with their parts all dis­
play'd as distinctly as you possibly can.
If the stem or body of the flowers, &c.
be thick, pare away one half that it
may lie flat; and put another brown
paper over them; and put all between
2 iron plates, screw'd tight together, 
and set them in a slack oven for 2 hours;
then take them out and wash them
over with brandy and Aqua fortis, and
lay them on fresh paper to dry, and
when dry smear the back sides over
with a brush, dipp'd in a dissolution of
gum-dragon to make them stick and
lay them in a paper book prepared for
that purpose, where they will be fast
and always look fresh.

HERBESCENT [herbescens, L.] grow­
ing to be herbs.

HERBID [herbidus, L.] full of grass
or herbs.

HERBULENCY [of herbulentus, L.]
fulness of grass or herbs.

HERCULES, according to the poets, 
was the son of Jupiter and Alcmena, the
most illustrious and glorious of all the
heroes of antiquity. Dion. Halicar says, 
he was a prince of Greece, that travelled
with his army as far as the straits of
Gibraltar, and destroy'd all the tyrants
of his time. They ascribe to him
twelve notable labours or atchieve­
ments; 1. The killing a lion in the
Nemæan wood. 2. The serpent Hydra
in the Fens of Lerna. 3. The wild
boar of Arimanthus, that wasted Arcadia, 
4. He slew the centaurs. 5. He took a
stag running on foot. 6. He slew the
birds Stymphalides. 7. He cleansed the
Augean stables. 8. He drew a bull a­
long the sea, from Crete into Greece.
9. He took the tyrant Diomedes, and
gave him to his man-eating horses.
10. He took the giant Geryon. 11. He
went down to Hell, and brought thence
Theseus, Pirithous, and the dog Cerberus.
12. He slew the dragon that guarded
the Hesperian gardens, and took the
golden apples.

Some by Hercules understand the sun, 
and by his twelve labours, the twelve
signs of the zodiack. By his beloved
Hebe, the goddess of youth, the spring
time, wherein the youth of the earth
is renewed. By his overcoming Geryon, 
and rescuing his cattle, that the sun by
destroying winter preserves beasts.

Suidas interprets the club of Hercules
to be philosophy, by which he slew the
dragon, i. e. natural concupiscence and
her three evils or furies, viz. Anger, 
Covetousness and Pleasure.

To HERD together [of heorð, Sax.
an herd] to live or keep together in
herds.

HEREDITARY Right, is a right or
privilege, by virtue whereof a person
succeeds to the estate or effects of his
ancestors.

HERETICKS [Hieroglyphically] were
represented by serpents.

HERIOT Custom, was when the te­
nant for life was by custom oblig'd to
the payment of the best horse, &c. at
his death; which payment is to be
made, not only by the next heir in
blood, but by any of the next successors.

HERISSE [in Heraldry] of herisson, an
hedge-hog, signifies set with long sharp
points.

HERISSON, is a Barrier made of one
strong beam or plank of wood, stuck
full of iron spikes; it is supported in
the middle, and turns upon a Pivot or
Axis; it is used in stopping a passage, 
in nature of a turn-stile, for it is equal­
ly ballanced upon the Pivot, which
stands upright in the middle of the pas­
sage, upon which it turns round, as
there is occasion to open or shut the
passage. See the figure.

Image omitted.



HERMAPHRODEITY [of Ἑρμαφροδί­
τη of Ἕρμης was Mercury, and Ἀφροδίτη, Ve­
nus] the state or condition of an herma­
phrodite; the being of both sexes, male
and female.

HERMAPHRODITICAL, of or pe­
taining to an hermaphrodite.

HERMATHENA, a figure or statue
representing Hermes or Mercury, and
Athena or Minerva both in one.



HERMARACLES, a figure com­
pounded of Mercury and Hercules.

HERMES [with Antiquaries] a kind
of figure or statue of the god Mercury, 
usually made of marble, but sometimes
of brass without arms and legs, and
usually placed by the Greeks and Romans
in their cross-ways.

HERMETICK Art, a name given to
Chymistry, upon a supposition that Hermes
Trismegistus was the inventor thereof, 
or excelled therein. We know but
little of this Hermes, but that he was an
ancient king of Egypt 1000 years before
Æsculapius. There are several pieces
still extant under his name; but all
supposititious.

HERMETICAL Seal, See Hermeti­
cally.

HERMETICALLY [with Chymists]
as a glass sealed hermetically, is one, 
that having his neck heated, till it is
just ready to melt, is closed together
with a pair of red hot pincers.

HERMETICK Science [so called of
Hermes, i. e. Mercury, whom the chy­
mists assert to have been the first inven­
tor of it] the art of chymistry.

HERMHARPOCRATES, a figure or
statue of a deity, composed of Mercury
and Harpocrates.

HERMIANS, a sect of hereticks in
the second century, who held that God
was corporeal.

HERMODACTYL [Ἑρμοδἀχτυλος, 
Gr. i. e. Mercury's finger] a round
headed root brought from Syria, that
gently purges phlegm.

HERMOGENIANS [to called of Her­
mogenes their leader] a sect of hereticks
in the second century, who held that
Matter was the first principle, and Idea
the mother of all the elements.

HEROICALNESS heroical nature, 
quality, dispo­
sition, &c.

HEROICKNESS heroical nature, 
quality, dispo­
sition, &c.

HEROICK Age, that age or period of
the world wherein the heroes lived.

HEROICK Poem, a poem that treats
of great and noble actions or the at­
chievements of some Hero; in English
it commonly consists of lines that have
in general 10 syllables, whether in
rhyme or blank verse, as in Milton's
Paradise lost.

An HEROICK Poem, may be divided
into these six parts: 1. The Fable. 2.
The action. 3. The Narration. 4. The
Characters. 5. The Machines. 6. The
Thoughts and expressions.

Crux HERRINGS such as are caught
after the fourteenth of September.

Corred HERRINGS, such as are caught
in the middle of Yarmouth seas, from
the end of August to the middle of Oc­
tober, and serve to make red herrings.

HERSE, a carriage for dead corps.
See Hearse.

HERSE, is likewise an engine like a
harrow, stuck full of iron-spikes; it is
used in place of a Chevaux de Prise, to
throw in the ways where horse or foot
are to pass, to hinder their march, and
upon breaches to stop the foot. Com­
mon harrows are sometimes made use
of, and are turned with their points
upwards. See the figure.

Image omitted.



HERSILLON, is for the same use as
the Herse, and is made of one strong
plank of wood about ten or twelve foot
long, stuck full of points or spikes on
both sides, as the figure shews.

Image omitted.



HERST [Hyrſt, Sax.] in the names
of places, intimates, that the places
took their name from a wood or forest.

HESITANCY [hæsitantia, L.] hesita­
tion; a being in doubt or uncertainty.

HESPERIAN Gardens, the gardens of
the Hesperides.

HESPERIDES, the daughters of Hes­
perus, Ægle, Arethusa and Hesperethusa, 
who, according to the poets, had gardens
and orchards whose trees bore golden
fruit which were guarded by a vigilant
dragon. Varro is of opinion, those
golden apples were sheep (which might
be so called, because their fleeces were



of the colour of gold, or that the word
μῆλον, in Greek, signifies both a sheep
and an apple) and that the dragon was
the shepherd.

HESPERUS, is said to be the son of
Atlas, who lived in Italy, from whom
it was called Hesperia; he was esteemed
for his piety towards the gods, and ju­
stice and kindness to his subjects. He
observing the motion of the stars on the
top of mount Atlas, is said to have va­
nish'd suddenly away in a tempest, and
had the morning star, the brightest in
the heavens, called after his name.

HETEROCLITES [with Grammar.]
nouns which vary in their gender or
declension, being either defective or
redundant, &c.

HETERODOXNESS [of ἑτοροδυξία, 
Gr.] the being different in opinion from
the generality of people, or the esta­
blished principles.

HETERODROMUS [of ἕτερος and
δρὸμος, Gr.] is a statical term for the
common Vectis or Leaver, which has
the Hypomoclion placed below the Power
and Weight. Of this kind of Leavers
are the prong and dung-fork, whose
Hypomoclion is the labourer's knee. And
all pincers, sheers, cutting knives, &c.
fastened to blocks are double ones.

Perpetual HETERODROMOUS Lea­
vers [in Staticks] are the wheel, wind­
lass, capstan, crane, &c. and also the
outermost wheels of all wind and wa­
ter-mills, and all cog-wheels.

HETEROGENEAL Bodies [in
Mechanicks]
those bodies whose density is unequal in 
different parts of their bulk.

HETEROGENEOUS Bodies [in
Mechanicks]
those bodies whose density is unequal in 
different parts of their bulk.

HETEROGENEAL Light [according
to Sir Isaac Newton] is light that con­
sists or rays of differing degrees of re­
frangibility: Thus the common light
of the sun or clouds is heterogeneal,
being a mixture of all sorts of rays.

HETEROGENEAL Quantities, are
those which are of such different kinds
and considerations, as that one of them
taken any number of times, never e­
quals or exceeds the other.

HETEROGENEITES [with Chymists]
the parts and principles of different na­
tures (such as oil, salt, spirit, water
and earth) that can be separated from
any body, being analiz'd by fire, are so
called, because they are all of very 
different natures and kinds from one
another.

HETEROGENEOUSNESS [of έτερογέ­
νὴς of ἕτερος and γένος, Gr. kind] hete­
rogeneity; the being of a different na­
ture, kind or quality.

HETEROUSII [of ἕτερος another, 
and οἱσια Gr. substance] such as held that
the Son of God was not of a substance
like and similar to that of the Father.

HEWER [of hea&wyn;ian, Sax.] a cutter
of timber and stones.

HEXACAPSULAR [of ἕξ six, and cap­
sular a little chest] a term applied to such
plants as have six seed vessels.

HEXAGONALLY [of ἑξάγωνος of ἕξ
and γονία, Gr. a corner] after the manner
of an hexagon, or a geometrical figure
that has six equal sides, and as many an­
gles.

HEXAMETER [ἑξάμετρος of ἕξ six
and μέτρον Gr. measure] consisting of 
six feet.

The following tables being a curious
and admirable contrivance, not doubting
but that they will be acceptable to the
curious reader, I present them.

The use of the tables for making hexa­
meter Latin verses, and the manner of
the operation.

Observe these several directions fol­
lowing.

1. Every verse made by these tables, 
will be a hexameter verse, and will be
made up of just six Latin words.

2. Every one of these six words are
to be produced out of these six tables
respectively, viz. the first word out of
the first table, the second word out of
the second table, the third out of the third
table; and so of the fourth, fifth, and
sixth.

3. When you are about to make any
verse by these tables, you must on a
piece of paper write down any six of
the nine figures at pleasure.

4. That these six figures are so many
respective keys to the six tables. The
first figure towards the left hand is al­
ways to be applied to the first table, the
second figure towards the right hand to
the second table, and so every one of
the six tables.

So that the first figure produces out of
the first table the first word of the verse, 
the second figure by the second table the
second word of the verse; and so every
figure of the six, their respective words
out of their respective tables.

5. When you have pitched upon six
figures to make your set of, and written
them down on a paper, the rule for the
operation is this: With the figure that
belongs to its proper table, you must
number on with the squares on the same
table, till you come to nine in counting
upon the squares (always reckoning the
first square of the table once more than
the figure, except it be nine; and then



you are always to count the first square
or letter, you must make a stop (for in
the whole operation you must never
count past nine) and write that letter
down on a paper, and that is to be the
first letter of the Latin word. From
thence proceed till you come to the
ninth square or letter beyond, and set
that down, and so on till the word is
wrought out by the table, which you
Will know by this, that when the word
is ended, if you number on till the ninth
square, you will find it a blank. As for
example: Having chosen the number
following, 1 3 2 4 3 6.

The first figure towards the left hand
being (1) belongs to the first table, and
therefore I call the first square or letter
of that table 2, the second square 3, the
third 4, and so on, till I come to 9, at
which I stop, and the letter being (l) I
set it down; and because it is to be the
first letter of the first word, I set it down
in a great letter: as follows.

Lurida sistra, puto producunt fædera
quædam.

Then the next square, wherein I
found that letter (l) I reckon I, and count
till I come to the 9th square again from
the said (l) wherein I find the letter (u)
which I put down next to (l) as above;
from thence I count to the 9th square
further, and find the letter (r); which
having set down, I count on to the 9th
square beyond, and find the letter (i), 
which having set down, I count on a­
gain to the 9th square farther, and find
the letter (d), which having set down, 
I count on again to the 9th square, and
there find the letter (a) which having
set down, I count on to the 9 square
farther, and there find a blank, by which
I know the word is ended, which is
Lurida, as in the verse.

To work the second word out of the
second table.

The second figure being 3, I apply it
to the second table, and call the square
thereof 4, the second 5, the third 6, and
so reckon the squares in order, as in the
first table; and finding therein the let­
ter (s), which having written down on
the paper in the same line with Lurida, 
at a convenient distance, because it is
to begin another word, and beginning
from the square, in which I found (s), 
I count the squares onward, till I come
to the 9th square, and finding the letter
(t), having set it down, I count on to the
9th square, and finding the letter (r), 
which I set down, I count to the 9th
square, and finding the letter (a), and 
counting on to the 9th square, I find it 
a blank, by which I find the word is
ended, which is Sistra.

To work the third word out of the
third table.

I apply to it the third figure in order, 
which is 2, and therefore call the first
square of that table 3, the second square
4, the third 5, and so orderly, till I num­
ber to the 9th square, in which finding
the letter (p), having set it down in the
same line at a convenient distance, be­
cause it is to begin another word, I count
from that square, till I come to the 9th, 
and finding the letter (u) I set that down
and proceed to the next 9th square, and
finding the letter (t) which having set
down, I count from that square to the
next 9th, and finding the letter (o) I set
that down, and proceeding thence to the
next 9th I find a blank, by which I know
the word is finished, and is puto.

To work out the fourth word of the
verse out of the fourth table.

I apply the 4th figure in order, which
is 4 to the fourth table, and count the
first square of it 5, the second 6, and so
proceeding to the 9th figure, where find­
ing the letter (p) I write it down in the
line at a convenient distance, because it
is the first letter of a word, and proceed­
ing to to the 9th square, I find the letter
(r), which having written down, I pro­
ceed to the next 9th square, and find the
letter (o), and in the next 9th square the
letter (d), in the next 9th the letter (u), 
in the next 9th (c), in the next 9th (u), 
in the next 9th (n), in the next 9th (t), 
and in the next 9th a blank, by which I
find the word is ended, and is producunt.

The fifth figure, 3 I apply to the first
square of the 5th table, calling it 4, and
counting the 9th square as before, I find
(f), and thence to the 9th (æ), and thence
to the 9th (d), and thence to the 9th (e)
and thence to the 9th (r), and thence to
the 9th (a), and thence to the 9th finding
a blank, I perceive the word is finished, 
which is fædera.

To work the sixth word of the verse, 
out of the sixth table.

The sixth and last figure of the set
being 6, I apply it to the first square of
the 6th table, and counting it 7, count
to the 9th square, I find (q), which being
set down as before, I proceed to the
next 9th and find (u), and in the next 9th
(æ), in the next (d), in the next (a), in
the next (m), and in the next a blank, 
by which I know the word is ended, and
is quædam, and the whole line is,

Lurida Sistra, puto, producunt fædera
quædam.




Accordingly these following numbers
made choice of, and wrought out by the
tables according to the foregoing me­
thod, will produce the following verses.

The number 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, will
produce,
Lurida scorta palam prænarrant cri­
mina nigra.

The number 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2.
Barbara castra, puto, causabunt ag­
mina dira.

The number 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3.
Martia sistra, patet, monstrabunt fœ­
dera multa.

The number 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4.
Aspera vincla domi producunt lumi­
na prava.

The number 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5.
Horrida bella tuis partendunt verbera
acerba.

The number 6, 6, 6, 6, 6, 6.
Pessima damna pati promittunt prælia
quædam.

The number 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7.
Ignea signa fortis proritant pocula
sæpe.

The number 8, 8, 8, 8, 8, 8.
Turbida fata sequi prœmonstrant tem­
pora dura.

The number 9, 9, 9, 9, 9, 9
Effera tela, ferunt, promulgant sidera
sæva.



The number 1, 3, 2, 4, 3, 6. 
Lurida sistra, puto, producunt fœdera
quædam.

The number 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9.
Martia vincla tuis promittunt pocula
sæva.

And after the same method, by trans­
posing the figures, may be wrought out
of these tables, as many different verses, 
to the number of 300000, and upwards.

A heading reads, "The versifying Tables for HEXAMETERS." The six tables at this point are not reproduced here.



HEXAPHYLLOUS [of ἑξ six, and
φύλλον, Gr. a leaf] a term apply'd to
such plants as have six leaves.

HEXAPETALOUS [of ἑξ six, and
πέταλον, Gr. a leaf] composed of six
leaves, as the Filix, Pulsatilla, &c.

HEYBOTE [Old Records] the liberty
granted to a tenant for cutting so much
underwood, bushes, &c. as were neces­
sary for mending or maintaining the
hedges or fences belonging to the land.

HIATUS, a chasm, a gap, a defect
in a manuscript copy, where some of it
is lost.  L.

HIACINTH [in Heraldry] in blazon­
ing by precious stones, signifies blue.
See Hyacinth.

HICCIUS Doctius, an unintelligible
term, sometimes used by jugglers, &c.

Raw HIDE, a hide just taken off the
beast, before it has undergone any pre­
paration.

Salted HIDE, a green hide seasoned
with salt, allom or salt petre, to prevent
it from corrupting by lying long.

Tanned HIDE, a hide having the hair
taken off, and steeped in tan-pits.

Curried HIDE, one which after tan­
nine has passed thro' the hands of the
currier, and is fitted for use in making
shoes, &c.

To HIDE [hẏðan, Sax.] to lay or
put in a private place; also to abscond
or lurk.

HIDE Bound, stingy, close-fisted, nig­
gardly.

HIDEOUSNESS [of hideux, F.] fright­
fulness.

HIDEGILD [of hiðe and ʒilð, Sax.]
the price by which a person redeemed
his hide from being whipt, or bought
off a whipping.

HIERA Picra [of ἱερὸς holy and πιχρὸς,
Gr. bitter] a purging electuary made
of aloes, lignum aloes, spikenard, saf­
fron, mastick, honey, &c.

HIEROGLYPHICKS [ἱερογλυφιχὰ, of
ἱερὸς, sacred, and γλύφω, Gr. to carve or
engrave certain characters or pour­
traitures of several sorts of creatures, 
instead of letters; under which forms
they express'd their conceptions: Or
hieroglyphicks are certain sacred or
mysterious characters, figures or images
of creatures, under which the ancient
Egyptians couched their principles of
philosophy, history and polity; whence
the word is now taken for a symbol, 
emblem or mystical figure.

HIEROGRAMMATEI [of ἱερογράμ­
ματοι, Gr.] priests, among the ancient
Egyptians, appointed to explain the my­
steries of religion, and to direct the
performance of the ceremonies thereof.
They invented and wrote the hierogly­
phicks and hieroglyphical books, and
explained them and other religious
matters.

HIEROPHANTÆ [at Athens in
Greece] priests who were overseers of
sacrifices and holy things; or those who
were the priests of the goddess Hecate.

HIEROSCOPY [ἱεροσχοπία of ἱερὰ sa­
cred things, and σχοπέω, Gr. to view] a
kind of divination, performed by view­
ing or considering the victim, and every
circumstance that occurs during the
course of the sacrifice.

HIGH PLACES, those places where
the Heathens worshipped their idols.
In times of the earliest antiquity, the
Heathens were so far from building
temples for the religious worship of
their deities, that they thought it either
unlawful or absurd so to do, for ac­
counting the sun the supreme deity, 
they did not think it fit to confine him
to the narrow compass of a temple; it
being a common saying among them;
The whole World is the Sun's Temple;
and when temples were first begun to
be built, the tops of their roofs were
left open.

They also chose mountains or ele­
vated places for their worship, and
planted trees about them, to render the
places solemn, pleasant and delightful
to the worshippers.

The Jews likewise so far imitated
the Heathens in this, as to have a col­
lege of priests constituted, call'd the
prophets of the grove, as may be read, 
1 Kings 18, 19: they had likewise high
places to particular idols, as appears 2
Chron. 15. 16. where they committed
all manner of abominations in groves
and caves and tents set apart for prosti­
tution.

HIGHNESS [heahneſ, Sax.] eleva­
tion, talness.

HILARIA [among the Romans] feasts
celebrated annually with great gaiety
in honour of the mother of the gods.

HILLOCKY [of hilloc, Sax.] full of
hillocks or little hills.

HINDOES a sort of Pagans in India
on the other side the



river Ganges; they are not Banians for
they will kill and eat of any sorts of
beasts, besides oxen and cows; they
believe in one only God, and the im­
mortality of the soul; but they spoil
this just belief with a great number of
superstitions; they take their meals
within a circle, into which they will
not suffer the Banians, whom they ab­
hor, to enter; they are generally soldi­
ers, and the Mogul makes use of them
to garrison his best places.

INDOUS a sort of Pagans in India
on the other side the
river Ganges; they are not Banians for
they will kill and eat of any sorts of
beasts, besides oxen and cows; they
believe in one only God, and the im­
mortality of the soul; but they spoil
this just belief with a great number of
superstitions; they take their meals
within a circle, into which they will
not suffer the Banians, whom they ab­
hor, to enter; they are generally soldi­
ers, and the Mogul makes use of them
to garrison his best places.

HINDRANCE [of hinðrẏan, Sax.]
a stop, let impediment, &c.

A HINT [ente, F.] a brief notice, 
&c.

HIPS [in Carpentry] those pieces of
timber that are at the corners of a roof.

HIPPEUS [ἱππέυς, Gr.] a comet or
blazing star with beams, resembling a
horse's mane.

HIPPIADES [ἱππίαδες, Gr.] images
representing women on horse-back.

HIPPIATRICE [of ἵππος a horse, 
and ἰατρευω, Gr. to cure] the art of cu­
ring the diseases of horses and other
beasts.

HIP [contractions of hypochon­
dra of ὑποχόνδριον, Gr. that
part of the belly where the liver and
spleen lie] a disease call'd Hypochondria­
cus Affectus, L. a kind of convulsive
passion or affection arising from the fla­
tulent and pugnant humours in the
spleen, melancholy.

HIPPO [contractions of hypochon­
dra of ὑποχόνδριον, Gr. that
part of the belly where the liver and
spleen lie] a disease call'd Hypochondria­
cus Affectus, L. a kind of convulsive
passion or affection arising from the fla­
tulent and pugnant humours in the
spleen, melancholy. 

HIPPOCENTAURS. See Centaurs.

HIPPOCRATIC Face [with Physci­
ans] i. e. Hyppocratical or Hippocrates's
countenance, a distemper, when the no­
strils are sharp, the eyes hollow, the
temples low, the laps of the ears drawn
together, the skin about the forehead
high and dry; the complexion pale, of
a leaden colour or black.  L.

HIPPOCRATIA [of ἵππος and χφα­
τὸς, Gr.] a festival observed in honour
of Neptune, during which horses were
led along the streets richly harnessed
and deck'd with flowers.

HIPPOMANES [ἱππομανὴς, q. τοῦ ἵπ­
που μανία, Gr.] a black, fleshy kernel in
the fore-head of a young colt, which
the mare bites off as soon as she has
foaled; also a noted poison among the
ancients, one of the chief ingredients
in love potions.  L.

HIPPOPOTAMUS [ἱπποπόταμος of
ἵππος a horse, and ποταμὸς, Gr. a
river] an amphibious creature, that
lives both on land and in the water.

HIPPOPOTAMUS or river horse, is
to be found principally in the river
Nile in Egypt and some parts of India.

The feet of this beast are said to grow
forked like those of an ox; but in its
back, mane and tail it resembles a horse, 
and neighs like one. It has teeth like
those of a boar, but not so sharp; its
hide when it is not wet resists all sorts
of weapons.

Mr. Thevenot who had seen one of
them, describes it after the following
manner; it is of a sort of a dun colour, 
and in the hinder parts very much re­
sembles a buffle, but its legs are shorter
and larger.

It is about the size of a camel and its
muzzle is like that of an ox.

The body of it is twice as large as
that of an ox, its head like that of an
horse, its eyes and ears small, its no­
strils very wide, has no chest; its feet
are very large and almost round, with
4 claws on each, like those of a croco­
dile; the tail small like that of an ele­
phant, the skin bare and almost with­
out hair.

In its lower jaw it has 4 great teeth, 
half a foot long, 2 whereof are hooked,
and about the size of the horn of an ox:
these are one on each side of its mouth.

This animal was kill'd with musket-­
shot by some Janizaries, who found it
upon land. They shot at it several
times without piercing through its skin
but at last being wounded in the jaw,
it fell.

HIPPOPOTAMUS [Hieroglyphically]
was pictured to represent an impious
wretch; because it is related of it, that
it will kill its father and mother, and
tear them in pieces with its teeth.

HIRELING [hẏrlinʒa, Sax.] one
who works for hire.

HIRSUTENESS [hirsutia, L.] brist­
liness.

HISSING [of hiſean, Sax. to hiss] a
noise or cry of serpents.

HISTORICALLY [historiquement, F.
of historicus, L. of ίστοριχός, Gr.] by way
of history.

HISTORICE [ίστοριχή, Gr.] part of
grammar, that explains the meaning of
authors.

HISTORIOGRAPHY [ίςοριογραφία of
ἴστορία and γράφω, Gr. to write] the wri­
ting of history.

Natural HISTORY a description of
natural bodies; either Terrestrial, as ani­
mals, vegetables, fossils, fire, water, air, 
meteors; or Celestial as planets, stars, co­
mets, &c.

Civil HISTORY is that of people, 
states, republicks, cities, communities,
&c.



Singular HISTORY, is one which de­
scribes, a single action, as an expedition
battle, siege, &c.

Simple HISTORY, one delivered with­
out any art or foreign ornament; being
only a just and bare relation of matters, 
just in the manner and order wherein
they were transacted.

Personal HISTORY, is one that gives
the life of some single person.

Figurate HISTORY, is one that is en­
riched with the ornaments of wit, inge­
nuity, and address of the historian.

HISTORY [in Painting] is a picture
composed of divers figures or persons, 
and represents some transaction either
real or feigned.

Mixt HISTORY, is that which besides
the ornaments of figured history calls in
the proofs and authorities of simple
history, furnishing authentick memoirs
letters, &c.

To HITCH [spoken of Horses] to hit
the legs together in going.

HITHERMOST [of hiðer-mæſt, 
Sax.] the nearest.

HOAR-Frost [hoariʒ-froſt, Sax.]
is generated when the vapours near the
earth are congealed by the coldness of
the night, which is only in the winter
time, when the cold is predominant;
the difference between dew and hoar
frost, is that mists turn to dew if they
consist of drops of water; but into hoar
frost, when they consist of vapours, that
are frozen before, or are congealed in
their passage down to the earth.

HOARINESS [of hoariʒ, Sax.]
whiteness by reason of age, mould, &c.

HOB, a small piece of wood in a cy­
lindrical form, used by boys to set up an
end, to put half pence on to chuck or
pitch at, with another half penny or
piece made on purpose, in order to strike
down the hob, and by that means throw
down the half pence; and all that lie
with their heads upwards is the pitchers, 
and the rest or women are laid on again
to be pitched at.

HOBBLER [prob. of hubbelen, Du.]
one who limps or goes lame.

To HOCK, to cut beasts in the hock
or hough.

HODEGOS [of ὁδηγός, Gr.] a guide.

HODOMETRICA. [of ὁδός a way, and
μέτριχός pertaining to measure, Gr.]
finding the longitude at sea, is the me­
thod of computation of the measure of
the way of a ship between place and
place, i. e. of observing the rhumbs and
lines on which the ship sails, and what
way she has made.

HOE, a husbandman's tool for cutting
up weeds.

HOG [Hieroglyphically] was pictured
to express an enemy to good manners, 
and a prophane person. For the Eastern
nations did so hate an hog for its filthy
disposition, that it was a crime for some
of their priests, who waited on the al­
tars of their gods, to touch it. It was
also used to signify a voluptuous man, 
living in ease and carelesness.

HOGGISHNESS [of ruʒu, and
neſſe, Sax.] swinish nature, selfishness, 
greediness.

HOG-MAGOG-HILLS, a ridge of hills
situate about 2 miles south east of Cam­
bridge, on the top of which is a rampier
which was in former times so fortified
with ditches as to be impregnable, and
is thought to have been a Danish camp.

HOGOE [in Cookery] a mess so called
from its high favour or relish.

HOKE-Day, the tuesday fortnight af­
ter Easter-day, which in old time was
celebrated with rejoicings and sports in
commemoration of the daughter of the
Danes on that day, and the expelling the
rest the kingdom in the reign of king
Ethelred, A. D. 1002.

This was so memorable a time with
our ancestors as to be made a kind of
Epocha to date their leases and other
writings from or to make them payable
at. It was the second Tuesday after Eas­
ter.

To HOLD his own [Sea phrase] is said
of a ship under sail, when it keeps in its
course right forwards.

HOLD [Hunt. Term] a covert or shelter
for deer, &c.

HOLINESS [of haliʒneſſe, Sax.]
sacredness, divineness.

HOLLAND, linen cloth principally
the manufacture of Holland, whence it
takes its name. The chief mart or
staple of this cloth is Haerlem, to which
it is sent from those places where it is
made as soon as it is woven to be
whitened, &c. It is wove of various
finenesses and breadths according to the
uses it is intended for; that sort call'd
Gulix Holland is a yard wide and de­
sign'd for shirting. The Friezland Hol­
land which is design'd for sheeting and
aprons is generally a yard quarter and
half wide, and is esteemed the strongest
and best of all, not being callendred nor
whitened with pap like the others;
but is imported to England, &c. just as
it comes from the whitsters.

HOLLOW [in Architecture] a con­
cave moulding, being about a quadrant
of a circle; the same that some call a
Casemate, and others an Abacus.



HOLINESS [of holian, Sax.] the ha­
ving a cavity.

HOLM [holm, Sax.] either single or
joined to other words, signifies a river, 
island, or a place surrounded with wa­
ter. But if this signification be not ap­
plicable to some places, then it may sig­
nify a hill or any rising ground or plain
grassy ground by the water-side.

HOLOCAUST [Ὁλόχαυστον of ὄλος, 
the whole, and χαιω Gr. to burn] a sa­
crifice among the Jews which was all
burnt upon the altar, as was their daily
sacrifice, the Holocaust was to be a bul­
lock without blemish, this was brought
to the tabernacle of the congregation, 
the hands of the person who offered it
being laid upon its head, and was done
by way of acknowledgment that all
that belong'd to him were the effects of
the divine bounty. This was kill'd by
the Levites, who sprinkled the blood
of it upon the altar and having taken
off the skin, cut it in pieces and laid it
on the altar, and burnt it for a sweet smel­
ling savour unto the Lord; there was al­
so a libation of wine or drink offering
poured out; and while the victim was
burning, the musick play'd, and the
priest offered up a prayer that God
would accept the sacrifice.

After the temple was built there
were daily offered 2 lambs for a Holo­
caust, the one in the morning before
and the other in the evening after all
the other sacrifices; and on the sabbath­
day and the new moons the number
was doubled: The Holocausts were 2
young bullocks a ram and 7 lambs, 
which was done every day during the
solemnity of the passover and also on
the day of pentecost; and on the feast
of trumpets, a bullock, a ram, 7 lambs
and a he-goat; the same was also done
upon the day of Atonement; and upon
this solemnity the high priest offered
before he entered into the Sanctum
Sanctorum, a bullock for a sin offering, 
and a ram and a he-goat for a Holo­
caust; and at the feast of tabernacles
70 bullocks were offered, during the
time of that festival which lasted eight
days.

The Heathens very probably in imi­
tation of the Jews offered Holocausts to
their false deities; and the consuming
of sacrifices wholly by fire was a gene­
ral custom, till Prometheus, as it is said, 
wrought in the burning of only a part, 
and keeping the remainder for his own
table, which president was afterwards
followed by others.

HOLOMETER [of ὅλος whole and
μέτρον, Gr. measure] a mathematical
instrument serving universally for
taking all sorts of measures, both on
the earth and in the heavens.

HOLPEN [of helpan, Sax.] helped.

HOLT [holt, Sax.] either at the be­
ginning of the name of a place, as Hol­
ton, or at the end, denotes the place
did anciently abound with wood.

HOLY Ghost [in Heraldry]
as a cross of the Holy Ghost, 
has a circle in the middle
and on it the Holy Ghost in
figure of a dove; the four
arms are drawn narrow from
the centre, and widening towards the
end; and there the returning lines di­
vide each of them into two sharp points,
upon each of which is a pearl; and four
Flowers-de-Lis issue from the intervals
of the circle, between the arms.

Image omitted.



HOLY Mysteries that were brought to
light [Hieroglyphically] were by the
Egyptians represented by a crab fish;
because it lives in holes under the rocks.

HOLY Week, the last week in Lent.

HOLY Year, the year of Jubilee.

Knights of the HOLY Sepulchre, an or­
der of knighthood founded by a British
lady St. Helena, after she had visited
Jerusalem and found the cross of our
blessed Saviour.

HOMAGE of the plain, is where no
oath is taken.

HOMAGE Liege, a more extensive
kind of homage, where the vassal held
of the lord, not only for his land, but
for his person.

HOMAGE of Devotion, is a donation
made to the church, and imports not
any duty or service at all.

HOMAGE of Peace, is that which a 
person makes to another, after a recon­
ciliation.

HOMELINESS [prob. of ham, Sax.
home, q. d. such as is used at home]
plainness, unadornedness, want of
beauty, &c.

HOME spun, unpolished, clownish.

HOMESOKEN [ham-ſocn, Sax.] a
power granted by the king to some
person for the punishment of a person
for entering violently into an house.

HOMILY [homilia, L.] in the primi­
tive church was used to signify a plain
conference by way of question and an­
swer, which was commonly done by
the bishops till about the 5th century, 
when the learned priests were allowed
to preach, catechise, &c. in the same
manner as the bishops used to do.



But at this time it signifies a sermon
or discourse upon some head or prin­
ciple in religion, commonly composed
in a plain manner, that it may be more
easily understood by the common peo­
ple.

There were several homilies made
here in England, in the time of the re­
formation, printed and ordered to be
read in those churches which were not
furnished with a minister sufficiently
learned to compose discourses them­
selves; as also to prevent the teaching
of unsound doctrine.

HOMINICOLÆ [of homo, a man, and
colo, L. to worship] a name which the
Apollinarians gave to the orthodox, to
upbraid them as worshippers of a man, 
because they maintained that Jesus
Christ was God-man.  L.

HOMOCENTRICK [of ὅμοιος like, 
and χέντρον, Gr. a centre] having the
same centre, concentrical.

HOMOIOPTOTON [ὁμοιόπτωτον,
Gr.] a rhetorical figure, where several
members of a sentence end in like
cases.

HOMOIOTELEUTON [ὁμοιοτέλευτον, 
Gr.] a rhetorical figure, where several
members of a sentence end alike.

HOMOGENEOUSNESS [of όμογένεια, 
Gr.] sameness of nature.

HOMOIMERICAL Principles, the
principles of Anaxagoras were so called, 
which were as follows, he held that
there were in all mixt bodies (such as
flesh, fruits, &c.) determinate num­
bers of such similar principles, that
when they came to become parts (ex­
empli gratia) of an animal body, would
there make such masses and combina­
tions as the nature of them did require,
viz. the sanguinary particles would then
meet all together and make blood; the
urinous particles would make urine; the 
carneous, flesh; and the osseous, bones.

HOMOIMORY [ὁμοιομερια of ὅμειος
like, and μέρος, Gr. a part] a likeness
of parts.

HOMOLOGATION [of ὁμολογία, Gr. 
consent] assent, or (in the Civil Law)
it is the act of confirming a thing, or
rendering it more valid and solemn by
a publication, repetition or recognition
of it.

HOMOLOGOUS Sides or Angles of
two Figures, are such as keep the same
order from the beginning in each fi­
gure, as in two similar triangles.

HOMOLOGOUSNESS [of ὁμολόγος, 
Gr.] agreeableness or likeness in reason
or proportion to one another.

HOMOOUSIANS, a name by which
the Arians called the orthodox, because
they held that God the Son is Homoou­
sios, i. e. consubstantial with the Fa­
ther.

HOMOPHAGI [of ὥμος raw, and 
φάγω, Gr. to eat] a name given by the
ancient geographers to certain people
who eat raw flesh.

HOMOUSIOS [ὁμοούσιος, of ὅμοιος
like, and οὐσία, Gr. essence] a term in
Theology, which signifies the being of
the same substance or essence.

HOMUNCIONATES, orthodox in
the IVth century, to whom the Arians
gave that name, by reason they admit­
ted two substances and two natures in
Jesus Christ.

HOMUNCIONISTS [of Homuncio, 
L. a little man] a sect, the same as Pho­
tinians, so call'd of denying the two
natures in Jesus Christ, and holding that
he was only mere man.

An HONEST man [Hieroglyphically]
was represented by a man with his
heart hanging by a chain upon his
breast.

HONESTNESS [honestas, L. honê­
teté, F.] honesty, 
a principle of justice between man and
man.

HONESTY [honestas, L. honê­
teté, F.] honesty, 
a principle of justice between man and
man. 

HONORARY Counsellors, such as
have a right to set in assemblies, courts, 
&c.

HONORIFICABILITUDE [honorifi­
cabilitudo, L.] honourableness.

HONORIFICK [honorificus, L.] bring­
ing honour.

HONOUR [honor, L. honneur, F.] re­
spect or reverence paid to a person;
also esteem, reputation, glory; also ho­
nesty, virtue, chastity, modesty.

HONOUR, is or should be the re-­
ward of virtue, and he that aspires af­
ter it, ought to arrive at it in the paths
of virtue; this the Romans intimated
very significantly by building the tem­
ple of Honour in such a manner, that
there was no coming at it, without pas­
sing thro' the temple of Virtue. Kings
are call'd fountains of honour, because
it is in their power to bestow titles and
dignities.

HONOURS [honores, L.] dignities, 
preferments.

HONOUR Point [in He­
raldry] is that which is next
above the exact centre of
the escutcheon, and divides
the upper part into two
equal portions, so that the
first upwards from the centre is the
Honour-Point, and the next above that
is the precise Middle chief.

Image omitted.





Maids of HONOUR, are young la­
dies in the queen or princess's houshold, 
whose office is to attend the queen, &c.

HONOURS [of a City] are the publick
offices or employments of it.

HONOURS [of a Church] are the
rights belonging to the patron, &c.

Funeral HONOURS, are the ceremo­
nies performed at the interments of
great men.

HONOURS [of the house] certain ce­
remonies observed in receiving visits, 
making entertainments, &c.

HONOURABLENESS, honourable
quality, &c.

HONOURARY [honorarius, L.] per­
taining to honour, done, or conferred
upon any one, upon account of honour.

HONOURARY, is a term used of a
person, who bears or possesses some
quality or title, only for the name's
sake, without doing any of the functi­
ons thereto belonging, or receiving any
of the advantages thereof.

HONOURARY Tutor, a person of
quality appointed to have an eye over
the administration of the affairs of a
minor, while the Onerary tutors have
the real, effective, management of
them.

HONTFANGTHEF, a thief taken, 
having the thing stolen in his hand.

To HOOD-wink, to keep a person in
ignorance or blindfolded.

HOOD [with Falconers] a piece of
leather, wherewith the head of a hawk, 
&c. is covered.

HOOD, this termination put to the
end of English words frequently signi­
fies state and condition, as Brother-hood, 
Child-hood, Man-hood, Widow-hood, &c.

HOOKED [of hoce, Sax. hoeck, Du.
a hook] crooked, bending.

A HOP [of hoppan, Sax. hopper, 
Dan.] a leap with one leg.

HOPE [hopa, Sax.] expectation, af­
fiance; trust.

HOPE, is an affection of the mind
that keeps it stedfast, and from being
born away or hurried into despair by
the violence of present evils, by a well-­
grounded expectation of being extri­
cated out of them in time, and thence
it is called the anchor of the soul. The
ancients represented Hope, in painting, 
&c. as a beautiful child in a long blue
robe, hanging loose, standing on tip­
toes, holding a trefoil in his right-hand, 
and a silver anchor in its left.

HOPELESNESS, a quality that af­
fords grounds to hope for some benefit.

HOPEFULNESS [hopeleaſ, Sax.]
not affording ground to hope.

HOPLOMACHI [with the Ancients]
a sort of gladiators who fought in ar­
mour, either Cap-a-Pee, or only with a
cask and cuirass. Gr.

HORÆ [Hours] are personified by the
poets, and made goddesses, are named
Enomia, Dice and Eirene the daughters
of Jupiter and Themis, nurses to Venus, 
and perpetual companions of the Gra­
ces. They are represented with chear­
ful countenances, and delighting in the
beautiful ornament of the meadows, 
that come forth in the Spring (the time
of their birth) they are said to tread
softly, walk extreme slowly, and al­
ways to bring something new with them
wherever they come. They were e­
steemed admirers of industry, and to
take care of such as were diligent and
studious. They are said to have the
keeping of the gates of heaven commit­
ted to them, and that they could make
fair or cloudy weather when they
pleased.

HORARINESS [of horarius, L. ho­
raire, F.] horary, or hourly quality.

HORD, a company or body of wan­
dring people (as the Tartars) who have
no settled abode or habitation; also a
sort of village of 50 or 60 tents, with
an open place in the middle.

A HORD [Horð, Sax.] a hord, a
storehouse, a treasury; also what is laid
up there.

HORDICALIA [of borda, L. a cow
with calf] a Roman festival wherein they
sacrificed cattle big with young.

The sensible or true HORIZON [with
Astronomers] is that circle which limits
our sight, and may be conceived to be
made by some great plain, or the sur­
face of the sea.

It divides the heavens and earth into
two parts, the one light and the other
dark, which are sometimes greater or
lesser, according to the condition or situ­
ation of the place, &c.

Right HORIZON, is that which cuts
the equator at right angles.

Oblique HORIZON, is that which
cuts the equator obliquely.

Parallel HORIZON, is that where the
pole of the world is the zenith, or that
which either is in the equator or pa­
rallel to it.

HORIZONTALLY [horizontalement, 
F.] according to, at, or near the ho­
rizon.

HORIZONTAL Plane, is that which
is parallel to the horizon of the place.

HORIZONTAL Plane [in Perspective]
is a plane parallel to the horizon, pas­



sing thro' the eye, and cutting the per­
spective plane at right-angles.

HORN-Mad, a person is said to be so
when he is in a rage upon account of
a notion of his being cuckolded.

HOROGRAPHY [of ὥρη an hour, and
γράφω, Gr. to describe, &c.] the art of
making or constructing dials.

HOROLOGIOGRAPHER [of ὡρολο­
γεῖον an instrument or machine that
shews the hours or time of the day, and
γράφω to describe] a maker of dials, 
clocks, or instruments to shew the time
of the day.

HOROSCOPAL, pertaining to an
Horoscope.

Lunar HOROSCOPE [Astronomy] is
the point which the moon issues out of
when the sun is in the ascending point.

HOROSCOPIST [of horoscopus, L. of
ἅροσχοπος, of ὥρα an hour and σχοπέω,
Gr. to view, &c.] one who observes
horoscopes, or the degree of the as­
cendant, or the star ascending above
the horizon, at the moment an astro­
logical figure or scheme is made; an
astrologer.

HORRIBLENESS [of horribilis, L.
and ness] dreadfulness, terribleness.

HORRIDNESS [horriditas, L.] hor­
ribleness, heinousness; also trembling
for fear.

HORRIFICK [horrificus, L.] causing
dread, fear, trembling, &c.

HORRISONOUS [horrisonus, L.]
sounding dreadfully.

HORROR such an excess of fear
as makes a person
tremble.

HORROUR such an excess of fear
as makes a person
tremble. 

HORSE [horſ, Sax.] a beast well
known. An horse is an emblem of
war, strength, swiftness.

HORSES, consecrated to the Sun of
which mention is made 2. Kings 23. 17.

It is well known that the sun was
worshipped all over the East, and that
the horse, the swiftest of tame beasts
was consecrated to this deity, who was
represented riding in a chariot, drawn
by the most beautiful and swiftest horses
in the world.

In Persia and among the Massageta
horses were sacrificed to the sun, Xeno­
phon describes a solemn sacrifice, which
was made with ceremony to the sun:
They were all of the finest, and were
led with a white chariot, crowned and
consecrated to the same God. And it
is very probable that the horses that
Josiah removed out of the court of the
temple were appointed for the like
sacrifices.

The Rabbins say that these horses
were every morning put to the chariots
dedicated to the sun, and that the king
or some of his officers got up and rode
to meet the sun at his rising as far as
from the eastern gate of the temple to
the suburbs of Jerusalem.

An HORSE covered with harness [Hie­
roglyphically] represented war and speed.

HORSE-Shoo, there is a superstitious
custom among some people, of nailing
horse-shoos on the threshold to keep out
witches; whence it should arise I can­
not learn, unless from the like custom
practised in Rutlandshire at Burgley
house, the ancient seat of the Harring­
tons, near Oakham; which lordship the
lord Harrington enjoy'd with this privi­
lege, that if any of noble birth came
within the precinct of that lordship, 
they should forfeit, as an homage, a
shoo from the horse whereon they rode;
or else to redeem it with a sum of
money: Accordingly there are many
horse-shoos nailed upon the shire-hall
door, some of large size and ancient
fashion, others new and of our present
nobility.

HORSE-Shoo-head, a disease in infants
wherein the sutures of the head are
too open.

HORSE, a wooden frame made to
open and shut with hinges for the con­
veniency of women to hang cloaths on
to dry.

HORSE [with Carpenters] a piece of
wood jointed across two other perpen­
dicular ones, to support the boards, 
planks, &c. which make bridges over
small rivers.

HORSE [in the language of Exchange-­
Alley] the chance of the benefit of a lot­
tery ticket, for one or any certain num­
ber of days, if it be drawn a prize.

HORTA [of hortare, L. to exhort] a
goddess esteemed by the Romans who
invited men to great enterprizes, and
had a temple which flood always open.

HORTAGILERS [in the Grand Sig­
nior's Seraglio] upholsterers or tapestry
hangers.

HORTATIVES [hortativa, L.] ex­
hortations.

HOSANNA Rabba, a name the Jews
give to the seventh day of the feast of
tabernacles, in which the word Hosanna
is often repeated in their prayers, &c.

A HOSE [hoſa, Sax.] a stocking.

HOSPITABLENESS [hospitalitas, L.
hospitalité, F. of hospitium an inn] hospi­
tality, hospitable disposition.

HOSPITALER, one who entertains
and provides for poor people, travellers
&c.



HOSTODAR, a title of the princes of
Moldavia and Wallachia.

HOST [hostia, L.] a victim or sacri­
fice to the deity.

HOSTILENESS [hostilitas, L. hosti­
lité, F.] hostility, the state or practise of
enemies.

HOSTILINA [among the Romans] a
goddess who presides over corn when
it shoots forth into ears.  L.

HOSTING, in a hostile manner fight­
ing, warring. Milton.

HOTEL-DIEU, the chief hospital of
any city in France for sick persons.  F.

HOUGH at the beginning of a
name, is an intimation
that the place is of low situation. as
Holland in Lincolnshire, which is the
same as Lowland.

HOW at the beginning of a
name, is an intimation
that the place is of low situation. as
Holland in Lincolnshire, which is the
same as Lowland. 

HOUGH-Bonny [in Horses] a hard, 
round swelling or tumour, growing up
on the tip of the hough or hoof.

Astronomical HOUR [hora, L. heure, 
F. ωρα of ὀρίζειν, Gr. to bound, limit or
divide, because it divides the day] is the
24th part of a natural day, and contains
60 minutes, and each minute 60 seconds, 
&c. which hours always begin at the
meridian, and are reckoned from noon
to noon.

Babylonish HOURS, are begun to be
accounted from the horizon at the sun's
rising, and are reckoned on for 24 hours
till his rising again.

Jewish HOURS, are one twelfth part
of the day or night, reckoned from the
sun rising to the sun setting (whether
the days or nights be longer or short­
er) which are called in scripture the first
second or third hours, &c.of the day
or night.

Sometimes in the Jewish division of
the day, it was divided into 4 parts, 
morning, high day or noon, the first even­
ing and the last evening; and the night
into 3 parts, night, midnight and morn­
ing watch.

Sometimes they divided the day un­
equally, according as the season of the
year varied; for all the time the sun is
above the horizon, called day, was divi­
ded into 12 equal parts, and consequent­
ly at different times of different lengths;
and all the time the sun is below the
horizon called night, was divided into
12 equal parts, and consequently vary­
ing in the same manner.

Italian HOURS, are reckoned after
the manner of the Babylonish hours, 
only they begin at the sun's setting in­
stead of its rising.

European HOURS, are equal hours
reckoned from midnight 12 hours, from
thence to noon, and 12 from noon to
midnight.

Forty HOURS of prayer [with Roman
Catholicks] are publick prayers conti­
nued for the space of 8 days successively, 
and without intermission before the holy
sacrament, to obtain the assistance of
heaven upon some important occasion.
On these occasions the sacrament is ex­
posed 40 hours, 14 hours each day.

HOUR-Grunters, old watchmen.

HOUR [in Chymical
Writers] is expressed
by one of these cha­
racters.

Image omitted.



HOUSE-wife [huſ &wyn;if, Sax.] a wo­
man of good œconomy in houshold af­
fairs.

HOUSING [with Bricklayers] a term
used when a tile or brick is warped or
cast crooked or hollow in burning, they
say such a brick or tile is housing.

HOUSWIFRY, good œconomy in
managing the affairs of an house. This
hieroglyphically, was by the ancients re­
presented by the industrious tortoise.

HOUSHOLD Days, four solemn fes­
tivals in the year, when the king after
divine service offers a bezant of gold on
the altar to God. These days are Christ­
mass, Easter, Whitsunday and All-saints.

HOWKER a sea vessel, something
like a pink but masted
like a hoy, they will carry from 50 to
200 tuns, and with a few hands may be
carried to the East-lndies, they are very
manageable, will tack soon and short, 
sail well, lie near the wind, and will
live almost in any sea. They are much
used by the Dutch.

HOUGRE a sea vessel, something
like a pink but masted
like a hoy, they will carry from 50 to
200 tuns, and with a few hands may be
carried to the East-lndies, they are very
manageable, will tack soon and short, 
sail well, lie near the wind, and will
live almost in any sea. They are much
used by the Dutch. 

A HUBBLE-Bubble, a device for
smoaking tobacco thro' water, which
makes a bubbling noise, also a person
who speaks so quick as to be scarce
intelligible, a talkative person, a rattle.

HUCKABACK, a sort of linnen cloth
that is woven so as to lie partly raised.

HUE [here, Sax.] complexion, colour
countenance, &c.

HUE and Cry [huer and crier, F. i. e.
to shout or cry aloud] in ancient times, 
if a person who had been robbed, or in
whose company one had been murdered
came to the next constable, ordering
him to raise hue and cry, and make
pursuit of the offender, describing the
person, and the way he was gone, the
constable was obliged to call upon his
parishioners to aid and assist him in seek­
ing him; and not finding him, to give
notice to the next constable, and he to
the next, and so from one to another
till he was apprehended, or to the sea­



side. In Scotland this was performed
by blowing an horn, and making an
out-cry after the offender.

A HUFF, an affront, or treatment
with angry words.

HUFFING [of heoʒan, Sax.] vapou­
ring, ranting, &c.

HUGENESS, vastness, largeness.

HUGEOUS, very large.

A HUGG [prob. of hoʒan, Sax.] or
hugghen, Du.] an embrace.

HUGUENOTS [this name is variously
derived by authors: Some derive it from
huc nos venimus, the beginning of the first
protection of the apologetical oration
made before cardinal Lotharingius, in
the time of Francis the second of France.
Du Verdier derives it of John Huss, 
whose opinion they embraced, and
guenon an ape q. d. John Huss's Apes.
Others from Hugh Capet, whose right
of succession to the crown the Calvinists
maintained against the house of Guise.
Others of Huguenot, a piece of mony, 
a farthing in the time of Hugh Capet, q.
not worth a farthing; others of Hugon, 
a gate in the city of Tour, where they
assembled when they first stirred. Pas­
quier derives it of Hugon, an imaginary
spright that the populace fancied strolled
about in the night; and because they
generally in the night went to pray
they called them Huguenots i. e. disci­
ples of king Hugon] a nickname the Pa­
pists give to the Protestants in France.

HULLOCK, a small part of a ship's
sail, which is loosed and left open in a
great storm, when it is not safe to have
the whole out, and is commonly used in
the missen sail, to keep the ships head to
the sea; when a ship will not weather
coil, they loose a Hullock of the fore-sail
to lay her head the other way, and so
changing the helm to the weather side,
the ship will fall off and lay her head
where her stern lay before.

HULLY [prob. of hulct, Sax. a bed]
full of hulls.

HUMANITIES [humaniores literæ,
L.] the study of the Greek and Latin
tongue, grammar, rhetorick, poetry,
and the ancient poets, orators and his­
torians.

HUMANLY [humaniter, L. humani­
ment, F.] after a human manner.

HUMANNESS [humanitas, L. humani­
té, F.] humanity.

HUMANISED [humanise, F.] ren­
der'd human.

HUMBLENESS [humilitas, L. humi­
lité, F.] humility.

HUMIDNESS [humiditas, L. humidité
F.] moisture.

HUMMUMS, the name of a sweating
house.

Aqueous HUMOR [with Oculists] or
waterish humour, is contained between
the Tunica Cornea and the Uvea, and
serves to moisten and levigate the two
other denser humours, and also the Tu­
nica Uvea and Retina.

Chrystalline HUMOR [with Oculists]
or Icy humor, which is contained in the
Tunica Uvea, and is thicker than the
rest. This is by some call'd glacialis,
and is the primary instrument of vision, 
in respect of its collection and reception
of the rays, which coming thither, di­
lated by the aqueous humor, are col­
lected and convey'd to the Retina.

Vitreous HUMOR [with Oculists] or
glassy humor, is bigger than any of the
rest, fills the backward cavity of the
eye. This, some say, serves to dilate
the rays that it receives from the Cry­
stalline, and to bring them to the Retina;
or, as others are of opinion, it helps
to collect the rays refracted by the Cry­
stalline into one point, that the vision
may be the more distinct and vivid.

HUMORIST [humorista, It.] one full
of humours, whimseys or conceits; a
fantastical or whimsical person.

HUMORISTS, the title of the mem­
bers of a celebrated academy of learned
men at Rome.

HUMOUR, is accounted as peculiar
to the English drama, at least our co­
mick poets have excell'd therein, and
carried it beyond those of any other
nation; and ours perhaps is the only
language that has a name for it.

HUMOUR [in Dramatick Poetry] is
used for a subordinate or weaker spec­
cies of what the criticks call Manners.

HUMOUR [in Comedy] is defined to
be a fainter or weaker passion, peculiar
to comick characters, as being found
in persons of a lower degree than those
proper to tragedy; or it is that which
is low, ridiculous, &c.

HUMOUR [in Medicine] the particu­
lar temperament or constitution of a
a person, considered as arising from
the prevalence of this or that Humour
or Juice of the body; as a cholerick
Humour, a melancholy Humour, spright­
ly Humour.

HUMOUROUSNESS, comicalness, 
fulness of pleasantry, fantasticalness.

HUMOURSOMNESS, hardness to be
pleased, peevishness.

Natural HUNGER, is an irritation
of the stomach, occasioned by fasting.

Animal HUNGER, is the sensation or
perception of that irritation, and the



appetite or desire of food, that is the
consequence of it.

HUNGRINESS [of hunʒer, Sax.]
craving appetite.

HUNKS, a nick-name of scorn and
derision us'd of a covetous miserly fel­
low.

HURDLES [of Hurð, Sax.] hazle
rods wattled together.

HURDLES, or Clayes, are made of
branches or twigs interwoven together
in the figure of a long square, about
five or six foot long, and three, or
three and a half broad; the closer
they are woven they are the better.
They are for several uses, as for co­
vering Traverses or Lodgments, Capo­
neers, Coffers, &c. and are covered
over with earth to secure them from
the artificial fireworks of the enemy, 
and from the stones which might be
thrown upon them, and likewise to lay
upon marshy ground, or to pass the
foss, especially when it is full of mud
or slime. See their form in the figure.

Image omitted.



HURDLES [in Husbandry] are frames
made either of split sticks, or hazle
rods platted together to make sheep­
folds, &c.

HURE [in Heraldry] the head of a
wild boar, a bear, a wolf, or some such
fierce creature; but not of lions, or
other any such noble creature.  F.

HURL-Bone [of an Horse] a bone
near the middle of the buttocks, very
apt to go out of its socket by a slip or
strain.

HURLERS [in Cornwall] seventeen
large stones, situated at some distance
one from another, probably design'd as
a commemoration of some victory
gain'd thereabouts; but by the ignorant
and superstitious neighbouring inhabi­
tants report to have been men turn'd
into stones for prophaning the sabbath, 
by exercising a diversion much in use
among them thereon, call'd hurling the
ball.

HURLING [q. d. whirling] throw­
ing stones, &c. with a whirling motion
of the hand.

HURLY-THRUMBO, a bawling
noisy preacher, orator, &c. who lays
about him violently, using much action
and gesture; also one who uses many
extravagant expressions and rants.

A HURRY [of harier, F.] great haste.

HURRICAN [of huracan, Sp.] a vio­
lent storm of wind, which often hap­
pens in the West-lndies in September and
October, overthrowing trees, houses
and whatsoever stands in its way. They
begin in the north, but turn round, and
in a little time veer thro' all the points
of the compass.

HURST [of hẏrſt, Sax.] joined
with the names of places, denotes that
they took their name from a wood or
forest.

HUERTS [in Heraldry] are roun­
dles azure, &c. the
same the French call Torteaux d'Azure:
Some imagine they signify bruises or
contusions in the flesh; but others Hur­
tleberries.

HEURTS [in Heraldry] are roun­
dles azure, &c. the
same the French call Torteaux d'Azure:
Some imagine they signify bruises or
contusions in the flesh; but others Hur­
tleberries.

HURTFUL [hẏrt-ful, Sax.] inju­
rious, prejudicial.

HURTFULNESS, prejudicialness,
&c.

HUSBANDMAN [Hieroglyphically]
was represented by a labouring ox.

HUSH Mony, a bribe or sum of mony
given to a person who has been privy
to something he ought to reveal to con­
ceal it, and is usually meant in an ill
sense.

HUSKANAWING, a solemnity prac­
sed by the Virginian Indians, once
every fourteen or sixteen years. It is
an institution or discipline that all
young men must pass under before they
can be admitted to be of the number of
great men, officers, or cockarouses of
the nation.

The choicest and briskest young men
of the town, and such only as have ac­
quired some treasure by their travels
and hunting, are chosen out by the ru­
lers to be Huskanaw'd, and whoever re­
fuses to undergo this process, dares not
remain among them.

The ceremony is performed after the
manner following: After the perfor­
mance of several odd preparatory cere­
monies, the principal part of the busi­
ness is to carry them into the woods, 
and there to keep them under confine­



ment, and destitute of all society for
several months, giving them no other
sustenance but the infusion or decoction
of some poisonous intoxicating roots;
by virtue of which physick, and the se­
verity of the discipline which they un­
dergo, they become stark mad: In which
raving condition they are kept 18 or 20
days. During these extremities, they
are shut up night and day in a strong
inclosure, made on purpose, in shape
like a sugar-loaf, and every way open
like a lattice, for the air to pass
through. In this cage, after they have
been shut up till the doctors find they
have drank sufficiently of the Wysoccan
(as they call this mad potion) they gra­
dually restore them to their senses, by
lessening the intoxication of their diet, 
and then bring them back into the town, 
whilst still wild and crazy, through the
violence of the medicine.

It is pretended, that they in this time
drink so much of the water of Lethe, 
that they perfectly lose all remembrance
of former things, even of their rela­
tions, parents, and language; and after
this they are very fearful of discover­
ing any thing of their former remem­
brance; for if such a thing should hap­
pen to any of them, they must imme­
diately be Huskanaw'd again: And the
second time the usage is so severe, that
seldom any one escapes with his life.
Thus they must pretend to have forgot
the very use of their tongues, so as not
to be able to speak, nor understand any
thing that is spoken, till they learn it
again. And they are for some time
under the guard of their keepers, who
constantly wait upon them every where, 
till they have learnt all things perfectly
over again.

The undergoing this discipline, is
with them the most meritorious thing
in the world, in order to preferments
to the greatest posts in the nation, which
they claim as their undoubted right at
the next promotion.

The Indians pretended, that this vio­
lent method of taking away their me­
mory, is to release the youth from all
their childish impressions, and from that
strong partiality to persons and things
which is contracted before reason takes
place.

They hope by this proceeding to root
out all the prepossessions and unreaso­
nable prejudices which are fix'd in the
minds of children; so that the young
men, when they come to themselves
again, their reason may act freely, 
without being biassed by custom and
education.

Thus also they become discharged
from the remembrance of any ties of
blood, and are established in a state of
equality and perfect freedom to order
their actions, and dispose of their per­
sons, without any other controul than
that of the law of nature.

HUSKY [prob. of Husche, Du.] full
of husks, or the coats of corn, seed, &c.

HUSSARS [of Poland and Hungary]
cavalry or soldiery suppos'd to have
taken their names from the huzza or
shout they make at their first onset: they
are generally employ'd to engage with
the turkish horse; they are clothed in
an odd habit, wearing tigers skins and
those of other wild beasts hanging at
their backs, as a defence against bad
weather; their officers are adorned
with plumes of feathers, and the com­
mon soldiers have their heads shaven
with only a tuft left in the middle, and
a large Mustacho hanging down to their
stomach, and on their heads a fur cap
with a cocks feather stuck in it.

They are very bold and resolute;
but are more fit for an sudden attack, 
than a long battle; nor are very expert
at the using their fire arms, but are
very dextrous at their Sabres. They
neither give nor take quarter. The
emperor of Germany and French king
entertains some of them in their service.

HUSSITES, the followers of John
Huss.

HUSSY, is an appellation given to
woman kind, and is us'd both in a good
and a bad sense; in a good sense it is a
contraction of the word house-wife, and
then signifies a clean, neat, careful, 
industrious woman; and in a bad sense, 
a whore, or careless, negligent, drun­
ken one; and sometimes it is only a
note of anger or displeasure, as of a
mother to her daughter, as Hussy i. e.
you naughty girl.

HYACINTH [ὑαχίνθος, Gr.] a pre­
cious stone, so called
from its resemblance of the purple
flower named Hyacinth; of which there
are four sorts, those that are intermix­
ed with a vermilion colour; those of
a saffron colour; those of an amber
colour; and those of a white intermixt
with a faint red; and are either orien­
tial or occidental. These stones either
engrave or cut fine, and were it not
that the engraving oftentimes costs
more than the stone, they would be
more us'd for seals, &c.

These stones were used by the anci­
ents for amulets and talismans, who
wore them about their necks, or in



rings, &c. and imagined they had in
them a virtue to secure them from the
plague, &c.

JACINTH [ὑαχίνθος, Gr.] a pre­
cious stone, so called
from its resemblance of the purple
flower named Hyacinth; of which there
are four sorts, those that are intermix­
ed with a vermilion colour; those of
a saffron colour; those of an amber
colour; and those of a white intermixt
with a faint red; and are either orien­
tial or occidental. These stones either
engrave or cut fine, and were it not
that the engraving oftentimes costs
more than the stone, they would be
more us'd for seals, &c.

These stones were used by the anci­
ents for amulets and talismans, who
wore them about their necks, or in
rings, &c. and imagined they had in
them a virtue to secure them from the
plague, &c.

Confection of Hyacinth, in medicine, 
is a thin electuary of a cordial quality, 
composed of divers precious stones, the
Hyacinth stone being one of the princi­
pal ingredients, and also coral, harts­
horn, seeds, roots, and divers other in­
gredients, pulverized or ground, and
mixt together.

HYACINTHIA, festivals held at
Sparta, in honour of Apollo, and re­
membrance of his favourite Hyacinthus.

HYACINTHINE [hyacinthinus, L.
Υαχίνθινος, Gr.] pertaining to or like the
Hyacinth.

HYACINTHIZONTES [of ὑαχινθίξω, 
Gr.] a kind of emeralds inclining to a
violet colour.

HYACINTHUS, Apollo and Zephy­
rus (as the poets tell us) both were ena­
moured with Hyacinthus a youth of ex­
cellent beauty, and had a mind to obtain
him by some trial of skill. Apollo he shot
arrows, and Zephyrus blew. Apollo sang
and caused pleasure, but Zephyrus's
blasts were troublesome, and therefore
Hyacinthus chose to betake himself to
Apollo. Zephyrus upon his being rival­
led, prepares for revenge, and Apollo
throwing a quoit, it was repulsed by Ze­
phyrus, and falling on the head of Hya­
cinthus killed him: And it seeming unbe­
coming the earth, that the memory of
such a calamity should be quite erased, 
it caused a flower to spring up of the
same name; the beginning of which, as
the poets tell us, was inscribed on it.

HYADES [so called of ὰπὸ τοῖ ὒειν, 
i. e. to rain] a constellation called the
seven stars. The poets feign them to
be the daughters of Atlas and Æthra, 
whence they are also called Atlantiades.
Their names are Ambrosia, Eudora Pasi­
thae, Coronis, Plexauris, Pytho and Tyche.
They are famous among the poets for
bringing rain, they are placed in the
bulls-head, and the chief of them in the
left eye, are by the Arabs called Aldeba­
ran.

The poets feign, that Hyas their bro­
ther having been torn in pieces by a li­
onness, they wept so vehemently for
his death, that the gods, in companion
to them translated them to heaven, and
placed them in the forehead of the bull
where they still continue to weep: And
hence the constellation is supposed by
some to presage rain.

HYALINE [hyalinus, L. of Ὑαλινὸς, 
Gr.] pertaining to glass, glassy, Milton.

HYÆNA [Ὑᾶινα, Gr.] a kind of beast
much like a wolf, very ravenous and
subtil; of which it is related by some
writers, that he will come in the nighf
time to shepherds houses, and learning
their names, by counterfeiting a man's
voice, call them out and devour them.

HYÆNA [Hieroglyphically] was used
by the ancients to express an unconstant
person; because it is related of it, that
it is one year male, and the next be­
comes a female. It was likewise used
as an emblem of a brave courage, that
can defy all difficulties, and look upon
the frowns of fortune with a generous
contempt; because the Naturalists say,
that the skin of this animal will pro­
cure to us this privilege of passing thro'
the greatest dangers without harm.

HYBERNAL Occident, the Winter,
West, or South West. That point where
the sun sets at its entrance into the tro­
pick of Capricorn, i. e. on the shortest
day.

HYBERNAL Orient, the Winter, East
or South East. That point of the hori­
zon where the sun rises at its entrance
into the tropick of Capricorn.

HYBISTRICA, a festival with sacri­
fices and other ceremonies celebrated
by the Greeks, at which the men wore
the apparel of women, and the women
of men, in honour of Venus, either as
a god or a goddess, or both; or, as
others say, a festival held at Argos,
where the women habited like men in­
sulted their husbands with all tokens of
superiority, in memory of the Argian
dames having defended their country
with notable courage against Cleomenes
and Demaratus.

HYDATOSCOPIA [of ὓδατος, of wa­
ter, and σχοπέω, Gr. to view] a divina­
tion or foretelling future events by
means of water.

HYDRA. [Ὓδρα, Gr.] the poets tell
us, that Hydra was a Lernæan serpent,
having an hundred heads, but one body,
and that when one head was cut off, 
two sprang up in its place, and that
Carcinus came and assisted the Hydra.
The ground of the story is this: Lernus
was a king at that time, when men uni­
versally dwelt in towns or villages, and
every town had its king; among which
Sthenelus, the son of Perseus, governed
Mycenæ, the largest and most populous
place. Lernus not bearing to be subject
to him, it was the occasion of a war
between them. Lernus's town was a
little well fortify'd place, defended by
fifty stout archers, which day and night
were shooting their arrows from the
tower. The name of this little town



was Hydra. Upon which Eurystheus
sent Hercules thither; but they who
were beneath threw fire, and aimed at
the defenders of the tower; and if any
one was hit with it and fell, immedi­
ately two stout archers rose up in his
place. But Hercules at length took the
town, burnt the tower, and destroyed
the town; and this gave birth to this
fable. Palæphatus.

HYDRA [Ὓ#x03B4;ρα, Gr.] a water ser­
pent; especially that monstrous one, 
said by the poets to have had an hun­
dred heads, and bred in the lake Lerna, 
and to have been killed by Hercules, 
and plac'd among the stars.

HYDRAGOGICAL [of ὑδραγωγία of
ὓδωρ water, and ἀγω, Gr. to lead] per­
taining to the conveyance of water.

HYDRAULICK [of ὑδραυλιχὸς of ὓδραυλος
, sounding water, of ὓδωρ wa­
ter, and ἀυλὸς, Gr. a pipe] pertaining
to a water-organ.

HYDROMANCY [hydromantia, L. of
ὑδρομαντεια, of ὓδωρ water, and μαντεία
divination, Gr.] a manner of divining
or making conjectures by water, in
which the victims had been wash'd, and
some parts of them boil'd; also a divi­
nation by common water, in which
they observed the various impressions, 
changes, fluxes, refluxes, swellings, di­
minutions, colours, images, &c. of the
water. Sometimes they dipt a looking-­
glass into the water, when they desired
to know what would become of a sick
person; for as he look'd well or ill in
the glass, according they conjectured as
to his future condition; sometimes they
fill'd a bowl with water, and let down
into it a ring, equally poised on both
sides, and hanging by a thread tied to
one of their fingers; and then in a form
of prayer, requested the Gods to declare
or confirm the question in dispute;
whereupon, if the thing were true, the
ring of its own accord would strike a­
gainst the side of the bowl a set number
of times: Sometimes they threw stones
into the water, and observed the turns
they made in sinking.

HYDROMETER [of ὓδωρ and μέτρον,
Gr. measure] an instrument to measure
the gravity, density, velocity, force or
other properties belonging to water.

HYDROMETRIA [ὑδρομετρία, Gr.]
the mensuration, of waters and other
fluid bodies; their gravity, force, velo­
city, quantity, &c.

HYDROPARASTATES [of #x1F53;δωρ wa­
ter, and παριστημι I offer, Gr.] a sect, 
a branch of the Manichees, whose dis­
tinguishing tenet was, that water should
be used in the sacrament instead of
wine.

HYDROPHOBIA [ὑδροφοβία of #x1F53;δωρ
water, and φόβος fear, Gr.] a distemper
sometimes accompanied with a fever, 
phrenzy, and other symptoms proceed­
ing from the bite of a mad dog, in which
the patient dreads water, &c. the pa­
thognomick sign that the disease is come
to its height, and rarely happens till
within three or four days of the pati­
ent's death, the disease being then un­
animously allowed to be incurable by
Physicians both ancient and modern,  L.

HYDROPHORIA [of #x1F53;δωρ and φέρω,
Gr. to bear] a festival or funeral cere­
mony, performed by the Athenians, &c.
in memory of them that perished in the
deluge.

HYDROPOTE [of ὑδροπότης, Gr.] a
water drinker.

HYDROSTATICAL, of or pertain­
ing to the doctrine of hydrostaticks.

HYDROSTATICAL Ballance, an in­
strument contrived for the easy and ex­
act finding the specifick gravities of bo­
dies, either liquid or solid. It estimates
the degrees of the purity of bodies of all
kinds, the quality and richness of me­
tals, oars or minerals, the proportions
in any mixture, adulterations, &c. of
which the only adequate judge is the
specifick weight.

HYGRO-ORGANICAL [of ὑγρὸς and
ὄργανον, Gr.] of or pertaining to vessels
or contrivances for the conveyance of
moisture or water.

HYGROSTATICKS [of ὑγρὸς and
στατέω, Gr. to weigh] the art of finding
the specifick weights of moist bodies.

HYLE [with Alchymists] is their
first matter; or it is mat­
ter considered as produced by nature
herself; also called chaos.

HYLEC [with Alchymists] is their
first matter; or it is mat­
ter considered as produced by nature
herself; also called chaos.

HYLOBII [of ὓλη wood, and βίος life, 
Gr.] such philosophers who retired to
woods and forests to be more at leisure
for contemplation.

HYMEN [in Poetry] a term of invo­
cation, as Hymen, Hymenæe.

HYMEN [Ὑμέναιος, Gr.] some say
Hymen was an Athenian, who recovered
back virgins that had been carried away
by robbers, and restored them again
unmeddled with to their parents; and
therefore his name was called upon at
nuptials as a defender of virginity. O­
thers say, that Hymen was a young man, 
who on his wedding-day was killed by
the fall of the house, whence it was
afterwards instituted, that by way of
expiation, he should be named at nup­
tials as the God of marriage. The anci­



ents represented Hymen with a chaplet
of roses, and as it were dissolved and
enervated with pleasures, with long
yellow hair, in a mantle of purple or
saffron colour, or holding a veil of a
flame colour to represent the blushes of
virgins, bearing a torch in his hand.

HYMEN [in Anat.] a thin membrane
or skin, resembling a piece of parch­
ment, supposed to be stretched in the
neck of the womb of virgins, below
the nymphæ, and that is broke at their
defloration, being followed with an ef­
fusion of blood.

HYMEN [in Botany] a fine delicate
skin, wherewith flowers are inclosed
while in the bud, and which bursts as
the flower blows or opens.

A HYMN [ὓμνος of ὓμνοδέω, Gr. to
celebrate] a song or ode in honour of
God; or a poem proper to be sung in
honour of some deity.

HYMNOLOGY [ὑμνολεγία, Gr.] a
finding of hymns or psalms.

HYPERBATION [ὑπέρβατον of ὑπερ­
θαίνω, Gr. to transcend] this is sometimes
treated on as a figure in grammar, but
always rather to be taken notice of
as bearing the character of a strong and
violent passion; and so a figure in rhe­
torick, is nothing but a transposition
of thoughts and words, from the natural
order of discourse.

Apollonian HYPERBOLA, is the com­
mon Hyperbola, in contradistinction to
Hyperbola's of the higher kind.

HYPERBOLIFORM Figures [Mathe­
mat.] such curves as approach in their
properties to the nature of the Hyper­
bola, the same that are called Hyperbo­
loids.

HYPERCRITICKS [ὑπερχριτιχοί, Gr.]
over-rigid censurers or criticks, who
let nothing pass; but animadvert se­
verely on the slightest fault.

HYPERDULIA [ὑπερδουλεία, of ὑπέρ
above and δουλεία worship, Gr.] the wor­
ship paid to the virgin Mary, so called, 
as being superior to the Dulia, the wor­
ship paid to the saints.

HYPERION [according to the poets] 
the son of Cælus and Vesta, married his
sister Theia or Basileia, a virgin remark­
able for her modesty and chastity, but
being elected queen was afterwards de­
sirous to leave heirs, and marrying
with her brother Hyperion, had Helios
and Selene; who were admired by all
for the excellency of their beauty. But
the other brothers of Theia entering
into a conspiracy assassinated Hyperion,
and drowned Helios in the river Erida­
nus. On this Selene, who passionately
loved her brother Helios, threw her self
headlong from a tower and expired.

Helios appeared to his mother in a
dream and told her they were deified, 
and that from thenceforth the holy fire
in heaven should be called Helios [Ἣλιος
i. e. the sun] and that which was before
named Mene, should be called Selene
[Σηλήνη the moon.]

Historians say, this Hyperion was an
astronomer that found out the motion
of the sun, moon, and other planets, 
and the seasons and distinctions of time
measured out by them, and therefore
is called the father of those planets, as
being the first that taught the knowledge
and nature of them.

HYPO [ὑπό under, Gr.] a particle us'd
in the composition of many words.

HYPOCHONDRIA [ὑπόχονδρία, of
ὑπέρ and χόνδρος, Gr. a cartilage] the
sides of the upper part of the belly about
the short ribs, under which the liver,
stomach and spleen lie.

HYPOCHYMA [ὑπόχυμα, Gr.] a suf­
fusion, a fault in the sight, when gnats, 
cobwebs, little clouds, &c. seem to fly
before the eyes.  L.

HYPOCRITE [Hieroglyphically] was
represented by a leopard; because it is
reported of this beast, that it craftily
dissembles and hides its head with its
paws, that it may more easily catch its
prey, for that the beasts, tho' they are
much delighted with the scent of its bo­
dy, are as much frighted at its head.

HYPOGASTRICK Vein [Anat.] a vein
arising in the same parts with the hypo­
gastrick artery, and discharging itself
into the Iliaca interna.

HYPOGLOTTIDES [Anat.] two large
glands of the tongue situate under it,
near the venæ ranulares, and there are
2 more large glands on the side of it.
They all filtrate a kind of serous mat­
ter of the nature of saliva, which they
discharge into the mouth by little ducts.

HYPOPHILOSPERMOUS Plants [of
ὐπό, φυίλλον a leaf, and σπέρμα, Gr. seed]
are such as bear their seeds on the back­
sides of their leaves.

HYPOSTATICAL Union [in Theo­
logy] the union of the human nature
with the divine.

HYPOTHESIS [with Philosophers]
principles supposed, as granted for the
solution of any Phænomena, that from
thence an intelligible and plausible ac­
count may be given of the causes and
effects of the phæomena proposed. The
laying down or supposing such princi­
ples to be granted, is called an Hypothe­
sis. It is not absolutely necessary that 



what is supposed be true, but it must be
possible, and ought also to be probable.

HYPOTHESIS [with Astronomers] sig­
nifies a system, and is usually used and
understood in respect to the universe, 
and in relation to the dispositions of the
heavens, and the motions of the stars:
Concerning which an Hypothesis that is
elaborately contrived is called a system:
as the Ptolemaick, Copernican or Tycho­
nian.

HYRST [hyrſt, Sax.] in the names
of places denotes, that they took their
names from a wood or forest.

HYSSOPICK Art, a name given to
chymistry by Paracelsus, in allusion to
that text in the Psalms, Purge me with
Hyssop; because that art purifies metals, 
minerals, &c.

HYSTERICA [ὑστέριχος, Gr.] medi­
cines against the disease of the womb,
L.

HYSTERICKS [ὑστεριχὰ, Gr.] reme­
dies against hysterick affections.

HYSTEROPOTMOI [ὑστεροποτμοι, Gr.]
such as had been thought dead, and af­
ter a long absence in foreign countries
returned safe home; or such as had
been thought dead in battle, and after
unexpectedly escaped from their ene­
mies and returned home. These (among
the Romans) were not permitted to en­
ter their own houses at the door, but
were received at a passage opened in
the roof.

HYSTEROTOMIA [ὑστεροτομια, of
ὑστέρα and τὲμνω, Gr. to cut] the cutting
a child out of the womb.

HYSTEROTOMATOCIA [of ὑστερα, 
τόμη a cutting, and τόχος, Gr. birth]
an operation more usually called the
Cæsarian operation, the same as Hystero­
tomia.


I

Ii, Roman; I i, Italick; I i, English;
Ιι, Greek, are the ninth letters of
their respective alphabets, and י Hebrew
is the tenth in order of that alphabet.

I is both a vowel and a consonant as
it happens to stand related to other let­
ters, that may be joined to it in the same
sound or syllable. The Flemmings, Ita­
lians, Spaniards and ourselves pronounce
this letter, when a consonant, two diffe­
rent ways Whenever j comes before
another vowel in the same syllable it is
a consonant.

I, the vowel is not sounded in Parlia­
ment, Suit, Fruit, Height, &c. and tho'
it very often ends foreign words, it ne­
ver ends English ones: Before r, it has
the sound of u, as bird, third, first, &c.

JACK, is an
engine much 
used about guns
or mortars, and
is always car­
ried along
with the Artil­
lery, for rai­
sing up the
Axle-tree, if a
wheel chance
to be broke; it
is likewise used
for traversing
large mortars, 
such as those
of 18 inches
diameter, 
which are up­
on Low Dutch carriages, and for ele­
vating them; for traversing the sea
mortars, and many other uses, too te­
dious to be named: With this engine
one man is able to raise more than six
could do without it. See the figure.

Image omitted.



JACK a Dandy, a little, impertinent, 
insignificant fellow.

JACK at a Pinch, a hackney parson, 
or one who officiates for another upon
sudden emergencies, without any pre­
vious notice.

JACKANAPES, a term of contempt
for a little prating, whiffling fellow.

JACK KETCH, a hangman or com­
mon executioner.

JACK ADAMS, a silly, impertinent
fellow.

JACK in a Box, a cheat or sharper.

JACK SPRAT, a diminutive term
for a person of small reputation; also a
dwarf or a person of a small stature.

JACK, a sort of coat of mail, anci­
ently worn by horsemen in the wars, 
not made of solid iron, but of many
plates of iron fastened together; these
jacks some sort of tenants, who held
lands, were obliged to provide upon
any invasion made upon the country.

JACK in a Lanthorn, a certain me­
teor, or clammy vapour in the air, 
which reflects light in the dark, common­
ly haunting churchyards, fens, marshes
and privies, as steaming out of a fat
soil, and there hovering about where
there is a continual flux of air: It ap­
pears like a candle and lanthorn, and
sometimes leads travellers out of their
way.

JACKAL, a wild beast about the big­
ness of a spaniel-dog, with black shagged
hair, who in the evening hunts for prey



for the lion, and follows it with open
cry; to whom the lion listens, and fol­
lows to seize it: For the Jackal will
not eat of it, till the lion is satisfied, and
afterwards feeds on what he leaves.

JACKET [jacquetté, F.] a short coat
anciently worn by horsemen, over
their armour and cuirasses; it was
made of cotton or silk stitch'd between
two light stuffs, and sometimes of cloth
of gold.

JACOBINS [so called, because their
principal convent stands near the gate
of St. James, in the city of Paris in
France] monks and nuns of the order
of St. Dominick.

JACOBITES a sect of Eastern chri­
stians in the 6th and
beginning of the 7th century, so de­
nominated from Jacob Bardeus a Syrian, 
a disciple of Eutyches and Dioscorus, who
spread the heresy in Asia and Africa to
that degree, that the sect of the Euty­
chians were swallow'd up by that of the
Jacobites, which also comprehended all
the Monophysites of the East, i. e. such
as acknowledged but one nature, and
that human in Jesus Christ, by that tak­
ing in the Armenians and Abyssines:
They denied the three persons in the
Trinity, and made the sign of the cross
with one finger, to intimate the one­
ness of the Godhead. Before baptism
they applied a hot iron to the foreheads
of children after they had circumcised
them, founding that practice upon the
words of John the Baptists, Matt. 3. He
will baptize you with the Holy Ghost
and with fire.

Mr. Simon says the number of the
Jacobins is but small there not being
above 30, or 40000 families of them, 
principally inhabiting Syria and Mesopo­
tamia, and that they are divided among
themselves, the one part embracing and
the other disowning the communion of
the church of Rome.

JACOBITISH [of Jacobus, James]
inclined to the principles of Jacobites, 
or attached to the interest of king James
the II. or the Pretender, commonly
call'd the Chevalier de St. George.

JADISH, spoken of a horse [of ʒaað, 
Sax. a goad or spur, q. d. one that will
not go without the spur] lazy, apt to
be tired.

JADE, a greenish stone, bordering
on the colour of olive, esteemed for
its hardness and virtues, by the Turks
and Poles, who adorn their fine sabres
with it; and it is said to be a preserva­
tive against the nephritick colick.

JAH [הי from the Radix היה, Heb. he
was] a name of God frequently to be
met with in the Old Testament, and es­
pecially compounded with many pro­
per names, as Adonijah.

JAIL-Bird, a prisoner. See Goal.

JAM [with Miners] a ridge of
rock or stone, that nips
off the vein of oar and
hinders them from pursuing it.

JAMB [with Miners] a ridge of
rock or stone, that nips
off the vein of oar and
hinders them from pursuing it.

JAUMB [with Miners] a ridge of
rock or stone, that nips
off the vein of oar and
hinders them from pursuing it.

JAMAICA Wood, a sort of speckled
wood, of which cabinets, &c. are
made.

JAMBE [according to the Poets] the
daughter of Pan and Echo, who, to di­
vert the goddess Ceres from her melan­
choly, would tell her pleasant stories,
and make her laugh by jests and fancies
that she would put into Iambick verse;
and from her that sort of metre, which
was before unknown, took its name.

IAMBICK Verse, is so called of the
Iambick feet, of which it chiefly con­
sists, which are one short and one long
syllable, as meos. It is the most vari­
ous of all other sorts of verse, being
of three sorts; Diameter, Trimeter, or
Senarie: The last of which is most in
use; this consists chiefly in Iambick feet;
but has now and then a Spondee and
Trochee, as suis &c. ipsa Roma viribus
ruit.

St. JAMES-wort, an herb.

St. JAMES's Cross [in Heraldry] is
one whose head or top ter­
minates in the form of a
heart, and the two arms
bearing some resemblance
to the Cross Patonce, so cal­
led, because worn by the Spanish
knights of Santiago or St. James. See
the figure.

Image omitted.



JANIZARIES [in the Turkish army]
foot soldiers, who were formerly only
christian children, either such as were
taken prisoners, or such, the poverty of
whose parents gave up in lieu of the
tribute, exacted by the Grand Seignior
for liberty of conscience; but that is
now ceased. The number of them is
different, according to the different
exigencies of the state; formerly it
was but 33000, but of late years they
have been augmented to 100000. Their
pay is from 2 to 12 aspers a day, besides
a doliman or long coat with short sleeves,
which they have allow'd them once a
year, the first day of their Ramezan or
Lent. In time of peace they carry
only a long stick; but in a time of war
fire arms, and a sabre.

JANIZARIES, is a name sometimes
given to such as are resolute, bold and
daring, to execute the designs of any



person either in a publick or private
station, at all hazards.

JANSENISTS [so called of Cornelius
Jansenius, bishop of Ypres] a sect of
Christians in the 6th century, whose
principles were chiefly founded upon
his book entitled Augustinus, wherein
he endeavours to explain St. Augustin's
scheme concerning grace.

The substance of which is, that all
the concurrent causes or principles di­
stinct from the soul, do so far determine
the will that it is plainly over-ruled by
them.

When Jansenius's book was published
in 1640, it was strenuously opposed.
Pope Urban the VIII. to put a stop to the
dispute, publish'd a bull against it, 
charging it with reviving doctrines
condemned by his predecessors. This
gave vigor to the controversy, and the
French procured Innocent the X. to
condemn 5 propositions, which con­
tained the chief of Jansenius's notions.
The assembly of the French clergy re­
ceiv'd pope Innocent's condemnation.

The partisans of Jansenius did like­
wise condemn those 5 propositions, but
at the same time affirmed that they
were not in his book.

Anthony Arnaud and eminent doctor
of the Sorbonne was expell'd the faculty
of divinity at Paris, for asserting that
he questioned whether those proporti­
ons could be found in Jansenius's book.
But pope Alexander the VII. affirming
that they were there, those who refus'd
to sign the form for censuring the pro­
positions through all the diocesses of
France, were expelled, interdicted or
excommunicated.

But notwithstanding the controversy
has still been kept on foot, by means of
a distinction betwixt fact and right, and
by means of an expedient of putting
different senses upon the popes consti­
tutions.

JANUARY [is supposed to take its
name of Janus, an ancient king of
Italy, or of Janus a pretended deity, 
whom the Romans suppos'd presided
over the beginnings of all business:
And by others, of janua, L. a gate, it
being, as it were, the entrance to the
rest of the months] January the first
month in the year, is represented in
painting all in white, like snow or
hoar-frost, blowing his fingers; hold­
ing in the left arm a billet, and Aqua­
rius standing by his side. At this time
cakes of new meal and salt were offered
to Janus, together with new wine and
frankincense.

Then all tradesmen and artists began
their works, and the Roman consuls ap­
pointed for the year ensuing, entered
solemnly upon their office. The Ro­
mans took care that at that time all
quarrels should be laid aside, that new­
years gifts, the tokens of friendship
should pass between them, and that
the day should conclude with mirth
and diversion.

On the full day of this month the
consuls marched to the capitol, attended
with a croud all in new cloaths; and 2
white bulls that had never born the
yoke, were sacrificed to Jupiter Capitoli­
nus, and a great deal of incense and
other perfumes were offered; and dur­
ing this religious solemnity they offered
their vows for the prosperity of the
empire and emperor.

It was added to the Roman calendar
by Numa; who placed it near the win­
ter solstice.

JANUS [is supposed by some to be so
called of ויו, Heb. wine, of which he is
said to have been the first inventor;
others derive the name of janua, L. a
gate, q. the gate of the world, of hea­
ven, or of months] the most ancient
king of Italy among the Aborigines, 
about the year of the world 2629, and
1319 before the birth of Christ, who
entertained Saturn when he was ba­
nished by his son Jupiter. It is related
of him, that he was the wisest of all
kings, and knew things past and to
come; and therefore they pictured him
with two faces, and deified him after
his death; and Numa built him a tem­
ple, which was kept shut in a time of
peace, and open in time of war. Some 
are of the opinion, that Janus was the
same as Ogyges, or Noah, or Japhet;
and thence said to have two faces, the
one looking backwards and the other
forwards, i. e. the one on the world
before the flood, and the other on the
world after the flood; and he is said to
have come into Italy in the golden age
of the world (when there was no gold
coined, when men were just) and to
have taught men to plant vines, &c. to
to offer sacrifice, and to live tempe­
rately.

Janus is described with two faces, 
either as respecting the evening and the
morning, or rather in regard of his
singular prudence, which is a virtue
consisting in the remembrance of things
past, and a foresight of things to come;
he has 12 altars beneath his feet, and
holds a key in his right hand, and a
scepter in his left; by one intimating



that he can as it were open the world
by the light he gives, and shut it up
again by withdrawing the same light
from us, and the scepter denotes the
dominion he has over it. Sometimes
he was represented with four faces, ei­
ther in regard of the four seasons of the
year, or the four quarters of the world.

He was esteemed the god of peace;
tho' he was never called upon but in
times of war. His temple was shut in
the time of peace, but stood open in a
time of war.

JAPONNESE Language, the language
of Japan is said to be very curious, 
they having several words to express
one thing, some in honour, others in
derision; some for the prince, others
for the people; as also for the quality, 
age and sex of the speaker and person
spoken to.

JARDEES [with Horsemen] are
callous and hard swel­
lings in the hinder legs of an horse, 
seated on the outside of the hough, as
the spavin is on the inside.

JARDONS [with Horsemen] are
callous and hard swel­
lings in the hinder legs of an horse, 
seated on the outside of the hough, as
the spavin is on the inside. 

A JARR [of jarra, Span.] an earthen
vessel well known, of oil it contains
from 18 to 36 gallons.

JARRING [probably either of gar­
riens, L. prating as Minshew supposes, 
or of guerroyant, F. brawling according
to Skinner] disagreement between per­
sons, falling out, quarrelling.

JASPER, is commonly taken for a
precious stone; but is rather reckoned
among marbles, it is of various co­
lours; but the most beautiful is green, 
and that which is most esteemed is full
of little spots, scattered here and there
upon the green. Some value the pur­
ple coloured very highly: Some is of
a carnation colour, red, rose coloured
striped, white, and of many other co­
lours.

In some of it nature has represented
landskips, trees, flowers, &c. very
curiously. It is not transparent and
approaches pretty near to the Agate.
It is found in many parts of the East
and also in some parts of Europe.

Some attribute to it the medicinal
vertues of helping women in labour
and stopping blood.

IATRALIPTICA, that part of phy­
sick that cures by friction, and the ap­
plication of fomentations and platters.

IATROCHYMIST [Iatrochymicus, L.
of ἰατρὸς a physician, and χυμὸς chy­
mistry] a chymical physician, or one
who uses or prescribes chiefly chymical
preparations.

IATROMATHEMATICIAN [of ἰα­
τρὸς a physician, and μαθηματιχὸς, Gr. a
mathematician] a physician, who con­
siders diseases, and their causes mathe­
matically, and prescribes according to
mathematical proportions.

JAVARIS, a sort of swine in Ameri­
ca, that has its navel on the back; dif­
ficult to be taken, because it is scarcely
to be tired in running, and so furious, 
that it rends every thing to pieces with
its tushes.

JAUMBS [jambes, F.] the side-posts
of a door.

JAUNTINESS [of an uncertain de­
rivation; unless of Jancer F.] wanton­
ness, hoydening, ramping humour.

JAWLAPS, the red skins under a
cock's jaws.

JAZEL, a precious stone of an azure
or blue colour.

IBEX, a wild goat that is very swift
and runs up steep rocks. Bochart de­
scribes the Ibex after the following
manner; he says, it lives upon steep
rocks; that nature has given it large
horns, which it bends back as far as its
buttocks, so that it will leap from the
highest precipices, and falls upon its
back without hurting it self, because
its horns receive and break the blow.

IBIBOCA, a kind of serpent in Brasil, 
whose bite, tho' venomous, does not
presently prey upon the vitals, but pro­
ceeds by degrees; the principal remedy
for the cure is a plaister made of the
serpent's head.

IBIS, a bird, which Strabo says is
like a stork, and that some are black
and others white. The Egyptians wor­
shipped them because they devoured
the serpents, which otherwise would
over-run the country.

It is agreed that the Ibis is a species
of storks. The white Ibis is a real
stork; the black, which is properly
the Ibis, is a bird peculiar to Egypt;
it never goes out of it, and some say, 
that it cannot even live out of it. At
a distance it seems to be all black, if
you look near it, it is of the colour of
a lap-wing or wood-raven; the fea­
thers whereof seem to be mix'd with
green and a colour bordering upon blue.
The belly of it and sides under the
wings are white. Its beak is large, 
strong and of a scarlet colour, as well
as its legs and feet.

Its beak is about 18 inches long, its
neck 12 or 14 inches, its body and
breast are as large as the back of a
goose. When its head is under its
wing it has the form of a heart.



The white is to be seen in all parts
of Egypt, but the black is not commonly
to be met with any where but about
Damietta. The Egyptians had this bird
in so high a veneration, that it was a
capital crime among them to have kill'd
one of them through inadvertency.

Cambyses king of Persia, who was
not unacquainted with their supersti­
tion in this respect, had some of these
birds plac'd before his army, when he
besieged Damietta. The Egyptians not
daring to shoot against them, nor con­
sequently against their enemies, suffered
the town to be taken, which was as it
were the key to all Egypt.

The Ibis not only eats the flying
serpents or Saraphs, but kills them after
it is sated with them. It eats likewise
the eggs of serpents, and carries them
to its young ones, which are very gree­
dy of them.

After the death of the Ibis, the Egyp­
tians were used to embalm it, in order
to preserve it, they made a kind of fu­
neral for it, and paid great honours to
it.

It is very remarkable in this bird, 
that altho' it be a water fowl, and lives
chiefly about the Nile, yet it never en­
ters the water, and does not know how
to swim. The use of glysters is said
to have been learnt from the Ibis and
not from the stork.

It generally builds its nest upon palm
trees to avoid the cats. The flesh of
the Ibis is said to be red like that of
salmon, and sweet, and its skin is very
hard and smells like wild fowl.

ICADES [of ἐιχὼς, of ιχοσιἔ twenty, 
Gr.] an ancient festival, celebrated
monthly on the twentieth day (he ha­
ving been born on the twentieth) by
the Epicurean philosophers, in memory
of their matter Epicurus. They bore
his images about the houses in state, 
and made sacrifices.

ICARUS, the son of Dædalus, who
(according to the poets) with his father
flying from Crete, thro' youthful wil­
fulness despised his father's counsel, and
flew higher than he should, and so melt­
ed the wax which held his winged fea­
thers together, and fell into the sea and
was drowned.

ICE [Iis, Dan. Iſ, Sax.] water con­
gealed into a glassy substance by a cold
air or freezing wind. It is the com­
mon opinion of philosophers, that ice
is made by certain spirits of nitre, 
which in the winter mix with the
parts of the water, and being of them­
selves improper for motion, because of
their figure and inflexibility, infeeble
and destroy gradually that of the parts
to which they are joined.

ICH Dien [ich I and deinnen, Teut. to
serve] a motto which Edward the black
prince took for his, and ever since has
been the motto of the arms of the
prince of Wales. The prince observ'd
it on the shield of John king of Bohemia, 
who served in the French wars, at the
battle of Cessi where he was kill'd, and
therefore took it as his motto, in token
of subjection to his father, under whom
he served in that war against France.

ICHNEUMON [Ιχνεύμον ἀπὸ τοῖ ἰχ­
νεύειν Gr. of investigating] the Egyptian
rat, is of the size of a cat, with very 
rough hair spotted with white, yellow
and ash colour; its nose like that of a
hog, with which it digs up the earth;
it has short black legs, and a tail like a
fox; it lives on lizards, serpents, snails, 
cameleons, rats and other animals; and
is of great service in Egypt, by its natu­
ral instinct hunting out and breaking
the eggs of the crocodile, and thereby
preventing too great an increase of that
destructive creature. The naturalists
also say, that it is so greedy after the
crocodiles liver, that rowling himself in
mud, it slips down his throat while he
sleeps with his mouth open, and gnaws
its way out again. The inhabitants of
Heracteopolis worshipped the Ichneumon, 
it being the mortal enemy to the cro­
codile.

The ICHNEUMON [Hieroglyphically]
was used to represent safety and preser­
vation.

ICHNOGRAPHICAL [of εὶχονογραφιχὸς
of εἰχὼν and γραφιχὸς, Gr.] describing by
images, pictures, &c. hieroglyphical.

ICHOGLANS, the grand Signior's
pages or white eunuchs, who serve in
the Seraglio. They are christians chil­
dren, and brought up in a discipline so
severe, as is scarce credible.

ICHTHYOLOGIST [ἶχθυολόγος, Gr.]
a writer or describer of fishes.

ICHTHYOMANCY [ἰχθυομαντεία, 
Gr.] divination by the entrails of fishes, 
for which Tiresias is said to have been
famous.

ICHTHYOPHAGIST [ἰχθυοφάγος, 
Gr.] a fish-eater.

ICINESS [of Iis, Dan. Iſ, Sax.] icy
nature or qualities, also plenty or a­
bundance of ice.

ICONOCLASTS [of Ἐιχωνοχλάστης, of
Ἐιχων an image, and χλαστης, a breaker, 
of χλάω, Gr. to break] a name given
to those of the eighth century, who de­
clared against the use of images in the



Christian church. The original of which
was as follows. A certain Jew, named
Sarcutapechis, persuaded Ezide king of
the Arabs, to take the images of saints out
of the Christian churches; and sometime
after that one Bazere a slave becoming
a Mahometan in Syria, insinuated himself
so much into the favour of Leo Isauri­
cus, that he at his and the instigation of
other Jews, who had predicted has com­
ing to the empire, did about the year
726 declare against images, and ordered
the statue of Christ, that was placed over
one of the gates to be thrown down, 
and this having occasioned a tumult, he
was so enraged thereat, that he issued
out a proclamation, abolishing the use
of images, and threatening the wor­
shippers of them with severe punish­
ments; nor could he be prevailed upon
by the earnest solicitations of German­
icus the patriarch and the bishop of
Rome in their favour.

Likewise his son and successor Con­
stantine, forbad praying to saints or the
Virgin Mary; they also laughed at Pope
Stephen the 3d and Paul the I. who
would have dissuaded him from it, and
called a council wherein what he had
done was approved; but this council
being condemned at Rome, he laboured
more than ever to gain his point.

Leo the IV. succeeded him in the year
775, but reigned but 4 years, leaving his
son Constantine under the tutelage of the
empress Irene, and the second Council
of Nice being held in her time in the
year 787. which as Baronius and others
relate, desired that the images of Christ,
and the saints, &c. might be restored.

But Spanhemius says; the emperor
Philip, and John the patriarch of Con­
stantinople having rejected the 6th gene­
ral council against the Monothelites in
712, took away the pictures of that and
the former councils that had been hung
up by the emperor Justinian in the por­
tico of St. Sophia, and that the pope
thereupon in a synod held at Rome, or­
dered the like images to be placed in St.
Peters church and henceforth to be wor­
shipped.

The Saracens offended at that super­
stition persecuted the Christians, and
Leo calling a synod, published a procla­
mation. condemning the worship of them, 
but allowing their being hung up in
churches, the better to prevent idolatry;
and upon a further dispute with pope
Gregory the II. who excommunicated
him and absolved his subjects from their
obedience, in the year 730 he command­
ed they should be quite taken down and
destroyed.

Constantine Copronymus followed the
example of his father in the year
744, the 13th year of his reign assembled
the 7th general council of the Greeks, in
which images and their worship was
condemned. His steps were likewise
followed by Leo the IV. his son who at
his death leaving the administration of
the state to the empress Irene, during the
minority of his son Constantine the VII.
she to gain the monks to her interest
made use of them for the restoring i­
mages, advancing Tarasias from a lay­
man to be patriarch of Constantinople; and
so managed the council which she call'd
at Nice, that they decreed several sorts
of worship in images; as salutations, 
incense, kissing, wax-lights, &c. but did
neither approve of the images of the
Trinity, statues, nor any carved work. 

Constantine being come of age and
opposing this procedure, was barborusly
deprived of his sight and life by his un­
natural mother Irene; which fact is com­
mended by cardinal Baronius, as also
Gregory II. declaring the emperor Leo
uncapable of the crown; which he calls
a rare example to posterity, not to suffer
heretical princes to reign.

On the other side the popes imitated
their predecessors in their hatred to the
Greek emperors, whom they despoiled
of their exarchate of Ravenna and their
other possessions in Italy, which by the
assistance of the French was converted
into St. Peter's patrimony.

But it is evident by the capitulary of
Charlemaign against images, that the
French, Germans and other Northern
countries did abhor image worship; and
also the acts of the synod of Frankfort
under that prince, who also wrote 4
books to pope Adrian against image
worship and the illegal council of Nice
before mentioned.

This image worship was also opposed
by other emperors, who succeeded, as
also by the churches of Italy, Germany
France and Britain, particularly by the
learned Alcuinus.

ICONOGRAPHIA [of ἐιχών an image
and γράφω, Gr. to describe] a description
of images or ancient statues of marble
and copper, of busts and semibusts, of
Penates, paintings in fresco, Mosaick
work: and ancient pieces of miniature.

ICONOLATER [of ἐιχών and λατρεύω,
Gr. to worship] a worshipper of ima­
ges.

ICONOLOGY [of ἐιχὼν and λόγος,
Gr.] interpretation of ancient images, 
monuments and emblems, or an art
describing the figures and representa­



tions of men, deities, the passions, ver­
tures and vices, with their peculiar cha­
racteristicks; thus Apollo is sometimes
represented with a bow and arrows
and sometimes with a harp.

Bacchus crowned with ivy, armed
with a Thyrsus, clothed with a tigers
skin, and sometimes drawn by tigers,
and follow'd with a train of Menades.

Ceres with a sickle in her hand, and
a sheaf of corn.

Cupid with a cow and arrows, a
quiver and a torch, and sometimes
with a muffler over his eyes.

Hercules wearing a lion's skin for his
surtout with a club in his hand.

Juno is represented riding in a cloud
with a peacock by her side, or some­
times in a chariot drawn by peacocks.

Jupiter holding a thunder-bolt in his
hand, and an eagle by his side.

Mars is dress'd in armour Cap-a-Pe,
with a cock which was consecrated to
him.

Mercury with a caduceus or wand in
his hand, with wings on his hat and on
his sandals.

Neptune sitting in a chariot drawn by
two sea horses, with a trident in his
hand.

Pluto riding in a chariot drawn by
four black horses, holding a fork with
two tines.

Saturn in the form of an old man
with a scythe.

Venus in a chariot, drawn with doves
or swans.

ICOSAEDRON [ἐιχοσάεδρον Of ἔι­
χυσι twenty, and
ἒδρα, Gr.] is a regular body, consisting
of twenty triangular pyramids, the ver­
texes of which meet in the center of a 
sphere, supposed to circumscribe it, and
have their height and bases equal. This
figure, drawn on a pastboard, cut half
thro', and then folded up, will repre­
sent an icosihedron, as in the following
figure.

Image omitted.



ICOSIHEDRON [ἐιχοσάεδρον Of ἔι­
χυσι twenty, and
ἒδρα, Gr.] is a regular body, consisting
of twenty triangular pyramids, the ver­
texes of which meet in the center of a 
sphere, supposed to circumscribe it, and
have their height and bases equal. This
figure, drawn on a pastboard, cut half
thro', and then folded up, will repre­
sent an icosihedron, as in the following
figure.

Image omitted.



IDÆIDACTYLI, were the ancient
inhabitants of Crete, and had their ori­
ginal from mount Ida in Phrygia, and
were called Dactyli, from their being
ten in number, according to that of the 
fingers. They carried their rites and
mysteries into Samothracia, and being
believed to have found out the use of
fire, to have discovered the nature and
use of brass, iron and other metals,
and to have invented many other things
of great use and advantage to mankind,
and therefore were reputed as gods or
dæmons.

IDEA [Ιδέα of εῖδος form, or of ἒιδω
to see, Gr.] the form or representation
of any sensible object, transmitted into
the brain, thro' the organs of sight, or the
eye; but in a more general sense, it is
taken for the immediate object of under­
standing, whatever it be; or, as others
define it, thus: Idea is whatever the
mind perceives in itself, or stands there
for the immediate object of any phan­
tasm, notion, species, thought, or under­
standing: Ideas are either simple or com­
plex.

IDEA [with Logicians] is not to be
understood only of those images that
are painted by the fancy; but all that
is within our understanding, when we
can truly say we conceive a thing, after
what manner soever we conceive it.

Simple IDEAS, are those Ideas that
come into our mind by Sensation, as Co­
lours by the Eye, Sounds by the Ear, Heat,
Cold, and Solidity by the Touch, which
come into the mind by only one sense;
also Space, Extension, Figure, Rest and
Motion, which we gain by more than
one sense; also, Pleasure, Pain, Power,
Existence, Unity and Succession, which
convey themselves into the mind by all
the ways of sensation.

Complex IDEAS, or compounded i­
deas, and are founded by the power
which the mind hath of comparing, se­
parating or extracting its simple Ideas,
which come into it by sensation and re­
flection.

IDENTICALLY [of identique, F.] by
or according to the same.

IDENTICALNESS [of identitas, L. of
idem the same] the sameness of a thing
in nature or properties; the being the
very same thing.

IDENTITY [identitas, L.] is defined
by Metaphysicians. to be the agreement
of two or more things in another.

IDEOT. See Idiot.

IDES [so called of Iduo, in the old
Tuscan language, to divide, because they
divided the months as it were into two
parts] were the days of the month a­
mong the Romans, after the Nones were
out, and they commonly fell out on the
13th of all the months except March,
May, July, and October, in which they fell



the 15th, because in those months the
Nones were on the 7th.

IDIOCRATICAL, of, or pertaining
to Idiocrasy.

IDIOMATICAL, according to the
Idiom, i. e. the peculiar phrase or man­
ner of expression in the language or the
propriety of speech.

IDIOMATICALLY, by the Idiom, or
after the manner of Idiom.

IDIOPATHIC of or per­
taining to I­
diopathy.

IDIOPATHETICAL of or per­
taining to I­
diopathy.

IDIOSYNCRATICAL, of or pertain­
ing to Idiosyncrasy.

IDIOTISM [Ιδιωτισμος, Gr.] the con­
dition of an ideot; natural folly or sim­
plicity.

IDLENESS [Itelneſſe, Sax.] lazi­
ness, slothfulness.

IDLY [Iðelichʒ, Sax.] after a lazy
slothful manner.

IDOL [Ἔιδωλον, Gr.] some define an
idol to be not an image of a real thing;
but of something that is false and ima­
finary, that is adored or worshipped;
such as that of a sphinx, a dragon, a
griffin, a satyr, a chimæra, &c. and
they urge this of St. Paul for it, An
idol is nothing. Or it may be defined
to be an image, statue or representation
of some false Deity. The sun and other
planets seem to have been the first Idols,
and the Heathens who had valiant
princes, either thro' flattery or fear,
after their death deluded the vulgar
with their being translated into Heaven
and changed into stars, and then paid
them divine honours.

Nor did they stop at paying adoration
to human kind, but proceeded to that
of beasts, which were either useful, as
the Ox, &c. or hurtful as the Crocodile,
out of a veneration for the former or
fear of the latter, were transformed into
deities. Not only men, women and
beasts, but also trees, plants, rivers,
and many other inanimate things were
made deities; but represented under
divers forms and of various matter, as
Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, Stone and
Wood.

IDOLS of the ancients, were at first
nothing but a rude stock or stone, and
such a one was that of Juno Samia,
which afterwards, in the magistracy of
Procles was turned into a statue. Pau­
sanias relates, that in Achaia there were
kept very religiously 30 square stones,
on which were engraven the names of
as many gods. And in another place he
tells us of a very ancient statue of Venus
at Delos, which instead of feet had only
a square stone. And some imagine the
foundation of adoration being paid to
stones, was from the stone that Saturn
is fabled to have swallowed.

One thing is remarkable in these stones,
as particularly in the square stone that
represented the god Mars at Petra in
Arabia, that their colour was commonly
black, by which it should seem, that
that colour in those times was thought
most solemn, and becoming things de­
dicated to sacred uses.

They were called in Greek Βαιτύλια,
which seems to be derived from the
Phœnician language, wherein לאהב Be­
thel signifies the house of God; and
thence some think that their true origi­
nal is to be derived from the pillar of
stone that the patriarch Jacob erected
at Bethel.

There have been whole nations seen
to worship a rough stone. The Ara­
bians, as Maximus Tyrius relates, adored
a great square stone. It is certain that
before Mahomet, they had a very great
veneration for a certain black stone,
which is still at this day fastened to a
pillar, standing in the porch of the tem­
ple at Mecca, and is kissed very devout­
ly by the Mahometans.

The Mahometans make mention of an
Idol call'd Soura, which they say had
been worshipped in the time before the
deluge.

The god Heliogabalus was nothing
but a stone in the form of a cone, un­
der which they worshipped the sun.

They adored likewise spears or
lances, great pieces of timber, fire, a­
nimals, the sun, moon, stars, earth,
flowers, plants, trees and fountains.

The ancient Gauls and Germans had
scarce any other Gods but these.

The ancient Idols of the Egyptians
were for the most part very ill contriv'd
figures, representing animals or symbo­
lical figures, compounded of man and 
some animal or other: Here the head
of a dog grafted upon the body of a 
man; there the head of a cat upon that 
of a woman; oxen, ravens, serpents,
the vilest insects, the very herbs of
their gardens, as onions, &c. in their
country received divine honours.

IDOL [in a larger sense] signifies any
thing but the true God, that persons set
their affections too highly upon, and
pay particular respects to, as a Husband,
Wife, Son, Daughter, &c.

IDOLATRESS, a female image-­
worshipper.

IDOLATRIZING [of Ἐιδωλαλατρεία,
of ἔιδολα idiols, and λατρέυειν to worship,



Gr.] committing idolatry, worshipping 
of idols.

IDOLATROUSLY, after an idola­
trous manner.

IDOLATRY, is the superstitious
worship that is paid to idols and false
Gods. This word is in general under­
stood of all impious, superstitious and
sacrilegious worship.

As for the original of Idolatry, peo­
ple are not agreed.

The author of the book of wisdom
proposes three causes of it

1. The love of a father, who having
lost his son in an advanced age, to com­
fort himself under this loss, causes
divine honours to be paid him.

2. The beauty of works engraven.

3. The skill of an artificer in potter's
earth, who consecrates a statue of his
own making, as if it were a deity.

They who believed that man was
form'd by chance, imagined that by
degrees he came to institute a religion
for his own use, and that fear and su­
perstition were the first causes of this
religion. Primus in erbe, Deos fecit
timor. Lucretius. Man under the di­
sturbance of his mind, proceeding from
his fears, forged imaginary deities.

The first objects of idolatrous wor­
ship, seem to have been the sun, moon
and stars, the brightness, beauty and
usefulness of them, with respect to us
and every thing about us, induced men to
ascribe some divine virtues to them, 
and afterwards a religious worship.

Vossius maintains, that men began
first to depart from the worship, which
they ow'd to God, by rendering divine
honours to the two principles of good
and evil.

Mankind observing that the world
abounded with good and evil, were
not able to imagine, that God, who is
all over goodness, should be the author
of evil. They therefore invented two
deities of equal power, to whom they
allotted quite different offices.

The first principle, the author of
good, created the world; the second
principle, the author of evil, spread
throughout it all the evil he could.

To the worship of these two prin­
ciples succeeded that of spirts, parti­
cularly that of dæmons, afterwards that
of souls was introduc'd, as of heroes
and illustrious persons.

As to the time of its original; the
Rabbins say it was before the flood, 
and that the descendents of Cain intro­
duc'd into the world the worship of
the creature, and that Enos was the
first inventor of it, which they gather
from this expression, Then men began to
call upon the name of the Lord, which
they render thus; then the name of the
Lord was profaned, by giving it to idols.

Josephus and the generality of the
fathers seem of opinion, that after the
deluge, idolatry became very soon the
prevailing religion of almost all the
world; for wherever we cast our
eyes after Abraham's time, we see only
a false worship and idolatry in the
world. Abraham's forefathers and A­
braham himself were engaged in it, as
appears from Joshua 24. 2, 14.

Some attribute the original of it to
Serug, the grandfather of Terah; others
to Nimrod, who instituted the worship
of fire; others fix it upon Ham, the
son of Noah; and others to his son Ca­
naan.

It was without doubt introduced very
early into the world, but it does not
seem possible to trace it to its original;
nor must we believe that idolatry came
all from the same country, every na­
tion set up its particular gods, and a
religion after its own mode.

IDOLOTHYSY [ἰδολοθυσία, Gr.] a
sacrificing to idols.

IDONEOUSNESS [of idoneus, L. and
ness, Eng.] fitness, meetness.

IDYLLION [Ἐιδίλλιον of εἶδος figure
or representation, Gr.] a little gay
poem, containing a description or nar­
ration of some agreeable adventure.

JEALOUSLY [avec jalousie, F.] with
jealousy.

JEALOUSNESS [jalousie, F. zeloty­
pia, L. of ζηλοτυπία, Gr.] suspicion, 
mistrust, &c.

JECTIGATION [with Physicians] a
trembling or palpitation felt in the
pulse of a sick person, which indicates
that the brain, which is the origin of
the nerves, is attacked and threatned
with convulsions.

JEJUNENESS [of jejunus, L. and
ness, or jejunitas, L.] barrenness, emp­
tiness of stile, dryness.

JENNETS. See Gennets.

JENTIVES a sort of Heathens in
East-India, chiefly in
the kingdom of Golconda, and that of
Cambaya, who believe one only God
and the immortality of the soul; but
admit of the transmigration of souls, 
and therefore abhor the effusion of
blood and killing of animals, for fear
of killing their own fathers or any of
their friends.

JENTUES a sort of Heathens in
East-India, chiefly in
the kingdom of Golconda, and that of
Cambaya, who believe one only God
and the immortality of the soul; but
admit of the transmigration of souls, 
and therefore abhor the effusion of
blood and killing of animals, for fear
of killing their own fathers or any of
their friends. 

JEOPARDOUS, hazardous.

JEOPARDOUSNESS, hazardousness.



JEOPARDED [prob. of the French
words j'ai perdu, F. i. e. I have lost]
brought into danger, hazard, &c.

IEROMANCY [Ἱερόμαντεία, Gr.] di­
vination by sacrifices; it made conjec­
tures from the external parts and mo­
tions of the victim, then from its en­
trails, the flame in which it was con­
sumed, from the cakes and flower, 
from the wind and water, and several
other things.

JESDEGERDICK Epocha [with Chro­
nologers] a Persian epocha, which takes
its date from the coronation of Jesde­
gerdis, the last king of Persia; or rather
from its being conquered by the Otto­
man Saracens, July 16th, An. Chr. 632.

JESSAMIN [in Heraldry] by those
that blazon by flowers instead of metals
and colours, is used for Argent, on ac­
count of the whiteness of the flowers.

JESSANT [in Heraldry]
signifies shooting forth as
vegetables do, and frequent­
ly occurs in Flower-de-luces, 
as in the escutcheon; a
leopard's head Jessant, 
flower-de-luce, Or.

Image omitted.



JESTER [prob. of gesticulator, L. a
mimick, for in ancient times the mi­
micks used gesticulations or gestures in
breaking their jests on the company] a
witty jocose person, formerly kept by
princes, &c. to break jests for their
diversion.

JESUITES [so call'd of Jesus] a re­
ligious order of the Romish clergy, or a
sort of monks of the society of Jesus,
first founded by Ignatius Loyola a Spanish
soldier about the year 1534. They are
call'd Regular Clerks by the council of
Trent. They were confirm'd by pope
Paul III. in the year 1539 viva voce; and
in the year 1540 approv'd by an authen­
tick bull; by which their number was
not to exceed 6o; but this clog was
taken off in the year 1543 by another
bull; and divers popes since have con­
firmed this order and granted such pri­
vileges to it, as has rendred them exor­
bitantly numerous and powerful; but
their seditious writings and practises has
caus'd them to be discountenanced in
several governments in Christendom
notwithstanding they are of the Romish
persuasion.

JESUITESSES, an order of nuns
who had monasteries in Italy and Flan­
ders. They follow'd the rules of the
Jesuites; and tho' they did not obtain
the approbation of their order at Rome, 
yet they had several monasteries where
they had a lady abbess, and made vows
of poverty, chastity and obedience.

They did not confine themselves to
their cloisters but went abroad and
preached. They were 2 English women
who by the instignation of father Ger­
rard set up this order intending it for
the use of missionaries into England.
But this order was surpress'd by a bull
of pope Urban the VIII. A D. 1630.

JESUITICALLY [of de jesuite, F. a
religious order, so denominated from
Jesus] after the manner of jesuits;
equivocatingly.

JESUITS powder, the drug Quinqui­
na or Cortex Peruviana.

JESUS [Ἰησοῖς, Gr.] some have subti­
lized upon the number of the Greek let­
ters, which being applied together make
888, i. e. 8 unites, 8 eights, and 8 hun­
dreds, and apply them to certain pre­
dictions of the Cumæan Sybil.

JET. See Jeat.

JETTY, of or like jet, of the colour
of jet.

JEWEL office, an office where care is
taken of fashioning and weighing the
king's plate, and delivering it out by
such warrants as the masters receive
from the lord chamberlain.

JEWISH, pertaining to the Jews.

IGNIPOTENCE [of ignipotens, L.]
efficacy, prevalency against, or power
over fire.

IGNOBLENESS [ignobilitas, L.] base­
ness or meanness of birth.

IGNOMINIOUSNESS [of ignominia, 
L. ignominie, F. and ness Eng.] disgrace­
fulness, shamefulness, dishonourableness,
reproachfulness.

IGNORAMUS, an ignorant or silly
fellow.

An IGNORANT fellow [Hieroglyphi­
cally] such an one as was unacquainted
with the world, was painted with ass's
head and ass's ears.

IGNORANTNESS [ignorantia, L. ig­
norance, F.] unknowingness, unskilful­
ness, ignorance.

JILTING, deceiving, tricking, cheat­
ing, &c. used by strumpets and lewd wo­
men, especially in the point of amours.

ILET [islette, F.] a little island.

ILET-Holes. See Oylet.

ILIA [Ἲλία, Gr.] the daughter of
Numitor king of the Albanes, who being
a vestal virgin (as it is said) was gotten
with child by Mars on the bank of the
river Tiber, and brought forth two
twins. Romulus and Remus, for which
fact she was set alive in the ground, 
and her children exposed hard by the
same river; but being found by Faustu­



lus, Tut, the king's shepherd, he brought
them up.

ILIACK Passion [with Physicians] a
painful wringing or twisting of the guts
when they are stopped up, or full of
wind, or troubled with sharp humours;
or when the upper part of any entrail
sinks or falls into the lower, the same
that is called Chordapsus and Volvulus.  L.

ILLACRYMABLENESS [illacryma­
bilis, L.] uncapableness of weeping.

ILLAQUEATED [illaqueatus, L.]
intangled or insnared.

ILLATIVELY [of illatio, L.] by way
of inference.

ILLEGALLY [illegitime, F.] not ac­
cording to law.

ILLEGALNESS, [of in neg. and lega­
litas, L.] contrariness to law.

ILLEGITIMATENESS [of illegitimus
L. illegitime, F.] unlawfulness, baseness
of birth, spuriousness.

ILLIBERALNESS [illiberalitas, L.]
niggardliness, unbountifulness, mean­
ness of spirit.

ILL NATUREDNESS [of ill a contr.
of Efel, Sax. natura, L. and ness] un­
kind disposition, moroseness, cross grain­
edness, &c.

ILLUMINATI, certain Spanish here­
ticks, called by them Allumbrado's, who
began to appear about the year 1575, 
but the authors of it being severely pu­
nished, it was as it were stifled till about
the year 1623; but then recovered itself
again with more vigour, in the parts of
Spain about Sevil.

An edict published specifies 76 errors, 
the principal of which are, that with
the assistance of mental prayer, uni­
on with God, &c. (which they boasted
of) they were in such a state of perfec­
tion, as not to need either good works
or the sacraments of the church; soon
after these were suppressed, a new sect
appeared under the same name in France.
These likewise were intirely suppressed
in the year 1535.

Among other extravagancies they
held that friar Anthony Bucknet, had a
system of belief and practice revealed to
him, which exceeded all that was in
Christianity: That by virtue of that
method, people might improve to the
same degree of perfection and glory that
the Saints and Virgin Mary had: that
none of the doctors of the church knew
any thing of devotion: That St. Peter
was only a good well meaning man, 
and St. Paul never had scarce any thing
of devotion: That the whole church
lay in darkness and unbelief: That God
regarded nothing but himself: That
within 10 years their notions would
prevail all the world over: And then
there would be no occasion for priests, 
monks or any religious distinctions.

ILLUMNATIVE [illuminare, L. illu­
miner, F.] tending to enlighten.

To ILLUMINE [illuminor, L.] to il­
luminate. Milton.

ILLUMINED, a term used anciently
of such as had been baptized, and sprang
from a custom of putting a lighted taper
in the hand of the baptized, as a symbol
of the faith and grace received thereby.

ILLUSIVENESS [of illusor, of illu­
dere, L.] mocking
nature; also deceitfulness.

ILLUSORINESS [of illusor, of illu­
dere, L.] mocking
nature; also deceitfulness. 

ILLUSTRIOUSNESS [of illustris, L.
illustre qualité, F.] illustrious quality, 
famousness, nobleness, renownedness.

IMAGE [imago, L.] a natural, lively
representation of an object, opposed to
a smooth well polished surface; but is
generally used for a representation or
likeness of a thing, either natural or ar­
tificial; a statue or picture.

To IMAGE, to represent.

IMAGES were in use among the an­
cient Romans for civil and good pur­
poses, who put underneath the bustoes
and statues of their ancestors, inscrip­
tions of their origin and improvement
in commendable actions, to incite their
children to do the like; but images
have for a long time been introduced
into religion; at first by way of orna­
ment, and then thro' an extreme respect
and superstition, they became idols, and
were and still are actually worshipped
with divine honours.

Themistius relates, that all the Grecian
images till the time of Dædalus were
unformed, and that he was the first per­
son that made two separated feet, where­
as before they were but one piece, be­
ing only shaved out of wood or stone.
But in after-ages, when engraving and
carving were invented, they changed the
rude lumps into figures resembling li­
ving creatures; nevertheless in more
refined ages, such of the unformed ima­
ges as were preserved, were reverenced
for their antiquity and prefered before
the most curious pieces of modern art.

IMAGES [in Rhetorick] the use of
them is to paint things naturally, and to 
shew thern clearly.

IMAGES [in Poetry] their end is to
cause astonishment and surprize.

IMAGE [in Physicks] is the trace or
mark which outward objects impress
upon the mind, by means of the organs
of sense.

IMAGES [in Discourse] any thoughts



to produce expressions, and which pre­
sent a kind of picture to the mind; or in
a more limited sense, such discourses as
some persons, when by a kind of en­
thusiasm or extraordinary emotion of
the soul, they seem to see things where­
of they speak.

IMAGINABLENESS [of imaginabilis, 
L.] capableness of being imagined.

IMAGINARINESS [of imaginarius, 
L. and ness] fantastickness, the not hav­
ing a real existence; but only in the
fancy.

IMAGINATION, is an application
of the mind to the phantasm or image
of some corporeal thing impressed in
the brain: Or, it is a power or faculty
of the soul, by which it conceives and
forms ideas of things, by means of cer­
tain traces and impressions that had
been before made on the brain by sen­
sation.

IMAGINATIONISTS, fanciful per­
sons.

IMAGINATIVENESS [of imaginati­
vus, L. and ness] fantasticalness; also
suspiciousness, jealousy, thoughtfulness.

IMAGINES [among the Romans]
certain images of ancestors, which the
noblemen kept under the porches of
their houses in wooden cases; which
were carried about at their funeral
pomps and triumphal entries.

IMAM [among Mahometans] is a ru­
ler or governour of a mosque, and by
way of eminence it signifies one who
has the supreme authority both in spi­
rituals and temporals; but there are in
most cities subordinate Imams, who
are only concern'd in the affairs of re­
ligion, and are in mosques much like
as our parish priests.

An IMBARKMENT [embarquement, 
F.] an entring or being entered on ship­
board.

IMBASED [of im and bas, F.] made
lower in value; mixt with a baser me­
tal.

IMBATTLED [of im and bataillé, 
F.] ranged in battle array.

IMBECILNESS [imbecillitas, L. im­
becillité, F.] weakness, feebleness.

An IMBELLISHING [imbellissement, 
F.] an imbellishment, ornament or
beautifying.

IMBEZZLEMENT, waste, consump­
tion, spoil.

IMBLAZ'D [of in and blaſe, Sax.]
made to blaze, shining.

IMBLAZONARY [of blason, F.]
shield and colours with coat-armour, 
&c. Milton.

IMBOSSMENT, imbossed work, a
sort of carving or engraving, on which
the figures stand out above the plane,
on which they are made.

IMBORDERED [of im and bordure, 
F.] bordered, having borders. Milton.

IMBOSOM'D [of in and boſom, 
Sax.] inclosed in the bosom. Milton.

IMBOWELLED [of im, neg. and
boyau, F.] a bowel, having the bowels
taken out.

IMBRACERY [Law term] tamper­
ing with a jury, the penalty of which
is 20 pounds and imprisonment at the
pleasure of the judge.

IMBROWN'D, rendering opaque, 
shady. Milton.

IMITABLENESS [of imitabilis, L.
imitable, F. and ness] a capableness of
being imitated.

IMITATIVE [imitativus, L.] done
by imitation.

IMMACULATENESS [of immacula­
tus, L. immaculé, F. and ness] spotles­
ness, undefiledness.

IMMANE [immanus, L.] hugeness,
vastness, outragiousness.

IMMARCESSIBLENESS [of immar­
cessibilis, L. and ness] never-fading na­
ture, &c.

IMMATERIALNESS [immaterialité, 
F.] a not being made up of matter;
also a not being to the matter or pur­
pose.

IMMATURENESS [immaturus, L.]
unripeness.

IMMEDIATENESS [of immediate, 
L. immediat, F.] presentness, a follow­
ing another thing without any thing
coming between; also the acting with­
out means.

IMMEDICABLENESS [of immedica­
bilis, L. and ness] incurableness.

IMMEMORABLENESS [of immemo­
rabilis, L. and ness] unworthiness to be
remembered.

IMMEMORIAL [in a Law Sense] as
time immemorial, that was before the
reign of our king Edward II.

IMMEMORIALNESS [of immemorial, 
F. and ness] the being out of mind or
beyond the memory of man.

IMMENSENESS [of immensitas, L. 
immensité, F.] vastness, unmeasurable­
ness, greatness, hugeness. An ampli­
tude or extension, that cannot be equal­
led by any finite measure whatsoever, 
or how oft soever repeated.

IMMENSURABLENESS [of in neg.
mensurabilis, L. and ness] incapableness
of being measured.

IMMERSION [with Chymists] is the
putting metals or minerals into some



corrosive matter to reduce them to
powder.

IMMERSION [with Astronomers] sig­
nifies, that any planet is beginning to
come within the shadow of another, as
in eclipses, and whenever the shadow 
of the eclipsing body begins to fall on 
the body eclipsed, they say that is the
time of the Immersion, and when it goes
out of the shadow, that is the time of 
the Emersion.

IMMETHODICALNESS [of im for
in neg. and methodus, L.] the being out
of method, or contrary to method; ir­
regularity.

IMMINENTNESS [of imminens, L.
and ness] readiness to come upon us, 
&c. being as it were hanging just over
our heads.

IMMODERATENESS [of immodera­
tio, L. and ness] immoderation.

IMMODESTLY [immodeste, L. immo­
destement, F.] without modesty.

IMMODESTNESS [immodestia, L.
immodestie, F.] want of modesty or
shamefacedness.

IMMORALNESS [of im and morali­
tas, L.] want of morality, or contrari­
ness to morality; corruption of man­
ners, lewdness, &c.

IMMORTALIZED [immoertalisé, F.]
rendered immortal.

IMMORTALNESS [immortalitas, L.
immortalité, F.] the state of that which
is immortal, a never dying.

IMMOVEABLENESS [immobilitas,
L. immobilité, F.] unmoveableness.

IMMUTABLENESS [immutabilitas,
L. immutabilité, F.] unchangeableness.

IMMUTABILITY [in God] is an in­
communicable attribute, and is a free­
dom from all kind of change or uncon­
stancy; both as to his nature and pur­
poses.

Moral IMMUTABILITY [in God]
consists in his not being liable to any
change in his thoughts or designs; but
that what he wills he has willed from
all eternity.

To IMP the wings of one's fame, 
to tarnish or sully his reputation.

To IMP the feathers of time with
pleasure, &c. to divert one's self with
recreation.

An IMPAIRING [prob. of im
and pejorare,
L.] a diminishing, lessening, making
worse, &c.

An IMPAIRMENT [prob. of im
and pejorare,
L.] a diminishing, lessening, making
worse, &c.

IMPALEMENT, an execution by
driving a stake, &c. through a man's
body.

IMPANNELLED [prob. of in and pa­
neau, F. a square piece] inrolled, or put
into the roll, containing the names of
jury-men.

IMPARADISED [of in and paradisus, 
L. παράδεισος, Gr. of מדדפ, Heb.] en­
joying a paradise, delighted. Milton.

General IMPARLANCE, is when it
is set down and entered in general terms, 
without any special clause.

Special IMPARLANCE, is when the
party desires a farther day to answer, 
adding also these words, Salvit omnibus
advantagiis, &c.

IMPARTIALNESS [of im neg. and
partialité, F.] disinterestedness, a not
favouring or inclining to one party, 
&c. more than to another.

IMPASSIBLENESS [of impassibilitas, 
L. impassibilité, F.] uncapableness of
suffering.

IMPASSIONED [of in and passionné, 
F.] wrought up to a passion. Milton.

IMPATIENTNESS [of impatientia,
L. impatience, F.] uneasiness of mind
under sufferings; also hastiness or pas­
sion.

IMPEACHABLE, capable or liable
to be impeached.

To IMPEARL [of in and perlie, F.]
to form into pearls of dew. Milton.

IMPECCABLENESS [of impeccabilis,
L. impeccabilité, F.] an incapacity or
uncapableness to commit sin.

IMPED [with Gardeners] inoculated
or grafted.

IMPENDING [impendens, L.] hang­
ing over the head, being at hand.

IMPENETRABLENESS [impenetrabilité, F. of impenetrabilis, L.] uncapa­
bleness of being penetrated, pierced, 
or dived into; impenetrability.

IMPENITENTNESS, [impœnitentia, 
L.] impenitence, unrelentingness, a
hardness of heart, which causes a man
to continue in sin, and hinders him
from repenting.

IMPERCEPTIBLENESS [qualité im­
perceptible, F. of imperceptus, L.] unper­
ceivable quality, or uncapableness of
being perceived.

IMPERFECTNESS, want of perfec­
tion, unperfectness, defect; the want of
something that is requisite or suitable
to the nature of the thing,  F. of  L.

An IMPERFECTION [with Printers]
one or more sheets that are wanting to
make a compleat or perfect book.

IMPERIOUSNESS [imperiositas, L.]
imperious, lordly, domineering, &c.
humour of acting.

IMPERISHABLE [of in and perissable, 
F.] uncapable of perishing. Milton.

IMPERSUASIBLE [impersuasibilis, 
L.] that cannot be persuaded.



IMPERTURBATION, a being free
from trouble of mind, sereneness, 
calmness.

IMPERTINENTNESS [of imperti­
nence, F. of in negat. and pertinens, L.
belonging to] extravagance, nonsense, 
absurdness; also reasonable or ill-timed
troublesomeness.

IMPERVIOUSNESS [of impervius, 
L. and ness] the being impracticable to
be passed, impassableness, or the having
no way.

IMPETRABLENESS [of impetrabilis, 
L. and ness] capableness of being got­
ten or obtained by entreaty, &c.

IMPETRATION [in Old Statutes] 
the getting of benefices and church of­ 
fices beforehand from the church of
Rome, which belonged to the king, or
other lay patron.

IMPIOUSNESS [impietas, L. impieté,
F.] irreligion, ungodliness.

IMPIETY [Hieroglyphically] was by
the Egyptians represented by a quail;
because they say, that this bird doth fu­
riously chatter, as if she were offended,
when the crescent of the moon first ap­
pears.

An IMPIOUS wretch [Hieroglyphi­
cally] was represented by the Hippopo­
tamus or river-horse, a creature that
lives in the water as well as in the air;
because it is said to kill both its father
and mother, tearing them in pieces
with its teeth.

IMPLACABLENESS [implacabilitas, 
L.] implacable, unappeasable, or irre­
concilable hatred.

IMPLANTATION, a setting or fix­
ing into.

IMPLANTATION [with some pre­
tenders to Physick] a method of curing
by placing plants, or at least their
roots, in a ground prepared for that
purpose, and water'd with what the
patient us'd to wash himself; by which
means they pretend that the disease is
translated into the plant. If the plant
happens to die before the cure be per­
fected, by reason of the ill qualities it
imbibes, another plant or plants must
be placed instead of it, and the process
must be continued as at the first.

To IMPLICATE [implicatum, L.] to
infold, wrap up in, &c.

IMPLICITNESS [of implicatus, or
implicitus, L.] a being folded or inve­
loped in another, the not being ex­
pressed in plain terms, but only follow­
ing by consequence; a tacit under­
standing.

To IMPLOY [employer, F.] to mind
one's business; to keep in action.

IMPLOY [employ, F.] oc­
cupation, busi­
ness, trade, &c.

IMPLOYMENT [employ, F.] oc­
cupation, busi­
ness, trade, &c.

IMPOLITICKNESS [of in neg. poli­
ticus, L. πολιτιχὸς, Gr. and ness] contra­
riness to the rules of policy; impru­
dence, &c.

IMPOROUSNESS, a being free from, 
or the want of pores for the passage of
swear, vapours, &c.

IMPORTANTNESS [of importance,
F.] importance, consequence, weight.

IMPORTUNATENESS [importuni­
tas, L.] an eager urging or pressing,
troublesomeness, a wearying with two
frequent or unseasonable requests, hard
dunning.

IMPORTUNE [importunus, L.] un­
seasonable. Milton.

IMPOSITION, a peculiar way of
curing certain diseases, being a kind of
transplantation, which is thus perform­
ed. They take some of the implanted
spirit, or excrement of the part of the 
patient's body, or of both together,
and place it between the bark and the
wood of a tree or plant, and then cover
it with mud. Or others bore a hole in
the tree, &c. with an augur, and put
in the matter beforementioned, and
then stop the hole with a tampion of
the same wood, and cover it with mud.
And when the effect has followed they
take the matter out of the tree. If they
would have the effect should be speedy,
they make choice of a tree, that is a
quick grower; if they would have the
effect lasting, they chuse a tree of long
continuance, as the Oak.

IMPOSSIBLENESS [impossibilitas, L.
impossibilité, F.] impossibility or that
which cannot be done.

IMPOSTS [in Architecture] are some­
times call'd Chaptrels, they bring the
parts on which the feet of arches stand, 
or the capitals of pilasters, that support
arches. These imposts are conform­
able to their proper orders. The Tus­
can has a plinth only; the Dorick two
faces crowned; the Ionick a larmier or
crown over the two faces; the Corin­
thion and Composite have a larmier, 
freeze, and other mouldings.

IMPOSTUMATED [apostume, F.]
grown to an impostumation, i. e. a ga­
thering or collection of corrupt matter;
in the body.

IMPOVERISHMENT [depauperatio, 
L.] a being made poor.

IMPRACTICABLENESS [impra­
ticable, F. and ness] impossibleness to
be done or effected.



IMPRECATIONS [with the Anci­
ents] a kind of goddesses which the La­
tins also call'd Diræ, whom they ima­
gined to be the executioners of evil
consciences; who were called Eumeni­
des in hell, Furies on earth, and Impre­
cations in heaven. They invoked these
deities with prayers and pieces of ver­
ses to destroy their enemies.

IMPREGNABLENESS [of impregna­
ble, F. and ness] uncapableness of being
taken by force.

IMPREGNATED [s'impregné, F.] im­
bodied, imbibed, soaked in.

IMPREGN'D [impregné, F.] impreg­
nated. Milton.

To IMPRESS soldiers or seamen, is
to compel them into the publick ser­
vice.

IMPRESSED [of impressus, L.] print­
ed, stamped, having an impression on
it; also compelled into the publick ser­
vice.

IMPRESSED species [with the Peripa­
teticks] species which (they say) bodies
emit resembling them, which are con­
veyed by the exterior senses to the
common sensory, these impressed species
or impressions, being material and sen­
sible are rendered intelligible by the
active intellect, and being thus spiri­
tualiz'd they are thus termed as expres­
sed from others.

IMPRESSION [with Philosophers] is
a term apply'd to the species of objects, 
which are supposed to make some mark
or impression on the senses, the mind
and the memory.

IMPRESSIVE [of impressus, L.] apt
to impress or making an impression.

IMPREST money, money given to
soldiers, &c. compelled into the pub­
lick service.

IMPRIMING [with Hunters] is the
rousing, unharbouring or dislodging a
wild beast; also a causing it to forsake
the herd.

IMPROBABLENESS [of improbabilis,
L. and ness] unlikeliness to be true.

IMPROVABLENESS [prob. of im
and prouver, F. to essay or try, q. d.
to make better by essay or trials, and
ness, unless you had rather from in and
probus, L. good] capableness or being
improved or made better.

IMPROVIDENTNESS [improviden­
tia, L.] want of forecast, or taking
thought beforehand.

IMPRUDENTNESS [imprudentia, L.]
indiscretion, unadvisedness, want of
deliberation, forethought, precaution, 
&c.  F.

IMPUDENCE, a deity of the Pagans,
who had her temple at Athens, where
she was worshipped as a goddess while
at the same time in another temple
there they worshipped shame as a god;
the partridge was consecrated to impu­
dence, on account of some resembling
qualities in her nature.

IMPUDENTNESS [impudentia, L.
shamelesness], a being void of modesty
or civility; also sauciness.  F.

IMPULSIVENESS, impelling, forc­
ing or driving in quality.

IMPURENESS [impuritas, L.] filthi­
ness, uncleanness, lewdness.

IMPUTRESCIBILITY [of imputres­
cibilis, L.] incorruptibleness.

IN, as to put a horse IN with Horse­
men] is to breed or dress him, by which
expression is understood, the putting
him right upon the hand, and upon the
heels.

INABSTINENCE [of in neg. and ab­
stinentia, L.] intemperance.

INACCESSIBLENESS [of in neg. ac­
cessible, F. of  L. and ness] unapproach­
ableness, un-come-at-ableness.

INACCURACY [of in neg.
and accura­
tus, L.] the want of accuracy, inartifi­
cialness, negligentness.

INACCURATENESS [of in neg.
and accura­
tus, L.] the want of accuracy, inartifi­
cialness, negligentness.

INADEQUATENESS [of in neg.
adæquatus, L. and ness] disproportio­
nateness.

INADVERTANTNESS [of inadver­
tence, F. and ness] inadvertancy; a
want of heed or care; a not minding
sufficiently.

INALIENABLENESS [inalienable, F.
of alienare, L. and ness] incapableness
of being alienated, or transferred to
another by law.

INAMIABLENESS [of inamabilis, 
L. and ness] unloveliness, undeserving­
ness of love.

To INAMOUR [of in and amor, L.]
to engage in love, to indear the affec­
tion.

INAPPLICABLENESS [of in and ap­
plicabilis, L. and ness] uncapableness of
being applied to.

INARTICULATENESS [of in and
articulatus, L.] the being not articulate, 
indistinct, confused.

INARTIFICIALNESS [of inartifici­
lis, L. and ness] artlesness, unlikeness to
have been performed by a workman.

INAUDIBLENESS [of inaudibilis, L.
and ness] uncapableness of being heard.

INAUGURATED [inauguratus, L.] a
being admitted into the college of Au­
gurs [among the Romans] installed, in­
vested with an office or dignity.



INAUSPICIOUSNESS [of inauspica­
tus, L. and ness] unpromisingness; also
unluckiness, unfortunateness.

INCA a name or title given by
the Peruvians to their kings
and princes of the blood.

YNCA a name or title given by
the Peruvians to their kings
and princes of the blood. 

INCALESCENCY [of incalescere, L.]
growing hot by some internal motion
and fermentation, or by friction.

INCAMERATION [in the apostolick
chancery at Rome] the union of some
land, right or revenue to the dominion
of the pope.

INCANTATION, words or ceremo­
nies used by magicians to raise devils;
or to abuse the simplicity of the peo­
ple.

INCAPABLENESS [of incapacité, F.]
the want of qualities, power or parts
sufficient or necessary to do or receive
a thing.

INCAPACITY in matters of Benefices 
[with the Roman Catholicks] is of two
kinds; the one renders the provision of
a benefice null in its original, as want
of a dispensation for age in a minor, 
legitimation in a bastard, naturalization
in a foreigner, &c. the other is acces­
sionary, and annuls the provisions, 
which at first were valid, as grievous
offences and crimes, &c. which vacate
the benefice to all intents, and render
the holding it irregular.

INCAPACIOUSNESS [of incapax, L.
and ness] the wanting capacity, room or
space.

INCARNATED [incarnatus, L.] ha­
ving brought or taken flesh upon him;
also supplied or filled up with new flesh.

INCARNATIVE Bandage [with Sur­
geons] a fillet with a nooze or eye at
one end of it, so that the other may be
put through it.

INCARTATION [with Chymists] a
purifying of gold, by means of silver
and Aqua fortis.

INCASTELLED [of in and castellum, 
L. a castle] inclosed within a sort of
round castle or brick, as conduits are.

INCENSE a kind of aromatick and
odiferous gum, issuing out of incisions
made in the tree called by the ancients
Thurifera, in the dog days; it is of two
kinds male and female; but the male is
accounted the best; it is white and
unctuous within, and being laid or
sprinkled on the fire immediately kin­
dles into a flame; the female is soft and
of a more gummy quality, and of a less
agreeable scent.

Both Jews and Heathens offered in­
cense with their sacrifices.

INCENSED [incensus of incendere, L.
to burn] perfumed or fumed with in­
cense.

INCENSED [of incensus of incendere, 
L. to kindle] provoked to anger, set in
a flame.

INCEPTIVE [inceptivus, L.] of, or
pertaining to a beginning.

INCEPTIVE Magnitude [in Geometry]
as for instance; a point has no magni­
tude of itself, but is inceptive of it. A
line considered one way has no magni­
tude as to breadth; but by its motion is
capable of producing a surface, which
hath breadth,

INCESSANTNESS, continualness, un­
ceasingness.

Spiritual INCEST, is when a vicar, 
or spiritual pearson, enjoys both the
mother and the daughter, i. e. holds two
benefices, the one of which depends up­
on the collation of the other.

INCESTUOUSNESS [of incestuosus, 
L. and ness] marriage or carnal copula­
tion with one that is too near of kin.

INCH by inch, gradually.

INCIDENCE [in Geometry] the direc­
tion by which one body strikes upon a­
nother.

Angle of INCIDENCE, the angle made
by that line of direction, and the angle
struck upon.

INCIDENT [in a Poem] is an episode
or particular action, tacked to the prin­
cipal action or depending on it.

INCIDENTAL, happening or falling
out occasionally.

INCIDENTALNESS, the quality of
happening or falling out occasionally.

INCIDENTNESS [of incidens, L. and
ness] liableness.

INCIRCLED [encircle, F. of in and
circulus, L.] incompassed or surrounded
with a circle.

INCISORY [incisorius, L.] that cut­
teth.

INCITEMENT [incitamentum, L.] in­
ducement, motive.

INCIVILNESS [incivilité, F. incivilis,
L. and ness] uncivility, rudeness, unman­
nerliness.

INCLEMENT [inclemens, L.] unkind, 
unmerciful, rigorous. Milton.

INCLEMENTNESS [inclementia, L.
inclemence, F.] rigorousness, sharpness, 
unmercifulness.

INCLINABLENESS, proneness to, 
aptness, affection, natural disposition.

INCLINATION of Meridians [in Di­
alling] is the angle that that hour-line
on the globe, which is perpendicular to
the dial plane makes with the Meridian.

INCLINATION of the planes of the
orbits of the planets to the plane of the



ecliptick are by Astronomers accounted as
follows: the orbit of Saturn makes an
angle of 2 degrees 30 minutes; that of
Jupiter 1 degree and 1 third; that of
Mars is a small matter less than 2 de­
grees; that of Venus is 3 decrees and one
third; that of Mercury is almost 7 de­
grees.

INCLINING [inclinatus, L. inclinant, 
F.] bowing or bending to, leaning for­
wards.

INCLOISTERED [of in and cloitrer, 
F.] shut up in a cloister or monastery.

INCLUSIVENESS [of inclusivus, L.]
of an including quality.

INCOG [of incognitus, L.]
privately-unknown.

INCOGNITO [of incognitus, L.]
privately-unknown.

INCOGITANTNESS [incogitan­
tia, L.] a
not thinking or minding, thoughtlesness
heedlesness.

INCOGITATIVENESS [incogitan­
tia, L.] a
not thinking or minding, thoughtlesness
heedlesness. 

INCOHERENTNESS [of in cohærens, 
L.] disagreement, or not suiting well
together.

INCOMBUSTIBLENESS [qualité
incombustible, F. of in neg. and combusti­
bilis, L.] a quality that will not burn.

INCOMBUSTIBLE Cloth, a sort of
linnen cloth, made from a stone in the
form of talc, which stone is called Lapis
Amianthus and Asbestos. This cloth is
said to be of that nature, that it will not
be consumed, thro' thrown and let to
lie never so long in a violent hot fire;
and therefore in ancient times (as Pliny
relates) shrouds were made of it, and
used at royal obsequies; to wrap up the
corps, that the ashes of the body might
be preserved distinct from those of the
wood of the funeral pile. And writers
relate, that the princes of Tartary use it
for the same purpose at this day. And
it is the matter of which the perpetual
lamps were made. The stone, which
is the matter of it, is found in several
places, as China, Italy and Wales, and
also some in Scotland. Pliny relates, 
that he was himself at a great entertain­
ment, where the napkins of this cloth
being taken foul from the table, were
thrown into the fire, and by that means
were taken out fairer and whiter than if
they had been washed. As to the manner
of making this cloth, Paulus Venetus, r­e
lates, that he was informed by an inten­
dant of the mines in Tartary that this
mineral (that is found in a certain
mountain there) is first pounded in a
brass mortar, to separate the earth)
part from it, and that it is afterwards
woven into cloth.

But in two trials that were made be­
fore the royal society in London, a piece
of this cloth, of twelve inches long and
six broad, which weighed twenty four
drams, being put into a strong fire for
some minutes, it lost one dram each
time.

INCOMMENSURABLE Quantities 
[with Mathematicians] are such, which
have no aliquot part, or any common
measure that may measure them; as the
diagonal and side of a square; for altho'
that each of those lines have infinite
aliquot parts, as the half, the third, &c.
yet not any part of the one, be it never
so small, can possibly measure the o­
ther.

INCOMMENSURABLENESS [of in­
commensurabilité, F.] uncapableness of
being measured by any other equal
quantity.

INCOMMENSURABLENESS [of in
neg. and commensuratus, L. and ness] in­
commensurable quality.

INCOMMODIOUSNESS [incommodi­
tas, L. incommodité, F.] inconvenient­
ness, inconveniency.

INCOMMUNICABLENESS [incom­
municabilis, L.] incommunicable quali­
ty; that uncapableness of being impart­
ed to others.

INCOMPACTNESS [of incompactus, 
L.] the being not compact, or close join­
ed together.

INCOMPARABLENESS, incompara­
ble nature or quality.

INCOMPATIBLENESS [incompatibi­
lité, F.] a being incompatible; antipathy, 
contrariety.

INCOMPENSABLENESS [of in and
compensare, L.] uncapableness of being
compensated or recompensed.

INCOMPETENTNESS [incompetence, 
F. of incompetens, L.] insufficiency, ina­
bility.

INCOMPETIBLENESS [of in neg.
and competible, F.] the condition of a
thing, that will not square or agree with
another.

INCOMPLETENESS [in and comple­
tus, L.] incomplete, unfinished quality.

INCOMPOSEDNESS, disorderedness,
the being out of frame, or disturbed in
mind.

INCOMPRESSIBLE [of in neg. and
compressibilis, L.] not to be compressed
or squeezed close together.

INCOMPRESSIBILITY an inca­
pableness
of being compressed or squeezed close
together.

INCOMPRESSIBLENESS an inca­
pableness
of being compressed or squeezed close
together.

INCONCEIVABLENESS, quality na­
ture or property, that cannot be con­
ceived.



INCONGEALABLENESS [of in and
congelibilis, L.] nature or quality that
cannot be congealed or frozen.

INCONGRUOUSNESS [incongruitas, 
L.] disagreeableness, unfitness, irregu­
larity, &c.

INCONSEQUENTNESS [inconsequen­
tia, L.] weakness of arguing, when the
conclusion does not follow, or cannot
be fairly drawn from the premises.

INCONSIDERABLENESS, worthles­
ness, &c. not worthy of regard or no­
tice.

INCONSIDERATENESS [inconside­
rantia, L.] want of thought, thought­
lesness.

INCONSISTENTNESS [of in neg.
consistentia, L. and ness] a not agreeing,
suiting, or consisting with; a being in­
compatible.

INCONSOLABLENESS, a state of
uncomfortableness, or that will not ad­
mit of comfort.

INCONSTANTNESS [inconstantia, 
L.] unsteadiness, changeableness, fic­
kleness.

INCONTESTIBLENESS [of incontes­
tible, F.] indisputableness.

INCONTINENTNESS [of incontinen­
tia, L.] incontinence, a not abstaining
from unlawful desires, lack of modera­
tion in lusts and affections; unchastity.

INCONVENIENTNESS [of inconveni­
ens, L.] a want of conveniency.

INCONVERTIBLENESS [of in and
convertibilis, L.] incapableness of being
converted or turned; unalterableness.

INCORPORALNESS [of incorporali­
tas, L.] the being without a body.

INCORPORATED [incorporatus, L.
incorporé, F.] imbodied, formed or ad­
mitted into a corporation or society.

INCORPORATED [with Chymists]
mixed well or united, as the particles
of one body with those of another, so
as to appear an uniform substance.

INCORRECTNESS [of incorrectus, 
L.] faultiness.

An INCORRIGIBLE Person [in Hie­
roglyphicks] was by the ancients repre­
sented by a leopard's skin, because there
are such spots in it, that no art can re­
move or whiten.

INCORRIGIBLENESS [of incorrigi­
ble, F. or in neg. and corrigibilis, L.]
quality or temper, &c. that will not
be amended.

INCORRUPTIBILITY [with Meta­
physicians] is an inability not to be.

INCORRUPTICOLÆ, a sect who
had their original at Alexandria, in the
time of the emperor Justinian. The
beginning of the controversy was a­
mong the Eutychians; whether the body
of Christ was corruptible or incorrup­
tible from his conception: Severus held
it corruptible; Julianus Halicarnassus
held the contrary, as not being obnox­
ious to hunger, thirst or weariness;
and that he did but seemingly suffer
such things; from whence they were
call'd Phantasiastæ and Aphthartodoeitæ.

INCRASSATION, a rendering fluids
thicker than before by the mixture of
less fluid particles.

INCREATE [of in neg and creatus, 
L.] is that which does not depend upon
another by creation, uncreated.

INCREDULOUSNESS [incredulitas, 
L. incredulité, F.] unbelieving temper, 
&c.

INCRESSANT [in He­
raldry]
signifies the moon in the
encrease, from the new to
the full. See the figure.

Image omitted.



INCRESCENT [in He­
raldry]
signifies the moon in the
encrease, from the new to
the full. See the figure.

Image omitted.



INCROACHINGNESS, incroaching
disposition or quality.

INCRUSTED [incrustatus, L.] made
into a hard crust.

INCRUSTED Column [in Architecture]
is a column consisting of several pieces
of slender branches of some precious
marble, agate, jasper, &c. masticated
or cemented around a mould of brick
or any other matter; which is done
for two reasons, the one is to save the
precious stones, or to make them ap­
pear of an uncommon largeness, by the
neatness and closeness of the incrusta­
tion, when the mastick is of the same
colour.

INCUBATED [incubatus, L.] brood­
ed or hovered over as by a bird on her
eggs or nest.

INCULPABLENESS [inculpabilis, L.]
unblameableness, &c.

INCUMBENCY [of incumbens, L.] a
plying, performing, occupying.

An INCUMBENT [of incumbere, L.
to labour strenuously; because he ought
to bend his whole study to discharge his
function] a person who has the care or
cure of souls, one that enjoys a benefice.

INCURABLENESS, incapableness of
being cured.

INCURIOUSNESS [of incuriosus, L.]
carelesness, heedlesness.

INCURVATION of the Rays of Light 
[in Dioptricks] is the variation of a
ray of light, from that right line in
which its motion would have continu­
ed, were it not for the resistances made
by the thickness of the medium thro'
which it passes, so as to hinder its strait
course, and turn it aside.



INDAMMAGEMENT [of endomma­
ger, F.] dammage, hurt, prejudice.

INDECENTNESS [indecentia, L. in­
decence, F.] unbecomingness, unseemli­
ness, unhandsomness.

INDEFATIGABLENESS [indefatiga­
bilis, L.] unwearied diligence or ap­
plication.

INDEFINITE Pronouns [with Gram­
marians] are such that have a loose and
undetermined signification, and are
called either indefinite Pronouns, Perso­
nal, as whosoever, whatsoever, each, 
other: Or, Pronouns indefinite, which
relate both to person and thing; as, 
any, one, none, and the other.

INDEFINITENESS, uncapableness of
bounds or limits, unlimitedness.

INDELIBLENESS [of indelibilis, L.]
uncapableness of being blotted out or
destroy'd.

INDEMONSTRABLENESS [inde­
monstrabilis, L.] incapableness of being
demonstrated.

INDENTED [in Heral­
dry] needs no explanation;
but it ought to be obser­
ved, that there are in
Heraldry two sorts of it,
which are only distinguish­
able by the largeness of the teeth, the
smaller being commonly called Inden­
ted, and the larger by the French, Da­
ncetée or Dantelé.  F.

Image omitted.



INDENTURE [indentura, L.l an a­
greement or contract between two or
more persons in writing, indented at
the top, and answering to another co­
py, which contains the same covenants
and articles to be kept by the other par­
ty.

INDEPENDENT [with Metaphysici­
ans] when one thing does not depend
another as its cause.

INDEPENDENCE [independance, F.]
absoluteness, a having no dependance
on another.

INDEPENDENTISM, the state or
condition of being independent.

INDEPENDENTS, a sect of Protes­
tent dissenters, who deny all subordi­
nation in the ministry, and hold that
every particular church or congregation
are invested with sufficient power to
act and do every thing, that relates to
religious government within it self, and
is not at all subject or accountable to
any other church or churches or their
deputies, nor to their assemblies or
synods.

They allow that tho' one church
may advise or reprove another, yet
has no authority to censure or excom­
municate, that there is no absolute oc­
casion for synods or councils at all, and
that their resolutions are to be consi­
dered only as wise or prudent advices, 
and not as decisions to be peremptorily
obey'd.

As to the general articles of faith
and practise in all other matters they
agree with the generality of Protestants.

INDETERMINED Problem [with Ma­
thematicians] is one which is capable of
an infinite number of answers; as to
find out two numbers, whose sum, to­
gether with their product, shall be
equal to a given number; or to make
a rhomboid, such that the rectangle
under the sides be equal to a given
square; both of which problems will
have infinite solutions.

INDEX [of a Logarithm] is the cha­
racter or exponent of it, and is that fi­
gure, which shews of how many places
the absolute number belonging to the
Logarithm does consist and of what na­
ture it is, whether it be an integer
or fraction. Thus in this Logarithm
2.562293, the number standing on the
left hand of the point is called the In­
dex, and shews that the absolute num­
ber answering to it consists of three
places; for it is always one more than
the Index. Again, if the absolute num­
ber be a fraction, then the Index of the
Logarithm hath a negative sign, and is
marked thus 2.562293.

INDEX of a Quantity [with Alge­
braists] is that quantity shewing to what
power it is to be involved, as a 3 shews
that a is to be involved to the third
power, &c.

INDEXES of Powers [in Algebra] are
the exponents of powers: Thus 2 is
the Index or Exponent of the second
power or square, 3 of the third power
or cube, 4 of the fourth power or bi­
quadrate, &c.

INDICATION Curative [with Phy­
sicians] those indications that shew how
the disease is to be removed that a pa­
tient labours under at the present time.

INDICATIONS, signs, marks, tokens, 
pointing out something to be done.

INDICATIONS Preservatory, are those
that shew what is to be done for the
preservation and continuance of health.

INDICATIONS Vital, are such as
respect the life of the patient, his
strength and way of living.

INDICATIVE [of indicativus, L.]
shewing or declaring.

INDICTED [of indictus, L.] told, 
shew'd, declared; also accused or im­
peached in a court of judicature.



INDICTION [with Chronologers] the
space of 15 years: This account began
at the dismission of the council of Nice, 
A. C. 312. Indiction also signifies the
convocation of an ecclesiastical assem­
bly, as of a Synod or council, and even
a diet.

INDIFFERENTNESS [indifferentia, 
L. indifference, F.] the having little or
no concern or affection for; also mid­
dle nature or quality, neither best or
worst.

INDIGENTNESS [indigentia, L. in­
digence, F.] neediness, poverty.

INDIGESTEDNESS [of indigestus, L.
indigesté, F. and ness] the not being di­
gested; confusedness, want of order.

INDIGESTIBLENESS, uncapable­
ness of being digested.

INDIGNANT [indignant, L.] angry.

INDICO a kind of stony substance,
brought from the east­
ward, used in dying blue. It is a fecula
procured from the leaves of a shrub, 
frequent in the East and West-Indies, 
where they plant and cultivate it with
great care; when it is ripe, i. e. when
the leaves are brittle, and break by
only touching, they cut them, tie them
up in bundles, and lay them to rot in
large vats of river or spring water. In
three or four days the water boils by
mere force of the plant heating it, &c.
upon this they stir it up with large
poles, and then letting it stand to settle
again, take out the wood, which is now
void both of leaves and bark. After­
wards they continue to stir what re­
mains at bottom divers times; after it
has settled for good, they let out the
water, take the sediment which remains
at bottom, put it into forms or moulds, 
and expose it in the air to dry; and
this is indigo.

INDIGO a kind of stony substance,
brought from the east­
ward, used in dying blue. It is a fecula
procured from the leaves of a shrub, 
frequent in the East and West-Indies, 
where they plant and cultivate it with
great care; when it is ripe, i. e. when
the leaves are brittle, and break by
only touching, they cut them, tie them
up in bundles, and lay them to rot in
large vats of river or spring water. In
three or four days the water boils by
mere force of the plant heating it, &c.
upon this they stir it up with large
poles, and then letting it stand to settle
again, take out the wood, which is now
void both of leaves and bark. After­
wards they continue to stir what re­
mains at bottom divers times; after it
has settled for good, they let out the
water, take the sediment which remains
at bottom, put it into forms or moulds, 
and expose it in the air to dry; and
this is indigo.

INDIRECT Modes or Syllogism [in
Logick] are the 5 last modes of the first
figure, expressed by the barbarous
words Baralipton, Celantis, Dabitis, 
Frisesomorum.

INDIRECTNESS [of indirectus, L.]
unfair dealing or management.

INDISCERNIBLENESS, uncapable­
ness of being discerned.

INDISCERPIBLENESS [of in neg.
and discerptus, L.] a term used by Phi­
losophers, to signify a being inseparable.

INDISCREETNESS, want of discre­
tion or judgment; imprudence, incon­
sideration.

INDISPENSIBLENESS [of in and
dispenser, F. of dispensare, L.] uncapa­
bleness of being dispensed with.

INDISPOSED [of in neg. and dispo­
situs, L.] disordered in body or mind,
sick.

INDISPUTABLENESS, unquestiona­
bleness, so great certainty as not to be
argued against.

INDISSOLVABLENESS, uncapable­
ness of being dissolved, &c.

INDISTINGUISHABLENESS [of
indistinguibilis, L.] uncapableness to be
distinguished.

INDIVISIBLENESS [indivisibilité, F.
indivisibilis, L. and ness] uncapableness
of being divided.

INDIVISIBLES [indivisibilia, L.]
things that cannot be divided.

INDOCIBLENESS [indocilitas, L.
indocilité, F.]
unsensibleness of pain or grief; also an
unconcernedness, regardlessness.

INDOCILNESS [indocilitas, L.
indocilité, F.]
unsensibleness of pain or grief; also an
unconcernedness, regardlessness. 

To INDORSE [endosser, F.] to write
ones name on the back of a money bill.

INDOWMENT [of in and donaire, 
F. a dowry] a bestowment; a gift of
nature, an accomplishment, as to na­
tural gifts or parts.

INDUBITABLENESS, undoubted­
ness, &c.

INDUCTIVE [of inductus, L.] apt
to induce or lead into. Milton.

INDULGENCES [with Roman Ca­
tholicks] pardons which the Church
gives to penitents, in remitting the pu­
nishment due to their sins, which other­
wise they would be obliged to undergo, 
either in this world or in purgatory.

Moreri says; it has always been the
belief of the Catholicks, that the son of
God has given his church a power to
absolve penitents, not only from their
sins, by venue of the merits of our Sa­
viour, apply'd in the Sacrament of pe­
nance, but likewise from the obligation
to punishment, which they were liable
to differ to satisfy divine justice.

This custom, says he, stands recom­
mended not only by the authority of
ancient popes, but likewise by several
councils; as also by that of Clement in
1095, wherein they began to give in­
dulgences to those who undertook the
Croisade of the Holy war.

Clement the VI. in his Decretal or
Constitution, which is generally re­
ceived by the Church of Rome, declares
that our Saviour has left an infinite
treasure of merits and supererogatory
satisfactions, arising from his own suf­
ferings, together with those of the
blessed virgin and the rest of the family:
that the pastors or guides of the Church, 
and especially the popes, who are the
chief disposers of this treasure, have
authority given them to apply it to the



living by the vertue of the keys, and to
the dead by way of suffrage, to discharge
them from their respective proportions
of sufferings, by taking as much merit
out of this general treasure, as they
conceive the debt requires, and offer­
ing it to the Almighty.

Pope John the XXIII. impowered his
legates to constitute confessors, to ab­
solve penitents from crimes of all na­
tures, upon payment of sums of mony
proportionable to their guilt. Leo the
X. undertook to carry on and finish the
great structure begun by his predecessor
Julius the II. publish'd indulgences and
plenary remission to all such as should
contribute thereunto; and finding the
project take, gave his sister, the princess
of Cibo, the benefit of the indulgences
of Saxony, and other neighbouring
parts, letting those of other countries
out to the highest bidder, who to make
the most of their bargains, chose the
ablest preachers to cry up and set out
the value of the ware.

The archbishop of Mentz pitch'd upon
John Texal, a Dominican, who associat­
ing himself with some others of that
order, began to discharge their office, 
when John Stupitz, vicar general of
the Augustins, growing angry that his
society, which formerly had been made
use of in this affair, should now be laid
aside; and observing the palpable ex­
cuses of the preachers and receivers of
the mony, complain'd of it first to the
elector of Saxony, then address'd him­
self to Martin Luther, one of his own
order, and a man of great reputation
in the university of Wirtemberg, for his
parts, learning and natural eloquence, 
who first preach'd against the preachers, 
and then against the indulgences, and
soon after expos'd the other abuses and
corruptions of the Church of Rome.

INDULGENTNESS [indulgentia, L.]
indulgence; indulgent nature.

INDURANCE, bearing, suffering, 
holding out.

INDURATION, a giving a harder
consistence to things by a greater so­
lidity of their particles; or a dissipation
of the thinner parts of any matter, so
that the remainder is left harder.

INDUSTRIOUSNESS [industria, L.]
industry, pains taking, diligence, la­
bour.

INEFFABLENESS [ineffabilis, L.]
unspeakableness, &c.

INEFFICACIOUSNESS [inefficax, L.]
ineffectualness.

INEFFICACY [inefficacité
F. of ineffi­
cax, L.] inefficacy, unfruitfulness.

INEFFECTUALNESS [inefficacité
F. of ineffi­
cax, L.] inefficacy, unfruitfulness. 

INELEGANT [inelegans, L.] unelo­
quent; also not having any graceful­
ness or beauty, &c.

INELEGANTNESS [inelegantia,
want of
elegancy, beauty, grace, &c.

INELEGANCY [inelegantia,
want of
elegancy, beauty, grace, &c.

INEQUABLENESS [of in neg. and
æquabilis, L.] uncapableness of being
made equal or even.

INEQUALNESS [of in neg. æquali­
tas, L. inegalité, F. and ness] inequality.

INEQUALITY of natural Days, tho'
the sun is supposed vulgarly to measure
our time equally, yet it is very far from
doing so; and as it is impossible for a
good clock or movement to keep time
with the sun: so one that is truly such,
will measure time more truly, and go
exacter than any sun-dial.

The reason of the inequality of na­
tural days, is, that the motion of the
earth it self, round its axis, is not ex­
actly equal or regular, but is sometimes
swifter and sometimes slower.

INENERGETICAL Bodies [with
Naturalists] are such as are unactive and
sluggish.

INERRABLENESS [of in and erra­
bilis, L.] infallibility, uncapableness of
erring.

INESCATION [with some pretenders
to Physick] a kind of transplantation
used in curing some diseases. It is done
by impregnating a proper medium or
vehicle with some of the Mumia or
vital spirits of the patient, and giving
it to some animal to eat. It is pretend­
ed, that the animal unites and assimi­
lates the mumia with it self, imbibing
its vicious quality, by which means the
person to whom the mumia belonged, 
is restored to health.

INESCUTCHEON [in
Heraldry] is a small escut­
cheon born within the
shield, with some other
coat, and is generally the
same as scutcheon of pre­
tence, as the arms of a wife, who was
an heiress, and by that means has
brought the arms and estate into her
husband's, which he bears within his
own: It contains one fifth of the field,
is born as an ordinary, thus; Ermin an
Inescutcheon Gules.

Image omitted.



INESTIMABLENESS [of inæstimabi­
lis, L.] uncapableness of being justly
valued, esteemed, &c.

INEVITABLENESS [inevitable, F.]
unavoidableness.

INEXCUSABLENESS [inexcusabilis, 
L.] uncapableness, or undeservingness
to be excused.



INEXHAUSTIBLENESS, uncapa­
bleness of being emptied or drawn dry.

INEXORABLENESS [inexorabilis, L.]
temper or humour not to be intreated.

INEXPEDIENCY [of in neg. and ex­
pediens, L.] inconveniency, unfitness.

INEXPERIENCEDNESS, want of ex­
perience.

INEXPIABLENESS [inexpiabilis, 
uncapableness of being expiated.

INEXPLICABLENESS [inexplicabilis, 
L.] uncapableness of being explained.

INEXPRESSIBLENESS [of in neg.
and expressus, L. and ness] uncapableness
of being expressed.

INEXPUGNABLENESS [inexpugna­
bilis, L.] uncapableness of being con­
quered or overcome by fight, invinci­
bleness.

INEXTINGUISHABLENESS [inex­
tinguibilis, L.] unquenchableness.

INEXTIRPABLENESS [inextirpabi­
lis, L.] uncapableness of being rooted
out.

INEXTRICABLENESS [inextricabi­
lis, L.] uncapableness of being disen­
tangled or extricated.

INFALLIBLENESS [infallibilis, L.]
unerring quality, impossibility of de­
ceiving or being deceived.

INFAME [in Heraldry] signifies dis­
graced, spoken of a lion or some other
beast that hath lost his tail, as if by that
it were made infamous or disgraced.

INFAMOUSNESS [of infamia, L.] in­
famy, infamous quality, condition, &c.

INFATUATED [infatuatus, L. in­
fatué, F.] made or become foolish, be­
sotted, prepossessed in favour of a per­
son or thing, which does not deserve it;
so far that he can't easily be disabused.

INFECTIOUSNESS [of infectio, L.]
infectious nature, &c.

INFECTIVE, apt, or tending to in­
fect, or infection.

INFECUNDNESS [of infœcunditas, 
L.] unfruitfulness, barrenness.

INFELICITOUS [infelix, L.] un­
happy.

INFERIORNESS [inferiorité, F. or
of inferior, L. and ness] lower rank or
degree.

INFERNALNESS, the being of the
nature, temper or disposition of Hell;
hellish quality.

INFINITE [infinitus, L. infini, F.]
boundless, endless, that has no bounds, 
terms or limits: Infinite implies a con­
tradiction, to have terms or bounds to
its essence, and in this sense God only
is infinite. The word is also used to
signify that which had a beginning, but
shall have no end, as angels and hu­
man souls.

INFINITE Line [in Geometry] an in­
definite or undeterminate line, to which
no bounds or limits are prescribed.

INFINITE in itself [in Metaphysicks]
is not that which is only so in reference
to us, the sand, stars, &c. because
their number cannot be discovered by
any man; but as God.

INFINITE, in respect to us; as the
sand, stars, &c. because their number
cannot be discovered by any man.

Infinitely INFINITE Fractions [in
Arithmetick] are those whose numera­
tor being one, are together equal to
unite; from whence it is deduced that
there are progressions infinitely farther
than one kind of infinity.

INFINITENESS [in God] is an in­
communicable attribute; by which is
meant, that he is not bounded by place,
space or duration; but is without li­
mits or bounds, without beginning or
end.

INFINITUDE [of infinitus, L.] in­
finiteness, boundlesness. Milton.

INFIRMNESS [infirmitas, L.] weak­
ness, feebleness of body, sickness.

INFLAMMABLENESS [of inflamma­
ble, F. of inflammare, L.] capableness of
being inflamed or set on fire.

INFLAMMATION [in Medicine] a
blistering heat, a tumour occasioned by
an obstruction, by means whereof the
blood in the flesh and muscles, flowing
into some part faster than it can run off
again, swells up and causes a tension
with an unusual soreness, redness aud
heat.

INFLATE Expression, an expression
swelling with big words; but to no
great purpose.

INFLATION [in Medicine] a puffing
up, a windy swelling, the extension of
a part occasioned by windy humours.

INFLECTION [with Grammar.] is
the variation of nouns and verbs in
their several cases, tenses and declensi­
ons.

INFLEC­
TION Point
of any Curve 
[Geometry]
is that point
or place
where the
curve begins
to bend back
again a con­
trary way. 
As for in­
stance,
when a curve line as A, F, K, is partly
concave and partly convex towards any



right line, as A, B, or towards a fixt
point, as the point F, which divides
the concave from the convex part, and
consequently is at the beginning of the
one, and the end of the other, it is cal­
led the point of inflection, as long as
the curve be continued on towards F, 
keeps its course the same; but the
point K is called the point of retrogres­
sion, where it begins to reflect back
again towards that part or side where
it took its original.

Image omitted.



INFLECTION [in Opticks] a multi­
plex reflection of the rays of light, cau­
sed by the unequal thickness of any
medium; so that the motion or progress
of the ray is hindred from going on in
a right line, and is inflected or bent
back on the inside by a curve.

INFLUENCE [in Astrology] a quality
supposed to flow from the bodies of the
stars, or the effect of their heat and
light, to which the pretenders to that
art attribute all the events that happen
on the earth.

INFRAMUNDANE [of infra beneath, 
and mundanus, L.] beneath or below the
world.

To INFRANCHISE [of affranchir, 
F.] to set free, to give one his liberty;
to make a freeman or denizon; to in­
corporate into a society or body poli­
tick.

INFRANCHISEMENT [affranchisse­
ment, F.] a making free, &c. also deli­
very, discharge, release.

INFRALAPSARIANS, a sect, who
hold that God has created a certain
number of men, before the fall of
Adam, only to be damned, without al­
lowing them the means necessary for
salvation, if they would labour never
so much after it.

INFRANGIBLENESS [of infrangibi­
lis, L.] uncapableness of being broken.

INFREQUENCY [of infrequentia, L.]
seldomness.

To INFUMATE [infumare, L.] to
smoke or dry in the smoke.

INGENIER. See Engineer.

INGLORIOUSNESS [of inglorius, L.]
dishonourableness, &c.

INGRESS [with Astronomers] signi­
fies the sun's entering the first scruple of
one of the four cardinal signs; especi­
ally Aries.

INGUSTABLE [ingustabilis, L.] that
may not or cannot be tasted.

INHABITABLENESS [of inhabita­
bilis, L.] unfitness or incommodiousness
to be inhabited.

INHERITANCE [jus hæreditarium, 
L. heritage, F.] an estate, whether it
come by succession or purchase; as e­
very fee simple and fee tail.

INHOLDER [of inne and healðan, 
Sax. to hold or keep] an inn-keeper;
also a master of a house.

INHOSPITABLENESS [of inhospita­
litas, L.] inhospitable temper or beha­
viour; discourteousness to strangers or
guests.

INHUMANNESS [inhumanitas, L.
inhumanité, F.] is as it were a putting
off, or stripping one's self of human
nature; savage nature, cruelty, barba­
rity.

INIMITABLENESS [inimitabilis, L.]
quality, &c. that cannot be imitated.

INITIALIA [among the Romans] a
name given to the mysteries of Ceres.

To INJOY [of in and jouir, F.] to
take pleasure in; also to possess.

INJOYMENT [of in and jouissance,
F.] pleasure; possession.

INJUDICIOUSNESS [of in neg. and
judicieux, F.] want of judgment, discre­
tion, &c.

INJURIOUSNESS [of injuriosus, L.]
hurtful quality, injury, wrong, &c.

INJURY [with Civilians] a private
offence committed designedly, and with
an evil intention to any man's prejudice.

INK-Horn [of inck, Du. and horn,
Sax.] a vessel to hold ink.

INKINESS [of inck, Du.] inky na­
ture; also smearedness or being blotted
with ink.

INLARGEMENT [elargissement, F.]
an enlarging or making more large; an
expatiating or treating more largely.

An INLAY, an inlaid work, or what
is inlaid. Milton.

INLAYD Work [of in and leaʒan, 
Sax.] worked in wood or metal, with
several pieces of different colours curi­
ously put together. See Marquettry.

INLIGHTENED [of in and lihtan, 
Sax. to make light] having received, 
or being made light; being made to
know what was before unknown.

IN-MATES [in Law] are such as for
money dwell jointly in the same house
with another man, but in different
rooms, passing in and out at the same
door, and not being able to maintain
themselves.

INMOST [of inmæſt, Sax.] the
most inward.

INLY, inwardly. Milton.

INNS of Court, are four particular
houses or colleges for the entertain­
ment of students in the law, viz.

Gray's INN, anciently the manour
house of baron Grey, in the reign of
king Edward III.



Lincoln's INN, first built, for his own
dwelling house, by Henry Lacy, earl of
Lincoln.
The two Temples, the inner and the
middle, which were anciently the ha­
bitation of the knights Templars; to
which the outward Temple was added
afterwards, called Essex house.

INNS of Chancery are eight, appoint­
ed for young students in the law.

1. Barnard's INN, which once be­
long'd to Dr. Macworth, dean of Lin­
coln; and in the possession of one Lionel
Barnard.

2. Clement's INN, once a messuage
belonging to the parish of St. Clement's
Danes.

3. Clifford's INN, sometime the dwel­
ling house of Malcolm de Hersey, and af­
terwards of the Cliffords, earls of Cum­
berland, of whom it was rented.

4. Furnival's INN, once the mansion
of Sir Richard Furnival, and afterwards
of the Talbots, earls of Shrewsbury.

5. Lion's INN, once a private house, 
known by the name of the Black-Lion.

6. New INN, once the dwelling house
of Sir J. Tyncaulx, which has been also
called Our Lady's Inn.

7. Staple's INN, so called, because it
formerly belonged to the merchants of
the staple.

8. Thavy's INN, anciently the dwel­
ling house of John Thavy, armourer of
London.

And also Serjeants INNS, two houses
of a higher rank, set apart for the
judges and serjeants at law.

INN-HOLDERS 
were incorporated
Anno 1505. They
consist of a master, 3
wardens, about 24
assistants, and 112 on
the livery. Their ar­
morial ensigns are a­
zure a chevron argent
between 3 oat-garbes or, on a chief of
the 2d, St. Julian's cross sable. Their
crest a star on a helmet and torse in­
volv'd in clouds. Their supporters two
horses. Their hall is on College-hill.

Image omitted.



INNATENESS [of innatus, L. and
ness] inbornness, inbredness, natural­
ness.

INNAVIGABLENESS [of innavigabi­
lis, L.] unfitness to be sailed in.

INNOCENTNESS, guiltlesness, harm­
lesness; also simpleness.

INNOCUOUSNESS [of innocuus, L.]
harmlesness.

INNUMERABLENESS [of innumera­
bilis, L.] uncapableness of being num­
bered.

INNUMEROUS [innumerus, L.] in­
numerable. Milton.

INOBEDIENCE [inobedientia, L.] dis­
obedience.

INOFFENSIVENESS [of in and offen­
sive, F.] innocentness, harmlesness.

INOFFICIOUSNESS [of inofficiosus, 
L.] backwardness in doing any good
office.

INORDINATE Proportion [in Num­
bers] is as follows; suppose 3 magni­
tudes in one rank and 3 others propor­
tionate to them in another, then com­
pare them in a different order; as these
three numbers 2 3 9 being in one rank
and these three other 8 24 36 in ano­
ther rank proportional to the precedent
in a different order, so that 2 shall be
to 3 as 24 to 36, and 3 to 9 as 8 to 24;
then cast away the mean terms in each 
rank, conclude the first 2 in the first
rank is to the last 9, as 8 the first of the
other rank to the last 36.

INORDINATENESS [of inordinatus, 
L.] immoderateness, extravagantness.

IN PACE [i. e. in peace] a term used
by the monks for a prison, where such
of them are shut up as have committed
any grievous fault.  L.

INPENY and OUTPENY [Old Rec.]
money paid by the custom of some ma­
nours upon the alienation of tenants, 
&c.

IN Procinct [in procinctu, L.] in rea­
diness, ready. Milton.

INQUEST [in Law] an inquiry in a
judicial manner by a jury, and some­
times the jury it self is so called, as the
grand jury at Hicks's hall is call'd the
Grand Inquest. The court of Conscience
at the Guild Hall of the city of London, 
for determining complaints preferr'd by
freemen one against another upon ac­
count of debts under 40 shillings, is
call'd the court of Inquest.

INQUISITIVENESS [of inquisitus
L. and ness] inquisitive humour, &c. a
desire to know every thing.

INQUISITION [in Spain, Portugal, 
&c.] an ecclesiastical court of the Church
of Rome, erected for the putting a stop
to Heresy, and the punishment of He­
reticks. The rise and progress of this
court seems to have been as follows.

Some have observ'd that before the
conversion of the emperor Constantine
the Great, none but the bishops examin­
ed into doctrines and punished Heresy
with excommunication; but after the
emperors became Christians, they or­
dered that such as has been convicted of
Heresy and excommunicated, should be
banished and their estates confiscated;



this practice was continued till about
the year 800 after Christ, when the pow­
er of the western bishops was enlarg'd
to the authority of citing persons to
their courts, and to convict and punish
them by penances or imprisonment.

This continued till the XIIth centu­
ry, when Heresy, as it was then call'd, 
being much encreased by the Albigenses
and Waldenses, pope Gregory the IXth.
in the year 1229, in a council held at
Thoulouse, established new constitutions, 
committing the whole management of
them to the bishops; but afterwards
he thinking that the bishops were too
indulgent, he committed the direction
of this inquisition to the Dominicans, 
who for their cruelty were banished
from Thoulouse by the inhabitants.

And so this court was never firmly
established in France; but was received
by Italy, except the kingdom of Naples, 
and in Spain and Portugal and the coun­
tries depending.

This court or tribunal takes cogni­
vance of Heresy, Judaism, Mahometa­
nism, Sodomy and Polygamy; and the
people of those countries very much
dread it, that parents do deliver up
their children, and husbands their wives
to its officers, without so much as dar­
ing to murmur in the least.

In Portugal they erect a theatre capa­
ble of containing 3000 persons, on
which they place a very rich altar;
having seats fix'd on each side of it, in
the form of an amphitheatre, where
the criminals are placed, and over a­
gainst them there is a high chair, to
which they are singly called by one of
the inquisitors, to hear their crimes and
condemnation.

The prisoners know their doom by
the clothes they wear that day, for
those who wear their own clothes are
discharged, upon paying a fine: They that
have a Santo Benito, or a strait yellow
coat without sleeves, charged with a
St. Andrew's cross, have their lives
spared, but their effects are forfeited to
the royal chamber, and to pay the ex­
pences of the inquisition: They that
have flames of red serge sewed on their
Santo Benito without any cross, are con­
victed of having been pardoned before, 
and threatened to be burnt, if ever they
relapse again; but those which besides
these have their own pictures round
their Santo Benito, with figures of de­
vils, are condemned to die.

The persons charged with or sus­
pected of Heresy, are shut up in dismal
dungeons, and there confin'd for several
months, till they accuse themselves, 
being never let to know their accusers, 
or confronted by witnesses; their
friends go into mourning for them as
if dead, and dare not either solicit their
pardon or come near them, and are
often forced to fly their country for
fear of being sent to the inquisition
likewise.

Several other countries besides those
above-mentioned, have had inquisi­
tions; but they have been laid down
by reason of the extraordinary severity
and cruelty, used in the punishment of
those call'd offenders.

The power of the inquisition is also
very much curbed in the republick of
Venice, where it seems rather to be a
political instrument to preserve the
state than the church.

In the Indies it is severe to extrava­
gancy, for tho' there must be the oaths
of seven witnesses to condemn a person, 
yet slaves and children are allow'd to
be witnesses against him, and the person
is tortured till he accuses himself, the
slightest expression against the church
or office of inquisition, which they call
by the name of the holy office, is suf­
ficient.

INQUISITORS. They are stiled
Lords Inquisitors, and the chief Inquisi­
tor General. He was first appointed by
pope Urban IV in the year 1263. whose
power was enlarg'd so far at last by
sundry popes, that in 1564 pope Pius
IV. and afterwards Pius V, not only
commanded all ecclesiastical persons to
submit to him, but ordered all princes, 
judges and other ministers, to put the
orders of the Inquisitor General in exe­
cution, whose business it is to preside
over the ecclesiastical court, and judge
of all matters of faith, heresy, doctrine, 
&c.

The inquisitors being clergymen, do
not pronounce the sentence of death;
but form an act, wherein they say, 
the criminal convicted of such a crime
by his own confession, is with much
reluctancy given up to the secular pow­
er to be punished according to his own
demerits. This they give to the seven
judges, who attend on the left side of
the altar, who condemn the criminal
first to be hang'd and then burnt; but
the Jews are burnt alive.

INQUISITORS [in Law] sheriffs, 
coroners, &c. who have power to en­
quire in certain cases.

INRICHMENT [of enrichir, F.] an
inriching or being inriched, imbellish­
ment, &c.



INSANABLENESS [insanabilis, L.]
incurableness.

INSANENESS [of insanus, L.] un­
healthfulness; also madness.

INSANGUIN'D [of in and sanguina­
tus, L.] rendered bloody, drenched with
blood.

INSATIABLENESS [of insatiabilis, 
L.] unsatisfiedness; uncapableness of
being satisfied.

INSATIATENESS [insatietas, L.]
unsatisfiedness.

INSCRIBABLE, that may be inscri­
bed or contained in other figures, as a
triangle, square, &c.in a circle.

INSCRIBED [in Geometry] a figure
is said to be inscribed in another, when
all the angles of the figure inscribed
touch either the angles, sides or planes
of the other figure.

INSCRIBED Hyperbola [with Geome­
tricians] is such an one as lies entirely
within the angle of its asymptotes, as
the conical hyperbola doth.

INSCRUTABLENESS [of inscruta­
bilis, L.] unsearchableness.

INSCULPED [insculptus, L. insculpé, 
F.] engraved, carved, or cut.

INSECURENESS [of in and secu­
ritas, L.] unsafe­
ty.

INSECURITY [of in and secu­
ritas, L.] unsafe­
ty. 

INSEMINATION [with pretenders
to Physick] one of the four kinds of
transplantation of diseases; the method
of performing it is by mixing the im­
pregnated Medium with the Mumia ta­
ken from the patient, with fat earth, 
where has been sown the seed of a plant
appropriate to that disease, and by
sprinkling it with water wherein the 
patient has washed; and they imagine
the disease will decline in proportion as
the plant grows.

INSENSIBLENESS [of insensibilis, L.]
voidness of sense; senselesness.

INSEPARABLENESS [of inseparabi­
lis, L.] inseparable quality or condition.

INSERTION [in Physicks] the impli­
cation of one part within another.

INSIDIOUSNESS [of insidiosus, L.]
fulness of wiles, deceitfulness, crafti­
ness.

INSIGNIFICANTNESS [of in neg.
and significantia, L.] considerableness, 
worthlesness.

INSINUATION [with Rhetoricians]
is a crafty address or beginning of an
oration, whereby the orator slily creeps
into the favour of the audience.

INSINUATINGNESS [of insinua­
tivus, L.] 
insinuating nature, engagingness, win­
ningness.

INSINUATIVENESS [of insinua­
tivus, L.] 
insinuating nature, engagingness, win­
ningness. 

INSIPIDNESS [insipidus, L.] unsavo­
riness, the want of taste or relish.

INSOCIABLENESS [insociabilis, L.]
unfitness for society, unsociable temper.

INSOLATED [insolatus, L.] laid in
the sun, bleached.

INSOLENTNESS [insolentia, L.] inso­
lence, haughtiness, sauciness.

INSOLUBLENESS [of insolubilis, L.]
uncapableness of being loosed or resol­
ved.

INSOLVENTNESS [of in neg. and
solvere, L.] incapacity of paying debts, 
&c.

INSPIRITED [of inspiré, F. or in and
spirit, Eng.] having life and spirit put
into it.

INSPISSATE [inspissatus, L.] thick­
ened.

INSTABLENESS [instabilitas, L. in­
stabilité, F.] unstedfastness, &c. uncon­
stancy, fickleness, uncertainty.

To INSTALL [of in and ſtal, Sax.
or installer, F.] to put into possession of
an office, order, or benefice; properly
the placing of a clergyman in a cathe­
dral church, or a knight of the garter
in his stall, where every one has his
particular stall or seat.

An INSTANT [with Philos.] is de­
fined to be an indivisible in time, that
is neither time nor a part of it; where­
to nevertheless all the parts of time
are joined; a portion of time so small, 
that it can't be divided; or, as others
define it, an instant is an instantly small
part of duration, that takes up the
time of only one idea in our minds
without the succession of another
wherein we perceive no succession at all.

A temporary INSTANT, is a part of
time that immediately precedes ano­
ther; and thus the last instant of a day
really and immediately precedes the
first instant of the following day.

A natural INSTANT, is what we o­
therwise call the priority of nature
which is observed in things that are
subordinated in acting; as first and se­
cond causes; causes and their effects.

A rational INSTANT, is not any real
Instant, but a point which the under­
standing conceives to have been before
some other Instant; founded on the na­
ture of the things which occasion it to
be conceived.

INSTANTNESS [of instans, L. and
ness] the immediateness.

INSTANTANEOUSNESS [of instan­
taneus, L. and ness] momentaneousness
or happening in the nick of time.

INSTINCT [instinctus, L.] a natural
bent or inclination; that aptitude, dis­



position, of natural sagacity in any crea­
ture, which by its peculiar formation it
is naturally endowed with, by virtue
whereof, they are enabled to provide
for themselves, know what is good for
them, and are determined to preserve
and propagate the species.

INSTINCTIVE [of instinctus L.] be­
longing to, or causing instinct. Milton.

INSTRUCTIVENESS, of instructive
or teaching quality.

INSTRUMENTALNESS [instrumen­
talis, L.] servicableness, or contribu­
ting to as a means.

INSUFFICIENTNESS, inability, in­
capacity.

INSULATED [insulatus, L.] made an
island.

INSUPERABLENESS, invincibleness
uncapableness, or a not being liable to
be overcome.

INSUPPORTABLENESS [of in neg.
and supportable, F. and ness] intolerable­
ness, unbearableness.

INSURER [asseurer, F.] one who for
a certain premium or sum of money, 
undertakes to make good any loss that
may happen, or has happened unknown, 
to goods, ships, houses &c. by casualties
of pirates, the seas, fire, &c.

INSURMOUNTABLENESS, unca­
pableness of being overcome by labour, 
industry, &c.

INTACTILE [intactilis, L.] that
cannot or will not be touched.

INTEGRAL Numbers, are whole
numbers in opposition to broken num­
bers or fractions.

INTELLIGENTIAL, intellectual, 
understanding. Milton.

INTELLIGENTNESS [of intelligens,
L.] understanding faculty.

INTELLIGIBLENESS, capableness
of being understood, apprehended or
conceived by the understanding.

INTEMPERATURE [with Physici­
ans] a distemper or indisposition that
consists in inconvenient qualities of the
body, as an hot, thin, or salt disposition.

INTEMPESTIVENESS [intempesti­
vus, L.] a being out of time or due sea­
son.

INTENDANCY [intendance, F.] the
office or management of an intendant, 
i. e. one who has the inspection, conduct
of a jurisdiction, &c.

INTENSENESS greatness, ex­
tremeness.

INTENSITY greatness, ex­
tremeness.

INTENT meaning, purpose,
design, drift, mind, 
F. of  L.

INTENTION meaning, purpose,
design, drift, mind, 
F. of  L.

INTENTION, the end proposed in
any action, the determination of the
will in respect of any thing. F. of  L.

INTENTION [in Law] a writ which
lies against one who enters after the
death of a tenant in dower, or other
tenant for life, and holds him out in the
reversion or remainder.

INTENTION [of Study] is when the
mind fixes its view on an idea with
great earnestness, so as to consider it on
all sides and will not be called off by the
crowding in of other ideas.

INTENTION [with Rhetoricians] is
the repetition of the same word in a
contrary sense; as una salus victis nul­
lam sperare salutem.

INTERCALATED [intercalatus, L.]
put between; as the putting in a day in
the month of February in leap year.

INTERCEDENT [intercedens, L.]
coming in between.

INTERCEPTED [interceptus, L. in­
tercepte, F.] catched up by the way, 
prevented.

INTERDICT [interdictio, L.] a po­
pish censure, formerly inflicted by bi­
shops or ordinaries, forbidding all sacrifi­
ces and divine offices (except the baptism
of children, the sacrament of the eu­
charist, and extreme unction at the
point of death) to be performed with­
in any parish, town, country or nation.
This was commonly inflicted on a pre­
tence that the privileges of the church
had been violated, by the lords, magis­
trates, or princes of any nation; and
England wholly lay under an interdict
from the pope for six years in the reign
of king John.

INTERFUSED [interfusus, L.] pour­
ed forth, in or among. Milton.

INTERGAPING of Vowels [with
Gram.] is when two vowels meet toge­
ther, one at the end of a word, and the
other at the beginning of the next, so
as to make an uncouth sound.

INTERJECTION [with Gram.] is an
expression which serves to shew a sud­
den motion of the soul, either of grief, 
joy, desire, fear, aversion, admiration, 
surprize, &c. And as the greatest part
of those expressions are taken from na­
ture only in all languages, so true in­
terjections consist generally of one sylla­
ble. The Latins borrowed most of
their interjections from the Greeks, and
we, and the rest of the moderns, borrow
them from the Latins; tho' the English
have some few of their own; but they
are but few.

In the INTERIM, in the mean time
or while.

INTERIM, the name given to a for­
mulary or a kind of confession of some



articles of faith obtruded upon the pro­
testants, after the death of Luther by
the emperor Charles V, when he had
defeated their forces; so called because
it was only to take place in the interim, 
till a general council should have deci­
ded all the points in dispute between the
Protestants and Roman Catholicks. This
consisted of 26 articles, concerning the
points of religion in controversy be­
tween the Protestants and Romanists.
The emperor published this Interim at
Augsburg, in the year 1548; but the pro­
ject neither pleased the pope, nor the
Protestants who most of them protested
against it.

INTERMINATED [interminatus, L.]
unbounded, having no limits.

INTERMITTING [intermittens, L.]
leaving off for a while.

INTERNAL An­
gles [Geometry] are
all angles made by
the sides of any right
lined figure within
also the two angles
between the parallel
lines on each side the crossing line, as D
and F, and C and E, in the figure, are
called the two Internal Angles, and are
always equal to two right angles.

Image omitted.



INTERNALNESS, inwardness.

To INTERPLEAD [of entre and plai­
der, F.] as when two persons are found
heirs to land by two several offices, and
the thing is brought in doubt to which
of them possession ought to be given; so
that they must interplead, i. e. formally
try between themselves who is the right
heir.

INTERROGATORY [interrogatorius
L.] of or pertaining to an interrogation
or examination.

An INTERRUPT, an interruption.
Milton.

INTERRUPTION [with Geometrici­
ans] is the same as disjunction of propor­
tion, and is marked thus; to signify the
breaking off the ratio in the middle of
four separated proportionals, as B: C::
D: E, i. e. as B is to C, so is D to E.

To INTERSECT [intersectum, L.] to
cut off in the middle.

INTERSECTION [with Mathemati­
cians] signifies the cutting off one line
or plane by another: and thus they say
the mutual intersection of two planes is
a right line.

INTERSPACE [of inter between and spatum, L.] a space between two
things.

INTERVOLV'D [of inter and volve­
re, L.] rolled one within another.
Milton.

INTERWOVEN [of inter, L. be­
tween, and &wyn;eafan, Sax. to weave]
weaved or woven with or among.

INTESTABLENESS [of intestabilis, 
L.] uncapableness (in Law) of making
a will.

INTESTATE, to dye intestate, i. e.
without making a will, was anciently
accounted a very infamous thing, which
notion proceeded from the decrees of
the ancient councils, that every person
should leave a part of his effects to be
distributed to pious uses: and that this
should not be neglected, the parish
priests were enjoin'd to exhort dying
persons to confess their sins, and to
dispose of some part of their estate to
the church or poor; which custom so
far prevailed, as to deny absolution and
the sacrament to those who refus'd to
comply with this advice, and if any
man died without making a will, he
was look'd upon as a murderer of him­
self, and it was deem'd reasonable that
his assets should be forfeited to his re­
spective lord, especially, if he lay any
time sick, and did not die suddenly.

It being accounted a scandalous thing
not to leave a legacy to some religious
use, it was decreed that the bishop, for
the interest of the person so deceased, 
should make some charitable distribu­
tions out of his estate; and for this
reason he was to have the administra­
tion of the deceased's goods and chat­
tels to satisfy his creditors, and to per­
form every thing in the same manner, 
as if he had been executor by will.

But the temporal lords out of cove­
tousness siezed on this privilege them­
selves, alledging that as intestate per­
sons were deemed felos de se, their
goods and chattels were forfeited to
them, and so neither paid the debts of
the deceas'd, nor gave aims of any
part of them.

This gave occasion to the English bi­
shops to complain of them in a council
held at Lambeth in the year 1261, and
in a council held in London in 1342.

This custom of secular lords siezing
their vassals goods, was afterwards
practised by bishops with respect to their
clergy, and by the popes in respect to
the bishops.

INTESTINE Motion of the Parts of
the Fluids, where the attracting corpus­
cles of any fluid are elastick, they must
of necessity produce an intestine Motion;
and this greater or lesser according to
the degrees of their elasticity and at­
tractive force.



INTESTINENESS [of intestinus, L.]
the being within or inward.

INTHRALMENT [of in, ðræl, Sax.
and ment] slavery, or bringing into
bondage.

INTIMATENESS, great familiari­
ty; strict friendship.

INTIRENESS [integritas, L. entie­
reté, F.] wholeness, compleatness, &c.

INTOLERABLENESS [intolerabilis, 
L.] unbearableness, &c.

INTRACTABLENESS [of intracta­
bilis, L.] ungovernableness, unmanage­
ableness.

INTRANS'D [of in and transe, F.]
cast into a transe. Milton.

INTREPIDNESS [intrepidus, L.] un­
dauntedness, fearlesness.

INTRICATENESS [intricatum, L.]
perplexity, intanglement, difficulty.

INTRIGUE [intrigue, F. derived, 
as some say, of ἐν and θρὶξ, Gr. hair]
and is properly understood of chickens
that have their feet intangled in hair;
a secret contrivance, cunning design or
plot; an assemblage of events or cir­
cumstances occurring in an affair, and
perplexing the persons concerned in it.

INTRINSICALNESS [of intrinsicus, 
L.] inwardness, &c.

INTRODUCTIVE, serving to bring
in.

INTRONATI [at Sienna in Italy]
the name of an academy, the members
of which contented them at their first
institution with establishing these six
short laws (1) to pray, (2) to study, (3)
to be merry, (4) to offend no body, (5)
not to credit too lightly, (6) to let the
world talk.

INTUITION [in Metaphysicks] a
perception of the certain agreement or
disagreement of any two ideas, imme­
diately compared together. Lock.

INVALIDNESS [invalidité, F.] the
nullity of an act or agreement.

INVARIABLENESS [invariabilis, 
L.] unchangeableness.

INVECTED [in He­
raldry] is
fluted or furrowed, and is
the reverse of ingrailed, in
that Ingrailed has the point
outwards toward the field;
whereas invected has them inwards, the
ordinary and small Semi-circles out­
wards towards the field, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



INVECHED [in He­
raldry] is
fluted or furrowed, and is
the reverse of ingrailed, in
that Ingrailed has the point
outwards toward the field;
whereas invected has them inwards, the
ordinary and small Semi-circles out­
wards towards the field, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



INVECTIVENESS [invectivus, L.]
reproachfulness, virulence in words,
&c.

INVENTION, a subtlety of mind or
somewhat peculiar in a man's genius, 
which leads him to the discovery of
things that are new.

INVENTION [in Rhetorick] is reck­
oned the first part of that art. For by
the help of invention in oratory, Rheto­
ricians have found out certain short and
easy methods; to supply them with argu­
ments to discourse properly on all sub­
jects; these are distributed into certain
classes called Common Places.

INVENTION [with Painters, &c.] is
the art of finding out proper objects
for a picture, by the help of history or
ancient tables.

INVENTION [with Poets] every
thing that the poet adds to the history
of the subject he has chosen, and of the
turn he gives it.

INVENTION of the Cross, a festival
observed by the church of Rome, in
commemoration of the day on which
the cross of our Saviour (is related) to
be found by the empress Helena, in the
time of Constantine the Great; she being
at Jerusalem inform'd, that the cross of
our Saviour had been buried in his
sepulchre, she ordered some persons to
dig, and there they found the cross
and nails, together with the cross of
the two theives; but the wood on
which the inscriptions were written, 
were separated from the crosses, so
that our Saviour's cross could not be
distinguished from the rest; till Maca­
rius, bishop of Jerusalem, ordered to
make the following experiment.

He ordered a dying woman to be laid
upon the crosses, two of which had no
effect upon her; but being set upon the
third, she (is said) to have perfectly re­
covered the first moment she touched
it, by which it was concluded that
that was our Saviours'.

The empress afterwards built a mag­
nificent church in the place where the
cross was found, and there she left some
part of the wood inrich'd with orna­
naments; but carried the rest with the
nails to Constantinople.

There may be a possibility in this
relation, but it contains a great many
improbabilities.

INVENTIVENESS [of inventif, F.]
and ness] aptness to invent.

INVENTORY [inventaire, F.] a cata­
logue of goods and chattels found in the
possession of a party deceased, and ap­
praised, which every executor or admi­
nistrator is bound to deliver to the or­
dinary, whenever it shall be required.

INVENTORY [in Commerce] a list or
particular valuation of goods.

INVENTORY'D [inventorié, F.] writ­
ten down in an inventory.



INVENTRESS [inventrix, L. inven­
trice, F.] a female inventor.

INVERSE [inversus, L.] turned in
and out, upside down, backward or
the contrary way.

INVERSE Rule of Three a me­
thod
of working the Rule of Three, which
seems to be inverted or turned back­
wards.

INVERSE Rule of Proportion a me­
thod
of working the Rule of Three, which
seems to be inverted or turned back­
wards.

INVERSE Ratio [with Mathematici­
ans] is the assumption of the consequent
to the antecedent; like as the antece­
dent to the consequent, as if B: C::
D: E, then by inversion of Ratio's C: B::
E: D.

INVERSLY [of inversus, L.] back­
wardly, in an inverted order.

INVERTED [in Heraldry] as wings
inverted, is when the points of them
are down.

INVESTIGATION [with Gram.] is
the art, method or manner of finding
the theme; in verbs, the mood, tense, 
&c.

INVETERATENESS [inveteratus,
L.] inveterate malice, or the quality
of an old grudge.

INVIDIOUSNESS [of invidiosus, L.
of  F.] envy.

INVINCIBLENESS [invincibilis, L.]
unconquerableness.

INVIOLABLENESS [inviolabilis, L.]
uncapableness of being violated.

INVISIBLENESS [invisibilis, L.]
invisible quality, 
uncapableness of being seen.

INVISIBILITY [invisibilis, L.]
invisible quality, 
uncapableness of being seen.

INVITATORY Verse [in the Roman
Catholick service] a verse that stirs up
to praise and glorify God.

INVOCATION [in an Epick Poem] is
accounted the third part of the narra­
tion; and most poets, in imitation of
Homer, have begun their poems with
an invocation; who, no doubt, thought
the invocation would give a sanction
to what he should say, as coming from
divine inspiration.

INVOCATION, the ancient poets
and the moderns in imitation of them, 
used invocations to the muses in the
beginnings of their poems, and the
like did the Heathens to their great
men, or Heroes after their death; and
by degrees the martyrs and saints who
were in great esteem among the primi­
tive Christians were honoured with
orations, &c. after their decease, from
a notion of their presence at their
tombs. This by degrees grew into an
idolatrous worship, and an universal
invocation, so as to have particular
offices inserted into the common service
books; and has grown to that excess
with the Roman Catholicks, as to offer
ten prayers to the virgin Mary for one
to God Almighty.

The eastern church began to call
upon the dead in the 5th century, and
demanding their suffrage as tho' present
in the divine offices; but the western
church carried it so far, as frequently to
canonize those they had a respect for;
tho' the wickedness of their lives gave
them no title to any such honour, to
make processions, masses, litanies, 
prayers and oblations for and to them.

INVOLUNTARINESS [of involun­
tarius, L.] unwillingness, or the not
being done with the free will.

INVOLUTION, a wrapping or roll­
ing up in.  L.

INURBANENESS, clownishness, in­
civility.

INUSITATE [inusitatus, L.] not in
use.

INVULNERABLENESS [invulnera­
bilis, L.] uncapableness of being wound­
ed.

INWARDNESS [of in&wyn;earð, Sax.]
the being on the inside.

INWOVEN [of in, and &wyn;eafan, 
Sax.] weaved in. Milton.

IO, being transformed into a cow, is
a fable of the poets, taking its rise from
this, that Io, being got with child by a
Phœnician mariner, fled away in a ship
that had a cow painted on it. See Isis.

IO [according to the Poets] was the
daughter of Inachus, with whom Jupi­
ter being enamoured, and Juno being
jealous of her, Jupiter transformed her
into an heifer; Juno suspecting the fal­
lacy, begged this heifer of her husband, 
and committed her to the keeping of
Argus; (who is said to have had an
hundred eyes) but Jupiter sent Mercury
to slay Argus, which he did; and Juno, 
in revenge, sent a Gad-bee to sting her
and made her mad, so that she ran into
Egypt, where her old form came to her
again, and she was married to Osiris;
and after her death she was deified and
worshipped under the name of Isis.
Others say, that Io was the daughter of
Arestor, king of the Argives, who be­
ing gotten with child before her father
had given her in marriage, and he
finding it out and incens'd, confin'd her, 
and committed her to the keeping of
Argus her mother's brother; but he
being slain, and she making her escape, 
got away to avoid her father's displea­
sure, and went by a ship into Egypt.

JOACHIMITES [of Joachim, an ab­
bot of Flora in Calabria] a sect who



esteemed Joachim a prophet, and who
(as they say) left at his death several
books of prophecies.

JOBBER, one that undertakes jobs.

JOBENT Nails, a smaller sort of
nails, commonly used to nail thin plates
of iron to wood.

JOCKLET [ẏoclet, Sax.] a little
farm, requiring as it
were but one yoke of oxen to till it.
Kentish.

YOCKET [ẏoclet, Sax.] a little
farm, requiring as it
were but one yoke of oxen to till it.
Kentish. 

JOCOSENESS [jocositas, L.] merri­
ness in jesting, drollery.

JOCULARNESS [of jocularis, L.] jo­
coseness, jestingness, &c.

JOCUNDNESS [of jocundus, L.] mer­
riness, pleasantry, sportfulness.

JOGHI'S [in East-India] a sect of hea­
then religious, who never marry nor
hold any thing in private property;
but live on alms, and practice great se­
verities; they travel from country to
country preaching; are properly a sort 
of penitent pilgrims, and are supposed to
be a branch of the Gymnosophists. They
pretend to live several days without eat­
ing or drinking, and after having gone
through a course of discipline for a cer­
tain time, they account themselves as
impeccable and privileged to do any
thing; upon which they give a loose to
their passions, and run into all manner
of debauchery.

JOINER [of joindre, F.] one who
makes wooden furniture, &c.

JOINERS, were in­
corporated Anno 1570, 
and are a master, 2
wardens, 24 assistants, 
and 190 on the livery.
Their armorial ensigns
are gules, a chevron
argent between 2 pair
of compasses above, 
and a sphere in base or, on a chief of
the 3d, two roses of the first, and be­
tween them a pale sable, charged with
an escallop shell of the second. The
crest is a demi savage proper, holding
a spear or. The supporters 2 Cupids of
the last, the dexter holding a woman
crowned with a castle, the sinister a
square, both proper. Their hall is in
Thames-street, near Dowgate-hill.

Image omitted.



JOINERY, the art of working in
wood, and of fitting or assembling va­
rious parts or members of it together;
it is employ'd chiefly in small work, and
in that differs from carpentry, which is
conversant in larger work.

JOINT [junctura, L. jointure, F.] the
juncture, articulation or assemblage of
two or more things.

JOINT [with Architects] the separa­
tion between the stones, which is filled
with mortar, plaister or cement.

JOINTING [in Carpentry] the several
manners of assembling or fitting pieces
of wood together.

JOINTURED [spoken of a wife] ha­
ving a dowry settled on her.

JOLLINESS [q. d. jovialitas, L. of
Jovis, Jupiter] gaiety, mirth, good
humour.

IONICK Order [in Architecture] an
order so called from Ionia in lesser Asia, 
the body of the pillar is usually chan­
nelled or furrowed with 24 gutters, and
its length with the capital and base is
29 modules, the chapiter being chiefly
composed of Volutes or scrolls.

Vitruvius says, the people of Ionia
formed it on the model of a young wo­
man dressed in her hair, and of an easy,
elegant shape; whereas the Dorick had
been formed on the model of a robust, 
strong man.

JOVE [Ζεὺς, Gr.] the soul of the world
is called Ζεὺς, i. e. Jupiter of ξάω, to
live; and it takes its name from this, 
to wit, that the health [well being] of
all things depend on him alone, and
because he is the cause and life of all
things that do live, therefore he is cal­
led the king of the universe.

Or the soul of the world is called
Jupiter, because as the soul presides
over us, so nature rules far and wide
over all things. They call the soul of
the world Δία, i. e. Jove, and for this
reason, that all things were made and
are preserved in their being by him.

Some call the soul of the world δευς
of δεὺω to water, because he waters
the earth, or because he administers
vital moisture to all living things.

JOVIALNESS. See Jolliness.

JOVIALIST [q. d. one born Jove
læto, under the jovial planet Jupiter] a
pleasant, jolly, merry fellow.

JOUK [with Falconers] a hawk is
said to jouk when he falls asleep.

JOURNAL, a common name of se­
veral news papers, who detail the par­
ticular transactions of Europe.

JOURNEY-work, day-work; but
properly working for a master of the
same trade, &c.

JOUST, justing. Milton.

JOWRING as a jowring pain, a
constant grumbling
pain, as that of the tooth-ache.

JOUREING as a jowring pain, a
constant grumbling
pain, as that of the tooth-ache. 

JOY, is of all the passions the most
agreeable to nature; but Moralists say, 
care must be taken that it break not out



on improper occasions, as on other
mens misfortunes.

To JOY [rejouir, F.] to rejoice.

JOYFULNESS, gladness.

JOYLESS, destitute of joy. Milton.

JOYNDER [in Common Law] the
joining or coupling of two persons in a
suit or action against another.

JOYNING of Issue [Law term] is
when the parties agree to join and refer
their cause to the trial of the jury.

JOYNTER [with Joiners] a kind of
plane to smooth boards.

JOYNTURE [in Law] a covenant, 
whereby the husband assures to his wife
upon account of marriage, lands or te­
nements for term of life or otherwise.

JOYNTURE, the state or condition
of joint tenants; also the joining of one
bargain to another.

IRASCIBLE Appetite, a passion of
the soul, to which Philosophers ascribe
wrath, boldness, fear, hope, and de­
spair.

IRASCIBLENESS [of irasci, L.] ca­
pableness of being angry, angriness, 
aptness or readiness to be angry.

IREFULNESS [irreful or irſunʒ­
ful, Sax.] wrathfulness, angriness.

IRIS [with Botan.] the Flower-de-­
Luce, Cresses, Rocket-gentle or Rocket-­
gallant.

IRIS [in Painting, &c.] was repre­
sented as a nymph with large wings, 
extended in the form of a semicircle, 
the plumes being set in rows of divers
colours, with her hair hanging before
her eyes, her breasts like clouds, and
drops of water falling from her body, 
holding in her hand a Rain-bow or a
Flower-de-luce.

IRIS [in Opticks] those changeable
colours that sometimes appear in the
glasses of telescopes, microscopes, &c.
also that coloured figure which a trian­
gular glass will cast on a wall, when
plac'd at a due angle in the sun-beams.

IRIS [according to the Poets] the
daughter of Thaumas, for the wonder­
fulness of her beauty, and was painted
with wings, and riding upon her own
rainbow by reason of her swiftness.
She was Juno's messenger, and was ne­
ver from her, always ready and watch­
ful to be employ'd in her most impor­
tant affairs; her office was to unloose
the souls of women from their bodies, 
as Mercury, the messenger of Jupiter, 
unloosed those of men; and as he was
employ'd in messages of peace, she was
always sent to promote strife and dis­
cord.

IRISH Tongue is accounted to have
been of British extraction, but is of
great antiquity; and the letters of it
bear some resemblance to the Hebrew, 
Saxon, and other characters; but the
old Irish is now become almost unintel­
ligible; very few persons being able
to read or understand it.

To IRK, to be troublesome or uneasy
to the mind.

IRKSOMNESS [ẏrhðe, Sax.] trou­
blesomness, tediousness, &c.

IRON [iron, Sax.] a hard, fusible, 
malleable metal. Iron is accounted the
hardest of all other metals, as being
the most difficult to melt; and yet it is
one of the lightest metals, and easiest to
be destroy'd by rust, by reason of the
steams which proceed from it: It is
engendered of a most impure quicksil­
ver, mixed with a thick sulphur, filthy
and burning; or as others say of an
earth, salt and sulphur, but very impure
and irregularly mix'd, which renders
it very much dispos'd to rust.

IRON [with Chymists] is called Mars, 
and is represented by this character ♂
which is an hieroglyphick, and denotes
gold at the bottom; only its upper part, 
too sharp, volatile and half corrosive, 
which being taken away, the iron would
become gold.

The first character of iron is; that it
is the heaviest of all bodies after cop­
per. Its second, that it is the least duc­
tile, the hardest and most brittle of all
metals. Third, that it is very fixed, 
as to its metalline part, not sulphureous
one. Iron being well purged of its
sulphur by a vehement fire; becomes
harder, compacter, and somewhat ligh­
ter, and is called steel. Fourth, it ig­
nites before it fuses, and fuses with
much difficulty; and contrary to the
nature of all other metals, the more it
is ignited, the softer and more ductile
it becomes: Being scarce flexible or
malleable at all before ignition. Fifth, 
it is dissoluble by almost all bodies in
nature, i. e. that have any degree of
activity, as salt, dew, the breath, fire, 
water, air, &c. Sixth, it is very sono­
rous and elastick, tho' the sound it
yields is less sweet than that of copper, 
Seventh, of all bodies it is the only
one that is attracted by the Load stone.

It may be softened by heating and
hammering of it often and permitting it
to cool naturally; and may be made
white by cooling it in Sal armoniac, and
quick-lime. The strongest temper of
iron, is said to be that, which it takes in
the juice of strained worms; if you ap­
ply a roll of sulphur, to a bar of iron



heated red hot, it will dissolve it and
fall into a fine dust.

IRON Oar, is found in the mines in
grains and lumps, and being melted and
burned in forges, is brought into forms
by main force of fire. Iron being heat­
ed red hot, and then put into water har­
dens it; and by the often doing so, it
becomes steel, which is more stiff and
hard; but yet more brittle; but has more
of a springy nature to leap back, than
any other metal; for both steel and iron
have abundance of pores, which go tur­
ning and winding like screws, by means
of which it approaches the Load-stone, 
and is said to be a kin to the Load-stone, 
being dug out of the same mines. If a
plate of iron be put in the fire, and made
red hot, it (is said) will come out longer
than it was when it was put in.

To IRON, to put into irons, i. e.
chains, or fetters, also to smooth linnen, 
&c. with a heated iron.

IRON-Monger [of iron-manʒere, 
Sax.] a dealer in iron.

Clerk of the IRONS, an officer in the
mint, whose business is to take care that
the irons be clean and fit to work with.

IRON-MONGERS, 
were incorporated
1462, and consist of a
master, 2 wardens, 
100 assistants (being all
on the livery) besides
yeomanry. The livery
fine is 15 l. 12 s. and
that for steward 16 l.
Their arms are argent on a chevron
gules, between three gads of steel azure, 
as many pair of shackles or. The crest on
the helmet and torse, two lizards com­
batant proper, chained and collared or;
no supporters. Their metro, God is our
Strength. Their hall is in Fenchurch­
street, near Billeter lane.

Image omitted.



IRONY [ἱρωνία, Gr.] is a manner of
speaking quite contrary to what we
think, as when we call a lewd woman
chaste and a known rogue an honest man
The chief sign of this trope is generally
the tone of the voice in pronouncing
ironies.

IRRATIONABLENESS [of irrationa­
bilis, L.] unreasonableness, irrationality.

IRRATIONAL Root [with Mathema­
ticians] is a third root, i. e. that square
root, or any other root, which cannot
be perfectly extracted out of a rational
number, and is usually expressed by some
character called the radical sign: Thus
V 5, or V (2) 5, signifies the square root
of 5; and V (3) 16, the cube root of 16,
&c.

IRRATIONAL Quantities [with Ma­
thematicians] are such, between which 
there is no expressible reason or pro­
portion; all such as are in no wise
commensurable to a given quantity.

IRRATIONALNESS [of irrationalis,
L.] defectiveness of reason.

IRRECONCILABLENESS [of irre­
conciliable, F.] estate, quality, &c. that
cannot or will not be reconciled.

IRRECOVERABLENESS [of in neg.
and recoverable, F.] impossibleness of be­
ing recovered or gotten again.

IRREFRAGABILITY [of irre­
fragabilis,
L.] undeniableness, uncapableness of
being baffled, &c.

IRREFRAGABLENESS [of irre­
fragabilis,
L.] undeniableness, uncapableness of
being baffled, &c.

IRREFUTABLENESS [of irrefuta­
bilis, L. and ness] unliableness or impos­
sibleness of being refuted or disproved.

IRREGULAR Column [with Archi­
tect.] is such an one as not only devi­
ates from the proportions of any of the
five orders; but whose ornaments ei­
ther in the shaft or capital are absurd
and ill chosen.

IRREGULARNESS [irregularité, F.
of  L.] going out of rule.

IRRELIGIOUSNESS [of irreligiosus, 
L.] irreligion, ungodliness.

IRREMEDIABLENESS [of irremedi­
abilis, L.] quality or circumstance that
cannot be remedied.

IRREMISSIBLENESS [of irremissibi­
lis, L.] uncapableness of being remitted, 
unpardonableness.

IRREPARABLENESS [of irreparabi­
lis, L.] uncapableness of being repaired
or restored to its first state.

IRREPREHENSIBLENESS [of irre­
prehensibilis, L.] undeservingness or un­
capableness of being blamed or repre­
hended.

IRRESISTIBLENESS [of irresistible, 
F.] uncapableness of being resisted.

IRRESOLUTENESS [irresolute, F.]
uncertainty, unresolvedness of mind;
suspence, want of courage.

IRRETRIEVABLENESS [of in re­
trouver, F. and ness] irrecoverable or
irretrievable state or quality.

IRREVERENTNESS [of irreverens, 
L.] irreverence, want of respect or re­
gard to sacred things.

IRREVOCABLENESS [of irrevocabi­
lis, L.] condition, &c. that cannot be cal­
led back, or revoked to its former state.

IRRIGUOUSNESS [of irriguus, L.]
well watered state or condition.

IRRITABLE [irritabilis, L.] quickly
made angry.

IRRORATION [with some preten­
ders to Physick] a kind of transplantati­



on used for the curing of some diseases. 
It is thus performed, they sprinkle trees
or other proper plants daily with the
urine or sweat of the patient, or with
water, in which his whole body, or at
least the part affected, has been warned, 
till such time as the disease is removed.

ISCHIADICK, a term applied to the
two veins of the foot, which terminate
in the crural.

ISCHIATICK [of ἰχίος, Gr.] troubled
with, or subject to a pain in the hip.

ISELASTIC, a kind of combat, cele­
brated in the cities of Greece and Asia, 
in the time of the Roman empire; the
victors at these games were crowned on
the spot, immediately after the victory;
had pensions allowed them, were car­
ried in triumph into their country, and
were furnished with provisions at the
publick cost.

ISIA, feasts and sacrifices anciently
solemnized in honour of the goddess Isis.

ISIACI, priests of the goddess Isis;
they wore shoes of the thin bark of the
tree called Papyrus, and were clothed
with linnen garments, because Isis was
held to be the first that taught the cul­
ture of linnen to mankind; they bore
in their hands a branch of the marine
absynthium, sung the praises of the god­
dess twice a day, viz. at the rising and
setting of the sun; at the first of which
they opened their temple, and went a­
bout begging alms the rest of the day;
and at night, they returning, repeated
their oraisons, and shut up their temple.

ISING-GLASS, a kind of fish glue, 
brought from Islandia and those parts;
used in physick, and for adulterating
wines.

ISIS [of Io, L. Ἴω, Gr.] was a god­
dess of the Egyptians, and according to
the poets, was the daughter of Inachus, 
the priest of Juno; belov'd by Jupiter;
Juno being jealous, and going in quest
of her husband, found them together, 
Jupiter in the form of a cloud, and Isis
in the form of a white cow; for Jupi­
ter had so transformed her, that his
wife Juno might not suspect her; but
she understanding his subtilty, begged
the cow of him; and he being afraid, 
by a refusal, to discover her and his
own dishonesty, gave her to Juno, and
she presently put her into the custody of
Argus, with a hundred eyes, where she
continued till Jupiter sent Mercury to
deliver her; who having play'd Argus
asleep with his musick, slew him; upon
which Juno caused Isis to run mad; so
that she run up and down the world in
a frantick condition, and swam over
the seas into Ionia, unto which she left
her name, and also the sea that bounds
that country. At last, returning back
to Egypt, and being restored to her first
form, she was married to Osiris, king
of the country; where they together
governed with so much gentleness and
wisdom, and were so remarkably be­
neficial, that the people paid divine ho­
nours to them after their death, and
her hair was preserved as a sacred re­
lick at Memphis: She was honoured as
the goddess of navigation, and of the
weather. Her statue was a cow with
horns. At the entry of her temple was
the statue of a Sphinx, to intimate that
she was a mysterious goddess.

Some say she taught them the art of
spinning wool, and weaving, &c. also
the manner of cultivating land, of ga­
thering in corn and making bread of it.
She likewise gave them laws and set­
tled their polity.

Authors are not agreed as to the pa­
rents of Isis: But Herodotus says, the
Egyptians took Isis for Ceres, and be­
liev'd Apollo and Diana to be her chil­
dren; that Latona was their nurse, and
delivered her of Apollo, who was call'd
Orus in the Egyptian language, Ceres
Isis and Diana Bubastis.

If any one shall take the pains to
collect the opinions of all the authors, 
who have written of Osiris and Isis, he
he will find that these two deities, in­
clude all the heathen gods.

Isis according to them is Ceres, Juno
the moon, the earth or nature, Miner­
va, Proserpine, Thetis, the mother of
the gods or Cybele, Venus, Diana, Bel­
lona, Hecate, Rhamunsia. In a word
she was surnamed Myrionyma, i. e. the
goddess of a thousand names.

Upon an ancient marble at Capua, 
she is stiled goddess Isis, who art all
things, Te tibi, una quæ es omnia Dea
Isis. The goddess had a famous temple
in the city of Sais; and the following
words were to be seen, as Plutarch re­
lates, upon the pavement of this tem­
ple dedicated to Minerva, who is the
same as Isis. I am every thing that has
been, that is and will be, and no one a­
mong mortals has hitherto taken off my
veil.

Apuleius introduces Isis, as speaking
in these terms; I am nature, parent of
all things, mistress of the elements, the
beginning of ages, the sovereign of the
Gods; queen of the souls of the deceased, 
the first of the celestial natures, the uniform
face of Gods and Goddesses, It is I who
govern the bright sublimity of the heavens, 



the salutary winds of the sea, the mournful
silence of children; my divinity which is
single, tho' represented in several forms, is
honoured by different nations, and under
different names. 

The Phrygians call me the Pessinun­
tiam, mother of the Gods; the Athenians
the Cecropian Minerva; those of Cyprus
the Paphian Venus; those of Crete the
Dictæan Diana; the Sicilians, a people
who speak three languages, the Stygian
Proserpine; the Eleutherians, the old
goddess Ceres; others Juno; others Bel­
lona; some Hecate; many call me Rham­
nusia; the eastern Ethiopians, the Ari­
ans; they who are instructed in the ancient
doctrines, I mean the Egyptians, honour
me with ceremonies, which are peculiar
to me, and call me by real name Queen
ISIS. 

For her sake the Egyptians kept in
the corner of the temple a white cow, 
which when it died, they all mourned
as for a prince, until another was put
in the place of the dead beast. The
same is related of the God Apis; and
Isis is also taken to be the same that is
called Anubis.

The Egyptians represented Isis with
the head of a cow, or at least with
horns, or with a crescent on her head;
and between the horns of the crescent
they generally placed a globe, which
denotes the world.

She is represented likewise with a
bird upon her head, which is thought
to be the Ibis. 

She is to be seen often with a key, a
cross, or a whip in her hand. 

The worship of her was famous
throughout Egypt, but principally at
Bubastus, Coptos and Alexandria. 

The ancient Germans likewise adored
Isis, but their Isis was different from
that of the Egyptians. 

Some maintain that she had been wife
to Mannus, the son of Thuiscon, from
whom the Germans pretend to derive
their original.

Some learned man have asserted, that
under the names of Mannus and Isis, 
these ancient people meant Adam and
Eve.

Mannus in German signifies a man, as
well as Adam in Hebrew, and Isis is the
same name as Ischa, the name of Eve
in Hebrew.

The same has been believed of Isis
and Osiris, adored by the Egyptians.

Since Isis was represented with the
horns of an ox, it is probable enough
that this may be she, which in Moses's
writings, &c. is call'd the golden calf,
or as the septuagint reads it, the golden
Heifer.

Several of the fathers speaking of the
adoration of the golden calf, have said
that the Israelites adored a calf's
head.

And as the Jews worshipped the sun
and earth under different names, as
God, Meni, Baal, Astaroth; the king
and queen and all the host of heaven, 
it is very probable that under these
different names they paid their honours
to Isis and Osiris.

ISIS [in Pourtraiture] was represented
full of duggs, to signify [Hieroglyphically]
the benefits that men receive from the
happy influences of the moon, which
was worshipped by this statue in Egypt.

ISLAND Chrystal a transparent stone
of the nature of a talc, a bit whereof
laid on a book, every letter seen thro'
it will appear double.

ISLANDER [insularis, L. insulaire, 
F.] an inhabitant of an island.

ISLET, a little isle.

ISOCHRONE [ἰσόχρονος, Gr.] equal
in time, as the isochronal vibrations of
a pendulum, are such as are made in
equal time.

ISOPERIMETERS [with Geometri­
cians] such figures as have equal peri­
miters or circumferences.

ISOSCELES [of ἶσος
equal, and σχέλος, Gr. the
leg] a triangle that has
two legs equal; as in the
figure.

Image omitted.



ISSUE, a passage, outlet, going out;
success; an end or event; also off­
spring.  F.

ISSUE [in Com. Law] that point of
matter depending in suit, upon which
the parties join and put their cause to
the trial of the jury.

General ISSUE [in Law] that where­
by it is referred to the jury to bring in
their verdict, whether the defendant
hath done any such thing as the plain­
tiff lays to his charge.

Special ISSUE [in Law] is that when
special matters being alledg'd by the
defendant in his defence, both parties
join thereupon, and so grow rather to
a demurrer, if it be Questio Juris, or to
the trial by a jury, if it be Questio Facti.

ISSUELESS, without off-spring.

ISTHMIAN Games [so called from
the Isthmus of Corinth, where they were
celebrated] these were solemnities re­
presented every three years by the Gre­
cians, in honour of their deity Neptune;
or as others say of Melicertes, who ac­
cording to the fable, having cast himself



into the sea, was transformed into a sea
god.

ITALICK Arcitecture, the compo­
site order.

ITCHING [incertæ etymologiæ] a cer­
tain motion in the blood, &c. better
known by the sense of feeling, than by
a description in words.

ITERATED [iteratus, L.] repeated, 
done over again.

JUBEBS. See Jujubes.

JUBILANT [jubilans, L.] singing
for joy. Milton.

JUBILEE [at Rome] the ceremony of
performing it is as follows, the pope
goes to St. Peters church, to open what
they call the holy gate, knocking at it
3 times with a golden hammer, repeat­
ing the 19 verse of the 118 psalm Open
to me the gates of Righteousness, and I
will go into them and praise the Lord.
And at this time the masons break down
the wall, which being done the pope
kneels down before it, while the Peni­
tentiaries of St. Peter wash him with
holy water, then taking up the cross, 
begins to sing the Te Deum, and enters
the church, the clergy following him.

in the mean time 3 Cardinal Legates, 
are sent to open 3 other holy gates with
the same ceremonies in the churches of
St John of Lateran of St. Paul and St.
Mary the greater. This is performed at
the first vespers of Christmass Eve, and
the next morning the pope gives his
benediction to the people in the Jubilee
form.

When the holy year is ended, they
shut the gates again in the following
manner; the pope after he has blest
the stones and mortar, lays the first
stone, and leaves there 12 boxes full
of gold and silver medals.

Formerly much people resorted from
all parts to Rome to enjoy the benefits
of the Jubilee, but now adays but few, 
except those who dwell in Italy, the
pope allowing them to observe the Ju­
bilee in their own country, granting the
same benefits as if they came to Rome.

JUCUNDNESS [jucunditas, L.] plea­
santness, &c.

JUDAS Tree, a tree with broad
leaves, something resembling those of
the apricock, growing in the hedges of
Italy and Spain.

Infernal JUDGES. When the corpse
of a deceased person was prepared for
the sepulchre, his nearest relations gave
publick notice of the day, when such a
one, by name, was to pass the lake, in
order to his interment; to which the
judges and all his friends were invited.
At the time prefix'd, above 40 judges
assembled, and sat in a semicircle, in a
certain place beyond the lake (probably
the lake it self). The vessel (whose pi­
lot was, in the Egyptian tongue, call'd
Charon) being ready, hauled to the
shore. Before the coffin, which con­
tained the body, was suffered to imbark, 
every one was at liberty to accuse the
deceased; if an accuser appeared and
made good his charge, that the decea­
sed had led an ill life, the judges gave
sentence accordingly, and the body was
deny'd the usual burial; but if the ac­
cuser was convicted of having accused
him unjustly, he incurr'd a severe pu­
nishment. If no accuser appear'd, or if
the accusation appear'd false, then the
relations laying aside their lamentation, 
proceeded to recite the praise of the
deceas'd, beseeching the infernal gods
to give him a favourable reception
among the pious. After this the
body was deposited in the sepulchre of
the family. It is very plain that the
Greeks took all they fabled, concerning
the infernal judges, and the happiness
and judgments of men after death, from
this practice of the Egyptians.

JUDGING [with Logicians] is defined
to be that action of the mind, by which
joining several Ideas together, it af­
firms from one what the other is, as
when having an idea of Earth, and an
idea of Round, we either affirm or deny
that the earth is round. It is call'd the
second of the four principal operations
of the mind.

JUDGMENT [i. e. Understanding, in
Latin Mens] a heathen deity, worship­
ped by the Romans, to whom they ad­
dress'd their prayers for a good and
right mind or understanding. Her
temple was in the capitol.

The Greeks give the name of 
to this deity, tho' Plato believed her to
be nothing else but the soul of the
world, diffused thro' the universe.

JUDGMENT [in Physicks] a faculty
of the soul, by which it perceives the
relation that is between two or more
ideas.

JUDICATURE [of judicatorium, L.]
judgment or trying causes; a term ap­
ply'd either to the court wherein the
judge sits, or the extent of his jurisdic­
tion; also the profession of those who
administer justice.  F.

JUDICIARY [judicialis, L.] done in
the due form of justice, or according
to the course of law.

JUDICIARY [in Astrology] a science 
or art that pretends to judge of, and



foretel future events, by considering the
positions and influences of the stars, &c.

JUDICIALNESS [of judicialis, L.]
judicial quality, state or condition.

JUDICIOUSNESS [of judicieux, F.]
discerning faculty, &c.

JUFFERS [with Carpenters] stuff a­
bout four or five inches square, and of
several lengths.

JUGATINUS, a Heathen deity of the
Romans, who they believed to preside
over marriages, at the conjunction of
husband and wife.

JUICE [with Naturalists] a liquid
substance, which makes part of the
composition of plants, which commu­
nicates its self to all the other parts, 
and serves to feed and increase them;
also the vapours and humidities inclo­
sed in the earth.

JUICE [with Physicians] a kind of
fluid in an animal body, as nervous juice, 
that which is found in the nerves.

Pancreatick JUICE [with Phys.] a li­
quor separated in the gland of the Pan­
creas.

JUICELESS [sans jus, F.] having no
juice.

JUICINESS, the abounding in, or
abundance of juice.

JUICY [plein de jus, F.] full of juice.

JULE [with the Greeks and Romans]
a hymn sung in honour of Ceres and
Bacchus, in the time of harvest, to en­
gage those deities to be propitious.

JULIAN Period [so called of Julius
Cæsar Scaliger, the inventor of it] is a
cycle of 7980 years successively following
one another; by the continual multipli­
cation of the three cycles, viz. that of
the sun of 28 years, and that of the moon
of 19 years, and that of the indiction of
15 years; which Epocha, although but
feigned, is yet of very good use in cal­
culation, in that every year, within the
period, is distinguishable by a certain
peculiar character: for the year of the
sun, moon, and the indiction will not
be the same again, till the whole 7980
years be revolved. He fixed the begin­
ning of this period 764 years before the
creation.

JULIAN year, is the old account of
the year (or a space of time consisting
of 365 days and six hours, instituted by
Julius Cæsar, who caused the Roman ca­
lender to be reformed) which to this
day we use in England, and call it the old
stile in contradistinction to the new ac­
count, framed by pope Gregory, which
is 11 days before ours, and is called the
new stile.

JULY [was so called of Julius Cæsar
who regulated the year, for before that
time that month was called Quintilis]
the 7th month in the year.

JULY [in Painting &c.] is represen­
ted in a jacket of a light yellow, eating
cherries; his face and bosom sunburnt;
having his head adorned with a garland
of Centaury and Thyme, bearing a scythe
on his shoulder, and having a bottle
hanging at his girdle, and by him a lion.

JUMALA [in Finland and Lapland] an
idol deity of those inhabitants, represen­
ted by the figure of a man, sitting upon
a kind of an altar, having a crown up­
on his head, set with 12 precious stones, 
and a large gold chain about his neck.
He held on his knees a great golden cup
full of the same metal; and his temple
stood in a forest.

The Laplanders supposed this idol to
have the command over all the lesser
divinities, with an absolute dominion
over the elements, life and death.

JUNCTURE [with Surgeons] the re­
ducing of crooked members to their due
state; the same as Diorthrosis.  L.

JUNE [takes its name, either of Ju­
niores, L. the younger, because that
young people had an assembly in that
month for their recreation; or of Juni­
us Brutus (as others say) who drove out
the king of the Romans in that month]
it is the sixth month of our year.

JUNE [in Painting &c.] was represen­
ted in a mantle of dark grass green;
having his head adorned with a coronet
of bents, king-cobs and maiden hair, 
holding in his left hand an eagle, and in
his right Cancer, and on his arm a basket
of summer fruits.

JUNKETING [some derive it of Jou­
cades, O. F. sweet-meats] feasting or
making merry.

JUNO [so called of juvando, L. help­
ing] according to the poets, was daugh­
ter of Saturn and Rhea, otherwise called
Cybele and Ops, the sister and wife of Ju­
piter, the queen of the gods, and the
goddess of kingdoms and riches; she had
also a jurisdiction and command over
marriages and child-bearing; and on
these accounts had many fair temples
and altars erected in honour of her. As
to her marrying with her brother Jupi­
ter, they tell us, that she was not willing
to consent to it; but Jupiter effected it
by the following stratagem. He took up­
on him the shape of a cuckow, and in a
storm lighted upon her lap, and Juno
out of pity, to shelter it from the wea­
ther, put it into her bosom; but when



the subtil bird felt the warmth of her
body, it took again the form of Jupiter, 
and obtained his desire by a promise of
marriage; and on this account, at Argos
a cuckow was adored for Jupiter.

She was esteem'd the goddess of king­
doms and riches, and known by a great
many different names, and indeed as
some men have confounded all the gods
with Jupiter, those who made the image
of Juno mentioned by Lucian, had the
like design to incorporate all the god­
desses in her person.

She presided over weddings and wo­
men in labour, and when the Roman
ladies were barren, they went into her
temple, where having pull'd off their
clothes, and lying upon the ground, they
were lash'd by a lupercal priest, with
thongs made of goat, skin, and are
said, thereupon to become fruitful.

She was named also Juno Lucina, from
Luce, L. because she was thought to
help women to bring forth children and
shew them the light, and for the same
reason was also call'd Opigena and Ob­
stetrix, and Juga, because she was said
to preside over the yoke of matrimony, 
and of consequence over the union of
the husband and wife, and on account
of that qualification had an altar erect­
ed to her in one of the streets of Rome.
She was also call'd Domiduca, because
she was believ'd to conduct the bride to
the bridegrooms house: She had like­
wise various other names and appella­
tions. And in a word with the Pagans, 
she was like a guardian angel to wo­
men, in the same manner as their
false deity Genius, was accounted the
keeper of men; and had many temples
erected to her.

JUNO, was represented upon a
throne sitting, adorned with a crown
on her head that touched the clouds, 
and a scepter in her hand, and round
about her the fair and beautiful Iris
(the rain-bow) and attended by pea­
cocks (her beloved bird) on both sides.

JUNO, is sometimes taken for the
moon, and as such, is painted sitting
upon lions, holding a scepter and a spin­
dle in her hands, with beams of light
about her face.

She was sometimes painted with a
pair of sheers and a platter in her hand, 
cloathed in the skin of a goat, and gir­
ded with vine-branches, and a lioness
under her feet. Sometimes she was
painted with a scepter, on the top of
which was the image of a cuckow, and
the two meteors Castor and Pollux wait­
ing on her.

JUNO [by modern Painters] is also
represented with black hair and bright
eyes, cloathed in a sky coloured mantle
wrought with gold and peacocks eyes,
like circles in a peacock's train.

JUNONALIA, a festival observ'd in
honour of Juno, which was instituted
on occasion of certain prodigies that
happened in Italy, whereupon the pon­
tiffs ordered that 27 young maids, di­
vided into 3 bands, should walk singing
a song, composs'd by the poet Livius;
but while they were learning the song
by heart, in the temple of Jupiter Sta­
tor, thunder fell upon the temple of
Juno, on mount Aventine.

Upon this accident the southsayers
consulted, answered that this
prodigy concern'd the Roman ladies, and
that the goddess miust be pacified by
some sacrifices and offerings; therefore
they collected mony and bought a gold­
en bason, and made a present of it to
the goddess on mount Aventine.

Then the Decemviri appointed a day
for a solemn sacrifice, which was or­
dered as follows: Two white cows
were led from the temple of Apollo, 
thro' the gate Carmentalis into the city, 
and two images of Juno made of cy­
press, were also carried: then march'd
the 27 girls clothed in long gowns, 
singing an hymn in honour of the god­
dess; after these march'd the Decemviri, 
clothed in robes edg'd with purple, and
crown'd with laurel. This pomp pas­
sed by the Viens gate and stopped in the
great field of Rome, where the maids
fell to dancing, keeping time with the
hymn, and from thence proceeding by
the Tuscan street and Velabrum, thro' the
ox market to Juno's temple, where the
victims were sacrificed by the Decem­
viri, and the image of cypress wood
was there set up, thus ended this reli­
gious ceremony.

JUNONIA, a yearly solemnity per­
formed in commemoration of her mar­
riage, at which times the maids of all
ages ran races in honour of Juno, peti­
tioning her for husbands, calling her Ju­
no Pronuba and Jugalis; and at Rome an
altar was erected to Juno Juga, where
the new married couple appeared to of­
fer sacrifice, which was either a white
cow, geese or ravens; and they took the
gall from the sacrificed beast, and cast
it behind the altar, to intimate that all
bitterness of spirit should be banished
from married persons.

JUNONES, were the Genii Dæmones
or goddesses that waited upon women, 
watching over and protecting them.



JUNTO a meeting of men to sit
in council; but is most
commonly us'd in an ill sense, for a
company of conspirators, or a factious
assembly of male-contents, met toge­
ther either to exercise that authority, 
which their rebellion has put into their
power; or to consult of ways and
means of carrying on and supporting
their present and future designs.

JUNCTO a meeting of men to sit
in council; but is most
commonly us'd in an ill sense, for a
company of conspirators, or a factious
assembly of male-contents, met toge­
ther either to exercise that authority, 
which their rebellion has put into their
power; or to consult of ways and
means of carrying on and supporting
their present and future designs.

JUPITER, [was so called of Juvando, 
and also Diespiter, q. the father of the 
day, and by the Greeks Ζεύς of τοῦ ζῆν to
live] according to the poets, was the
son of Saturn and Cybele, who having
expelled his father his kingdom, divided
the empire of the world between him­
self and his brothers; he took to his
share the command of heaven, and as­
signed the waters to his brother Nep­
tune, and sent Pluto to command in Hell.

He was called the father of the gods, 
and the king of men, because nature is
the cause of the essence of things, as pa­
rents are of children; and he only had
the power to handle the thunderbolts, 
and to hold the world in subjection.
He had a great many names, as Jupiter
Capitolinus, Jupiter Inventor, Jupiter
Feretrius, &c. and as many statues, and
many temples erected to him.

Cicero says there were 3 Jupiters, 
but others instead of 3 make 300, part
of the 3000 gods owned by the Heathens.
However all the actions of these Jupi­
ters are attributed to one only, who
conquered the Titans and the giants, 
was the father of Mercury, Apollo and
Minerva, and to satisfy his lust so often
transform'd himself into a beast.

The Heathen theology, seems by Ju­
piter to understand that intelligent be­
ing which created the world, whom
they therefore called μοιραγέτης, i. e.
the conductor and director of the Parcæ
or destinies, as being that mind which
ordered all these things which human
ignorance attributed to fate and de­
stiny.

The Heathens painted him like an
old man sitting upon a throne with a
crown upon his head, cloathed with a
rich garment, sparkling with stars, hold­
ing in his hand two globes, which re­
presented heaven and earth, and Nep­
tune's trident under him, and a carpet
representing the tail and feathers of a
peacock. Sometimes they pictured him
with thunderbolts in his hand, in the
form of crooked iron bars, sharp at the
end, joined together in the middle.

The Egyptians worshipped him in the
figure of a ram, and represented his
providence by a scepter, with a great
eye upon the top of it.

JUPITER [by modern Painters] is
represented with long, black, curled
hair, in a purple robe, trimmed with
gold, and sitting on a golden throne,
or the back of an eagle (which he chose
for his bird, because when he went to
deliver his father out of his confine­
ment, an Eagle gave him an omen of
happy victory) encompassed with bright
yellow clouds, and holding in his hand
thunderbolts.

JUPITER [Hieroglyphically] was by
the ancients represented without ears, 
to intimate that God seems not to listen
or take notice of the profaneness of
men, nor of their impious discourses:
And sometimes with one hundred
hands, and as many feet, to intimate
the multiplicity of effects, which pro­
ceed from his agency, and that he sus­
tains all things from falling into confu­
sion.

Pausanias tells us, that the Greeks had
a statue of Jupiter with 3 eyes, to inti­
mate his knowledge of all things in hea­
ven, earth and Hell; or of things past, 
present and to come.

Every nation had their Jupiter call'd
by several names; but the Greeks and
Romans call'd the sovereign god of each
nation by the name of Jupiter.

JUPITER [with Heralds]
who blazon the arms of
princes by planets, instead
of metals and colours, is
used for azure or blue, as
in the figure.

Image omitted.



JUPITER [with Astron.] is account­
ed the biggest of all the planets, being
computed to be 2460 times bigger than
our earth. Its periodical time is 43332
days, 12 hours, and revolves about its
axis in 9 hours 56 minutes.

JUPITER [with Astrologers] signifies
judges, divines, senators, riches, law, 
religion, and its characteristick is ♃.

JUPITER's Distaff, an herb, other­
wise called Mullein.

Canonical JURIS-PRUDENCE, is that
of the canon law.

Foedal JURIS-PRUDENCE, is that of
the fees.

Civil JURIS-PRUDENCE, is that of
the Roman law.

Clerk of the JURIES, an officer in the
court of Common-Pleas, who makes out
the writs called Habeas Corpora and
Distringas, for the appearance of the
jury, after they have been returned
upon the Venire Facias.



To JUST. See justing.

JUSTICE [justitia, L. q. juris statio, 
the station or boundary of right] tho'
accounted the splendor of all virtues, 
yet derives its excellency only from
the corruption of men, taking its rise
from their vices; and as the use of
mercy is for the least offending, so the
use of Justice is for the greater offend­
ing, and is either in action or punish­
ment, and is either commutative or dis­
tributive.

JUSTICE [in God] is a communica­
ble attribute, by which it intended not
only the rectitude of his nature in ge­
neral; but more especially his dealing
with his creatures, according to the de­
serts of their deeds.

JUSTICE [in Men] is a propension
and custom to give every man his due.

JUSTICE [with Moralists] is not to
injure or wrong any one.

Positive JUSTICE [with Moralists] is
to do right to all, to yield them what­
soever belongs to them. The Justice
of moral actions differs from Goodness in
this, that Justice denotes barely a con­
formity to the law; but Goodness fur­
ther includes a respect to those persons, 
towards whom the action is performed.

Commutative JUSTICE, is that which
concerns all persons one with another, 
in relation to dealings, as buying, sel­
ling, exchanging, lending, borrowing, 
&c.

Distributive JUSTICE, is that which
concerns princes, magistrates and offi­
cers, &c.

JUSTICE, has been personified by
the Heathens and made a goddess, and
represented in the form of a virgin, of
a severe aspect, holding a pair of scales
in one hand, and a sword in the other, 
or else rods and a bundle of hatchets, 
and sitting upon a square stone.

Aratus gives us a fine description of
this goddess, i.e. that during the Gol­
den Age, she was night and day conver­
sant on earth, among people of all
sorts, age, sex and condition, teaching
them her law; but that during the
Silver Age, she appear'd only in the
night and in secret, reproaching men
with their irregularities and crimes;
but in the Iron Age was forced to quit
the earth and retire to Heaven, because
of the multitudes and enormities of
their crimes.

Justice was also represented blind­
fold, to intimate that Justice should be
administred impartially, without any
respect to persons.

The Egyptians represented Justice as
a goddess without a head, to signify, 
that judges must do nothing of their
own heads; but wholly divert them­
selves of their own opinions and incli­
nations, and entirely follow the deci­
sions of the laws.

JUSTICE and Equity [Hieroglyphical­
ly] were sometimes represented by a
swallow, because it distributes its meat
equally to its young ones.

JUSTICE [in Painting, &c.] was re­
presented in a crimson mantle trimmed
with silver, and was called the goddess
Astræa, she held a pair of scales in one
hand, and a sword in the other.

General JUSTICE is a constant
giving to eve­
ry one his due, and this hath for its ob­
ject all laws divine and human.

Universal JUSTICE is a constant
giving to eve­
ry one his due, and this hath for its ob­
ject all laws divine and human. 

Particular JUSTICE, is a constant
will and desire of giving to every one
his due, according to a particular a­
greement, or the laws of civil society;
and this is also called commutative or
expletory Justice.

JUSTICE of the Forest, is also a lord
by office, and the only justice that can
appoint a deputy. He is also called
Justice in Eyre of the Forest. He has the
hearing and determining of all offen­
ces, within the king's forests, commit­
ted against venison or vert.

JUSTICES of the Peace [within the
Liberties] are such in cities and towns
corporate, as the former are in any
county; and their authority and pow­
er is altogether the same, within their
several precincts.

JUSTE a Corps, a garment that
reaches down to the knees, sits close to
the body, and shews the shape of it.

JUSTIFIABLENESS [of justus and
fio, L.] capableness of being justified, 
warrantableness.

JUSTIFIED [justificatus, L.] cleared
or proved innocent of any crime, charge
or accusation; also verified, maintain­
ed for good, proved.

To JUSTIFY [justificare, L.] to
clear one's self, to make his innocency
appear, to verify, to shew or prove, 
to maintain or make good.

JUSTINGS [joutes of jouter, F. to
run at tilts] were ex­
ercises used in former times by such per­
sons, who desired to gain reputation in
feats of arms, of whatsoever degree or
quality, from the king to the private
gentleman; they were usually perfor­
med at great solemnities, as marriages
of princes; and also on other occasions.
The time and place being appointed;
challenges were sent abroad into other



nations to all that desired to signalize
themselves. And rewards were ap­
pointed by the prince for those that
came off conquerers. As for the places
it was various; in the year 1395 there
was great justing on London Bridge, be­
tween David earl of Craford in Scotland, 
and the lord Wells of England, &c. In
the time of king Edward the III. justings
were frequent in Cheap-side; and on the
North-side of Bow Church, there was a
building of stone erected, called Sildam
or Crownfield, to see the justings that
were frequently performed there, be­
tween the end of Soper Lane and the
Cross. It was built on this occasion; in
the year 1330 there was a great justing
of all the stout earls, barons and nobles
of the realm, which listed three days, 
where queen Philippa, with many la­
dies, fell from a scaffold of timber, but
received no harm; after which the king
built it strongly of stone for himself, the
queen and persons of high rank, to be­
hold the justings. This Sildam remain­
ed till the time of Henry VIII, as it ap­
pears in that he came thither, dressed in
the habit of a yeoman of the guard, 
with a Patison on his shoulder, and ha­
ving taken a view of the watches of the
city, went away undiscovered.

Smithfield also was a place for per­
forming these exercises; in the year 1357
great and royal justs were held in Smith­
field, there being present the kings of
England, France and Scotland, and their
nobility. And in the time of Richard
II, royals justs and tournaments were
proclaimed by heralds in several courts
in Europe to be performed in Smithfield, 
to begin on sunday next after the feast
of St. Michael. At the day appointed
there issued out of the tower, about 3
in the afternoon, 60 coursers apparel­
led for the justs, upon every one an es­
quire of honour, riding a soft pace, and
then came forth 60 ladies of honour
mounted upon palfreys riding on the
one side richly apparelled, and every la­
dy led a knight with a chain of gold.
The knights that were of the king's
party had their armour and apparel a­
dorned with white harts, and crowns of
gold about the hart's neck, and so they
rode thro' the streets of London to Smith­
field, with a great number of trumpets
and other instruments of musick before
them. Where the ladies that led the
knights, were taken down from their
palfreys; and went up to their seats pre­
pared for them. The esquires of honour
alighted from their coursers, and the
knights mounted. And after the helmets
were set on their heads, and they were
ready at all points, proclamation was
made by the heralds, and then the justs
began. These justs lasted many days
with great feasting. The manner of it
was thus: the ground being railed about
in which the justers were to exercise, 
the contenders were let in at several
barriers, being compleatly armed from
head to foot, and mounted on the stout­
est horses; who after they had payed
their respects to the king, the judges
and ladies, they took their several sta­
tions, and then the trumpets sounded
and they having couched their lances, 
that is, having set the but end against
their breast, the point toward the adver­
sary, spurred their horses, and ran furi­
ously one against another, so that the
points of their spears lighting upon the
armour of each other, gave a terrible
shock, and generally flew to pieces.

If neither party received any injury, 
they wheeled about, took fresh lances, 
and ran a second time, and so a third, 
and if neither suffered any disgrace in
3 encounters, they both came off with
honour.

There were many circumstances rela­
ting to these preformances; as if a man
was unhorsed, he was quite disgraced, or
if he was shaken in the saddle, or let his
lance fall, or lost any piece of his ar­
mour, or wounded his antagonist's horse
&c. all which were accounted disrepu­
table. And there were also certain
rules for distributing the prizes to them
that behaved themselves with the great­
est gallantry.

JUSTNESS [justitia, L.] a being just, 
just quality; the exactness or regularity
of any thing.

JUSTNESS of thought, consists in a
certain accuracy or preciseness, by which
every part of it is perfectly true and
pertinent to the subject.

JUTURNA [among the Romans] a
Heathen goddess or nymph, especially
worshipped by women and maidens.

The common Roman story of Jutur­
na is, that she being a maiden of great
beauty, Jupiter fell in love with her;
and as a reward of her mutual affec­
tion, he had bestow'd the gift of im­
mortality on her, by transforming her
into a fountain, or rather the nymph
of it.

This fountain was in Latium, not far
from Rome, the water of which was
made use of in all sacrifices; but espe­
cially in those of the goddess Vesta, in
which it was prohibited to use any



other, and was therefore call'd virgin
water.

This goddess or nymph was wor­
shipp'd by the women, they expecting
by her, assistance an easy deliverance;
and by maidens, that they might have
happy matches.

JUVENALIA [among the Romans]
certain games or feats of activity, insti­
tuted by Nero the first time his beard
was shaved, celebrated for the health of
youth.  L.

JUVENILENESS [juvenilitas, L.]
youthfulness, youthful heat or temper.

JUVENTUS [among the Pagans]
was esteemed as the
goddess of youth; and Servius Tullius
placed her statue in the Capitol, and
Tarquinius Priscus designing to conse­
crate a temple to Jupiter Capitolinis, 
and for that purpose had caused those
of other deities to be demolish'd; but
the god Terminus and the goddess Ju­
venta, did by signs declare their unwil­
lingness to be removed from thence, 
and therefore were left standing.

M. Livius the consul, vow'd a second
temple to her, that very day he gain'd
the victory over Asdrubal, and after­
wards gave orders for the building of
it when he was censor, sixteen years
after which it was consecrated.

JUVENTA [among the Pagans]
was esteemed as the
goddess of youth; and Servius Tullius
placed her statue in the Capitol, and
Tarquinius Priscus designing to conse­
crate a temple to Jupiter Capitolinis, 
and for that purpose had caused those
of other deities to be demolish'd; but
the god Terminus and the goddess Ju­
venta, did by signs declare their unwil­
lingness to be removed from thence, 
and therefore were left standing.

M. Livius the consul, vow'd a second
temple to her, that very day he gain'd
the victory over Asdrubal, and after­
wards gave orders for the building of
it when he was censor, sixteen years
after which it was consecrated.

JUXTA-Position [with Philos.] a con­
tiguity or nearness; a ranging the small
parts of any mixt body into such a posi­
tion, order or situation, that the parts
being contiguous, shall determine or
shew a body to be of such a figure or
quality; or to be endued with such pro­
perties, as are the natural result of such
a configuration or dispositian of parts.

IXIA [Ἱξία or Ἱξίνή, Gr.] a sort of
Carduus, called Camaleon.

IXINE [Ἱξία or Ἱξίνή, Gr.] a sort of
Carduus, called Camaleon.

IXION [according to the Poets] was
the son of Phlegais, who murdered his
father in law Deioneus; having invited
him to a banquet where he had so con­
trived the place they were to meet in, 
that Deioneus, was let drop through the
floor, into a pit of burning coals; and
afterwards, being troubled with re­
morse of conscience, wandered up and
down the earth, till Jupiter out of pity
made satisfaction for his crime, and re­
ceived him into heaven; where ease and
pleasure made him become wanton and
ungrateful, and growing enamour'd with
Juno, sought to defile Jupiter's bed; up­
on which Jupiter presented to him a
servant maid, named Nephele (a cloud)
in the habit and form of Juno, upon
which he begot the lecherous Centaurs.
Jupiter upon this sent him back again to
earth, where he making boasts of his
familiarity with Juno, Jupiter condemn­
ed him to Hell, to be tormented by being
continually carried about upon a wheel
encompassed with serpents, which never
stood still but when Orpheus was there
playing upon his harp.


K

Kk, Roman, Kk, Ital. K k, English, 
K k Saxon, Κ κ, Greek, are the 10th
letters in order of the alphabets; ק, 
the 19th of the Hebrew.

K, is a numeral letter signifying 250.

K̅ with a dash over it stood for
150000.

The letter k, tho' most commonly
written is not pronounced, but it lost
after c, as in Arithmetick, Logick, Ma­
gick, Physick, &c. Pick, Prickle, Stick, 
Stickle, &c.

It has been and still is a dispute a­
mong Grammarians whether k is a dif­
ferent letter from c, because the Latins
have very seldom us'd it, otherwise than
as a numeral letter; nor do the French
make much use of it except in foreign
names of places, persons, &c. and
some therefore would have it left out;
especially in words deriv'd from the
Latin, contrary to the common English
usage which is to strengthen c by set­
ting k after it as in Politick, &c.

The dash is placed on top of letter K.



The letter K [in old Charters and
Diploma's] had various significations, as
K.R. was set for Chorus, K.R.C. for
Cara Civitas, i. e. the dear city, K.R.M.
for Carmen, i. e. a verse, K.R.A.M.N.
for Charus Amicus Noster, i. e. our dear
friend, &c.

KABIN [among the Persians and
Turks] a temporary mar­
riage for a time, upon condition that
the husband shall allow the wife a
certain sum of money if he repudi­
ates or quits her.

KEBIN [among the Persians and
Turks] a temporary mar­
riage for a time, upon condition that
the husband shall allow the wife a
certain sum of money if he repudi­
ates or quits her.

KADARES [among the Maho­
metans] a sect who
deny the generally received tenet a­
mong the Musselmen, predestination, 
and maintain the doctrine of free-will,
and the liberty of it in its full extent.

KADARITES [among the Maho­
metans] a sect who
deny the generally received tenet a­
mong the Musselmen, predestination, 
and maintain the doctrine of free-will,
and the liberty of it in its full extent.

KADEZADETITES a modern sect
of Mahome­
tans among the Turks, which had its
rise in the reign of Sultan Morat and
whose chief promoter was one Burgali
Effendi, who invented many ceremo­
nies in praying for departed souls at the
burial of the dead. The followers of



it, cause their Imaum to cry aloud in
the ears of the corps to remember that
God is one, and his Prophet is one; and
the principal devotees here are Russians
and other Renegado Christians.

KADEZADELI a modern sect
of Mahome­
tans among the Turks, which had its
rise in the reign of Sultan Morat and
whose chief promoter was one Burgali
Effendi, who invented many ceremo­
nies in praying for departed souls at the
burial of the dead. The followers of
it, cause their Imaum to cry aloud in
the ears of the corps to remember that
God is one, and his Prophet is one; and
the principal devotees here are Russians
and other Renegado Christians. 

KALENDERI [among the Mahome­
tans] a religious order, or rather an
Epicurean sect, who make a pretence
to religion by the practice of libertinism
and looseness in their conversation.

The founder of this sect was one
Santoni Kalenderi, who they say gave
himself up much to a mortified life, 
tho' greatly addicted to musick. But
how strict and sober so ever he was, 
his followers are quite of another tem­
per, for they live in much jollity, ba­
nishing all kinds of melancholy and
sadness, free from cares, anxieties, 
passions and torments of the mind, and
they frequently use this saying; This
day is ours, to morrow is his that shall
live to enjoy it; and accordingly indu­
striously attend all opportunities of
pleasure, spending their time in eating
and drinking; to maintain which they
will sell the stones or jewels out of
their buckles, earings and bracelets.

They account a tavern as holy as a
mosque, and pretend they serve God
as much by rioting and debauchery, or
(as they call it) the liberal use of his
creatures, as others do by severity and
the mortification of the flesh.

KARATA a kind of aloes, which
grow in America, the leaves of which
being boiled are made into thread, of
which fishing nets cloth, &c. are made.
The root or leaves being thrown into
a river, stupifies the fish, so that they
may be easily taken with the hand;
and the stalk being dried and burned, 
burns like a match; and if it be rub­
bed briskly on a harder wood, takes
fire and consumes it self.

KEBERS [among the Persians] a sect
that are tolerated at Ispahan, and have
nothing in common with other Persians
but their language; who are generally
rich merchants. They are distinguish­
ed from the rest of the Persians by
their beards and dress, and are had
in great esteem for the regularity of
their lives. They believe the immor­
tality of the soul, and hold some no­
tions like those of the ancients, con­
cerning Hell and the Elysians fields.
When any of them die, they let loose
a cock in his house, and drive it into a
field; if a fox seizes it and carries it
away, they take it for a proof that the
soul of the dead person is saved. If
this experiment does not answer their 
expectations, they prop the carcases up
with a fork against a wall in the church­
yard, and if the birds first pick out the
right eye, they take it for granted that
he is one of the predestinated and bury
it with great ceremony; but if the birds
first pick out the left eye, they look
upon him a reprobate, and throw the
carcase into a ditch; or pit with his
head downwards.

They have neither temples, nor
priests, nor do they make use of any
books of morality and devotion.

KEBLEH [among the Turks] the
point or quarter to which
they turn themselves when they make
their prayers, which is towards the
temple at Mecca; also an altar or nich
in all their mosques, which is placed
exactly on the side next to the temple
at Mecca.

KIBLEH [among the Turks] the
point or quarter to which
they turn themselves when they make
their prayers, which is towards the
temple at Mecca; also an altar or nich
in all their mosques, which is placed
exactly on the side next to the temple
at Mecca.

KEBLEH-NOMA, a pocket compass
which the Turks always carry about
them, to direct how to place themselves
exactly when they go to prayers.

KEEPER of the exchange and mint, the
lame as warden of the mint.

KEEPER one who, preserves, re­
tains, nourishes; an observer, &c.

KEEPER of the Privy-Seal, a member
of the privy council, thro' whose hands
pass all charters sign'd by the king, be­
fore they come to the broad seal; and
also some deeds which do not pass the
great seal at all. He also is a lord by
office.

KEEPERS of the Liberties of England, 
by the authority of parliament, &c. 
Custodes Libertatis Angliæ Autoritate
Parliamenti; the stile in which writs
and other proceedings at law ran, dur­
ing the usurpation of Oliver Cromwel.

KENNING [cennunʒ, Sax.] know­
ing, descrying at a distance.

KERF [with Sawyers] the way made
by the saw, or the sawn away slip in a
piece of timber or board.

KERK Sessions, the name of a petty
ecclesiastical sessions in Scotland.

KERNELLINESS [of cirnel, Sax.]
fulness of kernels.

KEY [with Musicians] is a certain
tone, whereto every composition, whe­
ther it be long or short, ought to be
fitted: And this Key is said either to be
flat or sharp, not in respect of its own
nature, but with relation to the flat or
sharp third, which is joined with it.

KEY [in Polygraphy and Stenography]
is the alphabet of the writing in cypher, 
which is a secret known only to the
person who writes the letter and he to
whom it is sent.



KEY [of an Author or Book] an ex­
plication that lets into some secrets in
respect to persons, places, and times, 
&c. which don't appear without it.

The power of the KEYS [with the Ro­
manists] is used to signify ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, or power of excommuni­
cating or absolving. Thus the Papists
say, the pope has the Power of the Keys, 
and can open and shut paradise as he
pleases.

KEYS [of Spinnets, Organs, &c] lit­
tle bits, by means of which the jacks
play, so as to strike the strings of the
instrument; and wind is given to the
pipes of an organ, by raising and sink­
ing the sucker of the sound-board.

KEYS of the Island [in the isle of Man]
are the 24 chief commoners, who are
as it were the keepers of the liberties
of the people.

KINDNESS, benevolence, friendly
disposition, treatment, &c.

A KING [Hieroglyphically] was repre­
sented by an elephant, because it is a
beast very noble in its carriage, and is
said not to be able to bow the knee;
and is a great enemy of serpents, as
kings ought to be to thieves and rob­
bers.

KING of the Sacrifices [among the
ancient Romans] a priest superior to the
Flamen Dialis, but inferior to the Pon­
tifex Maximus.

KINGS at Arms, officers of great an­
tiquity, and anciently of great autho­
rity; they direct the heralds, preside at
their chapters, and have the jurisdiction 
of armory. There are three in num­
ber, Garter, Norroy and Clarencieux.

KINNER Nut, an earth-nut, a ches­
nut.

A KINS-Man [of kind, Teut, or cẏnne
and Man, Sax.] a he-cousin, &c.

KINS-Woman [of cẏnne, and &wyn;iman,
Sax.] a she-cousin, &c.

KISSING [kẏſſan, Sax.] saluting
with a kiss.

KITCHIN-Stuff [of kuchen, Teut.
cẏcene, Sax. and étoffe, F.] grease, &c.
the refuse of a kitchin or cookery.

KNAGGINESS [of cnæp and neſſe, 
Sax.] fulness of knots, as wood.

KNAVERY [of knab, Teut. cnapa, 
Sax. a boy or servant] in ancient times, 
had no worse sense than a servileness, 
as ſcẏlðcnapa, shield-bearer; but now it
is generally used in an opprobious sense, 
for craft, deceit, cheating, fraud, &c.

KNAVISHNESS, dishonesty, fraudu­
lentness, &c. also waggishness.

KNICK-Knacks, fine things to play
withal, gew-gaws.

KNICK-Knacketary Man, one that
makes a collection of knick-knacks or
curiosities, things uncommon in nature
or art; a virtuoso.

KNIGHT [knecht, Teut. cniht, Sax.]
a person whom the king has singled out
from the common class of gentlemen, 
and dignified with the honour of knight­
hood In ancient times there were six
particulars required in him that was to
be made a knight. 1. That he was no
trader. 2. That besides other things
he was not of servile condition.
3. That he should take an oath that
he would not refuse to die for the sake
of the gospel and his country. 4. His
sword was to be girt on by some noble­
man. 5. That he should have the
badge of knighthood put upon him.
And, 6thly, That he should be enrolled
in the king's books. It was also re­
quired, that knights should be brave
undaunted, expert, provident and well-­
behaved. Christian kings appointed
many religious ceremonies to be ob­
served at the creation of knights, and
none were admitted to the order of
knights, but such as had merited the
honour by some commendable and ex­
traordinary exploits. They were an­
ciently distinguished by a belt, a target, 
a sword, or some martial token. But
now the honour being grown cheap, 
these ceremonies have been laid aside,
and there goes nothing now to the
making a knight in England, but the
king's touching him with a sword as he
kneels, and saying, Rise up Sir R.N.

KNIGHTS Bannerets, the ceremony
of their creation is thus, The king,
or his general, at the head of his army, 
drawn up in order of battle after a
victory, under the royal standard dis­
play'd, attended by all the officers and
the nobility of the court, receives the
knight, led by two knights of note or
other men renowned in arms, carrying
his pennon or guidon of arms in his
hand; being preceded by the heralds, 
who proclaim his valiant achieve­
ments, for which he has merited to be
made a knight banneret, and to display
his banner in the held; then the king or
the general says, Advances toi Banneret, 
and causes the point of his pennon to
be rent off, and the new knight is sent
back to his tent, the trumpets sounding
before him, and the nobility and offi­
cers attending him, where they are no­
bly entertained. This order is cer­
tainly most honourable, because never
conferred but upon the performance of
some heroick action in the field; where­



as all other orders are bestow'd by fa­
vour, or other meaner motives. But
there have been none of these knights
made for many years past.

KNIGHTS Baronets, is a modern de­
gree of honour, and next to a baron;
they have precedency before all knights, 
except those of the garter, bannerets
and privy-counsellors, and the honour
is hereditary in the male line. This
order was first instituted in the year
1611 by king James I. They are crea­
ted by patent, the proem whereof sig­
nifies, that it is for propagating a plan­
tation in the province of Ulster in Ire­
land, for which purpose each of them
was to maintain thirty soldiers in Ire­
land, for three years, allowing each
soldier 8d. per diem, the whole sum of
which was paid into the Exchequer up­
on passing the patent. They are to
bear in a canton, or in an escutcheon, 
the arms of Ulster, viz. a field argent, a
sinister hand couped at the wrist gules.

BARONS [prob of barones, L. men
of valour] are peers of England, but
of the lowest dignity, and as such sit in
parliament, as all the peers of England
do by their baronies, though they be
dukes, marquesses, or earls besides, and
likewise archbishops and bishops have
baronies annexed to them. Barons are
knights of three sorts.

BARONS [by Tenure] are bishops, 
who hold their baronies by virtue of
their being chosen to their fees.

BARONS [by Writ] are such as are
called to sit in parliament by their so­
vereign, without any precedent title.

BARONS [by Patent] their title is
Right Noble Lord; king Charles II. gave
the barons a circle of gold, with six
pearls set close to the rim. He is like­
wise allowed to have the cover of his
cup held underneath while he is drink­
ing; and a baroness may have her train
held up in the presence of a viscoun­
tess. The manner of erecting a baron
by patent is as follows, he appears in
court in his long robe and hood, at­
tended by several persons of quality;
two heralds walk before him, followed
by Garter king at arms, holding the
king's writ; a baron, supported by two
gentlemen of distinction, brings the
robe or mantle, and so they enter the
king's presence, kneeling three times;
then Garter delivers the writ to the
lord chamberlain, and when in reading
they come to the word Investivimus, the
king puts on his mantle, and the writ
being read, declares him and his heirs
barons.

The subforms of this word-entry were capitalized. They should not be classified as individual main word-entries, but subforms of the headword "KNIGHTS Baronets".



KNIGHTS Batchelors [either of bas
Chevaliers, F. i. e. low knights, or of
Baccalaria, a kind of fees or farm, con­
sisting of several pieces of ground, each
of which contained twelve acres, or as
much as two oxen would plough; the
prossessors of which Baccalaria, were
called Batchelors; others derive the
name of batailler, F. to combat or fight]
they were anciently called so, as being
the lowest order of knights, or inferior
to bannerets. They were obliged to
serve the king in his wars at their own
expence, for the space of forty days.
They are now called Equites Aurati in
Latin; Equites, i. e. horsemen, because
they were to serve on horseback; and
Aurati golden or gilded, because they
had gilt spurs given them at their crea­
tion. This dignity was at first confined
to military men, but afterward, it was
conferred on men of the robe. It was
an ancient ceremony at the creation, 
to honour the knights with the girdle
of knighthood; which he who received
was to go to church, and solemnly to
offer his sword upon the altar, and to
vow himself to the service of God. In
process of time, besides the girdle and
sword, gilt spurs were added for the
greater ornament. The ceremony of
the creation is very simple, the candi­
date kneels down, and the king touch­
es him lightly with a naked sword, 
saying, Sois Chevalier au nom de Dieu, 
F. i. e. be a knight in the name of God;
and afterwards Avance Chevalier A. B.
These may be said to be the only
knights in England, besides those of the
Garter and of the Bath, who are of a
much higher sphere; for Bannerets
have been long disused, and Baronets
are not properly knights. When a
knight had committed a capital offence, 
it was usual publickly to degrade and
deprive him of his honour of knight­
hood, which was done by ungirding
his military belt, taking off his sword
and breaking it, and hewing off his
spurs with a hatchet, plucking his
gauntlet from him, and reversing his
escutcheon of arms.

KNIGHTS of the Bath, this order of
knighthood is of no less antiquity than
the times of our Saxon ancestors, and
tho' the original of it cannot be exactly 
determined, yet it appears that Geoffry
of Anjou, before his marriage to Maud
the empress, daughter to our king Hen­
ry I. was thus made a knight at Rome, 
Ann. 1227; tho' Cambden and others
write that it was instituted by Richard
II. and Henry IV. Ann. 1339. Upon



this occasion, king Henry being in the
Bath, and being informed by some
knights, that two widows were come to
demand justice of him, he immediately
leap'd out of the Bath, saying, he ought
to prefer doing Justice to his Subjects be­
fore the Pleasure of the Bath; and there­
upon created Knights of the Bath. Some
say these knights were made within the
lists of the Bath, and that king Richard
ordained that there should be no more
than four of them, but king Henry IV.
encreased them to forty six: Their mot­
to was Tres in uno, L. i. e. three in one, 
signifying the three theological virtues.
At the creation of these knights, there
were several religious rights and cere­
monies performed, which usually be­
longed to hermits and other holy orders.
First. When the esquire to be knighted
came to the court, he was to be received
by the king's officers, and to have two
esquires of note to attend him; and if he
came before dinner, he was to carry up
one dish to the king's table, after which
those esquires were to conduct him to his
chamber, and at night he had his beard
shav'd and his hair cut round. Then the
king commanded his chamberlain to go
to the chamber of this intended knight, 
attended by several knights and es­
quires, with musick, singing, dancing,
and there to inform him of feats of
chivalry. Then the esquire was put
into the Bath, and when taken out put
into a bed without curtains, there to lie
till he was dry, and afterwards cloath­
ed with a robe of russet, with long
sleeves, having a hood to it, like that of
an hermit; then the old knights con­
ducted him to the chapel, being accom­
panied with musick, and other esquires, 
dancing and sporting before him, where
being entertained with wine and spices, 
they were dismiss'd with thanks; the
new knight was to stay in the chapel all
night, and spend it in prayer, and the
next morning to confess his sins to the
priest; and while mass was saying, a
taper was burning before him, which
he held in his hand during the gospel;
at the elevation an esquire took off his
hood from his head, and held it till the
last gospel. And mass being ended, the
same esquire offered the candle at the
altar and a penny or more. After this
the new knight was put to bed, and lay
there till day-light. Then the cham­
berlain and other company went to his
chamber and said, Sir, good morrow to
you, it is time to get up and make yourself
ready: And having dress'd him, they
mounted on horseback, and conducted
him to the hall with musick, a young
esquire carrying his sword before him, 
holding it by the point. Being come to
the hall door, he was received by the
marshals and ushers, who desired him
to alight, and the marshal was either to
have his horse or an hundred shillings
for his fee; and being conducted up the
hall, there he stay'd while the king
came, the young esquire still holding
his sword. The king being come, he
took one of the spurs from the cham­
berlain, and delivering it to some per­
son of note, commanded him to put it
on his right heel, which was done
kneeling, and the other spur was put
on by another knight; which being
done, the knight holding up his hands
together, the king girt on his sword, 
and embracing him about the neck, 
said to him, Be thou a good Knight,
kissing him. This being done, the
knights conducting him to the high al­
tar in the chapel, he there promised to
maintain the rights of the holy church
during his whole life, and then ungirt
his sword, and offered it to God, pray­
ing to God and the saints, that he might
keep that order to the end, after which
he drank a draught of wine. Upon his
going out of the chapel, the king's
master cook stood ready to take off his
spurs for his fee, saying to him, I the
king's master cook, am come to receive
your spurs for my fee; and if you do any
thing contrary to the order of knighthood
(which God forbid) I shall hack your
spurs from your heels. This being done, 
he was conducted again to the hall by
the knights, where he sat the first at
the knights table, the knights being
about him, to be serv'd as the others
were; but was neither to eat nor drink
at the table, nor spit, nor look about
him upwards or downwards any more
than a bride. But one of his gover­
nors was to hold a handkerchief before
him when he was to spit; and when
the king was departed, he was to be at­
tended to his chamber by knights, mu­
sick, &c. who taking their leave of
him went to dinner. When the com­
pany were retired, he was disrob'd, 
and his attire was to be given, to the
king at arms, or that herald that at­
tended, or to the minstrels, with a
mark of silver, if he were a knight bat­
chelor; two marks if a baron, and four
if an earl or of superior rank; and his
russet night-cap or a noble was given
to the watch. After this, he was
clothed with a blue robe, with strait
sleeves, in the fashion of a priest, 



having a white silk lace hanging on his
left shoulder; which lace he wore upon
all his garments, till he had gained
some honour and renown in arms; and
was register'd as of high record, as the
nobles, knights, &c. or till some great
prince or noble lady did cut the lace off, 
saying to him, Sir, we have heard so
much of your true renown concerning your
honour, which you have done in divers
parts, to the great fame of chivalry, as to
yourself and him that made you a knight, 
that it is meet this lace be taken from you.
After dinner the knights and gentlemen
conduct him to the king's presence, 
where he says, Right noble and renowned
Sir, I do in all that I can give you thanks
for these honours, courtesies and bounty
which you have vouchsafed me: And then
takes his leave of the king; and then
the esquires governors take their leave
of their master, with much complai­
sance demanding their robes and fees, 
according to the custom.

Frame-Work KNITTING, or stocking
weaving, was first devised, as it is said, 
by William Lee master of arts of St.
John's colledge Cambridge, 1599.

KNIVES, one Richard Matthews was
the first Englishman that attained the
perfection of making fine knives and
knife hafts, and obtained a prohibition
aginst all foreigners bringing knives in
to England, the fifth of queen Elizabeth.

KNOPH, a divinity of the Egyptians, 
whom they represented as a beautiful
man with feathers upon his head, a gir­
dle, and a scepter in his hand; and an
egg proceeding out of his mouth; the
egg was the Hieroglyphick of the world, 
the shell signified the Heavens, that shut
in all visible things on every side, the
white the Air and Water, and the yolk
the Earth, that contains in it a secret
virtue, that causeth it to produce living
creatures by the assistance of a natural
heat: The egg proceeding out of the
mouth, bespeaks the image and repre­
sentation of the Creator of the universe.

KNOT or Nodus [of a Romance or Dra­
matick piece] is used for that part where
the persons are the most embarrassed by
a conjecture of affairs, the end of which
it is not easy to foresee.

Knights of the KNOT, an order of
sixty knights instituted by Jane I. Queen
of Naples, on occasion of the peace esta­
blished by her and the king of Hungary, 
by means of her marriage with Lewis
prince of Tarentum.

Bowling KNOTS, a very fast knot that
will not slip, so called, because the bow­
ling bridles are fastened to the crengle,
by this knot.

Wale KNOTS, are round knobs or
knots.

KNOTS [with Physicians] tuberosities
formed in the joints of old gouty people
consisting of a thick, viscous, crude, indi­
gested pituita, accompanied with a bili­
ous humour, hot and acrimonious.

KNOTTINESS, fulness of knots, in­
tricateness, perplexedness, difficultness.

KNOWINGNESS [cna&wyn;an, Sax. prob
of γνόω, Gr.] knowledge.

KNOWLEDGE, [according to Mr.
Lock] consists in the perception of the
connection and agreement or disagree­
ment, and repugnancy of our Ideas.
Thus we know that white is not black, 
by perceiving that these two Ideas do
not agree.

KYPHONISM [of χύφων, Gr. a piece of
wood whereon criminals were stretched
and tormented] it was thus, the body
of the person to be tormented was a­
nointed with honey, and exposed to the
sun, in order to attract the flies and
wasps; it was for a certain number of
days, and some authors say, sometimes
for twenty. Sometimes the person was
stretched on the ground, with his arms
tyed behind him; sometimes hung up
in the air in a basket. This punishment
has been frequently inflicted on the
martyrs in the primitive times.

KYSTUS [χύστις, Gr.] a bag or mem­
brane in form of a bladder full of unna­
tural humors.


L

L l, Roman; L l, Italick; L l, English;
L l, Sax. Λλ, Greek, are the ele­
venth letters of the alphabet, and ל He­
brew, the 12th, L, if it be the last
letter of a word of two or more sylla­
bles, is generally single, as evil, civil, 
&c. especially such as are derived from
the Latin; but in words of one syllable, 
it is for the most part double, as fall, 
tell, fill, roll, bull; and if a consonant
be next before l, joined with a vowel
at the end of a word, they must not be
parted, as Bi-ble, Ca-ble, Aff-able, &c.

L, is one of those consonants call'd
liquids, on account of its soft and melt­
ing sound or pronunciation; and being
set before a mute consonant and a vow­
el, renders the syllable more gentle, 
than when two other consonants meet.

L, in Latin numbers, stand for 50.

L̅, with a dash over it, denotes 50000.

The dash is placed on top of letter L.



LABIATE [of labium, L. a lip] ha­
ving lips.



LABEL [in Heraldry] is
generally allowed to be
the difference of the second
son, and his family; and
of such dignity, that the
son of an emperor cannot
bear a difference of higher esteem. And
Morgan conjectures, that it may repre­
sent, the one label, the banner of love
from all eternity, or that of the three
Lambeaux, is the symbol of three divine
virtues, Faith, Hope and Charity, united
in one being. See the figure.

Image omitted.



LABORATORY [with Gunners] a
place or work-house, where the fire-­
workers or bombardiers prepare their
stores; as driving fuzees, filling shells, 
making quick match, filling carcases, and
all other fire-works belonging to war,
&c.

LABORATORY Tent [in an Army] a
large tent, carried along with the artil­
lery into the field, furnished with all
sorts of tools and metals for the fire-­
workers, for the uses abovementioned.

LABRING [prob. of laborare, L.] es­
saying or striving to raise itself with
wings, labouring. Milton.

LABYRINTH of Egypt [Λαβύρινθος, 
Gr.] built by Psamniticus, on the bank of
the river Nile, situate on the south of the
Pyramids, and north of Arsinoe: It con­
tained within the compass of one conti­
nued wall, 1000 houses, and 12 royal
palaces, all covered with marble; and
had only one entrance; but innumerable
turnings and returnings, sometimes one
over another; and all in a manner
scarce to be found, but by such as were
acquainted with them; the building be­
ing more under ground than above; the
marble stones were laid with such art, 
that neither wood nor cement was used
in any part of the fabrick; the cham­
bers were so disposed, that the doors at
their opening gave a report as terrible
as a crack of thunder. The main en­
trance of all was white marble, adorn'd
with stately columns, and curious ima­
gery. Being arrived at the end, a pair of
stairs of 90 steps, conducted to a stately
portico, supported with stately pillars of
Theban stone, which was the entrance
into a stately and spacious hall (the
place of their general conventions) all
of polished marble, adorned with the
statues of their gods. This labyrinth
was accounted one of the seven wonders
of the world. This work was afterwards
imitated by Dædalus in the Cretan laby­
rinth, tho' it fell as short of the glories
of this, as Minos was inferior to Psam­
niticis in power and riches. There was
also a third at Lemnos, famous for its
sumptuous pillars; and a fourth, that of
Italy, which Porsenna king of Hetruria, 
designed for a sepulchre for him and his
successors. There was also one at Wood­
stock in Oxfordshire, made by king Henry
II for fair Rosamond.

LABYRINTHIAN [labyrintheus, L.]
of, or pertaining to a labyrinth.

LACCA, a gum, or rather wax (made
as some say, by a kind of winged ants)
hard, brittle, clear and transparent, 
brought from India, &c. and used in
painting varnishing, &c. also a certain
red gum issuing from certain trees in
Arabia, of which the best hard sealing
wax is made.

LACHESIS [of λαχεἱν, Gr. to appor­
tion by lot] one of the three destinies, 
the other being Clotho and Atropos.
The three fatal goddesses, who according
to the poets, reside in the palace of Plu­
to; or the Destinies, who did appoint
to every one the several adventures of
his life; what they had decreed, accor­
ding to the judgment of the gods, could
not be altered: they were more especi­
ally occupied in handling the threads of
man's life: the youngest held the distaff
and did draw the thread; the next in
age wound it about the spindle or reel;
and the third being old and decrepid cut
it off: and this was followed by the im­
mediate death of the person living.

LACHRYMA Christi [i. e. the tears of
Christ] a pleasant sort of wine, made of
grapes growing in Terra di Lavoro in
the province of Naples.  L.

Fistula LACHRYMALIS [with Ocu­
lists] a Fistula in the larger angle of the
eye.  L.

LACINIATED Leaf [with Botan.] a
jagged leaf.

LACKER [so called of Gum Lac, of
which it is made] a varnish used over
leaf silver, in gilding picture frames, 
&c.

LACKER Hat, a sort of hat made
without stiffening.

LACTANT [lactans, L.] suckling, 
giving milk.

LACTIFICK [lactificus, L.] that
makes or breeds milk.

LACTUCINA [of lac, L. milk] a
heathen goddess to whom the heathens
attributed the care of the young corn
and other vegetables, while they were
yet milky and juicy.

LADANUM a gummous or re­
sinous matter, ooz­
ing out of the leaves of a shrub called
Gistus Ladaniferæ, used in medicine.

LABDANUM a gummous or re­
sinous matter, ooz­
ing out of the leaves of a shrub called
Gistus Ladaniferæ, used in medicine.



Bolt-Sprit LADDER [in a Ship] is a
ladder at the beak head, made fast over
the bolt-sprit, to get upon when there
is occasion.

Entring LADDER [in a Ship] is a
wooden ladder placed in the waste of
the ship.

Gallery LADDER [in a Ship] is a lad­
der of ropes hung over the gallery and
stern of ships, to come out of, or go
into a boat in foul weather, and a high
sea.

LADE laðe, Sax. usually sig­
nifies the
mouth of a river; sometimes a ford, 
and is part of the proper names of pla­
ces; as, Crecklade, Fromlade, Lethlade, 
&c.

LODE loðe, Sax. usually sig­
nifies the
mouth of a river; sometimes a ford, 
and is part of the proper names of pla­
ces; as, Crecklade, Fromlade, Lethlade, 
&c. 

LADIES Bed-Straw, an herb.

LADIES Cushion, a sort of flower.

LADIES Laces, a kind of striped
grass.

LADIES Mantle, an herb.

LADIES Smock, an herb, otherwise
called Cuckoo flower.

LADING [of hlaðian, Sax. to load]
the burden or cargo of a ship.

LADY Traces, a sort of satyrion or
ragwort.

LAG, a loiterer; also one that is
the last of a line or family; also one
that degenerates from the virtues of
his ancestors, a disgrace to his family.

LAGON [Old Law] a parcel of goods
cast overboard in a storm, with a buoy
or cork fastened to them, in order to
find them again.

LAGOTROPHY [lagotrophia, L. of 
λαγοτροφία of λαγὰς and τροφέω to feed, 
Gr.] a warren of hares.

LAICALITY [laicalitas, L. of λαἴχος
of λαὸς the people, Gr.] the property by
which any man is said to be a lay-man.

LAKE [lacus, L.] a large collection
of fresh waters, which have open com­
munication with the sea, and are for
the most part in inland countries; some
lakes are so large in extent, as to ob­
tain the name of seas, as the Caspian
sea, the sea of Galilee, and the Dead Sea.

Some lakes both emit and receive
rivers, and others do only emit them, 
and some neither receive nor emit
them, but are formed either by the na­
tural receiving of rain water in a large
valley, or the overflowings of some
particular river.

LAMA, an order of priests among
the western tartars, and of the people
of Barantola of the southern Asiatick
Tartary; This kingdom is governed by
2 kings or chief governours, the first
of which is call'd Deva and applies
himself to secular affairs, while the
other call'd Lama lives retired from the
world, which are highly esteem'd not
only by the commonalty, but their
greatest personages. They are gene­
rally very superstitious, and pretend to
be magicians.

Their Grand Lama or high priest is
accounted the second person in the king­
dom, being next in authority to the
king himself; he receives homage not
only from those of lower, but from
those of the highest rank; and neigh­
bouring kings upon their enthroniza­
tion send to him to obtain his benedic­
tion, and go in pilgrimage to pay to
him their adorations, calling him La­
ma Cangiu, i. e. God, the Everlasting fa­
ther of Heaven.

He is never to be seen but in a secret
apartment of his palace, enlightened
with many lamps, where he sits cross
legg'd on a cushion, in a place raised
from the ground, himself being covered
all over with gold and precious stones;
where his worshippers being at some
distance, prostrate themselves before
him; it not being lawful for any so
much as to kiss his feet.

And to make the people believe he is
immortal, when he dies, his under
priests set up another in his stead, and
so carry on the imposture from gene­
ration to generation.

These priests persuade the people, 
that the Lama was raised up from death
and Hell 700 years before; and that he
has liv'd ever since, and will live for
ever.

He is honoured to that degree of ex­
travagancy, that the greatest lords, 
princes and kings, esteem it as the
highest favour to have never so small a
or particle of his excrements, which
they hang about their necks in a gold
box, as an approved amulet against all
manner of evils. And it being the
highest favour to obtain some of the
Lama's excrements, they also some­
times eat them as a preservative against
all mischiefs.

LAMASABACTHANI [of חמל why, 
and ונתקבש hast thou forsaken me, Syr.]
why hast thou forsaken me.

LAMBEAUX [in Heral.] Morgan says
it is a cross patee at the top, and issu­
ing out at the foot into three labels, 
having a great deal of mystery in rela­
tion to the top, whereon the first born
son of God did suffer: sending out three
streams from his hands, feet, and
side.



LAMBDOIDAL Suture [among Ana­
tomists] the hindermost seam of the scull, 
so named, because in shape it resembles
the Greek capital Lambda (Λ) or a pair
of compasses.

LAMBENT [lambens, L.] licking.

LAMBENT Medicines [with Physici­
ans] such medicines as are taken by lick­
ing them off a stick of liquorice, &c.

To LAM [prob. of lamen, Du. to
make lame] to smite or beat.

LAMENESS [laamneſſe, Sax.] a
defect, or weakness, or hurt in the
legs, arms, &c.

A LAMENT, a lamentation. Mil­
ton.

LAMENTABLENESS [lamentabilis, 
L.] woefulness, pitiableness.

LAMENTINE, a fish called a sea-­
cow or Manatee, some of which are
near 20 foot long, the head resembling
that of a cow, and two short feet, with
which it creeps on the shallows and
rocks to get food; but has no fins. The
flesh of them is commonly eaten, and
is delicious meat.

LAMIA, as the poets feign, being
beloved by Jupiter, Juno, out of jea­
lousy, destroyed all the children she
had as soon as she bare them, which so
enraged her, that like a cruel monster, 
she devoured all the children she found.

The Lamia is a sea monster, so ex­
orbitantly large, that some of them
have been said to have weigh'd 30000
pounds, and such as two horses in a
waggon could scarce draw.

Some of them are said to have been
taken at Nice and Marseilles, in whose
stomachs were found men intire and
compleatly arm'd.

Rondelet relates, that he saw one at
Xaintonge, the mouth of which was so
large, that a large fat man entered it
with great ease: He adds, that if it
were held open, with a gag, the dogs
could get in very easily, in order to eat
what they could find in his stomach.

The Lamia is the greediest fish that
is and digests in the least time. Its teeth
are large, sharp and biting, of a triangu­
lar figure, cut like a saw, dispos'd in 6
rows, the first of which appears out of
its mouth, those of the second are strait, 
and the third are turned inwards.

LAMIÆ [among the Romans] hags, 
witches, she-devils, which the vulgar
fancied had eyes that they could take
out and put in at their pleasure; who, 
under the shape of fair women, enticed
youth to devour them: or, as others
say, the Lamiæ were the 3 Harpies,
called Aello, Ocypite and Celæno, a
strange sort of birds with womens faces, 
dragons tails and eagles talons; who
are said to suck in the night the blood
of infants, and were very troublesome
at publick feasts in the night. They
are also called Furiæ and Striges.

But these probably had never any
existence but in the imagination of nur­
ses and silly women.

A LAMP [lampas, L. of λαμπὰς Gr.]
a light well known.

Perpetual LAMP, the ancient Romans
are said to preserve lights in their se­
pulchres many ages, by the oiliness of
gold resolved by art into a liquid sub­
stance. And it is reported, that at the
dissolution of monasteries, in the time
of king Henry VIII. there was a lamp
found that had then burnt in a tomb
from about 300 years after Christ, 
which was near 1200 years. Two of
these subterranean lamps are to be seen
in the Musæum of rarities at Leyden in
Holland. One of these lamps, in the
papacy of Paul III. was found in the
tomb of Tullia Cicero's daughter, which
had been shut up 1550 years.

LAMPADARY an officer in
the church
of Constantinople, whose office was to
see the church well illuminated, and to
bear a taper before the emperor, em­
press and patriarch, when they went in
procession or to church.

LAMPADAPHORIA the church
of Constantinople, whose office was to
see the church well illuminated, and to
bear a taper before the emperor, em­
press and patriarch, when they went in
procession or to church.

LAMPAS [with Farriers] a kind
of swelling in a horse's
mouth or palate, i. e. an inflammation
in the roof of his mouth, behind the
nippers of the upper jaw; so called, 
because it is cured by a burning lamp
or hot iron.

LAMPRAS [with Farriers] a kind
of swelling in a horse's
mouth or palate, i. e. an inflammation
in the roof of his mouth, behind the
nippers of the upper jaw; so called, 
because it is cured by a burning lamp
or hot iron. 

LAMPASSE [in Heraldry] is what is
by the English heralds called Langued, 
i. e. the tongue of a beast appearing out
of his mouth, being of a colour diffe­
rent from the body.  F.

LAMPETIANS, a sect of hereticks, 
so called of Lampetius, one of their
ring-leaders, who held some of the
doctrines of the Arians, and condemned
all kinds of vows, particularly that of
obedience, as inconsistent with the li­
berty of the sons of God.

LAMPRAY with an Eel [Hierogly­
phically] represented
adulterers; for the lamprey is said to
seek the company of other fishes of the
same shape; and for that reason, some
say, they are venemous, because they
join themselves with snakes, and other
water serpents.

LAMPREY with an Eel [Hierogly­
phically] represented
adulterers; for the lamprey is said to
seek the company of other fishes of the
same shape; and for that reason, some
say, they are venemous, because they
join themselves with snakes, and other
water serpents. 

LAMPROPHORI [λαμϖροφοροὶ of λαμ­
ϖρὸς white, φέρω, Gr. to bear] the Neo­



phytes or New Converts, so called, dur­
ing the seven days after they had been
baptized, on account of their being
clothed with a white robe.

A LANCE [lancea, L.] a javelin, pike
or spear; an offensive weapon much in
use with the ancients; being a long
staff like a pike, pointed at the end, and
armed with iron.

LANCEPESADE, an officer under a
corporal, who assists him in his duty, 
and performs it for him in his absence.
They teach the new raised men their
exercise, and post the centries. They
are generally accounted the most vigi­
lant and brave of the company: And
on a march, their place is on the right-­
hand of the second rank.

To LANCH out [s'elanchant, F.] to
put a ship or boat afloat out of a dock;
also to expatiate in words; also to be
extravagant in expences.

LANCIFEROUS [lancifer, L.] bear­
ing a lance or spear.

LANGINATION [lancinatio, L.] a
lancing.

LANCU [Lanon or Lanzu, i. e. the
ancient philosopher] a religious sect
among the Chinese, so named from a
philosopher whose name was Lanon or
Lanzu, cotemporary with Confucius;
for they say he continued 80 years in
his mother's womb, before he was
born: They boast of their power in
diverting all manner of evils by means 
of charms, and also of casting out de­
vils from persons possess'd, and places 
haunted.

LANEOUS [laneus, L.] woolly, made
of wool.

LAND Fall [mong Sailors] signifies
fall in with land; Thus, when mari­
ners have been in expectation of seeing
land in a short time, and they happen
to see it accordingly, they say, they
have made a good land fall.

To set LAND [among Sailors] is to
see by the compass how it bears.

Head LAND, a point of land, or that
which lies farther out into the sea than
the rest.

LAND layed [with Mariners] the land
is said to be laid, when a ship is just got
out of sight of the land.

LAND Pike, an American animal like
the pike fish, having legs instead of fins, 
by which it crawls, tho' awkwardly on
the ground; these creatures lurk about
the rocks, and are rarely seen but to­
wards night, at which time they make
a noise more shrill and grating to the
ear than toads.

LANDING [of ʒelanðian, Sax.] to
go or put out of a ship upon land.

LANDSCAPE [lanðſcip, Sax.] a
landskip. Milton.

LANDSKIP [lanðſcip, Sax.] a re­
presentation of part of a country, both
place and persons; the landskip being
called the Parergon or by-work, and
the persons the argument: Or a land­
skip is a description of the land, as far
as it can be seen above our horizon, by
hills, valleys, cities, woods, rivers, 
&c. all that in a picture which is not
of the body or argument (which denote
the persons) is called by this name of
Landskip.

LANGREL [with Gunners] a shot
used at sea to cut the enemies rigging;
a sort of shot that runs loose with a
shackle or joint in the middle, having
half a bullet at each end, which is to
be shortened when put into the piece;
but spreads it self when discharged.

LANGUAGE [langage, F. of lingua, 
L.] tongue or speech, a set of words
upon which a particular nation or peo­
ple are agreed to make use of to ex­
press their thoughts.

And therefore languages are diversi­
fied according to the different nations
and people; and are also mutable and
fluctuating, by reason of the intercourse
of foreigners and other occurrences, so
that few languages remain the same
for two centuries; as is evident in the
French and our own language.

As to the original of language; it is
past doubt, that the first language, 
whatever it was, was given to Adam
by God thro' inspiration, and that God
afterwards communicated his will to
mankind by words and not by intuition.
And that till after the flood this lan­
guage was universal; for Moses writes, 
that upon the building of the tower of
Babel, And they have all one Language.

As for the diversity of languages, it
is almost universally allow'd that they
had their rise at that time; but as to
the manner how it was effected, is still
a dispute among the learned.

The question among them is, whe­
ther God only expung'd the significa­
tion of the words out of the memories
of those persons employ'd in the build­
ing of that tower; or whether he
immediately inspired them with words.

The learned Scaliger's opinion is, 
that they only forgot the meaning of
words, and so naming one thing instead
of another, were forc'd to desist from
their attempt; not understanding one
another; tho' they all at the same
time spoke the Hebrew tongue: Nor is



he of opinion, that they all spoke dif­ 
ferent languages; but that the confusion
of tongues might very well be effected
without that.

The Jews strenuously maintain and
positively insist upon it; that the Hebrew
tongue, such as it is now found in the
books of the Old Testament, was the
primitive language, and that which
was spoken by our original sire Adam;
but the Arabs dispute the point of anti­
quity with the Jews; and others again
contend, that the language spoken by
Adam in the state of innocency is en­
tirely lost, and that the Hebrew, Chal­
dee and Arabick are only dialects of
the original.

As to the qualities and properties of
the European languages especially, and
the excellency of the present English, 
may be seen at large in the preface to
the second edition of my Dictionarium
Brittanicum in folio.

LANGUED [in Heraldry] signifies the
tongue of any animal hanging out, of
a different colour from the body, as lan­
gued Azure, Gules, &c. i. e. having the
tongue of a blue or red colour.

LANGUENT [languens, L.] languish­
ing.

LANGUIDNESS [of languidus, L.]
languishingness, faintness.

LANGUIFICK [languificus, L.] mak­
ing faint and feeble.

LANIFICE [of lanificium, L. of lana, 
wool, and facio to make, &c.] spinning
carding or working wool.  L.

LANKNESS, limberness, slimness, 
slenderness.

LANO-NIGER, a sort of base coin, 
in use about the time of king Edward 1.

LANTERNISTS, an academy of
learned men set up at Toulouse in France
in the following manner. Some per­
sons of distinction desirous to form a
society for mutual improvement, ap­
pointed a set day for meeting at each
others habitations; and to be less lia­
ble to be interrupted, they chose to meet
in the evening after the time of com­
mon visits was over; and further for
the greater privacy instead of flambeaux
us'd only a small pocket lanthorn, by
which means their meeting continued
to be a secret for a considerable time;
but being at length discovered and the
design known, it was so highly ap­
prov'd that they were form'd into a so­
ciety and call'd Lanternists; and to per­
petuate their original, took for their
device a star with this motto; Lucerna
in nocte, and settled a prize to be given
annually to those who should make the
best rhiming copy of verses in praise
of the king, to be publish'd by the so­
ciety; the prize is a curious medal
struck with a star and the legend; on
one side Apollo playing upon the harp;
sitting on the top of Parnassus with this
motto on the reverse Apollini Tolo­
sano.

LANUGINOUSNESS [of lanuginosus, 
L.] downiness, &c.

LAPHRIA [λαφρία, Gr.] an anniver­
sary festival held in Achaia, in honour
of Diana. At the approach of the fe­
stival they made an ascent to the altar, 
heaping up earth in the manner of
stairs; round the altar they placed in
order pieces of green wood, all of 16
cubits long, and upon that they laid
the dryest wood that could be gotten.
On the first day of the solemnity, the
priestess of Diana, who was a virgin, 
rode in a chariot drawn by bucks: On
the second they offered sacrifice of
birds, bears, bucks, lions, wolves, and
all sorts of animals and garden-fruits.

LAPIDESCENT Waters [with Natu­
ralists] such waters, which being full of
stony matter dissolved in them, and co­
vering grass, leaves, rushes, and sticks
that lie in them all over, cover them
with a sort of stony coat, so that they
seem to be changed into a perfect stone.

LAPIDIFICATION [with Chymists]
is the art of turning any metal into
stone; which operation is performed
by dissolving the metal in some corro­
sive spirit, and afterwards boiling the
dissolution to the consistence of a stone.

LAPSE [in Law] a benefice is said to
be in lapse, when the patron, who
ought to present thereto in six months
after it is voidable, has omitted to do
it; upon which default the ordinary
has a right to collate to the said bene­
fice.

To LAPSE [of lapsum, of labi, L.] to
fall from.

LAPWING, a bird about the size of
a thrush, with a long, thin, black beak, 
a little hooked, the legs short and grey;
upon its head a tuft of feathers of va­
rious colours, which it raises and low­
ers at pleasure; the feathers on the
neck and stomach incline to red, the
tail is black with streaks of white; it is
a beautiful bird, but does not sing.
The wings do not terminate in a point
like those of most other birds, but are
roundish, it opens and claps its wings
very often, and thence has obtain'd the
name of a Lapwing.

LARA or LARANDA, one of the
Naiades, a nymph, on whom Mercury



is said to have begotten the houshold
gods called Lares. They were distin­
guished into publick and private; the
publick Lares were esteemed protectors
of cities, people and high-ways, and
the private Lares of families.

LARBOARD Watch [Sea Term] one
half of a ship's crew, under the direc­
tion of a chief mate, which watches in
its turn with the starboard watch.

LARBOARD the Helm [Sea Phrase]
is to put the helm on the larboard or
left side of the ship.

LARCH Tree, so called of Larissa, a
city of Thessaly, where it was first
known] a lofty tree, bearing leaves
like those of a pine tree, and a sort of
mushroom or fruit called Agarick. The
gum of this tree is called Venice Turpen­
tine.

To LARD Meat [Cookery] is to draw
thin slips of fat bacon thro' the outsides 
of it.

LARES, certain domestick gods of the
Romans, called also Penates, shaped like
monkeys; or, as others say, dogs, pla­
ced in some private place of the house, 
or in the chimney corner, which the
family honoured as their protectors, 
and therefore offered to them wine and
frankincense. Somewhat of what was
brought to the table was usually
burnt to their honour, as first fruits; or
they publickly sacrificed a sow to them
as being guardians and overseers of
highways and streets; for the Romans
distinguish'd them into publick and pri­
vate Lares.

All sorts of false deities whatsoever
appointed by towns, emperors or pri­
vate persons for their tutelar gods, and
of whom they kept small images were
call'd Lares; and for this reason the
festivals of the gods Lares, solemniz'd
the 11th day before the calends of Ja­
nuary, is by some call'd the solemnity of
the little statues. They hung up burn­
ing lamps before their images, crown­
ed their heads and perfumed them al­
most every day with effusions.

Plutarch tells us, that they were cover­
ed with dog's skin, and a dog placed next
to them, to express the care they had
of the house, and their friendship to
those that did belong to it. The poets
feign that Lara being sentenced to lose
her tongue for revealing to Juno, Jupi­
ter's intention of deflowering Juturna, 
she was sent to Hell under the conduct
of Mercury, who living with her by the
way, begat two sons, named Lares, 
from whence these gods are derived.

LARGENESS [largus, L.] greatness, 
width, breadth, &c.

To LARGE [Sea Phrase] the wind is
said to large, when it blows a fresh
gale.

LARGE, as, to go large [in Horseman­
ship] is when a horse gains or takes in
more ground in going wider in the
center of the volt, and describing a
greater circumference.

LARGIFICK [largificus, L.] that
gives liberally, frankly and freely.

LARGIFLUOUS [largifluus, L.]
flowing abundantly.

LARGITION [largitio, L.] largeness, 
bountiful giving.

LARMIER [of larme, F. a tear, be­
cause it causes the water to fall by drops
or tears at a distance from the wall]
the eaves or drip of a house; a flat
square member placed on the cornice, 
below the Cymatium and juts out the
farthest. Architecture.

LARVÆ, the ghosts or spirits of
wicked men, which after death were
believed to wander up and down the
earth: Phantoms or apparitions that
torment the wicked and affright good
men.

LARVATED [larvatus, L.] wearing
a mask; also frighted with spirits.

LASCIVIENT [lasciviens, L.] play­
ing, wantoning.

LASCIVIOSITY [lasciviositas, L.] las­
civiousness.

LASCIVY [lascivia, L.] lasciviousness.

LASER [with Botanists] the herb
Benjamin.  L.

LASHING [among Sailors] is the
making fast, or tying any thing to the
ship's sides, masts, &c. as pikes, mus­
kets, boards, casks, &c.

LASHITE in the Danish times,
a common forfeiture
of 12 ores, each ore being in value 6d.
or as others 16d. sterling.

LASHLITE in the Danish times,
a common forfeiture
of 12 ores, each ore being in value 6d.
or as others 16d. sterling.

LASSITUDE [with Physicians] a
stoppage of the animal spirits in the
nerves and muscles which forebodes
some sickness approaching.  L.

LAT, an idol worshipped by the an­
cient Arabian Pagans, and Indians of
the town of Soumenat. The statue of
this idol was only a single stone, said to
be an hundred yards high, placed in
the middle of a temple, supported with
56 pillars of massy gold. This idol
was demolished by Masimond the son
Sebectegin, who having broken it to
pieces established Mahometism in India as
far as he was able.

LATCHETS [in a Ship] are small
lines sown into the
top sails, called bonnets and drablers, in
the form of loops, by which the bon­



nets are laid to courses or plain sails, 
and the drablers to the bonnets.

LASKETS [in a Ship] are small
lines sown into the
top sails, called bonnets and drablers, in
the form of loops, by which the bon­
nets are laid to courses or plain sails, 
and the drablers to the bonnets.

LATEBROSE [latebrosus, L.] full of
dens, hiding or lurking places.

LATERAL judge, an assessor, one
that sits on the bench with, and assists
another judge.

LATERANUS [of later, L. a brick]
a heathen deity of the Romans to whom
they ascribed the care of fire-hearths.

LATICLAVIUM [among the Ro­
mans] a tunick or coat trimmed with
broad studs or buttons, like the head of
a nail. It was a garment of distinction
and of the senatorial order.

To LATINIZE to express one's self
after the manner of the Latins; also to
give Latin terminations to words.

LATOMIST [latomus, L. λάτομος, of
λᾶς a stone, and τέμνω, Gr. to cut] a
stone-cutter, a mason.

LATONA [according to the Poets]
the mother of Apollo and Diana by Ju­
piter.

LATRIA [λατρεία, Gr.] the worship
of God.  L.

LATROCINIUM [in ancient Char­
ters] the liberty and privilege of adjudg­
ing and executing thieves, or malefactors.

LAVATORY [in Chile in America]
certain places where
gold is got out of the earth by washing.

LAVADERO [in Chile in America]
certain places where
gold is got out of the earth by washing.

LAUDIMIUM [in the Civil Law] the
fiftieth part of the value of the land or
houses, which in ancient times the pro­
prietor paid to the new tenant, as an
acknowledgment upon investiture, or
for being put into possession.

LAVER, a large vessel for washing
some parts of the body in, the most fa­
mous of which was those in Solomon's
temple, born by 4 cherubims, standing
upon pedestals mounted on wheels of
brass, having handles to draw them
from one place to another, as occasion
required. They consisted of a bason
which receiv'd the water from another
square vessel above it thro' cocks, which
was adorn'd with the heads of a lion, 
an ox and a cherubim; these lavers
were in number 10, 5 on the right side
and 5 on the left of the temple, between
the altar of burnt offerings and the steps
which led to the porch, and each laver
contained 40 baths.

LAVERNA [among the Romans] a
goddess whom they accounted the pro­
tectress of thieves and robbers, and in
honour of whom they sottishly built a
temple: She had also a wood consecra­
ted to her, where the thieves shared
their booty.

LAUGHING [hla&wyn;anðe, Sax.] the
act of laughing.

LAUGHTER, a deity to whom as
Plutarch tells us the Lacedemonians e­
rected a statue, and the Hypateans of
Thessaly annually offered sacrifice to him, 
as also the Romans did in the spring;
attended with loud laughter.

LAUGHTER, the ancients used to
paint Laughter, or the genius or deity
of it, in a garment of various colours.

LAVISHNESS profuseness, wast­
fulness.

LAVISHMENT profuseness, wast­
fulness. 

To LAUNCE aft [Sea term]
in stowing
things in the hold, signifies stow it aft,
or stow it forward.

To LAUNCH forward [Sea term]
in stowing
things in the hold, signifies stow it aft,
or stow it forward.

LAUNCE ho [Sea phrase] used when
the yard is hoised high enough, or the
pump sucks.

To LAUNCH [of lancer, F.] a ship or
boat, is to put it a-float out of a dock.

LAUND [launð, Sax.] signifies a plain
among trees.

LAUNDER [in the Tin-works] a
trench in a floor, cut eight foot long and
ten foot over, with a turf at one end
for a stopper, to let the water (that
comes along with the bruised ore from
the coffer of a stamping mill) run away
while the ore sinks to the bottom.

LAUREATED [laureatus, L.] crown­
ed with laurel. The ancient conquer­
ors used to wear crowns of laurel, in
token of victory.

LAUREL [Figuratively] is the em­
blem of victory and triumph.

LAUREL [Hieroglyphically] repre­
sents favour and preservation, because
lightening never blasts it as it does o­
ther trees; and upon that account it is
dedicated to Jupiter and Apollo.

LAUREATION [in the universities
in Scotland] the action of taking up the
degree of master of arts.

LAURENTALIA [among the Ro­
mans] festivals or holy-days dedicated
to Laurentia, who was the nurse to
Romulus and Remus.  L.

LAURETS, certain pieces of gold, 
coined A. D. 1619. with the head of
king James I. laureated. The 20 shil­
ling piece was marked with XX, the
10 shilling piece with X, the 5 shilling
piece with V.

LAURIGEROUS [lauriger, L.] wear­
ing a garland of bays.

LAW [laʒe, Sax.]

LAW [among Moralists] is a decree
by which a sovereign obliges a subject
to conform his actions to what he pre­
scribes, or a rule of acting or not act­
ing, set down by some intelligent being, 
or persons having authority for so doing.



Positive LAW [in Ethicks] is that
which proceeds from the sole pleasure 
of the law-giver.

The natural LAW [in Ethicks] is one 
which is exactly fitted to suit with the 
rational and social nature of man; so 
that human kind cannot maintain an
honest and peaceful fellowship without
it.

LAW of Merchants, a special law
peculiar to merchants, and different
from the common law of England;
which is, if there be two joint mer­
chants, and one of them dies, his exe­
cutor shall have the moiety. It is also
called the law of the staple.

LAW-Day [laʒe-dæʒ, Sax.] any
day of open court, but anciently used
of the more solemn courts of a county
or hundred.

LAWS [of Nations] are of two sorts, 
either Primary or Secondary; the Pri­
mary Laws are such as concern embas­
sies, and the entertainment of strangers;
and such as concern traffick, and the
like: The Secondary Laws are such as
concern arms.

LAW, was painted by the ancients
in purple robes, seeded with stars, in a
mantle of carnation colour, fringed with
gold.

LAW [la&wyn;, Sax.] signifies a hill a­
mong borderers.

Law [of Arms] the allowed rules
and precepts of war, as to make and 
observe leagues and truces; to punish 
such as offend in a camp, &c.

LAWS [of Molmutius] the laws of
Dunwallo Molmutius, the 16th king of
the Britains, who began his reign 444
years before the birth of our Saviour.

LAWS of Oleron [so called, because
made at Oleron, an island of France, 
when king Richard was there] certain
laws belonging to sea-affairs.

LAWS Spiritual, the ecclesiastical or
civil laws, according to which the or­
dinary and ecclesiastical judges act in
those causes that come under their cog­
nizance.

LAWING of Dogs, is cutting off
three claws of the fore-feet by the
skin, or the ball of the fore-feet.

LAWLESS [of laʒhe eſſe, Sax.]
illegality, disorderliness; also the con­
dition of an outlawed person.

LAWN [Dooms-Day Book] a plain
between two woods.

LAX [laxus, L.] loose, slack.

LAXAMENT [laxamentum, L.] re­
lease, refreshment, relaxation.

LAXATED [laxatus, L.] loosened, 
&c.

LAXATIVENESS [laxativus, L.]
that is of a loosening or opening qua­
lity.

LAXATION, a slackening, easing;
also a loosening.  L.

LAY, a word signifying moan or
complaint [Old French] a kind of anci­
ent poetry, consisting of very short ver­
ses.

LAY [leẏ, Sax.] a song or poem.

To LAY an evil Spirit, to confine it
that it do not infest houses.

LAY Brother [among the Romanists]
an illiterate person, who does the ser­
vile offices in a convent or monastery;
but is not in any orders, nor makes any
vows, enters not into the choir, and
wears a habit different from the monks,
&c.

LAYER, a place in a Creek, where
small oisters are thrown, which, by the
laws of the admiralty, are to lie there
till a broad shilling, put in between
both shells, may be heard to rattle
when it is shut.

LAZINESS [losigh, Du.] slothfulness, 
sluggishness, idleness.

LEACHEROUS [prob. of leʒer, 
Sax.] lustful.

LEACHERY [prob. of leʒerſcipe 
or leʒer-team, Sax.] lustfulness, lust.

LEAD [leað, Sax.] a metal compos­
ed of an earthy salt and sulphur, im­
pure and ill digested with imperfect
Mercury, coming near to the nature of
antimony. It is the heaviest of all bo­
dies after Mercury; it has the greatest
affinity with gold of any metals in point
of weight. Some authors affirm, that
if a person shall dip his hand in the
juice of water mallows, purslain and
mercury, he may put it into melted
lead without harm; the natural cold­
ness of these juices, and their thickness, 
covering the hand as it were with a
skin. It is easily bent, and as readily
melted, and differs only from iron, in
that the parts lie more close together, 
and more smooth, which makes it so
pliable and heavier than iron.

LEAD-wort, a kind of herb.

Sounding LEAD is a lead of about
six or seven pound
weight, ten or twelve inches long, and
fastened at the end of the sounding Line
or deep Sea Line.

Dead-Sea LEAD is a lead of about
six or seven pound
weight, ten or twelve inches long, and
fastened at the end of the sounding Line
or deep Sea Line.

To heave the LEAD [Sea Phrase] is to
stand by the ship's horse, or in the
chains, and to throw out the lead, and
sound the depth of the water, to know
where the ship may sail; and he that
heaves the lead, sings the depth he
finds.



A LEAF [with Botan.] is defined to
be a part of a plant extended into
length and breadth, in such a manner, 
as to have one side distinguistable from
the other.

A simple LEAF, is that which is not
divided to the middle in several parts, 
each resembling a leaf itself, as in a
dock.

LEAGUE [in France] contains 2282
fathoms or toises, in Spain 3400 geome­
trical paces, in Sweden 5ooo, and in
Hungary 6000.

To stop a LEAK [Sea Term] is to put
into it a plug wrapt in oakum and well
tarred, or in a tarpawlin clout, to keep
out the water, or to nail a piece of
sheet-lead upon the place.

LEAP Year [so called of leaping a
day] consists of 366 days, and returns
every 4th year, the other 3 containing
but 365 days each. The reason of it is, 
the sun not making his annual revolu­
tion in exactly 365 days, but in 365
days, 5 hours, 49 minutes and 16 se­
conds, a day is added to every 4th year, 
to make amends for the 5 hours, 49
minutes, 16 seconds; which is yet too
much.

LEARNING [of leorneſſe, Sax.]
erudition.

LEASE [by Indenture] is letting land
or tenement, right of common, rent, 
or any inheritance, to another for
term of years or life, for a rent reserv­
ed in writing indented.

LEASE Parole, is a lease as above-­
mentioned; but by word of mouth.

LEATHERSELLERS were incorpo­
rated Anno 1382, and
confirmed by several
kings since, and are
the 15th. They are a
master, 3 wardens, 26
assistants, and 167 on
the livery. Their li­
very fine 20 l. and
Their armorial ensigns
are argent, 3 bucks regardant gules.
Crest a buck attired or, attired sable,
supporters a buck as the last, and a ram
of the first. Motto, Soli Deo Honor &c.
Gloria. Their hall is situate on the
east end of Little St. Helens.

Image omitted.



LEAVER [in Mechanicks] one of the
6 principles, is a ballance resting on a
determinate point, called its Hypomocli­
on or Fulcrum, the centre not being in
the middle, as in the common bal­
lance, but near to one end, by which
means it will raise a great weight.

LEAVES [of leafe, Sax.] of a tree
plant, &c.

LECHERWITE [of læʒan to lie
with, and &wyn;ite, Sax. a fine] a fine laid
on those who committed adultery and
fornication.

LECTIONARY, a service book or
missal.

LECTISTERNIA [among the Ro­
mans] a religious ceremony, seldom prac­
tised but upon occasion of some great
and publick calamity: when it was per­
formed the statues of their idol deities
were taken down from their pedestals, 
and laid in the adytum of the temples, 
on beds made for that purpose, with
willows under their heads, and tables
before them; and in this posture they
were magnificently entertained.

There were 3 most stately beds made, 
on which were laid the statues of Jupi­
ter and Apollo, with that of Latona, Di­
ana, Hercules, Neptune and Mercury, to
pacify them. Then all the gates were
opened, and the tables every where fur­
nished with victuals: foreigners either
known or unknown were lodged and
entained gratis; all occasions of hatred
and quarrel were buried in oblivion;
enemies conversed together as friends, 
and all prisoners were set at liberty.

LEDA, daughter of Thestius, and mo­
ther of Castor and Clytemnestra, by her
husband Tyndarus, king of Oebalia, and
of Pollux and Helena by Jupiter, who in
the shape of a swan enjoyed her, as she
was bathing herself in the river Eurotas
and she was afterwards delivered of an
egg, of which they both proceeded.

LEE [of leaʒ, Sax.] whether it
stand at the beginning or end
of a name signifies a field or
pasture; but such a field as is not often
ploughed.

LEG [of leaʒ, Sax.] whether it
stand at the beginning or end
of a name signifies a field or
pasture; but such a field as is not often
ploughed.

LEY [of leaʒ, Sax.] whether it
stand at the beginning or end
of a name signifies a field or
pasture; but such a field as is not often
ploughed.

LEE [Sea language] that part which
the wind blows upon, or is opposite to
the wind, as the Lee shore.

To be under the LEE Shore [Sea term]
is to be close under the wind, or under
the weather-shore.

To come by the LEE [Proverb] is to
come off with loss.

LEE Watch [Sea term] a word of
command to a man at the helm, and is
as much as to say, take care that the Ship
don't go to the Leeward of her Course.

LEECH Worm a kind of insect.

Horse LEECH a kind of insect.

LEED-month [q. loud month, of
hlẏð. Sax. a noise
or uproar] the month of March, so cal­
led on account of the winds being then
high and boisterous.

LEID-month [q. loud month, of
hlẏð. Sax. a noise
or uproar] the month of March, so cal­
led on account of the winds being then
high and boisterous.



LEEDS [Old Rec.] meetings ap­
pointed for the nomination
or election of officers.

LEITS [Old Rec.] meetings ap­
pointed for the nomination
or election of officers.

LEGABLE [legabilis, L.] not intail­
ed as hereditary, but may be bequeathed
as legacy.

LEGALNESS [legalité, F. of legalis,
L.] lawfulness.

LEGATE [legatus, L.] is properly an
envoy or ambassador sent by one prince
or state to another, to treat on some af­
fair; but now the title of Legate is gi­
ven particularly to one that is sent by
the pope to a prince or state, and is
esteemed equal in dignity to the ex­
traordinary ambassador of any other
prince.

LEGEND, the words that are about
the edges of a piece of coin or medal, 
serving to explain the figure or device.

LEGEND [of legenda, L. to be read]
a book used in churches, containing
the lessons to be read at divine service;
and for this reason the lives of saints
were called Legends; because portions
out of them were appointed to be read
to the people at morning prayer.

The Golden LEGEND [in the Romish
Church] a book upon the same subject, 
so called by way of eminence; used
with great applause from the 13th to
the 15th century; but began to be laid
aside about the time of the reformation
in England, by reason of the many ab­
surdities and ridiculous falsehoods con­
tained in it.

LEGION, a body of soldiers among
the Romans, of 5 or 6000 foot, and 4
or 5000 horse.

LEGIBLENESS [legibilis, L.] capa­
bleness of being read.

LEGITIMATENESS [of legitimus, 
L.] lawfulness, rightfulness, legalness;
also a being born in lawful wedlock.

LEMMA [with Geom.] an assump­
tion or preparatory proposition, laid
down to clear the way for some follow­
ing demonstration: Often prefixed to
theorems to render their demonstration
less perplext and intricate; and to pro­
blems in order to make their resolution
more easy and short.

LEMONADE, a drink made of wa­
ter, lemons and sugar.

LEMPET, a sort of fish; a limpin.

LEMURES [q. Remures of Remus, 
whose ghost is said to have appeared to
his brother Romulus, after he was slain 
by him] restless ghosts of departed per­
sons, who returned to torment the li­
ving. The spirits of dead persons, 
whom the Romans thought haunted
houses in the night, and were disposed
to be mischievous.  L.

LEMURIA [among the Romans] the
festival of the Lemures instituted by Ro­
mulus, to the ghosts and phantoms;
which was observed the 9th day of
May, every other night for 3 times, to
pacify the ghosts of the dead; they threw
beans on the fire of the altar to drive
them out of their houses; the temples
were all shut up, and to marry at this
time was accounted unlucky.

To LENEFIE [lenefier, F.] to soften, 
asswage, &c.

LENGTH [in Horsemanship] as to pas­
sage a Horse upon his own Length, is to
make him go round in 2 treads, as a
walk or trot, upon a spot of ground so
narrow, that the haunches of the horse
being in the centre of the vault, his own
length is much about the semi-diameter
of the volt, the horse still working be­
tween the 2 heels, without putting out
his croup, or going at last faster or
slower than at first.

To LENGTHEN [prob. lenʒðen, of
lenʒ, Sax. long] to make longer.

LENITIVENESS [of lenire, L. lenitif, 
F.] softening or assuaging quality.

LENIMENT [lenimentum, L.] a mo­
derating, or that which takes away un­
easiness, harshness, &c.

LENOCINY [lenocinium, L.] the prac­
tice of bawdery.

LENS [in Dioptricks] a glass which
either collects the rays into a point in
their passage thro' it, or disperses them
farther apart, according to the refrac­
tion.

LENT, a settled time of publick fast­
ing and humiliation, most usually con­
sisting in Europe of 40 days; practised
in the Christian church in imitation of
our Saviour Christ's falling in the wil­
derness. This fast was observ'd by the
Greek church for seven weeks, begin­
ning before Easter; but did not fast on
saturdays and sundays; except on that
saturday before Easter sunday. The
Latin church observ'd it six weeks, ex­
cepting only sundays. The Eastern
church were very strict observers of
Lent, eating nothing on it but bread and
pulse, till about the year 700; but in
the year 800 an indulgence was granted
to eat eggs, milk meats, and to drink
wine; but now they only abstain from
flesh.

The custom of keeping Lent was in­
troduc'd into England about the year
650; but since the Reformation has not
been so rigorously enjoined or practi­



sed; and is now almost wholly laid
aside, except by Roman Catholicks, but
is still continued in popish countries
with great rigor.

LENTIFORM Prominences [in Anat.]
protuberances on the Crura medullæ ob­
longatæ, i. e. the two heads or begin­
nings of the marrowy substance of the
brain, gathered together as it were into
two bundles.

LEO, a lion, a wild beast.  L.

LEO [with Astrologers] the fifth in
order of the 12 signs of the zodiack, 
whose character is (♌). This is a no­
ble and illustrious constellation. It is
storied that Jupiter bestowed this ho­
nour on this animal, because he was
accounted the prince of four-footed
beasts. Some say that this was the first
combat of Hercules that is worthy of
commemoration; for Hercules ambitious
of glory, did not only overcome him
without weapons, but choaked him in
a naked embrace. Pisander of Rhodes
writes of him, that he wore the lion's
skin as a trophy of his great atchieve­
ment. This is that lion that he killed
in Nemea.

LEONINE Verses, a sort of Latin
verses that rhime in the middle and end, 
imitating as it were a lion's tail; as, 
Brixia vestratis Merdosa volumina vatis, 
Non sunt nostrates tergere digna nates.

LEONTICA [with the Antients] a
festival and sacrifice, celebrated in ho­
nour of the sun. It was so called of
Leo, a lion, because they represented
the sun in the form of a lion radiant, 
bearing a Tiara, and griping the horns
of a bull in his fore-paws, who in vain
struggled to disengage himself.

LEOPARD [leopardus, L. λεοπαρδα­
λις of λέων a lion, and
παρδαλις, Gr. a panther] a fierce and
cruel wild beast, the skin of which is
spotted with a diversity of colours. It
has small white eyes, wide jaws, sharp
teeth, round ears, a large tail, with 5
claws upon its forefeet, and but 4 on
those behind. It is said to be extreme­
ly averse to man. Its name shews that
it has something of the lion and the
Pardus or male panther, of which and
a lioness or a lion and a female panther
it is said to be engendered.

LIBBARD [leopardus, L. λεοπαρδα­
λις of λέων a lion, and
παρδαλις, Gr. a panther] a fierce and
cruel wild beast, the skin of which is
spotted with a diversity of colours. It
has small white eyes, wide jaws, sharp
teeth, round ears, a large tail, with 5
claws upon its forefeet, and but 4 on
those behind. It is said to be extreme­
ly averse to man. Its name shews that
it has something of the lion and the
Pardus or male panther, of which and
a lioness or a lion and a female panther
it is said to be engendered.

LEOPARD'S Bane [with Botanists] a
sort of herb.

LIBBARD's Bane [with Botanists] a
sort of herb.

LEOPARD [in Heraldry] represents
those brave and generous warriors, who
have performed some bold enterprize,
with force, courage, promptness and
activity.

A LEOPARD [Hieroglyphically] signi­
fied a great hypocrite, or a notable dis­
sembler; because this beast is said craf­
tily to dissemble, and hide its head
from being seen, that it might with less
difficulty catch its silly prey; for the
beasts are said to be as much frighted
at that, as they are taken with the
pleasant scent of his body; when there­
fore they come towards it, to delight
themselves with the perfume that it
yields, it is said to cover its head with
its paws, until they come within its
reach. It also represented an incorri­
gible person, because the spots of it no
art can whiten or remove.

LEORNING Knights [leorninʒ-­
cnitaſ, Sax.] disciples, scholars.

LEPER, a person affected with a di­
sease call'd a leprosy, who by the Mo­
saick law was excluded the conversation
of mankind, and banish'd into the coun­
try and uninhabited places; even Jew­
ish kings were shut out of their palaces
and excluded from society and their
government, as for the cure and cere­
monies of cleansing, read Levit.

LEPROUSNESS [of leprosus, L.] the
being troubled with a leprosy.

LEPUS [with Astron.] the hare, a
constellation. They tell us Mercury
placed this animal among the stars on
account of its swiftness. It seems to
breed the most young of any four-foot­
ed beast; of which, some it brings
forth, and some it has in its womb, as
Aristotle, says in his book of Animals.

LE Roy s'avisera [i. e. the king will
consider] by these words, written on a
bill presented to the king by the par­
liament, is understood his absolute de­
nial of that bill in civil terms, and it is
thereby wholly made null and void.  F.

LE Roy se veut [i. e. the king is wil­
ling] a term in which the royal assent is
signified by the clerk of the parliament
to the publick bills; giving authority
to them, which before were of no
force nor virtue.

LESSEE, the person to whom a
lease is granted.

LESSER Circle [with Astron.] those
which divide the globe into two une­
qual parts, as the polar circles, tro­
picks, and parallels of declination and
altitude.

LESTAGEFRY [leſtaʒe-Freoh, 
Sax.] an exemption from the duty of
paying ballast money.

LETCHEROUS [of leʒer, Sax.] lust­
ful.

LETCHEROUSNESS [prob. of le­
ʒerſcife, Sax.] lustfulness, proneness
to lust.



LETHARGICKNESS [lethargicus, L.
of ληθάργιχος of λήθη, oblivion, and
άργὸς swift, Gr.] the being afflicted with
lethargy.

LETHE. See Lathe.

LETHE [λήθη, Gr. i. e. oblivion or
forgetfulness] a river in Hell, which, 
according to the poets, had the virtue
of making all that drank of it forget all
things past. The ancients had this no­
tion, that after the souls had been a cer­
tain number of years in the Elysian
fields, they were to return into the
world again, and there to live in other
bodies; and that they might be content
to undergo the troubles of a second
life, before their departure they drank
a draught of the river Lethe, whose
water had the virtue to make them
forget the miseries of a former life, 
and what ever passed in those happy
mansions.

LETHIFEROUSNESS [lethifer, L.]
death bringing quality.

LETTERS [by whom invented] the
first letters are said to be the Chaldean, 
which Phito affirms were invented by
Abraham, and used by the Chaldeans, 
Assyrians and Phœnicians: Tho' there
are some that attribute the invention
of letters among the Assyrians to Bada­
manth; but whether these were the 
same that Moses wrote in, is a difficult 
matter to determine. Those Charac­
ters that Moses delivered to the Jews, 
are by some thought not to be the same
now used by the Jews; but that Ezra
was the author of them; but others 
are of opinion, that the law was writ­
ten in the Hebrew character now used.

Greek LETTERS, Linus, a Calcidian, 
is said to have brought letters out of 
Phœnicia into Greece, which were the 
Phœnician characters, which were used 
in Greece, till Cadmus the son of Agenor, 
brought 16 new letters thither, to 
which 16, Palamedes, in the time of the 
Trojan war, added 4 more, to which 
Simonides the Milesian added the other
4, making 24.

Latin LETTERS, Nicostrata Carmen­
tæ, is reported first to have taught the
use of them to the Latins, which cha­
racters have been altered since their
first invention; and supposing that these
Latin letters were used in the most
flourishing times by the Romans, yet the
Roman letters were corrupted by the
Goths, Lombards, Franks, &c.

LETTERS Patents [are so called from
their being open] are writings sealed
with the great seal of England; where­
by a man is authorized to do or enjoy
any thing, that otherwise of himself
he could not do.

LETTERS of respite, a letter issued
out by the king in favour of honest and
unfortunate debtors, against too rigo­
rous creditors, whereby payment is
delay'd for a certain time.

LEVANA, a goddess that had an
altar, and was worshipped at Rome; she
was thought to lift up young children
from the ground. As soon as the infant
was born, the midwife laid it on the
floor; then the father took it up in his
arms and embraced it; and without this
ceremony was performed, the children
were scarce thought legitimate.

LEUCOCHRYSOS [λευχόχρυσος, Gr.]
a sort of jacinth stone, of a golden co­
lour, with a streak of white.

LEUCOGÆA [λευχογαιος, Gr.] a
precious stone of a white colour; cal­
led also Galactites.

LEUCOPHTHALMOS [λευχόφθαλ­
μος, Gr.] a precious stone resembling
the white of an eye.

LEVELLERS, people in Oliver Crom­
wel's army, who were for having an
equal share in the administration of the
government between the nobility and
commonality.

LEVER [in Mechanicks] is one of
the 6 powers; the Lever differs from
the common ballance in this, that the
center of motion is in the middle of a
common ballance; but may be any
where in the Lever.

LEVIATHAN [ןדיול, Heb.] a whale, 
or, as some suppose, a water-serpent
of a vast bigness.

LEVIATHAN [in a Metaphysical
Sense] the devil.

LEVITICAL [Leviticus, L.] belong­
ing to the tribe of Levi, or to the
priests office, which was the peculiar
inheritance of that tribe, under the
Mosaical dispensation.

LEVITY [levitas, L.] lightness, in­
constancy, fickleness.

LEVITY [with Philosophers] is op­
pos'd to gravity.

Absolute LEVITY a quality which
some suppose to
be the cause why bodies that are ligh­
ter in specie than water, do swim up
to the surface of it; but it appears by
experiments, that Gravity and Levity
are only relative, and not comparative
things.

Positive LEVITY a quality which
some suppose to
be the cause why bodies that are ligh­
ter in specie than water, do swim up
to the surface of it; but it appears by
experiments, that Gravity and Levity
are only relative, and not comparative
things. 

LEVITATION, the property directly
opposite to graviation.  L.

LEVITES [of Levi one of the 12
Tribes] principally means men of the
Tribe of Levy, employ'd in the lowest



of the ministerial offices of the taber­
nacle and temple, whereby they were
distinguished from the priests, who be­
ing descendents from Aaron, were like­
wise of the tribe of Levy by Kohath, 
but were employ'd in the higher offices.

Their offices were the study of the
law, singing and playing on instruments
in the temple, and they were the ordi­
nary judges of the country; but always
in subordination to the priests; these
Levites had no portion of land allow'd
them as an inheritance at the division
of the land of Canaan, but in lieu
thereof they had their subsistance from
the tithe of Corn, Fruit and Cattle, 
throughout Israel; out of which they
themselves paid tithes to the priests;
they had 48 cities with pastures, fields, 
gardens, &c. allow'd them for their
habitation, out of which 13 were al­
low'd to the priests, and 6 of these were
privileged places or cities of refuge.

To LEVY [in a Law Sense] is to set
up or erect, as to levy a mill.

To LEVY, is also to cast up or
cleanse, as to levy a ditch.

LEWDNESS, wickedness, debauch­
edness.

LEWIS d'or, a golden French coin
in value 24 livres, now settled at 17 s.
sterling.

LEXICOGRAPHER [λεξιχογράφος, of
λέξις a word, and γράφω to write, Gr.]
a writer or compiler of a lexicon or
dictionary.  L.

John of LEYDEN, alias John Buckhold,
an anabaptist, a subtle, eloquent man, 
well vers'd in the scriptures, by trade
a tailor; having with many others of
his partizans reviled the senate at Mun­
ster and chose another among them­
selves, they siez'd on Maurice church
and burnt it; drove out the inhabitants
and converted their effects to their own
use. While these things were transact­
ing this John of Leyden, feigned himself
dumb, and making signs for a table
book, he wrote down 12 names (as he
pretended) by the command of God, 
who were to be the 12 elders of Israel, 
he assuming the supreme magistracy to
himself, afterwards pretending a com­
mand from God, that he should be
made a king, and was accordingly in­
verted with Regalia, and appointed all
proper officers under him. His titles
were the King of Justice, the King of
the new Jerusalem. He openly profess'd
polygamy, and took 3 wives to himself.

In the year 1536 this mock king being
apprehended, was fastened to a stake, 
and had his flesh pull'd from his bones
piece meal by 2 executioners with red
hot pincers.

LIAR [leoʒore, Sax.] a teller of
untruths.

LIAR [on Ship-board] he who is first
catch'd in a lie on a monday morning, 
who is proclaimed at the main-mast, 
liar, liar, liar; whose punishment is to
serve the under-swabber for a week, 
to keep clean the beak-head and chains.

LIBANOMANCY [λιβανομαντεὶα, Gr.]
a divination by frankincense, which if
it presently catch'd fire, and sent forth
a grateful odour, was esteemed a happy
omen; but if the fire would not touch
it, or any nasty smell, contrary to the
nature of frankincense, proceeded from
it, it was thought to forbode ill.

LIBANUS [λίβανος, Gr. חונבל, Heb.
of mount Libanus, a hill in Syria, 125
miles in length] the frankincense tree
which grows plentifully on that great
mountain.

LIBEL, a little book, a petition or
bill of request.

LIBEL, a writing containing injuries, 
reproaches or accusations against the
honour and reputation of any person.

A Libel in a strict sense, is a malicious
defamation and aspersion of another, 
expressed neither in printing or writing, 
and tending either to blacken the me­
mory of one that is dead, or the repu­
tation of one that is alive; and in a
larger sense any defamation whatsoe­
ver.

LIBELLATICI, certain Christians
in the primitive church so called, be­
cause to save their lives and estates
they procured attestations from the
Heathen magistrates, that they had
obey'd the edicts of the emperors in sa­
crificing to idols, and for this purpose
they either privately by themselves or
by other persons declared, that they
renounced their faith, and so delivered
themselves, either by mony or favour
from the lash of the law, which re­
quired this renunciation to be done in
publick.

The African church refusing to ad­
mit such persons into their communion, 
till after a long series of penance, which
penances being very severe, they fre­
quently address'd themselves to con­
fessors or martyrs to obtain by their
intercessions a relaxation of these
church punishments.

LIBER [of Liber, L. free] profane
authors make mention of several Bac­
chus's or Dionysius's, Cicero names 3; the
first the son of Jupiter and Proserpina; 
the second the son of Nile, who is said



to have kill'd Nysa; the third the son of
Caprius who reigned in Asia, and was
the author of the Labæan laws; the
fourth was the son of Jupiter and the
moon; the fifth the son of Nisus and
Thione; and the son of Jupiter and Se­
mele the most celebrated of them all, 
who was the Theban Bacchus.

The poets give the following account
of his birth: Semele being with child of
Bacchus desired Jupiter to come and vi­
sit her, as he did Juno, that is to say
with thunder and lightening. Jupiter
granted her request; but the splendor
of his appearance was insupportable to
her, she either died of the fright or
was stiffled by the flames Jupiter took
young Bacchus out of Semele's womb, 
and inclos'd him in a hole that he had
made in his thigh, when the time was
come for his production, then Jupiter
took him out and gave him to Mercury, 
who carried him to Nysa in Arabia, 
where he was brought up by the Muses.

Bacchus is the god of wine, some
pretend that he planted the vine, and
taught men to extract the juice of the
grape. He is said to have made several
conquests and performed several jour­
neys into Arabia and to India.

The Ivy is consecrated to him as well
as the vine, and several particulars are
observed in his life, which have per­
suaded some learned men, that part of
his history has been confounded with
that of Moses.

For example: Bacchus is said to have
been the son of the river Nile; that he
was of an uncommon beauty, that he
was shut up in a box and expos'd upon
the water; that he had two mothers, 
and was born out of his father's thigh.

Moses in a certain sense was the son
of Nile, having been expos'd and found
upon the river in a kind of box made
of rushes. He was of an extraordinary
beauty, and had for his first mother the
wife of Amram, and for his second the
daughter of Pharaoh, and the latin ver­
sion of Gen. 45 and 26. is rendred, Egressi
sunt de femore ejus.

Bacchus was bred up by nymphs in
the mountains of Nysa in Arabia; Mo­
ses was brought up by the care of Pha­
raoh's daughter in the land of Goshen
between Egypt and Phenicis, in like
manner as Bacchus in the mountains of
Nysa.

He first made great conquests, and
undertook great voyages. He had Bac­
chanalians in his army advanced as far
as India, and while he was in the light
the Indians were in darkness.

Moses was at the head of the men
and women of his people in Arabia
about mount Sinai, which country is
sometimes call'd the Indies.

The female Bacchanalians who ac­
companied Bacchus with their drums
and cymbals describe very well the fe­
male Israelites who coming out of the
red sea, fell a dancing and playing on
these instruments.

We know that the Egyptians were
for three days in such darkness as might
be felt, whereas the land of Goshen
where the Israelites were there was the
clearest light.

Bacchus is said to have passed the ri­
vers Orontes or Hydaspes dry shod, hav­
ing first struck them with his Thyrsus.

That his ivy rod crawled along when
it was thrown upon the ground. That
the Bacchanals who accompanied this
god, produced water out of a rock by
striking it with the Thyrsus: It is far­
ther added that streams of wine, milk
and honey, were seen to flow, wherever
they passed.

These are particulars that suit so well
with Moses, that it is impossible not to
know him by them.

Bacchus is sometimes represented with
horns. Moses had rays upon his face, 
which in scripture are termed horns.

These and many others, are so many
marks of resemblance borrowed from
the sacred history, and applied to Bac­
chus.

LIBERAL Arts, such as are fit for
gentlemen and scholars; in opposition
to Mechanical Arts: such as depend
more on the mind than that of the
hand; that consist more in Speculation
than Operation, as Grammar, Rhetorick, 
Painting, Sculpture, Architecture, Musick.

LIBERALNESS [of liberalitas, L.]
generosity, bountifulness.

LIBERALIA, festivals in honour of
Bacchus, so called, as some say, of Liber
Bacchus, who being reputed the god of
wine, setting the minds of persons free
from cares: But Varro derives it from
liber, adj. signifying free, because du­
ring this time, the priests were free
from their function. Old women per­
forming the ceremonies and sacrifices
of the Liberalia.  L.

LIBERTAS, liberty, freedom, leave;
a privilege by grant or prescription to
enjoy some extraordinary benefit.  L.

LIBERTAS [among the Romans] the
goddess of Liberty, who had a temple
at Rome, in which she was worshipped
by the Romans, as she was also by the
Greeks, under the names of Eleutheria;



she was represented in the form of a 
virgin, clothed in white, holding in
her right hand a sceptre, and in her
left a hat, with a cat before her.

LIBERTINE [with the Romans] a 
person legally set free from servitude.

LIBERTINE [in the Civil Law] a
person who is manumised and set free
from bondage, to which he was born.

LIBERTINES, a sect spoken of in
the new testament. Some authors sup­
pose them to be the sect of the Jews, 
descended from those who were car­
ried away captive by Pompey, &c. to
Rome, and afterwards recovered their
liberty.

LIBERTINISM, the state of him
that of a slave is made free.

LIBERTINISM [with Divines] is a
false liberty of belief and manners, 
which will have no other dependence
but on particular fancy and passion; a
living at large, or according to a per­
son's inclination, without regard to the
divine laws.

LIBERTY [libertas, L.] a being free
from obligation, servitude or con­
straint.

LIBERTY [of Conscience] a right or
power of making profession of any re­
ligion a man sincerely believes.

LIBERTY to hold Pleas, signifies to
have a court of one's own, and to hold
it before a mayor or bailiff, &c.

LIBERTY [in Ethicks] is a faculty of
the will, by which all requisites of acti­
ons being given, it may chuse one or
more out of many objects propos'd, and
reject the rest: Or, if one object only
be proposed, it may admit that, or not
admit it; may do it, or not do it.

LIBERTY [in Speaking] a free or easy
way of expression.

LIBERTY of the Tongue [in Horseman­
ship] is a void space left in the middle
of the bit, to give place to the tongue
of a horse, made by the bits arching in
the middle, and rising towards the
roof of the mouth. The various form
of this Liberty of the Bit, gives name
to the bit.

LIBIDINOUSNESS [of libidinosus, L.]
lustfulness.

LIBITINA [of libendo, L.] some say
was Proserpina, others will have her to
be Venus; she had a temple in Rome in
which the funeral pomp was kept, and
sacrifices were there offered to her for
the dead: The furniture for the fune­
rals was laid up there, to put persons
in mind of mortality: She also presided
over birth as well as death; the birth
being the first step to death.

LIBITUM at your pleasure
[in Mus. Books] you
may if you please.  L.

Ad LIBITUM at your pleasure
[in Mus. Books] you
may if you please.  L.

LIBLONG, a sort of herb.

LIBRA [with Astron.] one of the 12
signs of the zodiack, whose characte­
ristick is (♎).

LIBRAL [libralis, L.] of or pertain­
ing to a pound in weight or coin.

LIBRARIAN, a person who looks
after a library.

LIBRARII, those persons who sub­
scribed in legible and beautiful cha­
racters, what had been written by the
notarii, in notes and abbreviations.

LIBRATION of the Moon [Astron.]
an apparent irregularity or trepidation
of the moon, by which she seems to li­
brate or shake about her own axis, 
sometimes from East or West, and
sometimes on the contrary.

LIBRATION of the Earth [Astron.]
is that
motion whereby the earth is so retain­
ed in its orbit, as the axis of it conti­
nues constantly parallel to the axis of
the world.

Motion of LIBRATION [Astron.]
is that
motion whereby the earth is so retain­
ed in its orbit, as the axis of it conti­
nues constantly parallel to the axis of
the world. 

LICE. See Louse.

LICENCES [in Painting] are the li­
berties which the artist takes in dispen­
sing with the rules of perspective, and
the other laws of his art.

Poetical LICENCE, is a liberty which
poets takes of dispensing with the ordi­
nary rules of grammar; which licences
were anciently greater to the Greek
poets than are now allow'd.

LICENTIATE, with us is generally
used of a physician, who has a licence
to practice granted him by the college
or bishop of the diocese.

LICENTIOUSNESS [licentiosus, L.]
looseness, lewdness, disorderliness.

LICH Wake [of lice, Sax. a dead
corps, and &wyn;acian, Sax. to watch] the
custom of watching the dead every
night till they were buried.

LICKORISHNESS [of liquoritia, L.]
aptness to lick, taste, or eat tid bits; or
the love of dainties, &c.

LIE [in French Heraldry] is used to
express the strings that are to any thing, 
which the English express by stringed.

To LIE under the Sea [with Mariners]
is said of a ship, when her helm being
made fast a lee, she lies so a hull, that
the sea breaks upon her bow or broad
side.

LIEGE Homage, a vassal who was o­
bliged to serve his lord towards all, 
and against all but his own father.

LIEGANCY [ligeance, F.] most
commonly taken for



a true and faithful obedience of a sub­
ject to a sovereign prince; also the en­
gagement of the sovereign to protect
his subjects; sometimes it is used to sig­
nify the dominion or territory of the
liege lord.

LIGEANCY [ligeance, F.] most
commonly taken for
a true and faithful obedience of a sub­
ject to a sovereign prince; also the en­
gagement of the sovereign to protect
his subjects; sometimes it is used to sig­
nify the dominion or territory of the
liege lord.

LIENTERICK [lientericus, L.] one
that is sick of a lientery.

LIFE, a history or relation of what
a man has done in his life-time.

Animal LIFE the life of living
creatures, consisting
in the exercise of the senses.

Sensitive LIFE the life of living
creatures, consisting
in the exercise of the senses.j 

Vegetative LIFE, the life of trees or
plants, or that faculty by which they
grow.

LIFELESS [lifleaſ, Sax.] without
life, dead; also dull, stupid, &c.

LIFELIKINS, a kind of oath, as Adz
lifelikins, upon or by my life.

LIGAMENTS [ligamenta, L.] those
things that tie or bind one part to ano­
ther.

LIGATURES [in the Greek tongue]
characters made to express two or more
Greek letters together.

LIGATURE [with Surgeons] bandage, 
or fillets of cloth or linnen, for bind­
ing the arm and facilitating the opera­
tion of bleeding.

LIGATURE [with Mystick Divines]
a total suspension of the superior facul­
ties or intellectual powers of the soul.

LIGATURE [with the natives of
Marcassar, Siam, &c.] a kind of bandage
or charm for curing diseases; also a
chain for binding up a woman to a
man, or a man to a woman, so as to
put it out of her power to have to do
with any other man, and out of the
power of the man to have to do with
any other woman; he being thereby
rendred impotent to all other women, 
and all other men impotent to that
woman. Some of their philosophers
pretend that this Ligature may be ef­
fected by the drawing of a knot, the
sticking of a knife in the wall, or the
shutting of a lock at the time the priest
is joining the couple together; and
that it may be dissolved by the spouses
urining thro' a ring.

LIGE [in Horses] a distemper, being
little bladders or pustules under the
lips.

LIGHT [leoht, Sax.] is either the
sensation that rises from beholding any
bright object, as the sun, a lamp, &c.
called primary light; or else it is the
cause of that sensation, as it is an action
or property of that luminous or light
body.

LIGHT [lævis, L.] not heavy; also
quick, nimble; also trifling.

LIGHT [with Astrol.] a planet is said
to be light, i. e. nimble, compared with
those that move slower.

LIGHT upon the Hand [in Horseman­
ship] is said of a horse that has a good
retractable mouth, and does not rest too
heavy upon the bit.

LIGHT Bellied [spoken of a Horse] is
one that has flat, narrow and contract­
ed sides, which make his flank turn up, 
like that of a grey-hound.

Secondary LIGHT, a certain action of
the luminous body on the medium be­
tween that and the eye, by means
whereof one is supposed to act on the
other.

LIGHT [by some] is understood to
mean that action of the Medium, that
is interposed between us and the lumi­
nous object; but others understand it of
that train of rays, which coming forth
from thence pervades the Medium be­
fore it can come to affect the eyes.

To LIGHTEN a Horse [in Horseman­
ship] is to make a horse light in the
forehand, i. e. to make him freer and
lighter in the forehand than behind.

To LIGHTEN [of leoht, Sax.] to
render of less weight.

LIGHTENING [litunʒ, Sax.] a
flashing of light or fire out of the
clouds.

LIGHTNESS [levitas, L. lihtinʒ­
neſſe, Sax.] the want of weight, 
which causes the hasting of a body up­
wards, by reason of its rarity and spi­
rituality, &c.

LIGHTNESS [of leohtneſſe, Sax.]
the opposite of darkness.

LIGHTS [in Ships of War] are of use
by way of distinction. The Admiral of
a fleet carries 3 lights on the poop, and
one on the main-top; the Vice Admiral
carries 2 on his poop and one on his
main top; the Rear Admiral carries 1
on his poop and 1 on his main-top.
The Vice Admiral of each particular
squadron carries only 2 on his poop, 
but none on his main-top; the Rear
Admiral of each squadron carries only
1 on his poop. When the whole fleet
carry their lights, the Rear Admiral
carries 2 lights, the one hoisted a yard
above the other on the ensign staff; and
if it be foul weather and dark night, 
every ship carries a light.

LIGHTS [in Architecture] the open­
ing of doors, windows, and other pla­
ces through which the light has pas­
sage.



LIGHTS [in Painting] those parts of
a piece that are illumined, or that lie
open or exposed to the luminary, by
which the piece is supposed to be en­
lightened, and which, for that reason, 
are painted in light, vivid colours.

LIGNESCENT [of lignum, L. wood]
growing wooden, becoming wood.

LIGURE [so called from its likeness
to Ligurian amber] a precious stone, 
mentioned Exodus xviii, 19.

LIKENESS [ʒelicneſſe, Sax.] re­
semblance.

To LIKE [of ʒelican or licean, Sax.]
to approve of.

LIKELINESS, worthiness to be liked, 
comeliness; also probability.

LIKELIHOOD [of ʒelic-heofað,
Sax.] probability.

LILIACEOUS [liliaceus, L.] of, per­
taining to or like lilies, of the lily kind.

LILITH [היליל, prob. of ליל night,
Heb.] the Jews have a notion that she
was Adam's first wife, and by pronoun­
cing the name of God flew away into
the air. This Lilith they imagine to
be a spectre, that kills or carries away
young children in the night; and there­
fore, as a charm against her, it is a
custom to throw into the four corners
of a chamber, where a Jewish woman
lies in, a paper with these words in it, 
תיליל צוה הוהו םדא, &c. i.e. Adam
and Eve, Lilith, get thee out.

To LIMB [of lim, Sax.] to pull limb
from limb.

In LIMBO, in prison.  L.

LIMBUS [with Mathem.] the limb or
utmost edge of astrolabe, or other
mathematical instrument.  L.

LIMBUS Patrum [according to the
notion of the Roman Catholicks] the
place where the deceased patriarchs re­
sided till the coming of our Saviour;
and also the place where our Saviour
continued, from the time of his death
to his resurrection; and where the souls
of infants who die without baptism are
received; who have not deserved Hell, 
as dying in innocence; nor are fit for
Heaven, because of the imputation of
original sin.

LIME Tree [with Botan.] a tree
bearing sweet flowers; the linden or
teyl-tree.

LIMENTIUS [of limen, L. a thres­
hold] the God of thresholds among the
Romans.

LIMITARY [of limes, L.] belonging
to the limits or bounds.

LIMITS of a Planet [Astron.] the
greatest excursion or distance from the
ecliptick.

LIMNIADES, the nymphs of the
lakes.

LIMOUS [limosus, L.] full of mud.

LIMPNESS, limberness.

LIMPITUDE [limpitudo, L.] clear­
ness, pureness.

LINES [in Military Art] signify the
posture of an army drawn up for a bat­
tle; the front being extended as far as
the ground will allow, to prevent its
being flanked. These lines are 1. the
van; 2 the main body; 3. the rear.

LINE of the two Sysygies [Astron.] a
right line, supposed to be drawn thro'
the centre of the earth and the real
place of the sun.

Equinoctial LINE [in Dialling] is the
common place, where the equinoctial
and the plane of the dial do mutually
intersect one another.

LINE [in Fencing] is that directly op­
posite to the adversary, wherein the
shoulders, the right arm and the sword
should always be found, and wherein
also the 2 feet are to be placed, at a
foot and an half distance from each o­
ther; and in this position he is said to
be in line.

LINEAMENTS [lineamenta, L.] fine
strokes or lines observed in the face, 
and forming the delicacy thereof; or
that which preserves the resemblance
and occasions the relation of likeness
or unlikeness to any other face, or the
features or proportion of the face, 
drawn out as it were in lines.

LINGUACIOUS [linguax, L.] long-­
tongued, blabbing, talkative.

LINGUACIOUSNESS, talkativeness.

LINT [of linen, Sax. or linteum, L.]
fine linnen scraped to a sort of tow.

LINTER [in Anatomy] the inner rim
of the ear, the same as Scapha. L.

LINUM incombustible [i. e. flax that
will not be consumed by burning] a
mineral substance of a whitish silver
colour and of a woolly texture; consist­
ing of small threads or longitudinal fi­
bres, endued with that admirable pro­
perty of resisting fire, and remaining
unconsumed in the most intense heat.
It is called also Amianthus and Asbestos.
See Incombustible Cloth.

LION [leo, L. λεὼν, Gr.] a wild crea­
ture, accounted the king of beasts; his
hair is shaggy, and inclines to a reddish
or deep yellow colour; the fore-part
of his head or face is of a form inclin­
ing to square, his eyes large and fierce, 
his nose flat, his mouth wide, the neck
(if a male) covered with a bushy mane, 
his belly slender; his legs and thighs
large and nervous, his tail large, long



and very strong; his forefeet have 5
claws, his hind feet 4; his tongue is
sharp and armed with 2 rows of rug­
ged points like nails, with which he
licks or tears his meat off the bones;
he stales and ingenders backwards, 
the lioness or female has no mane.

A Lion being looked upon as the king
of beasts, is esteemed the most magna­
nimous, the most generous, the most 
bold, and the most fierce of all four-­
footed beasts; and therefore has been 
chosen by heralds, to represent the 
greatest heroes, who have been endued
with these qualities.

The Lion [Emblematically] is used to
represent vigilancy; some being of o­
pinion, that he never sleeps. And he
also represents command and monar­
chical dominion: and also the magna­
nimity of majesty, at once exercising
awe and clemency, subduing those that
resist, and sparing those that submit.

LION [in Blazonry] in blazoning a
lion, their teeth and talons must always
be mentioned, they being their only
armour, and are in coat armour for
the most part made of a different colour
from the body of a beast; and there­
fore speaking of their teeth and talons, 
you must say they are armed so and so.

A LION [Hieroglyphically] wiping
out with his tail the impressions of his
feet, was a representation of the great
Creator, covering over the marks of
his divinity by the works of nature, and
hiding his immediate power, by the
visible agency of inferiour beings.

LIONCEL [with Heralds] a small li­
on; so called, to distinguish it from one
that is full grown; for there may be
several lions in a coat, or an ordinary, 
and still be of their full size; but the
Lioncel is express'd to be but a little
lion.

LIONNE [in French Heraldry] signifies
rampant, when they speak of a leopard
in that posture, which they say is pecu­
liar to the lion.

LIQUABILITY capableness of
being melted.

LIQUABLENESS capableness of
being melted.

LIQUATION [with Apothe­
caries] an ope­
ration, by which a solid body is reduced
into a liquid: or the action of fire or
heat on fat, fusible bodies, which puts
their parts into motion.

LIQUEFACTION [with Apothe­
caries] an ope­
ration, by which a solid body is reduced
into a liquid: or the action of fire or
heat on fat, fusible bodies, which puts
their parts into motion.

LIQUEFIABLE [liquabilis, of lique­
fio, L.] capable or easily to be melted.

LIQUESCENTNESS [of liquescens, 
L.] aptness to melt.

LIQUID Effects and Debts, are such
as are not really existing; but such as
there can be no dispute about.

LIQUIDNESS [of liquidus L.] liquid
quality; the property of fluidity or qua­
lity of wetting other bodies immerged
in it.

LIQUIDS [with Philosophers] such bo­
dies which have all the properties of
fluidity; the small parts of which are so
figured and disposed, that they stick to
the surface of such bodies as are dipt in
them; which is usually called wetting.

LIQUIDATED [liquidatus, L.] made
moist or clear; also spoken of bills made
current or payable; payed off, cleared,

LIQUIDATION, an ascertainment
of some dubious or disputable sum; or
of the respective pretensions which 2
persons may have to the same liquid or
clear sum,

LIQUIDATION [in Trade] the order
and method which a trader endeavours
to establish in his affairs.

LISIERE [in Fortification] the same
as Berme or Foreland.

LISTLESNESS [q. lustlesness] want of
will or inclination.

LISTED [of lez or lesiere, F.] having
or being made of, or resembling the list
of cloth. Milton.

LISTENING [hlyſtan, Sax.] is said
to be performed by extending or bra­
cing the tympanum of the ear, which
puts it into such a condition, as that it
will be more affected by any tremulous
motion of the external air.

To enter the LISTS [of lice, a list]
is to engage in a fight or dispute.

LITANY [of λιτανεία, Gr.] a general
supplication or prayer, sung or said in
churches; especially one in the com­
mon prayer book of the church of Eng­
land, appointed to be said or sung on
certain days.

LITANY [litania, L. of λιταί, Gr.
prayers] are supplications and publick
prayers, used in a solemn manner, to
invoke God and the saints for mercy;
used in processions in popish countries, 
on Corpus Christi day; and in several
countries and towns on various days.

LITÆ [λιταί, Gr. prayers] the
daughter of Jupiter, or mediators be­
twixt Gods and men, for obtaining what
was desired either of Gods or men;
they are represented lame, wrinkled, 
and squint-eyed; which is meant of
prayers; lame, as not immediately
granted; squint-eyed, as looking to by
ends; and wrinkled, as requiring la­
bour and assiduity.

LITERALNESS [of literalis, L.] the
being according ro the letter.



LITHARGE [of λίθος, a stone and
άργυρος Gr. silver] a sort of scum or dross
that arises from the purifying of gold
and silver with lead, the common sort
is only the lead it self, blown by the
blasts of very large bellows, off the
tests in refining furnaces, where they
are extracting silver out of lead; which
is effected in the following manner.

Having duly prepared the test, and set
it into the furnace, and the lead design­
ed to be refined having first been assay'd, 
it is put into the test by degrees, and
then melted or fused by a strong fire
blown with bellows, upon which it runs
down upon the middle of the test, and
the bellows being kept continually
blowing, the upper part is forced out
at a hole in the opposite tide of the fur­
nace in the mean time; the silver sepa­
rates, and settles itself in the center of,
the test; and the lead that is blown off
falls into the kiln or hole under the fur­
nace, and becomes a sort of large grain­
ed powder, something like coarse saw-­
dust, and of a colour inclining to red or
yellow; by this operation about one
pound in forty of the lead evaporates.

LITHENESS [liðeneſſe, Sax.] sup­
pleness, limberness.

LITHOIDES [λιθοειδής, Gr.] the bone
of the temples, which in the upper part
toward the sagittal suture, is equally cir­
cumscribed with the scaly agglutinati­
ons; but behind with the parts or addi­
tions of the future lambdoides and the
sixth seam, which severeth the lower
parts thereof from the Sphenoides, and
the fore-part from the upper jaw.

LITHOMANCY [λιθομαντεία of λιθος
and μαντεία, Gr. divination] was a sort
of divination performed by a precious
stone called Siderites, which they wash'd
in spring water in the night by candle­
light; the person that consulted it, was
to be purified from all manner of pollu­
tion, and to have his face covered;
this being done, he repeated divers
prayers, and placed certain characters
in an appointed order, and then the
stone moved of itself, and in a soft gen­
tle murmur, or (as some say) in a
voice like that of a child, returned an
answer.

LITIGIOUSNESS [of litigiosus, L.]
contentiousness, delight in law-suits.

LITORAL Shells [with Naturalists]
such sea shells which are always found
near the shore, and never far off in the
deep.

LITOTES [among Rhetoricians] a fi­
gure, when less is spoken than is in­
tended,  L. as, I do not despise, instead
of, I take delight in. I cannot praise you,
which implies, I have just grounds to
dispraise. I cannot praise you enough, 
I shall never be able to make you a­
mends.

To LITTER [of litiere, F.] to spread
straw for beasts to lye down on; also
to throw things about an house.

LITUITS Skin [in Heraldry] that fur
which consists of one colour alone, is
white, and in doubling is taken for
this skin.

LITTLE [litel, Sax.] small.

LITURGY [λειτουργία, Gr.] is usually
understood of the communion service
of the Greek church, and that which
goes by the name of the mass in the
church of Rome.

The Liturgies are various, according
to the diversities of nations who pro­
fess the Christian religion.

The Greeks have 4 Liturgies, viz.
those of St. James, St. Mark, St. John
Chrysostom and St. Basil; but they ordi­
narily use only the two last; and most
of the eastern people are credulous
enough to believe that those Liturgies
were really compos'd by the persons
whose names they call them by.

There are more Liturgies in the Sy­
riack than in the Greek tongue, the Ja­
cobins reckoning up 40 different ones, 
all in manuscript, to whom they give
as many different names.

The Armenians have their Liturgy in 
the old Armenian language which was
composed, by one of their patriarchs
named John, who liv'd some time after
the council of Calcedon, as Gallanus re­
lates.

The Ethiopian Liturgy is in the old
Ethiopick tongue, tho' both they and
the Syrians call their Liturgy, Chaldaick.

The Nestorian Liturgies are in Syri­
ack.

The Liturgies of the Coptick are in
Coptic or Egyptian, which is now scarce­
ly understood by any body; and for
that reason there is an Arabick version
in their manuscript copies.

The Maronites have 12 Liturgies in
their missal, which they printed at
Rome in 1592.

LITURGY, anciently the Liturgies
consisted of very few ceremonies and
prayers; but by degrees came to be
greatly clogg'd with superstitious repe­
titions.

The English LITURGY was first com­
pos'd, approv'd and confirm'd by parli­
ament in the year 1548, and the offices
for morning and evening are still in the
same form that they were put in at



first; except that there was no confes­
sion nor absolution; the office begin­
ning with the Lord's-prayer, and the 10
commandments were omitted in the
communion service; the offertory was
made of bread and wine mixt with
water, and in the prayer for the church
of Christ, thanks were given to God
for his wonderful grace declared in his
saints, the blessed Virgin, patriarchs, 
prophets, apostles and martyrs; and
they commended the saints departed to
the mercy of God and peace.

Liturgies are different, according to
the different nations and religions in
the world.

LITUUS [with Medalists] a staff
used by augurs in form of a crosier.

To LIVE [Sea Term] is to endure
the sea.

LIVELINESS [lifelicneſſe, Sax.]
vivaciousness, &c.

LIVE-long, an herb.

LIVELIHOOD [of life and heafoð, 
Sax. the head] a way of living.

To stand at LIVERY is to be kept at
livery stables.

LIVERY [in Deed] is when the Feof­
fer takes the ring of the door, or a
twig, or a turf of land, and delivers it
to the Feoffee, in the name of the Seizin
of the land.

LIVERY [in Law] is when the Feof­
fer says to the Feoffee, being in the
view of the house or land, I give you
yonder house and land to you and to your
heirs, and therefore enter into the same, 
and take possession of it accordingly.

LIVIDNESS [of lividus, L.] black
and blueness.

LIVOR [with Surgeons] a kind of
leaden or dead bluish colour in any part
of the body, caused by a stroke or
blow.  L.

LIXIVIATE Salts [with Chymists]
the fixed salts of plants, drawn by cal­
cining the plant, and then making a lye
of ashes and water.

LIZARD [lizarde, F. lacerta, L.] a
little creeping creature, of a green co­
lour, much like an evet, but larger,
very common in Italy and other hot
countries.

LOADSTONE [prob. of læðan to
lead, and ſtan, Sax. a stone, q. d. lead­
ing-stone] is digged out of iron mines, 
the virtues of it are,

1. That when it is in a free position, 
without any thing to hinder it, it will
direct itself to the poles of the world.
2. It will draw another loadstone to
itself, and sometimes also will repel it.
3. By being touch'd with iron, it
communicates to it not only the vir­
tue, which itself has of pointing to the
poles of the world, but also that virtue
by which it attracts iron; so that ten
or a dozen needles, or as many buckles, 
may be made to hang together like a
chain.

A loadstone being made thoroughly
hot in the fire, loses its attractive vir­
tue.

Some authors write, that by the help
of the magnet or loadstone, persons
may communicate their minds to a
friend at a great distance; as suppose
one to be at London, and the other at
Paris, if each of them have a circular
alphabet, like the dial-plate of a clock, 
and a needle touched with one magnet, 
then at the same time that the needle
at London was moved, that at Paris
would move in like manner, provided
each party had secret notes for divid­
ing words, and the observation was
made at a set hour, either of the day
or of the night; and when one party
would inform the other of any matter, 
he is to move the needle to those let­
ters that will form the words, that
will declare what he would have the
other know, and the other needle will
move in the same manner. This may
be done reciprocally.

LOAMINESS, fulness of loam, or
loamy nature.

LOBES [with Botan.] the division of
the bulk of seeds, which usually consists
of two parts, as is plainly seen in beans, 
peas, &c.

LOBSTERS [Hieroglyphically] two
lobsters, fighting one with another,, re­
presented sedition in a common-wealth;
and because land-lobsters are said to be
great enemies to snakes and serpents, 
therefore the Egyptians put them to sig­
nify a man of temperance, who sup­
presses his lusts and wicked affections, 
that are most dangerous serpents to his
soul.

LOBULE [Anat.] a little lobe.

LOCAL Problem [with Mathemat.] is
such an one as is capable of an infinite
number of different solutions, as where
the point which is to solve the problem
may be indifferently taken within a cer­
tain extent, i. e. any where, in such a
line, or within such a plane or figure, 
&c. which is termed a geometrical Lo­
cus, and the problem is said to be a local
or indeterminate one.

LOCAL Customs, are those peculiar
to some lordship or other district, and
not agreeable to the general customs of
the country.



LOCALNESS, the being of a thing
in a place.

LOCK [of a river] is a place where
a current or stream is stopp'd by flood-­
gates, or to reserve a quantity of water
in a canal or reservoir, to swell and in­
crease the natural depth and course of
the river; and render it fitter for the
bringing down loaded barges, lighters, 
&c.

LOCK, an humorous word for chance, 
as he stands a queer lock, i. e. he has but
an indifferent chance.

LOCK [with thieves] a person who
buys or receives their stollen goods.

LOCKS [for Horses] are pieces of lea­
ther about the breadth of two fingers, 
turned round and stuffed on the inside, 
to prevent their hurting the pasterns, 
about which they are clapp'd.

LOCUS Primarius, i. e. the primary
place [with Philos.] is that part of the
absolute and immoveable space of exten­
ded capacity to receive all bodies which
a particular individual body takes up.

LOCUS Secundarius, i.e. the secundary.
place [with Phil.] is that apparent and
sensible place, in which we determine
a body to be placed, with respect to o­
ther adjoining or neighbouring bodies.

LOCUS Geometricus, a line by which
an indeterminate problem is solved.
Thus if a right line suffice for the con­
struction of the equation, it is called
Locus ad rectum; if a circle, Locus ad
circulum; if an ellipsis, Locus ad Ellip­
pam, &c.

LOCUST [locusta, L.] a mischievous
insect, that eats up and spoils all green
plants.

LODEMERGE [in the laws of Ole­
ron] the skill or art of navigation.

LODE-WORKS [in the stannaries or
tin mines in Cornwall] works performed
in the high grounds, by sinking deep
wells, call'd shafts. See Stream works.

LODGING [of ʒeloʒian, Sax. or
loger, F.] a place of habitation or re­
pose for a time.

LOGARITHMICK Spiral [with Ma­
them.] is a sort of Spiral line, which
may be conceived to be form'd much
after the manner with other spirals.
As supposing the radius of a circle to
move uniformly through the circumfe­
rence, while a certain point moves
from the extremity of this radius to­
wards the center, with a motion retar­
ded in a geometrical proportion; the
mark of this point will form the loga­
rithmical spiral.

LOGICAL Division, is an oration or
speech, explaining a thing part by part.

LOGICALNESS, argumentativeness, 
the being according to the rules of lo­
gick.

LOGICIAN, one skilled in the art of
logick.

LOGICK [λογιχὴ of λόγος, Gr.] is the
art of guiding our reason in the know­
ledge of things; as well for our own
instruction, as that of others. It con­
sists in the reflection which men have
made on the four principal operations
of the mind, viz. conceiving, judging, 
reasoning and disposing.

LOGODÆDALY [logodædalia, L. of
λόγος, Gr. a word, and Dædalus] a good­
ly shew and flourish of words, without
much matter.

LOGODÆDALIST [logodædalus, of
λογοδαίδαλος, Gr.] an inventor or for­
ger of new words, and strange terms.

LOGOGRIPHE [of λογος a word,
and γριφος, Gr. a net] a kind of symbol
or riddle propos'd to students for a so­
lution, in order to exercise and improve
the mind. It is for the most part some
equivocal allusion, which being taken 
literally, signifies something quite diffe­
rent from what is intended by it.

LOIMOGRAPHER [of λοιμὸς a pesti­
lence, and γράφω, Gr. to describe] one
who writes about, or describes pesti­
lences.

LONCHITES, a comet, which bears
resemblance to a lance or spear; the
head being of an oval form, the stream
of its rays, or the tail, being long, 
thin, and pointed at the end.

LONG-Jointed [spoken of a Horse] is
one whose pattern is slender and pliant.

LONG-WORT, the herb Angelica.

LONGITUDINAL, extended length­
wise.

Keep your LOOF, is a direction to the
man at the helm to keep the ship near
the wind.

LOOF Tackle [in a Ship] a small tackle
serving to lift all small weights in and
out of a ship.

A LOOK, a casting the eye, beholding, 
seeing; a form of countenance, as an
angry look.

LOOKING GLASSES were sometimes
used by magicians in their superstitious
and diabolical operations; and there are
those who affirm that Solomon and Alex­
ander had some of them, by the help of
which they knew all things natural, and
sometimes even supernatural things.

The way of divining by looking-glas­
ses was known among the ancients.

It is said they would hood-wink the
eyes of a child, and notwithstanding he
should shew in a looking glass what



people had a mind to be acquainted
with.

The sorcerers of Thessaly, who boasted
that they could draw down the moon, 
wrote the particulars, upon which they
were consulted on a looking glass, and
he who consulted them read the answer;
not upon the looking-glass, but in the
moon; which was said they procured to
descend from Heaven.

Pausanius speaks of a looking glass, 
made use of in order to know whether
sick persons should recover or not.
The looking glass was fastened to a
pack-thread, and let down gently to the
surface of the water, so that the circle
or extremity, or the edge of it touch­
ed the water; then they presented their
prayers, with burning incense to the
goddess, and in the looking glass, they
are said to see the sick persons in the
condition in which they were to be after
their sickness, either dead or in health.

Looking glasses were antiently made
of brass finely polished, and frequently
of a round or oval form.

LOOP [in the Iron Works] about 3
quarters of a hundred weight of iron:
melted and broken off from a sow, in
the fire of the finery.

Shingling the LOOP, is the breaking
off this loop from the sow, and working
it into a bloom.

LOOSE Strife, willow herb or wil­
low-weed, which is so called by country
people, because there goes a tradition
of it, that if it be held to cattle when
fighting, it will part them.

LOQUACIOUSNESS [loquacitas, L.]
talkativeness.

LORD in Gross [being a private per­
son] is when a man makes a gift in tail
of his lands, to hold of him and dies, 
his heir is said to have but a seignory or
lordship in gross.

LORD, a mock word or name given
to men or boys, who are hunch-back'd.

LORD [with Astrologers] that planet
that has most testimonies of fortitude
in a revolutional figure.

LORD of the year [with Astro1ogers]
the planet that has the greatest strength
in a figure of a persons nativity, and so
becomes the principal significator of his
temperament, manners, affections, &c.
called thence Lord of the Geniture.

LORETTO, is seated upon an emi­
nence, about a league and half from
the gulf of Venice. The Roman Catho­
licks, believe that the chappel is that
which was the house of the Virgin Ma­
ry at Nazareth, and that it was brought
to that place by angels.

They tell us, that the Christians being
driven out of Palestine, about the year
1291; this house whole, except the foun­
dation, was taken up by angels and
brought to Dalmatia, which is about 800
leagues from Nazareth, and about mid­
night was set upon an hill, which was
the cause of great admiration; while it
stood there the minister of a neighbour­
ing place called St. George Tersacte, had
a revelation that this was the chapel of
Nazareth, upon which the governour
sending 4 persons of character to Naza­
reth, to examine into the truth of the
fact; they at their return affirmed that
they had measured the foundation of
the walls, and they answered exactly to
the measure of the chapel, and that the
chapel had disappeared that very day at
Nazareth, on which it was first seen in
Dalmatia.

This chapel having stood 3 years and
7 months in Dalmatia, was in the year
1294 taken up again by angels, and
transplanted over the Adriatick sea, in
length 150 miles and set down in a wood
belonging to one Lauretta, and that af­
ter it had stood there 8 months it had
another remove to an eminence, at a­
bout the distance of a league and half, 
and placed upon ground that belonged
to 2 brothers, who each claimed the
property of the chapel; and to put an
end to this dispute the angels about 4
months after gave it another remove
to the place where it now stands.

The treasure and wealth of this cha­
pel is said to be inestimable, there are
continually 10 golden lamps and 40 sil­
ver ones burning: An infinite number
of jewels, golden angels, cups of sap­
phire, crowns set with diamonds; and
an inconceivable quantity of massy gold.

LOREY, an article in the chamber of
accounts in France, which ordains, that
if a combat be accepted, and afterwards
taken up by the consent of the lord of
the fee, each of the parties shall pay 2s.
6d. and the party overcome forfeit 112
shillings.

LORIMERS [prob of lorum, L. a
thong or bridle] a
company of artificers, who make horse
bits, spurs, &c. and other things for hor­
ses,

LORINERS [prob of lorum, L. a
thong or bridle] a
company of artificers, who make horse
bits, spurs, &c. and other things for hor­
ses, 

LORIMERS, were
incorporated about the
year 1488, and are a
master, 2 wardens, a­
bout 50 assistants and
no livery. Their ar­
morial ensigns are a­
zure on a chevron ar­



gent between 3 curbits or, as many bosses
sable. Their hall is on London-wall.

Image omitted.



LOSS [of leſan, Sax. to lose] losing, 
damage.

LOTE Tree [lotos, L. λωτὸς, Gr.] a
tree, bearing broad jagged leaves, full
of veins, the upper part being green, 
and the other whitish.

LOTHERWIT, a penalty or fine
anciently imposed on those that com­
mitted adultery or fornication.

LOTHSOMNESS [laðianſom, Sax.]
hatefulness, nauseousness.

LOTIONS [in Med.] remedies that
are of a kind between a bath and a fo­
mentation, used to wash the head or
any part affected.

LOTTERY [lotteria, Sax. lotte­
rie, F.] a play of chance, in the nature
of a bank, wherein are put tickets for
sums of money, mixt with many more
blank tickets, which tickets being mixt
together, and drawn at a venture, each
person has the value of the lot drawn
to the number of his ticket. There
are also lotteries of goods, which are
much after the same manner.

LOVAGE, an herb.

LOVE [in Ethicks] is a friendly mo­
tion to mankind; but the moralists
tell us, must not be thrown away on an
ill object, nor procure base and un­
worthy fuel to its flames, nor hinder
the exercise of other duties.

Family of LOVE, a sect which sprang
up first in Holland, but afterwards ap­
pear'd in England, in the year 1580;
and under the pretence and shew of
great sanctity gain'd proselytes among
the common people; and in order to
appear the more particular, they used
many odd and out of the way expres­
sions; some of their opinions were, 
That none were elect, but those that were
admitted into their family; and that it
was lawful for them to swear to an un­
truth before a magistrate, for their own
conveniency, or before any other person
who was not in their society.

These notions were maintain'd and
spread in books written in Dutch, and
afterwards were translated into English, 
entitled, The Gospel Kingdom. Docu­
mental Sentences. The Prophecy of the
Spirit of Love; and the publishing of the
Peace upon Earth; By H. N. who tho'
a long time conceal'd, was at last
found to be one Henry Nichols of Lon­
don, who affirmed that he did partake
of God, and God of his human na­
ture; these books were burnt by order
of queen Elizabeth, who using also
some severities towards the professors, 
they dwindled away.

LOVE Socome, a grinding of corn at
their lord's mill freely, out of love to
their lord.

LOVE, the name of a certain flower.

LOVE Apple, a root in Spain, that
inclines to a violet colour.

LOVELINESS [in lufelic and neſ­
ſe, Sax.] quality deserving love.

LOVELY [lufiʒentlice, Sax.] ami­
able.

LOVER, a tunnel in the roof or top
of the house to avoid smoke.

LOUND [lounð, Sax.] signifies a plain
among trees.

LOUSY [luſiʒ, Sax.] infested with
lice.

LOUSINESS, lousy condition, a be­
ing infested with lice.

LOW-COUNTRIES, several provin­
ces of Germany, lying next the sea, which
by time and great pains have been
much enlarged by damming and bank­
ing out the sea, and the great rivers
the Rhine, the Scheld, the Meuse and
the Issel, more and more by degrees to
prevent their inundations, which are
the most threatening when the north
west wind drives violently upon the
coast when the rivers overflow their
banks, and when the tides, of the new
and full moon happen at the same time;
when these three circumstances happen
together, the waters swell so as to threa­
ten the destruction of the whole coun­
try.

And accordingly great damages have
been done at times by inundations, such
as could never be repaired; the last
great one happened in the year 1682, 
when the several damages in all the
provinces were computed at 100 milli­
ons; and by which the prince of orange
lost an estate of 50000 crowns per an­
num.

LOWING [of hlofan, Sax.] bellow­
ing like a cow, &c.

LOWRING [loeren, Du.] frowning, 
looking sowr or grim, also beginning
to be overcast with clouds.

LOWWINES [with Distillers] are
the whole quantity of spirit, weak, and
small, mix'd together.

LOYAL [spoken of a Horse] a horse
is said to be loyal, who freely bends all
his force in obeying and performing
any manage he is put to; and does not
defend himself, nor resist, altho' he is
ill treated.

LOYAL mouth [of a Horse] an excel­
lent mouth, of the nature of such
mouths, as are usually called mouths
with a full rest upon the hand.



LOYALNESS [loyauté, F.] fidelity, 
faithfulness; especially to a sovereign
prince or state.

To LOYTER, to tarry, to stand tri­
fling, to spend time idly.

LOZENGE, a square cake made of
preserved herbs, in the shape of a dia­
mond cut, or quarrel of glass.

LOZENGE [in Heraldry]
is used to contain the coat
armour of all unmarried
gentlewomen and widows, 
as some say, because it is
the figure of the ancient
spindle; or, as others say, because the
shields of the Amazons were of that
form: It is the form or shape of a pane
of window-glass, before the square
came so much in fashion, and has two
obtuse angles, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



LOZENGE [in Heral­
dry] is a 
shield or an ordinary of all
lozenges, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



LOZENGY [in Heral­
dry] is a 
shield or an ordinary of all
lozenges, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



LOZENGE [in Geometry]
a figure, the two opposite
angles of which are acute, 
and the other two obtuse, 
as in the figure.

Image omitted.



LUBRICIOUS [lubricus, L.] slippery, 
uncertain, not conclusive; as a lubrici­
ous Hope, a lubricious Argument, &c.

LUBRICIOUSNESS [lubricitas, L.]
slipperiness, uncertainty, fickleness.

LUCARIA [of lucus, L. a wood or
grove] a festival celebrated by the Ro­
mans in a wood, where they retired
and concealed themselves, after they
had heen defeated, and were pursued
by the Gauls.

LUCENT [lucens, L.] bright, shining.

LUCERN, a wild beast in Russia, al­
most as big as a wolf; the skin of which
has a very rich fur, of colour between
a red and brown, and something mailed
like a cat, intermixed with black spots.

LUCID Intervals, the fits or pa­
roxysms of mad persons, wherein the
phrensy leaves them in possession of
their reason.

LUCIDNESS [luciditas, L.] bright­
ness.

LUCIFER [according to the Poets]
the son of Jupiter and Aurora.

LUCIFER [with Astronomers] the
bright star Venus, which in a morning
goes before the sun, and appears at the
break of day, and in the evening fol­
lows the sun, and is then call'd Hesperus
or the evening star.

LUCIFERIANS, a name given to
the adherents of Lucifer or Cagliari: St.
Austin says that he had read, they held
the soul's propagation from the parents;
but could not assure the truth thereof.
These sectaries were in being in the
time of Theodosius the great.

LUCIFEROUS Experiments [among
Naturalists] such experiments as serve
to inform and enlighten the mind, as to
some truth or speculation in philoso­
phy, physick, &c.

LUCIFUGOUS [lucifugus, L.] that
shuns the light.

LUCIGENOUS [lucigena, L.] born
or begotten in the day time.

LUCINA [with the Poets] a name of
Juno; or, as others say, of Venus, sup­
posing her to assist women in labour, 
whom they invoked for a safe delivery.

LUCKINESS [of luck, Du.] fortu­
nateness.

LUCKY, fortunate.

LUCRATIVENESS, gainfulness.

LUCRATIVE Interest [in Civil Law]
is such as is paid, where there hath
been no advantage made by the debtor, 
and no delay nor deceit in him.

LUCRIFICK [lucrificus, L.] gaining, 
making gain.

LUCTIFEROUSNESS [luctifer, L.]
sorrowfulness or mournfulness.

LUCTIFICK [luctificus, L.] causing
sorrow or mourning.

LUDICROUSNESS [of ludicrus, L.]
sportiveness; triflingness.

LUDI compitales [among the Romans]
were solemnized in the Compitæ, i. e.
the cross-ways and streets. Servius
Tullius instituted them in honour of the
houshold gods or familiar spirits, it be­
ing given out he himself was begotten
of one of the Genii.

LUFF [Sea Term] See Loof.

LUGUBRIOUS [lugubris, L.] mourn­
ful, sorrowful.

LUKEWARMNESS [&wyn;læc-&wyn;earm
and neſſe, Sax.] a being between hot
and cold; indifference, regardlesness.

LUMINARIA [in the ancient Wes­
tern churches] the name of the time of
the nativity of our blessed Saviour, cal­
led Christmass.  L.

LUMINARY [luminaire, F. luminare, 
L.] a light body, or body that gives
light; as the sun, and moon, which are
stiled Luminaries by way of eminency, 
because of their extraordinary bright­
ness, and the great quantity of light
that they afford.

LUMINOUSNESS [of luminosus, L.]
lightness, fulness of light.

LUMPISHNESS [of lompsch, Du.]
a being in lumps or clods; also dulness,
heaviness.



LUNA [with Astrol.] the moon, cal­
ed Feminine and Nocturnal; because, 
borrowing her light from the sun, she
excels in passive qualities and moisture.

LUNA [in Heraldry] the
moon, is used, by such as
blazon the arms of mo­
narchs by planets, instead
of metals and colours, for
Argent or Silver; because
the moon is the second re­
splendent planet to our sight, as silver
is the second in value among metals.
And some heralds have accounted this
way of blazon proper to distinguish the
arms of sovereigns and those of sub­
jects. See the figure.

Image omitted.



LUNA [in the Pagan Theology, &c.]
is said to be the daughter of Hyperion
and Thea, but others say the daughter
of the Sun, the wife of the Air and mo­
ther of the Dew.

They tell us of a time when there
was no moon, and that there was a
king in Arcadia called Proselenus [i e.
before the moon] who was before her, 
and she appeared a little time before
Hercules encountered the giants.

The poets represent her in a party-­
coloured garment, to shew her various
aspects.

A black bull was sacred to her, to
intimate that she is black and horned
after her change.

The Egyptians held her to be both
male and female, and therefore men
sacrificed to Venus under the name of
Luna in the habit of a woman, and wo­
men in mens.

The inhabitants of Caran in Mesopo­
tamia, had this notion, that such as be­
liev'd the moon to be a goddess, would
be slaves to their wives as long as they
lived; but those who believed her to
be a god would be their masters.

They imagin'd when the moon was
eclipsed, she was brought down to the
earth by the charms of magicians, and
the method they had to recover her, 
was by beating drums and brazen in­
struments, which being louder than the
charms, might abate their force upon
her.

LUNA [in Astronomy] the lowest of
the 7 planets next to the earth, Feminine
and Nocturnal, is an opake body, ha­
ving no light in herself; but borrow­
ing it from the sun, by reflecting his
light to us. She compleats her course
in 27 days, 7 hours and 41 minutes: but
requires 29 days 12 hours and 44 mi­
nutes before she overtakes the sun.

Hence arises a threefold month,

1. Of peragration or periodical month, 
in which she finishes her revolution.

2. Synodical month, i. e. the space of
time from her parting from and re­
turning to the sun.

3. Illumination month, which is the
time she is visible, which is about 26
days 12 hours.

LUNA [with Astrologers] is said to be
Feminine and Nocturnal, excelling in
passive qualities and moisture, prevails
over the brain, bowels, &c. and it is
found by experience that persons who
are afflicted with madness, the fits are
more extraordinary and more or less
violent on the periodical returns of the
tides, and as the moon increases or de­
clines.

LUNAR Cycle [with Astron.] is a pe­
riod or revolution of 19 years, invented
to make the lunar year agree with the
solar: So that at the end of this revo­
lution of 19 years, the new moons hap­
pen in the same months, and on the
same days of the month as they did 19
years before; and the moon begins
again her course with the sun. This
lunar cycle is also called the Golden
Number; the Circulus Decennovenalis;
also Eunedecateris, and Circulus Metoni­
cus, of Meton the Athenian, who first in­
vented it.  L.

LUNARY [lunaris, L.] belonging to
the moon.

LUNATICKNESS, lunacy, distract­
edness, madness.

LUNATED [lunatus, L.] crooked, 
like a half moon.

LUNE [with Geo­
metricians]
planes in form of a cres­
cent or half moon, termi­
nated by the circumfe­
rence of two circles which
intersect each other within, as in the
figure.

Image omitted.



LUNULE [with Geo­
metricians]
planes in form of a cres­
cent or half moon, termi­
nated by the circumfe­
rence of two circles which
intersect each other within, as in the
figure.

Image omitted.



L'UN en l'autre [Heraldry]
i. e. the one in the other, 
F. is the same that the Eng­
lish call counterchanged, 
and is when the escutcheon
is parted of two colours, 
and the charge extends over both; that
charge has the upper half, or metal of
the lower part of the escutcheon, and
the lower part of the colour or metal
of the upper; or if Party per pale, then
one side is of one colour, and the other
of another, answering to the two sides
of the field. See the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



LUNES [with Falconers] leashes or
long lines to call in hawks; called also
lowings.



LUNETTE [with Horsemen] a half
horse-shoo; a shoo without the spunges
(the part of the branches which runs
towards the quarters of the foot are so
called).  F.

LUNETTES [in Fortif.] are enve­
lopes, counter-guards or mounts of
earth cast up before the courtin, about
five fathom in breadth, of which the
parapet takes up three. They are
usually made in ditches full of water, 
and serve to the same purpose as Faus­
Brays; they are composed of two faces, 
which form a re-entring angle; and
their platform, being no more than 12
foot wide; is a little rais'd above the
level of the water, and hath a parapet
three fathom thick.  F.

LUNETTES [with Horsemen] two
small pieces of felt made round and
hollow, to clap upon the eyes of a vici­
ous horse, that is apt to bite, or strike
with his fore feet; or that will not suf­
fer his rider to mount him.  F.

LUNI-SOLAR Year [with Astrono­
mers] is one that is composed by mul­
tiplying the cycle of the sun and moon
together, the product of which being
532, shews that those 2 luminaries re­
turn to the same points again in so
many years.

LUPERCALIA [so called, as some
say, of Lupa, a she-wolf, which gave
suck to Romulus and Remus; or, as others
say, of λύχος a wolf, because the chief
employment of Pan, was to drive away
such beasts from the sheep that he pro­
tected] feasts celebrated by the Romans, 
on the 15th of February. The cere­
mony was thus; first a sacrifice was
killed of goats, because Pan was sup­
posed to have goat's feet) and a dog (as
being the necessary companion of shep­
herds) then two noblemen's young sons
were brought to the Luperci, and they
stained their foreheads with the bloody
knife, and others wiped it off with
locks of wool dipped in milk: Then
they cut the skins of the goats into
thongs, and ran about the streets all
naked but their middle, lashing all they
met in their way with the thongs, be­
cause the Romans had happily recovered
their beasts, when they ran in this
manner after the thieves that had stolen
them away; while they were sacrificing
to the god Pan. The young women,
and those that were barren, never en­
deavoured to get out of their way, but
rather to come into it; because they
thought a stroke from them, was a great
helper of conception and delivery.

LUPERCI, the priests of the god Pan.

LURCHING, leaving a person under
some embarassment.

LURE [luerre, F.] a device which
falconers use, made of leather, in the
form of two wings stuck with feathers, 
and baited with a piece of flesh, to call
back a hawk at a considerable distance;
a decoy or allurement.

LURIDNESS [of luridus, L.] black
and blueness, paleness, &c.

LUSTINESS [of lustig, Teut.] strong­
ness of body; also healthiness.

LUSTRABLE [lustrabilis, L.] that
may be purged or purified.

LUSTRAL [lustralis, L.] an epithet
apply'd by the ancients to the water
used in their ceremonies, to sprinkle
and purify the people, cities or armies, 
defiled by any crime or impurity; a
sort of holy water.

LUSTRATION [of luo, L. to pay]
Heathens, Jews and Christians were wont
by these to purify any thing polluted;
either person, house, city, camp, &c.

Sometimes they made use of fire and
fumigations, as well as sacrifices, and
these were either publick or personal.

The Greeks added an Anathema to
these, i. e. a human victim, upon which
they first cast all the imprecations ima­
ginable, and then offered him. See
Lustrum.

Servius was the first who purified
the people, which he did in the follow­
ing manner; he put them into battle
array, and caused a bull and an he-goat
to pass round them 3 times, while he
sacrificed.

LUSTRIFICK [lustrificus, L.] purg­
ing.

LUSTRUM [among the Romans] the
space of five years or rather 50 months;
at the end of which, they from time
to time numbered the people, and pu­
rified the city. Others derive it from
the word lustrare to make a review, 
became the censors review'd the army
once in five years. Varro derives it
from luo to pay, because at the begin­
ning of each five years, they paid tri­
bute, that had been imposed by the se­
nate.  L.

LUTHERANISM, the opinions of
Martin Luther a German divine, who
about the year 1517 began to oppose
the Church of Rome, by preaching a­
gainst the licentious use or rather abuse
of indulgences; which giving great
provocations to the court of Rome, he
proceeded from one point of doctrine
to another; upon which a great many
of the nobility and clergy, as well as



of the laity joining with him, effected
the reformation of several whole elec­
torates and kingdoms. His opinions
are now held by most Protestant church­
es, some few particulars excepted.

LUTHERNS, windows over the
cornice in the roof of a building, stand­
ing perpendicular over the naked of the
wall, and serving to enlighten the up­
per stairs.

LUXATION [with Anat.] is a loo­
sening of the tendons or ligaments, so
that the bones continue not firm in their
natural situation or place; or when a
bone absolutely goes out of its proper
cavity into another place.  L.

LUXURIANCY [luxuria, L.]
abundance, 
as luxuriancy of words.

LUXURIANTNESS [luxuria, L.]
abundance, 
as luxuriancy of words. 

To LUXURIATE [luxuriare, L.] to
abound, to exceed, to grow rank.

LYCAIA, an Arcadian festival, re­
sembling the Roman Lupercalia. It was
first observed by Lycaon, in honour of
Jupiter, sirnamed Lycæus. It was cele­
brated with games, in which the con­
queror was rewarded with a suit of
brazen armour; and a human sacrifice
was offered at this festival.

LYCANTHROPIST [lycanthropus, L.
of λυχάνθρωπος of λύχος a wolf, and
ἄνθρωπος, Gr. a man] one troubled with
the melancholy frenzy, called Lycan­
thropy, with which persons that are
seized, fancy themselves wolves, and
wander in woods and desart places, 
howling like wolves; which is said to
have been caused by the bite of a mad
wolf.

LYCEIA [λυχεία of λύχος, Gr. a wolf]
a festival held at Argos to Apollo, on ac­
count of his delivering the Argives from
wolves that wasted their country.  L.

LYEF-Yeld [lẏef-ẏelð, Sax.] leave
silver, a small fine or piece of money, 
which in the Saxon times, the tenant
paid to the lord of the manour, for
leave to plow or sow, &c.

LYMPHÆDUCTS. See Lymphatick
Vessels.

LYMPHA [with Surgeons] a watery
matter, issuing from sinews that are
pricked, and other wounds.

LYMPHATICK Persons [lymphatici, 
L.] persons frighted to distraction, or
those that have seen spirits or fairies in
the water.

LYRE [lyra, L.] a harp, some of
which are strung with wire, and others
with guts.

LYRICK Verse, &c. are such as are
set to the lyre or harp, apply'd to the
ancient odes and stanza's, and answer
to our airs and tunes, and may be play'd
on instruments.


M

M m, Roman; M m, Italick; M m, 
English; M m, Saxon; Μμ, Greek;
are the 12th letters of the alphabet; and
מם, the 13th of the Hebrew. M, in
English always keeps its sound; so that
n following it, is lost in Autumn, Solemn,
&c.

M [in Astronomical Tables] signifies
meridional or southern.

M [in Law] was a brand or mark
which a criminal, convicted of murder, 
and having the benefit of the clergy, 
was stigmatiz'd, it being burnt on the
brawn of his thumb.

M [in Latin Numbers stands for a
thousand.

M̅ with a dash [with the Ancients]
signified a thousand thousand.

The dash is placed on top of letter M.



M [in Physical Prescriptions] signifies
manipulus or little handful, and at the
end of a doctor's Recipe, for mista, mix
or mingle, or mixtura, a mixture.

M is also us'd as a contraction, as
M. A. Magister Artis.

MA, the name of one of Rhea's maids, 
who tended Bacchus; also Rhea herself
was so called.

MABBED dress'd loosely, carelesly
or slatternly.

MOBBED dress'd loosely, carelesly
or slatternly.

MACARONICKS [among the Itali­
ans] a jumble of words of different
languages, with words of the vulgar
tongue latiniz'd, or put into Latin ter­
minations and forms, as sugarizavit, he
sugared; and Latin words put into the
form of the modern; a sort of burlesque
poetry made out of their language, and
the scraps and terminations of divers
others. The invention is attributed to
one Theophilus Folangi, in the year 1520, 
and to have been so called, of Macarone, 
Ital. a coarse, clownish man, or of the
Italian Macaroons, which are a sort of
worms or cakes, made of unleavened
flower, eggs and cheese, after a clumsy
manner by the peasants; So as the lat­
ter were a Hotch-Potch of various in­
gredients; so were the Macaronicks of
Italian, Latin and French, and adorned
with natural beauties, pleasant jests and
a lively stile.

MACCABEES, a name given to seven
brethren among the Jews, in the time
of Antiochus Epiphanes, and in general
to all these who then suffered persecu­
tion for their zeal and constancy, in de­



fence of the liberty of their country and
the religion of their forefathers.

There are four books of Maccabees
admitted by the Church of Rome; the
two first they allow to be canonical, 
and the two last as apocryphal.

The first book is suppos'd to be writ­
ten originally in Hebrew or Syriack, 
which are not extant, but others sup­
pose the Greek to be the original.

It contains an account of the most
memorable transactions of the Jews
for 40 years, viz. from the reign of
Antiochus Epiphanes to the death of Si­
men the high priest: that is, from 3829
to 3869, or 135 years before Christ:
who the author was is not known.

The second book is an abridgment
of a larger, compos'd by one Jason, 
which contained the history of the per­
secutions of Epiphanes and Eupator a­
gainst the Jews; but the work of Jason
is not extant, and the author of the
abridgment is not known; for which
reason the Church of England do not ad­
mit them as canonical.

This second book contains a history
of 15 years, from 3828 to 3843 from
the execution of Heliodorus's commis­
sion, who was sent by Seleneus to fetch
away the treasure of the temple to the
victory obtained by Judas Maccabæus
over Nicanor.

The third book contains the history
of Ptolemy Philopater, king of Egypt, a­
gainst the Jews in his kingdom.

The fourth book is so little known, 
that it is not clearly understood what
it is.

In the old editions of the Greek bible
there is a book concerning The govern­
ment of Reason, which some imagine to
be it, by reason of the inlargements
therein upon the history of Eleazer and
the seven brethren, who suffered mar­
tyrdom at Antioch.

MACHIAVILIANISM [of Nicholas
Machiavel, a politician of Florence in
Italy] a politick principle, not to stick
at any thing to compass a design, to
break thro' the most solemn obligati­
ons, to commit the greatest villanies, 
in order to remove any obstructions to
great and ambitious designs; especially
in relation to government.

MACHINAL [machinalis, L.] belong­
ing to an engine.

MACHINAMENT [machinamentum, 
L.] an engine.

MACHINE, an engine compos'd of
several parts, set together by the art
of mechanism, as springs, wheels, &c.
for raising or stopping the motion of
bodies, used in raising water, architec­
ture, military, and many other affairs.

Simple MACHINES, are the ballance, 
lever, pully, wheel, wedge and screw.

Compound MACHINES, are such as
are compounded or made up of simple
ones.

MACHINE [with Architects] an as­
semblage of several pieces of timber, 
so disposed, that a small number of
men, by the help of ropes and pullies, 
may be able to raise vast loads of
weights.

Hydraulick MACHINE, a machine
for raising or conducting of water, as
a sluice, pump, &c.

Warlick MACHINES [among the An­
cients] were for launching-arrows, ja­
velins, stones, or for battering down
walls, as battering rams, &c. but now
artillery bombs, petards, &c. are so
called.

Dramatick MACHINES, are those
where the poet brings some deity or
supernatural being upon the stage, ei­
ther to solve some difficulty, or perform
some exploit beyond the reach of hu­
man power.

MACHINERY, an assemblage of ma­
chines or engines, by which any thing
is performed; also contrivance.

MACIATION, a making lean.  L.

MACILENCY [macilentia, L.] lean­
ness.

MACKLER, a seller of weavers
goods.

MACROBIUS [μαχρόβιος of μαχρὸς
long, and βίος life, Gr.] long lived; a
proper name.

MACULOSE [maculosus, L.] full of
spots or stains.

MADNESS [ʒemaað, Sax.] a kind
of delirium without a fever, attended
with rage, and a total deprivation of
reason; also enraged, fury.

MADNEP Wort, &c. herbs.

MADIFICATION, a moistening or
wetting, properly the receiving so
much moisture, that the body is quite
soaked thro' by it.

MÆANDER [μαίανδρος, Gr.] a ri­
ver in Phrygia, full of turnings and win­
dings in its course, as it is said, to the
number of 600; whence any thing that
is full of intricacy and difficulty is cal­
led a Mæander.  L.

MÆANDER [with Architects] a fret­
work in arched roofs, or carved cranks
in vaults and caves.  L.

MÆANDRATED [mæandratus, L.]
turned, intricately wrought.

MÆR, comes from the Saxon word
Meere, noted. See Mer.



MÆMACTERIA [μαιμαχτήρια of
μαιμαχτη, Gr.] sacred festivals celebra­
ted to Jupiter, the rainy or showery.

MÆMACTERION [μαιμαχτηριὼν, 
Gr.] the fifth month among the Atheni­
ans, being about our September.

MAGAZINE [magazin, F.] is a pub­
lick store-house; but it is most com­
monly used to signify a place where all
sorts of warlike stores are kept; where
guns are cast; smiths, carpenters and
wheel-wrights, &c. are constantly em­
ployed in making all things belonging
to an artillery; as carriages, waggons,
&c.

MAGDALENS, an order of nuns, 
or rather worn out and penitent cour­
tesans at Rome, upon which a revenue
was settled by pope Clement VIII. and
made an order that the effects of all
publick prostitutes who died without
will should be appropriated to the
maintenance of them, and that those
that made wills, if they did not leave
to them at least one fifth part of their
effects, their wills should be invalid.

MAGI, philosophers, astrologers
and priests among the Egyptians and
Asiaticks.

MAGI [of μαγοὶ, Gr. wise
men] the Magi of Per­
sia are worshippers of fire and disci­
ples of Zoroaster, who they confound
with Abraham. They have three books
which contain the whole of their reli­
gion. The names of these books are
Zend, Pazend and Abesta. They ascribe
the two former to Abraham and Abesta, 
and is a commentary on the other two.

The tradition of the Magi is, that
Abraham read books in the midst of the
furnace, in which Nimrod had ordered
him to be thrown.

After their master Zoroaster, tho
Magi maintain that there are two
principles in the world; one of good
which they call Oromazd, and the other
evil named Aherman.

They worship fire in temples call'd
Atesh Kanah or Atesh Kade; that is to
say, the house of fire.

There were formerly a great num­
ber of these buildings upon the moun­
tain Alborz in the province of Adherbi­
gran, which is Media.

To Fire they give the name Bab, that
is to say Part; because they acknowledge
this element as the principle of all
things, which system among the Greeks
was embrac'd by Anaxagoras.

The Magi observe a mysterious si­
lence, when they wash or eat, having
first said certain words. This silence,
which they never break, makes a part
of their religion.

Pythagoras, it is very likely might
imitate this silence of the Magi, as well
as the reverence for fire, which he
inculcated to his disciples.

To every month of the year, to
every day, and also to every star, to the
mountains, mines, waters, trees, they
ascribe particular Genii, or some of those
angels who were created before man, 
and fell into infidelity and disobedience, 
and were therefore confined to what
they call the country of the Genii, not
unlike to what is meant by the land of
Fairies.

As to the 3 books before-mentioned, 
which the Guebres or fire worshippers
impute to Abraham, really belong to
Ibrahim Verdoust, who is called Zoroas­
ter by the Greeks. These books are very 
rare and unknown, because the Guebres
keep tham religioutly secret among
themselves, and never communicate
them to strangers. They are written
in the antient Persian language and have
not been yet seen in Europe.

Tho' these philosophers maintained
2 principles in nature, the one good and
the other evil; the first being represen­
ted by light, and the other by darkness;
both owned as gods and addressed by
them with prayers and adorations; yet
they are divided in their opinions; be­
cause some thought both to be from all
eternity; and others maintained that
only the good principal was eternal, and
that the evil one was created.

They also agree that these 2 princi­
ples are in continual opposition to each
other, which is to continue to the end
of the world, when the good principle
will have the upper hand; after which
each will has his own world; that is, 
the good with all good people about
him, and the bad one with all the wick­
ed people, will likewise govern in his
world.

The Magi paid divine honours to
light, to the sun, to the consecrated fire
in their temples, and even to the fire in
their houses; before which they per­
formed all the acts of their religion.

On the contrary they had darkness in
the greatest abhorence, which tliey held
as the symbol of the evil principle, 
which they hated as we do the devil.

This religion took its rise among the
Chaldeans; the knowledge they had ac­
quired in astronomy contributed to in­
cline them to it. This it was that o­
bliged Abraham to go out of Chaldea.



From Chaldea this worship spread
through the whole East, from thence
into Egypt, from Egypt into Greece; and
thence among all the nations of the
West.

The first authors of this superstition
were known in the East by the name of
Zabians or Sabbeans. The remains of
this ancient sect are still subsisting in the
East by the name of Sabbeans, which
they pretend to have received from
Sabius the son of Seth. They have
still among them a book, which they
ascribe to Seth, which contains the
doctrine of their sect.

To this sect of the Sabbeans was dia­
metrically opposed to that of the Magi, 
who had images and idols in abhorence
and worshipped god only by fire. They
had their beginning in Persia, and spread
as far as the Indies, where they are still
in being. They acknowledge 2 prin­
ciples the one Good and the other Evil.

What has been said before being but
an hypothesis, which tho' it be probable
indeed does not come up to a certainty.
We shall mention something that may
be more depended upon, as being ex­
tracted from oriental authors, who have
informed us what this sect of the Zabi­
ans is, and what were their opinions.
See Zabians.

MAGIANS [of μαγοὶ, Gr. wise
men] the Magi of Per­
sia are worshippers of fire and disci­
ples of Zoroaster, who they confound
with Abraham. They have three books
which contain the whole of their reli­
gion. The names of these books are
Zend, Pazend and Abesta. They ascribe
the two former to Abraham and Abesta, 
and is a commentary on the other two.

The tradition of the Magi is, that
Abraham read books in the midst of the
furnace, in which Nimrod had ordered
him to be thrown.

After their master Zoroaster, tho
Magi maintain that there are two
principles in the world; one of good
which they call Oromazd, and the other
evil named Aherman.

They worship fire in temples call'd
Atesh Kanah or Atesh Kade; that is to
say, the house of fire.

There were formerly a great num­
ber of these buildings upon the moun­
tain Alborz in the province of Adherbi­
gran, which is Media.

To Fire they give the name Bab, that
is to say Part; because they acknowledge
this element as the principle of all
things, which system among the Greeks
was embrac'd by Anaxagoras.

The Magi observe a mysterious si­
lence, when they wash or eat, having
first said certain words. This silence,
which they never break, makes a part
of their religion.

Pythagoras, it is very likely might
imitate this silence of the Magi, as well
as the reverence for fire, which he
inculcated to his disciples.

To every month of the year, to
every day, and also to every star, to the
mountains, mines, waters, trees, they
ascribe particular Genii, or some of those
angels who were created before man, 
and fell into infidelity and disobedience, 
and were therefore confined to what
they call the country of the Genii, not
unlike to what is meant by the land of
Fairies.

As to the 3 books before-mentioned, 
which the Guebres or fire worshippers
impute to Abraham, really belong to
Ibrahim Verdoust, who is called Zoroas­
ter by the Greeks. These books are very 
rare and unknown, because the Guebres
keep tham religioutly secret among
themselves, and never communicate
them to strangers. They are written
in the antient Persian language and have
not been yet seen in Europe.

Tho' these philosophers maintained
2 principles in nature, the one good and
the other evil; the first being represen­
ted by light, and the other by darkness;
both owned as gods and addressed by
them with prayers and adorations; yet
they are divided in their opinions; be­
cause some thought both to be from all
eternity; and others maintained that
only the good principal was eternal, and
that the evil one was created.

They also agree that these 2 princi­
ples are in continual opposition to each
other, which is to continue to the end
of the world, when the good principle
will have the upper hand; after which
each will has his own world; that is, 
the good with all good people about
him, and the bad one with all the wick­
ed people, will likewise govern in his
world.

The Magi paid divine honours to
light, to the sun, to the consecrated fire
in their temples, and even to the fire in
their houses; before which they per­
formed all the acts of their religion.

On the contrary they had darkness in
the greatest abhorence, which tliey held
as the symbol of the evil principle, 
which they hated as we do the devil.

This religion took its rise among the
Chaldeans; the knowledge they had ac­
quired in astronomy contributed to in­
cline them to it. This it was that o­
bliged Abraham to go out of Chaldea.

From Chaldea this worship spread
through the whole East, from thence
into Egypt, from Egypt into Greece; and
thence among all the nations of the
West.

The first authors of this superstition
were known in the East by the name of
Zabians or Sabbeans. The remains of
this ancient sect are still subsisting in the
East by the name of Sabbeans, which
they pretend to have received from
Sabius the son of Seth. They have
still among them a book, which they
ascribe to Seth, which contains the
doctrine of their sect.

To this sect of the Sabbeans was dia­
metrically opposed to that of the Magi, 
who had images and idols in abhorence
and worshipped god only by fire. They
had their beginning in Persia, and spread
as far as the Indies, where they are still
in being. They acknowledge 2 prin­
ciples the one Good and the other Evil.

What has been said before being but
an hypothesis, which tho' it be probable
indeed does not come up to a certainty.
We shall mention something that may
be more depended upon, as being ex­
tracted from oriental authors, who have
informed us what this sect of the Zabi­
ans is, and what were their opinions.
See Zabians.

MAGIAN, of or pertaining to the
Magi.

MAGICK [μαγεία, Gr.] is by some
distinguished into four kinds.

MAGICK RODS or Wands. Authors
relate that the Chaldeans had a custom, 
that when they went upon any under­
taking or journey, they wrote upon
wands or arrows, which they mingled
together in a quiver, the names of the
cities they intended to go to, or the
things they were to undertake; that
afterwards drawing the arrows out of
the quiver at all adventures, they were
determined as to their undertaking by
the inscription of the arrow which first
came forth.

This custom of divining by rods or
arrows is very antient in the East.

The Scythians and Alans divined by
means of certain branches of willow and
myrtle: The modern Arabians at this
day make use of arrows inclosed in a
bag.

Upon one they write Lord Command
me and upon another the Lord prevent
me. If the first arrow that is drawn out
of the sack has the inscription Lord pre­
vent me, then the thing is intirely omitted.

There is also something like this to
be found among the Turks, Chinese, and
anciently among the Medes and He­
brews. Tacitus observes it also among
the ancient Germans. They cut a bow
of some fruit tree into several pieces, 
which they mark'd with certain cha­
racters and threw them by hazard upon
a white cloth. Then the father of the
family took up the pieces one after a­
nother, and thence by the marks that
were upon them took auguries for fu­
ture events.

Natural MAGICK, a natural philoso­
phy, or the application of natural ac­
tive causes to passive causes; by means
of which many surprizing, but natural
effects are produced; but the Arabians
corrupting it, and filling it with many
superstitious vanities, the name of it
began to be understood in an ill sense.

Natural MAGICK [according to the
description of some] is by art and in­
dustry to produce vegetables before
their natural time, as ripe roses, figs, 
&c. in February; also the causing light­
ning, thunder, rain, winds, transfigu­
rations and transmutations of animals, 
such as Roger Bacon is said to have per­
formed by Natural Magick.

Divine MAGICK, which is perform­
ed by the immediate grace of the Al­
mighty, and depends on that spirit and
power, which discovers itself in noble
operations; such as prophecy, mira­
cles; such magicians were Modes, Ju­
shua, the prophets and apostles.

Celestial MAGICK, attributes to spi­
rits a kind of rule or dominion over
the planets, a dominion over men, and
on this it raises a ridiculous kind of
system, nearly bordering on judiciary
astrology.

White MAGICK, called also Theurgick, 
performed by the assistance of an angel, 
which, upon account of religion, en­
joins fasting, piety and purity; that the
soul which is desirous of commerce
with the superior deities, may not be
in any thing diverted by the body, be­
ing sinful or polluted.

MAGICK Geodetick, magick perform­
ed by the assistance of a Dæmon.

Superstitious MAGICK, is performed
by the invocation of devils; and the
effects of it are very evil and wicked, 
tho' very strange and surpassing the
power of nature; and are said to be
performed by means of some compact, 
either express or tacit, with evil spirits.
But their power is not near to what is
imagined, nor do they produce half the
effects commonly ascribed to them.

Mathematical MAGICK, is that which
by mathematical learning, and the as­



sistance of the celestial influences, pro­
duces seemingly miraculous works; as, 
walking and speaking images, as also
by mechanical science, and rare art, 
beyond the reach of vulgar capacities.
See Bishop Wilkins, &c.

MAGICK Square, is when
numbers in an arithmetical
proportion, are disposed in­
to such parallel and equal
ranks, as that the sum of each row, as
well diagonally as laterally, shall be
equal, as in the square they make 18.

Image omitted.



MAGICIAN [magicien, F. magus, L.
of μάγος, Gr.] the Persians called those
magos or magicians, that the Greeks
called Φιλοσόφους; the Latins Sapientes;
the Gauls, Druids; the Egyptians, Pro­
phets or Priests; the Indians, Gymnoso­
phists; the English Cunning Men, Wi­
zards or Conjurers.

Simon the Samaritan, was honoured
with a statue at Rome, for his excellen­
cy in the magick art, in the time of
Claudius Cæsar, with this inscription, 
To Simon the holy god; and Ceneus a­
mong the Greeks, was worshipped as a
god in the days of Augustus, for his skill
in the magick art.

MAGISTERIES [with Chymists]
sometimes signifies resins and resinous
juices, as the magisteries of Jalop, Scam­
mony, &c.

MAGISTERY [magistere, F. magiste­
rium, L.] a very fine chymical powder, 
made by dissolving and precipitating the
matter, as magistery of Bismuth, Coral, 
Lead, &c.

MAGISTERY [according to Mr.
Boyle] a preparation of a body (not an
analysis of it, because the principles are
not spread) whereby the whole, or
very near the whole of it, by some ad­
ditament is turned into a body of a dif­
ferent kind.

MAGISTRATURE, magistracy.

MAGNA Charta [i. e. the great Paper
or Charter] king John, to appease his
barons, is said to have yielded to laws
and articles of government, much like
to those of Magna Charta. But at this
time we find no law written ancienter
than this Magna Charta, which was
granted the 9th year of Henry III. and
confirmed by Edward I. This was ap­
prov'd of by the subjects as so benefi­
cial a law, and of so great equity, in
comparison to those which were in use
before it, that king Henry had for grant­
ing it the 15th penny of all the move­
able goods, of both the temporality and
spirituality.

It is called the great charter, either
because it contained more than many
other charters; or because of the great
and remarkable solemnity in the de­
nouncing excommunication and direful
anathemas against the infringers of it.
For when king Henry III. swore to the
observation of this charter, the bishops
holding lighted candles, extinguished
them, and then threw them on the
ground, and every one said, Thus let him
be extinguished and stink in Hell, who
violates this charter. Or else, because
it contained the sum of all the liberties
of England; or else, because there was
another charter, called Charta de Fo­
resta, established with it, which was the
lesser of the two.

MAGNANIMITY [magnanimitas, L.]
this the ancients used to represent hie­
roglyphically, by a lion rampant.

MAGNANIMOUSNESS [of magna­
nimus, L.] magnanimity, greatness of
mind.

MAGNES arsenical [with Chymists] a
composition of equal parts of arsenick, 
sulphur and antimony, melted together
over the fire, and condensed in manner
of a stone. It is called Magnes, or a
Magnet, because it is supposed, being
worn, to defend the weather from in­
fection, during the time that malignant
diseases reign, and that by its magneti­
cal virtue.

MAGNETISM [with Chymists] a cer­
tain virtue, whereby one thing becomes
effected at the same time with another, 
either in the same or a different man­
ner.

MAGNIFICENTNESS [magnificentia, 
L.] a largeness of soul, in conceiving
and managing great things; state, 
greatness, generosity, stateliness, cost­
liness.

MAGNIFIC [magnificus, L.] magni­
ficent. Milton.

MAGNIFYING Glass [in Opticks] a
little convex glass, lens, &c. which in
transmitting the rays of light reflects
them so, as that the parallel ones be­
come converging, and those which
were diverging become parallel; by
which means objects view'd thro' them
appear larger than when view'd by the
naked eye.

MAGNILOQUY [magniloquium, L.]
lofty specch, speaking of great matters.

MAGNILOQUOUS [magniloquus, L.]
speaking big, loud, or of great matters.

Commensurable MAGNITUDES [with
Geometricians] are such as may be mea­
sured by one and the same common
measure.



MAGOPHONIA [of μάγος and φόνος,
Gr. murther] a festival observed by the
Persians, in commemoration of the
massacre of the Magi, who had usurped
the throne upon the death of Cambyses.

MAHIM [in Law] is a hurt re­
ceiv'd in a man's body, 
by which he loses the use of any mem­
ber, that is, or might be a defence to
him in battle.

MAYHIM [in Law] is a hurt re­
ceiv'd in a man's body, 
by which he loses the use of any mem­
ber, that is, or might be a defence to
him in battle.

MAHUM [mehaigne, F.] maim,
wound, hurt.

MAHIM [mehaigne, F.] maim,
wound, hurt.

MAHOMETAN, of or pertaining to
Mahomet.

MAHOMETANISM, is the doctrine
of Mahomet or the principles of the
Mahometan religion.

The Mahometans acknowledge that
both the Jewish and Christian religion
are true; but pretend they are now
abrogated; since God has communi­
cated himself to his prophet Mahomet;
they also alledge that neither the Jews
nor the Christians have at this time any
principles of their religion, because
their books have been corrupted.

They affirm that Mahomet for the
space of 23 years, did receive a certain
number of papers from God, by the mi­
nistry of the angel Gabriel, out of which
he compos'd the Alcoran.

The chief article of the Mahometan
faith is the unity of God; the second
that Mahomet is the messenger of God, 
who also they pretend wrought mira­
cles; as that he drew water out of his
fingers, and that marking the moon
with his fingers he cleft it.

They say also that the stones, trees
and beasts acknowledged him to be the
true prophet of God and that they salu­
ted him in these words: You are the
true messenger and prophet of God. They
tell us likewise that Mahomet went in
the night from Mecca to Jerusalem, 
from whence he ascended into Heaven;
that there he had a view of Paradise
and Hell; that he had conversation with
God, and at last came down from Hea­
ven that very night, and was found at
Mecca before the break of day.

They believe a general resurrection
of the dead, and that then an Anti-Ma­
homet will appear, and that Jesus Christ
will descend from Heaven to kill him, 
and to establish the Mahometan religion.

They say the resurrection of the dead
will be in the following manner; that
they will appear all naked from head
to foot; that the prophets, saints, 
doctors and the just will be clothed and
carried up to Heaven by angels and che­
rubims. And that those that remain
shall suffer hunger, thirst and naked­
ness. That the sun drawing near them
within a mile, will cause them to sweat
in a violent manner, and that they will
be afflicted with an infinite number of
other torments; that in the day of
judgment Good and Evil shall be weigh'd
in scales, and those persons whose
Good shall over-balance their Evil, 
shall go into Paradise; but those whose
evil shall outweigh their Good, shall be
sent to Hell, except the prophets and
saints shall make intercession for them.

They also seem to believe a kind of
purgatory, where those whose sins have
over-balanced their good actions, tho'
they died in the faith, and were not
assisted by the intercession of the just, 
must suffer in proportion to their sins;
but shall be afterwards taken up into
paradise.

They hold that there are angels, 
who are executioners of the commands
of God, design'd for certain offices both
in Heaven and earth, who write down
the actions of men in a book; and that
the office of the angel Asrael is to re­
ceive the souls of those that die, and
another named Esrapis constantly keeps
a large horn or trumpet in his mouth, 
ready to sound it at the day of judgment.

They also beside the general judg­
ment hold a particular one, which they
call the Torment of the Sepulchre, which
is in the manner following; that as
soon as a person is buried, two of the
first angels, viz. Manzar and Neker come
and ask the deceased questions concern­
ing his faith towards God and his pro­
phets, concerning the law and Kiab, 
i. e. what way a person ought to turn
himself to pray to God. If they be just
ones, they will answer; our God is the
God that created all things, our faith
is Muslimick, i. e. orthodox, and the
place towards which we bow ourselves
in our prayers, is Kiab. But the infi­
dels not knowing what to answer are
consigned to grievous torments.

They generally hold predestination
and that both good and evil happen by
the particular command of God.

When they pray, at pronouncing the
name of God they make a bow and add
most high, most blessed, most excellent
or some other such attribute.

In their noon and afternoon prayers
they are oblig'd to read low; but their
morning and evening prayers with a
loud voice. The men in saying their
prayers ought first of all to lift up their
hands to the tops of their ears; but the
women no higher than their jaws. If



they chance to speak or laugh in their
prayers, so as to be heard, they are
void; and they are forbid to pray to
God in the garment they commonly
work in, and which they would not
wear, if they were to pay a visit to a
person of quality.

The tradition of Mahomet commands
them to wash their hands three times, 
to cleanse their teeth with a certain
sort of wood, and then to wash their
mouth three times and the nose as of­
ten without intermission, when they
have once begun; then to wet their
ears with the same water they wash'd
their heads with, and whenever they
wash their hands and feet they are ob­
lig'd to begin at the fingers.

MAIDEN [in Scotland, &c.] an in­
strument or machine used in beheading
persons.

MAIDEN-Head [Mæðen-haðe, Sax.]
the hymen of a virgin.

MAJESTATIVENESS stateliness.

MAJESTICALNESS stateliness.

MAJESTY [majestas, L.] a title of
honour, usually given to sovereign
princes.

MAJESTY, among the old Romans
was a title given to the state, and the
great officers thereof; but was after­
wards confin'd to the emperor and im­
perial family.

In former times the title of majesty
was given to popes and archbishops.

The emperors of Germany endea­
voured to keep the title of majesty and
closed crown to themselves. But Fran­
cis I. made it common to the kings of
France.

When Charles V. was elected empe­
ror of Germany, the kings of Spain who
before had born only the title of High­
ness, took upon them the title of maje­
sty.

Henry VIII. of England was the first
English king took upon him the title of
majesty, whereas his predecessors had
only that of Grace or Highness. But at
this time it is given to most of or all
the kings in Europe, but to kings or
emperors only.

MAIN of an Horse. See Mane.

To set a MAIN [of main, F. a
hand] to throw
with box and dice, &c.

To throw a MAIN [of main, F. a
hand] to throw
with box and dice, &c.

MAJOR of a fortified Town, has the
charge of the guards, rounds, patrols
and centinels.

MAJOR and MINOR [in Musick] are
spoken of the concords, which differ
from each other by a semi-tone.

MAJORALITY, the time or office 
of a major or mayor of a city, &c.

MAIZE, a kind of Indian-wheat, 
which bears an ear a foot, sometimes a
foot and an half long upon a stalk of 6
or 8 foot high.

To MAKE Customs [Law Term] is
to execute or
perform them.

To MAKE Services [Law Term] is
to execute or
perform them.

MAKE Hawk [with Falconers] an old, 
stanch hawk, who being us'd to fly is
fit to instruct a young one.

MAKER [of Macan, Sax. to make]
one who causes, forms or frames.

MALAGNETTA [with Apoth.]
grains of paradise.

MALAPERTNESS, sauciness, ex­
traordinary readiness to give saucy lan­
guage.

MALBRANCHISM, the doctrine or
sentiments of father Malbranch, a priest
of the oratory of France, and much the
same as Cartesianism.

MALEDICTION [in old Deeds] an
imprecation or curse, which was anci­
ently annexed to grants of lands, &c.
made to churches and religious houses, 
to deter persons from attempting to a­
lienate or apply them to other uses.

MALEFICK Planets [with Astrolo­
gers] the planets Saturn and Mars, so
called on account of the evil effects at­
tributed to them.

MALEFICKNESS [of maleficus, L.]
injuriousness.

MALENDERS [in a Horse] a disease, 
being chops or chinks on the bending
or joint of a horse's knee, which some­
times suppurate; when these chops ap­
pear in the bending of the hough, they
are called selanders.

MALEVOLENTNESS [malevolentia, 
L.] ill-will, hatred, spight.

MALICIOUSNESS [of malitiosus, L.
malicieux, F.] fulness of malice, spite­
fulness.

MALIGNANTNESS [malignitas, L.]
hurtfulness, mischievousness, malignant
nature or quality, ill-will.

A MALIGNANT [malignus, L.] an
envious, ill-affected person.

MALL [q. pellere malleo, to
drive with a mallet]
a sort of play or exercise with a woo­
den ball, and an instrument called a
Mall, by which the ball is struck with
great force and art, so as to run through
an iron arch, at the end of a long al­
ley, smoothly gravelled and boarded on
each side. This arch is call'd the pass, 
and the alley is also call'd the Mall.

MALLEABLENESS, the quality of
being beaten out or wrought with a
hammer, and spreads, being beaten,



without breaking or cracking, which
glass will not bear, but gold will, to
the highest degree of any metal what­
soever.

MALLET [malleus, L.] a sort of
wooden hammer.

MALOCOTOON [q. malum, an ap­
ple, and coctona, L. cotton, because of
its downy coat] a sort of peach, called
also Melocotony.

The Cross of MALTA, 
which is worn by the
knights of St. John of Je­
rusalem, is a cross of eight
points, according to the
form in the escutcheon hereunto an­
nexed.

Image omitted.



MALTHA [μάλθα of μαλάσσω, Gr.
to mollify] pitch and wax melted toge­
ther; also a kind of terrace made of
quicklime and hog's-grease.

MALVACEOUS [malvaceus, L.] like, 
belonging to, or made with mallows.

MALVOISIN [q. d. mal evil, voisin
a neighbour, F.] an ancient warlike
engine for casting stones, battering
walls, &c.

MAMALUKES [prob. of דולממ, Heb.
under the dominion of another] a dy­
nasty which reigned a considerable time
in Egypt. Light horsemen, an order
of valiant soldiers, who were at first
Circassian slaves brought up to military
exercises, in which they were very ex­
pert, and were the chief military sup­
port of the Saracens in Egypt; but hav­
ing killed sultan Moudam, they took
upon themselves the government.

MAMIN Tree [in Jamaica] a tree
that grows plentifully in the woods, 
yielding a pleasant liquor, drunk by the
inhabitants, &c. call'd the Planter's
Toddy-Tree.

MAMMON [ןוממ, Syr. riches or
grain, of the Heb. ןומה, i. e. plenty, 
leaving out the (ה) hemantick at the be­
ginning] the God of wealth and riches.

MAN well the top [Sea Term] is a 
word of command, when men are or­
dered to go into the top of a ship.

MAN the Ladder [among Sai­
lors] is a word
of command, when any person of fi­
gure is at the side of the ship, ready to
enter or be helped into it.

MAN the Ship's side [among Sai­
lors] is a word
of command, when any person of fi­
gure is at the side of the ship, ready to
enter or be helped into it. 

A MANAGE [for Horses] a riding-­
ground or academy with a pillar fixed
in the center of it, to which horses are
tied that are beginning to learn, and
pillars set up on the sides 2 by 2, in or­
der to teach horses to raise their fore­
legs; the Manage is also the particular
way of working or riding a horse.

High MANAGE, is the high or raised
airs, which are proper for leaping hor­
ses.

MANAGE [menage, F.] the manag­
ing of a family of a concern, &c.

MANATE [about the island His­
paniola] a fish of the
whale kind, and some of them so large
that they can scarce be drawn by a yoke
of oxen.

MINATI [about the island His­
paniola] a fish of the
whale kind, and some of them so large
that they can scarce be drawn by a yoke
of oxen.

MANCHE 
[in Heral.] an
old fashioned
sleeve with
long hangers
to it, as in the figures here annexed.  F.

Image omitted.



MAUNCHE 
[in Heral.] an
old fashioned
sleeve with
long hangers
to it, as in the figures here annexed. F.

Image omitted.



MANDARIN, the language spoke by
the Mandarins and in the court of Chi­
na, and is that in China that the Latin
is in Europe; the Mandarins being al­
ways men of letters.

MANDARINS, certain Chinese lords, 
who are commonly governors of some
province, they are for the most part
chosen out of the Loitias, who are the
most learned of the sect of their admi­
red philosopher Confucius.

They are so highly reverenced, that
no person presumes to speak to them
but upon their knees; they are distin­
guished into learned Mandarins, who
are appointed to be judges, and military
Mandarins.

Those who are made governors, are
appointed to govern such places as are
at a great distance from the place of
their nativity, where they have a very
magnificent palace, in the chief hall of
which is a statue of their king or em­
peror, standing upon a lofty pedestal; be­
fore which the Mandarin kneels, before
he seats himself upon the bench.

MANDIL [among the Persians] a cap
or turban, made of a piece of white
muslin, which being first wrapped round
the head, a piece of silk of the same
length is wrapped round that, so that
the several stripes or colours of the silk
seem wavy; this is so closely bound to­
gether, that it is said, a cutlass wont pe­
netrate it. In rainy weather they co­
ver it with a sort of case made of red
cloth.

MANDRAKE [כיאדוד, Heb. μανδρα­
γάρας of μάνδρα Gr. a cave or den, be­
cause of its growing near caves and
shady places; or as some say, of ανδρός
γονῆ, i. e. the knee of a man] a plant
whose divided roots bear some resem­
blance to the legs and thighs of a man.
It bears a yellow fruit, called Mandrake
apples.



MANDY Thursday [q. dies, man­
dati i. e. the
day of command] the thursday next be­
fore Easter, so denominated from our
Saviour's giving a charge to his disci­
ples before his last supper. It has been
an ancient practise in England, for the
kings and queens on that day to wash
the feet of so many poor men as they
had reigned years, and to give them a
dole of cloth, shoos, stockings, money, 
bread, and fish; in imitation of our Sa­
viour, who washed the disciples feet at
his ordering the Lord's supper, bidding
them do the like to one another.

MAUNDY Thursday [q. dies, man­
dati i. e. the
day of command] the thursday next be­
fore Easter, so denominated from our
Saviour's giving a charge to his disci­
ples before his last supper. It has been
an ancient practise in England, for the
kings and queens on that day to wash
the feet of so many poor men as they
had reigned years, and to give them a
dole of cloth, shoos, stockings, money, 
bread, and fish; in imitation of our Sa­
viour, who washed the disciples feet at
his ordering the Lord's supper, bidding
them do the like to one another.

MANDUCI [among the Romans] the
name of certain hideous figures of per­
sons, which were designed to entertain
some and fright others at their plays.
The mothers used to fright their chil­
dren with their names, by crying Man­
ducus venit.

MANEQUIN [with Painters, &c.]
a little statue or model usually made of
wax or wood, the junctures whereof are
so contrived, that it may be put into any
attitude at pleasure, and its draperies
and folds may be disposed at discretion.

MANE-SHEET [with Grooms] is a
covering for the upper part of a horses
head, and all round his neck, which at
one end has two holes for the ears to
pass through, and then joins to the hal­
ter on the fore-part, and likewise to the
surcingle or long girth on the horse's
back.

MANES [were so called by Antiphra­
sis, for Manum in the old Latin signified
good; some again derive the word from
manare to flow, because all the air be­
tween the earth and the circle of the
moon, they thought was full of Ma­
nes, who came out of their mansions
to torment mankind] were certain
Roman deities, which some suppose to
have been the souls of persons deceased
and others, that they were infernal
gods, and gods of the dead, Some are
of opinion; that the celestial gods were
those of the living, and the Manes the
gods of the dead. Others take Manes
to be the gods of the night, and that
the Latin word Mane was thence de­
rived, Apuleius writes, that they were
Dæmons or Genii, which were some­
times called Lemures, of which the good
were called Lares familiares, and the
bad Larvæ. The Manes were supposed
to preside over tombs, and had adorati­
on paid to them accordingly.

Festus says that the Romans used to
invoke the Manes, because they believed
them favourable unto men; and that
they were also called Superior and Infe­
rior gods. Others again take Manes for
Hell; that is those subterraneous places
where the souls of men both good and
bad were to go, from whence the good
were to be sent to the Elysian fields, 
and the wicked to Tartarus or places of
punishment.

Manes were also taken for infernal
and subterraneous gods, and indeed for
all deities whatsoever that had the
charge of, and did preside over the
graves of the dead; and in this sense
epitaphs have been dedicated to them
in these words Diis manibus.

MANFULNESS [of man and ful­
neſſe, Sax.] valour, stoutness.

MANGINESS [demangeaison, F.] a 
having the mange, a sort of itching
distemper common to dogs.

MANIA, was accounted the mother
of the Lares, to whom sacrifice was of­
fered at a festival call'd Compitalia, 
wherein slaves were mix'd with their
masters, eat and drank with them and
diverted themselves in the cross-ways.

There was also at first a cruel custom
of sacrificing children to her for the
preservation of the rest of the family;
But Brutus having expell'd Tarquin, gave
the oracle of Apollo another interpreta­
tion, and ordered, that instead of the
heads of men, they should be the heads
of poppies and onions.

They also placed as many effigies of
men and women, stuffed with flax or
chaff before the doors and in the cross­
ways, as there were free persons in 
every house, and as many balls of wool
as there were slaves in it; that so nei­
ther Mania nor the houshold gods, her
supposed children, might do any mis­
chief to the living.

MANIA [μανία of μαίνομαι, Gr. to
be mad, or μάω to be carried with vio­
lence] a kind of madness, by which the
faculties of judgment and imagination
are depraved, and the patient is posses­
sed with great rage and anger.  L.

MANICHEES, a sect of hereticks who
began to infect the Christian church so
early as about the year 277, whose he­
resy spread very much in the East, espe­
cially in Arabia, Egypt and Africa. The
ring-leader of this sect, was one Cubricus, 
who from affectation changed his name
into that of Manes, which signifies a ves­
sel. A rich widow to whom he had
been a servant, dying without issue, 
left him a great deal of wealth, which
(probably) elated him, he assumed the
title of Apostle or envoy of Jesus Christ, 
and that he was the paraclete or com­



forter, which Christ promised to send;
he likewise held two principles, the
one good and the other bad to the good
one he gave the name of light, and be­
cause it did nothing but good, and to the
other which did nothing but evil he gave
the name of darkness, by the latter of
which he said our souls were made;
they held that Christ did not assume a
real, but only an imaginary body; that
the law of Moses did not come from
God or the good principle, and therefore
for that reason was abrogated; and as to
the New Testament, tho' they pretended
to receive the books, yet they only took
such parts of it as they could wrest to
their own opinions; pretending that
whatever was inconsistent with them
had been foisted in by some late writers, 
who were a sort of half Jews; but
they allowed fables and apocryphal
books to pass for apostolical writings;
and are strongly suspected to have for­
ged several themselves.

They seemed to be rather a sect of
philosophers than religious, professing
Astronomy and Astrology, and pretending
to the use of amulets and charms.

MANICATED [mancicatus, L.] wear­
ing a sleeve, glove or gantlet.

MANICORDIUM, a musical instru­
ment in form of a spinnet, its strings
are covered with scarlet cloth to deaden
and soften the sound. It is used in nun­
neries by the nuns to learn to play, and
not disturb the silence of the dormitory.

MANIFESTNESS, plainness, &c. to
be seen, &c.

MANIFESTO, an apology or pub­
lick declaration in writing made by a
prince, shewing his intentions in any
enterprize; the motives that induced
him to it, and the reasons on which his
right and pretensions are founded.

MANIFOLD [of maniʒ and feolðan, 
Sax.] a great many.

MANILLE [in Africa] one of the
principal commodities
carried to those coasts by the Europeans
to traffick with the Negroes in exchange
for slaves. It is brass rings in the form
of bracelets, which the natives deck
their legs and arms with, but the better
sort of them wear the Manilles made
of silver and gold, but these are of their
own manufacture.

MENILLE [in Africa] one of the
principal commodities
carried to those coasts by the Europeans
to traffick with the Negroes in exchange
for slaves. It is brass rings in the form
of bracelets, which the natives deck
their legs and arms with, but the better
sort of them wear the Manilles made
of silver and gold, but these are of their
own manufacture. 

MANIPULATION, a term used in
mines, to signify the manner of digging
the silver.

MANIPULUS [among Apothecaries]
an handful of herbs, roots, flowers, &c.
i. e. as much as one can take up in his
hand.

MANNA [with Physic.] a sort of
sweet liquor, which drops of itself, or
else is let out by cutting from the bran­
ches and leaves of ash-trees in Calabria
in Italy; or, as others say, a kind of
dew congealed on trees and plants in
Syria, Germany and Calabria, but the
Calabrian is most in use.

MANNA. That mentioned by Moses
was a little grain white like hoar frost, 
round and of the bigness of coriander-­
seed. It fell every morning upon the
dew, and when the dew was exhaled by
the heat of the sun, the Manna appear­
ed alone, lying on the rocks or the
sand. And yet the same Manna that
was melted by the heat of the sun, 
when it lay in the field, was of so hard
a consistence when it was brought into
the house, that it was used to be bea­
ten in mortars, and would even endure
the fire, was baked in pans, made into
paste, and so into cakes.

And still at this day there falls Manna
in several places of the world: In Ara­
bia, in Poland, in Calabria, in mount
Libanus, in Dauphine, and other places.

The most common and most famous
is that of Arabia, which is a kind of
condensed hony, to be found in the
summer time upon the leaves of the
trees, the herbs, the rocks or the sand
of Arabia petræa, which is of the same
figure as Moses describes it.

That which is gathered about mount
Sinai is of a very strong smell, which is
communicated to it by the herbs on
which it falls. It very easily evaporates, 
in so much that if 30 pounds of it were
to be kept in an open vessel, there
would hardly 10 of it be remaining at
the end of 15 days.

Many persons are of opinion that
the Manna now to be found in Arabia
is the same as that with which the Isra­
elites were fed, and that whereas it has
a medicinal quality and is purgative and
weakening, rather than nourishing and
strengthening, yet they imagine it might
be made habitual to the stomach by use.

MANNASI [about Jamaica] a
certain monstrous fish, 
called the sea-cow from its resembling
a cow, that brings forth her young
ones alive, and suckles them with milk
from her dugs; she is an amphibious
animal, lives for the most part in the
water, but feeds on grass in the fields.

MANNATI [about Jamaica] a
certain monstrous fish, 
called the sea-cow from its resembling
a cow, that brings forth her young
ones alive, and suckles them with milk
from her dugs; she is an amphibious
animal, lives for the most part in the
water, but feeds on grass in the fields.

MANNER [with Painters, Carvers, 
&c.] a particular habit or mode the ar­
tist has in managing his hand, pencil, 
instrument, &c. thus they say the man­
ner of Reuben, Titian, &c.



A good MANNER [in paintng, &c.]
a habit or peculiar way of painting, a­
greeable to the rules of art; natural, 
strong, easy and duly proportioned.

A bad MANNER, the contrary of
the former.

Grand MANNER [in Archit.]
is said of an
order heroically and gigantically de­
signed; where the division of the prin­
cipal members have all a bold and am­
ple relievo.

La Grande MANIERE [in Archit.]
is said of an
order heroically and gigantically de­
signed; where the division of the prin­
cipal members have all a bold and am­
ple relievo.

MANNER [with Music] is a parti­
cular way of singing or playing; which
is often express'd by saying, he has a 
good manner.

MANOMETER [of μάνος thin,
and μέτρον mea­
sure, or of σχόπος, Gr.] an instrument
to measure or shew the alterations in
the rarity and density of the air.

MANOSCOPE [of μάνος thin,
and μέτρον mea­
sure, or of σχόπος, Gr.] an instrument
to measure or shew the alterations in
the rarity and density of the air.

MANOR [of memoir, F. of ma­
nendo, L. because the
lord did usually reside there] was a no­
ble sort of fee anciently granted, partly
to tenants for certain services, and
partly reserved for the use of the lord's
family; a jurisdiction over his tenants
for their farms.

The original of manours was this;
The king anciently granted a certain
compass of ground to some man of me­
rit, for him and his heirs to dwell
upon, and exercise some jurisdiction, 
more or less, within that circuit; for
which the lord performed such services, 
and paid such annual rents, as was re­
quired by the grant. Now the lord
parcelling this land out to other meaner
men, received rents and services of
them; and so as he was tenant to the
king, they also were tenants to him.

The whole Fee was called a Lordship, 
of old a Barony, from whence comes
the term Court Baron, which is always
an appendant to the manour.

Manour at this time, signifies rather
the jurisdiction or royalty incorporeal, 
than the Land or Site; for a man may
have a manour in gross. i. e. the right
and interest of a Court Baron, with the
perquisites belonging to it, and another
person, or others, have every foot of
the land.

MANOUR [of memoir, F. of ma­
nendo, L. because the
lord did usually reside there] was a no­
ble sort of fee anciently granted, partly
to tenants for certain services, and
partly reserved for the use of the lord's
family; a jurisdiction over his tenants
for their farms.

The original of manours was this;
The king anciently granted a certain
compass of ground to some man of me­
rit, for him and his heirs to dwell
upon, and exercise some jurisdiction, 
more or less, within that circuit; for
which the lord performed such services, 
and paid such annual rents, as was re­
quired by the grant. Now the lord
parcelling this land out to other meaner
men, received rents and services of
them; and so as he was tenant to the
king, they also were tenants to him.

The whole Fee was called a Lordship, 
of old a Barony, from whence comes
the term Court Baron, which is always
an appendant to the manour.

Manour at this time, signifies rather
the jurisdiction or royalty incorporeal, 
than the Land or Site; for a man may
have a manour in gross. i. e. the right
and interest of a Court Baron, with the
perquisites belonging to it, and another
person, or others, have every foot of
the land.

MANSION [in Law] the lord of a
manour's chief dwelling house within
his fee; otherwise called the capital
messuage.

MANSLAUGHTER [man-ſlæhte, 
of ſlæʒan, Sax. slay] the killing a man
without malice propense, whether in a
recounter or carelesly, and differs both
from murther and chance-medly, in that
they both import a present intent to
kill. This offence is felony by the law, 
but allowed the benefit of the clergy
for the first time; but the convict for­
feits his goods and chattels.

MANSUEFACTION, a taming or
making gentle.  L.

MANSUETUDE [mansuetudo, L.]
meekness, mildness, gentleness, tame­
ness.

MANTELET, a short purple mantle, 
worn by bishops in France over their
Rochets, on some special occasions.  F.

MANTELETS [with Military Men]
are great planks of wood, in height
about five foot, and in thickness three
inches, which are used at sieges to cover
the men from the enemies fire; being
pushed forward on small trucks, and
are either single or double.

Single MANTE­
LETS, are com­
posed of two or
three such planks
joined together, 
with bars of iron, 
to the measure
of three foot or
three foot and a
half broad, to co­
ver those that
carry them from
the enemies fire.
See the figure.

Image omitted.



Double MAN­
TELETS, are
composed by put­
ting earth be­
tween two such
rows of planks, 
and are used in
making approa­
ches and batte­
ries near the
place, as others
are in making
lodgements on the 
counterscarp.
They are cover'd
with iron, and are to cover the soldi­
ers from the grenades and fire-works
of the place. See the figure.

Image omitted.



MANTELLE [Heraldry]
is when the two upper
ends of a shield are cut off
by lines drawn from the
upper edge of the shield to
that part of the sides, where
the chief line should part it, so forming
a triangle of a different colour or me­
tal from the shield, as if a mantle were
thrown over it, and the ends drawn
back, according to the figure.  F.

Image omitted.





MANTICE [μαντιχὴ, Gr.] divina­
tion or foretelling things to come.

MANTLE [of manteau, F.] is the
same in English as Mantelle, F. and tho'
Manteau with us signifies a long robe;
yet it was a military habit, used in an­
cient times by great commanders in
the field, as well to manifest their high
places, as also (being cast over their
armour) to repel the extremity of wet, 
cold and heat, and withal to preserve
their armour from rust, and so pre­
serve its glittering lustre.

MANTLINGS [in Heral.] as now
represented about shields, 
are a sort of flourishing:
However, they are always
suppos'd in blazon to be
doubled; that is, lined
throughout with some part
of the furs. French heralds say, that
these Mantlings or Mantles were origi­
nally short coverings, that commanders
wore over their helmets, to defend
their head from the weather; and that
coming away from battle, they wore
them hanging about them in a ragged
manner, caused by the many cuts that
they had received on their heads; and
therefore the more hacked they were, 
the more honourable they were ac­
counted; and that in process of time
they were by degrees made deeper, and
so from the helmet, to hang down be­
low the whole shield, and were adorn­
ed either according to the honour of
the bearer, or fancy of the painter.

MANTUA [manteau, F. prob. so
called from Mantua, a
dukedom in Italy] a loose gown worn
by women, an upper garment.

MANTOE [manteau, F. prob. so
called from Mantua, a
dukedom in Italy] a loose gown worn
by women, an upper garment. 

MANTURNA [among the Romans]
a goddess who was supposed to oblige
wives to stay at home.

MANUAL Operation [of manus, L.]
any thing done or performed by the
hand.

Sign MANUAL, the signing of a
deed or writing under hand and seal.

MANUFACTURE [of manus a hand, 
and factura a making, or facio, L. to
make] handy-work, or any commodity
made by the hand, or things that are
the natural product of a country; as
woollen cloths, bayze, stuffs, hats, &c.
of wool, linen cloth of flax, &c. Also
the place or work-house were manu­
factures are wrought or carried on.  F.

MANUMISSION [of manus and mit­
tere, to send] an enfranchizing or set­
ting a slave or bond-man free; which
in former times was performed before
a magistrate with divers ceremonies.

MAP [mappa, L.] a plain figure, re­
presenting the several parts of the sur­
face of the earth, according to the laws
of perspective, or it is a projection of
the surface of the globe, or a part
thereof in Plano, describing the several
countries, islands, seas, rivers, with
the situation of cities, woods, hills, &c.

Universal MAPS, such as exhibit the
whole surface of the earth, or the two
hemispheres.

MARABOUTS, the idolatrous priests
of Guinea, and the country of the Ne­
groes in Africa: The Great Marabout is
the second person in the kingdom of
Ardres in Guinea, who determines all
affairs both spiritual and political.

MARANASIN, the king of men, a
name given by the Sidonians to Jupiter.

Parian MARBLE, a very fine white
sort of marble, produc'd in the island
Paros, one of the Cyclades of the Ar­
chipelago, of which king David is sup­
pos'd to have procured great quanti­
ties for the building of the temple; and
it is said that the magnificent hall
where Ahasuerus kept his sumptuous
feasts was paved with Parian marble, 
interspers'd with emeralds; and the
greatest part of the most sumptuous
edifices of the ancients were made of
this marble.

MARBLING of Books [in Book-bind­
ing] the sprinkling them with colours
on the outside, and working them with
a pencil in imitation of marble.

MARCASITICAL, of or pertaining
to, or belonging to, or of the nature of
a marcasite.

MARCASSIN [in Heraldry] is a wild
boar, differing from an old one, not only
in size, which may not be visible in
arms, but that its tail hangs down;
whereas that of an old boar is always
turned round in a ring, with only the
end hanging.  F.

MARCELLIANISM [of Marcellus of
Ancyra their leader] the doctrine and
opinions of the Marcellians, who are
said to have held the errors of Sabellius:
the Marcellians did not own the three
hypostases.

MARCESCENT [marcesceus, L.]
growing withered, fading.

MARCESSIBLENESS [marcessibilis, 
L.] withering or fading nature.

MARCH [of the god Mars, to whom
it was dedicated] now reckoned with us
the third month in the year; heretofore
it was the first and is still reckoned so
in some ecclesiastical computations;
the year of our Lord beginning on the
25th day of March. The ancients used



to paint March tawny, with a fierce as­
pect, a helmet on his head, leaning up­
on a spade, holding Aries in his right
hand, and almond blossoms and cions
in his left, and with a basket of garden
seeds on his arm.

MARCHERS those noble­
men, who in
ancient times inhabited near the bor­
ders of Wales and Scotland, and secured
the marches and bounds of them, ruling
like petty kings by their private laws.

Lord MARCHERS those noble­
men, who in
ancient times inhabited near the bor­
ders of Wales and Scotland, and secured
the marches and bounds of them, ruling
like petty kings by their private laws.

MARCITES [so called of Marcus, 
who conferr'd the priesthood and admi­
nistration of the sacraments on women]
a sect of hereticks in the 2d century
who called themselves Perfecti, and
made a profession of doing every thing
with a great deal of liberty and without
fear.

MARCOSSIANS [so called of one
Marcus an Egyptian, who was also re­
puted a magician] an ancient sect of
hereticks, a branch of the Gnosticks.
They had a great number of apocry­
phal books, which they hold for cano­
nical, out of these they pick'd several
idle fables concerning the infancy of
Jesus Christ, which they put off for
true histories. Many of these fables
are still in credit among the Greek
monks.

MARCULPUS, a saint to whom the
French pay a particular regard: the
common people there being persuaded, 
that seven boys being born successively
without a girl between them, can cure
fevers, and even the king's evil, upon
praying to St. Marculphus.

MARESCHAL de Camp [in France]
the same as a major general with us;
an officer whose post is next to that of
the lieutenant general.

MARGENT [marge, F. margo, L.]
the brink or bank of any water, or the
blank space about the edges of a page
of a book, either printed or written.

MARGINATED [marginatus, L.]
having a margin or margent.

MARITATED [maritatus, L.] mar­
ried.

The Congregation of St. MARK [at
Mantua in Italy] a religious order
founded by Albert Spinola a priest to­
wards the end of the 12th century.

Knights of St. MARK [at Venice] an
order of knighthood conferr'd only on
such who have done some extraordina­
ry services to the republick.

MARK [mearc, mancuſ and mancu­
ſi, Sax.] among the Saxons contained
30 of their pence, which was in value
6 s. It is not certain at what time it
came to be valued at 13 s. and 4 d. but
it was so in the year 1194.

MARK of Gold [in ancient Times]
was the quantity of 8 ounces, and was
in value 17 l. 13 s. and 4 d. of our coin
at this time.

MARK Weight, a foreign weight
commonly 8 ounces, and a mark pound
is 16 ounces.

MARK [in France, Holland, &c.] a
weight used for gold and silver, con­
taining eight ounces, or 64 drams, of
192 penny weight. When gold or sil­
ver are sold by the Mark, it is divided
into 24 grains, and the grain into 24
primes.

MARKET, a place where any or all
sorts of provisions are sold, Bradon says
that anciently markets were to be at
least 6 miles and a half and one third
of a half distant from each other; but
that as people increased so likewise did
the privilege of keeping markets; an­
ciently it was customary to have both
markets and fairs kept on Sundays, and
in church-yards, because of the great
distance of the inhabitants from them;
so that the business of religion and
trade were carried on together; and
tho' this custom was forbid by several
kings, yet it was not entirely suppress'd
till the time of K. Henry VI. And there
are still some remains of this practice
in the most northern parts of this king­
dom.

MARMORATED [marmoratus, L.]
made of, wrought in, covered with
marble.

MARMOREOUS [marmoreus, L.] of
or like marble.

MARONITES [so call'd from one
Maron their ring­
leader] a certain sect of Christians in
Asia, who were said formerly to have
embrac'd the errors of the Jacobites, 
Nestorians and Monothelites, but are
now brought over to the church of
Rome. Their language is a kind of
corrupt Syriack, they have a patriarch
(who is a monk of the order of St.
Anthony and claims the title of patriarch
of Antioch, and is always call'd Peter, 
(altho' his name be Thomas, &c.) arch­
bishops, bishops and about 150 curates;
but labour so much under the oppres­
sion of the Turks, that they are forc'd
to work for their living; but yet are
very much inclin'd to hospitality and
entertaining pilgrims, according to their
mean ability; they are strict obser­
vers of Lent, even according to the
ancient rigour, not eating more than
one meal a day, nor that before they



have heard mass, which is not till about
four a clock in the afternoon.

They shew much reverence to their
clergy, the priests are distinguished by
a blue scarf they wear about their caps.

They allow none to marry after they
are entered into orders; but those that
are married may become priests. Pope
Gregory XIII. founded a college at Rome
for the education of their youth, who
having been instructed by Jesuits are
sent back into their own country.

Their clergy wear no surplices nor
cornered caps, keep particular fasts and
feasts; but differ in many particulars
from the church of Rome. Their ser­
vice is read both in the vulgar Language
and Latin.

MARONISTS [so call'd from one
Maron their ring­
leader] a certain sect of Christians in
Asia, who were said formerly to have
embrac'd the errors of the Jacobites, 
Nestorians and Monothelites, but are
now brought over to the church of
Rome. Their language is a kind of
corrupt Syriack, they have a patriarch
(who is a monk of the order of St.
Anthony and claims the title of patriarch
of Antioch, and is always call'd Peter, 
(altho' his name be Thomas, &c.) arch­
bishops, bishops and about 150 curates;
but labour so much under the oppres­
sion of the Turks, that they are forc'd
to work for their living; but yet are
very much inclin'd to hospitality and
entertaining pilgrims, according to their
mean ability; they are strict obser­
vers of Lent, even according to the
ancient rigour, not eating more than
one meal a day, nor that before they
have heard mass, which is not till about
four a clock in the afternoon.

They shew much reverence to their
clergy, the priests are distinguished by
a blue scarf they wear about their caps.

They allow none to marry after they
are entered into orders; but those that
are married may become priests. Pope
Gregory XIII. founded a college at Rome
for the education of their youth, who
having been instructed by Jesuits are
sent back into their own country.

Their clergy wear no surplices nor
cornered caps, keep particular fasts and
feasts; but differ in many particulars
from the church of Rome. Their ser­
vice is read both in the vulgar Language
and Latin.

MAROONING, setting a person on
shore on an uninhabited island.

MAROTIC Stile [in French poetry]
a peculiar, gay, merry, yet simple and
natural manner of writing; introduced
by one Marot, and since imitated by
others. The difference between the
Marotic stile and the Burlesque, consists
in this, that the Marotic is most simple, 
but its simplicity has its nobleness, the
Burlesque is low and groveling, and
borrows false and fulsom ornaments
from the crowd, which people of taste
despise.

Letters of MARQUE, letters of re­
prisal, granted by a king, &c. by which
the subjects of a country are licensed to
make reprisals on those of another.

MARQUESS [so called from
March, Germ. i. e.
a limit or boundary, because anciently
they were governors of Marches or
frontier countries] is an order of nobi­
lity between a duke and an earl or
count, that was not known in England
till the time of king Richard II. who
in the year 1337, created his favourite, 
Robert Vere, who was then earl of
Oxford, marquis of Dublin. The title
given to a marquis in writing, is most
noble, most honourable, and potent Prince;
and by the king he is stiled, Our right
trusty, and entirely beloved Cousin.

The honour of a marquis
is hereditary, and the el­
dest son of a marquis, is, 
by the courtesy of England, 
called earl or lord of a
place; but the youngest sons are called
lord Robert, lord John, &c. A mar­
quis's cap is the same with a duke's, 
and their coronets differ from those of
dukes, in that, whereas a duke's is
adorned with only flowers and leaves, 
a marquis's has flowers and pyramids,
with pearls on them intermix'd, as in
the figure.

Image omitted.



MARQUIS [so called from
March, Germ. i. e.
a limit or boundary, because anciently
they were governors of Marches or
frontier countries] is an order of nobi­
lity between a duke and an earl or
count, that was not known in England
till the time of king Richard II. who
in the year 1337, created his favourite, 
Robert Vere, who was then earl of
Oxford, marquis of Dublin. The title
given to a marquis in writing, is most
noble, most honourable, and potent Prince;
and by the king he is stiled, Our right
trusty, and entirely beloved Cousin.

The honour of a marquis
is hereditary, and the el­
dest son of a marquis, is, 
by the courtesy of England, 
called earl or lord of a
place; but the youngest sons are called
lord Robert, lord John, &c. A mar­
quis's cap is the same with a duke's, 
and their coronets differ from those of
dukes, in that, whereas a duke's is
adorned with only flowers and leaves, 
a marquis's has flowers and pyramids,
with pearls on them intermix'd, as in
the figure.

Image omitted.



MARQUESSET, a marchioness or
wife of a marquess.

MARQUETTE [ancient customs in
Scotland] a right or due, which the wo­
men paid to the king or lord, to ransom
themselves from that infamous custom, 
by which they were obliged to pass the
first night of their marriage with their
lords. So called, probably, because the
fee was half a mark of silver.

MARQUETRY, a sort of chequered
inlaid work, made of wood of a variety
of colours, in the shape of flowers, 
knots, or other devices.  F.

Duty or Service of MARRIAGE [in
Antient Custom] old maids and widows
above 60, who held fees in body, or
were charged with any personal and
military services were antiently obliged
to marry, that they might render those
services to the lord by their husbands, 
or to indemnify the lord, which they
could not do in person.

For the proportion, that marriages
bear to births, and births to burials, 
Mr. Denham has given us a table for
several parts of Europe, that for Eng­
land in general, is

Marriages to Births as 1. to 4. 36.
Births to Burials as 1. 12. to 1.

From which table it appears that mar­
riages one with another do each pro­
duce about 4 births. And by Mr.
King's computation, about 1 in 104 per­
sons marry; and the number of people
being estimated in England at 5 millions
and a half, about 41000 of them marry
annually.

MARRIAGEABLENESS, fitness or
ripeness for marriage.

MARS [with Astronomers] one of the
seven planets, whose character is ♂.

MARS [according to Varro, was so
denominated of mares, L. males; be­
cause he presided over them in battle:
but others say, of Mavors, of magna, 
great things, and verto to turn; others
from ἄρης of ἀναίρειν, Gr. killing; or as
others will have it from הידא a lion, or
הדא he tore in sunder; and others from
mamers in the Sabine tongue] the god of
war, as the poets feign, was the son of
Juno, begotten without the assistance of
her husband Jupiter; for Juno being
displeased that her husband Jupiter
should bring forth Minerva, by the strik­
ing of his head; she consulted with the
goddess Flora, how she might of herself
bring forth a son; Flora bad her touch
a flower which grew in the field Olenius, 
which she having done, she conceived



and bare Mars, who being a son of dis­
content, was made a god of war and dis­
cord. He was never grateful to Jupiter, 
and in his minority was nursed by Thero, 
in the northern climates, that are incli­
nable to war. He lay with Venus the
wife of Vulcan, who by his craft, had
made an iron net, and cast it about
them, as he found them naked; which
net was so artificially made, that nei­
ther of them could disintangle themsel­
ves; and then he called all the gods to
see them in that posture, which caused 
much laughter among them; but at
length, by the entreaty of Neptune, he
set them at liberty.

He was represented riding in a high
chariot, drawn by two furious horses, 
by some named Terror and Pavor or
fear, with all his armour, offensive and
defensive. His attendants were three
frightful spirits, Apprehension, Contention
and Clamour in tattered garments: Be­
fore him flew Fame full of eyes, ears
and tongues.

He was said by some to have been
born in Thrace, because the people of
that country offered human sacrifices to
him, and others offered to him the wolf, 
the vulture, the dog, the pye, the calf
and the horse. Justin says, the Scythians
had no other god; but Herodotus says, 
they worshipped other gods, but did al­
low no temples or statues, but only to
Mars. The Romans had him in high
esteem, because they derived their ori­
ginal from him, and gave out, that Ro­
mulus was his son.

They would not suffer his statues and
images to be erected in their city; but
without it, to intimate their inclination
to foreign, rather than civil war. His
priests were called Salii(of Saliendo)
because they danced and skipped about
his altars, which were erected under the
same roof with those of Venus, to ex­
press the happy influences that the stars
Mars and Venus bestowed on children,
when they met in their nativities.

Mars is said to be the first prince
that invented the discipline of war and
the forming of armies, and therefore
is supposed to be the same with Nimrod
or Belus among the Assyrians.

MARS [with Astronomers] the third
planet in order descending, finishing his
revolution in two years fere, he having
the sun for his centre, when he is acron­
ically opposite he appears to be below
him, nearer to the earth, and almost as
large as Venus, having a greater paral­
lax than the sun, viz. four minutes at
some times, so that when he is in the
lowest apsis of his orb, a great intense­
ness of heat may be felt, if it be in the
summer time, and a great remission of
cold, it it be in the winter; and the
contrary when he is in his apogæum.
The distance between them being com­
puted at 1690280 miles.

MARS [with Astrol.] is called the les­
ser unfortunate, because of its scorching
and drying qualities.

MARS [with Heralds] sig­
nifies gules, or red, assign'd
him on account of his being
so much concerned in
blood, according to heathen
Theology.

Image omitted.



MARSH [merſc. Sax. maersche, Du.
marais, F.] a standing pool of water
mixt with earth, whose bottom is very
dirty, which dries up and diminishes very
much in the summer; also low lands, 
that are sometimes overflowed by the
sea or rivers; or that are well watered
with rivers, ditches, &c.

To MARSHAL [Milit. Aff.] to lodge
to put in due order or rank, to draw up
according to the rulers of the military
art.

MARSHALLING [in Heraldry] is dis­
posing of all persons and things in all
solemnities and celebrations, coronati­
ons, interviews, marriages, funerals, 
triumphs, and the like; also an order­
ly disposing of sundry coat armours, per­
taining to distinct families, and of their
contingent ornaments, with their parts
and appurtenances in their proper pla­
ces.

MART Town, a large town, that is
noted for a great fair, to which people
of several nations resort, as Frankfort
in Germany, &c.

MARTAGON [with Florists] a flower, 
a kind of lily.

MARTIALNESS [of martialis, L.]
warlikeness.

To MARTINATE [a Canting Term]
to transport a person into foreign plan­
tations, or banish him from his native
country for offences committed.

MARTLETS [in Heral­
dry] are what are called
Martinets, small birds, 
whose feet are so short, they
are seldom to be seen, and
their wings so long, that should they
pitch upon a level, they would not be
able to rise; wherefore they alight not
but upon places aloft, that they may take
flight again, by throwing themselves
off. See the figure.

Image omitted.





MARTYRED [martyrisé, F. of μαρ­
τυρίξεις, Gr.] having suffered martyr­
dom.

To MARTYRIZE [μαρτυρίξω, Gr.]
to put to death on the account of reli­
gion, or for bearing testimony to the
truth.

MARTYROLOGY [μαρφυρ, of
μάρτυρ a martyr, and λόγος, Gr. a
speech, &c.] a history of martyrs; also
a register anciently kept in religious
houses, wherein was an account of the
donations of benefactors, and the days
of the month and year when they died,
&c.

MARTYROLOGIST, one who
writes a history of martyrs.

MARVELLOUS [marveilleux, F.]
wonderful.

MARVELLOUSNESS, wonderful­
ness.

MASCHIL [ליבשמ, Heb. instruction]
a term in the title of several psalms, 
signifying he that instructs or makes to
understand.

Some interpreters think, but without
reason, that it signifies an instrument
of musick. It is more probable that
it signifies an instructive song.

Some ancient Rabbins thought that
in repeating the psalms that have this
inscription they always added an expli­
cation to it.

Some of the fathers have thought
that the word Maschil expresses the
profound meaning of the psalm.

But others on the contrary say, that
it shews the clearness and perspicuity of
the psalm, and that it has no need of
any particular explication.

MASCLES [in Heraldry]
mascles; F. some say that
Mascles represent the holes
or marshes of nets; others,
that they represent spots
in certain flints about Ro­
ses, and are called Masculæ
in Latin, which small flints being cut
in two, this figure appears on the in­
side of them.

Image omitted.



MASCULINE Rhimes [in French po­
etry] such as are made with words
which have a strong, open and accent­
ed pronunciation, as amour, joul, moil
and sort; whereas feminine rhimes are
such as have an e feminine in their last
syllable, as pere, mere, &c.

MASCULINE Planets [with Astrol.]
are Sol, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn; but
Mercury is a kind of hemaphrodite.

MASCULY [in Heraldry] full of mas­
cles.

MASH [of misceo, L. to mingle] a
mixture.

To MASK, to put on a mask, or put
on a disguise; to go to masks or mas­
querades.

MASONS were in­
corporated about the
year 1419, having been
call'd the free Masons; 
a fraternity of great 
account, who have 
been honoured by se­
veral kings, and very 
many nobility and gentry being of their
society.

They are governed by a master and
two wardens, 25 assistants, and there 
are 65 on the livery, the fine for which
is 5 l. and that for stewards 10 l.

Their armorial ensigns are, Azure on
a chevron between three castles argent, 
a pair of compasses somewhat extended
of the first. Crest a castle of the 2d.

Their hall is in Basing-Lane.

Image omitted.



MASONRY [maçonnerie, F.] masons
work; the art of hewing, cutting or
squaring stones, and fitting them for
the uses of building; also the assem­
bling and joining them together with
mortar.

Bound MASONRY, is that wherein
the stones were placed one over another
like tiles, the joints of the beds being
level, and the mounters perpendicular.

Greek MASONRY, is that, where af­
ter two stones are laid, which make a
course, another is laid at the end, which
makes two courses.

MASONRY by equal Courses, the same
as bound masonry, only that the stones
are not hewed.

MASONRY by unequal Courses, is made
of unhewn stones, and laid in bound
work; but not of the same thickness, 
nor observing any equality.

MASONRY filled up in the Middle, is
made of unhewn stones thrown in at
random upon mortar.

Compound MASONRY, is formed of
all the rest.

Free MASONS a very ancient
society or bo­
dy of men, so called, either for some
extraordinary knowledge of masonry
which they are supposed to be masters
of; or because the first founders of the
society were persons of that profession.
These are now in all or most nations in
Europe; what the end of their societies
is, yet remains in some measure a se­
cret, unless that they tend to promote
friendship, society, mutual assistance
and good fellowship; or what Samuel
Prichard has lately publish'd in his pam­
phlet, entitled, Masonry Dissected.



Accepted MASONS a very ancient
society or bo­
dy of men, so called, either for some
extraordinary knowledge of masonry
which they are supposed to be masters
of; or because the first founders of the
society were persons of that profession.
These are now in all or most nations in
Europe; what the end of their societies
is, yet remains in some measure a se­
cret, unless that they tend to promote
friendship, society, mutual assistance
and good fellowship; or what Samuel
Prichard has lately publish'd in his pam­
phlet, entitled, Masonry Dissected.

MASORAH [הדסמ, Heb. i. e. tradi­
tion] criticisms of the Jewish rabbies, 
on the Hebrew text of the bible; con­
sisting of various readings; and an ac­
count in what form every word is met
with through the scripture; also a com­
putation of all the verses, words and
letters of it.

MASORITES [of חדסמ, Heb. tra­
dition, or הדיסמ to bend] a name given
to those rabbins, who, under Esdras the
scribe, purged the Hebrew bible of the
errors crept into it in the Babylonish
captivity; divided the canonical books
into 22, and those 22 books into chap­
ters, and the chapters into verses; dis­
tinguished the manner of reading from
that of writing, which they call the
Keri and Cetib; made the punctation, 
that supplies the want of vowels, &c.
These continued 130 years, and ended
in rabbi Simon the Just, who went to
meet Alexander the Great in his ponti­
fical robes. Capellus denies this, espe­
cially as to the invention of the Hebrew
points, and ascribes it to the Masorites
of Tiberius, 400 years after Christ.

MASQUE a covering for the face;
a visard.  F.

MASQUE [with Architects] certain
pieces of sculpture, representing some
hideous form; grotesque or satyrs fa­
ces, used to fill up or adorn some va­
cant places.

MASS [in Mathematicks] the matter
of the body cohering with it, i. e. mov­
ing and gravitating along with it; and
is distinguished from its bulk or volumn, 
which is its expansion in length, breadth
and thickness.

MASS of Blood [with Anat.] all the
blood in a human body.

MASS [with Apothecaries] every
physical composition of powders, and
other ingredients wrought into one
lump.

MASS [with Surgeons] an oblong and
sharp pointed instrument, which is put
into a trepan, that it may stand more
firmly.

MASS [with Latin Authors] is gene­
rally used to signify all kinds of divine
service, or a lesson of that service; but
in the Romish church, it signifies an ob­
lation, which they call Mass, and fre­
quently liturgy, or church service; but
especially what they call the unbloody
sacrifice of the body, and blood of our
Saviour Jesus Christ, which is offered
upon the altar, under the species of
bread and wine.

The word Mass taken in this sense, 
is not to be found in any place of scrip­
ture; but is said to have been us'd ever
since the third century, by the Latin fa­
thers, and other ecclesiastical authors.

It is in vain to seek its etymology;
either in Greek or Hebrew, as some
have done.

Missa is deriv'd from mitto to send.
Missa has been us'd for missio.

And as at the conclusion of the Mass
of the Catechumens, that is after the
gospel was read, and after the sermon;
as also after the sacrifices and prayers
were ended, the priest or the deacon
sent the people away by pronouncing
with a loud voice Ite missa est or Missio
est. You may all return home.

High MASS is that sung by cho­
risters, and celebrated
with the assistance of a deacon and sub­
deacon.

Grand MASS is that sung by cho­
risters, and celebrated
with the assistance of a deacon and sub­
deacon.

Low MASS is that wherein the pray­
ers are all barely rehearsed without
any singing, and performed without
much ceremony, or the assistance of any
deacon or sub deacon.

The MASS of the Beatæ, or the Mass
of our Lady, is that perform'd and offer­
ed to God, by the intercession of the
virgin Mary.

Beau MASS a mass rehearsed
every day, at which
the ladies and Beau-monde of the place
attend.

Perfumed MASS a mass rehearsed
every day, at which
the ladies and Beau-monde of the place
attend.

Common MASS, or mass of the com­
munity in a monastery, is a mass cele­
brated at certain hours, whereat the
whole body or community assists.

MASS of the Holy Ghost, a mass which
is celebrated at the beginning of any so­
lemnity, or ecclesiastical assembly, be­
ginning with the invocation of the Holy
Ghost.

Holy-day MASS, is such on which cer­
tain prayers or lectures are read suita­
ble to the day.

MASS of Judgment, a mass wherein
a person clear'd himself of any calumny
by some proof agreed upon.

MASS of the Dead, a mass perform'd
at the request of the deceased, which
begins with Requiem, thence called a
Requiem.

MASS of a Saint, is that wherein
God is invok'd by the intercession of
some saint.

MASS of Security, a mass anciently
rehearsed at examination of Catechu­
mens, when enquiry was made as to
their disposition for baptism.

Votive MASS, an extraordinary mass
besides that of the day, rehearsed on
some extraordinary occasion.



Dry MASS, is one wherein there is
no consecration.

MASSALIANS, a sect of Hereticks
who appear'd in the Christian church, 
about the year 361. Their authors
were certain monks of Mesopotamia, 
who growing weary of labour, which
at that time was a considerable part of
their discipline, they pretended that
prayer alone was sufficient without good
works, that it afforded them strength
to resist all temptation, that it put the
devil to flight and rooted out sins; they
held that men had two souls, the one
of which was heavenly, and the other
a devil, who was expell'd by prayer, 
and thence were call'd Euchites, of ευ­
χη, Gr. prayer.

They gave it out that they could
prophesy, and pretended that they could
see the Trinity with their bodily eyes, 
and that they became so far like to God, 
that in such condition they did not sin, 
even in their thought; they fancied
that the Holy Ghost descended upon
them visibly, at the time of their or­
dination, at which time they pretended
they danced on the devil. They dis­
solved marriages, and persuaded chil­
dren to leave their parents to follow
them; and forbad the giving alms to
any but those of their own sect.

The men wore their hair long like
women, and went clothed in magnifi­
cent robes.

MASSES [in Painting] are the large
part of a picture, containing the great
lights and shadows; so that when it is
almost dark, we can only see the masses
of a picture, i. e. the great lights and
shadows.

MASSIVE [massif, F.] not delicate, 
as a massive column is, 
one which is too short for the order it
bears.

MASSY [massif, F.] not delicate, 
as a massive column is, 
one which is too short for the order it
bears.

MASSINESS solidity, weighti­
ness, bulkiness.

MASSIVENESS solidity, weighti­
ness, bulkiness. 

MASSONE [in He­
raldry]
is when an ordinary is
represented in the manner
of a stone wall, with all
the joints between the
stones appearing, as they generally do
in stone buildings; and so the import
of the word is, as much as done in
mason's work. See the figure.

Image omitted.



MASSONED [in He­
raldry]
is when an ordinary is
represented in the manner
of a stone wall, with all
the joints between the
stones appearing, as they generally do
in stone buildings; and so the import
of the word is, as much as done in
mason's work. See the figure.

Image omitted.



MASSORA [אדוסמ, Heb. tradition]
a performance on the Hebrew bible by
some ancient Jews, Rabbins, to secure
it from any alteration, and to be a
Hedge to the Law; by numbering the
verses, words and letters of the text, 
and marking all the variations of it.

MASSORITES, Jewish doctors, au­
thors of the Massora.

MAST [mæſt, Sax.] of a ship;
also the fruit of the oak, beech, ches­
nut, &c.

Fore-MAST [of a Ship] stands in the
fore-part or fore-castle, and is about
4.5ths of the main-mast in length.

Misen MAST [of a Ship] stands aft
in the sternmost part of it, and is in
length about half that of the main-mart.

Top MASTS [in a Ship] are those
masts that are fixed upon the main, 
fore, misen-masts and bow sprit.

Top Gallant MASTS [in a Ship] are
those fixed to the head of the main and
fore-top-masts; they carry flag-staves on
their tops, whereon are hanged the
flags, pendants, &c.

Jury MAST [in a Ship] is a mast
made of yards, or other pieces of tim­
ber spliced or fished together, woulding
them with ropes. This mast is set up, 
when in a storm or fight a mast is born
over-board, till they can be provided
with a better.

Armed MAST [in a Ship] is a mast
made of more than one tree.

Over MASTED a ship is said so to
be, when her masts
are either too long or too big, which
makes her lie too much down by the
wind, and labour too much a hull.

Taut MASTED a ship is said so to
be, when her masts
are either too long or too big, which
makes her lie too much down by the
wind, and labour too much a hull.

Under MASTED, a ship is said so to
be, when her masts are either too small, 
or too short, which hinders her from
bearing so much sail as is requisite to
give her true way.

MASTER of the Ordnance, a great
officer, to whose care all the king's ord­
nance and artillery is committed.

MASTER Wort [with Botanists] an
herb, whose leaves resemble Angelica, 
except that they grow on lesser stalks
and lower.

MASTERLESS, ungovernable, un­
ruly, having no master.

MASTICATION, a chewing, which
action breaks the meat to pieces, by the
help of the teeth; so that by that means
being mix'd with the spittle, it is pre­
pared both to be the more easily swal­
lowed and digested in the stomach.

MASTIGADOUR [with Horsemen] a
slabbering Bit, a snaffle of iron, all
smooth; and of a piece, guarded with
Pater-Nosters, and are composed of 3
halfs of great rings, made into demi-­
ovals of unequal bigness, the lesser be­
ing inclosed within the greater, which
ought to be about half a foot high. A 
Mastigadour is mounted with a head
two reins.



MATCH [with Gunner] a sort of
rope made of such combustible stuff, 
that being once lighted, it will burn on
by degrees, and regularly, without ever
going out, as long as any of it is left.

MATCH-MAKERS, those persons
who mediate between men and women
to encourage them to marry.

MATCHLESNESS [of match, leaſ
and neſſe, Sax.] uncapableness of be­
ing matched or equalled.

To MATE [Mate, Sax.] to amaze
or astonish, to dash, daunt or put out
of countenance.

To MATE, to match, to pair, or
equal.

MATEOTECHNY [ματαιοτεχνία, Gr.]
a vain or idle science.

MATERIALISTS, an ancient sect, 
who being possessd with this principle, 
out of nothing comes nothing, had re­
course to eternal matter, on which they
supposed God wrought in the creation.

MATERIATED [materiatus, L.]
made of matter.

MATERNAL Affection [Hieroglyphi­
cally] was represented by the pelican,
which is said to strike blood out of its 
own breast to feed its young.

MATERNALNESS, motherliness,
motherly affection.

MATH [with Husbandmen] a mow­
ing, as Aftermath, after-grass, or second
mowing of grass.

MATHEMA [μάθημα, Gr.] the ma­
thematicks or mathematical arts.

MATHEMATICAL Composition, is
the synthetical method, or that which
proceeds by certain degrees or steps, 
from known quantities in the search
of unknown, and then demonstrares, 
that the quantities so found will satisfy
the proportion.

MATHEMATICKS [mathematiques, 
F. artes mathematicæ, L. τέχναί μαθη­
ματιχαὶ, Gr.] in its original signification
comprehended any kind of discipline or
learning; but now the word is usually
applied to some noble sciences, which
are taught by true demonstration, and
are exercis'd about Quantity, i. e. what­
soever is capable of being numbered or
measured, which is compriz'd under
numbers, lines, superficies and solids.

Pure MATHEMATICKS, are Arith­
metick and Geometry, and consider the
quantity abstractedly, and without any
relation to matter.

Simple MATHEMATICKS, the same
as pure mathematicks.

MATHESIS [μάθησις of μανθάνω, Gr.
to learn] the mathematicks.

MATINS [in the Romish church] the
first part of the daily service.

MATRALES [among the Romans] a
festival observed by the matrons on the
first of June, in honour of the goddess
Matuta, or Ino, the wife of Athamas, 
king of Thebes. They only entered the
temple with a slave, and their sisters
children; the slave they cuff'd in me­
mory of the jealousy of Ino, and pray'd
for their sisters children, but not for
their own.

MATRASS [with Chy­
mists] a bolt-head, a long, 
strait necked vessel of glass, 
fitted to the nose of an a­
lembick, and frequently
used in distillation, and are
also call'd receivers, of
this form.

Image omitted.



MATRICE [with Dyers] is applied
to the first simple colours, whence all
the rest are derived and composed, as
black, white, blue, red and fallow or
root colour.

MATRICE [Anat.] that part of
the female of any kind, 
wherein the fœtus is conceived and nou­
rished till the time of its delivery.

MATRIX [Anat.] that part of
the female of any kind, 
wherein the fœtus is conceived and nou­
rished till the time of its delivery.

To MATRISATE [matrisatum, L.]
to imitate the mother.

MATRIX [of μήτρα, Gr. the mother]
the matrice,  L.

MATRIX [with Surgeons] that part
of the womb in which the child is con­
ceived.

MATRIX any thing serving for
the place of genera­
tion of a body, whether organical, as
the matrix of animals; or inorganical, 
as those of vegetables, metals or mine­
rals.

MATRICE any thing serving for
 the place of genera­
tion of a body, whether organical, as
the matrix of animals; or inorganical, 
as those of vegetables, metals or mine­
rals.

MATRON [matroné, F. matrona, of
mater, L.] a virtuous, prudent, motherly
woman, that keeps her family under
good goverment or discipline, and such
an one, as to chastity and exemplary
life, to whom young virgins may be
safely committed to be educated.

MATRON [of an Hospital] a grave
woman that looks after the children.

MATRONS [in a Law sense] married
women of experience, who had been
mothers of children; such as are em­
pannelled upon juries on convicts, who
plead their bellies.

MATRONAL [matronalis, L.] of or
belonging to a matron.

MATRONALIA [among the Ro­
mans] the feast of the matrons, instituted
by Romulus, and celebrated by the Ro­
man women in honour of Mars; to
whom they thought themselves oblig'd
for the happiness of bearing good chi­
dren; a favour which he first conferred



on his mistress Rhea; during the time of
which, the men sent presents to the
women, as the women in like manner
did to the men on the Saturnalia. It
was observed on the first of March for
pregnancy, the year then beginning to
bear fruit.

MATROSSES [in a Train of Artil­
lery] a sort of soldiers next in degree
under the gunners, who assist them a­
bout the guns, in traversing, spunging
and firing, loading, &c. They carry
fire-locks, and march along with store
waggons, as a guard, and also as assis­
tants in case a waggon should break, &c.

MAT [matta, L.] rushes interwoven
to lay on floors, and for various other
uses.

MATTER [with Natural Philoso­
phers] is a solid, divisible and passive
substance call'd body, and first principal
of natural things; which is extended in­
to length, breadth and thickness; which
is capable of putting on, all manner of
directions and degree of swiftness.

Nude MATTER [in Law] is the na­
ked or bare allegation of a thing done, 
to be proved only by witnesses, and not
by a record, or any specialty in writing
under seal.

MATURA, the goddess of ripe corn.

MATURENESS [of maturitas, L.]
ripeness of fruit or years, the arrival
of any thing to its just degree of per­
fection.

MATURESCENT [maturescens, L.]
waxing ripe.

MATURNA, a heathen goddess wor­
shipped by the Romans, as one whose
office was to oblige the bride to stay at
home.

MATUTA [in the old Roman lan­
guage, signified good] she had a temple
at Rome built by Servius Tullius. Some
say she was Ino, the nurse of Bacchus, 
and wife of Athamas; others will have
her to be Aurora.  L.

MATUTILIA [so called of Matuta]
feast in May, consecrated to Manna or
Leucothoe. All maid servants except
one were excluded from those feasts, 
and this one, every matron was to strike
on the cheek, becauie Matuta was pla­
gued with jealousy, that her husband
loved her maid better than he did her.

MAUDLED [prob. of matutinus
L. of the morning]
besotted or disordered by drinking
strong liquors, especially in a morning.

MAUDUIN [prob. of matutinus
L. of the morning]
besotted or disordered by drinking
strong liquors, especially in a morning.

MAUSOLÆUM, a stately sepulchre
built by Artemisia, queen of Carta, for
Mausolus her husband, whom she lov'd
so dearly, thai besides his edifice, she
caused the ashes of his body, after it
had been burnt, to be put into a cup
of wine, and drank them, to give him
a lodging in her heart. This sepulchre
was built by four of the most excellent
artificers of that time. It was square, 
411 foot in compass, and 45 cubits
high; the square looking to the east
was made by Scapas; that towards the
west by Leochares; that to the south
by Timotheus, and that towards the
north by Briaxis, on the top of it was
a brazen chariot, drawn by four hor­
ses with many wonderful and curious
inventions. The whole was inrich'd
with so many rare ornaments, that it
was esteemed one of the greatest won­
ders of the world.

MAWKISHNESS [of Maʒa a maw
or stomach, ſeoc sick, and neſſe,
Sax.] sickness at the stomach, squea­
mishness; also a nauseous taste.

MAXILLAR [maxillaris, L.] of or
pertaining to the jaw-bone.

MAXY [with Tin Miners] is what
they call a weed of the marcasite kind, 
when the load or vein of oar degene­
rates into this or any thing else, that is
not tin, they call it a Weed.

MAY [of majores, so called by Romu­
lus, in honour of his senators; or, as
others say, from Maia, the mother of
Mercury, to whom sacrifices were of­
fered in that month] the fifth and most
pleasant month in the year with us.
The ancients used to paint May with a
lovely aspect, in a robe of white and
green, embroidered with daffodils, 
haw thorn and blue-bottles, and on
his head a garland of white and damask
roses, holding a lute in one hand, and
a nightingal on the fore-finger of the
other.

MAY Fly [so called of the month of
May, wherein it is produced] an insect
called a water-cricket, which in this
month creeping out of the river turns
to a fly. It lies commonly under stones
near the banks, and is a good bait for
some sort of fish.

MAY Games, certain sports or mer­
riments, dancing, &c. used on the first
day of May, which seem to have taken
their rise from the like customs of the
Romans, who followed such sports in
honour of Maja or Flora, the goddess
flowers.

MAYOR [anciently, as some say, 
meyt, rather of miret, Brit. to keep or
preserve, than of the Latin, major; or, 
as others say, of דמ, Hebrew or Syriack, 
which signifies lord, and the old Saxons
being descended of the old Germans,



who (as Berosus says) descended of the
old Hebrews, and so had retained many
Hebrew words; and thence the word
mayor is deriv'd of דמ, which of itself
signifying lord, the addition of lord to
it is a tautology.

MAZY [of maſe, Sax.] of or be­
longing to a maze, intricate.

MAZEMENT [of maſe, Sax. a
gulph] amazement.

MEAGRE [in a figurative Sense] dry, 
barren, as a meagre stile, a jejune, bar­
ren, dry stile.

MEAGRENESS [of mæʒre and
neſ&#383e, Sax.] leanness.

MEALED, pulveriz'd or reduced to
powder.

MEALINESS [mæle, ʒelic and neſ­
ſe, Sax.] mealy nature, &c.

A MEAN [of moyen, F.] a middle.

MEAN [in Law] the middle between
two extremes; and that either first in
time, as his Action was mean, betwixt
the disseisin made to him and his reco­
very, i. e. in the interim or the mean 
time; or secondly in dignity, as there
is a Lord mean and Tenant mean.

MEAN Axis [in Opticks] is a right
line drawn from the point of concourse
of the optick nerves, thro' the middle
of the right line, which joins the ex­
tremity or end of the same optick
nerves.

MEAN proportional [in Musick] the
second of any three proportionals.

MEANING [of mænan, Sax. to
mean] sense, signification.

MEANNESS [prob. of mæne bad, 
or ʒæmene and neſſe, Sax.] lowness, 
pitifulness, poorness, &c.

Continual MEANS [with Arith.] are
when one root or first number is mul­
tiplied by itself, and the following num­
bers likewise by themselves, the num­
bers taken between one and the num­
ber last produced, are called continual
means; as 2, the root multiply'd by
itself produces 4; which 4 multiplied
by itself, produces 16, and 16 being
squared, produces 256; and so 2. 4.
and 16, are continual means between 1
and 256.

MEASLES [messen, Du.] a distemper
or cutaneous disease, consisting in a
general appearance of eruptions, not
tending to suppuration, with a fever.

MEASURABLENESS, capableness
of being measured.

MEASURE of a Number [in Arithme­
tick] is such a number as divides ano­
ther without leaving any fraction.

MEASURE of a Line [Geometry] is
any right line taken at pleasure.

MEASURE [with Philos.] as time is
the measure of motion.

MEASURE Note [in Musick] is a
Semibreve; so 
named, because it is of a certain deter­
minate measure or length of time by
itself; and all the rest of the notes are
measured by, or adjusted to its value.

Time Note [in Musick] is a
Semibreve; so 
named, because it is of a certain deter­
minate measure or length of time by
itself; and all the rest of the notes are
measured by, or adjusted to its value.

MEASURE [in Poetry] is a certain
number of syllables, which are distin­
guished and heard separately by the ear
from another number of syllables. The
union of two or more measures make
a verse, and in the variety of measure
consists the chief harmony of verse.

MEASURE [in Geometry) any certain
quantity assumed, as one or unity, to
which the ratio of other homogeneous
or similar quantities is express'd.

MEASURE of a Figure or plane sur­
face, is a square, whose side is of any
determinate length.

MEASURE of a Solid, is a cube, the
sides of which are of any length at plea­
sure.

MEASURE of an Angle, 
is an arch described from
the vertex, a, in any place
between its legs, as b c.

Image omitted.



MEASURE of Velocity 
[in Mechanicks] is the
space pass'd over by the
moving body in any given
time.

MEASURE of the Mass [in Mecha­
nicks] is the weight or quantity of mat­
ter of it.

MEATHES [meðð, Sax.] mead, a
sort of drink made with hony, metheg­
lin. Milton.

MEAWING [miaulizatio, L.] the
crying of a cat.

MECHANICAL Science, is that which
is conversant about the outward frame
and structure of bodies, and the figures
they obtain by workmanship.

MECHANICALNESS, mechanical
nature, property, quality.

MECHANICKS [mechanique, F. artes
mechanicæ, L. μηχανιχὴ, Gr.] the science
of motion, or that part of the mathe­
maticks that shews or demonstrates the
effects of Powers, or moving forces and
applies them to engines, machines, &c.
and demonstrates the laws of motion, 
&c.

MEDAL [medaille, F. of metallum, 
L.] a piece of metal in the form of mo­
ney, stamped to preserve the memory
of some illustrious person, some notable
victory, or something that is a peculiar
benefit to a nation or state.



Ancient MEDALS, such as were
struck between the 2d and the 7th cen­
tury.

Modern MEDALS, those that have
been struck within these 300 years.

Consular MEDALS, such as were
struck during the time that Rome was
govern'd by consuls, and are so called
in distinction to imperial medals.

Imperial MEDALS of the upper Empire, 
such as were struck from the beginning
of Julius Cæsar's reign, to the year of
Christ, 260.

Imperial MEDALS of the lower Em­
pire, are those till the time of the taking
of Constantinople.

Singular MEDALS, are either such
as are not found in the cabinets of the
curious; but are only met with by
chance; or such, of which there is not
above one of a sort extant.

Spurious MEDALS, are such as are
counterfeited and put off as antique, 
when they are not.

Mutilated MEDALS, are such as are
not intire, or are defaced.

Redintegrated MEDALS, are such
wherein the letters Rest are found, 
which intimates that they have been
restored by the emperor.

Dipp'd MEDALS, are such as are
struck with pure copper and afterwards
silvered.

Covered or Plated MEDALS, such as
have a leaf of silver over the copper.

Grain'd or Indented MEDALS, are
those whose edges are cut like teeth.

Countermark'd MEDALS, are those
that are cut on the side of the head or
on the reverse.

MEDIATE [mediatus, L.] it is a term
of relation to two extremes apply'd to
a third, which is in the middle.

MEDIATION [in Geom.] with re­
spect to lines, is called bissection or bi­
partition.

MEDIATRINA, a goddess who was
supposed to cure sick people at her
feasts, which were in September, the
Romans drank new wines mixt with
old, which served them instead of phy­
sick.

MEDICATED, meats or drinks, are
such as have medicinal ingredients
mingled with them.

MEDICINAL Days [with Physicians]
those days in which an imperfect and ill
crisis of a distemper often happens; and
are so called, because medicines may
be given on them. They are reckoned
the 6th, 8th, 10th, 12th, 16th, 18th,
&c.

MEDICINAL Hours, those hours
proper to take medicines in, of which
there are four, viz. the Morning fasting, 
about an hour after Dinner, about four
hours after Dinner, and going to Bed.

MEDICINE [medicina, L.] an art
that assists nature, and is design'd for
the preserving of health in human bo­
dies as much as is possible, by the use
of proper remedies. It is divided into
five parts.

1. Physiology, which treats of a human
constitution, as it is sound and well.

2. Pathology, which treats of the pre­
ternatural constitution of our bodies.

3. Semiotica, which treats of the signs
of health and diseases.

4. Hygiena, that which delivers rules
for the regimen, to be observed in the
preservation of health.

5. Therapeutica, which teaches the ma­
nagement of diet, and also compre­
hends surgery and the art of medicine
properly so called.

MEDICO-PHYSICAL, of or pertain­
ing to natural physick.

MEDITATION, deep consideration;
an action whereby we consider any
thing closely, or wherein the mind is
employ'd in the search of any truth.

MEDITRINALIA [of Meditrina, a
certain goddess of physick] feasts cele­
brated by the Romans on the 30th of
September, and so called, because they
then began to drink new wine, mingled
with the old; which they held to be
medicinal, and serv'd them instead of
physick.  L.

MEDIUM [with Philosophers] is the
peculiar constitution or frame of any
space thro' which bodies move; thus
Air is the Medium in which all living
creatures on the land breathe and live;
where all meteors breed and move;
the Water is the Medium in which fishes
live and move.

Ætherial MEDIUM [according to
Sir Isaac New­
ton] a more universal, ærial medium
than that particular one wherein we
live and breathe, and much more rare, 
subtil, elastick and active than air; and
by that means freely permeating the
pores and interstices of all other medi­
ums, and diffusing itself thro' the whole
creation. And by the intervention of
which his opinion is, that most of the
great Phænomenas of nature are affect­
ed.

Subtil MEDIUM [according to
Sir Isaac New­
ton] a more universal, ærial medium
than that particular one wherein we
live and breathe, and much more rare, 
subtil, elastick and active than air; and
by that means freely permeating the
pores and interstices of all other medi­
ums, and diffusing itself thro' the whole
creation. And by the intervention of
which his opinion is, that most of the
great Phænomenas of nature are affect­
ed.

MEDIUM Cœli [with Astrologers] the
middle heaven, the 12th house, or the
angle of the South in a Scheme, in
which planets and stars have the great­
est height they can have, and of con­



sequence dart rays more direct and of
greater strength and efficacy.

Logical MEDIUM, is an agreement, 
reason or consideration, for which any
thing is affirmed or denied: or that
cause why the greater extreme is attri­
buted to or deny'd of the less in the
conclusion.

Arithmetical MEDIUM, is that which
is equally distant from each extreme, 
called Medium rei.

Geometrical MEDIUM, is that where
the same ratio is preserved between the
first and second, and the second and the
third terms, called Medium Personæ.

MEDULLINE [medullinus, L.] of or
belonging to marrow.

MEDUSA [Μηδοῖσα, Gr.] the daugh­
ter of Phorcus, by a sea-monster call'd
Cetus, or the whale, as the poets tell
us, had hair as yellow as gold; Neptune, 
being enamoured with her beauty, lay
with her in Minerva's temple, and on
her begat Pegasus; at which Minerva
being provoked turned her hair into
snakes, and all that afterwards look'd
on it were turned into stones. Perseus
cut off Medusa's head, when the snakes
were asleep, and carrying it into Afri­
ca, fill'd it full of serpents.

MEEKNESS [prob. of meca or mæca, 
Sax. equal] gentleness, quietness of tem­
per, not apt to be provoked to anger.

MEGÆRA [Envy] one of the three
furies of Hell; the other being Alecto, 
which signifies want of repose, and
Tysiphone, vengeance, violent death.

MEGALESIA [μεγαλήσια, Gr.] the
Megalensian games, certain games cele­
brated by the Romans, on the fifth of
April, in honour of Cybele, the grand­
mother of the Gods. In the procession, 
the women danc'd before the image of
the goddess, and the magistrates ap­
peared in all their robes.  L.

MELCHITES [so called of the Hebrew
word ךלמ, Melek a king; this name be­
ing given them in derision, as being of
the religion of the emperor, who pre­
sided over that council] the Syrian, Coph­
ti or Egyptian and other eastern Chri­
stians in the Levant, who tho' they are
not Greeks, yet follow the common doc­
trine of the Greek church, and adhere to
the decision of the great council of
Chalcedon.

They have translated the bible into
Arabick, also the councils and Eutholo­
gion, with most of the divinity books
of the Greeks. They deny purgatory.
and strongly oppose the popes supre­
macy: and are said not to differ in
their faith from the Greek church.

MELEAGRIS [with Florists] a flower
called a fritillary.

MELLIFLUENT [mellifluus, L.]
flowing with honey, full of sweetness;
also eloquent.

MELLOWNESS [of mear&wyn;a and
neſſe, Sax.] softness of taste, ripe­
ness.

MELODIOUSNESS [melodieux, F.]
fulness of melody, harmoniousness of
sound.

MELODY [μελοδία of μέλος a verse, 
and ώδὴ a song, Gr.] a sweet air, or
pleasing musical tune.

MELPOMENE [Μελπομένη of μέλπο­
μαι, Gr. to sing] one of the muses, to
whom the poets ascribe the invention of
tragedy. She was represented in paint­
ing, &c. like a virago, with a grave
and majestick countenance, cloathed in
a mantle of changeable crimson, hav­
ing her head adorned with diamonds, 
pearls and rubies; holding scepters, 
with crowns upon them, in her left
hand, and in her right hand a naked
poniard; and at her feet crowns and
scepters lying.

MEMBER [in a Metaphorical Sense]
a part of a body ecclesiastick, civil or
politick, as a member of Christ, of a
society, of parliament, &c.  L.

MEMBERS [membra, L. membres, F.]
the outward parts of the body, that
grow, as it were branches from the
trunk of a tree.

The MEMBERS of a Man, are divid­
ed into similary or simple and com­
pound.

Similary MEMBERS [with Anatom.]
are the bones, which in a human body, 
are to the number of 306, of which
70 go to compose the head, 65 to the
back and breast; 84 to the two shoul­
ders, arms and hands; and 90 in the
two thighs, haunches, legs and feet.

Besides bones, there are cartilages, 
the ligaments, tendons, fibres, or small
fillets, strait, traversing in roundness
and oblique.

Also veins (which are reckoned equal
to the number of the days in the year,
i. e. 365) the arteries, nerves and flesh;
in these are included the kernels, the
entrails (in their substance) the bowels
and the muscles, which are accounted
in number 415. To these may be ad­
ded the skin, fat and marrow.

Compound MEMBERS [with Anatom.]
are of two sorts, external and internal.

External Compound MEMBERS [with
Anatom.] are the head, breast, belly,
arms and legs.



Internal Compound MEMBERS [with
Anatom.] are of three sorts, Natural, 
Vital and Animal. Of the last,
The natural internal Compound MEM­
BERS [with Anatom.] are those that
serve the lower belly, as the nutritive fa­
culty or power, i. e. the first digestion, 
by which the food is converted into
chyle or suck. These are the pipe or
passage from the mouth to the stomach
and the bowels. Others serve the se­
cond concoction, and cause the chyle to
convert into blood and nourishment, 
and separate the excrements; 2 those
that serve the middle belly, as the heart
lungs, &c. called vitals, which see. And
the
Animal Internal MEMBERS [with
Anatom.] they are disposed in 5 ranks, 
viz. the outward and inward skin of the
brain, the smaller streams of it, i. e.
the marrow of the back bone and the
nerves: the organs or instruments of ex­
terior sense, viz. the eyes, ears and nos­
trils: The fuliginous and phlegmatick
excrements.

MEMBRANE [membrana, L.] a simi­
lar part of an animal body; being a
thin, white, flexible expanded skin, 
formed of several sorts of fibres inter­
woven together, serving to cover or
w rap up some certain parts of the body.

MEMBRANOUS [membraneus, L.] of, 
or pertaining to, or full of membranes.

MEMBRED [in Herald.] membré, F.
is a term by which they express the
limbs and legs of a bird: When the
beak and legs are of a different colour
from the body, they say, beaked and
membred of such a colour.

MEMBRETTO [with Architects] a
pilaster that bears up an arch. They
are often fluted, but not with above se­
ven or nine channels. They are com­
monly used to adorn door-cases, galle­
ries, fronts and chimney pieces, and to
bear up the cornishes and friezes in
wainscot. Italian.

MEMOIRS [memoires, F.] histories
written by such persons who have had
a hand in the management, or else
have been eye-witnesses of the transact­
ing of affairs, containing a plain narra­
tion, either of the actions of their
prince or statesmen, or of themselves;
also a journal of the acts and proceed­
ings of a society, as those of the royal
society, &c.

MEMOIRS [memoires, F. memorialia, 
L.] papers deliver'd by ambassadors to
the princes or states, to whom they
are sent upon any occasion.

MEMONA [among the Romans] a
goddess, who (as they fancied) nourish'd
embryos or unborn children and de­
fended them from all accidents.

MEMORABLENESS [of memorabilis,
L.] worthiness of remembrance, fa­
mousness, notableness.

MEMORY [memoria, L. memoire, F.]
a power or faculty of the mind, where­
by it retains or recollects the simple
ideas, or the images and remembrance
of the things we have seen, imagined, 
understood, &c. The most that can be
said of it is, that it is an extraordinary
and useful, natural faculty and endow­
ment: some persons have so excelled the
common part of mankind in it, that hi­
storians tell us, that Cyrus, emperor of
Persia, could call all his soldiers in his
numerous army by their names. And
that Seneca, the philosopher, could re­
cite 2000 names at the first hearing of
them. Pope Clement the VI. had so
good a memory, and what was so abso­
lutely his own, he never forgot it.
Zuinger asserts, that a young man of
the island of Corsica, could readily re­
cite, after once hearing, 36000 words
of all sorts, either backwards or for­
wards, or any way, and taught this
science to others.

MEMPHITES [so called of Memphis, 
in Egypt] a sort of stone famed for this
property, that being pulveriz'd and
smear'd on a part of a body to be am­
putated, it will deaden it so that the pa­
tient shall feel no pain in the operation.

MENANDRIANS [so called of Me­
nander. a disciple of Simon Magus, and
a magician] St. Irenæus represents him, 
as pretending to be the first virtue, hi­
therto unknown to the world, and to
have been sent by the angels for the
salvation of all mankind; and taught
that none could be saved, unless he
was baptized in his name.

MENDICABLE [mendicabilis, L.]
that may be begged,

MENDICANTS [of the Romish
Church] certain religious orders, viz.
the Carmelites, Cordeliers and Angustines, 
to which may be added the Capuchins,
Recollects, Minims, and others of a later
date; four of which having no lands, 
go from house to house begging alms, 
which in a manner, considering all
things, may justly be call'd robbing or
plundering the people.

This seems to be politically kept up
to be a continual charge upon the peo­
ple, who under the notion of a volun­
tary or free gift, are oblig'd to be at a
greater charge, than any charge that
the church or state could with any shew



of reason or pretence of justice lay upon
them for their maintenance.

MENDICATED [mendicatus, L.] beg­
ged, obtained by begging.

MENDING [emendens, L.] repairing
a thing worn out or damaged; reform­
ing in manners; growing better in
health.

MENE [of Μὴν Gr. a month, or μήνη, 
Gr. the moon] an Heathen goddess, 
worshipped (as St. Austin says) by the
Roman matrons and maidens, as presid­
ing over their monthly courses; but
some understand her to be the moon.

MENGRELIANS, Christians of the
Greek religion, who do not baptize
their children till the eighth year, and
enter not into the church (the gentle­
men especially) till the 6oth (or as
others say, the 40th) but heard divine
service, standing without the church.

MENI, an ancient goddess of the
Jews, which the prophets Isaiah and
Jeremiah reprove them for worshipping;
the one under the name of the Queen
of Heaven or the moon, and the other
under that of Meni, which is suppos'd
to be the same with Astarte and Venus
Cœlestis. See Jeremiah.

A MENIPPEAN [of Menippus, a sa­
tyrical or crabbed philosopher] a satyr
both in verse and prose.

MENNONITES [so calIed of one
Memnon Simonis of Frisia] a sect of Ana­
baptists in Holland in the 16th century;
their tenets were, that the New Testa­
ment is the only rule of faith; that
the terms of Person and Trinity are not
to be used in speaking of the Father, 
Son and Holy Ghost; that the first men
were not created just; that there is no
original sin; that Jesus Christ had not
his flesh from his mother Mary, but
from the essence of his father; that it
is not lawful for Christians to swear or
exercise any office of magistracy, nor
use the sword to punish evil-doers, nor
to make war upon any terms; that a
Christian may attain to the height of
perfection in this life; that the mini­
sters of the Gospel ought not to receive
any salary; that the souls of men after
death rest in an unknown place. But
they afterwards broke into several
sects, one of which were call'd Gale­
nites, which see.

MENOLOGION [μηνολόγιον, Gr.] an
account of the course of the moon, an
almanack.  L.

MENSES [i. e. months, q. χαταμήνια 
τὰ ἐμμηνία, Gr.] the monthly courses
of women, or purgations, which in
young maids usually begin about the
age of 12 or 14; but cease in those that
are past bearing.

MENSTRUOUSNESS, menstruous
quality or condition, or such as is com­
mon to women in their monthly courses.

MENSTRUUM [of mensis, L. a
month] and is thence derived by Chy­
mists, because they say that a mixt body
cannot be compleatly dissolved in less
than forty days; and thence forty days
is called a Chymical or Philosopical
Month. A dissolving liquor that will
dissolve and separate the parts of hard
bodies, which will eat thro' hard metals
and dissolve stones, as Vinegar, Aqua­
Fortis, &c.  L.

MENSURAL, of, or pertaining to
measure.

MENSURABLENESS [of mensurabilis, 
L.] capableness of being measured.

MENTAL [of mens, L.] belonging
to the mind.

MENTULATED [mentulatus, L.]
having a large Penis.

MERACEOUS [meraceus, L.] pure, 
clear, without mixture, spoken of wine, 
i. e. as it is pressed out of the grape, 
neat.

MERCENARINESS [of mercenarius, 
L.] mercenary disposition or nature.

MERCERS were in­
corporated Anno 1393, 
and consist of 4 war­
dens, and about 40
(but uncertain) assist­
ants, and 283 on the
livery, for which the
fine is 53 l. 4 s. This is
the first of the 12 com­
panies. Their arms are gules, a demi-­
virgin with her hair dishevelled, crow­
ned, issuing out (and within an orb) of
clouds all proper. The motto, Honor
Deo. Their hall is in Cheapside.

Image omitted.



MERCHANDIZING [merchandisant, 
F.] dealing as a merchant, trading, tra­
ficking.

MERCHANT TAI­
LORS, the patent for
the arms of this com­
pany (then call'd tai­
lors and Linnen Ar­
mourers) was granted
Anno 1480. And in
1501 they were incor­
porated by Henry VII.
by the name of Merchant Tailors, and
their supporters were granted them in
the year 1585. They are governed by
a master, 4 wardens, and about 40 assis­
tants, and there are on the livery 485, 
the fine for which is 15 l. Their armori­
al ensigns are argent, a tent royal be­



tween a parliament robes gules, lined
ermine; on a chief azure a lion of Eng­
land. Crest a holy lamb in glory pro­
per. Supporters two camels or. The
motto, Concordia parvæ res crescunt.
Their hall is in Thread-needle-street.

Merchant Tailors is derived of mer­
chandes tailleures, of tailler, F. to cut;
mercatores scissores, L. for when incor­
porated into a company, they do not
seem to have been tailors, i. e. makers
of clothes, by the addition of the words
merchandes of merchander, to buy and
sell, to merchandise; and mercator, L.
of mercari, of the same signification in
Latin, and merchant in English; but ra­
ther woollen drapers or mercers that
cut cloths, stuffs and silks for sale; and
the Latin, expressing the word tailor
by scissor, favours this notion; but if it
must have reference to dealers in apparel, 
it rather appears they were salesmen, 
than working tailors, by the addition of
the word merchant, which is not added
to any other handicraft. Some say they
were honoured with the additional
title of merchant, by king Henry VII.
who was a brother of that company, 
as were six kings more, viz. king Ri­
chard II. and III. king Edward IV. king
Henry IV. V. and VI.

Image omitted.



MERCHANTABLENESS [of mer­
chander, F. and habilis, L.] saleable, 
fit for sale, traffick or the market.

MERCHETUM [in Scotland] a com­
mutation of money or cattle anciently
given to the lord to buy off that old, 
impious custom of the lord's lying the
first night with the bridal daughter of
a tenant; which word was afterwards
used for the fine tenants paid to their
lord, to have leave to marry their
daughters.

MERCIFUL [of merci, F. of merces, 
L. a reward, and full] full of pity or
commiseration.

MERCIFULNESS, fulness of pity, &c.

MERCILESS [of merci and less, F.]
void of mercy, cruel.

MERCILESNESS, cruelty.

MERCURIAL Phosphorus, a light a­
rising from the shaking mercury in
vacuo.

MERCURIUS Vitæ [the Mercury of
Life] a chymical preparation made of
butter of antimony, washed or diluted
in a great quantity of warm water
till it turn to a white powder.  L. The
same is by chymists also called Algarot.

MERCURY [of the Philosophers] a
pure, fluid substance, inform of common
mercury, said to be in all metals, and
capable of being extracted from them.

MERCURY [in Astronomy] the least
of all the planets, and also the lowest
except the moon. Its characteristick
is ☿.

MERCURY [with Herbalists] a plant, 
of which there are two sorts, viz. Dog-­
mercury, and Good-harry, or Bonus
Henricus.

MERCURY [in Heraldry] in blazon­
ing by planets, signifies purple or pur­
pure.

MERCURY [so called, as some say, 
as tho' medicurius of medium the middle, 
and curius quasi currens, i. e. running or
stepping in between; because speech, 
of which this deity is made president, 
runs to and again between two persons
conversing together; others derive the
name of Mercury, q. mercium curam, 
as one taking care of merchandize, 
he being supposed to be the god of
merchants] he was, as the poets
feign, the son of Jupiter and Maia, the
daughter of Atlas, who bears the hea­
vens up with her shoulders, and was
born upon mount Cyllene in Arcadia.
His common office was to be the com­
mon messenger and interpreter of the
gods, and therefore had wings on his
head and heels, and a Caduceus, which
is a rod with two serpents twisted round
it, in his hand, in token of peace, and
amity. Other of his offices were to
guard the ways, and guide the deceas'd
souls into Hell; and therefore the poets
say, that none can die till Mercury comes
to break the tie that unites the body and
soul together; and according to the
opinion of the Metempsychosis, when
these souls have passed many years in
the Elysian fields, and have drank of the
river Lethe; he, by virtue of his rod, 
caused them to pass into other bodies
to live again.

To him is attributed the invention of
the lute, and a kind of harp which he
presented to Apollo. He was accounted
the god of eloquence, and also of thieves, 
having been a very dexterous thief
himself; as appears in his stealing his
sword from Mars, a pair of tongues
from Vulcan, Venus's girdle from her, 
Neptune's trident from him, and Apollo's
arrows and his beasts, when he fed
Admetus's cattle. He had also contrived
to have stolen away Jupiter's thunder­
bolts, but omitted to put it in execution
out of fear.

Mercury is said to have had one son by
his sister the goddess Venus, who was
named Hermaphrodite, who happening
to meet with the nymph Salmacis at a
fountain; the gods, at her request,



made both their bodies but one, in such 
a manner, that both sexes were conser­
ved intire. By this fable the poets
would intimate the union that should be
between married persons, who ought
to be as one body and one heart.

He was much reverenced by the
Egyptians, who worshipped him in the
image of a dog, called Anubis.

It is very probable that the famous
Trismegistus, who flourished in the first
ages of the world, was worshipped un­
der the name of Mercury. His statue
was usually placed in markets, and
therefore was called Ἀγορᾶιος; he was
painted with yellow hair, and a purse
in his hand, to intimate the advantage
that is to be expected from learning and
diligence. His statues were placed in
high-ways, unto which they offered
their first fruits. His image was some­
times that of Hercules Gallicus, out of
whose mouth came forth chains of
gold, which were joined to the ears of
several little men that stood at his feet, 
to express the power of eloquence that
enslaves the auditors.

The ancients also painted him in a
coat of flame-colour, with a mantle of
pure white, trimmed with gold and sil­
ver, his hair long, yellow and curled, 
his cap or hat white, with white wings
on it, and on his feet; holding in his
hand a caduceus, or rod of silver, with
two serpents twining.

MERCY [in Painting, &c.] is repre­
sented as a lady, sitting upon a lion, hold­ 
ing a spear in one hand, and an arrow
which she seems to cast away in the o­
ther.

MERCY Seat [among the Jews] a ta­
ble or cover lined on both sides with
plates of gold, and set over the ark of
the covenant, on each side of which was
a cherubim of gold, with wings spread­
ing over the Mercy-Seat, their faces
looking one towards another.

MERDOSE [merdosus, L.] full of dung
or ordure.

MERE [mere, Sax.] a line or boun­
dary, dividing ploughed lands in a com­
mon.

MERETRICIOUSNESS [meretricius, 
L.] whorishness.

MERIDIAN [linea meridiana, of meri­
dies, L. noon or mid day] the first meri­
dian is altogether arbitrary, and there­
fore astronomers and geographers ge­
nerally make their own meridians. The
ancients placed their first meridian at
Fero, one of the Canary islands; and
from the place where the meridian
cros'd the equator number'd their lon­
gitude, eastward, round the whole
globe; but since the discovery of Ame­
rica, every nation placeth their first
meridian at the chief city of their king­
dom; and then from that meridian ac­
counts longitude east and west upon the
equator.

Magnetical MERIDIAN, is a great cir­
cle, which the magnetic needle, or nee­
dle of the mariner's compass only re­
spects.

First MERIDIAN [In Geog.] is that
from which the rest are reckoned, ac­
counted east or west.

MERIDIONAL [meridionalis, L.] ly­
ing, or that is towards the south, south­
ern.

MERIDIONALITY of a Place, its
situation in respect to the meridian.

MERIT of Congruity [School term] is
when there is no just proportion be­
tween the action and the reward; but
the goodness and liberality of the be­
stower makes up what was wanting in
the action.

MERIT of Condignity [School term] is
when there is an absolute equality and
just estimation, between the action and
the reward, as in the wages of a work­
man.

MERITORIOUSNESS [of meritorius, 
L.] deservingness.

MERLON [in Fortification] that part
of a parapet, that is between, or is ter­
minated by two embrasures of a batte­
ry; so that its height and thickness is
the same with that of the parapet, 
which is generally in length from 8 to
9 foot next the guns, and 6 on the out­
side; 6 foot in height, and 18 foot thick.

MERMAID [prob. of mare, L. or
mer, F. the sea, and maid] a sea monster, 
which is described by painters and po­
ets with the upper parts of a woman, 
and the lower of a fish.

MERMAID [with Heralds] tho' there
may perhaps be some animals in the
sea, that may bear some resemblance
to what is found in coat-armour; yet, 
as they are painted in some bearings, 
as gules, a Mermaid proper, attiring
herself with her comb and glass, they
are only fancies of painters.

MERMAIDS, whereas it has been
thought they have been only the pro­
duct of painters invention, it is confi­
dently reported that there is in the
following lake, fishes which differ in
nothing from mankind, but in the want
of speech and reason. Father Fran­
cis de Pavia, a missionary, being in
the kingdom of Congo in Africa, who
would not believe that there was such



creatures, affirms, that the queen of
Singa did see, in a river coming out of
the lake Zaire, many mermaids some­
thing resembling a woman in the
breasts, nipples, hands and arms; but
the lower part is perfect fish, the head
round, the face like a calf, a large
mouth, little ears, and round full eyes.
Which creatures father Merula often
saw and eat of them.

MEROBIBE [merobibus, L.] one who
drinks pure wine without any mixture
of water.

MERRINESS [of mẏriʒ and neſſe, 
Sax.] chearfulness, gayness of mind.

MES Air [in Horsemanship] is a ma­
nage, half terra a terra, and half a
corvet.

MESENTERICK Plexus [Anat.] a
piece of net-work, formed by the bran­
ches or ramifications of the Par Vagum.

MESENTERICK Arteries [with A­
natomists] arteries belonging to the me­
sentery. The upper of which is said
to spread it self amidst the small guts, 
and the under one to pass on to the
lower part of the mesentery.

MESENTERICK Vein [With Anatom.]
the right branch of the Vena porta, 
which extends or spreads it self over
the guts Jejunum, Ileum, Cæcum and
Colon.

MESENTERY [with Anatomists] a
membranous part, situated in the low­
er belly; which is inrich'd with glan­
dules or kernels, nerves, arteries, 
veins and vessels, which carry the jui­
ces call'd Chyle and Lympha, and fasten
the bowels to the back, and to one a­
nother.

MESOLOGARITHM, logarithms of
the cosines and cotangents.

MESS [on Ship-board] a division of a
ship's crew, sometimes 3, 4 or 6, who
jointly diet together, for the more easy
distribution of the victuals.

MESSE, an Indian piece of money, 
in value 1500 petties or 15 d. Sterling.

MESSENGERS [of the State] are
officers under the direction of the se­
cretaries of state, of which there are
20 always in waiting, who are reliev­
ed monthly, and thus distributed; four
at court, five at each secretarie's office, 
two at the third office for north Bri­
tain, three at the council office, and
one at the lord chamberlain's office, 
who attend that office, always in readi­
ness to be sent with dispatches, either
domestick or foreign; either to appre­
hend persons accused or suspected of
high treason, or other offences against
the state, being empowered by the se­
cretaries warrant; for the safe keeping
of which their houses are made a sort
of prisons; and for the maintenance of
the prisoners, the government allow
them 6s. 8d. a day a man, &c.

Those which are sent abroad with
any dispatches, their travelling allow­
ances is dated, viz. to Paris, Ireland, 
or Edinburgh 30, to Holland 25 pound, 
and so proportionable for a shorter or
farther distance.

Their salaries are 45 pound per An­
num, and they purchase their places,
usually for about the sum of 300 l.

MESSIEURS, is a French title of ho­
nour or civility, is the plural number
of Monsieur, and with us signifies Sirs.

MESSUAGIUM [in Scotland] the
same as a manour-house in England;
the principal place or dwelling-house
within a barony or lordship.

METABASIS [with Rhetoricians] a
figure by which the orator passes from
one thing to another, as these things are
most delightful: Nor are these things less
pleasurable.

METAGISM [with Gram.] a defect
in the pronunciation in the letter M.

METALS [metalla, L. μέταλλα, Gr.]
well digested and compact bodies gene­
rated by the heat of the sun, and subter­
raneous fires in the bowels of the earth, 
which are heavy, hard and fusible, and
are capable either of being melted with
a very strong fire, or hammered out
into thin plates; they are generally
reckoned seven, gold, silver, copper, 
tin, iron, lead and quick-silver. The
particles that compose these metals are
salt, oil and earth, which being ming­
led together, and meeting in the long
and branchy pores of the inward parts
of the earth, Are there so straitly link­
ed together, that art has not yet found
out means to separate them.

Bath METAL a factitious me­
tal composed of
the finest brass, mixed with tin or some
mineral.

Princes METAL a factitious me­
tal composed of
the finest brass, mixed with tin or some
mineral.

Bell METAL, a composition of cop­
per and tin melted together.

METALS [in Heraldry] are only
two, Gold or Or, and Silver called Ar­
gent. And it is a general rule in. Heral­
dry, never to place metal upon metal, 
or colour upon colour; so that if the
field be of any colour, the bearing must
be of one of the metals.

Over-METAL [in Gunnery] in dis­
parting a piece of ordnance, gunners
say, it is laid over metal, when the
mouth of it lies higher than the breech.



To be laid under METAL [in Gunne­
ry] is when the mouth of a piece of
ordnance lies lower than her breech.

Right with METAL [in Gunnery]
when a piece of ordnance lies truly le­
vel, point blank, or right with the
mark, gunners say, she lies right with
her metal.

Superficies of METALS [in Gunnery]
is the surface or outside of a gun.

METALEPSIS [μετάληψις, Gr.] a
participating or taking; also a translat­
ing or transferring.  L.

METALLURGIST [of μέτρλλον me­
tal, and ἔργατος a workman, Gr.] a me­
tallist, one that works in metals, or
searches into the nature of them, as
chymists do.

METAMORPHISTS [of μεταμορφοω, 
Gr. to change the form] a sect of Sacra­
mentarians in the 16th century, who af­
firmed that the body of Jesus Christ as­
cended into Heaven as wholly deified.

METANGISMONITES [of ἄγγος,
Gr. a vessel] a sort of Christian here­
ticks, who say, that the Word is in the
father, as one vessel is in another.

METAPHOR [μετάφορα, Gr.] is a
putting a foreign name for a proper
one, which is borrowed from some­
thing like that it is spoken of; as the
king is said to be the Head of his King­
dom; because the head is the chief of
all the Members. Metaphors ought to
be taken from those things that are sen­
sible by the body, which the eye often
meets with, and of which the mind
will form an image, without searching
after it.

METAPHYSICKS [ars metaphysica, 
of μεταφυσιχὰ, Gr. q. d. treating of
things above or beyond nature] is a
science which considers beings, as being
abstracted from all matter; in beings it
considers two things: 1. The essence
of it, which seems to have a real being, 
tho' it does not exist, as a rose in the
depth of winter. 2. The existence
which is actually in being, as the ex­
istence of a rose or tulip, is that by
which they now are. In every being
it considers three properties; the Uni­
ty, the Goodness and Truth of it. And
it also treats of Powers, Acts, Principles
and Causes. And in opposition to Aris­
totle, and others, proves that the world
was not eternal; so that Metaphy­
sicks may be call'd natural Theology, and
transcends all the other parts of philo­
sophy.

General METAPHYSICKS, gives an
account of being in its abstract nature;
and under this notion it may bear this
definition, Being is that which has in
itself a real and positive existence.

METEMPSYCHOSIS [Μετεμψυχοσις, 
Gr.] the transmigration of souls from one
body to another, whatever the modern
Jews may say of it, it is not taught in
any place, either of the old or new
testament.

There is great probability that the
Jews imbibed this notion in Chaldæa,
during their long captivity in Babylon, 
or from that intercourse they had with
the Greeks, who themselves had bor­
row'd it from the Orientals.

It is certain that at the time of Jesus
Christ, this opinion was very common
among the Jews. This appears plain
from their saying that some thought
Jesus Christ to be John the Baptist, 
others Elias, others Jeremiah, or some
one of the old prophets.

And when Herod the Tetrarch heard
speak of the miracles of Jesus Christ, 
he said that John the Baptist whom he
had beheaded was risen again.

Josephus and Philo who are the most
ancient and the most knowing of all
the Jews, next to the sacred authors
now extant. Speak of the Metempsy­
chosis, as an opinion that was very
common in their nation.

The Pharisees held according to Jose­
phus, that the souls of good men might
easily return into another body, after
the death of that they had forsaken.

He says elsewhere, that the souls of
wicked men sometimes enter into the
bodies of living men, whom they pos­
sess and torment.

Philo says, that the souls that descend­
ed out of the air into the bodies which
they animate, return again into the
air after the death of those bodies:
That some of them always retain a
great abhorrence for matter, and dread
to be plunged again into bodies; but
that others return with inclination and
follow the natural desire of which they
are influenced.

The Jewish doctors wrap this doc­
trine up in obscure and mysterious
terms, they believe that God has deter­
mined for all souls, a degree of per­
fection to which they cannot attain in
the course of one life only. That they
are therefore oblig'd to return several
times upon the earth, and to animate
several bodies successively, that they
may fulfil all righteousness, and prac­
tice the commandments both negative
and affirmative, without which they
cannot arrive at the state to which
God intends they shall come.



Whence it is, say they, that we see
some people die in the most vigorous
time of their youth? It is because they
have already acquired their degree of
perfection, and have nothing remain­
ing to be done in a frail and mortal bo­
dy.

Others like Moses, they say, die with
reluctance, because they have not yet
accomplish'd all their duties: Others on
the contrary like Daniel die with satis­
faction, and even desire death; because
nothing remains for them to do in this
world.

The Metempsychosis or revolution of
souls is performed after two manners.

The first is when a soul comes into
a body already animated; thus it was
that Herod the Tetrarch imagined that
the soul of John the Baptist was entered
into the body of Jesus Christ, in order
to work miracles.

At other times they say souls enter
into other bodies already animated, 
there to acquire some new degree of
perfection, which they wanted. Thus
they said the soul of Moses to be uni­
ted to that of the Messiah, &c.

The second manner of transmigra­
tion is when a soul enters into a body
newly formed, either to expiate some
crime it had committed in another bo­
dy, or to acquire a greater degree of
sanctity.

The Jews think this revolution is
perform'd at least three or four times.

They say that some souls of a more
exalted nature have a great contempt
for matter, and do not return to ani­
mate bodies, but with great reluctance.

Others that are more gross and car­
nal, always preserve an inclination to­
wards the body, and return thither of­
ten without any other reason, but to
gratify this desire.

They even extend this transmigra­
tion to brute beasts, and to inanimate
things; and the number is not small of
those that maintain this opinion. The
most famous of the Jewish doctors have
held it, and pretend that Pythagoras, 
Plato and Virgil, and the ancient philo­
sophers that espous'd it, had derived
it from the writings of their prophets.

This notion is very ancient in the
East. The Chinese teach that Xekiah
an Indian philosopher, who was born
about 1000 years before Jesus Christ, 
was the first broacher of this doctrine
in the Indies.

That from thence it spread into Chi­
na, in the 56th year after Jesus Christ.

The Chinese pretend that Xekiah was
born 8000 times, and that at his last
birth, he appear'd in the form of a
white elephant.

It is upon this principle that the In­
dians and Chinese are so little scrupulous
of putting themselves to death, and
that they so often kill their children
when they find themselves under any
difficulty of maintaining them.

It is related that a king of this coun­
try having had the small-pox, and see­
ing his face to be much disfigured, 
could not endure any longer to live un­
der such a frightful figure; but ordered
his brother's son to cut his throat, who
was afterwards burnt.

The story of the Indian philosopher
Calanus is well known, who burned
himself in the time of Alexander the
Great.

The Indians look upon death with
much indifference, being persuaded of
the Metempsychosis, which passes among
them as a thing not to be doubted.

Hence it is that they abstain from
killing any living creature, for fear of
violating the souls of their fathers, or
of some near relation inhabiting these
animals.

They do not so much as defend them­
selves against wild beasts, and charita­
bly redeem animals out of the hands of
strangers, who are about to kill them.

METEMPTOSIS [with Mathemati­
cians] used particularly in chronology, 
expressing the solar equation, necessary
to prevent the new moon from hap­
pening a day too late: As on the con­
trary Proemptosis signifies the lunar e­
quation, necessary to prevent the new
moon from happening a day too soon.

METEOROLOGICAL [of μετεωρολο­
γιχός, Gr.] of or pertaining to meteors
or meteorology.

METEOROSCOPE, an ancient ma­
thematical instrument for determining
the distances, magnitudes and places of
the heavenly bodies.

METEORS [meteora, L. of μετέωρον, 
of μετά beyond, and ἀείρω, Gr. to lift up, 
and so are denominated from their ele­
vation, because for the most part they
appear to be high in the air] these ac­
cording to Descartes, are certain various
expressions made upon the elements, 
exhibiting them in different forms; as
ignis fatuus, ignis pyramidalis, draco vo­
lans, &c. Meteors are distinguished into
three sorts, Fiery, Airy and watry.

Fiery METEORS, are composed of a
fat, sulphurous kindled smoak, when this
is diversified according to their figure, 
situation, motion and magnitude. For



when this fat is kindled, the smoak ap­
pears in the form of a lighted candle, it
is called by the Latins, Ignis fatuns, i. e.
Jack in a Lanthorn, or Will in a Wisp
by the English. When it appears like
a cross bar or beam, the Latins call it
trabs. When it resembles a pillar of
fire standing upright, they call it Ig­
nis pyramidalis; and when the middle
parts are thicker and broader than the
ends, they call it Draco volans, i. e. a
flying Dragon; and when it seems to
skip like a goat, appears sometimes
kindled, and sometimes not, they call
it Capra saltans, i. e. a skipping Goat.

Appearing METEORS, are appear­
ances called mock suns, mock moons, 
the meteor called Virga, in the form
of a rod or fire-brand.

METEREOSCOPIST [of μετέωρον and
σχοπέω, Gr. to view] one who studies
the difference of sublime heavenly bo­
dies, the distance of the stars, &c.

METHOD [with Logicians] is the art
of disposing a series of thoughts, either
to find out a truth that is unknown to
ourselves; to convince others of a truth
that we know; and this is called Anali­
sis and Synthesis.

Analitical METHOD [with Mathema­
ticians] or Algebra, is nothing but a
general Analysis, of the pure mathema­
ticks; or it is so called, because it shews
how to solve questions, and demonstrate
theorems, by inquiring into the funda­
mental nature and frame of things, 
which is as it were (for that purpose)
resolved into parts, or taken all to
pieces, and then put together again.

Poristical METHOD [with Mathema­
ticians] is a method that shews when, by
what means, and how many different
ways a problem may be resolved.

Synthetical METHOD of enquiring or
demonstration [with Mathematicians] is
when the enquirer pursues the truth, 
chiefly by reasons drawn from princi­
ples that have been before established, 
and proportions that have been before
proved; and so proceeds by a long re­
gular chain, till at length he arrives at
the conclusion. This is the method
that Euclid has followed in his elements, 
and that most of the ancients have fol­
lowed in the demonstrations, and is
contradistinguish'd from the analytical
method.

Zetetick METHOD [with Mathem.]
is the analytick or algebraical method
of resolving questions; by which the
nature and reason of the thing is chiefly
sought for and discovered.

METOCHE [μετοχή, Gr.] a term in
architecture used for the space and in­
terval between the dentils.

METOPS [μετόπα, Gr.] a space or
interval between every triglyph in the
frize of the Dorich order, which among
the ancients used to be adorned with
the heads of beasts, basons, vases, and
other instruments used in sacrificing;
also the space between the mortice holes
of rafters and planks.

METOPOSCOPIST [of μετωποσχοπία
of μέτωπον the forehead, and σχοπέω, Gr.
to view, &c] one who tells the nature
or inclinations of men, by looking in
their faces.

METRA, it is related, that Metra, 
the daughter of Erisicthon, could change
her shape whenever she pleased. The
reality of the fable is, Erisicthon was a
man of Thessaly, who having spent all, 
was reduced to poverty. He had a
daughter named Metra, a very beauti­
ful woman, so handsome, that whoever
did but see her fell in love with her.
But in those days men did not hire mis­
tresses with money; but instead of it, 
some gave horses, some cows, some
sheep, or whatsoever Metra demanded.
Upon this the Thessalians, seeing that
all these necessaries of life were scraped
together for Erisicthon, said Metra, was
his horse, his cow, and every thing else.
Palæphatus.

METRICE [μετριχή, Gr.] that part
of ancient musick, employ'd about the
quantities of syllables.

METTLESOM [of metallum, L. and
ſom, Sax.] full of vigour, sprightly.

METTLESOMNESS, briskness, live­
liness.

MEUM and TUUM [i. e. mine and
thine] signifies property; that which of
right or justice belongs to, or is the pe­
culiar property of any person or per­
sons, whether obtained by legal convey­
ance, as an inheritance or a legacy, or
by purchase or acquisition, by labour, 
merit, &c.  L.

MEW [hieroglyphically] a sea-mew, 
being a bird so very light, as to be car­
ried away with every wind, was by the
ancients put to represent an unconstant
person, and one unsettled in his mind.

MEZUZOTH [הוזוזמ, Heb.] are cer­
tain pieces of parchment that Jews
hide or fix in the door posts of their
houses according to Deut. 6. 9. and 11, 
13, where that they should not forget
the laws of Gods, it is said, thou shalt
write them on the posts of thy house and
on thy gates; to fulfil this command li­
terally, and to avoid the scoffs and ridi­
cule of Gentiles, the Rabbins direct that



they write it on parchment, and in­
close it in something; therefore they
write the foregoing sentence on square
pieces of parchment, prepared on pur­
pose, and with a particular sort of ink, 
and in a character of a squarish form, 
Deut. 6. 4, 5. Hear O Israel the Lord
our God is one Lord &c. Then hav­
ing left a little space they add Deut. 11
and 13. And it shall come to pass if
thou shalt hearken diligently to my com­
mandments, &c. as far as, thou shalt
write them, &c. Then they roll up
the parchment and put it in a case, 
and write on the end of it יד which is
one of the names of God; these they
fix at the doors of their houses, cham­
bers, and all the most frequented places
of their habitations; sometimes these
are fixed to the right side of the knock­
ers of the doors; and when they go in
and out they touch them with the end
of one of their fingers, which they af­
terwards kiss devoutly.

MEZZANINE [in Architect.] an En­
tresole, or little window, less in height
than breadth, serving to illuminate an
Attic, &ampc.

MICE, of Mouse; which see.

MICHAELMASS, the 29th day of
September, a festival appointed by the
church to be observ'd in honour of St.
Michael the Arch-angel, who is suppos'd
to be the chief of the host of Heaven, 
as Lucifer is of the infernal, and as he
was suppos'd to be the protector of the
Jewish church, so he is now esteem'd
guardian and defender of the Chri­
stian church.

The church of Rome celebrate three
apparitions of St. Michael, which they
say, have happened long since the pri­
mitive times of Christianity. The first
is one that, they say, happened at Cho­
nes or Colossus in Phrygia; which festival
they celebrate on the 6th of September,
tho' they do not pretend to know the
exact time of the appearance.

The second is one on mount Gargarus
in Italy, in the kingdom of Naples, a­
bout the end of the fifth century; this
festival they observe on the fifth of
May, and that of the dedication of the
cavern, on which he appeared on the
29th of September.

The third appearance of St. Michael
is pretended to be to Aubert bishop of
Auranches, upon a rock call'd the tomb,
in the bay between Normandy and Bri­
tany, where at this day the abbey of St.
Michael is expos'd to the sea. This ap­
parition is related to have been on the
16th of October. Anno Christi 706.

MI-COUPE [in Heraldry] is a term
used by French heralds, when the Es­
cutcheon is parted per fesse, only half
way a cross, where some other parti­
tion meets it; and in blazon it ought to
be exprest, whether such partition is
to be a Dextra or a Sinistra.

MICROMETER [of μιχρος and με­
τπον, Gr. measure] an astronomical in­
strument made of brass, having a move­
ment, a plate divided like the dial-plate
of a clock, with an index or hand, &c.
which may be fitted to a large telescope, 
and used in finding the diameters of the
stars.

MICROPHONES [of μιχρὸς and φωνὴ
a voice, Gr.] an instrument magnifying
small sounds.

MICROSPHÆRUM [μιχρὸσφαιρον, 
Gr.] the plant spikenard with a small
leaf, the least and best of the three
sorts.  L.

MICROACOUSTICKS [of μιχρὸς lit­
tle, and ἀχοίω, Gr. to hear] instruments
to help the hearing and magnify sounds.

MICROSCOPICAL, of or pertaining
to a Microscope.

MIDAS [i. e. μηδὲν ἴδων, i. e. seeing
or knowing nothing] a rich king in
Phrygia, who reigned about A. M.
2648, in the time that Deborah judged
Israel, who (according to the poets)
having entertained Bacchus as his guest, 
ask'd of him that he might have this
faculty, that all he touched might be
turned into gold; which being granted, 
he turned his palace, utensils, &c. and
also his meat into gold, as soon as he
came to touch it: at last, seeing his
folly, he desired to have this gift taken
from him again, and was ordered to
wash himself in the river Pactolus, 
where having washed away all his gol­
den wish, Pactolus was hence called
Chrysorrhoa, i. e. flowing with gold.
After this, he being judge between Pan
and Apollo, which of them sang best, 
he gave his verdict for Pan; at which
Apollo being provoked gave him asses
ears. The moral of the fable is taken
to be, that Midas being a tyrant, and
having many hearkeners, and tale-bear­
ers, by them he knew all that was done
and spoken in all his kingdom, as if he
had long ears to hear what every one
said; and by his turning all into gold is
signified, that he used to oppress his
subjects, the better to store his coffers, 
which is often and as foolishly wash'd
and wasted away, as it is gotten by
cruel and unlawful means.

MIDDLE Base [in Heraldry] is the
middle part of the base, represented by



the letter H in the escutcheon. See Es­
cutcheon, letter E.

MIDDLE Chief [in Heraldry] is the
middle part of the chief, represented
by the letter G, in the escutcheon Ibid.

MIDDLING [of miððle, Sax.] in­
different, between two extremes.

MID-HEAVEN [in Astron.] that point
of the ecliptick, which culminates, or
is in the meridian.

MIGHTINESS [miʒhtineſſe, Sax.]
powerfulness.

MIGRATION, a removing or shift­
ing the habitation, the passage or re­
moval of any thing out of one state or
place into another, particularly of co­
lonies of people, birds, &c. into other
countries.

MILDNESS [milðneſſe, Sax.] gen­
tleness of temper.

MILE, a certain space or measure, 
whereby we express the distance of
places one from another; to which all
other measures of length in any other
nation are referred, as to the integer
of which they are parts, which varies
being of different lengths among diffe­
rent nations or people; which having
been exactly calculated according to
Rhinland feet, which are the general
way of reckoning throughout the North, 
the proportions are as follows.

The miles of England contain 5454
Of Scotland --6000
Of France --5250
Of Spain --7090
Of Burgundy --6000
Of Flanders --6666
Of Holland --8000
Of Muscovy --3750
Of Italy --5000
Of Lithuania --18500
Of Poland --19850
Of Sweden --30000
Of Germany the small --20000
The middlest --22500
The largest --25000

MILEGUETTA, cardamum grains.

MILITARY Exercises, are the evo­
lutions or various manners of ranging
and exercising soldiers.

MILITARY Column, a column, on
which is engraven a list of the troops
of an army, imploy'd in any expedition.

MILITARY Fever, a kind of malig­
nant fever frequent in armies, by rea­
son of the ill food, &c. of the soldiery.

MILITARY Way a way made for the
passage of an army.

MILKY, of the nature of milk.

MILKY WAY [called in Latin, Via
lactea and in Greek Ιαλαχτἤσις] is a cir­
cle to be seen in the Heavens in a clear
night, and is the only real circle in
them. It infolds after the manner of
a swaddling band, the constellations of
Cassiopeia, Aquila and part of Sagitta­
rius, the tail of Scorpio, Centaurus, Ar­
go navis, the feet of Gemini, Perseus, &c.

It appears of a whitish or milky co­
lour, and has been found by telescopi­
cal observations to be an innumerable
multitude of small stars, which by rea­
son of their immense distance cannot be
perceived distinctly by the naked eye.

MILLAINS [on Gunter's line] are the
3d subdivision of the primes, and ex­
press the thousandth part of them.

MILLENARIANS See Chiliasts.

MILLENARIES See Chiliasts.

MILLENNIUM [of mille and annus,
L.] the 1000 years reign of Christ here
on earth.

MILLEPEDES, insects call'd hog-lice
or sows.  L.

MILPHOSIS [μίλφωσις, Gr.] the fal­
ling off of the hair of the eye-brows.

MILRINE [in Heraldry] as a cross
Milrine, is a cross that has the four
ends clamped and turned again, as the
Milrine itself is that carries the milstone, 
and is formed as that is also, only the
Milrine hath but two limbs, whereas
the Cross Moline hath four.

MIMOGRAPHER [mimographus, L. 
μιμόγραφος, Gr.] a writer of wanton
matters, jests or buffoonry.

MIMOLOGY [μιμολόγιον, Gr.] a
making of rhymes.

MIMOLOGER [μιμολόγος, Gr.] one
who recites rhymes.

MINA [μνᾶ, Gr. of הנמ, Heb.] a
species of Hebrew mony, 
which properly signifies one part or
ounce. Ezekiel tell us Chap. 45, 12. that
the Mina or Mana was valued at 60
shekels, which in gold make of our En­
glish money about 54 pounds 15 shillings;
and in silver almost seven pounds.

The Greek or Attick Mina, is valued
at 100 drams, or about two pounds se­
venteen shillings sterling. They had
also a lesser Mina valued at 75 drachma.

MNA [μνᾶ, Gr. of הנמ, Heb.] a
species of Hebrew mony, 
which properly signifies one part or
ounce. Ezekiel tell us Chap. 45, 12. that
the Mina or Mana was valued at 60
shekels, which in gold make of our En­
glish money about 54 pounds 15 shillings;
and in silver almost seven pounds.

The Greek or Attick Mina, is valued
at 100 drams, or about two pounds se­
venteen shillings sterling. They had
also a lesser Mina valued at 75 drachma. 

To go MINCING, is to walk with a
wanton, tripping gate or jetting gesture, 
tossing or holding up the head with a
proud air.

MINDFUL [minðful, Sax.] regard­
ful, thinking on.

MINDLESS [minðleaſ, Sax.] re­
gardless.

MINDFULNESS [minðfulneſſe,
Sax.] regardfulness, observance.



MINE [minera, L. minere, F.] a place
where metals, &c. are dug. Mines or
metals are chiefly found under moun­
tains, and especially in places that face
the East and South sun.

That ground which is rich in mines, 
is generally barren, and sends forth nox­
ious steams and vapours, prejudicial to
the health of mankind, and the growth
of vegetables.

It is not improbable, but the finding
out of metals in mines was owing to
the conflagration of woods; and Aris­
totle relates, that some shepherds in Spain
having set a wood on fire, found melted
silver run down the same place.

MINE [in Gunnery] a hole or pit dug, 
by pioneers under any place or work, 
having a passage or alley about five
foot square, with several turnings and
windings, at the end of which is the
place or hole called the Chamber of the
mine which is just under the work de­
signed to be blown up, which is filled
with barrels of gun-powder, in order
to blow it up.

Chamber of a MINE [in Milit. Affairs]
is the small place at the end of the gal­
lery, like a small chamber, where the
barrels of powder are deposited, for
blowing up what is proposed to be
sprung.

Gallery of a MINE, is the first passage
made under ground, being no higher
nor broader than to suffer a man to
work upon his knees, and which reach­
es to the chambers.

To MINE [miner, F.] to dig cavities
in the earth and fill them with gun­
powder.

MINERVA [in Medicine, &c.] a term
apply'd to those parts of the body, 
wherein there are collections and coa­
cervations of humours made, which
harden from obstructions and cause di­
seases, as minera morbi.

MINERALS [mineralia, L. of צדא ןמ, 
Heb. i. e. from the earth] mixed and
solid bodies, generated of exhalations
and vapours, inclosed in the bowels of
the earth, which is the matter of which
metals are formed in process of time.

Half MINERALS [mineralia media, 
L.] are those minerals that are as it
were of a middle nature, between
stones and metals, such as several sorts
of earth, salts and sulphur, as ruddle, 
black lead, alum, vitriol, &c.

MINERALOGIST [of mineralia, L.
and λέγω, Gr.] an author who treats of
minerals.

MINERVA [so called of minando, 
threatning] the poets tell us, that Ju­
piter having taken a resolution to bring
forth the goddess Minerva or Pallas a­
lone by himself, without the assistance
of Juno, Minerva came out of his brain
in gallant armour, holding a lance in
her hand, and dancing a dance called
the Pyrrhick; which was a warlike
dance, invented by Pyrrhus the son of
Achilles. And that Vulcan at this time
did the office of a midwife, cleaving
Jupiter's scull with a sharp hatchet that
Pallas might creep out. Being thus ac­
coutred, she was held to be the goddess
of war, and to be concerned in all bat­
tles. They attribute to this goddess the
invention of several sciences and useful
inventions; as spinning, weaving, the
use of oil, the art of colouring cloth, 
of building, and the like, making her
the goddess of wisdom and all arts.
The Athenians paid her a singular ho­
nour and respect, and instituted several
solemn festivals in honour of this god­
dess, which were celebrated with divers
rare spectacles and expressions of joy.
She refused to be married to any of the
gods and so led a virgin life. In one of
those festivals, the boys and girls used to
pray to the goddess for wisdom and
learning, of which she had the patro­
nage; and the youths carried their
matters their fee or present, which was
call'd Minerval.

Minerva represents wisdom; that is, 
skilful knowledge joined with direct
practice, comprehends the understanding
of the noblest arts, the best accomplish­
ments of the mind, together with all
virtues; but more especially that of
charity.

The poets make five Minervas': The
1st, Apollo's mother; the 2d, the daugh­
ter of Nile, which was worshipped by
the Egyptians, in the city of Sat; the 3d
that beforementioned; the 4th, the
daughter of Jupiter and Corypha; and
the 5th, the daughter of Pallantis, whom
she killed, he attempting to ravish her.

MINERVA [in Painting] is repre­
sented in a blue mantle, embroidered
with silver.

MINERVAL, a present made by scho­
lars to their masters, or rather their
schooling money, who also had a vaca­
tion during the Minervalia.

MINERVALIA pagan festivals ob­
served in honour of the goddess Miner­
va, and celebrated the 10th of March, 
for 5 days successively; the first of which
was spent in prayers to the goddess, and
the rest in sacrifices, combats of gladi­
ators, acting of tragedies, and reciting
pieces of wit; wherein he that obtained



the victory had a prize given him by the
appointment of the emperor Domitian.

MINIATURE [migniature, F.] a
painting of pictures in water-colours;
also very small; a delicate kind of pain­
ting, consisting of little points or dots, 
instead of lines, commonly done on vel­
lum, with very thin, simple water co­
lours.

MINIM [with Printers] a small sort
of printing letter,

MINIM [with Musicians] a note of
slow time, two of which make a semi­
brief; as two crochets make a minim, 
two quavers a crochet, and two semi­
quavers a quaver.

MINNIMS [so called of minimus, L.
least, as an intimation of their humili­
ty] an order of monks founded by
Francis de Paule; who for rules pre­
scribed them the observation of the 10
commandments and those of the church, 
and besides the vows of poverty and
chastity, they made another of a conti­
nual Lent; and prohibited them from
riding upon any thing but an ass; or­
dered that they should recite for their
office 77 times the Lord's prayer and as
many Ave Maria's; that they should be
very regardful of their superiors, and
not to enter into nunneries, nor admit
any women into their convents unless
founders, or of the royal blood; that
they should not touch or carry any mo­
ney about them; nor eat flesh, eggs, 
butter, cheese or any thing else coming
from milk, except in cases of sickness, 
and having besides these prescribed se­
veral other particular ties, he forbids
making any addition or change in his
rules, and promises eternal life to those
that shall observe them. They are cal­
led Bonnes Hommes at Paris.

MINIMS [of minima, L.] little things, 
pigmies. Milton.

MINIOGRAPHY [miniographia, L.] a
writing with vermilion.

MINION of the largest Size [with
Gunners] a piece of ordnance of three
inches and a half diameter at the bore, 
eight foot in length, and containing
1000 pound weight of metal; carries a
ball 3 inches diameter, weighing three
pound twelve ounces. The charge of
powder is 3 pound 1-4th; and its point
blank shot is 125 paces.

Ordinary MINION [with Gunners] a
large gun 3 inches diameter at the bore, 
in length 7 foot, its weight in metal 800
pound, carries a bullet of 2 inches 1-8th
diameter, and weight 3 l. and 1-2. The
charge of powder is 2 inches and a
half, and its point blank shot is 120 pa­
ces.

MINISTRAL [ministralis, L.] be­
longing to a minister.

MINIUM [with Painters] red lead;
it is made of common lead, calcined in
a reverbatory furnace; or else of white
lead put into an earthen pan, and stir­
red with a spatula over the fire.

MINORIES, near Aldgate, so called of
a cloister of minorites, or friars minors
there.

MINORITES, a sort of friars called
also Cordeliers.

MINOS, a king of Crete, the son of
Jupiter and Europa, as the poets feign, 
he lived Anno Mundi 2670. He first
gave laws to the inhabitants of Crete, 
and for his justice was made chief judge
of Hell, and umpire with Rhadaman­
thus and Æacus. He married Pasiphae, 
the daughter of Sol, and had many
children by her. The Athenians having
out of envy to his son Apon, on account
of his many heroick acts, murdered
him, he made fierce war upon them,
and compelled them to give seven of
the sons of their nobility yearly, to be
devoured by the monster Minotaurus, 
from which cruel tribute Theseus at
length delivered them. Dædalus made
an intricate labyrinth for this Minos, 
where the Minotaur was kept.

MINOS was painted with long, 
brown, curled hair, crowned with a
crown of gold, in a robe of blue and
silver, with buskins of gold on his legs.

MINOTAURUS, a double formed
monster, having partly the shape of a
man, and partly that of a bull, begot­
ten, as the poets feign, by Pasiphae, 
the wife of Minos, and a bull, by the
contrivance of Dædalus. This monster
was kept by Minos in the labyrinth of
Crete, and was fed with man's flesh, 
which was brought to him from A­
thens. The moral is, as some say, that
Pasiphae lay with one Taurus, a servant
of Minos; others say, that she fled away
in a ship call'd Taurus, that had been
made by Dædalus.

MINT [mentha, L. μίνθη, Gr.] an
herb well known.

MINTED [of mẏnetan, Sax.] coin­
ed, as money.

MINUET, a dance, or the tune be­
longing to it.

MINUTE [in Geography] the 60th
part of a degree, which in the heavens
is something more than an English mile.

MINUTE [in Architect] is the 30th
part of a measure, called a module.
See Module.

MINUTE Line [with Navigators] a
small, long line tied to a log of wood,



having several knots or divisions at 50
foot distance, wound about a reel fixed
in the gallery of a ship. The use of
which is, by the help of a minute glass, 
to make an estimate, and keep an ac­
count of the way or course a ship runs
at sea.

MI-PARTY [in French Heraldry] a
term used, denoting the escutcheon is
half way down, parted per Pale, and
there cross'd by some other partition.

MIQUELETS, a sort of foot soldi­
ers inhabiting the Pyrenean mountains, 
armed with pistols under their belts, a
carbine, and a dagger.

MIRACULOUSNESS [miraculosus, 
L. miraculeux, F.] wonderfulness.

MIRIFICENCE [mirificentia, L.] do­
ing wonders.

MIRIFICK [mirificus, L.] marvel­
lous, wonderfully done, strangely
wrought.

MIRROUR [Metaphorically] a pat­
tern or model, as he is a mirrour of
virtue and patience.

MIRROURS, are what are com­
monly call'd looking glasses, and are
the surfaces of any opaque body so po­
lish'd and regulated, as to be capable of
reflecting those rays of light that fall
upon them; besides those mirrours in
common use made of glass, finely
ground, polished, and to make them
opake, foliated or laid over on the
back, with a leaf of tin, fix'd on with
quicksilver. Before the invention of
glass plates, they were made of brass, 
steel or other metal finely polished.

MIRTHLESNESS [mẏrðeleaſ, and
neſſe, Sax.] melancholiness.

To MISADVISE [of mis and aviser, 
F.] to give bad counsel.

To MISAPPLY [of mis and applica­
re, L.] to apply ill.

MISAPPREHENSION, an appre­
hending wrong.

MISBECOMING [of mis, be and co­
man, Sax.] indecent.

MISBEGOTTEN [of mis and be­
ʒottan, Sax.] ill-begotten.

To MISBEHAVE [of mis, be and ha­
ban, Sax.] to behave ill.

MISBELIEF [of mis and ʒeleafa, 
Sax.] a false faith, unbelief.

MISBODING [of mis and boðian, 
Sax.] boding or threatening ill.

To MISCALL [of mis and kaller, 
Sax.] to call wrong.

MISCELLANEOUSNESS [of miscel­
laneus, L.] mixture or mixedness toge­
ther without order.

MISCHIEVOUSNESS, hurtfulness, 
detrimentalness.

MISCIBILITY, capableness of being
mingled.

MISCIBLE [of misceo, L.] capable
or being mingled.

To MISCONCEIVE [of mis and con­
cevoir, F.] to understand wrong.

MISCONDUCT [of mis and conduite, 
F.] ill-conduct or management.

To MISCOUNSEL [of mis and con­
sulere, L.] to give bad counsel. Milton.

To MISCOUNT [of mis and conter, 
F.] to reckon or number wrong.

To MISDEMEAN [of mis and deme­
ner, F.] to behave amiss.

MISDOING [of miſðoen, Sax.] ill
doing.

MISE [Law Term, in a Writ of Right]
signifies the same that in other actions
is called an issue. Accordingly this
phrase, to join the mise upon the meer, 
signifies the same as to say, to join the
mise upon the clear Right, i. e. to join
issue upon this point, whether the te­
nant or demandant has the better
right.

MISE, an honorary gift or customary
present to a prince of Wales, at his en­
trance upon the principality, of which
the county of Flint, pay'd 2000 marks, 
the county of Chester 5000 marks at the
change of every owner of the said
earldom, for the enjoyment of the pri­
vileges of that palatinate; at Chester
they keep a mise book where every
town and village is rated.

MISERABLENESS [miserabilis, L.]
wretchedness; also niggardliness, co­
vetousness.

MISERICORDIA [in Law] an arbi­
trary fine or amercement imposed on
an offender, and it is called Misericor­
dia or Mercy, because it ought to be
very moderate, and rather less than the
offence committed, and the entry is, 
Ideo in misericordia. L. also signifies
sometimes a being quit or discharged of
all manner of amercements that one
happens to fall under the penalty of in
a forest.  L.

MISERICORDIA [in Athens and
Rome] a goddess who had in those pla­
ces a temple, which was a sanctuary or
place of refuge to criminals and unfor­
tunate persons.

MISFASHIONED [of mis and fa&ccirc;onné, 
F.] shapen wrong or illy.

MISFEASANCE [in Law] misdoings
or trespasses.  F.

To MISGIVE [of miſ-ʒifan, Sax.]
to apprehend or fear some ill.

To MISGOVERN [of mis and gouver­
ner, F.] to rule amiss.



MISHAP [prob. of miſ, Sax. and
happer, F. to snap] a mischance.

MISHAPEN [of miſ-ſcapen, Sax.]
having an ill shape.

To MISIMPLOY [of mis and employ­
er, F.] to use improperly.

To MISINFORM [of mis and infor­
mer, F. of  L.] to inform wrong.

To MISJUDGE [of mis and juger, F.]
to judge wrong.

To MISINTERPRET [of mis and
interpretare, L.] to interpret wrong.

To MISLEAD [of miſ and læðan, 
Sax.] to lead the wrong way.

To MISLIKE [of miſ-ʒelican, Sax.]
not to like, to disapprove.

MISMANAGEMENT [of mis and
menagement, F.] bad management.

To MISMATCH [of mis and mate, 
a companion] to put things to others, 
to which they are not fellows.

MISNA [הנשמ, Heb.] a body of the
Jewish civil law, &c. or rather an ex­
plication of the law which the Jews
believe to be given to Moses by God
by word of mouth, besides the written
law; which unwritten law, they say
was preserved among the doctors of
the synagogue, until the time of the
celebrated rabbi Jehuda Hahhodesh or
the holy, who wrote the Misna, about
the year of Christ 180; that it might
no longer depend on the memories of
those to whom it was communicated.

This book is divided into six parts, 
the first treats about the distinction of
seeds in a field, the trees, fruits, tythes, 
&c.

The Second, regulates the manner of
the observation of festivals.

The Third, concerning women and
matrimonial cases.

The Fourth, relates to law suits, that
may happen in the way of trade.

The Fifth, is concerning obligations, 
sacrifices and whatsoever has any rela­
tion to them.

The Sixth, treats of the various sorts
of purifications.

MISOGYNIST [misogynus, L. of μι­
σόγυνος, Gr.] a woman-hater.

MISOGYNY [misogynia, L. of μισο­
γυνεία, Gr.] the hate and contempt of
women.

To MISPEND [of miſ-ſpenðan, 
Sax.] to spend amiss, to waste.

MISPRISION of Clerks [Law Term]
is a default or neglect of clerks in wri­
ting, engrossing or keeping records;
for which defaults no processes are to
be made void in law, or discontinued
but are to be amended by the justices of
assize.

MISPRISION of Felony, &c. [in Law]
is the making a light account of such
a crime by not revealing it, when a
person knows that it has been commit­
ted; or by suffering any person who
has been committed to prison, even
upon suspicion of it, to be discharged
before he has been indicted, for it.
This offence of milprision, is finable by
the justices before whom the offender
has been convicted.

MISPRISION of Treason, is the con­
cealing or not disclosing known treason;
the punishment for which offence is, 
that the offender shall lose his goods, 
and the profit of his lands, during the
king's pleasure.

MISPROPORTIONED [of mis and
proportionné, F. of  L.] not proportional.

Congregation of the MISSION [among
the Roman Catholicks] the directors of
a seminary for training up youth for
priests, who are oblig'd to go continu­
ally up and down the countries to teach
and instruct the people of small towns, 
villages, &c. in the principles of reli­
gion and doctrines of the church; but
are forbid by the statutes of their order
to go where any arch-bishop, bishop or
provincial resides, upon a supposition
that there is no want of instruction in
such places.

MISSIONARIES [of the Church of
Rome] ecclesiasticks who devote them­
selves and their labours to the perfor­
mance of some spiritual mission for the
conversion of infidels, conviction of
hereticks, &c. Of these, viz. Jesuits, 
Carmelites and Capuchins, there are great
numbers dispersed in most parts of the
world, especially in Asia, Africa and
America, who the better to induce
themselves in China, India, &c. gene­
rally get a smatch of physick and the
mathematicks, by which means they
have got footing there.

MISSELDINE [miſtelta, Sax.] a
sort of shrub or
shrubby plant that
grows on some trees, as the oak, &c.
of which the ancients had this notion, 
that if thrushes which eat the berries, 
roosted all night on it, and dunged up­
on it, the dung turned to birdline; and
thence came the Latin proverb, Turdus
fibi malum cacat, i. e. the Thrush shits
her own sorrow.

MISSELTOE [miſtelta, Sax.] a
sort of shrub or
shrubby plant that
grows on some trees, as the oak, &c.
of which the ancients had this notion, 
that if thrushes which eat the berries, 
roosted all night on it, and dunged up­
on it, the dung turned to birdline; and
thence came the Latin proverb, Turdus
fibi malum cacat, i. e. the Thrush shits
her own sorrow.

MISTLETOE [miſtelta, Sax.] a
sort of shrub or
shrubby plant that
grows on some trees, as the oak, &c.
of which the ancients had this notion, 
that if thrushes which eat the berries, 
roosted all night on it, and dunged up­
on it, the dung turned to birdline; and
thence came the Latin proverb, Turdus
fibi malum cacat, i. e. the Thrush shits
her own sorrow. 

MISTHOUGHT [of mis and ðoht, 
Sax.] an ill-thought.

MISSEN Mast [in a Ship] is a
round piece of tim­
ber, that is erected in the stern or back
part of it; there are in some large



two such masts, and when so, that mast
of the two which stands next to the
main mast, is called the Main Missen, 
and the other that stands near the poop, 
is call'd the Bonaventure Missen. The
length allowed for a Missen Mast, is half
that of the Main Mast; or the height
of it is the same with that of the Main
Top-Mast from the quarter-deck; and 
the length of the Missen Top-Mast, is
half that.

MIZZEN Mast [in a Ship] is a
round piece of tim­
ber, that is erected in the stern or back
part of it; there are in some large
two such masts, and when so, that mast
of the two which stands next to the
main mast, is called the Main Missen, 
and the other that stands near the poop, 
is call'd the Bonaventure Missen. The
length allowed for a Missen Mast, is half
that of the Main Mast; or the height
of it is the same with that of the Main
Top-Mast from the quarter-deck; and 
the length of the Missen Top-Mast, is
half that.

MISSEN Sail [in a Ship] the sail that
belong to the Missen Yard.

MISSEN Top Sail [in a Ship] the sail
that belongs to the Missen Top-Sail Yard.

MISSEN GROSS a German coin, in
value two pence
halfpenny.

Silver GROSS a German coin, in
value two pence
halfpenny.

MISSION [of the Pope] a power or
licence given by him, to preach the
Romish doctrines in foreign countries.

To MISTEACH [of miſ-tæcan,
Sax.] to teach wrong.

MISTRESS [maitresse, F. magistra, 
L.] of an house; a kept mistress or
concubine, a paramour or sweetheart.

MISTRUSTFUL [of miſ-tru&wyn;a and
full, Sax.] suspicious, jealous.

MISTRUSTFULNESS, suspicious, 
temper, jealous-patedness.

MISTS [miſt, Sax.] vapours hover­
ing over the earth, and staying till they
are either drawn upwards by the rays
of the sun, or falling down to the earth
by their own weight, where by a less
degree of cold, they are changed into
dew, and by a greater into hoar frost.

MISTY [of miſticʒ, Sax.] as misty
weather.

To MISUSESE [of mis-user, F.] to a­
buse; to make a wrong use of.

To MISUNDERSTAND [of miſ­
unðer and ſtanðan, Sax.] to under­
stand amiss.

MITCHELS [in Masonry] Purbeck, 
stones for paving, picked all of a size
from 15 inches square to 2 foot, being
squar'd and hew'd ready for paving.

MITAILLE [in French
Heraldry] signifies that the
escutcheon is cut only half
way athwart, by way of
Bend Sinister. See the fi­
gure.

Image omitted.



MITHRAS, a great and famous deity
of the Persians, who (as some of them
say) was produc'd by the alone heat of
lust from the earth, or as others say
from a stone, and therefore the symbol
us'd by his devout and secret votaries
was Θεὸς ἐχ πετρὰς, i. e. God of a rock,
and was accounted a middle deity be­
tween Arimanes and Oromasdes, or a
middle deity between good and bad.
They sacrificed a horse to him, and ge­
nerally a white one. And a particular
sort of jewel was consecrated to this
god called Mithrax.

MITHRIDATE [mithridatium, L. μὶ­
θριδατης, Gr. of Mithridates, king of
Pontus, the inventor of it, among whose
papers the receipt of it was found, and
carried to Rome by Pompey] a confection, 
that is a preservative against poison;
several of the ingredients of which are
vipers flesh, opium, agarick, squills, 
&c.

MITIGATED [mitigatus, L.] appea­
sed, pacified, asswaged.

MITRAL [of mitra, L.] of, or be­
longing to, or like a mitre.

MITRANCHE [French
Heraldry] signifies that the
escutcheon is cut athwart, 
but only halfway bendwise, 
that is by Bend Dexter, for
the Sinister is called Mitaille. See the 
figure.

Image omitted.



MITRE [mitra, L. μίτρα, Gr.] an
ornament worn by popish bishops and
abbots, when they walk or officiate in
their formalities or Pontificalibus. The
pope has four mitres, different in rich­
ness, which he wears according to the
solemnity of the festival.

MITRE [with Artificers] an angle
that is just 45 degrees.

MIXT Mathematicks, are those arts
and sciences which treat of the proper­
ties of quantity, applied to material
beings or sensible objects, as Astronomy, 
Geography, Dialling, Navigation, Gaug­
ing, Surveying, &c.

MIXT Action [in Law] is one that
lies both for the thing detained, and
against the person of the detainer.

MIXT Body [with Schoolmen] is a
whole resulting from several ingredi­
ents, altered or new modified by the
mixture.

Perfect MIXT Bodies, are the class
of vital or animated bodies, where the
elements or ingredients they are com­
posed of, are changed and transformed
by a perfect mixture.

Imperfect MIXT Bodies, are inani­
mate bodies, the forms whereof remain
still the same as of the ingredients
which constitute them.

MIXT Mode [according to Mr. Lock]
is a combination of several simple ideas
of different kinds; as beauty consists of
Colour, Figure, Proportion, &c.

MIXTURE [in Physick] an assem­
blage or union of several bodies of dif­
ferent properties in the same mass.



MIXTION, mixture or mixing.

MIXTURE [in Drapery] the union, 
or rather confusion, of several wools of
different colours, before they are spun.

MIZZLING [of miſt, q. d. mistling]
raining in very small drops.

MOANFUL [of mænan and full, 
Sax.] sorrowful, lamentable, &c.

MOB, a woman's night-cap.

To M. B [of mobile vulgus, the rab­
ble] to insult a person riotously.

MOBBED, drest in a mob, also in­
sulted by a mob.

MOBILE [mobilis, L.] moveable.

Primum MOBILE [in the Ancient A­
stronomy] a ninth heaven or sphere
imagined to be above those of the pla­
nets and fixed stars.

MOBILITY. Upon Copernicus revi­
ving the notion of the mobility of the
earth, pope Paul V. appointed commis­
sioners to examine into the matter, 
who resolv'd that scholars might main­
tain the possibility of the earth's mobi­
lity as an Hypothesis, but forbad the
asserting it as a demonstrated and known
truth, because they imagined it contra­
dicted several texts of scripture.

MOCCADOES, the thrums or ends
that weavers make in working fine wor­
sted stuffs, which are used in darning or
mending holes in woollen garments.

MODALITY [with Schoolmen] the
manner of a thing in the abstract, or
the manner of existing.

MODE [modus, L. moð, Sax.] way, 
manner, fashion or garb.

The MODE of a thing [with Logicians]
is that, which being conceived in a
thing, and not being able to subsist with­
out it, determines it to be after a cer­
tain manner, and causes it to be named
such. This is also called the manner of
a thing, or attribute or quality.

Internal MODES [in Metaphysicks]
those modes which are inherent in the
substance, as roundness in a bowl.

External MODES, are those which
are extraneous to the subject, as when
we say a thing is beheld, desired, lov­
ed, &c.

Simple MODES, are combinations of
simple ideas or even of the same simple
ideas several times repeated, a score, 
a dozen, &c.

Mixt MODES, are combinations of
simple ideas of several kinds, as Beauty
consists in a composition of colour, fi­
gure, proportion, &c.

Immediate MODES [with Schoolmen]
are such as are immediately attributed
to their subjects or substantives, as mo­
tion is an immediate mode of the body,
understanding of the mind.

Mediate MODES, are those that are
attributed to the subject by the inter­
vention of some other mode; as swift­
ness and slowness are only attributable
to the body in respect to its motion.

Essenial MODES are attributes,
without which
the substance cannot subsist; as wisdom, 
goodness, &c. in God; figure, place, 
quantity, &c. of the body.

Inseparable MODES are attributes,
without which
the substance cannot subsist; as wisdom, 
goodness, &c. in God; figure, place, 
quantity, &c. of the body.

Non-Essential MODES are attri­
butes which
affect created substances, remaining af­
fix'd to them so long as is necessary, as
the whiteness of Milk, coldness of Ice.

Separable MODES are attri­
butes which
affect created substances, remaining af­
fix'd to them so long as is necessary, as
the whiteness of Milk, coldness of Ice.

Positive MODES, are such as give to
their substantives something positive, 
real and absolute.

Privative MODES, are attributed to
subjects, when the mind perceives
some attributes to be wanting therein, 
and frames a word which at first sight
seems to denote something positive, but
which in reality only denotes the want
of some property or mode; as a priva­
tion of light is attributed to a blind
man.

MODES of Spirit, are knowledge and
willing.

MODES of Body, are figure, rest and
motion.

MODES of thickness, the same as es­
sential attributes.

MODES of having, are those whereby
any thing may be had by another.

MODE [in Musick] the particular
manner of constituting the octave, as it
consists of several essential or natural
notes, besides the key.

MODEL [modellus, L. modelle, F.] an
original or pattern proposed for any
one to copy or imitate.

MODEL [with Architects] a kind of
measure, which is the diameter of the
bottom of a pillar in each order, by
which the length, &c. of it is measur­
ed, and which is commonly divided in­
to 60 equal parts, called Minutes; ex­
cept in these of the Dorick and Tuscan
orders, where the model is but half
the diameter.

MODEL [modelle, F. of modulus, L.]
an original pattern which any work­
man proposes to imitate; it is made
either of wood, stone plaster, &c. and
in architecture, should be made by a
scale, where an inch or half inch re­
presents a foot, for the more exact
compleating the design.

MODEL [in the Composite, Corinthi­
an and Ionick orders] is divided into 18
parts, the same as Module.



MODELLED [modellé, F.] framed or
fashioned according to the model or
pattern.

MODERATENESS [moderatio, L.]
moderation.

MODERNS [according to some] all
those authors who have written since
Boetius.

MODERN Astronomy, takes its begin­
ning from Copernicus.

MODERN Architecture, the present
Italian manner of building; or it is ra­
ther in strictness what partakes partly
of the antique, retaining something of
its delicacy and solidity; and partly of
the Gothick, whence it borrows mem­
bers and ornaments without propor­
tion or judgment.

MODERN Medals, such as have been
struck within these 300 years.

MODERNNESS [of modernus, L.]
newness, the being of late days.

The MODERNS [les modernes, F.]
persons of later times, in contradiction
to the ancients.

MODESTNESS [modestia, L.] mo­
desty; modest behaviour, &c.

MODESTY [in Painting] is repre­
sented as a beautiful virgin, clothed in
blue.

MODIFICABLENESS [of modifica­
tio, L.] capableness of being modified.

MODIFICATED [modificatus, L.]
modified.

MODIFIED [modifié, F. of  L.] ha­
ving modality or manner of existence.

MODIFIED [with Logicians] a thing
is said to be modified, when the sub­
stance is considered as determined by a
certain mode or manner; as for ex­
ample, when we consider a Body, the
idea we have of it represents a Thing
or Substance; because we consider it as
a thing that subsists by itself, and has no
occasion for any else to subsist it. But
when we consider, that this body is
round, the idea we have of roundness, 
represents to us only the manner of be­
ing or a Mode, which we conceive can­
not subsist naturally without the Body, 
the roundness of which it is, when we
join the Mode with the thing, then we
consider a round body, which idea re­
represents to us a thing modified.

MODILION [of modiglione, It. i. e.
little model] so called in respect to the
greater, which is the diameter of the
pillar in the Dorick order, a module is
half the diameter of the body of the
column below, in other orders it is the
whole diameter, and is commonly sup­
posed to be divided into 60 equal parts, 
called Minutes.

MODISHNESS [of à la mode, F.] fa­
shionableness.

MODULE [in Architecture] a certain
measure of bigness, taken at pleasure, 
for regulating the proportions of co­
lumns, and the symmetry or distribu­
tion of the whole building. Modilions
are little inverted Consoles, under the
Soffit or bottom of the Drip in the
Ionic, Composit and Corinthian cornices, 
and ought to correspond to the middle
of the columns. In the Corinthian they
are always moulded with carved work.
In the Ionic and Composit they are more
simple, having seldom any ornament, 
except one single leaf underneath.

MOIDORE, a Portugal gold coin, in
value 27 shillings Sterling.

To MOISTEN [of moietér, F.] to
make moist.

MOISTNESS [of moiteur, F.] wet­
tishness, dampness.

To MOLDER [of molð, Sax. earth]
to turn to earth or dust.

MOLINE [in Heraldry] as a Cross Mo­
line, is a cross that runs round both
ways, at all the extremities; but not
so wide or sharp as that which is called
Anchored.

MOLINISTS [so call'd of Molina a
Spanish jesuit, who was reader of divi­
nity lectures for 20 years, in the uni­
versity of Evora in Portugal, who died
at Madrid in the year 1604., aged 65
years] adherents to his opinions, con­
cerning the consistency of grace, with
free will, about which he wrote a
book which gave rise to the disputes, 
upon the subjects of grace and predesti­
nation, which has made so great a noise
in the world, especially by the opposi­
tion made against it by the Dominicans.

MOLITIONS, grindings; also endea­
vours, attempts.

MOLLIFYING [mollificans, L.] sof­
tening, assuaging.

MOLLIFYINGNESS, mollification, 
softening quality.

MOLOCH [ךלמ, Heb. i. e. a king]
the idol Moloch is the same with Saturn, 
to whom the Heathens sacrificed their
sons and daughters, causing them to be
burnt alive in a brasen image made for
that purpose. The Ammonites, whose
god this was, obliged all parents, ei­
ther to offer up their children in this
manner, or make them pass between
two fires in honour of Moloch. And
Herodotus says, that sometimes men
offered themselves voluntarily to be
burnt for this god. Moloch stood near
Jerusalem in a beautiful valley, belong­
ing to the children of Hinnom, in the



midst of a pleasant grove, where the
Jews imitated their profane neigh­
bours. The Carthaginians sacrificed
200 noblemen's children to Moloch, 
when Agathocles made war upon them
in Africa. Moses in several places for­
bids the Israelites to dedicate their
children to Moloch, by making them
pass through the fire, in honour of
that god.

He ordered those to be put to death, 
who should offend against this com­
mand; and God himself threatens to
pour out his wrath, against such a
man, and to root him out from among
his people.

There is great probability that the
Hebrews were much addicted to the
worship of this deity, even from be­
fore their coming out of Egypt, since
Amos, and after him St. Stephen, re­
proaches them, with having carried
along with them into the wilderness
the tabernacle of their god Moloch:
Portâstis tabernaculum Moloch vestri.
Solomon built a temple to Moloch, upon
the mount of Olives, and Menasseh a
long time after imitated his impiety, 
by making his son pass thro' the fire in
honour of Moloch. It was chiefly in the
valley of Tophet and Hinnom, to the
east of Jerusalem, that this idolatrous
worship was paid to Moloch by the
Jews, by consecrating their children
to him, and by making them pass thro'
the fire in honour of him.

Some are of opinion, that they con­
tented themselves by making these
children leap over a fire sacred to Mo­
loch, in order by this, to consecrate
them to this false deity; and by this
lustration to purify them, being an
usual ceremony on other occasions
among the Pagans. Others believe
that they made them pass between two
fires opposite to each other, for the
same intention. But others maintain
that they really burnt their children, 
by way of sacrifice to Moloch. The
scriptures will furnish several proofs
of this. See Psalm cvi. 37. Isaiah, vii.
5. Ezek. xvi. 20, 21. xxiii. 37, 39.
Where it is positively asserted, that the
Hebrews sometimes sacrificed their
children to Devils, to Moloch, and to
strange gods. And in the second book
of Kings, it is directly said, that the in­
habitants of Sepharvaim burnt their
children in the fire, to Anammelech and
Adrammelech their gods, which with­
out doubt are the same as Moloch of the
Ammonites. However I would not be
understood to assert, that they always
really burnt their children in honour
of this idol; and perhaps when it is on­
ly expressed that they made them pass
through the fire, Lustrare per ignem, or
transferre per ignem, this means in some
places, the leaping over the flames, or
passing nimbly between two fires. But
we are persuaded that generally speak­
ing, the worshippers of Moloch immo­
lated or sacrificed their children, and
put them to death in honour of this
false deity.

The Rabbins assure us, that the idol
Moloch was of brass, sitting upon a
throne of the same metal, adorned
with a royal crown, having the head
of a calf, and his arms extended, as if
to embrace any one. When they
would offer any children to him, they
heated the statue within by a great
fire, and when it was burning hot, 
they put the miserable victim within
his arms, which was soon consumed
by the violence of the heat. And that
the cries of the children might not be
heard, they made a great noise with
drums, and other instruments about
the idol. Others say that his arms
were extended, and reaching towards
the ground; so that when they put a
child within his arms, it immediately
fell into a great fire, which was light­
ed at the foot of the statue. Others re­
late that it was hollow, and that with­
in it were contrived seven partitions, 
one of which was appointed for meal
or flower; in the second there were
turtles, in the third an ewe, in the
fourth a ram, in the fifth a calf, in the
sixth an ox, and in the seventh a child, 
all these were burnt together by heat­
ing the statue on the outside.

MOLTING the falling off or
change of feathers, 
hair, skin, horns, voice of animals, 
which happens to some annually; and
to others at certain stages of their lives.

MOULTING the falling off or
change of feathers, 
hair, skin, horns, voice of animals, 
which happens to some annually; and
to others at certain stages of their lives. 

MOLYBDOMANCY [μολυβδομαντεία
of μόλυβδος lead, and μάντεια, Gr. di­
vination] a divining, by observing the 
motions, figures, &c. of melted lead.

MOMENTUM [in Mechanicks] is
the same with Impetus or quantity of
motion in any moving body.

MOMENTANEOUSNESS [of mo­
menta­
neus, L.] shortness of duration or con­
tinuance.

MOMENTARINESS [of mo­
menta­
neus, L.] shortness of duration or con­
tinuance.

MOMENTOUSNESS [momentosus,
L.] weightiness of concern; the being
of moment or worth.

MOMENTS [with Naturalists] are
the quantities of motion in any moving 



body; also simply, the motion itself, 
which they call vis insita, or the pow­
er by which any moving bodies do con­
tinually change their places.

MOMUS [μῶμος, Gr.] disgrace, re­
prehension] the carping god, who had
his beginning from Sleep and the Night;
and tho' he was very slothful and igno­
ant, and would do nothing himself, 
yet found fault with every thing that
was done by others. Among others, 
he is said to have blamed Vulcan, for
making man without a window in his
breast, that his wiles might be visible.
Whence all carpers are called Momu­
ses.  L.

MOMUS [in Painting, &c.] was re­
presented in a darkish coloured robe, 
with beard and hair parti-coloured.

MONANGIOPOLYSPERMOUS [of
μόνος alone, άγγεῖον a vessel, πολυς many, 
and σπέρμα, Gr. seed] a term apply'd to
such plants as have many seeds in one
single seed vessel.

MONARCHY [of μοναρχία of μονόος, 
alone or single, and a αρχή dominion, Gr.]
is a state or kingdom governed by a
single magistrate, in whom the supreme
power is lodged, which is sometimes
absolute, comprizing both the legislative
and executive power, which is common­
ly called an arbitrary government, such
as that of France, Turky, &c.

A mix'd MONARCHY is one that is
tempered by the interposition of the
estates or great men of the realm, both
of the nobility and gentry; thus in
England the executive power is vested
in the king or monarch absolutely; but
the legislative power is invested in the
parliament; but it is to be noted, that
the king has a negative power as to
the laws proposed to be obligatory on
the people, and also the power of pro­
roguing and dissolving parliaments, but
no power to raise money, but by laws
consented to by the parliament.

Monarchies by general custom are
successive from father to son, &c. But
some are elective as that of Poland, and
there are also many instances of monar­
chies where the succession has not been
hereditary.

MONASTERIES a monastery was
originally no more than a cell for a sin­
gle solitary monk; but afterwards grew
to be houses for religious fraternities.
Eusebius bishop of Vercelles first brought
them into great cities in the West; and
in the 4th century, St. Basil is said to
have formed rules or regulations for
monastical societies in the East; and in
the 6th century the like was done by
St. Bennet for those in the West. Which
order in process of time came to be di­
vided into many branches.

Monasteries were at first places of
strict discipline and austerity of life, 
and also schools for the instruction and
education of youth. During the ravages
of the Goths and Vandals, the Huns, 
Franks, and Almains; monasteries were
the only places of safe retirement for
learned men and repositories of all sorts
of learning, and out of them were pro­
duced many learned men, well qualified
both for the ministerial function and
government, which gaining them the
esteem of all ranks and degrees of peo­
ple and princes, they obtained great
indulgences and privileges; the latter
as well as the former receiving their
education from them, till about the
year 1000, when colledges and univer­
sities were erected, more especially for
learning and the sciences, and monas­
teries were confined chiefly to religious
observations and restrictions; so that
their esteem was somewhat eclipsed, 
till about the 13th century the Mendicant
friars attempted to recover their repu­
tation by mixing philosophy and school
divinity with their other performances.

MONE [of mænan, Sax.] grieving
and lamenting, bewailing.

MONK [monachus, L. of μόνος Gr. a­
lone, solitary] persons who according
to their first institution were separated
from the company of men. The origin
of a monkish life is usually attributed
to Paul the hermit, and St. Anthony, 
whose example replenished Egypt with
monks: some altogether solitary, others
in community.

This kind of life afterwards spread
into Syria, Pontus and the lesser Asia.
Those of Egypt and Syria are called by
the name of St. Anthony, but those of
Asia took the name of St. Basil, who
brought in Anthony's rule. Athanasius
coming to Rome and publishing the life
of St. Anthony, many embraced this way
of living in Italy, from whence it spread
into other provinces.

Monks at first lived out of town, most
of them being lay men, their profession
debarring them from ecclesiastical func­
tions, all their employment consisting
in hard prayer and hard labour.

MONKISH, of or belonging to
monks.

MONOCEROS [μονόχερως, Gr.] an
unicorn or beast that has but one horn;
also the sene fish.  L.

MONOGAMIST, one who is of sin­
gle marriage.



MONOLOGIST [monologus, L. of
μονολόγος, Gr.] one that loves to have
all the talk to himself.

MONOLOGUE [μονολογία, Gr.] a
soliloquy, a dra­
matick scene, where only one actor
speaks.

MONOLOGY [μονολογία, Gr.] a
soliloquy, a dra­
matick scene, where only one actor
speaks.

MONOME [in Algebra] a quantity
that has but one denomination or name.

A MONOPETALOUS Flower, uni­
form and regular [with Botan.] is one
in which the petal is not divided, or if
divided, the segments answer each o­
ther.

MONOPETALOUS Flower, difform
and irregular, is one in which the parts
of the petal do not exactly answer one
to the other.

MONOPHYSITES [of μόνος alone
or single, and φυίσις, Gr. nature] a name
given to all the sectaries in the Levant, 
who will allow of but one only nature
in Jesus Christ.

MONOPS [μονωψ, Gr.] a beast in Pæ­
onia, as big as a bull, who being pursued
closely, voids a sort of sharp and fiery
ordure, which if it lights upon the hun­
ter, he dies immediately.

MONOPYRENOS [of μονος and πυρήν
Gr.] a kernel which has one seed or ker­
nel in the berry, as philyrea, misletoe, 
&c.

MONOSPERMOUS [of μόνος and
σπέρμα, Gr. seed] which bears a single
seed to each flower, as in Valerian, the
Marvel of Peru, &c.

MONOTONIA [of σπέρμα and τόνος, 
Gr. tone] the having but one tone; also
a want of inflection or variation of
voice, or a pronunciation, where a long
series of words is delivered with one
unvaried tone.

MONSEIGNEUR, a title used by the
French to persons of a higher rank.

MONSIEUR, a title used by them
speaking to their equals.

MONSOONS, are periodical winds
in the Indian or Eastern sea; that is, 
winds that blow one half the year one
way, and the other half on the oppo­
site points; and these points and times
of shifting are different; in the different
parts of the ocean; for in some places, 
the wind is constant for three months 
one way, then three months more the
contrary way, and so all the year.

MONSTER [monstrum, L.] a natural
birth, or the production of any living
thing, degenerating from the proper and
usual disposition of parts in the species
it belongs to, as when it has too many
or too few members; or some of them
are extravagantly large; any thing a­
gainst or besides the common course of
nature.

MONSTRANT [monstrans, L.] shew­
ing or declaring.

MONSTRIFICABLE [monstrificabilis,
L.] very large, monstrous.

MONSTROSITY, monstrousness.

MONSTROUSNESS [monstrosus, L.]
prodigiousness, the being beyond the
ordinary course of nature.

MONTANISTS [so called of montanus]
an heretick in the 2d century, who so
deceived the world by his hypocrisy, 
that he was reputed to have the gift of
prophecy and doing miracles.

He gave it out that himself was the 
Paraclete, or comforter promised by
Christ; permitted the dissolution of mar­
riages to avoid martyrdom, and also
condemning second marriages as forni­
cation, and ordered a severe fast of 3
Lents.

His disciples asserted, that God the fa­
ther having a design to save the world
by the law and the prophets; but not
being able to perform it, assumed flesh, 
in the womb of the virgin, preached in
Jesus Christ and suffered death in his
shape.

At last he hanged himself with Maxi­
milla, one of his women scholars.

MONTANT [in French Heraldry] sig­
nifies the same as we do by the moon
in her increase, when she always faces
to the right of the escutcheon.

Lunar Synodical MONTH, is the space
of time between two conjunctions of the
moon with the sun.

Lunar Periodical MONTH the space
of time, wherein the moon makes her
round thro' the zodiack.

Lunar Illuminative MONTH, is the
space from the first time of her appear­
ance, after the new moon, to her first
appearance the new moon following.

MONTH of Apparition [with Astro­
nomers] is
the space of 26 days 12 hours, in which
the moon is to be seen; the other 3 days
in which it is darkened by the sun be­
ing taken away.

MONTH of Illumination [with Astro­
nomers] is
the space of 26 days 12 hours, in which
the moon is to be seen; the other 3 days
in which it is darkened by the sun be­
ing taken away. 

MONTH Decretorial also consists
of 26 days
12 hours.

MONTH Medical also consists
of 26 days
12 hours.

MONTH of Consecution [with Astro­
nomers] is
the same as synodal month, i. e. the
space of time between one conjunction
of the moon with the sun and another, 
bearing somewhat more than 29 days
and a half.

MONTH of Progression [with Astro­
nomers] is
the same as synodal month, i. e. the
space of time between one conjunction
of the moon with the sun and another, 
bearing somewhat more than 29 days
and a half.

MONTH of Peragration [with As­
tron.] i. e.



the space of the moons course from any
point of the zodiack, to the same again, 
consisting of 27 days, 7 hours and 45 mi­
nutes.

MONTH Periodical [with As­
tron.] i. e.
the space of the moons course from any
point of the zodiack, to the same again, 
consisting of 27 days, 7 hours and 45 mi­
nutes.

MONTH [in Hieroglyphicks] was re­
presented by a palm-tree, sending forth
a branch every new moon.

MONT-JOYE [among the French] a
name by which they call heaps of stones
laid together by pilgrims; in which they
stick crosses, when they are come with­
in view of the end of their journey;
and so those betwixt St. Denis in France
and Paris, are called St. Denis's Mont­
joyes,  F.

MONT-JOYE [with Military Men] is
a banner, so Mont-joye St. Denis is as
much as to say, the banner of St. Denis.

MONTOIR [in Horsemanship] a stone
as high as the stirrups, which Italian
riding masters mount their horses from, 
without putting their foot in the stir­
rup.  Ital.

MONTOIR [with Horsemen] the poise
or rest of the foot on the left stirrup,  F.

MONUMENT [monumentum, L.] a
memorial for after ages, either a pillar
statue, tomb, &c. raised in memory of
some famous person or action.

MOOD [moðe, Sax. mind] disposition
humour, temper.

MOODINESS [moðic and neſſe, 
Sax.] doggedness, sullenness.

MOODS [modi, L.] as the moods in
grammar.

MOODS [with Grammar.] determine
the significations of verbs, as to the man­
ner and circumstances of what is affirm­
ed or denyed; some reckon four, as the
indicative, imperative, the potential and
infinitive; to these other add two more, 
the optative and subjunctive; which are
literally the same with the potential;
but are distinguished, the optative by the
adverb, and the subjunctive by a con­
junction.

MOODS [with Logicians] are the uni­
versal affirmative; the universal nega­
tive; and the particular affirmative, and
the particular negative.

MOODS [with Musicians] are four
viz. 1. The perfect of the more. 2.
The perfect of the less. 3. The imper­
fect of the more. 4. The imperfect of
the less. But these moods are now
grown much out of use, except the last, 
which is called the
Common MOOD, viz. that a large con­
tains 2 longs, 4 breves, 8 semibreves, 
16 minims, 32 crotchets, 48 quavers,
&c.

MOODS [among the ancient Greeks]
were five; the use of which was to shew
in what key a song was set, and how the
different keys had relation one to the
other. These moods were called after
provinces of Greece, viz. the Dorick;
Lydian, Ionian, Phrygian and Æolick;
some of which were suited for light and
soft airs, others to warlike tunes, and
others to grave musick.

Dorick MOOD [in Musick] consisted
of slow tun'd notes, and was proper for
the exciting persons to sobriety and
piety.

Ionick MOOD, was for more light
and soft musick; such as pleasant, amo­
rous songs, jiggs, courants, sarabands.

ÆoIick MOOD, was of an airy, soft
and delightful sound, such as our Ma­
drigals, and was useful to allay the pas­
sions by means of its grateful variety
and melodious harmony.

The Lydian MOOD, was a solemn
grave musick, and the composition or
descant was of slow time, adapted to
sacred hymns, &c.

The Phrygian MOOD, was a warlike
musick, fit for trumpets, hautboys, and
such like martial instruments; in order
to animate and raise the minds of men
to undertake military atchievements.

MOODY [modic, Sax.] sullen, &c.



MOON [mona, Sax.] one of the ten
secondary planets, being the earths sa­
tellite or attendant, being only 60 semi-­
diameters of the earth remov'd from
it, which traverses through the zodi­
ack in 27 days, 7 hours and 41 minutes;
but does not overtake the sun in less
than 29 days, 12 hours and 44 minutes.
The moon was an ancient idol of Eng­
land, and worshipped by the Britains in
the form of a beautiful maid, having
her head covered, and two ears stand­
ing out.

The form of this idol seems some­
what strange and ridiculous, for being
made for a woman, she hath a short
coat like a man; but it is more strange
to see her hood with two such long
ears. The holding of a moon before
her breast, may seem to have been de­
signed to express what she is; but the
reason of her chaperon with long ears, 
as also of her short coat and piked
shoos, has not, that I find, been explain­
ed by the learned. This idol was wor­
shipped by our Saxon ancestors, and
from it Monday takes its name. See
the figure in the foregoing page.

Image omitted.



MOON, the common people in some
counties in England, are accustomed at
the prime of the moon to say; It is a
fine moon, God bless her; which some
imagine to proceed from a blind zeal, 
retain'd from the ancient Irish, who
worshipped the moon, or from a cus­
tom in Scotland (particularly in the
high-lands) where the women make a
curtesy to the new moon; and some
English women do still retain a touch
of this gentilism, who getting up upon, 
and sitting astride on a gate or stile the
first night of a moon, they say.

All hail to the moon, all hail to thee;
I prithee good moon declare to me, 
This nightwho my husband shall be.

The moon was worshipped by the
ancient Heathens under several names, 
and several shapes.

As the moon at her first appearance.
She was worshipped in the form of a
woman clothed in white garments, and
holding in her hand a burning torch:
When she was half full with a basket
of fruit; and when she was at the full
in a dark coloured garment.

As Juno, she was honoured with the
ornaments of a queen.

As Diana, she was worshipped in the
habit of a woman, holding a torch in
one hand, two snakes in the other, a
bow and arrows on her shoulders, sit­
ting in a chariot drawn by white deers. 

As Venus, she was represented as a
woman naked crowned with roses and
rising out of the sea.

As Lucina, she was crowned with the
herb dittany, and holding in her hand
a burning torch.

As Ceres, she was represented as a
matron with a sheaf of corn on her
head.

As Hecate, she was worshipped in the
shape of a monster, having three
heads.

The MOON [in her Decrement] is in
her waining.

The MOON [in her Detriment] is in
her eclipse.

The MOON [in her Complement] is
when she is at full.

The MOON incressant, is the same as
in her increment.

The Colour of the MOON [in Blazon.]
is either proper, which is Argent or Or, 
as she is borne; but these two metals
represent her best, unless she be in her
detriment, and then Sable is better.

MOON [in Heraldry] is always borne
in coat armour, either increasing or de­
creasing; but never in the full. An
increasing moon is a symbol of nobility
and increase, called Increment.

The MOON [with Divines] is the
hieroglyphick of the Christian church, 
who comparing Jesus Christ to the sun, 
compared the church to the moon, as
receiving all its beauty and splendor
from him.

The MOON [Hieroglyphically] repre­
sents inconstancy and lightness, because
of its frequent changes.

MOON-STRUCK, smitten by the
moon; planet-struck. Milton.

To MOOR a Ship a Proviso [Sea Term]
is to have an anchor in the river, and
a hawser on shore; in this case they
say, the ship is moored with her head
a-shore.

MOOR [moor, Sax.] a marsh or fen;
also a heath or barren ground.

MOORISH, pertaining to Moors, &c.

MOORS-Head [with Horsemen] so is
a horse called of a roan colour, who
besides the mixture or blending of a
gray and a bay, has a black head, and
black extremities, as the mane and
tail.

MOQUA a frenzical riot of some
Mahometans who have
returned from Mecca, against those
who have not professed Mahometanism.
He that runs the Moqua or Muck, takes
his dagger in his hand, whose blade is
usually half poisoned, and running
about the streets kills all those he
meets, who are not Mahometans, till



he is killed himself, pretending to be­
lieve that he serves God and Mahomet
by killing their enemies. When one
of these madmen is slain, all the Maho­
metan rabble run to him, and bury him
like a saint, every one contributing to
make a noble burial for him.

MUCK a frenzical riot of some
Mahometans who have
returned from Mecca, against those
who have not professed Mahometanism.
He that runs the Moqua or Muck, takes
his dagger in his hand, whose blade is
usually half poisoned, and running
about the streets kills all those he
meets, who are not Mahometans, till
he is killed himself, pretending to be­
lieve that he serves God and Mahomet
by killing their enemies. When one
of these madmen is slain, all the Maho­
metan rabble run to him, and bury him
like a saint, every one contributing to
make a noble burial for him.

MORAL Sense, the faculty whereby
we discern or perceive what is good, 
virtuous, &c. in actions, manners, 
characters, &c.

MORAL Certainty, is a very strong
probability, in contradistinction to a ma­
thematical demonstration.

MORAL Impossibility, is what is
other wise called a very great and al­
most insuperable difficulty, in opposi­
tion to a physical or natural impossibi­
lity.

MORAL Philosophy, that which is
otherwise called Ethicks, and is a sci­
ence that teaches the directing and
forming our manners; explains the
nature and reason of action; and shews
how we may acquire that happiness
that is agreeable to human nature.

MORAL Actions, are such as render
a rational or free agent good or evil, 
and so of consequence, rewardable or
punishable, because he doth them.

MORALITY or Moral Philosophy, is
a conformity to those unalterable ob­
ligations which remit from the nature
of our existence, and the necessary re­
lation of life, whether to God as our
Creator, or to man as our fellow-crea­
ture, or it is the doctrine of virtue, in
order to attain the greatest happiness, 
and hath these three parts, Ethicks, 
Oeconomicks and Politicks.

Socrates is said to have been the first
philosopher, who set himself about the
reforming of manners; for till his
time, the whole business of the philo­
sophers, was the study of the heavenly
bodies; tho' Pythagoras shewed Socra­
tes the way, yet the specimen that he
gave was very imperfect; he deducing
his rules of Morality, from the obser­
vations of nature, which part of know­
ledge he acquired by conversing with
the Egyptian priests.

The main aim of Pythagoras's moral
doctrine, was to purge the mind from
the impurities of the body, and from
the clouds of the imagination. His
morality seems to have had more puri­
ty and piety in it, than the other sy­
stems, but less exactness; his maxims
being only a bare explication of divine
worship, of natural honesty, of mo­
desty, integrity, publick spiritedness, 
and other common offices of life.

The golden verses which go under
the name of Pythagoras, were attribut­
ed to his disciples, who were as re­
markable for the practice, as the theo­
ry of Ethicks. So that in the time of
the first consuls of Rome, his sect was in
that repute, that to be a wise man and
a Pythagorean, were accounted terms
equivalent.

To this morality of Pythagoras, So­
crates added settled principles, and re­
duced it into method; his main design
was to reform and purge the philoso­
phy of Pythagoras. His whole doctrine
was one continued lesson of virtue. He
established it as a rule of discourse, to
treat of the most serious subjects, with­
out an air of too much seriousness, 
knowing that to please, was the surest
method to persuade; and therefore his
morals gained admittance, by a seem­
ing easiness and agreeableness.

That doctrine of morality that was
left him by his master Socrates, was
improv'd by Plato, who carried each
virtue to its last height and accomplish­
ment, by mixing his ideas on the uni­
versal principle of philosophy thro' the
whole design. His philosophy abounds
with good lessons, which tend either to
the encouragement of virtue or dis­
countenancing of vice. Diogenes was con­
temporary with Plato, and commenc'd
a severe pique against him, designing
to expose the easiness and gentility of
Plato, by an affectation of rigour. The
foundation of his morals, were a vain
haughtiness and moroseness of temper.
Plato first rectified the doctrine of the
immortality of the soul, which Pere Ra­
pin says, Socrates learned from Pythago­
ras, Pythagoras from the Egyptians, and
the Egyptians from the Hebrews, by the
travels and converse of Abraham.

Aristotle formed the doctrine of Plato
his master, into a more regular body, 
by distinguishing the characters of pub­
lick and private virtue, &c.

But after all, this morality of Aristo­
tle's, as well as that of Socrates and
Plato, is only capable of making a phi­
losopher; but has not strength enough
to make an honest man, without the
sublime philosophy of Christianity; tho'
this morality had a fine notion, suffici­
ent to teach a man to know his duty;
yet it was not sufficient to engage him
to love and embrace it.

The morals of Zeno and Epicurus ha­
ving made a great noise in the world, 
Ethicks from that time began to be cul­
tivated more than any other part of
philosophy, and the summum bonum was



the main subject that was banded about,
according to the various opinions, and
sometimes according to the complexi­
ons and constitutions of philosophers:
Some placing it in one thing, and some
in another, till they had muitiplyed to
that degree, that Varro reckons up 288
different opinions. After Zeno and E­
picurus, we find no new draught of mo­
rality. Indeed there are Theophrastus's
characters, which are very good lessons
of manners; and Tully's offices, which
are founded upon the severest virtue;
and Seneca's morals, which are less
pure and exact; and Pliny gives us some
bright and forcible strokes of morality;
but Epictetus is the most rational of the
Stoicks; but the Christian revelation has
opened a way for such refined Ethicks, 
that it makes all the heathen morality
appear to be dark and trivial.

The brightness of the Christian Mo­
rality amazed the Pagans themselves;
and the lives of the primitive Christians
were so severely sober, that they were
constant lessons of morality to the Hea­
thens; which put them upon reducing
their morals to a purer standard: So
that at last it became so severe, as to
vie with that of the Christians; and
most of the philosophers, in the time
of Antoninus, joined themselves to the
Stoicks. But, as a certain author says, 
all the Heathen or Stoick Morality ap­
peared to be so weak, that they soon
fell into the contempt of all such as se­
riously gave themselves to the study of
virtue and a good life. For as to what
Zeno taught concerning the indifference
to pleasure and pain, glory and infamy, 
wealth and poverty, this was never
really found, but under the discipline
of faith. And besides the contentment
and felicity under sufferings, which was
so much boasted of by the heathen sa­
ges, it was never made good but by
Christian examples: And that the sum
of the philosophical virtue of the Hea­
thens, upon a strict inquiry, seemed to
be nothing but an art to conceal mens
vices, and to flatter their pride; be­
cause the utmost that it could perform, 
was only to fill the mind with false
ideas of constancy and resolution: But
the Christians brought them into an ac­
quaintance with their real infirmities, 
and instructed them how to restrain
their irregular desires, which they
were allowed to enjoy by their former
institutions. The new evangelical mo­
rals were established by the new doc­
trine of these new lights; as St. Basil, 
St. Chrysostom, St. Jerom, St. Ambrose,
St. Austin, &c. have been the most e­
minent ancient expositors of this divine
morality.

MORASS [moratz, Dan.] a marsh, 
fen, or low moist ground, to which
waters drain from higher ground, and
have no descent to carry them off.

MORBIDNESS [of morbidus, L.] dis­
easedness, unsoundness of constitution.

MORBID [in Painting] a term used
of very fat flesh very strongly expressed.

MORBUS Vernaculus [the epidemi­
cal or common disease] a disease which
affects a great many persons in the same
country; the cause of it being peculiar
to the country where it reigns; as in­
termitting fevers to those who inhabit
marshy places; a flux in several parts
of the West Indies and Ireland; the
scurvy in Holland, &c.

MORDACIOUSNESS [mordacitas, 
L.] bitingness, corroding quality.

MORDENT [mordens, L.] biting.

MORDICANTNESS [of mordicans, 
L.] bitingness.

MOREL or Petty MOREL [with Herbalists] the
herb garden night­
shade.

MOREOVER [of mære and ofer, 
Sax.] and besides.

MORES [North Country] high
and open places; in
other places it is used for low and bog­
gy grounds.

MAURES [North Country] high
and open places; in
other places it is used for low and bog­
gy grounds. 

MORGAGE [of mort, F. of mortuus, 
L. and gage, F. a pledge] a pawn of
lands, tenements, &c. 

To MORGAGE [of mort and gager, 
F. to pledge] to pawn lands, &c.

MORGAGEE, the party to whom
any thing is morgaged.

MORGAGER, the party who pawns
or morgages.

MORIA [μορία, Gr.] the goddess of
folly.

MORIGEROUSNESS [of morigerus, 
L.] obedientness.

Maid MORIAN a boy dressed in
a girl's habit,
having his head gaily trimmed, who
dances with the morris-dancers.

Maid MARRION a boy dressed in
a girl's habit,
having his head gaily trimmed, who
dances with the morris-dancers.

MORPHEUS [so called, because, as
tho' by the command of his lord, he
represented τὰς μορφὰς, i. e. the counte­
nances and shapes of men] the God of
dreams, who had the power of taking
upon him all manner of shapes.

MORS [Death] was personified by
the ancients and represented as the only
and most powerful minister of the in­
fernal deities, who brings all mortals
down to the river Acheron.



The poets make her the daughter of
Nox [Night] and the sister of Somnus
[Sleep] for whom, they say, she had a
peculiar affection.

There was a temple among the Eleans, 
with the statue of a woman holding in
her hands two boys asleep, a white
one in her right, and a black one in
her left; both of them having distorted
legs. The inscription intimated that
one of them was Sleep and the other
Death, and that the woman that nou­
rished them was Night.

If any sacrifice was grateful to her, 
it was a cock; but no sacrifices, no tem­
ples, no priests nor ceremonies were
appointed to her, because she was ac­
counted a most rigid deity, whom no
prayers could move, no sacrifice pacify, 
and yet this very goddess was esteem'd
as sent to mankind as the remedy of all
evils, and the end of all grief and mi­
sery, and is as much to be desired by
good men, when the laws of nature
will permit her to come, as she is dread­
ed by men of wicked lives and affright­
ed consciences.

MORSE, a sea ox, an amphibious
animal, living sometimes in the sea, 
and sometimes on land; he is in size
about the bigness of an ox; but in shape
rather resembles that of a lion; his
skin is twice as thick as a bull's hide;
his hair is short, like that of a seal;
his teeth are as large as an elephant's, 
like them in form, and as good ivory;
and train oil is made of his paunch.

MORSUS Diaboli [with Anatom.] the
outer ends of the Tubæ Fallopianæ (i. e.
those next to the ovaria) because their
edges there appear jagged and torn.

MORTAISE [in Carpentry] or as our
carpenters call it, Mortise; is a square
piece of wood, with a square hole
through it, which is properly the mor­
tise, being to fasten another piece in it.

MORIAL [in a Figurative Sense]
cruel, bitter, great.

MORTALNESS [mortalitas, L.] dead­
liness, dying or killing nature.

Bills of MORTALITY, the weekly
bills compiled by the parish clerks about
London; giving an account of the num­
ber of persons which die of each disease;
and also of those who were born every
week.

MORTAR Piece [with Gunners] a
thick, short sort of cannon, having a
very large bore, mounted on a very
low, strong carriage, with wooden
wheels of one intire piece, for throw­
ing of bombs, carcasses, &c.

Land MORTARS [in Gunnery] are of
different sorts; the most common are
10, 13, 14 and 15 inches diameter.
They are mounted on a very thick
plank; but have no wheels; but upon
a march are laid upon a block carriage.

Cohorn MORTARS, are made of
hammered
iron, of four
inches dia­
meter at the
bore, in
length ten
inches and a
half, in the
chace nine inches; being fixed upon a
piece of oak twenty inches in length, 
ten and a half in breadth; and betwixt
three or four in thickness; they stand
fixt at forty five degrees of elevation, 
and throw hand-granades as all other
hand-mortars do. See the figure.

Image omitted.



Hand MORTARS, are also of several
sorts, as 
Tinkers MORTARS, which are fixed
at the end of a staff about four foot and
a half long, and the other end being
shod with iron to stick in the ground, 
while a soldier keeps it in an elevation
with one hand, and fires it with the
other.
Firelock MORTARS, are fix'd in a
stock, with a lock like a firelock, and
swing between two arches of iron, with
holes answering to one another. These
stand upon a plank of wood, and are
portable by one man, from one place
to another.

MORTHLAGA [Morðlaʒa, Sax.]
a murderer or man slayer.

MORTICINOUS [morticinus, L.] dy­
ing of itself, not being killed.

MORTIFIED [mortifié, F. of  L.]
made or grown dead; subdued or con­
quered.

To MORTIFY acid Spirits [with
Chymists] is to mix them with such
things as destroy their strength, or hin­
der their operation.

To MORTISE [with Carpenters]
is to fasten one
piece of timber into another; or to fix
the tenon of one piece of wood into the
hole or mortise of another.

To MORTOISE [with Carpenters]
is to fasten one
piece of timber into another; or to fix
the tenon of one piece of wood into the
hole or mortise of another.

MORTISE [mortaise, F.] the hole
made in one piece of wood to receive
the tenon of another piece.

MORTMAIN [of mortuus dead, and
manus hand, L.] a name appropriated to
such societies and corporations as by
their constitution are immortal; their
farms and manours being as it were
dead to the common-wealth, in that
they neither descend to the people nor



revert to the lord; nor are liable to the
feudal services of wards, marriages and
reliefs.

Among the different kinds of estates, 
in Mortmain, formerly those belonging
to the church were most considerable;
for at the time of the survey made by
William the Conqueror of all the land in
England, the whole was found to be
60215 knight's fees, out of which the
church was then possessed of 28015, to
which additions were still making till
the time of king Edward I. who being
apprehensive the estate of the church
might grow too great, in the 7th year of
his reign, procured the statute of Mort­
main to be made; by which it is enacted
that no estates shall be given to the
church without the leave of the king;
and by a supplemental provision, this
act was in the 15th year of king Richard
I. made to reach all lay fraternities and
corporations.

MORTNE [in Heraldry]
signifies born dead,  F. and
is applied to a lion, that
has neither tongue, teeth, 
nor claws; and the reason
of calling it born dead, may be, that
having neither tongue, teeth, nor claws
it is in a dead state, having no weapons
to get nor tear his prey, nor a tongue
to turn the meat in its mouth, which is
a state of death to a beast of prey.

Image omitted.



MORTUARY [in the Canon Law]
signifies a gift given by a person at his
death, as a recompence for any perso­
nal tithes and offerings, that shall have
happened not no have been duly paid
at his life time; accordingly in former
times the deceased's best beast was com­
monly given to the priest, which tho' it
was sometimes bequeathed as a legacy, 
yet where they were customarily paid, 
they were settled by act of parliament
and settled as a due debt.

The antient way of paying the mor­
tuary was, by leading or driving, &c.
the horse, cow, &c. before the corps of
the deceased at his funeral.

By the statute of the 21st of Henry the
VIII this was converted into a certain
sum of money; but these mortuaries
are only payable in some particular pla­
ces.

Caput MORT [with Chymists] the
gross and earthy substance that remains
of any mixt body, after the moisture
has been drawn out.

MOSAICK, belonging to Moses.

MOSAICK Work [or rather Musaic
work; so called,
as some say, from the Musea of the
Greeks, which adorned both out and in­
side with it, and from whom Pliny says
they were derived] a work composed
of many little stones or other matters of
different colours, so disposed as to re­
present divers shapes of ornaments, 
birds, &c.

The ancients did adorn their floors
pavements of temples, palaces, &c. in
this manner, especially the Greeks; one
of the most admired curiosities of this
kind now remaining is the pavement of
the choir of St. Remi's church at Rheims, 
in which is admirably represented.

1. King David playing upon an harp, 
with the words Rex David over his head.
2. A picture of St. Hierom about whom
are the figures and names of all the pro­
phets, apostles and evangelists.
3. The 4 rivers of the terrestrial pa­
radise, with their names, Tigris, Eu­
phrates, Gihon, Phison.
4. The four seasons of the year.
5. The 7 liberal arts.
6. The 12 months of the year.
7. The 12 signs of the zodiack.
8. Moses sitting on a chair and holding
an angel on one of his knees.
9. The 4 cardinal virtues.
10. The 4. quarters of the world, &c:

All these are done in stones not bigger
than ones nail, except some white and
black tombs, and some round pieces of
spotted Jasper, with many other curio­
sities.

There are in some places Mosaick
work done in plaister.

Some make a distinction between
Mosaick words and inlaid works; and
say that each little stone has but one co­
lour, like the stitches of needle work, 
so that being cubical and perfectly join­
ed together they imitate the figures and
shadows of painting. But inlaid works
they chuse stones that have naturally the
shadowing and colours wanted.

MOSAICK [or rather Musaic
work; so called,
as some say, from the Musea of the
Greeks, which adorned both out and in­
side with it, and from whom Pliny says
they were derived] a work composed
of many little stones or other matters of
different colours, so disposed as to re­
present divers shapes of ornaments, 
birds, &c.

The ancients did adorn their floors
pavements of temples, palaces, &c. in
this manner, especially the Greeks; one
of the most admired curiosities of this
kind now remaining is the pavement of
the choir of St. Remi's church at Rheims, 
in which is admirably represented.

1. King David playing upon an harp, 
with the words Rex David over his head.
2. A picture of St. Hierom about whom
are the figures and names of all the pro­
phets, apostles and evangelists.
3. The 4 rivers of the terrestrial pa­
radise, with their names, Tigris, Eu­
phrates, Gihon, Phison.
4. The four seasons of the year.
5. The 7 liberal arts.
6. The 12 months of the year.
7. The 12 signs of the zodiack.
8. Moses sitting on a chair and holding
an angel on one of his knees.
9. The 4 cardinal virtues.
10. The 4. quarters of the world, &c:

All these are done in stones not bigger
than ones nail, except some white and
black tombs, and some round pieces of
spotted Jasper, with many other curio­
sities.

There are in some places Mosaick
work done in plaister.

Some make a distinction between
Mosaick words and inlaid works; and
say that each little stone has but one co­
lour, like the stitches of needle work, 
so that being cubical and perfectly join­
ed together they imitate the figures and
shadows of painting. But inlaid works
they chuse stones that have naturally the
shadowing and colours wanted.

MOSQUE a publick edifice or
place of meeting, where
the Mahometans assemble to pray or per­
form their publick devotions.

These are said to be all built in a
square form with good stones; with a
square court paved with white marble, 
before the principal gate, with low gal­
leries round it, the roof being suppor­
ted with marble columns; in this court
the Turks warn themselves before they
enter the mosque, altho' it be in winter
time, there being a pool and several
cocks for that purpose.

The walls are all white, excepting
those places where the name of God is
written in large Arabick letters.



Within the mosks there hang a great
number of lamps, and between the
lamps a great many rings of crystal, 
ostriches eggs and other curiosities
brought from foreign countries, which
make a glittering shew when the lamps
are lighted. Upon the top of the mos­
ques a crescent or half moon, that be­
ing the arms of the empire, as the Roman
Catholick churches have a cross.

About every mosque there are 6 high
towers, to each of which are three lit­
tle open galleries one above another;
these towers as well as the mosques, 
are covered with lead adorned with
gildings and other ornaments, and are
called minarets, from these men call
the people to prayers, they not using
bells.

To each mosque there generally be­
longs an hospital, where all travellers
of what nation or religion soever, are
entertained for three days, and to each
mosque there is a place called Tarbe
which is the burying place of the foun­
der, within which is a tomb about six or
seven foot long, covered with a large
covering of green velvet or satin; at
each end of which stand two candle­
stick, with two wax tapers; about
which are placed many seats for those
that read the Alcoran for the soul of the
deceased.

It is unlawful to enter a mosque with
shoes or stockings on, and for that reason
the pavement is spread with stuff sewed
like fillets, at a small distance from one
another; of these the mosques are full, 
and each fillet is sufficient to hold a row
of men kneeling, sitting or prostrated
according to the times of their ceremo­
nies.

It is unlawful for women to enter in­
to the mosques, and therefore they
stay without in the porches.

They have neither altars nor images, 
but when they pray they turn their fa­
ces towards Mecca where Mahomet's
tomb is.

MOSK a publick edifice or
place of meeting, where
the Mahometans assemble to pray or per­
form their publick devotions.

These are said to be all built in a
square form with good stones; with a
square court paved with white marble, 
before the principal gate, with low gal­
leries round it, the roof being suppor­
ted with marble columns; in this court
the Turks warn themselves before they
enter the mosque, altho' it be in winter
time, there being a pool and several
cocks for that purpose.

The walls are all white, excepting
those places where the name of God is
written in large Arabick letters.

Within the mosks there hang a great
number of lamps, and between the
lamps a great many rings of crystal, 
ostriches eggs and other curiosities
brought from foreign countries, which
make a glittering shew when the lamps
are lighted. Upon the top of the mos­
ques a crescent or half moon, that be­
ing the arms of the empire, as the Roman
Catholick churches have a cross.

About every mosque there are 6 high
towers, to each of which are three lit­
tle open galleries one above another;
these towers as well as the mosques, 
are covered with lead adorned with
gildings and other ornaments, and are
called minarets, from these men call
the people to prayers, they not using
bells.

To each mosque there generally be­
longs an hospital, where all travellers
of what nation or religion soever, are
entertained for three days, and to each
mosque there is a place called Tarbe
which is the burying place of the foun­
der, within which is a tomb about six or
seven foot long, covered with a large
covering of green velvet or satin; at
each end of which stand two candle­
stick, with two wax tapers; about
which are placed many seats for those
that read the Alcoran for the soul of the
deceased.

It is unlawful to enter a mosque with
shoes or stockings on, and for that reason
the pavement is spread with stuff sewed
like fillets, at a small distance from one
another; of these the mosques are full, 
and each fillet is sufficient to hold a row
of men kneeling, sitting or prostrated
according to the times of their ceremo­
nies.

It is unlawful for women to enter in­
to the mosques, and therefore they
stay without in the porches.

They have neither altars nor images, 
but when they pray they turn their fa­
ces towards Mecca where Mahomet's
tomb is.

The MOSQUE at Medina in Arabia
Fælix is supported by 400 pillars, fur­
nished with 300 silver lamps, and is cal­
led by the Turks, mos a kiba, or most holy;
because in it lies the coffin of their pro­
phet, covered with a cloth of gold, un­
der a canopy of silver curiously embroi­
dered, which the Bassa of Egypt is obli­
ged to renew yearly by the Grand Sig­
nior's order, and then the old one being
cut into reliques is sold at great prices.

The MOSQUE at Mecca in Arabia 
and the birthplace of Mahomet is very
lofty, raised in the form of a dome,
with two beautiful towers of extraordi­
nary height and architecture; it hath
above 100 gates and a window over
every gate, and is greatly adorned on
the inside.

MOSCHETTOES a small nation of
Indians on the
north side of the continent of America, 
near cape Gratia Dios, who tho' they
have no form of government among
them, yet hold the king of England for
their sovereign, and learn and use the
English tongue, being very friendly to
the English and account the governour
ot Jamaica to be one of the greatest
princes in the world.

This people are so very dextrous in
throwing and avoiding darts, that they
will defend themselves against them, al­
tho' they are thrown very thick.

MOSKITTOES a small nation of
Indians on the
north side of the continent of America, 
near cape Gratia Dios, who tho' they
have no form of government among
them, yet hold the king of England for
their sovereign, and learn and use the
English tongue, being very friendly to
the English and account the governour
ot Jamaica to be one of the greatest
princes in the world.

This people are so very dextrous in
throwing and avoiding darts, that they
will defend themselves against them, al­
tho' they are thrown very thick.

MOSCHUS [μόσχος,Gr.] a sort of
perfume well known; or the little
beast like a goat, of which it is bred. L.

MOSE, a beast in New-England 12
foot high, the body as big as a bull's, 
the neck like a stags, the legs short, the
tail longer than a bucks, and the tips of
the horns 12 feet asunder.

MOSSINESS [meoſiʒneſſe, Sax.]
fulness of moss, or being mossy.

MOSTLY [mæſtlic, Sax.] for the
most part.

MOTACISM [with Gram.] is a vow­
el following the letter m.  L.

MOTHER Tongues, are such langua­
ges as seem to have no dependance upon, 
derivation from, or affinity with one
another. Some have been of opinion, 
that at the conclusion of languages at the
building of Babel, there were formed
70 or 72 languages. But bishop Wilkins
and others are of opinion that there
were not so many, nor that men did
then disperse into so many colonies.

There have been, and at this time
there are in the world a far greater
number. Pliny and Strabo relate, that
in Dioscuria, a town of Colchos, there
were men of 300 nations, and so many
distinct languages, did resort thither on
account of traffick.

Some historians relate, that in every
80 miles of that vast continent, and al­
most in every particular valley of Peru, 
a distinct language or mother tongue to
them was spoken.

And Purchase speak of 1000 distinct
languages spoken by the inhabitants of
north America about Florida.

Julius Scaliger asserts, that there are
no more than eleven mother tongues
used in Europe, of which four are of
more general use and large extent, and



the other seven of a narrower extent
and use. Those of the larger extent
are,

1. The Greek, which in ancient times
was used in Europe, Asia and Africa, 
which also did by dispersion and mixture
with other people, degenerate into se­
veral dialects. As the Attick, Dorick
Ælick, Ionick.

2. The Latin, which, tho' it is much
of it derived from the Greek, had anci­
ently four dialects, as Petrus Crinitus
shews out of Varro. From the Latins
are derived the Italian, Spanish and
French.

3. The Teutonick or German, which
is now distinguished into upper and low­
er.
The upper Teutonick has two notable
dialects. 1. the Danish, Scandian, or as it
may be called the Gothick; to which
the language used in Denmark, Sweden, 
Norway and Island do appertain. 2. The
Saxon from which much of the English
and Scotch are derived, and also the
Frizian languages, and those languages
on the north of the Elve.

4. The Sclavonick, which extends it­
self thro' many large territories, tho'
not without some variation, as Bohemia, 
Croatia, Dalmatia, Lithuania, Muscovia, 
Poland and Vandalia, this is said to be a
language used by 60 several nations.

The languages or lesser extent are, 

1. The Albanese or old Epirotick, now
in use in the mountainous parts of Epi­
rus.

2. The European Tartar or Scythian,
from which some suppose the Irish took 
its original.

3, As for the Turkish tongue, that o­
riginally is no other but the Asiatick
Tartarian tongue, mixed with Armenian, 
Persian, much Arabick and some Greek.

4. The Hungarian used in the greatest
part of that kingdom.

5. The Finnich, used in Finland and
Lapland.

6. The Cantabrian, in use with the
Biscainers, who live near the ocean on
the Pyrenean hills, which border both
on Spain and France.

7. The Irish, from thence brought
over into some parts of Scotland, which
Mr. Camden supposes to be derived from
the Welsh.

8. The old Gaulish or British, still
preserved in Wales, Cornwal and Bri­
tain in France.

To these Mr. Brerewood adds 4 more.

1. The Arabick that is now used in the
steep mountains of Granada, which how­
ever is no mother tongue, being a dia­
lect of the Hebrew.

2. The Cauchian, used in east Friez­
land.

3. The Illyrian, in the island Veggia.

4. The Jazygian, on the north-side
of Hungary.

MOTHER-Hood [of moðerhoð, 
Sax.] the state or relation of a mother.

MOTHER Churches, are such as have
founded or erected others.

MOTHERING, a custom still retain­
ed in many places of England, of visit­
ing parents on Mid-lent Sunday and it
seems to be called Mothering, from the
respect in old time paid to the Mother
Church. It being the custom for peo­
ple in popish times to visit their mother
church on Mid-lent Sunday, and to make 
their offerings at the high altar.

MOTHERLESS [of moðer-leaſ,
Sax.] having no mother.

MOTHERLINESS [moðer and ʒe­
licneſſe, Sax.] motherly affection, be­
haviour, &c.

MOTHERLY [of moðer, Sax.] hav­
ing a white substance on it by reason
of age; as liquors.

MOTION [motio, L.] a moving or
changing place.

MOTION, the action of a natural
body which moves or stirs it; also an
inclination; also a proposal or overture;
also instance or request.

Proper MOTION, is a removal out
of one proper place into another, as
the motion of a wheel in a clock.

Improper MOTION, is the passage of
a body out of one common place into
another common place, as that of a
clock when moved in a ship.

Absolute MOTION [with Philosophers]
is the changing of the absolute place of
any body that moves; so that the swift­
ness of its motion will be measured by
the quantity of the absolute space, 
which the moving body has run through.

Simple MOTION, one that is produ­
ced from some one power.

Compound MOTION, is one produced
by several conspiring powers.

Relative MOTION [with Philosophers]
is a change of the relative place of a
body that moves, the swiftness of which, 
is estimated or measured by the quan­
tity of relative space, which the thing
moving runs over.

The MOTION of the Spirit, is called
agitation, whereby the spirit agitates
itself in the matter, seeking to inform it.

The MOTION of the Light, is that
whereby the light and the heat diffuse
themselves into all the parts.

The MOTION of Matter, is eightfold
of expansion, contraction, aggregation,



sympathy, continuity, impulsion, li­
bration and liberty.

The MOTION of Expansion, is that
whereby the matter being rarified with
heat, dilates itself of its own accord, 
seeking larger room.

The MOTION of Contraction, is that
whereby the matter is contracted, be­
taking itself into a narrower space by
condensation.

The MOTION of Aggregation, is when
a body is carried to its connaturals.

The MOTION of Sympathy, is that
whereby a like body is drawn to its
like.

The MOTION of Antipathy, is that
where an unlike body is driven away
by its contrary.

The MOTION of Continuity, is that
whereby matter follows matter, shun­
ning discontinuity.

The MOTION of Impulsion or Cession, 
is that whereby matter yields to mat­
er that presseth upon it.

The MOTION of Libration, is that
wherein the parts wave themselves to
and fro, that they may be rightly pla­
ed in the whole.

The MOTION of Liberty, is that
whereby a body, a part thereof being
violently moved out of its place, and
yet not plucked away, returns thither
again.

MOTION of a Bomb or Cannon Ball, 
is the progress it makes in the air after
it is delivered, and is of three sorts; as
Violent MOTION of a Ball, is the
first expulsion of it, when the powder
has worked its effect upon the ball; or
so far as the ball or bomb may be sup­
posed to go in a right line.
Mixt MOTION of a Ball, is when
the weight of the bomb or ball begins
to overcome the force that was given
by the powder.
Natural MOTION of a Ball, is when
the bomb or ball is falling.

Natural MOTION, is such a motion
as has its principle or moving force
within the moving body, as that of a
stone falling towards the earth.

Violent MOTION, is a motion, the
principle of which is without, and a­
gainst which the moving body makes a
resistance, as the motion of a stone
thrown upwards.

Pretty MOTION [with Horsemen] a
term used to signify the freedom of the
fore-legs, when a horse bends them
much upon the manage; also when a
horse trots right out, and keeps his bo­
dy strait, and his head high, and bends
his fore-legs handsomly.

The Laws of MOTION [according to
Sir. Is. Newton] are,

1. That every body will continue its
state, either of rest or motion, uni­
formly foward in a right line, unless it
be made to change that state by some
force impressed upon it.

2. That the change of motion is in
proportion to the moving force expres­
sed; and is always according to the di­
rection of that right line in which the
force is express'd.

3. That reaction is always equal and
contrary to action; or, which is the
same thing, the mutual actions of two
bodies are equal, and directed towards
contrary parts; as when one body
presses and draws another, 'tis as much
pressed and drawn by that body.

Animal MOTION, is that whereby
the situation, figure, magnitude, &c. of
the parts, members, &c. of animals
are changed, and is either.

Spontaneous MOTION which is
that per­
formed by means of the muscles, at the
direction or command of the will.

Muscular MOTION which is
that per­
formed by means of the muscles, at the
direction or command of the will.

Natural MOTION is that moti­
on that is ef­
fected without direction or command of
the will.

Involuntary MOTION is that moti­
on that is ef­
fected without direction or command of
the will.

Diurnal MOTION [in Astron.] is
motion where­
with all the heavenly bodies, in the 
whole mundane sphere, appear to re­
volve every day round the earth from
East to West.

Primary MOTION [in Astron.] is
motion where­
with all the heavenly bodies, in the 
whole mundane sphere, appear to re­
volve every day round the earth from
East to West.

Second MOTION [in Astron.] is
that whereby a
planet, star, or the like, advances
certain space every day from West to­
ward East.

Proper MOTION [in Astron.] is
that whereby a
planet, star, or the like, advances
certain space every day from West to­
ward East.

MOTION [in Musick] is the manner
of beating the measure, to hasten or
slacken the time of the pronunciation
of the words or notes.

MOTION [in Mechanicks] the inside
of a watch.

MOTTO [in Heraldry] is same short
sentence either divine or heroick, just
as the divisor was disposed; some al­
lude to the name of the bearer; some
to the bearing, and others to neither.
It is generally in three or four words, 
placed in some scroll or compartment, 
usually at the bottom of the escutche­
on; and so it is the last in blazoning.

To MOVE a court of Judicature, is to
propose a matter to it, in order to ob­
tain their directions, &c.

MOVEABLENESS [mobilitas, L.]
capableness of
being moved.

MOBILITY [mobilitas, L.]
capableness of
being moved.



MOVEABLE Signs [with Astrol.] are
Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn, 
which are so called, because they make
the changes of the seasons, in spring, 
summer, autumn and winter. They
are also called Cardinal Signs.

MOULDERING [of molðe, Sax.
earth, &c.] falling or crumbling into
dust, &c.

MOULDINESS [prob. of molſnað, 
Sax. or of mucidus, L.] a sort of hoari­
ness, by reason of staleness, as bread, 
&c.

MOULDING [of amoulder, Span.]
any thing cast in a mould.

MOULINET [in Mechanicks] a rol­
ler which being crossed with two le­
vers, is usually applyed to cranes, cap­
stans, &c. and other machines for rai­
sing things of great weight.

MOUND [q. mundus, L. the world]
a ball or globe with a cross upon it, 
which kings, &c. are represented with
in their coronation robes, holding in
their left hand, as they do a scepter in
their right. It represents the sove­
reign majesty and jurisdiction of kings;
and by the roundness of the mound, 
and the ensigning thereof with the
cross, Guillim says, is signified, that the
religion and faith of Christ ought to be
received, and religiously embraced
throughout his dominions, which high
duty is residing in his own sovereign
power.

MOUND [of Plaster of Paris] the
quantity of 3000lb.

MOUNT Egg [with Tin Miners] a
different slug in the bottom of the float, 
that which remains after tin is melted
down, and remelted from the burnt
oar; which tho' it is of a tin colour, 
yet is of an iron nature, as has been
discovered by applying a magnet to it.

MOUNTAINOUSNESS [montanus, 
L. montaigneux, F. and ness] the hav­
ing, or the fulness of high hills.

MOUNTING [in Heraldry] signifies
the same spoken of beasts of chase, as
rampant does of beasts of prey.

MOURAILLE [with Horsemen] bar­
nacles, an instrument of iron or wood, 
composed of two branches, joined at
one end with a hinge to hold a horse
by the nose, to prevent his struggling
and getting loose, when an incision is
made, or the fire given, &c.  F.

MOURNING, for relations or
friends has been and still is expressed, 
by different people after different man­
ners; some expressing their grief by
tearing their hair and garments, beat­
ing their breasts, pulling off their head­
cloths, and throwing dust and ashes
upon their heads, instead of perfumed
unguents, with which they were sprink­
led or smeared, on occasion of gladness
and festivity.

The ancient Jews were wont neither
to wash nor anoint themselves during
the time of mourning; but wore their
cloths dirty and torn, or else put on
sackcloth, i. e. strait cloths without
plaits or folds made of camels hair, or
some other coarse matter; they went
bare-headed and footed, but covered
their face; they fasted till sun-setting,
and then eat only bread or pulse, and
drank water.

They kept themselves retired, sitting
on the ground or lying in ashes, in deep
silence, seldom speaking, except to vent
their grief by mournful complaints.
This lasted for relations for seven days
and upon extraordinary occasions a
month.

MOUSE [muſ, Sax. mus, L.] an ani­
mal well known.

A MOUSE [Hieroglyphically] was by
the ancients used to signify a good
choice, because mice are said, by their
smell, to distinguish the best cheese, 
&c. among a great many.

MOUSSUE [in Heraldry]
as Croix Moussue, is a cross
rounded off at the end, as
in the figure.  F.

Image omitted.



MOUTH [moð, Sax.] a well known
part of the body of an animal; that
part of a human face consisting of the
lips, the gums, the inside of the cheeks, 
and the palate.

MOUTHFUL [muðfull, Sax.] that
may well be put into the mouth at
once.

A fine MOUTH [Horsemanship] a horse
is said to have a fine Mouth that stops, 
if the horseman does but bend his body
backwards, and raise his hand, without
staying for the check of the bridle:
Such a mouth is also called sensible,
light and loyal.

A fix'd MOUTH [with Horse­
men] is when a
horse, does not chuck or beat upon the
hand.

A certain MOUTH [with Horse­
men] is when a
horse, does not chuck or beat upon the
hand.

A false MOUTH [with Horsemen] is, 
when tho' the parts of a horse's mouth
look well, and are well formed, it is
not at all sensible.

A MOUTH of a full Appui [with
Horsemen] i. e. a mouth of a full rest
upon the hand; is the mouth of a horse
that has not the tender nice sense of
some fine mouths; but nevertheless



has a fixed and certain rest, suffers a
hand that is a little hard, without
hacking or beating upon the hand.

MOWER [mafan, Sax.] one who
cuts down grass.

MOYLE [with Gardeners] a graft or
cyon.

MUCCULENCY [mucculentus,
L.] snotti­
ness.

MUCCULENTNESS [mucculentus,
L.] snotti­
ness.

MUCH [muchio, Ital.] a great quan­
tity.

MUCIDNESS [mucedo, L.] musti­
ness.

MUCILAGINOUSNESS [of mucilago,
L.] fulness of mucilage, or a vicious
sort of substance.

MUCKINESS [of meox, filth, and
neſſe, Sax.] dirtiness, &c.

MUC or running the Muc, is
when a Mahometan has
been at Mecca, and having procured a
dagger half poisoned, runs about, and
kills all he meets that are not Mahome­
tans, till he is killed himself, after
which he is buried, and esteemed a
saint.

MOQUA or running the Muc, is
when a Mahometan has
been at Mecca, and having procured a
dagger half poisoned, runs about, and
kills all he meets that are not Mahome­
tans, till he is killed himself, after
which he is buried, and esteemed a
saint.

MUCOUS Glands [Anat.] three
glands which empty themselves into
the Urethra.

MUCOUSNESS [mucositas, L.] snot­
tiness.

MUCULENT [muculentus, L.] full
of snot or snivel.

MUCULENTNESS [muculentia, L.]
snottiness.

MUDDY, of or pertaining to, having
or full of mud, thick with dregs, &c.

MUDDINESS [perhaps of modder, 
Du. and ness] the having mud, being
muddy.

MUDDLED, half drunk, tipsy.

MUFTI [with the Turks] the head
or chief priest of the Mahometan reli­
gion, who makes a great figure in the
state, and must necessarily be apply'd
to, when there happens a debate about
deposing the Sultan, yet nevertheless
if he falls under the displeasure of the
Grand Signior, is liable to be deposed
himself; while he is in his office, he is
esteemed the oracle of their law, and
is applyed to in all doubtful and diffi­
cult cases.

MUGGISH [mucosus, L.] inclina­
ble to be musty, or to
smell so.

MUGGY [mucosus, L.] inclina­
ble to be musty, or to
smell so.

MUGGLETONIANS [so called of
one Lodowick Muggleton] a sect that
sprung up in the time of the civil wars, 
in the reign of K. Charles I. among
other of his scandalous heresies, they
affirmed that God the father leaving the
government of Heaven to Elias, came
down on earth and suffered death in a
human form; they assert that they
have the power of damning and saving, 
&c. deny the Trinity, holding besides
many other erroneous principles.

MULE, a beast generated between a
horse and an ass, either a male horse
and a she ass, or a male ass and a mare.

These are accounted a sort of mon­
sters, and it is by some denyed, that
they propagate their species; tho'
others are of a contrary opinion.

The coaches of the grandees in Spain
are drawn by mules.

MULES [with Gardeners] is a name
given to those flowers and fruits, which
are produced from two different spe­
cies, either by engrafting or inocula­
tion.

MULE Fern, a kind of herb.

MULETTO, a great mule, a moil.
which in some places is made use of
for carrying sumpters.

MULLET [in Heraldry]
of molette, F. the rowel of
a spur; but some take it
for a star; this can have
but five points with us;
tho' the French sometimes
allow it six; and if it have six points
with us, it must of necessity be a star;
whereas the French have stars of five
points, as well as Molettes of six; and
thence some conclude, that it is the
rowel of a spur, and that it should be
always pierced, which a star cannot be.
Mullets are used in arms, either as
bearings, or as differences in younger
families, and is generally taken by the
fourth son and his descendants.

MULLIO [in Old Writings] a cock
of grass or hay; Hence
in old English we find the word moult, 
and thence comes our Mow of hay or
corn.

MULLO [in Old Writings] a cock
of grass or hay; Hence
in old English we find the word moult, 
and thence comes our Mow of hay or
corn.

MULT [in a company of Merchants]
such a fine as they have power to lay
on ships or goods belonging to any of
their members, for raising money for
several purposes, such as the mainte­
nance of consuls, making presents to
foreign princes, &c.

MULTANGULARNESS [multangu­
lus, L.] the having many angles.

MULTIBIBE [multibibus, L.] one
that drinks much, a great drinker.

MULTICAPSULAR [of multus, and
capsula, L. a box, chest, &c.] divided
into many partitions, as poppies, flax, 
&c.

MULTIFORMNESS [multiformis, 
L.] a being of many forms.



MULTILATERALNESS [of multus
and lateralis, L.] the having many
sides.

MULTILOQUIOUSNESS [multilo­
quium, L.] talkativeness.

MULTIMODOUS [multimodus, L.]
of divers sorts, fashions, or manner.

MULTINOMIAL quantities [in Al­
gebra] are quantities composed of se­
veral names, or Monomes joined by the
the signs +; or − thus, m+n, −
n+p, and b−a−c−+d−f, are Mul­
tinomials.

MULTIPEDE [multipeda, L.] an in­
sect that hath many feet; a sow or
wood-louse.

MULTIPLE [multiplex, L.] one num­
ber is the multiple of another number, 
when it comprehends it several times.

MULTIPLE Proportion [with Arith­
meticians] is when the antecedent be­
ing divided by the consequent, the quo­
tient is more than unity, as 25 being
divided by 5, it gives 5 for the quotient, 
which is the multiple proportion.

MULTIPLEE [in Arithm.] is when
a great number contains a lesser num­
ber a number of times, without any
remainder. Thus 16 is the multiplee
of 4, because it contains it just 4 times
without any remainder.

MULTIPLIABLENESS [of multipli­
cabilis, L.] capableness of being multi­
plied.

MULTISILIQUOUS [of multus and
siliqua, L. a husk] plants, such whose
seed is contained in many distinct seed
vessels, succeeding to one flower, as
columbine, monks-hood, white helle­
bore.

MULTISONOUS [multisonus, L.]
that hath many or great sounds.

MULTIVAGOUS [multivagus, L.]
that wanders or strays much abroad.

MUMBLING [of mummein, Teut.]
muttering, growling; also chewing
awkwardly.

MUMIA [of כומ, Arab, or Persian, 
wax] mummy.

MUMMIES of Egypt [so called of
Amomum, one of the ingredients, with
which, and cinnamon, myrth, wax, 
&c. the ancients embalmed the dead
bodies of their kings and great persons;
others derive Mummy of Mum, Persian
word for wax, with which they em­
balm] are bodies found in a waste piece
of ground, like a burying-place, near
a village called Sakara, not far from
Grand Cairo in Egypt, in which there
are several Pyramids.

There are underground, many vault­
ed rooms cut in quarries of white stone, 
with a hole like the mouth of a well, 
to go down into them; these wells are
square, built with stones and fill'd with
sand, to close the grotto, which sand is
taken out when people are desirous to
go in and see them; who are let down
by ropes properly plac'd to the bottom, 
where there is a door.

The rooms within are generally
square, and in them many by places
where the mummies are deposited, 
some in tombs of stone, others in chests
or coffins made of sycamore wood, and
set off with many ornaments.

The dead bodies are wrapped in rol­
lers of linen cloth, dipt in a composi­
tion prepared to preserve them from
corrupting. These rollers are so often
roll'd about the body, that there are
sometimes more than 1000 ells going in
length from head to foot.

These are often decorated with many
hieroglyphicks gilt with gold, repre­
senting the quality and brave actions of
the person deceased. Some have a
golden leaf neatly fix'd on the face, o­
thers have a kind of head-piece made
of cloth and prepar'd with mortar on
which the face of the person is repre­
sented in gold.

In unwrapping them small idols of
metal are sometimes found, curiously
wrought, and some have a small piece
of gold under their tongue.

Some mummies are inclos'd in chests
made of many cloths pasted together
which are as strong as wooden ones
and never rot.

The balm that preserves these bodies
is black and shines like pitch, and smells
pleasantly; some of these have been
found 3000 years old.

MUMMIES, are also human carcas­
ses dry'd by the heat of the sun, and by
that means kept from putrefaction, and
frequently found in the dry sands of
Libya probably of travellers over­
whelmed with clouds of sand raised by
hurricanes.

MUMMY [with Gardeners] a sort of
composition made with wax, &c. for
planting and grafting of trees.

MUMMY, the liquor or juice that
oozes from human bodies, aromatized
and embalmed, gathered in tombs or
sepulchres.

MUMMY [with Physicians] is of 4
sorts, viz.
1. Arabian MUMMY, a liquid sub­
stance that issues out of sepulchres
from the carcasses that are embalmed
with aloes, myrrh and balsam.



2. Egyptian MUMMY, which is also
a liquor issuing from those dead bodies
that are embalmed with Pisalphatus or
a sort of pitch produc'd in Palestine,
with which the bodies of the meaner
sort were wont to be embalmed, which
are sometimes sold to the Europeans.
3. A Factitious MUMMY or Pisalphal­
tus, being a mixture of pitch and rosin, 
which is sold for the true mummy.
4. Hammonian MUMMY, which are
the dead carcasses dried under the sands
by the heat of the sun, especially in
the country of the Hammonians between
Cyreniaca and Alexandria, where tra­
vellers are often buried in the sands by
the violence of the winds.

To beat a person to a MUMMY, is to
beat him so much that he seems to be all
one continued contusion.

MUMMY [with some Physicians] a
kind (as they pretend) of implanted
spirit, found chiefly in carcasses when
the infused spirit is fled. The infused
spirit is also by them called Mummy in
living bodies; and both of them are
supposed to be of use in the transplan­
tation of diseases from human bodies, 
to those of brute animals or vegetables.

MUM-GLASS, an humerous name
for the monument erected on Fish-street
Hill, in commemoration of the fire of
London in 1666.

MUMPER, a sort of genteel beggar, 
reckoned the 47th order of canters or
gipsies, who will not accept of victuals, 
but only money or clothes.

The Male MUMPER, often wears an
apron and a cap, pretending to be a
decay'd tradesman, who having been
long sick, by reason of the expence and
weakness and inability to work is con­
strain'd to ask alms; sometimes he will
appear like a decay'd gentleman who
has been ruined by the south-sea scheme
or some other unforeseen losses.

The Female MUMPER, knocks con­
fidently at peoples doors, desiring to
speak with the gentlewoman of the
house, and after she has apologiz'd for
her rudeness, complains that having a
great family, and many losses, the long
sickness or death of her husband, &c.
she is reduc'd to great straits, and
therefore humbly craves relief, not as a
common beggar but as an unfortunate
gentlewoman.

MUMPERS-Hall, a common recep­
tacle for all sorts of beggars, either an
alehouse situated in some private place, 
where they assemble at nights and lavish­
ly spend what they have got by day.

MUMPISHNESS, sullenness.

MUNASHI a Mahometan
sect, who believe
the transmigration of souls, and par­
ticularly that the souls of men deceased
enter into such beasts, whose propensi­
ties are the most like to the dispositions
of those whom they animated before;
as the soul of the lascivious into a goat, 
of a gluttonous person into a swine, of
a vigilant person into a dog, &c.

MUNASICHITES a Mahometan
sect, who believe
the transmigration of souls, and par­
ticularly that the souls of men deceased
enter into such beasts, whose propensi­
ties are the most like to the dispositions
of those whom they animated before;
as the soul of the lascivious into a goat, 
of a gluttonous person into a swine, of
a vigilant person into a dog, &c. 

MUNDATORY Medicines [with Sur­
geons] medicines that are proper for 
cleansing ulcers.

MUNDUNGUS, stinking tobacco.

MUNDUS Patents [in Rome] the o­
pening and rites of a little round temple
to the infernal deity Dis and the infer­
nal powers, which was performed three
times annually, viz. on the 4th of Oc­
tober, the 7th of the Ides of November, 
and on the day after the Vulcanalia.
The Romans having this notion, that
Hell was then open, did not, during the
times of these sacrifices, either offer
battle, list soldiers, put to sea, or marry.

MUNIFICENTNESS [munificentia, 
L.] liberality, bountifulness.

MURAL Crown [among the Romans]
a crown of gold or silver, 
with battlements of walls
about it, in the form of
beams, given to him who
first scaled the walls of an
enemies city, which ho­
nour was due to the meanest soldier, as
well as the greatest commander; if he
could prove he had been the first that
entered the place; on the circle of this
coronet there were lions engraven, to
express the undaunted valour of the
bearer. See the figure.

Image omitted.



MURDER [Hieroglyphically] was re­
presented by the ancients by a sea horse, 
which destroys its sire.

MURDERING Shot, nails, old iron, 
&c. put into the chambers of cannon, 
called murdering pieces, to be used
chiefly on board of ships to clear the
decks, when boarded by an enemy.

MURDEROUSNESS [of morðrian, 
Sax.] propensity to kill or murther.

MURK, the husks of fruit.

MURREY [in Heraldry] in Latin
called Color Sanguineus, is
accounted a princely co­
lour, and one of the colours
in ancient times appertain­
ing to the prince of Wales.
A colour in great esteem, 
and used in some robes of the knights
of the Bath. It is express'd in graving, 
by lines hatched across one another di­
agonally, both dexter and sinister.



Spelman says, it represents in heaven
the dragon's tail, and among precious
stones, the sardonix. See the figure.

Image omitted.



MURRION [morione, Ital.] a steel
head-piece.

MURTHER [morðre, Sax.] a wil­
ful and felonious killing another with
malice propense.

MURTHER. It was a custom in old
time, that if a man was found guilty on
an appeal of murther, that his wife and
all the nearest of his kindred should
draw the felon who committed the
murther by a long rope to the place of
execution.

To MURTHER [morðrian, Sax.]
to kill with malice propense.

MURTIA, the goddess of idleness, 
that made people lazy, had a temple
built by the Romans on mount Aventinus.

MUSCARIUS, a title given by the
Eleans to Jupiter, because when Her­
cules was sacrificing among them, and
was exceedingly troubled with flies, 
Jupiter is said to have driven them all
away beyond the river Alpheus.

MOSCHETO [in America, &c.]
a very common
and troublesome insect, something re­
sembling a gnat.

MUSCHETTO [in America, &c.]
a very common
and troublesome insect, something re­
sembling a gnat.

MUSCLES of involuntary Motion, 
have their contracting and extending
power within themselves, and have no
antagonist; such the lungs and heart
are supposed to be.

MUSCLES of voluntary Motion, have
each of them their antagonist muscles, 
which act alternately in a contrary di­
rection, the one being stretched and
extended, while the other is contracted
at the motion of the will.

Antagonist MUSCLES, are such as
serve to move the same members con­
trary ways.

MUSCOSENESS [muscositas, L.] ful­
ness of moss, mossiness.

MUSCOVY Glass [so called, because
plenty in Muscovy] the mirror stone, so
called, because it represents the image
of that which is set behind it. See Se­
lenites.

MUSCULAR Fibres, the fine threads
or fibres, whereof the body of muscles
is composed.

MUSCULAR Membrane [Anatomy] a
membrane supposed to invest the whole
body, immediately under the adipose
membrane.

MUSCULAR Arteries [Anatomy] two
arteries proceeding from the subclavian, 
and distributed among the hind muscles
of the neck.

MUSCULAR Motion,  is the same
with voluntary and spontaneous mo­
tion.

MUSCULAR Veins [with Anatomists]
a name given to several veins, two of
which proceed from the skin and the
hind muscles of the thigh, and termi­
nate in the subclavian.

MUSCULATED, having or consist­
ing of muscles.

MUSCULOUSNESS [of musculosus, 
L.] largeness or fulness of muscles.

MUSEN [Hunting term] is when a
stag or male deer casts its head.

MUSES, they had several names, ac­
cording to the several places where they
dwelt; sometimes they were called Pie­
rides, on account of the forest Pieris in
Macedonia, where they were said to be
born; sometimes Heliconiades, from
mount Helicon, which is near their be­
loved Parnassus; from whence Cytheron, 
Castalides and Agannippides, from two no­
ted fountains that were consecrated to
them. These muses, by the assistance
of Apollo, invented musick; their chief
office was to be present at solemn
festivals, and sacred banquets; and there
to sing the praises of famous men, that
they might encourage others to under­
take glorious actions. They are repre­
sented as women, because disciplines
and virtues have feminine names assign­
ed to them. They are painted young, 
handsome and modest, agreeably dressed
and crowned with flowers. They were
much esteemed for their chastity; and
it is related of them, that when Adonis
the favourite of Venus, offered to stir
up in them some inclinations of love, 
they fell upon him and put him to
death.

The MUSES [of μυέω, Gr. to initiate
or instruct, because they teach hidden
things, above the vulgar, Eusebius; or
of μαιῶθαι, to do the office of a mid­
wife, because to them is attributed the
invention of arts, Scaliger; or of μῶσθαιαι, 
to search or inquire into, Phornutus; or
of דשומ, science, Heb. Vossius and Hein­
sius] are fabulous divinities of the anci­
ent Heathens, who were supposed to
preside over the arts and sciences, and
to be the daughters of Jupiter and μνη­
μοσύνη i. e. memory; which fiction is
introduced, because Jupiter was esteem'd
the first inventor of disciplines, which
are necessary in order to a regular life.

These indeed were at first but three, 
viz. μελετή, i. e. meditation; μνήμη, 
i. e. memory; and ἀοιδή, singing.

But a certain carver of Sycion, having
orders to make three statues of the three
muses, for the temple of Apollo, mis­



took his instructions, and made three
several statues of each muse; but these
happening to be very curious and
beautiful pieces, they were all set up in
temple, and from thence began to
be reckoned nine muses, and Hesiod af­
wards gave them the names, Calliope
Clio, Erato, Thalia, Melpomene, Terpsi­
chore, Euterpe, Polyhymnia and Urania.

Calliope was supposed president of he­
roick poetry; Clio of history; Erato of
the lute; Thalia of comedy; Melpomene
of tragedy; Terpsichore of the harp; Eu­
terpe over wind musick; Polyhymnia of
musick: Urania of astronomy.

MUSICALNESS [of musicus, L.] har­
moniousness of sound.

MUSICIANS, this company is com­
posed of Masters of mu­
sick, Dancing masters, 
&c. they have no hall, 
but meet sometimes at
Embroiderers Hall in
Gutter-Lane. They
consist of a master, 2
wardens, about 20
assistants, they are also
on the livery, the fine for which is 8 l.
Their armorial ensigns are azure, a
swan with her wings expanded, chant­
ing within a double tressure counter
story ardent. On a chief gules 2 lions of
England, and between them a pale or
charged with a rose of York,

Enharmonick MUSICK, is a sort of
musick that abounds in Diæsis, or
sharps.

Chromatick MUSICK is a delightful
pleasant sort of musick; but this, by
reason of its wanton measures, was re­
jected.

Elementary MUSICK, the harmony of
the elements of things.

Celestial MUSICK, the musick of the
spheres, comprehends the order and
proportion in the magnitudes, distances
and motions of the heavenly bodies, and
the harmony of the sounds resulting
from those motions.

Human MUSICK, is that which con­
sists chiefly in the faculties of the human
soul and its various passions.

Diatonick MUSICK, a musick proceed­
ing by different tones either in ascending
or descending: This the ancients admit­
ted.

Moods of MUSICK, are denominated, 
according to divers countries, for whose
particular genius they seemed at first to
have been contrived; and these are three
the Lydian, the Phrygian and the Dorick.

MUSICK [of the Lydian Mood] was
shrill.

MUSICK [of the Phrygian Mood] was
martial, and excited men to fury and
battle; by this mood Timotheus stirred
up Alexander to arms.

MUSICK [of the Dorick Mood] was
grave and modest, and therefore called
religious musick. To these three Sap­
pho the Lesbian added a fourth, called
the Mixolydian Mood, which was only
fit for tragedies, and to move compas­
sion.

There have also been three other moods
added to them, equal to the number of
the planets; the Hypolygian, Hopophrygian
and Hypodorian, and these were called
colateral ones. And there was also an
eighth added by Ptolemy called the Hyper­
mixolydian, which is the sharpest and 
shrillest of all.

The exercise of musick is salutary, in
that it expels melancholy; vocal musick
opens the breast and pipes, and is good
to remedy stammering in speech. Anci­
ent historians, as Ælian, Pliny and Plu­
tarch relate, that the ancient musicians
have moved the passions of mens minds
at their pleasure, appeased the discon­
solate and desperate, tempered the amo­
rous, and healed even the sick, and
wrought wonderful effects.

MUSICK [Hieroglyphically] was repre­
sented by the ancient Egyptians, by a
swan and grashopper; the first of which
is said to sing sweetly, immediately be­
fore her death.

MUSIMON [according to Guillim] is
a. bigenerous beast, of unkindly procrea­
tion, and ingendred between a she-goat
and a ram, as the Tityrus is between a
sheep and a buck-goat.

MUSK [muscio, Ital. musc, F.] a per­
fume growing in a little bag or bladder, 
under the belly, near the genitals of an
Indian beast resembling a roe or wild
goat, and appears to be nothing else but
a kind of bilious blood, there congealed
and almost corrupted; they reside in
woods, &c. and being hunted down by
the natives and killed, this congealed
blood is taken out and dried in the sun.

MUSKET. See Musquet.

MUSKINESS [of musqué, F.] musky
nature smell, &c.

MUSLIN [mousselin, F.] a fine sort of
linnen cloth made of cotton, commonly
brought from East-India.

MUSQUASH [in several parts of
America] a beast resembling a beaver in
shape, but something less. The male
has two stones, which smell like musk;
and if the beast be killed in winter ne­
ver lose their scent.



MUSQUASHES, a Virginian and
Maryland root, with the juice of which
the Indians paint their mats and tar­
gets.

To make a MUSS, is to throw money, 
&c. up and down in a crowd to make
people scramble for it.

MUSSULMANISM, Mahometanism.

MUSTINESS [of mucidus, L. musie, 
F.] staleness, mouldiness or scent.

MUTA [among the Romans] the
daughter of the river Alma, and the god­
dess of silence, which they worshipped, 
being of this notion, that worshipping
her would make them keep their
thoughts concealed.

MUTABLENESS [mutabilitas, L.]
changeableness.

MUTATION [in the ancient Musick]
the changes or alterations that happen
in the order of the sounds, which com­
pose the melody.

The continual MUTATION of things 
hieroglyphically] and the change of one
being into another in the world, was
signified by a shake in the form of a cir­
cle, biting and devouring its tail; be­
cause the world, as it were, feeds upon
itself, and receives from itself a conti­
nual supply of those things that time
consumes.

MUTE [mutus, L.] one who is natu­
rally dumb, or whose tongue is cut out, 
or that forbears speaking wilfully, or
by choice.

MUTES, persons who stand in a mour­
ning habit and a disconsolate manner
about the corps at the funeral pomp of
great personages, who lie in state.

MUTE Signs [with Astrol.] are Can­
cer Scorpio and Pisces, being creatures
that have no voice; so that when the
significators are in these signs in nativi­
ties, they are supposed to spoil or cause
some impediments in the persons speech.

MUTES [muti, L. dumb] Mutes are
so called, because they begin by their
own power, and have the sound of the
vowel after them; of which some are
pronounced from the lips, as b and p, 
and are called Labials or lip letters:
Others from the teeth, as t and d, and
are called Dentals or teeth-letters:
Others from the palate, as k and q, and
are called Palatials or palate letters.
They are reckoned in number eight, b, 
c, d, g, k, p, q, t.

MUTILATED [mutilatus, L.] maim­
ed, having some part or member cut
off; wanting some part; also statues or
buildings, where any part is wanting, 
or the projecture of any member is bro­
ken off.

MUTINOUSNESS [mutin, L.] sedi­
tiousness, tumultuousness.

MUTTERING [of mutiens of mutire, 
L. or muyren, Du.] speaking between
the teeth, grumbling.

MUTTON-Monger [of mouton, F.
and manʒere, Sax.] a seller of mutton;
a butcher.

MUTUAL Love and Friendship [Hi­
eroglyphically] was represented by two
bats; in that a mutual love, &c. obli­
ges us to succour one another; it is re­
lated of bats, that they keep close toge­
ther, when they apprehend any danger.
A bat also was used to signify a man rais'd
from the dust, to an unmerited degree of
honour.

MUTUAL Vicissitude [Hieroglyphically] was represented by the ancient
Egyptians by the fig tree, whose old fruit
never falls off, till the new ones appear.

MUTUALNESS, reciprocalness, in­
terchangeableness.

MUTUNUS [among the Romans]
an obscene deity; the
same as the Priapus of the Grecians,
The women worshipped him before
marriage, and scandalous ceremonies
were performed to him.

MUTINUS [among the Romans]
an obscene deity; the
same as the Priapus of the Grecians,
The women worshipped him before
marriage, and scandalous ceremonies
were performed to him.

MUTUUM [in the Civil Law] a loan
simply so called, or a contract introdu­
ced by the laws of nations, where a
thing, consisting either in weight, num­
ber or measure is given to another; upon
condition that he shall return another
thing of the same quantity, nature and
value on demand.  L.

MUZZLE Ring [with Gunners] the
great circle of a cannon, that encom­
passes and strengthens the muzzle of it.

MYAGROS [μύαγρος of μῦα a flie, and
ἄγρα a Pagan deity to whom the Arcadi­
ans offered sacrifice, whose office was to
hunt or drive away flies] This deity
was worshipped on the account of the
troublesomness of flies, not only in hou­
ses but also at their offering sacrifice, as
we read of Beelzebub the god of flies.

MYOMANCY [of μύς a mouse, and
μαντεία, Gr. divination] a kind of divi­
nation or method of foretelling future
events by means of mice.

MYOPIA [μυοπία of μύων to shut, 
and ωπα, Gr. the sight] a kind of dimness
or confusion of sight in beholding objects
that are distant, and yet a clearness of
the sight in beholding such things as are
near at hand; purblindness.  L.

MYRMIDONES [of μύρμηχες, Gr.
ants] when the plague had carried away
all the inhabitants of the isle Egina, Æa­
cus their king obtained of Jupiter the
favour, that all the ants should be turned



into men, that the island might be
again filled with inhabitants. The mo­
ral is, they were thus named, because
they applied themselves to the improve­
ment of the ground, and like ants were
stirring it up.

MYRMIDONS [μυρμιδονες, Gr.] a
people of Thessaly, that went under the
conduct of Achilles to the war against
Troy.  L.

MYRMILLONES, a sort of comba­
ants among the Romans, who had on
the top of their cask or helmet, the re­
presentation of a fish; and in their en­
gagements with the Retiarii, if they
were caught and wrapt in the net, it
was not possible for them to escape
death.

MYRRH [myrrha, L. μύρον, Gr.] a
kind of gum produced by a shrub com­
mon in Arabia by incision, that which
is the cleanest, rough, light and brittle, 
smells sweet, and tastes bitter and hot, 
is the best. It is of a heating quality, 
disposes to rest, and is good in cold
diseases of the head, &c.

MYSTERIARCH [mysteriarcha, L.
μυστηριάρχης of μυστήριον a mystery, and
μυστήριον, Gr. a ruler or chief] a master
of the holy mysteries; a prelate.  L.

MYSTERIES [of Religion] those
truths that have been revealed by di­
vine revelation, beyond the reach of
human reason.

MYSTERIES [in Numbers] the num­
ber 5 multiplied by 5, makes 25; and
4 multiplied by 4, makes 16; and 3
multiplied by 3, makes 9; but 9 and 16
is equal to 25: Or if 3, 4, 5, be doub­
led, they make 6, 8, 10. The square
of 10, is equal to the square of 8 and 6, 
viz. 10 multiplied by 10, makes a 100;
and 8 multiplied by 8, makes 64; and
6 multiplied by 6, makes 36; and 64
and 36 make 100, which may be trip­
led, quadrupled, &c.

The numbers 220 and 284, altho'
they are unequal, yet the aliquot parts
of the one number do always equal the
other. So the aliquot parts of 220, 
are 110, 54, 44, 22, 20, 11, 10, 5, 4, 2, 
1, which added together, makes 284.

The aliquot parts of 284, are 142, 
71, 4, 2, 1, which being added toge­
ther, make 200, which is rare to be
found in other numbers.

MYSTERIOUSNESS [of mysterieux, 
F.] hiddenness, difficultness to be under­
stood, &c.

MYSTICALNESS [mysticus, L. and
ness] mysteriousness.

MYSTICK. Theology, a kind of refi­
ned sublime divinity professed by the
Mysticks, which consisted in the know­
ledge of God and divine things not ac­
quired in the common way; but infu­
sed immediately by God, and which
has the effect to move the soul in an
easy, calm, devout, affective manner, 
to unite it intimately to God, to illumi­
nate the understanding, and warm and
enliven the will in an extraordinary
manner.

MYSTICKS, a religious sect distin­
guished by their professing pure, sub­
lime and perfect devotion, with an in­
tire disinterested love of God, free from
all selfish considerations.

MYTHISTORY [mythistoria, L. of
μυθιστορία of μίθος a fable, and ἱστορία, 
Gr. history] an history mingled with
false fables and tales.

To MYTHOLOGIZE [of μυθολο­
γίζειν, Gr.] to explain or write morals
on fables, or the mysteries of the old
Pagan religion.


N

Nn, Roman; N n, Italick; N n, 
English; N n, Saxon; are the 13th
letters in order of the alphabet; נ, He
brew, the 14th; Ν ν, the 14th of the
Greek.

N [in Latin Numbers] signified 900.

N̅ with a dash, 9000.

The dash is placed on top of letter N.



Lawful NAAM [of neman, Sax. to
take, or nemmen, Du. to nim or take
hold of] is in law a reasonable dis­
tress, and proportionable to the value of
the thing distrained for.

Unlawful NAAM, a distraining above
the value; also see Namium vetitum.

Æra of NABONASSAR [in Chrono­
logy] a famous Æra on account that
(as Ptolemy writes) there were astrono­
mical observations made by the Chal­
deans, from the beginning of his reign, 
to his own time; and according to
Ptolemy, the first year of this Æra,
was the year 747 before Christ, and the
3967th year of the Julian period. He
was a king of Babylon, called Baladan, 
Berodach or Merodach Baladan, Isa. 39.
1. also Belesis or Belosus.

The years of this period are Egyptian
ones, of 365 days, each commencing on
the 26th of February, and the days be­
ginning at noon.

NACKER mother of pearl; the
shell of the fish wherein
pearl is bred.

NAKER mother of pearl; the
shell of the fish wherein
pearl is bred.

NÆNIA [with the Romans] a goddess
supposed to preside over mournful dit­



ties sung at funerals, &c. to flutes and
other instruments, &c. She had a tem­
ple built to her without the city, near
the gate called Viminalis.

NÆVOSITY [nævositas, L.] freck­
ledness; the having moles.

NAIADES [ναίαδες of νάω, Gr. to
flow] the nymphs of the floods, elves, 
fairies, &c. haunting rivers and foun­
tains.

NAIADES [in Painting, &c] are re­
presented very beautiful of counte­
nance, having hair clear as crystal, 
their heads adorned with garlands of
water cresses, with red leaves, their
arms and legs naked, and their actions
are pouring out water.

NAIANT [in Heraldry]
q. d. nantes, L. of natare, 
to swim, is a term applied
to all fishes that are borne
transverse; that is across
the escutcheon; because
they swim in the water in that posture.
See the figure.

Image omitted.



NAILS [næʒlen, Sax.] the custom of
paring nails at a certain time, is a relick
of ancient superstition, and probably
might be transmitted to our forefathers
from the Romans, who superstitiously
avoided paring their nails on the Nundi­
næ, observed every ninth day.

Spots on the NAILS, the conjecturing
of future events by them is no modern
practice. Cardan affirms, that he had
discovered a property in himself of find­
ing in them some signs of most events
that ever happened unto him.

The spots on the top of the nails sig­
nify thing past; in the middle things
present, and at the bottom things to
come: white specks are suppos'd to pre­
sage felicity; blue, misfortunes and the
like.

NAISSANT [in Heraldry] is a form
of blazon peculiar to all living things, 
that in an escutcheon issue out of some
ordinary or common charge, and is dif­
ferent from Issuant, which denotes a
living creature, issuing out of the bot­
tom of any ordinary or charge.

NAKED Flower [with Botan.] is one
that has no empalement, as a Tulip.

NAKED FEET, the nakedness of the
feet was a token of reverence, as ap­
pears by Moses putting of his shoes, 
when he approach'd the burning bush.
The ancient Jewish priests went naked
footed; and the Talmudists presume to
say, the service of the priests had been
unlawful, if they had but trod with
their foot upon a cloth, a skin or even
upon the foot of their companions;
and some say that the common Israelites
put off their shoes and cleansed their
feet, before they entered the temple.

The Turks do now uncover and wash
their feet and hands before they go into
their mosques. The Ethiopian Christi­
ans do the same at the entrance of their
churches; and the Indian Brachmans do
the like before they go into their Pa­
gods.

NAKEDNESS [of nacket, Teut.] the
being without clothing; it is also us'd
to signify the privities of men or wo­
men.

NAKEDNESS [Metaphorically] is us'd
to signify unlearnedness or unqualified­
ness to perform any thing a person at­
tempts, who is said to discover his na­
kedness, i. e. his weakness or imper­
fection; also it is us'd for want of suc­
cour, or being without defence.

NAME [name, Sax. name, Teut.] a
word by which men have agreed to ex­
press some idea, or thing, or subject
spoken of.

To NAME [of nama or naman, Sax.]
to give a name to, to mention a name.

NAMELESS [nameleaſ, Sax.] with­
out a name; also not named.

NAPÆÆ [ναπὰι of νάπος, Gr. a grove
or vale, &c.] the nymphs of the moun­
tains [in Painting, &c.] are represented
with a pleasant countenance, cloathed in
green mantlets, girt about their wastes,
having their heads adorned with gar­
lands of honey-suckles, roses, thyme,
&c. and either gathering flowers, mak­
ing garlands, or dancing in a ring.

NAPHEW, nevew, or French tur­
nep.

NAPHTHA [הדפנ of צפנ Heb. to fly
about, νάπθα, Gr.] Babylonish bitumen, 
a kind of petrol or rock fruit, found in
several parts of the world; it is got in
great quantities from certain springs
which are near the city Hit in Chaldea;
also in several parts of Europe, as in
Italy, France, &c. but these are very
different from the Asian Naphtha;
which when set on fire, is not only
hard to be distinguished; but, if water
be cast upon it it burns more vehe­
mently. It is such a powerful com­
pound, that if it comes near the fire or
sun-beams, it will suddenly set all the
air round about it in a flame.

NAPPING [of knappian, Sax.] to
sleep, sleeping.

NAPPY [of noppe, Dan. knoppa, 
Sax.] having a nap or shag, as cloth;
also strong drink, that will set one to
napping or asleep.



NARCISSUS [according to the Poets]
was the son of the river Cephissius and
Liriope, a youth of extraordinary beau­
ty, who disdain'd the love of the nymph
Echo; but afterwards seeing his own
face in a fountain fell in love with him­
self, and pining away with that passion
was turned into the flower Narcissus, or
the Daffodil.

NARCOTICKNESS [of ναρχωτιχὸς, 
Gr.] stupifying, benumming quality.

NARRABLE [narrabilis, L.] that
may easily be told or declared.

NARRATION [of an Epick Poem]
is reckoned the third part; and this
some divide into four parts. The Title, 
the Proposition, the Invocation, the body
of the poem or Narration, properly so
called.

NARRATION, or body of the poem, 
is that which expresses the action, pas­
sion and sentiments. This narration
ought to contain a just mixture of plea­
sure and instruction; not depending on
the beauty of the verse, the diction and
the thoughts; but the manners and
passions of the persons which are in­
troduced, and the things that are treat­
ed of. In short, the narration should
every where agree with the subject. It
should be great and sublime, where the
things spoken of are so. It should be
warm and pathetic, where passion is
to be represented; flowing and elegant
in descriptions, and every where free
from any thing flat and vulgar.

Poetical narrations are interrupted
by exclamations, apostrophes, digres­
sions, and many other figures, that en­
gage the attention. They always shew
the most charming side of what they
represent, and take no notice of any
thing or art, but what is great and rare, 
and neglect what would lessen the height
of admiration.

To go NARROW [with Horsemen] a
horse is said to go narrow, when he
does not take ground enough, that does
not bear far enough out, to the one
hand, or to the other.

NARROWNESS [of narro&wyn;e, Sax.]
scantiness in breadth.

NASAMONES [in Lybia] a people
anciently dwelling on the coasts of the
Atlantick ocean, liv'd chiefly on piracy;
among whom it was the custom, for
the bride to lie with every one of the
guests the first night, but afterwards
she liv'd chastly.

NASSIP [among the Mahometans]
fate and destiny, which they believe
to be in a book written in heaven, 
which contains the good or bad fortune
of all men; and which cannot possibly
be avoided, in which persuasion with
the greatest unconcernedness, they ex­
pose themselves to the worst and most
threatening dangers.

NASTY, filthy, offensive,

NASTINESS [prob. of nasus, L. the
nose, q. offending the nose, or of neſe
and neſſe, Sax.] filthiness, offensive­
ness, &c.

NASTURCES [nasturtia, L.] capu­
chin capers.

NASTURTIUM [with Botanists]
the herb nose-smart, cresses or garden
cresses,  L.

NATAGAI [among the Pagan Tar­
tars] an idol worshipped by them, and
suppos'd to be the god of the earth and
all living creatures. The image of this
idol, his wife and children is in every
house, where they are highly honour­
ed and reverenc'd; and their worship­
pers are so stupid as to present them
with meat and to rub their mouths with
the fat, as if they thought they stood
in need of nourishment.

NATALITIA [among the Romans]
were festivals celebrated to the Genii, 
during which it was held ominous to
shed the blood of beasts. These solem­
nities being wholly dedicated to joy
and festivity.

NATIO [among the Romans] a god­
dess whom they supposed to have the
care of new born children; she was
not the same as Lucina, to whom some
ascribed the government and looking
after the term of her being with child;
but others attribute to her also the
bringing the child into the world.

NATIONALNESS [of natio, L. and
ness] universalness, or properness to
the whole nation.

NATIVE [ancient Deeds] one born a
slave; by which he differed from one
who had sold himself or become a slave
by his own deed.

NATIVE Spirit [with Naturalists]
the innate heat, first supposed to be
produc'd in a fœtus or child in the
womb.

NATIVENESS, naturalness, inbred­
ness, &c.

NATIVITY, natal day, or the day
of ones birth.

NATIVITY, besides the Nativity of
Christs on the 25th of December, the
Roman Catholicks observe that of the
Virgin Mary, but it was not generally
receiv'd in France and Germany, till a­
bout the year 1000; and the Greeks and
Eastern christians did not observe it till



the year 1200; but they now do it with
great solemnity.

NATIVITY [with Astrologers] a
scheme or figure of the heavens, drawn
according to the position of the planets
at that moment of time, when the
person was born; when in a particular
manner he becomes liable to the influ­
ences of the heavenly bodies.

NATRON [νατρον, Gr.] a kind
of black, greyish
salt, taken out of a lake of stagnant wa­
ter, in the territory of Terrana in E­
gypt.

A NATRON [νατρον, Gr.] a kind
of black, greyish
salt, taken out of a lake of stagnant wa­
ter, in the territory of Terrana in E­
gypt.

NATURA, nature; also the privy
parts,  L.

NATURA naturans, God, as giving
Being and Nature to all others, in op­
position to,  L.
NATURA naturata, creatures who
receive their Being from the Natura
Naturans, or God.  L.

NATURAL [naturalis, L.] belong­
ing to or proceeding from nature, such
as nature made it, not counterfeit;
something coming immediately out of
the hands of nature, in opposition to
factitious or artificial.

NATURAL Concrete [with Philoso­
phers] implies a body made up of diffe­
rent principles, and therefore is much
of the same signification as mixt; so
Antimony is a Natural Concrete, or a bo­
dy compounded in the bowels of the
earth.

NATURAL Faculty, is that power
arising from the circulation of the
blood; or it is an action depending
chiefly upon the brain, whereby the
body is nourished, increased and pre­
served by the blood and animal spirits;
upon which likewise all excretions, di­
gestions and generations depend.

NATURALS [in Physick] called Res
naturales, L. In every animal, however
sick and diseased, there is still remaining
some degree of life and strength, and
the causes and effects of them. These
are called Naturals.

NATURAL Functions [in the Animal
Oeconomy] are those actions whereby
things taken into the body, are chang­
ed and assimilated, so as to become
parts of the body.

NATURAL Inclinations, are those
tendences or motions of the mind to­
wards things seemingly good; which
are common in a greater or less degree
to all mankind.

NATURAL History a Description of
any of the natural products of the
earth, water or air, v. g. beasts, birds, 
fishes, vegetables, minerals, and all
such phænomena's as at any time ap­
pear in the material world, as mon­
itors, meteors, &c.

NATURAL Harmony [Musick] is that
produced by the natural and essential
chords of the mode.

To NATURALIZE [naturalizare, 
L.] to receive a foreign expression or
word into the original stock of a lan­
guage.

NATURE [natura, L.] the system
of the world, the machine of the uni­
verse, or the assemblance of all created
beings; the universal disposition of all
bodies; also the government of divine
providence, directing all things by cer­
tain rules and laws.

NATURE [in Metaphysicks] is the
essence of any incorporeal thing, as it
is the Nature of the Soul to think, of God
to be good, and the like.

NATURE [with Philosophers] the
principle of all created beings.

NATURE [in Grammar] a term used 
in Prosodia of a syllable that is short
or long, without any rule in grammar
to render it so by position, &c.

The Laws of NATURE [among Mo­
ralists] are that most general and uni­
versal rule of human actions, to which
every man is obliged to conform, as he
is a reasonable creature. It binds the
whole body of human race, and is not
subject to change, which is the disad­
vantage of positive laws.

Those who search for the Law of
Nature in God himself, are divided into
two parties.

Some place the spring of it in the
divine Will, and thence conclude, that
inasmuch as that Will is in the highest
manner free, God may therefore change
the law of nature.

Others say this natural law is found­
ed in the justice of God, after such an
essential manner, as to express a kind
of image of his attributes, and thence
proceeds the immutability of it.

NATURE [Hieroglyphically] was by
the Egyptians represented by a vulture;
see Vulture. And to express the effects
of Gods power in Nature, they painted
a man with a multitude of hands, 
stretching them out upon the world.
The Nature of Man was represented by
a woman having her hair strait up, and
shewing the image of a tree turned up­
side down. The hair is in lieu of the
roots, and this intimated that our
country was in Heaven, from whence
we had our beginning, and that thither
our affections ought to tend.



NATURE [with Schoolmen] the es­
sence of a thing, or the quiddity there­
of: i. e. the attribute that makes it
what it is, as it is the Nature of the Soul
to think.

NATURE, is also used to signify the
established order and course of material
things, the series of second causes, or
the laws that God has imposed upon
the motions impress'd by him, as Phy­
sicks is the Study of Nature, and Mira­
cles are effects above the Power of Na­
me.

NATURE is also used to signify an
aggregate of powers pertaining to any
body, especially an animal one, as we
say Nature is strong, weak, &c.

NATURE, is also used to signify the
action of providence, the principle of
all things, or that spiritual being which
is diffused throughout the whole crea­
ion, and moves and acts in all bodies, 
and gives them certain properties, and
procures certain effects.

NAVAL Crown [with
the Romans] a crown of
gold or silver, adorned
with the figures of beaks
of ships, which it was
their custom to give as a
reward to those who had first boarded
an enemy's ship. See the figure.

Image omitted.



NAVE of a Church, the body of the
church, or the place where the people
are disposed, reaching from the rail or
balluster of the choir to the chief door.

NAUGHTY [nahtiʒ, Sax.] bad, 
wicked, &c.

NAVIGABLENESS [of navigabilis, 
L.] capableness of being sailed in.

NAULUM [νάυλον, Gr.] a piece of
money which the ancient Greeks and
Romans put into the mouth of a person
deceased, to pay Charon (the poetick
ferry-man of Hell) for carrying him
over the Stygian lake in his ship or
boat,  L.

NAUSEA [in Physick] a retching and
propensity, an endeavour to vomit, 
arising from a loathing of food, excited
by some viscous humour that irritates
the stomach.

NAUSEA [Anatomically] is defined by
Boorhave to be a retrograde, spasmo­
dick motion of the musculous fibres of
the oesophagus, stomach and intestines;
attended with convulsions of the abdo­
minal muscles, and the Septum Trans­
versum.

NAUTILUS, a petrified shell found
in the earth; in other respects like
those found in the sea or rivers.

Surveyor of the NAVY, an officer,
whose business is to survey the ships,
hull, masts and rigging; to audit the
accounts of carpenters, boatswains, 
&c. belonging to the royal navy.

NAZAREATE [of Nazarenus, L.]
the state and condition of a Nazarite.

NAZARITESHIP [of כידצנ, Heb.
i. e. Separatists] the state or condition
of a Nazarite; this consisted in making
a vow of abstaining from wine and all
intoxicating liquors, of letting the hair
grow without cutting, or shaving; of
not entring a house in which a dead
corps was, and of not attending any
funeral.

So strict they were, that if any person
happened to die where they were pre­ 
sent, the whole ceremony and conse­
cration of nazariteship was repeated.

The time of the ceremony lasted
usually eight days, and sometimes a
month, which being accomplished, the
priest brought the person to the door of
the temple, and there he offered to
the Lord a he-lamb for a burnt offering, 
and a she-lamb for an expiatory sacri­
fice, and a ram for a peace offering;
there were offered also loaves and
cakes, with wine for a drink offering.

After this the priest or some other
person, shaved the head of the Nazarite
at the door of the tabernacle, and
threw the hair into the fire on the al­
tar. Then the priest put into the hand
of the Nazarite the shoulder of the
ram roasted, with a loaf and a cake, 
which he returned back to the priest, 
and he lifting them up in the presence
of the Nazarite, offered to the Lord.
This nazariteship was sometimes tem­
porary, i. e. only for a certain time or
perpetual, i. e. for the whole life, by which
latter were consecrated in their infan­
cy by their parents.

NAZARITE is used in scripture,
sometimes to signify
bazely, or born at Nazareth a city in
Judea; and sometimes as a name of
contempt to Jesus Christ and his disci­
ples or followers; and sometimes for a
religious order among the Jews, who
made a vow of nazariteship.

NAZARENE is used in scripture,
sometimes to signify
bazely, or born at Nazareth a city in
Judea; and sometimes as a name of
contempt to Jesus Christ and his disci­
ples or followers; and sometimes for a
religious order among the Jews, who
made a vow of nazariteship. 

To NEAL [of on-ælan, Sax.] to
make a metal softer or less brittle by
heating it in the fire, to anneal or
stain, or bake glass painted, that the
colour may go quite through it.

NEAP [of neaſ, Sax. scarce] scanty, 
deficient, as neap Tides.

NEARNESS [near and neſſe, Sax.]
proximity.

NEATNESS [neatneſſe, Sax.]
cleanliness, tightness in apparel, house,



&c. also pureness, unadulteratedness.

NEBULA, a mist or fog.  L.

NEBULE [in Heraldry]
nebuly, Engl. of nebulatum
or nubilum of nebula, L. sig­
nifies cloudy, or represent­
ing clouds. See the fi­
gure.

Image omitted.



NEBULOUSNESS [of nebulosus, L.]
mistiness, cloudiness, darkness.

NEBULOUS Stars [Astron.] certain
fixed stars of a dull, pale and dim
light; so called because they look
cloudy, or bring clouds, and setting
with the sun render the air troubled
and dusk.

NECESSARY in Causing, is when
there is a cause from whence an effect
must necessarily follow.

NECESSARINESS [of necessarius, L.]
needfulness, unavoidableness.

NECESSITATED [necessité, F.] for­
ced, compelled.

NECESSITOUSNESS [of necessiteux, 
F.] indigence, poverty.

NECESSITY [among Naturalists] is
that by which a Being is put into such
a condition, that it cannot be in any
other.

Absolute NECESSITY [among Natu­
ralists] is when it is contrary to the
very nature and principles of the thing
to be otherwise.

Simple absolute NECESSITY [in Me­
taphysicks] is that which upon no terms
or conditions will permit a thing to be
in another condition than it is in.
This does not comport with any but an
independent Being, as God himself.

Respective absolute NECESSITY [with
Metaphysicians] is when a thing will
continue as it is according to the order
of creation, and the settled course of
second causes.

Physical NECESSITY [Philos.] is the
want of principle or natural means ne­
cessary to act; called also physical or na­
tural Impotence.

Moral NECESSITY [in Philos.] is
only a great difficulty, such as that
which arises from a long habitude, a
strong inclination or violent passion.

Absolute NECESSITY is that which
had no de­
pendence on any state or conjuncture, 
or any particular situation of things;
but is found every where and in all the
circumstances, in which the agent can
be supposed; as the necessity a blind
man is under of not distinguishing co­
lours.

Simple NECESSITY is that which
had no de­
pendence on any state or conjuncture, 
or any particular situation of things;
but is found every where and in all the
circumstances, in which the agent can
be supposed; as the necessity a blind
man is under of not distinguishing co­
lours.

Relative NECESSITY, is that which
places a person in a real incapacity of
acting or not acting in those circum­
stances and that situation he is found
in, though in other circumstances, and
in another state of things, he might ei­
ther act or not act.

Antecedent NECESSITY [with Philo­
sophers] is one that arises from an ante­
cedent cause necessarily operating, as
the rising of the sun to morrow morn­
ing.

Concomitant NECESSITY, arises from
an antecedent and necessary cause; but
depends on the circumstances of the
effect.

NECESSITY [necessitas, L.] a pagan
deity, the daughter of fortune, the mo­
ther of the destinies, and constant com­
panion of man through his whole life;
and to whom, as the poets feign, even
Jupiter himself was forced to submit.
This Necessity was worshipped as a god­
dess by the Heathens. She was also re­
presented with fortune her mother, 
with brazen hands, holding long pins
and great coins.

NECK Verse, a verse or two in a Latin
book of a Gothick black character, which
a person convicted of several crimes
(especially manslaughter, for which he
otherwise should suffer death) was for­
merly put to read in open court; and if
the ordinary of Newgate said, legit ut
Clericus, i. e. he reads like a Clerk, he was
only burnt in the hand and set at liber­
ty. But now this practise of reading
the neck-verse is quite left off.

NECROLOGY [of νέχρος, dead, and
λόγος, Gr.] a book kept in ancient times
in churches and monasteries; in which
the names of the benefactors were re­
gistred; the time of their death, and
also the days of the commemoration.

NECROMANCY, the Pagans had an
imagination, that none but such as were
matched away before their time, or that
had killed themselves, were liable to
have the mysteries of that art practised
upon them; they supposing that such per­
sons souls were lodged upon the confines
of the world, not being able to reach to
the utmost bounds of the infernal shades, 
where they fancied the spirits of none
were settled but those who died after
manhood, parted naturally with their
bodies, and had the solemnity of a re­
gular funeral.

These necromancers sometimes pour'd
warm blood upon the corpse, and some­
times made use of the veins of a dead
man in order to obtain an answer of
what they wanted to know. By this
art is sometimes understood to signify
enchantments of all kinds and the pre­



tences of causing and curing diseases, &c.
without natural means.

NECROMANCERS were sometimes
supposed to have communication with
spirits or devils, who dictated to them
the answers that they were to make to
enquirers.

NECROSIS [in Theology] a mortify­
ing of corrupt affections.

Magnetical NEEDLE [in Navigation, 
&c.] a needle touched with a load-stone, 
and suspended on a pivot or center; on
which, playing at liberty, it directs itself
to certain points in and under the hori­
zon.

Horizontal NEEDLE, is one equally
ballanced on each side the pivot which
sustains them; and which playing hori­
zontally by its two extremes, point out
the north and south points of the hori­
zon.

NEEP Tides [with Mariners] are those
tides which fall out when the moon is
in the middle of the second and last quar­
ter; which are four days before the
full or change, and are called, deed-neep
or dead-neep.

NEFANDOUSNESS [of nefandus, L.]
horribleness, wickedness not to be men­
tioned or uttered.

NEFARIOUSNESS [of nefarius, L.]
great wickedness, villainousness, abomi­
nableness.

NEGATIVE Pains [in Law] is a
being excluded from honours and digni­
ties, &c. without the having any direct
and positive pains inflicted.

NEGLECTFUL [of neglectus, L. and
ful, Eng.] negligent.

NEGLIGENTNESS [negligentia, L.]
negligence.

NEGOTIATED [negotiatus, L.] tran­
sacted, managed by way of traffick.

NEGROES, so called of Nigritia, a
country in Africa, so named from the ri­
ver Niger that runs thro it, between
Guinea and Zoara, and having the At­
lantick ocean on the west. It contains
14 kingdoms, the people of which are
black, with short woolly hair on their
heads, and are commonly with us cal­
led black moors, who are continually
at war one with another, and all the
prisoners they take men, women and
children they sell to other Africans or
to the Portuguese, &c. for slaves, and
they are sold to the English, French, Dutch
and Spaniards, and transported into the
colonies of America, to cultivate the
ground, do all manner of drudgeries and
dig in the mines.

Their chief food is a root called
Guames, and a kind of chesnuts called
Gores; beans of a bright red colour, and
pease of an extraordinary largeness, and
of divers colours.

They have no vines, and consequent­
ly no wine, but what is got from a cer­
tain species of palms, by chopping and
making incisions in the trunks of them.
with a hatchet, from whence distils a
juice, which is at first very sweet, and
in three or four days becomes pretty
strong, but by reason of the heat of the
climate turns sour in 14 days.

Some of those who live near the sea
coasts are a little civilized by conversa­
tion with Europeans, and some of them
have embraced christianity, but the o­
thers who live higher up the country
are savage and brutal.

NEHILOTH [חולחנ, Heb.] this word
is found at the beginning of the 50th
psalm, and is supposed to signify the dan­
ces or the flutes.

This psalm is addressed to the master
who presided over the dancers, which
were exercised in certain religious ce­
remonies, or to the band of musick
which performed on the flute.

NEIGHING [of hnæʒan, Sax. hinni­
ens, L.] making a noise like a horse.

NEKIR [among the Mahometans]
an angel, which they fan­
cy, together with another, called Mun­
ker, holding a great mace in their hands
go to the graves of the dead, and exa­
mine them of their faith; and if they
find them Musselmen, i. e. true believers
[in Mahomet, &c.] they permit them to
lie at rest, and behold Heaven through
a little window, till the day of judgment
(it being their notion, that all souls lie
in the graves with their bodies till the
day of judgment) but if these Musselmen
themselves should mistake the angels, by
reason of their magnitude, for God and
worship them, then they give them
a blow with their mace, and they are
shut up blind in the grave, and don't
see any thing of Heaven.

NEKER [among the Mahometans]
an angel, which they fan­
cy, together with another, called Mun­
ker, holding a great mace in their hands
go to the graves of the dead, and exa­
mine them of their faith; and if they
find them Musselmen, i. e. true believers
[in Mahomet, &c.] they permit them to
lie at rest, and behold Heaven through
a little window, till the day of judgment
(it being their notion, that all souls lie
in the graves with their bodies till the
day of judgment) but if these Musselmen
themselves should mistake the angels, by
reason of their magnitude, for God and
worship them, then they give them
a blow with their mace, and they are
shut up blind in the grave, and don't
see any thing of Heaven.

NEMEAN Games [so called of the
wood Nemea in Achaia, where Hercules
slew a mighty lion] solemn games in­
stituted in honour of Hercules. The ex­
ercises used were running with horses, 
foot races, fighting with whirl-bats, 
quoiting, wrestling, darting, and shoot­
ing. And the reward of him that came
off victor, was at first a crown made of
an olive branch; but afterwards a gar­
land of ivy.

NEMENSTRINUS [of nemus, L.] a
wood or forest] a Roman deity of the
woods and forest.



NEMESIS [of τής διανεμἔσηώς, Gr.]
i. e. a distribution to every one accord­
ing to justice] the daughter of Jupiter
and of Necessity, the goddess of punish­
ment or revenge, called also Adrastia
from Adrastus, who first built her a tem­
ple; and also Rhamnusia of Rhamnus, 
the place where this temple was,  L.
She was painted as justice is, with a
sword in one hand, and a pair of scales
in the other, with a sad countenance
and piercing eyes, or with a bridle and
ruler.

NEMOROSITY [nemorositas, L.] full­
ness of woods and groves.

NENUTHAR, a flower called a wa­
ter-lilly.

NEOGAMIST [neogamus, L. νίογαμος, 
Gr.] one newly married.

NEOMENIA [νεομηνια, Gr.] the begin­
ning of the lunar month, which the
Jews observed as a great festival. The
Sanhedrin appointed two men to watch
and discover the appearing of the new
moon, who having made their report, 
they caused publication to be made, 
that day the new moon was begun; but
since the destruction of the temple, the
Jews have had annually almanacks, or
ephemerisses printed, to inform them
of the new and full moon, their fasts
and festivals, the seasons of the year,
&c.

NEOTROPHY [neotropium, L. of νεο­
τραφεῖον τῶν νεῶν τροφεῖον, Gr.] a house
where young persons are brought up.

NEPIER'S Bones [so called from
the lord Nepier or
Neper, Baron of Merchiston in Scotland, 
the inventor of them] certain number­
ing rods made either of ivory, wood, or
small slips of past-board, which serve
to perform multiplication by addition, 
and division by substraction.

They are rods, plates, or Lamellæ of
Wood, Metal, Paste-board, or other mat­
ter of an ablong form (as in the table)
and each divided into 9 little squares;
each of which is resolved into two ta­
bles diagonally.

In these little squares are written the
numbers of the multiplication table, in
such order as that the units, or right
hand figures, are found in the right
hand triangle, and the tens on the left
hand figures, in the left hand triangle;
see the table.

The use of them in multiplication.

To multiply any given number by a­
nother; dispose the Lamellæ in such or­
der, that the top figures may exhibit the
multiplicand; and join the Lamellæ of
units on the left hand, in which seek the
right hand figure of the multiplicator;
and write out the other numbers which
correspond to it in the squares of the



other Lamellæ, adding the several num­
bers which occur in the same rhumb
together and their sums. And after the
same manner write out the others num­
bers which correspond to the other fi­
ures of the multiplicator; and dispose
them under one another as in the com­
mon multiplication; and then add the
several numbers into one sum.

As for example

If 6123 is to be multiplied by 365, 
having tabulated the multiplicator, the
several products thereof into each figure
of the multiplier you are directed to by
the index; which being added together
(respect being had to the due placing
their sum) is 2179788, which is the pro­
duct of 6123 by 356.

6123
  356
-------
    36738
  30615
18369
-------
2179788

The use of Nepier's bones in division,

Dispose the Lamellæ so that the upper
figures may exhibit the divisor, to these
join the Lamellæ of units on the left
hand. Descend under the divisor till
you come to those figures of the divi­
dend, wherein it is first required how
oft the divisor is found, or at least the
next less number, which is to be sub­
tracted from the dividend, and write
down the number corresponding to this
in the place of units for a quotient. De­
termine the other parts of the quotient
after the same manner, and the division
will be compleated.

As for example

Having disposed the Lamellæ, or tabu­
lated the divisor 6123, I see that 6123
cannot be had in 2179; therefore I take
5 places, and on the rods finding a num­
ber that is equal, or next less to 21797, 
which is 18369; that is, 3 times the
divisor; set 3 in the quotient, and sub­
stract 18369 from the figures above, and
there rests 3428; to which add 8, the
next figure of the dividend, and seek a­
gain on the rod for it, or the next less, 
which being found to be 5 times, set 5
in the quotient, and substract 30615 from
34288, and their rests 3673; to which
add 8 the last figure in the dividend, and
finding it to be 6 times the divisor set
6 in the quotient.

6123)2179788(356
          ...
18369
--------
34288
30615
--------
36738
36768
--------
000000

Table omitted.



NEPIER'S Rods [so called from
the lord Nepier or
Neper, Baron of Merchiston in Scotland, 
the inventor of them] certain number­
ing rods made either of ivory, wood, or
small slips of past-board, which serve
to perform multiplication by addition, 
and division by substraction.

They are rods, plates, or Lamellæ of
Wood, Metal, Paste-board, or other mat­
ter of an ablong form (as in the table)
and each divided into 9 little squares;
each of which is resolved into two ta­
bles diagonally.

In these little squares are written the
numbers of the multiplication table, in
such order as that the units, or right
hand figures, are found in the right
hand triangle, and the tens on the left
hand figures, in the left hand triangle;
see the table.

The use of them in multiplication.

To multiply any given number by a­
nother; dispose the Lamellæ in such or­
der, that the top figures may exhibit the
multiplicand; and join the Lamellæ of
units on the left hand, in which seek the
right hand figure of the multiplicator;
and write out the other numbers which
correspond to it in the squares of the
other Lamellæ, adding the several num­
bers which occur in the same rhumb
together and their sums. And after the
same manner write out the others num­
bers which correspond to the other fi­
ures of the multiplicator; and dispose
them under one another as in the com­
mon multiplication; and then add the
several numbers into one sum.

As for example

If 6123 is to be multiplied by 365, 
having tabulated the multiplicator, the
several products thereof into each figure
of the multiplier you are directed to by
the index; which being added together
(respect being had to the due placing
their sum) is 2179788, which is the pro­
duct of 6123 by 356.

6123
  356
-------
    36738
  30615
18369
-------
2179788

The use of Nepier's bones in division,

Dispose the Lamellæ so that the upper
figures may exhibit the divisor, to these
join the Lamellæ of units on the left
hand. Descend under the divisor till
you come to those figures of the divi­
dend, wherein it is first required how
oft the divisor is found, or at least the
next less number, which is to be sub­
tracted from the dividend, and write
down the number corresponding to this
in the place of units for a quotient. De­
termine the other parts of the quotient
after the same manner, and the division
will be compleated.

As for example

Having disposed the Lamellæ, or tabu­
lated the divisor 6123, I see that 6123
cannot be had in 2179; therefore I take
5 places, and on the rods finding a num­
ber that is equal, or next less to 21797, 
which is 18369; that is, 3 times the
divisor; set 3 in the quotient, and sub­
stract 18369 from the figures above, and
there rests 3428; to which add 8, the
next figure of the dividend, and seek a­
gain on the rod for it, or the next less, 
which being found to be 5 times, set 5
in the quotient, and substract 30615 from
34288, and their rests 3673; to which
add 8 the last figure in the dividend, and
finding it to be 6 times the divisor set
6 in the quotient.

6123)2179788(356
          ...
18369
--------
34288
30615
--------
36738
36768
--------
000000

Table omitted.



NEPETA [with Botan.] the herb
nep, cats-mint or calamint,  L.

NEPHALIA [Νεφάλια, Gr.] the feasts
of sober men, a feast and sacrifice of
the Greeks, on which the Athenians of­
fered a drink made of water and honey
to the Sun, Moon, Mercury; the Nymphs, 
Venus and Aurora. They burnt with
these all woods, except that of the vine, 
mulberry and fig-tree, which they did
not offer in this sober feast, they being
symbols of drunkenness.

NEPTUNALIA, festivals celebrated
by the ancients in honour of Neptune.

NEPTUNE [of nando i. e. swimming,
or of nubendo, L. i. e. covering, because
the sea covers the earth, or as others
say, from the Lybian, or the Egyptian
word nephia, signifying capes, promon­
tories, and the wastes or extremities
of the ground or sea] The Greeks
call him ποσειδὼν, from the Phœnician
word Posedoni, a breaker or destroyer
of ships. Neptune was one of the chil­
dren of Saturn, who at the division of
the world, among him and his brethren, 
had the command of the sea allotted to
him: His scepter was a trident; he
bears a trident instead of a scepter, be­
cause fishermen in fishing make frequent
use of a trident; or because this three
forked instrument is very apt or fit for
stirring the earth. And his chariot a
great sea-shell, drawn either by whales
or sea monsters; or by horses, whose
lower parts were those of a fish. His
wife was called Amphitrite, because the
sea does compass the earth. He is
feigned to have taught men the use of
an horse, which he caused to come
forth of the earth, by a blow of his
trident, at the dispute that he had with
Minerva, about giving a name to the
city of Athens, in the Areopagus; as an
olive-tree did from Minerva's striking
the rock with her spear: But because
he had engaged himself in a conspiracy
against Jupiter, he was confin'd to the
earth, and being under strait circum­
stances, was necessitated to offer him­
self to the service of Laomedon, to help



him to build the city of Troy. The
Tritons, which were half men and half
dolphins, were his children, who at­
tended him, sounding shell-trumpets.
By his conversation with the earth, he
begot the Harpies, monsters that had
the faces of maids, but bodies like vul­
tures, with wings and claws on their
hands and feet; and whatever they
touched was infected and spoiled; and
whatsoever came near them they stole.

Neptune was a god in great esteem
with the Romans, not only as they
thought him to have the command of
one of the Elements; but because, they
say, he advised them, in the first begin­
ning of their empire, when there was
a scarcity of women in the city, to
steal the Sabine virgins. He was called
Hippus and Equester, because he taught
men the use of horses; and in acknow­
ledgment of the benefit their empire
had received from horses, they institu­
ted horse-races in honour of him. He
had a famous temple in Rome, inriched
with the spoils of many sea victories;
but Augustus the emperor, caused his
statue to be pulled down, because he
was thought to have raised a tempest
against him at sea, where he was like
to have been drowned.

So that Neptune is the same with that
power and virtue, which is contained
in moisture.

Neptune is called Φυτάλμιος, because
all things which the earth produces are
done by the power and efficacy of moi­
sture. He is also called Ενισιχθον, Σει­
σιχθον, Ενοσιγαιον and Τιναχτοραγάνη, all
which epithets signify a mover of the
earth. For the spirit which is in the
bowels of the earth, being pent up in
narrow streights, seek for passage out, 
and bursting out, they move and break
the earth: And that eruption some­
times makes a bellowing.

NEPTUNE [in Painting, &c.] is re­
presented clad in a mantle of blue or
sea green; trimmed with silver with
long hoary hair, riding in a blue cha­
riot, drawn by monstrous fishes, or else
on the back of a dolphin, holding in
his hand a silver trident.

NEREIDS [the daughters of Nereus]
meremaids or fishes, the fishes, the up­
per part of which resembles a beautiful
woman, and the rest a fish.

NEREUS [of νερεὺς, Gr.] one of the
poetical deities of the sea; the son of
Oceanus and Tethys, who married his
sister Doris, and whom they make to
have fifty daughters, called Nereids.
The moral of which fable is fifty par­
ticular seas, being parts of the main sea
itself.

NEREUS, is the sea. It is derived
of ἀπὸ τοῖ νεῖθαι, i.e. of swimming, be­
cause we swim through the sea. They
represent Nereus as an old man, be­
cause the froth of the sea represents
hoary-headedness. For Leucothoe, who
is the daughter of Nereus, intimates
something of that matter, as much as
to say the whiteness of froth.

NERGAL [i. e. in the Samaritan
language, a cock] an idol of the sun, 
brought into Samaria from Persia, and
worshipped in the form of a cock.

NERGAL [לנדנ, Heb.] a continual
fire, which the Persian Magi preserved
upon an altar in honour of the sun, 
and the lights of the firmament. This
fire was always kept burning, like the
vestal fire of the Romans; whensoever
they meddled with this fire, they used
to sing hymns in honour of the sun.
The Jewish writers affirm that this was
the god adored in Ur of the Chaldees, 
and that Abraham was obliged to quit
that country, because he would not con­
form to that idolatry. The Persians
were wont to dedicate to the sun a cha­
riot and horses, and to adore that glo­
rious light every morning. The Ma­
hometans do still seem to perform some
kind of devotion to the rising sun, 
saluting it assoon as they see it with
great humility, and purifying them­
selves by washing. The Chaldeans were
wont to burn themselves in honour of
Nergal. And Curtius tells us, that
Alexander was an eye witness of this
madness. The person to be thus sacri­
ficed took his farewel of his friends in
a publick banquet; and after he was
reduced to ashes (some writers say) the
cunning priests caused the devil to ap­
pear in his shape to his acquaintance, 
and relate to them strange stones of the
other world.

NERION [Botany] the rose laurel.

NERVE [nervus, L.] or sinew, a
white, round, long body, composed of
several threads or fibres; deriving its
origin from the brain or the spinal mar­
row; and distinguished thro' all the
parts of the body; serving for the con­
veyance of the animal spirits, for the
performance of sensation or motion.

Olfactory NERVES, called by anato­
mists Par Olfactorium, i. e. the olfactory
pair, they arise in the fore part of the
brain, a little below the Os Frontis, and
are pretty thick near the Os Cribrosum, 
and are there called Processus Papillares, 
when they have made their way thro'



the Os Cribrosum, they are distributed
throughout the membranes of the nose;
their use being in the sensation of
Smelling.

Optick NERVES [Anat.] are nerves
which pass through the skull, in two
perforations of the basis of it, a little
above the Sella Equina, from whence
they proceed to the tunicks of the eye, 
whereof the Retina, which is supposed
to receive the objects of vision, is an
extension of the inner or medullary
part alone.

Pathetick NERVES [Anat.] are cer­
tain nerves which arise behind the
Testes, and pass out of the skull at the
Foramen of the former pair, and spend
themselves wholly on the trochlear
muscle.

Intercostal NERVES [Anat.] are com­
posed of nervous filaments, deriv'd
partly from the brain, viz. the bran­
ches of the fifth and sixth pair, and
partly from the spinal marrow, by those
branches they receive from the verte­
bral nerves.

Cervical NERVES [Anat.] these con­
sist of seven pair, the first and second
pair arise between the first and second
Vertebra of the neck; the second pair
contributes the main branch towards
the formation of the diaphragmatick
Nerves; the three last pair of the neck, 
joining with the two first of the Dorsum
or Thorax, make the Brachial Nerves.

Dorsal NERVES [Anat.] are 12 in
number, these contribute to the Bra­
chial Nerves, all except the two upper
pair, and are generally distributed in­
to the intercostal and abdominal mus­
les, the Pleura, and the external parts
of the Thorax.

The Lumbal NERVES [Anatomy] of
these there are five pair, the first of
which sends two branches to the lower
side of the diaphragm; the second, 
come twigs to the genital parts; and
others, as well as the three following, 
to give the first roots to the crural
Nerves. The rest of the branches of
the lumbal nerves, are distributed
into the muscles of the loins and adja­
cent parts.

Brachial NERVES [Anat.] are pro­
duced partly from the Cervical, and
partly from the Dorsal. After the se­
veral branches, whereof these nerves
are composed, have been variously
complicated and united, they run a lit­
tle way in a trunk, and then divide
again into several branches, and are
variously distributed into the muscles
of the skin and arms.

The Crural NERVES [Anatomy] are
compos'd of an union of six or seven
pair, viz. the three last of the Lumbal, 
and the three or four first of the Os Sa­
crum. This is the largest and firmest
trunk in the body. These spend their
upper branches on the muscles of the
thigh and skin, as far as to the knee, 
and then proceed in a trunk down­
wards, which sends forth its branches
to the extremities of the toes.

Diaphragmatick NERVES [Anatomy]
these nerves proceed from the cervi­
cals. After these nerves have joined
in a trunk, they run through the Medi­
astinum, and arriving at the Diaphragm, 
they send out several branches, some
of them into the muscular, and others
into the tendinous part of it.

NERVES [Architect.] are the mould­
ings of the projecting arches of vaults;
or such as arise from the branches of
Ogives, and cross each other diagonally
in Gothick vaults, and serve to separate
the nervous spirit. See Pendentives.

NERVOUSNESS, fulness of nerves, 
sinewiness, strength, &c.

NERVOUS Juice or Spirit, is a pure, 
subtil, volatile humour, commonly
called the Animal Spirits; secreted from
the arterial blood in the cortical part
of the brain, collected in the medulla
oblongata, and driven thence by the
force of the heart, into the cavities of
the nerves; to be by them conveyed
throughout the body, for the purposes
of sensation and animal motion.

NESTORIANS [so called of Nestorius
sometime bishop of Constantinople] a
particular sect of Christians, who ac­
cording to the general strain of Church
Historians, has been represented as an
heretick; for asserting that tho' the
Virgin Mary was the mother of Jesus
Christ as a man, yet she was not the
mother of God, because no human
creature could impart that to another
which she had not herself; that God
was united to Christ under one person, 
but remained as distinct in nature and
essence, as tho' he never had been uni­
ted at all; that such union made no al­
teration at all in the human nature;
but that he was subject to the same pas­
sions of love and hatred pleasure and
pain &c. as other men have, only they
were better regulated and more pro­
perly applied than by ordinary men.
The generality of Christians in the Le­
vant go under this name. They ad­
minister the sacrament with leavened
bread, and in both kinds, give their
priests leave to marry, and use nei­



ther condemnation nor auricular con­
fession.

NETE Hyperboleon [νητη ὐπερβολεον, 
i. e. the last of the highest chords] the
name of the highest and most acute of
the chords of the ancient lyre, or the
ancient scale, or diagramma; and an­
swered to the A, mi, la, of the third
octave of the organ or modern system.

NETE Diazeugmenon [νητη διαξευγμέ­
νον, the last of the separate ones sc. Chord]
one of the chords of the ancient lyre, 
answering to E, si, mi, of the third
octave of the organ, &c.

NETE Synemmenon [νητη συνεμμένον, 
the last of those added, sc. Chord] the
name of the highest chord of a tetra­
chord of the Greek system, added to
make the b soft fall between the Mese
and the Paramese, i. e. between la and si.

NETHERLANDS. The lower Ger­
many, or that part of it next to the sea;
so called by reason of its situation, ly­
ing between France, Lorrain, Germany, 
and the ocean.

It is divided into 17 provinces, 4 of
which are dukedoms, viz. Brabant, Lim­
burg, Luxemburg and Guelderland; 7
are earldoms, viz. Flanders, Artois, 
Hainault, Holland, Zealand, Namure and
Zutphen; and 5 baronies, viz. West
Friezland, Mechlin, Utrect, Over Issel and
Groningen.

These were formerly govern'd by
distinct lords or princes, but were all
united under Philip the good, duke of
Burgundy; who left them to his son
Charles the Hardy, who being kill'd at
Nancy in 1477, the 17 provinces fell to
his only daughter Mary of Burgundy;
who by marrying with Maximilian the
first, carried them into the house of
Austria.

The kings of France, pretended a
right to Artois, Flanders, &c. In the
reign of K. Philip II. of Spain, William
of Nassau, prince of Orange, and seve­
ral other discontented noblemen gave
beginning to those disturbances; which
terminated in the loss of Holland and
those other countries, now known by
the name of the United Provinces; occa­
sioned by the dread of the inquisition, 
the unsupportable rigour of the go­
vernment of the duke of Alva, and the
violent encroachments of the Spaniards
upon the liberties and privileges of the
countries.

NEVERMORE [næfrmær, Sax.]
never, at no time.

NEUROGRAPHY [νεῦρον and γράφω, 
Gr.] a description of the nerves.

NEUTHA [with Chymists] a little skin
growing to the ears or eyes of new
born infants.

NEUTRAL [neutralis, L.] neither
of the one or the other.

NEUTRALITY [neutralité, F.] a
being neuter, the state or condition of
one who is neuter, a middle condition
between a friend and an enemy.

NEUTRALNESS, neutrality, the
not being of either party.

NEW Years Gift, a present made on
the first of January, a custom now in
use among us, which we deriv'd from
the Romans, who offered presents to the
emperors in the Capitol, although they
were absent.

NEWNESS [of ni&wyn;eneſſe, Sax.]
lateness, freshness, &c.

NEWEL [in Architecture] is the up­
right post that the winding stairs turn
round about.

NEWT, a small sort of lizard.

NEWTONIAN Philosophy, the doc­
trine of the universe, and particularly
of the heavenly bodies; their laws, 
affections, &c. as delivered by Sir Isaac
Newton.

This philosophy is understood diffe­
rently by different persons; some au­
thors under this philosophy including
all the corpuscular philosophy, consi­
dered as it now stands corrected and
reform'd by the discoveries and im­
provements that Sir Isaac Newton has
made in several parts of it; and in this
sense it stands contradistinguish'd to the
Cartesian, Peripatetick, and ancient
Corpuscular philosophy.

Others understand by it, the method
or order that Sir Isaac Newton has ob­
serv'd in philosophising, viz. the rea­
soning and drawing of conclusions di­
rectly from Phœnomena, exclusive of all
previous Hypotheses; the beginning from
ample principles; deducing the first
powers and laws of nature from a few
select phœnomena, and then applying
those laws, &c. to account for other
things; in which it is the the same with
experimental philosophy.

Others understand by it a philosophy, 
whereby physical bodies are considered
mathematically, and where geometry
and mechanicks are employ'd to the so­
lution of phænomena. And in this
sense it is the same with mechanical and
mathematical philosophy.

Others mean by the Newtonian Phi­
losophy, the new principles which Sir
Isaac Newton has brought into the new
system that is founded thereon, and the
new solution of Phœnomena deduc'd
there-from.



NEW Years Gift, presents made upon
the first day of every new year; the
original of which custom is ascribed to
Romulus and Tatius king of the Sabines, 
who govern'd jointly in Rome, in about
the 7th year of that city; where Tatius,
as it is related, having on the first of
January been presented with some
boughs out of the forest of the goddess
Strenia, in token of good luck began
this custom, and gave the name of
Strenæ to those presents.

The Romans made this an holiday in
honour of Janus, offering sacrifices to
him; and the people went in crowds to
mount Tarpeiæ, where Janus had an
altar, clothed with new cloaths, and
chose to begin their respective employs
or works on this day; they wish'd one
another good luck, and were careful
not to speak any thing that was pro­
voking or ill-natured.

The common presents among people
of the lower rank, were dates, figs
and hony, which they usually covered
with leaf gold; and those who were
under the protection of great men usu­
ally added a piece of money.
 
In the reign of Augustus, the Senators
Gentry and Populace were wont to bring
him Strenæ or new years gifts; and if
he were not in the city they carried
them to the capitol.

From the Romans this custom was
taken by the Greeks, and from the Hea­
thens by the Christians; who very early
came into the practice of making pre­
sents to the magistrates; and the custom
is still retain'd as a token of friendship, 
love and respect.

NIAS [of nias, F.] simple, silly, foo­
lish: Whence a Nias Hawk, is one
newly taken out of the nest, and not
able to help herself. Hence also our
word Nisey, for a silly person.

NIBCHAZ [ןהבנ of הבנ, Heb.] as a
certain learned writer imagines; and
therefore he thinks this God was the
same with the Egyptian Anubis, who
worshipped in the image of a dog.

Angular NICHE, one formed in the
corner of a building.

Ground NICHE, one which instead of
bearing upon a massive, has its rise
from the ground.

To NICK, to come or do any thing
just at the proper point of time it was
desired; to hit a mark shot at, &c. also
to cut notches in a stick, &c.

NICK of time, the very exact moment
that any thing should be done or is do­
ing.

NICKUM, a sharper, bite or cheat
of any sort, whether gamester, trades­
man, &c.

To NICK it [in the game at Hazard]
it is to throw the same chance, &c. that
the main is, before the thrower is
chanced at all.

NICHOLAITANS, a sect in the pri­
mitive Church, said to have taken their
rise even during the times of the apo­
stles; from one Nicholas, one of the 7 first
deacons; and from this sect the Gnosticks
are suppos'd to have taken their rise.

Some have taken upon them to excuse
him and say that upon his giving his
wife, who was very handsome, leave to
marry another person she should like, 
in order to convince his companions
that he intended to live or keep a vow
or profession of continence, which he
had made; that certain persons from
this rash zeal pretended to maintain the
legality of living with women in com­
mon, and that meats offered to idols
were as lawful to be eaten as any o­
thers; that libertinism was a means to
bliss, &c.

NICKUMPOOP [incert. Etym.] a
meer block-head, dolt or sot; a sense­
less; dull witted fellow; it is also used
in an obscene signification.

NICODEMITES, a sect of hereticks
in Switzerland; so denominated from
Nicodemus, from professing their faith
in private.

NIDIFICATION, a making or build­
ing of nests as birds do.

NIECE, a she 
cousin, a kinswoman, 
a brother or sister's daughter,  F.

NIGGARDLINESS, sordid covetous­
ness.

NIGHT [niht, Sax. nox, L. νὺξ, Gr.]
is commonly us'd to signify all that
time the sun is below the horizon of
any place, which in some parts of the
world near the north and south poles is
several months long; whereas under
the equator they are always equal to
the day; but in other parts of the
world the nights are sometimes longer
and sometimes shorter, according to
the situation of the places.

NIGHT [in a Metaphorical Sense]
means the darkness of the understand­
ing and sometimes, affliction, distress, 
death, eternal punishment,&c.

NIGHT [in Chymical writers]
is exprest by this character.

Image omitted.



NIGHT, a poetical divinity, 
feign'd to be the author of Cha­
os and darkness, or (as others say) of
heaven and earth; married to Erebus
the god of Hell, by whom she had four



children, viz. Fate or Destiny, Old Age, 
Sleep and Death.

The ancients painted her holding 2
children in her arms, one asleep and
fresh coloured, the other seemingly a­
sleep but black, with its feet astride;
which denoted Death, and its true i­
mage Sleep, both commonly the off­
spring of the night.

They usually sacrificed a cock to
this deity.

NIGHT [in Painting, &c.] is repre­
sented clothed in a black mantle, spot­
ted with stars of gold. See Nox.

NIKEPHORIA [Νιχηφορία of Νιχἠ, 
victory, and φέρω, Gr. to bring] rejoi­
cing, triumphs, &c. on account of
victory.

NILE, a large river in Africa, which
branching into many arms or streams, 
waters many countries or kingdoms. It
is called the preserver of Upper Egypt
and father of the Lower; by reason of
its overflowing, and by means of the
manure spread over it by the mud that
is washed down by it.

This river is the most, remarkable
that it overflows commonly in the heat
of summer, when other rivers are ge­
nerally at the lowest; and by that means
supplies the naturally deficiency of rain
in those parts; as soon as the overflow­
ing is sufficiently abated they sow their
seed.

The Heathens attributed this won­
derful overflowing to their god Serapis;
and thence whenever it happened to
stop, or come but sparingly or out of
course, they were wont to sacrifice one
of their most beautiful young women in
the following manner. They first dres­
sed her in very rich apparel, and then
threw her into the river, as a victim to
implore this imaginary deity to be pro­
pitious.

The Arabian historians relate, that
this barbarous worship was abolished
by the Caliph Omar, who instead of a
virgin threw a letter into the river;
the contents of which was to beg of the
true God, that he would order the Nile
to overflow if it pleased him.

NILOMETER [of nilus and μέτρον, 
Gr. measure] a pillar erected in the mid­
dle of the Nile, upon which are mark­
ed the degrees of the ascent of the wa­
ter.

There were several of these indiffe­
rent places of the Nile. At this day
there is one where the Nile is divided
into two arms; one of which passes to
Cairo and the other to Gizah.

Antiently they kept the measure of
the swelling of the Nile, in the temple
of Serapis like a sacred relick; and the
emperor Constantine had it transported to
the church of Alexandria; upon which
the Pagans affirmed that the Nile would
never overflow any more; and that Sera­
pis being provoked, would be revenged
on Egypt, and cause a barrenness in the
the land. But contrary to their fears
the Nile did overflow and ascended to
its usual height the years following.

The Nile overflows regularly every
year in the month of August, in the high­
est and middle Egypt; where this over­
flowing is necessary, because it hardly
ever rains there. But in the lower
Egypt, the flood is less sensible and less
necessary, because it frequently rains
there, and the country is sufficiently
watered.

It is less sensible, because they make
fewer dikes there or receptacles of wa­
ter, and the inundation spreading itself
equally through all the country does
not rise higher than a cubit through the
whole Delta; whereas in higher and
middle Egypt, where it rains very sel­
dom, they have made high banks at a
leagues distance, in the midst of which
there are deep canals to receive the
waters of the river.

They make a breach in these dikes, 
and when a country is sufficiently water­
ed, the dike is stopped up and opened in
another place; and thus the whole land
of Egypt is successively watered as a gar­
den.

When the Nile overflows only to the
perpendicular height of 12 cubits, a fa­
mine necessarily follows in Egypt; nor
is the famine less certain if it should ex­
ceed 16 cubits as Pliny writes; so that
the just height of the innundation is be­
tween 12 and 16 cubits.

An Arabian author, who has given an
annual account of the Nile, for more
than 1200 years, says, that when the
depth of the channel of the Nile is 14
fathom, a harvest may be expected that
will amount to one years provision; but
if it encreases to 16 the corn will be
sufficient for two years; less than 14
causes a scarcity, and more than 18 a
famine.

This inundation is caused by the
great rains which fall in Ethiopia, in the
months of June, July and August, which
are the winter months in that country.
These waters carry with them much
mud and soillage, which very much
contributes to fatten and enrich the
land.



When the waters are withdrawn the
culture of the land is very easy. The
seed is cast upon the dry mud, and with
very little tillage produces in great
plenty.

NIMBIS, a term used by antiquaries,
for a circle round the heads of empe­
rors on certain medals; and resembling
the Aureolæ or circles of light, placed
round the heads of the images of saints.

NIMETULABITES [so named from
Nimetulabi, their instructor] a sect among
the Turks, who meet every Monday in
the night time, and sing hymns to God,
&c. The ceremony of admission into
this order is as follows; he who desires
to be admitted, shuts up himself close
in a chamber, and eats no more than 4
ounces of food in a day for 40 days,
which being expired, the fraternity
take him by the hand and lead him a
moorish dance; which is performed with
a multitude of ridiculous gestures and
actions, till by the violence of the ex­
ercise, and his former regimen, he falls
down on the ground; which fall they
contrue an extasy; and during this time
of lying he is fancied to have seen a vi­
sion.

NIMBLENESS [of nemen, Du. to
catch up hastily] agility, quickness.

NIMBOSE [nimbosus, L.] stormy, 
tempestuous, cloudy.

NINETEEN [neʒen-tien, Sax.]
xix. 19.

NINNY [ninnarius, L. barb.] a con­
tented cuckold.

NIOBE, was the daughter of Tanta­
lus, and wife of Pelops, who having six
sons and six daughters, was so elated
with her felicity, that she prefer'd her­
self before Latona; and (according to the
poets) had all her children slain by the
goddess for her insolence; for which
calamity she wept herself to death, lo­
sing her speech, and remaining stupid
without moving, which gave the poets
occasion to feign, that she was turned
into a stone, as Palæphatus says; the
truth of the fiction is, that Niobe being
bereaved of her children by death, com­
manded her statue to be made in stone
(and probably in a mournful posture)
and she sitting upon her childrens sepul­
chre. She is said to have lived A.M. 2240.

A NIP the sharp point of a pen.

NIPPING, pinching.

NISLEE [in Heraldry] as
Croix nislee, nylle, or nillee, 
F. is like a cross Cercelee 
but something narrower, 
and never pierced, and
some say, it is the same as
the Cross moline sable. Columbiere says, 
it is as much as to say, Annihillee, i. e.
annihilated, or so small and slender, that
it seems to be reduced almost to no­
thing. See the figure.

Image omitted.



NISAN [ןםינ, Heb.] the seventh month
of the Jews civil year, which is about
our September.

NISROCH [ךודסנ, which some take
to be derived and compounded of אשנ
to exalt, and בהד to enlarge] and so to
express the high and spacious heavens, 
winch, as Herodotus relates, the ancient
Persians worshipped; or of דשנ an eagle, 
being the image of an eagle: or as Eu­
sebius thinks, was the ark of Noah itself, 
and a representation of it, which was
worshipped by the Eastern people. The
name of an ancient idol among the Assy­
rians.

NITENT [nitens, L.] shining.

NITRATED [nitratus, L.] mixed
with nitre.

NITRUM [νίτρον, Gr. ןדתנ, Heb. אדתנ
Syriack, so called of Nitria, a town of
Egypt, where it was anciently made in
great quantities] salt petre, which is
either natural or artificial.

NISEY [of niais, F.] a fool or silly
fellow.

NIXIDII [so called of nixas, the
pangs or throws of a woman in travail]
certain gods among the Romans, that
presided over women in child-bed, in
whose form they were represented, and
had three statues in the capitol, over
against Miverva's altar; having been
brought out of Asia after the defeat of
Antiochus.

NOACHIDÆ, the children of Noah.
The Rabbins pretend that God gave Noah
and his sons certain precepts, which
contain according to them the natural
right which is common to all men indif­
ferently; and that the observation of them
alone will be sufficient to save them.

After the giving of the law to Moses
the Hebrews would not suffer any stran­
ger to dwell in their country, unless he
would conform to the precepts of the
Noahchidæ; and in war they put to death
without quarter all that were ignorant
of them.

These precepts are 7 in number,

1. Obedience is due to magistrates, 
judges and princes.

2. The worship of false gods, super­
stition and sacrilege are absolutely for­
bidden.

3. Cursing the name of God, blasphe­
mies and oaths.

4. All incestuous and unlawful con­
junctions or copulations; as sodomy,



bestiality, and crimes against nature are
forbidden.

5. The effusion of the blood of all
sorts of animals, murder, wounds and
mutilations.

6. Theft, cheats, lying, &c.

7. That the parts of an animal still
alive are not to be eaten, as was prac­
tised by some Pagans.

Maimonides says that the first 6 of
these precepts were given by Adam and
the 7th was added by Noah.

NOBILIARY, a collection or histori­
cal account of the noble families of a
nation or province.

NOBILITATED [nobilitatus, L.]
made noble or famous.

NOBILITY [nobilitas, L.] is defined to
be illustrious Descent, and conspicuousness
of Ancestors, with a succession of arms, 
conferred on some one (and by him to
his family) by the Prince by Law, or by
Custom, as a reward of the good and vir­
tuous actions of him that performed
them.

NOBILITY, a quality that dignifies or
renders a person noble: particularly
that raises a person possessed of it above
a peasant or commoner. The quality
or degree of a nobleman; also the whole
body of noblemen; also fame, reputa­
tion, renown.

NOBILITY, the Italians thus satyriz'd
nobility, the dukes and earls of Germany
(every son of a duke being a duke, and
every daughter of a dutchess being a dut­
chess) the dons of Spain, the monsieurs
of France, the bishops of Italy (every
city having a bishop), the nobility of
Hungary, the lairds of Scotland, the
knights of Naples; and the younger bre­
thren of England make altogether a
poor company.

Divine NOBILITY, has its respect to
the original of the soul, which comes
from heaven, and depends on the power
of God. If this were well considered, 
the worldly nobility would be less valu­
ed, and we should be rendered the more
capable of moral nobility. This is also
called heavenly or theological.

Human or worldly NOBILITY, regards
blood, and a genealogy of many ances­
tors. This worldly or human nobility
depends upon the good fortune of our
birth. This is called Political.

Moral NOBILITY, refers only to
virtue, which is to gain us esteem; and
this depends on our own free will, and
is also called Philosophical.

Dative NOBILITY, is such as has
been required by some merits or deeds, 
and conferred by the prince, &c.

Native NOBILITY, is what passes
from father to son, and makes the son
noble, because his father was so.

NOBLES are the grandees of
any kingdom or na­
tion, by whatsoever titles they are di­
stinguish'd; as with us under those of
Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, 
Lords, &c. These titles of honour are
conferr'd upon them by the prince, who
is said to be the fountain of honour.

Honorary distinctions have been very
ancient, the Greeks distinguish their
people into 3 ranks, noblemen, far­
mers and tradesmen, and indulg'd the
first with great privileges, who wore
the figure of a grashopper as a badge of
honour in their hair, and for the same
purpose the Romans wore a half moon
upon their shoes.

Among the Romans, the nobles us'd
to preserve the statues of their ance­
stors, and that they might more lively
represent the originals, the faces of
them were painted.

These were plac'd in their courts, 
&c.

NOBLEMEN are the grandees of
any kingdom or na­
tion, by whatsoever titles they are di­
stinguish'd; as with us under those of
Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, 
Lords, &c. These titles of honour are
conferr'd upon them by the prince, who
is said to be the fountain of honour.

Honorary distinctions have been very
ancient, the Greeks distinguish their
people into 3 ranks, noblemen, far­
mers and tradesmen, and indulg'd the
first with great privileges, who wore
the figure of a grashopper as a badge of
honour in their hair, and for the same
purpose the Romans wore a half moon
upon their shoes.

Among the Romans, the nobles us'd
to preserve the statues of their ance­
stors, and that they might more lively
represent the originals, the faces of
them were painted.

These were plac'd in their courts, 
&c. 

NOBLENESS of mind, is a principle
of acting honourably, justly and equi­
tably; scorning to do base and mean ac­
tions, and upon all occasions showing
an aversion to being sway'd by bribery, 
corruption and any unjust influence
whatever.

NOBLESS, nobility or noblemen, O.

NOCTAMBULIST, a person who
walks in the night, properly in sleep.

NOCTAMBULOUS [of noctambulus, 
L.] of or pertaining to walking in the
night.

NOCTILUCA, shining in the night.

Mr. Boyle distinguishes them into
three sorts,

1. The gummous NOCTILUCA, which
is by some called the consistent or con­
stant Noctiluca, which is in the form of
a consistent body.

2. The liquid NOCTILUCA, which, 
it is very probable, is only the former
dissolved in a proper liquor.

3. The aerial NOCTILUCA, so cal­
led, because it would immediately be­
gin to shine on being exposed to the
open air.

NOCTURNS [in Roman Catho­
lick churches]
part of the matins or church service, 
that are said about midnight, being
certain psalms and prayers, in imita­
tion of the ancient Christians, who said
them in the night for fear of the Hea­
thens.

NOCTURNALS [in Roman Catho­
lick churches]
part of the matins or church service, 
that are said about midnight, being
certain psalms and prayers, in imita­
tion of the ancient Christians, who said
them in the night for fear of the Hea­
thens.



NODATED [nodatus, L.] tied in knots.

NODDLE [of nod, L.] the head.

NODIA [with Botanists] a herb.

NODINUS [of nodus, L. a knot] a
pagan deity, who as they imagined, 
presided over and took care of plants, 
whilst they knotted, and the flowers
were wrapt up in the buds,  L.

NODONUS [among the Romans]
a certain deity, to
whom they attributed the forming of
the joints and knots in corn.

NODISUS [among the Romans]
a certain deity, to
whom they attributed the forming of
the joints and knots in corn.

NODUS Gordianus [i. e. the Gordian
Knot] Gordius having been made king
of Phrygia, at his first entring the tem­
ple of Apollo he placed a knot of lea­
ther thongs; of which there went a
prophesy, that whosoever should untie
it, should be conqueror of Asia; Alex­
ander coming thither, and having en­
deavoured, trying all ways to do it;
but not being able to untie it, he cut
it in pieces with his sword.

NOETIANS [so called of Noetius]
Hereticks who allowed only one person
in the Godhead, and accordingly taught
that it was God the Father who suf­
fered.

NOISINESS [prob. of noise, F. strife, 
quarrel] noisy temper, quality, &c.

NOISOMNESS [prob. of nuisance, F.
ſom and neſſe, Sax.] loathsomness, 
stinkingness, &c.

A NOKES, a fool, a ninny.

NOMADES [of νεμω, Gr. to feed] a
name anciently given to several nations
or people, whose whole occupation
was to feed and tend their flocks.

NOMANCY [of nomen, L. a name, 
and μαντεια, Gr. divination] the art of
divining the fates of persons by letters
that form their names.

NOMBLES [among Hunters] the en­
trails of a stag or deer,  F.

NOMBRIL Point [in He­
raldry] is the next below
the fess point, or the very
centre of the escutcheon;
supposing the same to be
equally divided into two equal parts
below the fess, for then the first of
those is the Nombril, and the lowest
the Base. See the figure, where it is
represented by the letter N.

Image omitted.



NOMENCLATOR [among the an­
cient Romans] a servant who attended
their masters, and was ready to prompt
the candidates for offices, places, &c.
with the names of the citizens or elec­
tors, that they might salute and solli­
cite them by name; which was ac­
counted a great mark of respect or
esteem.

NOMINALIA [among the Romans]
festivals in which they gave names to
their children, which was on the eighth
day to males, and ninth to females, 
which were called the Dies Lustrici.

NOMINALS a sect of school
philosophers, 
who were so denominated, because
they held that words, not things, were
the objects of the dialecticks.

NOMINALISTS a sect of school
philosophers, 
who were so denominated, because
they held that words, not things, were
the objects of the dialecticks. 

NOMOCANON [of νόμος, the law, 
and χανῶν, Gr. canon, rule] a collecti­
on of canons and imperial laws rela­
ting or conformable thereto; also a
collection of the ancient canons of the
apostles, councils and fathers; also a
penitential book of the Greeks.

NOMOGRAPHY [νομογραφία of νόμος,
a law, and γραφὴ, Gr. description] a
description of, or treatise of the laws.

NON Claim [in Law] a neglect or
omitting to claim that which a man
ought to claim as his right, within a
time limited.

NONA [among the Romans] a god­
dess to whom they attributed the pre­
servation of the embryo, &c. from
accidents, during the ninth month it
should be in the womb.

NON DESCRIPTS [in Botanical Au­
thors] such plants that have been pas­
sed by, tho' mentioned, but not de­
scribed.

NONE such [in Botan.] the Bristol
flower.

NONES [in the church of Rome] one
of the canonical hours, which is about
three a clock in the afternoon; in pri­
mitive churches this was the time for
breaking their fasts, upon fast days;
tho' others extended it to night.

NON FLORIFEROUS [in Botanick
Writers] not flowering, or bearing no
flowers.

NON Residence, the illegal absence
of a beneficed clergyman from his spi­
ritual charge, i. e. when he absents
himself for the space of one or two
months at several times in one year.

NON Resident, a person who does not
reside or keep in the place where his
charge is.

NOONING [of non, Sax.] a nap, 
&c. at noon.

NORMAL [with Geometricians] per­
pendicular, or at right angles; a term
used of a line or a plane that cuts ano­
ther perpendicularly.

NORTHERLY norðerlice,
Sax.
norðere, 
Sax.
on the north quarter of the
world.

NORTHERN norðerlice,
Sax.
norðere, 
Sax.
on the north quarter of the
world.



NORTHWARD [norð&wyn;earð, Sax.]
towards the North.

NORTH Light, a meteor which usual­
ly appears in Greenland about the time
of the new moon, and enlightening the
whole country, tho' the meteor itself
appears only in the North: It moves
from one place to another, leaving a
sort of mist or cloud behind it, and
continues till it is hidden by the beams
of the sun.

NOTABLENESS [notabilitas, L.] re­
markableness, &c.

NOTARICON, the third part or
species of the Jewish Cabala.

NOTATION, a marking, or setting
a mark upon; also an observing or
taking notice of,  L.

NOTES Musical [in relation to Time]
are nine, viz. the Large, the Long-­
Breve, Semi-breve, Minim, Crotchet, 
Quaver, Semi-quaver, and Demi semi-­
quaver, all which are to be found in
their proper places. The characters or
marks of these notes are usually set
down on a scale of five or six lines, to
serve as directions for keeping time in
singing, or playing on any sort of mu­
sical instrument.

NOTE of Augmentation [in Musick]
is the increasing or enlarging somewhat
to the full quantity or value of any
note.

NOTE of Diminution [in Musick] is
the diminishing or abating somewhat
of the full quantity or value of any
note.

NOTHING [naðinʒ, Sax.] not any
thing.

NOTHINGNESS, non-existence, in­
significancy, worthlesness.

NOTION, the form of any thing
represented or conceived in the mind;
conception, fancy; also thought; also
knowledge,  L.

First objective NOTION, is the thing
itself known, according to what it is or
has in itself, as Light known as Light.

Second formal NOTION, is the know­
ledge of a thing, according to what it
receives from the understanding; as of
Light, that it is the subject and not the
predicate.

First formal NOTION [with School­
men] is the knowledge which we have
of any thing according to what it is, or
has in itself; as of a light body, quæ­
tenus light.

Second objective NOTION, is what
agrees to the thing by the means of the
operation of the intellect, or what it
receives from the intellect.

Common NOTIONS, are certain prin­
ciples supposed to be innate, and which
therefore are self-evident.

A clear NOTION [in Logick] such an
one as is sufficient to recollect the
object.

An obscure NOTION, is that which
does not suffice to recollect the object.

A distinct NOTION, is that by which
we are able to assign the very marks
or characters, by which we recollect
the thing.

An adequate NOTION, is one where­
in we have distinct notions of the marks
or characters whereof it is composed.

An inadequate NOTION, is one where­
in we have only a confused notion of
the characters that enter a distinct one.

NOTIONALNESS, imaginariness.

NOTWITHSTANDING [of na&wyn;ið
and ſtanðan, Sax.] nevertheless, al­
tho', &c.

Necessary NOVATION [Civil Law] is
one made in consequence of a sentence
or decree of justice.

Voluntary NOVATION, is effected
three ways; 1. by changing the cause
of the obligation without the interven­
tion of any other person; 2. by chang­
ing the nature of the obligation; 3. by
delegation.

NOVEL, an ingenious and diverting
story, in which the writer dresses up an
invention of his own, with all the im­
bellishments of art; to render it both
agreeable and instructive.

NOVELNESS [novitas, L. noveaute, 
F.] novelty, newness.

NOVEMBER [in Painting, &c] is
represented as a man, clothed in a robe
of a changeable green and black, hav­
ing his head adorned with a garland of
olive-branches with fruit, holding in
his right hand sagittary, and in his left
turnips and parsnips.

NOVEMSILES, a species of gods
worshipped by the ancient Romans.

NOVENDIAL [novendialis, L.] of
nine days space or continuance. A Ro­
man festival, celebrated on occasion of
any prodigies appearing to menace them
with ill fortune.

NOVENSILES, dii novensiles [among
the Romans] heroes newly received in­
to the number of their Gods; or else
those Gods of the provinces and king­
doms which they had conquered, and
to which they offered sacrifices.

NOVICES [in the ancient Christian
church] were those religious who were
in a state of probation, of which there
were 3 sorts; some come without their
habit as saicks and secular clergy;
others with it, i. e. such as had been



monks in other places; either in for­
reign monasteries or in cells, belong
to the capital abbey.

NOVICES [among the modern Jesu­
its] be they persons of what condition
or quality soever, upon their admission
into the colleges, are oblig'd to make a
profession of forsaking the world and de­
nying themselves, to quit or forgoe their
estates, forsake parents and friends, and
intirely to disengage themselves from a
secular life; and to submit to the mor­
tification of the flesh, by undergoing a
severe discipline. To promise an im­
plicit obedience to their superiors, and
never to censure them.

And that they may the better under­
stand the manner and extent of their 
obedience; pictures are placed in their
studies, to instruct them emblematically.

In the middle is represented a lad
with a log of timber upon his shoul­
ders, and in a stooping posture, with
this motto Fortiter upon it.

In his left hand he holds a harp, in­
timating the cheerfulness wherein he
undergoes his submission; and in his
right a puppy dog in a rising posture, to
intimate the readiness of his obedience.
He is open breasted to signify that his
superiors have both his heart and body
at their service. His mouth is shut, and
is stopped, &c.

NOVICIATE [with the Roman Catho­
licks] a year of probation appointed
for the trial of religious, whether or
not they have a vocation, and the ne­
cessary qualities for living in the rules, 
to the observation of which they are
to bind themselves by vow; also the 
house or place where novices are in­
structed.

NOURISHING [nourrant, F. nutriens, 
L.] affording nourishment.

NOWED [in Heraldry] is knotted, 
and is derived of the Latin, nodatus, 
and signifies some intricacy in the way
of knotting, and is applied to such tails
of animals as are very long, and some­
times are represented in coat armour, 
as if tyed in a knot.

NOX, night, an imaginary goddess
of the poets, who had the greatest
command in the lower regions, and
who was one of the most remarkable;
she was held to be the mother of love, 
of deceit, old age, death, sleep, dreams, 
complaint, fear and darkness. The
cock was offered to her in sacrifice, 
and she was painted with black hair, 
with a garland of poppies about her
head, and her chariot was drawn with
black horses surrounded with stars,
and holding in her arms a white boy,
signifying Sleep, and also a black one,
to signify Death, both taking their rest.

NOXIOUSNESS [of noxius, L.] of­
fensiveness, hurtfulness, &c.

NUBIFEROUS [nubiser, L.] that
bringeth or causeth clouds.

NUBIFUGOUS [nubifugus, L.] that
chaseth away clouds.

NUBIGENOUS [nubigena, L.] engen­
dred or begotten by the clouds.

NUBIGEROUS [nubiger, L.] that
beareth or carrieth clouds.

NUBILE [nubilis, L.] marriageable.

To NUBILATE [nubilatum, L.] to
make cloudy.

NUCAMENTUM [in Botan. Writ.]
the same as Julus, those catkins or
wormlike tusts or palms, as they are
called in willows, which at the begin­
ning of the year grow out of and hang
pendulous, down from hazels, wal­
nuts, &c.

To NUDDLE, to walk or go along
hastily, in a seemingly careless man­
ner.

NUDE matter [in Law] a naked alle­
gation of a thing done, to be proved
only by witness, and not by record, or
other specialty in writing under seal.

NUDE [in Botan.] without leaves, 
and it is not only applied to stalks when
they grow without leaves, but to seeds
when they are inclosed in no vessel.

NUDIPEDALIA [among the Jews]
sacrifices performed bare-footed to ap­
pease the gods, and to ease them of
some calamity they laboured under;
after having continued their prayers
for the space of 30 days, having ab­
stained from wine, they shaved their
heads and went bare-footed to the tem­
ple.

The Jews finding themselves op­
pres'd by Florus, governour of Judea, 
for the emperor Nero celebrated this
barefooted ceremony with extraordi­
nary solemnity; Berenice sister to king
Agrippa, accompanied them therein, and
ever appeared bare-footed in behalf of
the Jews before the tribunal of Florus.

NUDITIES [in Painting and Sculp­
ture] is used to signify those parts of a
human figure, not covered with any
drapery; or those parts where the car­
nations appear.

NUGACIOUSNESS [nugacitas, 
L.] trifling­
ness.

NUGACITY [nugacitas, 
L.] trifling­
ness.

A determinate NUMBER, is such as
is referred to some given unit; as a
ternary or 3, which is properly called
a number.



An indeterminate NUMBER, is such
as refers to unity in general, and is
what is called quantity.

Homogeneal NUMBERS, are such as
are referred to the same unit; as five
golden spheres and two golden spheres, 
are homogeneal numbers.

Heterogeneal NUMBERS, are such as
are referred to different units; thus
four silver spheres and four brass
spheres, are heterogeneal numbers.

Whole NUMBERS, the same as Inte­
gers, i. e. all those that in the manner
of expressing refer to unity, as a whole
does to a part.

Broken NUMBERS, are fractions, 
such as consist of several parts of unity, 
or those which refer to unity as a part
to the whole.

Rational NUMBER, is such as is com­
mensurable with unity.

Rational whole NUMBER, is such
whereof unity is an aliquot part.

Rational broken NUMBER, is such as
is equal to some aliquot part or parts
of unity.

Rational mixt NUMBER, is such as
consists of a whole number and a brok­
en one, or of unity and a fraction.

Irrational NUMBER, is a surd, or a
number that is commensurable with
unity.

Even NUMBER, is one which may
be divided into two equal parts, or 
without remainder or fraction, as 4, 
6, 8, &c.

NUMBER unevenly even, one that
may be divided equally by an uneven
number, as 20, which may be divided
by 5.

Prime NUMBER, is that which is
only divisible by unity, as 5, 7, is.

Prime NUMBERS among themselves, 
are such as have no common measure
besides unity, as 12 and 19.

Compound NUMBER, is one which 
is divisible by some other number be­
sides unity, as 8 which is divisible by 4 
and by 2.

Compound NUMBERS among them­
selves, are such as have some common
measure besides unity, as 12 and 15.

Perfect NUMBERS, are such, whose
aliquot parts, being added together, 
make the whole number, as 6, 28, &c.
Thus the aliquot parts of 6 being 3, 2
and 1, are equal to 6. And those of
28, being 14, 7, 4, 2, 1, are equal to
28.

Imperfect NUMBERS, are such, 
whose aliquot parts being added toge­
ther, make either more or less than the
whole number, and are either abun­
dant or defective.

Abundant NUMBERS, are those, 
whose aliquot parts being added toge­
ther make more than the number of
which they are parts; as 12, the ali­
quot parts of which are 6, 4, 3, 2, 1, 
which make 16.

Defective NUMBERS, are such whose
aliquot parts being added together make
less than the number of which they are
parts; as 16, whose aliquot parts are
8, 4, 2 and 1, which make but 15.

Plane NUMBER, is such as arises
from the multiplication of two num­
bers; as 6, which is the product of 3
multiplied by 2.

Square NUMBER, is the product of
any number multiplied by itself, as 9
made by the multiplication of 3 by 3.

Cubic NUMBER, is the product of a
square number multiplied by its root, 
as 9, multiplied by its root 3, makes 27.

Polygonous NUMBERS, are the sums
of arithmetical progressions, beginning
with unity. These, where the diffe­
rence is 1. are called triangular num­
bers; where 2, square numbers; where
3, pentagonal numbers; where 4, hexa­
gonal numbers; where 5, heptagonal num­
bers, &c.

Pyramidal NUMBERS, the sums of
polygonous numbers, collected after the
same manner as the polygons them­
selves, are gathered out of arithmeti­
cal progressions, are called first pyra­
midal numbers.

Second Pyramidals, are the sums of
the first pyramidals.

Third Pyramidals, are the sums of the
second pyramidals.

Triangular pyramidal NUMBERS, are
such as arise out of triangular numbers.

First pentagonal pyramidal NUMBERS, 
are such as arise out of pentagons.

NUMBERS [in Poetry, Oratory, &c.]
are certain measures, proportions or
cadences, which render a verse period,
and air agreeable to the ear.

Similar plane NUMBERS, are such
numbers which may be ranged into the
form of similar rectangles, that is, into
rectangles whose sides are proportio­
nal; such are 12 and 48, for the sides
of 12 are 6 and 2 (as in figure, A) and
the sides of 48 are 12 and 4 (as in fi­
gure, B) but 6: 2: 12: 24, and there­
fore those numbers are similar,

Two images are omitted.





Spherical NUMBER [with Arithm.]
are such num­
bers whose powers end in the roots
themselves, as the numbers 5 and 6, all
the powers of them end in 5 and 6; so
the square of 5 is 25, the cube 125, the
quadrato cube is 625; so the square of
6 is 36, the cube 216, the quadrato
cube 1296.

Circular NUMBER [with Arithm.]
are such num­
bers whose powers end in the roots
themselves, as the numbers 5 and 6, all
the powers of them end in 5 and 6; so
the square of 5 is 25, the cube 125, the
quadrato cube is 625; so the square of
6 is 36, the cube 216, the quadrato
cube 1296.

NUMERABLENESS [of numerabilis, 
L.] capableness of being numbred.

NUMERAL Algebra, is that where­
in numbers are made use of instead of
letters of the alphabet.

Cardinal NUMERALS [with Gram­
marians] are those that express the
number of things, as one, two, three, 
four, five, &c.

Ordinal NUMERALS, are such as
shew the order or rank, as first, second, 
third, fourth, fifth, &c.

NUMERATION [in Arithmetick] is
that part that comprehends all manner
of operation by numbers.

NUMERIA, a certain deity suppo­
sed to preside over numbers and ac­
counts.

NUMERICALNESS, individualness.

NUMERO [with Physicians] signi­
fies so many of any ingredients, as the
figure or word added, as numero 4, as
take of Jujubes numero 4, i. e. 4 in num­
ber, and by way of abbreviation №.4.

NUMEROUSNESS [of numerosus, L.]
largeness of number, abundance.

NUMISMATOGRAPHIA [of νυμισ­
μα and γραφὴ, Gr. description] the de­
scription and knowledge of ancient me­
dals and coins.

NUN, a bird called a titmouse.

NUNCIATION, a shewing, a re­
portn, a declaration,  L.

NUNCIATURE, the office of a nun­
cio.

NUNCUPATIVE (with Schoolmen]
a term used to express something that
is nominal only; or that has no exi­
stence but in name.

NUNDINA [among the Romans] a
goddess, who, as they believed presided
over the purifications or lustrations of
children, which some derive from nonus, 
L. q. because the male infants were
not purified till the 9th day; but the fe­
males on the 8th.

NUNDINÆ [qu. novendinæ of nunc
dies nona, i. e. now the 9th day] a mar­
ket which was kept every ninth day at
Rome, to which the people resorted, 
not only to buy and sell, but also to
get intelligence of what laws were
made.

NUNS, religious women who make
a profession of a contempt of the world
and chastity.

In ancient times they were not obli­
gated by any vow not to marry: How­
ever it was thought scandalous, and a
mark of inconstancy, if they did mar­
ry after they had made a profession.

Nunneries were not built before the
time of Constantine the emperor; not­
withstanding there were then many of
these religious maids; but they lived
at home with their parents.

In the monasteries of Egypt and Sy­
ria, nuns at their admission were wont
to offer their hair to the abbess; be­
cause it was not lawful for them to
wash or anoint their heads; therefore
to keep their heads the cleaner from
vermin their hair was cut off.

There are in the Romish Church
nuns of several orders, as of St. Bennet, 
St. Clara, St. Bridget, St. Catharine.

The nuns of St. Bennet, took their
original from Scholastica, sister to St.
Bennet. These were not allowed to
stand godmothers at baptism, nor to go
abroad, except accompanied by some
ancient grave matron: They spent
their time in meditation, prayer and
singing, and were obliged to the obser­
vation of the canonical hours. They
were not to speak with any man except
in publick and before witnesses; if any­
one proved unchaste after three whip­
pings, she was fed with bread and wa­
ter in prison for a year.

Nuns of St. Clara, so called from
their foundress Clara of Assize, who
lived in a cottage 42 years, afflicting
her body with various kinds of auste­
rities; wearing the bristly side of a
hog's skin next to her body, went bare-­
footed and lay on the bare ground.
Her rules were the same as those of the
Franciscans.

Nuns of St. Bridget, took their name
of one Bridget a princess of Sweden
about the year 1360. Her rule was the
same as that of St. Basil. And they as



well as the monks were to wear grey
cloaks and coats with a red cross upon
them.

They were forbid to have any thing
properly their own, to touch mony;
and to lie upon straw. They were not
to admit or conference with a man ex­
cept at a window, and were persuaded
to believe that she who never opened
her window should be most rewarded
in Heaven.

These nuns were to be married by a
bishop to Christ by a ring, who also in­
vested her with her nuns habit at the
altar: Their coffins were carried by
four sisters, sprinkling dust on it into the
convent. These nuns were chiefly in
Sweden. But this order was at Rich­
mond in Surry in the year 1414.

Nuns of St. Catharine, took their
name of Catharine of Senæ in Tuscany,
in the year 1455, and followed the
rules of St. Dominick. This saint is
said to have drank nothing but water, 
and to have eaten only bread and raw
herbs; scarce slept an hour in two
days, chastized herself with an iron
chain for an hour and half at a
time, till she was all bloody, three
times a day. The nuns wear a white
garment, and over it a black veil.

NURSERY, a college of young
persons designed for the ministry or
priesthood.

NUSANCE [nuisance, F.] annoyance.

NUSANCE, a writ which lies for
one that has been guilty of a nusance
or annoyance in raising a wall, stop­
ping of water, or any unlawful act in
his own ground or elsewhere, to the
damage of his neighbour.

NUT [with Anatomists] the top of a
man's yard.

NUTATION [with Astronomers] a
kind of trepidation or tremulous mo­
tion of the axis of the earth, whereby
in each annual revolution it is twice
inclined to the ecliptick, and as often
returns to its former position.

NUTMEG, a sort of spice or aroma, 
tick nut, the product of some places in
East-India. These nuts grow enclosed
in three different covers; the first of
which is thin and of a yellowish red, 
this is called mace; this is surrounded
by the shell which is a hard, thin, 
blackish cover, under or within which
is a greenish film, within which is the
nut called the nutmeg, which is the ker­
nel or fruit.

Some tell us that the nutmeg trees
are propagated by birds, who having
devoured the nutmegs when ripe,
give it back whole by stool, which
falling to the ground besmeared with
a viscous matter, takes root and pro­
duced trees.

The whole commerce of nutmegs is
in the hands of the Dutch East-India
company.

NUTRITION [in Pharmacy] a kind
of preparation, consisting in the gradual
mixture of liqours of different natures,
by stirring them together till they have
acquired a thick consistence.

NUTRITION [with Physicians] a na­
tural increase, whereby that of any
bodily substance that is in continual de­
cay, is repaired by convenient nourish­
ment.

NUTRITIOUSNESS [of nutritius, 
L.] nourishing quality.

To NUZZLE, to hide the head in a
warm, soft place as a young child does
in its nurse's bosom.

NYCTAGES [of Νυξ, Gr. night] a re­
ligious sect who inveighed against the
practise of walking in the night to sing
the praises of God, because the night
was made for rest.

NYCTALOPIA [νυχταλοπία, of 
νυχτος 
αλγὸς ωπι, Gr.] a disease in the eyes,
which is twofold; 1. a dimness of sight
in the night or in dark places, without
any defect in the light; 2. a dimness of
sight in the light, and a clear sight in
shady or dark places.  L.

NYCTELIA. [of νυχτελεία of νυξ, night
and τελεῖα, to sacrifice or celebrate reli­
gious duties, Gr.] nocturnal orgies of
Bacchus, which once every three years
were celebrated for three nights suc­
cessively, with flambeaux, drinking in so
riotous and disorderly a manner, that
the Romans abolished them.

NYCTHEMERON [νυχθήμερον, Gr.]
the space of 24 hours, an intire night
and day.

NYMPH [nympha, L. νύμφή, Gr.]a god­
dess of waters, rivers, springs, lakes, &c.

NYMPHA [νυμφή, Gr.] the little skin
wherein insects are inclosed, both while
they are in the egg, or after they have
undergone an apparent transformation, 
or the first change of the Eruca, palmer
worm, or maggot in such insects as un­
dergo a transformation; or it is rather
the growth or increase of the Eruca, 
whereby the figure of the succeeding ani­
mal is beginning to be expressed, by the
explication of its members, which be­
fore lay involved up in the Eruca (as a
plant is in its seed.) So that Nympha is
only the animal under that imperfect
form. It is sometimes called Chrysalis, 
sometimes Aurelia, and by others Necy­
dalus.



NYMPHÆ [with Anatomists] small, 
soft pieces of flesh proceeding from the
juncture of the Os Pubis in the neck of
the womb; so called, because they are
placed near the passage where the water
issues out of the bladder,  L.

NYMPHA [with Anatomists] a hol­
lowness or void space in the nether lip,
L.

NYMPHÆA [in Rome] certain baths
or grotto's sacred to the nymphs, from
those statues which adorned them, or
from the waters and fountains which
they afforded, they were so called.
They were in number twelve, and were
retreats of pleasure, adorned with grot­
to's, fountains and statues of the nymphs, 
&c. They were square marble build­
ings, into which there was but one door;
where were steps that led down to grot­
to's, paved with marble of curious co­
lours; the walls were beautified with
shell work, and a stream which sur­
rounded the place, fell from a fountain
at the end of the grotto.

NYMPHÆUM [νυμφαιον, Gr.] a pub­
lick hall or building among the ancients, 
richly furnished and adorned for pub­
lick banquetting; where those who
wanted conveniences at home held
their marriage feasts.

NYMPHOMANIA [of νυμφη, the
Nymphæ, and μανία, Gr. madness] the
Furor uterinus, a distemper which pro­
vokes women to transgress the bounds
of common modesty without restraint.

NYMPHOTOMIA [νυμφοτομια, Gr.]
a cutting off the Nymphæ in women, 
which in some sometimes bunching out, 
hinders the Coitus, or makes it difficult.

NYMPHS [nymphæ, L. νύμφαι, Gr.] a
sort of imaginary goddesses, who, as the
poets feign, were the daughters of Ocea­
nus and Thetis, to whom they attribu­
ted the presidency over waters, lakes, 
springs, rivers and seas, and distinguished
them into Dryades, Hamadryades, Nai­
des, Napeæ, Nereides and Orcades; all
which see in their proper places.

The Greeks and Phenicians called the
souls of deceased persons by the name
of nymphs, imagining that they wan­
dered about in such places in which
they had most delighted while living;
which notion introduced the custom of
sacrificing in groves and under green
trees, supposing them to be the haunts
of souls, separated from their bodies;
imagining that their fore fathers, who
anciently had lived in woods, became
Dryodes, those who dwelt near foun­
tains &c. Naiades; those who dwelt
near the sea shore Nereides; and those on
the mountains Oreades.

Nymphs, say some, are only an alle­
gory taken from the vegetative humi­
dity, which gives life to trees, plants
and flowers, by which they grow and
increase.


O

Oo, Roman; Oo Italick; O o, Eng­
ishh; O o, Sax,; are the fourteenth
letter in order of the alphabet; o, the
15th, and Ωω, the 24th of the Greek, 
and ז, the 6th of the Hebrew.

O is also used as an interjection of
abhorrence, admiration, calling, der­
ision, desiring, indignation, &c.

O, is not sounded in People, Jeopardy,
&c.

O, with the ancients, was a numeral
letter signifying 11.

O̅, with a dash, stood for 11000000.

Image omitted.



O [among the Irish] set at the begin­
ning or before the name of a family is
a note of dignity, as O Bryan, O Neal, 
&c.

O [with the Ancients] was put as a
hieroglyphick or symbol of eternity.

An OAK [Hieroglyphically] represents
strength, virtue, constancy; and also
length of life, as being steady, and living
longer than most other trees.

OAKEN [acc, Sax. an oak] of or per­
taining to an oak.

OARS, a boat for carrying passengers
with two men to row it; also instru­
ments wherewith boats are rowed.

OATEN, of or pertaining to oats.

OATH [Að, Sax.] is a solemn appeal
to God, implying that we desire not his
mercy and protection any otherwise
than as the matter affirmed is either
true or false, and tho' all profane or
false swearing is strictly forbid, by the
scriptures of both the old and new tes­
tament, yet the necessity of the oc­
casion requires it for the discovery of
the truth.

Legal OATH, is a swearing in open
court, before a magistrate appointed by
authority to administer such oaths;
where a person is called upon to give
evidence, to any matter of fact, &c.

Corporal OATH is when a person in
giving evidence before such magistrate, 
by laying his hand upon some part of
the scripture, and kissing the book; this
form being appointed by law for coming
at the truth, this phrase being used, So
help me God, which is designed to signify
that the person swearing, pawns his or



her expectation of God's blessing in this 
life and of eternal salvation in the life
to come, upon the truth he swears.

OAT-MEAL [of aten and meale&wyn;e, 
Sax.] meal or flower made of oats.

OAZINESS, slimy, muddy, marshy
quality.

OBDURACY [of obduratus, L.] hard­
ness of heart, stubbornness, obstinacy.

OBDURED [obduratus, L.] hardened.
Milton.

OBEDIENCE [among Divines] con­
sists in such a submissive frame of spirit, 
by which a man always resigns and de­
votes himself to the disposal of the di­
vine Being; being ready in every con­
dition to do or suffer whatsoever he ap­
prehends to be most reasonable and ac­
ceptable, and by which he may best
express his love and subjection to him.

Active OBEDIENCE to God, consists
in a readiness of mind to do what he
enjoins.

Passive OBEDIENCE to God, is an ac­
quiescence of mind in whatsoever he
shall please to inflict.

OBEDIENTNESS, [obedientia, L.]
obedient quality.

OBELISK [οβελισχος, Gr.] a four
square stone, growing smaller from the
basis to the top, tending in a sharp point.
It differs from a pyramid, in that it is
made all of one intire stone or piece, 
and its basis is much narrower.

The Egyptian obelisks were square
pillars, raised in the form of a pyramid, 
and engraven on every side with hiero­
glyphical characters, and mysterious
secrets; understood by very few besides
their priests, who called them the fin­
gers of the sun, to which planet they
were commonly dedicated; their com­
position was of a stone dug near the
cataracts of Nile, as hard as porphyry, 
and of divers colours; representing (as
they imagined) the four elements. The
first that was erected was by Manustar, 
king of Egypt, An. Mund. 2604; whose
successors erected divers others; but they
were most of them destroyed by Camby­
ses king of Persia, when he conquered
Egypt. And those that remained were
carried by the Romans to Alexandria, 
and from thence to Rome, where there
are some remaining to this day; the
highest were about 140, and the lowest
about 15 feet.

OBESENESS [obesitas, L.] grosness, 
fatness.

OBJECT, the matter of an art or
science, or that about which it is em­
ployed the same as subject.

Material OBJECT the thing itself
which is treated or considered of.

Formal OBJECT, the manner of con­
sidering it.

OBJECT [objectum, L.] any thing
placed to behold, or opposed to any of
the senses; something apprehended or
presented to the mind either by sensa­
tion or by imagination.

OBJECTIVE Line [in Perspective] is
the line of an object, from whence the
appearance is sought for in the draught
or picture.

OBJECTIVELY [School term] a thing
is said to exist objectively, when it exists
no otherwise than in being known, or
in being an object of the mind.

OBIT, a funeral solemnity or office
for the dead, usually performed in the
church, while the corps was there be­
fore its interment: it is also used to
signify an anniversary office or mass held
annually in the church of Rome, on some
particular day, in commemoration of
some deceased person.

OBLATI, secular persons, who re­
signed themselves and their estates to
some monastery, and were admitted as
lay-brothers.

Some have been so extravagant as to
give their whole patrimony, and as far
as was in their power their whole fa­
mily too, to the use and service of the
monastery, and also obliged their des­
cendants to the same kind of servitude.

The form of their admittance was, 
by putting about their necks the bell
ropes of the church, and a few pence on
their heads, as a mark of servitude;
these wore habits, but different from
those of the monks.

Funeral OBLATIONS, offerings by
way of atonement for the faults or neg­
lects of the party deceased, in paying
tithes or other ecclesiastical dues; which
was the best horse led before the corps, 
and delivered at the grave or the church
gate for the use of the priest.

OBLIGATED [obligatus, L.] obliged, 
bound or tyed to.

Natural OBLIGATIONS, are such as
bind only by virtue of the law of nature, 
and assisted by civil laws and civil pow­
er.

Civil OBLIGATIONS, are such as
are supported on civil authority alone, 
and which conduces a constraint, with­
out any principle or foundation of na­
tural equity.

Perpetual OBLIGATIONS, are those
that cannot be taken off, as long as the
person exists, in whom it adheres. Of
the obligations we lie un­
der to God and towards our neighbour.



OBLIGATIONS [say the Moralists]
lie only to things possible, wherefore
promises about impossible things are null
and void; when the thing at the time
of making the pact appeared possible, 
if it happen by chance the pact is dis­
annulled.

Connate OBLIGATIONS [with Mo­
ralists] are such as all men fall under by
virtue of their being creatures endued
with reason; as such as necessarily at­
tend and accompany the rational nature, 
considered in that simple and general
notion.

Adventitious OBLIGATIONS [with
Moralists] are such as fall upon men, 
by the intervention of human deeds, 
not without the consent of the parties, 
either expressed, or at least presump­
tive.

Mixed OBLIGATION, is one both
natural or civil which being founded
in natural equity, is further confirmed
and enforced by civil authority.

Moral OBLIGATIONS, are such as
relate only to things or cases not only
possible but convenient; as the promise
of a visit at a stated time, which is not
suppos'd to be binding, if any event
happen to hinder the performance.

OBLIGATORINESS, binding, &c.
quality.

OBLIGEMENT, an obligation, a be­
ing obliged.

OBLIQUATION [in Catopticks] as
Cathetus of Obliqation is a right line, 
drawn perpendicular to a mirrour, in
the point of incidence of the reflection
of a ray.

OBLIQUE Projection [in Mechanicks]
is that where a body is impelled in a
line of direction, which makes an ob­
lique angle with the horizontal line.

OBLIQUE Percussion, is that wherein
the direction of the striking body is not
perpendicular to the body struck, or is
not in line with its center of gravity.

OBLIQUE Ascension [Astron.] is an
arch of the equator, intercepted be­ 
tween the first point of Aries, and that
point of the equator which rises toge­
ther with the star, &c. in an oblique
sphere.

OBLIQUE Descension [Astronomy] is
an arch of the equator; intercepted be­
tween the first point of Aries, and that
point of the equator which rises with a
star, &c. in an oblique sphere.

OBLIQUITY athwartness, side­
wayness, crook­
edness, slantingness.

OBLIQUENESS athwartness, side­
wayness, crook­
edness, slantingness.

OBLIQUITY of the Ecliptick [Astron.]
is the angle which the ecliptick makes
with the equator, which is 23 decrees
and 20 minutes.

OBLITERATED [obliteratus, L.]
blotted out.

OBLIVION, forgetfulness, which, 
by naturalists is defined to be a loss of
the ideas or conceptions of the things
once perceived; which happens when
they make but a light impression upon
the brain,  F. of  L.

OBLIVIOUSNESS [of obliviosus, L.]
forgetfulness.

OBLONGNESS [of oblongus, L. and
ness] oblong form, or the being of the
form of a long square.

OBNOXIOUSNESS [of obnoxius, L.]
liableness, subjectness to punishment,
danger, &c.

OBNUBILATED [obnubilatus, L.]
clouded over, overcast with clouds.

OBOLUS [ὀβολὸς, Gr.] a Roman silver
coin, the 6th part of a denarius or pen­
ny, in value about five farthings En­
glish; also the 6th part of an Attick
dram; also the weight of ten grains or
half a scruple.

OBOLUS, is now usually taken to
signify our half-penny; but in old time
it signified the half-noble; the noble
was then called a penny, and its quarter
a farthing. And in like manner dena­
rius signified the whole coin, whether
it were angel, royal, &c. and obolus its
half, and quadrans the fourth part.

OBRINES, an order of knights in­
stituted in the XIII century by Conrade,
duke of Massovia and Cujavia; but is
now suppressed.

OBSCENENESS, words or actions that
indicate impurity, unchastity, lewdness, 
bawdy or smuttiness.

OBSCURED [obscuratus, L. obsuri, 
F.] darkened, clouded, deprived of
brightness or clearness, rendred less in­
telligible.

OBSECRATION [in Rhetorick] a fi­
gure whereby the orator implores the
assistance of some god or man.

OBSEQUIES [obseques, F. of obsequium
L. i. e. ready to service; because these
obsequies are the last devoirs that can
be rendered to the deceased] funeral
rights and solemnities.

OBSERVANTNESS [observantia, L.]
regardfulness, respectfulness.

OBSERVATORY, a building erected
and accommodated with all sorts of in­
struments, proper for astronomical ob­
servations, for making of proper im­
provements and regulations for the cal­
culation of eclipses, &c. and finding the
true system and motions of the planets;
but especially of the moon, whose



irregularities require more application
to reduce to a compleat system than
any of the other planets.

There have been for this purpose
divers edifices erected, and furnished
with proper instruments and artists.

The most noted observatories in Europe
are 1. That of Tycho Brahe, a nobleman
of Denmark, at Uraineberg in the island of
Wern; between the coasts of Schonen
and Zeland in the Baltick.

2. The observatory of Paris, erected
by Lewis XIV. in order for the obser­
vation of the stars and planets; also
congelations, refrigerations, indura­
tions, &c. of the air and other mete­
ors. This edifice is built in a four 
square form, situate exactly answering
to the four cardinal points of the 
world, East, West, North and South; the
foundation being laid 80 foot below
the ground and the building carried up
as much above it; being three stories
in height and a terrass at the top, from
whence the whole horizon appears
flat.

The stair-case of this is also a work
of curiosity, being in the form of a
screw; and so contrived, that from the
bottom there is a full sight of the
stars that pass the Zenith of this place;
this observatory is likewise very well
furnished with proper instruments and
learned men, who have published se­
veral things useful in Astronomy, Geo­
graphy, &c.

3. The royal observatory at Green­
wich, founded by K. Charles II. and
attended for many years by Mr. Flam­
stead, whose great industry and accu­
rate skill have produced volumes in
Astronomy.

Observatories are now grown so
common, that there is scarce any uni­
versity or college where the mathe­
maticks are studied, but what is fur­
nished with observatories, tho' not so
noble as those before mentioned.

There has also of late years an ob­
servatory been erected at Peking in
China, by the late emperor, by the in­
tercession of the missionaries, and has
been furnished with instruments.

To OBSERVE [observare, L.] to con­
template or study; to mark, mind or
take notice of, to heed; to eye, to
watch, to spy; to have a strict eye
over.

OBSESSION of the Devil, is distin­
guished from possession of the devil in
this; that in possession the evil one en­
ters into the body of the man, and does
not leave him, whether he is always
tormenting and disturbing him, or whe­
ther he does it only by fits and inter­
vals.

On the contrary obsession is, when
without entering into the body of the
person, he besieges him without, and
torments him pretty much like a trou­
blesome guest, who follows and teazes
a man, from whom he is resolved to
get some advantage.

The marks of obsesseion are these; to
be lifted up into the air and afterwards
to be thrown down on the ground vio­
lently, without receiving any hurt; to
speak strange languages that the person
had never learnt; at the time of obsession
not to be able to come near holy things
or the sacraments; but to have an
aversion to them; to know and foretel
secret things; to perform things that
exceed the persons ordinary strength;
to say or do things that the person
would not, or durst not say; if he were
not externally moved to it. Calmet.

OBSIDIONAL Crown 
[with Heralds] is repre­
sented as in the figure, be­
ing a sort of garland made
of grass, which was by the
Romans given to those that
had held out a siege, or
enemy to raise it, by repulsing them or
otherwise.

Image omitted.



OBSTRUCTIVENESS [of obstructus, 
L.] impeding, or obstructing, or hin­
dring quality.

OBSTRUENCY [in Medicine] the
quality or disposition of those medicines
that condense the pores of the body;
or allay the too rapid or swift motion
of the blood.

OBTUSENESS [of obtusus, L.] blunt­
ness, dulness of edge.

OBTUSANGULARNESS [of obtu­
sus angularis, L.] the being obtuse an­
gled, or the having obtuse angles.

OBVIOUSNESS [of obvius, L.] ea­
siness to be perceived.

OCCASIO [among the Romans] an
allegorical divinity, the goddess of time, 
who presides over the most favourable
moment for success in any enterprize;
represented stark naked, with a long
lock of hair upon her forehead, and
bald behind: and also standing on a
wheel, with wings on her feet, and is
said to turn herself very swiftly round;
by which is intimated, that we should
lay hold of the present opportunity.

OCCASIONALNESS [of occasio, L.]
the being of happening by, or accord­
ing to occasion.



OCCATOR [among the Romans] a
god of husbandry, that presides over
harrowing the ground, and breaking
the clods.

OCCIDENTAL [of occiden­
talis, L.]
westerliness, or the having a westerly
situation.

OCCIDENTALNESS [of occiden­
talis, L.]
westerliness, or the having a westerly
situation.

OCCULT Line [in Geometry] in con­
structing a scheme, is a line that is only
assisting or helpful towards the com­
pleating the scheme, and is therefore
drawn very small or faint, or with
some matter that will rub out again, 
when the purpose for which it was in­
tended is served.

OCCULT Sciences, magick, necro­
mancy, the Cabala, &c.

OCCULT Cancer, the same as pri­
mitive cancer.

OCCULTNESS [of occultus, L.] hid­
denness, concealedness.

OCCUPANT [in Common Law] when
a man makes a lease to another for the
term of the life of a third person; the
lessee dying, he who first enters shall
hold the land as occupant, during the
life of the third person.

OCCUPATION [with Rhetoricians]
is a figure when the orator seems to
pass by, to be ignorant of, or to be un­
willing to declare that which at the
same time he chiefly insists upon. It is
also called Preterition.

OCCUPATIONS [in the Statute de
Bigamis] purprestures, intrusions, usur­
pations upon the king, by using liberties
or franchises that a person is not intit­
led to.

OCCURRING [occurrens, L.]
meeting, coming
in the way, offering or presenting it­
self.

OCCURRENT [occurrens, L.]
meeting, coming
in the way, offering or presenting it­
self. 

OCEANUS, the god of the sea, 
whom the ancients called the father of
all things, as believing water to be the
first principle of the universe. He is
also said to be the father of the rivers.
His wife was Thetis, by whom he had
Nereus and Dorcas, who marrying to­
gether had many daughters, called
Nymphs. Oceanus was painted as rivers
were, in the form of a man, with bulls
horns upon his head.

OCHLOCRATIA [of όχλος, a mul­
titude, and χρατος, Gr. power] a form
of government, wherein the populace
has the sole power and administration.

OCHY-HOLE, a remarkable cave in
Mendip-Hills in Somersetshire, of a vast
length; where several wells and springs
are discovered.

OCTAGONIAL [of ὀχτάγωνον, Gr.]
having eight angles and sides.

OCTANGULARNESS [of Octangu­
lus, L.] the having eight angles.

OCTAPLA [of οχταπλάσιος, Gr.
eight-fold] a kind of Polyglot bible, con­
sisting of eight columns.

OCTATEUCH [όχτατευχος, Gr.]
the eight first books of the Old Testa­
ment, from Genesis to the end of Judges.

OCTOBER [of octo, eight] is with
us the tenth month in the year; but
was so called from being the eighth, 
beginning the year with March.

OCTOBER [in Painting, &c.] is re­
presented in a garment of the colour of
decaying flowers and leaves; having
his head adorned with a garland of
leaves of oak, with acorns; holding
in his right hand a scorpion, and in his
left a basket of chesnuts, medlars, ser­
vices, &c.

OCTOPETALOUS [of octo, L. and
πέταλον, Gr. a flower leaf] having eight
flower leaves.

OCTOSTYLE [οχτοστυλος, Gr.] the
face of a building containing eight co­
lumns.

OCTUPLE [octuplus, or octuplex, L.]
eight fold.

OCULI-Cancrorum [with Physicians]
crabs-eyes; certain stones taken out of
the heads of river cray-fish,  L.

OCYPETE [ώχυπετης of ὠχις and
πέτομαι, i. e. I fly swiftly] the name of
one of the harpies.

ODNESS [of oed, Teut.] unevenness
in number; also singularness or unusu­
alness in manner or form.

The ODE [among the Ancients] signi­
fied a song or poetical composition, fit
for singing, which was usually per­
formed with the voice and lyre toge­
ther. The matter of it was to the ho­
nour of some hero or great man.

The distinguishing character of this
sort of poetry is sweetness, the poet
endeavouring to sooth his auditors or
readers by the variety of the verse, and
the delicacy of the words, the beauty
of the numbers, and a choice of such
things as are most beautiful in them­
selves, for the subject of his description.

The ode is not always confined to
what is great and sublime, it descends
sometimes to gallantry and pleasure.
These are commonly called Anacreon­
ticks, and in English are generally con­
fined to seven syllables, or eight at
most; but the seven feet measure is the
softest.

ODEUM [with the Ancients] a kind
of musick theatre; a place for rehear­
sal and practice before the actors and



musicians appeared to perform their
parts in the great theatre.

ODIOUSNESS [of odiosus, L.] hate­
fulness, abominableness.

ODONTALGICK, [of Ὀδονταλγία, 
Gr.] pertaining to the tooth-ache.

ODORIFEROUSNESS [of odoriferus, 
L.] sweet smellingness.

ODYSSE [ὀδνσσεία, Gr.] an epick
poem of Homer's, wherein he relates
the adventures that befel Ulysses in his
return from the siege of Troy.

OECONOMICA [ὀιχονομιχὴ, Gr.] a
part of moral philosophy, which treats
concerning the management of the pas­
sions.

OECONOMY [ὀιχονομία, of ὀίχος an
house, and νέμω, Gr. to distribute]
good order, disposition, method, con­
trivance, constitution, harmony, good
management or regularity in the af­
fairs of a family, way of living, &c.

OECONOMY [with Architects] that
method that has regard to the expen­
ces and the quality of the materials.

Animal OECONOMY, the first branch
of the theory of physick, or that which
explains the parts of a human body, 
their structure and use; the nature and
causes of life and health, and the effects
or phenomena arising from them.

Legal OECONOMY the legal dis­
pensation or
manner in which God was pleased to
guide and govern the people of the Jews
under Moses's administration; including
not only the political and ceremonial
laws, but also the moral law.

Jewish OECONOMY the legal dis­
pensation or
manner in which God was pleased to
guide and govern the people of the Jews
under Moses's administration; including
not only the political and ceremonial
laws, but also the moral law. 

Christian OECONOMY, the evangelical
dispensation is opposed to the legal one
and comprehends all that relates to
the covenant of grace that God has
made with men through Jesus Christ.

OENANTHIUS, the name of a god, 
worshipped by the Phœnicians, and to
whom Heliogabalus dedicated his impe­
rial robes.

OEMISTERIA [ὀνιςηρια, Gr.] sacrifi­
ces perfomed to Hercules, by the youth
of Athens, before the first time of cut­
ing their hair and shaving their beard.

OESOPHAGÆUS [ὀεσοφαγιιος, Gr.]
the Spincter Gulæ; a continuation of the
muscle called Pterigopharingæus, arising
from each side of the scutiform carti­
lage, and like it passes to a middle line
on the back part of the fauces.

OEUFS [in Architect.] the ovals or
ornaments of pillars,  F.

OFFERTORY [offertorium, L.] a
place in a church, where the offerings
or gifts of the people were kept; also
in the church of Rome an anthem sung
or played on the organ, at the time the
people are making an offering.

An OFFICE found [in Law] signifies
a thing found by inquisition, ex officio.

OFFICE [in Ethicks] duty, or that
which virtue and right reason directs
mankind to do.

OFFICE [in a Civil Sense] is the mu­
tual aid and assistance which mankind
owe to one another: also a particular
charge or trust, whereby a man is au­
thorized to do something.

OFFICE, a place or apartment ap­
pointed for officers to attend in, for the
discharge of their respective employ­
ments or office.

Casual OFFICES, are such as are gi­
ven for life by patent, commission, &c.
and which become vacant by the officer's
death.

OFFICES [with Architects] all those
lodges and apartments serving for the
necessary services and occasions of a pa­
lace or great house.

OFFICERS of Policy, are those in
whom the government and direction of
affairs of a community are invested, as
mayors, Sheriffs, &c.

OFFICERS of justice, are those who
are charged with the administration of
justice and equity in the courts.

Royal OFFICERS, are such as admi­
nister justice in the king's name.

Flag OFFICERS, are admirals, vice­
admirals and rear-admirals.

General OFFICERS [in an Army] the
captain-general, lieutenant-general, 
major-general, brigadier-general, quar­
ter master-general, and adjutant-gene­
ral.

Field OFFICERS, the colonel, lieute­
nant colonel, and major.

Subaltern OFFICERS, lieutenants, cor­
nets, ensigns, serjeants, corporals,
&c.

Staff OFFICERS [in Military Affairs]
quarter-master, serjeants, corporals, 
&c.

Staff OFFICERS [at Court] are such
as bear a white staff in the king's pre­
sence, and at other times going abroad, 
have a white staff borne before them by
a footman bare-headed, as lord steward, 
lord chamberlain, lord treasurer.

OFFICIALTY, the court or juris­
diction, whereof the official is head.

OFFICINAL [in Pharmacy] a term
used of such medicines as a colledge of
Physicians requires to be constantly kept
in apothecaries shops, ready to be made
up in extemporaneous prescriptions.

The ship stands for the OFFING [Sea
Phrase] is said of a ship seen from shore
sailing out to seaward.



The ship is in the OFFING [Sea phrase]
means that she has the shore near her, 
and having another a good way without
her towards the sea.

OFF-SCOWRING [of of, Sax. and
scheuren, Teut.] the refuse, or good for
nothing parts of any thing.

OFFSPRING [of-ſprinʒ, Sax.]
that which proceeds from any person or
thing, as children, fruit, &c.

OFTENNESS [oftenneſſe, Sax.]
frequentness.

OFTEN-Times [of aft and tima, 
Sax.] frequently.

OFF-WARD [Sea term] signifies con­
trary to the shore.

OGEE [with Architects] a wreath
circle, or round band; a
member of a moulding, that consists of
a round and a hollow; also an arch or
branch of a Gothick vault, which in­
stead of being circular, passes diagonally
from one angle to another, and forms
a cross between the other arches, which
makes the side of the square, of which
the arches are diagonal.

OGIVE [with Architects] a wreath
circle, or round band; a
member of a moulding, that consists of
a round and a hollow; also an arch or
branch of a Gothick vault, which in­
stead of being circular, passes diagonally
from one angle to another, and forms
a cross between the other arches, which
makes the side of the square, of which
the arches are diagonal. 

To OGLE [prob. of l'oeil, F. or ocu­
lus, L.] to look hard at; but commonly
used for to look at amorously.

OGRESSES. See Pellets.

OIKOSCOPY [οίχοσχοπία of οιχος an
house, and σχοπέω, Gr. to view] divina­
tion by accidents that happen at home.

OIL [oleum, L. ἐλαιον Gr.] is the ex­
pressed juice of olives, almonds, lin­
seed, nuts, &c. a liquid, fat, unctuous
inflammeable substance, which is procu­
red after various manners, and serves
for various purposes; either for eating, 
drinking or burning in lamps, &c. or
for painting, &c.

Fish OIL, an unctuous matter extrac­
ted from or boiled out of large fishes;
such as whales, &c. used by curriers, 
leather-dressers, soap-makers, &c.

OILINESS [of oleum, L. Ele, Sax.]
only nature.

Virgin OIL, oil of olives, nuts, &c
fresh gathered, without being heated, 
too much pressed, &c.

Granulated OIL, is that fixed in little
grains, which of oil of olives is most
esteemed.

OIL Bag, a vessel in birds, full of an
unctuous substance, secreted by one and
sometimes by two glands, for that pur­
pose, disposed among the feathers, which
being pressed by the bill or head, emits
in oily matter for the dressing or prun­
ing their feathers.

OIONISTS [οἰωνισταί, Gr.] diviners by
birds.

OINOMANCY [οἴνομαντεία, Gr.] divi­
nation by wine, when conjectures were
made from the colour, motion, noise, 
and other accidents of the wine of the
libations.

OKER, a yellow, dry, fat, soft, fossil
earth or semi-metal, found sometimes
in copper, lead and silver mines, and
sometimes in a bed or mine alone by it­
self; it is used sometimes as a proper flux
for metals, when they are too harsh or
brittle; but its principal use is in pain­
ting.

Red OKER is made of the yellow, by
calcining it in the fire, till it becomes
red.

Oker seems to be always impregnated
with iron, and is generally what gives
the chalybeal springs their medicinal
virtues, as may be seen by letting them
stand sometimes, when the oker may
be found at the bottom.

OISTER-Cost, the herb snake-weed.

OISTER-Green, an herb.

OLDNESS [Ealðnẏſſe, Sax.] advan­
cedness in age, antiqueness; staleness,
wornness.

OLDER [of Ealðor, Sax.] more a­
ged.

OLDISH [Ealðiſh, Sax.] something
old.

OLEOSITY [of oleosus, L.] oiliness, 
oily nature.

OLIBANUM [of ὄ and λίβανος, Gr.]
male incense, a sweet-scented gum or
rosin, that runs in white or yellowish
drops out of several small trees, at the
foot of mount Libanus, &c.

OLIVES, the fruit of the olive tree, 
of which there are two sorts, the culti­
vated and the wild, the first of which
is most esteemed. The tree grows of a
moderate height; its trunk is knotty, 
the bark smooth, of an ash colour; the
wood solid and of a yellowish colour;
the leaves are longish, resembling those
of the willow, of a darkish green on the
upper side, and white on the under.

These trees put out white flowers in
bunches in the month of June, the
flowers are monopetalous, widening up­
wards, and dividing into four parts; to
the flower succeeds the fruit, which is of
an oval form; is first green, then pale,
and when it is quite ripe becomes black.
This fruit being pickled is much es­
teemed.

A hard stone is inclosed in the pulp of
it, full of longish seeds; from this fruit
3 sorts of oil is pressed; the first and
purest is what is commonly call'd olive
or sallad oil; the second is not so good
either in taste or smell, the third worse



and fit only for lamps and other inferi­
or uses.

An OLIVE-Tree, [Hieroglyphically]
represents fruitfulness, peace, concord, 
obedience and meekness.

A garland of OLIVE, was by the
Greeks given to those who came off
victorious at the Olympick games, obser­
ved in honour of Jupiter, at the foot
of mount Olympus.

OLYMPIAD [so call'd from the Olym­
pick Games] a period of time of 4 years, 
anciently a common method of com­
puting time among the Greeks, and
principally from the 27th olympiad, in
which Chorebus was victor, which was
108 years before the first institution by
Iphitus; before an exact register of
those who bore away the prize at the
publick olympick games was kept.

Timæus is reckoned the first historian, 
who made use of this method; but was
followed afterwards by Eratosthenes and
Polybius; before whose times the Greek
historians only related the facts, with­
out precisely determining the time.

OLYMPIAN Jupiter, a title given
him from the city olympia, in Elis in
Peloponnesus, where he had a temple of
an admirable structure; which was not
only famous for the vast treasures that
belonged to it, but on account of the
oracles that were given; and for the
olympick games being celebrated near
it; but was most famous for the statue
of Jupiter made by Phidias, which was
accounted one of the wonders of the
world.

This statue was made fitting upon a
throne of gold and ivory, with a crown
on his head made of olive branches;
holding in his right hand the image of
victory, made of ivory, crowned with
a crown of massy gold upon its head
dress; and in his left hand a sceptre
made of a mixture of all sorts of me­
tals, with an eagle at the top of it.

His shoes and stockings were of gold, 
and the drapery of the same, adorn'd
with the figures of animals and flower
de Lis's.

The throne was imbellish'd with
ivory, ebony, gold, precious stones
and a multitude of emboss'd figures;
at the foot or pedestals of the throne
were 4 victories and 2 others at the
feet of the statue.

At the 2 feet on the foreside of the
throne, on the one side the figures of
sphinxes, carrying off some Theban
youths, and on the other the figures of
Niobe's children, who were shot to death
by Apollo and Diana, with arrows; be­
tween the feet of the throne Theseus
and the rest of the heroes, who accom­
panied Hercules to the Amazonian war, 
and several wrestlers.

All the place about the throne was
adorn'd with pictures, representing the
labours of Hercules, &c. on the upper
part on one side the throne the Graces, 
and on the other the Hours, on the
foot-stool golden lions, and Theseus's
combat with the Amazons.

In the temple there was also an altar
to the unknown God, like that at Athens.

Gli OLYMPICI, the title of the aca­
demists of Vicenza in Italy.

OLYMPICK Games, were celebrated
in the province of Elis, near the city
Pisa, on the banks of the river Alphæus, 
near the temple of Jupiter, every 4
years; at which were present a vast
concourse of people from all parts.

These games consisted of running, 
leaping, and other manly exercises in­
stituted in honour of Hercules, and
those who came off conquerors were
very highly honoured, not only by the
common people but by the state.

OLYMPII [among the Athenians] a
name given to their 12 gods, to whom
they had dedicated a very magnificent
altar; viz. Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, 
Neptune, Vulcan, Apollo, Juno, Vesta, 
Minerva, Ceres, Diana and Venus.

It is related that Alexander the Great, 
after his conquest of Persia, desir'd to
have his statue receiv'd among the
number of these deities, and set upon
the same altar; which is said to have
been by the Greeks comply'd with.

OLYMPIONICES [ὀλυμπιονίχης, Gr.]
the victors or conquerors at the olym­
pick games. They were crowned
with garlands of olive branches, carried
home in chariots, with a numerous
attendance, and the wall of the city
was broken down and they drove in
through the breach; they were also
presented with very rich presents, and
treated with such extravagant expence
and respect, that the Athenians finding it
burthensom, Solon procured a law to
be made to lessen the expences, which
determined the reward to be 500
Drachmæ, or about 13 pounds sterling;
but this law was not long liv'd, for
soon after they were entertain'd in the
Prytanæum or the publick hall; and
those who had gain'd 3 crowns at these
games, were endowed with several
privileges and exemptions, they were
excus'd from paying taxes of any kind, 
or serving any troublesome office. At
Sparta they had a particular place ap­



pointed them in the army, and were
placed as a guard to the king's person.
They had likewise the privilege of
sanctuary, and a coat with flowers em­
broidered on it to distinguish them. And
the generals of armies were frequently
chosen out of these Olympionices.

It was also usual to carve the names
of these victors and the histories of
their successes on marble pillars, and
were at last so extravagant as some­
times to deify them while living.

OLYMPICK Fire, the fire arising
from the sun's rays, collected in a
burning glass.

OLYMPUS, a mountain in Thessaly, 
of so great height, that it seems to tran­
scend the clouds, and was therefore
frequently by the poets feign'd to be
heaven itself.

OLYMPIONICI, conquerors at the
Olympick games.

OMAN, a certain deity of the Persians, 
whom the Magi worshipped daily for
an hour, singing hymns of praise to him, 
with their turbants on their heads, and
vervein in their hands.

OMBIASSES, priests and doctors of
the Pagan religion in the island of Ma­
dagascar, much the same as those they
call Marabouts at Cape Verde. See Ma­
rabouts; there are several sects of them.

One sort of them addicted themselves
to geomancy and drew their figures
upon a little smooth board, covered
with fine sand, and were consulted by
sick persons to know the time and means
of their recovery.

These Geomancers were also distin­
guish'd into several orders, resembling
our ecclesiastical dignities, as Sababa
pope or caliph, Lamlamacho archbishop, 
Catibou bishop, Faquilis priest; Mouladri
deacon, Tibou subdeacon, Ombiasse scribe
or physician, and Male clerk.

The common people stand in great
awe of them, and have employ'd them
sometimes against the French, but
without success.

OMBRE de Croix [in Heral.] the sha­
dow of a cross,  F. is a cross represented
of the colour of smoak, so as to be seen
thro'.

OMBRE de Soleil [in Her.]
i. e. the shadow of the sun, 
F. is when the sun is borne
in an escutcheon, without
either eyes, nose or mouth
apparent; but only a colouring so thin, 
that the field may be seen thro' it. See
the Figure.

Image omitted.



OMINOUSNESS [of ominosus, L.]
forebodingness, either of good or bad.

OMNE [among Logicians] or whole in
English], is such a whole, whose parts
are termed subjective or inferior; be­
cause this whole is a common term, and
its parts are compar'd within its extent.
Thus the word Animal is the omne or
whole, and the inferiors of it are Man
or Beast, which are compriz'd within
its extent, and are its subjective parts.

OMNIFEROUSNESS [of omnifer, L.]
all producing quality.

OMNIFICKNESS [of omnia faciens, 
L.] quality, &c. that does or effects all
things.

OMNIFORMITY [of omniformis, L.]
the being of all manner of shapes.

OMNIPARIENT [omnipariens, L.]
bearing or bringing forth all things.

OMNIPOTENTNESS [of omnipoten­
tia, L.] all powerfulness, &c.

OMNIPRESENTNESS [of omnis and
præsens, or præsentia, L.] omnipresence, 
or being present every where.

OMMISCIENTNESS [of omnis and
scientia, L.] knowledge of all things.

OMNIVOROUSNESS [of omnivorus, 
L.] all devouring nature, &c.

OMOPHAGIA, a feast of Bacchus, 
in which the mad guests eat goats alive, 
tearing their entrails with their teeth.

OMOPHORIUM [of ὀ῀μος, a shoul­
der, and φέφω to bear, Gr.] a little cloak
anciently worn by the bishops over
their shoulders, thereby to represent
the good shepherd, who brings home
the stray'd sheep on his shoulders.

There is no unicode for Greek small letter omicron with psili and perispomeni. The unicode ὀ is for Greek small letter omicron with psili, and ῀ is for the perispomeni on top of ὀ.



OMPANORATE, a title of the
priests of the island of Madagascar.

OMPHALOS [Ὀμφαλὸν, Gr.] the
navel.

OMPHALOPTICK [of ὀμφαλον and
Ὀπτιχος, Gr.] an optick glass that is
convex on both sides; commonly called
a convex lens.

OMPHALO Meseterick [with Anat.]
a term applied to a vein and artery
which pass along to the navel, and
terminate in the mesentery.

OMRA'S [in the great Mogul's
court in India] great
lords, which are generally Persians, 
who have great offices at court; but
none of them have any lands in pro­
priety, because the Mogul is sole propri­
etor of all the land in his dominions;
so that the Mogul being heir general to
all his subjects, neither the sons of
these Omra's, nor any else possesses the
estates of their fathers, they descend­
ing to the Mogul after their deaths; but
he does often allow them some small
pensions; but the fathers take care in
their life time that (they may be hand­



some and fair, so as that they may pass
for true Moguls who are of white com­
plexions, whereas the Indians are taw­
ny) to make some provision for
them.

Some of these Omra's are comman­
ders of 1000 horse, others 2000, so to
12000, their pay being more or less ac­
cording to the number of their horses.

here are always 25 or 80 of these
Omra's at court, out of which the go­
vernours of the provinces and great
officers of the state are chosen.

OMHRA'S [in the great Mogul's
court in India] great
lords, which are generally Persians, 
who have great offices at court; but
none of them have any lands in pro­
priety, because the Mogul is sole propri­
etor of all the land in his dominions;
so that the Mogul being heir general to
all his subjects, neither the sons of
these Omra's, nor any else possesses the
estates of their fathers, they descend­
ing to the Mogul after their deaths; but
he does often allow them some small
pensions; but the fathers take care in
their life time that (they may be hand­
some and fair, so as that they may pass
for true Moguls who are of white com­
plexions, whereas the Indians are taw­
ny) to make some provision for
them.

Some of these Omra's are comman­
ders of 1000 horse, others 2000, so to
12000, their pay being more or less ac­
cording to the number of their horses.

here are always 25 or 80 of these
Omra's at court, out of which the go­
vernours of the provinces and great
officers of the state are chosen.

ONANIA [of Onan] the crime
of self pollution.

ONANISM [of Onan] the crime
of self pollution.

ONEIROCRATIA [of ὄνειρος, a
dream, and χρατέω, I possess, Gr.] the
art of expounding dreams.

ONEIROCRITISTS [Ὀνειροχριταὶ, 
Gr.] judgers or expounders of dreams.

ONEIROSCOPISTS [Ὀνειροσχοποὶ, 
Gr.] inquirers into the signification of
dreams.

ONEIROPOLISTS [Ὀνειροπὀλοι, Gr.]
persons conversant about dreams.

ONI [an abbreviation of Oneratur nisi
habet sufficientem Exonerationem, L. i. e.
he is charged, unless he have a suffi­
cient discharge] a mark used in the Ex­
chequer, and set on the head of a sheriff, 
assoon as he enters into his account for
issues, fines and mean profits, and
thereupon he immediately became the
king's debtor.

ONKOTOMY [of Ὄγχος, a tumor, 
and τεμνω, Gr. to cut] the chirurgical
operation of opening a tumor or ab­
scess.

ONOCENTAUR [ὀνοχένταυρος of ὄνος
an ass, and χένταυρος, Gr. a centaur] a
fabulous animal, suppos'd to be a com­
pound of a man and an ass. It has the
body of a man, but the legs and thighs
of an ass.

ONONYCHITES [of Ὄνος, an ass, 
and Ὄνυξ, Gr. a nail; something that
has the hoofs, i. e. the feet of an ass]
a name the Heathens called the Christi­
ans, because they worshipped the same
God as the Jews did; prob. from what
Corn. Tacitus writes of the Israelites, 
that being very thirsty, they were led
to a spring by an ass going to drink, 
and that in gratitude they worshipped
an ass, and that the Christians worship­
ped the same.

ONTOLOGIST [ωντόλογος, Gr.] one
who treats of beings in the abstract.

ONYCHOMANCY, [Ὀνυχμαντεἰα,
Gr.] a sort of
divination performed by the nails of
an unpolluted boy, covered with oil
and foot, which they turned to the sun,
the reflection of whose rays was be­
lieved to represent by certain images
the thing they had a mind to be satis­
fied about.

ONYMANCY [Ὀνυχμαντεἰα,
Gr.] a sort of
divination performed by the nails of
an unpolluted boy, covered with oil
and foot, which they turned to the sun,
the reflection of whose rays was be­
lieved to represent by certain images
the thing they had a mind to be satis­
fied about.

OOSCOPY [ὠοσχοπία, Gr.] predictions
made from eggs.

OPACOUSNESS [opacitas, L.] ob­
scureness, darkness, &c.

OPALIA [among the Romans] festi­
vals celebrated to the goddess Ops, wife
of Saturn, on the 4th of the calends of
January, which was the 3d day of the
Saturnalia; these two Saturn and Ops 3
being accounted the 2 deities who took
care of the fruits of the earth; their
feasts were celebrated in harvest time, 
at which they feasted their slaves, and
allowed them all manner of liberty, in
consideration of the pains they had ta­
ken to till the ground.

OPASSUM [in Virginia] a creature
that has a head like a hog, a tail like a
rat, being about the bigness of a cat;
the female has a bag under its belly in
which it carries its young, and thither
they retire in any danger.

OPENNESS [of open and neſſe, 
Sax.] plainness, clearness, manifestness;
also an opening.

OPENING [openunʒ, Sax.] an open
place.

OPERA, a dramatick composition, 
set to musick, and sung on the stage, at­
tended with musical instruments, and
inriched with stately dressings, machines
and other decorations; the Opera was
first used by the Venetians, with whom
it is one of the principal glories of their
Carnival. It was afterwards used by
the French, and now by us.

OPERATIGAL, of or pertaining to
an opera.

OPERATION, the act of exerting or
exercising some power or faculty, upon
which some effect follows. F. of  L.

OPERATION [in Physick] the man­
ner wherein any remedy produces its
salutary effect.

OPERATIVENESS [of operatus, L.]
operating quality.

OPERATOR [in Surgery, &c.] a per­
son who works with the hand on the
human body, either to preserve or re­
store its health or ease, as an operator
for the stone, one who cuts for the
stone.

OPEROSENESS [of operosus, L.] labo­
riousness.

OPHITES [Οφίτης, Gr.] a sort of vari­
egated marble, otherwise called serpen­
tine marble.

OPHITES [of ὄφις, Gr.] a serpent] a
sect of hereticks in the second century,



who it is said honoured a serpent, and
when their priest celebrated their mys­
teries, they caused a serpent to come
out of a hole, which after it had rolled
itself over the things that were to be offe­
red in sacrifices, they said that Jesus
Christ had sanctified them, and then de­
livered them to the people who wor­
shipped them.

OPHIUCUS [Όφιοῖχος, Gr.] a nor­
thern constellation, containing thirty
stars, represented by a man holding a
serpent in his hand, this star being in
the hand of the man, and is of the first
magnitude.

OPTHALMIA [Οφθαλμία, Gr.] a
disease of the eyes, being an inflamation
in the coats, proceeding from arterious
blood, gotten out of the vessels, and
collected in those parts.

OPHTHALMICK Nerves [with
Anat.] a branch of the fifth pair of
nerves, which move the eye,  L.

OPHTHALMOGRAPHY [of Ὀφθαλ­
μος and γραφὴ, Gr. description] a
branch of anatomy, which considers
the structure and composition of the
eye, and the use of its parts, and the
principal effects of vision.

OPHTHALMOSCOPY [of Ὀφθαλ­
μος and σχοπεω, Gr. to view] a branch
of the science of Physiognomy, which
considers the eyes of persons, by them
to come to the knowledge of their tem­
peraments, humours and manners.

OPINION, a probable belief, or a
doubtful, uncertain judgment of the
mind, or the assent of the mind to pro­
positions not evidently true at the first
sight; nor deduced by necessary conse­
quence from others that are so; but
such as carry the face of truth; or it
may be defined an assent of the under­
standing, with some fear or distrust of
the contrary.

OPINION, the ancient Heathens
made a goddess of it, adoring her in the
form of a woman; and believed she
had the government of the sentiments
of men. She was represented in the
form of a young woman with a bold
countenance, but a staggering gate.

OPPILATIVENESS [of oppilatus, 
L.] aptness to cause obstructions.

OPPONENCY, the maintaining a
contrary argument.

OPPORTUNENESS [of opportunus, 
L.] seasonableness.

OPPORTUNITY [opportunitas, L.]
convenient time or occasion; was paint­
ed like time, i. e. like an old man in a
posture of haste, having a lock of hair
on the forehead, but bald behind, to
intimate, that persons ought to lay hold
of, and not let slip opportunity when
offered; but, as we say, take time by
the forelock.

Opportunity was also honoured as a
goddess by the Pagans, as the superin­
tendant of the fittest season to accom­
plish any business, and was represented
in the form of a naked woman with a
long lock of hair, but bald behind, to
intimate that opportunity if not laid
hold on when it offers, soon slips away;
also standing with one foot on a wheel
and the other in the air, holding a sail
in one hand and a rasor in the other, 
her feet also being winged and the
wheel in continual motion, to intimate
that opportunity is always inconstant
and in motion.

OPPOSITES [with Logicians] are
things relatively opposed, as master and
servant; or privatively, as light and
darkness; or contrary, as knowledge and
ignorance.

OPPOSITION [in Geometry] the re­
lation of two things, between which a
line may be drawn perpendicular to
both.

Complex OPPOSITION [in Logick]
the affirming and denying the same pre­
dicate of the same subject, as Socrates
is learned, Socrates is not learned.

Incomplex OPPOSITION [in Logick]
is the disagreement of two things which
will not suffer each other to be in the
same subject; as sight is opposed to
blindness, heat to cold.

OPPOSITION [with Rhetoricians] a
figure whereby two things are assem­
bled together, which appeared incom­
patible, as a wise folly.

OPPOSITNESS [of oppositus, L.] op­
posite or contrary state or quality.

OPS [Ὥπις, Gr.] a name of the god­
dess Cybele; which see.

OPTABLENESS [of optabilis, L.]
desireableness.

OPTICA [Ὀπτιχὰ, Gr.] medicines
good against distempers in the eyes,  L.

OPTIC [opticus, L. of Ὀπτιχὸς,
Gr.] pertaining to the
sight.

OPTICAL [opticus, L. of Ὀπτιχὸς,
Gr.] pertaining to the
sight.

OPTIC Place of a Star or Planet ap­
parent, is that part of its orbit, which
our sight determines when the obser­
ver's eye is at the circumference of the
earth.

OPTIC Place of a Star or Planet real, 
is that, when it is supposed to be at the
centre of the earth, or planet he inha­
bits.

OPTICIAN, a professor or teacher 
of the science of opticks.



OPTICAL Inequality [Astron.] is an
apparent irregularity in the motions of
far distant bodies.

OPTICK Pencil, is that assemblage
or pencil of rays, by means whereof
any point or part of an object is seen.

OPTICK Rays, those rays where­
with an optick pyramid or triangle is
terminated.

OPTICK Axis, a ray passing through
the centre of the eye.

OPTICK Chamber, the same as Ca­
mera Obscura.

OPTIC Glasses, they are ground ei­
ther concave or hollow, so as either
to collect or disperse the rays of light, 
by means whereof vision is improved, 
the eye strengthened, &c.

OPTICS [ars optica, L.] a science
which considers every object as seen
with direct rays, after the ordinary
manner. The particular branches of
it are Dioptricks and Catoptricks, treat­
ing of reflected and refracted rays.

OPTION of an Archbishop [in a Law
Sense] is, when a new suffragran bishop
is consecrated, the archbishop of the
province, by a customary prerogative, 
claims the collation of the first vacant
benefice in that see as his choice.

OPULENCE [opulentia, L.] wealth.

OPULENTNESS [opulentus, L.]
wealthiness.

OR [in Heraldry] signifies
gold,  F. It is often repre­
sented by a yellow colour, 
and in engraving by small
pricks all over the field or
bearing, as in the figure. It is said to
be composed of much white and a little
red, as two parts white and one red, 
and of itself to betoken wisdom, riches
and elevation of mind; with red, to
spend his blood for the wealth and
welfare of his country; with azure, to
be worthy of matters of trust and trea­
sure; with sable, most rich and constant
in every thing, with an amorous mind;
with vert, most joyful with the riches
of the world, and most glittering and
splendid in youth.

Others add, that Or signifies christian
and spiritual virtues, as faith, tempe­
rance, charity, meekness, humility
and clemency; of worldly virtues and
qualities, nobility, wealth, generosity, 
splendor, chivalry, love, purity, gra­
vity, constancy, solidity, prosperity, 
joy and long life; of precious stones, it
represents the carbuncle or the topaz;
of the planets, the sun; of the elements,
fire; of human constitutions, the san­
guine; of trees, the cypress or laurel;
of flowers, the heliotropium; of fowls, 
the cock and bird of paradise; of beasts, 
the lion; and of fishes, the dolphin.

ORACLES [oracula, L. of ora, 
mouths, or orare, to entreat] were am­
biguous answers made to the ancient
Heathens concerning things to come.
This some are of opinion, was done by
diabolical operation; and others, that
it was by the artifice of their priests, 
who made the ignorant people believe
that the God spoke by their mouths.
Of the former opinion were several fa­
thers of the primitive Christian church, 
and other great and learned men; as
Tertullian and Vossius, who held that
the devils, pretending to fore-know­
ledge and divination, gave dark and
doubtful answers, that if the event fell
out contrary to their expectation, the
people should think they had not com­
prehended the true sense of the oracle:
Notable instances of which are these
that follow.

When Crœsus consulted the oracle of
Apollo at Delphos, he received for an­
swer this doubtful riddle, in a form of
words so cunningly contrived, that the
truth was then farthest off, when he
thought to have gained it.

Crœsus Halyn penetrans magnam,
pervertit opum vim:
When Crœsus over Halis roweth, 
A mighty nation he overthroweth, 

Which he interpreting according to
his own desires, crossed the river, but
was vanquished himself by Cyrus, king
of Persia, and his own nation and
country ruined.

King Pyrrhus, before he made war
with the Romans, consulting this ora­
cle, received the following answer.

Aio te Æacide Romanos vincere posse.

Which ambiguous prediction he con­
struing, Te posse vincere Romanos, thou
shalt overcome the Romans, gave them
battle; but found in the event that the
devil meant, Romanos posse vincere te, 
that the Romans should overcome him, 
as they did.

Another prince, consulting this ora­
cle concerning the success of his war­
ring, received this answer,

Ibis redibis nunquam per bella peribis.

Which he distinguished with commas
thus, Ibis, redibis, nunquam per bella pe­
ribis, thou shalt go, thou shalt return, 
thou shalt never perish by war; under­
took the war and was slain; upon which
his nobility canvassing the oracle, per­
ceived that it should have been thus
comma'd, Ibis, redibis nunquam, per
bella peribis, i, e. thou shalt go, thou



shalt never return, thou shalt perish by 
war.

Of the latter opinion, that the pre­
dictions of the oracles were not so
much by diabolical operation, as by
the artifices of the priests, were Euse­
bius, Aristotle and Cicero, and many
other famous men, who were of opi­
nion; that oracles were only the cun­
ning tricks of the priests, by which the
credulous were abused under the colour
of inspiration and prediction.

Demosthenes seemed apprehensive of
this cheat, when he said that Pythia
always favoured king Philip in her
answers.

The first oracles we read of, were of
Jupiter Dodonæus in Epirus, and Jupiter
Ammon in Africa. Besides which there
were several others. See Amphiaraus, 
Dodona, Trophonius, &c. in their proper
places.

Some have been of opinion, that ora­
cles ceased upon the coming of Christ;
tho' this cannot indeed be said, yet it
should seem that they began then to
decline; and Suidas relates, that Augu­
stus, in whose time our Saviour was
born, consulting the oracle about his
successor, received the following, not
satisfying answer.

Παῖς
Ἑβραῖος χὲλεταἰ με θεοῖς μαχάρεσσιν
ἀνάσσων,
Υόνδε δομον πρόλιπεῖν, χὶ ἄιδην ἇυθις ἱχεσθαι
Αειπὸν ἄπιθι σιγῶν ἠχ βωμῶν ἣμετέροων.

An Hebrew child, whom the blest Gods 
adore, 
Hath bid me leave these shrines and 
pack to Hell;
So that of oracles I can no more
In silence leave our altar and farewel.

Whereupon Augustus coming home, 
erected an altar in the capitol, causing
this inscription to be engraven on it in
capital letters, HÆC EST ARA PRI­
MOGENITI DEI.

And Juvenal, who lived in Domitian's
time, says, Delphis oracula cessant.

But there are several ancient writers
that make it appear, that they conti­
nued above 400 years after; and the
ecclesiastical history tells us, that Julian
the apostate, consulting an oracle, could
receive no answer, because the body of
Babylus the martyr, was entombed nigh
the altar; so that the devils could not
deceive the world so much as they had
done, when Christ, the truth itself, was
manifest in the flesh; tho' all oracles
did not cease at that instant, nor were
they wholly silenced but with the de­
finition of paganism, about the year
451; when the pagans were, by the
edicts of Valentinian III. and Martianus, 
forbid, upon pain of death, the publick
practice of their idolatrous worship, 
and their crafty impostures: Tho' some
oracles ceased long before the birth of
our Saviour, as, in particular, the most
famous oracles of Greece; for the Per­
sians having laid their country waste, 
the priests forsook the temples, and so
the oracles became silent.

The learned Kircher to undeceive
the credulous, and to account for some
strange things which are related of the
famous Delphick oracle, contriv'd and
fix'd a tube so in his bed chamber, that
when any person call'd him at his gar­
den gate, next to his lodgings, tho' they
did not speak any louder than ordinary, 
he could hear them as plainly as if they
had been in the room, and return'd
them an answer with the same easy
conveyance.

This tube he afterwards remov'd
into his Musæum, and fixed it so artifi­
cially into a statue, that it opened its
mouth as if it had been alive, moved its
eyes and seem'd to speak; and he was
of opinion, that pagan priests by mak­
ing use of such tubes, were wont to
make the credulous and superstitious
believe that the idol return'd them an
answer to their question.

ORACULARNESS, the being of the
nature or quality of an oracle.

ORANGEAT, a drink made of juice
of oranges, &c.

ORATORY [oratorium, L.] a chapel
set apart for prayer; a closet or little
apartment in a large house, near a bed-­
chamber; furnished with a little altar
or image for private devotion.

ORATORY [with the Romanists] a
society or congregation of religious, 
who lived in community, but without
being obliged to make any vows.

ORB [orbis, L.] a hollow sphere.

An ORB [with Astronomers] is fre­
quently taken for the deferent of a
planet, but most commonly for its
sphere. But an orb is a round body
bounded by two surfaces, the one out­
ward and convex, and the other inward
and concave; so that the Heavens are
so many orbs, the higher encompassing
the lower, as the coats of an onion:
But a sphere properly signifies a globe
contained under one single superficies, 
and solid even to the centre.

ORBICULARNESS, roundness.

ORBITS [with Anatomists] the two
large cavities in which the eyes are
placed.



ORCHESTRA [of ὀρχεισθαι, Gr. to
dance] the lower part of the ancient
theatre, where they kept their balls;
it was in form of a semicircle, and sur­
rounded with seats. It is now taken
for a musick gallery.

ORCHESOGRAPHY [of ὀρχησις,
dancing, and γραφω, Gr. to write] a
treatise of the art of dancing, or a book
of dances.

ORD [orð, Sax, an edge] an initial
syllable in names of persons, which sig­
nifies an edge or sharpness.

ORDALEAN Law, the law of Or­
deal, which was appointed long before
the conquest, and continued in force
till the reign of king John and Henry
III, when it was condemned by pope
Stephen II. and utterly abolished by
parliament.

ORDEAL [orðeal, Sax. of or, 
great, and ðeal, Sax. judgment] a me­
thod practised about the time of Edward
the confessor, of trying criminal per­
sons; when it the person accused plead­
ed not guilty, he might either put him­
self upon God and his country, as at
this day, or upon God only, presuming
that he would free the innocent; and
thus Ordeal was either by fire or water;
by fire, if the person were of free
estate; or by water, if he were of ser­
vile condition, and it was also after di­
vers manners.

Simple ORDEAL, was when a person
accused carried in his hand a red hot
iron of a pound weight.

ORDEAL double, was when he car­
ried a hot iron of two pound weight.

ORDEAL triple, was when he car­
ried a hot iron of three pound weight.

ORDELFE [in Law] a privilege
whereby a man claims the ore found
in his own ground.

To ORDER [ordinare, L. ordonner, 
F.] to command or appoint, to dispose;
also to chastise.

ORDERLY [ordinatus, L. &c.] re­
gular; also regularly.

French ORDER [Architecture] an or­
der that is of new invention, whole
capitals consist in attributes agreeing to
the people, as Flowers de Lis, Cock's-­
Heads, &c.

Gothick ORDER [Architect.] deviates
from the ornaments and proportions of
the antique, the columns of which are
either too massive in manner of pillars, 
or too slender like poles; its capitals
out of all measure, and adorned with
leaves of wild Acanthus, Thistles, &c.

Caryatick ORDER [in Architect.] is
that whose entablature is supported
with figures of women instead of co­
lumns.

Persian ORDER [Architect] an order
which has figures of Persian slaves to
support the entablature instead of co­
lumns.

Rustic ORDER [Archit.] is one adorn­
ed with rustic quoins, boscages, &c.

ORDERS [in Archit.] are rules for
the proportion that is to be observed
in the erecting of pillars or columns, 
and for the form of certain parts be­
longing to them. And thence build­
ings are said to be of several Orders, 
when the proportion between the
thickness of the columns and their
height, and all things requisite thereto
are different.

The principal Orders are five, the
Doric, Ionick, Corinthian, Tuscan and
Composit.

The Dorick Order has its columns
eight diameters in height, and should
not have any ornament, neither in its
capital nor base. The Astragal and
Listel below the capital; which is half
a diameter in height, constituting part
of the shank or body of the pillar.

The Ionick Order, at its first inventi­
on, had its columns only eight models
in height; but afterwards the ancients
augmented the height of its pillars, in
order to make it more beautiful, and
also added to it a base that was not used
before; so that then, with its capital
and base, it contained nine diameters
of its thickness taken below: The pe­
destal of it is two diameters, and about
two thirds in height, and the Capital is
chiefly composed of volutas or scrolls, 
and they are commonly channelled
with 24 flutes.

The Corinthian Order is the finest and
richest order of them all. The length
of its columns, with its bases and capi­
tals, is usually about nine and a half
or ten diameters, and the capitals are
adorned with two rows of leaves, and
eight volutas, which, support the Aba­
cus.

The Tuscan Order is the most simple
and most destitute of ornaments, so that
it is seldom made use of except in
vaults, in some rustick edifices, vast
piles of building, as Amphitheaters, &c.

The Composit Order, or Roman Order, 
is one, the capitals of whose pillars are
composed of two rows of leaves, like
those of the Corinthian Order, and of
the Volutas and Scrolls of the Ionick.
These columns are commonly ten dia­
meters in height, and wholly like to
Corinthian in all their dimensions and



numbers except the capitals, which
have no more but four Volutas which
take up the whole space, which is filled
both by the volutas and stems, or stalks
of the Corinthian Order.

To these some add the Attick and
Gothick.

The Attick Order is a small order of
pilaslers of the shortest proportion, hav­
ing a cornice raised after the manner
of an architrave for its entablature.

The Gothick Order is widely different
from the ancient proportions and orna­
ments; as above.

ORDINARIES [in Heraldry] are
ten, viz. the Chief, the Pale, the Bend,
the Fess, the Bar, the Cross, the Saltier, 
the Chevron, the Bordure, and the Orl.
Some have endeavoured to encrease the
number to twenty, adding to those be­
forementioned, the Quarter, the Escut­
cheon, the Cappe dexter and sinister,
Chausse dexter and sinister, and the Point.
But these have not been received by
heralds in common. There are these
reasons assigned, why these Ordinaries
are called honourable; as 1. Because
they have been in use ever since the
practice of armoury, immediately after
the partitions. 2ly, Because that be­
ing placed all together on the escutche­
on (which represents the body of a
man) they intirely cover it, and seem
as it were to ward off the strokes that
come from the hand of the enemy.
The chief, represents the helmet; the
wreath, the chaplet or crown that co­
vers the head; the pale, the lance or
spear; the bend and bar, the belt; the
fesse, the scarf; the cross and saltier, 
the sword; the chevron, the boots and
spurs; and the bordure and orl, the coat
of mail.

If a person was wounded on the head
in battle, the king or general after­
wards gave him a chief, if in the legs, 
a chevron; if his sword and armour were
coloured with the blood of the enemy, 
a cross or bordure; and thus after a my­
sterious manner, erected for him an
honourable memorial of what he had
done for his king and country.

ORDINARILY [of ordinairement, F.]
commonly.

ORDINARINESS [of ordinarius, L.
and ness] commonness, vulgarness; also
indifferentness, meanness.

ORDINARY [ordinarius, L.] wonted, 
that which happens or passes frequent­
ly or usually.

An ORDINARY [in the Civil Law]
is any judge who has authority to take
cognizance of causes in his own right,
as he is a magistrate, and not by dep­
tation.

ORDINARY [in the Common and Ca­
non Law] the bishop of the diocess, or
he who has the ordinary ecclesiastical
jurisdiction within that territory, 
and the collation of the benefices there­
in; also the bishop's deputy, who gave
criminals their neck-verse to read, as
the ordinary of Newgate did not many
years since.

ORDINARY is applied to officers and
servants of the king's houshold who at­
tend on common occasions, as Physician
in Ordinary, &c.

ORDINATES [in Geom. and Conicks]
are lines drawn from any one point of
the circumference of the ellipsis or
other conick section, perpendicularly
across the axis to the other side.

ORDINATE Ratio [Geom.] is that
wherein the antecedent of the first ratio
is to its consequent, as the antecedent
of the second is to its consequent.

ORDINATE Applicate [in Conick
Sections] is a line in any conick section
drawn at right angles to and bisected
by the axis, and reaching from one
side of the section to the other. The
half of which, tho' it is now generally
called the Ordinate, is properly the
Semi-Ordinate; as in the figure.

Thus in the Parabola, ORD and OD,
or od in an ordinate rightly apply'd, 
and its half rd or VD is the true semi-­
ordinate, tho' commonly called the
Ordinate itself.

Image omitted.



ORDONNANCE [in Painting] is the
disposition of the parts of it, either
with regard to the whole piece, or to
the several parts; as the groups, mas­
ses, contrasts, &c.

ORGANS were first introduced into
the church about the year 657. In the
cathedral of Ulm in Germany is an Or­
gan 93 foot high, and 28 broad (the
biggest pipe 13 inches diameter) and
has 16 pair of bellows to blow it.



ORGAN [with Anat.] is defined to be
a part that requires a right, determi­
nate and sensible confirmation to make
it up, and for the performance of its
actions, as the Heart, a Muscle, an
Arm, &c.

Primary ORGANS [of an animal
Body] those composed of similar parts, 
and appointed for some one single
function, as the Arteries, Nerves, and
Muscles.

Secondary ORGANS, such as consist
of several of the former, tho' appro­
priated to one single action, as the
Hands, Fingers, &c.

Hydraulick ORGAN, an organ which
plays by the means of water.

ORGANIC [organicus, L. Ὄργανιχός, 
Gr.] of or pertaining to the organs of
the body; also instrumental, or serving
as a means.

ORGANICAL Disease [in Medicine]
a disease in the organical part of the
body, by which the function of it is
impeded, suspended, or destroyed.

ORGANICALLY [of organice, L.]
with or by an instrument.

ORGANICALNESS [of ὀργανιχὸς, Gr.
organicus, L. and ness] a being or con­
sisting of organs.

ORGIA [ὀργια, of ὀργὴ, fury, madness, 
Gr.] feasts and sacrifices of Bacchus, 
commonly celebrated by raving women
upon the tops of mountains, with
shouts, huzza's and uncommon noises.

Image omitted.



ORGNES, are thick, long pieces of
wood, pointed and shod with iron, 
clear one of another, hanging each by
a particular rope or cord over the
gate way of a strong place, perpendi­
cular, to be let fall in case of an ene­
my. Their disposition is such, that
they stop the passage of the gate, and
are preferrable to Herses or Portcullises, 
because these may be either broke by
a Petard, or they may be stopped in
their falling down, but a Petard is use­
less against an Orgne, for if it break
one or two of the pieces, they imme­
diately fall down again, and fill up the
vacancy; or if they stop one or two of
the pieces from falling, it is no hin­
drance to the rest, for being all sepa­
rate they have no dependance on one
another.

ORIFLAMB the royal standard of
the ancient kings of
France, so called from its being em­
broidered with flames of gold upon a
ground of red, which at first was only
borne in wars against infidels, and lost
in the battle against the Flemings. It
was also called the standard of St. Den­
nis.

ORIFLEMB the royal standard of
the ancient kings of
France, so called from its being em­
broidered with flames of gold upon a
ground of red, which at first was only
borne in wars against infidels, and lost
in the battle against the Flemings. It
was also called the standard of St. Den­
nis.

ORIGENIANS, an ancient sect of
Hereticks, who even surpassed the abo­
mination of the Gnosticks.

ORIGENISTS, a sect of Christians
so denominated, because they held
some errors drawn from Origen's book
concerning principles.

ORIGINALNESS [originalis, L.] the
first source or rise; original nature or
quality, primitiveness.

ORIGINATED [of origo, L.] having
or fetching its original from.

ORION [according to the Pagan The­
ology] proceeded from the urine of
Jupiter, Neptune and Mercury; which
3 deities having been hospitably enter­
tained by a peasant named Hyereus, bid
him demand whatsoever he pleased, and
it should be granted; whereupon he
desired to have a son without the help
of a woman: upon which their god-ships
pissed into the hide of the ox that he
had slain for sacrifice, and bid him bury
it 9 months in the ground; which he
doing, at the expiration of the time
found a boy, whom he named Orion, 
who became a great hunter and served
Diana; but he boasting of his great
skill, she slew him; but afterwards out
of compassion, made him a constellation
of 17 stars, which rises on the 9th of
March, and commonly brings storms
and great rains.

Hesiod tells us, Orion was the son of
Neptune by Euryale, the daughter of
Minos; to whom this gift was given, to
be able to walk upon the water as upon
dry land. He came to Chius, and hav­
ing overcome Merops, the daughter of
Onepion, with wine, lay with her; One­
pion coming to the knowledge of this, 
and being enraged at it put out his eyes
and expelled him the island. And he
wandering to and fro, at last came to
Vulcan at Lemnos, who taking pity of
him, gave him one of his family, by
name Cedalio, to be his guide. Orion
took this man upon his shoulders, that
he might direct him in his way. And



taking his journey towards the east, he
arrived at the sun, by whom he was cu­
red as to his blindness. And afterwards
went back to Onepion to be revenged
on him; who was kept under the earth
by his guards. Orion therefore des­
pairing to find him went to Crete, and
delighting extremely in hunting, fell
into the company of Diana and Latona, 
and (as it is reported) threatned he
would not leave a wild beast upon the
earth. Upon which the earth, taking
this in indignation, sent a scorpion of a
monstruous size, by whom, being stung
he died. But Jupiter, at the entreaty
of Diana and Latona, placed him among
the stars on account of his prowess and
also the scorpion in memory of the fact.

ORLE [in Heraldry] a sel­
vedge or welt,  F. is an or­
dinary, composed of a
three-fold line duplicated, 
admitting a transparency
of the field throughout the innermost
area or space wherein it is inclosed.

Image omitted.



In ORLE [in Heraldry] is
when any thing is placed
within the escutcheon all
about it, in the nature of
an orle, near the edges, and
leaving the middle plain, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



ORLO [in Archit.] the plinth or
square of a column, or under the base
of its pedestal.

ORNAMENTAL [of ornamentum, L.]
adorning.

ORNAMENTALNESS, becomingness,
beautifulness, adornedness.

ORNATE [ornatus, L.] neat, trim.

ORNEOSCOPICKS [ὀρνεοσχοπιχα, Gr.] 
omens or predictions given from the
flight, &c. of birds.

ORNEOSCOPISTS [ὀρνεοσχὸποι of ὀρνεον
a bird, and σχοπέω, Gr. to view] augurs
or diviners by birds.

ORNITHOLOGIST [ὀρνιθολογος,
Gr.] a describer of the several kinds
and natures of birds.

ORNITHOMANTISTS [ὀρνιθομαν­
τεις, Gr.] diviners by birds.

ORNITHOTROPHY [ὀρνιθοτροφεῖον,
Gr.] a place to feed birds in.

OROMAZES [which in the Chaldean
tongue signifies burning light] a name by
which the Magi and Chaldeans called the
Highest God. They described God all
surrounded with fire, and usually said
his body was like light, arid his soul re­
sembled truth.

This God was the good principle ac­
cording to them; but they owned also
in evil principle they call Azimanes, 
which in Chaldee signifies who is my ene­
my or subtil deceiver, who opposed Oro­
mazes and by whom he was to be des­
troyed in the end.

ORPHANAGE, the state or condition
of an orphan.

ORPHANOTROPHY [ορφανοτροφεῖον,
Gr.] an hospital where orphans are
brought up.

ORPHEUS [Ὀρφεὺς, Gr.] according to
the poets, was the son of Apollo and
Calliope, a very great philosopher and
an extraordinary musician, and as such
bore away the palm from all that had
been before him. Mercury, they say, 
made him a present of his harp, and he
played so exquisitely well upon it, that
he stopped the course of rivers, laid
storms, drew the most savage animals
after him, to divert themselves with
his excellent harmony; and that rocks
and trees were seen to move at the
sound of his musick: but besides having
lost by death his wife Euridice, he went
after her to the gates of Hell, where he
played with that dexterity, that Pluto, 
Proserpine, &c. were ravished with the
melody, and granted him to carry his
wife back with him, to live on earth a­
gain, upon condition, that in his return
he would not look back upon her, till
he was come to the light; but he break­
ing the condition, by looking back upon
her, her guard dragged her back to
Hell, at which he grew so disconsolate, 
that he resolved never more to enter­
tain any affection for a woman, and per­
suaded all he could to the like; which
so displeased the Thracian women, that
in their festivals of Bacchus, they tore
him in pieces. But his harp was placed
among the stars. He is said to have lived
A. M. 2700.

ORPHIC, of or pertaining to Orpheus.

ORTHODOXNESS [of orthodoxia, 
L. ορθοδοξια of ὀρθος, right, and δαξα, 
opinion, Gr.] true belief, soundness of
judgment.

ORTHOGRAPHICALNESS [of or­
thographicus, L. of ὀρθογραφίχὸς, Gr.] the
being according to the orthography, or
right writing or spelling.

ORTHOGRAPHY [in Geometry] the
art of drawing or delineating the fore­
right plan of any object, and expressing
the heights or elevations of each part.

External ORTHOGRAPHY is a de­
lineation of the  external face, i. e.
front of a building; shewing the princi­
pal wall with its doors, windows, &c. 
roof, ornaments and every part visible
to an eye, placed before the building.

Internal ORTHOGRAPHY, is a
draught or delineation of a building,



such as it would appear, if the external 
wall were removed.

ORTIVE Amplitude [with Astron.] is 
an arch of the horizon, intercepted be­
tween the point where a star rises and
the east point of the horizon.

OSCILLANCY [of oscillatio, L.] a
swinging to and fro, a see-sawing.

OSCILLATION [among the Romans]
a sacred rite, a swing up and down in the
air, of the figures of men.

Axis of OSCILLATION, is a right
line, perpendicular to the apparent ho­
rizontal one, and passing thro' the centre
of the earth, about which the pendulum
oscillates.

Centre of OSCILLATION, the mid­
dle point of the arch, dividing the ball, 
when the pin of a pendulum fastened
above is taken for the center of a circle,
whose circumference divides the ball 
into two equal parts.

OSCOPHORIA [of ὀσχοφορία of οσχή, a 
branch, and φέρω, Gr. to carry] feasts in­
stituted by Theseus, on account of his 
having destroyed the minotaur, and by 
that means freed his country Athens, 
from being obliged to send seven young
men annually to Crete, to be devoured
by the minotaur.

OSIRIS [ὄσιρος of ὄσιος and ίερός, Gr.
i. e. sacrosanctus, i. e. most holy; or as
others say, of דשא, Heb. blessed: by this
name the Egyptians understood the Sun, 
Bacchus and Jupiter] the son of Jupiter
(according to the poets) by Niobe the
daughter of Phoroneus. He is said to
have first taught the Egyptians husbandry, 
to till the ground and to dress vine­
yards; for which they deified him. He
married Io (who afterwards was called
Isis) the daughter of Inachus; he was
privily murthered by his brother, and
after much seeking, his wife Isis at length
found his body, and buried it in the
island Abates; but when there appeared
unto them an ox of an excellent shape, 
they imagined that it was Osiris, and
worshipped him in the shape of an ox, 
by the name of Apis and Serapis. They
had a custom of going out every year
to look him, and returned with great
shouts of joy, on pretence of having
found him. He reigned Anno Mundi 2200
or, according to others, 2100. Helvetius
a learned historian, supposes him to be
Mizraim, the eldest son of Cham.

Royal OSMUND an herb.

OSMUND the Waterman an herb.

OSPREY [ossifraga, L. i. e. the bone-­
breaker] a kind of eagle, that breaks
bones with her break; but, contrary to
the nature of other eagles, is said to be
short-sighted, to breed up not only her
own young ones, but also those that o­
thers have cast off.

OSSIFICATED, turned or become
bone, hardened from a softer cartilagi­
nous substance into one of a firmer tex­
ture.

OSTENSIVE demonstration [with
Mathematicians] such as demonstrates
the truth of any proposition, and in this
they are distinguished from apogogical
ones, or deductiones ad impossibile or ab­
surdum, which prove the truth of the
proposition by demonstrating the im­
possibility or absurdity of asserting the
contrary; they are twofold.

OSTENSIVE demonstrations [called
οτι, Gr.] which prove the thing to be
barely, but directly.

OSTENSIVE demonstrations [called
διοτι, Gr.] which prove the thing from
its nature, cause or essential properties.

OSTENTATIOUSNESS, vaunting­
ness, bragging, shewiness.

OSTEOLOGIST [of ὀστεολογος of
ὄστεον, a bone, and λέγω, Gr.] an anatomist
that describes the shape, structure and
use of human bones, &c.

OSTRACIAS [οστραχιας, Gr.] a sort of
precious stone like an oister shell.

OSTRACISM [ὀστραχισμος, Gr.] a ba­
nishment for 10 years, which the Athe­
nians inflicted on such persons, whose
over great power was suspected by the
people, fearing that they should degene­
rate into tyrants: So called of ὄστρεον, 
Gr. an oister; because they wrote the
name of him they intended to banish up­
on oister shells.

OSTRACITES [ὀστραχιτής, Gr.] a kind
of crusty stone, reddish and in the form
of an oister-shell, and separable into
laminæ, good against the gravel, it is
found in Germany; also called a nest of
boxes, because when one shell is taken
away, another appears of the same colour
and substance.

OSTRICH, an animal that is ranged
among birds. It is very large, has very
long legs, its wings very short, the neck
about the length of 4 or 5 spans.

The feathers of the wings are in
great esteem, and are used as an orna­
ment for hats, beds and canopies. They
are stained of several colours, and made
into tufts.

Their plumages are white and black, 
the females have a mixture of grey, 
black and white.

They are hunted by way of coursing, 
for they never fly; but they use their
wings to assist them in running more
swiftly.



Xenophon relates that the army of
young Cyrus found many ostriches near
the river Euphrates, that they chased
them with the swiftest horses in the ar­
my; but could never overtake them.

It is related of them, that when they
find themselves pursued, they take up
stones, between their cloven claws
which they throw at those that follow
them, with as much violence as the
strongest man can do.

It is said of the Ostrich that it digests
iron, but this is only a popular error.
It is true indeed that it swallows bits of
iron or of brass, if they are thrown to
it or if they find it, in the same manner
as other birds swallow small stones or
gravel; but not to nourish them, but to
assist in the digesting and comminution of
their food.

In the stomach of an ostrich which
was dissected, were found upwards of 70
French farthings, most of which were
worn, scratched and 3 parts consumed
away, probably by rubbing against each
other.

The ostrich lays her eggs in the
month of June upon the ground, covers
them with sand, and then leaves them
to the sun to hatch them. For as it is
a very heavy bird, it would break the
eggs, if it were to sit upon them like
other birds. She therefore hides them
in the sand and watches them. The
male and female doing this alternately, 
while the other goes to seek its food.

They are reported to lay 10, 12, 15, 
or 20, some of which generally mis­
carry, these the ostrich breaks and
feeds her young with the worms that
are bred from them.

Ostriches are said to be taken by a
man covered with the skin of an ostrich, 
who puts his arm into the skin of the
neck of the animal, lists it up on high, 
and imitates the motion of the head.
Others say, that when the ostrich is
pursued by the hunters, it will hide its
head in the sand, and continue there, 
thinking herself secure. Pliny says, it
will thrust its head into the bushes, and
remain there as if her whole body was
well concealed.

Again, it is said that the ostrich is
naturally deaf, which does not a little
contribute to her stupidity.

Some are seven foot and a half high
from the top of the head to the ground.

OSTRICH [Hieroglyphically] was
used to signify justice, because most of
her feathers are of an equal length.

OSTROGOTHS, q. d. Eastern-Goths,
Goths who came from the eastern part
of the world, and by conquest got foot­
ing in the southern and western parts
or Europe.

OTHERWISE [oðer&wyn;iſe, Sax.] or
else; also after another manner.

OTTOMAN, belonging to the Turk­
ish empire, laws or customs.

OTTER, a cant name for a sailor.

OVA, eggs,  L.

OVA [with Anatomists] are the little
spherical bodies in the form of blad­
ders or bubbles, consisting of two con­
centrick Membranula, replete with a
limpid humour like the white of an
egg, found under the external
brane of the ovaries of women.

OVALNESS [of ovalis, L. and ness]
the being in the form of an egg.

OVAL [in Geom.]
a figure bounded by a
regular curve-line re­
turning into itself. But
of its two diameters
cutting each other at right angles in the
center, one is longer than the other, 
in which it is different from the circle.
Every ellipsis is on oval figure, but e­
very oval figure is not an ellipsis.

Image omitted.



OVARIA [with Anatomists] the Ova­
na in women are about the bigness of
the testicles in men. Their substance
is composed of fibres and membranes, 
which leave little spaces, in which
there are several small vesicles, round, 
full of water, and which when boiled
harden like the whites of eggs: The
surface of the Ovaria is smooth and 
wrinkled in women of years. They
are covered with a proper membrane, 
which sticks close to their substance, and
with another common one from the
Peritonæum, which also covers the
spermatick vessels. They have each of
proper membranes, on which
there are several small twigs of veins, 
arteries and nerves. The vesicles of
the Ovaria are called eggs.

OVARY [with Botanists] is that part
of a flower which becomes the fruit, 
and so is properly the female organ of
generation.

OVATION [so call'd of a Sheep, be­
cause the general who so triumph'd of­
fered only a sheep; whereas in the
great triumph he offered a bull] an in­
ferior sort of triumph allowed by the
Romans to the generals of their armies, 
for lesser victories as over slaves, &c. or
when the war had not been declared ac­
cording to due form of law.

The manner was thus, the general
entred the city on foot, but some histo­



rians say on horse-back crowned with a
crown of myrtle; with flutes and not
with trumpets; nor was he admitted
to wear an embroidered garment, as
was done in greater triumphs; being
accompanied by the senators and fol­
lowed by the army.

OVEN [Incer. Etym.] a place for
baking.

OVER [ofer, Sax.] placed upon or
above the top.

OVER [ofre, Sax. a bank] in com­
position of proper names of places, &c.
signifies a bank, as Brownsover, and
Over a town in Glocestershire, upon the
bank of the Severn.

To OVER-Awe [of ofer and a&wyn;e, 
Sax.] to terrify.

To OVER-Bid [of ofer and biððan, 
Sax.] to bid too much.

OVER-Bold [of ofer and balð, 
Sax.] impudent.

OVER-Born [of ofer and bearan,
Sax.] prevailed over, oppressed.

To OVER-Burden [of ofer and
bẏrðen, Sax.] to over-load, &c.

To OVER-Charge [ofer, Sax. and
charger, F.] to charge too highly.

To OVER-Do [of ofer, and prob.
of ðoen, Sax.] to do more than is suf­
ficient.

To OVER-Eat [of ofer and ætan, 
Sax.] to eat too much.

To OVER-Fill [ofer-fẏllan, Sax.]
to fill more than enough.

To OVER-Flow [of ofer-fleo&wyn;an, 
Sax.] to flow over.

OVER-Gone [of ofer-ʒan, Sax.]
gone beyond, &c.

OVER-Grown [of ofer-ʒro&wyn;an, 
Sax.] grown too big.

OVER-Grown-Sea [Sea Term] when
the waves of the sea grow high, the
sailors call it a rough sea; but when
the surges and billows grow higher, 
then they say, it is an over-grown sea.

OVER-Hasty [of ofer, Sax. and
hâte, F.] too hasty.

To OVER-Hear [of ofer hẏran, 
Sax.] to hear privately.

OVER-All [in Heraldry] is when a
charge is, as it were, superadded to
that which was a very good bearing
without it.

To OVER-Live [of ofer and liblian, 
Sax.] to live beyond.

OVER-Loaden [of ofer and laðan, 
Sax.] having too great a load.

OVER-Long [of ofer, Sax. and
longus, L.] longer than is meet.

To OVER-Match [of ofer, Sax. and
mate, a companion] to exceed.

OVER-Measure [of ofer, Sax. and
mesure, F.] more than measure.

OVER-Much [of ofer, Sax. and
mucho, Ital.] more than enough.

OVER-Past [of ofer, Sax. and
passé, F.] passed over, gone beyond.

To OVER-Power [of ofer, Sax. and
pouvoir, F.] to be too powerful for.

To OVER-Reach [with Horses] is
when a horse brings his hinder feet too
far forwards, and strikes his toes
against the spunges of the fore shoes.

To OVER-Reckon [of ofer-reccan,
Sax.] to reckon too much.

OVER-Ripe [ofer-ripe, Sax.] too
ripe.

OVER-Seen [of ofer and ſeon, 
Sax.] mistaken, deceived.

To OVER-Shadow [of ofer-ſcea­
ðe&wyn;an, Sax.] to cast a shadow over.

To OVER-Shoot [ofer-ſcotan, 
Sax.] to shoot beyond, to exceed.

OVER-Sight [of ofer ʒeſihðe, 
Sax.] a mistake, or error by inadver­
tence.

To OVER-Spread [of ofer, Sax. and
spreeden, Du.] to spread over.

OVERT-Act [in the sense of the Law]
an open act, an advance or step made
towards compassing of an enterprize;
an act being capable of being manifested
or proved; and is distinguished from an
intentional act.

To OVER-Take [of ofer, Sax. and
tager, Dan. or tacken, Du.] to come
up to another that was before.

To OVER-Top [of ofer, Sax. and
top, Dan.] to exceed in height.

To OVER-Turn [of ofer-tẏrnan, 
Sax.] to overthrow, quite destroy, or
unhinge and ruin.

To OVER-Value [of ofer, Sax. eva­
luer, F.] to value too highly.

To OVER-Weigh [of ofer-&wyn;æʒan, 
Sax.] to out-weigh.

OVER-Weight [of ofer-ʒe&wyn;iht, 
Sax.] more than weight.

OVIFORM [oviformis of ovium, an
egg, and forma, L. a shape] in the form
or shape of an egg.

OUNCE Pearls, seed pearls too small
to be sold by tale.

OUNCE Cottons, cottons of a superior
quality to others brought from Damas­
cus.

OURAN-SOANGUE, men devils; a
sect of magicians in the island Grom­
boccanore in the East-Indies, of whom
it is related, that they have the art of
rendring themselves invisible, and pas­
sing where they please, and doing a great
deal of mischief; for which reason the
people hate them and kill them on the
spot, whenever they can catch them.



OURANOGRAPHIST [of ὀυρανος, 
the heaven, and γράφω, Gr. to describe]
an astronomer, or one who describes
the Heavens.

OUR [ohre, Sax.] of or belong­
ing to us.

OURS [ohre, Sax.] of or belong­
ing to us.

OUST, a vessel upon which hops or
malt is dryed.

To OUT-Bid [ute-biððan, Sax.] to
bid more than another.

To OUT-Brave [ute, Sax. and bra­
ver, F.] to silence, dash or out-do a per­
son by vaunting, &c.

OUT-Cast [of ute, Sax. and kaster, 
Dan.] a cast off, a forlorn person.

OUT-Cry [of ute and crie, Sax.] a
crying out, a noise.

To OUT-Do [prob. of ute and ðoen, 
Sax.] to exceed.

OUTER [utter, Sax.] outward.

OUTERMOST [ẏttermeſt, Sax.]
the most outward.

To OUT-Face [of ute, Sax. and fa­
cies, L. or face, F.] to assert confident­
ly and impudently, so as to silence a
modester person.

To OUT-Law one, to sue him to an
outlawry.

To OUT-Learn [of ute-leornian, 
Sax.] to learn faster or farther than an­
other.

OUT-Let [of ute and lætan, Sax.]
a passage out.

To OUT-Live [ute-libhan, Sax.] to
live longer than.

To OUT-Number [of ute, Sax. and
nombrer, F. or numerare, L.] to number
or amount to more than another.

To OUT-Pass [of ute, Sax. and pas­
ser, F.] to go beyond, to exceed.

OUTRIGHT [ute-riht, Sax.] tho­
roughly, totally; also immediately.

To OUT-Run [of ure arunian, Sax.]
to run better or faster than, or beyond
another; to exceed.

To OUTSTRIP [of ute, Sax. and
stroopen, Du.] to exceed, to excel, to
get the start of.

OUTSTRETCHT [of ute and aſ­
trecan, Sax.] extended, spread out in
length,

OUTWARDLY, on the out side.

To OUTWIT [of ure-&wyn;itan, Sax.]
to exceed, or impose on another by
wit.

OWL [of ule, Sax.] of these there
are several species. It has a head like
a cat and large sharp claws. It catches
mice like a cat; its eyes cannot bear
the great light of the sun. Other birds
hate it and pursue it, and in return the
owl hates and devours the lesser birds.

Its cry is mournful and dismal, and
it is taken for a bird of an ill omen. It
was consecrated to Minerva, and upon
this account it was honoured by the
Athenians.

If an owl be viewed before it has
something of an hideous aspect. Its
head is round, its eyes large and spark­
ling, its countenance terrible, its ears
large, its beak hard and crooked, of a
blackish colour.

The colour of his plumage is taw­
ney, a mixture of white and red very
agreeably diversified.

They are of three sizes, the large
ones are as big as a capon, the middle
sized as big as a wood pigeon, and the
smaller sort about the bigness of an
ordinary pigeon.

The horned owl is of two kinds ac­
cording to Aldrovandus, a larger and a
smaller, the larger has its plumage
more of an ash colour and more whit­
ish, and the smaller is more dun and
of a rusty colour.

The great owl is likewise of two
sorts, that is, of a larger and of a
smaller kind.

The great owl has neither horns nor
ears; but to make amends, it has a
kind of crown composed of very fine
soft feathers, which encompasses all
its face. Its beak is white and very
sharp, as also its pounces. Its back is
of a lead colour, marked with white
spots. Its breast and belly are whitish, 
with pretty large black spots inter­
spersed. Its whole body is covered
with a large quantity of feathers, that
they make it appear as big as a capon,
tho' when plucked is no bigger than a
chicken. It swallows a mouse or a
little bird all at once; but after it has
digested the flesh, it vomits up the fea­
thers and bones in a round ball, as the
Halcyon gives up the bones and the re­
mains or the small fishes it swallows.

The lesser owl resembles the great
one in almost every thing; but it is
smaller, and is hardly of a larger size
than a dove-house pidgeon. Its eyes
are extremly black, its bill is white
and short; the breast, belly, fore part
of the wings, the under part of the
belly and thighs are covered with ash
coloured feathers. The legs and claws
stick out with dun or reddish hair. It
has two claws before, and two behind, 
which are armed with black nails, very
strong and sharp.

OWL [Hieroglyphically] did represent
the death and unhappiness of a wicked
tyrant, or an hypocrite who hates to
be seen in the light of the sun.



OX [Oxa, Sax.] is a beast that sur­
passes most others in strength, yet pa­
tiently submits its neck to the yoke, 
and therefore is the emblem of strength
subdued and brought under; and for
that reason in heraldry is a proper
bearing for those who have laid the
yoke on the necks of fierce nations.

OX Eye [Sea Term] a violent storm
that sometimes happens on the coast of
Guinea; so called, because when it first
appears it is in the form of, and seems
not much larger than an ox's eye; but
comes with such impetuosity, that in a
very little space, and frequently before
they can prepare themselves for it, it
seems to over-spread the whole hemi­
sphere, and at the same time forces
the air with so much violence, that the
ships are sometimes scattered several
ways, and sometimes are sunk down­
right.

OXYGONOUS [of ὀξος sharp, and
γωνία, Gr. an angle] of or pertaining to
an oxygon; or an acute angled figure.

OYER [oyer, F. to hear] a law word
used in ancient times for what we now
call assizes.

OYER and Terminer [i. e. to hear and
determine] in ancient times it was
only upon some sudden outrage or in­
surrection; but at this time it is the
first and largest of the five commissions;
by vertue of which our judges of assizes
sit in their several courts.


P

Pp, Roman; Pp, Italick; Pp; English;
P p Sax, are the 15th letter of the
alphabet; Π π, the 16th of the Greek;
and ף, the 17 of the Hebrew.

The letter P is not heard in pronoun­
cing psalm, &c. contempt, &c. ph has the
sound of f.

P [among the Antients] a numeral
letter, signifying 100.

P̅ with a dash, stood for 400000.

The dash is placed on top of letter P.



PABULATORY [pabulatorius, L.]
the same as pabular.

PABULUM [with Naturalists] fuel, 
or that part in combustible bodies, 
which the fire immediately feeds on, or
is supported by.

PACALIA [among the Romans] feasts
celebrated in honour of the goddess
Pax, i. e. Peace.

PACATED [pacatus, L.] appeased, 
made peaceable.

To PACE [aller a pas, F.] as an horse.

PACHACAMAC [with the natives of
Peru and America] a name of God, the
creator of the world; tho' besides him
they worshipped the sun, and many o­
ther imaginary deities.

Pachacamac had several temples in dif­
ferent places; but his principal one was
in the valley of Peccachama, in which
they had also several idols, by whom
(being consulted) they received respon­
ses.

But they had so high a veneration for
Pachacamac, that they offered him what
they esteemed most precious; and durst
not behold him, so that even their priests
and kings, entred his temple with their
backs towards the altar, and came out
again without daring to turn about.

PACIFEROUSNESS [of pacifer, F.]
and ness] peace bringing quality.

PACIFICATION as Edict of Pacifica­
tion, the kings of France have granted
several edicts, to the Protestants of that
country, in order for the appeasing the
troubles and commotions caused by their
persecutions, after attempts had been
made by several severe edicts to stiffle
the reformation at its first beginning;
which not proving effectual, and new
troubles arising, K. Charles IX did in the
year 1562 publish an edict of Pacificati­
on, by which he reformed the free ex­
ercise of their religion, near all the ci­
ties and towns of the realm; and in the
year 1563 a second edict was published, 
permitting the free exercise of the re­
formed religion, in the houses of gen­
tlemen and lords, high justiciaries, or
those who had the power of life and
death; but only to those of their own
families and dependents; and permit­
ting also the other Protestants to have
sermons in such towns, as they had them
in before the seventh of March; but in
the year 1568 all that had been done
before in favour of the Protestants was
revoked, and the exercise of the Protes­
tant religion was wholly forbid, and all
the ministers were ordered to leave the
kingdom in 15 days; the king issuing out
a proclamation, declaring that he would
entertain no Protestants in any offices
belonging to the courts of justice or
of the revenue; Again, in Angust 1570
another edict was published, allowing
the lords justiciaries to have sermons in
their houses for all comers, and granting
other Protestants 2 publick exercises in
each government, and the continuance
of the same where they had it before the
first of August, and 4 cautionary towns, 
viz. Rochel, Montauban, Coginac and La
Charitie to be places of security for 2
years; but in August 1572 the king au­



thorized the Bartholomew massacre, and
the same month declared his reasons
for so doing in parliament; and also
forbid the exercise of the Protestant re­
ligion throughout the kingdom; and
Henry III did in April 1576 publish an
edict of pacification, allowing the Pro­
testants to build churches and have pub­
lick sermons wherever they pleased, 
without any restriction to time, place
or persons; also granting them courts
of justice that should consist of half
Protestants and half Papists, and 8 cauti­
onary towns; but this edict was also
revoked the December following; and
was renewed again in October 1577 for
6 years; soon after the expiration
of which several severe edicts were
published against the Protestants, declar­
ing that no religion should be allowed
but the Catholick; and moreover, that if
the king was contrarily inclined he
should not succeed to the crown. But
these severe edicts were revoked again
by K. Henry IV, and the edict of 1577
was confirmed. But the power and
malice of their enemies was so great, 
that this edict obtained only in some
places, where the Protestants were mas­
ters. And a new edict was published
in April 1598, called the edict of Nantz, 
by which the Protestants were permit­
ted the free exercise of their religion, 
in all those places where they had it in
1596 and 1597, and one exercise in each
bailiwick, and at 2 leagues distance from
principal towns.

This edict was confirmed by Lewis
XIII in 1610, and also by Lewis XIV in
1652; but in 1685 he intirely abolished
this edict and also that of Nismes.

PACIFICATORINESS [of pacificato­
rius, L. and ness] peace making quality.

PACIFICKNESS [of pacificus, L. and
ness] peace making quality.

PACKAGE [old Rec.] a duty of a pen­
ny per pound on certain merchandizes.

PACKERS, persons appointed and
sworn to pack up herrings, according
to the statute; also cloth and other
manufactures.

PACKING, putting up in packs; also
placing cards.

PACKET [paquet, F.] a parcel, or
bundle, as of letters, &c.

PACTA conventa [in Poland] are the
articles mutually agreed on between the
king and the republick, and which they
oblige each other to observe.

PAD, a bundle, O. Hence a little soft
bolster to put under some hard thing
that is worn next to the body of an ani­
mal man or beast is so called.

PADDOCK, or Paddock Course, a
piece of ground taken out of a park, 
encompassed with pales or a wall, for
racing with greyhounds for wagers, 
plate, &c. Those paddocks are usually
a mile long, and a quarter of a mile
broad. At one end is a little house
where the dogs are to be entered, and
whence they are to be slipt; and near
this place are pens to inclose two or
three deer for the sport.

PADUAN [with Medalists] a modern
medal, in imitation of an antique; or
a new medal struck with all the marks
and characters of antiquity.

PADVANTAGE, a right of pasturage
or putting cattle to feed on a common
pertaining to one or more towns.

PÆDARTHROCACE [of παῖς a boy, 
ἄρθρον a joint, and χαχον an evil, Gr.]
the corupting of a bone in the joint, 
the joint-evil, a disease incident mostly
to children, where the joints swell, and
the bones are most commonly rotten.

PAEAN [in Ancient Poetry] a foot,
so called because supposed
to be appropriated to the hymn Pæan.

PAEON [in Ancient Poetry] a foot,
so called because supposed
to be appropriated to the hymn Pæan.

PAEDEROTROPICA [παιδεροτροπιχή,
Gr.] a part of physick which relates to
the management of children.

PAGANS [pagani, of Pagus, L. a
village] those of the
Heathen or Gentile religion, so called be­
cause that after cities were converted
to Christianity, superstition still remain­
ed in the villages, for that the publish­
ers of Christianity mostly resorted to
cities.

PAINIMS [pagani, of Pagus, L. a
village] those of the
Heathen or Gentile religion, so called be­
cause that after cities were converted
to Christianity, superstition still remain­
ed in the villages, for that the publish­
ers of Christianity mostly resorted to
cities.

PAGANALIA [among the Romans]
feasts held in villages, where also
altars were erected, and sacrifices offe­
red annually to the tutelar gods, Here
the peasants offered cakes to Ceres and
Telius for plentiful harvests.

PAGE, a youth of honour, advanced
to the service of a prince, or some great
personage, to attend on visits of cere­
mony.

PAGOD, a name by which the Indi­
ans and Chinese call their temples and
idols.

PAINE fort & dure [in Com. Law] a
punishment for those that being arraign­
ed of felony, refuse to put themselves
upon the ordinary trial of God and
their country, and are therefore ac­
counted to stand mute and speechless.
This punishment is commonly called
pressing to death; during which time of
punishment, they are to have only hard
dry barley-bread and puddle water.

PAINED [peine, F. or prob of peinen
Teut, puner, Dan. pinan, Sax.] affected
with pain.



PAINFULLY [pin full and ʒelice, 
Sax.] after a painful and laborious
manner.

PAINFULNESS [pin and fulneſſe, 
Sax.] a quality causing pain; also labo­
riousness.

PAINTERS, this
company having the
addition of Painter-­
Stainers, are of high
antiquity, yet not
incorporated till An­
no 1580. 23d of Queen
Elizabeth; their arms
are azure, a chev­
ron Or, between three griffins heads
crased argent.

Image omitted.



PAIRED [appaier, F.] coupled, &c.

Trial per PAIS [Law Term] is a trial
by a country or a jury, i. e. those that
are of the same country or neighbour­
hood.

PALAESTRA [of παλαί, Gr. wrest­
ling] a building where the Grecian youth
exercised themselves in wrestling, run­
ning quoits, &c.

PALAESTRICAL, of or pertaining
to wrestling.

PALATABLENESS [of palatum, habi­
lis L. and ness] agreeableness of palate
or taste.

PALATINATE [palatinat, F. of  L.]
a province or signiory possessed by a
palatine, and from which he takes his
title and dignity.

PALATINE [palatin, F.] belonging
to the palace or court of an emperor, or
sovereign prince, as a count palatine.

PALATUA [among the Romans] a
goddess, who, as they believ'd presid­
ed over the palace.

PALATUAL, the sacrifice offered
to Palatua.

PALATUALES, the priests who of­
fered the sacrifice to Palatua.

PALEOLOGY [παιαιολογία of παλαιὸς
old and λέγω, Gr. to treat] a treatise of
antiquity.

To PALE-in [pallissader, F.] to en­
close or fence with pales.

PALE [in Heraldry] is one of the ten
honourable ordinaries; and
is so call'd, because it is
like the palisades used about
fortifications, and stands
perpendicularly upright in
an escutcheon, dividing it
length-ways from the top to the bot­
tom, and should contain a third part of
the shield, See the Escutcheon.

Image omitted.



In PALE, signifies things borne one
above another in the nature of a pale.

PALES [in Carpentry] boards set
up for partitions of gar­
dens, grounds, &c. also rows of piles
or stakes drove into the ground, to make
wooden bridges over rivers.

PILES [in Carpentry] boards set
up for partitions of gar­
dens, grounds, &c. also rows of piles
or stakes drove into the ground, to make
wooden bridges over rivers.

PALEE [in Heraldry] is when a
shield is divided into four
or more equal parts, by
perpendicular lines falling
from the top to the bottom.
See the Escutcheon.

Image omitted.



Party per PALE, signifies a shield di­
vided by one single line
thro' the middle from the
top to the bottom, which
is the nature of a pale. See
the Escutcheon.

Image omitted.



PALED, a coat is said to be paled, 
when it is equally charged with metal
and colour.

PALENESS [of pale, F. and ness of
palliditas, L.] wanness, or whiteness of
countenance.

Counter PALED [in Heraldry] is where
the pale is cut, and the demi-pales of
the chief tho' of colours the same with
those of the point, yet different in the
place where they meet; so that if the
first of the chief be metal, that which
corresponds to it underneath is of co­
lour.

PALEISH [of pallidus, L.] something
pale.

PALES, a goddess of shepherds, un­
der whose protection were the flocks
and herds. This goddess is said to
have been belov'd by Apollo, to whom
there was a festival observ'd the 20th
or 21st of April, by offering sacrifices;
and making great fires of straw and
hay, which were kindled with great
rejoicings, attended with the sound of
drums and trumpets.

The country people leap'd over those
fires, and purified their cattle there­
with, in order to keep them from the
mange and other distempers.

PALICI [of τοῖ παλιν ἰχέθαι, i. e.
coming out again from the earth] deities
famous in Sicily, said to have been the
sons of Jupiter by Thalia, who hiding
herself in the earth from Juno, brought
forth two brothers, call'd Palici, in
whose temple in Sicily, were two deep
basons of boiling sulphurous water ne­
ver running over, the two holes being
the holes at which these two brothers
came out, being turn'd into the afore­
said boiling fountains. These fountains
were called Delli, and were famous for
the trial and punishment of perjury;
for into them was thrown the oath of
him that had sworn, written on a note;



which, if true, floated; but if false, 
sunk to the bottom.

Some are said for perjury there to
have lost their eye-sight, insomuch
that those oaths determined the most
intricate causes; this temple was also
us'd as an Asylum or sanctuary for such
slaves as were oppress'd by their ma­
sters; the latter not daring to break
the oaths they took there, that they
would use them more kindly. Poetick.

PALILIA [among the Romans] feasts
and publick rejoicings celebrated April
20th, in honour of Pales the goddess of
shepherds; at which time they purified
their flocks and herds with the fumes
of Rosemary, Laurel and Sulphur, by
driving their cattle 3 times round it;
their Sacrifices were milk and wafers
made with millet; during which, they
danc'd and leap'd over fire made of
bean straw, branches of olives, pine
and laurel. These festivals were cele­
brated to her that she might drive a­
way the wolves, and prevent diseases
incident to cattle, and render the earth
fruitful.  L.

These feasts were also performed in
honour of Rome's original, which was
on that day founded by Romulus.

PALILICIUM [Astronomy] a fix'd star
of the first magnitude in the bull's eye, 
called also Aldibaran.

PALIMBACHIUS [with Grammari­
ans] a foot consisting of two long sylla­
bles and one short, as Nātũră.

PALIMPSESTON [παλίμψηστος, Gr.]
a sort of paper or parchment used for
making the first draught of things, 
which would bear wiping out, and
new writing in the same place.

PALINTOCHIA [of πὰλιν and τίχτεω, 
Gr. to bring forth] the delivery of a
child a second time.

PALISES [in Heraldry]
represents a range of palis­
sadoes before a fortificati­
on, and so represented on a
Fess, rising up a considera­
ble length and pointed at
the top, with the field appearing be­
tween them.

Image omitted.



PALISADES [in Architecture.]

Turning PALISADES [in Fortificat.]
an invention to
preserve the pa­
lisades of the
parapet from
the shot of the
besiegers, so or­
dered, that as many of them as stood in
the length of a rod or 10 foot, did turn
up and down like a trap, so that they
could not be seen by the enemy, but
just when they brought on their attack;
but nevertheless were always ready to
do the proper office of palisades; as
the figure.

Image omitted.



PALISADES [in Gardening] an orna­
ment in the alleys of gardens, wherein
trees are planted, which bear branches
from the bottom, and which are spread
in such a manner, as to appear a wall
covered with leaves.

A cross PALL [in Heral.]
represents the ornaments
of an archbishop sent 
from Rome to metropolitans, 
made of the wool of white
lambs. See the Escutcheon.

Image omitted.



PALL [in the church of Rome] an
archiepiscopal vestment, worn by bi­
shops, made of lambs wool; and, as
some say, spun by a particular order
of nuns, and adorn'd with several
black crosses; it is not above 3 fingers
in breadth; but has 2 labels hanging
down before and behind; arch-bishops
wear them about their neck when they
go to the altar, over their pontifical
habit.

They are said to be an emblem of
innocence and humility, and likewise
to put the bishop in mind of bis pasto­
ral office, and care of fetching the
stray sheep home, like the good shep­
herd, on his shoulders; but the most
essential thing intimated by them, seems
to be their dependence on the pope, to
whom archbishops of Canterbury have
paid 5000 Florins (a very considerable
sum, especially in those times) for a
pall, without which they were not
permitted to exercise their functions.

For by the decretals publish'd in the
beginning of the 13th century, by pope
Gregory the XI. it was declared that an
archbishop, could not call a council, 
bless the chrism, consecrate churches, 
ordain a clerk or consecrate a bishop, 
till he had received his pall from the
See of Rome; and that before the bishop
receiv'd his pall he should swear fide­
lity to the pope; and by another canon
it was decreed, that upon the transla­
tion of an archbishop he should not
carry away his pall with him, but ap­
ply to the pope for a new one; nor
should his successor make use of the
pall he left behind, and that every
archbishop should be buried in his pall, 
by which means the church of Rome
greatly inrich'd its exchequer.

PALLADES [among the inhabitants
of the city Thebes] virgins dedicated to
Jupiter in the manner following; one



of the most noble born and the most
beautiful was consecrated to him, who
was permitted to lie with whom she
pleas'd till the time of her natural
purgation, and then had a husband giv­
en her; but from the time of her pro­
stitution, till the time of her marriage, 
she was lamented as if she was dead.

PALL-MALL, an exercise or play, 
where a round bowl or iron ball is
with a mallet, struck thro' an arch of
iron, standing at either end of an alley;
as in St. James's Park.

PALLADIUM [of Παλλαδις, Gr.]
the statue of Pallas, represented holding
a pike in her hand that always moved
as she turned her eyes. The Trojans
did believe that this image fell down
from Heaven into the temple before it
was covered; and they were told by
the oracle of Apollo, that their city
should be inexpugnable so long as that
was with them. At the siege of Troy
it is said to have been stolen away by
Ulysses and Diomedes; but others say
this was a false one, which was expos'd
to the publick, and that the true one
was with the tutelar gods, carried by
Æneas into Italy; which being intro­
duced into Rome, many counterfeit
ones were made like it, to prevent the
true one from being stolen.

PALLAS [Πάλλαι, Gr.] the goddess
of war and wisdom, who, according
to the poets, came forth armed out of
Jupiter's brain when his head was cleft
by Vulcan. She was also call'd Minerva.
Which see.

PALLAS [in Painting, &c.] is repre­
sented in a blue mantle embroidered
with silver.

PALLED [prob. of appale, F.] flat, 
dead, without spirit, as wine, beer, 
&c.

PALLET [in Heraldry] is a small
pale, being half the breadth of a pale, 
of which pallets there are sometimes
several in one shield, and must never
be charged with any thing white or red.

PALLIARDS [among the Canting
Crew] a sort of beggars both male and
female, who to move compassion, go
about with one, two or more small
children in a dirty, ragged condition, 
who are continually crying or making
wry faces, as tho' hunger starv'd, and
the woman making a lamentable cry of
a doleful tale, of being a poor distres­
sed widow, &c. and at the same time
her male companion, lies begging ei­
ther in the fields or streets, with Cleymes
or artificial sores made with Spear-wort
or Arsenick, &c. which draws them
into blisters. The importer at the
same time making a hideous noise, and
pretending great pain; but if oppor­
tunity offers can recover his limbs to
rob and perhaps murder.

PALLIATIVE [paliatif, F.] serving
to palliate.

PALLIATIVE Cure [in Physick] is
the answering of a palliative indica­
tion; or the removal or mitigation of
the symptoms of a disease, the cause
of it still remaining.

PALLIATIVE Indication [with Phy­
sicians] is where the symptoms of a di­
sease give too much trouble and danger
to have the cure deferred till the dis­
ease, on which it depends, is removed.

PALLIDNESS [of pallidas, L. and
ness] paleness.

PALLIER [Carpentry] in a build­
ing, landing place in
a stair case; or a step, which being
broader than the rest, serves for a
resting place.

PAILLIER [Carpentry] in a build­
ing, landing place in
a stair case; or a step, which being
broader than the rest, serves for a
resting place.

PALM [palmus, L.] the inner part of
the hand; also a measure of a hand's
breadth, three inches.

PALM-Tree [Emblematically] repre­
sents justice, because it is said to pro­
duce all its fruit proportionable to its
leaves; and because the wood of it is
least subject to corruption.

The PALM-Tree [Hieroglyphically]
was used to represent the life of a re­
ligious man, the root of which is un­
pleasant to look upon, but the fruit and
branches are grateful both to the eye
and the taste. It also is used to repre­
sent victory, in that it is said to rise the
higher the greater weight it bears.

PALM-Worm [in America] an insect
about 12 inches long, and extreme
swift in its motion, having an incredi­
ble number of feet, and two claws at
the head and tail, with which it wounds
and poisons persons, putting them to
intolerable pain for 24 hours.

PALMESTRY [of palma, L. the
palm of the hand] a kind of divination
or telling fortunes by inspecting the
palm of the hand.

PALMETOIRE, an Indian tree, of
the juice of which the Indians make a
pleasant sort of wine,

PALMOSE [palmosus, L.] full of or
abounding with palm trees.

PALMUS, a hand breadth, a span
from the thumb to the little finger,  L.

PALMS [with Botanists] white buds
shooting out of willows or sallows be­
fore the leaf.

The PALPABLE obscure, darkness
that may be felt. Milton.



PALPABLY [palpablement, F.] plain­
ly, evidently, &c.

PALPABLENESS [of palpabilis, L.
and ness] capableness of being felt;
also plainness, manifestness.

PALSICAL [paralyticus L.] having
the palsey.

PALSICALNESS [of παράλυσις, Gr.]
afflictedness with the palsey.

PALTING [q.d. pelting] throwing at.

PALTRINESS [prob. of poltron, F.
or pallor, L.] pitifulness, sorriness.

PALY Bendy [in Heral.]
is when an escutcheon is
divided by lines perpendi­
cular, which is called Paly, 
and then again by others
diagonal athwart the shield from the
dexter side to the sinister, which is cal­
led Bendy.

Image omitted.



PAMPHARMACON [παμφαρμαχον,
of παν, all, and φαρμαχον, Gr. a poison
or remedy] an universal remedy against
all manner of poisons; also an univer­
sal remedy against all diseases.

PAN [plann, Teut. panne, Dan. pan­
ne, Sax.] a vessel of various metals
and for various uses.

PAN [πᾶν, Gr. all] hence mytholo­
gists find secrets of nature couched, and
then Παν signifies the universe. An 
ancient Egyptian deity called by them 
Mendes, a he-goat, in the form of which 
he was there worshipped. But the 
Greeks say he was the son of Penelope
the daughter of Icarus, whom Mercury 
ravished in the shape of a he-goat, and
born in Arcadia, whence he was es­
teemed a rural deity, and the god of 
mountains, woods and shepherds; and
also as the god of nature.

Plutarch, in a tract of his morals, cal­
led, περί τῶν λελοιπότων χρηστηριων i.e.
Why oracles cease to give answers, tells
us a notable story, that a ship sailing out
of Greece into Italy, was becalmed a­
bout the Echinades, and the persons in
the ship heard a voice loudly calling on
one Thamus an Egyptian, who was then
in the ship, who made no answer to the
first or second call, but at the third re­
plied, Here am I; then the voice spake a­
again, bidding him when he came to the
Palodes, to make it known that the great
god Pan was dead, and that, when they
came to the Palodes, which are certain
shelves and rocks in the Ionian sea, 
Thamus, standing on the poop of the
ship, did as the voice directed him;
whereupon was heard a mighty noise
of many together, who all seemed to
groan and lament, with terrible and
hideous shriekings. News hereof com­
ing to Tiberius emperor of Rome, he cau­
sed the learned men to enquire out of
their books who that Pan should be;
who answered, that he was the son of
Mercury and Penelope. Bur those who
more narrowly examined the circum­
stances of this accident, found it happen­
ed at the time when our Saviour suffered
on the cross, who was the true god Pan
and shepherd of our souls; and that upon
this divulging his death and passion, the
devils who used to speak in oracles, 
began to desist from that office.

Herodotus says the people of the pro­
vince Mendes, placed Pan among the
gods, who were before the XII, that he
was represented with the head of a
she-goat, and the legs of a he-goat, tho'
he was believed to be like other gods, 
and that as Mendes is a common name
to Pan, to an he-goat and to a town, 
there was a sacred he-goat kept, upon
the death of which, all the country
went into mourning, as others did upon
the death of Apis or Mnevis.

Orpheus says that Pan signifies univer­
sal nature, proceeding from the divine
mind and providence, of which the hea­
ven, earth, sea and the eternal fire, are
so many members.

Some by Pan understand the sun.

Common mythologists are of opinion
that his upper parts being like a 
intimate that the superior and celestial
parts of the world are beautiful, radiant
and glorious; that his horns represent the
rays of the sun, as they work upwards, 
and his long beard signify the same rays
as they have an influence upon the
earth, the ruddines of his countenance
bears a resemblance to the sky.

PAN [Hieroglyphically] is pictured
with two horns on his head, and a gar­
ment of a leopard's skin about his shoul­
ders, and a rank of seven slender pipes
in his hand, so joined together that their
musick could make an harmonious con­
sort, to signify the harmony and rare
correspondency that is in the world be­
tween the several parts that compose it.
The two horns did represent the sun;
his garment the beautiful variety of the
stars.

PAN, the lower part of this deity is
hairy, and resembles a goat, to intimate
the unevenness of the earth: Others
suppose that by the hairiness and rough­
ness of his lower parts, are represented
the shrubs, wild creatures, trees and
mountains here below. They feign
him lascivious and lustful, because of
the many causes of seeds, and the mix­
tures which are made from them.



He pursues the nymphs, for he de­
lights in exhalations, which proceed
from humidity, without which it is im­
possible that the world should exist.

Others understand by his amorous
complexion (which causes him to pur­
sue the nymphs) the desire of genera­
tion, which spreads itself through all
beings, who attract matter proper for
that end from the moisture which is
represented by the nymphs.

He is said to be clothed with a leo­
pard's skin, as well because of the
beautiful variety of all things, as also
because of the colours that are seen in
the world; or, as others think, his
spotted skin is the image of the starry
firmament.

His goat's feet signify the solidity of
the earth, and his pipe of seven reeds, 
that celestial harmony supposed to be
made by the seven planets.

His shepherd's crook is supposed to
intimate that care and providence by
which the universe is conducted and
governed.

It is pretended that the Heathens
have taken many circumstances of the
life of Moses and applyed them to the
god Pan. He was represented with
horns like Moses, and carrying a wan
in his hand; he was the god of shep­
herds, of hunters, of the country peo­
ple; as Moses was head of a people, of
shepherds, of labourers, and of coun­
trymen.

Pan taught Apollo the art of divina­
tion and playing upon the flute. Moses
gave to his brother Aaron the oracle of
Urim and Thummim, and appointed the
Levites to play upon instruments in the
tabernacle of the Lord.

We are told Pan commanded armies
and formed sieges; Moses was at the
head of a prodigious army of Israelites, 
&c.

He was generally represented with
the body and head of a man, and the
lower parts from the thighs down­
wards were those of a goat, having a
staff in his hand and horns upon his
forehead.

PANACEA [according to Galen]
medicines which he had in great
esteem. Thence,
PANACEA [with Chymists] is applied
to their universal medicine, which as
they pretend, will cure all diseases in
all circumstances, constitutions and
ages.

PANACEOUS, a term applied to
several plants, by reason of the extra­
ordinary virtues ascribed to them.

PANARITIUM [with Surgeons] a
very painful swelling at the end of the
finger at the root of the nail.

PANATHENAEA [of πᾶν, all, and
Ἀθηννία, Gr. Minerva] feasts observed
at Athens, for the union of the towns
of Attica, by Theseus. Here they wrest­
led naked, and danced the Pyrrhick
dance in armour.

PANCALIER, a plant otherwise
called Milan cabbage.

PANCARPUS [of πᾶν, all, and
χάρπὸς, fruit, Gr.] a spectacle or show, 
which the Roman emperors exhibited
to the people; a kind of chace or hunt
of a number of beasts, as bullocks, 
deers, hares, &c. which being shut
up in the circus or amphitheatre, 
into which trees were frequently trans­
planted so as to form a kind of forest, 
were let out to the people, and those
who would pursue, shot, killed and
cut in pieces all they could; others
suppose Pancarpus to be also a combat
wherein robust people, hired for that
purpose, fought with wild beasts.

PANCHYMAGOGA [of πᾶν, all, 
χυμος, humour, and ἀγωγός, a leader]
universal purges, medicines which dis­
perse all humours in the body.

PANCRATICAL [prancraticus, L.
of πᾶν, all, and χράτος, Gr. power]
almighty.

PANCREATICK Juice, an insipid, 
limpid juice or humour, separated from
the blood, and prepared in the Pan­
creas.

PANDÆMONIUM [of πᾶν, all, and
δαιμόνιων, Gr. of devils] the great hall, 
court or council chamber, or parlia­
ment house of devils. Milton.

PANDORA [πάν των δωρα, Gr. i. e.
receiving the gifts of all the gods] a
woman (according to the poets) made
by Vulcan, at the command of Jupiter, 
whom every god adorned with several
gifts. Pallas gave her wisdom, Venus
beauty, Apollo musick, Mercury elo­
quence; others say, the mother of
Deucalion, who sent a box to Epime­
theus, filled with all kinds of evils, who
having received it, opened it, and out
they all flew and filled the earth with
diseases, and all other calamities. He­
sychius expounds this of the earth, as
bellowing all things necessary for life.

PANEGYRICK [among the Greeks]
a church book, consisting of panegy­
ricks or discourses in praise of Jesus
Christ and the saints.

PANEGYRICK [Πανηγυριχος of πᾶν
all, and ἄγυρις, an assembly, Gr.] a
commendatory oration or poem recited



before a solemn assembly of people, 
which is said to have taken its original
from a custom of the Greeks, who
were wont to assemble together at cer­
tain stated festivals, and there instruct­
ed and animated one another, by wise
discourses to profitable and honourable
enterprizes, by rehearsing the exploits
of eminent persons; here orators, 
poets, historians, &c. recited their
performances.

From hence the custom of celebra­
ting the memory of persons who had
deserved well of their country by their
valour.

PANEITY [of panis, L. bread] the
essence of or the quality of being bread.
Prior.

PANES, satyrs of whom Pan was the
chief, and who for that reason were
often confounded with him.

They were the Pagan deities of the
woods, fields and hunting; and often
taken for a symbol of impudence and
unchastity.

A PANICK sudden consternati­
on that siezes upon
mens fancies, without any visible cause;
a needless or ill-grounded fright. The
reason why these terrors are attributed
to Pan, was, as some say, because when
Osiris was bound by Typho, Pan and the
satyrs appearing, cast him into a
fright; or because he frighted all the
giants that waged war against Jupiter:
Or as others say, that when Pan was
Bacchus's lieutenant general in his In­
dian expedition, being encompassed in
a valley, with an army of enemies far
superior to them in number, he advised
the god to order his men to give a ge­
neral shout, which so surprized the op­
posite army, that they immediately fled
from their camp. And hence it came
to pass, that all sudden fears impressed
upon mens spirits, without any just
reason, were, by the Greeks and Ro­
mans called, Panick Terrors.

PANICK Fear sudden consternati­
on that siezes upon
mens fancies, without any visible cause;
a needless or ill-grounded fright. The
reason why these terrors are attributed
to Pan, was, as some say, because when
Osiris was bound by Typho, Pan and the
satyrs appearing, cast him into a
fright; or because he frighted all the
giants that waged war against Jupiter:
Or as others say, that when Pan was
Bacchus's lieutenant general in his In­
dian expedition, being encompassed in
a valley, with an army of enemies far
superior to them in number, he advised
the god to order his men to give a ge­
neral shout, which so surprized the op­
posite army, that they immediately fled
from their camp. And hence it came
to pass, that all sudden fears impressed
upon mens spirits, without any just
reason, were, by the Greeks and Ro­
mans called, Panick Terrors.

PANICULATED [in Botan. Writ.]
a plant is said to be floribus paniculatus, 
i. e. with paniculate flowers, when
it bears a great number of flowers
standing upon long foot-stalks, issuing
on all sides from the middle stalks; the
whole bunch being broad at the bottom
or in the middle, and growing nar­
rower towards the top, as in some
starworts.

A PANTALOON, a buffoon or jack-­
pudding dressed in a pantaloon.

PANTHEA [of πᾶν all, and Θεος, 
God, Gr.] among the Romans, single
statues composed of the figures or
symbols of several different divinities;
or figures on medals, the heads of
which are adorned with symbols of
several gods, as one of Antoninus Pius, 
which represents Serapis by the bushel
it bears, &c.

PANTHEAN Statues, statues that
represent all or the most considerable
of the heathen deities, distinguished by
their several peculiar marks, which
were placed above, about, or upon the
statues: Jupiter was known by his thun­
der-bolt; Juno by her crown; Sol by
his beams; Mars by his helmet; Venus
by her beauty; Mercury by wings at his
feet, or his Caduceus; Bacchus by ivy;
Ceres by a cornucopia, or ears of corn;
Diana by a crescent; and Cupid by a
bundle of arrows, &c.

PANTHEOLOGIST [of πᾶν, all, 
and Θεολόγος, a divine, Gr.] a student
or writer of universal or a whole body
of divinity.

PANTHEON [of παν των θεῶν, Gr.
i. e. of all the gods] a temple in Rome, 
built in a round form by Agrippa, the
son-in-law of Augustus, adorned with
marble of various colours. In the
walls were niches, in which the sta­
tues of the gods were placed. The
gates were of brass, the beams cover­
ed with brass gilt, and the roof was of
silver plates. It was dedicated to Jupi­
ter Vindex. It was since consecrated
by pope Boniface III. to the Virgin Ma­
ry, and is now called Santa Maria della
rotunda.

PANTHER [πάνθηρ of πᾶν, all, and
θηρ, a wild beast, Gr.] so named, be­
cause it has the fierceness of all beasts
put together.

PANTHER [Hieroglyphically] is put
to represent hypocrisy and deceit; be­
cause it is related, that the scent of its
skin attracts all other beasts; but it
having a fierce countenance which
frightens them, it covers it with her
two fore-paws, till they come nearer, 
so that she can the more easily sieze
them.

PANTHERINE [of panthera, L.] of
or like a panther.

PANTING [pantelant, F.] fetching
the breath short, or breathing quick.

PANTOFFLES [pantoufles, F.] high
soled slippers, Pantables: Hence, to stand
upon the pantables (pantoufles] signifies
strenuously to insist upon, or stand up
for his honour, &c.

PAPÆ [of Παπὰ, Gr. i. e. father]
Greek Christian bishops or priests.

Some make a distinction betwixt Pa­
pæ and Papas, and say that Παπὰ signi­



fies the inferior clergy, and Παπἄς, 
chief priests.

PAPAYER [in the Caribbe Islands] a
kind of fruit.

PAPER [of Papyrus, L.] the Papyrus
is a plant or kind of bulrush, which
grows in Egypt upon the banks of the
river Nile, which the Egyptians apply'd
to several uses; as to make baskets, 
shoes, cloths, little boats to swim in
upon the Nile, and paper to write on.

The trunk of the Papyrus or paper
reed is composed of several leaves or
films, placed one over another, which
were peeled off and separated with a
needle, and afterwards stretched out
upon a wet table, to the length and
breadth of the intended leaf of paper.
Over the first layer of the leaves of
paper they put some thin paste, or only
some of the muddy water of the Nile a
little warmed, upon which they spread
a second layer of the leaves of the Pa­
pyrus, then they let it dry by the sun.

The leaves that are the nearest the
heart of the plant are the finest, and
make the best sort of paper, the next
to them are a degree coarser, and so of
the rest.

PAPER-Shoes [Hieroglyphically] re­
presented priesthood among the E­
gyptians; because their priests wore no
other.

PAPISTICAL [of papiste, F.] of or
pertaining to the Papists.

PAPISTICALLY, after a popish
manner.

PAPISTICALNESS, popishness.

PAPPESCENT [pappescens, L.]
growing downy.

PAPPOUS-lactescent [in Botany]
downy or milky.

PAPPOUSNESS [of papposus, L. and
ness] downiness, softness, spunginess.

PAPPY [of pappus, L.] soft, spungy.

PARABLE [παραβολὴ, Gr.] a conti­
nued similitude or comparison; a de­
claration or exposition of a thing by
way of similitude or companion; a dark
saying, an allegory; a fable or allego­
rical instruction, founded on some thing
real or apparent in nature or history;
from which some moral is drawn, by 
comparing it with some other thing in 
which persons are more immediately
concerned.

PARABOLA [with Rhetoricians] a
figurative expression, when one thing
is uttered, and another signified.

PARABOLIANI, a set of persons, 
who, in the Alexadurian church, devo­
ted themselves to the service of church­
es and hospitals.

PARABOLA 
[παραβολὴ, Gr.]
is a curve as A
B C, made by
cutting a cone
by a plane A E, 
parallel to one
of its sides, as
FG.

Image omitted.



PARABOLA 
[of παραβαλλω, 
Gr.] a figure a­
rising from the
section of a
cone, when cut
by a plain pa­
rallel to one of
its sides.

PARABOLICK Cuneus [Geometry]
is a solid
thus formed:
Multiply all
the A B's into
A E's; or, 
which is all
one, upon the
base F G H, 
erect a prism, 
whose alti­
tude shall be
F E; and this
shall be the
Parabolic Cu­
neus, which is equal in solidity to the
Parabolical Pyramidoid.

Image omitted.



PARABOLICK Space 
[in Geometry] is the area
contained between the
curve of the parabola, 
and a whole ordinate B C.
This is the two third of the circumscri­
bing parallelogram B C D E in the com­
mon parabola.

Image omitted.



PARABOLICK Pyramidoid [in Geo­
metry] a solid figure, so called from its
particular formation.

PARABOLICK Conoid [in Geometry]
a solid figure generated by the rotation
of a Semi parabola about its Axis, and
is equal to half of its circumscribing
cylinder.

PARABOLICK [in Geometry] a solid
body formed by the turning of a Semi-­
parabola about its ordinate.

PARABOLICALLY [parabolique­
ment, F.] by way of parable.

PAROBOLICALNESS [of paraboli­
cus, L. and ness] the being of the nature
or manner of a parable.

PARABOLIFORM [of parabola and
formis L.] of the form of a parabola.



PARACENTRICK Sollicitation of
Gravity or Levity [in Mechanicks] is the
same with the vis centripeta.

The Bed of PARADE, that on which
a person lies in state.

PARADE [in Fencing] the act of
parrying or turning off any push or
stroke.

PARADIASTOLE [παραδιατολήσ, Gr.]
a separation, a distinction; a figure in
rhetorick which joins things that seem
to have one import; and shews how
much they differ, by subjoining to each
its proper meaning, as triste lupus sta­
bulis, maturis frugibus imbres. L.

PARADIGRAMMATICE [of παρὰ­
δειγμα an example, and γραμμα a
picture, Gr.] the art of making all sorts
of figures in plaister. The artists of
this workmanship are call'd Gypsochi.

PARADISE [of παραδεισος of παρὰ
and σενω to water, Gr. or rather of
םדדפ, Heb.] a place of pleasure. The
garden of Eden, where Adam and Eve
resided during their innocency; also
the mansion of saints and angels that
enjoy the sight of God, the place of
bliss in Heaven; according to the no­
tion of the Greeks, it is an inclosure or
park, stored with all sorts of plants and
wild beasts of pleasure; and with us, 
any delightful place is called a Paradise.

The learned are divided in their
opinions, as well about the existence
of this Paradise, as about the place
where it was; many are of opinion
that it was quite destroy'd by the wa­
ters of the deluge; but others think it
is still in being, some will have it to
be on the high and inaccessible moun­
tains of Armenia.

Hoffman adds, that it is certain Para­
dise had a being before Adam, and
proves that it did not exist before the
creation of the world, because it was
terrestrial, and is described with fruit
bearing trees, rivers, &c.

He says there is reason to believe
that it was in a very temperate cli­
mate, and thinks that it contributed to
the long life of Adam and his succes­
sors, until intemperance the source of
distempers, got into the world to shor­
ten the days of mens lives; and he
likewise believes that the deluge has
quite destroy'd that paradise, and de­
priv'd it of all that rendred it pleasant, 
and therefore it is folly to lose time in
the search after it.

Birds of PARADISE, a rare bird so
called, either on account of its fine
colour, &c. or else because it is not
known where it is bred, from whence
it comes, or whither it goes.

PARADISUS [in Ant. Ecclesiastical
Writers] a square court before cathe­
drals, surrounded with piazzas or por­
ticos for persons to walk under, being
supported with pillars.

PARADISIAN, of or pertaining to
paradise.

PARADOX [with Rhetoricians] is
something cast in by the by, contrary
to the opinion or expectation of the
auditors, which is otherwise called
Hypomone.

PARADOXICALNESS, the nature
or quality of a paradox.

PARAGIUM [old Law] is taken for
the equal condition between two par­
ties to be espoused or married.

PARAGOGE [ϖαραγογὴ, Gr.] a figure
in Gram. or Rhetorick, whereby a let­ 
ter or syllable is added at the end of a
word, without adding any thing to the
sense of it; this figure is frequent with
the Hebrews, as חבדבא for ךדבא, I
will bless, and dicier for dici with the
Latins.

PARAGOGICALLY [of ϖαραγωγὴ,
Gr. a production or lengthening] ac­
cording to the figure called Paragoge.

PARAGOND [of paragone, Ital.]
equalled with, compared with. Milton.

PARAGRAPH [ϖαραγραφος, Gr.]
the character of a paragraph in a quo­
tation is §.

PARAGRAPHE [with Rhetoricians]
a declining or waving the matter in
controversy.

PARAGRAPHE [with Poets] a figure, 
when after having dispatched one sub­
ject, they pass on to another; as Hac­
tenus Arvorum cultus & sidera cœli;
nunc te Bacche canam.

PARAGRAPHICALLY [of ϖαρα­
γραφὴ, Gr.] paragraph by paragraph, or
in paragraphs.

Horizontal PARALLAX [with A­
stronom.] is when sun, moon, or any
other planet is in the Horizon; which
is the greatest of all; or it is the diffe­
rence between the real and apparent
place of a planet, when it is rising and
setting.

PARALLAX [in Levelling] is used
for the angle contained between the
true level, and that of the apparent
level.

To PARALLEL [mettre en parallele, 
F. of ϖαραλληλος, Gr.] to make or run
equal to or with.

PARALLEL Lines [in Geometry] are
such lines as lie equally distant from
each other in all their parts; so that
if they were infinitely extended they
would never touch, as ∥.

Unicode does not provide horizontal parallel lines, as they were shown in the dictionary. Alternatively, ∥ was inserted to represent vertical parallel lines.





A circular PARALLEL [in Geom.]
is one line or circle drawn without or
within another circle, as ⊖.

PARALLELISM, a machine con­
trived for the ready and exact reducti­
on or copying of designs, schemes, &c.
in any proper portion, called also a
Parallelogram, or Parallelogrammick Pro­
tractor.

PARALLELOGRAM 
[παράλλογραμμον, Gr.] a plain
figure bounded by 4 right
lines, whereof the opposite are paral­
lel one to the other, as in this figure.

Image omitted.



PARALLELOGRAM, an instrument
composed of 5 rulers of brass or wood, 
with sliding sockets to be set to any
proportion, for the inlarging or dimi­
nishing of any map or draught.

PARALLELOGRAMMICAL [of
παράλληλος and γρὰμμα, Gr.] of or be­
longing to a parallelogram.

PARALLELOPEPID [in
Geometry] one of the re­
gular bodies or solids, 
comprehended under six
rectangular and parallel
surfaces, the opposite ones whereof
are equal.

Image omitted.



PARALYTICALNESS [of paralyti­
cus, L. of παραλυτιχὸς, Gr. and ness]
palsical condition.

PARALYSIS [παράλυσις, Gr.] a dis­
ease commonly called the palsey.

PARAMENT [in Architect.] an uni­
form course of stones.

PARANETICAL [παρανετιχὸς, Gr.]
apt, tending to, or pertaining to per­
suasion or admonition.

PARANETE Diezeugmenon, the note
of de-la sol-re.

PARANETE Hyperbolæon, the note
g-sol re-ut.

PARANETE Synemmenon, the note
called c-sol fa.

PARANYMPH [Παράνυμφος of παρὰ
and ύμφην, a bride, Gr.] the friend of a
bridegroom, who performs the solem­
nities of the wedding, and conducts
the bride to the bride-groom.

The Rabbins say, that the principal
office of the Paranymph was to observe
that the bridegroom and bride com­
mitted no fraud in relation to the
blood, which was the token of the
brides virginity; among the Greeks the
Paranymphs kept the door of the nup­
tial bed, and had the care and manage­
ment of the feast, and all the other
rejoicings.

PARAPEGMA [παράπηγμά, Gr.] a
table or plate of brass fixed to a pillar, 
on which, in ancient times, laws, or­
dinances, proclamations, &c. were
engraven.

PARAPH a particular charac­
ter, knot, or flourish, 
which persons habituate themselves to
make always in the same manner at
the end of their name, to prevent their
signature from being counterfeited.

PARAPHE a particular charac­
ter, knot, or flourish, 
which persons habituate themselves to
make always in the same manner at
the end of their name, to prevent their
signature from being counterfeited. 

PARAPHRASTICALLY, by way of
paraphrase.

PARASITE [parasitus, L. of ϖαρά­
σιτος, Gr.] a king of priests, among
the ancients, or a minister of the gods;
or (as others) a guest of the priest's
whom he invited to eat part of the sa­
crifices; hence the word is used to sig­
nify a smell-feast or trencher-friend.

PARASITICALNESS [of parasiticus, 
L. of ϖαρασιτιχὸς, Gr. and ness] fawn­
ingness, flatteringness.

PARATILMUS [παράτιλμος of πα­
ρατιλλων, Gr. to tear or pluck up] a pu­
nishment, inflicted on adulterers among
the Greeks, by tearing up by the roots
the hair growing about the fundament.

PARAZONIUM [παραζωνιον, Gr.] a
term used by medalists for a scepter, 
rounded at the two ends, in the manner
of a truncheon or commander's staff;
or a kind of poniard or short sword, re­
presented as worn at the girdle.

PARCÆ [according to the ancient
Theology] the goddesses who preside over
the lives of men. And, according to
Plato, the daughters of Necessity and
Destiny. These (as the poets fable it)
spun the lives of men; Clotho held the
distaff and spun the  thread; Lachesis
turned the wheel; and Atropos cut the
thread of life. The three Parcæ are
introduced to denote the threefold
propriety of time, the first is called
Clotho, because all things that are
brought to pass, are like to a drawing
out of a thread in spinning, following
one another in a continual succession;
they called the second Lachesis, and the
reason of that name is, that all things
are destined to every one at his nativi­
ty, and happen, as it were, by a certain
lot; the third is called Atropos, because
those things that have been disposed
and decreed by her can by no means
be averted. Clotho is sometimes repre­
sented in a long robe of divers colours, 
and with a crown on her head adorned
with 7 stars, and holding a distaff in her
hand; Lachesis in a robe bespangled
with stars, and holding a spindle in her
hand; and Atropos clothed in a black
robe, and cutting the thread with a pair
of scissars. Lucian represents them after
a different manner, like three poor old



women, one holding a distaff, another
a wheel, and another a pair of scissars, 
having their heads adorned with large
locks of wool mixt with daffodils.

PARCHING [prob. of percoquens, L.]
burning or drying up.

PARCHINGNESS, burning, &c. qua­
lity.

PARDON [in Canon Law] an indul­
gence which the pope grants to suppo­
sed penitents, for the remission of the
pain of purgatory.

PARDON-Church-yard, a place for­
merly on the north side of St. Paul's
church; this was a large cloister, and
a chapel built by king Stephen, inviron­
ing a plot of ground; about this cloister
was artificially and richly painted the
dance of Machabray or dance of death, 
commonly called the dance of St. Paul's;
the like of which was painted about
St. Innocents at Paris. The metres or
poesy of this dance, were translated out
of French into English, by John Lidgate, 
monk of Bury, and with the picture of
death, leading all estates, painted about
the cloister. The monuments in this
cloister, both for number and work­
manship, exceeded all that were in St.
Paul's church; all which were demo­
lished in the year 1549, by the command
of the duke of Somerset.

PARDONABLENESS [of pardonable, 
F. and ness] capableness of being par­
doned or forgiven.

PAREGMENON [παρέγμενον, Gr, a
derivative] a rhetorical figure, which
joins words together, which are deriv'd
one from another, as wise, wisdom, &c.

PAREIRA Brava, the root of a plant
growing in Mexico, &c. accounted a
specifick for the cure of the stone and
gravel.

PAREMPTOSIS [παρέμπτωσις, Gr.] a
falling or coming in between.

PAREMPTOSIS [with Gram] a fi­
gure when a letter is added in the mid­
dle of a word, as ϖτόλις for πολις, a
city.

PARENCHYMA of a plant [according
to Dr. Grew] the pith or pulp, or that
inner part of the plant, through which
the juice is supposed to be distributed.

PARENCHYMATOUS [of παρένχέμα
Gr.] of or pertaining to the bowels
through which the blood passes.

PARENCHYMOUS Parts [in Old
Anatomy] such fleshy parts of the body
as fill up the void spaces between the
vessels, and do not consist of vessels
themselves: But it has since been disco­
vered by means of microscopes, that
all the parts of an animal body are no­
thing else but a network of small ves­
sels and canals.

PARENTHESIS [ϖαρένθεσις, Gr.] an
interposition, a putting between.

PARENTHESIS [with Grammar.] a
figure when some vowel is put into a
middle of a word, as νοισος for νοσος.

PARENTS [of pario, to bring forth
young] are properly only the father
and mother of children; but are some­
times taken in a larger sense for all
those of near kindred, especially by
blood in a direct line.

Children are under the strictest obli­
gation to obey, honour and respect their
parents, and disobedient, refractory and
stubborn children, [among the Jews]
were punished, being brought out of the
gate of the city, and stoned to death by
the command of God.

Moreover among the Heathens chil­
dren were so much at the disposal of
their parents, that if their fathers did
not think fit to receive them at their
birth, they had the liberty to expose
them, and in some places to kill them.

By the Athenian laws, a father might
have an action of ingratitude against
stubborn and rebellious children, which
would dissable them from holding any
office: they also allowed a father to
abdicate his son, he first declaring his 
reasons in court, which being approv'd
he was legally struck out of the family, 
and disinherited.

And if any one had beaten his parents, 
and not allowed them the conveniency
of his house and other necessaries, he
was reckoned an infamous person, and
this was a kind of excommunication, 
for those under this censure were nei­
ther admitted to the solemnities of re­
ligion nor civil commerce.

Good PARENTS [Hieroglyphically] are
represented by the pelican, who, as it is
reported, will cast herself into the flames
kindled about the nest where her young
ones lie, to deliver them from the im­
minent danger.

PARERE [in Traffick] a term bor­
rowed from the Italians, signifying ad­
vice or counsel of a merchant or per­
son negociating; or that such a person, 
being consulted on any point, introduces
his answer, in Italian, with a mi pare, 
i. e. it seems to me, or I think. This
begins to be naturalized with us.

PARGETER, a plaisterer.

PARGETING [incert. Etym. except
of paries, L. a wall] plaistering of walls
cielings, &c.

PARISHES [paræcia, L. paroisse, F.]
the original of dividing kingdoms, pro­



vinces, &c. in parishes, is said to be
owing to Fabian the 21st pope, who di­
vided Rome among the deacons, which
according to Luitprandus, in number 7.
Dionysius designed to every presbyter
his church, church-yard and parish, 
and instituted dioceses, and afterwards
pope Marcellinus appointed 25 dioceses.
Honorius arch bishop of Dover, a Roman
and a disciple of Gregory the great, was
the first who instituted parishes in Bri­
tain, at least among the English Saxons, 
who were about this time converted
to Christianity.

PARK [for fishing] a very large net
disposed on the brink of the sea, having
only one hole that looks towards the
shore, and which becomes dry after the
flood is gone off; so that the fish has no
way left to escape.

PARK [with Shepherds] a moveable
palisade set up in the field, to inclose
the sheep in to feed in the night time.

PARK Leaves, an herb.

PARLE [of parler, F.] a talking, dis­
course. Milton.

PARLIAMENTARINESS, the being
according to the rules, method, or au­
thority of a parliament.

Clerk of the PARLIAMENT, an offi­
cer who records all acts done in this
high court, and engrosses them fairly
in parchment rolls, in order to be kept
for posterity.

PARLIAMENTUM de la bonde, a
parliament in the time of king Edward
II. to which the barons came armed
with coloured bands on the sleeves for
distinction against the two Spencers.

PARLOUR [in Nunneries] a little
room or closet where people talk to the
nuns through a grated window.

PARLOUSNESS [q. peerlesness, F.]
uncapableness of being equalled, spo­
ken commonly in an ill sense.

According to the OED, this word-entry should be defined as "The state or quality of being parlous; esp. precariousness, dangerousness, direness." The definition of this word-entry should be associated to "peerlessness". The etymology of this word should not be French.



PARMA [with Antiquaries] a sort of
ancient buckler.

PAROCHIA, or parish, did anciently
signify what we now call the diocess of
a bishop; but at this day it is the cir­
cuit of ground in which the people that
belong to one church inhabit, and the
particular charge of the secular priest;
Camden says, that this realm was first di­
vided into parishes by Honorius arch­
bishop of Canterbury, Anno Christi 636, 
who reckons 2984 parishes. It is also
said that parishes were divided by the
Lateran council, before which every
man obliged to pay tithes, paid them to
what priest he pleased; but they de­
creed that every man should pay them
to his parish priest.

PARODICK Degree [in an Equation]
the several regular terms, in a quadra­
tick, cubick, or biquadratick equation, 
&c. the indices of whose powers ascend
or descend orderly, in an arithmetical
progression.

PARODY [parodia, L. of παροδία of
παρα by, and ίδός, Gr. a way q. d. trite,
or passing current among the people] a
a popular maxim, adage or proverb;
also a poetical pleasantry, consisting in
applying the verses of some person, by
way of ridicule, to another, or in tur­
ning a serious work into burlesque, by
endeavouring, as near as can be, to ob­
serve the same words, rhimes and ca­
dences.

PAROIMIA [with Rhetoricians] a
proverbial manner of speaking: also the
continuation of a trope or figure with
respect to the common use, as to wash
an Ethiopian and a Brick.

PAROL Arrest [in Law] an arrest by
word of mouth.

PAROL Demurrer [in Law] a privi­
lege allowed to an infant, who is sued
concerning lands which came to him by
descent.

Will PAROLE. See Will.

PAROLI [in Gaming] the double of
what was laid at stake: before.

PAROEMOEON [παρομοιον of
παρά, by, or according to the way, or
ὄιμη, Gr. a way] a proverb: also a fi­
gure used by Grammarians, in which all
the words of a sentence begin with the
same letter, &c. as O Tite, tute, Tati, 
tibi tanta Tyranne tulisti. And also when
several verbs or nouns are produced
like the former, only with a little vari­
ation of tenses and cases.

PAROTIDES [παροτιδες of παρά near
and οἴτις, gen. of οἴς, an ear, Gr.] cer­
tain glandules or kernels under and be­
hind the ears; whose use is to strength­
en the partition of the vessels, and to
soak up the moisture of the brain; also
a swelling of those kernels, commonly
called a swelling of the almonds of the
ears.

PAROXISM [ταροξιςμός of παροξύνω, 
to make very sharp, Gr.] the access or
coming on of a fit of a fever, ague or
other distemper.

PARRHESIA [with Rhet.] a figure, 
when one speaks boldly and freely about
matters displeasing to others, or liable
to envy.

PARRICIDE [parricida, parricidium, 
L.] the killer or killing of a father or
parent; also treason against ones coun­
try: The Romans had made no law
against parricides, supposing that no



person would be so inhumane as to
commit such a crime; till about 500
years after the death of Numa, Ostius
killed his father, upon which they or­
dered that so flagitious a malefactor
should be apprehended and have wood­
en shoes put upon his feet, and so be
carried to goal, where he was to re­
main one year, during which time his
feet were not suffered to touch the
earth, the common parent of mankind;
for the former the Roman law ordained 
this punishment, that the person con­
victed of this crime, should be first
whipped till the blood came, and then
should be tyed up in a leathern sack, 
together with a dog, an ape, a cock, 
and a viper, and so thrown into the
next river that was deep enough to
drown him.

The ancient Egyptians used to run
sharp reeds into every part of the bo­
dies of Parricides, and after they had
thus wounded almost every part, threw
them upon a heap of thorns, and set
fire to them.

And if a son was ungrateful enough
but to strike his parent, he was to
have his hands cut off.

A PARROT [Hieroglyphically] was
pictured to represent an eloquent man;
because no other bird can better ex­
press itself.

PARRYING [in Fencing] the action
of saving a man's self, or staving off 
the strokes, &c. offered him by ano­
ther.

PARSIMONIOUSNESS [of parsimo­
nia, L. and ness] sparingness, thrifti­ 
ness.

Macedonian PARSLEY hedge-par­
sley, pert, several herbs.

A Physical PART is that which tho'
it enter the composition of the whole, 
may yet be considered apart, and un­
der its own distinct idea.

Essential PART is that whereby, 
with the concurrence of some others, 
an essential whole is constituted, as the
body and soul are the essential parts of
a man.

Aliquant PART is a quantity which
being repeated any number of times, 
becomes always either greater or less
than the whole; thus 5 is an aliquant
part of 17.

Aliquot PART a quantity which be
ing repeated any number of times, be­
comes equal to an integer, as 6 is an
aliquot part of 24.

An Integral PART is that which
is necessary
to the integrity of the whole, as a head
or arm is to a man.

An Integrant PART is that which
is necessary
to the integrity of the whole, as a head
or arm is to a man.

PART [in Musick] a piece of the
score or partition, written by itself for
the conveniency of the musician.

A Subjunctive or Potential PART 
[with Logicians] is that which is con­
tained in some universal whole, as John
and Thomas, in man; a man and a lion
in animal.

PARTHENIÆ [of παρθενεῖα, Gr. 
virginity] the Spartans having been at
war with the Messenians for 20 years,
and by that means very much depopu­
lated their country, and apprehending
that if this war continued it might de­
populate their Sparta, they sent some
of their young men from the army into
the city, with licence to be familiar
with as many unmarried women as
they would; and the children begotten
by them in this manner were called
Partheniæ, on account of the uncertainty
who were their fathers: At the end of
the war this brood were deemed bas­
tards, and therefore were denyed the
bearing any office in the government,
&c.

This enrag'd them so that they con­
conspired with the slaves to destroy all the
nobility; but their plot being discover­
ed, they drove them out of the city;
but they being headed by Phalantas, 
travelled into Magna Grecia in Italy, 
and built Tarentum.

PARTIALNESS [partialité, F.] a
siding too much with a party; a being
more on the one side than the other.

A PARTICIPIAL, an adjective de­
rived of a verb, tho' not an absolute
participle.

PARTICLES [in Physick] the minute
parts of a body, or an assemblage or
coalition of several or many of which
natural bodies are composed.

PARTICULARIST [with polemical
Divines] one who holds particular
grace, i. e. that Christ died for the e­
lect only, &c. not for mankind in ge­
neral.

PARTICULARNESS [of particula­
ris, L. and ness] peculiarness, singular­
ness.

PARTILE Aspect [with Astrologers]
the most exact and full aspect that can
be; so termed, because it consists pre­
cisely in so many parts or degrees as
are requisite to compleat it even to a
degree.

PARTISAN [in Milit. Affairs] one
who is very dextrous at commanding a
party, and knowing the country very
well, employed in surprizing the e­
nemies convoys, or in getting intelli­
gence.



PARTISAN Party [Milit. Term.] a
small body of infantry commanded by
a Partisan, to make an incursion upon
the enemy, to lurk about their camp;
to disturb their foragers, and to inter­
cept their convoys.

PARTITIONS of an Escutcheon, ac­
cording to the number of coats that
are to be on it, are the several divisi­
ons made in it, when the arms of se­
veral families are borne in it, on ac­
count of intermarriages or otherwise.

Homogeneous Physical PARTS, are
those of the same denomination with
some other.

Heterogeneous Physical PARTS, are
such as are of a different denomination
from some other.

Similar PARTS, are such as are to
one another, as their wholes are to
one another.

PARTUISAN, a weapon sometimes
carried by lieutenants, not much un­
like a halbert.

PARTUNDA [among the Romans]
a goddess, to whom
they attributed the care of big-bellied
women, and who assisted at child-bear­
ing.

PARTULA [among the Romans]
a goddess, to whom
they attributed the care of big-bellied
women, and who assisted at child-bear­
ing.

PARTY per Pale [in Heraldry] is by
some supposed to signify, that the
bearer had received on his shield a cut
down-right or perpendicular in the
middle from top to bottom.

PARTY per Bend Dexter, represents
a cut falling upon the upper corner of
the shield on the right hand, and de­
scending athwart to the opposite cor­
ner.

PARTY per Fesse, represents a cut
cross the middle of the shield, from
side to side.

PARTY per Bend Sinister, intimates
that the cut had been on the left upper
corner, and comes athwart to the low­
er opposite corner.

PARTY Bleu, a company of villains, 
who infested the roads in the Nether­
lands; who belonged to neither army, 
but robbed on both sides, without any
regard to passes.

PARVIS [a porch, or church-porch, 
&c.] is applied to the mootings or law
disputes among young students in the
inns of courts; and also to that dispu­
tation at Oxford, called Disputatio in
parvis.

PASIPHAE [according to the Poets]
the daughter of Sol, and wife of Minos, 
king of Crete. It is fabled of her, that
she grew enamoured with a bull that
was feeding; and Dædalus made a
wooden cow, and enclosed Pasiphae in
it; and so the bull covering this woo­
den cow, had coition with Pasiphae, 
and that she conceived a monster that
had the body of a man, but the head
of a bull. The truth of this fiction is, 
they say that Minos, being out of order
in his privities, was cured by Procris, 
the daughter of Pandion, at which
time he was accompanied by a very
beautiful young man, named Taurus, 
(i. e. a bull) with whom Pasiphae being
enamoured, he lay with her and begat
a son. Minos reckoning the time that
he had been ill of his privities, and
knowing that this son could not be be­
gotten by him, because he had not had
to do with Pasiphae, knew that it was
the son of Taurus, but he would not
put the children to death, because he
was look'd upon to be his childrens
brother, but sent it away into the
mountain.

As to Dædalus's making the cow, 
some say, he was assisting to her in her
amours with Taurus, and that as often
as he was at work upon any fine figure, 
she took an opportunity to go to see
him work, and he being making the
effigies of a very fine cow, as like the
life as was possible, she cunningly went
to see the cow, and there had an op­
portunity of enjoying her lover, 'till at
last the matter came to be known, and
thereupon Dædalus was by Minos im­
prisoned in the Labyrinth.

PASME [in French Heraldry] a term 
used to signify an eagle grown so old, 
that she is, as it were, become sense­
less, having almost lost her sight, and
the beak grown so thick and crooked, 
that having lost the use of it to eat or
prey, she starves for hunger, which is.
said to be very frequent among eagles.

PASNAGE, the running or feeding
of swine within a forest; also the price
of it.

PASS [in the Tin-works] a frame of
boards set sloping, by which the oar
slides down into the coffer of a stamp­
ing-mill.

PASSALORHYNCHITES, a sect of
Montanists in the 2d century, who
made profession of perpetual silence, 
and the better to observe it kept their
thumb continually on their lip, their
practice they founded on the words of
the Psalmist, Set a guard, O Lord, on
my mouth.

PASSANT [in Heraldry]
as a lion, or any other
creature passant, signifies
walking along leisurely. See
the escutcheon.

Image omitted.





PASSIBLENESE [of passibilis, L. and
ness] capableness of suffering.

PASSING [passant, F.] going by;
also omitting, F.

PASSINGLY, excellently, as passing­
ly well,

PASSION Cross [in He­
raldry] is so called, because
it is supposed to resemble
that cross on which our Sa­
viour suffered, not crossed
in the middle, but somewhat below
the top, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



PASSION [passio of pati, L.] a qua­
lity that affects the senses, and the sen­
sitive appetite, but is soon over; also
the receiving of an action.

PASSION, transport of mind, strong
desire or inclination; affection, fond­
ness; anger or wrath; also a suffer­
ing.

PASSION [with Physicians] any pain, 
uneasiness, or disturbance in the body, 
as the Iliack Passion.

Corruptive PASSION, is a passion by
which the patient is either corrupted
wholly or in part, as when one is
wounded.

Perfective PASSION, is a passion by
which the subject receives some addi­
tional perfection, as to be instructed.

PASSIONATE for a thing, i. e. hav­
ing a strong desire for, or inclination
to it.

PASSIONATELY [passionnement, F.]
with passion.

PASSIONATENESS [of passion, F.
of  L. the terminat. and ness] hasty cho­
lerick temper, propensity to passion.

PASSIONS [in Poetry] the passionate
sentiments, gestures, actions, &c. which
the poet gives his persons.

PASSIONS, any motion whereby
the soul is carried towards any thing;
or the agitations of it, according to
the different objects which present
themselves to the senses; the affections
of the mind, as love, hatred, tear, joy.

PASSIONS of Men, The diversity of
passions, is by naturalists said to pro­
ceed from the contexture of the fibres, 
and different habitude of the humours
of the body: choler incites to anger, 
melancholy, or sadness; blood abound­
ing to joy; because that choler velli­
cates the spirits, melancholy compres­
ses them, blood dilates them, phlegm
obstructs them; and these effects are
found in them sleeping as well as wak­
ing; those who abound with choler, 
are prone to dream of fires, burnings,
brawls, and fightings; the phlegma­
tick, of waters, inundations, drown­
ing; the sanguine, of musick, dancing, 
and lasciviousness.

PASSIVE Voice of a Verb [with Gram.]
one which betokens suffering or being
acted upon, as doceor, I am taught, &c.

PASSIVE Principles [with Chymists]
are Water and Earth, which they so
call, because their parts are either at
rest, or at least not so swiftly moved
as those of Spirits, Oil, and Salt.

PASSIVE Prayer [with Mystick Di­
vines] is a total suspension or ligature
of the intellectual faculties, in vertue
whereof the soul remains of it self and
its own power impotent, as to the
producing any effects.

PASSIVENESS [of passivus, L. and
ness] passive or suffering nature, qua­
lity, &c.

PASSOVER, a solemn festival of
the Jews, observed in commemoration
of the destroying Angel's passing over
their house and not killing their first­
born, when he slew those of the Egyp­
tians.

PASTOPHORI [πασταφόροι of παστὸν
a veil, and φέρω, Gr. to bear] certain
priests, whose office it was, at solemn
festivals, to carry the shrine of the
deity, when they were to pray for
fair weather, rain, &c.

PASTORAL Staff, the staff or cro­
sier of a bishop wherewith they are
invested.

PASTORAL [pastorale of pastor, L.
a shepherd] Mons. Fontenelle says, pasto­
ral is the most ancient sort of poetry, 
because a shepherd's life is the most
ancient way of living. He says, that
pastoral should not be so rude as the
country conversation, nor so polite as
that of the court.

Another author says, shepherds should
never go out of their woods, and all
the similies in pastoral should be taken
from thence; all the sentiments should
be tender and natural, soft and easy.

Blank verse will agree very well
with pastoral, and being a nearer re­
semblance of the natural way of speech
than rhime, must be most agreeable to
that sort of poesy, which comes near­
est to nature, as pastoral does.

PATAICI Dii, a sort of deities, 
much like the Dii Cabiri of the Samo­
thracians, at least as to their figures;
for they were like Pigmies with which
the Phenicians adorn'd the prows of 
their ships.

PATAVINITY [among Criticks] a
fault objected against Livy, for using
the dialect or orthography of Padua in
his writings.



To PAT, to hit or strike softly, as
with the finger, &c.

PATALENA [of patere, L. to be o­
pen] an ancient female deity, to whom
they attributed the care of the corn, 
when it sprung from the blade.  L.

PATCHING [incert. Etym. prob. of
pezzare, Ital. unless of patagium, L. a
border, &c.] setting a piece of patch
upon a garment, &c.

PATE [in Fortification] a sort of for­
tification like what they call an horse­
shoe, not always regular, but generally
oval, encompassed only with a parapet, 
having nothing to flank it; usually e­
rected in marshy grounds to cover the
gate of a town.

PATER-nosters [with Roman Catho­
licks] are the great beads of their du­
plets, used in their devotions.

PATER-nosters [in Architect.] certain
ornaments placed underneath ovolo's, 
cut in form of beads, either round or
oval.

PATER, a father.  L.

PATER Guardian, a title given to
the head or chief of a monastery.&c.
of Franciscan friars.

Cross PATER-noster [with
Heralds] is the representa­
tion of a cross made with
beads. See the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



PATERNALNESS [of paternus, L.
and ness] fatherliness, fartherlike af­
fection or care.

PATHETICK Musick, musick that is
very moving, expressive, passionate, 
capable of exciting pity, compassion, 
anger, or the like passion.

PATHETICK Nerves [Anatomy] the
fourth pair which arise from the me­
dulla oblongata.

PATHETICALNESS [of patheticus, 
L. and ness] the quality moving the
affections.

PATHIC [pathicus, L. of παθεῖν, Gr.
to suffer] a sodomite, an ingle, who
suffers his body to be abused contrary
to nature.

PATHOGNOMIC [of πάθος affecti­
on, and γινωσχω, Gr. to know] an epi­
thet given to a symptom or concourse
of symptoms, that are inseparable from
a distemper, and are found in that only
and no other.

PATHOLOGIST [of παθολογία of
πάθος and λόγος, Gr.] one who treats
of pathology, i. e. of the preternatural
constitution of the body of man; disco­
vering the cause, nature, and difference
of diseases.

PATHOS [παθος, Gr.] passion, that
which one suffers or has suffered.

PATHOS [with Rhetoricians] signi­
fies the several affections which the
orator excites in his hearers.

PATIENCE, an herb, being a sort
of large and very sour sorrel.

PATIENTLY [patienter, L.] with
patience.

PATIENTNESS [patientia, L.] pa­
tient temper.

PATLY, fitly, opportunely.

PATNESS, fitness, opportuneness.

PATONCE, as a Cross Patonce [with
Heralds] is a cross that has its ends flo­
ry, but yet differs from that
which is called a Cross Flory, 
in that the Flory circum­
flexes and turns down like
a Fleur-de-luce, but the cross
patonce extends and stretch­
es to a certain patee form, as in the
escutcheon Gules, a Cross Patonce Ar­
gent.

Image omitted.



PATRIARCHAL Cross 
[in Heraldry] is one that
has its shaft crossed twice, 
the upper arms of it being
shorter, and the lower lon­
ger. See the eschutcheon.

Image omitted.



PATRIARCHS [of πατηρ a father; 
and αρχος, Gr. chief] is an especial
manner is used to signify those fathers
or heads of families recorded in the
old testament, who lived before Moses;
as Adam, Lamech, Noah, Abraham, 
Isaac, Jacob, &c. and hence it was
given to the bishops of the first churches
of the East, as Antioch, Alexandria, 
Jerusalem, Constantinople, &c.

PATRIARCHSHIP [of patriarcha,
L. and ship] the dignity or jurisdiction
of a patriarch.

PATRICIAN [patricien, F. of patri­
cius, L.] one descended of a noble fa­
mily, in opposition to the Plebeians.

PATRICIANS [so called of Patri­
cius their ring leader] their distinguish­
ing tenant was, that the substance of
the flesh is not the work of God, but of
the devil; on which account they bore
such hatred to their own bodies, as
sometimes to kill themselves.

PATRIOTSHIP [of patriota, L. and
ship] office, dignity, or quality of a pa­
triot.

PATRISSATING [patrissans, L.]
taking after the father.

PATRON [in Navigation] a name
given in the Mediterranean sea to the
person who commands the ship and
mariners, and sometimes to the person
who steers, or the pilot.



Lay PATRONAGE [in Law] is a
right attached to the person, either as
founder, or heir of the founder; or as
possessor of the fee to which the pa­
tronage is annexed, and is either real
or personal.

Real Lay PATRONAGE, is that
which is attached to the glebe, or to a
certain inheritance.

Personal Lay PATRONAGE, is that
which belongs immediately to the
founder of the church, and is transmit­
table to his children and family, with­
out being annexed to any fee.

Ecclesiastical PATRONAGE [in Law]
is that which a person is intitled to
by vertue of some benefit which he
holds.

Arms of PATRONAGE [in Heraldry]
are those at the top, whereof some are
marks of subjection and dependance, as
the city of Paris bears three Flowers de
Lys in chief, to shew her dependance
on the king.

PATRONSHIP [of patronatus, L. and
ship] the office, &c. of a patron.

PATRONIZER [patronus, L.] a pa­
tron, defender, &c.

PATRONYMIC [patronymicus, L. of 
ϖατρονυμιχὸς, Gr.] pertaining to the
names of men derived from their an­
cestors.

PATROVILLE [patrouille, F.] a
round of soldiers
to the number of 5 or 6, with a serge­
ant to command them; these set out
from the Corps de Guard, and walk
round the streets of a garrison, to pre­
vent quarrels and mischief, &c. and
to keep all in order, peace and quiet­
ness.

PATROUL [patrouille, F.] a
round of soldiers
to the number of 5 or 6, with a serge­
ant to command them; these set out
from the Corps de Guard, and walk
round the streets of a garrison, to pre­
vent quarrels and mischief, &c. and
to keep all in order, peace and quiet­
ness. 

PATTEE [in Heraldry]
a cross pattee, is a cross
that is small in the center,
and goes widening to the
ends, as in the escutche­
on.

Image omitted.



To PATTER [of patting] to strike, 
as hail or any small things falling, or
being thrown in great numbers.

PATTES, the paws of any beast.

PAUCILOQUIOUSNESS [paucilo­
quium, L.] sparingness of speech, few­
ness of words.

PAVENCE, the name of the Pagan
deity, under whose protection the mo­
thers and nurses recommended their
children, to secure them from fear; but
others will have him to be a sort of
bugbear, with which they frightened
their children, in order to quiet them, 
when froward.

PAYENTIA [among the Romans] a
goddess, who, as they fancied, protect­
ed children from fears; or, as others
say, frightened them.

PAVIOR [un paveur, F. pavitor, L.]
a maker of pavements in streets.

Paviors is an ancient
company, their coat
Argent, a Chevron be­
tween three rammers
Sable.

Image omitted.



PAVILION [of pa­
pilio, L. or padiglione, 
Ital.] a turret or build­
ing usually insulated, 
and under one single roof; sometimes
square, and sometimes in form of a
dome.

PAVILION [in War] a tent raised on
posts to lodge under in summer-time.

PAVILION'D, encompassed or in­
closed in a pavilion. Milton.

PAVILIONS [in Architecture] is used
for projecturing pieces in the facade of
a building, which mark the middle of
it.

PAULIANISTS, a sect so called; the
followers of Paulus Samosetanus, a bi­
shop of Antioch, who denyed the dis­
tinction of persons in the Trinity.

PAULICIANS [so called of Paulus
their chieftain] to the errors of the
Manichees, they added an abhorrence
of the cross, and employed it to the
most servile uses, out of despight.

PAVOR [among the Romans] fear, a
deity, whom they received from the
Corinthians, whose children being
frightned to death by the ghosts of
Medea's children, Mermerus and Pheres, 
they were ordered by the oracle to sa­
crifice to them annually, and erected
two statues, one to Fear, and another
to Paleness.

PAUSARIUS [among the Romans]
an officer who directed the stops, or
pauses, in the solemn pomps or proces­
sions of the goddess Isis, i. e. the stands
or places where the statues of Isis and
Anubis were set down; also an officer
in the gallies who gave the signal to
the rowers, that they might act in con­
cert, and row all together.

A Demy PAUSE [in Musick] a cessa­
tion for the time of half a measure.

A General PAUSE, a general cessa­
tion or silence of all the parts.

PAW, Foh! an interjection of nau­
seating.

To PAW [patiner, F.] to move, 
feel, or handle with the paws.

To heave a PAWL [Sea Phrase] is to
heave a little more for the Pawl to get
hold of the whelp.



PAX [with the Romans] a deity, re­
presented holding a laurel branch and
a spear, to shew that gentleness and
pity belonged principally to victorious
warriors.

Pausanius says that the statue Pax, 
was worshipped at Athens in the form
of a woman, holding by the hand Plu­
tus the god of riches. The emperor
Claudius began to build her a temple at
Rome; but the finishing and adorning
was deferred till the time of Vespasian, 
who did it after the conquest of Judæa, 
and destruction of Jerusalem; which
seems to be intimated by his coins with
the image of this goddess, holding in
one hand a lighted torch, setting some
broken arms on fire with it, and in the
other an olive branch with this device, 
Paci orbis terrarum; she was also re­
presented with an olive branch and
Mercury's Caduceus; his son Titus also
represented the figure of Peace like a
goddess, holding a palm in one hand
and a scepter in the other, with this
inscription, Pax æterna.

To PAY the Seams of a Ship [prob. of
poix, F. pitch] to lay them over with
hot pitch; or to lay on a coat of new
stuff, after her soil has been burnt off;
this stuff is a mixture of tallow and
soap, or of train-oil, rosin and brim­
stone boiled together.

To be PAY'D [Sea Phrase] a ship is
said to be so, when tacking about all, 
her sails are back-stayed, i. e. lie flat
against the masts and shrouds.

PEACE [pax, L. paix, F.] rest, si­
lence, quietness; also concord, agree­
ment, reconciliation; the direct oppo­
site to war.

PEACE of the Plough, that whereby
the plough tackle and plough cattle are
secured from distresses.

PEACE [in Painting, &c.] is repre­
sented as a beautiful lady, holding in
her hand a wand or rod towards the
earth, over a hideous serpent, and
holding her other hand over her face, 
as unwilling to behold strife or war.
By others she has been represented
holding in one hand an olive branch, 
and leading a lamb and a wolf yoked
by their necks in the other; and also
with an olive branch in her right hand, 
and a Cornucopia in her left.

A very famous temple was erected
for her at Rome, which was furnished
with most of the rich vases and curio­
sities taken out of the temple of the
Jews at Jerusalem: In this temple the
goddess was represented as a fine lady, 
endowed with a great deal of sweet­
ness and good nature, crowned with
laurel interwoven, holding a Caduceus
in one hand, and a nosegay of roses and
ears of corn in the other.

The Temple of PEACE built by Vespa­
sian was 300 foot long and 200 broad;
of which Josephus says, that all the ra­
reties that men travel through the
world to see, were laid up there.

PEACEABLY [paisiblement, F.] in a
peaceable manner.

A PEACOCK [Hieroglyphically] with
beautiful plumes, and in a posture of
admiring them, and exposing them to
the sun, represented a creature proud
of its natural perfections.

A PEACOCK [Emblematically] also
represents women over curious in their
dress and costly cloathing.

PEA-Hen [penache, F. pava, L.]

PEAKINGNESS, sickliness, unthri­
vingness.

PEAL'D, troubled or deaffened with
the noise. Milton.

PEAR-Tree [piriʒe-treo, Sax.]

PEARL. There are pearls brought
from many places in the four parts of
the world. And it is said that the
smaller pearls, that is those shell fish
that are called pearls, follow the great
ones called mother of pearls like bees.
They are known to be big with pearls, 
when their shells have bunches on
each side.

The oriental pearls have a water
that inclines to a carnation; those of
America are green, and those of the
north are gridelin. Pearls are found
in Bohemia in rivers of fresh water, and
in Silesia, and in Lorrain. They are
sometimes found also in common oi­
sters.

Pearls that have been long worn
turn yellow, and moulder away at the
end of 80 or 100 years.

They are made in the mother of
pearl beds after the manner of onions.
They have discovered in some mother
of pearls to the number of 150; but
not all perfect: Some compleat, but
others just beginning to be formed.

Wens of PEARL, certain excrescen­
cies or prominent pieces in form of
half pearls, found in the bottom of the
pearl shells.

PEAS-Cod [piſe coððe, Sax.] the
shell or husk of a pea.

PECCANTNESS [of peccans, L. and
ness] offensiveness, hurtfulness.

PECQUETS Duct [Anatomy] the
thoracic duct, so called from Pecquet
its discoverer.



A PECTORAL [in the Jewish Oeco­
nomy] an ornament worn by the high-­
priest on his breast, called also rationale, 
or the breast plate of Judgment. This
was a piece of embroidery about 10 in­
ches square, of very rich work, set with
four rows of precious stones, upon each
of which was engraven one of the names
of the tribes of Israel; it was composed
of two pieces folded one upon the other
like a purse, in which it is said the
Urim and Thummim was inclosed.

PECTORAL Muscle [Anatomy] a mus­
cle which moves the arm forwards; so
named on account of its situation, which
arises above from the Clavicula, and be­
low from the breast-bone, and all the
endings of the upper ribs, and is im­
planted in the upper part of the shoul­
der-bone.

PECTORALNESS [of pectoralis, L.
and ness] stomachick quality.

PECULATE [in Civil Law] the
crime of pilfering the publick money, 
by a person who manages it, or in whole
custody it is reposited.

A PECULIAR, a particular parish or
church that has jurisdiction within it­
self for a probate of wills, &c. being
exempt from the ordinary of the bishops
courts. Thus the king's chapel is a
royal peculiar, free from all spiritual ju­
risdiction, and only governed by the
king himself as supreme ordinary.

A PECULIAR [peculiaris, L.] a she
friend, a mistress.

PECUNIA [among the Romans] mo­
ney. A deity which, as they held, pre­
sided over riches; who had a son nam'd
Argentinus, whom they adored that they
might grow rich.

PECUNIUS, a deity of the ancient
Prussians, in honour of whom they kept
a fire of oak perpetually burning; which
if it happened to go out by the priest's
neglect, he was put to death. When it
thundered, they imagined that their
grand priest conversed with their god;
and for that reason, fell prostrate on the
earth, praying for seasonable weather.

PEDAGOGICAL [παιδαγογιχὸς, Gr.]
pertaining to an instructor of youth, or
to discipline.

A PEDESTAL [of pedestalia, L. pie­
destallo, Ital.] that part of a pillar that
supports it. It is a square body with a
base and cornice, serving as a foot for
the columns to stand upon, and having, 
according to Vignola, a third part of the
height of its column. It is different in
different orders, there being as many
kinds of pedestals as there are orders of
columns.

PEDICLE [with Botanists] a foot stalk
is that on which either a leaf, or flower, 
or fruit stands or hangs.

PEDICULATION, a particular foul­
ness of the skin, very apt to breed lice;
said to have been the distemper of the
Egyptians, and one of their plagues,  L.

PEDIMENT [in Architecture] an or­
nament that crowns the ordonnance, fi­
nishes the fronts of buildings, and serves
as a decoration over gates, windows, 
niches, &c. It is ordinarily of a tri­
angular form; but sometimes make an
arch of a circle.

PEDOMETER [of pedes, L. or ποῖς, 
a foot, and μέτρον, Gr. measure] a way-­
wiser, an instrument composed of vari­
ous wheels with teeth, which by a chain
fastened to a man's foot or wheel of a
chariot, advance a notch each step or
each revolution of the wheel; and the
number being marked at the edge of
each wheel, the paces may be number'd
or the distance from one place to ano­
ther exactly measured.

To hold Land in PEERAGE [ancient
Customs] a tenure which obliged the
person to assist the lord's bailiff in his
judgments, as all the antient vassals cal­
led peers did.

To PEG [of piic, Sax.] to put in or
fasten with a peg.

To PEG at Cocks, to throw at the
at Shrove-Tide.

PEGASUS [according to the Poets]
a winged horse, begotten by Neptune, 
from the print of whose foot sprung the
fountain Hyppocrene. Bellerophon moun­
ted him in order to fight the Chimæra, 
and he was afterwards placed among
the stars: others tell us that Pegasus
sprung from the blood of Medusa that
issued from her body, when Perseus cut
off her head.

PEGASUS [with Astronomers] is a
constellation in a northern hemisphere, 
pictured upon the globes as a flying
horse, in which according to Ptolemy's
catalogue are 20 stars; Tychos 19, and
by Flamstead's 98, of various magni­
tudes.

PEGOMANCY [πηγομαντεία of πηγή
a fountain, and μαντεία, divination, Gr.]
divining by fountain water: The same
as hydromancy, which see.

PELAGIANS [so called from Pelagius
their ring-leader, who Moreri says, was
a native of Great Britain, and as some
say a Scotchman] an heretical sect that
sprung up and infested the church in the
5th century, who are said to have af­
firmed; that it was not only possible for
man to become impeccable to this life, 



but that several had actually attained
to that degree of perfection; that they
also denyed the Grace of Jesus Christ, 
and held that by the natural force of
our free will we can work out our own
salvation, and acquire bliss; that they
also denied original sin, saying that it
descended to the posterity of Adam not
by propagation, but only by imitation;
that grace was given to our merits and
that they deserve it; that Adam was
mortal by nature and condition before
the fall; that sin was not the cause of
death; that our being as men was from
God; but our being just was from our­
selves.

That there were 3 ways of salvation, 
viz. by the law of nature, the law of
Moses, and the law of Christ, &c.

PELICAN [with Surgeons] an instru­
ment for drawing teeth.

PELICAN [pelicanus, L.] the pelican
is said to be of 2 kinds, the one living
on the water and feeding on fish, and
the other frequenting desarts and feed­
ing upon serpents and other reptiles.

Eusebius says, the pelican has a pecu­
liar tenderness for its young. It gene­
rally places its nest upon a craggy rock, 
that the serpents may not come at it;
but the serpent that is an enemy to this
bird, observes the wind, and when it
blows towards the pelican's nest, it
squirts out its venom and kills the
young ones; the pelican to bring them
to life again, mounts up above the
clouds, and linking its sides with its
wings, makes the blood to come forth, 
which falling on its nest through the
clouds, restores the young to life again.

PELICAN [with Gunners] an ancient
piece of ordnance, equal to a quarter
culverin, and carrying a ball of six
pounds.

PELLICOIDES [πελεχοείδης of πέλεχυς
a hatchet, and εἷδος, form, Gr.] a cer­
tain geometrical figure, that something
resembles a hatchet.

PELLICLE [pellicula, L.] when any
solution is evaporated so long by a gen­
tle heat, that a film or skin rises on the
top of the liquor, they say it is evapo­
rated to a Pellicle, and then there is
very little more liquor left, than will
just serve to keep the salts in fusion.

PELLUCIDNESS [of pellucidus,
L. and ness]
transparency, diaphaneity.

PELLUCIDITY [of pellucidus,
L. and ness]
transparency, diaphaneity. 

PEN [with the Britains and ancient
Gauls] an high mountain; hence those
hills which divide France from Italy, 
are call'd the Apennines.

To PEN up [of pẏnðan, Sax.] to shut
up, to inclose.

PENALNESS [of penal, F. of penalis, 
L. and ness] liableness to a penalty.

PENANCE [of pœna L. punishment]
the exercise of penitence, or a punish­
ment, either voluntary or imposed by
legal authority, for faults committed by
a person.

PENANCE [of pœnitentia, L.] a sort
of mortification enjoined by Romish
priests, O.  F.

PENANCE [in Canon Law] an ec­
clesiastical punishment chiefly adjudged
to the sin of fornication.

To do PENANCE, is to do those
things, that are imposed upon sinners, 
to either commute for sins, or publickly
to testify their sorrow for them.

PENANCES [in the Roman church]
are sometimes pecuniary; sometimes
austerities to themselves; as whipping, 
going bare-foot, &c. and sometimes
going pilgrimages, building churches;
or the saying so many prayers to such
and such saints; so many Ave Maria's
&c.

PENATES [of המינפ, Heb. inwards, 
or Penitus inwardly, because kept within
the house, Cic.] houshold gods, whose
statues were there kept, and worship­
ped with wine and incense. They were
made either of iron or earthen-ware, 
but their form was kept secret, as a re­
ligious mystery. In the time of peace
they committed their arms to the care
of the Penates. Cities and kingdoms
had also their Penates. Those of Rome
were brought by Æneas from Troy, to
which place Dardanus brought them
from Samothrace.

The Penates and Lares were diffe­
rent, in that the Lares were common
in all houses, and the Penates proper
to particular ones, and divine honours
were done to the Lares in the chimney-­
corner, or on the fire-hearths; and to
the Penates in the open court, or some
other place or sort of chapel within.

PENCIL 
of Rays [in
Opticks] a
double cone
of rays join­
ed together
at the base, 
one of which hath its vertex in some
one point of the object, and the glass, 
B, E, D, for its base, and the other hath
its base on the same glass, but its vertex
in the point of convergence, as at C.

Image omitted.



PENDANT [in a Ship] a short rope, 
which is fastened at one end to the head
of the mast, or yard, or clew of the sail,



having a block or shiver at the other 
end to reeve some running rope.

PENDANTS [with Heralds] pendant
escutcheons. In ancient times, men of
chivalry or knights would resort to the
courts of princes, and set up publick
challenges for justs and tournaments, or
else port them upon some bridge or o­
ther pass, and there provoke or chal­
lenge, all men of rank that came that
way, to encounter them. In order to
this, they hung up their shields, with
their coat of armour painted on them, 
on the neighbouring trees, or else on
poles erected for that purpose.

PENDENTIVE [with Architects] the
whole body of a vault, suspended out
of the perpendicular of the walls, and
bearing against the Arc boutant.

PENDENTNESS [of pendens, L. and
ness] hanging down quality.

PENDULOUSNESS [of pendulus, L.
and ness] pendentness, or the swinging
to and fro.

Simple PENDULUM, is one that
consists of a single weight.

Compound PENDULUM, is one that
consists of several weights, so fixed on
as to return the same distance both from
one another, and from the center about
which they vibrate.

PENETRANTNESS [of penetrant, F.
of  L. and ness] penetrating quality, 
power of penetrating.

PENITENT [pœnitens, L.] repenting, 
a being sorrowful for what has been
committed that is sinful or criminal.

PENITENTNESS [of penitent, F. of
penitens, L. and ness] penitent frame of
mind.

PENITENTIAL a collection of
Christian canons, that appointed the
time and manner of penance to be re­
gularly imposed for every sin, and forms
of prayer, that were to be used for the
receiving of those who entred into pe­
nance, and reconciling penitents by
solemn absolution. A method chiefly
introduced in the time of the degene­
racy of the church.

PENITENTIALLY [of penetentiel, 
F. of.  L.] in a repenting manner.

PENITENTIARY [penitencier, F. of
 L.] of or pertaining to penance, or re­
pentance.

PENITENTS persons in Italy, who
made a profession of doing publick pe­
nance, at certain times in the year, this
custom was begun in the year 1260 by a
hermit, who began to preach in Perugia
in Italy, that the inhabitants shall be
buried under the ruins of their houses, 
which should fall down upon them, if
they did not appease the wrath of God
by immediate repentance: upon which
the people after the example of the Ni­
nevites, clothed themselves in sack cloth
with their shoulders bare, and with
whips in their hands, went in procession
along the streets, slashing themselves, in
order to expiate their sins.

This sort of Penance came afterwards
to be put in practice in other countries
and particularly in Hungary, during a
raging pestilence all over the kingdom;
but a little while after it made a way
for the sect called Flagellants, who ran
together in great companies naked
down to the waste, and lashed themselves
with whips, till the blood gushed out, 
and declared that this new baptism of
blood (for so they termed it) blotted
out all their sins, even those that should
afterwards be committed.

This strange superstition was indeed
in time abolished; but in the stead
thereof another was approv'd, that is
the fraternities of penitents of diffe­
rent colours, who may still be seen in
Italy, in the pope's dominion, Avignon, 
Languedoc and other places, who make
processions on Holy Thursday especially, 
and also at other times, clad in sack­
cloth, and a whip tyed to their wastes, 
which yet they make no use on but for
the sake of the ceremony.

PENITENTS, certain peculiar fria­
ries, who assemble together for pray­
ers, made processions bare footed, their
faces being covered with linen, and
gave themselves discipline.

A PENNATED Leaf [with Botan.]
or feathered leaf, is one, in which the
parts, of which the leaf is composed, 
are set along the middle rib; either
alternately, or by pairs, as in liquo­
rice, vetches, &c.

PENNILESS [penniʒ leaſ, Sax.]
having no money.

PENNONCELS, small pieces of silk, 
cut in the form of a pennon, with
which men of arms used to adorn their
lances or spears. Probably to be more
visible signs to their own party; or to
terrify their enemies, by appearing
more numerous than they were.

PENNY [penniʒ, Sax. denarius, L.]
was the first piece of coined silver we
have any account of, and was for ma­
ny years the only one, till the reign of
king Henry, I. when there was half­
pence. The Anglo-Saxons had but one
coin, and that was a penny. Before
the year 1279 the old penny was struck
with a double cross, so that it might
be easily broken in the middle, or into



four quarters, and so made into half­
pence or farthings.

PENSILNESS [of pensilis, L. and
ness] hanging quality.

PENSION, money paid for diet or
lodging; also a sum of money paid
annually by a prince or state, to a per­
son for service required of him; also
an annual allowance by a company, 
corporation, or parish to the poor
members of it; an allowance or salary
by the year.  F. of  L.

PENSION Order, a peremptory or­
der against such of the society of Gray's-­
Inn, as are in arrears tor pensions and
other duties.

PENSIONARY, a person who has a
pension, appointment or yearly sum
during life, by way of acknowledg­
ment, charged on the estate of a prince, 
company, &c.

PENSIONARY [in Holland] the title
of a prime minister or president of
every city or province, who presides
in their particular councils, &c. and
in the assemblies of the states of the
provinces he is the speaker in behalf
of his city or province; but their au­
thority is not the same in all places, in
some they only give their opinion or
advice, and are only in the assemblies
of the magistrates when called, in
others they attend constantly; and in
others they make, prepare or draw up
the proportions in behalf of the bourg­
her matters, and methodize and draw
up their resolutions; and they have all
a fixt allowance from the state.

Grand PENSIONARY of Holland, is
the chair-man or prime minister of the
states, his office continues for five
years only; but at the expiration is
generally renewed by election and so
on usually during life.

PENSIONS [of Churches] a certain
sum of money paid to clergy-men in­
stead of tithes.

King's PENSIONERS a band of
gentle­
men, to the number of forty, first set
on foot by king Henry VII. whose office
is to guard the king's person in his own
house, armed with partisans; they at­
tend and wait in the presence chamber, 
and attend the king to and from cha­
pel.

Gentlemen PENSIONERS a band of
gentle­
men, to the number of forty, first set
on foot by king Henry VII. whose office
is to guard the king's person in his own
house, armed with partisans; they at­
tend and wait in the presence chamber, 
and attend the king to and from cha­
pel.

PENSTOCK, a flood-gate, placed in
the water of a mill pond.

PENT [of pinðan, Sax.] shut in or
up, kept in, inclosed.

PENTACAPSULAR [pentacapsularis
of πέντε, five, and capsula, L. a case or
seed pod] having five seed pods.

PENTACHORD [of πέντε, five, and
χορδὴ, Gr. string] a musical instrument
having five strings.

PENTACHROSTICK [of πέντε and
ἀχροστιχίς, Gr.] a set or series of verses
so disposed, that there are always
found five acrosticks of the same name
in five divisions of each verse.

PENTACOCCOUS [of πέντε, five, 
and χοχχὸς, Gr. a grain] having five
grains or seeds.

PENTAGRAPH [πεντάγραφον, Gr.]
an instrument wherewith designs, 
prints, &c. of any kinds may be copied
in any proportion without a person's
being skilled in drawing.

PENTAMETER [πεντὰμετρον, Gr.]
a verse consisting of five feet.

As I have before given you tables
for making Hexameter Latin verses, so
I shall here present you with some for
Pentameters.

The manner of operation for Penta­
meters, is the very same with that of
Hexameters (which see.) Only, where­
as Hexameter Verses consisting of six
Words, do therefore require six Tables.
Pentameters, deduceable from these ta­
bles, are to consist but of five Latin
Words, and so only require five Fi­
gures to work them thro' their five
Tables: So that any set of five Figures, 
worked thro' their respective Tables
(in all respects like as you have been
shewn in the Example of the Hexame­
ters) will produce five Latin Words, 
which will make a true Pentameter
Verse, which will be true Latin and
good sense.

Thus the figures 1 1 1 1 1 produce
Turpia significant arma maligna mihi
19723 produce
Turpia procurant acta molesta mera
32791 produce
Impia conglomerant acta maligna vides.

And if you are minded to compose a
pair of verses together, viz. Hexameter
and Pentameter, you must set down the
two sets of figures, as thus 685191
89155
of which sets of figures, wrought out
by their proper tables, will be produ­
ced the following verses.
Pessima fata tuis prænarrant sidera nigra, 
Tetrica significant astra nefunda viris.

Which sets of figures, if placed
backwards, will produce quite diffe­
rent verses.

By these tables, between two and
three hundred thousand Pentameter ver­
ses may be produced.



The Verifying Tables for PENTA­
METERS.


Five tables omitted.



PENTANGLE [of πέντε, Gr. five, 
and angulus, L.] a figure having five
angles.

PENTAPHYLLOUS [of πέντε and 
, Gr. a leaf] having five leaves.

PENTASPAST [ϖεντάσπαστον, Gr.]
an engine that has five pullies.

PENTASTYLE [ϖεντάστυλος, Gr.]
a work in architecture, wherein are
five rows of columns.

PENTATHLON [πένταθλον of πέντε
and ἀθλον, a striving, Gr.] the five ex­
ercises performed in the Grecian games, 
viz. Leaping, Running, Quoiting, Dart­
ing and Wrestling.

PENTECOST, a religious festival
celebrated by the Jews 50 days after
the passover, pursuant to the divine
command, which day among the
Christians is made to be that of the de­
scent of the Holy Ghost upon the Apos­
tles.

PENTECOSTARION, an ecclesia­
stical book among the Greeks, contain­
ing the office of the church from Easter
Day, till the eighth day after Pentecost, 
which is by them called the sunday of
all saints.

PENTHEUS [of πένθος, Gr. mourn­
ing] the son of Echion and Agave, who
(according to the poets) was torn in
pieces by his mother and his sister, be­
cause he contemned the rites and revel­
ling feasts of Bacchus. Natalis Comes
tells us, that he was a good king, who
endeavouring to root out the vice of
drunkenness from amongst his subjects, 
suffered many wounds in his good name
by their calumnies and reproaches.

PEPPER [piper, L. πιπερις, Gr.] an
Indian spice in small round grains grow­
ing upon a low shrub of the reptile
kind, and is usually planted at the foot
of large trees. The seeds, berries or
corns grow in clusters like grapes, are
at first green, when ripe on the tree
red, but being gathered and dryed in
the sun turn blackish, and is called black
pepper.

White PEPPER, is the fruit of the
same plant, prepared by moistening
the grain in sea water, and then drying
it in the sun; which causes the out­
ward husk to peel off, leaving only the
seed or pulp which is white.

Guinea PEPPER, otherwise called
Pimento, is of a coral colour; some of
which is very pungent, sharp or strong.

Long PEPPER differs not much from
the first mentioned; saving that it
grows in heads like Indian corn, with
many grains, close husked together in
heads, about the length and thickness



of a child's finger; but is not quite so
sharp and pungent as the other.

Jamaica PEPPER, by some called
all spice, by reason of its pleasant and
universal aromatick taste, when pulve­
riz'd.

To PEPPER a Person off, to punish
him severely by pelting with any small
globulous bodies; also to give a person
the soul disease soundly.

PEPUSIANS, a sect of Christian He­
reticks in the second century, so called
from Pepuza a town in Phrygia, which
they named Jerusalem, to which they
invited all persons to come; among
these women officiated as bishops and
priests.

PERAMBULATOR, an instrument
or rolling wheel
for measuring
roads, &c. a sur­
veying wheel.
It is made of
wood or iron, 
commonly half a
pole in circum­
ference, with a
movement, and
a face divided
like a clock, with
a long rod of
iron or steel, 
that goes from
the center of the
wheel to the
work: There
are also two
hands, which (as you drive the wheel
before you) count the revolutions;
and from the composition of the move­
ment and division on the face, shew
how many yards, poles, furlongs, and
miles you go.

Image omitted.



PERCH [of perche, F. a pole] a stick
or pole for birds to roost on.

To PERCH [of percher, F.] to sit upon
a perch, stick or twig of a tree, as
birds do.

PERCHANT [with Fowlers] a de­
coy-bird tyed by the foot, which flut­
ters, and draws other birds to it, and
so gives the fowler an opportunity of
catching them,  F.

PERCLOSE [in Heraldry] is that
part of a garter that is buckled and
nowed, which detains and restrains the
garter, being intire or dimidiated, from
dissolution.

PERCUNUS [among the ancient in­
habitants of Prussia] a deity in honour
of whom they always superstitiously
kept a fire of oak; which if the priest
who had the care of this fire suffered
to go out through his negligence, he
was to be punished with death. These
idolatrous people believed that when
it thundred it was their grand priest
called Krive, entertaining himself with
their god Percunus, and upon this per­
suasion fell down to the ground in ado­
ration to him; petitioning him for
seasonable weather, to make their
ground fruitful.

PERCUSSION [in Physicks] the im­
pression a body makes in falling or
striking upon another; or the shock or
collision of two bodies, which concur­
ring, alter the motion of each other.

PERDOITE [among the ancient in­
habitants of Prussia] a deity for whom
the mariners and fishermen had a par­
ticular veneration, because they be­
lieved that he presided over the sea.

They represented this deity by an
angel of a vast bigness standing upon
the waters, and turning the winds, 
which way he pleased; before they
went a fishing they offered to him sa­
crifices of fish, covering their tables
with the same, and eating the remains
of what was offered, and also drink­
ing very freely; after which their
priest whom they called Sigonetta took
observation of the winds, and told
them the day and place where they
should have good fishing.

PERDUE, lost, forlorn,  F.

PERFECT Animal [with some Wri­
ters] one born or produced by univo­
cal generation, in opposition to insects,
which (they suppose) to be produced
by equivocal generation.

PERFECT Numbers [Mathemat.] are
such numbers whose aliquot or even
parts taken all together, will exactly
make the whole number, as 6 and 28, 
&c. for of 6 the half is 3, the third
part 2, and the sixth part 1, which
added together make 6; and it hath no
more aliquot parts in whole numbers:
So 28 has these even parts, 14 the half, 
7 the fourth, 4 the seventh, and 2 the
fourteenth, and 1, which added toge­
ther make 28, and therefore is a per­
fect number; of which perfect num­
ber there are but 10 between 1, and
10000000000.

Absolute PERFECTION, is that
wherein all imperfection is excluded, 
such as is that of God, or secundum quid, 
and in its kind.

Essential PERFECTION, is the pos­
session of all the essential attributes; or
of all the parts necessary to the inte­
grity of a substance.



Metaphysical PERFECTION, the same
as Natural.

Natural PERFECTION, is that
whereby a thing has all its powers or
faculties; and those too in their full
vigour; all its parts both principal and
secundary; and those in their due pro­
portion, constitution, &c.

Moral PERFECTION, is an eminent
decree of virtue, or moral goodness, to
which men arrive by frequently re­
peated acts of benefice, piety, &c.

Physical PERFECTION. See Natu­
ral Perfection.

Transcendental PERFECTION, the
same as Natural.

PERFIDIA [in Musick] an affectati­
on of doing always the same thing, of
continuing the same motion, the same
song, the same passage, the same fi­
gures of notes.  Ital.

PERFLATILE [perflatilis, L.] easy
to be blown through by the wind.

PERFORATED [in Heraldry] i. e.
bored thorough. The ar­
morists use it to express the
passing or penetrating of
one ordinary (in part) thro'
another: As he bears, Ar­
gent, a Bend Ermine per­
forated through a Cheveron, Gules. See
the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



PER-FORCE [par-force, F.] by force
or violence.

PERFUNCTORINESS [of perfuncto­
rius, L.] a slight, careless way of doing
any thing.

PERGUBRIES [among the ancient
inhabitants of Prussia and Lithuania] a
deity to whom they ascrib'd the care of
the fruits of the earth; to whom they
made a feast on the 22d of March, and
met together in a house, where they
had prepared a horn or two of beer;
where the sacrificer having sung hymns
in the praise of that god, and fill'd a
bowl full of this liquor, took it in his
teeth, drank it off and threw the bowl
over his head, without touching it with
his hands; which he also repeated se­
veral times, in honour of other deities
whom he invoked by their names, 
praying for a good harvest.

All the company did the same, sing­
ing the praises of the god Pergubries, 
and spending the rest of the day in
feasting and mirth.

PERICARDIARY [in Physick] an
epithet given to worms generated in
the heart.

PERICARPUS [with Botanists] a
pellicle or thin membrane encompas­
sing the fruit or grain of a plant.

PERICNEMIA [of περι about, and
χνήμη, Gr. the Tibia] the parts about
the Tibia.

PERIGRINARY [perigrinarius, L.]
a monk in the ancient monasteries, 
whose office was to receive or entertain
strangers or visitors.

PERIOD [in Printing] a character
wherewith the periods of discourse are
terminated thus (.) call'd a full point.

PERIOD [in Chronology] an epocha
or interval of time by which the years
are accounted; or the series of years
whereby in different nations, and on
different occasions, time is measured.

PERIODICK [periodicus, L. περιοδι­
χὸς, Gr.] of, or pertaining to, or that
has its periods.

PERIODICK Diseases, such as decline
and rise again with similar symptoms
alternately.

PERIODICK [with Grammarians] a
term apply'd to a style or discourse that
has numbers, or which consists of just
and artful periods.

PERIOPHTHALMIUM [of περὶ a­
bout, and ὀρθαλμὸς, Gr. the eye] a thin
skin which birds can draw over their
eyes to defend them without shutting
their eye-lids.

PERIPATETICK Philosophy, the sy­
stem of philosophy taught and esta­
blished by Aristotle, and maintained by
his followers.

PERIPAT
ETICKS [περιπατετιχοὶ of
περιπατέω, Gr. to walk about; because
they used to dispute walking in the
place at Athens call'd Lycæum] a sect of
philosophers, the followers of Aristotle,
as Theophrastus, Cratippus, &c.

PERIPETIA [of περιπετὴς, Gr. falling
into a different state] that part of a
tragedy wherein the action is turned, 
the plot unravelled, and the whole
concludes.

PERIPHRASTICALLY, by way of
periphrasis.

PERJURY [Perjurum] is a swearing
falsely, knowingly and wilfully; in a
solemn manner, especially before ma­
gistrates by law appointed to administer
oaths.

The Romans punished perjury by
throwing the perjured person headlong
from the Tarpeian rock.

The Greeks set a mark of infamy
upon perjured persons; but afterwards
in the times of Christianity, such as
swore falsely upon the gospels, were to
have their tongue cut out.

Among the Turks, a perjured person
is led through the city in his shirt, rid­
ing on an ass, with his face to the tail,



holding it in his hand; his face and
shoulders being daubed with the ordure
of guts, and other garbage; after­
wards burnt on the cheek and fore­
head; and is for ever after rendred
uncapable of being a witness in any
cause whatsoever.

PERIWINKLE [in Heraldry] has
been made use of by the inventors of
the new way of blazon by flowers and
herbs, instead of metals and colours, 
to supply the word Azure.

PERMANENTNESS [of permanens, 
L.] durableness, &c.

PERMEABLE [permeabilis, L.] that
may be passed through.

PERMISSION, a permitting, grant­
ing leave or liberty.

PERMISSION [with Rhetoricians] a
figure when the orator professes to
have delivered the whole matter, and
to leave all to the judgment and dis­
cretion of the auditors.

PERMISSIVE, of or pertaining to
permission.

A PERMIT, a note so called, given
by the seller to the buyer of French
brandy, &c.

PERMUTATIONS of Quantities [in
Algebra] the changes, alterations, or
different combinations of any number
of quantities.

PERNICIOUSNESS [of perniciosus, 
L.] mischievousness.

PERPENDICULAR [with Astron.]
when any star is Vertical, i. e. right
over our heads it is said to be perpen­
dicular, because its beams fall directly
upon us.

A right Line is said to be PERPENDI­
CULAR to a plane, when it is perpen­
dicular to all the lines it meets with in
that plane.

PERPENDICULARNESS [of per­
pendicu­
laris, L.] the quality of falling directly
down right.

PERPENDICULARITY [of per­
pendicu­
laris, L.] the quality of falling directly
down right. S 

PERPENDICULARNESS of Plants, 
for tho'
the generality of plants rise a little
crooked, yet the stems shoot up per­
pendicularly, and the roots sink down
perpendicularly; even they that come
out of the ground inclined, or are di­
verted out of the perpendicular by any
violent means, straiten themselves a­
gain and recover their perpendicularity, 
by making a second contrary bend, or
elbow, without rectifying the first.

PERPENDICULARITY of Plants, 
for tho'
the generality of plants rise a little
crooked, yet the stems shoot up per­
pendicularly, and the roots sink down
perpendicularly; even they that come
out of the ground inclined, or are di­
verted out of the perpendicular by any
violent means, straiten themselves a­
gain and recover their perpendicularity, 
by making a second contrary bend, or
elbow, without rectifying the first.

PERPETUAL Motion [in Mechan.]
a motion which is supply'd from it self, 
without the intervention of any ex­
ternal cause.

PERPETUALNESS [perpetuitas, L.]
continuance without interruption, e­
verlastingness, endlesness.

PERRON [with Architects] a stair­
case lying open on the outside of the
building, properly the steps in the front
of a building, which lead into the first
story, when raised a little above the
level of the ground.

PERRUKE a set of false hair, 
curled and sew'd
together on a cawl.

PERRUQUE a set of false hair, 
curled and sew'd
together on a cawl. 

PERSECUTION, any unjust or vio­
lent suit or oppression; especially upon
the account of religion; any pain, af­
fliction, or inconvenience, which a
person designedly inflicts on another.

PERSEVERANCE [with Divines] a
Christian virtue, whereby persons are
enabled to persist in the way of salva­
tion to the end.

PERSEUS [according to the Poets]
the son of Jupiter and Danae, the
daughter of Acrisius, king of the Ar­
gives, who when he came of age had
winged sandals, an helmet and sword
given him by Mercury, and a brazen
shield covered with the skin of the goat 
called Ægis, given him by Minerva.
He was a stout champion, his first ad­
venture was a voyage against the Gor­
gons, who were three sisters, Medusa, 
Stheno and Euriale, who are said to
have had but one eye among them all, 
and snakes instead of hair; and that on
whomsoever they look'd, he was turned
into stone. But Perseus's shield had this
quality, that his looking upon that
would save him from the injury of that
eye. And he letting upon Medusa when
she and all her snakes were asleep, cut
off her head and placed it in his shield, 
with which he turned Atlas, king of
Mauritania, and many others into stone;
he afterwards, delivered Andromeda
from the monster that was ready to
devour her. This Perseus is said to
have been a king of the Mycenians, 
about A. M. 2640, who cut off the head
of a certain harlot, of such exquisite
beauty, that all that saw her were en­
amoured even to stupefaction, which
gave rise to the fable of turning them
into stones. See Medusa, Gorgon and
Phorci.

PERSICK Order [in Architecture] is
where the bodies of men serve instead
of columns to support the entablature;
or rather the columns themselves are
in that form. That which gave rise to
this custom, was, Pausanias having de­
feated the Persians, the Lacedæmonians
erected trophies of the arms of their



enemies in token of their victory, and
then represented the Persians under the
figure of slaves, supporting their
porches, arches, or houses.

PERSONAPLE [in Law] enabled
to maintain plea in court; as such a fo­
reigner was lately made personable by Act
of Parliament; also a being in a capacity
to take any thing granted or given.

PERSONAL Action [in Law] is an
action levied directly and solely against
person. in opposition to a real or
mixed action.

PERSONAL Goods [in Law] are those
which consists in moveables, &c. which
every person has in his own disposal, 
in opposition to lands and tenements, 
which are called real Estate.

PERSONALNESS, the abstract of
personal, the property of being a di­
stinct person.

PERSONALIZING the feigning a
person, or the
attributing a person to an inanimate
being; or the giving it the form, sen­
timents and language of a person; thus
the poets have personified all the pas­
sions, virtues and vices, by making di­
vinities of them.

PERSONIFYING the feigning a
person, or the
attributing a person to an inanimate
being; or the giving it the form, sen­
timents and language of a person; thus
the poets have personified all the pas­
sions, virtues and vices, by making di­
vinities of them.

PERSPECTIVE Plane, is a glass, or
other transparent surface, supposed to
be placed between the eye and the ob­
ject perpendicular to the horizon, un­
less the contrary be expresly mention'd.

PERSPECTIVE, is also used for a
kind of picture or painting in gardens, 
and at the ends of galleries, designed to
deceive the light, by representing the
continuation of an alley, a building, 
a landskip, or the like.

PERSPICACIOUSNESS [perspicaci­
tas, L.] quickness of sight or apprehen­
sion.

A PERSUASIVE, a discourse or ar­
gument that tends to persuade.

PERSULTATION, a leaping or
skipping over, as frisky cattle do in the
fields.

PERTNESS [of appert, F. and ness]
briskness, liveliness, smartness in talk.

PERTICÆ, perchers, large sconces or
candlesticks for tapers or lights, which
were set on the altars in churches.

PERTINGENCE [of pertingens, L.]
a reaching to.

PERVICACIOUSNESS [of pervicax, 
L. and ness] stubbornness.

PESADE [in Horsemanship] a mo­
tion of a horse, that in
lifting or raising his fore-quarters, keeps
his hind legs upon the ground without
stirring; so that he makes no time with
his haunches, 'till his fore legs reach
the ground.

PESATE [in Horsemanship] a mo­
tion of a horse, that in
lifting or raising his fore-quarters, keeps
his hind legs upon the ground without
stirring; so that he makes no time with
his haunches, 'till his fore legs reach
the ground.

PESSOMANCY [πεσσομαντέια, Gr.]
a sort of divination by putting lots into
a vessel, and drawing them out, having
first made supplication to the gods to
direct them, and being drawn, they
made conjectures from the characters
marked on them what should happen.

PESTILENTIALNESS [of pestilen­
tiel, F. and ness] plaguyness, pestilent
quality.

PESTLE [of Pork] the extremity or
bone of a leg.

PETALIM [petalismus, L.] a kind of
exile among the ancients; or a banish­
ment for the term of 5 years.

PETALOUS, having flower leaves.

PETARD, is an engine of metal, 
shaped like a sugar loaf or high-crown'd
hat, made
for break­
ing open
gates, draw­
bridges, bar­
riers, &c.
its length is
7 or 8 in­
ches, the
diameter of
the mouth is 5 inches, and that at bot­
tom one and a half; the thickness of
metal at the neck is half an inch, and
that of the breech 12 or 15; its charge
or powder is 5 pound or thereabouts, 
and it weighs about 55 or 60. There
are much larger and stronger petards, 
and there are likewise smaller. The
first are employed in breaking open
strong reinforced gates, and the last
such as can make but small resistance.

When the Petard is loaded with pow­
der, it is put upon a strong piece of
plank, covered with a plate of iron on
the outside, which covers the Ouver­
ture, being hollowed a little for the
purpose; the place where they join, is
done over with Wax, Pitch, Rosin, &c.
to inforce the effect. This being done, 
it is carried to the place designed to be
blown up, where joining the plank ex­
actly to the gate, the Petard is flayed
behind and fired by a Fusee, that the
Petardeer may have time to get off.
They are sometimes used in Counter-­
Mines, to break thro' into the enemies
Galleries to disappoint their mines.

Image omitted.



PETE [petus, L.] combustible earth, 
dug up in small pieces for fuel.

St. PETER ad vincula. See Gule of
August,  L.

St. PETER's Fish, a sort of sea fish.

PETICOAT [petit-cote, F.] a wo­
man's vestment.



PETITIONARY, of or pertaining to
a petition.

PETRESCENCE, a petrifying or be­
coming stone.

PETREFACTION [in Physiology] the
action of converting fluids, woods, and
other matters into stone,  L.

PETRIFICK [petrificus, L.] turning
or growing in stone.

PETROJOANNITES, the followers
of Peter John, or Peter the son of John, 
who lived in the 12th century; one of
whose opinions was, that he alone had
the understanding of the true sense
wherein the Apostles preached the gospel.

PETROLÆUM [of πετρα, a rock, 
and oleum, L. oil] a certain oil that
distils or flows out of a rock.

PETTEIA [in Musick] the art of
making a just discernment of ranging
or combining all manner of sounds
among themselves, so as they may pro­
duce their effect.

PETTISHNESS [prob. of depit, F.
and ness] aptness to be displeased or
angry.

PETTIT [petit, F.] little, small, in­
considerable.

PETTY Treason [in Law] the crime
of a clergy-man's killing his prelate, a
child his parent, a wife her husband, 
a servant his master.

PEWTERER [of peauter, Du.] a
maker of pewter vessels.

PEWTERERS, were
incorporated An 1482.
Their armorial en­
signs are, Azure on a
chevron Or, between
3 cross bars argent, as
many roses gules, the
crest two arms hold­
ing a pewter dish proper; the support­
ers two sea horses per fess or and ar­
gent. The motto, In God is all my trust.
It is the 16th company; their hall is
situate on the west side of Lime-street
London.

Image omitted.



PHAETON, a prince of the Ligurians, 
a great astrologer, applied himself to
study the course of the sun. It hap­
pened in his time, that Italy was so vio­
lently scorched with excessive heat, that
the earth was barren for many years
after: from hence the poets took occa­
sion to usher in this fable, that Phaeton, 
the son of Sol, by Clymene, having ob­
tained of his father to drive the chariot
of the sun for one day, set on fire the
earth and sky; for which Jupiter struck
him with a thunder-bolt, and tumbled
him into the river Po in Italy; and that
his sisters, the Heliades, bewailing his 
destiny, were transformed into poplar-­
trees to adorn the banks, and their tears
were turned into amber.

PHALEUCIAN Verse [so called of
Phaleucus] a verse of eleven syllables.

PHALLOPHORI [of φαλλοφοροι of
φάλλος, a skin, and φήρω, to bear, Gr.]
certain mimicks who ran about the
streets crowned with ivy, cloathed in
sheep's skins, and having their faces
smutted, bearing baskets of various
herbs, dancing in honour of Bacchus.

PHANTASM [φαντασμα, Gr. fan­
tome, F.] an object
perceived by an external sense, and re­
tained in the fancy; an apparition, a
ghost; also, an idle conceit.

PHANTOM [φαντασμα, Gr. fan­
tome, F.] an object
perceived by an external sense, and re­
tained in the fancy; an apparition, a
ghost; also, an idle conceit.

PHARISEES [כידשפ of שדפ Heb. he
separated] a sect of the Jews, who
sprung up in Judea, long before the
birth of our Saviour; and St. Jerome
says, that the authors of it were Sam­
mai and Hillel.

They fasted on the second and fifth
days of the week; placed thorns at the
bottom of their robes, that they might
prick their legs as they walked along, 
lay upon boards covered with flint­
stones, and tyed thick cords about their
waste. But they did not all nor always
observe these mortifications.

They not only payed tithes, as the
law required, and gave the thirtieth
and fiftieth part of their fruits; but
they added voluntary sacrifices to those
that were enjoined, and appeared very
exact in the performance of their vows.

But pride marred all their actions, 
because the only end they proposed was
to gain upon the esteem of the people, 
and the reputation of being saints.

They coveted the chief seats at feasts
and assemblies, that they might be es­
teemed as infallible teachers and doc­
tors of the law, which they had abomi­
nably corrupted by their traditions.

As to the doctrines they professed;
they attributed the event of all things
to destiny, tho' they endeavoured to
make the liberty of the actions of the
will to accord therewith: They were
so far Pythagoreans as to believe the
transmigration of the soul, especially
of those of virtuous persons, supposing
the rest to be always in torment.

They were also much addicted to as­
trology, &c. The Talmud reckons up
7 sects of Pharisees.

1. The Sichemites, who were prose­
lytes for the sake of interest.

2. The Lame or Immoveable, who
were so called on account of their seem­
ing so much taken up with meditation,



that they were like those that had lost
the use of their legs, or were transfor­
med into statues.

3. The Stumblers, so called from their
going with their eyes shut, for fear
they should see a woman, and by this
means often run against posts, walls, 
&c.

4. Enquirers, i. e. after what was
necessary to be done.

5. The Mortars, so called because
they wore a high crowned hat, in the
shape of a mortar, that their eyes
might be kept from wandering, and
that they might be fixed upon the
ground or else look strait before them.

6. The Lovers, so called because they
pretended to be governed in all their
actions, by the love of virtue only.

7. The Timorous or Fearful, whose
actions all proceeded from the slavish
principle of fear, and their principal
regard was to the negative principles
only.

By these practises and their great
shew of exactness in performing all their
vows, they grew very much in the o­
pinion of the populace, as persons of
great sanctity and religion, which puf­
fed them up so with pride, that they
looked with an eye of contempt upon
all others, as meer cast offs from God's
favour.

PHARMACEUTICAL [φαρμαχευτιχός
of φάρμαχον, a medicine, and σχέω, Gr.
to prepare] of or pertaining to phar­
macy, or the apothecary's art.

PHAROS [φαρος of φῶς, light, and
ὀρᾶν, Gr. to see] a small island near the
port of Alexandria in Egypt, where, in
ancient times, flood a high and stately
tower, reckoned with the seven won­
ders of the world. It is reported to
have been built square, in height 300
cubits, upon four pillars of glass, resem­
bling crabs. Ptolemy Philadelphus is said
to have expended 800 talents in building
it. At nights it had a fire at the top
to give warning to pilots, that they
might shun the danger of the coasts.
Hence all such towers are called Pharos's.

PHARYNGOTOMY [φαρυγγοτομια of
φάρυγξ and τεμνω, Gr. to cut] the same
as Laryngotomy.

PHARYNX [φάρυγξ, Gr.] the upper
opening of the Oesophagus or gullet, at
the mouth of the stomach, or situate at
the bottom of the fauces, consisting of
three pair of muscles.

PHASIS [of φάσις, Gr.] an appear­
ance.

PHENICOPTER [phænicopterus, L.]
a red nightingale.

PHENIX, a most rare bird and the
only one of its species, of which many
wonderful things are related. It is 
said that it lives several ages, and that
then is renewed again from its own
ashes.

The Rabbins say, that all the birds
having complyed with the first woman, 
and eaten of the forbidden fruit along
with her, the Phenix only would not
eat of it, from whence it obtained a
kind of immortality. For after a 1000
years a fire proceeds out of the Phe­
nix's nest and consumes it; but in such
manner that there remains as it were
an egg, from whence the bird is again
renewed and produced. Others say
that being arrived at the age of a 1000
years, it plucks off its own feathers
and dies of mere decay of nature: But
it soon is produced again from its own
body and returns to life.

The Naturalists who have spoke of
this bird, say things of it that are alto­
gether incredible.

It is a bird, as they say of the bigness
of an eagle, whose head is crested with
a most beautiful tuft, and the feathers
of its neck are gilded, and those of its
tail purple with carnation down.

There is but one of these in the
world at a time. According to some
it lives 500 years, according to others
a 1000. Some make its life 700 years;
Pliny but 660. Hesiod says the Phenix
lives as long as nine ravens, and the
ravens as long as nine men or nine ge­
nerations of men.

Tacitus says, that it was related in
his time, that the first that had been
seen in Egypt appeared in the time of
Sesostris, the second under Amasis, and
the third under Ptolemy Euergetes.

Pliny says, that a Phenix was brought
to Rome under the reign of the empe­
ror Claudius, in the year 800 from the
foundation of Rome; that it was shewn
in the assembly of the senate: But
Pliny says no body doubted but this was
false.

It is said that when the time of its
renovation approaches, it builds itself
a funeral pile of branches of sweet
scented trees, upon which it sits down
and dies.

From its bones and marrow there is
first produced a worm, which as it
grows takes the form of a bird. Which
when it is grown up, takes up the ashes
of its parent and carries them into Ar­
menia, or into Arabia, and places them
upon the altar of the sun.



Herodotus says, it carries the body of
its parent embalmed in a mass of
myrrh, which it deposits in the temple
of Hieropolis in Egypt.

A PHENIX [Hieroglyphically] was
pictured to signify a reformation, or the
resurrection, because it rises out of its
ashes, when it has been consumed by
the violence of the sun's beams, as 12
reported.

PHEONS [in Heraldry] the
bearded heads of darts, i. e.
made in the form of a fish-­
hook, that when they have
entred, cannot be drawn
out without enlarging the wound by in­
cision. See the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



PHILANTHROPIST [φιλὰνθρωπος of
φίλος and ἄνθρωπος, Gr. man] a lover of
mankind.

PHILELEUTHERIA [φιλελευθερία of
φιλῖα, the love, and ἑλευθέρια, Gr. liberty]
love of liberty.

PHILISTORICUS [φιλοῖστοριχος of
φιλος and ίστορια, Gr history] a lover of
history.

PHILLIZERS. See Filazers.

PHILO [of φίλος, Gr. a friend or lo­
ver] used in composition of several
words in English.

PHILOLOGIST [philologus, L. φιλόλο­
γος of φίλος and λόγος, Gr. a word] a
lover of letters or languages, a hum­
nist.

PHILOLOGY [φιλόλογία, Gr.] a sci­
ence, or rather an assemblage of sciences, 
consisting of grammar, rhetorick, poetry, 
antiquities, history, criticism, or a kind
of universal literature conversant a­
bout all the sciences, their rise, pro­
gress, authors, &c. which the French
call Belles Lettres.

PHILOSOPHERS Stone, the great
object of alchymy, a long sought for
preparation, which will transmute im­
purer metals, as tin, lead and copper, 
into gold and silver.

Natural PHILOSOPHERS, are rec­
koned of four sorts

1. Those who have delivered the
properties of natural bodies, under
geometrical and numeral bodies; as the
Pythagoreans and Platonists.

2. The Peripateticks, who explained 
the nature of things by matter, form
and privation; by elementary and occult
qualities; by sympathies, antipathies, fa­
culties, attractions, &c. But these did
not so much endeavour to find out the
true reasons and causes of things, as to
give them proper names and terms, so
that their physicks is a kind of Meta­
physicks.

3. Experimental Philosophers, who by 
frequent and well made trials and expe­
riments, as by chymistry, &c. sought
into the natures and causes of things,
and to these almost all our discoveries
and improvements are due.

4. Mechanical Philosophers, who ex­
plicate all the phenomena of nature by
matter and motion; by the texture of
their bodies, and the figure of their
parts; by effluvia, and other subtile par­
ticles, &c. and in short, would account
for all effects and phænomena by the
known and established laws of motion
and mechanicks; and these in conjunc­
tion with experimental ones, are the
only true Philosophers.

PHILOSOPHICAL [φιλοσοφιχὸς, Gr.]
of or pertaining to philosophy.

PHILOSOPHICAL Egg [in Chym.] a
thin glass vessel in the shape of an egg,
having a long neck or stem, and used
in digestions that take up a considerable
time.

To PHILOSOPHIZE [philosophare,
L. of φιλοσουιξεῖν, Gr.] to play the phi­
losopher; to dispute or argue like a
philosopher, to consider some object of
our knowledge, examine its properties, 
and the phænomena it exhibits; to in­
quire into the causes or effects, and
the laws thereof, according to the na­
ture and reason of things, in order to
the improvement of knowledge.

PHILOSOPHY [philosophia, L. φιλο­
σοφία of φιλέω, to love, and σοφία, Gr.
wisdom] the knowledge or study of na­
ture or morality, founded on reason
or experience.

Natural PHILOSOPHY. It is not to
be doubted but that the study of nature
begun soon after the creation; but the
most early accounts we have of it, say
that Xenophontus Colophonius began to
form philosophical sects, or teach it
publickly; who held that there were
four elements, and asserted a plurality
of worlds, and as to the soul of man, 
&c. that it was of an aerial nature;
and as to the deity, that the figure of it
was round, and that he was an intel­
ligent, wise and eternal Being, and
that he saw and heard every thing;
but did not use the faculty of respi­
ration,

Parmenides his scholar who succeed­
ed him, held but two elements, viz.
earth and fire, and asserted that the
earth was of a spherical form, hanging
in the centre of the universe.

Melissus, Zeno and Eleates, his scho­
lars differed. Melisses maintained that
the universe was infinitely extended



and without motion; and Zeno that
there was a plurality of worlds, de­
nyed a vacuum, taught that generation
consisted of the four prime qualities, 
and that the soul emerged from a par­
ticular composition of those ingredi­
ents, &c.

And so one notion sprung from an­
other, till they came so effectually to
lese themselves in the vast abyss of
conjectures, as at last to affirm that the
world was eternal; and that there was
no other being or supreme deity, but
what they call nature, or the soul of
the world.

But the moderns have pretty well
shook off the yoke of servilely follow­
ing Aristotle and others of the ancients, 
who when they could not account for
any phenomenon, were wont to attri­
bute it to occult qualities, in order to
screen their own ignorance; but the
noble inventions and experiments of the
two last centuries, have set us upon a
much better footing than before, as to
many Phænomena, which the ancients
had no proper way of accounting for.

PHILOSOPHY, the first that we find
studied philosophy were the Egyptians, 
to which they gave so great an air of
mystery, that the people did it reve­
rence as they did their religion. For
the priests, out of design to surpass the
capacity of the vulgar, and distinguish
themselves from the multitude, veiled
their observations under figures and
hieroglyphicks. But as they had no
way of communicating but tradition, 
and were not very ready to communi­
cate it to strangers, so we have little
certain knowledge what their philoso­
phy was; the Grecian philosophers
were the first that communicated and
left behind them to posterity, any such
pieces of philosophy, as would give any
clear knowledge of their principles and
inquiries. Those that applied them­
selves to the study of the motions of the
heavenly bodies; in order to distinguish
their periods and revolutions, and to
form the first draught of an universal
system, and to discern the obliquity of
the ecliptick, and lay open the secrets
of natural things, were Thales, Anaxi­
mander, Anaxagoras, Heraclitus, Hippo­
crates, Democritus, Empedocles, and
Archelaus. The two great founders of 
philosophy were Thales in Greece, and
Pythagoras in Italy.

Socrates and Plato were indebted to 
Thales for most of their fine notions. 
Thales was the first who began to re­
duce the confused ideas of his predeces­
sors into some method and order; and
Socrates traced out the plan of logick
and morality, and supplied principles
to physicks. Plato was the disciple of
Socrates, and laid down the plan of
moral philosophy: He first taught, that
true philosophy consisted more in fide­
lity and constancy, in justice and since­
rity, and the love of our duty, than on
a great knowledge and capacity. Ari­
stotle was disciple to Plato, and was the
first that collected the various parts of
philosophy, in order to cast them into a
regular system, and was by that means, 
and his vast discoveries the most servi­
ceable of all the ancients to philosophy
in the general.

After Aristotle's time philosophy de­
generated, and the purity of its first
originals were corrupted by the mul­
titudes of sects of philosophers that
sprung up. For, as Pere Rapin says, 
Zeno's school was filled with false vir­
tues, Epicurus's with real vices. Phi­
losophy became impious under Diago­
ras, impudent under Diogenes, selfish
under Democrates, railing under Lyon, 
voluptuous under Metrodorus, fantasti­
cal under Crates, drolling under Me­
nippus, libertine under Pyrrho, litigious
under Cleanthes, turbulent under Ar­
chesilaus, and inconstant under Lachi­
des. In short, philosophy became
abandoned to all the extravagancies
that can enter into the mind of man to
imagine. The old Platonick school
was by the new debased into the tribe
of Sceptics and Pyrrhonians, whose
profession was to doubt of everything;
and after the death of Theophrastus, the
order of Peripateticks cooled very much
in their application to natural things, 
preferring the pursuit of eloquence to
them: Thus philosophy declined in
Greece. But after the death of Alexan­
der, the kings of Ægypt and Pergamus
became encouragers of learning; and
after one of the Ptolemy's had banished
the professors of philosophy from Alex­
andria, they returned to Greece; and
the Romans beginning then to flourish, 
there was a short lucid interval of
learning at Athens; where flourished
Panætius, Polybius, Carneades, Clitoma­
chus, Apollonius, and Milo.

Athens being at that time the acade­
my for all the Roman youth of quality, 
from thence the Romans fetched their
philosophy. The first of the Romans
that explained their philosophy in writ­
ing, was Lucretius; also Terentius Varro, 
Quintilian, and Cicero. Toward the
latter end of the reign of Augustus,



Ptolemy of Alexandria established a new
sect in Rome, choosing out the more
rational parts of all the other systems
and reuniting them with his own. Du­
ring the time of Caligula, Nero, and
Domitian, the tyrannical emperors of
Rome, all professors being banished
from Rome, philosophy declined instead
of advancing. There was indeed Se­
neca, but he was more of a courtier
than a philosopher; but Plutarch re­
vived the philosophical spirit in the
times of Adrian and Trajan; and Pliny
went farther than any man before him.

So that not many years after, the
emperor Antoninus so pursued philoso­
phical studies, as to obtain the name of
Philosophus. Then flourished Epictetus, 
Arian, Galen, Diogenes Laertius, Hero­
des Atticus, Pausanias, Aulus Gellius,
Ptolemy the astrologer, Maximus of
Tyre; and about the same time, Taurus
of Berytus, Athenæus, Alexander Aphro­
disæus, Apuleius, and Porphyry, who for
a long time kept philosophy in fashion.
But Lucian finding it in a state of cor­
ruption, compared to what it had been, 
fell foul of the professors: But when
the light of the gospel began to prevail, 
then the Christian philosophy began to
dart its rays, and the fathers of the
church set themselves about the study
of philosophy, that they might be able
to vanquish the Heathens by their own
weapons. Among these were Justin
Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertul­
lian, and Eusebius. To these we may
add, Pantænus, Celsus, Lactantius, Ar­
nobius, Gregory Thaumaturgus, and Am­
monius, who were the first that taught
the philosophy of Aristotle in the Chris­
tian schools. So Basil is reported to
have been the ablest logician in his
time: Chrysostom eminent as well for
philosophy as eloquence; and St. Au­
stin, who composed a system of logick;
and many more that might be annexed.
When the Barbarians over-ran both the
eastern and western empires, all learn­
ing and philosophy snared in the same
fate with the government; and the
Saracens, who over-ran most of the
eastern, and good part of the western
empire, disseminated that little learn­
ing they had among them on the con­
quered, and by (as Pere Rapin says)
fixing too closely on the text and letter
of Aristotle, got an abstracted way of
reasoning, that was something diffe­
rent from the solidity of the Greeks
and Romans; which tho' it appeared
to have in it great sagacity, yet was
false and full of wild conceits, as will
appear by the works of those Arabian
philosophers, Avicenna, Alkindus, Al­
gazel, Averroes, Alpharabius, Albehasen, 
&e. Averroes followed Aristotle, and
Avicenna, Plato: Ludovicus Vives cen­
sures the metaphysicks of Avicenna, 
and their philosophy, as the dreams of
a roving magination, and a-kin to the
Alcoran.

After the Arabians came the school-­
men, who framing their genius on
Arabian comments, thence the school
philosophy became so subtle and knot­
ty. Of this sect Thomas Aquinas is ac­
counted the founder. Had this school
philosophy died in those countries
where superstition and sophistry were
buried, well had it been: But when
true religion and learning revived with
the reformation, school divinity was
industriously cultivated; which seems
to have been calculated for the conti­
nuance of the darkness of popery, be­
cause it rather perplexes than explains
things: And had it not been for the
subtilties of the schools, the smallest
ray of Christian light might have suf­
ficed to have attracted the eyes of sin­
cere Christians.

The school-men who come under the
name of philosophers, were Lanfranc,
whom William the conqueror made
archbishop of Canterbury, Abelard and
Peter Lombard, &c. who framed the
rude draught of his sect from Johannes
Damascenes. And this last mentioned is
said to have been the first that established
transubstantiation in the church of Rome, 
in the form it is now established. So this
being probably accommodated to that
and other extravagancies in popery, 
we may easily perceive what a fine new
philosophy it was: This philosophy
was perfected, and reduced to the scho­
lastick way, and into form, by Thomas
Aquinas. And like the Platonick sect, it
has been divided into three periods, 
the old, the middle, and the new: This
most considerable of the first period, 
was Alexander of Hales, an Englishman;
this lasted about 200 years. Albertus
Magnus began the second, and the Aris­
totelian doctrine was carried to its height
by Thomas Aquinas and John Duns Sco­
tus an Englishman. This lasted about
an hundred years. The third scholas­
tick sect was begun by Durandas, and
lasted about an 100 years.

Of these scholastick philosophers, 
Pere Rapin says, proceeded that dead
weight of sums and courses that stifled 
all the remains of good letters in the world.



But while these sums and sentences
were erecting by the school men, three
other philosophers started up, who
forsaking the scholastick rules, set up a
method quite opposite, as Lully, Cardan
and Paracelsus; Lully, having by his
commerce with the Arabians, accom­
plished himself with a good share of
knowledge in philosophy, astronomy,
and physick, out of them composed a
fourth, that is chymistry. Cardan, he
brought the dark cabalistical learning
upon the stage; and Paracelsus was for
framing a new Philosophy, a new Phy­
sick, and a new Religion, affecting to be
mysterious, and even unintelligible.

In the thirteenth century the caba­
listical, occult philosophy came into
vogue, being introduced or cultivated
by Cornelius Agrippa, Armond de Villenen
and Petrus de Oppino, who, it is very
probably, were greater cheats than
they were conjurers, as some have ac­
counted them.

Mechanical PHILOSOPHY, was that
which the most ancient of the Phænician
and Greek philosophers have adhered
to, in order to the explication of the
Phænomena of nature; they made use
originally of no other principles than
the consideration of empty space, the
doctrine of atoms and the gravitation of
bodies. These sillily attributed the
causes of gravity to something which
was plainly distinct from matter.

But our most modern natural philo­
sophers did not take in this cause in their
inquiries into nature.

They avoided aiming at any hypothesis
in, or to explain the Phænomona of natu­
ral effects, but leaving the philosophy
of causes or metaphysicks, they rightly
considered that it is the chief end, de­
sign, and business of natural philosophy
to consider effects, and by reasoning
upon them and their various Phæno­
mena, to proceed regularly at last to the 
knowledge of the first cause.

And it is certain that all true pro­
gress and proficiency in this kind of na­
tural philosophy, if it don't immediate­
ly lead us to the knowledge of the first
cause, yet it will bring us still nearer
and nearer to it.

PHILOTHYTÆ [φιλοθυται, Gr.] su­
perstitious devotees, that offered sacri­
fice upon any occasion, tho' never so
small and trifling.

PHILOTIMY [φιλοτιμία of φίλος, a
friend or lover, and τιμη, Gr. honour]
love of honour.

PHILTER [philtrum, of φιλτρόν, Gr.]
a love potion or powder, a charm to
cause love. The advocates for these
affirm, that philters have the power or
property of influencing a person, so as
to alter his or her inclinations, upon
whom they act from a disregard or ha­
tred of a person, to the admiring or lo­
ving the despised object, without any
other means used; and that this is ei­
ther only by the natural effect of the
composition, when the passions are to
be but moderately excited, or else by
the superaddition of magical incanta­
tion, where the affections are extrava­
gantly rouzed.

True PHILTERS are such as are sup­
posed to work their effect by some na­
tural and magnetical power.

Spurious PHILTERS, are spells or
charms supposed to have an effect be­
yond the ordinary laws of nature, by
some magick virtue.

PHILTRATION [in Pharmacy]
the separation
of the finer part of a fluid from a coar­
ser, by passing it thro' a linnen cloth,
brown paper, &c.

FILTRATION [in Pharmacy]
the separation
of the finer part of a fluid from a coar­
ser, by passing it thro' a linnen cloth,
brown paper, &c.

PHLEGM [φλέσμα, Gr.] one of the
humours of an animal body.

PHLEGMATICKNESS [of φλεγματι­
χος, Gr. phlegamaticus, L. and ness] full­
ness of, or being troubled with phlegm.

PHYLACOGRAPHIA [of φλυὰζειν,
Gr. to trifle] a merry and burlesque i­
mitation of some grave and serious
piece; particularly a tragedy travested
into a comedy.

PHONASCIA [of φωνός and σχία, Gr.]
the art of forming the human voice.

PHONICS [φωνιχα, Gr.] the doctrine
or science of sounds; called also Acous­
ticks.

PHOTASCIATERICA [φωτασχιατε­
ῥίχα of φῶς, light, and σχία, a shadow]
the art of dialling.

PHOTINIANS so denominated from
Photinus, bishop of Sirmich] a sect who
adhered to his opinions and errors,
which were those of Sabellius, Paulus
Samosetanus, Corinthus and Ebion; to
whose impious doctrines he added, that
Christ was not only a meer man; but
began to be the Christ when the Holy
Ghost descended upon him in the shape
of a dove in the river Jordan.

He was indeed a person of excellent
accomplishments, and in the first years
of his administration appeared very re­
gular; but after he had taught the 
people the knowledge of the true God,
he changed on a sudden and fell into
the aforesaid errors.



PHRASE, is also a term used of a short
sentence, or small set or circuit of
words constructed together.

Compleat PHRASE is where there is
a noun and a verb each in its proper
function, i. e. where the noun expresses
the subject, and the verb what is affirm­
ed of it.

Incompleat PHRASE is one where
the noun and the verb together only
do the office of a noun, consisting of se­
veral words, without affirming any
thing, as, that which is true, is an in­
compleat phrase, which might be ex­
pressed in one word, truth.

PHRASEOLOGIST [φρασεολόγος of
φρὰσις, a phrase, and λέγω, Gr. to say,
&c.] an explainer of elegant expressions
in a language.

PHRENETICNESS [of phreneticus, L.
of φρενετιχος, Gr. and ness] frenzicalness,
madness, &c.

PHRENETICK Nerves [in Anatomy]
those which spring from the 6th pair,
or Dr. Willis's 8th pair; they descend
between the skins of the Mediastinum,
and spread forth branches into them.

PHRYXUS and Helle, they write that
a ram foretold to Phrixus, that his fa­
ther would offer him in sacrifice to the
gods, and that thereupon, he taking his
sister, got up upon the ram and came by
sea unto the Euxine shore. And that
Phrixus afterwards killed the ram his
saviour and deliverer, pulled off his skin
and gave it for a present to Aeta, then
king of Colchos, for the sake of his
daughter; and some tell you that this
skin was the golden fleece that Jason
and the Argonauts went to fetch. The
truth of this fable is, Athamas of Æolus,
who was the son of Helle, governed in
Phrygia, and he had an overseer or stew­
ard who had the inspection of his af­
fairs, whose name was Crius (or Aries,
a ram) he coming to know that Atha­
mas intended to kill Phrixus, immediate­
ly acquainted him with it, and he built
a ship and put on board it good store of
gold; and among the rest was Aurora
the mother of Pelops, who also took
with her a golden statue which she had
procured to be made with her own mo­
ney, and thus provided, Crius with
Phrixus and Helle, set sail: and Helle
indeed fell sick in the voyage and died,
and from her the sea was called Helles­
pont. But they arriving at Pharos,
settled there, and Phrixus married the
daughter of Aeta, king of Colchos, giv­
ing for her dowry the golden statue of
Aurora, but not the fleece of the ram
(i.e e. the skin of Crius) and this is the
truth of the whole story.

PHYLACTERY [φυλαχτέριον of φυλὰσσω
Gr. to keep] the phylacteries are cer­
tain boxes or little rolls of parchment,
wherein were written certain words of
the law. These they wore upon their
foreheads, and upon the wrist of their
left arm.

They writ upon these phylacteries,
these 4 passages of the law.

1. Sanctify unto me all the first born
whatsoever openeth the womb among the
children of Israel; both of man and beast
it is mine, &c. 1. 3. Chap. of Exod.

2 And it shall be when the Lord shall
bring thee into the land of the Canaanites,
&c.

3. And from the 4th verse of the 6th
of Deuter. Hear O Israel the Lord our
God is one Lord.

4. From the 13 verse of the 11th of
Deut. And it shall come to pass if you shall
hearken diligently.

PHYSICO-THEOLOGY, natural the­
ology, natural religion.

PHYSICAL Point, a point opposed to a 
mathematical one, which only exists in
the imagination.

PHYSICAL Substance, a substance or
body, in opposition to spirit or metaphy­
sical substance.

PHYSICIAN [physicien, F.] a person
who professes physick, or the art of
curing diseases.

Cosmetick PHYSICIAN, one who stu­
dies to help or men the complexion.

Empirical PHYSICIAN, one who keeps
close to experience, and excludes all use
of reason in physick.

Dogmatical PHYSICIANS, those who
laid down principles, and then reasoned
from those principles and from experi­
ence.

Clinical PHYSICIANS, those who visi­
ted their patients when in bed, to exa­
mine into their cases.

Galenical PHYSICIANS, those who 
follow Galen, and prescribe things gen­
tle, natural and ordinary.

Methodical PHYSICIANS, those who
proceed in a certain regular method
founded upon reason, deducing conse­
quences therefrom to particular cases.

Spagirical PHYSICIANS, such as pre­
scribe violent chymical medicines,
drawn from minerals, &c. by fire.

PHYSICK [ars physica, L. φυσιχή, Gr.]
in a limited and improper sence, is 
applied to the science of medicine; the 
art of curing diseases; and also the me­
dicines prepared for that purpose.

PHYSICK [φυσιχή φυσις, Gr. na­
ture] natural philoso­
phy or physiology, is the doctrine of na­



tural bodies, their Phænomena, causes
and effects; their various affections, mo­
tions, operations, &c. or is in general
the science of all material beings, or
whatsoever concerns the system of this
visible world.

PHYSICKs [φυσιχή φυσις, Gr. na­
ture] natural philoso­
phy or physiology, is the doctrine of na­
tural bodies, their Phænomena, causes
and effects; their various affections, mo­
tions, operations, &c. or is in general
the science of all material beings, or
whatsoever concerns the system of this
visible world.

PHYSICALLY [physice, F.] according
to nature, or to the practise of physick.

PHYSICALNESS [of φυσιχος, Gr. phy­
sicus, L. and ness] naturalness; also me­
dicinalness.

PHYSIOGNOMER [physiognomus,
L. physiogno­
misie, F.] one skilled in physiognomy.

PHYSIOGNOMIST [physiognomus,
L. physiogno­
misie, F.] one skilled in physiognomy.

PHYSIOLOGIST, [φυσιολόγος of φὐσις
and λέγω, Gr.] one who treats of natu­
ral bodies.

PHYSIOLOGY [φυσιολογία, Gr.] na­
tural philosophy, or Physicks, which
see.

General PHYSIOLOGY, a science
which relates to the properties and
affections of matter or body in gene­
ral.

Special PHYSIOLOGY the sci­
ence, as it
considers matter as formed, and distin­
guished into such and such species or
determinate combinations.

Particular PHYSIOLOGY the sci­
ence, as it
considers matter as formed, and distin­
guished into such and such species or
determinate combinations.

PHYSIOLOGY, is also accounted a
part of physick, that teaches the consti­
tution of human bodies, so far as they
are found or in their natural state; and
endeavours to find reasons for the
functions and operations of them, by
the help of anatomy and natural phi­
losophy.

PHYTOLOGIST [φυτολόγος, Gr.] a
botanist, one who treats of plants.

PIAFFEUR [in Academies] a proud
stately horse, who being full of mettle
or fire, restless with a great deal of
motion, and an excessive eagerness to go
forward, makes this motion, the more
that you endeavour to keep him in.

PICARDS [so denominated from one
Picard] an heretical sect, who sprung
up in the 15th century, who improv'd
upon the mistakes of the Adamites; Pi­
card himself pretended to be the Son of
God, and that he was sent into the
world as a new Adam, by his father to
refresh the notion, and restore the
practice of the law of nature, which he
said consisted principally in two things, 
the community of women, and going
stark naked.

And one of the principal tenets of
this people was, that they of their per­
swasion were the only free people in
nature; all other men being slaves, es­
pecially those who wore any clothes
upon account of modesty.

PICK Lock, an instrument for open­
ing locks.

PICK THANK [of picken, Du. or
pic and ðancaſ, Sax.] one who de­
lights in finding and discovering the
faults or weaknesses of others.

To PICTURE [of pictura, L.] to re­
present in painting, drawing, &c.

PIDDLING [Incert. Etym.] eating
here and there a bit; also trifling.

PIE-powder [pied poudre, or poudreux, 
F. q. d. dusty foot] a court held in, 
fairs to do justice to buyers and sellers, 
and for the redress of all the disorders
committed in them; it is so called, be­
cause the suitors to this court are com­
monly country people with dusty feet;
or from the dispatch in determining
the causes even before the dust goes off
from their feet.

PIE [pica, L.] a Mag Pie, a bird.

A PIECE [in Commerce] signifies a
whole, as a length of cloth, &c. of a
certain number of yards, ells, &c. not
yet having any of it cut off.

To PIECE [rapiecer, F.] to join one
piece to another.

PIEDROIT [in Architecture] a peer
or kind of square pillar, part of which
is hid within a wall; also a pier or
jaumb of a door or window, compre­
hending the chambranle, chamfering, 
&c.

PIERCED [with Heralds] is when an
ordinary is perforated, or struck thro', 
that it has, as it were, a hole in it;
and the shape of this piercing must be
particularly expressed in blazonry, as
square, &c.

PIERCINGNESS [of perçant, F. and
ness] penetrating quality.

PIETY [pietas, L.] godliness, duti­
fulness to parents, a husband and supe­
rior relations.

PIETY, a goddess of the Pagans, who
was adored by them as presiding over
the worship that was paid unto other
deities: She also was accounted to pre­
side over the respectful regard and ten­
derness that children ow'd to their pa­
rents, and over that affection that pa­
rents ought reciprocally to have for
their children.

She has been represented after dif­
ferent manners by the Romans, and by
some she has been set out holding her
children in her arms, with a stork that
is said to carry its parents about in
their old age, and feeds them, which
is a symbol of piety.

There was a temple consecrated to
this goddess at Rome, in the consulship
of Quintus and Attilius, in which was



set up that woman's picture so famous
for her piety in sustaining her mother
in prison with the milk of her breasts, 
it being built on the place where she
had been imprisoned, in perpetual me­
mory of that filial piety.

PIETY [Hieroglyphically] together
with a kind and harmless nature, was
represented by the elephant; because
it is related that he worships every new
moon towards the Heavens, and ex­
presses by his outward actions some
sense of a supreme being; and because
he is of so harmless a nature, that he
never offends creatures that are not
hurtful of themselves. He will march
among innocent lambs, without offer­
ing the least injury to them; but if he
be offended will spare nothing, and
dread no danger to take revenge. It is
also represented by a Stork, which see.

PIETY [in painting, &c] is repre­
sented as a lady with a sober counte­
nance, holding in her right hand a
sword stretch'd over an altar, and a
stork in her left hand, with an elephant
and a child by her side.

PIGEON [Hieroglyphically] intimates
continency, chastity, mutual and con­
jugal love; because this bird is chaste
in its embraces, and extreme loving to
each other. Therefore to express the
transports of two amorous persons, the
Egyptian priests put two pigeons kissing
one another; and they also painted a
pigeon with its rump lifted up, to sig­
nify an excellent disposition, not sub­
ject to be inflamed with choler; also a
soul of a meek temper; because natu­
ralists do observe that this bird has no
choler.

PIGMENTS, such prepared mate­
rials, as painters, diers, and other ar­
ficers use to imitate particular colours;
also for painting glass; also for coun­
terfeiting precious stones.

PIGMY. See Pygmy.

PILA [in Coinage] is the punchion
or matrice, which, in the ancient way
of coining with the hammer, contained
the arms and other figures, and the in­
scriptions, to be struck for the reverse
of the coin; also from hence it may be
called the pile; and also now the head
side of a piece of money we call cross, 
because in those times there was usually
a cross instead of a head.

PILA [in Ant. Writ.] the arms side
of a piece of money, so called, because
in ancient times this side bore an im­
pression of a church built on piles.

Funeral PILE [anciently] a pyramid
of wood, whereon the bodies of the
deceased were laid to be burned.

PILE [piile, Du.] a heap of wood or
stones, or other things, laid one above
another.

PILE [in Heraldry] an
ordinary in form of a point
inverted, or of a stake shar­
pened, contracting from the
chief, and terminating in a
point towards the bottom of the shield
thus.

Image omitted.



To PILE, to heap up; also to ram
down poles.

PILLAR [pilier, F.] a column which
is divided into three parts, the pedestal, 
the shafts, and the ornaments. It is a
kind of round column disengag'd from
any wall, and made without any pro­
portion, being always too massive or
too slender; such as supports the vaults
of Gothick buildings.

PILLAR [in a figurative sense] sig­
nifies support.

PILLAR [in Architect.] a kind of
irregular column round and insulated;
deviating from the proportions of a just
column.

PILLAR [in the Manage] is the
center of the Volta, ring, or manage-­
ground, round which a horse turns, 
whether there be a wooden pillar
placed therein or not.

A Square PILLAR [Architecture] is a
massive work, called also a pier or
piedroit, serving to support arches, &c.

Butting PILLAR [Architecture] is a
buttress or body of masonry raised to
prop or sustain the shooting of a vault, 
arch, or other work.

PILLARS [Hieroglyphically] repre­
sent fortitude and constancy.

PILLAR'D, built, or sup'ported with
pillars. Milton.

PILLASTER [in Architecture] is
a kind of square
pillar, which is generally as broad at
the top as bottom, and has the same
measure, chapiter and base with the
column, according to the several or­
ders.

PILASTER [in Architecture] is
a kind of square
pillar, which is generally as broad at
the top as bottom, and has the same
measure, chapiter and base with the
column, according to the several or­
ders. 

PILLORY [le pilori, F.] was ancient­
ly a post erected in a cross road by the
lord, with his arms on it, as a mark of
his signory; and sometimes a collar to
tie criminals to; now a sort of scaffold
for false swearers, cheats, &c. to stand
on by way of punishment.

To PILLORY one [pilorier, F.] to set
one on the pillory.

PILOSE [pilosus, L.] hairy.

PIMPING [incert. Etym. but accord­
ing to some of Penis, L. a man's yard]
procuring whores, stallions, &c. most
properly spoken of men.



PIMPING, small, little.

PIMPERNEL, an herb.

A PINCH [of pincer, F.] a nipping
hard, &c. also a strait or difficulty.

PINCHING [with Gardeners] a sort
of pruning performed by nipping off
the sprigs, &c. of a plane or tree, be­
tween the nails of two fingers.

PINE Tree [pinus, L.]

PINE Tree [emblematically] represent­
ed death; because being once cut it
never sprouts again, and because being
extraordinary bitter it is reputed to
kill any other plant that joins to it.

PINEA a kind of light, porous
masses or lumps, formed
of a mixture of mercury and silver dust,
from the mines of Chili in America.

PIGNES a kind of light, porous
masses or lumps, formed
of a mixture of mercury and silver dust,
from the mines of Chili in America.

To PINION a Person, is to bind his 
hands or arms fast.

PINK [pinque, F.] a sort of small
ship, masted and ribb'd like other ships;
except that she is built with a round
stern; the bends and ribs compassing
so, as that her sides bulge out very
much.

PINNATE [pinnatus, L.] deeply 
jagged or indented (spoken of the leaves 
of plants) resembling feathers.

PINNING [with Bricklayers] the 
fastening of tiles together with wooden 
pins.

PINNER [prob. of pinning] a wo­
man's head-dress.

PINS, Englishmen first began to make 
all sorts of pins about the beginning of 
queen Elizabeth's reign, which before 
were sold here by strangers, to the 
value of 60000 pound per Annum.

PIOUSLY [pie, L. pieusement, F.]
with piety, duty or loyalty.

PIOUSNESS [of pius, L. and ness]
piety, godly disposition.

To PIPE [pipan, Sax.] to play on a
pipe.

PIPKIN [incert. Etymol.] a small
earthen vessel for boiling.

PIQUANTNESS [of piquant, F.
and ness] sharp­
ness, bitterness.

PIQUANCY [of piquant, F.
and ness] sharp­
ness, bitterness.

A PIQUE, quarrel or ill-will against
one; a grudge.

To PIQUE [in Musick Books] is to
separate or divide each note one from
another, in a very plain and distinct
manner.

To PIQUEER. See Pickeer.

To stand on the PIQUET [Military
Phrase] is when an horseman is sen­
tenced for some offence to stand on the
point of a stake with one toe, having
the contrary hand ty'd up as high as it
can reach.

PIRACY [piraterie, F. πειρατεία, Gr.]
robbing on the sea.

PIROUETTE [in the Manage] a
turn or circumvo­
lution, which a horse makes without
changing his ground.

PIROET [in the Manage] a
turn or circumvo­
lution, which a horse makes without
changing his ground. 

PISCIS [on a Globe] this is that great
fish which, as the poets feign, drinks
up the water that is poured out of
Aquarius's urn. It is related of this fish
(as Ctesias testifies) that it was first seen
in the lake not far from Bambyces, and
that it saved Derceto, that fell into the
sea by night. They say this Derceto
was a goddess of the Syrians. They
affirm the Piscis to be the nephew of
this fish; all which the Syrians wor­
shipped and placed among the stars.

PISS-A-BED, a flower or plant, Dan­
delion.

PISSASPHALTUS [πισσὰσφαλτος,
Gr.] a kind of mineral, consisting of
pitch, and the slime call'd Bitumen, im­
bodied together.

PISTE [in the Manage] the track
or tread which a horse makes upon the
ground.

PISTON, a part or member in seve­
ral machines, as pumps, syringes, &c.

PIT-A-PAT, a beating or throbbing
like the heart.

To PIT, to sink in holes, as in the
Small-pox.

PIT, a hole in which the Scots used
to drown women thieves; hence the
phrase, condemn'd to the Pit, is the same
as, with us, to say, condemn'd to the
Gallows.

PITANCE [pitantia, L.] a little re­
past, or refection of fish or flesh more
than the common allowance.

PITCH [pic, Sax. pix, L.] a sticky
juice or kind of coarse gum drawn
from fatty or bituminous woods, espe­
cially pines and fir-trees.

It is procured by cleaving the tree
into small pieces or billets, which be­
ing put into a furnace with two open­
ings, in one of which the fire is made;
the heat of which forces out the juices, 
and thro' the other the liquor or pitch
is gathered, the smoke being very in­
tense tinges it of the black colour it
commonly appears in.

Some say that tar is the first tap­
pings or runnings, and pitch the last
or worst.

The common PITCH, is the liquid Ga­
lipot, reduced into the form and con­
sistency we see it, by mixing it with
tar while hot.

Naval PITCH, is that which is drawn
from old pines, ranged and burnt like



charcoal, and used in pitching of ves­
sels.

To PITCH upon, to choose.

PITCHINESS [of piceus, L. and
ness] pitchy quality or condition.

PITCHY [piceus of pix, L.] dawbed
with pitch, &c.

PITEOUSLY [pitoyablement, F.] af­
ter a piteous manner.

PITEOUSNESS [piteux, F. and
ness] sorriness, meanness.

PITHIAS [with Meterologists]
the name of a comet, 
or rather meteor, of the form of a tub:
Of which there are divers kinds, viz.
some of an oval figure, others like a
tub or barrel set perpendicular, and
some like one inclined or cut short;
others having a hairy train or bush, 
&c.

PITHITES [with Meterologists]
the name of a comet, 
or rather meteor, of the form of a tub:
Of which there are divers kinds, viz.
some of an oval figure, others like a
tub or barrel set perpendicular, and
some like one inclined or cut short;
others having a hairy train or bush, 
&c.

PITHINESS, fullness of pith; also
substantialness, fullness of good matter.

PITHLESS, having no pith.

PITHO [of πείθω, Gr. to persuade]
the goddess of eloquence or persuasion, 
the same with the Greeks that the Ro­
mans calls Suada or Suadela.

PITIFULLY [pitoyablement, F.]
mournfully; meanly, &c.

PITIFULNESS [of pitie, F. and ful­
ness] propenseness to piety; also mean­
ness.

PITUITARY Gland [Anatomy] a
gland in the brain, of the size of a
large pea, in the Sella of the Os Sphe­
noides.

PITUITOUSNESS [of pituiteux, F.
pituitosus, L. and ness] phlegmatickness.

PITY [pitié, F.] is that tenderness
and concern that is excited in a human
breast, upon beholding the miseries of
our fellow creatures, &c. which in­
cites us either to comfort them, as much
as we can with condoling expressions, 
or to relieve and ease them in their
afflictions and miseries. This disposi­
tion of mind is also called Compassion or
Mercy.

PIVOT, a foot or shoe of iron, &c.
usually made in a conical form, or ter­
minating in a point, whereby a body
intended to turn round, bears on ano­
ther fixed at rest, and performs its
circumvolutions.

PLACABLENESS [of placabilis, L.
and ness] easiness to be appeased.

PLACARD [plackaert, Du. pla­
cart, F.] a leaf or
sheet of paper, stretched or applied
upon a wall or port; in Holland, it is an
edict or proclamation; also it is used
for a writing of safe conduct: In France, 
it is a table wherein laws, orders,
&c. are written and hung up.

PLACART [plackaert, Du. pla­
cart, F.] a leaf or
sheet of paper, stretched or applied
upon a wall or port; in Holland, it is an
edict or proclamation; also it is used
for a writing of safe conduct: In France, 
it is a table wherein laws, orders,
&c. are written and hung up.

PLACARD [in Architecture] the de­
coration of the door of an apartment;
consisting of a chambranle, crowned
with its frize or gorge, and its corni­
che sometimes supported with con­
soles.

PLACE [in Opticks] is the point to
which the eye refers an object.

PLACE [with Naturalists] is some­
times taken for that portion of infinite
space which is possessed by, and com­
prehended within the material world, 
and which is thereby distinguished from
the rest of the expansion.

PLACE of Radiation [in Opticks] is
the interval or space of a medium or
transparent body, thro' which any vi­
sible object radiates.

PLACE [with Philosophers] that part
of immoveable space which any body
possesses.

PLACE of the Sun or Planet [Astron.]
is that degree of the ecliptick reckoned
from the beginning of Aries, which is
cut by the planet's circle of longitude.

Eccentrick PLACE [of a Planet in its
orbit] is the place or point of its orbit
wherein a planet would appear, if seen
from the sun.

Heliocentrick PLACE [of a Planet] is
the point of the ecliptick, to which a
planet viewed from the earth is refer­
red.

Geocentrick PLACE [of a Planet] is
that point of the ecliptick, to which a
planet viewed from the earth is refer­
red.

PLACE of Arms [in a City] is a large
open spot of ground, where the garri­
son holds its rendezvous upon reviews, 
and in cases of alarm, and to receive or­
ders from the governor.

PLACE of Arms [in a Siege] is a large
place covered from the enemy, where 
the soldiers are kept ready to sustain
those who work in the trenches, and
to be commanded to places where they
are wanted.

PLACES [with Arithmeticians] as the
Place of Units, in a number which con­
sists of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, or more places, 
that which is the outermost towards
the right hand is called the place of
units, &c.

PLACES [with Grammarians] are 
etymology and words derived from the
same root, which, in the Latin are
called Conjugates.

PLACES [with Logicians] are uni­
versal terms, Genus, Species, Difference,
Property, Accident, Definition, Division.

PLACES [in Metaphysicks] are cer­
tain, general terms agreeing to all



beings, to which several arguments
are annexed, as Causes, Effects, the
Whole, Part, opposite terms.

PLACIDNESS [placiditas, L.] peace­
ableness, quietness.

PLAFOND [in Architecture] the
cieling of a room, 
whether it be flat or arched, lined with
plaster or joiner's work, and frequently
enriched with paintings; also the bot­
tom of the projecture of the larmier
of the corniche, called also the Sofit.

PLAFOUND [in Architecture] the
cieling of a room, 
whether it be flat or arched, lined with
plaster or joiner's work, and frequently
enriched with paintings; also the bot­
tom of the projecture of the larmier
of the corniche, called also the Sofit.

PLAGUY, vexatious, tormenting, 
&c.

PLAICE, a fish.

A PLAIN [planities, L.] an even, 
flat, low ground.

PLAIN [in Heraldry] it is an axiom, 
that the plainer the coat, the nearer to
antiquity.

Those are plain coats that are least
incumbred with abundance of figures, 
and which have nothing in them but
what is natural.

And as the source of a river, though
ever so small, is the noblest part of it, 
notwithstanding the same, by running
far, be grown great; so the first arms
given to virtuous persons, as a distin­
ctive mark or perpetual character of
their nobility, are nobler than those
that have many charges; because they
are more agreeable to the nature of
things; and it is a maxim in heraldry, 
that he who bears least is most.

PLAIN Number [Arith.] a number
that may be produced by the multipli­
cation of two numbers, one into ano­
ther.

PLAIN Place [in ancient Geometry] a
geometrical locus, which was a right
line, or a circle, in opposition to a
solid place, which was an ellipsis, pa­
rabola, and hyperbola.

PLAIN Problem [with Mathemat.]
such a one as cannot be solved geome­
trically; but by the intersection either
of a right line or a circle, or of the
circumferences of two circles.

PLAINNESS [of planus or plain and
ness] evenness; also unadornedness;
also manifestness.

PLAINLY evenly, &c. manifestly, 
sincerely, intelligibly.

PLAISTERERS were incorporated
about the year 1500.
Their arms are Azure
on a chevron ingrail'd
Or, between a trowel
and two hatchets han­
dles of the second.
Heads Argent in chief, 
and a treble brush in
base proper, a rose Gales, seeded Or, 
entres two Flowers-de-lis of the first.
The crest a dexter arm and hand, 
holding a hatchet proper. The suppor­
ters two Epimachus's, their necks
purfled, and the slip of their bellies Or, 
beaked Sable, and wings extending up­
wards Gules. Their hall is on the
north side of Addle-Street near Philip-­
Lane, London.

Image omitted.



PLAN [with Architects, &c.] is a
draught of a building, such as it appears
on the ground; shewing the extent, 
division, and distribution of its areas
into its apartments, rooms, passages, 
&c.

Geometrical PLAN, is one in which
the solid and vacant parts are repre­
sented in their natural proportion.

Rais'd PLAN, is one where the ele­
vation or upright is shown upon the
geometrical plan, so as to hide the
distribution.

Perspective PLAN, is one conduced
and exhibited by degradations or dimi­
nutions, according to the rules of per­
spective.

PLANGERE [in Architecture] the
under part of the corona or drip; mak­
ing the superior part of the cornice
between two cymatiums.

PLANE [planus, L.] a plain surface, 
all whole parts lie even between its ex­
tremities; also a joiner's tool.

Objective PLANE [in Perspective] is
any plane situate in the horizontal
plane, whose representation in per­
spective is required.

PLANE [in Fortification] a draught
representing a work, as it
would appear on the plain field, if it
were cut off level with the ground, so
as to shew the length of its lines, the
angles and distances between them, 
the breadth and thickness of the moats, 
ramparts, breast works, &c.

PLAN [in Fortification] a draught
representing a work, as it
would appear on the plain field, if it
were cut off level with the ground, so
as to shew the length of its lines, the
angles and distances between them, 
the breadth and thickness of the moats, 
ramparts, breast works, &c.

PLANET [πλανὴτης of πλάνω, Gr. to
err or wander] a wandering star.

PLANETS, are wandering stars or
bodies: Their second or proper moti­
ons from west to east are not regular as
those of the other stars are, nor do
they always keep at the same distance
one from the other; but are some­
times nearer and sometimes farther off, 
and sometimes joined, being observed
under the same point of Heaven, and
sometimes opposite.

Some turn about on their axis, at
several times, and these planets, which
may be imagined to be like our earth, 
are opaque bodies, and receive light
from the sun, and reflect it; for there



is none of the planets, except the sun, 
that shines with his own light, but he
enlightens the planets.

The planets are lower than the fixed
stars. This appears in that they some­
times eclipse them and hide their light
from us.

There is a great difference between
the planets as to their lustre. The Sun
appears of a gold colour; the Moon of
a silver colour; Venus very white, bril­
lant, and luminous; Jupiter is not so
white and luminous; Saturn appears of
a pale lead colour, and does not seem
to shine; Mars is as red as fire, and
glances very much; Mercury is of a
bright silver colour, and glances but
little, is not often seen in our climate, 
because of the obliquity of the sphere, 
and he being near the sun, for which
reason he is always obscured by, or
plunged in its rays, or the vapours of
the horizon; but it is frequently seen
in the torrid zone, because in those
places the sphere is not in so oblique a
position.

The planets are distinguished into
great and small.

The greater are in number seven, 
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, 
Mercury, and the Moon; the smaller
planets are in number nine, four of
which are called Jupiter's Satellites, 
and turn about Jupiter, and the other
five revolve about Saturn.

PLANIMETRICAL, pertaining to
the mensuration of plain surfaces.

PLANIPETALOUS Flower [of pla­
nus, L. and πεταλον, Gr. a leaf] flat
leaved, as when these small flowers are
hollow only at the bottom, but are flat
upwards, as in Dandelion, Succory, &c.

PLANKING [planchant, F.] flooring
or covering with planks.

PLANO convex glass, is a glass, one
of whose surfaces is convex, and the
other plain.

PLANT [planta, L.] is a general
name under which are comprised all
vegetable bodies, as trees, shrubs, and
herbs; it is an organical body consist­
ing of a root, and probably a seed, 
producing usually leaves, a stem, bran­
ches, and flowers,

PLANTATION, a spot of ground, 
which some planter or person arrived
in a new colony, pitches on to culti­
vate and till for his own use.

PLANTING [with Architects] signi­
fies the disposing the first courses of
solid stone on the masonry of the foun­
dation, laid level according to the mea­
sures with all possible exactness.

PLASHING [with Husband.] bend­
ing and interweaving the boughs in
hedges to thicken them.

PLASHY, full of plashes, puddles, 
or standing waters.

PLASTER of Paris, a fossil stone of
the nature of a lime stone, used in
moulding, making statues, building, 
and many other uses.

PLAT-BAND [with Gardeners] a
border, or bed of flowers along a wall, 
or the side of a parterre.

PLAT-BANDS of Flutings [Archit.]
the lists or fillets, between the flutings
of columns of the Ionick, Corinthian
and Composite order.

PLATED, covered over with a
plate of metal.

PLATFOND [in Architecture] the
cieling or roof of a chamber or other
room, &c. the same as soffit.

PLATONIC Love [so called of Plato, 
the divine philosopher] a pure spiritual
affection, subsisting between the diffe­
rent sexes, abstracted from all carnal
appetites and fruition, regarding no
other object but the mind and its beau­
ties; consisting in contemplation and
ideas of the mind; or between persons
of the same sex, it is a sincere disinte­
rested friendship, abstracted from any
selfish views.

PLATONICK [of Plato] pertaining
to Plato and his doctrines.

PLATONISM, the doctrine and sen­
timents of Plato and his followers, in
respect to philosophy.

PLATONIST, one that holds the
tenets or principles of Plato.

PLATOON [in Mil. Affairs] a small
square body of 40 or 50 men, drawn
out of a batalion of foot, and placed
between the squadrons of horse to su­
stain them; or in ambuscades, streights, 
or defiles, &c.  F.

PLAUSIBLENESS [of plausibilis, L. 
and ness] plausible quality, deserving­
ness of applause; also the seeming fair
and honest.

PLAYER [pleʒeire, Sax.] an actor,
&c.

PLAYSOM [of plæʒſom, Sax.] gi­
ven or disposed to play.

PLAYSOMNESS, addictedness to
play.

PLEADING [plaidant, F.] putting
in a plea in law; also alledging, pre­
tending.

PLEASANCE, pleasantness, pleasant
humour.

PLEASANTNESS [qualité plaisante,
F.] delightfulness.



PLEASANTRY, a pleasant joke,
mirth, &c.

PLEASING [placens, L.] affording
pleasure, satisfaction.

PLEASINGNESS [of plaisant, F. and
ness] pleasurable quality.

PLEASURE [plaisir, F.] the effect of
a sensation or perception agreeable to
the mind, or the satisfaction of some
appetite; content, joy, delight, diver­
sion; also good turns, service, kind­
ness, will.

PLEASURABLENESS, agreeable­
ness, divertingness.

PLEIADES [πλειάδες of πλείονες, Gr.
more] the constellation in the neck
called the 7 stars. They say
they are more than the Iliades, which by it
is collected into 7 stars. They say
they are according to the number of 
the daughters of Atlas. But there are
not 7 but only 6 visible; of which this
reason is given, they say that 6 of
them were married to gods, but the
7th to a mortal. That Jupiter lay with
3 of them; of which Electra brought
forth Dardanus, Maja, Mercury, Tay­
gete, Lacedæmon. Two were married
to Neptune; Alcyone, on which he be­
gat Hureus and Celeno, on which he be­
gat Leucum. Sterope was joined to
Mars, on which Oenomaus was begot­
ten; but Merope was married to Sysi­
phus who was a mortal, and thence is 
become obscure. They are very fa­
mous among men, because they inti­
mate the season of the year.

PLENARINESS [of plenus, L. and
ness] fullness.

PLENIPO, a plenipotentiary.

PLENIPOTENCE [plena potentia
L.] full power.

PLENIPOTENT, having full or
ample power. Milton.

PLENIPOTENTIARY, pertaining
to full power.

PLENTEOUSLY [of plenissimè, L.]
abundantly.

PLENTEOUSNESS [plenitas, L.]
plenty.

PLENTIFUL [of plenitas, L. and
full, Sax.] abundant.

PLENTIFULNESS [of plenitas, L.
and fulneſſe, Sax.] plenty.

PLENUM [with Philosophers] a full­
ness, a term used to signify that state
of things wherein every part of space
or extension is supposed to be full of
matter, in opposition to Vacuum, or a 
space devoid of all matter.  L.

PLEONASM [πλεονασμὸς of πλεονάζα,
Gr. to super-abound] this figure consists
in the using more words than are ne­
cessary, as when a person says, I did
such a thing with mine own hands, where
the word own is super-abundant.

PLETHORETICK [πληθοριχὸς,
Gr.] troubled
with a plethory.

PLETHORICAL [πληθοριχὸς,
Gr.] troubled
with a plethory.

PLEURORTHOPNOEA [of πλευ­
ρῖτις a pleurisy, ὀρθος straight, and πνοὴ Gr. breath] a disease in the side, where
the person afflicted cannot breathe un­
less he sits upright.

PLIANTNESS [of pliant, F. and
ness] flexibility.

PLINTH of a Statue [Archit.] a base
or stand, either flat, round, or square,
serving to support a statue, &c.

PLINTH [in Architect.] a flat square
member, otherwise called the slipper,
which serves for the foundation of the 
base or foot of a pillar. Also the Aba­
cus or upper part of the Tuscan pillar,
is so called by Vitruvius; also a thick
wall, in which there are two or three
rows of bricks placed, in form of a
plat-band.

PLINTH [of the Capital] a member 
about the chapiter of a plat-band of a 
pillar, like the Abacus of the Tuscan 
pillar.

PLINTH of a Wall [Architecture] two
or three rows of bricks advancing out 
of the wall; or any flat, high moulding,
serving in a front wall to mark the
floors, and to sustain the eaves of a 
wall, and the larmier of a chimney.

PLOT [in Dramatick Poetry] the knot
or intrigue, which makes the difficulty,
and embarrasses the piece in either a
comedy or tragedy.

PLOTTER, a conspirator, &c.

PLOTTING [in Surveying] the art
of describing or laying down on paper
the several angles and lines of a tract
of ground surveyed.

PLOTTON [of peloton, F. a clew or
bottom of thread, also such a knot of
men] a small square body of muske­
teers, drawn out of a body of infantry,
when they form the hollow square to
strengthen the angles; a platoon.

PLOUGH-ALMS, a penny which
every ploughman anciently paid to the 
church.

PLOUGHING [of ploger, Dan.]
turning up the ground with a plough.

PLOUGHMAN [of plog, Dan. and 
Man, Sax.]

PLOUGH-SHARE [plog, Dan. and
ſcear, Sax.] the iron of a plough.



PLOUGH-STAFF [plog, Dan. and
ſtaf, Sax.] the handle.

PLOUGH-TAIL [plog, Dan. and
tæʒl, Sax.]

PLOUGH-LAND, as much arable
land as one plough could plough in a 
year. This in the beginning of the
reign of Richard I. was accounted 60
acres, and in the 9th of the same king
100 acres.

PLOW Bote [old Rec.] a right of te­
nants to take wood to repair ploughs,
carts, and harrows, and for making
forks, rakes, &c.

PLUM [with Botan.] in a large sense,
signifies any fleshy fruit, containing one
seed inclosed in a hard stony shell, as
apricocks, peaches, cherries, &c.

PLUMBER [of plumbarius, L.] a
worker in, or maker of leaden vessels.

Plumbers were incorporated Anno
1611. Their arms
are Or, on a chevron,
between a mallet Sa­
ble and two plummets
Azure in chief, and a 
level of the second in
base, two soldering
irons in Saltire, en­
tres a cutting knife, and a shave hook
Argent. The crest, Justice with a
sword in her right hand, and a balance
in the left, standing on a fountain of
the fourth, where are the words, Ju­
stitia Pax. The motto is, In God is all
our hope. Their hall is on the east side
of Dowgate Hill.

Image omitted.



PLUMBERY, the trade of making
leaden vessels.

PLUMBING, trying by a plummet
or plumb-line.

PLUMIPEDE [plumipes, L.] having
feathered feet.

PLUMOSE [plumosus, L.] full of
feathers.

PLUMPNESS [prob. of pomum, L.
or pomme, F. an apple, q. d. full or
round as an apple, Skinner] fulless and
roundness in flesh.

PLUNDER [plynder, Dan.] spoil ta­
ken in war.

PLUNDERING [of plyndrer, Dan.]
spoiling, taking away by violence.

To PLUNGE [plonger, F.] to dip
into water over head and ears.

PLUTO [Πλουτος, Gr. i. e. riches,
because all wealth or riches is fetch'd
or sought for out of the bowels of the
earth.]

PLUTO [according to the Pagan
Theology] was the son of Saturn and Ops.
Some authors write, that he having
assisted Jupiter in his wars, upon the
division of the world, had the Eastern
countries and the lower parts of Asia
for his lot, having Spain, &c. for his
empire, living in Iberia, near the Pyre­
nean mountains; which being a coun­
try fertile both in provisions and mi­
nerals, he might probably come to be
accounted the god of riches.

The ancients imagin'd his regions
were under the earth, and that he was
the ruler of the dead, and that all their
souls descended to him, and that being
in his possession he bound them with
chains and deliver'd them to be try'd
by judges, and then dispens'd to them
rewards and punishments, according to 
every one's deserts.

He was therefore called the infernal
Jupiter, and oblations were made to
him by the living for the souls of their
deceased friends.

His proper offerings were black bulls,
the ceremonies were perform'd in the
night, it not being lawful to sacrifice
to him by day. They imagin'd that he
hated the light, and trembled when
there was any earthquake, for fear the
earth should open and let in the light.

He is represented riding in a chariot
of ebony, drawn by four black horses,
named Orpheneus, Æthon, Nycteus and
Alastor, sometimes holding a scepter,
at other times a wand, with which
he drives the dead to Hell. At other
times with a bunch of keys in his hand
intimating that the key of death was in
his custody, and that the horses ran
through the 4 ages of men. Sometimes
he was crown'd with cypress, and that
tree was dedicated to him, and boughs
of it were carried at funerals; because
this tree being cut down never shoots
again. His attendants were, the three
headed dog Cerberus, the three Furies,
the three Harpies, and the three Parcæ.

It is thought that Pluto was the first
that invented funeral ceremonies for 
the dead, which gave the ignorant oc­
casion to make him the god of Hell.

They had a notion that his whole
region was wash'd with huge and rapid
rivers; Cocytus, that falls with an im­
petuous roaring; Phlegeton, which rolls
with a fierce current of flames and the 
Acherusien fen, dreadful for its stench
and filthiness. When Charon wafts
over souls in his nasty boat, Cerberus
salutes them with terrible howlings,
and the Furies shake their serpentine
locks at them.

They tell us, that Pluto being brother
to Jupiter, and the richest of all the
gods, was disturbed that none of the



goddesses would have him, by reason of
the deformity of his person, and the
darkness of his kingdom; and therefore
took the opportunity to get into his
chariot, and arriving in Sicily, chanced
to see Proserpine, as she was gathering
flowers in the meadows, and forcing
her into his chariot, drove to the river
Chemerus, from whence was a passage
under ground to his regions.

The mythologists, by Pluto under­
stand the earth, whose natural powers
and faculties are under his direction.
By Proserpine they understand the seed
or grain of fruits or corn, which must
be received into it, and hid there before
it can be nourished by it.

PLUTUS, some suppose him a diffe­
rent god from Pluto, but others say, he
is the same. He is by the poets called
the god of Hell and riches; and is fa­
bled to be lame when he comes towards
a person, but winged when he goes
from him; because riches come slowly
but go away apace. He is also repre­
sented in painting, &c. blind; because
for the most part, he comes to them
that is most unworthy.

Aristophanus says, that having at first
a good eye-sight, he stuck to no body
but the just: but Jupiter depriving him
of his light, riches afterwards fell in­
differently to the share both of the good
and bad. 

A design was formed for the recove­
ry of Pluto's sight; but Penia and Po­
verty opposed it, and made it appear
that poverty was the mistress of arts, 
sciences and virtues, which would be
in danger of being lost, if all men were
rich: but those arguments not prevail­
ing, Plutus is sent to have recovered his
sight in Æesculapius's temple, and thence
says this comical author; the temples
and altars of other gods, and those of
Jupiter himself were abandoned, no
body sacrificing to any other than the
god Plutus.

PLUVIAL, the priest's vestment or
cope.

PLUVIALIS, a plover, a bird so cal­
of pluvialis, L. i. e. rainy, because it
delights in places wet with showers of
rain and marshy places.

PLUVIALE, a sort of hood or cloak
antiently worn by ecclesiasticks, to de­
fend them from the rain.

PLYING [prob. of pliant, F.] bending
giving way; also attending at a place 
to be employed, as watermen, porters, 
&c. also a doing any thing industrious­
ly.

PLYER [of plier or employ, F.] one
who plies or waits at a certain place to
be hired or employed, as watermen,
porters, &c. or whores at a bawdy-­
house, or elsewhere.

PNEUMA [πνὲυμα, Gr.] a puff or
blast of wind, breath, spirit.

PNEUMATICK Engine, an air pump.
See Pump.

PNEUMATICKS [pneumatica, L. of
πνευματιχα, Gr. of the air, or the laws
wherein that fluid is condensed, rarified, 
&c.] the doctrine of the gravitation and
pressure of elastick or compressible
fluids.

PNEUMATICAL Experiments, such
as are made in the exhausted receiver
of the air pump, in order to discover
the several properties of the air and its
influence on other bodies.

PNEUMATICKS [with Schoolmen]
the doctrine of spirits, as God, angels, 
the human mind, &c.

PNEUMATOCELE [πνευματοχήλη of
πνεῦμα, wind, and χήλη a rupture, Gr.] a
flatulent or windy hernia, or tumour of
the membranes of the testicles, pro­
ceeding from pent-up vapours and at­
tended with a tensive pain.

PNEUMATOMACHI [of πνευμα spi­
rit, and μαχέω, Gr. to fight against or
oppose] Hereticks, so called from their
opposing the divinity of the Holy spirit,
and placing him in the number of crea­
tures.

PNEUMATOLOGIST [of πνε῀υμα, 
the spirit of breath, and λέγω, Gr.] one
that treats of spirits, breath, &c.

In the first Greek encoding, the unicode for epsilon with perispomeni does not exist. I first inserted epsilon (ε), followed by a perispomeni (῀).



PNEUMATOSOPHY [of πνευμα and
σοφια, Gr. wisdom] the same as Pneu­
matology.

PNEUMONICS [πνευμονιχά, Gr.] me­
dicines good against diseases of the
lungs, where the respiration is affected.

POACHER [of pocher, F.] a destroyer
of game by illegal methods.

POCKETTING [of poch, Sax. a
pocket] putting into the pocket.

POCKWOOD-Tree an Indian tree, 
the wood of which is used by physici­
ans.

POCKINESS [of pocca and neſſe, 
Sax.] pocky state or condition.

POCONIS [of Virginia and Maryland]
a root peculiar to those places, of ad­
mirable efficacy to asswage swellings
and aches.

POESY [poesis, L. of ποίησις of ποιέω, 
Gr. to make, frame or invent] the
work of a poet, the art of composing
poems, or pieces in verse.

POETICAL Justice [in the Drama]
is used to signify a distribution of re­
wards and punishments to the several



persons, at the catastrophe or close of a
piece, answerable to the several cha­
racters in which they have appeared.

To POETICIZE [poetifer, F.] to act
the poet, to compose poems.

POINANTNESS [of poignant, F. and
ness] sharpness, satyricalness.

POINSON [poinçon, F.] a little sharp
pointed iron, fixed in a wooden handle, 
which the horseman holds in the right
hand, to prick a leaping horse in the
croup, &c. to make him yerk out be­
hind.

To POINT [pointer, F.] to make
sharp at the end; also to distinguish
writing, &c. by points.

A POINT [in Geometry] according
to Euclid, is that which has no parts or
is indivisible.

A POINT [by Geometricians] is sup­
posed to be that which has neither
breadth, length, nor thickness, but is
indivisible.

To POINT at or to, to direct to or
shew by the finger extended.

POINT [punctum, L.] an instant mo­
ment, &c. as at the point or death, 
&c.

POINT [in Astronomy] a term appli­
ed to certain parts or places, marked in
the heavens, and distinguished by pro­
per epithets, as,

Cardinal POINTS [Astron. and Geogr.]
the four grand divisions of the horizon
East, West, North and South.

Solstitial POINTS [Astron.] are the
points wherein the equator and eclip­
tick intersect, called the North and South
points, and the intersections of the ho­
rizon with the prime vertical, called
the East and West.

Vertical POINTS [Astron.] are the
Zenith and Nadir.

POINT [of Distance] is a point in
the horizontal line, so far distant from
the principal point, as the eye is re­
mote from the same.

POINT of Divergence, of a concave
glass, is the same as virtual Focus.

POINT of a contrary Flexure [in
Geom.] is the point of a curve, wherein
it is bent or inflected to a part, contrary
to that it tended to before.

POINT [in Heraldry] is when two
piles are born in a coat of arms, so as
to have their points meet together in
any parts of the escutcheon.

POINT inverted [Heraldry] is when a
point descends from the chief down­
wards; possessing two thirds of the
chief; but diminishing, as it approaches
the point of the escutcheon.

POINT in Band [in Heraldry] is
when the point
is placed transverse in the situation of a
bend or bar.

POINT in Bar [in Heraldry] is
when the point
is placed transverse in the situation of a
bend or bar.

POINT [in Horsemanship] a horse is
said to make a point, when working
upon volts, he does not observe the
round regularly, but putting a little out
of his ordinary ground, makes a sort of
angle or point by his circular tread.

POINT [in Musick] a mark or note
anciently used to distinguish the tones.

To sail upon a POINT is to sail by
the mariner's compass.

POINT [with Navigators] a term
used for a cape or head land, jetting­
out into the sea, when two points of
land are in a right line against each o­
ther, so as the innermost is hindred
from being seen by the outermost, they
say they are one in another.

POINT [in Poetry] brisk, lively turn
or conceit, usually found at the close of
an epigram.

POINT of Dispersion [in Opticks] is
that wherein the rays begin to diverge;
commonly called the virtual focus.

POINT of reflection [in Opticks] is a
point on the surface of a glass or other
body, whence a ray is reflected.

POINT of Refraction [in Opticks] is
the surface of a glass or other refracting
surface, wherein the refraction is ef­
fected.

POINT of Sight [in Perspective] is a
point on a plane marked out by a right
line, drawn from the perpendicular to
the plane.

POINT of View [in Perspective] is a
point at distance from a building or o­
ther object, wherein the eye has the
most advantageous viewer prospect of
the same.

POINT [in Physicks] is the smallest or
least sensible object of sight, mark'd with
a pen, point of a compass, or the like.

POINTED [in Heraldry] as a cross
pointed, is that which has the extremi­
ties turned off into points by straight
lines.

POINTING [with Navigators] is the
marking what point or place a ship is
upon a chart.

POINTS [with Grammar.] comma's
(,) semicolons (;), colons (:), periods (.),
point of admiration (!), of interrogati­
on (?). &c.

POINTS [in Hebrew] are certain
characters, which, in the writings of
that language, serve to make the vow­
els, and are mostly but a sort of points.



POINTS [in Heraldry] the
points of an escutcheon are
the several different parts of
it, denoting the local positi­
on of any figure: Of these
there are 9 principal ones, D shews the
dexter chief, C the precise middle
chief, S the sinister chief, H the honour
point, F the fesse point, N the nom­
bril point. A the dexter, P the sinister
base.

Heralds say that an escutcheon repre­
sents the body of a man, and the points
signified by letters, denote the principal
parts of the body; so that DCS, that
mark out the three points of the chief, 
represent the head of a man, in which
reside the sense, the memory, and the
judgment. H, represents the neck, and
is called the honour point, because
chains of gold; &c. are for honours
sake put about the neck by princes. F.
being the center, denotes the heart of
man, being the most exquisite and con­
siderable part, in which courage and
generosity reside. N, the nombril point, 
represents the navel, which being the
part by which we received nourishment
in our mothers womb, intimates, that
if persons desire to be esteemed, they 
must receive the nourishment of virtue.
A, represents the right side or flank, 
which is the most honourable, in that
it is the part most exposed to danger.
P, denotes the left side or flank. O, the
legs, which are an emblem of the con­
stancy and steadiness a man ought to
use upon all turns of fortune.

Image omitted.



Cross Fourchee de trois
POINTS, is according as
represented in the escut­
cheon.

Image omitted.



POISE [poids, F.] weight.

POISONING, by a statue in the time
of Henry VIII was made high treason;
after the repealing of that law the pu­
nishment inflicted, was to be put alive
into a cauldron of water and to be
boiled to death; but now it is only hang­
ing, it being felony without the bene­
fit of the clergy.

POISONOUSNESS [of empoisonné, F.
and ness] poisonous quality.

POKER, an instrument to stir the
fire.

POLAQUE, a sort of ship or sea vessel
used in the Mediterranean.

POLARNESS [of polaris, L. and ness]
the quality of a thing considered as ha­
ving poles; also the property of the
load-stone, in pointing to the poles of
the world.

POLES of the Horizon [Astron.] are
the points called Zenith and Nadir.

POLE [pole, Sax.] a long stick.

POLE [in Sphericks] is a point equal­
ly distant from every part of the cir­
cumference of a greater circle of the
sphere, as the center is from a plain
figure.

POLES [in Magneticks] are two
points in a load stone, corresponding to
the poles of the world, the one point­
ing to the North and the other to the
South.

POLES of the Ecliptick or Zodiack 
[Astron.] are points in the solstitial co­
loure, 23 degrees 30 minutes distant
from the poles of the world, thro'
which all the circles of longitude pass.

POLE-STAR [with Astron. &c.] is
a star in the tail of the little-bear, 
(which is a constellation of seven stars)
and is very near the exact north-pole
of the world.

POLEMIC [of πόλεμος, Gr. war]
pertaining to controversy or dispute.

POLEMOSCOPE [of πόλεμος and
σχοπέω, Gr. to view] in opticks is a kind
of crooked or oblique prospective glass, 
contrived for seeing of objects that do
not lye directly before the eye.

POLITY [politia, L. πολιτεία of
πολις, Gr. a city] the laws, orders, and
regulations, prescribed for the conduct
and government of states and commu­
nities; also a prudent management of
affairs.

POLITENESS [politesse, L.] accom­
plishedness, &c.

POLITICK [politicus, L. πολι­
τιχὸς, Gr.] belong­
ing to policy or politicks.

POLITICAL politicus, L. πολι­
τιχὸς, Gr.] belong­
ing to policy or politicks.

POLITICAL Arithmetick, is the ap­
plication of arithmetical calculations
to political uses, as the publick reve­
nues, number of people, extent and
value of lands, taxes, trade, commerce, 
manufactures, and all things relating
to the wealth, power, strength, &c. of
a nation.

Sir William Petty, in his discourse
about duplicate proportion, says, that
it is found by experience that there are
more persons living between 16 and
26, than of any other age; and laying
down that as a supposition, he infers, 
that the square roots of every number
of mans ages under 16 (whose root is
4.) shews the proportion of the proba­
bility of such persons reaching the age
of 70.

Thus it is 4 times more likely that
one of 16 years of age lives to be 70, 
than a child of 1 year old.



It is thrice as probable that one of 9
years lives to be 70, as such a new born
child, &c.

That the odds is 5 to 4, that one of
25 dies before one of 16.

That it is 6 to 5 (still as the square
roots of the ages) that one of 36 dies
before one of 25 years of age.

And so on, according to any declin­
ing age to 70, compared with 4, 6, 
which is nearly the root of 21, the law
age.

Dr. Halley has made a very exact esti­
mate of the degrees of the mortality of
mankind, from curious tables of the
births and burials at the city of Breslaw, 
the capital of Silesia, with an attempt
to ascertain the price of annuities upon
lives. See the Table in the article An­
nuities.

1. To find in any multitude or body
of people the proportion of men able to
bear arms, which he reckons from 18
to 56 years old, and accounts about a
quarter of the whole.

2. To shew the different degrees of
mortality, or rather vitality, in all
ages, by which means he finds the odds
there is that any person of any age doth
not die in a years time, or before he at­
tains such an age.

3. To shew of what number of years, 
it is an even lay that such a person shall
die, and finds, for instance, that it is an
even lay, that a man of 38 years of age
lives between 27 and 28 years.

POLITICALLY [politiquement, F.]
with policy.

POLITICKS [politica, L. πολιτιχὰ, 
Gr.] the first part of ethicks, or the art
of governing a state or common-wealth, 
for the maintainance of the publick
safety, order, tranquillity, and good
morals; policy; also address, subtilty;
also books treating of politick affairs.

POLL Silver, a personal tribute, an­
ciently impos'd upon the poll or person
of every one; of women from the age
of 12, and men from 14.

POLLENTIA [among the Romans]
the goddess of power, &c.

POLLUTEDNESS [of pollutus, L.
and ness] a being polluted, filthiness.

POLTROON [with Falconers] a name
given to a bird of prey, when the nails
and talons of his hind toes are cut off, 
wherein his chief force and armour
lay; in order to intimidate him, and
prevent him from flying and siezing at
the game.

POLTROON [un poltron, F.] a co­
ward or dastard, one who wants cou­
rage to perform any thing great or
noble.

POLYHISTOR [πολυιστορ, Gr.] a
learned, knowing man that has read
much.

POLYANTHEA, a famous collecti­
on of common places, in alphabetical
order, made first by Domini Nanni de
Mirabella, of great service to orators, 
preachers, &c. of the lower class.

POLYANTHOS [πολυάνθος of πολυ
and ἂνθος, Gr.] a flower which bears
many flowers, as verbascum, &c.

POLYEDRON [πολύεδρα, Gr.] a
solid figure or body, consisting of many
sides.

Gnomonick POLYEDRON, a stone or
body having several faces, on which
various kinds of dials are drawn.

POLYEDRON [in Opticks] a glass or
lens, consisting of several plain surfaces, 
disposed into a convex form, common­
ly called a multiplying glass.

POLYGAMIST [πολυγαμος, Gr.]
one who has more wives or husbands
than one at a time; in the 16th cen­
tury one Bernardinus Ochinus, set him­
self up for the head or patron of this
principle. He was at first a general of
the Capuchins; but afterwards made a
profession of Protestantism, &c. he main­
tained that every man might lawfully
have as many wives as he pleased.

POLYGAMY [πολυγαμία, Gr.] is ei­
ther the act of having or the principle
of allowing that a man may lawfully
have as many wives as he pleases at
the same time; this was formerly the
universal practice among the Jews; 
and still is among the Turks, Persians,
&c.

Some of the Jewish Rabbies affirm, 
that the law does not allow of more
then one wife at a time; but the ma­
jority of the Jewish doctors maintain
the lawfulness of having as many as
a man pleases; but for political ends
they restrained men to four.

Polygamy was practised among the
Jews, till the reigns of Theodosius, Ar­
cadius and Honorius, who published a
rescript that no Jew for the future, 
should have more than one wife at a
time.

It is observable that it was the uni­
versal practice of the western part of
the world; both before and since
Christianity to have but one wife.

POLYGON [polygonius, 
L, of πολυγὰνιος, Gr.] a
multilateral figure, or a fi­
gure having many angles, 
or whose perimeter consists
of more than four sides and
angles.

Image omitted.





POLYGONAL [of πολυγώνιος, Gr.]
pertaining to a polygon.

Similar POLYGONS, are such as
have their angles severally equal, and
the sides about those angles proporti­
onable. See Polygon.

Line of POLYGONS [on a Sector] a
line containing the homologous sides of
the first nine regular polygons (i. e.
from a regular triangle to a dodecagon)
inscribed in the same circle.

POLYGRAPHY [of πολὺ, much, and
γραφὴ, Gr. writing] the art of writing
in various unusual manners or cyphers;
as also of deciphering the same.

POLYHEDRONIC, of or pertaining
to a polyhedron, or a figure with many
sides.

POLYHEDROUS Figure [of πολύεδρα, 
Gr.] with Geometricians, a solid, con­
tained under, and consisting of many
sides, which, if they are regular Poly­
gons, all similar and equal, and the
body be inscribable within the surface
of the sphere, it is then called a regu­
lar body.

POLYHYMNIA [in Painting, &c.] is
represented in white vestments, with
her hair hanging loose about her shoul­
ders of a bright yellow, having her
head adorned with a garland set off
with the choicest jewels, intermixt
with flowers, and in a posture as pro­
nouncing a speech, and pointing with
her finger, holding a book in her left
hand, in which is written suadere, i. e.
to persuade,  L.

POLYMATHY [of πολὺς and μάθη­
σις, Gr. learning, &c.] the knowledge
of many arts and sciences; also an ac­
quaintance with a great many diffe­
rent subjects.

POLYMYTHY [of πολύς and μῦθος, 
Gr. a fable] a multiplicity of fables in
an epick or dramatick poem.

POLYOPTRON [of πολὺ and ὀπτομαι, 
Gr. to see] an optick glass, through
which objects appear multiplied but di­
minished.

POLYPETALOUS Flower, regular 
[with Botanists] is such whose petals
agree together in figure.

POLYPETALOUS Flower, uniform
[with Botanists] is such whose petals
agree together in figure.

POLYPETALOUS Flow. irregular
[with Botan.] is when the petals do
not agree together in figure or position.

POLYPETALOUS Flower, disform 
[with Botan.] is when the petals do
not agree together in figure or position.

POLYPHAGIA [of πολὺς and φαγία, 
Gr. eating] an eating much, a greedy
eating.

POLYTHEISM [of πολὺ much, and
Θέος, Gr. God] the doctrine or belief
of a plurality of gods.

POMATUM, a sweet ointment
made of the apples called pome-waters
and hogs-lard.

A Cross POMILLEE [with Heralds] is a cross
with round knobs on the
ends, supposed to be deri­
ved from Pomme, F. an ap­
ple. See the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



A Cross POMETTEE
 [with Heralds] is a cross
with round knobs on the
ends, supposed to be deri­
ved from Pomme, F. an ap­
ple. See the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



POMONA [among the Romans] a
goddess worshipped as the patroness of
gardens and fruit. Vertumnus, who
had the power of turning himself into
all shapes, loved her intirely; but
could not obtain her, till getting en­
trance in the shape of an old woman, 
he commending the beauty of her gar­
den, and the pains she took to make it
so agreeable, and from the contempla­
tion of the vines being supported by
the elm, fell into a discourse of the
usefulness and happiness of a married
life: The discourse prevailed but little, 
till throwing off his disguise, he appear­
ed as a young god, with his rays dart­
ing like the sun from beneath a cloud;
the nymph at the sight was soon fired
with a mutual flame and they became
a happy couple.

The moral of this fable is, Vertumnus
is an emblem of the year, which turns
itself into variety of shapes according to
the multitude of its productions in dif­
ferent seasons; but is at no times more
graceful, than when Pomona, the god­
dess of ripe fruits, submits to his em­
braces.

POMPOUSNESS [of pomposus, L.
and ness] stateliness, shewiness, magni­
ficence.

PONDERARE [Old Customs] a me­
thod of curing sick children by weigh­
ing them at the tomb of some saint, 
ballancing the scale with money, 
wheat, bread, or other things that the
parents were willing to offer to God, 
his saints, or to the church.

PONTIFEX, a pontiff or high-­
priest among the Romans, who had the
intendance and direction of divine wor­
ship as the offering sacrifices, and other
religious solemnities.

PONTIFICE [of pons and facio, L.]
a piece of bridge-work. Milton.

PONTLEVIS [in Horsemanship] is a
disorderly resisting action of a horse in
disobedience to his rider, in which he
rears up several times running, and
rises up so upon his hind-legs, that he
is in danger of coming over.  F.

PONTONS, boats of latten, about
24 foot long and 6 broad, in the form



of a long square, borne on carriages, 
when an army marches. Each boat
has a ring at each end, and an anchor
and cable, and also Baulks and Chests.
When they use them to pass a river, 
they are placed at anchor, a strong
rope running thro' the rings, which is
fastned on each side the river, to a tree
or stake: The baulks are laid cross the
boats, and the chests upon them joined
close, which makes a bridge in a very
short time, for horse or artillery.

PONT-VOLANT, a Flying-Bridge, 
a bridge used in sieges, made of two
small bridges laid one over another, 
and so contrived by chords and pullies, 
that the upper may be push'd forwards, 
till it joins the place where it is to be
fixed.

POORNESS [pauvereté, F. paupertas, 
L.] poverty; leanness.

To POP [prob. vox ficta a sono, L.]
to go or fly out on a sudden with a
noise; also to go in or out, or appear
on a sudden.

POP, a sudden noise or thing dis­
charged out of a pop gun, &c.

POPE [of Πάππα, Gr. a father] a
name which in ancient times was given
to all bishops, as appears by the epis­
tles of St. Jerome and Augustine, &c.
but about the end of the 11th century, 
Gregory the Seventh in a council held
at Rome, ordered that the name of
Pope should peculiarly belong to the
bishop of Rome.

POPISH [papiste, F.] pertaining to
the pope or popery.

POPULAR Errors, such errors as
people imbibe from one another by
custom, education and tradition, with
out having examined the reason or
foundations of them.

POPULARNESS [of popularis, L.
and ness] a being full of people; also
an affectedness of popular applause.

POPULOFUGIA [i. e. the flight of
the people] a certain festival held in
Rome, on account of the flying away of
the Roman people in the war between
the Romans and Gauls.  L.

POPULONIA [among the Romans]
a goddess, who, as they believed, secu­
red their country from thunder, inun­
dations, hail, insects, &c.  L.

POPULOUSNESS [populositas, L.]
having abundance of people.

PORCELAIN the chalky earth of
which China Ware
is made, it is found in quarries of 2
sorts, about 20 or 30 leagues from a
city in the empire of China, called Kim­
tetchim, where the finest sort is made,
from whence it is brought in great
quantities, in pieces in the form of
bricks, which being beaten and steeped
in water and well stirred with an iron
instrument, when it is settled affords a
kind of cream on the top, about the
thickness of 4 or 5 fingers, which is
scummed and stirred, till nothing but
gravel remains, which is pounded again, 
the former of which makes the finest
ware, and the latter the coarser; also
vessels made of that earth.

So that the notion of its being made
of the powder of oister-shells, buried
many years under ground is a vulgar
error.

PORCELANE the chalky earth of
which China Ware
is made, it is found in quarries of 2
sorts, about 20 or 30 leagues from a
city in the empire of China, called Kim­
tetchim, where the finest sort is made,
from whence it is brought in great
quantities, in pieces in the form of
bricks, which being beaten and steeped
in water and well stirred with an iron
instrument, when it is settled affords a
kind of cream on the top, about the
thickness of 4 or 5 fingers, which is
scummed and stirred, till nothing but
gravel remains, which is pounded again, 
the former of which makes the finest
ware, and the latter the coarser; also
vessels made of that earth.

So that the notion of its being made
of the powder of oister-shells, buried
many years under ground is a vulgar
error.

PORCELAIN, a little white sea shell, 
found along with the sponges, which
passes as current money in several parts
of Asia, Africa and America.

Knights of the PORCUPINE, a French
order, whose device was, Cominus &
eminus; but king Lewis XII, crowned
the porcupine with another motto, 
Ultos avos Trojæ.

PORES [m Physick] small interstices
or void spaces between the particles of
matter, that constitute every body, or
between certain aggregates or combi­
nations of them.

Mr. Boyle, in his essay on the poro­
sity of bodies, proves that the most solid
bodies that are, have some kind of
pores, and indeed if they had not, all bo­
dies would be alike specifically weighty.

POROUSNESS [porosus, L. and ness]
the having pores, or full of pores.

PORPHYRIANS [so called of Por­
phyry] a name given to the Arians in
the 4th century.

PORPHYROGENETES [of πορφύρα
purple, and γεννητὴς, Gr. i. e. born in, 
or of the purple] a name given to the
children of the eastern emperors.

PORRAGER [of porrage] a ves­
sel for broth, &c.

PORRENGER
 [of porrage] a ves­
sel for broth, &c.

PORRAGE [prob. of porrum, L.
porreau, F. a leek] the
decoction of flesh, or
any edible.

PORRIGE
 [prob. of porrum, L.
porreau, F. a leek] the
decoction of flesh, or
any edible.

POTTAGE
 [prob. of porrum, L.
porreau, F. a leek] the
decoction of flesh, or
any edible. 

PORRECTION, a stretching forth,  L.

PORRETANS, a religious sect, fol­
lowers of Gilbert de la Porrée, bishop of
Poictiers, who for admitting (as some
say) a physical distinction between God
and his attributes, was condemned in
the 12th century.

PORT [with Navigators] an inlet of
the sea between the land, with good
anchorage, where a ship may ride se­
cure from storms.

PORTS de Barre, are such as can 
only be entred with the tide.



Natural PORTS, such as seem to
have been formed by providence for
the communication of commerce.

Artificial PORTS, such as are formed
with moles and other projectures into
the sea.

Close PORTS, are those within the
body of a city.

Free PORT a port that is open and
free for merchants of all nations, to
load and unload their vessels, without
paying any duties or customs.

Free PORT [in Commerce] a total ex­
emption and franchise, which any set
of merchants enjoy for goods imported
into a state, or those of the growth of
the country exported.

PORT of the voice [in Musick] the
faculty and habitude of making the
snakes, passages and diminutions, where
in the beauty of a song or piece of
musick consist.

PORT last [of a Ship] the same as
gun-wale.

A cross PORTATE [with
Heralds] is a cross not e­
rect, but lying athwart
the escutcheon in a bend, 
as if it were born upon a
man's shoulder, as in the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



PORTA [in Anatomy] the same as
Vena Porta, a very considerable vein, 
employed in bringing the blood from
several parts by an infinite number of
branches, which it is divided into, to the
liver, thro' the whole substance where­
of it is disseminated.

PORT-CRAON, an instrument serv­
ing to inclose a pencil, and to serve
both as a handle to hold it, and a cover
so make it portable.

PORTAIL [in Architect.] the deco­
ration of the face or front of a church, 
called also frontispiece, as that of West-­
minster-Abbey; also the principal gate
of a palace, castle, pleasure-house or
the like.

PORTENT [portentum, L.] an omen, 
foreboding good or ill-luck.

PORTENTOUSNESS [portentosus, 
L. and ness] ominousness of ill-luck, or
the contrary.

PORTERAGE, the hire of a porter.

PORTERESS, a female porter.

To PORTION [of portion, F. of  L.]
to divide into portions, to parcel out.

PORTIONER, an officer that distri­
butes the tithes in a colledge, &c. also
one who officiates in a parsonage in his
turn.

PORTMANTEAU [in Joinery] a
piece of work, fastened to a wall in a
ward-robe, armoury, &c. proper for
hanging cloaks, &c.

PORTRAIT [with Paint.] pictures
of men and women, (either heads or
greater lengths) drawn from the life;
the word is used to distinguish face-­
painting from history painting.

PORTUOUS a breviary, a sort of
mass-book.

PORTHOSE a breviary, a sort of
mass-book.

PORTUGAL [Portugalia of Portus
Gallorum, i. e. the port or place where
the Gauls or French landed] there is a
saying of the Portugueze, that take one
of their neighbours (a native Spaniard)
and strip him of all his good qualities
(which may be soon done) and that
person then remaining will make a
compleat Portugueze.

PORTUMNUS a sea deity of the Ro­
mans called also Melicertus and Palæmon
by the Greeks, so called as supposing
him to preside over ports.

POSE [in Heraldry] signi­
fies a lion or any beast in a
posture standing still, hav­
ing all its four feet on the
ground, as in the escut­
cheon.

Image omitted.



POSITION [in Astronomy] as the po­
sition of the sphere is either right, pa­
rallel or oblique; whence arises the
inequality of our days, difference of
seasons, &c.

Circles of POSITION [Astronomy] are
6 great circles passing through the in­
tersection of the meridian and horizon, 
and dividing the equator into twelve e­
qual parts.

POSITION [in Dancing] the manner
of disposing the feet in respect to each
other.

POSITION [in the Schools] a thesis or
proposition maintained.

POSITIVE [positivus, L.] is a term
of relation, sometimes opposed to ne­
gative, as the Ten Commandaments are
same of them positive and some nega­
tive: Positive is also opposed to Relative
or Arbitrary, as beauty is no positive
thing; but depends upon the  diffe­
rent fancies of persons: Positive is also
opposed to Natural, as a positive right
is a right founded on a law, which de­
pends absolutely on the authority of
him that gave it.

POSITIVE [Divinity] is that which
consists in the simple understanding, or
expounding the dogmas and articles of
faith, as is contained in the sacred scrip­
tures, or explained by the fathers of
the church and councils, clear of all dis­
putes and controversies.

A POSITIVE [in Musick] a little or­
gan usually behind or at the foot of the
organ, played by the same wind, and



the same bellows, and consisting of the
same number of pipes with the large
one.

POSITIVENESS [of positive, L. and
ness] dogmaticalness, resoluteness, per­
tinaciousness, or assurance in asserting, 
denying, commanding, &c.

POSITURE [positura, L.] disposition.

POSSESSION [in Theology] is the
state of a person possessed by the devil.

Actual POSSESSION, is when a man, 
actually enters into lands or tenements
descended to him.

POSSESSION de facto [in Law] is
when there is an actual and effectual en­
joyment of a thing.  L.

POSSESSION de jure [in Law] is the
title a man has to enjoy a thing, though
it be sometimes usurped, and in the ac­
tual possession of another.

Unity of POSSESSION [Civil Law]
the same as solidation, as if a lord pur­
chases a tenancy held of himself by her­
riot service; the service becomes ex­
tinct by unity of possession, i. e. by the
signiory and tenancy's coming to the
same hand.

POSSESSION, three years in matters 
personal begets a right, and a possession
often years in real estates among per­
sons dwelling near the premises, and 
20 years among those that dwell else­
where.

POSSESSION, is also used for the ti­
tle or prescription that gives a right to
hold any thing.

Annual POSSESSION, is the usucap­
tion which gives a right to moveables.

Triennial POSSESSION of a benefice, 
if it be peaceable is sufficient to main­
tain it; if it be founded on a plausible
title.

POSSESSION of an estate for ten years
by a person present, and 20 years by
one absent with a title, or of 30 years
without any gives a full right.

Centenary POSSESSION i. e. for 100
years, constitutes a possession immemo­
rial, the best and most indisputable of
all titles.

POSSESSOR, one who possesses, or
has the enjoyment of a thing.

POSSESSORESS, a female possessor.

POSSIBLENESS [possibilitas, L.] ca­
pableness of being done, &c.

POSSIBILITY [in our Law] is defin­
ed to be a thing which may or may not
happen.

POSSIBILITY [in Ethicks] a non-re­
pugnance to existing in a thing that
does not any way exist.

Moral POSSIBLE, is that which may
be done by prudent persons; using all
the proper means they have for doing
the same.

Future POSSIBLE [School Term] is
that of a thing, whose production is de­
creed and ascertained; as the futurition
of all those events fixed by the immu­
table decree of the immutable will of
God.

Potential POSSIBLE, is that which is
contained or lies hid in its causes; as
the tree in its seed, the fruit in the
tree, &c.

Mere POSSIBLE, is that which might
exist, tho' it never shall.

Metaphysical POSSIBLE, is that which
may at least be brought to being, by
some supernatural or divine power, as
the resurrection of the dead.

Physical POSSIBLE, is that which
may be effected by a natural power.

To POST, to stick up or affix a wri­
ting on a post.

POST of Honour [in an army] the ad­
vanced guard, is a post of honour, and
the right of two lines is a post of ho­
nour, and is always to the eldest regi­
ments; the left is the next post, and is
given to the next eldest, and so on; the
center of the lines is the least honoura­
ble, and is given to the youngest regi­
ments.

POST diluvian, after the flood; of or
pertaining to the Post Diluvians, or
those persons who lived or succeeded
one another after Noah's flood.

POSTIQUE [in Architecture] an or­
nament of sculpture is said to be po­
stique, when it is added after the work
it self is done.

POSTULATE [with Mathematic.] a
clear evident proposition, wherein it
is affirmed or deny'd that something
may, or may not be done.

POSTVORTA [among the Romans]
a deity whom they imagined to foresee
what was to come, and to prevent the
evil that might happen; the opposite
deity to this was Antevorta, who ac­
cording to their sentiments, presided
over what was past, and they invok'd
to be rid of the evils they had already
felt.

These 2 goddesses being accounted
by them as the counsellors of provi­
dence: The women in their lying in, 
joined those two also to the rest of their
deities, Antevorta made the child come
forth a-right, that is, with its head
foremost, and the other put him out
when his feet appeared first: So Post­
vorta allay'd the pains of child-bearing, 
and Antevorta was suppos'd to assist and
quickly raise the woman lying in.



POSTURE [in Painting, Sculpture
&c.] the situation of the figure with
regard to the eye, and of the several
principal members thereof, in regard
to one another, whereby the action of
it is express'd.

POTABLENESS [of potabilis, L. and
ness] capableness of being drank.

POTAGERY, garden ware for the
pot.

POTANCE cramponné 
[in Heraldry] is a cross in
the form represented in
the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



A cross POTENT [in
Heraldry] is of the form
represented in the escut­
cheon.

Image omitted.



POTENTIA, power, or
that whereby a thing is capable of act­
ing, or being acted on,  L.

To exist in POTENTIA [with School­
men] denotes that existence which a
thing has in a cause capable of produ­
cing it; but which has not actually
produced it.

POTENTIAL [with Schoolmen]
something that has the quality of a
genus.

POTENTNESS [of potens, L.] migh­
tiness, powerfulness.

POT-GUN, q. d. a pop-gun.

POTICA [among the Romans] a
deity, who, as they fancied, presided
over the drinkables given to infants.

POT-VALIANT, the adventuring
upon dangerous enterprizes, when a
persons spirits are raised by strong li­
quors, which he would not dare to at­
tempt when sober.

POTULENT [potulentus, L.] pretty
much in drink.

POVERTY [paupertas, L. pauvreté, 
F.] poor state and condition.

POVERTY, a goddess adored by the
Pagans, but more out of fear than
love: They believe her to be the mo­
ther of industry and good arts.

POVERTY [in Painting, &c.] is re­
presented like a fury, with a pale and
fierce countenance, and ready to de­
spair.

POULTERERS were incorporated
Anno 1503. Their ar­
morial ensigns are, 
Argent on a chevron, 
between three storks
Azure, as many swans
proper. Their sup­
porters two pelicans
Or, vulning them­
selves Gules. The crest, on a helmet
and crown mural, a stork with wings
expanded Gules. This company, hav­
ing now no hall, meet at the inn-hol­
ders.

Image omitted.



POUNCE [a word framed from the
sound] as the pounce of a gun.

POUNCED [prob. of punctatus, L.
pointed] having talons or claws, as a
strong pounced eagle, &c.

A POUND Sterling, is 20 shillings;
a pound Scotch is 20 pence; a pound
Irish is 15 shillings.

Close POUND, such an one as the
owner cannot come to give them
food, as some close house, fortress, 
&c.

Overt or open POUND, is one built
upon the lord's waste, and thence cal­
led the lord's pound; also backsides, 
court-yards, pasture-grounds, &c. such
as the owner of the cattle impounded
may come to and give them meat, 
without offence of their being there, 
or his coming thither.

POUNDAGE [of punð, Sax.] the
rate allowed for the collecting, &c. of
money, so much per pound.

POUNDER, a great gun denomina­
ted according to the weight of the ball
it carries, as a 6, 12 or 24 pounder.

POURCOUNTREL, a fish that has
a great many feet, and changes its co­
lour like the place where it is; the
same as Polypus.

POURCOUNTREL [Hieroglyphic.]
was used to express a covetous miser, 
that scrapes together the wealth of this
world, because it is a greedy fish that
swallows all that comes near to it, 
when it is hungry.

POURSUIVANT, a king's messen­
ger, attending upon him in his wars or
at the council-table, exchequer, &c. to
be sent upon any occasion or message.

POURSUIVANT at Arms, a king's
messenger that is sent or employed in 
martial causes.

POURSUIVANTS at Arms [in anci­
ent Times] were gentlemen, who at­
tended the Heralds in order to their
promotion to that office, to which they
could not rise before seven years atten­
dance, and officiating for them in pre­
paring and assigning tournaments, &c.

POURVEYANCE, the providing
corn, fuel, victuals, and other neces­
saries for the king's house.

POURVEYER, an officer who pro­
vides as before.

POWCHES [in a Ship] those bulk
heads in the hold, used for stowing par­
cels of corn, &c. that it do not shift
from one side to another.



POWDERING-TUB [of poudrer, F.
and prob. of tobbe, Du.] a tub for
salting meat; also a salivation or course
of physick, for cure of the French pox.

Gun POWDER, a composition of
salt-petre, brimstone, aad charcoal.

Gun POWDER Treason Day, a festi­
val observed annually on the 5th of
November for the deliverance of king
James I. and the lords and commons
in parliament assembled, from being
blown up with gun-powder, and the
people from a barbarous intended mas­
sacre.

Jesuits POWDER, the Quinquina or
Jesuits bark.

Legislative POWER, is that which
is employed in prescribing general
rules of action.

Judiciary POWER, is that which
determines the controversies of sub­
jects, by the standard of the rules of
legislative power.

The POWER of God [Hieroglyphically]
was expressed by the god Janus, with
three heads and one body, but having
neither hands nor feet, because almigh­
ty God governs all things only by his
wisdom and pleasure, and needs no vi­
sible members to act in the world, and
produce his wonders. And to express
the effects of God's power in nature, 
the Egyptians painted a man with a
multitude of hands, stretching them
out upon the world.

POWER of a glass [in Opticks] is the
distance of the convexity from its so­
lar Focus.

POWER of an Hyperbola, is the six­
teenth part of the conjugate axis, or
the one fourth part of the square of
the semi-conjugate axis; or it is equal
to a rectangle under the one fourth
part of the sum of the tranverse axis, 
and parameter.

POWERFUL [of pouvoir, F. and
full] potent, mighty.

A POWERFUL Prince [Hieroglyphi.]
was represented by a serpent in an orb, 
carefully looking to every thing within
its sphere,  L.

POWERFULNESS, mightiness.

POWERLESS [of pouvoir, F. and
less] without power.

POWERS of Lines [in Geo­
metry] are
their squares, cubes, &c. or other
multiplications of the parts into the 
whole, or of one part into another.

POWERS of Quantities
 [in Geo­
metry] are
their squares, cubes, &c. or other
multiplications of the parts into the 
whole, or of one part into another.

POX [of pocca, Sax.] a disease, as, 
the small pox, &c.

French POX, a contagious disease
contracted by a poisonous humour usu­
ally in coition, and manifesting it self
in ulcers and pairs.

PRACTICABLENESS, capableness
of being practised, done or effected.

PRACTICALNESS [of practique, F.
and ness] practicableness.

PRACTICK [of Scotland] the course
of pleading the law, or the rules of
court in that kingdom.

PRÆADAMITES, those inhabitants
of the earth, which some people have
fancied to have lived before Adam.

PRÆADAMITICAL [of præ, L.
before, and Adam] according to the
opinions of the Pre-Adamites.

PRÆAMBLE [in a Law Sense] the
beginning of an act of parliament, 
which shews the intent of the makers
of the act, and the mischiefs or incon­
veniences they would remedy or pre­
vent thereby.

PRÆAMBULATORY, of or per­
taining to a preamble, fore-running.

Theological PRÆBEND, one who is
affected with a doctor of divinity, in
each cathedral and collegiate church in
France, to preach on fundays, and read
lectures three times a week.

PRÆDICAMENT [with Logicians]
a certain class, or determinate series
or order, in which simple terms or
words are ranged: Of these there are
usually reckoned ten heads, viz. Sub­
stance, Accident, Quantity, Quality, Ac­
tion, Passion, Relation, the Situation of
bodies, as to place, the Duration, as to
time, their Site or Position, and their
Habit or external Appearance.

PRÆMUNIENTES, writs sent to
every particular bishop to come to par­
liament, beginning Præmunientes, &c.

PRÆMUNIRE. See Premunire.

PRÆNOMEN [among the Romans]
a proper name prefixed to the general
name of the family, as Caius, Marcus, 
&c.

PRÆSEPE [in Astronomy] three ne­
bulous stars in the sign Cancer.

PRÆTEXTA [among the Romans]
a robe or long white vest, with a pur­
ple border, worn by the magistrates, 
priests and senators upon solemn days, 
and also by children. See Pretexta.

PRÆTEXTATA comædia, a come­
dy or play, where those who had a
right to wear the Prætextæ, as kings
and magistrates, were represented on
the stage; whereas common and mean
persons, who were introduced in the
play, were called Togati.

PRÆTORES Ærarii [among the
Romans] officers of the treasury or ex­
chequer,  L.



PRAGMATICALNESS [of prag­
maticus, 
L. of  Gr. and ness] busy, meddling, hu­
mour in other mens affairs; sauciness.

PRAGMATICNESS [of prag­
maticus, 
L. of  Gr. and ness] busy, meddling, hu­
mour in other mens affairs; sauciness.

PRAGMATICK [ϖῥαγματιχὸς of
ϖρᾶγμα, Gr. a cause, a quarrel] over­
busy in other persons affairs; saucy, 
arrogant.

PRAGMATICK Sanction, an ordi­
nance, business or affair, that some­
times belongs to the state, and some­
times to the church; but more parti­
cularly to those made by the kings of
France, relating to the affairs of the
church, wherein the rights of the
Gallican church are asserted against the
usurpations of the pope, in the pro­
motion or choice of bishops, archbi­
shops, &c.

Sometimes by this term is meant the
emperor's letter, by the advice of his
council, in answer to a collective body
of men, who desired to know the law
upon a particular occasion, &c. rela­
ting to their community.

PRATIQUE a communication of
commerce, which
the master of a merchant vessel obtains
in the port it arrives in.

PRACTICK a communication of
commerce, which
the master of a merchant vessel obtains
in the port it arrives in.

A PRATTLER [Hieroglyphically] is
represented by a grashopper, because it
is never quiet in summer, but fills the
air with its importunate singing. This
creature did represent an Egyptian di­
vine; because that tho' it sings, it has
no tongue, and therefore is to be ad­
mired; so these men that attained to
such excellent perfections, as the know­
ledge of God and superior beings by
dark hieroglyphicks and significant sha­
dows, did require no less esteem and
admiration.

PRAXÆANS [so called of Praxias
their leader] a sect that held that there
was no plurality of persons in the God­
head; and that it was the Father him­
self that suffered on the cross.

PRAXIDICA, a heathen goddess, 
whose office was to assign men just
bounds and measures for their actions
and discourses. In painting or carving
she was never represented by a whole
statue nor any more than a head only, 
to intimate the pre-eminence of the un­
derstanding; and the sacrifices offered
to her, were only the heads of victims.
Her temples had no coverings, to inti­
mate the necessity there is for persons
to have their eyes up to Heaven, in or­
der to the obtaining a steady conduct of
life, and to denote her divine original.

PRE-ADAMITES, a sect who pre­
tend that there were men who liv'd
before the creation of Adam, according
to the writings of Moses; or who fol­
low the opinions of a certain author, 
which are as follows.

1. That on the sixth day of the crea­
tion of the world, God created male
and female, i. e. that God created men
and women in all parts of the earth;
so as that the earth immediately pro­
duc'd animals, trees, fruits, &c. and
had at the same time men and women
placed in it.

2. That long after that God made
Adam to be the first man of his own
peculiar people, who were afterwards
called Jews.

3. That this creation of Adam out of
the earth, which is describ'd in the se­
cond chapter of Genesis, is different
from the creation of the men whom
Moses speaks of in the first chapter.

4. That the Gentiles, i.e. the people
differing from the Jews, were the men
of the first creation; and that Adam
from whom the Jews deduce their ori­
ginal, was a new production of God, 
who formed him to be the chief of his
own people.

5. That Moses's intention was not to
write the history of the world; but
only that of the Jews; wherefore he
says but little of the first creation of
men.

6. That Noah's deluge was not uni­
versal throughout the earth, but that
it drowned Judea only.

7. That all the people of the world
did not descend from Noah, nor from
his three sons.

8. That the Gentiles gave themselves
over to all sorts of vices, but that these
sins were not laid to their charge, be­
cause God had not given them a law;
and that they were not properly sins, 
but evil actions, as those of beasts, who
do wrong.

9. That the Gentiles dyed, not be­
cause they sinned, but because they
were composed of a body subject to
corruption.

10. That as to the second creation, 
to wit that of Adam, he had been crea­
ted to be the first patriarch of the
Jewish people, to whom God was to
manifest himself in due time, and af­
terwards to the Gentiles, in order to
form but one church of both.

Preceptorial PREBEND, a prebend,
the revenues whereof are
for the maintenance of a preceptor or
master tor the instruction of youth
gratis.



Golden PREBEND [of Hereford] one
of the 28 minor prebendaries, who has
the first canon's place that falls ex
officio, so called, because he had the
altarages, in respect of the gold com­
monly given there.

PRECARIOUS [in Commerce] is a
kind of trade carried on between two
nations at war, by the intervention of
a third at peace with them both.

PRECARIOUS [in Jurisprudence] a
fund or stock, whereof a person has not
the full propriety, whereof he cannot
dispose absolutely, and which is most of
it borrowed.

PRECARIOUSNESS [of precarius, 
L.] slenderness of title, small assurance, 
dependence on courtesy, humour, &c.

PRECEDENCY [among Men] the
manner in England is thus, that all no­
bles of each degree take place accord­
ing to the seniority of creation, and
not of years, unless they are lawfully
descended of the blood royal, and then
they take place of all others of the same
degree.

After the king, the princes of the
blood, viz. the sons, grandsons, bro­
thers, and nephews of the king are to
take place.

Then the great officers of the crown
are to precede all other of the nobility, 
viz. the archbishop of Canterbury, the
lord chancellor, the lord keeper of the
great seal, the lord archbishop of York, 
the lord treasurer, the lord president of
the privy council, and the lord privy
seal.

Next dukes, marquisses, dukes eldest
sons, earls, marquisses eldest sons, dukes
younger sons, viscounts, earls eldest
sons, marquisses younger sons, bishops, 
barons, viscounts eldest sons, earls
youngest sons, barons eldest sons, privy
counsellors, judges, matters of Chancery, 
viscounts younger sons, barons younger
sons, knights of the garter (if no other­
wise dignified, which is seldom found)
knights bannerets, baronets, knights of
the Bath, knights batchelors, colonels, 
serjeants at law, doctors, and esquires.

All deans, chancellors, prebendaries, 
doctors of divinity, law and physick, 
are usually placed before all sorts of
esquires.

All colonels, by the law of arms, 
ought to precede simple knights, and so
are all general officers, master of the
ordnance, quarter-master-general, &c.
all batchelors of divinity, law and phy­
sick, all masters of art, barristers, cap­
tains, and other commission officers in
the army, may equal and precede any
gentleman that hath none of these qua­
lifications.

PRECEDENCE [of Women] women
before marriage have precedency by
their father; but there is difference be­
tween them and the male children, 
that the same precedency is due to all
the daughters that is due to the eldest
tho' it is not so among the sons.

During the marriage, the wife regu­
larly participates of the condition of
her husband, by the civil law and law
of nations.

Yet this rule has some exceptions, 
for tho' in France the wives of those, 
who have their dignities by office, en­
joy the same precedency with their
husbands, yet it is not so with us, who
think that offices are bestowed on hus­
bands upon a personal account, which
is not communicable to their wives.
But yet, in the dignity of knights bat­
chelors, the wife participates of the
husbands title and precedency.

By our law, if a woman have prece­
dency by her birth or descent, she re­
mains still the same, notwithstanding
she marry a person of inferior dignity, 
contrary to the rules of the civil law.

If the daughter of a nobleman marry
another nobleman, she will lose the
precedency due to her by birth, tho'
she would not have lost it if she had
married a gentleman.

After the husband's decease, the wife
did by the civil law enjoy her husband's
precedency during her widowhood; but
if she married a person of inferior qua­
lity, she loses her precedency; but the
queen never loses her former dignity, 
tho', after the king's death, she marry
the meanest person.

A PRECEDENT Book, a book con­
taining instruction, rule, lesson, exam­
ples or authorities, to follow in judg­
ment and determinations in the courts
of justice.

PRECESSION of the Equinoxes 
[Astronomy] is the advancing or going
forwards of the equinoctial points: For
the equinoxes, by a very slow and in­
sensible motion, change their place, go­
ing backwards and westward, contrary
to the order of the signs.

PRECIOUSNESS [of precieux, F.
and ness] valuableness.

PRECIPITANTNESS [of præcipi­
tans, L.] rashness, hastiness, unadvised­
ness.

PRECIPITATE [præcipitatus, L.]
rash, hasty, unadvised.

Philosophical PRECIPITATE, is
made with running mercury put into a



matrass, and set in sand heat for 40
days, or till all the mercury is reduced
to a red powder. This is called Preci­
pitate per se.

PRECISENESS [of precision, F. and
ness] stiffness, formalness, finicalness, 
affectedness, exactness, scrupulousness, 
particularness.

PRECISION [School Term] the same
as abstraction.

PRECONISATION [in the consistory
at Rome] a declaration or proposition
made by the cardinal-patron of a per­
son, nominated by some prince to a pre­
lateship.

PREDESTINATION [in Theology]
a judgment or decree of God, whereby
he has resolved from all eternity, to
save a certain number of persons, 
hence called Elect.

PREDESTINATION, is also used to
signify a concatenation of second causes, 
appointed by providence: By means
whereof, things are brought to pass by
a fatal necessity; contrary to all appear­
ance, and maugre all opposition.

PREDETERMINATION [with
Schoolmen] that concurrence of God
which makes men act, and determines
them in all their actions both good and
evil.

PREDICATE [prædicatum, L.] that
latter part of a logical proposition, or
that which is affirmed of the subject, as
when we say, John is a Sailor, the word
Sailor is called the predicate, because it
is spoken or affirmed of the subject
John.

PREDOMINANTNESS [of predomi­
ner, F.] a being predominant, an over-­
ruling quality; prevalency, having some
superiority over some other.

PREDY the Hole [Sea Phrase] means, 
lay or stow every thing there, in its
due order and proper place.

PRE-ELECTED [præ-electus, L.]
chosen before.

PRE-EMINENTNESS [pre-eminence, 
F. of præ-eminentia, L.] an exceeding of
others in quality or degree.

PREENING [with Naturalists] the
action of birds, in cleaning, composing
and trimming their feathers, to enable
them to glide more easily thro' the air.
For this use, nature has furnished them
with two peculiar glands, which secrete
an unctuous matter into an oil-bag
perforated, out of which the bird on
occasion draws it with its bill.

PRE-ENGAGED [of pre and engagé, 
F.] engaged beforehand.

PRE-EXISTENTNESS, a being pre­
existent.

To PREFACE [præfatio of prefari, 
L. to speak before] to make a prepa­
ratory introduction to a discourse.

PREFERABLENESS, quality of de­
serving, to be preferred before others.

PREGNANTNESS [of prægnans, L.
and ness] a being great with child; also
(spoken of evidence or proof) strength;
also (of invention, wit, judgment, &c.)
ripeness, quickness, sharpness.

PREJUDICIALNESS [of prejudicial]
injuriousness, &c.

PRELATE [of the Garter] the first
officer of that noble order, and as anci­
ent as the order itself.

PRELIMINARIES [preliminaries, F.
of præ before, and limen a threshold]
the first steps in a negotiation, or other
important business.

To PRELUDE [præludere, L.] to lay
down some general propositions before
the main business is begun or entered
upon.

PREMATURENESS [præmaturitas, 
L.] early ripeness, or ripeness before
the time.

PREMEDITATEDNESS [præmedi­
tatus, L. and ness] the being thought
upon or contrived before-hand.

PREMOTION [School Term] the
action of co-operating with the crea­
ture, and determining him to act.

To run ones self into a PREMUNIRE, 
is to take a ready course to involve one
self in trouble and perplexity.

To incur PREMUNIRE [Law
Terms]
is to incur the same punishment as was
to be inflicted upon the transgressors of
a law, made in the 12th year of king
Richard II. commonly termed the Sta­
tute of Premunire.

To fall into a PREMUNIRE [Law
Terms]
is to incur the same punishment as was
to be inflicted upon the transgressors of
a law, made in the 12th year of king
Richard II. commonly termed the Sta­
tute of Premunire.

PREMUNIRE, the original of the
statute of Premunire was as follows;
the church of Rome in former times, 
upon the pretence of her Supremacy, 
assumed it as her right to bestow most
of the bishopricks, abbies, and other
ecclesiastical preferments of the greatest
value, before they were void; under
pretence of supplying the church with
better qualified persons before the
vacancy; therefore in order to put a
stop to these encroachments, king
Edward III. procured three statutes to
be made, against those that drew the
king's subjects out of the realm, to an­
swer things belonging to the king's
court, and the last made in the 28th
year of his reign did very much check
the usurpations of the court of Rome.

But the court of Rome still going on
in these practices, king Richard II. in



the 12th year of his reign procured a
statute against them, and in his 13th
year another, wherein he confirmed
the first of Edward III. and made the
penalty thereof, Perpetual Banishment, 
Forfeiture of Lands, Goods and Chattels, 
&c.

This likewise explained the offence
more particularly, to prevent any eva­
sions, and affixed the former penalty
to the offenders.

PRENDER [Law
Term]
the power or right of taking a thing
before it is offered.

Things lying in PRENDER [Law
Term]
the power or right of taking a thing
before it is offered. 

PRENOTION [prænotitia, L.]a fore­
knowledge, a notice or knowledge pre­
ceding some other in point of time.  L.

PRENTICE. See Apprentice.

PREORDINATION, an ordaining
before.

PREPOSTEROUSNESS, the having
the wrong end forward, absurdness, 
contrariety to nature or custom.

PRESBYTIA [πρισβυτία, Gr.] dim­
ness of sight in things nigh at hand.

PRESBYTERIANISM [of presbyte­
rien, F.] the principles, &c. of the
Presbyterians.

PRESBYTERY [presbyteratus, L. of
πρισβύτεριον, Gr.] an assembly of the
orders of presbyters with lay-elders, 
for the exercise of church discipline.

PRESCRIPTION [with Physicians]
the act or art of assigning a proper and
adequate remedy to a disease.

Extemporaneous PRESCRIPTION, is
such as a physician frames of himself
pro re natâ, according to the circum­
stances of the patient.

Officinal PRESCRIPTION, is what
the physician prescribes as to the or­
dering those medicines, they keep by
them ready prepared according to their
dispensatory.

To PRESENT [præsentare, L. pre­
senter, F.] to name to a benefice; also
to bring an information against one.

PRESENTNESS [of presant, F.] the
being present, readiness.

PRESERVATIVE [preservativus, 
L.] of a preserving quality.

PRESERVES, fruits ordered by con­
fectioners.

PRESIDENTSHIP [of president, F.
and ship] the office or dignity of a pre­
sident.

PRESIDIAL, the name of a certain
tribunal or court of judicature in
France.

PRESLE, Dutch reeds, used for po­
lishing.

A PRESS, a great throng or croud
of people.

PRESS [preoſt, Sax. a priest]
an initial syllable in pro­
per names, signifies priest, as Preston, 
Prestonbury, &c.

PREST [preoſt, Sax. a priest]
an initial syllable in pro­
per names, signifies priest, as Preston, 
Prestonbury, &c.

To PRESS upon the hand [with Horse­
men] a horse is said so to do, when
either thro' the stiffness of his neck, 
or from an ardour to run too much a­
head, he stretches his head against the
horseman's hand, refuses the aid of the
hand, and withstands the effects of the
bridle.

To PRESS a horse forward, is to assist
him with the calves of the legs, or to
spur him to make him go on.

PRESSINGNESS, urgentness.

PREST Sail [Sea Language] is when
a ship carries all the sail she can possi­
bly crowd.

PRESTESA [in Riding Academies]
signifies readiness, and imports the
diligence of a horse in working in the
manage.

PRESTIMONY [Canon Law] a fund
or revenue settled by a founder for the
subsistence of a priest, without being
erected into any title of benefice, cha­
pel, prebend, or priory, not subject to
any but the patron and those he ap­
points.

PRESUMPTION, the over forward
or saucy doing of a thing without or­
ders; also pride, conceit; also suspi­
cion.

PRESUMPTUOUSNESS [of præ
sumptuo­
sus, L.] presumption, assumingness, 
boldness.

PRESUMTUOUSNESS [of præ
sumptuo­
sus, L.] presumption, assumingness, 
boldness.

PRETENDER [celui qui pretend, F.]
one who lays claim to, or arrogates to
himself what does not belong to him, 
or makes a shew of what he has not.

PRETER [of præteritus, L. past]
an inflexion of verbs
expressing the time past.

PRETERIT [of præteritus, L. past]
an inflexion of verbs
expressing the time past.

PRETERIT Child [in the Roman
Jurisprudence] a child whom the father
has forgotten to mention in his last
will.

PRETER-NATURALNESS [of
præternaturalis, L. and ness] quality out
of the natural course.

PRETOR [prætor, L.] an eminent
magistrate among the Romans, of
which there were divers of different
offices and power; this title was given
at first to all magistrates, and after­
wards to the generals of armies, and
even to the emperors themselves. In
process of time, the administration of
justice to the citizens, was committed
to the pretors; and also the govern­
ment of provinces. Their office was



to see to the performance of justice, 
to take care of the sacrifices, to pre­
side over games; and at length their
power grew to that height, that they
could alter laws, repeal them, and or­
dain new ones.

PRETTINESS [of prætiʒ and
neſſe, Sax.] beautifulness, &c.

PRETORIUM, the place, hall, or
court, in which the Roman pretor lived, 
and in which he sat and administer'd
justice to the people.

PREVALENTNESS [of prævalens, 
L. and ness] prevalency.

PREVARICATION, is also a secret
abuse committed in the exercise of a
publick office, or of a commission giv­
en by a private person.

PREVARICATORY [of prævaricari, 
L.] shuffling, &c.

PREVENIENT [præveniens, L.] pre­
venting, Milton.

PREVENTION [in Canon Law] the
right that a superior person or officer
has to lay hold on, claim, or transact
an affair, before an inferior to whom
it more immediately belongs.

PREVIOUSNESS [of prævius, L.]
foregoing or introductory quality.

PREYING upon [of proye, F. or præ­
dans, L.] seizing on by violence.

PRIAPEIA [in Poetry] obscene
epigrams, &c. composed on the god
Priapus.

PRIAPUS [Πρίαπος, Gr.] the son of
father Bacchus and Venus (according to
the poets) a lascivious fellow, whom
the women followed so, that the citi­
zens were fain to expel him; but Ve­
nus (as they say) plaguing them, they
were constrain'd to build a temple to
him, and offer him sacrifice. They
worshipped him as the protestor of
their vineyards and gardens, who could
defend their fruit from mischievous
birds and thieves, and punish such as
endeavour to hurt and blast them by
their enchantment

His image is described naked, with a
distorted countenance and hair dishe­
velled, crowned with garden herbs, 
holding a sickle in his hands, as an en­
sign of terror and punishment. He was
thus set up in orchards, &c. in the
manner of a scare-crow, and made of
the first piece of wood that came to
the hands of the peasant. He was of­
ten in a doubt whether he should make
a god of it, or commit it to the flames;
it was not regularly carv'd, nor beau­
tiful, and generally without feet. The
ass was offered to him, because, as he
was going to violate the chastity of
Vesta, as she lay asleep, Silenus'a ass
bray'd and awakened the goddess.

He is said to be the son of Bacchus
and Venus, that is, the Sun and Moi­
sture, to intimate that all trees, plants
and fruits are generated and receive
their vegstation by the heat of the sun
and radical moisture.

PRIAPUS [Anat.] the genital parts
of a man; the Penis and Testes.

PRICKLINESS [of priccare, Sax.]
the having prickles, &c.

PRIEST [priester, Teut. prek, Dan.
preoſt, Sax. which some derive of
πρεσβυτερος, Gr. an elder: But Stephen
Guichard, in l'Harmonie Etymologique
des Langues, derives the name priest, 
of prestre, F. and that from πρηστὴρ, in­
cendiarius, of πρήθω, Gr. incendo, in­
flammo] a clergyman, one who per­
forms sacred offices.

The Romans called their priests Fla­
mins, the ancient Britons theirs Druids
the Indians theirs Brachmins, the Mo­
gul's Indians call theirs Daroes or Har­
bods, the Persians theirs Sedre, the
Tartarians theirs Lama, the Morocco's
theirs Alfaquis, and the Canada Indians
theirs Pawwaw.

PRIESTLINESS [of preoſtlice
and neſſe, Sax.] priestly quality or
behaviour.

PRIMAGE, a duty appointed by a
statute of king Henry VIII. to be paid
to mariners and masters of ships; to
the master for the use of his cables and
ropes; and to the mariners for load­
ing and unloading the ship.

PRIMARINESS [of primarius, L. and
ness] the being first; chief quality.

PRIMATESHIP [primatus, L.] the
dignity, &c. of a primate.

PRIME [in Geometry] the 60th part
of a degree.

The PRIME or Golden-Number, was
so called, because marked in the ca­
lendar of Julius Cæsar, with letters of
gold, and is a circle of 19 years; in
which time, it is supposed, that all the
lunations and aspects, between the sun
and moon, did return to the same
place. The chief use of it, is to find
the age and change of the moon.

PRIME Figures [with Geometricians]
are such which cannot be divided into
any other figures, more simple than
themselves; as a triangle into planes, 
the pyramids into solids: For all planes
are made of the first, and all bodies or
solids are compounded of the second.

PRIME [in Fencing] is the first and
chief of the guards, which is that the
body is in immediately after drawing



the sword, being the fittest to terrify
the adversary; the point of the sword
being held higher up to the eye than
in any other guard.

PRIMENESS [of primus, L.] chief
ness, excellentness.

PRIMEVALNESS [of primævus,
L. and ness]
the being of the first age.

PRIMEVOUSNESS [of primævus,
L. and ness]
the being of the first age.
 
PRIMIER Serjeant, the king's first
serjeant at law.

PRIMIGENIAL [primigenius, L.]
first in its kind, original.

PRIMIGENIALNESS [of primo­
genius, L.
and ness] originalness, the being the
first of the kind.

PRIMIGENIOUSNESS [of primo­
genius, L.
and ness] originalness, the being the
first of the kind.

PRIMITIVE [with Grammarians] an
original word from which others are
derived; one that is not derived of any
other language, nor compounded from
any other words of the same.

PRIMITIVENESS [of primitivus, L.
and ness] originalness.

PRIMNESS, demureness or affec­
tedness of looks, quaintness; also af­
fectedness in dress.

PRINCE, is one who is a sovereign
in his own territories, yet holds of
some other as his superior lord, as the
princes of Germany.

PRINCELINESS [of prince-like and
ness] princely quality, &c.

PRINCES, in ancient times, were
no other than the principal men in an
army: In the days of Augustus, and
afterwards, those who govern'd under
the emperor, were stiled princes of
the senate; in process of time, the
emperors constituted the person imme­
diately next to themselves, prince.
This person, by the English Saxons, 
was called clyto. We have in En­
gland but one prince distinguished by
that title, which is the prince of Wales, 
which title was given by king Henry
III. to his son Edward, and ever since, 
the king's eldest son is Prince of Wales.

A PRINCIPAL [in Commerce] the
first fund or sum put by partners into
common stock.

PRINCIPAL [of a College, &c.] the
head, the chief person.

PRINCIPAL, the sum of money
borrowed or lent, distinct from the in­
terest,

PRINCIPALNESS [of principalis, L.
and ness] chiefness.

PRINCIPALS [at Urchenfield in He­
refordshire] the best beast, bed, table, 
&c. which pass to the eldest child, and
are not to be divided or stsred with
the other goods.

PRINCIPLE [principium, L.] the
first cause of the being or production
of any thing; also an inducement or
motive; also a maxim or undoubted
truth; also a good practical rule of
action, in which sense a person may be
said to be a man of principles, when
he acts according to the known rules
of religion and morality.

First PRINCIPLE, a thing that is
self-evident, and is, as it were, natu­
rally known; as that nothing can exist
and not exist at the same time; that the
whole is greater than a part, &c.

Well PRINCIPLED, having good
principles.

PRINCIPLES [in Chymistry] are five
of mix'd natural bodies; as Phlegm or
Water, Mercury or Spirit, Sulphur or
Oil, Salt and Earth.

Active PRINCIPLES [with Chymists]
spirit, oil, and salt.

Passive PRINCIPLES, water and
earth.

PRINCIPLES [with Mathematicians]
are Definitions, Axioms, and Postulates.

PRINCIPLES [with Hermetick Philo­
sophers] the two universal principles of
sensible nature, Subtil and Solid, which, 
being joined in a greater or less degree, 
generate all that beautiful variety of
beings in the universe.

PRINTER, a person who composes
and takes impressions from moveable
characters ranged in order, or plates
engraven, by means of a press, ink,
&c.

PRINTING, the art of printing has
been used by the Chinese much more
anciently than the Europeans; but theirs
seems to have been by immoveable
characters only, cut in wood, as now
we print papers for rooms, but the art
of printing with moveable types, is
said to have been invented by Lawrence
Coster of Harlem in Holland; others say, 
by John Gottenburgh, of Germany: It
was brought into England by Caxton
and Turner, whom king Henry VI. sent
to learn it. One of the first printed
books, now extant, is Tully's Offices, 
printed in the year 1465, and kept in
the Bodleian library at Oxford.

PRISE [of priser, F. to take] a
vessel taken at sea from
the enemies of the state, or from pi­
rates, by a man of war, or a merchant
ship that has commission from the king.

PRIZE [of priser, F. to take] a
vessel taken at sea from
the enemies of the state, or from pi­
rates, by a man of war, or a merchant
ship that has commission from the king. 

PRISM [in Opticks] is a glass boun­
ded with two equal and parallel tri­
angular ends, and three plane and
well polished sides, which meet in three
parallel lines, running from the three



angles of one end to those of the other, 
and is used to make experiments about
light and colours; for the rays of the
sun falling upon it at a certain angle, 
do transmit thro' it a spectrum or ap­
pearance, coloured like the rain-bow, 
on which Sir Isaac Newton founded his
theory of colours.

PRITTLE-PRATTLE [prob. of
praten, Du. to prate] much and insigni­
ficant talk.

PRIVATEER, a ship fitted out by
one or more private persons, with a li­
cence from the prince or state to make
prize of an enemy's ship and goods.

PRIVATEERING, sailing in such a
ship, and with the design before menti­
oned.

PRIVATENESS [of privatus, L. and
ness] secretness.

PRIVATION [in Metaphysicks] is the
want or absence of some natural per­
fection, from a subject capable to re­
ceive it, in which subject, it either was
before, or at least ought to have been.

Partial PRIVATION [in Metaphysicks]
is only in some particular respect, and
relates principally to its perfect actions
or some decree of them, as when a
person shuts his eyes, or is purblind.

PRIVATIVENESS [of provativus, L.
and ness] depriving quality, or faculty
of carrying away.

PRIVEMENT ensient [in Law]
where a woman is with child by her
husband; but not with quick child.

PRIVIES in Blood [in Law] those
that are linked in consanguinity.

PRIVIES in Representation, such as
are executors or administrators to a
person deceased.

PRIVIES in estate [Law Term] are
he in reversion, and he in remainder, 
when land is given to one for life, and
to another in fee; for that their estates
are created both at one time.

PRIVIES in Tenure, as the lord of
the manour, by escheat, that is, when
the land falls to the lord for want of
heirs.

PRIVILEGE [in Commerce] is a per­
mission from a prince or magistrate, to
make and sell a sort of merchandize;
or to engage in a sort of commerce, ei­
ther exclude of others, or in concur­
rence with them.

PRIVILEGED Person, one who has
the benefit of, or enjoys some privilege.

PRIVINESS [of privus, L.] the hav­
ing the knowledge of.

PRIVITIES, the privy or secret parts
of a human body.

PRO, a preposition signifying for, or
in respect of a thing, &c.

PROBABILISTS, a sect among the
Roman Catholicks, who adhere to the
doctrine of probable opinions.

Poetical PROBABILITY, is the ap­
pearance of truth in the fable or action
of a poem.

PROBABLE Opinion, an opinion
founded on a grave motive, or an ap­
parently good foundation, and which
has authority enough to persuade a wise
person disinterested.

PROBABLENESS [probabilitat, L.]
probability.

PROBATION [in a Monastick Life]
a time of trial, or the year of novitiate, 
which a religious person must pass in a
convent to prove his virtue, and whe­
ther he can bear the severity of the
rules.

PROBATIONER [of probatio, L. and
ner, an English term for a noun sub.
of the doer] one that is under trial or
examination, a scholar, a novice who
undergoes a probation at the univer­
sity.

PROBATIONER [among the Pres­
byterians] one who is licensed by the
presbytery to preach, which is usually
done a year before ordination.

PROBATIONARY, pertaining to
probation or trial.

PROBATIONERSHIP, the state of a
probationer.

To PROBE [of probare, L. to try] to
search the depth, &c. of a wound, with
an instrument called a Probe.

PROBLEM [problema, L. πρόβλημα, 
Gr.] a proposition expressing some na­
tural effect, in order to a discovery of its
apparent cause.

PROBLEM [in Algebra] is a question
or proposition, which requires some
unknown truth to be investigated and
discovered, and the truth of the disco­
very demonstrated.

A PROBLEM [in Geometry] is that
which purposes something to be done, 
and more immediately relates to prac­
tical than speculative geometry, it being
to be performed by some known rules, 
without regard to their inventions or
demonstrations; as to divide a line, 
construct an angle, &c.

PROBLEM [in Logick] a doubtful
question, or a proposition, that neither
appears absolutely true nor false, but
which is probable on both sides, and
may be asserted either in the affirmative
or negative with equal evidence.

Local PROBLEM [with Mathem.] is
such an one as is capable of an infinite
number of different solutions, so that
the point, which is to resolve the pro­



blem, may be indifferently taken, 
within a certain extent, i. e any 
where in such a line, or within such
a plane, figure, &c. which is termed
a geometrical place. It is also called
an indeterminate Problem.

Solid PROBLEM [with Mathem.] is
one which can't be geometrically sol­
ved, but by the intersection of a circle, 
and a conick section, or by the intersec­
tion of two other conick sections besides
the circle.

Deliack PROBLEM, the doubling of
a cube, so called on this account, that
when the people of Delos consulted the
oracle, for a remedy against the plague,
the answer was, that the plague should
cease when the altar of Apollo, which
was in the form of a cube; should be
doubled.

PROCEEDING [procedens, L.] com­
ing from, having its spring or rise from;
going forward, &c.

A PROCEEDING, a matter carried
on or managed.

PROCELEUSMATICK Foot [in
Gram.] a foot consisting of four short
syllables, as Pelagius.

PROCESS [in Law] in its general
sense is used for all the proceedings in
any cause or action real or personal, 
civil or criminal, from the original writ
to the end; also that by which a man is
called into any court.

PROCESSION a ceremony in which
both the clergy and laity walk together
singing litanies and other prayers, as
they march along.

The antient Romans, when their
empire was in distress, or after some
victory, made processions for several
days together to their temples, either to
invoke the help of their gods in the one, 
or to give them thanks for the other.
The Christian clergy likewise have
their processions on the same accounts.
The first of these were begun by Chry­
sostom, at Constantinople, which was de­
signed by way of opposition to the great
appearances of the Arians. For they
being discountenanced, were wont to
meet without the town, singing an­
thems as they went along.

These processions were set on foot to
prevent their having any influence on
the orthodox; they bearing crosses
with flambeaux upon them, singing
their prayers.

From this original processions have
grown into their present use in the
Roman church, wherein the priests and
people proceed from one church to a­
nother, singing prayers and litanies;
and since Berengarius declared against
transubstantiation, it is made a point of
religion to carry the consecrated ele­
mants of bread and wine in a trium­
phal manner under a canopy.

PROCESSION [in Theology] a term
used to signify the manner wherein the
holy spirit is conceived to issue from
the Father and the Son, in the mystery
of the Trinity.

PROCESSION [in Cathedral and Con­
ventual Churches] in former times the
members had their stated processions, 
in which they walked two and two, in
their most ornamental habits, with mu­
sick, singing hymns, and other expres­
sions of solemnity, agreeable to the oc­
casion.

The parish-priest also of every pa­
rish had a customary procession, with
the patron of the church, the chief flag
or holy banner, and the other parishi­
oners in Ascension-Week, to take a cir­
cuit round the limits of the manour, 
and pray for a blessing on the fruits of
the earth,

Hence came our present custom of
Perambulation, which is still called our
going a Processioning, tho' most of the
order, the devotion, the pomp, and
superstition, is laid aside.

PROCLAMATION [of Exigents] an
awarding an exigents in order to an
Outlawry; a writ of proclamation issues
to the sheriff of the county where the
party dwells, to make three proclama­
tions for the defendant to yeild him­
self or be outlawed.

PROCLIVOUS [proclivis, L.] incli­
ning downwards.

PROCLIVITY [proclivitas, L.] an
aptness or propensity in a thing to in­
cline or tend downwards; an aptness, 
proneness.

PROCONSULSHIP [of proconsul, L.
and ship] the office, or dignity of a Pro­
consul.

PROCTORSHIP, the office, &c. of a
proctor.

PROCURATION, an act whereby a
person is impowered to act, treat, re­
ceive, &c. in a person's name, as if he
himself were actually there.

PROCURATION [in Old Customs] a
reservation of service due from the
vassals to their lords, by whom they
were to be entertained at certain times
in the year, when they made a visit to
their farms, in consideration of which
it was customary to pay a certain sum
of mony.

PROCURATION [among Ecclesias­
ticks] in imitation of the temporal



lords, the lords spiritual, as bishops and
arch-deacons, used to be entertained
by the churches under their jurisdiction
so that the arch-deacons often putting
the parish priests to an extravagant
charge, complaint was made thereof
to the popes, who endeavoured to re­
dress this grievance by councils and bulls, 
and particularly pope Innocent III. upon
a complaint made against the arch-dea­
con, who is said to have visited with
an hundred horse in his company, so
that when he came to a parsonage
house, he and his retinue devoured all
immediately.

PROCURATION Money, given to
money scriveners by such persons as
take up sums of money at interest.

PROCUREMENT [procuratio, L.
and ment] a getting, or a thing procu­
red.

PROCURER, a getter, &c. also a
bawd or pimp.

PROCYON [ϖροχύων, Gr.] a constel­
lation placed before the Great Dog, and
thence takes its name. It is Orion's
dog. He is reported to have been a
great lover of hunting; and for that
reason has a dog by him. There are 
also seen a hare and other wild beasts
near him. It has three stars, of which
the first, rises very splendid, and resem­
bles a dog, and thence is called Procyon.

PRODICTATOR a magistrate a­
mong the Romans, who had the power
of, and did the office of a Dictator.

To PRODIGALIZE [of prodigus, L.]
to be a prodigal, to spend profusely.

PRODIGALNESS [prodigalitas, L.]
lavishiness, profuseness, &c.

PRODIGIOUSNESS [of prodigiosus, 
L. and ness] wonderfulness, monstrous­
ness, excessiveness.

PRODUCE [productio, L. produit, 
F.] effect, fruit.

PRODUCT
 [productio, L. produit, 
F.] effect, fruit. 

PRODUCTIVENESS [productivus, 
L.] aptness to produce.

PROFANENESS [of profanus, L. and
ness] an abusing of holy things, impiety;
a disrespect paid to the name of God, 
and to things and persons consecrated
to him.

PROFILE [profile, F. profilo, Ital.]
side-ways or side-view, as a picture in
profile, i. e. drawn sideways, as a head
or face set side-ways, as on coins.

PROFILE, is sometimes used for a
design or description, in opposition to a
plan or Ichnography. Hence,
PROFILING is designing or descri­
bing with rule or compass.

PROFITABLENESS [of profitable, 
and ness] beneficialness, advantageous­
ness.

PROFLIGATENESS [profligatus, L.
and ness] abandonedness to debauchery, 
lewdness to the highest degree.

PROFLUENT [profluens, L.] flowing
plentifully.

The PROFOUND [profandus, L.]
the depth, the abyss, greatness of depth.
Milton.

PROFOUNDNESS [profunditas, L.]
depth, deepness.

PROG [prob. of procuratum, L. got­
ten] something gotten.

PROGENERATION, a breeding or
bringing forth.  L.

PROGNOSTICK [of προγνωστιχὸν, Gr.]
a sign or token that indicates some­
thing about to happen.

PROGRESSIVENESS [of progressif, 
F. of  L.] the quality of proceeding or
going forward.

PROHIBITION [in Law] a writ
issued to forbid any court, either spiri­
tual or secular, to proceed in a cause
there depending, upon suggestion that
the cognizance thereof does not belong
to that court.

PROJECTION [in Mechanicks] the
action of giving a projectile its motion.

PROJECTION [in Perspective] the
appearance or representation of an ob­
jective on a perspective plane.

PROJECTION of the Sphere in Plano 
[in Mathem.] a representation of the
several points or places of the surface
of the sphere, and of the circles de­
scribed thereon, &c. as they appear to
the eye situated, at a given distance, 
upon a transparent plane, situate be­
tween the eye and the sphere.

PROJECTION [with Alchym.] is the
calling of a certain imaginary powder, 
called the Powder of Projection, into a
crucible full of prepared metal, in or­
der to its being transmuted into gold.

PROJECTION monstrous, of an image 
[in Perspective] is the deformation of
an image upon a plane, or the super­
ficies of some body, which seen at a
certain distance will appear formous.

Powder of PROJECTION, or the
Philosopher's Stone, is a powder, suppo­
sed to have the vertue of changing
copper, lead, &c. into a more perfect
metal, as into silver, or gold by the
mixture of a small quantity with it.

PROJECTIVE Dialling, a method
of drawing, by a method of projection, 
the true hour lines, furniture, &c. on
dials, or any kind of surface whatsoe­
ver, without having any regard to the
situation of those surfaces, either as to
declination, inclination, or reclination.



PROLATION [in Musick] the act,
of shaking or making several inflecti­
ons of the voice on the same syllable.

PROLEPSIS [πρόληψις, Gr.] antici­
pation, prevention, pre-occupation; a
conceiving things in mind before-hand.

PROLIFICKNESS, aptness to breed.

PROLUSION [in Literature] a term
applied to certain pieces or composi­
tions, made previously to others, by
way of prelude or exercise.

PROMETHEUS [of Προμηθεὺς of προ, 
before, and μῆθος, Gr. council] ac­
cording to the poets, was the son of
Japetus, the father of Deucalion, who
first made man of clay or earth; whose
wit, Minerva admiring, promised him
any thing that was in Heaven, that he
wanted to perfect his work; he coming
thither, and seeing that all things were
animated by heavenly fire, having a
little Ferula in his hand, put it to the
chariot wheel of the sun, and that being
kindled, he brought fire on the earth, 
and put life and soul into the man that
he had made of clay. Jupiter being
angry at him, first sent Pandora, the
wife of his brother Epimetheus, with a
box to her husband, which after he had
opened, there flew out thence sundry
sorts of diseases, and afterwards com­
manded Vulcan to bind Prometheus with
iron chains, on mount Caucasus, and to
put an eagle or a vulture daily to de­
vour his liver, which did every night
renew again, to his great torment. He
remained in this condition, till Hercules
by his virtue and valour released him.

Some interpret this fable thus, that
Prometheus taught the way of fetching
fire out of stones, by striking them to­
gether, and thence he is said to have
fetched fire from Heaven. And that
he had his abode on mount Caucasus, 
from whence he continually beheld the
stars, and studied their motions and in­
fluences, and thence they gave it out, 
that he was bound to this mountain
And by the eagle consuming his li­
ver, is signified, how the thought of his
studies, did, as it were, prey upon him.

Bochartus imagines that this fable is
derived from the signification of the
word Magog, and that that was the
name of Prometheus, which signifies a
heart devoured, and consuming with
cares or otherwise.

Others say, Prometheus was a wise
man, who studied the stars, on the
highest part of mount Caucasus, and
that by his putting heavenly fire into
his clay man, is meant, his instructing
the dead clayey carcases of mankind
with wisdom, and that the inward
trouble he had to accomplish his desire, 
might be compared to a vulture gnaw­
ing his entrails.

PROMINENTNESS [prominentia, 
L.] a jutting out, or standing forward.

PROMISCUOUSNESS [of promis­
cuus, L. and ness] mixedness.

A perfect PROMISE [with Moralists]
is when a person does not only deter­
mine his will, to the performance of
such or such a thing, for another here­
after; but also shews that he gives the
other a full right of challenging or re­
quiring it from him; bare assertions
are not to be an obligation, neither do
expressions in the future convey a
right.

PROMISSORY, one to whom a
promise is made.

PROMPTOR [of promtare, Ital.] a
dictator or assistant to actors in a play;
one posted behind the scenes, who
watches attentively the actors speaking
on the stage, suggesting to them and
putting them forward when at a stand, 
and correcting them when amiss in their
parts.

To PROMULGE [promulgare, L.] to
publish, properly used of the Roman
laws, which were hung up in the mar­
ket-place, and exposed to publick view
for three market-days before they were
passed or allowed.

PRONATION [with Anat.] is when
the palm of the hand is turned down­
wards, as Supination is when the back
of it is turned upwards.

Personal PRONOUNS [in Gram.] are
such as are used instead of names of
particular persons, as I, Thou, He, &c.

PRONOUNS Relative [in Gram.] are
these placed after nouns, with which
they have such affinity, that without
them they signify nothing, as which, 
who, that.

Possessive PRONOUNS [in Gram.] are
such that express what each possesses,
as mine, thine, &c.

Demonstrative PRONOUNS [in Gram.]
are such as point out the subject spoken
of, as this, these, &c.

PRONUBA, a title of Juno, given
her on account of her being believed
to preside over marriage.

PRONUNCIATION [in Gram.] the
manner of articulating or sounding the
words of a language, represented to the
eye by writing and orthography.

PRONUNCIATION [with Paint.]
the marking
and expressing of all kinds of bodies,
with that degree of force necessary to



make them more or less distinct and
conspicuous.

PRONOUNCING [with Paint.]
the marking
and expressing of all kinds of bodies,
with that degree of force necessary to
make them more or less distinct and
conspicuous.

PRONUNCIATION [with Rhet.] is
the regulating and varying the voice
and gesture, agreeably to the matter
and words, in order to affect and per­
suade the hearers.

PROOF [with Printers] a printed
sheet sent to the author or corrector of
the press in order to be corrected.

PROOF [in Arith.] an operation,
whereby the truth and justness of a cal­
culation is examined and ascertained.

PROPAGATOR [propagateur, F.]
an increaser; also a spreader abroad.
 L.

To PROPEND [propendere, L.] to be
propense.

PROPENSENESS [propensitas, L.]
proneness, readiness to, inclination,
bent of mind.

PROPER [in Physick] something na­
turally and essentially belonging to any
being.

PROPER [in respect to Words] is un­
derstood of their immediate and parti­
cular signification; or that which is di­
rectly and peculiarly attached to them.

PROPER [in the Civil Law] is used
in opposition to acquired; for an inhe­
ritance derived by direct or collateral
succession.

PROPERNESS [proprietas, L. pro­
prieté, F.] peculiarness, convenientness,
fitness.

PROPERTY [proprietas, L. proprieté,
F.] the right or due, that belongs to
every person, vertue, or natural qua­
lity, rightful possession of a thing.

PROPERTY [with Logicians] is un­
derstood in a four-fold sense,
1. Property, is that which agrees to
some kind only, although not to every
person comprehended under the same
kind; as it is proper to man only to be
a Grammarian, Poet, or Physician, but
yet it is not proper to every man to be
such.
2. Property, is that which agrees to
every single person, and yet not to a
man only.
3. Property, is that which agrees to
every man, and to man only, and yet
not always, as hoariness, in old men
only, but yet not always, but for the
most part in old age.
4. Property, is when any thing agrees
to every man, to man only, and always
to man, as to speak, to laugh, &c.

PROPHANE. See Profane.

PROPHESIES [in Law] are taken
for wizardly foretellings of matters to
come, in certain and enigmatical
speeches.

PROPHETICALNESS [of propheti­
cus, L. prophetique, F. of προφετιχὸς, Gr.
and ness] prophetical nature and qua­
lity.

PROPITIATORINESS [of propi­
tiatorius, L. propitietoire, F. and ness]
atoning or propitiating quality.

PROPITIOUSNESS, favourableness.

PROPORTION, a rule or measure;
the relation which the parts have
among themselves, and to the whole.

PROPORTIONABLENESS [of pro­
portio, habilis, L. and ness] agreeable­
ness in proportion.

PROPORTIONAL, a quantity ei­
ther lineal or numeral, which bears
the same ratio or relation to a third,
that the first does to the second.

PROPORTIONALNESS pro­
por­
tionality, likeness of proportion.

PROPORTIONATENESS pro­
por­
tionality, likeness of proportion.

Continued PROPORTIONALS, are
such, that the third number is in the
same ratio to the second, as the second
has to the first, and the fourth the same 
ration to the third, that the third has to
the second, as 3, 6, 12, 24.

Mean PROPORTIONALS, are when
in three quantities there is the same
proportion of the first to the second, as 
of the second to the third; the same
proportion of 2 to 4, as of 4 to 8, and
4 is the mean proportional.

Exceptive PROPOSITION [with
Schoolmen] is one that is denoted by an
exceptive sign, as beside, unless.

Exclusive PROPOSITION [with
Schoolmen] is one denoted by a sign or
character of exclusion, as only, solely,
alone.

PROPOSITION [in Poetry] is the 
first part of an epic poem, in which the
author proposes or lay down, briefly
and in general, what he has to say in
the course of his work.

PROPOSITION [in the Mathem.] a
thing proposed to be demonstrated,
proved, or made out, either a problem
or theorem.

PROPOSITION, is an oration or
speech which affirms or denies, or an
oration that signifies either true or false.

Affirmative PROPOSITION, is that
in which the subject and attribute are
joined or do agree, as God is a spirit.

Negative PROPOSITION, is that 
when they are disjoined or disagree, as
Men are not stones.



A true PROPOSITION, is such as
declares a thing to be what it really is;
or not to be what it is not.

A false PROPOSITION, is such an
one as signifies a thing to be what it is
not; or not to be what it is.

PROPOSITIONS general [with
Logici­
ans] are known by the signs, Every, as
every covetous man is poor; No, as no
man can serve God and mammon.

PROPOSITIONS universal [with
Logici­
ans] are known by the signs, Every, as
every covetous man is poor; No, as no
man can serve God and mammon.

PROPOSITIONS particular, are
known by the signs some, a certain, some­
body, as some men are ambitious.

PROPOSITIONS singular, are when
a proper name of a man is contained in
them, as Cicero was an orator, Plato a
philosopher.

PROPOSITIONS general contrary, are
such, of which one generally affirms,
and the other generally denies, as all
men, &c. no man, &c.

A simple PROPOSITION, is that
which has but one subject, and one at­
tribute.

A compound PROPOSITION, is that
which has more than one subject, as
life and death, health and sickness, poverty
and riches, come from the Lord.

PROPOSITIONS [by Logicians] are
reduced to four kinds, which, for the
help of memory, are denoted by the
four letters, A, E, I, O.
A is an universal affirmative.
E is an universal negative.
I is a particular affirmative.
O is a particular negative.

And for the ease of memory, they
are comprised in these two verses.

Asserit A, Negat E, verum generaliter
ambo.
I Asserit, O Negat, sed particulariter 
ambo.

The use of a proposition, is when men,
by occasion of discourse, fall at vari­
ance, and cannot agree upon their mat­
ter; being both earnest to know the
truth, they bring the matter to a point,
debate that, and then go on to another.

A Finite PROPOSITION [with 
School­
men] is that which decalres something
determinate on a subject, as a man is a
two-footed animal.

Definite PROPOSITION [with 
School­
men] is that which decalres something
determinate on a subject, as a man is a
two-footed animal.

Infinite PROPOSITION [with
School­
men] is one wherein either one or both
the terms are infinite, or have a nega­
tive prefixed to them, as man is not
white.

Indefinite PROPOSITION [with
School­
men] is one wherein either one or both
the terms are infinite, or have a nega­
tive prefixed to them, as man is not
white.

A Direct PROPOSITION [with
Schoolmen] is such an one wherein a 
higher and more general is predicated
of a lower and more particular; as a
man is an animal.

An Indirect PROPOSITION [with
Schoolm.] is one wherein an inferior is
predicated of an higher; as an animal is 
Man.

Hypothetical PROPOSITION [with
Schoolm.] is one which consists of seve­
ral simple ones; affected with some
conditional ones, as, if the sun be set, it
is night.

Disjunctive PROPOSITION [with
Schoolm.] is one which consists of seve­
ral; affected with a disjunctive conjunc­
tion, as, it is either dark or light.

A copulative PROPOSITION [with Schoolm.] is one that consists of several, 
affected with a conjunction copulative;
as Henry does not stand and sit.

A modal PROPOSITION [with
Schoolm.] is one which, besides the pure
matter and form, involves some mode
or manner of disposition; as, it is nec­
cessary that man be rational.

To PROPOUND [proponere, L.] to
make proposals or offers of a reconci­
liation of a difference; or upon any
business whatsoever,

PROPRIETY [with Logicians] is
the fourth of the universal ideas, and
is when the object is an attribute,
which, in effect, belongs to the essence
of the thing; but is not first considered
in that essence, but as dependent on
the first idea, as divisible, immortal, &c.

PROPRIETY [with Gram.] is where 
the direct and immediate signification 
of a Word agrees to the thing it is ap­
ply'd to.

PRO RATA [in Commerce] accord­
ing to proportion or share.

PROSA, a goddess of the Pagans, 
who, as they believed, made the in­
fant come in the right manner into 
the world.

PROSELYTES. These were among
the Jews of 2 sorts.

1. The Proselytes of Righteousness and
Proselytes of the Gate.

The Proselytes of Righteousness sub­
mitted to the law of Moses; and the
others inhabited among the Jews, and
were oblig'd to observe the seven
commandments of the sons of Noah,
which the Jews accounted the law of
nature, which all persons were bound
to observe, and were;

1. To abstain from idolatry.
2. To hallow the name of God.
3. Not to commit murder.
4. To abstain from adultery and in­
cest.
5. Not to be guilty of stealing.



6. To do justice and to submit to it.
7. To forbear eating things stran­
gled and blood.

These the Jews believ'd to have
been given by God, the first 6 to Adam, 
and the last to Noah; and this was all
the revealed religion there was till the
time of Moses, which they were o­
blig'd to profess and promised to ob­
serve.

But as to the Proselytes of Righteous­
ness, they if men were oblig'd to be
circumcised, and to offer sacrifice. But
the women were oblig'd to receive
baptism and to have sacrifices offered
for them.

PROSERPINA [so called of Serpen­
do, because sown corn creeps forth in­
to the light; or of Περσεφονη, Gr. Varro]
the daughter of Jupiter and Ceres, was
the wife of Pluto, who was forced to
steal her, all the goddesses refusing him
on account of his ill looks, and the
darkness of his kingdom.

Ceres sought her for a long time, and
at last hearing she was in Hell, went
thither, and got her to be released, on
condition that she had tasted nothing
there; but Ascalaphus telling that she
had eaten two or three kernels of a
pomegranate, it hinder'd her depar­
ture; however, Ceres at length obtain­
ed of Jupiter, that she should have her
daughter's company one six months, 
and the other six she should be with
Pluto below. The moral of this is
taken to be the seed of corn sown, re­
maining in the ground in the winter, 
and springing up in the summer.

Others by Proserpine understand the
moon, and say it is because the moon, 
remains as long in the upper, as she
does in the lower regions. The anci­
ents called the upper hemisphere by
the name of Venus, and the lower by
the name of Proserpine.

This goddess has three names, either
because of three offices that are attri­
buted to her, or because the poets 
confound the three deities in one. In
heaven she is called Luna, (the moon)
on earth Diana, and in hell Proserpina.
They sacrific'd to her a barren heifer.

The ancients painted Proserpina in
white garments, filled with flames.

PROSPECTIVE, pertaining to view­
ing, &c.

PROSPERITY [prosperitas, L.] the
condition of a person who has all things
according to his heart's desire, and who
succeeds in his undertakings; happiness, 
good success, good fortune.

PROSPERITY [Hieroglyphically] was
represented by an eagle.

PROSPEROUSNESS [of prosperus,
L. and ness] prosperity.

PROSTITUTION [Metaphorically]
a stooping to any mean or base action
or office.

PROSYLLOGISM [of προ and συλ­
λογισμος, Gr.] a reason or argument
produced to strengthen or confirm one
of the premises of a syllogism.

PROTECTION [in a Special Sense]
an exemption or immunity, given by
the king to a person, to secure him
against law suits, or other vexations;
also a writing to secure from an arrest
for debt.

PROTERVIA [among the Romans]
a kind of sacrifice, in which whatsoe­
ver was left of the banquet raust be
burnt.

A PROTEST [in Commerce] a sum­
mons made by a notary publick to a
merchant, &c. to discharge a bill of
exchange drawn on him, after his hav­
ing refused either to accept or pay the
same.

PROTESTANTS, a name assumed
by the people of several imperial towns
and others in Germany, in the year 1529;
by reason of their protesting against a
decree, made in the diet of Spire by
Ferdinand, arch-duke of Austria, and
other Roman Catholick princes, who
demanded liberty of conscience, till a
council was held in pursuance of a de­
cree, made in 1526.

This name of Protestant was at that
time contin'd to those people before
mentioned; but the reformation of re­
ligion spreading far and near in seve­
ral parts of Europe, it has been assum­
ed generally by all those who have
reform'd from popery, how much
soever diversified among themselves, 
and in contradistinction to those of the
popish religion.

PROTEVANGELION, a book a­
scrib'd to St. James the apostle, treat­
ing on the birth of the Virgin Mary, 
and Jesus Christ. Postulus first brought
this book from the east, affirming that
it was publickly read in the eastern
church, and formerly believ'd to have
been written by St. James, first bishop
of Jerusalem. This copy he translated
into Latin, but the many fabulous re­
lations found in it, make it be accoun­
ted spurious.

PROTEUS [Προτευς, q. ϖρῶτος, Gr.
the first and most ancient of the gods]
according to the poets, was one of the
sons of Oceanus and Thetis, Neptune's
shepherd, or keeper of his Phoci, or
sea calves. Others say he was the son



of Neptune and Phœnico, and that Nep­
tune, taking a peculiar delight in vari­
ety of shapes and figures and the
power of transmutations, he was wont
to bestow it on his favourites, and be­
stow'd it on his son Proteus in the high­
est degree. The Latins call him Ver­
tumnus, because he could turn himself
into all sorts of shapes and figures, and
was a notable fortune-teller; but those
who pretended to make use of him,
were to surprize him, and bind him
fast, until he took his proper shape, and
told them what they wanted to know.

He was represented riding in a cha­
riot drawn by sea cattle, a sort of
horses with two legs, and tails like
fishes. Historians say he was a king of
Carpathus, an island in the Mediterra­
nean Sea, and that for his great wisdom
and justice he was chosen to be a king
of Egypt, and after his death deified by
his people. The reason why he was
said to be a sea god, and the feeder of
sea calves, is because his dominion was
upon the sea side, and his subjects were
very akilful in maritime affairs, and it
being the custom of the kings of Egypt
to wear diadems, on which were the
representations or figures of various
things, as a lion, a dragon, a tree, fire, 
&c. thence arose the fiction, that Pro­
teus could change himself into all shapes.
This Proteus or Vertumnus, was Vesores
king of Egypt, four years before the
Trojan war, Anno Mundi 2758. Paris
went to him after he had stolen Helena.

PROTHONOTARY [of the Common
Pleas] enters and enrolls all declara­
tions, pleadings, assizes, judgments, 
and actions, &c.

PROTRUSION [of protudere, L.] a
thrusting or putting forth.

PROTUBERANTNESS, a bunching
out.

PROUDISH [of prut, Sax.] a little
proud.

To be PROUD [spoken of Dogs] to
be desirous of copulation.

PROUDNESS [of prut or prutian
and neſſe, Sax.] Pride.

PROVEND [according to some
of præbendo, L. af­
fording] a measure containing the
quantity of grain daily given to a horse
or other beast of labour, for his ordi­
nary sustenance.

PROVENDER [according to some
of præbendo, L. af­
fording] a measure containing the
quantity of grain daily given to a horse
or other beast of labour, for his ordi­
nary sustenance. 

To go to PROVEND [in Monasteriess]
is to go to meals.

PROVERB [proverbium, L.] a con­
cise, witty, and wise speech, grounded
upon long experience, and containing
for the most part some good caveat.

PROVIDED [pourveuque, F.] on con­
dition.

PROVIDENCE [providentia, L.]
fore-wit, wariness, forecast; but more
especially the foresight or supreme in­
telligence of God, and his government
of all created beings; or the conduct
and direction of the several parts of the
universe, by a superior intelligent
being.

The notion of Providence is very an­
cient, even in the heathen theology; it
is mentioned by Thales.

It is founded on this supposition, that
the Creator has not so fix'd and ascer­
tain'd the laws of nature, nor so con­
nected the chain of second causes, as
to leave the world to its self; but that
he still holds the reins in his own
hands, and occasionally intervenes, al­
ters, restrains, inforces, suspends, &c.
those laws by a particular Providence.

The Epicureans deny any Providence, 
as thinking it inconsistent, with the
ease and repose of the divine nature to
meddle with human affairs.

Others deny the existence of a Pro­
vidence, from the seemingly unjust di­
stribution of good and evil, which seem
to fall indiscriminately on the just and
unjust.

Simplicius argues thus for a Provi­
dence: If God does not look after the
affairs of the world, it is either be­
cause he cannot or he will not; but the
first is absurd, since to govern can't be
difficult, where to create was easy; the
latter is both absurd and blasphemous.

Universal PROVIDENCE [in God] is
that whereby he takes care of all things
in general, but of mankind especially.

Particular PROVIDENCE [of God] is
that whereby he superintends and takes
care of every individual thing in the
world; continuing them in their be­
ings, disposing of their operations and
effects in such a wise order, as may be
most suitable to those wise ends and
purposes for which they are designed.

PROVIDENCE [by the Ancients] was
represented as a lady with a scepter in
her hand, and pointing to a globe, 
lying at her feet, with her other hand, 
sometimes she was pictured holding a
rudder and globe in her hands; at other
times with a Cornucopia and a vessel
full of corn at her feet.

PROVIDENCE [Hieroglyphically] was
by the Egyptians represented by a basi­
lisk, with the head and eyes of a hawk, 
because it is related of it, that there
is no other creature fuller of spirits
and vigour. It is also reported of a ba­



silisk that it kills at a distance, only by
sending forth from its eyes a secret
poison, which it conveys to the crea­
ture with whom it is displeased.

PROVIDENCE [in Painting] is repre­
sented as a lady lifting up both her
hands to Heaven, with these words, 
Providentia Deorum; or with a globe at
her feet, and holding a scepter in her
right hand, and a Cornucopia in her
left.

PROVIDENTIALNESS [of providen­
tia, L. and ness] the happening of a
thing by divine providence, providen­
tial effect.

PROVIDENTNESS, thriftiness, sa­
vingness.

PROVINCE [with Ecclesiasticks] an
archbishoprick; also the extent of the
jurisdiction of an archbishop.

The seven united PROVINCES of the
Netherlands, the provinces of Guelder­
land, Zutphen, Holland, Zealand, Utrecht
Friezland, Over-Yssel, and Groeningen, 
who in the year 1579 at Utrecht, made
a firm alliance, whereby they united
themselves never to be divided; yet
reserved to each province all its for­
mer rights, laws and customs.

PROVISO [in Law] concerning
matters judicial, is whereof the plain­
tiff in an action desists in prosecuting his
suit, and does not bring it to trial in
due time, the defendant in such case
may take out the Venire facias to the
sheriff, which hath in it these words, 
Proviso quod, &c.

PROVOCATIVENESS, provoking
nature or quality.

PROXIES, annual payments made
by the parochial clergy to the bishop, 
&c. on visitations.

PRUDENCE [prudentia, L.] wisdom
the first of the cardinal virtues, which
teaches us to govern our lives, man­
ners and actions, according to the dic­
tates of right reason.

PRUDENCE [by Moralists] is defined
to be a habit of the mind, whereby a
man judges and determines truly how
he should act and proceed; what he
should do or avoid in all things relating
to his advantage, temporal or eternal, 
so as to render himself happy both here
and hereafter.

PRUDENTIALNESS [of prudens, L.
and ness] prudence.

PRUDENTNESS [prudentia, L.] pru­
dence, prudent management.

PRUNELLA [in Medicine] driness
of the throat and tongue, happening in
continual fevers, especially acute ones, 
attended with a heat and redness of the
throat, and scurf covering the tongue;
sometimes whitish and sometimes black­
ish.

PRURIGINOUSNESS [of prurigino­
sus, L. and ness] itchiness, the having
the itch.

PRYK, a kind of service or tenure, 
an old fashioned spur with one point
only, which the tenant holding land
by this tenure was to find for the king.

PRYING [incert. Etym. except of
provant, F. making a trial of] searching, 
enquiring, or diving into.

PSALMOGRAPHIST [ψαλμογραφος
of ψαλμός and γραφειν, Gr. to write] a
writer of psalms.

PSATYRIANS, a sect of the Arians, 
who held that the Son was not like the
Father in will, that he was taken from
or made of nothing, and that in God, 
generation was not to be distinguished
from creation.

PSEPHOMANCY [ψηφομαυτεία of ψη­
φος a stone, and μαντεία, Gr. divination]
a divination by pebble-stones, distin­
guished by certain characters, and put
as lots into a vessel, which having made
certain supplications to the gods to di­
rect them, they drew out, and according
to the characters, conjectured, what
should happen to them.

PSEUDO [of ψευδής, Gr. false, coun­
terfeit] a term or particle used in the
composition of many Latin and English
words.

PSEUDO-MECHANICAL [of ψεὔδος
false, and μεχανιχός, Gr.] contrary to
the laws of mechanism.

PSEUDO-PROPHESY [of ψευδοπρο­
φετεία, Gr.] false prophesy.

PSILOTHRIX [of ψιλός naked, and
θριξ, Gr. hair] a depilatory or medica­
ment proper to make the hair fall off.

PSYCHE [ψυχή, Gr. the soul or life]
a goddess by which the ancients seem
to mean the human soul, she was repre­
sented with the wings of a butterfly on
her shoulders, to intimate by the nim­
bleness of that creature, the activity, 
nature and properties of the soul.

PSYCHOLOGIST [of ψυχολογιχος of
ψυχη the soul, and λέγω, Gr. to say] one
who treats concerning the soul.

PSYCHROMETER [of ψυχρος cold, 
and μέτρον, Gr. measure] an instrument
for the measuring the degree of mois­
ture or humidity of the air.

PSYCHOMANCY [of ψυχομαντεία of
ψυχή the soul, and μαντεία, Gr.] a divi­
nation by the ghosts, souls, or spirits of
dead persons.

PTOLEMAICK System [of the Hea­
vens] that system, which was invented



by Ptolemy, the great Alexandrian astro­
nomer, the illustrator and maintainer
of it, though the invention was much
older, having been held by Aristotle, 
Hiparchus, &c.

This is an Hypothesis order or dispo­
sition of the heavens and heavenly bo­
dies, wherein the earth is supposed to
be at rest and in the center, and the
Heavens to revolve round it from East
to West, carrying with them the sun, 
planets and fixed stars, each in their
respective spheres. Next above the
earth is the Moon, then the planet
Mercury; next Venus, above her the
Sun; next above him Mars, and
then Jupiter; beyond him Saturn; over
which are placed the two Chrystalline
spheres; and lastly, the Primum mobile, 
supposed to be the first heaven, that
gives motion to all the spheres. See
System.

This system was generally believed, 
till the discovery of America disproved
one part of it, and the consideration of
the rapid motion of the sun, and the
other planets, put Nicholas Copernicus
a famous German mathematician about
200 years ago, upon forming a new
System that might be more consistent
with the celestial phænomena; and late
improvements have put this Ptolemaick
System quite out of countenance; and
even demonstration is not wanting to
confute it. See Copernican System.

Image omitted.



PTOLEMAITES [so named after
Ptolemy their leader] a branch of the
Gnosticks, who held that the law from
Moses came part from God, part from
Moses, and part from the traditions of
the doctors.

PUBERTY [pubertas, L.] the age
when the hair begins to grow visible
upon the privities of either sex.

Among the Jews it was reckoned
from 13 years of age to 13 and a half, 
and then were reckoned young men, 
and were obliged to the observance of
all the precepts of the law, and in par­
ticular were obliged to marry.

The time of puberty for the maids
began at 12 years old and ended at 12
and a half, unless nature was so back­
ward as to shew no visible signs; and
at the end of the time of her puber­
tiship she was at liberty, and her father
had no longer any power to hinder
her from marrying.

Among the Romans it was reckoned
from the age of 14 to 16, so that when
they entred upon the 17th year, they
took the Toga virilis, as then commenc­
ing men; but among the Athenians is
extended to the 18th year.

PUBLICANS, among the Jews
were generally looked upon as the vi­
lest, by vile impositions getting the
appellations, of extortioners, thieves
or pick-pockets; the Jews were so
averse to these people, that they would
not allow them into their temple or
synagogue, nor admit them to partake
of their publick prayers or offices of
judicature, nor even take their evi­
dence in their courts of law.

PUBLICK Faith, [in the reign of
king Charles I.] a pretence or cheat to
raise money upon the publick faith of
the nation, to make war against the
king, about the year 1642.

PUBLICKNESS [of publicus, L. and
ness] manifestness; a being exposed to
all persons, or to many.

PUDDLE [patrovillis, F.] a hole or
lower place on the ground, with stand­
ing water.

To PUDDLE [patroviller, F.] to
move or stir water with the hands, &c.

PUDICITIA, a goddess adored at
Rome, represented as a woman veiled, 
of a very modest countenance, she had
two temples, one for the wives of the
Patricians, and another for those of the
Plebians.

PUDLAYS, pieces of stuff to do the
office of levers or hand-spikes.

PUERILENESS [puerilitas, L.] child­
ishness, boyishness.

PUFF [at Sales or Auctions] one
that attends, to bid mony for the
goods put up to sale, to draw in others
to out-bid him; also to advance the
value or character of any thing pri­
vately to make others buy it, or to have
a good opinion of it.

PUGNACIOUSNESS [of pugnax, L.
and ness] fighting disposition.



PUISSANTNESS [of puissante, F.
and ness] mightiness, &c.

PUISNE, a younger born, or a child
born after another.

PUL, a general name which is given
by the Persians, to all the copper-mo­
ney current in the empire.

PULIOL, a sort of herb, puliol-roy­ 
al, penny-royal.

PULLET [of a Ship] a close room
in the hold, in which, laying some
pigs of lead, or other weighty things, 
she may be sufficiently ballasted with
loss of little of her hold, and more
room left for the stowage of goods.

PULMONARY Vessels [with Anat.]
those vessels which carry the blood
from the heart to the lungs, and back
again; being the pulmonary vein, and
the pulmonary arteries.

PULPIT [pulpitum, L.] a place erect­
ed for speaking publickly.

PULPOUSNESS [of pulposus, L. and
ness] fulness of pulp.

PULSE [puls, L.] all sort of grain
contained in shells, hulls or cods, as
beans, peas, &c.

PULSE [pulsus, L.] is the immediate
index of the heart, by the mediation
whereof the blood is diffused thro' the
whole body, which is affected indiffe­
rently thereby, according to the diffe­
rent motion thereof; or the pulse is
the beating and throbbing of the arte­
ries; that reciprocal motion of the
heart and arteries, whereby the warm
blood thrown out of the left ventricle
of the heart, is so impelled into the ar­
teries, to be by them distributed thro'
all the parts of the body, as to be per­
ceivable by the touch of the finger.

Unequal PULSE [with Physicians] is
either in respect of time or strength, 
i. e. it either strikes quicker or slower, 
or else stronger or weaker.

Interrupted PULSE, is either when
the strokes are much smaller than
usual, or when their intervals are
much greater.

Intense PULSE, is a pulse whose
stroke is very hard, or else this strength
is made up with the multiplicity and
frequency of mications, as in the height
of fevers.

Remiss PULSE, is a pulse whose
strokes are less quick or less strong, and
in sickness indicates more danger than
in the other.

Deep PULSE, is more frequent in
old folks than in young, and shews a
disposition to asthma's, lethargy, and
melancholy, &c.

Superficial PULSE, is one which
shews an exact temperament of body, 
and a merry disposition of mind.

Trembling PULSE, indicates great
extremity.

Wandring PULSE, is one which is
sometimes felt in one place, and some­
times in another, and sometimes no
where, and is never but a few minutes
before death.

A strong PULSE, denotes a brisk and
copious influx of the nervous juice into
the Villi of the heart.

A slow PULSE, denotes a slowness
of the influx of the nervous juice from
the brain into the Villi of the heart.

A quick PULSE, intimates acrimo­
nies, spirits, agitated fevers, phrenzied.

A weak PULSE, denotes the contra­
ry to the former.

A intermitting PULSE, denotes that
life is in a slippery situation.

A hard PULSE, signifies that the
membrane of the artery is drier than
ordinary.

A soft PULSE, denotes the contrary
to that before mentioned.

PULSION [in Physicks] the stroke
by which any medium is affected, by
the motion of light, sound, &c. thro' it.

PULVERABLE, that may be pow­
dered.

To PULVERIZATE [pulverizare, 
L.] to reduce to powder.

PULVERULENCE [pulverulentus, 
L.] dustiness.

PULVIS fulminans, [with Chymists]
the thundering powder, a mixture of 3
parts of salt petre, two of tartar, and
one of brimstone, all finely powdered.
A small part, even a single dram, of
this being put into a shovel over a gen­
tle fire, till it melts by degrees, and
changes colour, will go off with a noise
like that of a musket, but hurts nobody
in the room, by reason its force tends
chiefly downward.

PUMICE-STONE [pumex, L. and
miʒ-ſtan, Sax.] a spungy, light, 
crumbling stone, cast out of mount
Ætna, and other burning mountains
used in graving, polishing, and other
uses.

Air PUMP. See Machina Boyliona.

PUN [prob of punnian, Sax. of poin­
te, F. and punctum, L.] a quibble, or
playing with words.

PUNCH, for chamber maids, is made
without water, of lime juice, with the
juice of orange and lemon, twice as
much wine as lime-juice, and four
times as much brandy and sugar.

PUNCH [incert. Etym.] a drinkable
well known.



A PUNCH [poinçon, F.] an instru­
ment for making holes.

PUNCH-HORSE [with Horsemen] is
a well set, well knit horse, having a
short back, thick shoulders, with a broad
neck, and well lined with flesh.

PUNCHINS [with Architects]
pieces of timber rai­
sed upright under the ridge of a build­
ing, wherein the little forces, &c. are
jointed.

PUNCHIONS [with Architects]
pieces of timber rai­
sed upright under the ridge of a build­
ing, wherein the little forces, &c. are
jointed.

PUNCHION, a little block or piece
of steel, on one end of which is some
figure, letter, or mark engraven either
in Creux or in Relievo, impressions of
which are taken on metal or some o­
ther matter, by striking it with a ham­
mer on the end not engraved.

PUNCHION [for Coining] a piece of
iron steeled, whereon the engraver has
cut in Relievo the several figures, arms, 
effigies, inscription, &c. that are to be
in the matrices wherewith the species
are to be marked.

PUNCHIONS [for Printing] are made
of steel as before, used in stamping the
matrices, wherein the types or printing
characters are cast.

PUNCHIONS, are also various, used
by several artificers in iron, steel, and
other metals.

PUNCTILIOUS [pointilleux, F.] ex­
ceptitious, captious; also of small con­
sequence.

PUNCTILIOUSNESS [of pointilleux
F. and ness] triflingness, aptness to take
exceptions.

PUNCTION [in Surg.] an aper­
ture made in the
lower belly in dropsical persons to dis­
charge the water.

PUNCTURE [in Surg.] an aper­
ture made in the
lower belly in dropsical persons to dis­
charge the water.

PUNCTUALNESS, exactness, regu­
larness.

PUNGENTNESS [of pungens, L.]
prickiness, sharpness.

PUNINESS [of puisne, F. younger, 
and ness] weakliness, tenderness, un­
thrivingness, spoken of children.

PUNNING [parler par pointe, F. q. d.
with a sharp or pointed word] using
words of a like or near sound in a sa­
tyrical or bantering sense.

PUPIL [in Civil Law] a boy or girl
not yet arrived at a state of puberty, 
i. e. 14 years of age the girl, and 21
the boy.

PUPILAGE [of pupillus, L. an or­
phan, and age] minority; also guar­
dianship.

PUPILLA [with Oculists] the round
aperture of the Tunica Uvea in the eye;
so called, because it represents your
image, when look'd into, no bigger
than Pupilla, L. a little puppet.

PUPILLARITY, the state or condi­
tion of a pupil.

PUPPET [of poupée, F. pupus, L.] a
sort of baby or little figure of a man, 
&c. made to move by lines, &c. on
stages and in puppet shows.

PURCHASE [in Law] signifies the
buying or acquisition of lands or tene­
ments with money, by deed or agree­
ment; and not obtaining by descent or
hereditary right.

PURCHASE [of pourchasser, F.] a
thing bought or to be bought, as land, 
houses, &c.

PURE Mathematicks, are arithmetick
and geometry, which only treat of
number and magnitude, considered ab­
stractedly from all kind of matter.

PURENESS [puritas, L. purité, F.]
purity, unmixedness, unspottedness, un­
stainedness, unblemishedness, innocency.

PURGATION [with Physicians]
purging by stool, 
is an excretory motion, quick and fre­
quent, proceeding from a quick and or­
derly contraction of the carneous fibres
of the stomach and intestines, whereby
the chyle, excrements and corrupted
humours, either bred or sent there
from other parts, are protruded from
part to part, till they are quite excluded
the body.

PURGING [with Physicians]
purging by stool, 
is an excretory motion, quick and fre­
quent, proceeding from a quick and or­
derly contraction of the carneous fibres
of the stomach and intestines, whereby
the chyle, excrements and corrupted
humours, either bred or sent there
from other parts, are protruded from
part to part, till they are quite excluded
the body.

PURGATION [in Pharmacy] the
cleansing of a medicine, by retrenching
its superfluities, &c. as stones out of
dates, tamarinds, &c.

PURGATIVE, of a purging quality.

PURGATIVENESS [of purgatif, F.
and ness] purging, purifying or clean­
sing quality.

PURGATORY [purgatorium, of pur­
gare, L. to cleanse or purge] is suppos'd
to be a place to which those persons
souls go by way of punishment after the
separation from the body, who have
not expiated their sins by acts of sorrow
and penance in this life, where they
are to bear a temporary punishment
hereafter.

The Roman Catholicks to shorten this
time of punishment, conceive the pray­
ers and works of supererogation of
persons on earth, and intercession of
saints in Heaven to have a very great
efficacy.

This doctrine was a stranger in the
Christian church for the first 600 years, 
but in the times of gross ignorance, 
when visions, lyes, and legends pre­
vailed much, it crept into the Roman
church, but the Greeks would never
receive this doctrine.



At first it became a custom among
the Christians to visit the tombs and
burying places of martyrs, in order to
excite their minds and raise their cou­
rage, to be able to undergo martyrdom;
there they repeated what this and that
saint had done and suffered, and com­
mended and prais'd them for them:
then they intimated how agreeable it
would be to the saint, if those who
were living would imitate them. From
this they proceeded to say, that they
did hear and approve their resolutions.

And as opinions concerning the state
of the soul before the day of judgment
grew into vogue, they imagined them
not so compleatly happy as they might
be, and thence began the custom of
praying for them, and not long after
they proceeded to pray to them.

With these notions came in the doc­
trine of saying masses for souls depart­
ed, and building monasteries, and leav­
ing large sums for saying masses, &c.

PURIFICATION, a ceremony of the
Jewish religion, ordained by the law
of Moses: where tis said, That a woman
should keep within 40 days after her lying
in, if she was delivered of a Son, and 80
if a Daughter, and when that time
was expired, she was to go to the tem­
ple and offer a lamb, with a young 
pigeon or turtle dove; or if she were 
poor, 2 pigeons or two turtles.

The Feast of the PURIFICATION 
among Christians, is observed in honour 
of the Virgin Mary's going to the temple, 
where according to custom she presen­
ted our Saviour Christ, and offered two
turtles for him.

There is in the Bibliotheca Patrum, 
a homily upon this feast, written by
Methodius a bishop of Tyre, who lived
in the third century.

Pope Sergius I. added the procession 
with wax tapers, to give (as the Papists
pretend) a more sensible representation
of the mystery, and from thence it was
called Candlemass-day.

PURIFICATORY [purificatorius, L.]
of a cleansing quality.

PURIM [םידופ, Heb. i. e. lots, on
account of the lots, mentioned in the
IX. Chap, of Esther] a name given by
the Jews to one of their feasts, cele­
brated in commemoration of Esther, 
who prevented the people of the Jews
from being intirely destroyed by the
conspiracy of Haman.

PURITANS, a sort of strict Calvi­
nists, who appeared in England between
the years 1565 and 1568, of which the
celebrated Thuanus gives the following
account.

"In England, Coleman, Burton, and
Hallingbam, and others of the same
opinion, who believed, or at least
pretended so, that their scheme of
religion was more pure and unex­
ceptionable, than that of others, be­
gan to question the received disci­
pline of the church of England, and
to oppose the liturgy and authority
of the bishops, saying that these dif­
fered but little from the church of
Rome, and that for their parts they
thought themselves obliged to the
plan of Geneva; who altho' they re­
ceived checks at first, yet their party
encreased to a considerable number.

There were some bishops even in­
clinable to their persuasion, besides
others of the lay gentry, who had a
mind to have some more of the
church lands, not to mention the
common people who are generally in
love with novelty, and were best
pleased with those that made most
noise against them."

To this account of the Puritans a
certain author adds; with all just and
due deference to the authority of this
great foreigner; tho' it must be allow­
ed, that there might be Enthusiasts
among them, there was a great deal of
piety and sincere religion among those
people called Puritans, which could not
be denyed even by some who were of
a quite contrary opinion to them.

PURITANISM, the principles and
doctrines of the Puritans, a sect of 
an­
cient dissenters from the church of
England.

PURITY [puritas, L. pureté, F.]
pureness.

PURITY [Hieroglyphically] with the
noble dispositions of the mind, was sig­
nified by a cock, there being no bird
of a more generous and braver cou­
rage, undaunted at the sight ef eminent
dangers.

PURLIEU-MAN, one who is al­
lowed to hunt or course in his own
purlieu, with certain limitations.

PURLING [proliquans, L.] running
with a murmuring noise, as a stream
or brook does.

To PURLOIN [pourloigner, F.] to
pilfer, to filch; properly to get privily
away, to lurch.

PURPLISH, inclining to a purple
colour.

PURPURE [in Heral.] is
expressed in engraving by
diagonal lines, drawn from
the sinister chief to the
dexter base point. It is



supposed to consist of much red, and a
small quantity of black.

Image omitted.



PURRING, a word formed from the
sound or continuation of the letter R]
the noise of a cat.

PURSE [with the Grand Senior] a
gift or gratification of 500 crowns.

PURSE of money [in the Levant] a­
bout 112 pounds sterling; so called be­
cause all the Grand Senior's money is
kept in leather purses or bags of this
value in the seraglio.

PURSEVANT [poursuivant, F.] an
officer, a sort of serjeant at arms, to be
sent upon any special occasion or mes­
sage; but more especially for the ap­
prehending a person who has been
guilty of an offence.

PURULENCE [of purulentus,
L. and ness]
fulness of matter or corruption.

PURULENTNESS [of purulentus,
L. and ness]
fulness of matter or corruption.

PUSILLANIMOUSNESS [pusillani­
mité, F. of  L.] want of courage.

A PUSLE [prob. of poesele,
a dirty slut.

A PUZZLE [prob. of poesele,
a dirty slut.

PUSSA [among the Chineses] a god­
dess called by some authors the Cybele, 
of the Chinese.

This idol is represented sitting on the
flower of the lote tree, above the top
branches of the tree, laying her 2 hands
one another upon her breast; besides
which she has also 16 arms, stretched
out 8 on the right side, and 8 on the
left, holding in each hand either a
sword, knife, book, bason, wheel, and
other mysterious and symbolical things.

This idol is adorned with very costly
ornaments, shining with diamonds, and
other precious stones.

To PUT a horse [with Horsemen] sig­
nifies to break or manage him; and thus
they say, put your horse upon caprioles
or curvets; this horse was not well put;
Your horse puts and represents himself
upon raised airs.

To PUT a horse upon the Haunches, 
signifies to make him bend them in gal­
lopping in the manage, or upon a stop.

PUTIDNESS [putiditas, L.] stink­
ingness, &c.

PUTLOCK [with Carpenters]
they are those pieces
that lie horizontally to the building, 
one end lying into it, and the other end
resting upon the the Ledgers, which are
those pieces that lie parallel to the side
of the building.

PURLOG with Carpenters]
they are those pieces
that lie horizontally to the building, 
one end lying into it, and the other end
resting upon the the Ledgers, which are
those pieces that lie parallel to the side
of the building. 

PUTREFACTION [with Naturalists]
is defined to be a slow kind of corrup­
tion in bodies, generally wrought by
the moisture of the air, or some other
surrounding fluid matter, which quite
changes the texture, and sometimes the
figure of the mixed body from what it
was before.

PUTRIDNESS [of putredo, L. and
ness] corruptedness, rottenness.

PUZZLING [q. d. posting or posing]
perplexing, &c.

PYANEPSIA [πυανωψα, Gr.] a festi­
val celebrated by the Athenians in the
month Pyanepsion, answering to our
September.

PY-BALD Horse, is one that has
white spots upon a coat of another
colour, as bay, iron gray, or dun colour.

PYBALDNESS, the being of two
colours.

PYGMIES [πυγμᾶιοι, Gr.l a fabulous
people of the ancients, who are said
to be perpetually at war with the
Cranes, and being not above one cubit
high, are said to have all their hous­
hold-stuff, and even the natural pro­
duction of their country proportiona­
ble. Their women were said to bear
children at five years old, and to grow
old at eight. They report that they
ride upon goats in the spring time, ar­
med, and march towards the sea side
to destroy the cranes nests and their
eggs, or else the cranes would destroy
them. Pliny places them in the East-­
Indies, Strabo in the remotest parts of
Africa, and Aristotle near the river Nile
in Egypt.

PYRAMID [of πυραμὶς of πῦρ, Gr.
fire, because flames of fire
grow from a breadth at bot­
tom, to a sharp point] an o­
belisk.

Image omitted.



Geometrick PYRAMID, a
solid standing on a square ba­
sis, and terminating at the top
point; or a body whose base is a poly­
gon, and whose sides are plain triangles, 
their several tops meeting together in
one point.

Image omitted.



A PYRAMID [Hieroglyphically] was
put to represent the nature of the soul
of man.

PYRAMID [in Architect.] a solid, 
massy edifice, which from a square, 
triangular, or other base, rises dimi­
nishing to a vertex or point.

PYRAMIDAL Number [Arith.] are
the sums of polygonal numbers, col­
lected after the same manner as the
polygon numbers themselves are ex­
tracted from arithmetical progressions.

PYRAMIDALE corpus [with Anat.]
a plexus of blood vessels on the back
of the testicles; called so from its py­
ramidal form, the same as Corpus va­
ricosum.



PYRAMIDALES musculi [Anat.]
certain muscles which take their name
from their resemblance to a Pyramid;
certain muscles of the nostrils and the
Abdomen, the last of which lie upon the
lowest tendons of the Recti; so that as
they proceed from the Os pubis, the
higher they climb the narrower they
grow, and end about the navel in the
white seam.

PYRAMIDAL of, belonging, 
or like to a Py­
ramid.

PYRAMIDICAL of, belonging, 
or like to a Py­
ramid.

PYRAMIDICALLY, in the form of
a Pyramid.

PYRAMIDICALNESS [of pyramidal, 
F. of pyramidalis, L. and ness] of a
pyramidical form.

PYRAMIDOID [of πυραμὶς and ἐ῀ι­
δος, Gr. form] is what is sometimes
called a parabolick spindle, and is a
solid figure formed by the revolution of
a parabola round its base or greatest
ordinate.

There is no unicode for Greek small letter epsilon with psili and perispomeni. The unicode ἐ is for Greek small letter epsilon with psili, and ῀ is for the perispomeni on top of ἐ.



PYRAMIDOGRAPHER [of πυραμίς
and γραφέυς Gr.] a describer of Pyra­
mids.

PYRAMIDS [of Egypt] one of the 
seven wonders of the world, are huge 
piles of building, within three leagues 
of Grand Cairo. There are three 
principal ones, different in dimensions;
of which two are shut up, and the
third is open. This is 520 foot high, 
and 682 foot square; it has 208 stone
steps, each stone about three foot 
thick, and thirty foot long. At one of
the angles is a little square room, and 
at the top a very fine platform of 12
great square stones, that are almost 17
foot square, from which the strongest
man is not able to throw a stone clear 
of the Pyramid. There are 16 steps to
the door. The entrance is square and
even all along. This walk leads to
two more, at the end of one of them
is a hall, where is an empty tomb of
one stone, of Porphyry, made, as some
say, for that Pharaoh which pursued
the Israelites into the Red-Sea. At the
end of the other walk or alley, there
is a hole made, as is probable, to let
the bodies down to the caverns below.
The two Pyramids which are lock'd, 
are much after the same form. At
some steps of the open Pyramid, is an
idol, which Pliny calls Sphinx, but the
Arabs call it Abin el haboun, being a
bustal of one stone, cut out of a natu­
ral rock, representing the face of a
woman of a prodigious bigness. It is
26 foot high, and 15 from the ear to
the chin. On the top of the head there
is an hole, through which a man might
pass, that reaches down to the breast, 
and ending there. According to Pliny, 
the largest of these Pyramids was 20
years in building, tho' 366000 men
were all that while employed about it.

The largest of these was built, some
say, by Cheops, or as others, by Chem­
nis, as a sepulchre; but he, being torn
in pieces in a mutiny of the people, 
did not obtain the honour of being
interred in it. The second was said to
be built by his brother Cephus: The
third by Mycerias; or, as others say, 
by the strumpet Rhodope.

PYRENOIDES [πυρηνοειδὴς of πυρὴν, a
kernel, and ἐ῀ιδος, shape, Gr.] a process
of the second vertebra of the back;
thus called from its resemblance to a
pear in shape. 

There is no unicode for Greek small letter epsilon with psili and perispomeni. The unicode ἐ is for Greek small letter epsilon with psili, and ῀ is for the perispomeni on top of ἐ.



PYRIASIS [πυρίασις, Gr.] a precious
stone of a black colour, which being
rubbed, burns the fingers.

PYRITES [ϖυρίτής, Gr.] a semi-me­
tal, supposed to be the marcasite of
copper, or the matrix or ore in which
that metal is formed.

PYRITIS [ϖυριτις, Gr.] a precious
stone which (it is said) will burn the
fingers if one holds it hard.

PYROBOLICAL, of or pertaining
to Pyroboli, or the art of making fire­
balls, bombs, &c.

PYROBOLIST, a maker of fire­
balls, &c.

PYROBOLY [of ϖῦρ, fire, and βαλλω, 
Gr. to throw] the art of gunnery.

PYROETS [with Horsemen] are mo­
tions either of one pist or tread, or of
two pists or treads.

PYROETS, of one tread, or what
the French call de la tête a la queuë, are
entire and very narrow turns made by
a horse upon one tread, and almost at
one time, so that his head is placed
where his tail was, without putting
out his haunches.

PYROETS, of two pists,are turns of
two treads upon a small compass of
ground, almost of the length of the
horse.

PYROLA [Botany] the herb winter­
green,  L.

PYROMANCY [ϖυρομαντεία of ϖῦρ
fire, and μαντεια, divination, Gr.] a
divination by the fire of the sacrifice.
The good signs were these: If the
flames immediately took hold of and
consumed the victims; if the flames
were bright and pure, without noise or
smoak; if the sparks tended upwards
in form of a Pyramid, and the fire went
not out, till all was reduc'd to ashes.



The contrary signs were, when the fire 
was kindled with difficulty; when the 
flame was divided; when it did not
immediately spread itself over all the
parts of the victim, but creeping a­
long consumed them by little and lit­
tle; when it ascended not in a straight
line, but whirled round, turned side
ways or downwards, and was extin­
guished by wind, showers, or any o­
ther unlucky accident; when it crack­
led more than ordinary, was black, 
casting forth smoak or sparks. All
these, and such like omens, signified
(with them) the displeasure of the gods.

PYROPUS [ϖυροπὸς of ωῦρ, fire, and
ὀ῀ψ, the face, Gr.] a carbuncle of a fiery
redness, a ruby; also one that has a
carbuncled face.

There is no unicode for Greek small letter omicron with psili and perispomeni. The unicode ὀ is for Greek small letter omicron with psili, and ῀ is for the perispomeni on top of ὀ.



PYROSIS [of πῦρ, Gr.] a burning
redness in the face.

PYROTECHNIAN a maker of
fire-works, 
one skill'd in pyrotechny.

PYROTECHNICIAN a maker of
fire-works, 
one skill'd in pyrotechny.

Military PYROTECHNY [πυροτεχνία, 
Gr.] is the doctrine of artificial fire­
works and fire-arms, teaching the
structure and use both of those us'd in
war, for the attacking of fortifications, 
&c. as Cannons, Bombs, Granades, Gun­
powder, Wildfire, &c. and those made
for diversion, as Serpents, Rockets, &c.

Chymical PYROTECHNY, is the art
of managing and applying fire in Di­
stillations, Calcinations, Sublimations, 
&c.

Metallick PYROTECHNY, the art of
fusing, refining and preparing metals.

PYROTECHNICK of or pertain­
ing to pyro­
techny.

PYROTECHNICAL of or pertain­
ing to pyro­
techny.

PYROTICKS [ϖυροτιχὰ, Gr.] cau­
sticks, medicines, which being apply'd
to the body, grow violently hot, and
cause redness or blisters in the skin, or
that close up and bring wounds to a
crust or scab.

PYRRHA, the wife of Deucalion.
See Deucalion.

PYRRHICK Dance, some refer the
original of it to Minerva, who led up
the dance in her armour, after the
conquest of the Titans: Others refer it
to the Corybantes, Jupiter's guard in his
cradle, who leaped up and down, 
clashing their weapons to hinder old
Saturn from hearing the cries of his
infant son. Pliny attributes the inven­
tion to Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles, 
who instituted such a company of dan­
cers ar the funeral of his father. The
manner of the performance seems to
have consisted chiefly in the nimble
turning of the body, and shifting every
part, as if it was done to avoid the
stroke of the enemy. Julius Scaliger
tells of himself, that while he was a
youth, he often danced the Pyrrhick
before the emperor Maximilian, to the
amazement of all Germany. And that
the emperor was so surprized at his
warlike activity, that he cried out, this
boy was either born in a coat of mail, 
instead of a skin, or else has been 
rocked in one, instead of a cradle.

PYRRHO, the Greek philosopher, 
the first founder of the Scepticks, who
taught that there was no certainty of
any thing.

PYRRHONIANS, a sect of ancient
philosophers, whose distinguishing te­
net was, that they profess'd to doubt
of every thing, maintaining that men
only judg'd of truth or falshood by ap­
pearances. The present Pyrrhonians or
Scepticks, are such, who from the
great number of things that are dark
and obscure, and from the aversion
they bear to popular credulity, main­
tain that there is nothing certain in
the world.

PYRRHOPOECILOS [ϖυῤῥοίποχιλος, 
Gr.] a kind of marble with red spots, 
of which the Egyptians made pillars
which they dedicated to the sun.

PYTHAGORAS [in Painting] is
drawn clad in white garments, adorn­
ed with a crown of gold.

PYTHAGOREAN System, so called, 
on account of its being maintained by
Pythagoras, is a system in which the sun
is supposed to rest in the center of our
system of planets, and in which the
earth is carried round him annually, in
a tract or path between Venus and Mars.
It is the most ancient of any, and the
same with the Copernican.

PYTHAGOREAN Theorem, is the
47th proposition of the first book of
Euclid.

PYTHAGOREANISM [of Pythago­
ras] the doctrine or principles of the
Pythagoreans.

PYTHIA [Πυθία, Gr.] the priestess
who delivered the oracles of Apollo at
Delphos. Before she ascended the Tri­
pos, she used to wash herself in the foun­
tain Castalia, and sitting down on the
Tripos shook the laural-tree that grew
by it, and sometimes eat its leaves.
She was also crowned with laurel, that
being thought to conduce to inspiration.
Being placed upon the Tripos, she recei­
ved the divine afflatus in her belly, 
and began immediately to swell and
foam at the mouth, tearing her hair,



cutting her flesh, and in all her other
behaviour appeared like one phrenetick
and distracted, especially if the spirit
was sullen and malignant; but if it was
in a kind and gentle humour, her rage
was not so violent.

PYTHIA, the Pythian games celebra­
ted in Greece, in honour of Apollo; also
the priestess of Apollo.

PYTHON [ϖυθων of ϖυθω, Gr. to
putrify, because ingendered of the pu­
trefaction of the earth after the flood, 
or of תפן, Heb. an asp] a serpent prodi­
ously large, whereby Juno persecuted
Latona, when big with Apollo and Di­
ana, the first of which, viz. Apollo, kil­
led that serpent, and thence was called
Pythius, and in memory of that victory
appointed the Pythian Games.

The serpent Python being slain by
Apollo, is thus interpreted. By Python
is understood the ruins of waters and
bogs, which cover the earth, and seems
to run over it; but Apollo (i. e. the
sun) dispersing the vapours in the air, 
by his arrows (i. e. his beams) slew this
serpent. Others interpret it, that A­
pollo being the god of wisdom, does, 
by good prepared medicines, destroy
all poisonous diseases in the body of
man, which diseases are represented by
the infectious serpent Python.


Q

Qq, Roman; Q q, Italick; Q q
Engbish; c &wyn;, Saxon; are the 16th
letter of the alphabet; but the Greeks, 
Hebrews and Asiaticks, have not this
letter, and the Saxons, &c. express it by
cw. This letter q always hath its vow­
el following it.

It is a mute letter, and has much the
same sound as qu and may serve instead
of it, as the Latins frequently change
qu into c as loquor, locutus, &c.

Q [among the Ancients] a numeral
letter standing for 500.

Q̅ with a dash stood for 500000.

The dash is placed on top of letter Q.



Q. D. stands for quasi dictum, L. i. e.
as if it were said.

Q. E. F. [in Mathemat.] stands for
quod erat faciendum, L. i. e. which was
to be done.

Q. V. stands for quantum vis, L. i. e.
as much as you will.

QUACKING [of quacken, Du.] mak­
ing a noise as ducks do.

QUACK. See Quacksalver.

QUACKERY [of quack, Teut.] fri­
volousness.

QUACKISM [of quack, Teut.] tri­
sting the practise of quackery.

QUADRA, any square frame or bor­
der in building, encompassing a basso
relievo, pannel-painting, or other work.

QUADRAGESIMA Dominica [q. d.
the 40th day after Easter] the sunday im­
mediately preceeding Lent.

QUADRAGESIMA, the fortieth,  L.

QUADRAGESIMAL [quadragessima­
lis, L.] of or pertaining to Lent.

QUADRAGESIMALS, in times of
popery, it was a customary thing for
people to visit their mother church on
Mid-Lent sunday, to make their offe­
rings at the high altar. And the like
superstitious devotion was performed
in the Whitsund week. But these pro­
cessions and oblations being commuted
for a payment called Pentecostals or
Whitsund farthings; were changed into
a customary payment, and called Qua­
dragessimals.

QUADRAN [in Poetry] a stanza or
stave consisting of four verses.

QUADRANT [quadrans, L.] a ma­
thematical instrument of great use in
Astronomy, Navigation, &c. that is tri­
angular, and contains just the fourth
part of a circle, containing 90 degrees;
and oftentimes the space contained be­
tween a quadrantal arch and two Radii
perpendicular one to another in the
center of a circle, is called a quadrant.

QUADRANTS, are variously contri­
ved, and as
differently
furnished
for their
various u­
ses; but
this they
have all in
common, 
that they
consist of
a quarter
of a circle, 
whose limb is divided into 90 degrees, 
and have either a line and plummet
suspended from the center; or, a label
with sights.

Image omitted.



QUADRANT [quadrans, L.] a fourth
part.

A QUADRANTAL Triangle [with
Geometr.] a spherical triangle like a die, 
having a quadrant for one of its sides, 
and one right angle.

QUADRAT [in Astrology] an aspect
of the heavenly bodies, wherein they
are distant from each other a quadrant
or 90 degrees, the same as quartile.

QUADRATE [quadratum, L.] a four
cornered figure, a square.



Single QUADRATICKS [with Ma­
themat.] are such where the square of
the unknown root is equal to the abso­
lute number given.

Affected QUADRATICKS [with Ma­
themat.] are such as have some inter­
mediate power of the unknown num­
ber, between the highest power of the
unknown number, and the absolute
number given.

QUADRATO Quadratum, is the 4th 
power of numbers, or the product of 
the cube multiplied by the root.

QUADRATO-Cubus, the fifth power 
of numbers.

QUADRATO-QUADRATO Cubus. 
the seventh power.

QUADRATRIX [in Geometry] a me­
chanical line, by means whereof, right
lines may be found equal to the cir­
cumference of a circle or other curve,
and the several parts of it.

QUADRATURE [quadratura, L.]
the making a thing square, or the find­
ing a square equal to the area of any
figure given.

QUADRATURE of Curves [in the
higher Geometry] is the measuring of
their area, or the finding a rectilinear
space, equal to a curvilinear space.

QUADRELS [in Architecture] a kind
of artificial stones, so called from their
form, they being square, made of chal­
ky, whitish and pliable earth, and dry'd
in the shade. They were two years in
drying, and were much used by antient
Italian architects.

QUADRENNIAL [of quadriennis, 
L.] of the space of four years.

QUADRICAPSULAR [in Botan.
Writ.] having a seed pod divided into
four partitions, as Stramonium, thorny-­
apple,  L.

QUADRIFID [quadrifidus, L.] a term
used by Botanists, of leaves divided or
notched into five parts.

QUADRILATERAL figures [in
Geometry] are those whose
sides are four right lines, 
and those making four an­
gles, and they are either
a Parallelogram, a Trapezium, Rectangle, 
Square, Rhombus or Rhomboides, as in
the figure.

Image omitted.



QUADRILATERALNESS [quadri­
laterus, L. and ness] the property of
having four sides, right-lines, forming
as many angles.

QUADRILLA, a small troop or
company of cavaliers, pompously dress­
ed, and mounted for the performance
of carrousels, justs, tournaments, run­
ring at the ring, and other divertise­
ments of gallantry.

QUADRIPHYLLOUS [of quatuor, 
L. and φυλλον, Gr. a leaf] plants whose
flowers have leaves or petals.

QUADRIVALVES [in Botany] those
plants whose seed pods open in four
valves or partitions.

QUADRUPEDOUS [quadrupedus, L.]
four-footed.

QUADRUPLATORES [in the court
of Exchequer] promoters, those that in
popular and penal actions are dela­
tors, having thereby part of the profit
assigned by the law.

QUADRUPLED [quadruplicatus, L.]
made four-fold.

QUÆRE is where any point of
law or matter in debate
is doubted; as not having sufficient au­
thority to maintain it.

QUÆRIE iis where any point of
law or matter in debate
is doubted; as not having sufficient au­
thority to maintain it.

QUÆSTIONARII [anc. Law Books]
those persons who went about with
indulgences from door to door, asking
charity either for themselves or others.

QUAIL [Hieroglyphically] was by the
Egyptians used to resemble impiety, be­
cause it is related of this bird, that it
chatters furiously, and torments itself, 
as if it were offended, when the crescent
of the moon first appears.

QUAINTNESS [incert. Etym.] odd­
ness, strangeness; also accomplished­
ness.

QUAKER [prob. c&wyn;acere, Sax.] one
who quakes or shivers, a professor of
Quakerism.

QUAKERS [a sect so denominated
from those quaking motions and ges­
tures, they appeared in at their meet­
ing or assemblies for devotion] they
appeared in England about the year
1650; some of their particular tenets
are,

1. That they are required by the
holy spirit to use Thee and Thou, or
the plain language.

2. That quivering and quaking are
now sometirnes used by the power of
God, and justify these extravagant mo­
tions from the scripture.

3. They believe new revelations still
to be continued, and that their minis­
ters may thus be enlightened up to the
degree of prophesy and vision.

4. They own a distinction in the
Godhead, an essential quality between
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; but ex­
cept against the word person, as too
gross to express it.

5. They believe extraordinary com­
mission or special manifestations of
God to his children, in the highest de­
gree of immediate revelations.



6. And from hence they infer that
by virtue of this privilege, their mi­
nisters receive the gospel in the same
manner as Paul did, not of Man, but by
the Revelation of Jesus Christ.

7. They say that those who are not
infallible are not in the spirit, and by
censequence no ministers, and that
every true member of the true church
has certainty and infallibility of judg­
ment, and knows the infallibility of
the truth he professes; yet they do not
lodge this infallibility in any private
person, nor in their whole church;
but that this infallible spirit, privately
or particularly works in the hearts of
men; and that those who improve
their talent, have the same rule of the 
holy spirit to read and understand the
scriptures, that the apostles and pro­
phets had when they wrote.

8. They deny that the holy scrip­
tures are the only object (i. e. rule) of 
faith, or that the letter of the scrip­
ture (or written word) is the sword of
the spirit.

9. They assert that the light within 
is the rule for every person to walk by, 
and that God speaks to men now in 
the same immediate manner, and as he
did to the holy apostles and prophets.

10. They affirm that the lives of the
saints are not at all sinful, and that it
is the doctrine of devils to preach that
men shall have sin and be in a warfare
as long as they are on earth.

11. Quakers administer neither bap­
tism nor the Lord's Supper, and dis­
own the institution of both sacraments.

12. They likewise hold swearing un­
lawful.

13. They acknowledge that the ci­
vil magistrate is ordained of God to
punish with the sword; but say that it
is not lawful for any of their party to
make use of it.

14. They declare against paying of
tithes, calling it an Antichristian yoke
of bondage.

QUAKING [c&wyn;acian, Sax.] shaking, 
shivering for cold, &c. trembling.

QUALIFICATOR [in the Canon 
Law] a divine appointed to qualify or 
declare the quality of a proposition,
brought before an ecclesiastical tribu­
nal; chiefly before the inquisition in
Spain, &c.

QUALIFICATORS [in the inquisi­
tion in Spain] certain ecclesiasticks who
when a person is tryed for heresy in 
that court, and the question arises 
concerning the quality of a proposition, 
maintained by Hereticks or those suf­
pected of Heresy are to pronounce;
whether it is downright Heresy, or has
not a tincture of it? Whether it is erro­
neous or sounds ill, and is offensive to
pious dispositions? Whether it is rash, 
scandalous or schismatical? Or lastly, 
whether it is seditious, blasphemous or
dangerous?

They are likewise judges of the pri­
soner's defence, whether their answers to
the matters objected are sufficient and rea­
sonable, or absurd and wide of the Point?

They are likewise consulted by the
Inquisitors, when they are debating
about the apprehending of any person
that has been informed against, and
here they are obliged to deliver their
opinion in their own hand writing, to
be inserted into the process, as being
the ground and warrant upon which
their trial proceeds; but the Inquisitors
are not obliged to follow their opinion, 
it not being conclusive in the court, but
only taken as advice.

QUALITY [among Logicians] is the
third of the categories, of which, ac­
cording to Aristotle's division, there are
four sorts: The first of which compre­
hends Habitude: Which see. The se­
cond comprehends natural Powers:
Which see. The third comprehends
sensible Qualities: Which see. The
fourth comprehends Form and Figure:
Which see.

QUALITY [in Physicks] the affection
of a thing whence it is denominated
such; or that which causes a thing to
affect our senses in this or that manner, 
and give it this or that denomination.

Primary sensible QUALITIES, are
such as are found in all bodies, or which
agree to all matter, considered as mat­
ter, such are Extension, Figure, Motion, 
Rest, Solidity, Impenetrability and Num­
ber.

Secondary sensible QUALITIES, are
such as result from a composition or
mixture of the elements; as Light, 
Heat, Cold, Colour, Sound, Taste, Smell, 
Hardness, Softness, Fluidity, Firmness, 
Roughness, Smoothness, Transparency and
Opacousness.

Spiritual QUALITIES, are the qua­
lities of the soul, or those affections of
the mind, as it is in this or that habi­
tude or disposition; as Knowledge, Opi­
nion, Certainty, Doubting, &c. all moral
virtues and vices.

Corporeal QUALITIES, according to
the Peripateticks, are things distinct
from the bodies themselves; and are
superadded to them, or flow from their
substantial forms. But the modern



philosophers explode the notion of qua­
lities distinct from the body, and say
they are no other than the affections of
the bodies themselves; as Figure, Mag­
nitude, Motion, &c. of the parts where­
of they consist.

QUALITY [in Metaphysicks] is an
accident which influences its subject af­
ter the manner of an essential form.

Active QUALITIES [with Philosoph.]
such as by virtue whereof operations
are actually produced on other bodies, 
duly disposed in respect thereunto; as
the Heat of Fire, the Moisture of Water.

Passive QUALITIES [in Physicks]
those whereby bodies are disposed to
receive the action of others; as Inflam­
mability in Oil, &c.

Real QUALITIES [in Physicks] are
those which remain in the subject, and
only act on bodies adjacent to them; as
fire in a piece of iron not ignited, &c.

Intentional QUALITIES [in Physicks]
are such as issue from the subject and
operate at a distance; as Light from
the Sun.

QUALMISHNESS [of c&wyn;ealmeiſe
and neſſe, Sax.] a being subject to
be troubled with fainting fits; also
scrupulousness of conscience.

QUANTITY [quantitas of quantus, 
L. how great] signifies whatsoever is
capable of any sort of estimation or
mensuration, and which, being com­
pared with another thing of the same
nature, may be said to be greater or
less, equal or unequal to it.

Continual QUANTITY [in Metaphy.]
is a quantity whose parts are joined to­
gether by a common term. Quantity
is an accident, by which a material
substance is intended. The species of
continued Quantity, are a Line, a Super­
ficies, and a Body. For quantity is ex­
tended, either into Length only, and
then it is called a Line, tho' not a ma­
terial one, but such as the mind can
frame by idea; or else it is extended
into length and breadth, and that is
called a Superficies; or else into length, 
breadth and depth, and that makes a
mathematical Body, which is not to be
understood as if it were a corporeal
substance.

Divided QUANTITY [in Metaphy.]
is a quantity, the parts of which are
not linked together by a common term, 
but are divided, as number, that may
be defined a multitude of units.

Moral QUANTITY, is that which
depends on the manners of men, and
the free determination of their wills;
as the Prices and Value of Things; De­
grees of Dignity, Good and Evil, Rewards
and Punishments, &c.

Physical QUANTITY [in Phy.] is that
which nature furnishes us within mat­
ter and its extensions, or in the powers
and forces of natural bodies; as Gra­
vity, Motion, Light, Heat, Cold, Rarity
and Density.

Notional QUANTITY, is that which
arises from the operation of the un­
derstanding only, such as the largeness, 
and narrowness of the capacity of the
mind and its conceptions.

Positive QUANTITIES [in Algebra]
are those which are greater than no­
thing, and which have the sign +
perfixed.

Negative QUANTITIES [in Algebra]
are such as are less than nothing, and
have this sign − perfixed,

QUARANTAIN [at the republick
of Venice] a cus­
tom observed, by vertue of which all
merchants or others, who come from
the Levant, are obliged to remain 40
days in the house of St. Lazarus, before
they are admitted into the city; except
the passengers bring letters of health, 
which if they do, then often the time
is shortened.

But if they do not bring these testi­
monials, or if the plague happens to be
in the place from whence the ship came, 
then the whole ships crew, as well as
passengers are obliged to stay the full
time, in the house of health, to be puri­
fied, tho' not one single person of them
be sick, and likewise all the cargo
which they think capable of being in­
fected from the air, &c.

And if any of the Quarantineers fall
sick of any distemper during the 40 days
the time is doubled.

This house is built in the water, and
surrounded with a wall, in which there
are several apartments, and some are
shut up and restrained in their conver­
sation, and those whose time is nearly
finished are not permitted to talk with
those that are just come in.

And if any person desires to see a
friend who is shut up in this Lazaretto, 
he must stand at some distance, and if
any visitor touch a person performing
Quarantine he must be confined, and stay
as long as the directors shall please to ap­
point to be thoroughly purged.

All manner of provisions are brought
hither from the city; and every person
may have his food dressed as he pleases.

England and all other nations, oblige
those who come from infected places to
perform Quarantine with their ships, &c.



a longer or shorter time, as may be jud­
ged most safe.

QUARDECUE, the 4th part of a
French crown, containing 16 sols,  F.

QUARRELSOME [querelleux, F. and
ſom, Sax.] apt to quarrel.

QUARRELSOMNESS [humeur que­
relleux, F. ſom and neſſe, Sax.] qua­
relsome humour.

QUARRIL, a piece of Spanish coin, 
in value about three half-pence English
money.

QUART [in Fencing] the fourth.

QUARTER, [of quarta pars, L. quar­
tier, F.] a fourth part of any thing, as
of an hundred weight twenty eight
pound, of a chaldron eight bushels.

QUARTER round [in Carpentry] any
moulding, whose contour is a circle, or
approaching to a circle.

QUARTER [in Heraldry] See Quar­
terings.

To QUARTER [écarteler, F.] to cut
or divide into quarters.

To QUARTER Soldiers [être en quar­
tier, F.] to lodge, or send to lodgings.

QUARTER [in a Camp] in general
is the ground on which a body of troops
encamps; also the troops encamped.

To beat up an enemy's QUARTERS, is
to drive them from the ground or en­
campment.

QUARTER of an Assembly, is the
place where troops meet to march in a
body, and is the same as Rendezvous.

QUARTER intrenched, is a place for­
tified with a ditch and parapet, to se­
cure a body of troops.

QUARTER [in Milit. affairs] is the
sparing the life, and giving good treat­
ment to a conquered enemy.

QUARTER [of a City] a canton or
division of it; when it consists in seve­
ral isles, &c. and is separated from some
other quarter by a river, a great street, 
or other boundary.

To work from QUARTER to QUAR­
TER [in Riding Academies] is to ride a
horse three times an end upon the first
of the four lines of a square, and then
changing hands to ride him three times
upon the second, and so to do upon the
third and fourth.

QUARTER-Wheeling [in Milit. Aff.]
is the turning the front of a body of
men round where the flank was.

QUARTERAGE [quartier, F.] mo­
ney paid quarterly.

QUARTER-CAST [with Horsemen]
a horse is said to cast his quarter, when
for any disorder in the coffin, there is a
necessity to cut one of the quarters of
the hoof.

QUARTERING [in Carpentry] signi­
fies the putting in of Quarters; and
sometimes 'tis used for the quarters
themselves.

Counter QUARTERING [in Herald.]
is when the quarters of a coat are quar­
tered over again, or subdivided each in­
to four.

QUARTERINGS [in Heraldry] are
partitions of an escutcheon, according
to the number of coats that are to be
on it; or they are the several divisions
made in it, when the arms of several
families are born altogether by one, 
either on account of intermarriages or
otherwise.

QUARTERIZATION, part of the
punishment of a traitor, by dividing his
body into four parts besides the head, 
which quarters are frequently set up on
poles over the gates of the city.

QUARTERLY [in Heral­
dry] is when a shield is di­
vided into four equal parts, 
in the form of a cross.

Image omitted.



QUARTERN [quarta pars, 
L.] the fourth part of an integer, ei­
ther in weight or measure.

QUARTERS [in Architecture] all
those slight upright pieces, between the
punchions and post, which serve to
lath upon. They are of two sorts, sin­
gle and double. Single Quarters are sawn
stuff, two inches thick and four inches
broad. The double Quarters are sawn
to four inches square.

QUARTERS  of the Heavens [with
Astron.] are the four principal points, 
viz. East, West, North and South.

QUARTERS [with Astrol.] are cer­
tain intersections in the sphere, both in
the world and the zodiack, to two of
which they give the names of Oriental
and Masculine, and to the other two Oc­
cidental and Feminine.

QUARTERS of the moon, [Astron.]
the moon is said to be in the first Quarter
when she is a quarter of the zodiack, 
or three signs distant from the sun, turn­
ing to us just half her enlightened bo­
dy; but when the moon comes to be
diametrically opposite to the sun, and
shews us her whole enlightened face, 
she is said to be in the full: And when
she proceeds towards her conjunction, 
and shews more than half her enlight­
ened face, she is said to be in the third
or last Quarter.

Fore-QUARTERS [of a Horse] are
the shoulders and fore-legs.

Hind-QUARTERS [of a Horse] are
the hips and legs behind.



QUARTERS [of a Horse's Foot] are
the sides of the coffin comprehended
between the toe and the heel on one
side and t'other of the foot.

Inner QUARTERS [of a Horse's Foot]
are those opposite to one another, fa­
cing from one foot to the other.

False QUARTERS [with Horsemen]
are a cleft of the horn quarters, ex­
tending from the cornet to the shoe, 
which voids blood, and causes much
pain, and makes a horse lame.

QUASI Contract [in Civil Law] an
act which has not the strict form of a
contract; but yet has the force of it,  L.

QUASI Crime [in Civil Law] the ac­
tion of a person who does damage or
evil involuntarily.

QUATREFOILS [in Heraldry] four-­
leaved grass.

QUATUORDECIMANS [quatuorde­
cim, L. fourteen] a sect of Christians in
the 2d century, who were for celebra­
ting the feast of Easter, on the 14 day
of the moon, upon what day of the
week soever it happened, as the Jews
did; this dispute was at first among
those called Catholicks; but did not
make any breach of charity: But af­
terwards in the year 196 Pope Victor
in a council held at Rome, excommuni­
cated those that celebrated Easter on
any other day than sunday: But Iræne­
neus bishop of Lyons and others dislik­
ing this severity, was occasion of warm
disputes about the matter, till it was
terminated by the council of Nice in
the year 335 as follows.

1. That Easter should not be cele­
brated till after the Vernal Equinox.

2. That the Vernal Equinox should be
fixt to the 21st of March.

3. That it should be observed on that
Sunday, which immediately followed
the 14th of the moon.

4. That if the 14th of the moon, 
happened to be on a Sunday, it should
be observed on the next Sunday fol­
lowing, that Easter might not be cele­
brated by them on the same day that
it was by the Jews.

To QUAVER [prob. of quatere, L.
to shake] to shake or trill a note, to
run a division with the voice.

QUEASINESS [prob. of quetschen, 
Teut. to offend, and neſſe, Sax.] sick­
ishness at the stomach, propenseness to
vomit.

QUEERNESS, oddness, fantastical­
ness, &c.

QUEINT [incert. Etymologiæ] odd, 
uncommon, humour­
ous, as a queint Expression.

QUAINT [incert. Etymologiæ] odd, 
uncommon, humour­
ous, as a queint Expression.

QUEINTNESS uncommonness,
humourousness.

QUAINTNESS uncommonness,
humourousness.

To QUEME, as to queme a thing
into one's hand, to put it in privately.

QUENCHABLE [of c&wyn;encan, Sax.
and habilis, L.] capable of being quen­
ched.

QUERELA [Old Rec.] an action or
suit at law preferred in any court of
justice, where the plaintiff was querent
or complainant.

QUERENT [querens, L.] complain­
ing.

QUERIMONIOUSNESS [of queri­
monius, L.] a complaining humour.

QUERRY [ecuyer, F.] a groom of a
prince, or one conversant in the king's
stables, and having the charge of his
horses; also the stable of a prince.

QUERULOUSNESS [of querulus, L.]
a complaining disposition.

QUEST [of quæsitus, L. sought] an
inquest or inquisition; an enquiry made
upon oath of an impannelled jury.

QUESTIONABLENESS [of question, 
F. of  L. and ness] doubtfulness, liable­
ness to be called in question.

QUESTIONLESS [of question, F. and
less] without doubt.

QUESTIONS, propositions made or
offered by way of dispute.

QUEST-MEN [in the city of Lon­
don] a certain number of parishioners
chosen annually, to go from house to
house and into the market, to weigh
the weights, and measure the measures
of the particular tradesmen, by a stan­
dard beam, weights and measures, to
examine whether they were true and
just.

QUEUE de hironde [in Fortification]
i. e. a swallows tail; a kind of out­
work, the sides of which open or spread
towards the head of the campaign, 
and draws in towards the gorge.

QUICK-Set [of c&wyn;ice and ſet­
tan, Sax. to plant] a sort of thorn, of
which hedges are made.

QUICKNESS [of c&wyn;ic and neſſe, 
Sax.] agility, nimbleness, briskness.

QUICK-Silver, [of c&wyn;ic and ſilfere, 
Sax.] a mineral or prodigy among
metals, which is fluid like water; and
tho' a very heavy body, yet easily flies
away, when let over the fire.

QUICK-Sighted [of c&wyn;ic and ʒe­
ſihðe, Sax.] having a sharp eye.

QUICK Witted [of c&wyn;ic and &wyn;it, 
Sax.] having a sharp wit.

QUID [prob. of cuð, Sax. cud] a
morsel or quantity of tobacco, to be
held in the month or chew'd.



QUID pro quo, one good turn for an­
other, trick for trick; a Rowland for
an Oliver,  L.

QUIDDITATIVE [of quidditas, L.]
essential.

QUIDDITY [in Metaphysicks] signi­
fies the same as Being, but infers a re­
lation to our understanding; for the
very asking what a thing is, implies, 
that it is an object of knowledge.

QUIES [among the Romans] Rest.
A deity which had a temple without
the city of Rome.

QUIESCENCE [of quies and essentia, 
L.] a state of rest.

QUIESCENTS [quiescentes literæ, L.]
letters that do not move, or are not
pronounced in reading.

QUIETISM [of quietus, L. quiet]
the principles, &c. of the Quietists.

QUIETISTS [so denominated from
quies, L. i. e. quiet or rest] a Christian
sect in the 16th century, followers of
Michael Molinos, a Spanish priest, who
endeavoured to propagate these opi­
nions in Italy; the chief of which
were,

That men ought to annihilate them­
selves, in order to be united to God, 
and to remain afterwards in quietness
of mind, without being concern'd for
any thing that might happen to the
body.

By this he inferr'd that no action was
either criminal or meritorious; because
the soul and its faculties being annihi­
lated had no part therein, so that
these principles led persons to transgress
all laws sacred and civil.

In the year 1687 the pope and inqui­
sitors declared this doctrine to be false
and pernicious, and ordered his books
to be burnt. He himself recanted, and
was afterwards imprisoned, and died
in 1692.

It is thought that there are still in
being many of this sect in Italy, tho'
they conceal their principles, and that
the doctrine has crept over the Alps
into France; the arch-bishop of Cam­
bray's book entitled. The maxims of the
saints explain'd, having some tendency
the same way.

QUIETNESS [of quies, L. and ness]
a quiet state, a being free from any per­
plexity, disturbance or trouble.

QUILLETS [prob. q. d. Quibblets, 
or little Quibbles] subtilties, quibbles, 
chicanery.

QUINCUNX, five twelfths of any
intire thing divided into twelve parts.

QUINCUNX [with Astrol.] an aspect
when the planets are distant five signs.

QUINCUNX Order, an
order of ranging trees, &c.
by five, as it were, as thus.

Image omitted.



Regular QUINDECAGON [of quin­
que, L. five, δεχα ten, and γωνία, Gr.
a corner] a plane figure of fifteen sides
and angles, when they are all equal to
one another.

QUINQUANNION [in ancient Cu­
stoms] a re­
spite of five years, which insolvent 
debtors formerly obtain'd by vertue of
the king's letter, to have time for the 
payment of their debts.

QUINQUENNIUM [in ancient Cu­
stoms] a re­
spite of five years, which insolvent 
debtors formerly obtain'd by vertue of
the king's letter, to have time for the 
payment of their debts.

QUINQUATRIA, festivals celebra­
ted in honour of Minerva, so call'd, as
some think, because they lasted five
days; but others say, because they fell
out five days after the ides of the
month, the same as Panathenæa. On 
the first of these days they offered sacri­
fices; on the second, third and fourth, 
were shewn the combats of gladiators, 
and on the fifth a cavalcade was made
through the city; they began on the
13th of March.

QUINQUE, five,  L.

QUINQUEFOLIATED [of quinque, 
five, and folium, a leaf, L.] a kind of
digitated ieaf, consisting of five, as it
were fingers, as in Cinquefoil.

QUINQUENNALIA, games or fe­
stivals, celebrated every fifth year, in
honour of the deified emperors.

QUINTAIN, an ancient custom, a
post driven into the ground with a
buckler fixed to it, for the performance
of military exercises on horse-back, 
with poles, throwing of darts, break­
ing of lances, &c. He who breaks most
poles and shews most activity, wins the
prize; also a right which the lord had
to oblige all the millers, watermen, 
and other young people unmarried to
come before his castle, once every
third year, and break several lances or
poles against a post or wooden man, for
his diversion.

QUINTILIANS [so called of Quinti­
lia their prophetess] an ancient Chri­
stian sect, who admitted women to per­
form the sacerdotal and episcopal func­
tions, grounding their practice on that
passage of St. Paul, that in Christ there
is no distinction of males and females.

QUINZIEME, a fifteenth, a certain
tax, anciently so called, because raised
on the fifteenth part of mens lands and
goods; also the fifteenth day after any
festival.  L.

QUIRINALIA, feasts observed at
Rome, in honour of Quirinus, i. e. Ro­
mulus, on the twelfth of the calends of
May.



QUIRK [with Architects] a piece of
ground either square or oblong, taken
out of a corner, or any place else of a
ground-plat to make a court yard, &c.

QUODLIBETARIAN, one who fol­
lows the dictates of his own fancy.

QUOIL [koller, Teut, a collar] a
round of a cable, when the turns are
laid one upon another, or a rope or
cable laid up round, one turn over an­
other, so that they may run out free
and smooth without kenks, i. e. without
twistings or doublings.

Weather QUOIL [with Sailors] is
when a ship has her head brought
about so, as to lie that way that her
stern did before, without loosing any
sail, but only bearing up the helm.

QUORUM [i. e. of whom] a word
frequently used in the commissions of
the justices of the peace, as where a
commission is directed to five or seven
persons, or to any three of them, a­
mong whom, B. C. and D. E. are to be
two, there B. D. and C. D. are said to
be of the Quorum; because the rest
cannot proceed without them. And
thence a Justice of the Peace and Quorum, 
is one without whom the rest of the
justices cannot act in some cases.


R

Rr, Roman; R r, Italick; R r, Old
English; r, Saxon; is the 17th
letter of the alphabet; Ρρ, Gr. the 15th, 
ר, Heb. is called the 20th. Litera Canina, 
or the dog's letter, because of its sound, 
something like the noise a dog makes
when he snarls.

R. S. stands for Regiæ Societatis, L.
i. e. of the Royal Society.

R [with the Ancients] was a nume­
rical letter, and signified 80.

R̅, with a dash at top,stood for
80000.

The dash is placed on top of letter R.



RABANITE [of םינבד Rabbanim, 
Heb. ancestors or fathers] a sect among
the Jews, who follow the doctrine of
their forefathers, and are such as pro­
perly succeeded the ancient Pharisees, 
all whole traditions they obstinately
adhere to; by which they are distin­
guished from the Caraites, so call'd be­
cause they confine themselves to the
scripture; and therefore these last do
very greatly hate the other Jews, and
look upon them as Hereticks.

RAB [בד Heb. i.e. ma­
ster or
doctor] some make the
following distinction between the 
names: Rab they say was a title of ho­
nour for those who had been receiv'd to
be doctors in Chaldea, that Rabbi was
a name proper to the Israelites of the
Holy Land; and that Rabboni was not
given to any but the wise men that
were of the house of David. The
Rabbins determined all matters in re­
ligion, and were concerned in civil
affairs; they celebrated marriages, and
publish'd divorces, and preach'd; and
had the first seats in synagogues, &c.

RABBINS [ובד Heb. i.e. ma­
ster or
doctor] some make the
following distinction between the 
names: Rab they say was a title of ho­
nour for those who had been receiv'd to
be doctors in Chaldea, that Rabbi was
a name proper to the Israelites of the
Holy Land; and that Rabboni was not
given to any but the wise men that
were of the house of David. The
Rabbins determined all matters in re­
ligion, and were concerned in civil
affairs; they celebrated marriages, and
publish'd divorces, and preach'd; and
had the first seats in synagogues, &c.

RABBONI Heb. i.e. ma­
ster or
doctor] some make the
following distinction between the 
names: Rab they say was a title of ho­
nour for those who had been receiv'd to
be doctors in Chaldea, that Rabbi was
a name proper to the Israelites of the
Holy Land; and that Rabboni was not
given to any but the wise men that
were of the house of David. The
Rabbins determined all matters in re­
ligion, and were concerned in civil
affairs; they celebrated marriages, and
publish'd divorces, and preach'd; and
had the first seats in synagogues, &c.

To RABATE [rabatré, F.] to descend
or come lower.

A RABBETING [with Shipwrights]
is the letting in of the planks to the
ship's keel, it being hollow'd away, 
that the planks may join the better and
closer.

RABBET [of a Ship's Keel] the hol­
lowing before-mentioned.

RABBOTH, the name of certain al­
legorical commentaries on the five
books of Moses, of great authority
among the Jews, who pretend they are
very ancient, being compos'd about
the 30th year of Christ, concerning
which they have a great many fabulous
stories; but it is easily to be prov'd that
they are not of that antiquity that the
Rabbins would have them to be.

RABDOIDES [ραβδοειδὴς, Gr.] See
Rhabdoides.

RABIDITY [of rabidus, L.]
madness, furious­
ness.

RABIDNESS [of rabidus, L.]
madness, furious­
ness.

RABINET [in Gunnery] the smallest
piece of ordnance but one, being an
inch and an half diameter at the bore, 
five foot and an half long, requiring a
charge of six ounces of powder, and
weighing three hundred pounds.

RACA [אקד of קיד, Heb. empty]
a word or expression of
the highest contempt for a vain, empty
fellow.

RACHA [אקד of קיד, Heb. empty]
a word or expression of
the highest contempt for a vain, empty
fellow. 

RACCOURCI [in Heraldry] signifies
the same as Coupée, i. e. cut off or
shortened, denoting a cross or other
ordinary, that does not extend to the
edges of the escutcheon, as they do, 
when named without such distinction.

RACEMOSE [racemosus, L.] full of
clusters.

A RACHAT [of racheter, F. to
redeem] a com­
pensation for theft, or the redemption
of a thief. The same as Theft-bote.

RACHETUM [of racheter, F. to
redeem] a com­
pensation for theft, or the redemption
of a thief. The same as Theft-bote.

RACHITÆ [of ράχις, Gr.] muscles
belonging to the back, 
so named by foreign anatomists, and
are probably the same that are called
by others Semispinati.  L.

RACHIÆI [of ράχις, Gr.] muscles
belonging to the back, 
so named by foreign anatomists, and
are probably the same that are called
by others Semispinati.  L. 



RACKING Pace [in Horsemanship] a
pace in which a horse neither trots nor
ambles, but is between both.

RACKOON, a New England animal
something like a badger, having a tail
like a fox, being cloathed with a thick
and deep furr. It sleeps in the day­
time in a hollow tree, and goes out a­
nights, when the moon shines, to feed
on the sea-side, where it is hunted by
dogs.

RAD [rað, reð, roðe, Sax.] differ
only in dialect, and signify Counsel.

RADDLINGS [Architect.] the bow­
ings in or coping of walls.

RADIANTNESS [of radians, L.]
glitteringness, &c.

A RADIATE discous Flower [with
Florists] is that which has its disk en­
compassed with a ray, as in the sun
flower.

RADIATED [radiatus, L.] having
rays or beams.

RADIATION of the animal Spirits, 
the manner of the motion of the ani­
mal spirits, on a supposition, that they
are diffused from the brain towards all
the parts of the body, through the
little canals of the nerves, as light
from a lucid body.

RADICALNESS [of radicalis, L.]
the quality of being radical, of having
roots, or of being well founded.

RADICATION, the action where­
by plants take root, or shoot out roots.

RADICLE [radiculi, L.] that part of
the seed of a plant, which, upon ve­
getation, becomes its root.

RADICOSE [radicosus, L.] having a
great, or many roots.

To RADIFICATE [radificatum, L.]
to make roots.

RADIOSE [radiosus, L.] that hath
thick, or many beams or rays.

RADIUS [in Mechan.] a spoke or
fellow of a wheel, because they issue
like rays from the center of it.

RADIOMETER, a mathematical
instrument called a Jacob's Staff.

RADMAN [Doom's-Day Book] sup­
posed to be the same with Rad-Knight
or, as others suppose, from reað, 
counsel, and if so, readman is a coun­
sellor.

RAFFLING [of raffler, F.] a play
with three dice, wherein he that
throws the greatest pair, or pair-royal, 
wins.

RAGOT [with Horsemen] a horse
that has short legs, a broad croup, and
a strong thick body; and is different
from a Coussat, in that the latter has
more shoulders and a thicker neck.

RAGULED as [in
Heral­
dry] a Cross raguled, may
be best understood, by cal­
ling it two ragged staffs in
a cross, as in the Figure.

Image omitted.



RAGGULED as [in
Heral­
dry] a Cross raguled, may
be best understood, by cal­
ling it two ragged staffs in
a cross, as in the Figure.

Image omitted.



RAJA, a term used by the Indians
for a sort of idolatrous princes, the re­
mains of those who ruled there before
the conquest of the Moguls.

RAIL [of ræʒl, Sax. a woman's
night rail] a bird so called, because its
feathers hang loose about its neck.

RAILERY [of railler, F.] scold­
ing, harsh, opprobri­
ous language.

RAILING [of railler, F.] scold­
ing, harsh, opprobri­
ous language.

RAILS [prob, of riegol, Teut.] a
wooden fence to inclose a place.

RAIN [ren of renian, Sax. prob. of
ρανις, a drop of ραίνω, Gr. to drop] a
vapour drawn by the sun, and falling
to the earth in drops.

Rain is formed of the particles of
vapours joining together, which, be­
ing joined, fall down to the earth. The
difference between Dew and Rain seems
chiefly to be this, that Dew falls at
some particular times, and in very
small drops, so as to be seen when it is
down, but is scarce perceivable while
falling: whereas Rain is grosser, and
falls at any time.

There are several causes that may
singly, or jointly, produce Rain.

1. The coldness of the air may make
the particles of the clouds to lose their
motion, and become less able to resist
the gravity of the incumbent Air, and
of consequence to yield to its pressure, 
and fall to the ground.

2. The vapours may be gathered by
the wind in such abundance, as first to
form very thick clouds, and then
squeeze those clouds together, till the
watery particles make drops too big to
hang any longer in the Air.

3. When the vapours arise in so
great abundance, as to reach and min­
gle with the clouds above them, then
they cause Rain in very large drops;
and this may happen in still sultry wea­
ther, because then the Clouds having
no sensible motion, and in the mean
time the Heat filling the Air with va­
pours, they joined with the clouds, 
and being stopp'd in their progress, do
open a passage for the stores of the
clouds to descend upon the earth.

4. Sometimes the warm wind thaws
the frozen clouds into drops, as we see
snow dissolved by heat. Now the
thicker and sooner any such cloud was
gathered, the larger the drops will be,



because there was greater store of va­
pours condensed there. And hence it
is, that in summer time, we have sud­
den showers of rain in exceeding great
drops. See Snow and Hail.

RAINBOW [renboʒa, Sax.]
Is the most admirable of all meteors, 
of which the following Phænomena are
worthy to be taken notice of, and is a
bow of divers colours represented in a
dewy cloud, consisting of innumerable
drops, each drop being like a globe of
glass filled with water.

1. A Rainbow never appears but in
a place opposite to the sun, so that
when we look directly at it, the sun is
always behind us.

2. When a Rainbow appears, it al­
ways rains somewhere.

3. The constant order of the colours
of the Rainbow, is thus, the outmost is
red, or saffron colour; the next is
yellow, the third is green, the fourth
or inmost is violet or blue.

4. The Rainbow is always exactly
round; but does not always appear
equally intire, the upper or lower
parts being often wanting.

5. Its apparent breadth is always
the same.

6. Those that stand upon the plain
ground, never see above half the cir­
cle of the Rainbow, and frequently
not so much.

7. The higher the sun is above the
horizon, the less of the circle is seen, 
and vice versâ, if there be no clouds to
hinder.

8. No Rainbow appears, when the
sun is above 41 degrees 46 minutes
high.

9. Sometimes two Rainbows appear
together, of which one is higher and
larger than the other, and shews the
colours aforesaid; but in an inverted
order, and much paler.

10. A Rainbow may be seen in the
night at the full moon, affording the
same appearance as from the sun, but
differing in colour.

11. The Rainbow does not appear
the same to all persons; but one sees
his particular bow, according to the
position he stands in.

Of all these sufficient causes may be
assigned, but must be omitted here for
want of room.

A Rainbow may be artificially repre­
sented, by causing water to fall in small
drops like rain, through which the sun
shining, will shew a bow to the be­
holder, standing between the sun and
the drops.

Lunar RAINBOW, the appearance
of a bow, made by the refraction of the
moon's rays, in the drops of rain in the
night time.

Marine RAINBOW, a Phenomenon, 
sometimes seen in a much agitated sea, 
when the wind sweeping part of the
tops of the waves carries them aloft;
so that they are refracted by the rays
of the sun falling on them, and paint
the colours of the bow.

RAININESS [reniʒneſ, Sax.] apt­
ness to rain, rainy quality.

Tract of RAINS [among Sailors] so
named, because there are almost con­
stant rains and continual calms, thun­
der and lightening very violently; and
when the winds do blow they are only
uncertain gusts, which shift about all
round the compass. By which means, 
ships are sometimes detained there a
long time, and make but little way in
that tract of the sea to the northward
of the equator, between 4 and 10 de­
grees of latitude, and lying between
the meridian of Cape de Verde, and
that of the eastermost islands of the
same name.

To RAISE [ariſan, Sax. reiser, Dan.]
to set higher; also to increase; also
to occasion or cause.

To RAISE a Horse [in Horsemanship]
is to make him work at Curvets Capri­
ols, Pesades, &c. also to place his head
right, and make him carry well, hin­
dring him from carrying low, or arm­
ing himself.

To RAISE a Siege [Milit. Term] is to
give over the attack of a place, and to
quit the works thrown up against it, 
and the posts taken about it.

To RAISE a Plan [of a Fortress] is to
measure with cords and geometrical
instruments the length of the lines, and
the capacity of the angles, in order to
represent it in small upon papers, so as
to know the advantages and disadvan­
tages of it.

RAISED [of ariſen, Sax.] lifted
up, &c.

RAISER [in Carpentry] a board set
on edge, under the foreside of a step
or stair.

RAISING Pieces [in Architecture]
are pieces that lie under the beams, 
in brick, or timber, by the side of the
house.

RAITING the laying of hemp,
flax, timber, &c. when
green in a pond or running water, to
season them for use.

RATING the laying of hemp,
flax, timber, &c. when
green in a pond or running water, to
season them for use. 

Fore RAIZE [of a Ship]
is that part



of it which is before, and is usually
more than a third, but less than half
the length of the keel.

RARE-AFTWARD [of a Ship]
is that part
of it which is before, and is usually
more than a third, but less than half
the length of the keel.

RAKE-AFT [of a Ship]
is that part
which is at the setting on of the stern
post; and is generally about a 4th or
5th of her Fore-rake.

RAKE-AFTWARD [of a Ship]
is that part
which is at the setting on of the stern
post; and is generally about a 4th or
5th of her Fore-rake.

RAKE [prob. of אקד,
Heb. with addition
of the words, Hell
and Shame] a profligate person, a de­
bauchee, a base, rascally fellow.

RAKEHELL [prob. of אקד,
Heb. with addition
of the words, Hell
and Shame] a profligate person, a de­
bauchee, a base, rascally fellow.

RAKESHAME [prob. of אקד,
Heb. with addition
of the words, Hell
and Shame] a profligate person, a de­
bauchee, a base, rascally fellow.

RAKISH, profligate, debauched, &c.

RAKISHNESS, profligateness, &c.

A RALLY [raillerie, F.] a banter­
ing, jeering, &c. also a chiding.

A RALLY [ralliment of rallier,
F.] a reassembling
or gathering together scattered troops.
 
RALLYING [ralliment of rallier,
F.] a reassembling
or gathering together scattered troops.

RAM [Hieroglyph] was put to signify
a good governor and war.

RAM's-Head [in a Ship] is a great
block belonging to the fore and main
halliards; and has in it three shivers, 
into which the halliards are put; and
in a hole at the end of it the ties are
reev'd.

RAMADAM, a sort of Lent ob­
served by the Mahometans, during which
they fast the whole day with so severe
superstition, that they dare not wash
their mouths, nor even swallow their
spittle; but make amends by feasting
all night, and spend more in this month
than in six others.

They are forbid to eat, drink, or lie
with their wives from break of day to
sun set; but after sun set, when the
Imam has caused the lamps to be light­
ed, which are on the tops of the mi­
narets or turrets of the mosques, they
make good cheer and spend the best
part of the night in feasting; sleeping
in the day time, they do most of their
business by night.

They call this month holy and sacred, 
and believe that as long as it lasts the
gates of Paradise are open, and those
of Hell shut up: And it is accounted an
unpardonable crime to drink wine at
this time.

RAMAGE [of ramatus, L. having
boughs, of ramus, a branch] branches
of trees, &c.

RAMAGE-Hawk [of ramus, L. the
branch of a tree] a wild hawk that has
been long among the boughs; or that
has but newly left, or is taken from the
eiry; and is so called in the months
of May, June, July, and August.

A RAMBLER [q. reambulator, L.]
a rover or wanderer.

RAMIFICATION [with Anat.] the
spreading of small vessels, which issue
out from one large one: Thus the se­
veral branches of the Aorta, by which
the arterial blood is conveyed to all
the outward parts of the body, are cal­
led the ramifications of that artery,  L.

RAMIFICATION [in Botan.] small
branches issuing out of larger ones;
also the production of boughs and
branches

RAMIFICATIONS [in Painting, &c.]
figures resembling boughs or branches.

RAMINGUE [with Horsemen] a resty
horse, who resists or cleaves to the
spurs, that with malice defends himself
against the spurs, sometimes doubling
the reins, and frequently yerking to
favour his disobedience,  F.

RAMISHNESS [of ram, Sax.] rank­
ness of smell, like a goat, &c.

RAMOSE-Leaf [with Botan.] is that
which is farther divided from an alated
leaf, as in the common female fern.

RAMOUSNESS [ramositas, L.] ful­
ness of boughs or branches.

A RAMP [of rampant, F.] a hoiden­
ing, frisking, jumping, rude girl.

RAMPANT [in Heraldry] as a lion
rampant, is when he stands
so directly upright, that
the crown of his head an­
swers directly to the plants
of his feet, on which he
stands in a perpendicular
line, and not by placing the left foot in
the dexter corner of the escutcheon;
so that the difference between a lion
rampant, and a lion saliant, is, that a
rampant stands upright, but the saliant
stooping forwards, as making a sally.

Image omitted.



A RAMPANT-Lion [Hieroglyph.] re­
presents magnanimity.

RAMPART [rampart, F.] a large
massy bank of earth, 
raised about the body of a place to co­
ver it from the great shot, and formed
into bastions, courtains, &c.

RAMPIER [rampart, F.] a large
massy bank of earth, 
raised about the body of a place to co­
ver it from the great shot, and formed
into bastions, courtains, &c.

RAMPART [in Civil Architect.] the
space left void between the wall of the
city and the next houses.

To RAMPIRE, to fortify a place
with a rampart.

RAN [ran, Sax.] open or publick
theft. A word still used in these, and
the like phrases. He spent, made away
with, confounded all that he could rap
and ran, or run.

RANANITES [of Rana, L. a frog]
a sect among the Jews, who are said to
have a veneration for, and worship
frogs; because God made use of them
to plague Pharaoh, and they pretend to



think that God is pleased with their
superstition.

RANCID [rancidus, L.] that has
contracted an ill smell by being kept
close.

RANCIDNESS [ranciditas, L.] rank­
ness, mustiness.

RANCOROUS [of rancorosus, L.]
spiteful, malicious, full of an old
grudge.

RANCOUROUSNESS [rancordia, L.
anger, q. cor rancidum] a grudge, spite, 
animosity, spleen, &c.

RANDOM [prob. of randello, Ital.
unadvisedly, or rendons, O. F. uncer­
tainty, or of randon, F.] without aim, 
at a venture.

RANGE [rangée, F.] a grate for a
kitchin fire.

RANGE [with Gunners] the path of
a bullet, or the line it describes from
the mouth of the piece to the point
where it lodges.

RANGED [rangée, F.] disposed, pla­
ced in its rank of order: Or, as Mr.
Baxter, of rheng, Brit, any long order.

RANGES [in a Ship] are two pieces
of timber going a cross from side to
side, one aloft on the fore castle, a lit­
tle abaft the fore-mast, and the other
in the beak head, before the moulding
of the bow-spirit.

RANGING [Milit. Affairs] is the
disposing of troops in a condition pro­
per for an engagement or for a march.

RANK [rang, F.] a due order, or a
place allotted a thing suitable to its na­
ture, quality, or merit.

RANKNESS [rancneſſe, Sax.] the
having a frowzy, strong, or noisom
smell; also luxuriantness.

A RANT [in the Drama] an extra­
vagant flight of passion, over-shooting
nature and probability.

RANTER, an extravagant in flights
of language or gay apparel.

RANULA, a little frog,  L.

RANUNCULUS [in Heraldry] is
taken for the butter-flower, being of a
yellow or gold colour, and therefore
some have fancied that it might be
used in blazoning for Or, supposing
that the metals and colours in Heral­
dry, may be expressed as well by flow­
ers as precious stones. But that has
not been approved by any writers of
note.

To RAP it, to swear passionately.

RAPACIOUSNESS [of rapacitas, L.
of rapere, L. to snatch] ravening, ra­
venousness, aptness to take away by
violence.

RAPE, a violent forcing a virgin or 
woman to carnal copulation against
her will, for which crime the old pu­
nishment in England was loss of eyes
and stones; but is now death.

RAPE [of the Forest] a trespass com­
mitted in the forest by violence.

RAPE, the wood or stalks of the
clusters of grapes, when dryed and 
freed from the fruit.

RAPE, a part of a county, being
much the same as an hundred.

RAPHA [with Anat.] a ridge or line 
which runs along the under side of the 
Penis, and reaching from the Frænum 
to the Anus, divides the Scrotum and 
Peritonæum in two.

RAPHE [Anat.] the same as suture.

RAPIDITY [rapiditas, L. rapi­
dité, F. of rapere,
L.] hasty motion, carrying somewhat
with it.

RAPIDNESS [rapiditas, L. rapi­
dité, F. of rapere,
L.] hasty motion, carrying somewhat
with it.

RAPIFOLIOUS [in Botan. Writ.]
having a leaf like a turnip.

RAPINE [rapina, L. of rapere, to
snatch violently, &c.] robbery, pillag­
ing, a taking away a thing by open vio­
lence; and differs from theft, that being
taking away privately, contrary to the
mind of the owner,  L.

RAPPAREES [of rapere, L. to snatch
or take away] certain Irish robbers.

A RAPPER, a great oath.

RAPPING [of fraper, F.] a striking.

RAPP'D [raptus, L.] snatched or by
force taken away.

RAPTOR [in Law] a ravisher of
women, who in former times was pu­
nished with the taking away his eyes
and testicles,  L.

RAPTURE [raptura, L.] a taking
or snatching away, as the rapture of
St. Paul into the third Heaven; also a
transport of mind caused by excessive
joy.

RAPTUROUS, ravishing, &c.

RARE Body, one that is very porous, 
whose parts are at a great distance one
from another, and which contains but
a little matter under a great deal of
bulk.

RAREFACTION [with Philosoph.]
as the rarefaction of a natural body, is
its taking up more dimensions or larger
space than it did before.

RAREFACTIVES [with Physi­
cians] medi­
cines which open and enlarge the pores
of the skin, to give an easy vent to the
matter of perspiration.

RAREFACIENTIA [with Physi­
cians] medi­
cines which open and enlarge the pores
of the skin, to give an easy vent to the
matter of perspiration. 

To RAREFIE [rarefacere, L.] to
make thin. 

RARENESS [raritas, L. rarité,
F.] a rare thing, a 



thing that is extraordinary for beauty
or workmanship; a curiosity, uncom­
monness, excellency, &c.

RARITY [raritas, L. rarité,
F.] a rare thing, a 
thing that is extraordinary for beauty
or workmanship; a curiosity, uncom­
monness, excellency, &c.

RARENESS [of Meat] rawness; also
thinness; also scarceness.

RASCAL [either of raſcal, Sax.
old trash, trumpery, or racaille, F. riff-­
raff, or of ρὰγια, Gr. according to Ca­
saubon of אקד of קיד, Heb. vain, empty, 
&c.] a sorry fellow, a villain or rogue.

RASCALITY [la racaille, F.] the
scum of the people, the rabble; also a
base, rascally action.

RASCALLINESS, baseness, vileness, 
villainousness

To RASE on the Ground [with Horse­
men] is to gallop near the ground.

RASED [rasé, F.] demolished; also
blotted out.

RASHER of Bacon [prob. of rasura, 
L.] a thin slice.

RASHNESS [raðneſſe, Sax.]
over-hastiness, &c.

RASP, a raspberry.

RASPONTES a sect of Banians
which bear some 
resemblance to the sect of the Samarali, 
they believe the transmigration of
souls, but say that the souls of men go
into birds, who advertise their friends
of the good or evil which shall befal
them, and are therefore very supersti­
tious observers both of the singing and
flight of birds.

The wives of these are wont, when
their husbands die, to cast themselves
into the funeral pile wherein they are
burnt, unless by an article in the con­
tract of marriage they proved that
they should not be forced to it.

The men are generally stout and of
the soldiery and barbarous, having
little compassion upon any thing but
birds, which they take great care to
nourish, in that when their souls shall
pass into those sorts of animals, they
will exercise the same charity for them.

RASBONTES a sect of Banians
which bear some 
resemblance to the sect of the Samarali, 
they believe the transmigration of
souls, but say that the souls of men go
into birds, who advertise their friends
of the good or evil which shall befal
them, and are therefore very supersti­
tious observers both of the singing and
flight of birds.

The wives of these are wont, when
their husbands die, to cast themselves
into the funeral pile wherein they are
burnt, unless by an article in the con­
tract of marriage they proved that
they should not be forced to it.

The men are generally stout and of
the soldiery and barbarous, having
little compassion upon any thing but
birds, which they take great care to
nourish, in that when their souls shall
pass into those sorts of animals, they
will exercise the same charity for them.

To smell a RAT [soupçonner, F. subo­
lere, L.] to discover some intrigue.

RAT [with Mariners] is a place in
the sea, where there are rapid streams, 
and dangerous currents, or counter-­
currents.

RATABLE [of rata, sc. portio, L.]
that may be rated.

RATAN an Indian cane.

RATES of Ships, are the largeness
and capacity of ships of war, and are
six: The difference is commonly reck­
oned by the length and breadth of the
gun-deck, the number of tuns they con­
tain, the number of men and guns they
carry.

First RATE Ship, has the gun-deck
from 159 to 174 feet in length, and
from 44 to 45 feet in breadth, contains
from 1313 to 1882 tuns, carries from
706 to 800 men, and from 96 to 100
guns.

Second RATE, has its gun-deck from
153 to 165 feet in length, and from 41
to 46 feet in breadth, contains from
1086 to 1482 tuns, carries from 524 to
640 men, and from 84 to 90 guns.

Third RATE, has its gun-deck from
142 to 158 feet in length, and from 37
to 42 feet in breadth, contains from
871 to 1262 tuns, carries from 389 to
476 men, and from 64 to 80 guns.

Fourth RATE, has its gun-deck from
118 to 146 feet in length, and from 29
to 38 feet in breadth, contains from
448 to 951 tuns, carries from 216 to
346 men, and from 48 to 60 guns.

Fifth RATE, has its gun-deck from
100 to 120 feet in length, and from 24
to 31 feet in breadth, contains from 269
to 542 tuns, carries from 45 to 190
men, and from 26 to 44 guns.

Sixth RATE, has its gun-deck from
87 to 95 feet in length, and from 22 to
25 feet in breadth, contains from 152
to 256 tuns, carries from 50 to 110 men, 
and from 16 to 24 guns.

RATIFICATION [in Law] the
confirmation of a clerk in a benefice, 
&c. formerly given him by a bishop, 
where the right of patronage is doubted
to be in the king.

RATIO [in Arith. and Geom.] that
relation of homogeneous things, which
determines the quantity of one from
the quantity of another, without the
intervention of any third: Or,

RATIO [in Mathemat.] the rate, 
reason, or proportion that several
quantities or numbers have one to an­
other, with respect to their greatness
or smallness.

RATIOCINABILITY [of ratiocina­
bilis, L.] rationableness.

RATION [of Bread] for a foot sol­
dier, is a pound and a half a day.

RATIONABLE [rationabilis, L.]
reasonable.

RATIONABLENESS [rationabilitas,
L.] reasonableness.

RATIONAL Horizon [Astronomy] is
that whose plane is conceived to pass
through the center of the earth; and
therefore divides the globe into two
equal portions or hemispheres.

RATIONAL Quantity, &c. a quantity
or number commensurable to unity.

RATIONAL Integer is that where­
of unity is an aliquot part.



RATIONAL Fraction, is that which
is equal to some aliquot parts of an
unity.

RATIONAL mix'd Number, is one
that consists of an integer and a fracti­
on, or of unity and a broken number.

RATIONAL Way of erecting a Figure, 
a method of distributing the spaces of
the twelve houses, so call'd by Regio­
montanus, because of its excellency a­
bove those of the ancients. The me­
thod of this is, by dividing the equator
into twelve equal parts, by six great
circles drawn thro' the several sections
of the horizon and meridian, after the
same manner as Ptolemy and his fol­
lowers did the zodiack.

RATIONALE, an account or solu­
tion of some opinion, action, hypothe­
sis, phænomenon, or the like, on prin­
ciples of reason.

RATIONALE [the ושה of the He­
brews] a sacerdotal vestment worn by
the Jewish high priest.

RATIONALNESS [rationalitas, L.]
reasonableness,

RATIONALIST [of rationalis, L.]
one who prefers reason before revela­
tion.

RATLINGS [in a Ship] those lines
which make the ladder-steps to get up
the shrouds and puttocks.

RAT-TAIL [with Horsemen] a horse
that has no hair upon his tail.

To RATTLE [prob. of ratolen, Du.
or hreotan, Sax.] to make a rattling
noise, to talk confusedly or sillily, to
be noisy.

A MEER-RATTLE, an empty, 
noisy, talkative person.

RATTLE-Snake [in Virginia, &c.] a
large snake, having a rattle in his tail, 
composed of bones inclosed in a dry
husk; but altho' the bite of it is mortal, 
yet it never meddles with any thing, 
unless provoked.

RATTOON, a West-Indian fox, 
which has this peculiar property, that
if any thing be offered to it that has
lain in water, it will wipe and turn it
about with its fore-feet, before it will
put it to its mouth.

To RAVE [raver, F.] to talk idly or
madly, to be light-headed.

To RAVEN [ræfan, Sax.] to de­
vour greedily.

The RAVEN and the Crow, were by
the ancients, dedicated to Apollo, be­
cause they are the blackest of all birds, 
and that colour is appropriated to him, 
because the heat of the sun-beams
makes people black and tawny. For
which reason the Bramins in India ho­
noured black, in respect to the sun, to
which they show'd a singular devotion.

RAVEN [Hieroglyphically] is put to
signify long life, and of one not given
to change; a dead raven, a man dead
in a very old age.

RAVENDIA, a sect of Mahometans, 
who believ'd the transmigration of
souls, and that the soul of Mahomet, 
or some of the ancient prophets, ani­
mated the body of Abas Giafar Alman­
sor, the second caliph of the Abassidan
race; and therefore would pay him
divine honours, by making processions
round his palace; like as is done at the
temple of Mecca.

RAVENING [rapine, F. rapina, L.]
rapine, greedy eating.

RAVENOUSNESS [of ræfian, Sax.
to snatch greedily, or ravissant, F.]
greediness, rapaciousness, devouring
appetite.

RAVIN [of ræfian, Sax.] rave­
nousness. Milton.

A RAVING [reverie, F.] delirious
talking, &c.

To RAVISH [ravir, F. of rapere, L.]
to transport with joy admiration, &c.

RAVISHINGNESS [ravissement, F.]
a ravishing, charming, delighting na­
ture or quality.

RAVISHMENT [in Law] is the
taking away either a woman or an heir
in ward.

RAVISSANT [in He­
raldry] is the term used to
express the posture of a
wolf half-raised, as it were, 
just springing forwards up­
on his prey; see the figure.

Image omitted.



RAWNESS [of hreaþneſ, Sax. or
of rauw, Du.] being without skin; un­
cook'd, or not thoroughly dress'd;
also unexperiencedness; also having
the skin flay'd or rubbed off.

RAY [rayon, F. radius, L.] a beam
of the sun or any star.

RAY [in a Figurative Sense] the lustre
or brightness of any thing.

RAY Cloth, cloth that was never co­
loured or dyed.

RAY [with Botanists] is several semi-­
florets, set round a disk, in form of a
radiant star.

Diverging RAYS [in Opt.] are such
as go continually receding from each
other.

RAYMI or Intib Raymi [of Intib the
sun and Raymi a feast] a festival which
the Incas of Peru, were wont to cele­
brate in honour of the sun.

This festival was celebrated in the
month of June, after the summer sol­



stice. At which ceremony attended all
the officers of the army, and all the
Curaca's or great lords of the kingdom, 
being assembled in the capital city.
They all prepared themselves for this
festival, by a fast of three days, during
which time they abstain'd from their
wives, and no fire was suffered to be
kindled in the city.

The ceremony was begun by the In­
ca or king himself, who was esteemed
the son of the sun, tho they had also
another chief priest, who was of the
royal family.

When the fast was over the Inca
follow'd by the princes of the blood
and the great lords of the court, went
early in the morning into the great
Piazza of Cusco, and there turning his
face towards the east, and being all
bare-footed, waiting for the rising of
the sun, when they perceived it they
worshipped it. And the Inca holding
in his hand a great golden bowl, drank
to the sun, and afterwards gave it to
those of the royal family, to drink in
like manner.

And the lords of the court they like­
wise drank another liquor, that had
been prepared by the vestal virgins or
priestesses of the sun.

When this ceremony was ended, they
all returned towards the temple, where
the Inca attended with the princes of
the blood, entered and offered divers
vessels of gold to the sun, and the fi­
gures of several animals made in silver
and gold; and then the priest sacrificed
the victims which were lambs or sheep, 
and then the ceremony ended with
feasting and great rejoicings.

RAYONNANT [in Heraldry] signi­
fies darting forth rays, as
the sun does when it shines
out. So a Cross Rayonnant
is one which has rays of
glory behind it, darting out
from the center to all the quarters of
the escutcheon, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



RAZE [with Horsemen] a horse is
said to raze, or have razed, when his
corner-teeth cease to be hollow, to
that the cavity, where the black mark
was, is filled up, the teeth even, smooth
and raz'd, or shaved, as it were, and
the mark disappears.

RAZOR [culter rasorius, L.] a
barber's knife or instru­
ment for shaving.

RASOR [culter rasorius, L.] a
barber's knife or instru­
ment for shaving.

REACH, the space or distance that a
person or line, or thing can get or at­
tain to; also the extent of a persons
capacity or understanding.

REACH [with Mariners] is the di­
stance of any 2 points of land, which
bear to one another in a right line, 
and is principally us'd of navigable ri­
vers; as, Limehouse-Reach, Greenwich-­
Reach, Long-Reach, Chelsea-Reach, in
the river Thames.

REACHLESS [reaceleaſ, Sax.]
negligent.

REACTION [in Physicks] is the ac­
tion whereby a body acted upon re­
turns the action by a reciprocal one
upon the agent.

READINESS [of ʒereða, Sax.]
preparedness, promptitude, &c.

READINGS [in Criticism] as various
readings, are the different manners of
reading the text of authors in ancient
manuscripts, &c. a diversity having
risen from the corruption of time, or
ignorance of the copists.

READINGS [of Law] commentaries
or glosses on the law text, passage, or
the like, to shew the sense an author
takes it in, and the application that he
conceives to be made of it.

RE-AGGRAVATION [with Rom.
Cath.] the last monitory published after
three admonitions, and before the last
excommunication.

REAL, a Spanish Coin. See Ryal.

REALGAL, a mineral, a kind of
red arsenick, differing from the com­
mon, which is white; and from orpi­
ment, which is yellow.

REALNESS [realitas, L.] real exis­
tence, the truth of the matter.

REALISTS, a sect of school philo­
sophers, formed in opposition to the
Nominalists.

REALITAS [with the Scotists] a di­
minutive of res, and is a term used to
denote a thing which may exist of it
self, or which has a full and absolute
being of itself, and which is not con­
sidered as a part of any other.

To REALIZE [in Commerce] a term
scarce known before the year 1719, is
to convert what is got in Exchange-­
Alley, &c. in paper and imaginary
money into land, houses, moveables, 
or current species.

To REAR up [of areran, Sax.] to
erect or set up an end; also to nourish
or bring up.

REAR [in Milit. Art] the hindermost
part of an army or fleet.

REASON, a faculty or power of the
soul, whereby it distinguisheth good
from evil, truth from falsehood; or
that faculty of the soul whereby we
judge of things; also the exercise of
that faculty; or it may be defined that



principle whereby, comparing several
ideas together, we draw consequences;
also argument proof, cause, matter.

REASON [of State] in political af­
fairs, a rule or maxim, whether it be
good or evil, which may be of service
to the state; properly, something that
is expedient for the interest of the go­
vernment; but contrary to moral ho­
nesty and justice.

REASON Pieces [with Carpenters]
rather raising pie­
ces, are pieces of timber which lie un­
der the beams on the brick, or timber, 
in the side of an house.

RESON Pieces [with Carpenters]
rather raising pie­
ces, are pieces of timber which lie un­
der the beams on the brick, or timber, 
in the side of an house.

REASONABLENESS [of rationabi­
lis, L. raisonnable, F. and ness] equita­
bleness, justice, or rational quality.

REASONING [with Logicians] is an
action of the mind, by which it forms
a judgment of several others, as when
we judge that true virtue ought to have
relation to God, and that the virtue of
the Pagans was not true virtue, and it is
said to be the third of the four princi­
pal operations of the mind.

To RE-ASSIGN [reassigner, F.] to
assign again.

REATTACHMENT [in Law] a
second attachment of him, who was
formerly attached, and dismissed the
court without pay, as by the not com­
ing of the justice, or the like casualty.

REBATE [with Architects] chamfe­
ring or fluting.  F.

REBATEMENT [in Commerce] that
which is abated or discounted on pay­
ment of ready money, before it be­
comes due.

REBELLION [properly a renewing
the War] it was originally signified
among the Romans by a second resist­
ance, or rising up of such as had been
formerly overcome in battle, and had
yeilded themselves to their subjection.
It is now used for a traiterous taking
up arms, or a tumultuous opposing
the authority of the king, &c. or su­
preme power in a nation.

REBELLIOUSNESS [of rebellio, L.]
rebellion, disobedience, &c.

REBESK a sort of fine flourishes or
branched work in carving, painting, or
embroidery. See Arebesk work.

To RE-BUILD [of re, again, and
bytlian, Sax.] to build again.

REBUS [un rebus, F. prob. of rebus, 
the abl. pl. of res, L. a thing] a name, 
device, a pictured representation, with
words added to it; yet neither the one
nor the other can make out any sense
alone; the words or motto explaining
the picture, and the picture making up
the defect of the motto: As on a sun-­
dial, the words we must, alluding to the
dial, die all; or as the paramour in
Cambden, who, to express his love to
his sweet-heart Rose-Hill, had in the
border of his gown painted a rose, a
hill, an eye, a loaf and a well, which
in the Rebus language reads, Rose Hill
I love well.

REBUTTER [in Law] is when the
heir of the donor impleads the tenant
alledging the land was intail'd to him, 
and the donee comes in, and by virtue
of the warranty of the donor repels or
rebuts the heir: because tho' the land
was entailed to him, yet he is heir to
the warranter likewise. This is when
a man grants lands secured to the use of
himself, and the issue of his body, to
another in fee with warranty, and the
donee leases out the land to a third per­
son.

And likewise if a person allow his te­
nant to hold land without obliging him
to make good any waste, if afterwards
he sues him for waste made, he may
debar him of this action by shewing the
grant; and this is also called a rebut­
ter.

RECAPITULATORY, belonging to
recapitulation.

RECARGAZOON, the cargo or la­
ding of a ship homeward bound.

RECEIVER-General [of the court
of Wards] an officer which did former­
ly belong to that court, which being
now taken away by act of parliament, 
the office is now vacant.

RECEIVER [receveur, F.] a person
who receives. It is often used in an ill
sense, for one who takes stolen goods
from a thief, and conceals them.

RECEIVER [with Chymists] a vessel
used to receive what is distilled.

RECEIVER [of Mr. Boyle's air-­
pump] that glass out of which the air
is drawn, and within which, any living
creatures or other bodies are inclosed
for the making any experiments upon
them.

RECENSION, a reckoning, counting 
or numbering,  L.

RECENTNESS [recentia, L.] new­
ness, &c.

RECEPTIBILITY, capableness of 
being received, or of receiving.

RECEPTION [with Philos.] the same 
as passion.

RECEPTION [with Astrol.] a sort of 
accidental dignity or fortitude happen­
ing to two planets, especially if agree­
able in nature, when they are receiv'd 
in each other's houses, as when the 



sun arrives in Cancer, the house of the 
moon, and the moon in her turn ar­
rives in the house of the sun; exhala­
tion, triplicity.

RECESSION of the Equinoxes [in the
new Astron.] is the receding or going
back of the equinoxial points every
year about 50 seconds; which happens
by reason that the axis of the earth, 
after many revolutions round the sun, 
actually swerves from the parallelism, 
which it seems to keep with itself du­
ring the whole time of an annual re­
volution.

RECHANGE [in Commerce] the price
of a new exchange, due upon a bill of
exchange, which comes to be protested, 
and to be refunded to the bearer by the
drawer or endorser.

RECHANGE [Sea term] such tackle
as is kept in reserve on board of ship, 
to serve in case of failure of that al­
ready in use.

RECHARGE, of fire-arms, as a mus­
quet, &c. is a second loading or charge.

RECH'LESNESS [recceleaſneſſ, 
Sax.] carelesness, negligence.

RECIPIANGLE, a recipient angle,
an instrument for taking the quantity
of angles; especially in the making the
plans of fortifications.

RECIPROCAL [in Poetry] is said of
verses that run the same both back­
wards and forwards.

RECIPROCAL [with Gram.] is a term
applyed to certain verbs and pronouns, 
in those modern languages, which re­
turn or reflect the pronoun or person
upon himself.

RECIPROCALNESS [reciprocatio, L.]
interchangeableness.

RECIPROCATED [reciprocatus, L.]
mutually interchanged, or returned, 
like for like.

RECKONING [in Navigation] the e­
stimating the quantity of the ship's way, 
or of the run between one place and
another.

RECLAIMING [Old Customs] the
action of a lord pursuing, prosecuting
and recalling his vassal, who had gone
to live in another place, without his
permission.

A RECLINATION, a leaning back­
wards,  L.

RECLINING [reclinans, L.] leaning
backwards.

RECLUSION. the state of a recluse.

A RECOIL [recul, F.] the resilition
of a body.

RECOLLECTION, a mode of think­
ing, whereby those ideas, sought after
by the mind, are with pain and endea­
vour brought again to view.

RECOLLECTS [in the church of
Rome] or the minor brethen of St.
Francis, a congregation of religious es­
tablished about the year 1530; so deno­
minated from the spirit of Recollection, 
as to the observation of the rules of
their founder St. Francis, in their puri­
ty and simplicity.

To RECOMMEND [recommendare, 
L.] to give a person a good character.

RECOMMENDATIVE, of a recom­
mending quality,

RECONCILEABLENESS [of recon­
ciliable, F.] capableness of being recon­
ciled.

RECONCILIARI [old Law] a term
used of a church which is said to be so, 
when it is consecrated again after it
has been profaned or polluted, by hav­
ing been possessed by pagans or here­
ticks.

To RECONNOITRE [in War] is to
go to view and examine the situation of
a camp, &c. in order to make a re­
port.

To RECONNOITRE, a fleet or ship, 
is to approach near enough to know of
what rate, nation, &c. it is of.

To RECONNOITRE a Land, &c. is
to observe its situation, and find what
land it is.

RECOVERABLENESS [of recouvra­
ble, F. of recuperabilis, L.] capableness
of being recovered.

Real RECOVERY [in Law] is an
actual or real recovery of any thing
or the value thereof by judgment; as
if a man sue for land or any other
thing, and hath a verdict and judgment
for him.

Feigned RECOVERY [in Law]
is a cer­
tain form or course prescribed by law
to be observed for the better assuring
of lands and tenements to us, the effect
of it being to discontinue and destroy
estates-tail, remainders and reversions, 
and to bar or cut off the entails of
them.

Common RECOVERY [in Law]
is a cer­
tain form or course prescribed by law
to be observed for the better assuring
of lands and tenements to us, the effect
of it being to discontinue and destroy
estates-tail, remainders and reversions, 
and to bar or cut off the entails of
them.

RECREATIVENESS [of recreatif, 
F.] recreating quality.

RECRIMINATOR, one that blames
another that blames him,  L.

RECRUITS [in Milit.] are new men
raised to strengthen the forces already
a foot, either to fill up the places of
those slain or deserters, or augment the
number of men in a company.

RECTANGLE [with
Geom.] is a figure otherwise
called a long square, has 4
right-sides, and its two op­
posites equal.

Image omitted.





RECTANGLED [of rectus and angu­
lus, L.] consisting of right angles.

Similar RECTANGLES, are those
that have
their si­
des about
the equal
angles
proporti­
onal, that is, ab. eh. ad. ef.

Two images omitted.



RECTANGULARITY the being
right-an­
gled.

RECTANGULARNESS the being
right-an­
gled. 

To RECTIFY Curves [with Mathem.]
is to find a straight line equal to a
curve; or a plane equal to a curved
surface.

RECTI minores [with Anat.] two
small muscles of the head, which ap­
pear both in sight at once, arising from
the hinder part of the first Vertebra of
the neck, and are let into the middle
of the Os Occipitis, in two shallow de­
pressures of the said bone.

RECTO [in Law] a writ usually
called a Writ of Right, of such a nature, 
as that whereas other writs in real
actions are only to recover the posses­
sion of land, &c.in question, lost by
the plaintiff or his ancestors, this aims
to recover both the seisin thus lost, and
the property of the thing; so that both
rights are here pleaded together; that
of the property and that of the poses­
sion.

RECUMBENTNESS [of recumbens, 
L.] the relying or depending upon.

RECUPERATORY [recuperatorius, 
L.] of, or pertaining to a recovery.

RECURRENCY [of recurrens, L.]
the running back or returning.

RECURRENT Verses, verses that
read the same backwards as they do
forwards, as, Roma tibi subito, motibus
ibit amor.

RECURVATURE [of re, backwards, 
and curvatura, L. a bending] a bend­
ing or bowing backwards.

RECURVEDNESS [recurvitas, L.]
a being bent
backwards.

RECURVITY [recurvitas, L.]
a being bent
backwards. 

RECUSANTS [recusantes, L.l per­
sons who refuse to acknowledge the
king's supremacy; properly Roman Ca­
tholicks, who refused to submit; but it
has been extended to comprehend all
who separated from the established
Church of England, of whatsoever sect
or opinion.

RECUSATION [in Law] an act
whereby a judge is desired to refrain
from judging some certain cause, on
account of his relation to one of the
parties, because of some enmity, &c.

RED [rhund, C. Br. reð, Sax.] one
of the simple or primary colours of
natural bodies, or rather of the rays
of light.

RED-Book [of the Exchequer] an an­
cient manuscript volume, wherein are
register'd the names of those who held
lands per Baroniam, in the time of king
Henry II. and also it contains several
things before the conquest. It is in the
keeping of the king's remembrancer.

To RED-Shire [with Smiths] spoken
of a piece of iron in
their fire, that is heated too much, so
that it breaks or cracks under the ham­
mer, while it is working, between hot
and cold.

To RED-Scer [with Smiths] spoken
of a piece of iron in
their fire, that is heated too much, so
that it breaks or cracks under the ham­
mer, while it is working, between hot
and cold. 

REDDLE red chalk, a red fossil-­
stone, used by painters
in making craons, &c.

RUDDLE red chalk, a red fossil-­
stone, used by painters
in making craons, &c.

REDEEMABLES, lands, funds, &c.
sold, with a reservation of the equity
of redemption.

REDEEMABLENESS, capableness of
being redeemed.

REDEMPTION [in Law] a faculty
or right of re-entring upon lands, &c.
that have been sold and assign'd, &c.
upon re-imbursing the purchase-money
with legal costs.

REDEMPTION, a purchasing the
freedom of another from bondage,  F.
of  L.

REDEMPTION of Captives [in the
Church of Rome] a religious order, 
call'd also that of Notre Dame de la
Mercy, who besides the three customary
vows of chastity, poverty and obedi­
ence, make a fourth to employ them­
selves for the delivering Christian
slaves who are detained by Barbarians, 
and also to enter into servitude for the
redemption of Christians.

REDEMPTIONS [anc. Law Writ.]
grievous mulcts imposed, by way of
commutation for the head or life of the
delinquent.

REDEVABLE, indebted, obliged or
beholding to.  F.

REDHIBITION [Civil Law] an ac­
tion in a court, whereby to annul the
sale of some moveable, and to oblige
the seller to take it back again, upon
the buyer's finding it damaged.

REDICULUS [among the Romans]
a deity so said to be call'd of ridere, to
laugh, q. d. the god of laughter, on ac­
count of the precipitate and unexpected
return of Hannibal, having made the
Romans laugh and fall to ridiculing him;
or rather of redire, to return.



He had a temple built to him near
Rome, upon the way to the gate call'd
Capena, near to which Hannibal ap­
proaching in order to enter into Rome, 
was obliged hastily to return with all
his army, being seiz'd with a sudden
terror, occasioned as they said by a cer­
tain horrible Spectre which appeared
in the air, as it were for the defence
of the city, in memory of which they
consecrated the temple to Rediculus.

REDINTEGRATION [in Civil Law]
the action of restoring a person to the
enjoyment of a thing, whereof he had
been illegally dispossess'd.

REDMANS. See Red Knights.

REDOLENCY [of redolentia, 
L.] sweetness
of smell,  F.

REDOLENTNESS [of redolentia, 
L.] sweetness
of smell,  F. 

REDUCIBLENESS, capableness of
being reduced.

REDUCT [in Carpentry] a quirk or
little place taken out of a larger, to
make it more uniform and regular;
also for some other conveniences, as
cabinets, sides of chimnies, alcoves.

REDUCTION of a Figure, Design or
Draught, &c. is the making a copy
thereof, either larger or smaller than
the original.

REDUCTION [in Surgery] an opera­
tion, whereby a dislocated, luxated or
fractured bone is restored to its proper
place.

REDUNDANT Hyperbola, a curve
of the higher kind, so called, because
it exceeds the conick section of that
name in the number of its hyperboli­
cal legs; it being a triple hyperbola, 
with six hyperbolical legs.

REDUNDANTNESS [redundantia, 
L.] overflowingness, superfluity.

To REDUPLICATE [reduplicatum, 
L.] to double over again.

REEFT [with Mariners] part of a
sail that is taken up, as when, in a
great gale of wind, they roll up part
of the sail below, to make it narrow­
er, and not to draw too much wind:
This taking up or contracting is called
Reefing.

RE-ENTRY [of rentrer, F.] entring
again.

RE-ENTRY [in Law] a resuming
and retaking that possession that had
lately been foregone.

RE-ESTABLISHMENT [retablisse­
ment, F.] an establishing again.

To REEVE [with Sailors) is to draw
a rope thorough a block, to run up
and down.

RE-EXTENT [in Law] a second
extent made upon lands or tenements,
upon complaint made that the first ex­
tent was partially executed.

To REFER [referre, L.] to put a bu­
siness into the hands of another, in
order to be considered or managed.

To REFINE [raffiner, F.] to make
finer, to purge and purify, by drawing
liquors off from the lees, or metals, by
melting.

REFLECTION, it is related that
Pythagoras could write what he pleased
on a glass, and, by the reflection of the
same species, would make those letters
appear upon the circle of the moon, so
plain as to be read by any person, some
miles distant from him. Cornelius
Agrippa affirms the possibility of it, and
that the method of performing it was
known to himself and others.

REFLECTION [in the Pythag. and
Copernican System] is the distance of
the pole from the horizon of the disk;
which is the same thing, as the sun's
declination in the Ptolemaick hypo­
thesis.

REFLECTION of the Rays of Light 
[in Opticks] is a motion of the rays, 
whereby, after impinging on the solid
parts of bodies, or rather after a very
near approach thereto, they recede or
are driven therefrom.

REFLECTION [in Mechanicks] is
the turn or regressive motion of a mo­
veable, occasioned by the resistance of
a body, which hindered its pursuing
its former direction.

REFLEX [in Painting] is under­
stood of those places
in a picture, which are supposed to be
illuminated by a light reflected by some
other body, represented in the same
piece.

REFLECT [in Painting] is under­
stood of those places
in a picture, which are supposed to be
illuminated by a light reflected by some
other body, represented in the same
piece. 

REFLEXIBLENESS, capableness of
being reflected, or that property of
the rays of light, whereby they are
disposed to be reflected.

REFORM, a re-establishment or re­
vival of a former neglected discipline;
also a correction of reigning abuses.

REFORMADO [in a Ship of War]
a gentleman who serves as a voluntier, 
in order to gain experience, and succeed
the principal officers.

REFORMATION, the time of the
first establishment of the reformed or
Protestant religion.

Right of REFORMATION, a right
which the princes of Germany claim to
reform the church in their territories, 
as being invested with the spiritual as
well as temporal power.

REFORMATION [Hieroglyphically]
was by the ancients represented by a



Phenix, of whom it is related, that an­
other riseth out of her ashes, after she
hath been consumed by the sun beams.

REFRACTARINESS [of refracta­
rius, L.] obstinacy, headstrongness, a
refusing to be ruled, &c.

REFRACTED Dials, are such dials
as are drawn in a concave or hollow
bowl, so that the hour-lines may shew
the true hour, when the bowl is full of
water, or some other liqour.

REFRACTION [in Mechanicks] is
the deviation
of the moving
body from its
different
course, by rea­
son of the dif­
ferent density
of the medium
it moves in;
or a flexion
and change of
determination
occasioned by a body's falling oblique­
ly out of one medium into another of
a different density.

A ball, as at A, moving in the air, 
into the line A B, and falling obliquely
on the surface of the water G D, does
not proceed straight to E, but deviates
or deflects to B again; and if the ball
moving in the water in the same line, 
A B, should fall obliquely on the sur­
face of the water G D, it will not pro­
ceed straight to E, nor yet deflect to F.
but to G.

Image omitted.



REFRAGABLENESS [refragabilitas, 
L.] refractoriness.

REFRAINMENT [refrænatio, L.] a
refraining.

REFRANGIBILITY [of the Rays of
Light] is the disposition to be refracted
or turned out of the way, in passing out
of one transparent body or medium
into another.

REFRANGIBLENESS [of re and
frangibilitas, L.] capableness of being
refracted.

REFRENATION [refrænatio, L.] a
bridling or checking, a curbing or hold­
ing in, L.

REFRIGERANT [refrigerans, L.]
cooling.

REFRIGERATIVENESS [of refri­
gerativus, L.] cooling quality.

REFULGENTNESS [refulgentia, L.]
brightness, splendour.

REGALIS Aqua, an acid, corrosive
spirit or water, serving as a menstruum
for dissolving gold; it is prepared by
mixing common salt or sal armaniac
with spirit of nitre, or with common
aqua fortis, L.

REGARDANT [in He­
raldry] signifies looking
behind, and is apply'd to
beasts represented in an
escutcheon, with their
faces turned to their tails, 
as in the figure.

Image omitted.



REGARDED [regardé, F.] looked up
on with concern, respected, had respect
to.

REGARDFUL [of regard, F. and
ful, Sax.] having regard to, careful of, 
concerned for.

REGARDFULNESS, heedfulness, 
&c.

REGARDLESS [of regard, F. and
leſ, Sax.] heedless.

REGARDLESNESS, heedlesness.

REGARDER, a officer belonging to
the king's forest, who is obliged by
oath, to view and enquire of all offen­
ces and defaults that have been com­
mitted by the foresters, and all other
officers, in the execution of their office.

REGENERATE, regeneracy. Milton.

REGENERATENESS [regeneratio, 
L.] regeneration.

REGENT [in a Colledge] a professor
of arts and sciences, who holds a class
or set of pupils.

REGERMINATION, a springing or
budding out again,  L.

REGIBLENESS [of regibilis, L.] easi­
ness to be governed.

REGIFUGE [of regifugium, of regem
and fugare, L. to drive away] a festival
held in ancient Rome, on the sixth of
the calends of March, i. e. on our 24th
of February, in memory of the expul­
sion of their king, particularly of Tar­
quin's flying out of Rome on that day.

REGIMEN [in Medicine] a rule or
course of living, with regard to eating, 
drinking, clothing or the like, accom­
modated to some disease, and to the
particular course of physick the patient
is under.

REGIMENTAL [of regiment, F.] of
or belonging to a regiment.

REGIONS [with Philos.] are particu­
lar divisions of the air, which are ac­
counted three, the upper, middle, and
lower.

Upper REGION, commences from
the tops of the mountains, and reaches
to the utmost limits of the atmosphere, 
in which is a perpetual, equable calm­
ness, clearness and serenity.

Lowest REGION, is that wherein
we breathe, and is bounded by the re­
flection of the sun's rays; that is, by
the height to which they rebound from
the earth.



Middle REGION is that wherein the
clouds reside, meteors are formed, &c.
extending from the extremity of the
lowest to the top of the highest moun­
tains.

REGIONARIES [in Ecclesiastical His­
tory] a title given to those who had the
charge and administration of the church
affairs from the fifth century,

REGISTERS in parish churches were
first appointed by Thomas Cromwell, 
Earl of Essex, vicar-general to king
Henry the VIII. A. C. 1538.

REGISTER Ships [in Trafick] such
ships to which the king of Spain, or the
council of the Indies, grant permissions
to go and traffick in the parts of the Spa­
nish West-Indies; so called, because they
are registred before they set sail from
Cadiz.

REGISTER [with Letter Founders]
one of the inner parts of the mould, in
which the types are cast.

REGLET [Architect.] a little,
flat, narrow moulding, 
used chiefly in compartiments and pan­
nels, to separate the parts or members
from one another, and to form knots, 
frets and other ornaments.

RIGLET [Architect.] a little,
flat, narrow moulding, 
used chiefly in compartiments and pan­
nels, to separate the parts or members
from one another, and to form knots, 
frets and other ornaments.

REGLETS [with Printers] See Rig­
lets.

REGULAR Bodies [with Mathem.]
are solid bodies, whose surfaces are
composed of regular and equal figures, 
and whose solid angles are all equal, 
of which there are five.

1. A Tetrahedron, which is a pyramid
comprehended under four equal and
equilateral triangles.

2. The Hexhaedron, or cube, whose
surface is composed of six equal squares.

3. The Octahedron, which is bound­
ed by eight equal and equilateral tri­
angles.

4. The Dodecahedron, which is con­
tained under twelve equal and equila­
teral pentagons.

5. The Icosihedron, which consists of
twenty equal and equilateral triangles:
These are all the regular bodies that
can be, and they are called the Plato­
nick bodies.

REGULAR Curves, [with Mathem.]
are such as the perimeters of the co­
nick sections, which are always curved
after the same geometrical manner.

REGULARNESS [regularité, F. of
regularis, L.] agreeableness to rules, 
exactness, strict order.

REGULO, a title given to the sons
of the emperor of China.

REGULUS, a petty king; a Saxon
title for a count.

Martial REGULUS of Antimony 
[with Chymists] a mixture of horse-shoe
nails melted with the Regulus.

REGULUS [with Astron.] a star of
the first magnitude in the constellation, 
Leo.

REGURGITATION, a swallowing
again,  L.

RE-IMBARKED [reimbarqué, F.]
put on ship-board again, &c.

RE-IMBATTLED, put into battle
array again.

RE-IMBURSEMENT [in Traffick, 
&c.] a repayment; or returning what
money a person had received by way
of advance, &c.

To RE-INGAGE [of re, and engager, 
F.] to ingage again.

RE-INGAGEMENT [of re, and en­
gagement, F.] an engaging again.

RE-INVIGORATION, an invigo­
rating again, or the second time.

REJOINTING [with Architects] the
filling up of joints of the stones in old
buildings, when worn hollow by the
course of time or water.

A REITERATION [with Printers]
is when the last form is laid on the
press.

REITTERS, an ancient title of the
German cavalry.

RELATION [with Grammar.] is the
correspondence which words have one
to another in construction.

RELATION [with Logicians] is the
fourth category, as that of Father, Hus­
band, Master, Servant, King, Subject, 
and every thing that denotes compari­
son, as equal, greater, less.

RELATION [in Philos.] the mutual
respect of two things, or what each is
in regard to the other.

RELATION [in a Law Sense] is
when, in consideration of law, two
times, or other things, are considered
as if they were all one; and by this
the thing, subsequent is said to take its
effect by relation.

RELATION [in Geometry, &c] is
the habitude or respect of two quanti­
ties to one another, with regard to
their magnitude: The same as Ratio.

RELATION [in School Divinity] is
used to denote certain of the divine
perfections, called personal ones, in
regard, by those one divine person is
referred to another, and distinguished
from it, as in God there is one Nature, 
two Processions, three Persons, and
four Relations; the Relations Are Pater­
nity, Filiation, active Spiration, and pas­
sive Spiration.



RELATIVE Substantives [with
Gram.] are such as bear a relation to
some others, as a father, son, daughter, 
husband, wife, &c.

RELATIVE Adjectives, are such as
have relation to some others, as better, 
worse, higher, lower, equal, unequal, 
&c.

RELATIVE Pronoun, is such an one
as has relation to a noun that goes be­
fore, as he, him, that, who, which, with
their numbers.

RELATIVENESS [of relativus, L.]
the having relation to.

RELAXATION [with Surgeons] a
preternatural extension, or straining of
a nerve, tendon, muscle, &c. either by
violence or weakness.

RELAY [in Tapestry Work] an open­
ing left in a piece where the figures or
colours are to be changed, or which is
to be filled up when the other work is
done.

A RELAY [of rallier, F.] a fresh
equipage, horse, &c. sent before, or
appointed to be ready, for a traveller
to change, to make the greater expe­
dition, as in riding post.

RELEGATION, a kind of exile or
banishment for a time appointed, 
wherein the obnoxious person is re­
quired to retire to a certain place, and
to continue there till he is recalled,  L.

RELENTLESS, unrelenting, unca­
pable to relent, Milton.

RELENTMENT [rallentissement, F.]
a relenting.

RELIEF [in Chancery] is an order
sued out for the dissolving of contracts, 
and other acts, upon account of their
being unreasonable, prejudicial, grie­
vous, &c.

RELIEF. See Relievo.

RELIEF reasonable, is that enjoined
by some law, or fixed by an ancient
custom, and which does not depend on
the will of the lord.

RELIEVO [in Sculpture, &c.] im­
bossed work, the protuberance or
standing out of any figures above the
ground or plane whereon they are
formed,  Ital.

Demi RELIEVO, is when one half
of the figure rises from the plane or
ground.

RELIEVO [in Architect.] is the pro­
jecture of any ornament.

RELIEVO [in Paint.] is the degree
of force or boldness, wherewith the fi­
gures, beheld at a due distance, seem
to stand out from the ground of the
painting, as tho' they were really im­
bossed.

RELIGION [religio, L.] is defined to
be a general habit of reverence towards
the divine nature, by which we are
both enabled and inclined to worship
and serve God; after that manner
which we conceive to be most agree­
able to his will, so that we may pro­
cure his favour and blessing.

Natural RELIGION, is what men
might know, and be obliged to by meer
principles of reason, improved by con­
sideration and experience, without the
assistance of divine revelation.

Revealed RELIGION, is what God
has obliged us to perform by the ma­
nifestation of his will, upon the consi­
deration of temporal or future rewards
and punishments. The parts of reveal­
ed religion are Faith and Practice.

RELIGION [with Painters] is repre­
sented in a silver veil, with a mantle of
white.

The divers RELIGIONS of the World. 

ARABIA is subject to the Grand
Signior and other Mahometan princes, 
who nevertheless tolerate Christians to
live there, and they have also a famous
monastery upon mount Sinai, which
is possessed by the Caloyers or religious
Greeks of the order of St. Basil.

In Turkish ASIA Mahometanism is the
religion of the country; nevertheless
the Grand Signior tolerates other re­
ligions there as well as in Europe. The
Greeks have two Patriarchs there, 
that of Antioch, and that of Jerusalem.
In his empire are principally the
Christians called Armenians, Jacobines
Georgians, Maronites, Nestorians; there
are also Roman Catholicks, who are for
the most part French and Venetian mer­
chants, Coftes, Sabeans, and a multi­
tude of Jews.

BARBARY [in Africa] is inhabited
by Moors, Turks, and Arabs, who are
generally of the Mahometan religion, 
but the Portuguese and Spaniards have
a few places there; there are some
towns in which the infidels allow the
Christians and Jews the exercise of
their religion, paying tribute for it.

BRASILE [in America] is subject to
the Portuguese; where they have an
archbishop of St. Salvador; the coun­
try of Plata and that of the Patagons
are peopled with idolatrous inhabi­
tants, but the Spaniards have divers
places there, and endeavour to propa­
gate the Christian religion among those
idolaters.



CALICUT [in India] the people of
this kingdom believe in one God, the
Creator of Heaven and earth; but
they think him to be unactive and does
not concern himself in human affairs;
but say that an evil angel, named Deu­
mo governs the world, and to him
they pay divine honours, and also to
other false divinities.

CANADA [in New France, in Ame­
rica] the inhabitants are generally Ro­
man Catholicks, the country great part
of it belonging to the French; but New
England, New Holland and New Swede­
land, have also colonies there and pro­
sess the Reformed religion of their
respective countries.

But the savages, as Iroquois, Hurons
and Algonquains and others, have little
or no religion, except such as converse
with the Europeans.

The Island CANDIA, now subject to
the Grand Signoir, besides Mahometans, 
has Roman Catholicks, Greeks and Jews, 
who pay tribute for their liberty.

CAFRARIA [in Africa] is peopled
with Idolaters, but the Dutch have two
forts near the Cape of Good Hope, and
the Portugueze a castle in the kingdom
of Sofala.

The CARIBEE Islands and the na­
tives of Guiana are idolaters; but some
of them believe the immortality of the
soul; also the inhabitants of the coun­
try of the Amazons worship idols.

CEYLON, is an island of idolaters;
but there are many Mahometans among
them, and a good number of Christians.
The Hollanders having divers cities
there in their possession.

CHILI [in America] the Spaniards
have established divers seminaries in
Chili, in order for the conversion of the
natives, who have but very little reli­
gion.

The CHINESE are Idolaters; but the
exercise of the Christian religion, at
least as the Jesuits have been pleased to
model it, is permitted, and their order
have divers churches in that country;
there are also a great number of Jews, 
who have their synagogues by the em­
peror's permission.

CONGO [in Africa] there are many
idolaters in this kingdom, some Maho­
metans, and divers Christians, especially
in the province of Amplo, of which the
Portugueze are masters.

In CORFU, an island belonging to
the Venetians, the inhabitants are of
the Greek church.

The Island of CYPRUS is under the
dominion of the Turks, but the Latin,
and Greek churches are allow'd to be
there without any molestation. There
are also Armenians, Coftes, and all sorts
of sects, who only pay tribute for their
liberty.

DALMATIA is possess'd by both the
Venetians and Turks, and the little re­
publick of Ragusa pays tribute both to
the one and the other; but is of the
Romish communion, and hath an arch­
bishop. The Venetians have two bi­
shopricks in Dalmatia, which are those
of Zara and Spalatro.

DENMARK, is in general Protestants, 
and follow the confession of Ausburg.

EGYPT, the chief religion of this
country is Mahometan, which is follow'd
by the Moors, Turks and Arabs. The
Christian Cophtes have also churches
there, and the Jews synagogues.

FLORIDA [in America] its natives
are savages and idolaters, adoring the
sun and moon, but there are colonies
both of English and Spaniards there, and
have introduc'd the Christian religion
in divers places.

FRANCE is now generally of the
Roman Catholick communion, since the
late king Lewis XIV. has revoked the
edict of Nantz, and prohibited the ex­
ercise of the Reformed Religion.

GENEVA, the inhabitants, of this
republick, are generally of the re­
formed religion.

GERMANY has almost as many reli­
gions as it has princes, states and free
cities; but the emperor himself pro­
fesses that of the Church of Rome;
the principal sects besides are Luthe­
rans, Anabaptists and Calvinists: but the
Lutherans are the most numerous, and
the most countenanc'd by authority.

The Anabaptists had formerly gain'd
ground all over Germany; except Au­
stria and Bavaria, but now there are
scarce any of them left, except in pla­
ces bordering on Holland; Calvinism is
mostly profess'd in the Palatinate in the
country of Hesse, dutchy of Wirtemberg, 
and the Hans towns.

GOA. The isle belongs to the Por­
tugueze, who have divers churches
and monasteries in it, and the arch­
bishop of this island hath under him all
the bishops of the East-Indies. And
here the inquisition severely exercises
its authority over those they call apos­
tates.

GOLCONDA [in India] the king him­
self follows the religion of the Persians, 
but the people are idolaters.

GUINEA [in Africa] the inhabitants
of this country worship idols; but the



English, Dutch and Danes, possess seve­
ral places on the coast, and the Portu­
gueze have habitations in the country, 
where they endeavour to introduce
Christianity: The Negroes mix some
ceremonies of Mahometanism with
their idolatry; so do the inhabitants of
Zaara and Bildegulderid observe the
Mahometan religion; but that of the
natives of Nubia, is a mixture of the
Christian ceremonies, with those of
Judaism and Mahometanism; the Abys­
sines are the purest of all the Eastern
Christians, as for Monomotapa, the an­
cient religion of that is heathenism
idolatry; but Christianity has been e­
stablished in divers places of it by the
Jesuits.

HOLLAND, in all the dominion of
the states, the reformed religion ac­
cording to the mode of John Calvin is
uppermost; but there are many Ana­
baptists, Lutherans, Remonstrants, suf­
fered to be there, and also the Luthe­
rans are permitted to build churches;
and the Anabaptists have also theirs;
there are also a considerable number of
Jews, who have a synagogue at Am­
sterdam and Rotterdam; likewise Papists, 
but they are not suffered the publick
exercise of their religion.

HUNGARY, is inhabited partly by
Roman Catholicks, and partly by Luthe­
rans.

JAPAN, [in India] idolatry reigns
here since the persecution of Tarcosa­
ma, who reigned there in 1630, and
tho' the Christians had formerly, they
have at present no church there.

INDIA, the empire of the Mogul, is
subject to a Mahometan prince of the
sect of Ali, which is that of Persia;
but there are many idolaters in his
dominions. There are also Abyssines, 
Jews and Roman Catholicks, for every
nation there enjoys the free exercise
of its religion.

Divers kingdoms in the Peninsula of
Indus, on this side the gulph of Bengala, 
the inhabitants of which are almost all
idolaters, but Armenians, Banians or
Indian Priests, Jews and Moors, are
suffered to live there, according to
their several religions; besides Arabs, 
Abyssines and Persians, who partly fol­
low the Christian religion, and that of
the Moors or Mahometans.

The main land of INDIA beyond the
Ganges, is possess'd by divers idolatrous
princes; the Peninsula of the same In­
dus, on the east side of the gulph is
also a country, where they worship
idols and false gods.

ITALY, the inquisition suffers not
here, nor in any of the adjacent islands, 
any of those whom they call Hereticks;
since they look upon them as rebellious
subjects against the pope, the church's
pretended head.

But yet they tolerate Jews for par­
ticular reasons; but they are made to
pay tribute to the pope, for that liber­
ty they enjoy in the ecclesiastical state.

MADAGASCAR, the natives of this
island believe there is one God, crea­
tor of Heaven and earth, but they
also worship an evil spirit; tho' the
French who inhabit there do endeavour
to introduce Christianity among them.

MALACCA is dependant upon the
the king of Siam, who here permits
the exercise of all religions, and testi­
fies a particular esteem for that of the
Christians, but the greatest part of it
belongs to the Dutch, who grant liberty
of conscience to merchants of divers
religions, who live and trade there.

MALTA, there is no religion per­
mitted in this island, but that of the
Church of Rome.

MEXICO or New Spain, is well
stored with Roman Catholicks, where
there is an archbishop and divers bi­
shops; the Spaniards are also masters
of New Castile d'Or, where the Roman
Catholick religion has been introduced
by them; but the mountaineers of this
country are still Idolaters, adoring the
sun and moon as the principal divini­
ties, supposing one to be the husband
and the other the wife.

The MUSCOVITES follow the reli­
gion of the Greek Church, although
they have a Patriarch at Muscovy, yet
they acknowledge the Church of Con­
stantinople. The Morduois who inhabit
the frontiers of Muscovy, circumcise
after the manner of the Jews and Turks, 
tho' they are not of their religions;
they are neither profess'd Christians nor
Idolaters, but live according to the laws
of nature, and worship one God, the
Creator of the world, to whom they
offer the first fruits of all they gather, 
by casting them up towards Heaven.

NARSINGA [in India] here the peo­
ple practise the same superstitions as
they do at Calicut, and the country is
full of Pagods or temples, built in ho­
nour of their Dæmons.

NETHERLANDS, in those parts that
are under the government of France
and Spain, there is no other religion
tolerated but that of the Roman Catho­
lick; and if there be any Calvinists and
Lutherans there, they do not discover
themselves.



PEGU [in India] the people of this
kingdom are so obstinately bent upon
Idolatry, that all the attempts hitherto
to bring the Christian religion into the
country have been in vain.

PERSIA, in this empire the Mahome­
tan religion prevails, according to the
sect of Ali, which is different from that
of Abubeker, Omar and Osman, whom
the Turks prefer before that of Ali;
but the Persians allow full liberty of
conscience to all strangers, so that there
are Roman Catholicks, Armenians, Nes­
torians and Sabeans; Jews, and Banians
or Indian priests and other Idolaters.

PERU [in America] belongs to the
king of Spain, there the Roman Catho­
lick religion is establish'd by the Spa­
niards, who have an archbishoprick at
Lima, and divers bishopricks in other
provinces; and Idolatry remains but
among very few of the savages.

The PHILIPPINE Islands belong to
the king of Spain, who gives liberty of
conscience to all those of the country
that are Idolaters, and to divers Indians
and Chineses.

The islands of Sonda, call'd Java and
Sumatra, are inhabited by people ad­
dicted to the worship of idols; there
are also Mahometans and Christians.

The Hollanders are very potent in
the isle of Java, where the Dutch pos­
sess Batavia.

POLAND, this kingdom is of the
Romish religion, tho' there are many
Protestants in it, especially in lower Po­
land, about Lublin, Prussia and Livonia, 
towards the Baltick.

In the provinces that border upon
Moravia, Hungary and Silesia, and those
that advance towards the south and the
Levant, they for the most part follow
the Greek church.

RAGUSA, this republick belonging
to Dalmatia, pays tribute both to the
Turks and Venetians; but is of the po­
pish religion, and hath an archbishop.

SARDINIA professes the Romish reli­
gion, and uses the inquisition.

SCOTLAND is of the Protestant re­
ligion, but differs from England, in that
the establish'd religion of Scotland is
Presbyterian, and that of England epis­
copal.

SPAIN, there are none but Roman
Catholicks in this kingdom, or at least
known to be otherwise, the inquisition
being there put in execution, and they
suffer neither Moors nor Jews to be
there.

SICILY professes the Roman Catholick
religion, and also makes use of the in­
quisition,

SWEDEN follows the confession of
Augsburg; in all the territories of the
king of Great Britain the Reformed
religion is established.

SWITZERLAND consists of 23 can­
tons, of which five are Romanists, viz.
Uri, Switz, Underwald, Lucern and Zug;
the canton of Solurn is almost all Ca­
tholick; Zurich, Bearn, Bale and Schaff­
hausen are either Zuinglians or Calve­
nists; Friburg, Claris and Apenzeel are
partly Romanists and partly Calvinists.
Their allies the Vaudois are partly
Zuinglians; the country of the Grisons
partly Roman Catholicks and partly Pro­
testants. The Valtoline are all Roman
Catholicks.

TARTARY is subject to divers prin­
ces; the most potent of which is the
great Cham. Some of these princes are
Mahometans, others Pagans and Idolaters
there are also Nestorians and Jews;
but these last observe but little of the
law of Moses.

Crim TARTARY professes Maho­
metanism but have some Jews and Ro­
man Catholicks among them, who are
tolerated the exercise of their religion
paying tribute for it.

TRANSYLVANIA is filled with all
sorts of religions but that of the church
of Rome is least in request.

TURKY, the Mahometan religion
reigns there; but the Grand Signior
suffers Christians and Jews in divers
places. There are great numbers of
Christian Greeks, and they have a pa­
triarch at Constantinople, whose juris­
diction extends as far as Natolia.

VENICE the inhabitants of this re­
publick are generally Roman Catholicks, 
and have banished the Jews.

VIRGINIA is possessed by the Eng­
lish, who are of the Protestant religion, 
but the natives believe there divers
gods of different orders, who depend
upon one chief called Keuvas, who is
their soveraign, and he has been so
from eternity; they esteem the sun, 
moon and stars to be demi-gods.

RELIGIOUS Man [Hierogly.] was
represented by a lion running from a
cock; also by a palm-tree, the root
whereof is unpleasant to look upon, 
but the fruit and branches are pleasant, 
both to the eye, and to the taste.

An Enemy to RELIGION [Hierogly.]
was represented by an ass.

RELIGIOUSNESS, a religious dis­
position, piety.

RELINQUISHMENT [relictio, L.] 
relinquishing.



RELIQUA, the remainder or debt
which a person finds himself a debtor
in upon the accompt.

RELIQUIÆ, the ashes and bones of
the dead that remained after the burn­
ing of their bodies, and which they
very religiously kept in urns, and after­
wards laid them up in tombs,  L.

RELISHABLENESS, the being well
tasted.

RELUCTANCY [reluctatio,
L.] a wrest­
ling, or striving against, an unwilling­
ness, &c.

RELUCTANTNESS [reluctatio,
L.] a wrest­
ling, or striving against, an unwilling­
ness, &c. 

RELUCTANT [reluctans, L.] stri­
ving against.

REMARKABLENESS, worthiness
of remark.

RE-MARRYING, the marrying a­
gain, or a second time.

REMEDIABLENESS, capableness of
being remedied.

REMEDILESNESS [of irremediable, 
F.] uncapableness of being remedied.

A REMEDY [remedium, L. remede, 
F.] physick, medicine; also cure, help, 
ease, comfort; also means for the re­
dress of disorders or mischiefs; also a
shift in misfortunes.

REMEMBRANCE [remembranca, 
Ital. of rememorare, L.] is when the
idea of something formerly known re­
curs again to the mind, without the
operation of the external object on
the external sensory; remembring, 
memory.

REMEMBRANCERS [of the Ex­
chequer] three officers or clerks in that
office, as of the king, the lord trea­
surer, and of the first-fruits.

To REMIND [of re and mind] to put
in mind.

REMINISCENCE [reminiscentia,
L.] the faculty 
or power of remembering or calling to
mind: That power of the human
mind, whereby it recollects itself, or
calls again such ideas or notions which
it had really forgot: And in this it
differs from memory, which is a trea­
suring up things in the mind, and re­
taining them there without forgetting
them.

REMINISCENCY [reminiscentia,
L.] the faculty 
or power of remembering or calling to
mind: That power of the human
mind, whereby it recollects itself, or
calls again such ideas or notions which
it had really forgot: And in this it
differs from memory, which is a trea­
suring up things in the mind, and re­
taining them there without forgetting
them.

REMINISCERE, an ancient name
for the second Sunday in Lent, being so
called from the first word of the begin­
ning of the mass for that day, reminis­
cere miserationum tuarum.

REMISSNESS [of remis, F. remissio, 
L.] slackness, negligence, carelesness.

REMITTANCE, forgiveness.

REMITTANCE [with Bankers] a
due or fee allowed both for their
wages, the tale of money, and the diffe­
rent value of the species where the
money is paid.

REMITMENT [in Commerce] a
return of money
from one place to another in bills of
exchange, orders, or the like.

REMITTANCE [in Commerce] a
return of money
from one place to another in bills of
exchange, orders, or the like.

REMITTER [in Law] is where a
man has two titles in law, and is seized
by the latter, and that proving de­
fective, he is remitted or restored to
the former more ancient title.

REMONSTRANT [remonstrans, L.]
expostulatory, &c.

REMONSTRANTS, a party of
Christians in Holland called also Armini­
ans, so denominated from a writing
they called a Remonstrance, which they
presented to the states of Holland in the
year 1609, wherein they reduced their
doctrines to these five articles.

1. That God in election and repro­
bation had regard on the one side to
faith and perseverance, and on the
other side to incredulity and impe­
nitence.

2. That Jesus Christ died for all men
without exception.

3. That grace was necessary for the
application of one's self to God.

4. That yet it did not act in an irre­
sistible manner.

5. That before affirming that the
regenerate cannot totally fall away, 
this question ought to be more accu­
rately examined.

REMONSTRATED [of re and mon­
stratus, L.] shewed by reason and in­
stances, &c.

REMORA the ship-halter. A
small fish called a
Sea-Lamprey or Suck-stone; of which
the ancients had an opinion, that, by
sticking to the keel of a ship it would
stop its course. And thence Remora is
taken for any delay, stop, let, hin­
drance.  F.

REMELIGO the ship-halter. A
small fish called a
Sea-Lamprey or Suck-stone; of which
the ancients had an opinion, that, by
sticking to the keel of a ship it would
stop its course. And thence Remora is
taken for any delay, stop, let, hin­
drance.  F. 

REMORSELESS [of remords, F. of
re and morsus, L. and neſſe, Sax.]
without check, or sting of conscience.

REMOTENESS [of remotus, L.] the
being far from.

REMOVEABLENESS, liableness to
be removed.

A REMOVE, a removing, changing
of place or abode.

REMPHAN, was deified by the Egyp­
tians, for his great care of the country, 
and was represented by a Star, which
probably was the star of the god Rem­
phan, mentioned in the Acts of the
apostles.



This star seems to be Saturn, for 
in an Egyptian alphabet, where the
names of the planets are marked Sa­
turn stands thus ΡΗΦΑΝ. This god was
also worshipped by the Israelites; some
take it to be Venus, others Adonis. Rem­
phis was a king of Egypt, who liv'd 
about Jacob's time, and might proba­
bly be that Pharaoh that was so kind to
Joseph.

REMPLI [in Heraldry] i. e. filled up, 
signifies that all the chief is
filled up with a square
piece of another colour, 
leaving only a border of
the proper colour of the
chief about the said piece, as in the
figure.

Image omitted.



REMULUS [with Anat.] the narrow
part of the ribs which joins with the
Vertebræ, or turning joints of the
back-bone.

REMUNERABLE, capable of being
rewarded.

REMURIA [among the Romans]
feasts instituted in honour of Remus the
brother of Romulus.

RENAL Glandules [with Anat.] two
flat and soft glands about the thickness
of a nut, above the reins on each side.

RENASCENT [renascens, L.] spring­
ing up, or being born again.

RENASCIBLENESS [renascibilitas, 
L.] the power or capableness of being
born again, of renewing, or regene­
ration.

A RENCOUNTER [rencontre, F.] an
encounter of 2 little bodies or parties
of forces; an accidental meeting, an
unexpected adventure, as when 2 per­
sons fall out and fight on the spot,
without having premeditated the com­
bat; and thus it is opposed to a Duel.

RENCONTRE [in Her.]
or a Rencontré, denotes that
the face of a beast stands
rightforward, as if it came
to meet the person before
it, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



To RENDER [with Builders.] See
to Parget.

To RENDER [in Law] a term used
in levying a fine. A fine is either sin­
gle where nothing is granted, or with
render, whereby something is rendered
back again by the cognisee to the cog­
nisor; or double, which contains a
grant or render back again of some
rent, common, or other thing out of
the land itself to the cognisor.

RENDITION, a rendering.

RENITENCY [of renitens, L.] a re­
sisting or striving against.

RENITENCY [in Philosophy] that re­
sistency or force that is in solid bodies, 
by which they resist the impulse of o­
ther bodies, or re-act as much as they
are acted upon.

RENNET, the maw of a calf, com­
monly used for turning milk, in making
curds for cheese, &c.

To RENOVATE [renovare, L.] to
renew.

RENOWNEDNESS, famousness.

RENT [of rentan, Sax.] torn in
pieces.

RENTABLE, that may be rented.

RENTERING [of rentaire, F.] in
Manufactory the sewing of 2 pieces of
cloth edge to edge without doubling
them, so that the seam is scarcely to be
seen; also the sewing up a rent or hole
made in the dressing or preparing of
cloth.

RENUENTES [Anatomy] a pair of
muscles of the head, so named, as be­
ing antagonists to the Annuentes; their
use is to throw the head backwards
with an air of refusal.

RENVERSE [in Her.]
denotes any thing set with
the head downwards, as
Chevron renverse, is a che­
veron with the point
downwards, or when a
beast is laid on its back, F. as in the  
figure.

Image omitted.



RE-ORDINATION, the act of con­
ferring orders a second time.

REP-Silver [Old Rec.] money anci­
ently paid by servile tenants to their
lord, to be quit of the service of reap­
ing his corn.

To REPAIR a Medal is to clear off
the rust, to render it clean, and as
perfect as it may be.

REPAIRABLE, that may be repair­
ed or mended.

REPANDOUSNESS [of repanditas, 
L.] bentness or bowingness backwards.

To REPART [with Horsemen] is to
put a horse on, or to make him part
the second time.

REPARTEE [repartie, F.] a rea­
dy, smart, reply, es­
pecially in matters of wit, humour, 
or raillery.

REPARTY [repartie, F.] a rea­
dy, smart, reply, es­
pecially in matters of wit, humour, 
or raillery. 

A REPEAT [in Musick] a character
shewing that what was last play'd or
sung must be gone over again. 

REPEEK [at the game
called Picket]
a term used when the player has a fif­
teenth or fourteenth by kings, &c. and
the ruff before he plays a card.

REEK and REPEEK [at the game
called Picket]
a term used when the player has a fif­
teenth or fourteenth by kings, &c. and
the ruff before he plays a card.



REPELLING Power [in Physicks] a
certain power or faculty residing in the
minute parts of the natural bodies, 
whereby they mutually fly from each
other.

REPENT [with Bot. Writ.] creeping.

REPENTANCE [with Divines] is
such a conversion of a sinner to God, 
by which he is not only heartily sorry
for the evil he has done, and resolved
to forsake it, but actually begins to re­
nounce it, and to do his duty accord­
ing to the utmost of his ability, with
a stedfast purpose to continue a faithful
servant of God unto the end of his
life.

REPENTANT, repenting,  F.

REPERCUSSION [in Musick] a fre­
quent repetition of the same sounds.

REPERCUSSIVENESS [of repercussi­
vus, L.] beating back, or rebounding
quality.

A REFERTORY [refertorium, L.] a
book into which things are methodical­
ly entered, in order to the more rea­
dy finding of them; also a place where
things are orderly laid up, so as to be
easily found.

REPETITION [in Musick] a reite­
rating or playing over, again of the
same part of a composition, whether it
be a whole strain, part of a strain, or
double strain.

REPETITION [with Rhet.] is when
the person thinks his first expression
not well understood, and is sollicitous
to make his hearers know what he
means, and repeats or explains in ano­
ther way.

REPLANTATION, a planting again
or the second time.

To REPLEAD [of re and plaider,
F.] to plead again to that which was
once pleaded before.

REPLENISHMENT, the replenishing.

REPLETENESS [repletio, L.] ful­
ness.

REPLETION [in Canon Law] is
where the revenue of a benefice is
sufficient to fill or occupy the whole
right or title of the graduate who holds
it.

REPOLON [with Horsemen] is a de­
mi-volt, the croup inclosed at five
times.

To REPOSE one's self [reposer, F.] to
take one's rest.

REPREHENSIBLENESS [of repre­
hensibilis, L.] reproveableness.

REPRESENTATION [in the Dram.]
is the exhibition of the action of a
theatrical piece, including the scenes, 
machines, recitations, &c.

A REPRESSION, a restraining, &c. 
 L.

REPRESSIVE [repressus, L.] of a
restraining nature or quality.

REPRISE [with Horsemen] is a lesson
repeated, or a manage recommenced.

REPRIZE [in Sea Commerce] a mer­
chant ship, which having been taken by
a corsair or privateer, &c. is retaken
or recovered by a vessel of the contrary
party.

REPROACHABLENESS [reproacha­
ble, F.] capableness, &c. of being re­
proached.

REPROACHFULNESS [of reproche, 
F. and fulneſſe, Sax.] a reproachful
quality or disposition.

REPROBATENESS [reprobati, L.]
the state of a reprobate; wickedness, 
impiety.

REPROVEABLENESS [of reproba­
bilis, L.] liableness to be reproved.

REPTILE [reptilis, L.] a creeping
thing that rests upon one part of the
belly, while it advances the other for­
ward, as an earth-worm, snake, &c.

REPTILES [with Botan.] those plants
which creep either on the earth or on
other plants, as wanting strength of 
stalk to sustain themselves.

REPUDIABLE, that may be put a­
way or divorced.

A REPUDIATE [repudiata, L.] a
divorced woman, one put away.

REPUGNANTNESS [repugnantia, 
L.] repugnancy; contrary nature or
quality.

REPULSE [with Philos.] otherwise
called reaction. It is one of the laws
of nature, that repulse or reaction is al­
ways equal to impulse or action; that
is, the action of two bodies one upon
another is always equal one with ano­
ther, or that the same force that strikes
upon another, is returned back by that
other on it, and the forces are impres­
sed with directions directly contrary.
In all blows and strokes the thing struch
(as suppose with a hammer on an an­
vil) the anvil strikes the hammer with
equal force. If one body press or draw
another, it is just as much pressed or
drawn by that.

REPULSION, a beating or driving
backwards, a repulse.

REPULSORY [repulsorius, L.] fit to
repel, or pull back.

REPURGED [repurgatus, L.] purged
again.

REPUTABLENESS [of reputatio
L.] being of good repute.

REPUTED, accounted, esteemed, 
looked upon.



To REQUEST the Game [with Hun­
ters] is when having run it down the
night before, they seek it again the next
morning with the bloodhound, &c.

REQUEST [in Law] a supplication
or petition made to a prince or court
of justice, begging relief in some cases
wherein the common law granted no
immediate redress.

Court of REQUESTS, an antient
court of equity, instituted in the time
of Henry VII. of like nature with that
of chancery, chiefly for the relief of
petitioners, who in conscionable cases
should address themselves by way of
petition to his majesty.

REQUIREMENT, the thing requi­
red: also a requiring.

REQUISITNESS, necessariness, &c.

To RESALUTE [resalutare, L.] to 
salute again.

RESARCELEE [in Heraldry] as a
cross resarcelee signifies one
cross, as it were, sewed to
another, or one cross pla­
ced upon another, or a
slenderer cross charged up­
on the first, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



RESCEIT [in Common Law] an ad­
mittance of plea, though the contro­
versy be only between two.

RESCOUS in Law, is when a man,
distraining cattle for damage done in
his ground, drives them in the highway 
towards the pound, and they get into 
the owner's house, and he refuses to 
deliver them upon demand; he that 
detains them is said to be a Rescous in 
Law.  F.

RESCOUS in Fact, is a resistance a­
gainst lawful authority, as by a violent 
taking away, or procuring the escape
of one that is arrested.

RESCRIPT, an answer delivered by
an emperor or a pope, when consulted
by particular persons on some difficult
question or point of law, to serve as a
decision thereof.

RESEISER [in Law] a taking again
of lands into the kings hands, for
which an ouster le main was formerly
misused.

RESERCEDE [in Heraldry] a term
used of a cross moline voided.

RESERVATION Mental a proposi­
tion which strictly taken, and according
to the natural import of the terms, is
false; but is qualified with something
reserved in the mind becomes true.

RESERVATION [in Conversation]
reservedness, that distance and state, 
which ladies observe towards those
that court them.

To RESERVE [in Law] sometimes
signifies to except, as when a man lets
his house, but reserves one room for
his own use.

RESERVE [Milit. Aff.] is a body of
troops sometimes drawn out of the ar­
my, and encamped by themselves in a
line behind the other two lines.

RESIANT, a person that resides or
dwells in a certain place.

RESIDENT [ant. Customs] a tenant
who was obliged to reside on his lord's
land and not to depart from it.

A RESIDENTIARY, a Cannon, a
parson installed to the privileges and
profits of a residence.

RESILIENTNESS [of resiliens, L.]
rebounding quality, resiliency.

RESIN or Rosin, [with Physicians] is
a fat and oily liquor, issuing either of
its own accord, or else let out by cut­
ting of any tree or plant; also an arti­
ficial rosin, chymically prepared, and
drawn from any plant or drug, that a­
bounds with resinous particles, as Resin
of Jalap, &c.

RESINOUSNESS [of resinosus, L. re­
sineux, F.] resinous or rosiny quality.

RESIPISCENCE [resipiscentia, L.] a
being wise again; a changing one's
mind from doing amiss; the reflection
which a person makes upon his bad
conduct; which leads him to reforma­
tion, repentance and amendment of
life.

RESISTENCE [resistentia, L.] the act
of resisting or withstanding.

RESISTENCE [in Philos.] resisting
force, any force which acts contrary to
another, so as to destroy or diminish
its effect; that property of solid bodies
which resists and opposes whatsoever
comes against them.

RESOLVABLENESS [of resolubilis, 
L.] capableness of being resolved.

RESOLUTION [with Chymists] a
separating the parts of mixt bodies, by
means of a dissolving ingredient.

RESOLUTION [in Physicks] the re­
duction into its original or natural
state, by a dissolution or separation of
its aggregated parts.

RESOLUTION [with Logicians] a
branch of method, called also Analysis.

RESOLUTION [with Mathem.] is
an orderly enumeration of the several
things to be done, to obtain what is re­
quired by a problem.

RESOLUTION [in Musick] is when
a canto or perpetual fugue is not writ­
ten all on the same line, or in one part;
but all the voices that are to follow the
Guido, are written separatedly, &c.



RESOLUTION [in Medicine] the coc­
tion of the crude matter of a disease, 
either by the natural strength of the
patient, or of its own accord, or by
the application of remedies.

RESONANCE, a resounding; an
echo.

RESPECTFULNESS [of respecteux, 
F. &c.] a respectful behaviour.

RESPITE of Homage [in old Rec.] the
forbearance of the homage due from
a vassal or tenant holding by homage
arising from knights service, which is
thereby likewise annulled.

RESPLENDENTNESS [of resplendes­
centia, L.] resplendency, a great lustre
or brightness.

RESPONDENT [in Com. Law] one
who undertakes to answer for another;
or binds himself as security for the
good behaviour of another; or another
person who excuses or declares the
cause of a party who is absent.

RESPONSIBLENESS [of responsable, 
F.] capableness of answering demands.

RESPONSORY [responsorius, L.] an­
swering.

RESSAULT [in Architect.] the ef­
fect of a body, which either projects or
sinks, i. e. stands either more out or in
than another, so as to be out of the
line or level, as a socle, entablature, 
cornice, &c. upon an avant corps, ar­
riere corps, or the like,  F.

RESSORT [in Law] its common
meaning is the spring or force of elasti­
city, whence it is used for a jurisdiction
and the extent or district thereof; also
a court or tribunal where appeals are
judged, as the house of lords judge en
dernier ressort; it is also used for a writ
of tail or cousenage, in the same sense
as descent in a writ of right.

RESSOURCE [prob. of resoudre, F.
to resolve] a means which presents it­
self afresh; the means or foundation of
a man's recovering himself from his
fall or ruin; or an after game for re­
pairing his damages,  F.

REST [in Physicks] is the continu­
ance of a body in the same place; or
it is its continual application and con­
tiguity to the same parts of the ambient
and contiguous bodies. It is an axiom
in philosophy, that Matter is indifferent
as to Rest or Motion.

Hence Sir Isaac Newton lays it down
as a law of nature, that every body
perseveres in its state either of Rest or
uniform Motion; except so far as it is
disturbed by external causes.

REST, is either absolute or relative.

Sir Isaac Newton defines true or abso­
lute Rest to be the continuance of a body
in the same part of absolute and im­
moveable space. And,

Relative REST, to be the continu­
ance of a body in the same part of re­
lative space.

Thus in a ship under sail, relative
Rest is the continuance of a body in the
same region of the ship, or the same
part of its cavity.

True or absolute REST, is its conti­
nuance in the same part of universal
space, wherein the ship with its cavity
and contents are all contained.

Hence, if the earth be really at Rest, 
the body relative at rest in the ship, 
will really and absolutely move, and that
with that velocity wherewith the ves­
sel moves: But if the earth do likewise
move, there will then arise a real and
absolute motion of the body at rest;
partly from the real motion of the
earth in absolute space; and partly
from the relative motion of the ship
on the sea.

Lastly, if the body be likewise rela­
tively moved in the ship, its real moti­
on will arise partly from the real mo­
tion of the earth in immoveable space, 
and partly from the relative motions
of the ship upon the sea, and of the
body in the ship.

Thus if that part of the earth, where
the ship is moved eastward, with a ve­
locity of 10010 parts; and the vessel
be carried by the winds westward 10
parts, and at the same time a seaman
on board walk with a velocity 1 part:
The seaman will be moved really and
absolutely in immoveable space east­
ward, with 10001 parts of velocity;
and relatively on the earth with 9
parts of velocity westward.

RESTITUTED Medals [with Anti­
quaries] are such medals as were struck
by the emperors, to renew or retrieve
the memory of their predecessors.

RESTITUTIONE temporalium [in
Law] a writ which lies where a man
is elected and confirmed bishop of a
diocess, for the recovery of the tem­
poralities or barony of the said bishop­
rick.

RESTORATIVENESS [of restora­
tivum, L.] a restoring quality.

RESTORATION, a restoring a
thing to the good state it was in before.

RESTRICTIVENESS a restrin­
gent qua­
lity.

RESTRINGENTNESS a restrin­
gent qua­
lity.

RESULTANCE [of resultans, L.] a
rebounding back.



RESULT [resultus, L.] what is ga­
thered from a conference, meditation, 
discourse, or the like.

RESUMPTION [with Schoolmen] a
summary repetition or running over of
an argument, or of the substance of it,
in order to a refutation of it.

RESUMPTION [in Logick] the re­
duction of some figurative or quaint
proposition to a more intelligent and
significant one. As the Meadows smile, 
i. e. they look pleasant.

A RESUMPTIVE [in Pharmacy] an
unguent for recruiting and restoring
languishing constitutions.

The RESURRECTION [Hieroglyp.]
was represented by a Phenix, that ri­
seth out of its ashes, when it hath been
consumed by the violence of the fire
kindled by the sun-beams, as is reported.

RETAIL, a buying in large, and
selling by smaller quantities.

RETAILER [in Heraldry] signifies
cut again, meaning that the escutcheon
is divided into three parts by two lines
in bend sinister.  F.

To RETAIN [in Horsemanship] a
term used of mares, who conceive and
hold after covering.

RETARDATION [in Nat. Philos.]
a delaying the motion or progress of a
body or diminishing its velocity.

RETCHLESNESS [of recce leaſ­
neſſe, of reccan; Sax. to care] care­
lesness, &c.

RETENTIVENESS [of retentivus, 
L.] a retentive faculty.

RETIARII [among the Romans] a
sort of combatants, who fought with a
trident or three forked instrument in
one hand, and a net in the other, in
which they endeavoured to entangle
their adversary.

RETICENCY [reticentia, L.] con­
cealment, passing over in silence.

RETICENCE [in Rhetorick] a figure
in which the orator makes oblique
mention of a thing, in pretending to
pass it by unmentioned.

RETICULA [with Astron.] a con­
trivance for the ex­
act measuring the quantity of eclipses.

RETICLE [with Astron.] a con­
trivance for the ex­
act measuring the quantity of eclipses.

RETICULAR Body [Anat.] a body
of vessels lying immediately under the
cuticle or scarf kin.

RETINUE [retenue, O. F. of retine­
re, L. to retain] attendants or follow­
ers of a person of quality, especially in
a journey.

RETIRADE [in Fortif.] a kind of
retrenchment made in the body of a
bastion, or other work that is to be
disputed inch by inch, after the first
defences are dismantled.

RETIRATION [with Printers] the
outside of a sheet, as it lies on the press.

RETIREDNESS [of retirement, F.]
private life, privacy.

RETORT [with Chymists] a vessel
made either of
glass, earth or iron, 
according to the
nature of the mat­
ter to be distilled, 
and the degree of
fire necessary to perform the operation
in this figure. It is commonly used in
distilling oils, volatile salts, and acid
spirits.

Image omitted.



A RETORSION, the returning of
an argument,  F. of  L.

RETRANCHE [in Heral.] denotes
the escutcheon is twice cut a thwart
bendwise, or doubly cut in Bend dexter;
and then it is said to be Tranché & re­
tranche,  F.

RETRAITE, a retiring, retreat, 
shelter.  F.

RETRAITE [in Fortif.] See Berme
and Foreland.

A RETREAT [in Masonry] a little
recess or diminution of the thickness
of a wall, &c. in proportion as it is
raised.

RETREAT, a beat of drum in the
evening, at the firing of a piece, called
the Warning Piece; at which the drum-­
major with all the drums of the batta­
lion, beats round the regiment.

RETRENCHMENT [in Fortifi.] a
ditch bordered with a parapet, and se­
cured with gabions or bavins, laden
with earth: Sometimes it is taken for
a simple retirade, made on a horn work 
or bastion, when it is intended to dis­
pute the ground inch by inch.

RETRIBUTION, a handsome pre­
sent, gratuity or acknowledgment, gi­
ven in lieu of a formal salary, or hire, 
to persons employed in affairs that fall
not under the common commerce of
money.

RETRIEVABLE [of retrover, F.]
recoverable.

RETRIEVABLENESS, recovera­
bleness.

RETROACTIVE [in Law] a term
used of new laws and statutes, which
are said to have no retroactive Effect, 
i. e. no force or effect, as to what was
done before their promulgation.

RETROGRADATION [Astronom.]
is an apparent motion of the planets, 
wherein they seem to go backward in
the zodiack, and contrary to the order
or succession of the signs.



RETROGRADATION of the Nodes 
[in Astron.] is a motion of the line of
the moon's nodes, wherein it conti­
nually shifts its situation from East to
West, contrary to the order of the
signs, compleating its retrograde circu­
lation, in the space of 19 years; after
which time either of the nodes having
receded from any point of the eclip­
tick, returns to the same again.

RETROGRADATION of the Sun 
[Astron.] is thus; when the sun has his
declination greater than the latitude of
the place; but either Northern or Sou­
thern as the place is; the sun wil ap­
pear twice upon the same point of the
compass, both before and after noon, 
to the inhabitants of that place, and is
therefore said to be retrograde.

RETROGRADATION [in the high­
er Geom.] is the same that is otherwise
called, contrary Flexion.

RETROGRADE [retrogradus, L.] a
going backwards, or in a direction, 
contrary to its natural one.

RETROGRADE Verses, the same as
reciprocal verses, or recurrents; cer­
tain verses which give the same words, 
whether read forwards or backwards;
as Signa te, signa temere me tangis &
angis.

RETROGRADE [with Astron.] a
planet is said to be so, when by its
proper motion in the zodiack it goes
backwards, or contrary to the successi­
on of the signs, as from the second
degree of Aries to the first, and from
that to Pisces.

RETROGRADENESS [of retrogra­
dus, L.] the faculty of going backwards.

RETROGRESSION of Curves, the
same with what is called contrary re­
flection.

RETURN [in Build.] a side or part
which falls away from the foreside of
any strait work.

RETURNS of a Mine, are the turn­
ings and windings of a gallery.

RETURNS of a Trench [in Fortifi.]
the several windings and crooked lines
of a trench, drawn in some measure
parallel to the sides of the place attack­
ed, to prevent being enfiladed, or hav­
ing the shot of the enemy scour along
the length of the line.

RETURNS [in Law] cer­
tain days in each
of the four terms, peculiarly set apart
for the several sorts of proceedings in
any cause to be determined.

Every term has four, five or six re­
turns, which are of six kinds; and
thence one of them is repeated in most
terms, with the name of this or that
festival, whereunto they are appropri­
ated, viz. Crastino, i. e. the morrow
after the day nominated; Octabis, the
eighth day after inclusively; Quindeno, 
the fifteenth day after; Tres, that day
three weeks; Mense, that day month;
and Quinque, that day five weeks.

Hilary-Term, has four such returns, 
viz. Octabis Hilarii, eight days after
Hilary day, two, Undena Hilarii, fifteen
days; Crastina Purificationis, the day of
the Purification; and Octabis Purifica­
tionis, eight days after inclusive.

Easter-Term, has five returns, viz, 
Quindena Paschæ, fifteen days after Ea­
ster; Tres Paschæ, three weeks after
Easter; Mense Paschæ, the day month
after Easter; Quinque Paschæ, the day
five weeks after Easter, and Crastini
Ascensionis Domini, the day after Ascen­
sion-Day.

Trinity-Term, has four returns, viz.
Crastino Trinitatis, the day after Trini­
ty; Octabis Trinitatis, eight days after
Trinity, inclusive: Quindena Trinitatis, 
fifteen days after; and Tres Trinitatis, 
three weeks after.

Michaelmas-Term, has six returns, 
viz. Tres Michaelis, three weeks after
Michaelmas, Mense Michaelis, the day
month after Michaelmas; Crastino Ani­
marum, the day after All-Souls; Cra­
stino Martini, eight Days after inclu­
sive; and Quindena Martini, fifteen
days.

RETURN-DAYS [in Law] cer­
tain days in each
of the four terms, peculiarly set apart
for the several sorts of proceedings in
any cause to be determined.

Every term has four, five or six re­
turns, which are of six kinds; and
thence one of them is repeated in most
terms, with the name of this or that
festival, whereunto they are appropri­
ated, viz. Crastino, i. e. the morrow
after the day nominated; Octabis, the
eighth day after inclusively; Quindeno, 
the fifteenth day after; Tres, that day
three weeks; Mense, that day month;
and Quinque, that day five weeks.

Hilary-Term, has four such returns, 
viz. Octabis Hilarii, eight days after
Hilary day, two, Undena Hilarii, fifteen
days; Crastina Purificationis, the day of
the Purification; and Octabis Purifica­
tionis, eight days after inclusive.

Easter-Term, has five returns, viz, 
Quindena Paschæ, fifteen days after Ea­
ster; Tres Paschæ, three weeks after
Easter; Mense Paschæ, the day month
after Easter; Quinque Paschæ, the day
five weeks after Easter, and Crastini
Ascensionis Domini, the day after Ascen­
sion-Day.

Trinity-Term, has four returns, viz.
Crastino Trinitatis, the day after Trini­
ty; Octabis Trinitatis, eight days after
Trinity, inclusive: Quindena Trinitatis, 
fifteen days after; and Tres Trinitatis, 
three weeks after.

Michaelmas-Term, has six returns, 
viz. Tres Michaelis, three weeks after
Michaelmas, Mense Michaelis, the day
month after Michaelmas; Crastino Ani­
marum, the day after All-Souls; Cra­
stino Martini, eight Days after inclu­
sive; and Quindena Martini, fifteen
days.

REVE [in Ant. Cust.] the bailiff of a
franchise or manour.

REVE [in Ant. Cust.] a duty or im­
position on merchandizes either im­
ported or exported.

REVELLER [of reveilleur, F.] a ri­
oter.

The desire of REVENGE, say the mo­
ralists, turns to vice, when it exceeds a
moderate defence of our selves, and
our dependants and concerns, and a
just assertion of our rights against the
invaders of them.

REVENUE [Hunting Term] a mess
of flesh formed chiefly of a cluster of
whitish worms on the heads of deers, 
which gnaw the roots of their horns, 
and so is the occasion of their casting
them.

REVENUE of a Partridge [with Fow­
lers] a new tail of a partridge, grow­
ing out after the former is lost.

REVERBERATION [in Chymist.] is
the causing the flame of a fire to beat
back down on the metal in a furnace.

A REVERBERATORY [reverbera­
torium, L.] a chemical furnace, built



close all round, and covered at top, so
as not to give vent to the heat or flame, 
but to make it return or beat back to
the bottom of the furnace.

REVERENCE [reverentia, L.] is an
humble, awful, and ingenious regard
for the divine nature, proceeding from
a due esteem and love of God, which
renders us unwilling to do any thing
which may argue a contempt of him, 
or which may provoke or offend him.

REVEREND [reverendus, L.] a title
given to the clergy, Right Reverend, to
Bishops, Most Reverend, to Archbishops.

REVERENDNESS [of reverendus, L.]
a reverend quality.

REVERENTNESS [reverentia, L.] a
reverent quality, humble behaviour.

A REVERSE [of a Medal] is the
backside, in opposition to the head or
principal figure.

REVERSED [in Heraldry] turned
back, or upside down. When a man
bears in his escutcheon another rever­
sed, it is a mark of his having ravished
a maid or widow, or that he has run
away from his sovereign's banner: or, 
when a man's own escutcheon is re­
versed entirely, it is a mark of his be­
ing a traitor.

REVERSIBLENESS, capableness of
being reversed.

REVERSING [in Musick] the
inverting of the
order of the parts, or the placing of
the higher part or treble, in the place
of the lower part or bass.

RENVERSING [in Musick] the
inverting of the
order of the parts, or the placing of
the higher part or treble, in the place
of the lower part or bass.

REVERSION [in Rhetorick] a figure, 
the same that in Greek is called Epi­
strophe.

REVERSION a returning or com­
ing back again.  L.

REVERSION [in Com. Law] is a
possibility reserved to a man's self and
his heirs, to have again lands or tene­
ments, made over conditionally to o­
thers, upon the failing of such condi­
tions.

REVERSION of Series [in Algebra]
a method of finding a sine from its
ark, or the ordinate of an ellipsis from
an area given to be cut off from any
point in the axis.

REVERTIBLE [reversible, F.] that
may return, or be returned.

REVICTUALLING [revitaillement, 
F.] a victualling again.

A REVIEW, the shew or appear­
ance of a body of troops or soldiers
ranged in form of battle, and after­
wards made to file off, to see if the
companies be compleat, or to receive
their pay, &c.

REVILE, reviling, reproaching.
Milt.

A REVISE [with Printers] a second
proof of a printed sheet taken off the
press, to examine whether the faults, 
marked in the former by the corrector, 
have been amended.

To REVIVIFICATE [reviviscere, L.]
to recover life again.

REVIVIFICATION [in Chymistry]
See to Revive.

RE-UNION [re-union, F.] the act of
reuniting, or rejoining, or closing to­
gether again; also the reconciliation
of friendship that has been interrupted.

REVOCABLENESS [of revocabilis, 
L.] liableness to be revoked, repealed, 
&c.

A REVOLTER, one who rises a­
gainst, or, who forsakes the cause of
his sovereign.

REVOLVING [revolvens, L.] rolling
in mind, considering. Milton.

REVOLUTION [in Geom.] is the
motion of any figure round a fixed line, 
as an axis.

REVOLUTION [in Astron.] is the
period of a star, planet, comet, or o­
ther phænomenon; or its course from
any of the zodiack points till it return
to the same.

REVULSION, a plucking away or
back.  L.

REVULSION [with Physicians] is the
turning of a violent flux of humours
from one part of the body to another, 
either a neighbouring or opposite part.

REVULSIVE [revulsivus, L.] pul­
ling back or away.

To REWARD [of re and &wyn;earðian, 
Sax.] to recompense.

REWARDABLE, that is capable or
worthy of being recompensed.

REWISH, lecherous, a term used
of the copulation of doves.

RHACHIS [with Anat.] the spine or
chine bone of the back.

RHACHISAGRA [with Physicians]
the gout in the spine, &c.

RHACHITÆ [with Anat.] cer­
tain muscles that
lie over the back-bone.

RHACHITÆI [with Anat.] cer­
tain muscles that
lie over the back-bone. 

RHADAMANTHUS [so called of
περι τα ῥόδα εμανη, Gr.] according to
the poets, was the son of Jupiter Asteri­
us, a wise legislator of the Cretans, who
upon that account, by the poets, was
feigned to be one of the three judges of
souls in Hell: He is said to have lived
about the year of the world 2660, and
to have been the most temperate man
of his time. They say his particular
province was to inquire into the crimes



which men had committed when alive, 
and to bring such to confession as, en­
joying themselves with impunity, had
deferr'd their repentance till death.

RHAGADES [ραγάδες, Gr.] chaps or
clefts in the hands, feet, lips, &c.

RHAMNUSIA, the goddess of indig­
nation, so called of Rhamnus, a town of
Attica, where she had a statue. This
is the same deity that the Greeks called 
Nemesis,  L.

RHANDIX, the part of a division of
a county in Wales, before the conquest,
containing four tenements; as every
Gavel contained four Rhandixes, every
Township four Gavels, and every Ma­
nour four Townships.

RHAPHE [ραφή, Gr.] the suture or
seam of the scull bone.

RHAPSODISTS, makers or compo­
sers of rhapsodies.

RHAPSODY [rhapsodia, L. of ῤαψώδια
of ῤαπτω, to sew, and ὠιδή, a verse or
song Gr.] a confused collection of di­
vers passages, notions, &c. mustered
up for the composing of some work;
also a tedious and impertinent spinning
out of a discourse, to little or no pur­
pose; so denominated (as some say)
of a contexture or repetition of a great
number of verses, especially Homer's
poems, which were collected and diges­
ted into books by Pisistratus.

RHAPSODOMANCY [of ῤαψωδια
and μαντεία, Gr.] an antient kind of di­
vination, performed by pitching on a
passage of a poet at hazard, and reckon­
ing on it as a prediction of what was
to happen.

Sometimes they wrote several verses
of a poet on so many pieces of wood, 
paper, or the like, shook them together
in an urn, and drew out one, which
was accounted the lot.

Sometimes they cast dice on the table
on which verses were written, and that
whereon the dye lodged, contained the
prediction.

RHEA [of ῤέω, to flow, Gr. because
she abounds with all manner of good
things] Cybele, the mother of the gods, 
according to the poets. See Cybele or
Vesta.

RHETORIANS, Hereticks in the 4th
century, who maintained, that all here­
ticks have reason on their side, of what
sect soever they are.

RHETORICALNESS [of retorique,
F. rhetorica, L. of ῤετοριχή, Gr.] elo­
quentness.

RHETORICK [rhetorica ars, L. ῤητο­
ριχή, Gr.] the art of speaking copiously
on any subject, with all the advantages
of beauty and force.

RHEUMATICKNESS [of ῥευματιχος
Gr.] subjectness to be afflicted, or the
being troubled with a rheumatism.

RHINOCEROS [ρινόχερως of ῤίν the
nose, and χερας, Gr. a horn] This ani­
mal is said to be chiefly found in the
isle of Rami, in the Indian sea, distant
3 days sail from the island Serendib.

It is smaller than an elephant, but
larger than a Buffalo.

It has a bunch under its belly, like
to what the camels have upon their
backs. It has a very thick horn upon
its snout, which the Indian kings make
use of at table; for it sweats at the ap­
proach of any kind of poison whatever.

This horn being cloven through, the
middle exhibits the figure of a man
drawn with white lines, among which
are also seen the figures of birds.

Father le Compte says, that the Rhi­
noceres is of the length of an elephant,
but its legs are shorter, and its hoofs
are cloven. It is one of the most sin­
gular creatures in the world. It is
something like a boar; but that it is
much larger; its feet are thicker, and
its whole body more unweildy. Its skin
is covered all over with blackish scales,
large and thick, which are extremely
hard, and divided into little squares or
knobs, a little raised above the skin,
something like that of a crocodile.

Its legs appear as if they had boots
on, and its head as if covered behind
with a kind of flat hood; on which ac­
count the Portugueze call it the monk of
the Indies.

Its head is thick, its mouth not wide,
its muzzle long, and armed with a
thick and long horn, which makes it
terrible, even to the very tigers, to
the buffalo's and elephants. But what
is still more wonderful in this animal,
is its tongue, which nature has cover'd
with so hard a membrane, that it differs
but little from a file, thus it fleas every
thing that it licks, and eats with great
facility the rough branches of trees,
tho' defended all round with sharp
thorns. It bends them easily upon its
tongue, and breaks them in its mouth
without any trouble.

Festus says, it is hunted for the sake
of its skin, which is very hard and
impenetrable; being covered all over
with scales and about four fingers
thick.

they make suits of armour of it and
bucklers as also shares for the plough.

RHIZAGRA [ῥίζάγρα, Gr.] a surge­
ons instrument to draw out a splinter, 
bone or tooth.



RHODON [in Pharmacy] a medicinal
composition, in which roses are the
chief ingredient.

RHOMBOIDES [of
ῤομβος, a four-square
and είδος, form, Gr.] is
a four-sided figure, 
whose opposite angles and opposite sides
are equal, but is neither equilateral
nor equiangular.

Image omitted.



RHOMBOIDES [Anat.] a muscle so
called from its shape. It lies under the
Cucullaris, and arises from the two in­
ferior spines of the neck, and four su­
perior of the back; and is inserted
fleshy into the whole balls of the Sca­
pula, which it draws forwards, and a
little upwards.

RHOMBUS, is a four sided
figure, whose sides are equal
and parallel, but the angles un­
equal.

RHOMBUSIDICAL, of or pertaining
to, or of the form of a Rhombus.

RHOPALIC Verses [of ροπαλόν, Gr. a
club, which begins with a slender tip, 
and grows bigger and bigger to the
head] a kind of verses among the an­
cients, which began with monosyllables, 
and were contained in words growing
gradually longer to the last, which was
the longest of all, as, 
Spes Deus æterna est stationis conciliator.

RHOPOGRAPHERS [of ροπος, toys, 
and γράφω, Gr. to write] painters who
confined themselves to low subjects, as
animals, landskips, plants, &c.

RHYME [rhythmus, L. of ῥύθμος, 
Gr.] the likeness of sound at the end of
words. Some think rhymes to have
been a modern invention; but others
think otherwise; and Mr. Dryden says, 
that Monsieur le Clerc has made it out, 
that David's Psalms were written in as
errant rhyme as they are translated
into.

Mr. Skinner is of opinion, that
rhyme was first brought into Europe
by the Arabians; but instances are giv­
en of rhymes in the Saxon poetry, 
long before the Arabians made such a
figure in the world: Though rhymes
indeed are of such importance in mo­
dern poetry, that scarce one part in
ten can have any pretence to that title, 
but for the sake of the rhymes, yet
they are not so essential to it as some
imagine. The lord Roscommon was of
another opinion, and wrote his tran­
slation of Horace's Art of Poetry in blank
verse; and Mr. John Milton's Paradise
Lost, which is the best poem in our
tongue, is without rhyme.

The harmony of our numbers ap­
pears not only from the moderns, but
the ancients; and Shakespear, that
wrote a hundred years ago, is an ex­
ample of the dignity of our verse, and
the musick of poetry, without the or­
nament of rhyme.

The English tongue wants no advan­
tage of harmony for the forming a
poet; and tho' rhymes may be well
enough spared, yet those English poets, 
that have rhymed well, have in that
excelled the French and Italians too.

RHYTIDOSIS [with Surgeons] a
wrinkling of any part of the body.

RHYTHMICA [in ancient Musick]
the branch of musick that regulated
the rhymes.

RHUMB [rhombus, L. ,ῤόμβος
Gr.] with navigators a
vertical circle of any given place; or
the intersection of part of such a circle
with the horizon.

RUMB [rhombus, L. ,ῤόμβος
Gr.] with navigators a
vertical circle of any given place; or
the intersection of part of such a circle
with the horizon.

RHYTHMOPOIA [ῤυθμόποίεια of
ῥυθμος and ποίεω, to make, Gr.] one of
the musical faculties, as they are cal­
led, that prescribes rules for the mo­
tions.

RIAL, a piece of gold current at ten
shillings.

In the first year of king Henry VII. a
pound weight of gold, of the old stan­
dard, was, by indenture of the mint, 
coined into 45 rials, current at 10s.
each, or 90 half rials at 5s. a-piece.

RIALS Farthings, which went at 2s.
6d. In the time of Henry VIII. the
golden rial was ordered to go at 11s.
3d. In the 2d year of queen Elizabeth, 
rials were coined at 15s. a-piece, when
a pound weight of old standard gold
was to be coined into 48 rials. In the
3d year of king James I. the Rose Rials
of gold were coined at 30s. a piece, 
and the Spur Rials at 15s.

RIBALDROUS [of rebaudre, F. a
whore] debauched, obscene.

RIBBON [in Heral.]
is the 8th part of a
bend: It is borne a little
cut off from the out­
lines of the escutcheon
thus: He beareth Or, 
a ribbon Gules.

Image omitted.



RIC [ric, Sax. powerful.] Hence
Alfric signifies altogether strong, Athel­
ric nobly, powerful, &c.

RICH Man [Hieroglyphically] and a
good subject, who submits to the com­
mands of his superiors, was represented
by a camel, being an animal useful 
strong, laborious, and very docile.



RICHES [prob. of ricſðom, Sax.]
wealth, a vast or great estate.

RICKETY [of ῥαχίτις, Gr.] troubled
with the rickets.

To RIDDLE [of hriððel, Sax.] to
sift in a sieve.

To RIDDLE [of aræðan, Sax.] to
propose; also to explain riddles or
hard questions.

To RIDE Land lock'd [Sea Phrase] is
when land lies all round the ship, so
that no point of the compass is open to
the sea.

To RIDE by the Stoppers [Sea Term]
is when the cable is fastened or staid
only by them, and not bitted.

RIDEAU, a curtain or cover,  F.

RIDEAU [in Fortifi.] a small eleva­
tion of earth, extending itself length­
ways, serving to cover a camp, or add
an advantage to a port; also a ditch, 
the earth whereof is thrown upon its
side.

RIDES, hinges for doors.

RIDGES [of a Horse's Mouth] are
wrinkles in the roof, running from
one side of the jaw to the other, with
furrows between them.

RIDICULOUSNESS [le ridicule, F.
of ridiculosus, L.] worthiness to be ri­
diculed.

RIDING Clerk [in Chancery] one of
the six clerks, who in his turn for one
year, keeps the comptrollment books
of all grants that pass the great seal.

RIFENESS [rifeneſſ, Sax.] fre­
quency, commonness.

Well RIGGED [Metaphor.] is said of
a person who is well dressed.

RIGADOON, a French dance, per­
formed in figures by a man and a wo­
man.

RIGHT [in Ethicks] imports a power
of acting, granted or left free by the
law; but it is not to be taken for the
law itself: Right denotes liberty, but
law includes some bond or engagement, 
by which our natural liberty is re­
strained.

RIGHT, strait; also honest or just;
also true, proper, natural.

RIGHT Circle [in the Stereographical
Projection of the Sphere] is a circle at
right angles to the plane of projection.

RIGHTNESS [rihtneſſe, Sax.]
the true or proper quality.

RIGHTEOUSNESS [riht&wyn;iſe­
ne#383;#383;e, Sax.] justness, equitableness, 
&c.

RIGIDITY [in Physicks] a brittle
hardness, or that kind of hardness sup­
posed to arise from the mutual inden­
tation of the component particles,
within one another; it is opposite to
ductility and malleability, &c.

RIGLET, any square, flat, thin
piece of wood, like those which are de­
signed for making the frames of small
pictures, before they are moulded.

RIGOR [rigor, L.] a stiff, cold
roughness, stiffness; a shaking of the
skin and muscles of the whole body,
accompanied with chilliness, or a con­
vulsive shuddering for cold; also seve­
rity of manners and disposition, stern­
ness, harshness, the utmost extremity.

RIGOROUSNESS [of rigorosus, L.
rigoreux, F.] fulness of rigour, over­
harshness.

RIMA [in Anatomy] a narrow aper­
ture of a small cavity under the Fornix,
opening into the Infundibulum; called
also the third ventricle of the brain,  L.

RIME [hrime, Sax.] a falling mist,
which dissolves gradually by the heat
of the sun.

RIMER [of rime, Sax. of rhythmus,
L. of ῥυθμὸς, Gr.] a maker of rhymes.

RIMMON [ןומד, Heb. i. e. a pome­
granate] was the chief god of Damascus, 
where he had a famous temple. He
held out in his right-hand a pomegra­
nate, to shew he was the protector of
that people, who bore a pomegranate
in their coat of arms, i. e. the Caphto­
rims; and it is very probable was the
same that some authors call Jupiter
Cassius, who was adored on the con­
fines of mount Cassius, which was near
Damascus.

RIND [with Botan.] the ble or inner
bark of trees, or that soft, whitish, 
juicy substance, which adheres imme­
diately to the wood.

RINDY [of rinð, Sax.] having a
rind, i. e. a skin to be pared off, as
some fruits.

RING of an Anchor, that part of it to
which the cable is fastened.

RINGS of a Gun, are circles of metal, 
and are the base ring, the re-inforced
ring, trunnion ring, cornice ring, and
muzzle ring.

RINGLETS, little rings, curls, Mil­
ton.

RIOTOUSNESS [of rioteux, F. or
of riota, L. Barb. or of Proghachd, 
Brit. according to Baxter] a living
after a riotous manner.

RIPENESS [ripeneſſe, Sax.] ma­
turity.

RIPENERS [in Physicks] a sort of
topical remedies, called maturantia.

To RIPPLE, to lave or wash lightly
over, as the surface of the sea over the
surface of the sand.



RISIBLENESS [risibilitas, L. risi­
bilité, F.] laughing
faculty.

As to the mechanism in man, how
it is raised, it is usually attributed, by
anatomists, to the communication be­
tween the Plexus Nervosus and Dia­
phragmatic Nerves. It is commonly
supposed an attribute peculiar to man, 
as being the only creature capable of
judging what is ridiculous: And some
assert, that the degree or judgment al­
ways is seen in that laughter; fools
always having too little or too much.

RISIBILITY [risibilitas, L. risi­
bilité, F.] laughing
faculty.

As to the mechanism in man, how
it is raised, it is usually attributed, by
anatomists, to the communication be­
tween the Plexus Nervosus and Dia­
phragmatic Nerves. It is commonly
supposed an attribute peculiar to man, 
as being the only creature capable of
judging what is ridiculous: And some
assert, that the degree or judgment al­
ways is seen in that laughter; fools
always having too little or too much.

RISING Timbers [in a Ship] the
hooks placed on the keel, so called, 
because according to their gradual ri­
sing; so in like manner her rake and
run rise, from the flat floor.

RISINGS [in a Ship] are those thick
planks which go before and behind, on
both sides, under the ends of the beams
and timbers of the second deck, to the
third deck, half-deck, and quarter deck;
so that the timbers of the deck bear on
them at both ends, by the side of the
ship.

RISUS Caninus, a dog-laughter; a
kind of laughter wherein the lips are
contracted, so as to shew all the teeth.
 L.

RISUS Sardonicus [in Physicks] a
contraction of each jaw, or a convul­
sive kind of grinning, caused by a con­
traction of the muscles on both sides of
the mouth,  L.

RITUAL [rituale, L.] a church­
book, directing the order and manner
of the ceremonies to be observed in
the celebration of divine service, in a
particular church, diocess, &c.

RIVALITY [rivalitas, L. rivalité, 
F.] rivalship, competition.

RIVALS [Hieroglyphically] were re­
presented by two rams running at one
another.

RIVER [rivus, L. riviere, F.] a stream
or current of fresh water, flowing in a
bed or channel, from a source or
spring into the sea.

RIVERS, have given names to seve­
ral families in Britain and elsewhere;
as Derwentwater, Troutbeck, Trent, &c.
as among the Romans, Tiberius, from
the river Tibris, Aufidius, from a river
of the same name.

To RIVET [river, F.] to put a rivet
or iron peg into a cavity, &c.

RIVOSE [rivosus, L.] full of rivers.

RIXABUND [rixabundus, L.] quar­
relsome, contentious.

RIXOSE [rixosus, L.] full of conten­
tion, brawling, or chiding.

ROAD [with Sailors] a place fit for
anchorage, at some distance from the
shoar, and sheltered from the winds;
where ships usually moor, and wait
for a wind or tide, either to carry
them into the harbour, or to set sail
out to sea.

Natural ROAD, is one which has
been frequented for a long succession
of time, and subsists with little expence
by reason of its disposition, &c.

Artificial ROAD, is one made by the
labour of the hand, either of earth or
masonry.

Terrestrial ROAD is such as is not
only made upon
the ground; but is also formed of earth
heaped up in manner of a bank, and
born up by spurs, buttresses, &c.

Sand ROAD is such as is not
only made upon
the ground; but is also formed of earth
heaped up in manner of a bank, and
born up by spurs, buttresses, &c.

Aquatick ROAD, is one made in the
waters, whether current, as over ri­
vers, &c. or stagnant, as banks, cause­
ways, over morasses, ponds, &c.

Publick ROAD, any common road, 
military or royal. The same as Grand
Road.

Military ROAD, a grand road ap­
pointed for the marching of armies,
such as were made by the Romans in
England, as Watling-street, Erminage-­
street, &c.

Double ROADS, such as were made
by the Romans, having two pavements
or causeways; the one for those going
one way, and the other for those re­
turning; to prevent being stopped the
one by the other. These two were se­
parated from each other by a bank
raised in the middle, and paved with
bricks, for the conveniency of foot
passengers, with borders, mounting
stones from space to space, and mili­
tary columns, to mark distances.

Subterraneous ROAD, one that is
dug in a rock with the chissel, &c. and
left vaulted, as that at Puzzuoli, near
Naples, which is near half a league
long, fifteen foot broad, and as many
high.

A ROAM, a ramble, a wandering.
Milton.

A ROAMER [prob. of Roma, L.
q. d. one that wanders to Rome, upon
some religious pretence] one that ram­
bles up and down.

ROARING [rarunʒ, of raran, 
Sax.] a making a noise like a lion, the
sea, &c.

To ROB [rẏppan, Sax. prob. of
roba, L. Barb. a robe. Hence rober
and derober, F. q. d. to take off the
robes or clothes] to take away clothes, 
money, also by force.



ROB [in Pharmacy] the juice of fruits
purified and boiled to a consumption
of two thirds of their moisture.

ROBBERY [robberie, O. F.] a violent
and forcible taking away of another
man's goods openly against his will, 
and putting him in bodily fear; so na­
med, because the person was deprived
of some of his robes, or because his
money, &c. was taken out of some
part of his robe.

ROBERVALIAN Lines, a name
given to certain lines for the transfor­
mation of figures, so termed from
Mr. Roberval their inventer.

ROBIGUS, or Robigo, a Roman deity
to whom they observed a festival cal­
led Robigalia, on the calends of May, 
that mildew and blasting might be kept
from their corn and fruit,  L.

ROBOREAN [roboreus, L.] of
the nature of, or
pertaining to oak.

ROBOREOUS [roboreus, L.] of
the nature of, or
pertaining to oak. 

ROBOROSE [roborosus, L.] stiff and
hard like an oak.

ROBUSTNESS [of robustus, L.] being
like an oak; also strong limbed, lusty.

ROBUSTOUSNESS [of robustus, L.] being
like an oak; also strong limbed, lusty. 

ROCHETS, mantles worn on days
of ceremony by the peers, sitting in the
English parliament.

ROCKET [in Pyrotechny] an artificial
fire-work, being a cylindrical case of
paper, filled with combustible ingre­
dients, and which, being tied to a stick, 
mounts in the air to a considerable
height, and there bursts.

ROCKINESS, a rocky nature or
quality.

RODE [rode of riðan, Sax.] did
ride.

ROGATIONS, a name given to those
publick prayers used by Christians three
days before the feast of Ascension. The
custom of those rogations was begun in
the year 474, by Mamertus bishop of
Vienne in Dauphine.

The design of these devotions is said
to be, that earthquakes might cease, 
and to pray that the people might be
defended from wolves, that were at
that time very numerous, and did great
mischief in the country; and it is
affirmed, that these rogation prayers, 
together with fasting, did remove these
judgments; and these devotions were
annually kept up.

Afterwards the council of Orleans, 
held in 511, declared that these Rogati­
ons should be practised all over France, 
at the same time they were at Vienne.

These Processions have since been
called the Gallican or little Litany, to
distinguish them from the Great or
Roman Litany, introduced by Pope
Gregory the Great.

ROGUE, one who wanders from
place to place without a licence; who, 
for the first offence, is called a rogue
of the first degree; and punished by
whipping and boring thro' the gristle
of the right ear with an hot iron, an
inch in compass; and for the second
offence, is called a rogue of the second
degree; and put to death as a felon, if
he be above 18 years of age.

Muster-ROLL, a roll wherein are
entered the soldiers of every troop, 
company, regiment, &c.

Court-ROLL [in a Manour] is a roll
wherein the names, rents, services of
each tenant are copied and enrolled.

Calves-head ROLL [in the two Tem­
ples] a roll wherein every bencher is
taxed annually at 2s. every barrister
at 1s. 6d. every gentleman under the
bar at 1s. to the cook and other offi­
cers of the house, in consideration of
a dinner of calves-head provided every
Easter Term.

Ragman's ROLL [for Regimund's
Roll] a legate in Scotland, who having
cited before him all the people in that
kingdom who held benefices, caused
them to give in the value of their
estates upon oath; according to which
they were afterwards taxed in the
court of Rome.

The ROLLS, the office where the re­
cords of Chancery are kept in Chancery-­
Lane; this house or office was ancient­
ly built by king Henry III. for con­
verted Jews, and called Domus Conver­
sorum; but their irregularities and
lewdness having provoked king Edward
III. he expelled them, and caused the
place to be appropriated for keeping
the rolls or records of Chancery.

Master of the ROLLS, is the second
person in that court; and, in the ab­
sence of the lord-chancellor, sits as
judge.

ROMAN Catholicks, a name given to
all such Christians who acknowledge
the Pope's supremacy.

ROMAN Language, a mixture of
Gaulish and Latins, the French language
so called by the Walloons; for the Ro­
mans, having subdued several provin­
ces in Gaul, established prætors or
proconsuls, &c. to administer justice
in the Latin tongue; on this occasion
the natives were brought to apply
themselves to learn the language of the
Romans, and so introduced abundance
of Latin words into their own tongue.



A ROMANCE [romanze, Ital. prob.
of Roma, Rome] a meer fiction or feigned
story; a fabulous relation of certain
intrigues and adventures of love and
gallantry, invented to entertain and
instruct the readers.

ROMANS, a polite language former­
ly spoken at the court of France, in
contradistinction to the Walloon lan­
guage.

ROME [Roma, L. which some derive
of Ράμα, Gr. strength, power, &c.
others of מוד, Heb. he was exalted, 
when תמד, Heb. height, &c. but others
of Romulus] a city of Italy.

ROME-Scot, was an annual tribute
of a penny for every family paid to
the see of Rome at the feast of St.
Peter ad vincula, i. e. on the first of
August.

This was first granted by Offa, as
some say, or by Ina king of the West-­
Saxons, as others say; who being on a
pilgrimage and at Rome, A. D. 725, 
gave it as an alms. This tribute a­
mounted to 300 marks and a noble a
year. Our ancestors did frequently
complain of this mark of slavery to the
church of Rome, as a burthen and a
scandal to the English nation. And in
the time of king Edward the III. it was
forbidden to be paid, tho' the parlia­
ment had complained of it as a grie­
vance, A. D. 1206, in the time of king
John. King Henry the VIII. abrogated
it, but it was servilely restored by
queen Mary; but at last utterly abo­
lished by queen Elizabeth.

ROMPEE [in Heraldry] so
they call a chevron, when
it is borne of this figure,
He beareth a chevron Rom­
pee, between three mullets,
or, by the name of fault.

Image omitted.



ROOD [of Land] a quantity equal
so the fourth part of an acre, and con­
taining 40 square perches or poles.

To ROOK one, to wipe one of his
money.

ROOKERY, a place where rooks
haunt or reside.

ROOMINESS [of rumicʒ, and neſ­
ſe, Sax.] largeness of place.

A ROOT [radix, L. roed, Dan.] that
part of a plant, &c. that extends itself
downwards, that imbibes the juices of
the earth, and transmits them to other
parts for their nutrition; also the ori­
ginal of a thing or matter, or by which
it naturally draws in its nourishment.

ROOT [in Mathemat.] a number or
quantity which is multiplyed by itself, 
or considered as the balls or foundation
of a higher power.

ROOT of an equation [in Algebra] is
the value of an unknown quantity in
an equation.

ROOTLINGS [in Botany] small
roots of plants.

Bolt-ROPE [with Marin.] a rope
wherein the sails are sewed.

Buoy-ROPE, a rope tyed to the buoy
at one end, and to the anchors flook at
the other.

Cat-ROPE, a rope for haling in the
cat.

Chest ROPE a rope added to the
boat rope, when tow­
ed at the ships stern, to keep her from
sheering.

Guest ROPE a rope added to the
boat rope, when tow­
ed at the ships stern, to keep her from
sheering.

Entring-ROPE, a rope belonging to
the entring ladder to hold by.

Jeer ROPE, a piece of a hawser
made fast to the main-yard and fore-­
yard, close to the ties, &c. to succour
the ties, by helping to hoise up the
yards, &c. that, if the ties should break,
they may hold up the mast.

Keel ROPE, a hair rope, which runs
between the keelson and the keel of
the ship, to clear the limber-holes, 
choaked up with ballast, &c.

Preventer ROPE, a rope over the
ramhead if one part of tie should
break, to prevent the other part from
running thro' the ram-head, and endan­
gering the yard.

Running ROPES [in a Ship] are those
which run on blocks and shivers.

Standing ROPES [in a Ship] the
shrouds and stays.

Top ROPES, those wherewith they
set or strike the main or fore-top masts.

ROPE Weed, an herb.

ROPISHNESS [spoken of liquors]
the thick, clammy quality.

RORATION, a falling of dew,  L.

RORIFEROUS Ductus [with Anat.]
a vessel arising about the kidney, on the
left side, which ascends along the chest, 
and ends at the subclavian vein, on the
left side, the use of which is to convey
the juices called Chyle and Lympha, from
the lower parts to the heart, called also
Ductus Chiliferus,  L.

RORIGENOUS [rorigenus, L.] pro­
duced of dew.

RORIFLUOUS [rorifluus, L.] flow­
ing with dew.

ROS [according to Galen] is a third
sort of moisture, whereby the parts of
animal bodies are nourished, and is
contained in all the parts of an animal, 
like a certain dew sprinkled upon them.

ROSACEOUS [rosaceus, L.] of the
rose kind.



ROSADE, a liquor made of pound­
ed almonds, milk and sugar.

ROSARY [in the church of Rome] an
office composed of 5 or 15 tens of beads
(each of the tens beginning with a
Pater noster) as a direction for the Sup­
plicants in saying so many Ave Maria's.

This number of Ave Manas, is said
in commemoration of the 5 joyful, 5
afflicting, and 5 glorious mysteries said
to be communicated to the Virgin Mary.

The 5 joyful mysteries are made to be
the Annunciation; her visitation of Eliza­
beth; the birth of our Saviour; her pu­
rification; and our Saviour's disputing
with the doctors in the temple.

The 5 Afflicting Mysteries are Our 
Saviour's agony in the garden; his being
scourged; his being crowned with Thorns;
his bearing the weight of the Cross, and
his Crucifixion.

The 5 Glorious Mysteries are our Sa­
viour's Resurrection, his Ascension, the
descent of the Holy Ghost, his glorification
in Heaven, and the Assumption of the
Virgin Mary.

St. Dominick is said to be the author
of this devotion, who as they pretend, 
was encouraged to it by an apparition
of the Virgin Mary to him.

ROSEATE [of roseus, L.] scented
with, or smelling of roses.

ROSE [Emblematically] represents the
momentary, and fickle state of man's
life, the frailty and inconstancy of
which is such, that we are no sooner
born into the world, but we presently
begin to leave it, and as the delectable
beauty, and redolence of smell of this
flower, does suddenly fade and perish, 
so the life of man, his beauty, strength
and worldly estate, are so mutable, 
weak and momentary, that often, that
the same day he flourishes most, he
dies.

ROSE [in Architecture] the figure of
a rose in sculpture chiefly used in frizes
corniches, vaults of churches, and par­
ticularly in the middle of each face of
the Corinthian Abacus, and also in the
spaces between modillions, under the
plafonds of corniches.

Under the ROSE [sub rosa, L.] a phrase
made use of to denote secresy, which
is said to have had this original. There
is, among the ancients, a tradition that
the God of Love made a very beautiful
Rose, the first that had been known, to
Harpocrates the god of silence, and
gave it him to engage him not to dis­
cover any of the intrigues of his mother
Venus. Hence proceeded a custom to
place a Rose in the rooms where they
met for mirth and divertisement, to
intimate that under the assurance there­
of they might lay aside all constraint
and speak what they pleased, and so
the rose became a symbol of silence.

ROSSELLY Land, light land.

ROSTRA, a part of the Roman Forum, 
wherein orations, pleadings, and fune­
ral harangues, &c. were delivered.

ROSY [rosaceus, L.] full of, or like
roses.

ROSYCRUCIANS, q. d. brothers of
the Rosy-Cross. Their chief was a
German gentleman, educated in a mo­
nastery, where having learned the lan­
guages, he travelled to the holy land, 
Anno 1378, and being at Damascus, and
falling sick, he had the conversation of
some Arabs and other oriental philoso­
sophers, by whom he is supposed to be
initiated into this mysterious art. At
his return into Germany he formed a
society, and communicated to them
the secrets he had brought with him
out of the East, and died Anno. 1484.

A sect or cabal of hermetical phi­
losophers; who bound themselves to­
gether by a solemn secret, which they
swore inviolably to observe; and obliged
themselves, at their admission into the
order, to a strict observance of certain
established rules.

They pretended to know all sciences, 
and especially medicine, of which they
published themselves the restorers, they
also pretended to be masters of abun­
dance of important secrets; and among
others, that of the Philosophers Stone;
all which they affirmed they had recei­
ved by tradition from the ancient E­
gyptians, Chaldeans, the Magi and Gym­
nosophists.

They pretended to protract the period
of human life by means of certain nos­
trums, and even to restore youth.

They pretended to know all things;
they are also called the invisible Brothers, 
because they have made no appearance
but have kept themselves incog. for se­
veral years.

This society is frequently signified
by the letters F. R. C. Fratres Roris
Cocti, it being pretended that the mat­
ter of the Philosophers Stone is dew, 
concocted and exhaled .

ROT-GUT very Small beer, or poor
ordinary liquor.

ROTA [in Policy] a court or juris­
diction in Rome, composed of 12 pre­
lates, who judge by appeal all matters
ecclesiastical and civil, arising between
the clergy; it is composed of persons
of divers nations, whereof there are 8



Italians, 3 Romans, 1 Tuscan, 1 Milanese
1 Polander, 1 Ferarese, 1 Venetian, 1
Frenchman, 2 Spaniards and 1 German.

They are called Auditors of the Rota, 
they have great privileges and wear
a violet coloured robe, and a band of
the same colour about their hats.

ROTA Aristotelica [Aristotle's wheel, 
so called because said to be first taken
notice of by Aristotle] a celebrated
problem in mechanicks, founded on the
motion of a wheel about its axis.

The difficulty is this; while a circle
makes a revolution on its centre, ad­
vancing at the same time in a right
line along a plane; it describes on that
plane, a right line equal to its circum­
ference.

Now if this circle, which we may
call the deferent, carry with it another
smaller circle concentrick with it, and
which has no motion, but what it re­
ceives from the deferent; which is the
case of a nave of a coach wheel, car­
ried along by the wheel; this little
circle or nave will describe a line in the
time of revolution, equal not to its
own circumference, but to that of the
wheel, for that its centre advances in
a right line, as fast as that of the wheel
does; as being in reality the same
therewith.

The matter of fact is certain: But
how it should be seems a mystery. It
is obvious that the wheel advancing, 
during the revolution, must describe a
right line equal to its circumference;
but how should the nave, that revolves
like the wheel describe a right line so
much greater than the circumference.

This Problem has exercised the wits
of many great mathematicians, who
have given different solutions; but none
of which are satisfactory.

ROTARY, of or pertaining to a
wheel; whirling or turning round, as
a rotary motion.

ROTATED [rotatus, L.] turned
round like a wheel.

ROTATION [in Geom.] the circum­
volution of a surface, round an immo­
veable line.

ROTATION [with Anat.] the action
of the muscles, call'd rotatores; or the
motion they give to the parts to which
they are affixed.

The ROTONDA in Rome [of ro­
tundus, L. round]
was anciently called the Pantheon, be­
cause dedicated to all the gods. It is a
great massy vault 140 foot high, and as
many broad, having a hole open at the
top of nine or ten foot diameter, which,
at this day stands a bold and firm
piece of architecture, altho' it is open
at the top and hath not had for many
years pillars to bear up its roof. There
are now lying along on the ground, 
but on the outside of this structure, 
thirteen of its columns, each of them
being all of one piece, six foot in dia­
meter, and 53 foot in height. This
fabrick Pliny, in his time, accounted
one of the rarest wonders then extant.

ROTTENNESS [rotneſſe, of ro­
tan, Sax. or rotten, Du.] putrifiedness, 
or being infected with the rot.

ROTULA, i. e. a little wheel [in
Anatomy] the bone of the knee pan,  L.

ROTULUS Wintoniæ, a roll con­
taining an exact survey of all England.

ROTUNDIFOLIOUS [in Botan.
Writ.] which has round leaves.

ROTUNDNESS [rotunditas, L. ro­
tundité, F.] roundness.

ROUGHNESS [hrufneſſe, Sax.]
unevenness, is that which by the in­
equality of its parts is disagreeable to
the touch; hairiness, bristliness, &c.

To ROUND a Horse [in Horsemanship]
is a general expression for all sorts of
manage upon rounds: So that to round
a horse upon a trot, gallop, or other­
wise, is to make him carry his shoul­
ders and his haunches compactly or
roundly, upon a greater or smaller
circle, without traversing or bearing
to a side.

ROUNDNESS [rondeur, F. rotundi­
tas, L.] a round form.

ROUNDEL a song beginning and
ending with the same
sentence, or one that turns back again
to the first verse, and then goes round.

ROUNDO a song beginning and
ending with the same
sentence, or one that turns back again
to the first verse, and then goes round.

To ROUND [arrondir, F.] to go
round, Milton.

ROUNDING, encompassing round, 
Milton.

To ROUND in the Ear [prob. of ru­
man, Sax. to mutter] to chide a person
sharply.

ROUND Top [of a Ship] is a round
frame of boards, lying upon the cross
trees, near the head of the mast, where
the men may stand to furl and loose
the top-sails, &c.

ROUND-Splice [with Mariners] is
when a rope's end is so let into another, 
that they shall be as firm as if they
were but one rope.

ROUT [in a Law Sense] an assembly
or combination of three or more per­
sons going forcibly to commit an un­
lawful act: altho' they do not perform
it.

ROUT of an Army [deroute, F.] the
discomfiture.



To ROUT an Army is to discomfit
or put it to flight.

To ROW a Boat [of ro&wyn;an, Sax.] to
pull it along by oars.

ROWEL [in a Ship] is a round piece
of wood or iron, wherein the whip
goes, being made to turn about, that it
may carry over the whip the easier
from side to side.

ROWTY, over-rank, or strong, said
of corn or grass.

ROYAL Antler [with Hunters] the
third branch of the horn or a hart or
buck, which shoots out from the rear
or main horn, above the bezantler.

ROYAL Army is an army marching
with heavy cannon, capable of besieg­
ing a strong, well-fortified city.

ROYAL Crown of En­
gland, is clos'd by semicir­
cles of gold, meeting at
the monde or globe on
which the cross stands, and
those simicircles adorned with crosses
and flower de Lis, the whole imbel­
lish'd with precious stones.

Image omitted.



ROYAL Fishes, whales and sturge­
ons, to which some add porpoises;
which are the king's, by his preroga­
tive, when cast on shore.

ROYALNESS [royaute, F. regalitas, 
L.] royalty.

ROYALTIES, the royal rights or
prerogatives of a king or queen;
which the Civilians reckon to be six in
number, viz. the power of judicature, 
the power of life and death, of war
and peace, of levying taxes; the goods
that have no owners, as waifs, strays, 
&c. and the coinage of money.

The Ensigns of ROYALTY [in Great
Britain] are the crown, scepter, and
dove, cross, St. Edward s staff, four
different sorts of swords, the orb and
cross, &c. used at coronations.

To ROUZE a Hart [Hunting Phrase]
is to raise him from his harbour.

To ROUZE a Hawser, &c. [Sea
Phrase] is to hale in that part of it
which lies slack in the water.

To ROUZE [in Falconry] is said of a
hawk when he lifts up and shakes him­
self.

A ROUZING Lie, a whisking great
one.

A RUBBER [of reiben, Teut.] one
that rubs, or a rubbing brush.

RUBEOLA [with Physicians] a sort
of small pox or measles.

RUBICAN Colour [of a Horse] is a
Bay, Sorrel, or Black, with a light Gray
or White upon the flanks; but so, that
the Gray or White is not predominant
there.

RUBICUNDITY [rubicunditas, L.]
redness.

RUBIED, tinctured of the colour of
a ruby, red, Milton.

RUBIGINOSE [rubiginosus, L.]
rusty.

RUBIGINOUS [rubiginosus, L.]
rusty.

RUBIGO [with Botanists] mildew, a
disease that happens to plants, and
proceeds from a dewy moisture, which
falling upon them, and not being drawn
up by the heat of the sun, by its sharp­
ness, gnaws and corrupts the inward
substance of plants,  L.

RUBRICK [in the Canon law] a
title or article in the ancient law-books, 
so called, because anciently written, as
the titles of the chapters in our anci­
ent bibles are, in red letters.

RUBY [rubis, F. of rubere, L. to be
red] the most valuable of precious
stones, next to the diamond; and when
perfect beautiful, nothing inferior.

RUBY [in Heraldry] being red, is
used for gules, by those who blazon the
arms of the prime nobility by precious
stones, instead of metals and colours.

RUCTATION [with Physic.] belch­
ing, a depraved motion of the stomach, 
caused by an effervescence there, 
by vapours and flatulent matter are
sent out of the mouth.

RUDDER-Rope, a rope let through
the stern-post, and the head of the
rudder; so that both ends may be spli­
ced or fastened together. The use of
this rope is to save the rudder, if it
should be torn off from the irons by
any accident.

RUDDER-Irons [of a Ship] the
cheeks of that iron, whereof the pin­
tle is part, which is fastened and nail'd
down upon the rake of the rudder.

RUDDINESS [ruðuneſſe, Sax.]
fresh-colouredness.

RUDERARY [ruderarius, L.] be­
longing to rubbish.

RUDIMENTS [rudiment, F. of rudi­
mentum, of rudis, L. ignorant] the first
elements, principles or grounds of any
art or science; so called, because those
that first come to be instructed, are
supposed to be Rudes, i. e. altogether
ignorant.

RUDENTURE [in Architect.] the
figure of a rope or staff, sometimes
plain, and sometimes carved, where­
with the flutings of columns are fre­
quently filled up.

RUDERATION [in Architect.] the
laying of a pavement with pebbles or
little stones.  L.

RUEFULNESS [of reo&wyn;fian, Sax.]
sorrowfulness, repentance.



RUELLE [of rue, F. a street] a lit­
tle street. It is of late brought into use
among us, to signify an Alcove, or o­
ther genteel apartment, where the
ladies receive visits either in bed or up.

RUFF, a bird, which in fighting rai­
ses up its feathers like a double ruff.

RUFFLES, a sort of ornaments of
linnen or lace, worn on the arms of
men and women.

RUGGEDNESS [of hruhʒe, Sax.]
roughness, unevenness.

RUGITUS [with Phys.] an efferve­
scence of Chyle, and excrements in the
blood, whereby wind and several other
motions, excited in the guts, roll up
and down the excrements, when there
is no easy vent upwards or downwards,
 L.

RUGOSENESS [of rugosus, L.]
roughness, fulness of wrinkles, plaits, 
or furrows, &c.

To RUINATE [ruinatum, L.] to
ruin, or bring to ruin.

RUINATION, destruction, ruin.

RUINOUSNESS [of ruinosus, L.] a
ruinous, or ruinating faculty or state.

RULE [regula, L.] a certain maxim, 
canon, or precept, to be observed in
any art or science, law, or principle
to go by; a statute or decree of a re­
ligious order; sway or command.

RUMB [in Navigation] the course
of a ship, i. e. the angle
which she makes in her sailing with
the meridian of the place she is in; also
one point of the mariner's compass, or
11 degrees and 1-4, viz. the 32 part of
the circumference of the horizon.

RHUMB [in Navigation] the course
of a ship, i. e. the angle
which she makes in her sailing with
the meridian of the place she is in; also
one point of the mariner's compass, or
11 degrees and 1-4, viz. the 32 part of
the circumference of the horizon. 

RUMIA [among the Romans] a
deity invoked to take
care of their sucking 
children, to whom they offered sacri­
fice of milk and water, mix'd with
hony.

RUMILLA [among the Romans] a
deity invoked to take
care of their sucking 
children, to whom they offered sacri­
fice of milk and water, mix'd with
hony.

RUMINA [among the Romans] a
deity invoked to take
care of their sucking 
children, to whom they offered sacri­
fice of milk and water, mix'd with
hony.

RUMINATION a chewing the cud, 
&c. a natural motion of the stomach, 
&c. mutually relieving one another, by
which means the food that was eaten
hastily at first, is convey'd back to the
mouth again, and there chew'd and
swallow'd down a second time, to the
great advantage of the creature.

To RUMMAGE [in a Figurative
Sense] is to rake into, or to search nar­
rowly.

To RUMOUR, to tell abroad.

RUN of a Ship [Sea-Term] is that
part of her hull under water, which
comes narrower by degrees from the
floor-timbers to the stern-post.

Good-RUN [Sea-Term] a ship is said
to have a good run, when she comes
off handsomely by degrees, and her
tuck lying not too low.

Bad-RUN [Sea Term] is when a ship's
tuck lies too low, so that it hinders the
passage of the water towards the rud­
der, so that she cannot steer well, nor
make any good way thro' the sea, but
will still be falling to the leeward.

RUNG Heads [of a Ship] the heads
of the ground-timbers, which are
made a little bending, or where they
begin to compass, and that direct the
mould or sweep of the futtocks and
navel-timbers.

RUNIC Language that of the Goths, 
Danes, and other ancient northern na­
tions; but this is more frequently cal­
led Sclavonic. Some imagine it was
called Runic, as being mysterious and
scientifical, like the Egyptian hierogly­
phicks.

RUNNET the maw of a calf, or
an acid juice found in
the stomachs of calves, that have fed
on nothing but milk; and are killed
before the digestion be perfected, com­
monly used in turning milk, to be
made into cheese-curds.

RENNET the maw of a calf, or
an acid juice found in
the stomachs of calves, that have fed
on nothing but milk; and are killed
before the digestion be perfected, com­
monly used in turning milk, to be
made into cheese-curds.

RUPTURE-Wort, an herb.

RURALITY [of ruralis, L.]
country-likeness,
clownishness.

RURALNESS [of ruralis, L.]
country-likeness,
clownishness.

RURICOLIST [ruricola, L.] an hus­
bandman.

RURIGENOUS [rurigena, L.] born
or dwelling in the country.

RUSHINESS [of riſc, Sax. a rush]
a being full of or having rushes.

RUSINA, a heathen deity, suppos'd
to be a rural or country goddess, who
presided over all the labours and all
the divertisements of the country.

RUSTICITY [rusticitas, L.
rusticité, F.]
clownishness, violentness.

RUSTICALNESS [rusticitas, L.
rusticité, F.]
clownishness, violentness.

RUSTICI [in ant. Writs] the clowns
or inferior tenants, who held lands and
cottages, by doing the service of plough­
ing, and other laborious services in
husbandry for their lord.

RUSTICK Gods, those who presided
over agriculture; country deities.

RUSTICK [in Architect.] a method
of building in imitation of nature, ra­
ther than according to art; the columns
are encompassed with frequent cinc­
tures.

RUSTICK Work [Architect.] is where
stones of a building, instead of being
smooth, are hatched or picked with
the point of a hammer.

RUSTICK Order, [Architecture] an
order with rustick quoins, rustick-­
work, &c.



RUSTINESS [roſtiʒneſſe, Sax.]
the being rusty.

RUSTLING [hriſtlan, Sax.] mak­
ing a noise, as armour and new gar­
ments do.

RUSTY [nortiʒ, Sax.] covered
with rust.

RUSY, full of stratagems, and de­
vices; subtle, crafty.

RUSTRE [in Heraldry]
is exactly the same square
figure as the mascle, only
the rustre is pierced round, 
whereas the mascle is pier­
ced square, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



RUTA [in Botany] rue,  L.

RUTHFUL [ruðful, Sax.] pitiful, 
compassionate.

RUTHFULNESS [ruðfulneſſe, 
Sax.] compassionateness.

RUTTIER [un vieux routier, F.] an
old beaten soldier.

RUTTING [with Hunters] signifies
a hart or buck going to couple or in­
gender.

RY, a shore, coast, strand, or bank
of the sea,  Brit.

RYAL, a piece of gold-coin, which
in the time of king Henry VI. was cur­
rent for 10s. under Henry VIII. for 11s.
3d. and in queen Elizabeth's time for
15s.



S

S s s Roman, S s s Italick, S ſ Sax.
S s s Old English, Σ σ ς, Gr. are
the eighteenth letters in order of the
alphabet, ס the fifteenth, and ש the
twenty first of the Hebrew.

S [une esse, or, S, F.] an iron bar
like an S.

S, is lost, and may be term'd a liquid
in the words Isle, Island, Viscount. S 
sounds like z in Chaise, Praise, &c. and
z like s in raze, A long s must never
be placed at the end of a word, as
maintains, nor a short s in the middle
of a word, as conspires.

SS, in the title-pages of books, often
stand for Socius, L. a companion or
member, or Societatis, of the company.

S among the ancients, was a numeri­
cal letter, and signified 7.

S [in books of Navigation] stands for
south.

SABAITES, an ancient heathenish
sect of the ancient Chaldeans, of which
the learned Jewish Rabbi, Maimonedes
gives us this account, that Abraham
was educated in their religion, and
owned no other deity but the sun and
stars; but that Abraham at length, 
strongly opposed this superstition, and
asserting one only God, the author of
the universe, and who governed all
things by his providence.

The Sabaites oppos'd the Marians, 
which were fire worshippers, and fan­
cied the planets to be the habitations
of the gods; and the planets being
sometimes out of sight, they made ima­
ges in representation of them, to which
they paid adoration in their absence.

SABASIA [σαβάζια, Gr.] nocturnal
mysteries celebrated by the Greeks, in
honour of Jupiter Sabazius, into which 
all that were initiated, had a golden
serpent put in at their breasts, and
taken out at the lower part of their
garments, in commemoration of Jupi­
ter's ravishing Proserpina, in the form
of a serpent.

SABBATH [of Witches] a nocturnal
assembly, supposed to be held on Sa­
turday, in which the devil is said to
appear in the shape of a goat, about
which they make several dances and
magick ceremonies. In order to pre­
pare themselves for this meeting, they
take several soporifick drugs, after
which they are fancied to fly up the
chimney, and to be spirited or carried
thro' the air, riding on a switch to
their sabbath assembly.

SABBATHIANS [so called from one
Sabatheus, a Jew, in the 4th century]
he pretending to be converted to Chri­
stianity, was ordain'd a bishop by Mar­
tianus, a Novation bishop; and endea­
vouring to introduce the Jewish customs
and ceremonies among his sect, was
depriv'd of that office.

SABBATICALNESS [of sabbatique, 
F. or sabbaticus, L. of תבש, Heb.] the
being of the nature or quality of a sab­
bath.

SABBATUM [in Doomsday Book]
peace or quiet.

SABEANS. See Zabians.

SABLE [in Heraldry]
signifies black, as in the
escutcheon. Of the vir­
tues and qualities of the
soul, it denotes simplicity, 
wisdom, prudence, and honesty; of the
planets, saturn; of the four elements, 
the earth; of metals, lead, and iron;
of precious stones, the diamond; of
trees, the olive; of birds, the crow
or raven; of the ages of men, the
last.

Image omitted.



SABULOUSNESS [sabulositas, L.]
sandiness, &c,



SACEA, festivals held by the Baby­
lonians, &c. in honour of their god
Anaitides: They were in the East much
the same as the Saturnalia were at
Rome, a feast for slaves, and one of the
ceremonies of it was to chuse a priso­
ner condemn'd to death, and to allow
him all the pleasures and gratifications
he could wish, before he was carried to
execution.

SACCADE [in the Manage] a vio­
lent check the cavalier gives his horse, 
by drawing both the reins very sudden­
ly; a correction used when the horse
bears too heavy on the hand.

SACCO Beneditto, a kind of linnen
garment of a yellow colour, with two
crosses on it, and painted over with de­
vils and flames, worn by persons con­
demn'd (by the Spanish inquisition) to
be burned, as they go to execution.

SACCOPHORI [σαχχοφόρος of σαχχος
a sack, and φέρω, Gr. I bear] an ancient
sect, so called on account of their
wearing of sack-cloth, and affecting a
great deal of austerity and penance.

SACCULUS, a little bag or purse, 
a satchel,  L.

SACERDOTALNESS [of sacerdotal, 
F. sacerdotalis, L.] priestliness, or like­
ness to a priest.

SACRAMENTARIUM, an ancient
church-book, comprehending all the
prayers and ceremonies practised at the
celebration of the sacraments,  L.

SACREDNESS [of sacer, L. sainteté, 
F. sanctitas, L.] holiness.

SACRICOLIST [sacricola, L.] a
devout worshipper.

SACRIFICE [sacrificium of sacra, 
holy things, and facio, L. to perform]
an offering made to God on an altar, 
by a regular minister, as the payment
of homage, &c.

Writers say, that the devils being
enemies to God and his glory from the
malignity of their natures, were not
content with the offerings of the fruits
of the earth, and of all manner of
creatures that were usually sacrificed
to them, but were so barbarous as to
require human victims, viz. men and
women, to be butcher'd and burnt a­
live upon their altars.

The Romans did sometimes dedicate
their young infants to the houshold
gods, the gods of the family. The Scy­
thians, that inhabited about that part
call'd Taurica, were wont to sacrifice
to their Diana, all strangers that came
into their hands. Many damsels were
beaten to death with bundles of rods at
an altar of Bacchus in Arcadia. The
Germans and Cimbri were wont cruelly
to torment men, and afterwards to sa­
crifice them. The inhabitants of the
most northern climates were wont to
make a feast for their aged, and crown
them with garlands, and afterwards
cast them down from an high rock into
the sea; and others threw them off
the bridges into rivers; whence they
were called Senes Depontani. And Cæ­
sar, in his commentaries, relates, that
the ancient Gauls used to dress up a
huge statue made of branches of ozier, 
having filled it with living persons, to
burn it to their idols. The Egyptians, 
and inhabitants of Palestine offered their
own children to their gods; and the
Israelites themselves so far imitated
their barbarities, as to cause their
children to pass between two fires till
they were miserably scorched; and
they also shut them up in an hollow
idol of brass, call'd Moloch, made red
hot, and while these innocent victims
were in this manner tormented, they
sounded trumpets, beat drums, &c. to
drown their outcries. Thence the
place was named Tophet, i. e. a drum.
And Ahaz and Manasseh, kings of Ju­
dæa, were so wretched as to cause
their own children to pass thro' the
fire to Moloch.

In sacrifices to idols, a choice of ani­
mals was made according to the dispo­
sitions of their gods: For Mars is sup­
posed to have lov'd no creatures, but
such as were furious and warlike, as
the bull, &c. and Neptune the bull and
the horse. The he-goat was dedicated
to Bacchus, because it is propense to
spoil vineyards; Ceres and Juno had
cows offer'd in honour of them; Diana
she-goats; and Faunus, kids.

The ceremonies observ'd in their sa­
crifices were these: They were care­
fully to observe if the victim had any
blemish; if so, it was rejected, and an­
other taken, and the priest took a lump
of burnt corn and salt, and sometimes
meal mingled with salt, and threw it
on the victim; and when they had
kill'd the beast, they laid it on the fire, 
and those that offered it, held their
hands upon it, and prayed with the
priest, and then poured wine into the
fire; If it were a Holocaust, i. e. a
whole burnt-offering, the whole was
consum'd in the flames: But if not, 
part of it was laid aside for the priests, 
and those that offered it.

Then they danced round the altar, 
singing hymns and songs in honour of
the deity to whom it was offered.



These hymns consisted of three parts or
stanza's; the first was sung in turning
from east to west; the other in turning
from west to east; and the third part
they sung standing before the altar.

The superior gods had their altars in
eminent places, and their temples built
on such high ground, that they might, 
without any impediment, receive the
first rays of the rising sun. The priest
wore a gown, either white or purple;
and, before he approach'd the altar, 
wash'd his hands in pure water, fancy­
ing that this washing cleans'd the soul, 
and rendered it acceptable to the gods.
The priest then, having his head ad­
orned with garlands and ribbons, led
the beast, adorned in like manner, to
the altar, being followed by a crowd of
people, adorned with crowns made of
such trees as were supposed most ac­
ceptable to the god. The victim stood
by the altar a small time, while the
priest offered a set form of prayer to
Janus and Vesta, and then with a knife
mark'd the beast from head to tail; and
if it was anything unruly, and willing
to get away, they imagined it was not
acceptable to the god, and therefore
procured another. After the perfor­
mance of these and other such like ce­
remonies, the priest laid on the head
and back of the beast, the Mola Salsa, 
i. e. meal and salt mingled with fran­
kincense, and after he and his assistants
had tasted of a cup of wine, he poured
the rest between the horns of the beast, 
and pulling a few hairs from the place, 
threw them into the fire; then the
beast was slain, either by knocking
down or cutting his throat, and slead;
then the south-sayer with a long knife, 
turned the bowels up and down, for it
was unlawful to touch them with his
hands; and having made his observa­
tions, and given his judgment of them, 
they were presented to the deity on a
launce, or if to a sea-god thrown into
the waves; then the priest threw fran­
kincense into the fire with wine, and
took a part of every member which his
ministers had cut out into a platter, and
cast them into the flames; and while
they were burning, he and the offerers
made prayers to the god, holding their
hands upon the altar, and afterwards
retired with the assistants to feast upon
the remaining part of the beast, singing
the praises of the deity. After they had
eaten, they returned back to the altar, 
and east into the flames the morsels of
meat that they had left, with the
tongue and some wine, with thanks to
the deity for the honour and advantage
of sharing with him in the victim of­
fered to him.

To the superior gods they prayed
standing, but to the infernal, sitting.

The gods of the air were adored
with musical instruments, and melodi­
ous songs, more than the former.

The sea gods were worshipped near
the sea, and the blood of the victim
was poured into the salt water.

The sacrifices to the infernal deities
were performed in the night. The
beasts were black, and offered in some
cave or dark place, except it were to
Pluto.

The nymphs and divinities of the
field had milk, honey, and wine
offered to them in their sacrifices; the
male deities had usually male beasts
offered to them, and the goddesses fe­
males.

SACRIFICIALNESS [of sacrificialis, 
L.] the being of the nature of a sacri­
fice.

SACRILEGIOUSNESS [of sacrilege, 
F. of sacrilegium, L.] sacrilegious na­
ture or quality, or the stealing of sa­
cred things.

SACRIST [sacristarius, L.] a vestry-­
keeper or sexton.

SACRISTY, the vestry, the place
where the vessels and ornaments of the
church were kept.

To SADDLE [of sadel, Brit, or
Saðlian, Sax.] to put on a saddle; also
to embarrass, as to saddle a cause; also
to furnish, as to saddle a spit.

SADLERS are a 
company of great an­
tiquity; they were in­
corporated in the reign
of king Edward I. and
confirmed by several
succeeding kings:
They consist of a ma­
ster, 3 wardens, 22 assistants, 65 on the
livery, &c. their livery fine is 10 l.

Their arms are, Azure, a chevron, 
between 3 saddles Or. Their suppor­
ters 2 horses Argent, bridled Gules, bit­
ted of the second. The motto, Our
trust is in God. Their hall is near the
west end of Cheapside.

Image omitted.



SADDUCES [so called of קדצ, Za­
dock] they observed the law, that they
might enjoy the temporal blessings that
it promised, and to escape the punish­
ments it threatened against its trans­
gressors.

They rejected all the Jewish tradi­
tions, and absolutely denyed fatality, 
asserting that it was impossible for



God to do any evil, and that he did
not regard what men did, concluding
it was wholly in the will of man to do
either good or evil. There was an
irreconcileable hatred between them
and the Pharisees.

SADDUCISM, the principles and
doctrines of the Sadduces. They al­
lowed no books of the scripture, but
the five books of Moses; they denied
the being of angels and spirits, the im­
mortality of the soul, and the resur­
rection of the body.

SAFE-Guard, a sort of dust-gown, or
upper riding-garment, worn by women.

SAFENESS [of sauve, F. safe] safety, 
security.

SAFETY and Preservation [in Hiero­
glyph.] were represented by the Ichneu­
mon.

SAFRON of Mars [with Chymists]
saffron of steel, so called from its red
colour.

SAGATHEE, a slight woollen stuff, 
being a kind of rateen or serge, some­
times mixed with a little silk.

SAGACIOUSNESS [sagacitas, L.] 
sharpness of wit, quickness of appre­
hension, &c.

SAGACITY [Hieroglyph.] was repre­
sented by a dog's head.

SAGDA [דנס, Chald.] a kind of gem
about the size of a bean, of a leek green
colour, which attracts wood, as amber
does straws, a load-stone, iron, &c.

SAGITTARIUS [whose characte­
ristick is ♐] is by astrologers called a
masculine, cholerick, and diurnal sign, 
by nature hot and dry, of the fiery
triplicity, and is represented on a ce­
lestial globe by the figure of an archer.

SAILETTES [near Dauphiné in
France] a Chartreux convent of ladies
of quality, the nuns of which make
profession of their rule, before the
bishop of Grenoble, and when they
make their vow, they present them­
selves before him; with wax tapers
in their hands, adorned with the es­
cutcheons of their families, and the
bishop puts a ring on their finger and
a crown on their heads, like to that
which is given to the daughters of
France.

SAILS, the vanes of windmills, or
the arms, whereby the wind has its
effect on them.

SAKER [sacre, Span.] a sort of great
gun, of which there are three sizes.

SAKERET [in Falconry] the male of
a saker-hawk. This kind of hawks
is esteemed next after the falcon and
gyr-falcon, but is differently to be
managed.

SAL, salt.  L.

SAL volatile Oleosum, an aromatick
volatile salt, of Sal Armoniack, distilled
with salt of Tartar, dulcified with spi­
rits of wine, a dram and half of some
aromatick oil or essence, drawn from
one or more sweet scented plants, be­
ing added to every ounce of it. The
plants are such as balm, rosemary, &c.

SALACIOUSNESS [salacitas, L.]
salacity, lechery, lustfulness.

SALAD, a kind of head-piece or
armour worn by light horsemen.

SALADINE, a tax imposed in Eng­
land and France in the year 1188, to
raise a fund for the Croisade, under­
taken by Richard I. king of England, 
and Philip Augustus, king of France, 
against Saladine, sultan of Egypt, then
going to besiege Jerusalem.

SALAMANDER, a spotted creature;
something resembling a lizard in shape, 
commonly, but erroneously, supposed
to breed and subsist in the hottest fire, 
and to quench it.

SALAMANDER [in Hieroglyphicks]
was by the Egyptian priests put to re­
present a brave and generous courage, 
that the fire of affliction cannot over­
come or consume, because it is related
of this animal, that it will live in the
flames without receiving the least pre­
judice from the violence of the heat;
for some authors say, it is of such a
moist and cold constitution, that the
fire cannot quickly have a power to
hurt it. Pliny says, that the salamander
infects all fruits that it touches, leaving
them some impression of its cold na­
ture, so that they become afterwards
as dangerous as poison.

SALARY [old Law Books] a toll or
duty paid for salt.

SALE [of ſallan, Sax.] a selling, or
putting up to be sold.

SALEBROUSNESS [of salebrosus, L.]
unevenness, roughness, cragginess.

SALESMAN [of Sale, Sax.] one
who sells clothes or any commodity.

SALIENT [in Heraldry]
is when the right-foot, an­
swers to the dexter corner
of the escutcheon, and the
hindmost foot to the sinister
base point of it, being, as
it were, in a readiness to spring
ward.

Image omitted.



SALIARIA [among the Romans] a
solemnity held in March, in honour of
Mars, whose priests, at this feast, dan­
ced with targets in their hands.

SALII [among the Romans] priests
of Mars, so called of Saliendo, dancing,



whereof there were 12 instituted by
Numa, who upon a great plague in
Rome, having implored the divine assi­
stance, had a small brass buckler, called
Ancile, sent him from Heaven; he was 
advised by the nymph Egeria and the
Muses to keep it carefully, the fate of
the empire depending upon it, as being
a sure pledge of the protection of the
gods, and their affection to the Romans;
he therefore made eleven more so
very like, that they could not be distin­
guished, which were delivered to the
keeping of the 12 Salii, priests chosen
out of the noblest families, to be laid
up in the temple of Mars, upon whose
yearly festival, the first of March, they
were carried about the city with much
solemnity, dancing, clashing the buck­
lers, and singing hymns to the gods:
They were answered by a chorus of
virgins drest like themselves, who were
chosen to assist them upon that occa­
sion; the festival was ended with a
sumptuous feast. They were painted
in parti-coloured garments, with round
bonnets, with two corners standing up
on their heads; they went dancing
along the streets in their processions.

SALINENESS [of salinosus, L.]
saltness, or salt
quality.

SALINOUSNESS [of salinosus, L.]
saltness, or salt
quality.

SALINITROUS [of Sal and nitron]
compounded with salt or salt-petre.

SALINO-Sulphureous, of a saline and
sulphureous quality.

SALIQUE Law, a celebrated body
of laws, made by the Franks when they
entered into Gaul, which consisted of
24 articles or titles, in which different
matters and crimes are treated of:
The 6th of which treating of Alleuds or
Free-holds, imports, that no part of the Sa­
lique land may pass over or be left to fe­
males; but that the males must always
succeed in the Inheritance; from whence
it has been concluded that the custom
of excluding the daughters from the
crown of France, was founded on this
article.

SALIVA, spittle,  L. a thin, pellucid
humour, separated by the glands, about
the mouth and fauces, and conveyed
by proper salival ducts into the mouth, 
for several uses.

SALLY [in Architecture] is in French
what the English call projecture.

A SALLY [Figuratively] a flash of
wit; also a rant, a flight, a transport
or sudden fit of passion, heat, &c.

SALLY [with Ringers] a particular
way of ringing a bell.

SALLOON [Architect.] a state­
room for the reception of ambassadors, 
and other great visitors. A very lofty
spacious hall, vaulted at top, and
sometimes having two stories or ranges
of windows: A grand room in the
middle of a building, or head of a gal­
lery, &c.

SALPETROUS, of or pertaining to, 
or of the quality of salt-petre.

SALPROTIC. See Pulvis fulminans.

SALT [Sal, L.] an active substance, 
supposed by Naturalists to be that
which gives consistence to all bodies, 
and to preserve them from corruption;
and also that it is that from which pro­
ceeds the variety of tastes, whereby
we distinguish one edible or taste from
another, and give them names accord­
ingly.

SALT [Metaphorically] is used in se­
veral senses; sometimes as a symbol
of wisdom, at others of perpetuity and
incorruption; sometimes again of ste­
rility and barrenness; at other times
of hospitality and fidelity; by way of
allusion to the different qualities of it, 
according to its various application.

SALT MINES, are mines in upper
Hungary, not far from Epirus, of which
Dr. Brown who saw them, has given us
the following account.

From the first place of the descent to
the bottom of it is about 180 fathoms
deep, of which the miners first descend
by the ropes a good part of the way, 
and afterwards by ladders into the
lowest parts: That the mine is for
the most part in an earthy and not a
rocky ground; that the veins are large, 
in some of which are found lumps of
salt above 10000 pounds weight.

That it is hewed out in long square
pieces, about two foot long and one
thick, which are ground to a sort of
powder for use.

That the water that is drawn out of
this mine, when boiled away yields a
blackish salt, which the country give
to their cattle.

That the stone salt when dug, is of a
greyish colour; but when ground, be­
comes as white as if refined, consisting
of pointed parts; nor is it all of one
colour; that which is most pure and
resembles crystal is tinctured with di­
vers colours; so that some transparent
blue and yellow lumps, are carved into
divers figures; as if they were crystal.

There have been of late several such
mines discovered in England, but the
salt is not so pure and fine as that of
Hungary.



SALT, the observation on the falling
of Salt, proceeds from a particular no­
mination among the ancients, who
upon the notion of salts being incor­
ruptible, made it the symbol of friend­
ship; and if it fell casually, they thought
their friendship would not be of long
duration.

Fixed SALT [in Chem.] is made by
calcining or reducing the matter to
ashes, and then boiling it in a good
quantity of water, and afterwards
straining the liquor, and evaporating
all the moisture; which being done, 
the salt will remain in a dry form at
the bottom of the vessel.

SALT of Sulphur [with Chymists] the
salt called Sal Polychrestum, soaked with
spirit of sulphur, and then reduced to
an acid salt, by evaporating all the
moisture: in either of these operations
much water is to be poured on it, to
make a lye; and after that the liquor
must be strained and evaporated in a
sand heat, till the fixed salt remains at
the bottom of the vessel.

SALTERS, were incorporated by
king Henry VIII. They
consist of a master, 3
wardens, 28 assistants, 
140 on the livery, be­
sides yeomanry. The
livery fine is 20 l. they
are the 9th of the 12
companies, and there
have been 10 of it lord mayors.

The armorial ensigns are; per che­
vron Azure and Gules, three covered
salts Or, sprinkling salt proper. On a
helmet and torse, issuing out of a
cloud Argent, a sinister arm proper, 
holding a salt, as the former. Support­
ers two otters argent, platee gorg'd with
ducal coronets, thereto a chain affixed
and reflected over their loins Or. The
motto sal sapit omnia. Their hall is in
Swithin's Lane.

SALTIRE [in Heraldry] is an ordi­
nary that consists of a four-­
fold line, two of which
are drawn from the dexter
chief towards the sinister-­
base corners, and the other
sinister-chief towards the
dexter-base points, meeting about the
middle by couples in acute angles, as
in the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



SALTISHNESS, having a saltish re­
lish.

SALVABLENESS [of salvus, L. safe]
capableness of being saved.

SALVATELLA [of salus, L. health]
a famous branch of the cephalick vein,
passing over the Metacarpus, between
the ring-finger and the little finger: So
called, because it has been a received
opinion, that the opening that vein was
a cure for melancholy.

SALUBRIOUSNESS [of salubritas, 
L. salubrité, F.] wholesomness, health­
fulness.

To SALVE [salvare, L.] to accom­
modate a difference.

SALUTATION, a saluting, a greet­
ing; the formal act of shewing respect
or civility, either in words, or by the
carriage or gesture of the body.

SALUTARY [salutarius, L.] health­
ful, wholesome.

SALUTARINESS, wholesomness, 
healthfulness.

To SALUTE [in Military Affairs] is to
discharge cannon, or to bow down the
colours to the ground, and lay them
as it were at the feet of kings, princes, 
generals, colonels, &c.

SALUTE [in Marine Aff.]
is the civility and
submission that one ship pays to ano­
ther or to a fort, when they sail by it
or come into it; which is done by strik­
ing the colours, firing a certain num­
ber of guns, &c. and it is a maxim at
sea, that he that returns the salute, fires
one gun less than he that payed it;
which method is observed between the
ships of princes of equal dignity.

But the Swedes and Danes, return
the complement without regarding
how many guns were fired to them;
the Swedes always giving two guns, 
and the Danes three.

It is never expected that the salute
should exceed 7 guns, it is accounted
an excess to discharge more; but strik­
ing sail is more than manners and is a
token of submission, and here it is ne­
ver returned.

Merchant men lower their main-­
yard; but men of war strike only their
top-sails.

The English claim the right of being
saluted first in all places, as being so­
veraigns of the seas. The Venetians 
claim this honour within their gulph.

In rivers and boats, they do not sa­
lute each other, only on the Rhine in
Germany, where the ground on each
side belongs to 30 different princes; all
the ceremony is, that the boats that go
up the stream, put by to make way for
the boats that go down the stream, and
are carried forcibly by the current.

SALUTATION [in Marine Aff.]
is the civility and
submission that one ship pays to ano­
ther or to a fort, when they sail by it
or come into it; which is done by strik­
ing the colours, firing a certain num­
ber of guns, &c. and it is a maxim at
sea, that he that returns the salute, fires
one gun less than he that payed it;
which method is observed between the
ships of princes of equal dignity.

But the Swedes and Danes, return
the complement without regarding
how many guns were fired to them;
the Swedes always giving two guns, 
and the Danes three.

It is never expected that the salute
should exceed 7 guns, it is accounted
an excess to discharge more; but strik­
ing sail is more than manners and is a
token of submission, and here it is ne­
ver returned.

Merchant men lower their main-­
yard; but men of war strike only their
top-sails.

The English claim the right of being
saluted first in all places, as being so­
veraigns of the seas. The Venetians 
claim this honour within their gulph.

In rivers and boats, they do not sa­
lute each other, only on the Rhine in
Germany, where the ground on each
side belongs to 30 different princes; all
the ceremony is, that the boats that go
up the stream, put by to make way for
the boats that go down the stream, and
are carried forcibly by the current.

SALUTIFEROUSNESS [salutifer, 
L.] an health bringing quality.

SAMBENITO, See Sacco Beneditto.



SAMBUCUS, an ancient musical in­
strument of the wind kind, and resem­
bling a flute; so called, because proba­
bly made of the Sambucus or elder-tree.

SAMIAN Earth, a medicinal earth, 
brought from Samos in the Indian sea.

SAMOSETANIANS [so called of
Samosetanus, bishop of Antioch] an anci­
ent sect of Anti-trinitarians.

SAMPSÆIANS, a sect properly nei­
ther Jews, Christians nor Gentiles; they
allow of one God, and are stiff Uni­
tarians.

SANABLENESS [of sanabilis, L.]
capableness of being healed.

SANATIVENESS [of sanare, L.] an
healing quality.

SANCTIMONIAL [sanctimonialis, 
L.] of or pertaining to holiness.

SANCTIMONIOUS [of sanctimonia, 
L.] holy, devout.

SANCTION, the authority given to
any judicial decree or act, whereby it
becomes legal or current.

SANCTUARY [sanctuarium, L.] in
ancient times, was a place privileged
by a prince, for the safe-guard of the
lives of men, who were capital offen­
ders. Traitors, murderers, &c. were
protected in these sanctuaries, if they
acknowledged their fault in forty days, 
and consented to banishment; but after
forty days no man might relieve them.
Of these sanctuaries there were many in
England.

SAND-Bags, are bags containing a­
bout a cubical foot of earth; they are
used for raising parapets in haste, or to
repair what is beaten down; they are
of use when the ground is rocky, and
affords no earth to carry on their ap­
proaches, because they can be easily
brought from afar off and removed at
will. The smaller Sand-Bags hold a­
bout half a cubical foot of earth, and
serve to be placed upon the Superior
Talus of the Parapet, to cover those that
are behind, who fire through the Em­
brasures, or Intervals which are left
between them.

Image omitted.



SAND-Heat [with Chymists] one of
the chymists heats, consisting of hot
sand, wherein herbs, flowers, &c. are
infused in a cucurbit, in order to a di­
gestion.

SANDY [ſanðiʒ, Sax.] having sand
or made of sand.

SANDINESS [of ſanðineſſe, Sax.]
fulness of sand.

SANDARACK, a white gum, oozing
out of the juniper-tree.

SANDARACK, a mineral, it is either
natural or artificial; the natural is
found in mines of gold and silver; the
artificial is made of orpiment, put into
an earthen pot; close stopped, and bak'd
five hours in a furnace.

SANDERS, a precious kind of Indian
wood, of which there are three sorts, 
red, yellow and white.

SANDISH, somewhat sandy, or like
sand.

SANENESS [sanitas, L.] soundness
of health.

SANDYX, a red or purple colour, 
made of Cerus and Ruddle, burnt toge­
ther; red Arsenick; also a shrub bear­
ing a flower of a scarlet colour.

SANGUIFICATION [with Physic.]
the conversion or turning of Chyle into
blood, which is performed (not as the
ancients imagined) in some peculiar
part of the body, as the heart, liver, 
&c. but in all parts of it.

SANGUIFLUOUS [sanguifluus, L.]
flowing with blood.

SANGUINARINESS, blood-thirsti­
ness, cruelty.

SANGUINE-Stone, a blood-stone; a
kind of Jasper, brought from New-­
Spain, of a dark brown colour, mark'd
with spots of a blood-red, used for
stopping blood.

SANGUINE [in Heral.] is
expressed in engraving by
lines hatched across one
another diagonally, both
dexter and sinister, as in the
figure.

Image omitted.



SANGUIS [in our ancient Customs] a
right or power, which the chief lord of
the fee had to determine in causes
where blood was shed.

SANHEDRIM [מידדהנס, Heb. Συνε­
δριον, Gr.] an assembly, as those of par­
liaments and soveraign courts, where
many judges and counsellors meet to­
gether, to consult on and determine
great affairs.

The Jews call by the name of San­
hedrim the house of judgment, which is
a council of 70 senators, who assembled
in an apartment of the temple of Je­
rusalem, and there determined the most
important affairs of their nation.

The chief of this assembly was called
Nasi, i. e. Prince; his deputy was
called Ab-beth-din, i. e. father of the



house of judgment, and the sub-deputy
was called Chacam, that is the wise, the
rest were called elders or senators.

The room they met in was a Rotunda, 
half of which was built without the
temple, and half within; that is, there
was one semi-circle of the room within
the compass of the temple, and as it
was never allowed to sit down in the
temple, they tell us, this part was for
those who stood up; the other half or
semi-circle, extended itself without the
holy place, and it was here the judges
sat.

SANIODES [of σανίδος, Gen.
of σανίς, Gr. a table]
a disease, when the breast is straitened
and flattened like a table.

SANIDODES [of σανίδος, Gen.
of σανίς, Gr. a table]
a disease, when the breast is straitened
and flattened like a table.

SANITAS, a heathen goddess, whose
worship as Pausanius relates, was very
common in Greece, and that there was
an altar for Jason, Venus, Panacer, Sa­
nitas or Health and Minerva in the tem­
ple of Amphiarus. She had likewise a
temple at Rome in the sixth ward of
the city; and Domitian also built a lit­
tle temple for her, with this inscription, 
Saluti Augusti.

SANTALUM, a hard, heavy, odo­
riferous, medicinal wood, brought
from the East-Indies, the wood of the
tree saunders,  L.

A SAP [sape, F.] a digging with
pick-axes, shovels, and
such other tools at the foot of a wall,
or any building, to undermine and o­
verthrow it. Or,
A SAP, is the digging deep under
the earth, in sinking lower by degrees, 
to pass under the Glacis, and open a
way to come under cover to the passage
of the Moat. After they have over­
come all the obstacles which the be­
sieged have opposed to hinder the ad­
vancement of their approaches, and
that, notwithstanding their frequent
sallies, they are at last got near the
foot of the Glacis, the Trench is carried
directly forwards, the workmen cover­
ing themselves the best way they can, 
with Blinds, Wool-packs, Sand-bags, 
or Mantelets upon wheels; when they
are got to the foot of the Glacis, they
make Epaulments or Traverses on each
side, to lodge a good body of men. The
Sap is made five or six fathom from
the saliant angle of the Glacis, where
the men are only covered side-ways;
wherefore they lay planks over-head, 
with hurdles, and earth above them.
Having by this means obliged the enemy
to quit the Covert-way, the Pioneers
with Mantelets, Wool-packs, or Sand­
bags, make immediately a Lodgement, 
covering themselves the most advan­
tageously they can from the fire of the
opposite bastion.

A SAPE [sape, F.] a digging with
pick-axes, shovels, and
such other tools at the foot of a wall,
or any building, to undermine and o­
verthrow it. Or,
A SAP, is the digging deep under
the earth, in sinking lower by degrees, 
to pass under the Glacis, and open a
way to come under cover to the passage
of the Moat. After they have over­
come all the obstacles which the be­
sieged have opposed to hinder the ad­
vancement of their approaches, and
that, notwithstanding their frequent
sallies, they are at last got near the
foot of the Glacis, the Trench is carried
directly forwards, the workmen cover­
ing themselves the best way they can, 
with Blinds, Wool-packs, Sand-bags, 
or Mantelets upon wheels; when they
are got to the foot of the Glacis, they
make Epaulments or Traverses on each
side, to lodge a good body of men. The
Sap is made five or six fathom from
the saliant angle of the Glacis, where
the men are only covered side-ways;
wherefore they lay planks over-head, 
with hurdles, and earth above them.
Having by this means obliged the enemy
to quit the Covert-way, the Pioneers
with Mantelets, Wool-packs, or Sand­
bags, make immediately a Lodgement, 
covering themselves the most advan­
tageously they can from the fire of the
opposite bastion.

SAPIDNESS [of sapidus, L.] savour­
iness.

SAPIENTIAL, an epithet used of
certain books of scripture, calculated
for our instruction and improvement
in prudence or moral wisdom, as Pro­
verbs, Canticles, Ecclesiastes, the Psalms
and book of Job.

SAPLESS [of ſæpeleſ, Sax.] with­
out sap.

SAPLESNESS, the having no sap, 
wanting sap.

SAPONACEOUS [of sapa, L. sope]
sopy, like or pertaining to sope.

SAPO SAPIENTIÆ [with Chym.]
i. e. the soap of wisdom, i. e. common
salt,  L.

SAPORATED [saporatus, L.] made
savoury.

SAPORIFEROUS [saporifer, L.]
causing a savour.

SAPORIFICKNESS [of saporificus, 
L.] a taste causing quality.

SAPOROUSNESS [of saporus, L.]
savouriness.

SAPPHIRE [in Heraldry] the blue
colour in the coats of noblemen, an­
swering to the Jupiter in the coats of
sovereign princes, and Azure in those
of the gentry.

SAPPHIRE Rubies, are certain pre­
cious stones, between blue and red, 
which in effect are nothing but rubies, 
whose colour is not perfectly form'd.

SAPPHIC [in Poetry] a kind of Greek
and Latin verse; so called of Sappho, a
famous poetess of Mytelene, the inven­
tress of it, consisting of eleven syllables
or five feet, of which the first, fourth
and fifth are Trochees, the second a
Spondee, and the third a Dactyl. As
Sedibus gaudens variis dolisque.

SAPPINESS [ſæpeneſſe, Sax.] the
having sap.

SAPPING [of saper, F.] undermin­
ing.

SAPPING [in Milit. Art] a working
under ground, to gain the descent of a
ditch, counterscarp, &c. and the at­
tacking of a place. It is performed by
digging a deep ditch, descending by
steps from top to bottom, under a cor­
ridor, carrying it as far as the bottom
of the ditch when that is dry, or the
surface of the water, when wet.

SAPPY [Sapic, Sax.] having sap.

SARABAND [sarabande, F.] a mu­
sical composition always in triple time, 
and is in reality no more than a mi­



nuet, the motions of which are slow
and serious.

SARABAND, a dance to the same
measure, which usually terminates
when the hand rises, whereby it is di­
stinguished from a courant, which usu­
ally ends when the hand that beats
time falls; and is otherwise much the
same as a minuet.

SARCASM [sarcasmus, L. σαρχασμὸς, 
Gr.] a keen irony, whereby the orator
scoffs and insults his adversary.

SARCASTICALNESS [of sarcasticus, 
L. of σαρχασμος, Gr.] scoffingness, sa­
tyricalness.

SARCOLOGY [σαρχολογία, Gr.] a
discourse on the flesh, or the soft parts
of a human body.

SARCOMA [σάρχωμα, Gr.] a fleshy
excrescence, or lump growing in any
part of the body, especially in the
nostrils.

SARCOPHAGUS [σαρχοφάγος of
σάρξ and φάγειν,
Gr. to eat] a tomb-stone or coffin, 
made of a stone, so called, because it
would consume a dead body in 40 days, 
and therefore the ancients laid in them
those bodies they had not a mind to
burn.

SARCOPHAGUM [σαρχοφάγος of
σάρξ and φάγειν,
Gr. to eat] a tomb-stone or coffin, 
made of a stone, so called, because it
would consume a dead body in 40 days, 
and therefore the ancients laid in them
those bodies they had not a mind to
burn.

SARDOIN, the Lapis Sardius.

SATANICALNESS [of Satan] de­
vilishness.

SATELLITE Guard, a person who
attends on another, either for his
safety, or to be ready to execute his
pleasure.

SATELLITES [with Astron.] certain
secondary planets moving round the
other planets, as the moon does round
the earth, thus named, because they
are always found attending them from
rising to setting, and making the tour
of the sun together with them.

SATTINET, a slight, thin sattin.

SATURATE [in Botanick Writers]
deeply, as to colour,  L.

SATURN [Saturnus, L. or Saturn, 
of satus, sown, because he is supposed
to preside over agriculture, according
to Varro] according to the poets, was
the son of Cœlus and Terra; which
Cœlus, having cast his sons, the Cyclops, 
into hell, Saturn in revenge, with his
scythe, cut off his privities, and depri­
ved him of the power of begetting.
What he had taken from him, he cast
into the sea, where, by a continual
agitation of the waves, it found a fa­
vourable womb among the froth, and
thence the goddess Venus was produc'd.

Saturn had an elder brother named
Titan, to whom the kingdom of the
world did of right belong; But he, by
the persuasions of his mother Vesta, and
his sister Cybele, resign'd the scepter to
Saturn for his life, upon condition that
he should not suffer any of the male-­
children to live, that the empire of
the world might devolve to his poste­
rity after the death of Saturn.

For this reason, Saturn is said to
have devoured his male children but
his wife Cybele saved Jupiter and Juno, 
by conveying them away, and Neptune
and Pluto, who were privately nou­
rished by their mother, and sent him a
stone wrapped in swaddling clouts, in­
stead of a child, which he greedily de­
voured in the dark. But Apollodorus
says, that he did swallow Neptune and
Pluto; and that, when Jupiter was of
age, he married Metis, the daughter of
Oceanus, who gave a drink to Saturn
that made him vomit them up; where­
upon Titan, seeing his expectations
frustrated, made war upon Saturn, 
with the assistance of his sons, and
having vanquished him, clapped him
up into prison, and there kept him, 
till his son Jupiter became of age, and
delivered him thence. But Saturn hav­
ing learned by some oracle, that one
of his sons should take his scepter and
kingdom from him, resolved to lay
snares to destroy his son Jupiter; but
he, taking arms against his father, cast
him out of his kingdom and empire of
Heaven; whereupon Saturn retired to
Italy to hide himself, which was thence
called Latium a latendo. (Bochartus ap­
plies this story to Nimrod's usurpation
of the supreme power.) Janus, the
king of Italy, is said to have received
Saturn with all civility and respect.

Saturn is said to have brought upon
the earth the Golden Age, when the
ground yielded all sorts of fruits, with­
out labour and tillage, when Astræa or
justice managed the affairs of men, and
they lived together in a perfect love
and amity. The four ages mentioned
by the poets were the Golden under Sa­
turn or Noah; the Silver under Jupiter, 
or the posterity of Noah; the Brazen
under Nimrod; and the Iron, which yet
continues.

The Learned Bochartus endeavours to
prove that Saturn is Noah, and that all
the fables of him are delineations of
his true history: The three sons of
Saturn, that divided the empire be­
tween them, are equal to the three
sons of Noah; the youngest Ham, he
proves to be Jupiter, Japhet to be Nep­
tune, and Shem to be Pinto; and that



their different governments have a re­
lation to the places they have inhabi­
ted. And that Ham, going into Egypt
and Lybia, being hot places, is said to
have possessed Heaven; and that Ja­
phet going into Europe and the Islands, 
they feigned him god of the sea, or
Neptune; and that Shem being remark­
able for his piety, his profane bre­
thren, by way of derision, made him
the god of Hell, or Pluto.

Gualtruchius says, that Saturn, or
time is represented as an old senior, 
with wings upon his shoulders, and a
scythe in his hand, as cutting down all
before him; and that he is represented
as swallowing his own children with
hard stones, because time eats and con­
sumes the most durable substances.

The ancients painted Saturn with six
wings, to intimate the swiftness of
time, and feet of wool; or, as others
say, with the gout, holding in his hand
a serpent biting his tail, with a sickle
and an old garment hanging upon him.

The Romans deposited under his pro­
tection, and in his temple, their trea­
sure, because in his reign, i. e. in the
golden age, there was no theft or rob­
bery committed; and there they laid
up the rolls of the names of the Roman
people, which were made of the skins
of elephants.

SATURN [with Atron.] is the high­
est of all the planets, but the slowest in
motion; and some reckon it 71, others
91 times bigger than the earth.

SATURN [with Alchymists] lead.

SATURNALIA, were festival days
observed in December in honour of Sa­
turn; and, as Bochartus is of opinion, 
took their original from Noah's drunk­
enness. These were times of all de­
bauchery and licentiousness, servants
taking upon them to command their
masters, and slaves to be unruly, with­
out fear of punishment.

The priests of Saturn were initiated
in scarlet robes, to express their
bloody-mindedness, and offered to him
young infants in Sacrifice, for which
inhumanity they were all crucified
under Tiberius Cæsar. And the Cartha­
ginians likewise did every year offer to
him human sacrifices, which was the
subject of an embassy from Rome; for
tho' the Romans did mightily honour
and esteem Saturn, yet they did not ap­
prove that men should be offered to
him. But they shewed him this parti­
cular respest, that they caused torches
and tapers to be burning continually
upon his altars.

Saturn is supposed to be the same
with Moloch of the Israelites. It is de­
rived of ךלמ, a king. And kings, and
powerful men, were called Saturni by
the Heathens.

SATURNINIANS [of Saturnus, a
disciple of Menander] a sect, a sort of
Gnosticks.

A SATURNINE Person, one of a
sullen, melancholy complexion, suppo­
sed to be under the predominancy of
Saturn.

SATURNINNESS [of Saturn] dul­
ness, slowness.

SATYR [satyra, L. satyre, F. σά­
τυρος, Gr.] an invective poem, that in­
veighs sharply against vice and vicious
persons, all manner of discourse, 
wherein any person is comprehended;
but commonly taken for a poem that
sharply and wittily rebukes vice and
reflects on vicious persons: A lampoon.
That satyr be just, it ought to be gene­
ral; or if it be of general use, it ought
to be true, or else it will be a libel, 
and accountable to the law; and it
ought to be strong, to strike power­
fully, and the style and manner must
be manly and smooth.

SATYRS [σάτυροι, Gr.] fabulous
demi-gods, who with the Fauns and
Sylvans were supposed to preside over
groves, under the direction of Pan.
They are represented in painting, as
half beasts, half men, having horns on
their heads, and feet like goats.

SATYRIASIS [σατυρίασις, Gr.] the
lustless extension of the yard; also the
immoderate desire of venery; it is also
sometimes taken for the leprosy, be­
cause that disease makes the skin rough, 
like that of a satyr; also a swelling of
the glandules behind the ears.

SATYRIASMUS, the same as saty­
riasis,  L.

SATYRICALNESS, bitingness in
speech, invectiveness.

SATYRS, what was the original of
Satyrs, when and where they first be­
gan to appear in the world, or for
what reason they came to be deified, is
neither delivered down to us, nor ex­
plained by any ancient writer of au­
thority.

They are represented as very swift
four footed animals, having human
faces, crooked hands, short horns on
their forehead, and their lower parts
like goats, inhabiting the mountains of
Judea.

It is related that Euphemus, being
forced by storm, landing in a desart
island called Satyrida, found inhabitants



with yellow hair, that had tails not
much less than horses, that they did
not speak, but ran directly to the wo­
men, and if not prevented would have
laid violent hands on them.

When such monsters appeared to
mankind, that which was so terrible
and admirable, was thought to have
something of divinity in it; and where
as those satyrs were supposed to inha­
bit the woods, the ignorant shepherds
worshipped them, that they might
spare their flocks when they met them.

The custom was to offer all sorts of
fruit; but more especially grapes and
apples to the satyrs.

They are said to be constant compa­
nions of Bacchus; and to have delight­
ed in such discourse and conversation
as was reproachful; tho' others say, 
that at first it was only pleasant, lively, 
moral, and full of variety; as they
grew old they came to have the name
of Sileni.

A SAVAGE [un sauvage, F.] a wild
Indian.

SAVAGERY, savage nature, &c.

SAVAGES, wild, barbarous people, 
who keep no fixed habitation, have no
religion, law or policy.

SAVAGENESS [naturel sauvage, F.]
wildness, cruelty.

SAUCE-Box, a saucy person.

SAUCINESS [prob. of saws, Brit.
salt] unmannerliness, presumptuous­
ness, &c.

SAUCISSONS [in Milit. Art.] fag­
gots or fascines made of large boughs
of trees bound together; they are com­
monly used to cover men, to make
epaulments, traverses or breast-works
in ditches full of water, to render the
way firm for carriages, and for other
uses,

SAVING [qui sauve, F.] preserving, 
sparing.

To SAUNTER [prob. of sancta terra, 
L. i. e. the holy land, because in an­
cient times, when there were frequent
expeditions to the Holy-land, many idle
persons sauntred about from place to
place, under pretence that they had
taken the cross upon them, or intended
so to do, and go thither] to wander or
rove up and down.

SAVOURINESS [of savoureux, F. of
saporus, L.] relishableness, &c.

SAWS [sage, Teut. ſaʒa, Sax.] old
grave sayings, proverbs, maxims.

SAXONS [Seaxum, Sax.] a warlike
people called into Britain by king Vor­
tigern, either to defend him against the
Scots and Picts, or to secure him in the
command he had usurped over the Bri­
tains. They began to establish their
Heptarchy about the year of Christ 457.
As to the original of their names, au­
thors differ. Isidore derives the name
Saxon from Saxum, L. a stone, they be­
ing a hardy and warlike nation. But
the name Saxon, according to the nor­
thern antiquities, is older even than
the Latin tongue itself. Krantzus de­
rives it from Aschanez, the son of Co­
mer; but he does not support it by suf­
ficient authority. Goropius Becanus
fetches it from Sacee, a people about
Armenia; but this seems to be without
any foundation. But it is most proba­
ble they were called Saxons, from the
short swords they commonly wore, 
called Saxen or Seaxen; and Tacitus
says, the northern Germans were distin­
guishable by a round shield, and a short
sword, that they wore. And as Pon­
tanus observes, the arms of Saxony at
this day are two short swords a-cross.

SCABBED [scabiosus, L.] having
scabs.

SCABBEDNESS [scabitudo, L.] the
being scabby.

SCAB'BINESS [scabitudo, L.] the
being scabby.

SCABELLUM [in the ant. Archit.]
i. e. a foot stool; a kind of pedestal
usually square, sometimes polygonous, 
very high and slender, commonly ter­
minating in a kind of sheath or scab­
bard; or profiled in manner of a bal­
luster.

SCABROUSNESS [of scabrosus, L.
scabreux, F.] ruggedness, roughness.

SCAFFOLDING [echaufaudage, F.]
poles and boards erected for the con­
veniency of building.

SCALA, a ladder,  L.

SCALA [with Surgeons] a certain
instrument to reduce a dislocation,  L.

SCALA [in Anat.] the canal or coch­
lea, that is divided by a Septum into
two canals, called Scala,  L.

SCALE [escaille, F. scaglie, Ital.] of a
fish, a bone, &c.

Plain SCALE, and diagonal, serve
to represent any numbers or measures, 
whose parts are equal one to another.

SCALENI [of σχσληνὸε, Gr.] three
muscles of the chest, so called from
their figure, having three unequal
sides,  L. of  Gr.

SCALENUM [with Geom.]
a triangle that has its three
sides unequal to one another.
See the figure.

Image omitted.



SCALENUS primus [in Anat.] a
muscle arising from the fore-part of
the second, third, and fourth, trans­
verse processes of the Vertebræ of the 



neck, and let into the first rib; the
office of which is to draw the upper
rib, together with the other, upwards, 
in fetching breath,  L.

SCALENUS secundus, a muscle taking
its rise from the second, third, fourth, 
and fifth transverse processes of the
Vertebræ of the neck side-ways, and
passing over the first rib to its insertion
in the second, and sometimes to the
third,  L.

SCALENUS tertius, a muscle that
takes its rise near the Scalenus secundus, 
from the same transverse processes of
the Vertebra of the neck, and also
from the sixth of those processes, and
is inserted to the first rib,  L.

SCALINESS [of ecaillé, F.] the be­
ing covered with scales.

SCALY [of ecaillé, F.] covered with
scales.

SCALPEL [in Anat.] a knife used in
dissections; and also in many chirur­
gical operations.

To SCAMPER [escamper, F.] to run
away in a hurry.

SCANDAL [in the vulgar sense] is
some action or opinion contrary to good
manners, or to the general sense of
the people; alto a disadvantageous ru­
mour or report, or an action whereby
any one is affronted in publick.

SCANDAL [scandalum, L. σχάνδαλον, 
Gr.] in a scripture sense, is any thing
that may draw persons aside, or sollicit
them to sin.

Active SCANDAL, is a real inducti­
on to sin.

Passive SCANDAL, the impression
an active scandal makes on the person
that is induced to sin.

SCANDALOUSNESS [of scandaleux, 
F.] reproachfulness, infamousness.

SCANDENT-Stalk [with Botanists]
i. e. climbing stalk, is one which climbs
by the help of tendrils, as the vine, 
&c.

SCANNING [in Poetry] the measu­
ring of a verse, to see the number of
feet and syllables it contains, and whe­
ther or no the quantities, that is, the
long and short syllables, be duly ob­
serv'd.

SCANTINESS [prob. of echantillon, 
F. or wantingness, Eng.] being less than
is requisite.

SCANTLING [eschantillon, F.] the
measure, whereby the dimensions of
things are to be determined.

SCAPHISM [of σχάφη of σχἀπτω, Gr.
to make hollow] among the ancient
Persians, a kind of punishment executed
by locking the criminal close up in the
trunk of a tree, bored thro' to the di­
mensions of his body, only with five
holes for his head, arms, and legs to
come thro', in which he was exposed
to the sun, and the appearing parts
were anointed with milk and honey to
invite the wasps. The criminal was
forced to eat abundantly, till his ex­
crements, close pent up in the wood, 
rotted his body. Some write, that
some persons have lived there forty
days.

SCARCENESS [prob. of carus, L.
dear, or scears, 
Du. sparing] difficultness to be come at, 
uncommonness, not plenty.

SCARCITY [prob. of carus, L.
dear, or scears, 
Du. sparing] difficultness to be come at, 
uncommonness, not plenty.

SCARIFICATION [with Surgeons]
an operation whereby several incisions
are made in the skin, with an instru­
ment proper for that purpose, usually
practised in cupping,  L.

SCARIFRICATOR, an instrument
made in form of a box, with twelve or
more lancets, all perfectly in the same
plane; which being, as it were, cock'd
by means of a spring, are all dischar­
ged, at the same time, by pulling a
kind of trigger, and the points of the
lancers are at once equally driven with
in the skin.

SCARLET-Grain, a matter used in
dying a scarlet colour. It is usually
taken for the grain of a plant growing
on a kind of holm, in some parts of
France, Spain, and Portugal. The
Arabs call it Kermes.

SCARP [escarpe, F.] the foot of a
rampart-wall; or the sloping of a wall
from the bottom of a work to the Cor­
don on the side of the moat.

SCARPE [in Heral.] is
the scarf which military
commanders wear for or­
nament, as he bears Ar­
gent, a scarpe Azure. See
the figure annexed.

Image omitted.



SCARRY [of Scar, Sax. escharre, F.
of ἐσχάρα, Gr.] having the mark or
seam of a sore or wound.

The SCAVANS the learned, of
sçavant, learned, F.

SCELETON [of σχελλο, Gr. to dry
up] a proper connec­
tion of all the bones of the body, after
they are dry'd.

SCELETUS [of σχελλο, Gr. to dry
up] a proper connec­
tion of all the bones of the body, after
they are dry'd.

SCENE [scena, L. σχηνὴ, Gr.] in the
ancient Drama, in its general sense, 
was the theatre wherein dramatick
pieces, and other publick shows, were
represented; also the place where the
action is conceived to have passed, as
the Scene of War; also the division or 



part of a dramatick poem determined
by a new actor's entering.

The SCENOGRAPHICK Appearance, 
is different from an orthographick one, 
in that the latter shews the side of a
figure, body, or building, as it is seen
when the plane of the glass stands
directly to that side; whereas Sceno­
graphy represents it as it seems thro' a
glass not parallel to that side.

SCENOGRAPHY [scenographia, L.
σχηνογραφία, Gr.] is the representation
of a building, &c. as it is represented
in prospective, with its dimensions and
shadows, or such as it appears to the
eye.

A SCEPTER [Hieroglyphically] hav­
ing on the top a stork's head, and
supported upon the hoof of a river-­
horse, was put to intimate, that piety
was to be preferr'd to impiety, and
religion before atheism and contempt
of civil power: For the stork is an
emblem of piety, which the scepter
should maintain and support above the
reach of profaneness, intimated by the
hoof of the river-horse, which is an
animal cruel and rapacious, that hath
no regard to its parents, but cruelly
murders them in its rage.

A Scepter with an eye upon it, was
used as an hieroglyphick of God.

SCEPTICALNESS [of σχἐπτεθαι, 
Gr. to contemplate] scepticism, or a
doubting or suspending the judgment
of things.

SCEPTICISM, the doctrine and
opinions of the Scepticks. It consisted
in doubting of every thing, and affirm­
ing nothing at all, and in keeping the
judgment in suspense to every thing.

SCHELLING, a Dutch coin contain­
ing 12 groots or 6 stivers, in value 6d.
⅕ of English money; 33 of which and
4d. make 20s. sterling.

SCHERIF [among the Mahometans]
one of high birth and dignity, who is a
descendant from their false prophet
Mahomet, by his son-in-law Halt, and
daughter Fatima.

There were several of these Scherifs, 
who erected Dynasties in Africa; the
Edressites were Scherifs, and the race
of princes who now reign in Fez and
Morocco, do also bear the title of Sche­
rif.

SCIORA [of σχίορον or  σχιώδιον, Gr.]
Athenian festivals dedicated to Minerva, 
which took their name from that um­
brella or fan, carried about them in
procession, to skreen persons from the
heat of the sun.

SCHISM [schisma, L. χίσμα, Gr. a 
division or separation] it is chiefly used
of a separation, happening through
diversity of opinions, among people of
the same religion and faith.

SCHIREMOTE [ſciremot, Sax.]
was, in ancient times, a solemn meet­
ing of all the free tenants and knights
in a county, to do fealty to the king, 
and elect an annual sheriff.

SCHITES an ancient Mahometan
sect, which was opposed by the whole
Ottoman empire as the most heretical
of all others; becaute they prefer Ali
to Mahomet in the prophetical office, 
and confine the gift of prophesy to the
natural line derived from Hali, and
that none deserved the title of a pro­
phet that was guilty of sin; some of
these affirm that God appeared in the
form of Ali, and with his tongue pro­
claimed the most hidden mysteries of
religion, and some have gone so far as
to ascribe divine honours to him, and
to expect his return in the clouds, and
have fixed that belief as an article of
their faith, and therefore they keep a
fine horse ready saddled, &c. for him
in the moaque of Cusa.

Others believe that he his concealed
in a grotto near Cusa, where he will
continue till the day of judgment, and
then come forth to convert all people
to the Alcoran.

And there are some among them, 
who look for the return of Mahomet
the son of Hanise, who they say is still
living on the mountain of Radua, from
whence he is to come to fill the earth
with piety and justice.

Others of them look for the coming
of Mahomet who is to be their last king, 
according to this prediction of their
prophet,

The world will last until there be a
king of my family and name over the
Arabians.

SCHOLARSHIP [of scholaris, L.]
the qualification of a scholar.

SCHOLASTIC [of scholasticus, L. of
σχολαστιχὸς, Gr.] of, like, or pertaining
to a scholar or school.

SCHOLASTICKNESS, a being qua­
lified with school-learning.

SCHOLIUM [with Mathemat.] a re­
mark by the by, as after the demon­
strating of a proposition, it is pointed
out how it might be done some other
way; some advice is given, or precau­
tion, to prevent mistakes, or some par­
ticular use or application thereof.

SCHOLIUM [σχὸλίον, Gr.] a note, 
annotation, or remark, made on some



passage, proposition, &c. a gloss, 
brief exposition, a short comment.

SCHOONBIAH, a sect among the
Musselmen, whose distinguishing tenet
is that the orthodox Musselmen were
not a whit better than the heterodox.

SCIENCE, as opposed to art, is a
formed system of any branch of know­
ledge, comprehending the doctrine, 
reason or theory of the thing, without
any immediate application of it to any
uses or offices of life.

SCIENCE in God [by Divines] is
distinguished into three kinds.

1. The SCIENCE of mere Knowledge, 
whereby he knows himself and all
things possible.

2. SCIENCE of Vision, whereby he
knows all things he has resolved to do
or to permit, in the same order in
which he has resolved to do and to
permit them.

3. An intermediate SCIENCE, where­
by he knows what angels and man will
do in certain cases and certain circum­
stances, if he resolves to bring them
about.

SCIENTIAL, of or pertaining to 
science.

SCINTILLOSE [scintillosus, L.] full
of sparks.

SCIMETER, a sort of broad, crook­
ed sword.

SCIOGRAPHY [σχιογραφι, Gr.] the
profile or section of a building, to shew
the inside thereof.

SCIOGRAPHY [with Astron.] the art
of finding the hour of the day or
night by the shadow of the sun, moon, 
stars, &c.

SCIOMANCY [σχίομαντεία of σχια
and μαντεία, Gr. divination] a divina­
tion by shadows; or the art of raising
and calling up the Manes, or souls of
deceased persons, to give the know­
ledge of things to come.

SCIRRHOUS, of or belonging to a
scirrhus.

SCIRRHOMA [σχεῤῤόμα of σχιῥῤόω,
Gr. to harden] an
induration or hardening of the glands, 
caused by gritty and obstructed matter, 
as it happens frequently to the liver in
a jaundice.

SCIRRHOSIS [σχεῤῤόμα of σχιῥῤόω,
Gr. to harden] an
induration or hardening of the glands, 
caused by gritty and obstructed matter, 
as it happens frequently to the liver in
a jaundice. 

SCIRRHUS [σχιῤῤός, Gr.] a hard
immoveable swelling, that resists the
touch, but is without pain.

SCLAVONIC Language, is held to be
the most extensive language in the
world, next to the Arabick, being spo­
ken from the Adriatick to the North sea
and from the Caspian to Saxony, by many
nations, viz, the Poles, Muscovites, Bul­
garians, Bohemians, Hungarians, Carin­
thians, Prussians and Suabians, all which
are descendants of the antient Sclavi, 
or Sclavonians, and Sclavonick is their
mother tongue, tho' they have different
dialects.

SCLEROPHTHALMY [σχληροφθαλ­
μία of σχληρός, hard, and ὀφθαλμία, a
disease in the eye, Gr.] a disease, where­
in the eye is dry, hard, red and painful, 
and the eye-brows also, so as, by their
excessive dryness, not to be opened af­
ter sleep, without great pain.

SCLEROSARCOMA [of σχληρός and
ραρξ, Gr. flesh] an hard tumour with
an ulceration in the gums.

SCLEROTICA [in Anat.] one of the
common membranes of the eye, situated
between the Adnata and the Uvea.

SCOFFER [of scoppen, Du. of σχωππω
Gr.] a derider.

SCOLDING Women, [according to
our ancient Laws] were to be set in a
tre-buchet, commonly called a ducking-­
Stool, commonly set over some deep
water, into which they were to be let
down or plunged twice under water, 
to cool their heat and choler.

SCLOLECOIDES Processus [of σχωληξ
a worm, and ειδος, Gr. form] the
worm-like process of the Cerebellum.

SCOLLOP-Shell [in Heral.] is often
put into the coat-armour of military
persons.

SCOLOPENDRA [of σχολόπενδρα, 
Gr.] a sort of worm engendered of a
melancholy humour, which makes the
gums become swelled and ulcerated,
and the teeth loose.

To build a SCONCE, to run a score
at an ale-house or tavern, &c. so as
to be afraid to go there, for fear of be­
ing dunned.

SCOOPER, a water fowl, so named
from its crooked beak, resembling a
scoop.

SCOPULUOS [scopulosus, L.] rocky, 
full of rocks.

SCOPULOUSNESS [scopulositas, L.]
a rockiness or being full of rocks.

SCORBUTICKNESS 
 [of scorbu­
tus, L.] a 
being troubled with the scurvy.

SCORBUTICALNESS
 [of scorbu­
tus, L.] a 
being troubled with the scurvy.

SCORE [in Musick] partition, or the
original draught of the whole compo­
sition, wherein the several parts, viz.
treble, second treble, bass, &c. are dis­
tinctly scored and marked.

SCORNFULNESS, contemptuous­
ness.

SCORPIO [whose characteristick is
♏] is one of the twelve signs of the
zodiack, called by astrologers a femi­



nine, nocturnal, cold, and phlegmatick
northern sign of the watery triplicity,
and is represented, on the celestial
globe, by the form of a scorpion.  L.

SCORPION [σχορπος, Gr.] a veno­
mous insect of a blackish colour, having
eight feet and a sting in its tail.

SCORPION-Grass an herb good a­
gainst the poison
of scorpions.

SCORPION-Wort an herb good a­
gainst the poison
of scorpions. 

A SCORPION [in Hieroglyphicks] re­
presents malice and wicked subtlety, 
because it is reported to be cunning, in
watching an opportunity to wound an
inconsiderate passenger.

The SCOTCH Language, is a corrupt
English, mixed with German, Low Dutch
and French.

To SCOUR away, to scamper or run
away.

A SCOUT [escoute, F. schout, Du.] a
spy sent to bring tidings of the army
of an enemy, or to discover their de­
signs; also a judge or magistrate in
Holland.

SCRAGGEDNESS [prob. of craig, sc.
lean] leanness.

A SCRAPE [of ſcreop, Sax.] as a
meer scrape, a saving industrious per­
son.

A SCRAPE-Good a nigard, a co­
vetous person.

A SCRAPE-Penny a nigard, a co­
vetous person. 

SCRAPINGNESS, savingness, par­
cimony, over sedulousness in getting.

SCREAKING [prob. of skriger, 
Da.] a shrill noise like that of rusty hinges.

SCREAMING, a crying out loudly, 
shrilly, and violently.

To SCREECH [prob. of skriger, 
Dan.] to hoot or howl like a screech-­
owl.

SCREECH Owl, [prob. of scricciola, 
Ital.] an owl that makes a skrieking or
hooting in the night.

A SCREW [escroüe, F.] one of the
five mechanick powers: chiefly used
in pressing or squeezing bodies close:
and also in raising weighty things.

SCRIBING [with Joiners] a term
used when one piece of stuff is to be fit­
ted to the side of another, which is ir­
regular, to make the two join close
together all the way; this is done by
marking it with the point of a pair of
compasses.

SCRIVENERS, were
incorporated Anno 1616
and are a master, two
wardens, 24 assistants, 
and 38 on the livery, 
&c.

The arms are Azure, 
an eagle with wings
expanded, holding in his mouth a pen­
ner and ink-horn, standing on a book, 
all Or. Their hall is on the east side
of Noble Street.

Image omitted.



SCROBY [prob. of scrobs, L. a ditch, 
q. d. deserving to be thrown into a
ditch] sorry, pitiful.

SCROFULOUSNESS [of scropulosus, 
L.] being afflicted with the kings-evil.

SCROLL [prob. of roll] a slip or roll
of parchment; also the same as Voluta
in architecture.

SCRUBBADO, the itch, a distemper;
also slovenly, mean habited.

SCRUPLE [with Chronologers] a small
part of time used by several eastern
nations, among the Chaldeans, a 1/1086
part of an hour.

To SCRUPLE [of scrupulus, L.] to be
in doubt whether one shall do a thing
or not, on a conscientious account.

SCRUPLES [with Astron.] as scruples 
eclipsed, are that part of the diameter
of the moon, which enters the shadow, 
expressed in the same measure where­
in the apparent diameter of the moon
is expressed. See Digit.

SCRUPLES of half Duration [Astron.]
are an arch of the orbit of the moon;
which is described by her centre, from
the beginning of the eclipse to the mid­
dle.

SCRUPLE of Immersion or Incidence, 
[Astron.] are an arch of the orbit of the
moon, which is described by her cen­
ter, from the beginning of the eclipse
till the time when its center falls into
the shadow.

SCRUPLES of Emersion [Astron.] are
an arch of the orbit of the moon, 
which is described by her center, in the
time from the first emersion of the
moons limb to the end of the eclipse.

SCRUTINY [in the Canon Law] a
ticket, or small paper billet, in which
the electors write their notes privately
at elections, so that it may not be known
for whom they vote.

To SCUFFLE [q. d. to shuffle, and
that Vossius derives from ςυφελεξειν Gr.
to handle roughly] to strive together in
a fray or fighting.

SCULPSIT, he carved or engraved.
 L.

SCULPTURE [sculptura, L.] the art
of cutting or carving wood, stone or
other matter, to form various figures
for representations; sculpture includes
both engraving and working in Relievo.

SCURRILOUSNESS [scurrilitas, L.
scurrilité, F.] scandalous language, saucy
drollery, buffoonry.



SCURVINESS, badness, naughtiness, 
sorriness.

SCUTIFORM [scutiformis, L.] in the
form of a shield or buckler.

SCYLLA, a rock in the sea between
Sicily and Italy, over against the gulf
Charybdis, so that the passage there is
dangerous for ships; whence the Latin
proverb Incidit in Scylam capiens evitare
Charibdim, to avoid Scylla, he falls into
Charibdis, i. e. to leap out of the frying
pan into the fire.

The poets tell us, that Scylla was the
daughter of Phoronis and Hecate, who
having been familiar with Neptune, 
Amphitrite, provoked with jealousy, cast
a certain poison into the fountain that
Scylla used to bathe in, which made her
run mad, and leaping into the sea, was
metamorphosed into a sea monster.

Others say t'was Glaucus she had to
do with, and that Arce was the jealous
rival that poisoned the fountain; that
Scylla, seeing her lower parts going in­
to dogs, snakes and dolphins tails, 
drowned herself in despair.

Some again say, that she was the
daughter of Nysus, king of Megara, 
which being besieged by Minos, she
espying him from the walls was ena­
moured with him, and betrayed her
father to him, by cutting off a purple
lock of his hair, which the oracle had
pronounced he should be immortal as
long as he wore, and that Minos detes­
ting her treachery, slighted her, 
whereupon she finding herself despised
by him, threw herself into the sea, 
and that the gods joined dogs to be her
tormenters.

Charybdis is also said to be a rapaci­
ous woman that stole Hercules's oxen, 
that he had taken from Geryon, and
was thunder-struck by Jupiter, and
transformed into a sea monster.

But historians say, that Scylla and
Charybdis were rocks and eddies in the
streights, between Italy and Sicily, thro'
which Hercules passed with much dan­
ger and loss; but he afterwards, by
engines of his own invention, cleared
the seas so effectually, and rendered
them so navigable, that since that time
there has been nothing heard of them.

SCYPHUS [with Anat.] those pas­
sages that convey the Saliva, from the
Os Cribriformis or sieve like bone to
the palate.

SCYTALA [in Mechanicks] a kind of
radius or spoke, standing out of the
axis of a machine, as a handle or lever
to turn it round or work it by,  L.

SCYTALA Laconica [with the Lace­
dæmonians] a little round staff; an in­
vention for the secret writing of letters
to correspondents, by means of two
rollers or cylinders exactly alike, one
being kept by each of the correspon­
dents.

SEAFARING [of Sæ and faran, 
Sax. to go] employed or living at sea.

SEA PORT [of Sæ, Sax. and portus, 
L.] q. d. a gate or door of the sea.

SEA Navel wort, an herb.

SEALING [in Archit.] is the fixing
a piece of wood or iron in a wall, with
plaister, mortar, cement, lead, or other
solid bindings.

To sew a SEAM [ſeamian, Sax.] to
sew a length with a needle.

SEAMLESS [ſeamleſſe, Saxon]
without a seam.

SEASONABLENESS [of saison, F.]
opportuneness.

To SEAT [of ſittan, Sax.] to place
upon a seat, to cause to sit.

SEATER was an idol of our Saxon
ancestors, and was represented in the
form of the figure annexed. First, on a
pillar was plac'd a pearch, on the sharp, 
prickled back of which this idol stood.
He was represented of a lean visage, 
with long hair and a long beard, bare 



headed and bare footed. In his left
hand he held up a wheel, and in his
right hand he carried a pail of water, 
wherein were flowers and fruits. His
long garment is girded with a towel of
white linen,

His standing on the sharp fins of a
fish was to signify that the Saxons, for
their serving him, should pass stedfastly
and without harm in dangerous and
difficult places, by the wheel was inti­
mated the strict unity and conjoint con­
cord of the Saxons, and their concurring
together to run one course: by the
girdle which the wind streamed from
him was signified the Saxons freedom:
by the pail with flowers and fruits was
intimated, that with kindly rains, he
would nourish the earth to bring forth
fruits and flowers; and from him our
Saturday takes its name.

Some suppose Seater to have been
the same with the Saturn of the Romans.

Image omitted.



SEATETH, is a term us'd of a hare
when it takes to its resting place.

SEBARAI [יאדבס, Heb. opinion] a
name given to such rabbies as liv'd and
taught after the finishing of the Talmud.

SEBESTENS, a fruit resembling a
little plum, used in medicine.

SECANT [in Geom.] a line that cuts
another, or divides it into two parts.

SECESSION, withdrawing, a depart­
ing from a side,  L.

SECOND [of Time] the 60th part of
a minute, either in the division of a
circle or the measure of time. A de­
gree, or an hour, is each divided into
60 minutes, marked thus (′): a minute
is divided into 60 seconds, marked thus
(″): a second into 60 thirds, marked
thus(′″), &c.

SECOND [in Musick] one of the
musical intervals, being only the di­
stance between any sound and the next
nearest sound, whether higher or lower.

SECOND Terms [in Algebra] those
where the unknown quantity has a de­
gree less, than it has in the term where
it is raised to the highest.

SECOND Sight, an odd qualification
that many of the inhabitants of the
western islands of Scotland are said to
have; which is a faculty of seeing
things to come, or at a great distance, 
represented to the imagination, as if
actually visible and present. Thus, if
a man be about to die, or dying, his
image shall appear distinctly in its na­
tural shape in a shroud, or other fune­
ral Apparatus, to a second sighted per­
son, who, perhaps, never had seen his
person; after which, the person, so
seen, immediately dies.

SECOND-Sightedness, the faculty
aforementioned, which is a quality not
hereditary; and the person who has it
cannot exert it at pleasure, nor can he
prevent it, or communicate it to others.
This quality is held in discredit among
the people, so that none will counter­
feit it, and many conceal and dissemble
it. This, tho' strange, has been well
attested, and that by authors of credit;
and last by Mr. Martin, a fellow of the
royal society, in his natural history of
these islands.

SECONDARY Fever [with Physic.] 
is that which arises after a crisis or dis­
charge of some morbid matter: as after
the declension of the small pox or mea­
sles.

To SECRETE [of secretum, L.] to
hide or conceal by putting out of the
way.

Animal SECRETION [in Physic.] is
the separation of one fluid from ano­
ther, in the body of an animal or ve­
getable, by means of glands, or some­
thing of the like nature.

SECULAR Games [ludi seculares, of
seculum, an age, L.] these plays were
so named, because they happened but
once in an age or an hundred years; at
the proclaiming of which, the cryer
said, Come to these Plays, which no Man
now living hath ever seen, nor shall he see
again; At these plays, besides the con­
tention of the charioteers, the Thessa­
lian horsemen hunted wild bulls, and, 
when they had wearied them, would
leap on their backs, and by the horns
force them down to the earth.

At the celebration of one of those
plays, there were given to be kill'd by
Philip, the emperor, after the Persian
expedition, thirty two Elephants, twen­
ty two Tigers, sixty Lions, one hundred
Hyenæ's, one Rhinoceros, ten Archoleon­
tes, ten Camelopards, forty Wild-Horses, 
thirty Leopards, besides a Thousand pair
of fencers or sword-players, which
were to delight the people with their
blood and wounds.

SECULARIZATION, the action of
converting a regular person, place, or
benefice to a secular one.

SECULARIZ'D [secularisé, F.] made
secular, i. e. a lay-man of a clergy­
man.

SECULARNESS [secularis, L.]
worldliness, addictedness to the things
of this world.

SECULARS [of seculum, L. an
age] a title given to parish priests in
opposition to regulars, i. e. to such as
lead a monastick life.



SECUNDA Aqua [with Chym.] Se­
cond Water, is Aqua fortis, which has
been already used to dissolve some me­
tal, &c.

SECUNDI Generis [with Anat.] those
lacteal vessels that carry the chyle from
the glands, after it has been diluted
there with the Lympha, into the com­
mon vessels; whereas the lacteals of
the Primi Generis carry it from the in­
testines into the glands,  L.

SECURENESS [securitas, L. secureté, 
F.] security, safety.

SECURITAS de bono Gestu [Law
Term] surety of the peace,  L.

SECU'RITY, is painted like a lady
leaning against a pillar before an altar, 
with a scepter in her hand.

SEDITION [Hieroglyphically] was
represented by two lobsters fighting
with one another.

SEDITIOUSNESS [of seditiosus, L.
seditieux, F.] a seditious humour or
quality.

SEDULOUSNESS [sedulitas, L.]
carefulness, diligence.

SEED [with Botanists] is defined to
be a body perfected by the mutual ope­
ration of two sexes, containing the
molimen of a plant of the same nature
of that from which it was taken.

SEEING, since that, forasmuch as,
&c.

SEEING is a sensation which pro­
ceeds from a due and va­
rious motion of the optick nerve, which
is made in the bottom of the eye, by
the rays of light coming from an ob­
ject, and thence conveyed to the brain;
by means of which, the soul perceives
the thing illuminated, together with
its quantity, quality, and modification.
Though this sense has its beginning in
the eye, yet it is perfected in the brain, 
where the soul is affected with the im­
pressions of visible objects.

SIGHT is a sensation which pro­
ceeds from a due and va­
rious motion of the optick nerve, which
is made in the bottom of the eye, by
the rays of light coming from an ob­
ject, and thence conveyed to the brain;
by means of which, the soul perceives
the thing illuminated, together with
its quantity, quality, and modification.
Though this sense has its beginning in
the eye, yet it is perfected in the brain, 
where the soul is affected with the im­
pressions of visible objects. 

Lee SEEL [with Sailors] is when a
ship feels or rolls to the windward, in
which there is danger, lest she come
over too short or suddenly, and so
should founder by the seas' breaking
right into her, or else have some of her
upper works carried away; but if she
rolls to the leeward, there is no dan­
ger, because the sea will presently right
her.

SEELING [spoken of Horses] who are
said to seel, when white hairs about
the breadth of a farthing, mixed with
those of his natural colour, grow upon
his eyebrows; which is a mark of old
age, for they never feel before the age
of 14.

SEEMINGNESS [of &yogh;iemen, Teut.]
appearance.

SEGETIA [among the Romans] a 
goddess who, as they
imagined took care of the corn, and all
other fruits of the earth, and one of
those deities, they called Salutares.

SEGESTA [among the Romans] a 
goddess who, as they
imagined took care of the corn, and all
other fruits of the earth, and one of
those deities, they called Salutares.

SEGMENTATED [segmentatus, L.]
made of many pieces, of divers colours.

SEGMENT [in Geometry] when a
line or the side of any plain triangle is
any way cut in two, or more parts, ei­
ther by a perpendicular line let fall
upon it, or otherwise, those parts are
usually called segments; and so much
as one of these parts is longer than the
other is called the difference of the
segments.

SEGMOIDAL Valves [in Anat.] are
little valves of the pulmonary artery, 
thus named from their resemblance to
the segments of circles; the same as
semilunar valves.

SEIA [with the Romans] a goddess
worshipped under the notion of her
having the care of the seed sown; she
had a statue erected in the Circus, and
she was one of those deities called Salu­
tares, and which they invoked in the
time of common distress or danger.

SEJUNCTION, a putting asunder.

SELAH [הלס, Heb.] an Hebrew word
which occurs frequently in the psalms, 
the meaning of which is variously con­
jectured; some supposing it was a pause
or stop to the singers to raise their
voices; and others that it directs the
change of tune or person; but others
think it was a direction to change the
whole chorus; for sometimes the cho­
rus broke off in the middle of a psalm, 
and another set of vocal musick went on
with it; others say that it signified
Amen and others for ever.

SELDOMNESS [Selðomneſſe, 
Sax.] the not happening often.

SELECTNESS [of selectus, L.] cho­
senness, choiceness.

SELENE [in the Pagan Theogony] the
daughter of Cœlus and Vesta and sister
of Helios, i. e. the sun.

SELENITES [σεληνίτης λίθος, Gr.]
the Moon-stone, which has this remark­
able property, that it increases and de­
creases as the moon waxes and wanes, 
said to be found in Persia; also Muscovy-­
glass, to which the aforesaid properties
have been ascribed.

SELENOGRAPHIST [of σελήνη the
moon, and γράφω to describe, Gr.] a de­
scriber of the moon.

SELEUCIANI, Hereticks in the fourth
century, so called from Seleucus and



Hernias; some of their tenets were, 
that God was corporeal, matter and
eternal, that the elementary matter
was coeternal with him; that the hu­
man soul was formed by angels of fire
and air; that Jesus Christ did not sit at
the right hand of God; but had quitted
that right, and had removed his throne
into the sun, and stigmatized those
they baptized in the forehead with a
red hot iron.

Æra of the SELEUCIDES, a compu­
tation of time commencing from the
establishment of the Seleucides, a race
of Greek kings, who reigned as suc­
cessors of Alexander the Great in Syria.

SELF-ended, for one's own advan­
tage.

SELF-dependent, independent, not
depending on another.

SELF-evident, needing no proof or
demonstration.

SELF-interested [interessé, F.] selfish.

SELF-interestedness, a love of one's
self.

SELF-originated, owing its original
or rise to its self.

SELLS [in Architecture] are of two
kinds, viz. Groundsels, which are the
lowest pieces of timber in a timber-­
building, on which the whole super­
structure is erected; and Window sells
(sometimes called Window soils) which
are the bottom pieces in a window-­
frame.

SEMBLANS, an ancient sect of He­
reticks, so called of Semblanus their lea­
der, who condemned all use of wine as
evil in itself; that the vine was the
production of Satan and the earth; and
denyed the resurrection.

SEMBLABLY [semblablement, F.]
seemingly, likely.

SEMBLABLENESS [of semblable, F.]
likeliness.

SEMBLANCE, likeness, appear­
ance,  F.

SEMBRADORE, an engine inven­
ted by Don Joseph de Lucatella for the
even sowing of seeds.

SEMI-ARIANS, a party of the Ari­
ans, those who refused to receive the
word consubstantial, yet acknowledged
the son of God Ὁμοίουσιος, of a like
substance or essence with the Father.

SEMICIRCULARNESS [of semi­
circularis, L.] half circularness.

SEMICYLINDRICAL, in the form
of a half cylinder.

SEMIDIATESSARON [in Musick]
a defective fourth.

SEMI-Double [in the Roman Brevia­
ry] such offices and feasts as are cele­
brated with less solemnity than the
double ones; but yet with more than
the single ones.

SEMIDIAPHANOUS, half diapha­
nous or transparent.

A SEMIFLORET [with Florists] an
half-flourish, is tubulous at the begin­
ning like a floret, and afterwards ex­
panded in the form of a tongue.

SEMIFLOSCULOUS [in Botan.
Writ.] a semifloret,  L.

SEMIMETALS, are fossil bodies not
malleable, yet fixed in some measure in
the fire; consisting of a metallick part
and some other matter of another kind
connected therewith; as Antimony, Cin­
nabar, Marcasite, Bismuth, Calamine, Co­
balt, Vitriol, Armenian Stone, Lapis Hæ­
matitis, Loadstone, &c.

SEMINERVOSUS [in Anat.] a mus­
cle of the thigh, so called from its be­
ing half tendinous and nerve-like. It
has its rise from the outward part of
the knob of the Os Ischium, and is in­
serted to the Tibia.  L.

SEMINATION, the act of sowing, 
or shedding seeds, particularly that of
vegetables.  L.

SEMINATION, the emission of the
male seed into the womb by coition.

SEMIORDINATES [in Geom.] the
halves of the ordinates or applicates.

SEMIPEDAL, consisting of a foot
and an half in measure.

SEMIPROOF, the proof of a single
evidence.

SEMI-TENDINOSUS [with Anat.]
a muscle of the thigh, arising from the
outward part of the Os Ischium, and is
inserted to the Tibia immediately below
the end of the muscle called Gracilis,
 L.

SEMI-VOWELS [with Grammarians]
i. e. half-vowels, are the letters f, 1, 
m, n, r, s, x, z, which are so called, 
because, tho' they are consonants, they
are not expressed without the assistance
or sound of the vowel e, and are distin­
guished into Solids and Liquids.

SEMONES [q. Semi homines, L. i. e.
half men] a sort of Demi gods among
the Heathens, who were not of the
number of celestial deities.

SEMPER-PERSPICUOUS, always
perspicuous or visible.

SEMPERLENITY [semperlenitas, L.]
continual lenity.

SENSE [sensus, L.] a faculty of the
soul, whereby it perceives external
objects, by means of some action or
impression made on certain parts of the
body, called the Organs of Sense, and
by them propagated to the sensory.



External SENSES, are powers of per­
ceiving ideas, upon the presence of ex­
ternal objects.

Internal SENSES, are powers or de­
terminations of the mind to be pleased
with certain forms of the mind, which
occur to our observation in objects per­
ceived by the external Senses.

Moral SENSE, is a determination of
the mind to be pleased with the con­
templation of those affections, actions, 
or character of rational agents, which
we call virtuous.

SENSIBLE Quantities [with Log.]
are such as hardness, softness, weight, 
heat, cold, colours, sounds, smells, 
tastes, &c.

SENSIBLENESS [sensibilitas, L. sen­
sibilité, F.] the sensible faculty.

SENNIGHT, seven nights, q. d. seven
nights time.

SENSITIVE Soul, the soul of brutes,
or the sensible Soul, which man is sup­
posed to have in common with brutes.

SENSITIVENESS [of sensitivus, L.]
the faculty of perceiving, &c.

SENSELESS [of sensus, L. sens, F.
and leaſ, Sax.] void of sense.

SENSELESNESS, want, or voidness
of sense.

SENSORY [sensorium, L.] the organ
or instrument of sense; the place to
which the species of sensible things are
carried through the nerves and brain, 
that they may be there perceived by
their immediate presence to the sense.

To SENSUALIZE [rendre sensuel, F.]
to render sensual.

SENTENCE [in Poetry] a short, pithy
remark or reflection, containing some
sentiment of use in the conduit of life.

SENTENCE [in Grammar] a period
or set of words, comprehending some
perfect, sense or sentiment of the mind.

SENTIMENT, thought, mind, opi­
nion, inclination, passion,  F.

SENTIMENTS [in Poetry, Tragedy, 
&c.] are the thought which the poet
makes his persons express.

SENTINUS [of sentire, to feel or
perceive, &c.] a heathen deity, believ'd
to be the giver of the faculty of feeling
to children, in their mothers womb.

SEPARABLENESS [of separabilis, 
L.] capableness of being separated.

SEPARATENESS [separatus, L.] a
being separated from.

SEPARATION, a divorce, or part­
ing of man and wife,  F. of  L.

SEPTANGULARNESS [of septem
and angularis, L.] the having seven an­
gles.

SEPTEMBER [of septem, L. so call'd
as being the 7th month, beginning at
March] is painted, &c. in a purple
robe, with a chearful look, crowned
with a coronet of white and purple
grapes, holding in his right hand a
Cornucopia of pomegranates and other
summer fruits, and a balance, and in
his left hand a handful of oats.

SEPTENTRIONALITY [of septen­
trionalis, L.] northernliness.

SEPTIZONE [of septizonium, of sep­
tem seven, and Zonæ girdles] a building
girt with seven rows of columns.

SEPTUAGINT [of septuaginta, L.
i. e. 70] a name given to a Greek tran­
slation of the old Testament, at the
command of Ptolemy Philadelphus, king
of Egypt, about 300 years before Christ, 
which interpreters were sent by the 
high priest Eleazar, who chose out of
every tribe, 6 of the most learned in
the Greek and Hebrew tongues.

Jerome says, that they translated
only the 5 books of Moses: and Jose­
phus and the Talmudists, are of the
same mind; but most of the antient
fathers are of opinion, that the 70 tran­
slated the whole bible, and affirm, that
the king shut up these interpreters, in
different apartments, to see how much
their translations differed; which upon
examination were all found to agree.

And Justin martyr adds, that he him­
self did see at Alexandria the ruins of
the buildings that contained all these
little cells or apartments.

This translation contributed very
much to the conversion of the Gentiles.
which Eusebius of Cæsarea observes as
a singular providence, alledging that
the Jews would not have suffered any
translations after the coming of our
Saviour, or at least would have impos'd
corrupt translations on the world.

SEPTUPLE [of septuplex, L.] seven­
fold.

SEPULCHRE [sepulchrum, L.] a
tomb or monument, or a place destina­
ted for the interment of the dead; the
term is used in a more especial manner
for the burying places of the Ancients;
but those of the Moderns are more u­
sually called tombs. Besides, the Anci­
ents had a sort of sepulchre, which they
called Cenotaphium, which was an emp­
ty sepulchre erected in honour of one
who had no burial at all; as well as
for those whose bodies or ashes, being
burnt, were there reposited.

SEQUENT [sequens, L.] following.

Voluntary SEQUESTRATION [in
Common Law] is that which is done by
the consent of both parties.



Necessary SEQUESTRATION [in
Common Law] is that which the judge
doth by his authority, whether the
parties will or not.

SEQUESTRATOR, an officer in the
time of the civil wars, who received
the rent, of the estates of delinquents.

SERAGLIO, the palace of the Grand
Seignior, at Constantinople, where he
keeps his court, and where his concu­
bines are lodged, and where the youth
are trained up for the chief posts of the
empire; also the palace of a prince or
lord; also the place of residence of a
foreign ambassador is there called a
Seraglio.

SERAPH [ףדש, Heb. to in­
flame] a spirit of
the first or highest rank in the Hierar­
chy of angels, or one of that class, 
supposed to be most inflamed with di­
vine love, by reason of their nearer
and more immediate attendance upon
the throne, and to communicate ar­
dour to the inferior or remoter orders
of angels.

SERAPHIM [ףדש, Heb. to in­
flame] a spirit of
the first or highest rank in the Hierar­
chy of angels, or one of that class, 
supposed to be most inflamed with di­
vine love, by reason of their nearer
and more immediate attendance upon
the throne, and to communicate ar­
dour to the inferior or remoter orders
of angels.

SERAPIS [as some think, of ףדש, 
a seraphim, or דש a prince, Heb. and
Apis] was a god of the Egyptians, mark­
in an extraordinary manner, because
they did believe that Osiris, one of their
kings, the son of Jupiter had been, af­
ter his death, metamorphosed into an
ox. And hence proceeded the Israelites
worshipping the golden calves. The
ox called Serapis was to live a certain
number of years, and then the priests
drowned him in the river Nile, and all
the people of the land mourned and
lamented for his death, till another
was found with the same marks upon
him; upon which there was an uni­
versal rejoicing over the country, ex­
pressed by banqueting and all manner
of sports.

SERAPIS [Hieroglyphically] in its
temple in Alexandria in Egypt (being
an idol made of all sorts of metals, of
such a prodigious size, as that it filled
the temple, reaching the roof with its
head and both the sides with its hands)
represented the world; the golden
head of the idol signified the heavens, 
the shoulders and stomach the air, the
belly the sea, and the feet the earth, 
as it is represented speaking of itself.
Ἑιμι Θεος τοῖς, δεμας οἱζ χαγὼ εἴπω,
Οὐράνιος χόσμος χεφαλὴ, γιστὴρ δὲ θάλασσα­
Υαία δὲ μοί ποδες εἲσι τάδ ούατ᾽ εν αίθέρι χειται 
Ὂμματα τελαυγες λαμπροῦ φἀος Ἡλίοιο.

The parenthesis preceding the last word of the second last line of the Greek verse was eliminated. The word of the second last line should be included at the end of the line. However, it was placed at the beginning of a new line because of the limitation of the space in the preceding line.



SEREIN, a dampish and unwhole­
some vapour, that in hot countries
falls after sun-set; a kind of mildew,
 F.

To SERENADE [donner de senerades, 
F.] to play or sing to a lady or mistress, 
under her door or window, in the night
or early in the morning.  Ital.

SERENITUDE [serenitudo, L.] se­
renity, clearness of the sky, calmness of
the mind.

SERGEANT at Law a learned
lawyer of
the highest degree in the common law, 
as a doctor is in the civil. The court
of common pleas is their peculiar, tho'
they may plead in other courts. They
are called brothers by the judges, who
shew them great respect.

SERGEANT of the Coif a learned
lawyer of
the highest degree in the common law, 
as a doctor is in the civil. The court
of common pleas is their peculiar, tho'
they may plead in other courts. They
are called brothers by the judges, who
shew them great respect. 

SERGEANT at Arms, an officer
appointed to attend the person of the
king; and also to arrest traitors and
persons of quality, and to attend the
lord high steward, when he sits in judg­
ment upon a traitor, &c.

SERIOUSLY [serió, L.] with seri­
ousness.

SERIOUSNESS, sobriety, gravity,
intentness of mind.

SERMOLOGIES [of Sermo and λογος
Gr.] books or homilies of popes or o­
ther persons of eminence and sanctity,
antiently read at the Feasts of the Con­
fessors, the Purification, All-Saints, and
every day from Christmas to the octave
of the Epiphany.

SERMOUNTAIN, a sort of herb.

SEROUS [serosus, L.] of, or pertain­
ing to the humour called Serum, wa­
terish.

SEROUSNESS [serosité, F, of se­
rosus of serum, L.] 
wheyishness, properly of the blood, 
being an aqueous liquor mixed with
the blood and other humours, or being
serous.

SEROSITY [serosité, F, of se­
rosus of serum, L.] 
wheyishness, properly of the blood, 
being an aqueous liquor mixed with
the blood and other humours, or being
serous.

SERPENT, a reptile, to whom the
Heathens paid divine adoration. They
kept serpents in baskets made of bul­
rushes and osier twigs, which they con­
secrated to Bacchus, Ceres, and Proser­
pina.

The Egyptians kept a serpent in their
temples in a chest, and worshipped and
kissed it, and especially in the temple of
Serapis and Isis.

Epiphanius makes mention, of a sort
of Hereticks called Ophitæ, who kept a
serpent in a chest, worshipped and kissed
it, and fed it with bread.

Æsculapius the god of physick, was
worshipped under the form of a ser­
pent.

SERPENT, a kind of musical instru­
ment, serving as a bass to the Cornet or



small Shawm, to sustain a chorus of sin­
gers in a large vessel.

SERPENTARIUS [in Astronomy] a
constellation in the northern hemi­
sphere,  L.

SERPENTIGENOUS [serpentigena, 
L.] ingendered or bred of a serpent.

SERPENTIGEROUS [serpentiger, 
L.] bearing or carrying serpents.

SERPENTINE Marble, a kind of
marble, so called because speckled like
a serpent's skin.

SERPENTS [Hieroglyphicks] were
used to represent Hereticks.

SERRATED-Leaf [with Botanists]
is an indented leaf, or a leaf which is
snipped about the edges into several a­
cute segments, resembling the teeth of
a saw, as Dog's Mercury.

SERVETISTS, the disciples and
followers of Michael Servet, who, being
an Antitrinitarian, was burnt at Geneva, 
1553.

SERVITES, an order of religious, 
denominated from their peculiar at­
tachment to the service of the Virgin
Mary.

SESQUI-duplicate Ratio [in Geom.
&c.] is when, of two terms, the great­
er contains the less twice, with half
another over, as 50 and 20.

SESQUIALTERAL Ratio 
[with Geometricians, &c.] is a Ratio be­
tween two lines, two numbers, &c.
where one of them contains the other
once, with the addition of one half, as
6 and 9.

SESQUIALTERAL Proportion 
[with Geometricians, &c.] is a Ratio be­
tween two lines, two numbers, &c.
where one of them contains the other
once, with the addition of one half, as
6 and 9.

SESQUIDITONUS [in Musick] a
concord resulting from the sound of two
strings, whose vibrations, in equal times
are to each other in the Ratio of 5 to 6.

SESQUITERTIAL Proportion [in
Mathem.] is when one number contains
another once, and a third part of it
more, as 6, 8, 12, 16, 21, 28.

SETOSE [setosus, L.] full of bristles.

SETOSITY [setositas, L.] fulness of
bristles.

Aeronical SETTING [with Astron.]
is when a star sets, when the sun rises.

Cosmical SETTING, is when a star
sets with the sun.

Heliacal SETTING, is when a star
is immerged and hid in the sun's rays.

SETTLEDNESS [of ſetl, Sax.] a
fixedness, of being settled in place, 
mind, &c.

SEVEN [ſeofan, Sax.] the number
7 is remarkable, and has been used by
most nations as a period of time, as 7
days in the week, 7 years of service, 7
times 7 the distance of the year of Ju­
bilee. It is called critical by physicians, 
who on the seventh day were wont
to give their judgment, as to life or
death of the sick; and also for the cli­
macterial year, 7 times 7, or 49, or 9
times 7 i.e. 63. It is also named male
and female, because a compound of
numbers even and odd, as 3 and 4, and
comprehending the 3 and 4 is a num­
ber wholy perfect.

SEVEN-fold [ſeofon-fealð, Sax.]
7 times as much.

SEVENTEEN [ſeofontine, Sax.]
17.

SEVENTY [Seofontic, Sax.] 70.

SEVERENESS [of severus, L.] 
roughness, stern­
ness, &c. also harshness, gravity, strict­
ness, cruelty, &c.

SEVERITY [of severus, L.] 
roughness, stern­
ness, &c. also harshness, gravity, strict­
ness, cruelty, &c.

SEWERS, commonly call'd shoars, 
are conduits or conveyances for the
water, suillage or filth of a house, 
street, city, &c.

SEXAGESIMAL [Arithmetick] is
that which proceeds by 60's, as the di­
vision of circles, &c. into 60 degrees, 
the degrees each into 60 minutes, and
every minute into 60 seconds.

SEXAGESIMALS, are fractions
whose denominators proceed in a sexa­
cuple proportion, i. e. the first minute
= to 80/6 a second 1/3600 a third 1/210000
and so on.

SEX-Angled [with Geom.]
having six angles, as in the
figure.

Image omitted.



SGRAFIT [of sgraffici­
ata, Ital. scratch-work, 
prob. of γράφω, Gr. to write] a method
of painting in black and white only, 
not in fresco, yet such as will bear the
weather.

To SHAB off, to go away sneakingly.

SHAB, a shabby fellow,

SHABBINESS [prob. q. d. scabbiness]
raggedness, meanness of habit.

SHACKLED [of ſcacul, Sax. a fet­
ter] wearing shackles or fetters, &c.

To SHADE [of ſcaðe&wyn;an, Sax.] to
cover with the shadow.

SHADOW [in Opticks] a privation
of light, by the interposition of an
opake body.

SHAGGEDNESS [of ſceacʒeð, Sax.]
the having long, rough hair.

SHALLOWNESS, want of depth
of water, judgment, &c.

SHAPELESS [of Sceapleaſ, Sax.]
without shape, deformed.

SHARK [Figuratively] is used for a
sharping fellow, who lives by taking
persons at a disadvantage, and tricking
and cheating them.



SHARP [in Musick] a kind of artifi­ 
ial note or character so formed (♯)

SHATTER-PATED, scarce compos
mentis, crazy-headed, hare-brain'd,
confused, acting without thought, &c.

SHAVELING, one that has his head 
shaved, as monks, &c.

SHAVER, as a cunning shaver, i. e.
a crafty fellow.

To SHEAF [ſceafian, Sax.] to bind
corn into sheaves.

SHEARING [in the Woollen Manu­
facture] is the cutting with large sheers
the too long and superfluous nap or
shag on cloths, stuff, &c.

To SHED [of Sceaðan, Sax.] to spill, 
to pour out, as to shed Tears, the Teeth, 
Hair, Horns.

SHEEP [HieroglyphicalIy] represented
a fool or silly person, because no beast
is more simple than a sheep; but a ram
represents a good governor.

SHEEPISHNESS [of Sceap, and ʒe­
licneſſe, Sax.] faint-heartedness, 
simpleness, &c.

SHEEP-Cote [Sceap-cote, Sax.
a place to put sheep in.

SHEEP-Fold [Sceap-falðe, Sax.
a place to put sheep in.

SHEEP-Hook [Sceap-hoce, Sax.] a
shepherd's staff or crook.

A SHEEP'S-Head [Metaphorically] a
mere blockhead, a stupid, dull fellow.

To SHEER a shore an anchor [a­
mong Sailors]
signifies to draw it home.

To SHEER Home an anchor [a­
mong Sailors]
signifies to draw it home.

SHEER, clear, transparent, thin, 
spoken of muslin; quite or altogether
got off or away.

SHEER over, quite over, Milton.

To SHEER. See Shear.

SHEERMAN [Scear-man, Sax.] that
sheers cloths, woollen stuffs, &c.

SHELF [with Miners] that hard sur­
face or coat of the earth, which lies
under the mould, usually about a foot
deep.

SHELTERER [prob. of Sceala, Sax.
a shell] one who shelters; also is shel­
tered.

SHELTERLESS, having no place of
Shelter.

SHELVING [prob, of schelb, Teut.
crooked] slanting,

SHELVINGNESS, the sinking or ri­
sing gradually like a shelve or sand in
the sea.

SHELVY [of schelb, Teut.] full of
shelves or sand heaps, as the sea.

SHEPHERDESS [Sceapa, hyrðeſ,
Sax.] a she-keeper of sheep.

SHERIFFWICK [Scyr-ʒeref&wyn;ic, 
Sax.] a sheriff's jurisdiction.

SHIN-Bone [Scina ban, Sax.] a bone
between the leg and foot.

SHIELD [in Heraldry] in
coat-armour is sometimes
represented as in the figure, 
tho' they were of a diffe­
rent shape and size; the use
of them was to defend the body against
the weapons of enemies.

Image omitted.



SHINGLES [in Carpentry] are small
pieces of wood or quartered oaken
boards, saw'd to a certain scantling;
but they are more usually cleft to about
an inch thick at one end, and made
like wedges, about four or five inches
broad, and eight or nine (and in some
places twelve) inches long. They are
us'd to cover houses with; but more
commonly churches or steeples, instead
of tiles or slates.

SHINING [of Scinanðe, Sax.] cast­
ing a lustre, looking bright.

SHININGNESS [Scinanðeneſſe, 
Sax.] lustre, brightness.

SHIPPING [of skip, Dan. ſcip, Sax.]
ships.

SHIP-shapen [with Sailors] unsightly, 
spoken of a ship that is built strait up
after she comes to her bearings, the
same that is termed Wale-reared.

SHIPWRIGHTS, were constituted
in the reign of king
James I. They are a
master, two wardens, 
and 16 assistants. Their
arms are a Noah's ark
on a chief, the cross of
St. George charg'd with
a lion of England; the
crest is the said ark and the dove vo­
lant, with an olive branch in its mouth
proper.

Image omitted.



SHIRK [q. d. a shark] a sharping fel­
low that lies upon the catch, as the
shark-fish.

SHIRKING, sharping, lying upon
the catch.

SHOAD [with Tin Miners] such frag­
ments of ore, which by rains, currents
of water, &c. are torn off from the
load or veins of ore.

SHOCKING [of shocken, Du.] put­
ting into a commotion of mind.

SHODDEN [of Sceoð, Sax.] having
shoes on.

A SHOE-Maker [of ſceo and macan, 
Sax. to make] a maker of shoes.

SHOLINESS [q. d. Shallowness] ful­
ness of flats in the sea, &c.

SHOLY [q. d. shallow] full of flats.

SHON, did Shine. Milton.

SHORN [of Scearan, Sax.] sheared
or clipped off.



SHORT-Sails [in a Ship of War] are
the same as fighting sails, and are the
fore-sail, main-sail, and fore top-sail, 
which are all the sails used in a fight, 
lest the rest should be fired or spoiled.

SHORT-Sightedness, a fault in the
conformation of the eye, in which the
crystalline, &c. being too convex, the
rays reflected from distant objects are
refracted too much, and caused to con­
verge too fast, so as to unite together, 
before they reach to the Retina, by
which means the vision is render'd both
dim and confused.

SHORTNESS [ſcortnyſſe, Sax.]
brevity, deficiency in length.

Chain-SHOT, is two whole or half
bullets joined to­
gether, either by
a bar or chain of
iron, which al­
lows them some
liberty asunder, 
so that they cut
and destroy whatever happens in their
way, and are very serviceable in a sea-­
battle, to cut the enemy's sails.

Image omitted.



Round SHOT [in Gunnery] are round
bullets fitted in proportion to the
gun.

Cross-bar SHOT, are round shot, 
with a long spike of iron cast in each, 
as if it went through the middle of it.

Case SHOT, is either small bullets, 
nails, bits of old iron, or the like, put
into a case, to shoot out of ordnance.

Langrel SHOT, runs with a shackle
to be shortened when it is put into the
gun, having half a bullet either of lead
or iron, which spreads itself when it
flies out.

Trundle-SHOT, is a bolt of iron of
16 or 18 inches in length, having sharp
points at both ends, and around broad
bowl of lead cast upon it, about a
hand's breadth from each end, and fit­
ted to the bore of the gun.

SHOT of a Cable [with Sailors] is the
fastening of two cables together, that
a ship may ride more safely.

SHOT [of Sceotan, Sax.] hit or
wounded with a bullet, arrow, &c.

To SHOULDER [of Sculðor, Sax.]
to lay on the shoulder; also to justle
with the shoulder.

SHOULDER-Blade, a bone of the
shoulder, of a triangular figure, cover­
ing the hind part of the ribs, called
also Scapula.

A SHOUT, a loud halloo or huzza.

SHOWERINESS [Scuricʒneſſe, 
Sax.] raininess, inclinableness to be
showery.

SHOWERY [of Scuricʒ, Sax.] rai­
ny, apt or inclinable to produce show­
ers.

SHRANK, [of Scrincan, Sax.] shunk
up, lessened in length, breadth, &c.

SHREADINGS [in Carpentry] the
making good of the rafter-feet in the
cornice; that is, when rafters are cut
with a knee, these shreadings (other­
wise call'd furrings) go strait along with
the rafter from the top of the knee to
the cornice.

SHREWDNESS, cunningness, smart­
ness, sagacity.

SHRILNESS, sharpness of sound.

SHRIN'D, inshrind, seated or placed
in a shrine. Milton.

SHROWD [ſcruð, Sax.] a garment
for a dead corps.

SHROWDING of Trees [in Husban­
dry] the cutting or lopping off the top
branches of them; which is only done
to trees not fit for timber; and designed
either for some present use, or for fuel.

SHRUB [ſcrube, Sax.] a small or
low tree.

SHRUB [with Botanists] a plant with
many woody perennial stalks or trunks
from the same root, as a briar, &c.

SHRUBBINESS [ſcrybicneſſe, 
Sax.] fulness of shrubs.

SHRUBBY [of ſcrybiʒ, Sax.] full
of shrubs.

SHRUNK [of ſcrincan, Sax.] con­
tracted.

SHUTTERS [of ſcittan, Sax. to
lock, schutten, Du. to inclose] for
windows, &c.

SIBYLS [σιβὺλλα, q. σίου of Θεοῦ βούλη, 
Gr. i. e. the council of God] of these, 
in all, are reckoned nine or ten, as the
Sibylla Persica; Lybica, Delphica, Cu­
mana, Erythræa, Samia, Tyburtina, Hel­
lespontica, Phrygia, and Cumæa, whose
writings seem to have prophesied of
Christ so plainly, that there is ground
to suspect the Greek verses, that bear
their name, were written after our
Saviour's death.

The Sybilla Cumana, was a virgin
who lived an innocent life in a cave, 
near Cuma in Italy, far from all ac­
quaintance and society of men. She
composed nine books of things to come, 
and brought them to Tarquinius Priscus
to be sold, demanding about 300 pounds
for them; which he refusing to give, 
she burnt three of them, and required
the same price for the rest; but, the
king refusing to give it, she went away, 
and having burnt three more, and re­
turning, demanded the same money
for the remaining three, for which the



king, by the advice of his soothsayers, 
gave her the money. The Duumviri
sacrotum or Pontifex Maximus, kept
these books in their custody; and, on
all difficult occasions, these books were
consulted by order of the senate.
There are yet remaining some frag­
ments of this Sibyl, preserved in seve­
ral writers.

SIBYLLA Agrippa, was painted in
the form of an old woman in a roseal
garment.

SIBYLLA Delphica, like a young
woman in a black garment, with a horn
in her hand.

SIBYLLA Europea, like a comely
young woman, but with a red face, 
clothed with a fine veil on her head, 
and a fine garment of golden work.

SIBYLLA Herophila, young and fair, 
in a purple garment, and having her
head covered with a veil of lawn.

SIBYLLA Lybica, like an old woman
clad in a purple garment, and crowned
with a garland of flowers.

SIBYLLA Phrygia, with an old ill-­
favoured face, clad in a red garment.

SIBYLLA Persica, clad in a golden
garment, and a white veil.

SIBYLS. A certain author has en­
deavoured to prove, that there never
was more than one Sibyl that was a
prophetess, and that she was a Grecian, 
whose name was Hierophyle, born at
Erythræa; and that the diversity of her
names was occasioned by her travels, 
or by the spirit's transporting her from
one place to another; and that she
died at Cuma in Italy. Vossius tells us,
that the ancient books of the Sibyls at
Rome were altogether profane; but
that those, brought from Greece by
Crassus, contained some prophecies
that had been given by certain Jews
for Sibylline oracles: Which is the
reason of those prophecies of the com­
ing of the Messiah, that are found a­
mong them.

SIBYLLINE [sibyllinus, L.] of the
Sybils.

SICCIFICK [siccificus, L.] causing
dryness.

SICKLINESS [of ſeoclineſſe, 
Sax.] unhealthfulness, aptness to be
sick.

SICKNESS [ſeocneſſe, Sax.] in­
disposition of body, &c.

A SICKLE [ſicol, Sax. sikel, Du.
prob. of secare, L. to cut] a hook for
reaping corn.

SIDELING, side-ways, on one side, 
awry. Milton.

SIDELINGS [old Lat. Writ.] balks
between, or on the sides of the ridges
of plowed lands.

SIDER. See Cyder.

SIDEROMANCY [σιδηρομαντεία of
σέδηρα, iron or steel, and μαντεία, Gr.
divination] a divination performed by
a red-hot iron, upon which they laid
an odd number of straws, and observed
what figures, bendings, sparklings, &c.
they made in burning.

SIEGE [of siege, F. a seat] going to
stool, voiding of excrements.

SIGALEON [among the Egyptians]
an idol worshipped in the temple of
Isis and Serapis, in the form of a young
man, keeping his mouth shut with his
singer, as an emblem of Silence, and
accordingly was accounted as the god
of Secresy and Silence. It is generally
agreed among authors that Sigaleon
was the same as Harpocrates, and that
the Egyptians used both these names to
signify the god of Silence.

SIGHTS [in Mathematicks] two thin
pieces of brass on the extreme of an
Alidade or Index of a Theodolite, &c.
for the just direction of the Index to
the line of the object.

SIGILLARIA, a festival among the
Romans, wherein they sent presents of
seals, and other such things, one to the
other,  L.

SIGN [in Physick] some appearance
of the body distinguishable by the sen­
ses, whence the presence, nature and
date of a disease, or health, or death, 
may be inferred.

SIGNA, marks or characters, short­
hand, initial or beginning letters, which
by way of abbreviation are put for
whole words, as D. D. D. for donum
Deo dedit, L.

SIGNA [among the Romans] ensigns
or banners, of which there were seve­
ral sorts; on some of them was a hand
expended, as a symbol of concord;
some had a silver eagle; others the
image of the emperor; others a dragon
with a silver head, and the rest of the
body taffety,  L.

SIGNALS, signs made by sea or
land by the admiral, commander, &c.
as of any squadron of ships, either for
sailing, fighting, marching, &c.

SIGNIFICANTNESS [of significan­
tia, L.] significancy.

SILENCE [in Hieroglyph.] was repre­
sented by a wolf, because it is said to
make men dumb at its first sight.

Seasonable SILENCE [Hieroglyph.] was
represented by a wild goose; because
Ammianus relates, that when these
birds fly over the mountains, where



great numbers of eagles make their
abode, knowing their inability of keep­
ing silence, they take a stone in their
bills, which hinders them from making
a noise, and when they are out of dan­
ger they let it fall.

SILENI [according to the Poets]
were satyrs, so called when they were
grown old, who are feigned to be great
tipplers of wine.

SILENI, were as numerous as the
Fauni. They were thought to be mor­
tal, because there were several of their
sepulchres in the region about Perga­
mus; but the Fauni, the Satyrs, the Si­
leni and the Bacchi, the Tytiri and the
Panes, being all of a like nature, were
reputed to be Dæmons, and the minis­
ters of the other gods; they were cal­
led by the name of Incubi, being ac­
counted to be amorous of women, and
desirous of their embraces; and indeed
it is not to be questioned but there were
many ill things done under their names
in such lonely places, and those crimes
which were perpetrated by mortals, 
were attributed to demi-gods.

SILENUS. Historians tell us, that
Silenus was the first of all the kings that
reigned at Nysa, who lived in the reign
of Midas, and that the shepherds hav­
ing caught him, by putting wine into
a fountain he used to drink of, brought
him to Midas, who gave him long ears, 
It is probable that he was one of the
princes of Caria, who was famous for
his wisdom and learning. And the fable
of Midas's lending him long ears, only
signified the great knowledge he had in
all things. Silenus being siezed, pur­
chased his liberty with this remarkable
sentence: That it was best not to be born, 
but the next degree of happiness was to die
quickly. Virgil makes Silenus deliver a
very excellent and serious discourse
concerning the creation of the world, 
when he was scarce recovered out of
his fit of drunkenness, which makes it
appear, that the drunkenness Silenus
is charged with, had something in it
mysterious, and that approached to in­
spiration. He is described as an old
man, bald headed, with a flat nose and
large forehead, which denotes the
physiognomy of one that is insolent and
given to wine; large ears, a short fat
body, with a great belly; being gene­
rally thought to be drunk, he rides
upon a saddle-backed ass, or supports
his reeling steps with a staff, sometimes
he has a Cantharus or great can in his
hand, with the handle of it much worn
by the frequent use he makes of it.

SILENTNESS [silentium, L.] silence, 
stilness.

SILK-GLASS [of Virginia] a curious
plant that has very thin and fibrous
leaves, of which a sort of fine stuff is
made, with a gloss like silk, and cor­
dage much better than that of hemp or
flax, both for strength and continu­
ance.

SILK THROWERS, were incorpo­
rated Anno 1629. and
are a master, two war­
dens, 19 assistants, no
livery. The assistants
fine is 8 l. and stewards
20. Their arms are
Argent, three bundles
of silk Sable, on a chief
a silk thrower's mill.

Image omitted.



SILLINESS [prob. of Sillic, 
wonderfully] simpleness, foolishness.

SILVER [Sẏlfer, Sax.] a metal, 
next in value to gold, in weight it
comes next to that of lead, being to
that of gold as 10 to 19, and to that of
water, as 10 to 1; as to its fixedness
in the fire, it goes beyond all bodies
except gold; having been found by Dr.
Halley to lose but 1-12 of its weight, 
having been kept in fusion in the Focus
of a furnace for two months; it is also
the most ductile and malleable of all
bodies after gold; again, as to its fusi­
bility, it easily dissolves by fire, much
more easily than copper or iron; but
more difficultly than gold or lead, and
runs before it ignites. Its character
with chymists is ☽,  Teut. and  Du.

SILVER, adj. [Solferene, Sax.] of
or pertaining to silver.

SILVER Weed, the herb White Tan­
sey.

SILVERED [of Sẏlfrene, Sax.]
done over with silver.

SILVERING, the covering any work
with leaf silver, &c.

SIMA [in Architect.] a Cymatium.

SIMATIUM [in Architect.] See
Cymatium.

SIMAISE [in Architect.] See
Cymatium.

SIMILAR Disease, a disease of some
simple solid part of the body; as of a
fibre, in regard to its tension or flacci­
dity, a membrane, &c.

SIMILAR right-lin'd Figures [in
Geom.] are such figures as have equal
angles, and the sides about those angles
proportional.

SIMILAR Sections [in Conicks] are
such, whose diameters make equal an­
gles, with their ordinates.

SIMILARNESS [of similaris, L.
similarié, F.] likeness, the being of the
same nature.



A SIMILE, a similitude, a compari­
son of two things, which, tho' different
in other respects, yet agree in some
one; also a parable,  L.

SIMONIANS, so called of Simon
Magus, who pretended to be the great
virtue and power of God sent from
Heaven to earth: Among the Samari­
tans he pretended to be God the Fa­
ther; and among the Jews he made
himself pass for the Son. He patched
up a kind of medly system out of the
philosophy of Plato, the religious fa­
bles of the Heathens and Christianity;
from Plato he borrowed many things
as to the worship of angels, which he
perverted to magical uses, pretending
there was no salvation to be had but
by the invocation of angels, who were
the mediators between God and Man.

SIMPLE [in Musick] is chiefly used
in opposition to double; sometimes to
a compound of several parts or figures
of different values.

SIMPLE Leaf [with Botanists] is that
which is divided to the middle in seve­
ral parts, each resembling a leaf itself, 
as in a Dock.

SIMPLE Nouns [with Gram.] are the
same as primitive nouns.

SIMPLE Wound [with Surgeons] is
that which only opens the flesh, and
has no other circumstances attending
it.

SIMPLEFYING [in Ecclesiastical
Affairs] is the taking away the cure of
souls from a benefice, and dispensing
the beneficiary from his residence.

SIMPLE tenaille [in Fortif.] a 
work whose head
or front consists of two faces, which
make one re-entering angle.

SINGLE-tenaille [in Fortif.] a 
work whose head
or front consists of two faces, which
make one re-entering angle.

SIMPLES [in Botan.] all herbs or
plants, as having each its particular
virtue, whereby it becomes a simple
remedy.

SIMPLICITY [in God] is an incom­
municable attribute, and is a freedom
from all kind of composition or mix­
ture, either of principles or parts.

SIMPLICITY [in Metaphysicks] is an
indivisible unity, and is either absolute
or limited.

SIMPLICITY absolute, is when a
thing is indivisible independently, which
is the property of God himself.

SIMPLICITY limited, is when any
thing is really indivisible, but yet that
depends upon some external being.

SIMPLUDARIA [of simplex and
ludus, L.] a kind of funeral honour paid
to the deceased, by dancing and leap­
ing.

SIN-born, born of, sprung from, or
owing its being or original to sin. Mil­
ton.

SIN-EATERS. It has been a custom
in Herefordshire to hire poor people at
funerals to take upon them the sins of
the deceased, and these they called
Sin-Eaters. And in some parts of Lan­
cashire and Cheshire they have a custom
to set on a table board a high heap of
Soul Cakes, of which every visitant
takes one.

SINCERENESS [sinceritas, L. since­
rité, F.] uprightness, plain-heartedness.

SINCERITY [in Ethicks] is defined
to be that virtue, act, or power of the
mind, by which the will is determined
to follow and perform that which the
intellect determines to be best, and to
do it, because it is so.

SINEWINESS [of Sineht of Sinu, 
Sax.] nervousness.

SINEW [Sẏn&wyn;e, Sax.] a nerve.

SINEWY [Sin&wyn;ealt, Sax.] nervous.

SINGLE Excentricity [with Astron.]
is the distance between the center of
the ellipsis and the focus, or between
the sun and the center of the excen­
trick.

SINGLE Ten, a silly person.

SINGULARNESS [singularitas, L, 
singularité, F.] the being singular; un­
commonness; also excellency; also a
particular way of behaviour, &c. affect­
edness.

SINISTER-Base [in He­
raldry] is the left angle of
the base represented by the
letter I in the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



SINISTER-Chief [in He­
raldry] the left angle of
the chief, represented by
the letter C in the escut­
cheon.

Image omitted.



SINISTERNESS [sinisteritas, L.]
unfairness, self-interestedness, auk­
wardness, &c.

SINISTER Side of an Escutcheon, the
left side.

SINISTRI, a sect of ancient Here­
ticks, so called, because they held
(sinistram) their left hand in abhor­
rence, and made it a point of religion
not to receive any thing with it.

SINKING [of Sincan, Sax.] falling
or settling to the bottom or under wa­
ter, falling or fainting.

A SINUATED Leaf [with Botan.]
is that which is cut about the edges
into several long segments, as in oak-­
leaves.



SINUOUSNESS [of sinuositas, L.
sinuosité, F.] fulness of turnings and
windings, or a series or bends and
turns in arches.

To SIRENIZE [of siren, L.] to allure
persons to their destruction.

SIRENS [either of σειρειν or σώρειν, 
to draw or allure, or σείρειν, Gr. to de­
ceive, &c.] sea monsters famous in the
writings of the poets, said to be the
daughters of the river Achelous, and
of one of the 9 muses; some say Mel­
pomene; others Calliope, or Terpsichore, 
or Sterope: in short they are not agreed
in their mothers name or their own.
They were in number three, some call
them Aglaepe, Pisinoe, Thelxiopia; o­
thers Thelxiope Molpe, Aglaophonos;
others again Leucosie, Ligea, Parthenope.

Their dwelling was upon the coast
of the Sicilian sea, where they are fa­
bled to have sung so harmoniously that
the mariners who pass'd that way were
in danger of being shipwreck'd, by
approaching too near the shore, in
stopping to hear them.

They are represented on the upper
parts as fine women, but having wings
and feet like birds.

The poets tell us, that when the
Argonauts passed that way, the Sirens
did what they could to charm them;
but Orpheus taking his harp, made their
songs and other attempts useless:
whereupon the Sirens in despair at be­
ing overcome, threw themselves into
the sea, and became rocks.

Others say, they were precipitated
into the sea, and became sea monsters, 
having half the body of a woman and
the other half of a fish, and that this
happened to them after Ulysses had dis­
appointed their expectation, by stop­
ping his companions ears with wax, 
and making himself to be lash'd fast
with ropes to the mast of his ship.

It is related that in 1672, they caught
a Siren at Malta: Cornelius a Lapide
speaks of a Siren taken in Friezland, 
which they say, liv'd long enough to
learn to spin.

Between the island Ceylon and the
point of Indus, it is related that there
were taken 9 Sirens and 7 Tritons; and
that upon the coast of Martinico, near
a promontory call'd the Diamond, was
seen a sea monster, who upwards from
his middle had the shape of a man, 
and the rest was like a fish.

In the Philippine islands, it is said
that they catch a sort of fish like Sirens, 
and also that many of them are seen
in the province of Angola. They are
found to be male and female, being 8
foot long, and 4 in breadth: their
arms are very short but their fingers
are long, their head and eyes are oval, 
their forehead high, nose flat, with a
large mouth; but they have hardly any
chin or ears.

When they are killing they cry out as
a man would do, that expected to be
murdered.

SIRIUS [σείριος, Gr.] the dog-star, a
bright star of the first magnitude in the
mouth of the constellation, called Canis
major.

SISTER-Hood [ſ&wyn;uſter, Sax. or
suster, and hood, Dan. a termination
added to relation] the society of sisters.

SITUATION [with Logicians] is the
ninth of the categories, as sitting, 
standing, before, behind, to the right, to
the left.

SIXAIN [in Milit. Affairs] an anci­
ent order of battle for six batallions, 
which, supposing them to be all in a
line, is formed thus. The 2d and 5th
batallions advance and make the Van.
The 1st and 6th fall into the rear, leav­
ing the 3d and 4th to form the main
body. Each batallion ought to have a
squadron on its right, and another on
its left. Any number of batallions, 
produced of the number 6, may be
drawn up by this order; so 12 batalli­
ons may be put into 2 Sixains, and 18
into 3 Sixains.

SIX-FOLD [ſix-fealðe, Sax.] six
times as much.

SIZE, a glewish matter, which
painters in distemper mix with their
colours; also a kind of paste used by
shoemakers; also a sort of jelly used
by plaisterers, &c.

SIZEABLENESS [of assieux, F. &c.]
the being of a fit size.

SIZING [at the Tin-Works] a curious
method of dressing the tin-ore, after it
comes from the launder of the stamping
mill; which is by listing it through an
hair sieve, and casting back that which
remains in the sieve into the tails, to
be trampled over again.

To SKEW, to go sideling along, to
waddle.

SKILFUL [according to Minshew of
sciolus, L. and full, Sax.] knowing, 
experienced in.

SKINK-Pottage, a sort of Scotch
pottage, made of the sinews of a leg of
beef.

A SKIRMISH [escaramuza, Span.] a
combat in presence of two armies, be­
tween two parties, who advance from
the bodies for that purpose, and intro­



duce and invite to a general regular
fight.

SKINNERS, were incorporated An­
no 1325. they consist of
a master, 4 wardens, 
68 assistants, and 170
on the livery; the fine
for which is 16l. 16s.
8d. This is the sixth
company of the twelve, 
of which there have
been 29 lord mayors. This company
has been honoured by having of their
fraternity six kings, five queens, one
prince, nine dukes, two earls, and a
baron. Their armorial ensigns are
Ermine on a chief Gules, three crowns
Or, with caps of the first. The crest, 
a leopard Proper, gorg'd with a chaplet
of bays Or. The supporters, a lucern
and a wolf, both Proper. The motto, 
To God only be all glory. Their hall is
on Dowgate-Hill.

Image omitted.



SKIRTING Boards [in Carpentry] are
the narrow boards fitted round the un­
der side of wainscot against the floor.

SKITTISHNESS [prob. of Styttan, 
Sax. to shoot] wantonness, friskiness.

SKULL [prob. of schell, Teut, a
shell, or schedel Teut, the head] is the
uppermost bone of the head, fashion­
ed in the form of a globe, and distin­
guish'd with its orders of small holes
and seams, and outwardly covered with
skin and thin flesh, lest it should be
over-burthened with too much weight.
These are full of pores, for the more
convenient evaporation of the gross
humours of the brain, and certain ex­
crements of it, whereof hairs are pro­
duced. The skull is inwardly hollow, 
that the brain, which is the seat of all
the senses, may be the more commo­
diously placed in it. It is distributed
into three parts; the fore-part (called
Sinciput) and conjoineth into the fore­
head; the hinderpart (call'd Occiput);
and the middle or crown (call'd Vertex), 
seated between the fore and hinder­
parts. In these three partitions are
placed three sensible faculties; in the
fore-part is the sensus communis, or
fancy, i. e. the judgment of the senses, 
or universal notion of things; in the
middle, the imagination; in the hin­
der-part of the head, the memory.

SLABBINESS [of slauben, Du.) slop­
piness, fulness of plashes.

SLACKNESS [laxitas, L.] looseness.

To SLAKE, to mix lime with water.

SLANDEROUSNESS, reproachful­
ness.

SLATCH of Fair Weather [Sea Phrase]
is when there comes an interval of
fair weather, after long foul weather.

SLATTERNLY [of sloorken, Du.)
negligent and careless, as to neatness
in dress and housewifery.

SLAVERY [esclavage, F.] perpetual
servitude, drudgery.

SLAVISHNESS [esclavage, F.] hard
service, drudgery.

To SLAUGHTER [of Slæʒan, Sax.
schlagen, Teut.] to kill or slay, to
butcher.

SLEAZINESS [of Cloth] slightness
of workmanship.

About SLEDGE [with Smiths] one
that is used for battering or drawing
out the largest work, and is held by
the handle with both hands; which
they swing round over their head, to
strike as hard a blow as they can.

Up-hand SLEDGE [with Smiths] is
used by under workmen; it is used with
both the hands before, and is seldom
raised higher than the head, and is for
work that is not of the largest size.

SLEEK [Slið, Sax.] smooth, even,
glib, made so by often rub­
ing with the slickstone.

SLICK [Slið, Sax.] smooth, even,
glib, made so by often rub­
ing with the slickstone. 

SLEEKNESS [Sliðneſſe, Saxon]
smoothness.

SLEEP [ſlæp, Sax.] is that state
wherein the body appearing perfectly
at rest, external objects move the ob­
jects of sense as usually, without excit­
ing the usual sensations. Sleep is said
to consist in a scarcity of spirits; which
occasions that the orifices or pores of
the nerves of the brain, whereby the
spirits us'd to flow into the nerves, be­
ing no longer kept open by the fre­
quency of the spirits, shut up of them­
selves.

SLEEPER [in Carpentry] is the ob­
lique rafter that lies in a gutter.

SLEETY, betwixt rainy and snowy.

SLEIGHT [prob. of schlaow, Teut.
cunning] dexterity.

SLIDING [in Mechan.] a motion
when the same point of a body, mov­
ing along a surface, describes a line
on that surface.

SLIMINESS [of ſliminʒneſſe, 
Sax.] a muddy softness, clamminess.

SLIPPER [in Architecture] the same
as Plinth.

SLIPPING [with Gardiners] is the
pulling off a sprig from a branch, or a
branch from an arm of a tree.

SLOPENESS slantingness, a go­
ing diagonally.

SLOPINGNESS slantingness, a go­
ing diagonally. 

SLOTH [Hieroglyph.] was represented
by a tortoise, because it is of a nature
very lazy, and slow in its march.



SLOTH [prob. of Slað, Sax.] unwil­
lingness, idleness, laziness, dronishness.

SLOW of Course [with Astron.] is
when a planet moves less in 24 hours
than his mean motion.

SLOWNESS of motion. Our learned
countryman Mr. J. Dee relates, that he
being in his travels, in company with
the noted Cardan, saw an instrument
(which was first sold for 20 talents of
gold) wherein there was one wheel, 
which constantly moved round amongst
the rest, yet did not finish one revolu­
tion under 7000 years.

SLUC'D, issuing or pouring forth
from a sluce. Milton.

SLUMBROUS, slumbring, of or
pertaining to slumber. Milton.

SLUNK [of Slincan, Sax.] stolen or
sneaked away; also cast, as a calf.

SLUTTISH [prob. of lutosus, L.]
nasty, not cleanly in cookery or house­
wifery.

SMATCH [of ſmac, Sax.] a small
taste of a thing.

SMELLING [incertæ Etymologiæ, but
the most prob. that etymologists have
given us is by Minshew, who derives it
of schamacken, Teut. to taste; but it
may as well be derived of ſmæc, Sax.
a taste or relish] perceiving scents by
the nostrils.

SMELLING [with Philosophers] is an
external sense, by which an animal, by
the assistance of his nostrils, (which are
furnished with very subtle fibres) re­
ceives all manner of smells, and those, 
that have the most tender fibres, enjoy
this sense in the most exquisite manner.
This sense in man is spoiled by the va­
pours of different and dainty viands or
meats, which is alledg'd as the reason
why men have not this sense to that
perfection that most other animals
have, who, by feeding on a more sim­
ple diet, enjoy this sense in greater
perfection, and can by their smelling
find out their food, tho' at a great di­
stance.

SMELLING, the act whereby we
become sensible of odorous bodies, by
means of certain effluvia of them, 
which striking on the olfactory organ, 
with briskness enough to have their
impulse propagated to the brain, do
excite a sensation in the soul.

SMICKET [of ſmoc, Sax.] a wo­
man's inner garment of linnen; the o
chang'd into an i, and the term et the
better to fit the mouth of a Prude.

A SMILE [smile, Dan.] a pleasant
look, a silent laugh.

SMINTHEAN [of σμίνθευς, Gr. a
rat] an epithet given to Apollo, from
killing, rats, mice, &c.

SMIRIS [of σμάω, Gr. to cleanse]
the Emery and Emeril-­
stone, a kind of hard stone used by gla­
ziers to cut glass, and by jewellers, to
polish jewels, &c.

SMYRIS [of σμάω, Gr. to cleanse]
the Emery and Emeril-­
stone, a kind of hard stone used by gla­
ziers to cut glass, and by jewellers, to
polish jewels, &c.

Black SMITHS had
a charter granted Anno
1577, from Q. Eliza­
beth, confirm'd by K.
James I. and K. Charles
I; but there are some
records found relating
to this company, so
ancient as Edward III's time. Their
armorial ensigns are, Sable a chevron
between three hammers Argent, han­
dled and crowned Or, on a helmet and
torse, a phenix firing herself by the
sun-beams, all proper. The motto, 
By Hammer and Hand all Arts doth stand.
Their hall is situate on the west side of
Lambeth-hill.

Image omitted.



A SMOTHER [of ſmorian, Sax.]
a vapour or smoke caused by burning
straw, &c.

SNAG, an unequal tooth standing
out from the rest.

SNAIL-CLOVER, a sort of herb.

SNAKE-EATER, an American bird.

A SNAKE [ſnaca, of ſnican, Sax.
to creep] a kind of serpent,  Du.

A SNAKE [Hieroglyphically] was (in
the following form, viz. in an orb bi­
ting his tail) by the ancients put to sig­
nify the continual mutation of creatures
and the change of one being into ano­
ther; because the world, as it were, 
feeds upon itself, and receives from it­
self a continual supply of those things
that time consumeth.

SNAKY [of ſnaca, Sax. a snake]
having, or like snakes.

SNAKE-ROOT, a Virginian root, of
a grateful and wholesome bitter taste.

SNEAKING [of ſnican, Sax. sniger
Dan.] creeping up and down bashfully;
also niggardly.

SNEEZING [of ſnieſan, Sax.] a
convulsive motion of the muscles of
the breast used in expiration; wherein
after suspending the inspiration begun, 
the air is repelled from the mouth and
nose, with a momentary violence.

SNEEZING, the custom of saluting
or blessing persons when they sneeze, 
is supposed to derive its original from
a disease whereof such as sneezed dy'd;
and this is confirmed by Carelias Sigon­
nius, who in his history of Italy, makes
mention of a pestilential distemper in
the time of Gregory the great, that



proved pernicious and deadly to those 
that sneezed.

But there is still an older date of this
practise, it being mentioned by Apule­
ius, who lived 300 years before Grego­
ry's time, as Petronius, Arbiter and o­
thers.

Codignus and Pinto, in their travels
inform us, that this custom is used in
the remotest parts of Africa, and the
east.

The ground of this so ancient custom
was probably; the notion of the ancients
that sneezing was either a good sign or
a bad, and therefore used to congratu­
late the one, and deprecate the other
by this salutation, for we find in the
writings of Plutarch, Aristotle and o­
thers, that sneezing at certain times was
held lucky, at others unlucky. And
Austin informs us, that the ancients
were wont to go to bed again, if they
sneezed while they were putting on
their shoes.

SNIPPY, parcimonious, niggardly.

SNOW [ſna&wyn;, Sax.] is a moist va­
pour, elevated near the middle region
of the air, whence it is thickened into 
a cloud, and reduced into the form of 
carded wool, then falling down by lit­
tle parcels. The white colour of snow
proceeds from the conjunction of hu­
midity with cold, which naturally en­
genders whiteness. If snow falls in
the summer-time it is caused by the
high mountains, which cooling the
lower region, give bodies unto vapours
and cause them to descend as low as the
earth.

SNOW [according to the learned
Dr. Grew] as to the form of it, has
many parts of it of a regular figure, 
for the most part being as so many lit­
tle rowels or stars of 6 points, being
perfect and transparent ice, as may be
seen upon a vessel of water, upon which
6 points, are set other collateral points;
and these always at the same angles, as
are the main points themselves. From
whence the true notion and external
nature of snow seems to appear, viz.
that not only some few parts of snow, 
but originally the whole body of it, or
of a snowy cloud, is an infinite mass
of icicles, regularly figured, and not
one particle of it originally being irre­
gular. It being a cloud of vapours ga­
thered into drops, which drops forth­
with descend; upon which descent, 
meeting with a soft freezing wind, or
at least passing thro' a colder region of
the air, each drop is immediately fro­
zen into an icicle, shooting itself forth
into several points or Striæ on each
hand from its center. And as to any
of them that are not regular or in a
star like form, it happens thus; that
still continuing their descent, and meet­
ing with some sprinkling and intermix­
ing gales of warmer air, or, in their
continual motion, and wastage to and
fro, touching upon each other, some
are a little thawed, blunted, frosted, 
clumpered, and others broken. And
these, though they seem to be lost, are
really hard, because true ice, the inse­
parable property of which is to be hard, 
and seem only to be soft, because, upon
the first touch of the finger, upon any
of the sharp edges or points; they in­
stantly thaw, or else they would pierce
the fingers like so many lancets, And
tho' snow be true ice, and so a hard and
dense body, and yet is very light, is
because of the extreme thinness of each
icicle in comparison of it breadth. For
so, tho' gold is the most ponderous of
all bodies, yet, when it is beaten into
leaves, it rides upon the least breath of
air, and so will all other bodies where
there is but little matter and large di­
mensions. And as to the whiteness of
snow. it is because it consists of parts, 
all of them singly transparent; but be­
ing mixed together appear white, as
the parts of froth, glass, ice, and other 
transparent bodies.

SNOWY [of ſna&wyn;an, Sax.] of or be­
longing to snow.

SNUFFISH apt to take excepti­
ons at; also dawbed
with snuff.

SNUFFY apt to take excepti­
ons at; also dawbed
with snuff.

SNUFFLING [of Snyflunʒ, Sax.
snot] speaking through the nose.

SNUG, close, hidden, concealed.

To SOAK [Socian, Sax.] to steep or
lie in any liquid; to imbibe, to drink
up as a sponge, &c.

SOARING [of s'essorer, F.] flying
high, aiming at high things, aspiring.

SOBBING [prob. of Seofian, Sax.
to lament] to catch up the breath short
in weeping or lamenting.

SOCIABLENESS [socialitas, L.] a 
social temper, 
fitness for conversation.

SOCIALNESS [socialitas, L.] a 
social temper, 
fitness for conversation. 

SOCIETY [in Commerce] a contract
or agreement, between two or more
persons, whereby they bend themselves
together for a certain time, and agree
to share equally in the profits and los­
ses which shall accrue in the affair, 
for which the copartnership is con­
tracted.

SOCINIAN, of or pertaining to So­
cinianism.



SOCINIANS [so called of Faustus So­
cinus] a sect in the beginning of the
16th century, who asserted that the
Arians had given too much to Christ, 
in that he was no more than mere man, 
and had no existance before Mary; they
openly denyed the pre-existence of the
word, and that the Holy Ghost was a
distinct person; and maintained that the
Father alone was truly and properly
God, exclusive of the Son and Holy
Ghost; alledging that the name of God
given to Jesus Christ in the scriptures, 
signified no more than that God the
Father had given him a soveraign pow­
er over all creatures, and in consequence
of that privilege men and angels ought
to adore him.

SOCK [soccus, L.] a kind of high
shoe, reaching above the ancle, wore
by the actors in the ancient Drama, in
representing of comic persons.

SOCLE [with Architects] a flat,
square member, under
the bases of pedestals of statues, vases, 
&c. it serves as a foot or stand.

ZOCLE [with Architects] a flat,
square member, under
the bases of pedestals of statues, vases, 
&c. it serves as a foot or stand.

SOCRATICK Philosophy, those doc­
trines and opinions, with regard to mo­
rality and religion, maintained and
taught by Socrates.

SODOMITICALNESS [of sodomiti­
cus, L.] guiltiness of sodomy.

SOFIT [in Architect.] a sort of
ceiling. In ordinary
buildings it is taken for the boards over
the tops of windows, opposite to the
window boards at bottom. In great
buildings it signifies the ceiling or wain
scot of any apartment, formed of cross
beams, or flying corniches, the square
compartments or pannels whereof, are
inriched with sculpture, painting, or
gilding; also the eaves of the Corona
of the capital of a column.

SOFITO [in Architect.] a sort of
ceiling. In ordinary
buildings it is taken for the boards over
the tops of windows, opposite to the
window boards at bottom. In great
buildings it signifies the ceiling or wain
scot of any apartment, formed of cross
beams, or flying corniches, the square
compartments or pannels whereof, are
inriched with sculpture, painting, or
gilding; also the eaves of the Corona
of the capital of a column.

SOFTENING [with Painters] the
mixing of the colours with a pencil or
brush.

SOFT Bodies [with Philos.] such bo­
dies, which being pressed, yeild to the
pressure or stroke, lose their former fi­
gure, and cannot recover it again; and
in this differ from elastick bodies, which
by their own natural power do recover
their former figure.

SOHO [heus, L.] an interjection of
calling to one at a distance, as much as
to say, stop, or stay, or come hither.

A SOJOURN, a sojourning, a tarry­
ing or abiding for a time. Milton.

SOKED [of Socian, Sax.] thorough
wet, drenched, &c. in some liquor.

SOL [the Sun or Apollo] was by the
ancients painted with long, curled yel­
low hair, crowned with lawrel, clad in
a purple robe, on a throne of emeralds, 
holding in his hand a silver bow.

SOL [in Hermetick Philosophy] sulphur.

SOL [in Blazonry] by those that bla­
zon by planets, instead of metals and
colours, is the same as Or, the sun be­
ing the most glorious of all the planets
as gold is of metals.

SOL, or Sou, a shilling, a French coin, 
of copper, mixed with silver, equal to
12 Deniers, and the 20th part of a Livre
a 10th part less in value than the Eng­
lish penny.

The SOLAR System [with Astronom.]
is the order and disposition of the seve­
ral celestial bodies which revolve round
the sun as to the center of their motion, 
viz. the planets and the comets.

SOLICITANTS [in the church of
Rome] are such confessors as solicit
their penitents to any undecent or scan­
dalous practise; against whom divers
bulls have been published by sundry
popes, and especially by Gregory XV, 
which extends itself to any churches of
that communion, and appoints that
those who are convicted of any crime
of this kind, should not only undergo
the usual penance; but be sent to the gal­
lies for 5 or 7 years; and if the of­
fence was very meritorious, the inquisi­
tion might deliver him over to the se­
cular magistrate. They are to be sus­
pended forever from hearing confes­
sions, and to be deprived of their bene­
fices, dignities, &c.

SOL-FAING [in Singing] the naming
and pronouncing the several notes of a
song, by the syllables sol, fa, la, &c.

SOLID [in Physicks] is a body whose
minute parts are connected together, 
so as not to give way or slip from each
other upon the smallest impression.

SOLIDNESS [soliditas, L. solidité,
F.] massiveness, sound­
nese, firmness; the opposite to super­
ficialness: also soundness of judgment;
also gravity in behaviour.

SOLIDITY [soliditas, L. solidité,
F.] massiveness, sound­
nese, firmness; the opposite to super­
ficialness: also soundness of judgment;
also gravity in behaviour.

SOLIDITY [in Architect.] is apply'd
both to the consistence of the ground
whereon the foundation of a building
is laid; and also to a massive of ma­
sonry of a great thickness, without any
cavity in it.

SOLIDITY [in Physicks] is a proper­
ty of matter or body, whereby it ex­
cludes every other body from the place
itself possesses.

SOLIDITY [in Geom.] is the quan­
tity of space contained in a solid body, 
called also the solid content and cube of
it.



SOLIDS [with Gram.] or solid letters
are those which are never liquefied, as
F, and also J and V are, which often
become consonants when they are set
before other vowels in the same sylla­
ble, as in Jupiter Voluntas.

Regular SOLIDS [in Geom.] are such
as are terminated by regular and equal
planes, as the Tetraedron, Exaedron, Oc­
taedron, Dodecaedron and Icosiedron.

Irregular SOLIDS [in Geom.] are all
such as do not come under the definiti­
on of regular solids, as the Sphere, Cy­
linder, Cone, Parallelogram, Prism, Pyra­
mid, Parallelopiped, &c.

SOLIDS [with Anat.] are all the con­
tinuous and continent parts of the body, 
thus stiled in opposition to the fluids or
the parts contained therein.

SOLIFIDIANISM [of solus and fides, 
L.] the doctrines, &c. of the Solifidians
i. e. such who hold, that faith only
without works, is necessary to salva­
tion.

SOLIGENOUS [soligena, L.] begot­
ten of the sun.

SOLITARINESS [of solitarius, L.]
loneliness, a being unfrequented; a so­
litary humour.

SOLITARY Column, a column that
stands alone in any publick place.

SOLITARY-Worm, a worm in the 
intestines, or placed in the Pylorus;
which, tho' it is but one, extends the 
length of the intestines.

SOLITAURILIA [among the Ro­
mans] a sacrifice of a sow, bull, and
sheep, which the censors offered once
every five years, when they performed
the Lustrum, or numbred and taxed the
citizens.

SOLIVAGOUS [solivagus, L.] wan­
dering alone, solitary.

SOLLICITOUSNESS [of sollicitus, 
L.] carefulness, anxiousness.

SOLOECOPHANES [Σολοιχοφανής, Gr.]
that which seemeth to be a solecism or
impropriety of speech, and is not.

SOLSTITIAL Points [in Astron.] are
those points of the ecliptick, wherein
the sun's ascent above the ecliptick and
his descent below it are terminated.

SOLVABLENESS [of solvable, F.]
ability to pay.

SOLUBLE-Tartar [Chymistry] a kind
of chymical salt, prepared by boiling
8 ounces of cream of tartar, and 4 oun­
ces of fixt salt of tartar, in three pints
of water, in an earthen vessel for half
an hour, &c. which being cooled, 
strained, and the moisture evaporated, 
the salt will remain at the bottom.

SOLVENT [in Medicine] the same
as dissolvent.

SOLUTION [in Physicks] the reduc­
tion of a firm body into a fluid state, by
means of some menstruum.

SOMATICA [of σῶμα, Gr. a body]
the science of bodies.

SOMATICAL [somaticus, L. of συ­
ματιχός, Gr.] corporeal, bodily, sub­
stantial.

SOMETHING [from Somþinʒ, 
Sax. with Meta­
physicians] is defined to be the same as
Being, as is to be proved by these axi­
oms which follow: If it be impossible
for the same thing to have essence, and
not to have essence, at the same time: to
be a thing and not to be a thing; to be
something and not to be something; then
essence, Thing and Something are words
synonymous to Being.

SOMEWHAT [from Somþinʒ, 
Sax. with Meta­
physicians] is defined to be the same as
Being, as is to be proved by these axi­
oms which follow: If it be impossible
for the same thing to have essence, and
not to have essence, at the same time: to
be a thing and not to be a thing; to be
something and not to be something; then
essence, Thing and Something are words
synonymous to Being.

SOMEWHERE [Somh&wyn;ær, Sax.] in
some place.

SOMME [in Heraldry]
signifies in French blazonry, 
horned, or a stag's carrying
his horns, and when there
are less than thirteen bran­
ches in them they tell the
number.  F. See the figure.

Image omitted.



SOMMONOCODOM [among the
Siamese] a deity reputed by the Tela­
poins, to be born of a virgin, and to be
the God expected by the universe, who
is said to have written a book of what
the Siamese ought to believe and prac­
tice.

SOMNILOQUACIOUS [of somnus
sleep and loquax] talking or apt to talk
in sleep.

SOMNUS or the god of sleep, is de­
scribed with wings, because of its going
throughout the world with incredible
speed, and seizes upon the eyes of mor­
tals with a silent surprize and a pleasing
softness. Hence it is said to be sent
down from Heaven as the greatest bles­
sing that can come from thence; to ease
all care, and to repair the infirmities
of nature, weakened by labour. The
poets describe his palace with abundance
of beauties, in which he had sons; but
three taken notice of more particularly.
Somnus has two gates, through which
he sends his dreams, one is of horn, by
which they pass that carry truth along
with them; and the other is of ivory, 
whence proceed such dreams as carry
false appearances with them, and are
dangerous to be trusted. Morpheus the
son of sleep is supposed to imitate man­
kind, and all their habits and actions.
Icelos, as he is called by the gods, and 
Phæbeter by mortals, raises the images
of all other animals. Phantaseos des­



cribes the pictures of rivers, mountains
and all other things that are inanimate.

SOMNOLENCY [somnolentia, L.]
drowsiness, sleepiness.

SONABLE [sonabilis, L.] that will
easily sound.

SONNA [among the Mahometans]
their oral law, which contains the
things that Mahomet did and said, which
are not contained in the Alcoran.

These, they say, were at first deli­
vered by tradition and then committed
to writing.

SONSHIP [Sunaſhoðe, Sax.] the
relation of a son.

SOOT [Soote, Sax.] smoak conden­
sed, an earthy, volatile matter, arising
with the smoak by the action of fire, or
condensed on the sides of the chimney.

SOOTHFAST [of Soðfaſt, Sax.]
true. O.

SOOTHSAYING [of ſoð, true, and
ſæʒan, Sax. to say] divining.

SOOTINESS [of ſootiʒneſſe, 
Sax.] the being sooty.

SOOTY [ſooticʒ, Sax.] smeared, 
&c. with condensed smoak.

SOPHI, a title of the king of Persia;
this is the name of the family, as it
should seem, or rather the religion of
Hali and Fatima the daughter of Maho­
met, took to themselves the name or
title of Sophi: they founded a sect called
Imenie to explain the Alcoran, which
is followed by the Persians and several
of the nations of the East-Indies.

To distinguish themselves, they never
wear any silken tuft upon their turbant, 
nor any thing wrought in gold or silver, 
their turban being only of woolen, and
a colour called in Arabick, Sophi.

SOPHISM [sophisma, L. of σοφισμα, 
Gr.] a captious, fallacious reasoning;
an argument false at bottom, and in­
vented only to amuse and embarrass the
person to whom it is used.

SOPHIST a name that at first 
was given to philo­
sophers, and afterwards to rhetoricians, 
and at length to all persons who excel­
led in any art or science, whether ora­
tory, history, law or divinity, and also
to those who were remarkable for their
wisdom; but among us it is usually ap­
plyed to such as spend their time in
verbal niceties or sententious or frivo­
lous meanings, or delusive expressions, 
&c. a quibbler.

SOPHISTER a name that at first 
was given to philo­
sophers, and afterwards to rhetoricians, 
and at length to all persons who excel­
led in any art or science, whether ora­
tory, history, law or divinity, and also
to those who were remarkable for their
wisdom; but among us it is usually ap­
plyed to such as spend their time in
verbal niceties or sententious or frivo­
lous meanings, or delusive expressions, 
&c. a quibbler.

SOPHISTICALNESS [of sophisticus, 
L. sofistique, F. of σοφιστιχος, Gr.] capti­
ousness, deceitfulness, a sophistical qua­
lity.

SOPHISTICATION [in Alchymy,
Chymistry, &c.] is the using indirect
means of whitening copper, gilding
and giving other superficial tinctures, 
or augmenting metals by divers mix­
tures, to delude persons who employ
them.

SOPHRONESTERES [of σωφρονιζω, I
come to my right mind, Gr.] the teeth
of wisdom or eye-teeth, so called; be­
cause they don't come till years of dis­
cretion.

SOPITIVE [sopitivus, L.] causing
sleep.

SOPORAL [soporus, L.] causing sleep.

SOPOROUS [soporus, L.] sleepy.

SOPT [soppen, Du. to sop] bread
soaked in dripping, wine, ale, &c.

SORB Apple [sorbe, F.] the service
berry.

SORBITION, a supping or drinking, 
 L.

SORBON is the first and most conside­
rable college of the university of Paris, 
founded by Robert Sorbon in the reign
of St. Lewis, from whom sometimes
the whole university was named, which
was founded by Charlemaigne at the in­
stance of the learned Alcuinus, who was
one of the first professors there; since
whose time it has been very famous;
particularly for maintaining the rights
of the crown, and the privileges of
the Gallican church, against the in­
croachments of the church of Rome.

This university consists of four facul­
ties, viz. divinity, the canon law, phy­
lick, and the liberal arts; it contains
63 colleges, of which the Sorbon is the
principal, which was rebuilt at the ex­
pence of Cardinal Richelieu, in an ex­
traordinary magnificent manner; con­
taining lodging for 63 doctors, who are
called the society of the Sorbon; those
who are received among them, under
the degree of doctor, are only said to
be of the hospitality of the Sorbon.

SOREL, the young one of the buck's
breed in the third year.

SOREL [ſure, Sax. sour] a sallet
herb.

SORORICIDE [sororicida, of soror, 
and cœdes, L.] the killing of a sister, or
one who kills his sister.

SORREL. See Sorel.

To SORROW [Sarʒian, Sax.] to
be uneasy in mind, to grieve on account
of the sense of some good lost, or some
evil either present or to be expected.

SORRYNESS [of Sariʒneſſe, Sax.]
paltriness, meanness, lowness of value.

SOSIPOLIS [Σὸσιπολις, Gr. the saver
of the city] a heathen deity worshipped
by the Eleenses, from the time they ob­



tained a signal victory over the Arcadi­
ans after a miraculous manner: for
they say, that when both parties were
ready to engage, a woman appeared in
the middle of the camp of the Eleans, 
promising them victory, that she having
a little child in her arms laid it down 
on the ground, and as the Arcadians
approached the Eleans ready to ingage,
pressing upon them saw a prodigious
serpent fighting for his enemies, in the
same place where the woman had
laid down her child, that the Arcadians
being frighted at the horrible sight fled, 
and being pursued by the Eleans were
cut to pieces.

Whereupon the Eleans took this
woman and her son into the number of
their gods, she by the name of Ilithia,
and her son by that of Sosipolis, and 
built temples to them.

SOTERIA [with the Romans] sacri­
fices for health; games and solemnities
observed by the people for the health
and preservation of the emperor.

SOVERAIGN, a piece of gold coin, 
current at 22s. and 6 d. which in the 4th
year of king Edward the VI. was coin­
ed at 24s. a-piece; and in the 6th year
of Edward the VI. at 30 s. and in the
1st year of Henry VIII. (when by in­
denture of the mint, a pound weight of gold of the old standard) was to be coin­
ed at 24 soveraigns.

SOVEREIGNNESS [soveraigneté, F.]
soveraignty, the state or quality of a
sovereign prince.

SOUL [ſa&wyn;ul, Sax.] of man, is a be­
ing created of nothing, incorporeal, and
more excellent than elemental and æ­
thereal bodies. As to its residence in
the body, some hold that she is in all
the body, and wholly in every part of 
it. Others assign her residence in the
brain; the philosophers and divines
in the heart. Aristotle supposes a male
body to receive its soul 42 days after
conception, and a female the 19. Others
suppose it to be infused with the Se­
men itself. Des Cartes is of opinion, it is
infused when it is furnished with all its
organs, that is, after the formation of
the belly, heart, brain, &c. which ana­
tomists say is about the 4th month.

The SOUL, was by the ancients paint­ 
ed in white garments, branched with
gold and pearl, and crowned with a
garland of roses.

Rational SOUL, a divine substance
infused by the breath of God. This is
the principle of reason and understand­
ing, or that in us which thinks and un­
derstands.

Irrational SOUL, is the sensitive soul, 
and which man has in common with
brutes, and which is formed out of the
four elements: This is the principle of
life.

Vegetative SOUL, is that which a
man has in common with plants: This
is the principle of growth, nutrition,
and vegetation.

To SOUND [sonare, L. sonder, F.] to
make or yield a sound or noise.

SOUND [son, F. sonus, L.] is a tre­
mulous and waving motion of the air, 
which, being whirled into certain cir­
cles, is most swiftly waved this way
and that way.

SOUND [by Naturalists] is supposed
to be produced by the subtiler and more
etherial parts of the air, being formed
and modified into a great many smaller
masses or contextures exactly similar in
figure; which contextures are made by
the collision and peculiar motion of the
sonorous body, and flying off from it, 
are diffused all around in the medium, 
and do affect the organ of our ear in one
and the same manner. It appears also, 
that sound is not produced in the air, so
much by the swiftness, as by the fre­
quent repercussions and reciprocal sha­
kings of the sonorous body. Sir Isaac
Newton demonstrates, that sounds are
nothing else but the propagation of the 
pulse of the air, because they arise from
the tremulous motion of bodies. Which
(says he) is confirmed by those great
tremors, that strong and grave sounds
excite in the bodies that are round
about, as the Ringing of Bells, Noise of
Cannons, and the like. He also found
by experiments, that a sound moves
968 feet in a Second of Time,
which Second is but the 60th part of a 
minute. Mersennus computes, that the
diameter of the sphere of a sound, 
heard against the wind, is near a third
part less, than when it comes with the
wind. And yet there is one Phænome­
non of sounds, that is really wonderful, 
that all sounds, great or small, with the
wind or against it, from the same
distance, come to the ear at the same
time. The following properties of
sound have been observ'd, in which
there is a near relation to light. 1. As
light acquaints the eye with figures, &c.
so sound informs the ear. 2. As light
vanishes upon the removal of a radiat­
ing body, so sound perishes as soon as
the undulation of the air ceases. 3. As
a greater light eclipses a less, so a
greater sound drowns a less. 4. As too
great and bright a light is offensive to



the eye, so too great, loud, or shrill a
sound is offensive to the ear. 5. Sound
moves sensibly from place to place, as
light does, but nothing near so swift.
6. Sound is reflected from all hard bo­
dies, as light is. The Reverend Mr.
Derham, by observations and experi­
ments, concludes, that sounds may go
above 700 miles in an hour.

SOUNDING [in Navig.] the trying
of the depth of the water, and the qua­
lity of it, by a line and plummet, or
other artifice.

SOUSED, marinated, or kept in a
sort of pickle; also plunged in water.

SOUSTENU [in Heraldry] is, as it
were, supported by a small
part of the escutcheon, be­
neath it, of a different co­
lour or metal from the
chief, and reaching, as the
chief does, from side to
side, being, as it were a small part of 
the chief of another colour, and sup­
porting the chief, as in the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



SOUTHERLINESS [ſuðerneſſe,
Sax.] the being on or toward the South.

SPACE [spatium, L.] distance either
of time or place, the modes of which, 
are Capacity, Extension, or Duration.

SPACE, if it be considered barely in
length, between any two beings, is the
same idea that we have of distance. But
if it be considered in length, breadth, and 
thickness, it is properly called capacity. 
If it be considered between the extre­
mities of matter, which fills the capa­
city of Space with something that is 
solid, tangible, and moveable, it is called
extension.

SPACE [in Geom.] is the area of any
figure, or that which fills the intervals
or distances between the lines that ter­
minate it.

SPACE [in Mechanicks] is the line
which a moveable body, considered as a 
point, is conceived to describe by its motion.

SPAHI'S [of the Turkish army] a sort
of horsemen, who are paid out of the
Grand Signior's treasury but do not
possess any land as the Zaims and Ti­
mariots do. There are about 12 or
15000 of them in Europe, who are of
two sorts, tho' one called Silahtari or
Siladhors that is armed men with a
yellow cornet; the others Spahi Ogla­
nis or servants of the Spahi's, who
wear a red scarf; these march before
their masters, and are more esteemed
than they, because in a battle where
their masters turned their backs, these
maintained their ground against the
enemy.

They carry a lance in their hand, 
and a scimitar by their side, and a bow
and arrows; some of them wear coats
of mail and head-pieces of the same
colour with their scarves. They are
not distinguished into companies or
regiments, nor do they observe any
other order but following their stan­
dard.

They are obliged to guard the Grand
Seignior's and Grand Vizier's tents on
horseback, as are the Janizaries on foot.

SPALT a white, scaly, shining
stone, frequently used to
promote the fusion of metals.

SPELT a white, scaly, shining
stone, frequently used to
promote the fusion of metals.

SPARENESS, thinness, leanness.

SPARGANION [σπαργάνιον, Gr.] 
sedge or sword-grass,  L.

SPARINGNESS [epargne, F. prob.
of ſpærian, Sax. to spare] parcimony.

SPARGEFACTION a sprinkling,
 L.

SPARKISHNESS, gaity, briskness, 
spruceness, &c.

SPARKLING [of ſparclunʒ, Sax.]
casting out sparks of fire, brilliant, as 
diamonds, &c.

A SPARROW [Hieroglyph.] repre­
sents an happy increase of the year.

SPARS, the spokes of a spinning-­
wheel.

SPASMATICKNESS the being
troubled with the cramp.

SPATIOUS [spatiosus, L.] large, 
wide.

SPACIOUS [spatiosus, L.] large, 
wide.

SPATIOUSNESS [spatiositas, L.]
ampleness.

SPATLING Poppy, a flower.

SPAYADE, a young stag in the
third year.

SPAYING, an operation of castra­
ting the females of several kinds, as
sows, bitches, &c. to prevent any far­
ther conception, and promote their
fattening.

SPEAKABLE, capable of speech.
Milton.

SPECIALNESS [specialitas, L.] spe­
cialty.

SPECIES [among Logicians] is a
common idea, under one more common 
and more general; as the Parallelogram
and the Trapezia are species of the
Quadrilater; and Body and Mind are
species of Substance.

SPECIES [with Rhet.] is a particular
contained under a more universal one.

SPECIES [in ancient Musick] a sub­
division of one of the generals.

SPECIES [in Opticks] the image
painted on the retina of the eye, by the
rays of light reflected from the several
points of the surface of objects; received 



in at the pupilla, and collected in their
passage thro' the chrystalline, &c.

Impressed SPECIES, are such as come
from, within, or are sent from the ob­
ject to the organ.

Expressed SPECIES, are those, on the
contrary, from without, or that are
sent from the organ to the object.

SPECIES [in Commerce] are the seve­
ral pieces of gold, silver, copper, &c.
which, having passed their full prepa­
ration and coinage, are current in pub­
lick.

Decried SPECIES, are such as the
prince has forbidden to be received in
payment.

Light SPECIES, are such as fall short
of the weight prescribed by law.

False SPECIES, are those of a diffe­
rent metal from what they should be.

SPECIES [in Theol.] the appearances
of the bread and wine in the sacrament
after consecration. The species of the
bread are its whiteness, quantity, fi­
gure, &c. of the wine its flavour
quickness, specifick gravity, &c.

SPECIFICALNESS [of specifique,
F. of specifi­
cus, L.] a specifick quality.

SPECIFICKNESS [of specifique,
F. of specifi­
cus, L.] a specifick quality.

SPECIFICK [in Philos.] is that which
is proper of peculiar to any thing; that
characterizes and distinguishes it from
every other thing.

SPECIFICKS [with Physicians] medi­
cines against some particular disease, 
which are of three kinds. 1. Such as
are eminently and peculiarly friendly
to this or that part of the body, as to
the heart, the brain, the stomach, &c.
2. Such as seem to extract, expel, or
evacuate some determinate humour, 
by a kind of specifick power, with
which they are endowed, as Jalap pur­
ges watery humours, Rhubarb bile, &c.
3. Such as have a virtue or efficacy to
cure this or that particular disease, by
some hidden property.

SPECIOUSNESS [speciositas, L.]
fairness of show
and appearance.

SPECIOSITY [speciositas, L.]
fairness of show
and appearance.

SPECULABLE [speculabilis, L.]
which may be discerned.

SPECULARIS lapis, a kind of stone
clear as glass, used in divers countries, 
where it is found, for window-lights.

SPECULATISTS, persons addicted
to speculation.

SPECULATIVENESS [of speculatif, 
 F. of  L.] propenseness to speculation, 
studiousness in observation: Specula­
tiveness is the opposite to Practicalness.

SPECULATORY [speculatorius, L.]
speculative, contemplative.

SPECULUM, any hard body that is
capable of reflecting the sun beams.

SPECULUM [with Astrologers] a ta­
ble us'd after they have erected the
figure of a nativity; containing the
planets, with the cusps and aspects, 
terms, &c. all in their proper places, 
thereby to find out the progression of
the significators to the promittors, and
rectify the estimate time of the scheme
by accidents.

SPEECH [of ſpæce of ſpeacan, Sax.]
is that admirable conveyance of one
man's mind to another, which our
great creator has endow'd the human
species with, and which has several
necessary particulars to be observed, in
order to be clearly and intelligibly un­
derstood; to which purpose gramma­
rians call even the same word by dif­
ferent names, according as it stands
related to a thing, and expresses it
simply, or its bare existence, or some
quality action or passion thereof.

The Latin grammarians have distin­
guished words into eight kinds, and
rank'd them into so many different
classes, as Noun, Pronoun, Verb, Parti­
ciple, Adverb, Conjunction, Preposition, 
Interjection. This division has been
followed, in the general, by most mo­
dern grammarians: But in this they
differ from the Greeks, in that they
make the article one part of speech, 
and rank the interjection with the ad­
verb. But the Latins, who did not
commonly use the article, made the
interjection a part of speech; so that
they agree in the number of the parts, 
tho' not in the division, which is Ar­
ticle, Noun, Pronoun, Verb, Participle, 
Adverb, Preposition, Conjunction. The
moderns, as the French, Italians, &c.
who use the article, very much follow
the Greek division: But the English ge­
nerally follow the Latin division, and
make but little use of the article, ex­
cept the and a, the former of which is
generally used before a noun substan­
tive in the Nominative and Accusative
cases, and a, which is a note of a No­
minative, only when it is by itself.

SPEEKS [with Shipwrights] great and
long iron-nails with flat heads, of dif­
ferent lengths, and some ragged, so
that they cannot be drawn out again, 
used in many parts of a ship for fastern­
ing planks, &c.

SPELL the Missen-Sail [Sea Term]
signifies take it in and peek it up.

SPELLERS, the small beanches
shooting out from the flat parts of a
buck's horn at the top.



To SPEND [in Sea Language] a term
used of a mast of a ship, when it is
broken down by foul weather, it is said
to be spent.

SPENDTHRIFT [of Spenðan and
ðrift, Sax.] a prodigal spender.

SPERMOLOGIST [σπερμολόγος, Gr.]
a gatherer of seed.

SPHÆREOMETRIA [of σφαἴρα and
μετρον, Gr. measure] sphæreometry, or
the art of measuring spherical figures.

SPHÆREOMETRICAL [of σφαῖ­
ρα and
μετριχός, Gr.] of or pertaining to sphæ­
reometry.

SPHÆREOMETRICK [of σφαῖ­
ρα and
μετριχός, Gr.] of or pertaining to sphæ­
reometry. 

SPHÆROIDAL [of σφαῖρα and εἶδος, 
Gr. form] sphærical.

SPHÆR'D, formed or compassed in
a sphere. Milton.

SPHÆRICALNESS [sphæricus, L. of
σφαιριχος, Gr.] roundness like a sphere.

Direct SPHERE [in Astronomy] is 
when both the
Poles of the world are in the Horizon, 
and the equinoctial passes thro' the Ze­
nith; so that the equator and all its pa­
rallels, such as the tropicks and polar
circles, make right angles with the Ho­
rizon, and are divided by it into two
equal parts; so that the sun, moon and
stars ascend directly above, and descend
directly below the Horizon; as at all
places situated just under the equinoc­
tial line.

Fig. 1. represents a right sphere, 
where the axis of the globe coincides
with the horizon: and the equator
E Q. and all its parallels, are equally
divided by the horizon; consequently
those, that enjoy that position, have
their days always equal to their nights.

Figure omitted.



Oblique SPHERE [in Astronomy] is
such a situation of the world, as that
the axis of it inclines obliquely to the
Horizon; one of the Poles being raised
any number of degrees less than 90
above it; and the other depressed as
much below it, so that the sun and
stars ascend and descend obliquely, and
some of them never ascend at all. This
position happens to all places wide of
the equator.

In Fig. 2. which represents an ob­
lique sphere, for the latitude of 50 d.
North, all the Parallels to the equator
are unequally divided by the horizon;
therefore, their days and nights are
unequal, except when the sun is in the
equator, because it is equally divided
by the horizon; therefore, then their
day and night will be equal.

Figure omitted.



A Parallel SPHERE, is that position
of the globe which hath one of the
Poles in the Zenith, and the other in
the Nadir, the equator in the horizon, 
and all the circles, parallel to the equa­
tor, are parallel to the horizon.

In Fig. 3. the equator and horizon
are the same; and it is apparent from
the figure, that all the time the sun is
in the six northern signs, he will still
appear to describe circles above, and
parallel to the horizon of the inhabi­
tants of the north pole; hence it is
called a Parallel Sphere; and all the
other six months he will continue un­
der their horizon.



In each of the preceding figures, 
N. P. represents the north pole, and
S. P. the south, aa and bb the polar
circle, ♋♋ the tropick of Cancer, and
♑♑ the tropick of Capricorn. Ho.
the horizon, and E. Q. the equator, 
and the circle surrounding the whole, 
a meridian; the line that is drawn
from Pole to Pole represents the axis
of the globe.

Figure omitted.



SPHERICAL Geometry, the doctrine
of the sphere; particularly of the cir­
cles described on the surface thereof, 
with the method of projecting the same
on a plane.

SPHERICAL Trigonometry, is the art
of resolving spherical triangles, i. e.
from the three parts of a spherical
triangle given to find the rest.

SPHERICAL Astronomy, that part of
astronomy, which considers the uni­
verse, such as it appears to the eye.

SPHERICITY, the quality of a
sphere, or that whereby a thing be­
comes spherical; sphericalness.

SPHERICKS, the doctrine of the
sphere, particularly of the several cir­
cles described on the surface of it, with
the method of projecting the same in
Plano.

Oblong SPHEROID [with Mathemat.]
a solid figure made from the plane of
the Semi-ellipsis, by a circumvolution
or rolling made about its longest axis.

Prolate SPHEROID, a solid figure
found, as above, the circumvolution 
being about the shortest axis.

SPHINCTER Gulæ [of σφιγχτὴρ, Gr.]
a continuation of the muscle call'd
Pterygopharingæus, which arises from
each side of the scutiformis, or shield-­
like gristle, and passes to a middle line
on the back part of the Fauces.

SPHINX [of σφίγγω, Gr. to perplex
or puzzle] was, according to the poets, 
a monster, the daughter of Echidna
and Typhon, having the face and voice
of a girl, the body like a dog, the tail
of a dragon, and claws of a lion, and
large wings on the back. This infested
the city of Thebes, proposing ænigma­
tical questions to those that passed by;
and, if they could not presently solve
them, it devoured them without mer­
cy: So that the country round about
was forsaken, and no body dar'd to
venture near the city. The oracle, be­
ing consulted, declared, the only way
to be delivered from its tyranny, was
to tell the meaning of the riddle; the
riddle was this, What creature is it that
in the morning walks on four feet, at noon
on two, and in the evening on three?

Creon, the king, having caused it to be
proclaim'd all over Greece, that he
would quit his claim to the crown, to
him that should resolve the question, it
was done by Oedipus, as follows; that
it was man, who in his youth went
upon all fours, as beasts, upon his
hands and feet; and, when arriv'd to
his full age, upright on his feet only;
and, in old age, made use of a staff
instead of a third foot. Upon the re­
solving this riddle, the monster was so
enraged, that in a furious manner it
dash'd its brains out against a rock.
Some say, this Sphynx was a robber, 
and that the ambages of his riddle were
the windings and turnings of a rocky
mountain, where he haunted, robbing
and murdering those that travelled
near Thebes.

SPHINX [Hieroglyphically] was put to
signify Mysteries, and accordingly was
placed at the entrance of all the tem­
ples of Egypt; to intimate, that all the
gods there worshipped were mysteri­
ously represented, and that the common
people could never understand the
meaning of all the images and their pos­
tures without an interpreter. Cadmus
having an Amazonian wife, whose name
was Sphinx, went to Athens, and hav­
ing slain Dracon, seized on the kingdom
and after that took Harmonia, Dracon's
sister, to wife. Therefore when Sphinx
came to know that he had gotten ano­
ther wife, having gained over many of 
the citizens to her by fair words, and
gotten into her hands a great deal of
wealth, and a very swift dog, that Cad­
mus used always to have with him, she
betook herself to a mountain, called
Sphingius, from whence she attacked
Cadmus in a hostile manner, made daily 
ambushments, and destroyed many of
the inhabitants of Thebes. Now they
were wont to call ambushments σφιγμα­
τα, Gr. i. e. riddles, and this grew a
common saying with them, the Argivan
(Grecian) Sphinx, propounding some
riddle, tears us in pieces, and none can
unfold the riddle. Cadmus, he caused
it to be proclaimed that he would give
a great reward to whomsoever should
slay this Sphinx; upon this Oedipus of
Corinth coming thither, who was fa­
mous for martial atchievements, and
having with him a swift horse, and
some of Cadmus's soldiers, ascending the
mountain by night, slew Sphinx. And
hence the able had its original. Palæ­
phatus.

SPHONDYLIUM [with Anat.] a Ver­
tebra or turning joint of the back­
bone,  L.



SPICATED [spicatus, L.] in the form
of an ear of corn.

SPICK and span, intirely, as spick and
span new, entirely new.

SPICOUSNESS [spicositas, L.] a be­
ing spiked like ears of corn; also ful­
ness of ears.

SPIKE [with Botanists] is a body thick
set with flowers or fruits, in such a
manner as to form an acute cone, as in
wheet or barley.

SPIKENARD [spica nardi, L.] a kind
of ear growing even with the ground
and sometimes in the ground, used in
medicine, &c.

SPIKEDNESS [of spicatus, L.] like­
ness to an ear of corn.

SPIKING up a Gun [in Gunnery] is
fastening a quoin with spikes to the
deck, close to the breech of the carria­
ges of the great guns, so that they may
keep firm and close to the sides of the
ship, and not break loose when the ship
rolls.

SPILTH [ſpilð, Sax.] a spilling.

SPILLERS [with Hunters] the small
branches shooting out from the flat
parts of a buck's horn at the top.

SPINIGENOUS [spinigena, L.]
sprung up of a thorn.

SPINNING, is said to have been first
taught in England by Anthony Bonviss, 
an Italian, about the 20th of Henry VII.
at which time began the making of De­
vonshire kersies and Coxal clothes.

SPINOSISM [of Spinosa, born a Jew, 
but he professed no religion, either
Jewish or Christian] the opinion or
doctrine of Spinosa, who, in his books, 
maintains that all religions are only po­
litical engines, calculated to make peo­
ple obedient to magistrates, and to make
them practise virtue and morality, and
many other erroneous notions in phi­
losophy as well as theology.

SPINOSISTS, the followers of Spi­
nosa, or the adherers to his opinions.

SPINSTRY [of ſpinnan, Sax.] the
art of spinning.

SPINY [spinosus, L.] thorny.

SPIRAL [in Architect &c.] a curve
that ascends winding about a cone or
spire, so that all the points thereof
continually approach the axis.

SPIRED [of spira, ltal.] having a
spire or steeple tapering till it comes to
a point.

SPIRIT [spiritus, L.] an immaterial, 
incorporeal being; an intelligence, &c.

SPIRIT [in Metaphysicks] is defined
to be a finite, thinking substance, alto­
gether independent on, and free from
matter, under which angels, dæmons, 
and intelligences, are comprehended;
nor is there any difference between
them, but that the angels are good, 
and the devils evil, &c. All the other
properties, as essence, existence, know­
ledge, power, &c. are common to
both.

SPIRIT of Nitre [in Chymistry] is
made by mingling one part of salt­
petre with three of potters-earth, and
then distilling the mixture in a large
earthen retort, in a close reverberatory
fire.

SPIRIT of Wine, is only brandy recti­
fied once or more times by repeated
distillations.

To SPIRIT away Children, is to en­
tice or steal them away privily from
their parents or relations, in order to
convey them beyond sea, especially to
the plantations in the West-Indies; a
practise some years since too common, 
by persons then called Kidnappers, but
now not so much in use, it being
made death so to do, by ast of parlia­
ment.

SPIRITS [in an animal Body] are a
pure and subtile exhalation, bred and
planted in it, being a thin vapour en­
gendered of the humour, and serving
for a siege to the natural heat of the
body, and is therefore called Natural,
Vital and Animal; and in man, &c. an
air, which exhaling by sweat out of
the pores of the body, refreshes the
spirits, and quickens the members: It is
drawn in by breathing, and distributed
into three portions, the greatest part
of which is carried to the heart and
lungs for the refreshment of the spirits, 
and the forming, or to be the matter of
the voice; the other is conveyed to the
stomach by the Oesophagus, and com­
forts the nourishing odour, by which
the body is sustained fasting; the re­
maining part is attracted to the brain, 
to which it conveys odours, and tem­
perates the animal spirits.

Private SPIRIT, is the particular
view or notion every person has of the
dogmata of faith, and the truths of re­
ligion; as suggested by his own thought, 
and the persuasion he is under, in re­
gard thereunto.

SPIRIT [in Theology] is used by way
of eminence for the third person in the
Holy Trinity; also for the divine
power and virtue, and the communi­
cation thereof to men; also an incor­
poreal being or intelligence.

SPIRITUOSITY fulness of spi­
rits, liveli­
ness.

SPIRITUOUSNESS fulness of spi­
rits, liveli­
ness.



To SPIRT, to issue out with a force, 
as water, &c. out of a squirt, &c.

SPISSATED [spissatus, L.] thicken­
ed.

SPISSATION, a thickening.  L.

To SPIT like butter [with Gardeners]
a term used of old, fat dung, thoroughly
rotted.

SPLANCHNOLOGIST [of σπλαγχνα
the bowels, and λέγω, to tell, Gr.] a
describer or treater of the bowels.

SPLENDIDOUS [splendidus, L.]
glorious, magnificent, noble, stately.

SPLENDENCY [of splendens, L.]
shiningness.

SPLENETICKNESS [of spleneti­
cus, L. of
σπληνετιχὸς, Gr.] the being sick of the
spleen; also spitefulness, &c.

SPLENICKNESS [of spleneti­
cus, L. of
σπληνετιχὸς, Gr.] the being sick of the
spleen; also spitefulness, &c.

SPLENICK [splenicus, L. σπληνιχὸς, 
Gr.] of, or pertaining to, or good against
the spleen.

A cut SPLICE [with Sailors] is when
a rope is let into another with as much
distance as one pleases, so as to have it
undone at any time, and yet be strong
enough.

A round SPLICE, is when the end of
a rope is so let into another, that they
shall be as firm, as if they were but one
rope.

SPONDAULES [of σπονδὴ, a liba­
tion, and ἀυλὴ, Gr. a flute] a player on
the flute, or such like wind instrument, 
who during the offering of the sacri­
fice, performed some suitable air in the
priest's ear, to prevent the hearing of
any thing that might distract him or
lessen his attention.

SPONTANEOUS [in the Schools] a
term applied to such motions of the
body and mind, as we perform of our­
selves, without any constraint.

SPOON-Wort, an herb.

SPORTFUL [of disporto, Ital.] full
of play, &c.

SPORTIVE [of se disportare, Ital.]
diverting.

SPORTIVENESS, divertingness.

SPOTLESS [prob. of sport, Teut.]
without spot, innocent.

SPOTLESNESS, unspottedness, in­
nocency.

SPOTS in the Nails, those in the top
of the nails are said to represent things
past, those in the middle things pre­
sent, and those at the bottom future
events; white spots are supposed to
presage felicity, and blue ones misfor­
tunes, &c. though this conjecturing of
future events by these spots, seems to
be but a superstitious imagination, yet
it has antiquity on its side; and Cardan
affirms, that he had discovered a pro­
perty in himself, of finding in them
some signs of most events that ever
happened to him.

SPOUSAL [of espousailles, F. spousa­
lia, L.] an epithalamium or wedding-­
song. Milton.

SPOUS'D [of espouser, F.] espoused.
Milton.

To SPRAIN, to contort or over­
stretch the tendons.

SPRAWLING [some derive it of
spricel, Du. a grass-plot] lying stretch­
ed out at length and breadth.

The SPRING [Hieroglyphically] was
represented by a loving and fawning
dog.

SPRING [in Physicks] a natural facul­
ty or endeavour bodies have to return
to their first state, after having been
violently put out of the same, by com­
pressing, bending, or the like, called
elasticity or elastick force.

SPRINGER of an arched Gate [in
Architect.] the mouldings that bear the
arch.

SPRINGANT [in Heraldry] a term
applyed to any beast in a posture ready
to give a spring or leap.

SPRINGINESS [of ſprinʒan, Sax.]
a quality in some bodies, when they are
pressed or altered by a pressure or
stroke, to recover their former figure.

SPRUCENESS, neatness, gaiety in
dress.

SPUMID [spumidus, L.] foamy, 
frothy.

SPUMINESS [of spuma, L.] frothi­
ness.

SPUMOSE [spumosus, L.] full of
froth.

SPUMOUS [spumosus, L.] full of
froth.

SPUMY [spumeus, L.] frothy.

A SPUNGE [spongia, L.] a kind of
sea fungus or mushroom, found adher­
ing to rocks, shells, &c. on the sea-­
shore.

To SPUNGE, to wash or rub a thing
over with a spunge; also to clear a gun
from any sparks of fire remaining in it
with a gunner's spunge.

Pyrotechnical SPUNGES, are made
of the large mushrooms or fungous ex­
crescences growing on old oak, ashes, 
firs, &c. these are dryed in water, 
boiled and beaten, then put in a strong
lye made of salt-petre, and afterwards
dryed in an oven. These make the
black match or tinder brought from
Germany, for striking fire with a flint
and steel.

SQUALID [in Botan. Writ.] a term
applied to colours when they are not
bright, but look faded and dirty,  L.



SQUALIDNESS [of squaliditas, L.]
foulness, nastiness, slovenliness.

SQUALLEY, inclinable to sudden
storms of wind and rain.

SQUAMOSENESS [of squamosus, L.]
scaliness.

SQUAMOUS Root [with Botan.] is
that kind of bulbous root which con­
sists of several coats involving one ano­
ther, as the onion, &c.

SQUANDERER, a lavish spender.

Geometrical SQUARE, a compart­
ment frequently added on the face of a
quadrant, frequently called the Line of
Shadows and Quadrat.

SQUARE Battle or Battalion of Men, 
is one that hath an equal number of
men in rank and file.

SQUARENESS [of equarri, F.] a
square form.

To SQUAWL [schassen, Teut.] to
bawl out.

SQUINSY [squinantia, L.] the squi­
nancy.

S. S. Societatis socius, i. e. fellow of
the society,  L.

S. S. S. stratum super stratum, i. e.
layer upon layer,  L.

S. T. an indeclinable term, chiefly
used to command silence.

St. Saint.

A STAB, a wound made by a thrust
with some pointed weapon.

To STABLISH [stabilire, L.] to esta­
blish.

To STACK [prob., of stacca, Ital.] to
pile up wood, hay, &c.

STAD-Holder a governor or re­
gent of a pro­
vince in the United Netherlands.

STADT-Holder a governor or re­
gent of a pro­
vince in the United Netherlands.

A STAG [Hieroglyphically] lying on
its side, and chewing its meat, repre­
sented a learned and accomplished
man. The horns of a stag are an
hieroglyphick of the power, authority, 
and dignity unto which such deserve to
be promoted.

STAG, is an emblem of swiftness
and fear, also of a faint-hearted person.

STAGNANCY [of stagnans, L.] a
standing in a pool.

STAINANT Colours [in Heraldry]
are tawney and murrey.

STAIRS [ſtaʒæreſ, Sax.] steps to
ascend by.

STALACTITÆ [of σταλάγμος, Gr.
a drop or dropping] a sort of stony, 
sparry icicles that hang down from the
tops or arches of grotto's, caves, or
vaults under ground, as also from the
roofs and chapiters of pillars that are
built over hot springs or baths.

STALK [with Botan.] is defined to
be part of a plant receiving the nou­
rishment from the root, and distributing
it into the other parts, with which it is
clothed, not having one side distinguish­
able from the other. The stalk of a
tree is called the trunk; in corn and
grass, it is called the blade.

A naked STALK, one which has no
leaves on it.

A crested STALK, one which has
furrows or ridges.

A winged STALK, one which has
leaves on both sides.

A striped STALK, one that is of two
or more colours.

STALKING [of ſtælcan, Sax.]
walking softly, stately, and strutting.

STALLED [q. fatted in a Stall] fat­
ted.

STAMINA [with Anat.] are those
simple, original parts of an animal bo­
dy which existed first in the embryo, or
even in the seed; and by the distinction, 
augmentation, and accretion of which, 
the human body, at its utmost bulk, is
supposed to be formed by additional
juices.  L.

STAMMERING [of ſtamor, Sax.]
stuttering in speech.

STANCHNESS [prob. of Stanðan, 
Sax.] substantialness, firmness, &c.

STANDARD, for gold coin in Eng­
land, is 22 caracts of fine gold and 2 ca­
racts of copper; and the French and
Spanish gold are nearly of the same
standard.

STANDARD, for silver coin, is 11
ounces and 2 penny weights of fine sil­
ver, and 18 penny weights of copper
melted together, and is called Ster­
ling.

STANFILES, cut paste-boards thro'
which card-makers colour court-cards.

STAPHYLE [στάφυλη, Gr.] a disease
in the roof of the mouth, when the
Uvula grows black and blue like a
grape-stone.

STAR [with Moralists] is an emblem
of prudence, which is the rule of all
virtues, and leads us to worthy actions, 
enlightening us through the darkness
of this world.

STAR [in Heraldry] has usually five
beams or points, and so in Blazonry; if
there be no more, there is no need to
mention the number; but, when they
are more, the number must be ex­
pressed, and the star must never have
above sixteen.

STARLESS, without stars, Milton.

STAROST, a polish dignitary, who 
enjoys the honour and revenue of a
Starosty, which is an estate conferred



upon him by the king at his pleasure, 
on condition of paying into the king's
exchequer a fourth part of the revenue
for furnishing the arsenals, providing ar­
tillery and subsists the polish horse or
gendarmery.

STAR-PAV'D paved with stars.
Milton.

STARRINESS [of ſteorricʒ­
neſſe, Sax.] fulness of stars.

STARRY [ſteorricʒ, Sax.] full
of stars.

Falling STARS, are fiery exhalations
enkindled in the air, compleying there­
with in their motion, and called shoot­
ing stars, which, when their more sub­
tile parts are burnt away, fall down, 
because the weight of the viscous and
earthy matter, exceeds the weight of
the air that lies under it.

Fixed STARS, are so called, because
they always keep the same distance
among themselves, and not because
without motion; for they have two
motions; one motion is in common
with the whole Heaven, which is from
east to west, on the poles of the world, 
which carries all the stars along with
it, and this revolution is made in 24
hours; the other motion is from the
west to the east, on the poles of the e­
cliptick, which is very slow; for they
do not make their revolution, according
to that famous astronomer Tycho Brahe, 
in less than 25816 years. These stars
are divided into several constellations.
It is the general opinion, that the fixed
Stars are bodies that shine by their
own light. The region of Heaven
where these Fixed Stars are placed, is
that which is called the Firmament.
They are believed not to be contained
in the same spherical superficies, nor
any of them so low as the planets, for
this reason, because there is no paral­
lax nor difference of aspect to be found, 
nor have they ever eclipsed any planets.

STARTLY [of ſtẏran, Sax. star­
ren, Teut.] apt to start up as some hor­
ses, &c.

STATE [êtat, F. status, L.] condi­
tion; also pomp.

The natural STATE of Man [among
Moralists] being considered with rela­
tion to other men, is that which affects
us upon the bare account of our uni­
versal kindred.

The Adventitious STATE of man 
[among Moralists] is that which obliges
men by the authority of some human
constitution.

A STATE of Peace, is when men, 
live quietly together without the dis­ 
turbances of violence or injuries, and
voluntarily discharge their mutual du­
ties, as matters of necessary obligation.

A STATE of war, is when men are
mutually engaged in offering and repel­
ing injuries, or endeavouring forcibly
to recover their dues.

STATERA, a sort of balance, other­
wise called the Roman balance; a
gold-smith's balance; also troy weight, 
 L.

STATICKS [with 
Physicians] a kind
of epilepticks, or persons siezed with
an epilepsy.

STATION [among the Ancient
Christians] the fasts of Wednesday and Fri­
day which many observed with much
devotion.

STATIONARINESS [of stationari­
us, L. stationaire, F.] settledness in
place.

STATIONERS , they 
consist of a master, two 
wardens, 30 assistants, 
227 on the livery, their 
fine is 20 l. and there 
are two renter-war­
dens, for which the 
fine is 24 l. Their arms 
are sable on a chevron, between three
bibles Or, a falcon rising between two
roses Gules, seated of the second in chief
a glory, in the shape of a dove expanded
Proper. Their hall is near the south
end of Ave Mary Lane.

Image omitted.



STATIVE [stativus, L.] of or belon­
ging to a garrison, fort or station.

A STATUE [statua, L.] a standing
image made of metal, stone, wood, &c.

Achillean STATUE, a statue of some
Hero, so named, because of the great
number of statues Achilles had in all
the cities of Greece.

Allegorical STATUE, one which, 
under a human figure or other symbol
represents something of another kind, 
as a part of the earth; as a person in a
West Indian dress for America, a season
an element, &c.

Curule STATUES, are such as are
represented in chariots drawn by Bigæ
or Quadrigæ, i. e. 2 or 4 horses.

Equestrian STATUE, one represent­
ing a king or some famous person on
horse-back, as that of king Charles I. at
Stocks Market, &c.

Greek STATUE, is one that is naked
and antique; the Greeks having com­
monly so represented their deities and
heroes, their Athletæ and youths ge­
nerally performing their exercises of
wrestling naked.



Hydraulick STATUE, any figure
placed as an ornament to a fountain or
grotto, or which does the office of a
jet d'eau, &c.

Pedestrian STATUE, one on foot, as
that of king Charles in the Royal Ex­
change, or in the Privy Garden.

Roman STATUE one clothed after
the Roman manner, as that of king
Charles II. in the middle of the Royal-­
Exchange.

STAYDNESS, soberness, graveness, 
seriousness.

STEALTH [of ſtealan, Sax.] the
action of theft; also privacy.

STED [in the German language] 
a city, as Ingolstad.

STAD [in the German language] 
a city, as Ingolstad.

STOLD [in the German language] 
a city, as Ingolstad.

STEELY [of staaligh, Dan.] consist­
ing of steel.

STEEL-Yards, a balance for weigh­
ing things of various weights by one
single weight, as from one single pound
to 112 pounds.

STEERINGS, a sort of gold coin.

STEGANOGRAPHIST [of στεγονός, 
private, and γραφω to Write, Gr.] an ar­
tist in private writing.

STELLEER, a balance consisting of
an iron beam with notches, a hook
at one end, and a poise or weight, used
by butchers and others that keep mar­
kets, called the Roman beam.

STELOGRAPHY [στηλογραφία of στήλη
a bound, stone or pillar, and γραφα, a 
writing] an inscription or writing on a
pillar, &c.

STENOGRAPHICAL, pertaining to
secret writing.

STENT [ſtent, Sax.] a stint, a li­
mit, a bound.

STEP-Father, [ſteop-faðer, of
ſteop, Sax. rigid, severe and faðer]
a father in law.

STERCORACEOUS [of stercoratus,  
L.] of or belonging to dung, stinking.

STERCORATED [stercoratus, L.]
dunged, manured with dung.

STERCUTIUS [according to the
poets] the son of Picus and Fatua, who
was deified for the good he did to man­
kind, by shewing them how to improve
their land by dunging and manuring it.

STEREOGRAPHICAL [of στερεός so­
lid, and γράφω, Gr. to describe] accord­
ing to the art of Stereography, or re­
presenting solids on a plane.

STEREOMETRICAL [of στερεος and
μετρεώ, Gr. to measure] pertaining to
the art of Stereometry.

STEREOTOMY [στερεοτομια of στερεος
and τομή, Gr. a cutting] the art or sci­
ence of cutting solids or making sections
thereof, as in profiles of architecture
in walls, &c.

STERILNESS [sterilitas, L. sterilité, 
F.] barrenness, &c.

STEWARDSHIP [of ſti&wyn;arð and
ſcip, Sax. a term denoting office] the
office of a steward.

STICKINESS [of ſtican, Sax.] apt­
ness to stick.

To STICKLE [of ſtican, Sax.] to
be zealous for a person or affair.

STIFNESS [ſtifneſſe, Sax.] an
unbending quality, a coagulation of the 
matter with dry glue, that it will not
bend but break.

STIGMA'S are sometimes those in­
cisions, made in their flesh by the hea­
thens in honour of some false deity;
which marks also were sometimes
made with an hot iron, and sometimes
with the points of fine needles, which
were afterwards filled with a fine pow­
der of various colours; also some of
the Eastern Christians, and the pilgrims
at Jerusalem use it, by having a crucifix
&c. made upon their arms, breast, 
&c.

STIGMATA [στίγματα, Gr.] certain
marks anciently imprinted upon the
Roman soldiers, when listed.  L.

STIGMATA, notes or abbreviations
consisting only of points disposed various
ways, as in triangles, squares, crosses.

STIGMATA [among the Francis­
cans] the marks or points of our Savi­
our's wounds in the hands, feet, and
sides, impressed by him on the body of
St. Francis, as they say,  L.

STIGMATA [in Natural History]
points or specks seen on the sides of the
bellies of insects, particularly the Sphon­
dilium,  L.

STIGMATICALNESS [of stigmaticus
L. στιγματιχός, Gr.] infamousness, the
being branded with a mark of infamy.

STIGMATISED [stigmatisé, F. of
στιγματίζα, Gr.] branded with a note of
infamy.

STILE originally signified the instru­
ment or iron pen with which the anci­
ents used to write; but it is now appro­
priated to the manner of an author's
expressing himself. Discourse is the
character of the soul; men's words
paint out their humours, and every
one follows that stile to which his natu­
ral disposition leads him; and thence
proceeds the difference in stile among
them that write in the same language;
and there is as much difference in stile
as in complexion.

A diffused STILE, is one that is so
slowing, that how much soever the au­



thors may have affected brevity, yet
one half of what they have said may
very well be spared. Rhetoricians
have reduced stiles to three kinds, the
sublime, the middle and the low.

A Sublime STILE [among Rhetorici­
cus] is one that admits of nothing mean
or low. If there be a thousand things
said well, if there be any allay of a low
character among them, they will not
gain the character of the sublime. The
expressions must every where be noble, 
and answer the high idea that we
would give of the subject. There are
some bold writers that are very fond
of the sublime, and to that degree, that
they mix something great and prodi­
gious in every thing they write, with­
in examining whether there be any
foundation for it in reason. The sub­
lime stile consists in metaphors and fi­
gures which are used with the utmost
liberty. Virgil's Æneids are in the sub­
lime, he talks of nothing but battles, sie­
ges, wars, princes and heroes; every
thing is magnificent, and the sentiments, 
words, and grandeur of the expression
answers to that of the subject. There
is nothing in the poem that is common.
If he is under a necessity to make use of
any thing that is ordinary, he does it
by a particular turn, by some trope, as
for bread he puts Ceres, the goddess of
corn.

The middle STILE [among Rhetori­
cians.] There is no great need of
saying much in the description of this
manner of writing or stile, because the
very name of it indicates that it is the
mean between the sublime and the low
or simple. Virgil's georgicks are writ­
ten in the middle stile; as he is not in
them talking of battles, and the esta­
blishment of the Roman empire, he
does not use the sublime; so, on the
other hand, his matter not being so
humble as that of his Bucolics, he does
not descend so low. The matter in
these four books being a search after
the hidden causes of nature, and a dis­
covery of the mysteries of the Roman
religion, in which he mingles philoso­
phy, history, and divinity together; he
keeps the middle way between the
majesty of his Æneids and lowness and
simplicity of his Bucolics.

The low or simple STILE [among
Rhetoricians.] It is a maxim that
words must agree with things: The
simple Stile is to speak as we commonly
speak: Virgil's Bucolics are in the simple
Stile, that is, a stile that does not re­
quire pomp and ornaments of elo­
quence, nor a magnificent dress, but
yet it rejects the vulgar ways of expres­
sion, and requires a dress that is neat
and decent. But, tho' this stile is cal­
led simple, it does not mean that it is
vile and contemptible. But in the
same kind of stile some are softer, some
stronger, some florid, and some severe.

A soft STILE, is when things are
said with so much clearness, that the
mind is at no trouble to understand
them: to effect this, every thing that is
difficult must be made easy, all doubts
prevented, and nothing must be left for
the reader to guess at. Every thing
ought to be said within the necessary
compass. The sweetness of cadence
and number does admirably contribute
to the softness of stile, and, when it is
tender and delicate, it is extraordinary.
The learned recommend Herodotus in
the Greek, and Titus Livius in the La­
tin, as patterns of this soft stile.

The strong STILE is directly opposite
to the soft Stile, it strikes the mind, 
and renders it very attentive. In order
to give a stile this strength, the expres­
sions must be concise, signifying a great
deal, and raising several ideas. Au­
thors in Greek and Latin abound in
strong expressions; and none of the
modern languages have so great a share
as the English; the French cannot pre­
tend to this concise and strong manner
of expression.

A florid STILE depends in part on
the soft stile, and tropes and figures are
the marks of it. And Quintus Curtius's
history is reckoned an example of it.

The severe STILE is what allows not
any thing that is not absolutely neces­
sary; it grants nothing to pleasure, suf­
fers no ornaments, banishes all warmth
and emotion, and, when it is carried
too far, becomes dry.

A cold STILE [among Rhetoricians]
is, when orators make a bad use of
figures; for, tho' they take never so
much pains to move the auditory, they
are heard with a certain coldness and
indifference; as if a man weeps without
a cause, men laugh at his tears; if he
be angry without occasion, his anger is
look'd upon to be either folly or mad­
ness; but when both are well grounded, 
the persons present fall into the same
passions.

There may be also another distinction of
STILES, in respect to Arts; the STILE
of the Orator, the Historian, the Dog­
matical, and Poetical.

The STILE of an Orator should be
rich and abounding; for that being



design'd to enlighten obscure or doubt­
ful truths, it will be necessary that all
the clouds and obscurities, which hide
them, should be remov'd and dispers'd.

The abounding of the stile consists
not in a multitude of epithets and sy­
nonymous words and expressions, but in
such rich expressions as will make the
reasons more valuable, and not dazzle
the eyes and understanding. And
though tropes are serviceable on this
occasion, they ought never to dazzle
with a false lustre, or impose falshood
on the auditory for truth. The orator
should never be cold or indifferent in
any part of his oration; a person can­
not argue well, if he is unconcern'd for
the success of his argument; when the
heart does not agree with the senti­
ments, the discourse will languish. The
cadence and number of this stile ought
from time to time to be periodical.
The roundness of periods charms the
ear, and, affects the mind; and, when  
the periods are pronounced majestically, 
they add weight to the matter.

2. The Historical STILE.  History
requires eloquence as much as any
other subject whatsoever. The chief
qualifications are perspicuity and bre­
vity, and brevity contributes to the
perspicuity. It should be curt, free
from long phrases and periods, which
keep the mind in suspence. It ought
not to be interrupted with extraordi­
nary figures, by those great emotions
which raise passion, because the histo­
rian ought not to shew any.

On some occasions he may let his
eloquence shine, because he is some­
times under an obligation to report
what was said, as well as what was
done; and, where speeches also neces­
sary, figures will be also necessary to 
describe the passions of those that speak
them.

3. The Dogmatick STILE relates to
the instructing in mathematical, phy­
sical, or ethical, &c. arts and sciences. 
In this stile there is no occasion for fi­
gures to move the auditor; for it is
suppos'd he comes with a mind prepar­
ed to learn. No body is much con­
cern'd for the truth or falsity of a geo­ 
metrical proposition; therefore the
stile ought to be simple, dry, and with­
out any motions, by which the orator
is inspired by passion. In Physicks and
Ethicks, the stile ought not to be too
dry, as in Geometry and Algebra; be­
cause the matter is not so crabbed, tho'
they ought not to go too far out of the 
severe character.

4. The Theological STILE should be
clear and solemn, harmonious and
majestical.

STINGINGNESS [of Stinʒan, Sax.
to sting] a stinging quality.

A STINKINGNESS [Stinc and neſ­
ſe, Sax.] a stench, an unsavoury smell, 
exhaling trom a corrupted or other
body, ungrateful to the nose and brain.

STIPTICALNESS [of stipticus, L.
of Στυπτιχὸς
Gr.] a stiptick quality, or aptness to stop
blood, &c.

STIPTICKNESS [of stipticus, L.
of Στυπτιχὸς
Gr.] a stiptick quality, or aptness to stop
blood, &c.

STOCKS [Stocceſ, Sax. a device
for the punishment of offenders] were
ordered to be set up in every ward in
the city of London, in the reign of K.
Edward IV. in the year 1476, by Wil­
liam Hampton, mayor.

STOCK of an Anchor, that piece of
wood which is fastened to the beam
hard by the ring, and serves to guide
the flook of the anchor, to fall right
to fix into the ground.

STOCKS [with Ship-wrights] a frame
of timber and large posts made on
shore, to build frigates, pinnaces, &c.
whence, when a ship is building, she is
said to be upon the Stocks.

To STOCK [of Stoccan, Sax.] to put
in a stock or bank; also to put into a
stock, as a barrel into a gun stock, &c.

STOICALNESS [of Στοιχοι, Gr. the
Stoick philosophers] holding the prin­
ciples of the Stoicks, that wise men
ought to be free from passions, and
that all things were governed by fate.

STOLIDNESS [stoliditas, L.] foo­
lishness.

STOLEN [of Stelan, Sax.] taken
away feloniously.

STOMACHICKNESS [of stomachicus, 
L. of στομάχιχὸς, Gr.] a stomachick qua­
lity or helpfulness to the stomach.

STOMACHLESS [of stomach, and
leaſ, Sax.] wanting an appetite; also
not apt to resent.

STONE-blind, quite blind.

STONE-dead, quite dead.

STONINESS [Stanincʒneſſe, 
Sax.] fulness of stones, or a stony qua­
lity.

STONING to Death, a punishment
among the Jews, &c. for offences of
a very heinous nature, and such as the
law condemned to death, without
naming the particular kind or manner
of putting to death.

The condemned person was led out
of the city, an officer marching before
him with a pike, upon the top of
which was a piece of linnen cloth, to
cause it to be seen a far off, to give 



notice to any person who would come
and say any thing in the persons vindi­
cation. But if no one came he was
conducted to the place of execution, 
and having been exhorted to acknow­
ledge and confess his crime, then the
witnesses beginning, he was put to
death; by throwing stones at him.

Sometimes he was brought to a steep
place, from whence one of the wit­
nesses threw him, and the other rolled
a large stone upon him, which if it did
not kill him, they threw stones at him
till dead.

STONY [Stanuncʒ, Sax.] full of
stones.

The STONY, stoniness, Milton.

To go to STOOL, to discharge the
excrements.

STOOR-JUNKARE [among the
Laplanders] a deity, who was as it
were the lieutenant to their god Thor;
who, as they believ'd had all beasts
under his command, both tame and
wild.

Every family had a Stoor-Junkare, 
whom they worshipped on the top of
some rock, or near some cave on the
banks of some lake.

The form of this deity was a stone, 
that had some resemblance of a head, 
found among the rocks on the banks of
lakes.

The Laplanders are great admirers
of this stone, supposing it to be made
by the express command of Stoor-Jun­
kare. The second represents his wife, 
the third his son or daughter, and all
the rest his servants or maids.

The common sacrifice offered to him
is a beast, something resembling one
of our stags, and after this victim has
been sacrificed, they place its horns and
bones in a semi-eircle behind the fi­
gure of their idol.

STOPPAGE [of stopper, Dan.] a
stay, a hindrance, obstruction, &c.

STORIER, the fry or young fish;
also young swine bought to be fatted.

A STORK [Storc, Sax. of στοργὴ, 
Gr. natural affection] a bird of passage, 
and towards winter goes into warmer
climates; it usually builds its nest on
the tops of the highest trees, towers or
other high edifices. Its beak and legs
are long and red, its plumage is white, 
only the extremity of its wings are
black, and some parts of its head and
thighs. Its food is snakes, frogs, and
the like vermin. It sits 30 days, and
lays but 4 eggs.

A STORK [Hieroglyphically] repre­
sents piety, because it is said to be very
grateful to its parents in their old age.
This bird is the true emblem of a son, 
for whatsoever duty a son owes to his
father, they are all found in the stork;
for the young help the old, and furnish
them with food when they are not able
to provide for themselves; and thence, 
the Psalmist calls it הדסה of דסת, Heb.
mercy, on account of its compassionate
and tender disposition to wards its pa­
rents.

A STOUT Commander [Hieroglyphic.]
was represented by a lion, which is a
creature bold, courageous, strong and
terrible to all other animals.

STOW [stol and stold, with the
Celtoscyth Germ. signifies a city; and
hence stadt, signifies a place, seat, or
city; and ystol, Brit. a seat or stool;
hence Bristol or Bristow, Baxt.

STRAIT [Strac, Sax. étroit, F.]
direct, without bendings or turnings.

STRAIT [in Architect.] a term used
by bricklayers, to signify half, or more
or less than half, a tile in breadth and
the whole length. They are commonly
used at the gable ends, where they are
laid at every other course, to cause the
tiles to break Joint, as they term it;
that is, that the joints of one course
may not answer exactly to the joint of
the next course, either above or below
it.

To STRAITEN [rendre a l'estroit, 
F.] to make strait without bendings,
&c.

STRAITENED [prob. of Streclice, 
Sax.] made strait; also under a streight
or difficulty.

STRAITWAY [etroitment, F.] im­
mediately, presently, forthwith.

To heel a STRAKE [Sea Term] a ship
is said so to do, when she inclines or
hangs more to one side than another, 
the quantity of a whole plank's breadth.

STRAKED [of streke, Du.] having
strakes or lines.

STRAND-Runner, a bird about the
size of a lark, with a square bill some­
thing like a rasp, that runs on the rocks
of Spitsberg, and feeds on worms.

STRANGLING [strangulatio, L.]
choaking, suffocating.

STRAW built, made or built with
straw. Milton.

STREAKED [ʒeſtricen, Sax.]
marked with streaks.

STREAMING [of ſtreamian, Sax.]
running or issuing out in a stream.

STREAMING [in Heraldry] a term
us'd to express the stream of light dart­
ing from a comet or blazing star, vul­
garly called the beard.



STRENÆ [with the Romans] pre­
sents made out of respect on New-Years
Day; and as an happy augury for the 
ensuing year.

To STRENGTHEN [of ſtranʒian, Sax.] to make strong.

STRENIA [among the Romans] a 
goddess as they imagined, that presided 
over New-Years gifts, who had a
temple in the Via Sacra.

STRETCH forward the Halliards 
[Sea Phrase] signifies to deliver along
that part, which the men hale by, into
the hands of those that are ready to
hoise or hale.

STRETCHING [of aſtrecan, Sax.
strecher, Dan.] drawing out in length, 
reaching out.

STRIATED [with Architects] cham­
fered, channelled, as cockles, scollops, 
and other shell-fishes are.

To STRIKE a Mast [Sea Term] is to 
take it down.

To STRIKE down into the Hold [Sea 
Term] is to lower any thing into the 
hold by tackles or ropes.

STRIKE the Top-Sails upon the Bunt 
[Sea Term] is when they are only let
down mast high.

STRIKING-Wheel [of a Clock] is the
same that some call Pin-wheel, on ac­
count of the pins that are set round the
rim of it. In clocks that go eight days,
the second wheel is the Striking-wheel 
or Pin-wheel; and, in those that go six­
teen days, the first or great wheel is 
commonly the Striking-wheel.

STRIKING-Sail [Sea Phrase] is the 
letting down or lowering the top sails;
so that, when one ship strikes to an­
other in this manner, it is a compliment
of respect and submission, or a token of
yielding in an engagement.

STRIKING [with Sailors] is when a
ship, coming upon shoal water, beats
upon the ground.

STRIKING [in the King's Court]
whereby blood is drawn; the punish­
ment whereof is, that the criminal
shall have his right hand struck off in a
solemn manner; for striking in West­
minster-Hall, while the courts of justice
are sitting, the punishment is imprison­
ment for life, and forfeiture of estate.

STRINGENTNESS [of stringens, L.]
a binding quality.

A STROAKING [ſtracunʒ, Sax.]
a drawing the hand over.

STROAKING, a method of cure
that some people have given into in
certain diseases, being a stroaking or
rubbing the part affected with the
hand.

STROLLING [q. rolling, or of rou­
ler, F.] rambling.

STRONGULLION, the strangury.

STROPHE [Στροφὴ of Στρέφω, Gr. to
turn] the first of the three members of
a Greek lyrick ode or poem; the se­
cond being the Antistrophe that answers
to it; and the third is the Epode that
answers to neither, but is answered in
the next return.

STROPHE, is also the first turn of
the chorus or choir of singers in a tra­
gedy, on one side of the stage, answer­
ing to the Antistrophe on the other.

STRUCK [ʒieſtricuð, Sax.] hit, 
stricken.

STRUMATICKNESS [of strumati­
cus, L.] a being troubled with strumous
humours or swellings, that generally
appear in the glandulous or kernelly
parts.

STRUNG [of ſtrenʒ, Sax. a
string] having strings or upon strings.

STRUT [with Carpenters] the brace
which is framed into the ring-piece and
principal rafters.

STRUTHIOCAMELUS [Στρουθιο­
χὰμηλος, Gr.] the ostrich or estridge,
a large fowl which will digest iron.

STUC [stucco, Ital.] a composition
of lime and marble powdered very fine, 
used in making figures and other orna­
ments of sculpture.

STUDDED [of ſtuðu, Sax.] set
with studs, imbossed.

STUFFING [q. d. filling with Stuff, 
i. e. matter] filling.

STUM, is a pure wine kept from
fretting, by often racking it into clean
vessels, and strongly scented, i. e. new
matched; by which means it becomes
as clear or clearer than other wine, 
preserving itself from both its lees by
precipitation of them.

STUMMED [spoken of Wine] so­
phisticated.

STUNG [ſtunʒen, Sax.] wounded
or hurt with a sting.

STUNNED [ʒeſtuneð, Sax.] stu­
pified by a blow, deafened by a noise, 
&c.

STUPIFIERS, stupifying medicines, 
the same as Narcoticks.

STUPEFACTIVENESS [of stupe­
facio, L.] a stupifying quality.

STUPOR [stupens, F.] a being stu­
pified, astonishment; also a numbness
occasioned by any accidental bandage
which stops the motion of the blood
and nervous fluids, or by a decay of the
nerves, as in the palsy.

STUTTERING [of stutren, Teut.]
speaking hastily and brokenly.



STYLE [in Musick] the manner of
singing and composing.

STYLE, a kind of point or bodkin, 
with which the ancients wrote on
plates of lead, wax, &c.

STYLE [with Surgeons] a long steel
instrument, which goes diminishing to
ward one end.

STYLE [in Language] is a parti­
cular manner of deliver­
ing a man's thoughts in writing, agree­
able to the rules of Syntax.

STILE [in Language] is a parti­
cular manner of deliver­
ing a man's thoughts in writing, agree­
able to the rules of Syntax.

The Sublime STYLE, is that which
consists in magnificent words and sen­
tences, which by its noble boldness
ravishes the hearers, and extorts even
admiration from the unwilling.

The low STYLE is that com­
monly used
in smaller and humbler works, as let­
ters, dialogues, and common discourse.

The simple STYLE is that com­
monly used
in smaller and humbler works, as let­
ters, dialogues, and common discourse.

The intermediate STYLE is that
which
partakes of the magnificence of the
sublime, and the simplicity of the low.

The equable STYLE is that
which
partakes of the magnificence of the
sublime, and the simplicity of the low.

A loose STYLE, is a style which, 
wanting articles, numbers, &c. fluctu­
ates here and there, being not connect­
ed or hung together.

A dry jejune STYLE, is one destitute
of ornament, spirit, &c.

Laconick STYLE [so called of Laco­
nia, a city of the Lacedæmonians] a con­
cise style, comprehending a deal of mat­
ter under a few words.

Asiatick STYLE, a style which is
very diffusive and prolix, or where a­
bundance of words are used to express
a little matter; so called of the people
of Asia, who affected redundancies.

STYLITES [so called of Simon Sty­
lites, a famous anchorite in the fifth
century, who first took up his abode on
a column six cubits high; then on a 2d
of 12 cubits; then on a 3d of 22 cubits;
and at last on one of 36 cubits, where
he lived several years] a kind of solita­
ries, who spent their life on the tops of
columns, to be the better disposed for
meditation.

STYLOCHONDROHYOIDÆUS [of Στύλος χόνδρος, and ὐοειδες, Gr.] a
muscle of the Os Hyoides, arising from
the Styloid process, and is inserted into
the cartilaginous appendix of the Os
Hyoides.

STYLOHYOIDÆUS [of Στύλος and
ὐοειδὲς, Gr.] a muscle of the Os Hyoides, 
that arises by a round tendon, from
near the middle of the Processus Styli­
formis, and is inserted into the basis of
the Os Hyoides, the use of which is to
put the bone of the tongue on one side, 
and a little upward.

STYPTICKNESS [of stypticus, L. of
Στυπτιχὸς, Gr.] an astringent or bind­
ing quality.

STYX [Στύξ of Στυγεῖν, Gr. to hate, 
fear, and be sorrowful] the second ri­
ver of Hell, which runs nine times
round it; the parent of Victory, who
having been favourable to Jupiter in
his wars with the giants, Styx, by her
means, attained so great credit, that
the gods used to swear by its water;
and when any of the gods were suppo­
sed to have told a lye, Jupiter sent Iris
to fetch a golden cup full of the Stygian
water, which the god was to drink, and
if he proved perjured, he was to be de­
prived of his Nectar and Ambrosia for a
twelve month, and to lie silent and in
a lethargy during that time, and not to
be admitted to the banquets or coun­
cils of the other gods for nine years;
or, as others say, they were deprived
of their Nectar and their Divinity for
100 years. Styx is said to have been
fountain of Arcadia, whose waters
were venomous, and of so strange a
quality, that no vessel of metal would
hold them, and nothing but the hollow
of an ass's or mule's foot. It is said, 
Alexander the Great was poisoned with
it, and that it was carried to him in
an ass's hoof.

SUADA [with the Romans]
the goddess of persua­
sion, he that is called Pitho by the
Greeks.

SUADELA [with the Romans]
the goddess of persua­
sion, he that is called Pitho by the
Greeks.

SUASIVENESS [of suasorius, L.]
aptness to per­
suade.

SUASORINESS [of suasorius, L.]
aptness to per­
suade.

SUBALTERNATE [of subalternus, 
L.] succeeding by turns.

SUBALTERNATELY [subalterna­
tim, L.] successively.

SUB-ASTRINGENT, something a­
stringent, but a little astringent.

SUB-BRIGADIER are
under
officers in an army, appointed for the
ease of those over them of the same
name.

SUB-LIEUTENANT, &c. are
under
officers in an army, appointed for the
ease of those over them of the same
name.

SUBCARTILAGINEOUS [subcar­
tilagineus, L.] under the gristles.

SUBCONTRARY Posi­
tion [in Geom.] is when two
similar triangles are so
placed, as to have one com­
mon angle at the vertex, 
as B, and yet their bases
not parallel, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



SUBCLAVICULAR Vein [with
Anat.] a branch of the Vena Cava, or
hollow vein, which runs under the
neck-bone.



SUBCUTANEOUSNESS [of subcu­
taneus, L.] the lying under the skin.

SUB-DECUPLE Proportion [in Ma­
themat.] is the reverse of Decuple pro­
portion.

SUBDIVISION, a dividing the parts
of a thing already divided.

SUBDIVISIONS [in Milit. Affairs]
are the lesser parcels into which a re­
giment is divided in marching, being
half the greater divisions.

SUBFULGENT [subfulgens, F.]
shining a little.

SUBHASTATION [among the Ro­
mans] a particular way of selling con­
fiscated goods under a spear or pike set
up for that purpose; a port-sale or out­
cry.

SUBJACENT [subjacens, L.] lying
under.

SUBJECT [of a Syllogism] one of
the terms of a proposition, the other
being called the attribute,

SUBJECT [in Poetry] is the matter
treated of, the event related or set in a
fine view, and inriched with orna­
ment.

SUBJECT [in Physicks] the substance
or matter to which accidents or quali­
ties are joined.

SUBJECTNESS, liableness; also
subjection.

SUBITANEOUSNESS [of subita­
neus, L.] suddenness, hastiness.

SUBLAPSARY, of or belonging to
the principles of the Sublapsarians.

SUB-LIEUTENANT, an officer in
regiments of Fusileers, where there are
no ensigns, having a commission, as
youngest lieutenant, and pay only as
ensign, but takes place of all ensigns, 
except the guards.

SUBLIMATED [sublimatus, L. sub­
lime, F.] raised to an height.

SUBLIME, is an adjective, but is
sometimes used with the article the, as
a substantive for sublimity; as to the
stile of writing we say, suth a piece has
much of the Sublime in it. See Stile.

The SUBLIME [in Discourse] signi­
fies something extraordinary, which
strikes the soul, and makes a word ra­
vish and transport.

SUBLUAR [sublunis, of sub and
lunaris, L.] under the orb of the moon.

SUBLUNARINESS [of sublunis, L.
sublunaire, F.] the being under the
moon.

SUB-MARSHAL, an under mar­
shal, an officer in the Marshalsea, who
is deputy to the chief marshal of the
king's house, commonly called the
Knight-Marshal, and has the keeping of
the prisoners there.

SUBMERSED [submersus, L.] plung­
ed under water, &c.

SUBREPTION, the action of ob­
taining a favour from a superior by
surprize, or by a false representation.

SUBREPTITIOUS [surreptitius, 
L.] a term
applied to a letter, license, patent, or
other act, fraudulently obtained of a
superior, by concealing some truth, 
which, had it been known, would
have prevented the concession or
grant.

SURREPTITIOUS [surreptitius, 
L.] a term
applied to a letter, license, patent, or
other act, fraudulently obtained of a
superior, by concealing some truth, 
which, had it been known, would
have prevented the concession or
grant.

Conventional SUBROGATION [in
the Civil Law] a contract whereby a
creditor transfers his debt, with all the
appurtenances of it, to the profit of a
third person.

Legal SUBROGATION [in the Ci­
vil Law] is that which the law makes
in favour of a person, who discharges
an antecedent creditor, in which case
there is a legal translation of all rights
of the ancient creditor to the person of
the new one.

SUBSERVIENTNESS [of subservi­
ens, L.] serviceableness, usefulness.

SUBSISTENT [subsistens, L.] sub­
sisting.

SUBSTANCE [in Physicks] is a thing
which is conceived in the mind, as
subsisting by itself, and as the subject of
every thing that is conceived of it.

Compleat SUBSTANCE [in Metaphy­
sicks] is a substance that is bounded in
itself, and is not attained to the in­
trinsical perfection of any thing else, 
as God, an Angel, a Man, &c.

Incompleat SUBSTANCE [in Meta­
physicks] is a substance that is attained
to make another being perfect, and is
a part of some compound, as the Soul, 
a Hand, a Vein, &c.

Material SUBSTANCE [in Metaphy­
sicks] is a body that is composed of
matter and form, and is the object of a
particular science, as Natural Philoso­
phy.

An immaterial SUBSTANCE [in Me­
taphysicks] is a substance void of matter
and form, and is the object of Pneuma­
ticks.

SUBSTANTIALITY [of sub­
stantialis,
L. substantiel, F.] solidness, firmness,
wealthiness, serviceableness.

SUBSTANTIALNESS [of sub­
stantialis,
L. substantiel, F.] solidness, firmness,
wealthiness, serviceableness.

SUBSTITUTE [in Pharmacy] is a
drug or medicine that may be used in
the stead of another, or that will sup­
ply the place of another, of like vir­
tue not to be had.

SUBSTITUTION [with Grammar.]
is the using of one word for another,



or a mode, state, person, or number
of a word for that of another.

SUBSTITUTION [in the Civil
Law] is the disposal of a testator, 
whereby he substitutes one heir to an­
other, who has only the usus fructua­
rius, but not the property of the
thing left him.

To SUBSTRACT. See Subtract.

To SUBTEND [subtendere, L.] to
extend or draw underneath.

SUBTENSE [in Geometry] a right
line opposite to an angle, 
supposed to be drawn be­
tween the two extremities
of the arch which measures
that angle; or, it is a
right line drawn within a
circle at each end, and bounded by the
circumference, cutting the circle into
two unequal parts, to both which it is
subtended, as A is the subtense to the
arks B and C.

Image omitted.



SUBTERRANE, subterraneous.

SUBTERRANEOUSNESS, the qua­
lity of being underneath the earth.

SUBTILE [in Physicks] signifies ex­
ceeding small, fine, and delicate, such
as the animal spirits, &c. the effluvia
of odorous bodies, &c. are supposed
to be.

SUBTILIZATION [in Chymistry]
the dissolving or changing a mixed
body into a pure liquor, or into a fine
powder.

SUBTILENESS [subtilitas, L.] sub­
tility.

SUBTRACTION, a subtracting or
taking off or from,  F. of  L.

Simple SUBTRACTION [of Integers]
is the method of taking one number
out of another of the same kind, as
pounds, ounces, yards, &c. out of
pounds, ounces, yards, &c.

SUBVERTER, an overturner, a per­
verter,  L.

SUBURBICARY [suburbia, L.] a
term apply'd to those provinces of Italy
which composed the ancient diocess or
patriarchate of Rome.

SUCCAGO [with Apothecaries] any
juice boiled or thickened with honey or
sugar into a kind of hard consistence, 
otherwise called Rob and Apochylisma.

SUCCEDANEUM [in Pharmacy] a
medicine substituted in the place of a­
nother first prescribed, upon account of
the difficulty of getting some of the in­
gredients.  L.

SUCCESSION [with Philos.] an idea
gained by reflecting on that train of
ideas constantly following one another
in our minds, when awake.

SUCCESSION [in Law] signifies a
right to the universality of the effects
left by a person deceased.

SUCCESSION ab intestato. [in Law]
is the succession a person has a right
to, by being next of kin.

A Testamentary SUCCESSION [in
Law] is that which a person comes to, 
by virtue of a will.

SUCCESSION in the direct Line [in
Law] is that which comes from ascen­
dants or descendants.

Collateral SUCCESSION [in Law] is
a succession which comes by uncles, 
aunts, cousins, or other collaterals.

Abandoned SUCCESSION [in 
Law]
is a burdensome or vexatious one, 
which no body will accept of.

Jacent SUCCESSION [in 
Law]
is a burdensome or vexatious one, 
which no body will accept of.

SUCCESSIVENESS [of successif, F.
successivus, L.] the coming one after
another.

SUCCESSUS [among the Romans] a
deity whom they implored for the ob­
taining a happy event of any affair they
took in hand.

This deity was represented by the
figure of a man, holding in one hand a
cup, in the other an ear of corn, and
the stalk of a poppy. The cup inti­
mated the joy procured by this deity;
the ear of corn, the profit and advan­
tage he brought along with him, and
the poppy was an emblem of that re­
pose and quietness, he was supposed to
administer.

SUCCOTH Benoth [תונב תובס, Heb.
i. e. the tabernacle of daughters] an
idol of the Babylonians, the Babylonian
Venus, supposed to be the Venus Melitta;
and it is not improbable but that the
name Venus may have taken its origi­
nal from תונב Benoth, daughters. The
temple of this goddess was built in such
a manner, that there were several pri­
vate apartments or retreating places.
The women (as historians say) were
obliged by the law of their country, 
once in their life time, to expose them­
selves in honour of the goddess; and
the strangers, in requital for the kind
entertainment they had received, offer­
ed mony to the goddess. This relation
is partly confirmed by Justin, who says, 
it was accounted a kind expression of
civility among the Babylonians, to grant
liberty to their guests to lie with their
wives.

SUCCOUR [in Military Affairs] is
an enterprize made to relieve a place, 
that is, to raise the siege, and force the
enemy from it.



SUCCOURLESS [of secours, F. of
succurrere, L.] without succour, help, 
or relief.

SUCCULENTNESS [of succulentus, 
L.] juiciness.

SUCCUMBENCY [of succumbere, L.]
a sinking or fainting under.

SUCKLING [of ſuccan, Sax.] a
sucking child; also giving suck.

SUDORIFEROUSNESS [of sudorifer, 
L.] aptness to cause sweat.

To be in the SUDS [of Geſoðen, Sax.
to boil] to be embarrassed in some un­
successful transaction or affair.

SUFFERABLENESS [of sourfrir, F.]
capableness of being endured.

SUFFERANCE [in ancient Customs]
a delay or respite of time the lord
granted his vassal for the performance
of fealty and homage, so as to secure
him from any fœdal seizure.

SUFFERING [with Logicians] is the
fifth of the categories; as to be beaten, 
to be broken, to be warmed, &c.

SUFFICIENTNESS [sufficientia, L.
suffisance, F.] a being sufficient, ability,
capacity.

SUFFUSED [suffusus, L.] poured
out.

SUGAR-Royal, the matter of it ought 
to be the finest refined sugar; which
being melted with a weak chalk water, 
is sometimes allomed, to prevent the
lime from reddening it, and is three
times clarified, after which it is tran­
sparent.

SULLAGE, the filth of drains or
sinks of the kitchen or house, water­
courses, ditches, &c.

SULLIED [of souillé, F.] soiled, tar­
nished.

SULPHUR, a fat, unctuous, mine­
ral substance, fusible, and inflammable
by fire, and not dissolvable or capable of
being mixed with water
 L. and is expressed by
one of these characters.

Two images are omitted.



SULPHUR [with Chymists] their se­
cond hypostatical or active principle; a
liquid, clammy substance, which soon
takes fire, and rises up like oil after
distillation, called also Sulphur
Philosophorum, and is express'd
by this character.

Image omitted.



SULPHUR vivum, is so called as it is
taken out of the mine, a kind of grey­ 
ish, argillous clay, which ea­
sily takes fire, &c.  L. It is
expressed by this character.

Image omitted.



Flower of SULPHUR, is the purest
and finest part of sulphur, gained by
evaporating sulphur by sublimation.

Mineral SULPHUR, a kind of hard, 
earthy, bitumen, of a shining yellow
colour, a strong stinking smell, easily
taking fire and dissolving.

Magistery of SULPHUR is sul­
phur
dissol­
ved in a sufficient quantity of water, 
with salt of Tartar, and precipitated
by means of the spirit of vinegar or
some other acid.

Milk of SULPHUR is sul­
phur
dissol­
ved in a sufficient quantity of water, 
with salt of Tartar, and precipitated
by means of the spirit of vinegar or
some other acid.

Balm of SULPHUR is sul­
phur
dissol­
ved in a sufficient quantity of water, 
with salt of Tartar, and precipitated
by means of the spirit of vinegar or
some other acid.

Black SULPHUR [with
Chymists] is expressed by this
character.

Image omitted.



SULPHUREOUSNESS [of sulph­
reus, L.]
a sulphureous quality.

SULPHUREITY 
[of sulph­
reus, L.]
a sulphureous quality.

SULPHURINE, of or pertaining to, 
like or of the quality of sulphur.

SULTANESS, the Grand Seignior's
consort.

SULTANE [in Confectionary] a su­
gar work made of eggs, sugar, and fine
flower.

SUM [with Mathemat.] the quantity
arising from the addition of two or
more magnitudes, numbers, or quan­
tities together.

SUMBRIERO [in Spain, &c.] a ca­
nopy of state held over princes or great
persons, when they walk abroad, to
skreen them from the sun.

SUMMATORY Arithmetick, is the
art of finding the flowing quantity
from the fluxion, and so is the same
with the calculus integralis.

SUMM'D [spoken of Birds] com­
pleatly feathered or fledged. Milton.

SUMMER [in Architecture] a large
stone, the first that is laid over columns
and plaisters in beginning to make a
cross vault, or that stone, which being
laid over a piedroit or column, is made
hollow to recieve the first haunce of a
plat-band.

SUMMER [in Carpentry] a large
piece of timber, which, being supported
on two stone-peers or posts, serves as a
lintel to a door, window, &c.

SUMMITS [with Florists] are those
little bodies that hang upon slender
threads in the middle of the flower;
they contain a prolifick dust, which is, 
analagous to the male seed in animals.

SUMMUM bonum, [i. e. the chief
good of human nature] this was for
many ages the subject of philosophical
controversies, and Varro reckons up no
less than 288 different opinions about
it, that is, wherein it did consist. Some
define it to be that which by its enjoy­
ment renders truly and compleatly hap­
py. This is distinguished by schoolmen



into that which is simply and adequately
so, and beyond which there can be no
other, which they call felicitas compre­
hensorum; and into a lesser and subordi­
nate one, which is called felicitas via­
torum, L.

SUN [ſunna, Sax.] the efficient, il­
luminator, and ruler of the day, a glo­
rious planet, the spring of light and heat.

The SUN [Hieroglyphically] was re­
presented sitting upon a lion with rays
of light about his head, and a bundle
of ears of corn in one hand, to express
the power and goodness of that lumi­
nary, in causing all the fruits of the
earth to bring forth their increase; and
sometimes by a beautiful young gal­
lant, standing half naked in a ship neat­
ly trimmed, supported on the back of
a large crocodile, with flames of fire
round about it. The swiftness of the
sun's motion was represented by a wing­
ed horse. Sometimes they represent­
ed the sun by a Phænix, and also by a
hawk, because of its quick sight. The
sun was an universal God, adored in
all parts of the world.

SUN. The ancient Saxons worship­
ped the sun, This idol was placed in
a temple, and there adored and sacrifi­
ced to, for that they believed the sun
in the firmament did correspond with, 
or co-operate with, or act in this idol.
The form was as in the figure annexed.
It was made in the form of a half na­
ked man, set upon a pillar, his face, 
as it were, brightened with gleams of
fire, and holding with both his arms
stretched out, a burning wheel upon
his breast; the wheel signifying the
course which he runs round about the
world, and the fiery gleams and bright­
ness, the light and heat wherewith he
warms and comforts all things that
live and grow. The worship of this
idol being performed on a Sunday, hence
that day takes its name.

Image omitted.



SUN. Macrobius endeavours to shew, 
that all the deities of the poets, were
only the sun under a disguise. The
poets agree that Apollo is the sun, nay
the sun is the same as Bacchus; he says
that the sun was called Apollo, while he
was in the upper regions, or in the day
time, and Liber Pater in the night, 
while ho was running thro' the lower
hemisphere.

He also endeavours to prove that
Mars is the sun, as well as Mercury, 
Æsculapius, Hercules, Jupiter Ammon, 
&c.

The Assyrians worshipped the sun, as
being their only sovereign deity; and, 
hence it is, that they called his name
Adad, that is, only. The Mithra of the
Persians was likewise the sun, by which
name he was worshipped by the Romans.

The SUN and Moon [Hieroglyphically]
were by the ancients used to represent
eternity, because the heathens thought
they were without beginning and end.

To SUNDER [of ſunðrian, Sax.]
to divide or part asunder.

SUN-Dew, a plant, otherwise called
last-wort, moor-grass, and red-root.

SUN-Flower, a plant bearing a fine, 
large, yellow flower with radiated
leaves, or spreading like the rays of the
sun.

SUN-Foils, sun-flowers.

SUNNINESS [ſunnicʒneſſe, Sax.]
a being exposed or lying open to the
sun beams.

SUNNIS, a Mahometan sect, opposite
to the Schiais, that is, to the Persian
Mahometans; they maintain that Abube­
ker was the lawful successor of Maho­
met, who was succeeded by Omar, then
Osman, and last of all Mortus Ali, who
was son-in-law to Mahomet, they affirm
that Osman was secretary to Mahomet, 
and a person of great capacity, that the
3 others were not only persons of an



extraordinary understanding; but like­
wise great soldiers, and that they made
way for the doctrine of Mahomet no
less by the sword than by argument
and persuasion; therefore the sect of
the Sunnis, chose rather to maintain
their religion by force of arms than
reasoning.

SUOVETAURILIA [among the
Romans] a
sacrifice, wherein they offered three
victims of different kinds, a bull, a ram
and a boar.

SOLITAURILIA [among the
Romans] a
sacrifice, wherein they offered three
victims of different kinds, a bull, a ram
and a boar. 

SUPERABLENESS [of superabilis, 
L.] capableness of being overcome or
surmounted.

SUPERABUNDANTNESS [supera­
bundantia, L.] very great plenty, super­
fluity, excess.

To SUPERANNUATE [superannu­
are, L.] to admit into the number of
superannuated persons.

SUPERCELESTIAL [supercælestis, 
L.] above the heavens or heavenly
bodies.

SUPERCHARGED [in Heraldry] sig­
nifies one figure charg'd or borne upon
another, as a Rose upon a Lion, a Lion
upon an Ordinary, &c.

SUPERCILIOUSNESS [of supercilio­
sus, L.] affectedness of carriage, sour­
ness or severity of countenance.

SUPER-EXCELLENCY ex­
tra­
ordinary excellence.

SUPER-EXCELLENTNESS ex­
tra­
ordinary excellence.

SUPERFICIAL Content, the mea­
sure of any thing on the superficies or
outside.

SUPERFICIAL Fourneau [in Fortif.]
a wooden chest or box with bombs in
it, and sometimes fill'd only with pow­
der, buried under ground, to blow up
a lodgment, rather than an enemy shall
advance; the same as Caisson.

SUPERFICIALIST, one who does
what he does superficially, or who has
but a superficial knowledge of things.

A Rectilinear SUPERFICIES, is one
comprehended between right lines.

A Curvilinear SUPERFICIES, is one
that is comprehended between curve
lines.

A Plane SUPERFICIES, is one which
has no inequality, but lies evenly
between its boundary lines.

A Convex SUPERFICIES, is the ex­
terior part of a spherical body.

A Concave SUPERFICIES, is the in­
ternal part of an orbicular body.

SUPERFINENESS [of super-fin, F.]
the greatest fineness.

SUPERIMPREGNATION, a second
conception, after one has conceived
before,  L.

SUPER-INCUMBENT, lying or
leaning above, over or upon.

SUPER-INJECTION, an injection
upon or after a former injection, a se­
cond injection.

SUPERIORNESS [superioritas, L.
superiorité, F.] superiority.

SUPERNE, a term used of our ma­
nufactures, to express the superlative
fineness of a stuff.

SUPERNUMERARINESS [of super
and numerarius, L.] the exceeding the
number fixed.

SUPERSTITION, a vain fear of
the deity; also idolatrous worship, an
idle or silly opinion or foolish belief
about divine worship, or about omens
or signs of bad luck; over niceness, 
scrupulousness, &c.  F.

SUPERVACANEOUSNESS [of su­
pervacaneus, L.] needlesness.

SUPERVENIENT [superveniens, L.]
coming unlook'd for.

SUPINATION [with Anat.] the
action of the supinator muscle, or the
motion whereby it turns the hand, so
that the palm is lifted upwards towards
heaven.

SUPPEDANEA [with Physicians]
plaisters applied to the feet, call'd also
Supplantalia,  L.

SUPPER [of souper, F.] the last meal
at night.

SUPPERLESS, without a supper.

SUPPLEMENTAL [of supple­
mentum, L.]
of, or pertaining to a supplement.

SUPPLEMENTORY of supple­
mentum, L.]
of, or pertaining to a supplement.

SUPPLIANTNESS [of suppliant, F.]
the act of petitioning humbly.

SUPPLICATION [among the Ro­
mans] a solemn procession decreed by
the senate in honour of a general, who
had obtain'd a considerable victory, on
which occasion the temples were set
open, and publick thanksgivings were
offered for the success of the general
or emperors and a pompous procession
of the senators, walking in their robes
to the temples of their gods, where
they offered sacrifices and feasted the
populace; the whole city bearing a
part in the solemnity, giving thanks for
the victory.

At first these festivals lasted but a day
or two; but in time they were en­
larged upon extraordinary occasions, so
as to last for 50 days together.

SUPPORTERS [of Coat Armour] are
those animals that noble­
men carry to support their
shields; as quadrupedes, 
birds, or reptiles, as lions, 
leopards, dogs, unicorns,



eagles, griffins, and dragons. To per­
sons under the degree of baronets, it
is not permitted to bear their arms sup­
ported.

Image omitted.



SUPPOSAL, a supposition.

SUPPOSABLENESS [of supposer, F.
suppositum, L.] capableness of being
supposed.

SUPPOSITION [in Musick] is the
using two successive notes of the same
value, as to time, the one of which, 
being a discord, supposes the other a
concord.

SUPPOSITITIOUSNESS [of suppo­
sititius, L.] counterfeitness.

SUPPRESSION [in the Customs] the
extinction or annihilation of an office, 
right, rent, &c.

SUPPRESSION [with Gram.] any
omission of certain words in a sentence, 
which yet are necessary to a full and
perfect construction.

SUPPURATIVENESS [spoken of
Swellings] a ripening quality.

SUPRALAPSARY [of supra and lap­
sus, L. the fall of Adam] one who holds
that God has resolved, by an eternal
decree, to save some and damn others, 
without regard to the good or evil
works of men.

SUPREMENESS [supremitas, L. sup­
premacie, F.] the greatest height, ut­
mostness.

SURCHARGED [surchargé, F.] o­
vercharged.

SUR ANCREE [in He­
raldry] is a cross sur an­
chrée, i. e. double ancho­
red, is a cross with double
anchored-flukes at each
end, as in the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



SURD Root, a root whether square, 
cubick, &c. that cannot be extracted
perfectly out of a rational number.

SURDNESS [surditas, L. surdité, F.]
deafness, a defect of hearing.

SURMONTE [in Her.]
is a chief that has another
very small chief over it of
a colour or metal, and
therefore is said to be sur­
mounted, as having another over it;
see the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



SURMONTE, is also
used for bearing of one
ordinary upon another, as
in the figure, a pile sur­
mounted of a chevron.

Image omitted.



SURFACE [q. d. super faciem, L. i. e.
upon the face] the bare outside of a
body, which consider'd by itself, is a
quantity extended in length and breadth
without thickness, and is the same as
superficies.

SURNAME, a name added to the
proper or baptismal name, to denomi­
nate a person of such a family.

SURPRISINGNESS [of surprisé, F.]
the surprising nature, quality, &c.

SURRENDRY [surrendre, obsol. F.]
a delivering up.

SURROYAL, [with Sportsmen] the
broad top of a stag's horn, with the
branches or small horns shooting out
of it.

SURSENGLE, a long upper girth
to come over a pad or saddle, especially
such as are used by carriers to fasten
their packs on their horses.

SURSOLID Place [in Conick Sections]
is when the point is within the circum­
ference of a curve of an higher gen­
der than the Conick Sections.

SURVEYORSHIP [of survoir, obsol. 
F.] the office of a surveyor.

SUSCIPIENCY [of suscipiens, L.]
capableness of receiving.

SUSPENSION [with Rhet.] is when
the orator begins a discourse in such a
manner, that the auditor does not
know what he would say, and is ren­
dred attentive, by expecting something
that is great. The apostle Paul gives
a good example of this figure: The Eye
has not seen, the Ear hath not heard, 
neither hath it entred into the Heart of
Man, to conceive what God hath prepared
for them that love him.

SUSPENSION ab officio, is that
whereby a minister is, for a time de­
clared unfit to execute the office of a
minister.

SUSPENSION a beneficio, is when a
minister, for a time, is deprived of the
profits of his benefice.

SUSPENSION of Arms [in War] is a
short truce the contending parties agree
on, for the burying the dead, the wait­
ing for succours, or their masters or­
ders, &c.

SUSPENSION [in Mechanicks] as
the points of suspension in a balance, 
are those points in the axis or beam
whereon the weights are apply'd, or
from which they are suspended.

SUSTAINABLE [of sustinere, L.]
that may be upheld, &c.

SUSTENTATION [of soutenir, F. 
of sustinere, L.] maintenance, subsi­
stence.

SUTABLE, agreeable to or with.

SUTABLENESS, agreeableness to
another thing.

Conservative SUTURE [in Surgery] a
kind of suture anciently practised,



whereby the lips of large wounds
where there was a loss of substance, 
were hinder'd from receding too far.

Intertwisted SUTURE [in Surgery]
a suture wherein the needles are left
sticking in the wound with a thread
wound round them.

Dry SUTURE [with Surgeons] is a
suture made with small pieces of lea­
ther, or linnen indented like the teeth
of a saw, so that the teeth may fall one
within another, the whole row being
closed, being first spread with some
proper plaister to make it stick.

Incarnative SUTURE [in Surgery] is
so named, because it rejoins the edges
of a wound and keeps them close to­
gether, by means of a thread run across
them with a needle, which causes them
to grow together and incarnate.

Restrictive SUTURES [in Surgery]
were formerly used to stop the flux of
blood in large wounds, where any  
considerable vessels were cut.

SWALING [of S&wyn;elan, Sax.] 
wasting or blaring
away, as a candle.

SWEALING [of S&wyn;elan, Sax.] 
wasting or blaring
away, as a candle.

A SWALLOW [S&wyn;ale&wyn;e, Sax.] a 
bird. The notion of its being unfor­
tunate to kill swallows seems to owe its 
original to the Romans superstition, who 
had appropriated these birds to their 
Penates or houshold gods, and therefore 
would not injure them; and also be­
cause swallows are the messengers of 
the spring, upon which account the 
Rhodians had a solemn song to welcome 
in the swallows.

A SWALLOW [Hieroglyp.] signifies 
justice and equity, because it is said to
distribute its meat equally to all its
young ones.

SWAMPINESS, bogginess, marshi­
ness.

A SWAN [Hieroglyph.] represented
an old musician, because it is said of
this bird, that, when it is at the eye of
its death, it takes its farewel of the
world by singing melodious tunes.

A SWAN is also accounted a symbol
of a hypocrite, because as they have
fine wings and cannot fly, so they have
feathers white to perfection, yet their
flesh is black; so hypocrites appearing
outwardly very virtuous, yet are in­
wardly very wicked.

SWANNIMOTE [of S&wyn;anʒ, a swan, 
and ʒemote, Sax. an assembly] a court
held about forest affairs, three times a
year, before the verdurers as judges.

A SWAP, an exchanging, a trucking, 
or bartering.

SWARF-Money, the payment of an
half-penny yearly to the lord of the
manour of Lodebrook, in the county of
Warwick, which was to be performed
in the following manner. The person
must go before the rising of the sun, 
and walk three times about the cross, 
and say, the Swarf-Money; and then
take a witness, and lay it in the hole, 
but must look well to it that his wit­
ness do not deceive him, for if he
makes not proof of the payment, he
forfeits thirty shillings and a white bull.

SWEATING [of ſ&wyn;etan, Sax.]
perspiring through the pores.

SWEATING Sickness, a kind of
plague, with which England was visited
in the year 1551, which proved very
fatal to great numbers of people.

It seemed to be a pestilent fever, but
not seated in the veins or humours, 
there not appearing any carbuncle, 
purple, or livid spot, nor any thing of
the like nature.

This distemper first began to appear
in Shrewsbury about the middle of
April, but continued to spread itself all
over the kingdom till October. It was
but of short continuance to those who
were siezed with it; for if any took
cold with it, he died in about three
hours, and if they slept, as they were
generally inclined to do they died in
about six hours; and the rest generally,
either died or recovered in about nine
or ten hours at most.

That which was very remarkable
in this distemper was, that the young,
strongest and apparently most healthy
were siezed with it, so that very few,
very young or very aged persons were
afflicted with it, and what was more
particular was, that no foreigners, tho'
conversant in the most infected places
were, siezed with it; and also, that
the English in foreign countries were
siezed with it, at the same time that
their native country was infected at
home.

SWEEP, a semicircle or oval line, 
made by the motion of the hand, com­
passes, or any other vibration.

SWEEP-Stake, one who sweeps or
takes up the money at play.

SWIFT of Course [with Astron.] is
when a planet moves in twenty four
hours more than its usual motion.

SWIFTNESS of the Sun [Hieroglyph.]
was represented by the Egyptians, by a
round Discus in the hand of their god
Osiris.

To SWIG [S&wyn;iʒan, Sax.] to drink
large draughts.



SWIMMING-Bladder, a vesicle of
air inclosed in the bodies of fishes, by
means whereof they are enabled to su­
stain themselves at any depth of water.

SWINGING [ſ&wyn;enʒan, Sax.] vi­
brating to and fro.

SWINGING [of ſ&wyn;inʒan, Sax.]
huge, exceeding great.

SWINISH [of ſ&wyn;inlic of ſ&wyn;in, Sax.]
slovenly; also boorish in manners.

SWOLN [of ſ&wyn;eltan, Sax. swellen, 
Du.] swelled.

SWOONING [of aſ&wyn;unian, Sax.]
fainting away, wherein the patient
loses all his strength and understanding.

A SWORD's Man [ſ&wyn;eorð-man, 
Sax.] a fencer.

SYCAMIN [sycaminus, sycamo­
rus, L. of συχόμορος,
συχὴ a fig, and μορέα, Gr. a mulberry]
a great tree like a fig tree, that may be
called the mulberry fig tree.

SYCAMORE [sycaminus, sycamo­
rus, L. of συχόμορος,
συχὴ a fig, and μορέα, Gr. a mulberry]
a great tree like a fig tree, that may be
called the mulberry fig-tree.

SYDEROUS [syderosus, L.] planet-­
struck.

SYLLABICALLY [of συλλαβιχὸς, Gr.]
by syllables.

Conditional SYLLOGISMS [among
Rhet.] do not all consist of propositions
that are conjunctive or compounded;
but are those whose Major is so com­
pounded, that it includes all the con­
clusion. They are reducible to three
kinds, Conjunctive, Disjunctive and Co­
pulative.

Conjunctive SYLLOGISMS [in Log.]
are those, the Major of which is a con­
ditional proposition, containing all the
conclusion, as,

If there is a God, he ought to be loved.
There is a God;
Therefore he must be loved.

Copulative SYLLOGISMS, are such, 
in which a negative proposition is
taken, part of which is afterwards
laid down as a truth to take off the I
other part; as, A Man cannot be, at the 
same time, a Servant of God, and a Wor­
shipper of Money;

A Miser is a worshipper of Money;
Therefore a Miser is no servant of God.

Disjunctive SYLLOGISMS, are such, 
the first proposition of which is disjunc­
tive; that is, whose parts are joined
or rather disjoined by or; as, 

Those who killed Cæsar are Parricides, or
Defenders of Liberty.
Now they are not Parricides;
Therefore they are Defenders of Liberty.

SYLPHS, a kind of fairy nymphs,  L.

SYLVA [among the Romans] a game
in the Circus of Rome, wherein an ar­
tificial wood was planted and furnished
with a great number of wild beasts;
which were hunted or coursed by the
people, but without any arms, they
being obliged to take them alive. The
emperor Gordianus is said to have
given a Sylva in which were 200 red
and as many fallow deer, 30 wild asses,
and as many wild hories, 100 goats, 
200 wild goats, 150 wild boars, 100
bulls, 10 elks, and 300 ostriches.

SYLVA [in Poetry] a poetical piece,
composed, as it were, at a start, in a
kind of rapture and transport, without
much thought or meditation,

SYLVANUS, the god of woods and
shepherds, and the boundaries of land.
Groves were consecrated to him, and
solemn festivals were held in honour of
him; he is described always in the com­
pany of Pan, being of little stature, 
with the face of a man, and the legs
and feet of a goat, holding a branch of
cypress in his hand. The notion of
this god was introduced, that men
might think that there was no place
which could be without the presence
of a deity, and that nothing could be
done either in the fields or forests, but
that some god must behold it, and that
the fruit of every thing must be in­
creased and preserved by the divine
goodness. Fenestrella says, that Pan, 
Sylvanus, and Faunus, were the same
deity.

SYLVICOLIST [sylvicola, L.] a
dweller in a wood.

SILVIFRAGOUS [sylvifragus, L.]
breaking or destroying woods.

SYMBOL [symbolum, L. of σὺμβολον,
Gr.] a badge, sign, type, mark, em­
blem, or representation of some moral
thing by the images or properties of
natural things; a mystical sentence, a
motto or device, as a lion is a symbol
of courage, and two hands joined or
clasped together is a symbol of union
or fidelity.

SYMBOLS [with Medalists] certain
marks or attributes peculiar to certain
persons or deities, as a thunder-bolt
with the head of an emperor is a sym­
bol of sovereign, authority and power
equal to the gods, the trident is the
symbol of Neptune, and a peacock of
Juno.

SYMBOLICALLY [of symbolicus, of
συμβολιχὸς, Gr.] emblematically, by
symbols, emblems, motto's, and devi­
ces, &c.

SYMBOLOGRAPHIST [of σύμβο­
λον and γράφω, Gr. to write] a describer, 
or one that treats of symbols.

SYMMETRY [symmetria, L. of
συμμετρία of σύν, with, and μέτρον, Gr.]



measure] a due proportion, or the rela­
tion of equality in the height, length
and breadth of the parts necessary to
compose a beautiful whole, or an uni­
formity of the parts in respect to the
whole.

SYMPATHETICALNESS [of συν­
παθέω, Gr.] a sympathizing quality, or
the nature of sympathy.

SYMPATHY [sympathia, L. sympa­
thie, F. συμπάθεια, of σὺν with, and
παθος, suffering, &c. Gr.] an agree­
ableness of natural qualities, affections, 
inclinations, humours, temperature, 
&c. which makes two persons pleased
and delighted with each other; a fellow-
feeling, compassion.

SYMPHONIOUS, pertaining to sym­
phony, musical, Milton.

SYMPHYSIS [with a Medium] is of
three kinds, called Syneurosis, Sysarcho­
sis, and Synchondrosis; which see.

SYMPHYSIS [without a Medium] is
where two bones unite and grow toge­
ther of themselves, without the inter­
vention of any third thing, as a carti­
lage, gristle, &c.

SYMPOSIAC [of συμπόσιον, Gr. a
banquet] an entertainment or conver­
sation of philosophers at a banquet.

SYMPTOMATICAL [in Physick]
a term frequently used to denote the
difference between the primary and se­
condary causes in diseases.

SYMPTOMATICALNESS [sympto­
maticus, L. συμπτωματιχὸς, Gr.] the
being attended with symptoms.

SYNCATEGOREMATICALLY, 
[συγχατηγορηματιχὸς, Gr.] after the man­
ner of a Syncategorema, or signifying to­
gether with.

SYNECHDOCHE [with Logicians] is
when the Genus is put for the Species, 
i. e. the matter of which a thing is made
for the thing itself, as Iron for a Sword;
or, on the contrary, a Sword for Iron.

SYNOCHA [συνόχος of συνοχέω, to
support or hold up, or συνέχω, Gr. to
continue] from the former is used by
some for an intermitting fever, and
the latter for a continued one.

SYNOD [with Astron.] a conjunction
or concourse of two stars or planets in
the same optical place of the Heavens.

SYNODICALLY [of synodicus, L. of
συνοδιχὸς, Gr.] by a synod, or according
to the appointment of a synod.

SYNOESIA, a festival celebrated at
Athens, in commemoration of Theseus's
having united the petty communities of
Asia.

SYNONYMOUSNESS [of synonymus, 
L. of συνώνυμος, Gr.] the having divers 
words of the same signification.

SYNTACTICALLY [syntaxis, L. of
σύνταξις, Gr.] according to the rules of
Syntax.

SYNTHESIS [in Pharmacy] the com­
position or putting of several things
together, as the making a compound
medicine of several simple ingredients.

SYNTHESIS [with Logicians] is the
method of convincing others of a truth
already found out.

SYNUSIASTS, a sect of Hereticks, 
who maintained that there was but one
single nature, and one single substance, 
in Jesus Christ.

SYNYMENSIS [of σὺν with, and
ὑμὴν, Gr. a membrane] the connection
of bones by a membrane, as in the skull
of an infant.

SYPHON. See Siphon.

SYRONES [in Physick] wheals; also
worms; a sort of worms that breed in
the skin.

SYSTEM [systema, L. of σύστημα of
συνίστημι, Gr. to put or connect toge­
ther] in the general is a regular or or­
derly collection or composition of many
things together, or it is an assemblage
or chain of principles, the several parts
whereof are bound together, or follow
and depend on each other.

SYSTEM of the World [with Astron.]
an hypothesis or supposition of a certain
order and arrangement of the several
parts of the universe; whereby they
explain all the phenomena or appear­
ances of the heavenly bodies, their
motions, changes, &c. the most cele­
brated are the Copernican, the Ptole­
maick, and Tychonick.

SYSTEM [in Poetry] is a certain hy­
pothesis from which the poet is never
to recede; as, for example, when he
has made his choice either in Christi­
anity or the fables of the Heathens, he
must always distinguish between the
two, and never mix such different
ideas in the same poem.

Concinnous SYSTEMS [in Musick] are
those which consist of such parts as are
fit for musick, and those parts placed in
such an order between the extremes, 
as that the succession of sounds from
one extreme to the other may have a
good effect.

Inconcinnous SYSTEMS [in Musick]
are those where the simple intervals
are inconcinnous or badly disposed be­
twixt the extremes.

SYZYGIA [in Gram.] the coupling
or clapping of different feet together
in verse, either Greek or Latin.




T

Tt, Roman; T t, Italick; T t, Eng­
lish; T t, Saxon, Τ τ, Greek, are
the 19th letter in order of the alphabet;
and ט, the 9th, and ת, the 22d of the
Hebrew.

T with an i generally sounds like si
before a vowel, as in Action, Creation, 
Inclination; but Accession, Division, 
Admission, &c. must not be written
with ti, nor any word that is not writ­
ten with a t in Latin.

T, is the mark of a branding-iron, 
made use of for branding any male­
factor found guilty of manslaughter, 
bigamy, &c.

T [among the Ancients] was used as
a numeral letter, signifying 160.

T̅, with a dash at top, signified
160000.

The dash is placed on top of letter T.



T [in Musick Books] is used to denote
the tenor.

TABBYING, is the passing a sort of
silk or stuff under the calendar, to make
a representation of waves on it.

TABELLA [in Pharmacy] a so­ 
lid electuary or
composition of several drugs made up
into little squares, more commonly
called Lozenges.

TABLETTE [in Pharmacy] a so­ 
lid electuary or
composition of several drugs made up
into little squares, more commonly
called Lozenges.

TABERER [un tambourineur, F.]
one that plays upon a small drum, call'd
a tabour.

TABERDER, a batchelor in Queen's
College, Oxford; one who wears a gar­
ment or short coat, called a tabard, 
being a kind of jacket or sleeveless
coat, whole before, and open on both
sides, with a square collar, winged at
the shoulders; such as heralds wear
when on service.

TABERNACLE, a sort of tempo­
rary church or chapel for the use of
parishioners, while their church is re­
pairing, rebuilding, &c.

TABES [with Physicians] a pining
away for want of natural moisture,  L.

TABES, is also taken for an ulcer in
the lungs, causing the whole body to
decay and perish by degrees.

TABES, gore blood, the matter or
corruption that issues out of a wound, 
 L.

TABID Constitution, a dry, lean, 
wasting constitution.

TABlDNESS [of tabidus, L.] a wast­
ingness, decay, consumption.

To keep a good TABLE, to live plen­
tifully.

Razed TABLE [in Architect.] an em­
bossment in a frontispiece, for the put­
ting an inscription or other ornament
in sculpture.

Crowned TABLE [in Architect.] one
which is covered with a cornice, and
in which is cut a Basso Relievo, or a
piece of black marble incrustated for
an inscription.

Rusticated TABLE [in Architect.]
one which is picked, and whose surface
seems rough, as in grotto's.

TABLE-Diamond, or other precious
stone [with Jewellers] one whose up­
per surface is quite flat, and only the
sides cut in angles.

TABLE [of a Book] an index or re­
pertory at the beginning or end of a
book, to direct the reader to any pas­
sage in a book.

Knights of the Round TABLE, a mi­
litary order of 24 in number, all pick'd
from among the bravest of the nation, 
supposed to have been instituted by Ar­ 
thur, first king of the Britons, A. C.
1016; who, it is said, had such a table
made to avoid disputes about the upper
and lower end of it, and to take away
all emulation, as to places: from this
table they are supposed to take their
title Lesly relates that he has seen this
table at Winchester, and that the names
of a great number of knights are writ­
ten round it, which seems to confirm
the tradition. The keepers of this
table show it with a great deal of so­
lemnity. But Cambden is of opinion, 
that this table is of a much more mo­
dern structure than the sixth century;
and Paperbroch shews that there was no
such thing as any order of knights be­
fore the sixth century; and it is like­
wise said, that Arthur himself was but a
fabulous prince. King Edward is said
to have built a house, called the
Round Table, the court of which was
200 foot in diameter. And the knights
of the Round-Table, (according to Pau­
lus Jovianus) began first to be talked
of in the time of Frederick Barbarosa;
and some suppose that the Round-Table
does not appear to have been any
military order, but rather a kind of
just or military exercise between com­
batants with lances.

TABLES [in Astronomy] are tables
wherein the motions of the planets are
calculated, for the use of one particu­
lar.

TABLES [in Prospective] plain sur­
faces, supposed to be transparent and
perpendicular to the horizon.



TABLES [in Heraldry] coats or es­
cutcheons, containing nothing but the
mere colour of the field, and not char­
ged with figure, bearing, &c.

TABRET, a small drum.

TABULAR [tabularis, L.] belonging
to a table, board, or plank.

TACENT [tacens, L.] quiet, still, 
without noise; holding one's peace.

TACITNESS [taciturnitas, L. taci­
turnité, F.] silentness.

TACITURNOUS [taciturnus, L.]
silent, saying nothing, making no noise.

To stand close upon a TACK [Sea 
Phrase]
signify that the ship should sail close by
the wind.

To sail close upon a TACK [Sea 
Phrase]
signify that the ship should sail close by
the wind.

To hale aboard the TACK [Sea Phrase]
means to bring the tack down close to
the chess-trees.

Ease the TACK [Sea Phrase] signifies
slacken it, or let it go or run out.

Let rise the TACK, i.e. let it all go
out.

The ship sails upon a TACK 
i. e. she sails close by the wind.

The ship stands close to a TACK 
i. e. she sails close by the wind.

TACKER, one who stands or fixes
one thing to another, by tacks or by
sewing, &c.

Winding TACKLE [in a Ship] a
tackle that serves as a pendant, with a
great double block and the shivers in
each, in order to hoise in goods.

TACTILITY [of tactilis, L.] capa­
bleness of being touched.

To TAG [of attacher, F. to bind, 
&c.] to fix tags or points to laces.

TAG-RAG, a pitiful, ragged fellow,
&c.

A TAGGE, a sheep of a year old.

TAIL [with Anat.] that tendon of
a muscle which is fixed to the moveable
part, and that fixed to the immoveable
part, is called the head.

TAIL [with Botan.] the
pedicle of a plant.

Dove-TAIL [with Join­
ers, &c] one of the stron­
gest manners of joining, 
by letting one piece of
wood into another, cut in 
these forms, as by letting
A into B.

Two images omitted.



Peacock's-TAIL, a term
applied to all circular com­
partments, which go en­
larging from the center to
the circumference, imita­
ting the feathers of a Pea­
cock's-Tail.

Dragon's TAIL [in As­
tronomy] the descending
node of a planet.

Swallow-TAIL, the same as Dove-tail.

TAILS of lions are born in coat-ar­
mour, who are said to have very great
strength in them, and to slap them
about their back and sides when they
are in anger, and also to sweep the
ground with them when pursued, to
wipe out their footsteps, that they may
not be followed by the track.

TAILLE [in Heraldry] the same as
Parti per bend Sinister. F.

TAILLE Douce, a term in painting, 
which, Mr. Evelyn says, signifies the
art of sculpture, or calcography itself;
whether done with the burin or gra­
ver, or with Aqua Fortis, which is cal­
led etching.

TAILLE [in Musick] the same as
tenor.

TAILLIOR [in Architecture] is the
flat, square stone on the capital of a
pillar.

TALAPOINS [at Siam] Indian doc­
tors or priests, who go barefoot, eat
but once a day, live an exemplary life, 
and very zealously exclaim against
those that worship the devil; but they
are but little regarded. These Talapoins
have no aversion for such as turn Chris­
tians, if they do live agreeable to their
profession; it being their belief that
living a good life will render persons
under any persuasion safe.

TALASSUS [with the Romans] 
a deity supposed to 
preside over mar­
riages, as Hymenæus with the Greeks. He
was invoked on the wedding day, that
the nuptials might prove happy.

TALASSIUS [with the Romans] 
a deity supposed to 
preside over mar­
riages, as Hymenæus with the Greeks. He
was invoked on the wedding day, that
the nuptials might prove happy.

TALASSIO [with the Romans] 
a deity supposed to 
preside over mar­
riages, as Hymenæus with the Greeks. He
was invoked on the wedding day, that
the nuptials might prove happy.

TALBOT [prob. of tæʒl, a tail, 
and bufan, Sax. above] a dog with
his rail turned up, noted for his quick
scent, finding out the tracks, lodgings
and forms of beasts, and pursuing them
with open mouth, and a continual cry, 
with such eagerness, that, if not taken
off by the huntsman, he is spoiled.

TALE-Bearer [of talu and bearan, 
Sax.] a tell-tale.

Great TALENT of Silver [among
the Romans] 99 l. 6 s 8 d. sterling.

TALENT the lesser [of Silver] worth
75 l. sterling.

TALENT the greater [of Gold] worth
1125 l. sterling.

TALION-Law [lex talionis] a retri­
bution or punishment, whereby an evil
is returned perfectly like that commit­
ted against us by another; as an Eye
for an Eye, a Tooth for a Tooth, &c.

TALISMANS [τελεσμα, Gr. of ןמלע
Chald. an image] certain figures or
images, engraven or carved under se­



veral superstitious observations of the
characters and dispositions of the hea­
vens, to which some astrologers, &c.
attribute wonderful virtues, as calling
down the influences of the celestial bo­
dies; some say it is a seal, figure, cha­
racter, or image of a heavenly sign, 
constellation or planet, engraven on a
sympathetick stone, or on a metal cor­
responding to the star or planet, in or­
der to receive its influence; they are
some of them fondly believed to be pre­
servatives against all kinds of evil:
Some again are fancied to have mis­
chievous effects, and that, according as
the Talisman is preserved or wasted, 
the person whom it represents is pre­
served or wasted away.

TALK, [talcum, L.] a sort of mine­
ral; this, by chymical writers, is ex­
pressed by this character X.

TALLAGE, [Old Rec.] a certain rate
according to which barons and knights
were taxed by the king towards the
expences of the state, and inferior te­
nants by their lords on certain occasions.

TALLATIO [in an University] a
keeping an accompt, as by tallies, of
the battles or deliveries of meat and
drink in a college.

TALLIA, the set allowance in meat
and drink for every cannon and pre­
bendary in our old cathedral churches.

TALLOW-CHANDLERS, were in­
corporated Anno 1461. 
and by several kings
afterwards confirmed.
They consist of a mas­
ter, 4 wardens, about
40 assistants, and 148 li­
verymen, &c. The li­
very fine is 15 l. 8 s.
Their armorial ensigns
are, Party per fess Azure and Argent, a
pale counter-changed; on every piece
of the first a turtle dove of the se­
cond; with each an olive branch in
its mouth Or. Their hall is on Dow­
gate-Hill.

Image omitted.



TALLOW-Tree, a certain tree
which produces a sort of unctuous
juice, of which candles are made.

TALLOWISH, greasy, or of the
nature of tallow.

To TALLY, to answer exactly as
one tally does to another, or the tally
to the stock; also to mark or score upon
a tally.

TALMUD [דומלת of דמל Heb. he  
learned] the Talmud contains the body
of the doctrine of the religion and of
the morality of the Jews. They have
two works that bear this name; the first 
is called the Talmud of Jerusalem, and 
the other the Talmud of Babylon.
 
The first was compiled by Rabbi Jo­
hannan, who presided in the academy 
of Palestine for fourscore years, and 
who finished it, as they say the 230th
year after the ruin of the temple; for 
the use of the Jews that dwelt in Judea.
This Talmud is of an older date; but 
is shorter and more obscure than that 
of Babylon.

It is composed of 2 parts, the Mishna
and the Gemara. The Mishna is the
work of Rabbi Judah, surnamed the
holy, who compiled it about the year
120 after the destrustion of the temple
of Jerusalem by the Romans, and the
year 190 of the vulgar Æra.

The Mishna signiries the second law, 
and is a collection of all the traditions
of the Jewish doctors, which Judah ga­
thered into one body, for fear they
should be lost and come into oblivion, 
because of the dispersion of the Israe­
lites, and the interruption of their 
schools.

About an hundred years after Rabbi
Johannan composed the Gemara, which
is as much as to say completion or per­
fection, to compleat and finish the Mish­
na of Rabbi Judah the holy. And these
2 works together make up the body of
the Talmud.

The Talmud of Babylon is also com­
posed of the Mishna of Judah the holy,
and of the Gemara, composed by Rabbi 
Asa, who lived at Babylon about 100 
years after Rabbi Johannan. The Jews 
rather make use of this than that of 
Jerusalem, because it is clearer and more 
extensive.

It abounds with a multitude of fa­
bles and ridiculous stories. Yet they
even prefer the authority of the Tal­
mud to that of the scriptures, and com­
pare the bible to water, the Mishna to
wine, and the Gemara to Hypocras.

They believe the traditions and ex­
plications of this book are derived from
God himself, that Moses revealed them 
to Aaron, to his sons, and to the elders
of Israel, that these communicated
them to the prophets, and the prophets
transmitted them to the members of
the great synagogue, who passed them
from hand to hand, till they came to
the great doctors, who reduced them to
the form of the Mishna and Gemara.

TALON [with Architects] is a
small member made of square filets, 
and a strait Cymatium: It is different
from an Astragal, the latter being a
round member; whereas the Talon 



consists of two portions of a circle, one
on the outside, and the other within.

A Reversed TALON, is a talon with
the concave part uppermost.

TALONS [prob. of talon, F.] the
claws of a bird of prey.

TALPA [with Surgeons] a swelling
that is soft and pretty large, usually
arising in the head and face, which
takes its name from its preying upon
the scull under the skin; as a mole
creeps under the ground.

TALPES [in Chirurgery] tumours on
the head, commonly the consequence
of the venereal disease. They raise
the skin from the Pericranium, and
generally indicate the foulness of the
bone underneath.

TALUS [in Anat.] a bone of the
heel with a convex head.

TALUS [in Architect.] is the sensible
inclination or slope of a work; as of
the outside of a wall, when its thickness 
is diminished by degrees, as it rises in
height, to make it firmer.

TALUS [in Fortif.] is the slope given
to the rampart or wall, that it may
stand the faster,  L.

TALUS Superior, of a parapet, is the
slope on the top of the parapet, that
allows the soldiers to defend the covert
way with small shot, which they could
not do were it level.

TAMBAC a mixture of gold 
and copper, which 
the Siamese account more beautiful and 
set a greater value on than on gold 
itself.

TAMBAQUA a mixture of gold 
and copper, which 
the Siamese account more beautiful and 
set a greater value on than on gold 
itself.

TAMBOUR [in Architect.] a term
used of the Corinthian and Composit 
capitals, of a member that bears some
resemblance to a drum: also a little
box of timber-work, covered with a
cieling, within side the porch of some
churches, to keep out the wind, by
folding doors.

TAMBOUR [in Masonry] a round
stone or course of stones, several where­
of form a section of the shaft of a co­
lumn, not so high as a diameter.

TAMEABLE, that may be tamed.

TAMELY [tamelice, Sax.] after a
gentle manner.

TAMMUS, a Pagan deity, thought
to be the same as Adonis, Rab. Dav. 
Kinchi says, that Tammus was an idol
of brass, whose eyes the Pagans us'd to
fill with lead; then making a fire in
the hollow part of the idol, the lead
would melt, and the image seem to
shed tears.

Other Rabbins think that Tammus
was an idolatrous prophet, who had 
made an image of the sun, all of gold, 
which was suspended between Heaven
and earth; and that the king of Baby­
lon, having put this prophet to death, 
all the idols of the country assembled
themselves together to bewail his death, 
before the said image of the sun;
which gave occasion to the observation
of a feast, which was kept at the be­
ginning of the month Tammus, on
which they lamented the death of a
prophet, of this name.

St. Jerome has rendred Tammus by
Adonis, and there is great probability
that this is the true signification of it, 
the name signifies abstruse or concealed.
Now nothing can agree better with
Adonis than the epithet Secret or Hid­
den, whether we consider that secresy
and obscurity, in which his misteries
were involv'd, or the condition in which
he was represented during his festival.

He was put into a coffin, and lamen­
ted over, as if dead. Moses in some pla­
ces calls him the dead by way of deri­
sion. Lastly the circumstance of women
bewailing Tammuz, has determined the
greatest part of commentators, to ex­
plain the passages in Ezek. 15. 16. by
the feasts of Adonis.

TANNED [of ʒetannian, Sax.]
made leather, as skins or hides, being
consolidated and hardened by tanning.

TANGENT [of a Curve] is a right
line drawn so as to touch it, but if con­
tinued, will not cut it.

TANGENT [in Geometry] a right
line which
touches a
circle, i. e.
that meets it 
in such a
manner, that
if infinitely
produced, it
would never
cut the same, 
i. e. never
come within
the circle:
thus the line
A B is the tangent to the circle in D.

Image omitted.



TANGENT of an Arch [in Trigono­
metry] is a right line raised perpendicu­
arly on the extreme of the diameter, 
and continued to a point, where it is
cut by a secant, i. e. by a line drawn
from the center, through the extremi­
ty of the arch, whereof it is a tangent.

Artificial TANGENTS, are the lo­
garithms of the tangents of arches.

Line of TANGENTS, a line usually
placed on the Sector and Gunter's scale.



TANGENT of
a Circle [in Geom.]
is a right line, as
T R drawn with­
out the circle, 
perpendicular to
some radius, as
C R, and which
touches the circle
but in one point.

Image omitted.



TANGIBLENESS [of tangibilis, L.
and ness] capableness of being touched
or felt by the touch.

TANTALUS [according to the
Poets] was the son of Jupiter and Plota
the nymph, and grandfather to Aga­
memnon and Menelaus, who on a time
entertaining the gods at a banquet, to
make an experiment of their divinity, 
kill'd, dress'd, and serv'd up his son
Pelops at table: but the gods, discover­
ing the fact, so abhorred it, that, for
the loathsome banquet he made them, 
they made him as disagreeable an one:
For they set him in water up to the
chin, and apples bobbed him on the
lips; but he could neither stoop down
to the one to quench his thirst, nor
reach up to the apples to satisfy his
hungry appetite, the water sinking
lower, and the apples rising higher.
As for his son Pelops, Jupiter sent 
Mer­
cury to Hell to fetch his soul from
thence, and restored him all his limbs, 
putting them together in their right
places, and restored him 10 life again.
And whereas Ceres had eaten up his
shoulder, Jupiter made him one of
ivory, which had the virtue of healing
all manner of diseases.

TAPEINOSIS [ταπείνωσις, Gr. hu­
miliation] a figure in rhetorick, when
the orator speaks less than the truth.

TAPPING [in Chirurgery] an opera­
tion in which any of the Venters are
pierced, to let out matter, as in a
dropsy.

TAPSUS [with Botanists] the herb
white Mullein,  L.

TARANTULA [so named of Ta­
rentum in Apulia] a venomous ash-co­
loured spider, speckled with a little
white and black, or red and green
spots, about the size of an acorn, and
having eight feet, and as many eyes; it
is hairy, and from its mouth proceed
two sorts of horns or trunks, with ex­
ceeding sharp tops, through which it
conveys its Poison, whose bite is of
such a nature, that it is to be cured only
by musick.

TARAXIPPUS [Ταραξιππος of ταρασ­
σω and ίππος, a horse, Gr.] an ima­ 
ginary deity, adored by the people of
Elis in Peloponnese. He had an altar
plac'd in the list, where their chariot
horses were kept; and hence proceed­
ed that worship. There was near the
end of this enclosure or place rail'd in
a list of a considerable breadth, fixed
to the ground, in the form of a semi­
circle, of a lively bright colour, that
it might be conspicuous to the coursers
(i. e. racers) in their greatest speed, 
and so turn back again: it often hap­
pened, that when the horses came up
to the place, they either startled at the
sight, or the drivers out of great haste
turned them short, and made them
throw the coachman out of the box, 
and break the chariot.

The superstitious Grecians not know­
ing what to attribute this to, imagined
that there was some deity that would
be worshipped, and called him Tarax­
ippus, or the terror of horses.

TARDATION, a loitering, linger­
ing, &c.

TARDILOQUENCE [tardiloquentia, 
L.] slowness of speech.

TARDILOQUIOUS [tardiloquus, 
L.] slow of speech.

TARDINESS [of tarditas, L. slow­
ness] slackness in business; also guilti­
ness of a fault.

TARGUM [םוגדת, Chald.] a para­
phrase, or rather comment or explica­
tion of the Old Testament in the Chal­
dee tongue, for the use of the Jews
after the Babylonian captivity, to whom
the Chaldee tongue became familiar and
more known than the Hebrew it self.
So that when the Hebrew text was
read in the synagogue or temple, they
generally added to it an explication in
the Chaldee tongue.

The Targum of Onkelos is a Chaldee
paraphrase, upon only the books of
Moses, and his style approaches more
nearly to the purity of the Chaldee, as
it is found in Daniel and Ezra. He is
something more modern than Jonathan.

The Targum of Jonathan, son of Uzziel, 
who lived about 30 years before our
Saviour's time, is upon the greater
and lesser prophets, his style is pure
enough, and approaches pretty near
to the Chaldee of Onkelos.

The Targum of Joseph the blind, is
upon the Hagiographa. This author is
much more modern and less esteem'd
than those before mentioned. He has
written upon the Psalms, Job, the Pro­
verbs, Canticles, Ecclesiastes, Ruth and
Esther. His style is a very corrup 



Chaldee, with a great mixture of words
from foreign languages.

The Targum of Jerusalem, is only
upon the Pentateuch, nor is that intire
and perfect.

TARIFF [with Arithmeticians] a
proportional table contrived for the
speedy resolving of questions in the
rule of fellowship, when the stocks, 
losses, and gains are very numerous:
also a table framed to shew, at first
sight, any multiple or divisor, taken
any number of times under ten, for
the more easy and speedy division of a
large sum.

TARRYING [prob. of tardare, Ital.
or tacio, Brit.] loitering or lagging, 
abiding or continuing.

TARTAR [tartarum, L. tartre, F.]
a kind of salt, is express'd in chymical
writers by this character 🜿.

This character at the end of this word-entry was printed in two lines.



TARTAR Emetick 
[with Chymists] is cream or crystal of
tartar, mix'd with a fourth part of
Crocus Metallorum; and this mixture
boiled for eight or nine hours in a suf­
ficient quantity of water, in an earth­
en vessel, and strained thro' a wool­
len cloth, which having been gently
evaporated to the quantity of one half, 
and set to cool, will strike into chry­
stals.

TARTAR soluble [with Chymists] a
kind of salt, prepar'd by boiling a
pound of cream of tartar, and half a
pound of fixed salt of tartar in three
quarts of water, for the space of halt
an hour, in an earthen unglazed vessel, 
and straining it when it is cold, and
evaporating the moisture; which when
done, the salt will remain at the bot­
tom.

TARTAR Vitriolate [with Chymists]
is prepared by pouring spirit of vitriol
on oil of tartar per deliquium; and after
the effervescence or bubbling is over, 
by setting the glass in sand, and draw­
ing out the vapours with a gentle heat, 
till a very white salt remains at the
bottom.

TARTAREOUS [tartareus, L.] of
or pertaining to tartar, i. e. deep place 
in hell; also hellish.

TARTAROUSNESS [of tartareus, 
L. and ness] a tartareous quality.

TARTARUM [τάρταρος of τοῖ 
ταράθειν Gr. to
trouble or confound, because there all
things are full of trouble and confusion]
the poets take it for Hell, or the place
of torment for the wicked.

TARTARUS [τάρταρος of τοῖ 
ταράθειν Gr. to
trouble or confound, because there all
things are full of trouble and confusion]
the poets take it for Hell, or the place
of torment for the wicked.

TASKED [of tascu, Brit. to put a
burden on one, Baxter] having a cer­
tain portion of work appointed to be
done.

TASCONY, a sort of white earth
like chalk, and is the only earth that
endures the blast of the bellows, and
heat of the fire, and running metal.

TASTE [of taste, Teut. or tâte of
tâter, F.] one of the five external senses;
also savour, relish, which probably is
effected by the salts that are in bodies, 
which affect the tongue (according to
their various configurations) as diffe­
rently as they differ from one another;
and by tickling, or otherwise moving
those small nerves lying in the Papillæ
of the tongue, communicate a sensation
to the brain, that is either pleasant or
unpleasant.

TASTES [by Dr. Grew] are distin­
guished into simple and compound.

Simple TASTES, are single modes of
tastes, altho' mingled with others in
the same; as for instance, the taste of
a pippin is aci-dulcis; of Rhubarb, ama­
rastringent, and therefore compounded
with both; but yet in the pippin the
acid is one simple taste, and the sweet 
another, as distinct as the bitter and
astringent are in Rhubarb.

Simple TASTES, are bitter, sweet, 
sour, salt, hot, as in cloves, pepper, 
&c. and cold, as in Sal Prunellæ. Aro­
matick [spicy] nauseous; and some add
to these soft Tastes; either vapid, as in
water, the whites of eggs, &c. or
unctuous, as in oils, fat, &c. or

Hard TASTES, are, 1. Penetrant, 
such as work themselves into the
tongue without any pungency; as is
experienced in the root and leaves of
wild cucumber. 2. Stupefacient, as in
the root of black hellebore, which, if
chewed and kept some time upon the
tongue, affects it with a numbness or
paralytick stupor. 3. Astringent, as in
galls. 4. Pungent, as in the spirit of
Sal Armoniack.

Compounded TASTES are, 1. Austere, 
which is astringent and bitter, as in the
green and soft stones of grapes, 2. A­
cerb, which is astringent and acid, as in
the juice of unripe grapes. 3. Acrid, 
which is pungent and hot. 4, Muria­
tick, which is salt and pungent, as in
common salt. 5. Lixivious, which is
saltness joined with some pungency and
heat. 6. Nitrous, which is saltness
joined with pungency and cold. There
are also several other compounded
tastes, but we want words to express
them.

TASTEFUL [of tâte, F. and full]
having a good or pleasant taste.



TASTEFULNESS, relishableness,
palatableness.

TASTELESSNESS, insipidness, un­
relishableness.

TATIANISTS, Hereticks of the se­
cond century of Christianity, who con­
demned the use of wine and flesh.

TATTLE [prob. of tateren,
Du.] prating, im­
pertinent discourse.

TATTLING [prob. of tateren,
Du.] prating, im­
pertinent discourse.

TAU [in Heraldry] called
the St. Anthony's Cross, be­
cause St. Anthony, the monk
and hermit, is always
painted with it upon his
habit. It takes its name
from the Greek letter Τ, which it ex­
actly resembles. Some are of opinion:
it is an old hieroglyphic of security, 
and refer it to the charge given to the
angel in Ezekiel, not to kill them upon
whom was letter ת Tau, Heb.

Τ Tau, Greek [ת Heb.] a figure of the
cross of Christ, and in Hebrew is inter­
preted a sign or mark, of which it was
spoken to the angel, which Ezekiel saw
in spirit. "Go thy way, and set a 
mark (ות) upon the foreheads of 
them that mourn, and are sorry for 
all the abominations that are done 
therein." This mark was in order 
to their being preserved in the midst 
of them that were to be slain for their 
idolatry, in the wrathful displeasure 
of the Lord. And this letter Τ Tau,
Greek, was used by captains and he­
ralds, and signed on their names, who 
remained alive after a battle; so that 
as the letter Theta Θ was used as the 
mark of death, so was Τ Tau, or ת, of 
life.

TAUNTING [prob. of tanser, F. to
check, rebuke, or scold at] speaking
reproachfully, bitingly, &c.

TAUROBOLIUM [among the Gre­
cians] the sacrifice of a bull to Cybele,
the mother of the gods; by which he 
that was consecrated, esteemed himself
regenerated and pure for twenty years
to come. The manner of it was this; 
a bull, having his horns gilded, was
slain in a pit, which was planked with
planks bored full of holes, through
which holes the blood of the bull ran
upon a man that lay under the planks, 
who, all besmearing himself with blood
and dust, was held purified by it.

TAURUS [with Astronomers] the se­
cond sign of the zodiack, into which
the sun enters on the 21st of April; it is
represented on a celestial globe, by the
figure of a bull; and its characteristic
with astrologers, &c. is Τ.

TAUTOLOGICALLY, by way of
Tautology.

TAUTOLOGICALNESS, a tauto­
logical quality, or fulness of tautolo­
gies.

TAUTOLOGIST [ταυτολόγος, Gr.] one who says the
same things over and over.

To TAUTOLOGIZE [of τὰ ἀυτὰ 
λέγειν, Gr.] to say the same thing over
and over.

TAWER [of ta&wyn;ian, Sax.] a dres­
ser of leather, a tanner.

TAWDRINESS [as Dr. Tho. Hensh.
supposes] of knots and ribbons bought
at a fair, anciently held in the chapel
of St. Audrey or Etheldred ridiculous
or flaunting gayness.

TAY-BOU [in Tonquin, in the Indies 
towards China] the name of one of the
two great magicians, who makes the
people believe that he can foretel 
things to come, so that when they de­
sign to marry their children, to buy any
land, or undertake any considerable
business, they consult him as an oracle.

He keeps a book filled with the
figures of men, beasts, circles and tri­
angles, and three pieces of brass with
some characters on one side only; these 
he puts into three cups, and having
shaken them, throws them out upon the
ground; and if the characters lie up­
permost, he cries out that the person
will be the happiest person in the
world; but if on the contrary they lie
undermost, it is accounted as a very
bad omen.

If one or two of the characters lie
uppermost, then he consults his book
and tells what he thinks; he also pre­
tends to know the causes of distempers, 
when they that consult him are sent to
him by the Tay Bou; and pretends to
call the souls of the dead out of their
bodies to which they are troublesome.

TAY-PHOU-THONY [at Tonquin]
the name of the other Magician, to
whom they have recourse in their
sickness; if he says the devil is the oc­
casion of the distemper, then he orders
them to sacrifice, offering him a table
well furnished with rice and meat;
which the Magician knows how to
make use of: If after this the sick does
not recover, all the friends and kin­
dred of the sick person, with several
soldiers, surround the house, and dis­
charge their muskets thrice to frighten
the evil spirit away.

The Magician makes the patient
(especially if a seaman or fisherman



lies tick) sometimes foolishly believe
that he is troubled by the god of wa­
ter, then he orders that tapestries be
spread and huts built, and good tables
kept for three days, at certain distan­
ces from the sick man's house to the
next river, to induce this dæmon to
retire, and see him safe into his domi­
nions again.

But the better to know the cause of
these distempers, this Magician sends
them very often to the Tay Bou, who
answers, that they are the souls of the
dead that cause the sickness, and pro­
mises that he will use his art to draw
off these troublesome ghosts to himself, 
and make them pass into his own body
(for they believe the transmigration of
souls) and when he catches that ghost
that did the mischief, he shuts it up in
a bottle of water, until the person is
cured: If the person recovers, the Ma­
gician breaks the bottle, and sets the
ghost at liberty to go whither it will.
And if the person dies, after the Ma­
gician has enjoined the ghost to do no
more harm, he sends it away.

TAYL [in Heraldry] is commonly
used for the tail of an hart; but those
of other creatures have peculiar and
distinct names for them.

TECHNICAL Words, terms of art.

TECHNICAL Verses, are such as in­
clude the substance or particular parts
of an art or science, or contain the
rules and precepts of them; so digested, 
for the help of the memory.

TECHNICALLY [of technicus, L. of
τεχνιχός, Gr.] after the manner of tech­
nology.

TECHINESS [prob. of toucher, F.
to touch, q. d. touchiness] captiousness, 
aptness to be offended, frowardness, 
peevishness.

TECTONICK Nature [natura tecto­
nica, L. of τεχτονιχός of τεχτονιχή
the art of building] formative nature.

TEDIFERA DEA [i. e. the torch-­
bearing goddess] a name given to Ceres 
(the goddess of bread-corn) by the
poets, on account of her seeking her
daughter Proserpina with a torch; and
thence they sacrificed to her in the
night with torches burning. Some are
of opinion, that by Ceres is meant the
earth, and that by Proserpina is meant
corn, which had like to have been bu­
ried in the dark bowels of the soil;
but that in the night-time, when the
sun is under ground, the blade of corn
shoots out fast, which is the meaning
of Ceres's torch that night, when she
found her daughter.

TEEMFUL, full up to the top.

TEEMING [of team, Sax. an off­
spring, prob. of τείνω, Gr. to extend]
childing, frequently pregnant, or bear­
ing young; fruitful.

TEETH [toðaſ, Sax.] either of
man or beast.

TEGUMENTS of a human Body [in
Anat.] are reckoned five, viz. the Epe­
dermis or scarf skin, the Derma or true-­
skin, the Panniculosus Adiposus, the
Membrana Carnosa, and the common
membrane of the muscles.

TEINT [in Painting] an artificial or
compound colour, or the several co­
lours used in a picture, considered as
more or less high or bright, or deep
or thin, or weakened, &c. to give the
proper Relievo, or softness, or distance, 
&c. of the several objects.

TEIRS, the third part of a pipe, or
a measure of 42 gallons.

TEKUPHÆ [in the Jewish chrono­
logy] are the times wherein the sun
proceeds from one cardinal point to
the next.

A TELESCOPE, with a convex and
concave lens, represents, objects that
are at a vast distance, distinct and erect, 
and magnifies them according to the
proportion of the focal distance of the
convex lens to the focal distance of the
concave lens.

A TELESCOPE, with two convex
lenses, represents objects that are vastly
distant, distinct, but inverted, and
magnifies them according to the pro­
portion of the focal distance of the
exterior to the focal distance of the
interior lens.

ResteBine TELESCOPE, consists of
a large tube that is open at the end
next to the object, and closed at the
other, where is placed a metalline
Speculum, and having a flat oval Spe­
culum near the open end, inclined to­
wards the upper part of the tube, 
where there is a little hole furnished
with a small, plain, convex eye-glass.

TELESCOPICAL, of or pertaining
to a telescope.

TELLER [of tellan, Sax. to tell]
one who relates; also a teller of
money.

TELLUS, the goddess of the earth.
Tellus and Tellumo were worshipped
one under the notion of the male, and
the other of the female,  L. She was
usually painted in a green mantle.

TEMERARIOUSNESS [temeritas, 
L. temerité, F.] rashness, unadvised­
ness.



TEMOINS [with Military Men]
pieces of earth left standing as marks
or witnesses in the fosses of places the
workmen are emptying, that they
may know exactly how many cubical
fathoms of earth have been carried
away, in order to pay the workmen
their due for it.

TEMPERAMENT [in Physick] the
natural habitude and constitution of
the body of man, or the disposition of
the animal humours.

TEMPERAMENT [in Musick] a
rectifying or 
amending the false or imperfect con­
cords, by transferring to them part of
the beauty of the perfect ones.

TEMPERING [in Musick] a
rectifying or 
amending the false or imperfect con­
cords, by transferring to them part of
the beauty of the perfect ones.

TEMPERANGE [temperantia, L.]
moderation, a restraining of our affec­
tions and passions, Temperance is one
of the four cardinal virtues, and is by
moralists said to constitute honesty, or
decency and bashfulness. The two
species of it are Sobriety, which mode­
rates our eating and drinking; and
Chastity, which sets bounds to the en­
joyment of conjugal love. Temperance
hath also its potential parts, as meek­
ness, clemency, modesty.

TEMPERANCE [with Divines] is
defined to be a virtue that consists in
an abstinence from sensual pleasures, 
which renders the body tame and go­
vernable, and so serviceable to the
soul, and also chearful in the exercise
of religion; which sets the mind of
man free from the captivity of sense, 
and establishes its dominion over the
brutish part, so that the man lives by
faith and not by sense, and is disengaged
from the world, and the allurements
of it.

TEMPERATENESS [temperantia, 
L. temperature, F.] moderation, abste­
miousness in eating and drinking, &c.
the restraint of our affections or pas­
sions.

To TEMPEST, to be stormy. Mil­
ton.

A TEMPLAR [templier, F.] a stu­
dent in the Temple.

TEMPLARS or Kights Templars, said
to have been instituted in the year 1113
by Hugh of Rayennes, and confirmed by 
pope Eugenius. Their habit was a
white cloak or upper garment, with a
red cross on the back, and a sword girt 
about thorn; and thence they were by
the common people called Cross-Backs, 
or crouched backs. These knights at
first dwelt in part of the building that 
belonged to the temple in Jerusalem, 
not far from the sepulchre of our Sa­
viour, where they charitably enter­
tained strangers and pilgrims, and in
their armour led them through the
holy land, to view such things as were
to be seen there, defending them from
the infidels. These knights had in all
provinces of Europe their subordinate 
governors, in which they possessed no
less than 16000 lordships, a vast revenue.
Their governor in England was stiled 
master of the Temple, and was sum­
moned to parliament; and the temple in
Fleet-street, now the house of our law-­
students in London, being their house, 
the minister of the Temple church still
bears the title of master of the Temple.
This order continued for about the
space of two hundred years; but at
length, being both rich and powerful, 
and also grown vicious, the whole or­
der was abolished by Pope Clement V.
in the year 1309, as also by the council
of Vienna in 1312, and their possessions
were given to the knights of St. John of 
Jerusalem, whose mansion was near
Smithfield (now vulgarly called St.
Jones's) and other religious orders.
The crimes objected against them were
first, their revoking from their profes­
sed obedience to the Patriarch of Jeru­
salem, who was their visitor. Secondly, 
their unspeakable pride. Thirdly, 
their sins against nature.

TEMPLE [templum, L. some derive 
it of templando or contemplando, con­
templating; Varro of tuendo, defending, 
Mart. of τέμνω, q. dividing or separa­
ting, Scal. of τέμνος, q. d. a place se­
parated from others on account of re­
ligion; but others derive it of Θέμις
justice or the goddess of justice] a
church or cathedral for the perfor­
mance of divine service. The temples
that the heathens built to their gods
were very stately; for princes and na­
tions employed their riches and ingeni­
ous inventions of architecture in build­
ing them. In their temples there were
generally three altars; the first at the
entry where the victims were offered
and burnt, the second in the middle, 
and the third at the end, within an en­
closure. Upon the two last, only per­
fumes and sweet scents were burnt, and
there the people eat in their festivals to
their gods.

In the infancy of the world, neither
the true worshippers of God, nor the
idolatrous heathens had any temples, 
but performed their religious ceremo­
nies some on the tops of hills and
mountains, and others on large plains;
but afterwards chose retired places;



many of them celebrating their myste­
rious; rites in woods, and afterwards in
walled places, offering up their prayers
and sacrifices; but left the tops of them
open, that they might have a clear
view of the Heavens, and did not for
some time use covered buildings.

As to the places where the heathen
temples were built, they were different
according to their different deities.

The temples of tutelar gods or towns 
were built on heights, if there were 
any, the better to protect and defend 
them on all sides; the gods who presi­
ded over virtues, peace and arts, had 
their places in the best parts of the
city, to be nigher at hand, to inspire
men with noble thoughts and inclina­
tions for the good of the publick. As
for those who presided over pleasures, 
as Venus; war, as Mars and Bellona;
over fire as Vulcan; their temples were
built out of their towns, to intimate, 
that they were either hurtful to men, or
at least to denote, that they were not
to accustom themselves to their use.

Neptune's temples were generally
upon the sea coasts, and those of Æs­
culapius and the other deities who pre­
sided over physick in the most tempe­
rate part of the city, and where there
was the best air, that altogether might
contribute to the recovery of the sick 
sent thither. Nor must it be forgotten
that each temple had its particular god
or gods, and no other gods but such 
as temples were consecrated to, could 
be worshipped in them.

TEMPLERS, a sect of Christian He­
reticks, who lived in Jerusalem in the 
year 1030, after Philip Augustus, they 
being so denominated because they 
frequented the temple very much: they 
had an image made by exquisite art,
covered with a man's skin, and having 
two shining carbuncles instead of eyes: 
to this idol they sacrificed the bodies 
of the dead reduced to ashes, and gave 
them to be drank by others, to render 
them more strong and constant; those 
who were born to a templer, wedded 
to a maid, they roasted after death, and 
anointed the image with the droppings, 
as an evidence of their great zeal; 
some suppose these to have been the 
same with the knights Templers; but 
others oppose it.

Tetrastile TEMPLES, such as had 
four columns in front, and as many be­
hind.

Amphiprostyle TEMPLES, such as had 
columns before and behind, which also 
were tetrastyle.

Prostyle TEMPLES, were such as
had columns only on the foreside.

Diptere TEMPLES, such as had eight
rows of columns around, or were Oxa­
style, or had eight columns in front.

Periptere TEMPLES, such as had
four rows of insulated columns around, 
and were Hexastyle, i. e. as had six co­
lumns in front.

The temples of Æthiopia, are re­
ported to be all hewn out of a firm
rock, proportionable in their parts, 
with gates and windows, and to have
been all perfected in 24 years.

TEMPLES, certain jewels, which
great ladies anciently wore on their
temples and foreheads, and fastened to
their hair with bodkins.

TEMPORALNESS [of temporalis, L.
temporel, F.] a secular quality; also
temporariness, or the being for a time.

TEMPORANEOUSNESS [of tem­
porarius, 
L. temporaneus, F. and neſſe, Sax.] a
temporal quality, or the lasting only
for a time.

The word "temporaneus" is Latin rather than French.



TEMPORARINESS [of tem­
porarius, 
L. temporaneus, F. and neſſe, Sax.] a
temporal quality, or the lasting only
for a time.

The word "temporaneus" is Latin rather than French.



TEMPTER [tentator, L. tentateur, 
F.] one who allures or entices, the
devil.

TEMPTINGNESS [of tentans, L. and
neſſe Sax. terminat.] alluringness, 
charmingness.

TEMULENTNESS [temulentia, L.]
drunkenness.

TEN [tien or tyn, Sax.] the num­
ber 10 in figures, is composed of the 
first figure and (0) a cypher. It con­
joins the virtue of all numbers, which
it holds as it were, bound in itself, ei­
ther simple, or by multiplication; se­
condly, as among geometricians, a line
is the joining in one of divers pricks
or points, so the 10 makes the line of
numbers, neither can there be any go­
ing farther. We may add 1 to 9, and
2 to 8, and, by multiplication and re­
doubling of 10, set down a number
greater than the sands of the sea.

TENABLENESS [of tenable, F. and
ness of tenere, L. to hold] capableness
of being held and kept.

TENACIOUSNESS [tenacitas, L.
tenacité, F.] niggardliness, stiffness in
holding or maintaining an opinion, 
&c.

TENANT in Chief, is a tenant that
holds of the king in right of his crown.

TENANT by the courtesy of England, 
a tenant that holds for his life, by
means of a child begotten by him on
his wife, she being an heiress, and the
child being born alive.



TENANT by Elegit, a tenant that
holds by virtue of the writ called Elegit.

TENANT by Execution, is a tenant
that holds on account of an execution, 
upon any statute, recognizance, &c.

TENANT in Frank Marriage, a te­
nant who holds lands or tenements by
a gift of them, made to him upon mar­
riage between him and his wife.

TENANT in Mortgage, is a tenant
that holds by means of mortgage.

TENAMT in Service, a tenant that
holds by any manner of service.

TENANT per Statute-Merchant, a
tenant that holds lands by virtue of
their being forfeited to him by Statute
Merchant.

TENANT at Will, a tenant who
holds at the will of the lord, according
to the custom of the manour.

Sole TENANT, a tenant who has
no other joined with him.

Joint TENANTS, are tenants that
have an equal right in lands or tene­
ments, by virtue of one title.

TENANTS in common, are such as
have equal right, but held by divers
titles.

TENANTABLENESS [of tenens, L.
holding, or tenant, F. able and ness]
capableness or fitness to be held, pos­
sessed, or inhabited by a tenant.

TENDER-HEARTED [of tendresse, 
F. and heort, Sax.] of a tender, com­
miserating, and kind disposition.

TENDERLING [of tendresse, F.] one
that is or has been tenderly brought up.

TENDINOSE [of tendo, L. tendon, 
F. full of tendons.

TENDINOUS [of tendo, L. tendon, 
F. full of tendons.

A TENDRIL [with Botanists] is a
clasper, or that little curling part of
plants by which they climbing take
hold of any prop for their support.

TENEBRÆ [in the Roman church] 
a service used on Wed­
nesday, Thursday and Friday before Ea­
ster, in representation of Christ's agony
in the garden. The manner is thus:
there are fifteen lamps or candles light­
ed, which is just the number of psalms
or canticles that are in the office. These
being lighted on a triangular sconce, at
the end of every psalm that the priest 
repeats, one of the candles is put out, 
till at the end the congregation is left
in darkness,  L.

TENEBRES [in the Roman church] 
a service used on Wed­
nesday, Thursday and Friday before Ea­
ster, in representation of Christ's agony
in the garden. The manner is thus:
there are fifteen lamps or candles light­
ed, which is just the number of psalms
or canticles that are in the office. These
being lighted on a triangular sconce, at
the end of every psalm that the priest 
repeats, one of the candles is put out, 
till at the end the congregation is left
in darkness,  L.

TENEBROSE [tenebrosus, L. tene­
breux, F.] dark, gloomy.

TENMENTALE [in Ancient Cu­
stoms] the num­
ber of ten men, which in the days of
our English Saxon ancestors, was also
called a Decennary, and ten decenna­
ries made what we call an hundred.

TEMANTALE [in Ancient Cu­
stoms] the num­
ber of ten men, which in the days of
our English Saxon ancestors, was also
called a Decennary, and ten decenna­
ries made what we call an hundred.

TENENT [in Heraldry] a term used 
for something that sustains or holds up
the shield or coat-armour, and is gene­
rally synonymous with the supporter.

TENESMUS [of tenere, L. to hold
τενεσμὺς of τεἰνω, Gr. to stretch out]
a continual desire of going to stool.

TENET [q. tentum, a thing held, of
tenet, L. i. e. he holdeth] an opinion or
doctrine professedly held by some divine
philosopher, &c.

TENNE [in Heraldry] is
what is commonly in Eng­
lish called tawny, and some
call it brusk: the colour is
made of red and yellow
mixed together, and is expressed in
engraving by lines diagonal, from the
sinister chief and traverse. In blazon­
ing by celestial things, it is called the
dragon's head; and by precious stones, 
the hyacinth. See the figure.

Image omitted.



TENNIS [q. d. tens] a sort of play at
ball.

TENON [un tenon, F.] the square 
end of a piece of tim­
ber, diminished by one third part of its
thickness, fitted into the hole of ano­
ther piece called a mortoise.

TENNON [un tenon, F.] the square 
end of a piece of tim­
ber, diminished by one third part of its
thickness, fitted into the hole of ano­
ther piece called a mortoise.

TENOR [tenor, L. teneur, F.] man­
ner, estate, circumstance, order, series.

TENSES [of tems, F. or tempus, L.]
tenses are times of action, and they are
three, Past, Present, and Future, though
Grammarians make five. The Past may
be divided, as the Latin do, into Im­
perfect, as, I did love, and the Preter­
perfect, as, I have loved. The French
go farther, and divide the Past into five
parts, as the Preterit Imperfait, the
Preterit Indifiné, Preterit Parfait, Pre­
terit plusque parfait and Preterit Inde­
finé compose; the French also make two
Future Tenses, as the Simple Future and
the Compound Future. In the Optative
Mood the French add one Tense, and
make it consist of three simple and
three compos'd: But it were to be
wish'd, for the sake of learners, that
there were fewer tenses as well as
moods, or else that they were more
certain; for we frequently meet with
one tense made use of for another, and
most languages make use of the Present
for the Future Tense.

TENSIBLE [tensibilis, L.] that may
be extended.

TENSIBLENESS, capableness of be­
ing extended.

TENSIVE [tensivus, L.] belonging
to extension.

TENTATIVE [of tentare, L. to try]
of or pertaining to an essay or trial.



A TENTATIVE, an essay or effort 
whereby persons try their strength or 
sound an affair, &c. to see whether 
or no it will succeed.

TENTATIVE [in French Universit.] 
the first thesis or art that a student in 
the theology school holds to show his 
capacity, to obtain the degree of bat­
chelor.

TENTH [of tien, Sax. 10.]

TENTHLY, in the tenth place or
order.

TEPHROMANCY [τεφρομαντεία of
τέφρα ashes, and μαντεία, Gr. divination]
divination by ashes, which was per­
formed in the following manner: they
wrote the things they had a mind to be
resolv'd about in ashes, upon a plank or
any such thing; and this they expos'd
to the open air, where it was to con­
tinue for some time; and those letters
that remained whole, and were no way
defaced by the winds or other accidents, 
were thought to contain in them a so­
lution of the question.

TEPIDNESS [tepiditas, L.] luke­
warmness.

TERAPHIM [םיפדת, Heb.] some
have imagin'd that the teraphims men­
tion Judges xvii. 5. were the houshold
gods of the Heathens; but this does not
agree with what is said in the same
place, where mention is made of a gra­
ven image and a molten image, which
were the houshold gods. Others ra­
ther think they were Talismanical re­
presentations, consecrated by devilish
ceremonies, to engage some evil spirit
to answer in them the demands of their
worshippers, and give oracles. Elias 
Levita relates, that they were made in
the manner following, viz. that they
killed some man, who was a first born
son, and pulled off his head, embalmed
it, and set it on a plate of gold, and
engraved on it the name of the spirit 
that they invocated for answers to their
questions, and placed it in a hole or 
place in the wall, made on purpose 
for it; and having lighted lamps, &c.
round it, fell down before it and wor­
shipped it.

TERATOLOGY [of τέρατα, won­
derful things, and λέγω, Gr.] is when
bold writers, fond of the sublime, in­
termix something great and prodigious 
in every thing they write, whether
there be foundation for it in reason or 
not, and this is what is call'd bombast.

TERGEMINOUS [tergeminus, L.] 
three-double.

TERM [in Grammar] a particular 
word, action, or expression in a lan­
guage.

Military TERMS [among the ancient
Greeks] the heads of certain deities, 
placed on square land-marks of stone, 
&c. to mark the several Stadia, &c. 
in the roads.

TERM [in Anchitecture] a kind of
statue or column, adorned at the top
with the figure of a man's, woman's or
satyr's head, as a capital, and the lower
part ending, as a sheath or scabbard.

TERM [in Geometry] is sometimes
used for a point, and sometimes a line, 
&c. a line is the term of a superficies, 
and a superficies of a solid.

TERMS of Art, words, which, be­
sides their literal and popular meaning, 
which they either have or may have in
common language, bear a further and
peculiar meaning in some art or science.

TERMAGANTNESS [probably of
ter magnitudo, i. e. three times magni­
tude] a termagant disposition, the rant­
ing, hectoring, robust temper or be­
haviour of a masculine woman.

TERMINABLE [terminabilis, L.]
that may be ended.

TERMINALIA [among the Romans]
a feast of land-marks, observed in ho­
nour of Terminus, the deity of bounds, 
for adjusting and distinguishing the li­
mits of fields and every man's estate.

TERMINISTS, a sect or branch of
the Calvinists, who hold five particular
tenets, as to the term or time of grace.

TERMINUS [among the Romans]
the god of bounds and limits. The
people of Rome were commanded to
set stones on the confines of their
ground, which were call'd Terminalia;
and upon them they offered to Jupiter
every year; and if any one was so pre­
sumptuous as to remove them, his
head was to make satisfaction to Jupi­
ter, to whom they were consecrated;
these stones were every year crowned
with flowers, and milk was poured
upon them to the god Terminus.

TERMLY, every term, as often as
the terms of law return.

A TERNION [ternio, L.] a ternion, 
or number of three.

TERPSICHORE [τέρψίχορη of τέρψῖς,
delectation, and χορεῖα, a dance, Gr.]
one of the nine muses, to whom is
attributed the invention of dancing and
balls. The ancients used to represent
her in painting, &c. with a chearful
countenance, and playing upon some
instrument; having her head adorned
with a coronet of feathers of divers
colours, but chiefly green, in token of
the victory, the muses obtain'd over
the syrens, &c. by singing.



TERRACEOUS [terraceus, L.] of, 
or belonging to the earth.

TERRAPINE [in Virginia] a tortoise
or turtle.

TERRA Samia, a white, stiff, tough
earth, brought from the island Samos, 
 L.

TERRA a terra, Gallies and other
vessels are said to go terra a terra, when
they never go far from the coast.  L.

TERRAIGNOL [with Horsemen] is
a horse who cleaves to the ground, that
can't be made light upon the hand, that
can't be put upon his haunches, that
raises his fore quarters with difficulty, 
that is charged with shoulders; and, in
general, one whose motions are all
short, and too near the ground.

TERRAIN [with Horsemen] is the
manage ground upon which the horse
makes his pist or tread.

TERRAGE [in Architect.] the roof
of a house that is flat, and whereon
one may walk; also the covering of a
building which is in platform; also a
balcony with projectures.

TERRENE [terenum, L.] the earth, 
the earthly habitation, Milton.

TERRENENESS [of terrenus, L.]
earthiness.

TEREE plain [in Fortification] is a
platform or horizontal surface of the
rampart lying level, only with a little
slope on the outside for the recoil of the
canon. It is terminated by the parapet
on that side toward the field, and by
the inner Talas on the other, toward
the body of the place.

TERRE-Tenant, a tenant that holds
land; as when a lord of a manour has
a freeholder, who lets out his freehold
to another to be occupied, this occu­
pier is called the Terre Tenant, F.

TERRER [of terra, L. land] a
book or roll wherein
the several lands, either of a private
person, or of a town, college, or
church, &c. are described; and this
ought to contain the number of acres, 
the site, boundaries, tenants names, &c.

TERRIER [of terra, L. land] a
book or roll wherein
the several lands, either of a private
person, or of a town, college, or
church, &c. are described; and this
ought to contain the number of acres, 
the site, boundaries, tenants names, &c.

TERRESTRIAL Line is a tight line, in which the geometri­
cal place and that of the picture or
draught intersect one another.

TERRESTRIALNESS [of terrestris, 
L. terrestre, F. and ness] earthiness, 
the being earthly, or pertaining to the
earth.

TERRICOLIST [terricola, L.] one
who inhabits or dwells upon the earth.

TERIER [Ancient Customs] a col­
lection of acknowledge­
ments of vassals or tenants of a lordship, 
containing the rents, services, &c. they 
owe to their lord, and serving as a title
or claim for demanding and executing
the payments thereof.

TERAR [Ancient Customs] a col­
lection of acknowledge­
ments of vassals or tenants of a lordship, 
containing the rents, services, &c. they 
owe to their lord, and serving as a title
or claim for demanding and executing
the payments thereof.

TERRIER [with Hunters] the lodge 
or hole which foxes, badgers, rabbets, 
&c. dig for themselves under ground,
to save themselves from the hunters;
and hence Terrier, a little hound, who
hunts those animals, who creeps into
the ground like a ferret, and either af­
frights and bites them, or drags them 
out at the holes.

TERRIFICK [terrificus, L.] terrify­
ing, causing terror or fear.

TERRIGENOUS [terrigena, L.] 
born, bred, or ingender'd of the earth.

TERRILOQUY [of terriloquus, L.] 
the speaking of terrible or dreadful 
things.

TESSELATED [tessellatus, L.] che­
quered with inlaid pieces of wood, 
stone, of any other thing, as a pave­
ment of Mosaic work, made of curious 
small, square marbles, bricks or tiles, 
called Tessellæ, from the form of dice.

TEST, a furnace for melting iron, 
a sort of copper for refining silver, &c.

TESTA de Nevil [so called, because
'tis said to have been compiled by Jol­
land Nevil, an itinerant justice in the
time of king Henry III.] an authentick
record kept in the king's remembran­
cer's office in the exchequer, contain­
ing an account of all lands held in grand
or petty sergeanty, with fees and es­
cheats to the king.

TESTAMENT Nuncupative, a last
will made by word of mouth before
sufficient witnesses.

TESTATION, a bearing witness, 
a testifying, proving, witnessing, or
evidencing,  L.

TESTE, a word commonly subscri­
bed in the last part of every writ, 
where the date begins thus; teste me
ipso, i. e. witness my self, if it be an
original writ in the king's name; but
if it be a judicial writ, it bears the name
of the chief judge of the court, out of
which it issues, as teste Petro King 
Equite, &c.

TESTICULATED Root [with Bo­
tan.] is a kind of tuberous root, for it
consists of two knobs resembling a pair 
of testicles, as in some species of Orchis.

TESTIFICATOR, he that testifies, 
 L.

TESTONS [so called from their ha­
ving an head or Testa, or Tête, F. upon 
them] whence they are by us called
Testors or Testers. They were either
coined here or in France, in the time of



Henry VIII. and went in France for
eighteen-pence; and probably they
went for the same here. They were
made of brass, covered with silver.
They went in England in the time of
Henry VIII. for twelve pence, and sunk
in Edward VI's time to nine-pence, 
and afterwards to six-pence, and still
retain the name of Testor.

TESTUDINATED [testudinatus, L.]
vaulted, made like the shell of a tor­
toise, bowing like a vault.

TESTUDO [with Poets] a lyre, be­
cause it is said to have been made by
Mercury, its inventer, of the back or
hollow shell of the sea-tortoise.

TESTUDO, a tortoise; also a vault­
ed roof,  L.

TESTUDO [with the Ancients] a
kind of cover or skreen made by the
soldiers bucklers, held over their
heads, they being in close order.

TETANICK [tetanicus, L. of τετα­
νιχὸς,Gr.] having a crick in the neck, 
or cramp in it, that holdeth it so stiff
that it cannot bow.

To TETHER a Horse [entraver, F.]
to tie him so in a pasture, that he may 
eat all round him the length of the 
line, but no farther.

TETHYS [of τήθη, Gr. a nurse, be­
cause water feeds and nourishes all 
things] according to the poets, the 
daughter of Cælus and Vesta, the sister 
of Saturn, the wife of Neptune, and 
goddess of the sea.

TETRACTYS [in Anc. Geom.] a 
point, a line, a surface, and a solid.

TETRADITES, [a name given to 
several sects of Hereticks, on account 
of the respect they bore to the τετρὰς,
or number four.

TETRAEDRON [τε­
τραέδρον, Gr.] one of the 
five regular bodies con­
tained under four equal 
and equilateral triangles, 
which being folded up, 
will each of them represent the Tetrae­
dron.

Image omitted.



TETRAGON [in Astrol.] an aspect 
of two planets with regard to the 
earth, when they are distant from each 
other a fourth part of the circle or 90 
degrees.

TETRAGONIAS [with Astron.] a 
comet, the head of which is of a qua­
drangular form, and its tail or train 
long, thick, and uniform, and not 
much different from the meteor called 
Trabs.

TETRAGONISTICAL Calculus, is 
the same with the summatory or diffe­
rential Calculus of Leibnitz, or summa­
tory arithmetick, i. e. the art of find­
ing the flowing quantity from the
fluxion.

TETRAPENTEÆTERIS [τετραπεν­
ταετηρὶς, Gr.] an olympiad, the space
of four years, and the beginning of the
fifth.

TETRAPETALOUS Flower [with
Botanists] is one that consists but of
four single coloured leaves, called Pe­
tala, set round the Stylus to compose
the flower. And Mr. Ray divides them
into, 1. Such as have an uniform, te­
trapetalous flower, and their seed-­
vessels a little oblongish, which he
therefore calls Siliquose. 2. Such as
have their seed-case or vessel shorter, 
which he calls Capsulatæ and Siliculosæ, 
3. Such as have a kind of or seeming
tetrapetalous flower, i. e. a monope­
talous one deeply divided into four 
partitions.

TETRAPETALOIDES [with Bo­
tanists] is when the flower is deeply 
cut into four parts, as the flowers of 
Vermilion, Speedwell, &c.

TETRAPHYLLOUS [τετραφύλλος, 
of τὲτρα, four, and φυλλον, a leaf, Gr.] 
consisting of four leaves.

TETRAPLA [of τετραϖλοῦς, Gr.
i. e. four-fold] a bible disposed by Ori­
gen under four columns, with each a
different Greek Version, viz. that of
Aquila, that of Symmachus, that of the
Septuagint, and that of the Theodosian.

TETRAPTOTE [τετραπτωτον, Gr.]
a defective noun, having no more than
four cases.

TETRAPYRENOUS [with Botan.]
which has four seeds or kernels, as
Agrifolium, Holly, &c.

TETRARCHATE [tetrarchias, L.
τετραρχία, Gr.] the fourth part of a
country under the same government.

TETRASPERMOS [with Botanists]
that bears four seeds, as Borage, Sage, 
Rosemary, &c.

TETTER-BERRIES, the berries of
the white briony.

TEUTATES, a name by which
the ancient Gauls worshipped Mercury, 
to whom they sacrificed human vic­
tims; the Druids either burning, 
piercing them with arrows, or strang­
ling them in the middle of their tem­
ples.

TEUTONICK [of Teutones, as some
think of Tuisco, the sun of Mercury] be­
longing to the Teutones, an ancient
people of Germany, now called Duytish 
or Dutch people; as the Teutonick lan­
guage.



TEUTONICK Order, an order of
knights instituted in the year 1190, by
Henry, king of Jerusalem, and other
princes, in favour of the Germans.
Their institution was under the walls
of Acon or Ptolemais, in the Holy land, 
and confirmed in a church dedicated to
the Virgin Mary, whence they were
called Marian knights. The order is
now little known, though there is still
a great matter of it kept up.

TEUTONES [so called of Teuto or 
Tuisco, their god, whom they esteem­
ed to have been in that land, and of 
the earth] a people of Germany, called
Almains. Aventinus will have this
Tuisco to be the son of Noah, who was
sent by his father into Germany 135 
years after the flood.

TEXT, an original discourse, ex­
clusive of any note or interpretation.

TEXT-Book [in Universities] is a
classick author written very wide by
the students, to give room for an in­
terpretation dictated by the master, 
&c. to be inserted in the interlines.

TEXTRINE [textrinus, L.] pertain­
ing to weavers or weaving.

TEXTURE [in Physicks] the ar­
rangement or cohesion of several slen­
der bodies or threads, interwoven or
entangled among each other, as in
cloths, stuffs, the webs of spiders, &c.

THALASSIARCHY [thalassiarchia, 
L. of θαλασσίαρχία of θαλασσα, the
sea, and ἂρχος a ruler, Gr.] the admi­
ralship, or the office of the admiral.

THALIA [Θαλία of τοῖ θάλλειν, Gr.
i. e. to be green or flourish] one of
the nine muses, to whom the poets
ascribe the invention of geometry and
husbandry. Thalia was represented in
painting, &c. with a smiling counte­
nance, having on her head a coronet
of ivy, in a mantle of carnation, em­
broidered with silver twist, and golden
spangles, holding in her left hand a
vizard. The ivy intimated that she 
was mistress of comick poetry.

THALYSIA [of τοῖ θάλλειν, Gr.] fe­
stivals among the Athenians, on which
they offered sacrifices, that their fruits
might have a prosperous growth.

THAMMUZ [םמת, as some say, 
from תומת, Heb.] to die, or as others
will have it, from an Egyptian word
that signifies to disappear. This deity
is spoken of in the 8th of Ezekiel, and
is supposed to be the Adonis of the
Greeks, whom the poets represent as 
the favourite of Venus, so that when
Mars went about to kill him, she pass'd
with such haste over some reeds that 
stood in her way, that she wounded
her feet, and the drops of blood, fal­
ling upon some white roses, turned
them red. This Adonis is said to have
been killed by a boar, at which Venus 
was very much afflicted, and therefore
interceded with Proserpine to send him
back again; but Proserpine was so en­
amoured with him, that she only
granted that he might visit Venus one
part of the year, and be with her the
other. The Pagans, in the month of
June, used to lament his death, and
the women used to carry a dead body
to the ground, and lamented, to per­
petuate the memory of his death.
Some relate the story of Thammuz in 
another manner, and tell us that he
was a priest, who having been wrong­
fully put to death by a king of Babylon, 
the king, being tormented with re­
morse of conscience, laboured to make
satisfaction to him for the injury, and
caused many fabulous stories to be re­
lated of him, that the people might be
persuaded that he was admitted among
the gods, and commanded that every 
year there should be an universal
mourning for him.

THANKSGIVING [of ðancaſ and
ʒifan, Sax.] the giving of thanks.

THANKLESS [ðancleaſ, Sax.] un­
deserving of thanks; also ungrateful.

THANKLESNESS [ðancleaſ­
neſſe, Sax.] an unthankful temper, 
ungratefulness.

THARGELIA, [Athenian festivals 
observed in honour] of Apollo and 
Diana. In this festival the first fruits 
of the earth were offered up, as an 
earnest of her fertility, being boiled in
a pot called Thargelos.

A THATCHER [of ðacian, Sax.]
one who covers houses or barns with 
thatch.

THAUMATURGUS [θαυματουργοὶ, 
Gr.] a worker of miracles, a title which 
the Roman Catholicks give to several 
of their saints.

THAUMATURGY [of θαὖμα, a
wonder, and ἀυτουργέω, I myself work, 
Gr.] any art that does, or seems to do 
wonders; or, as it is defined by Dr.
Dee, a mathematical science, which
gives certain rules for the making of
strange works to be perceived by the 
sense, yet to be greatly wondered at.

THEA, festivals to Bacchus, in whose 
temple three empty vessels are related 
to be miraculously replenished with 
wine in the night time, although the
doors were secured under locks and 
bars.



THEANDRIC [of Θεὸς, God, and 
ἀνὴρ, Gr. man] divine and human, un­
derone, or God-man.

THEANTHROPOS [Θέάνθρωπος, of 
Θεος God, and ανθρωπος, Gr. man] a 
title given to our Saviour Jesus Christ, 
as being both God and Man.

THEATRE [theatrum, L. theatré, 
F. of θηάτρον of θεἇ­
σθιαι, Gr. to see or behold] any scaffold, 
or building erected for the exhibiting
publick shows or fights, a stage, a play­
house, a building contrived with all
manner of conveniences, both for the
actors and spectators, for the represen­
ting and beholding comedies, tragedies
&c.

THEATER [theatrum, L. theatré, 
F. of θηάτρον of θεἇ­
σθιαι, Gr. to see or behold] any scaffold, 
or building erected for the exhibiting
publick shows or fights, a stage, a play­
house, a building contrived with all
manner of conveniences, both for the
actors and spectators, for the represen­
ting and beholding comedies, tragedies
&c.

The THEATRE of M. Scaurus, (the
son-in-law of Sylla the dictator) then
being Ædile; the stage had three
heights one above another, in which
were 360 columns; the middle height 
of columns were all of glass, the other
of marble.

All the boards and planks were gild­
ed. The columns below were 38 foot
high, between which were placed
about 3000 statues.

The furniture was so extravagantly
rich, that when it was carried back, 
(for this theatre was but a temporary
thing, scarce for one month) to his seat
of pleasure at Tusculum, the slaves en­
raged at the superfluity, fired the house
and burnt as much as came to a 100
millions of Sesterces.

The two theatres of C. Curio, were
vastly large, being capable to contain
the greatest part of the people of
Rome.

Yet (what is to be admired) each
theatre hung but upon one hook, and
was so contrived, that to see the stage
plays in the afternoon, they should sit
back to back, and then in a trice the
theatres were turned about (the people
not at all shifting their places or stir­
ring) against the afternoon, when
sword-players and fencers were to fight, 
each man being in his rank and order, 
by the meeting of the horns and cor­
ners of it together, which then made 
one round amphitheatre.

The Amphitheatre begun by the
emperor Vespasian, and finished by his
son Titus, was so high, that the eye of
man could hardly reach it, reared with
rivers of treasure, spent in the rearing 
of it.

It contained on the steps only easy
seats for 87000 persons, so that the va­
cant places besides, would contain
about 20000 more. It was situated 
where Nero's fish-ponds had sometime 
stood.

THEATRE [in Architect.] is by the 
Italians used for the assemblage of se­
veral buildings, which by a happy dis­
position and elevation represents an
agreeable scene to the eye.

THEATRICALLY [of theatricus, 
L. of θεατριχῶς, Gr.] after the man­
ner or usage of the theatre.

THEATRIGALNESS, the being ac­
cording to the custom or manner of
the theatre.

TREFT-Hold, the receiving goods
from a thief, to favour and maintain
him, the punishment of which was
anciently imprisonment, now transpor­
tation.

THEMATISM [θεματισμός, Gr.]
the decorum and graceful appearance
of any pile of building: it is the mak­
ing the whole aspect of a fabrick so
correct, that nothing shall appear but
what is approved and warranted by
some authority.

THEMIS [Θέμις, Gr. i, e. that which
is right] a moral deity or goddess, 
whom the poets feign to have first
taught men right and justice, and
thence is taken frequently for justice
itself; the sister of Jupiter, and daugh­
ter of Cœlus and Terra, on whom he
begot Minerva. She had an oracle
in Bœotia, near Cæphisus, She is also
called Carmenta, the mother of Evan­
der, and said to have lived Anno Mundi
2998.

THEOCATAGNOSTES [of Θεός
and χαταγινώσχω, Gr. to reprehend] a
sect of Hereticks, who presumed to find
fault with certain words and actions of
God, and to blame many things in the
scriptures.

THEOLOGICALNESS [of Θεολογιχός
of Θεολογια, Gr. theologia, L. and ness]
a theological nature or quality.

THEOLOGIUM, a stage or little
place in the theatres, where the ordi­
nary actors appeared, also the places
where the gods appeared, including
the machines whereon they descended, 
and from which they spoke.  L.

THEOLOGIST [theologus, L. theo­
logien, F. of #x0398;εο­
λογος, of Θεός, God, and λόγος, a word,
Gr.] a theologer, a divine, a professor 
&c. of divinity.

THEOLOGUE [theologus, L. theo­
logien, F. of #x0398;εο­
λογος, of Θεός, God, and λόγος, a word,
Gr.] a theologer, a divine, a professor 
&c. of divinity.

Natural THEOLOGY, is the know­
ledge persons have of God by his works, 
by the sole light of nature and reason.

Supernatural THEOLOGY, is that
knowledge we obtain by revelation.



Positive THEOLOGY, is the know­
ledge of the sacred scriptures, and of 
the meaning of them, agreeable to the 
opinions of the fathers and councils, 
without argumentation.

Moral THEOLOGY, is that which
instructs us in the divine laws, relating 
to manners.

Scholastick THEOLOGY, is that
which proceeds by reasoning, or which 
derives the knowledge of federal 
divine things from some established 
principles of faith.

THEOMACHIST [Θεομάχος of Θεός
God, and μαχή of μἀχομαι, Gr. to fight]
one who fights against or resists God.

THEOMAGI [of Θείος divine, and
μαγοι, Gr. wise-men] persons skilled in 
divine wisdom.

THEOMANCY [Θεομαντεια, Gr.] is
different from artificial divination, 
which though, in some sense, it may 
be said to be given by the gods, yet does
not immediately proceed from them, 
being the effect of experience and ob­
servation. And μαντεια, is opposed to
oracular divination, i. e. that which is 
delivered by interpreters, as at Delphi, 
because that was confined usually to a 
fixed and stated time, and always to a cer­
tain place; for the Pythia could not be 
inspired in any place but Apollo's tem­
ple, and upon the sacred Tripos, where­
as the Theomantists were free and un­
confined, being able (after the offering 
of sacrifices, and performance of the
usual rites) to prophesy at any time, 
or in any part of the world. It was a
divine Afflatus or inspiration: The
manner of receiving of which was thus, 
the receivers of it were possessed with
a divine fury, swelling with rage, like
persons distracted and besides them­
selves, foaming and making a strange
and terrible noise, gnashing with their
teeth, shivering and trembling, and
making other antick motions.

THEOPASCHITES [of Θεός God, and
παχω, Gr. to suffer] a sect of Hereticks, 
who held that the whole Trinity suf­
fered in the person of Jesus Christ.

THEOMANTISTS [Θεμάντεις, Gr.]
were of three sorts. One fort was
possessed with prophesying Dæmons
which lodged within them, and dictated
what they should answer to those that
enquired of them, or spoke out of the
bellies or breasts of the possessed per­
sons, that all the while remained
speechless, or not so much as moving
their tongue or lips. The second sort
were such as pretended to what is com­
monly called Enthusiasm, and different 
from the former, who contained the 
deity himself; whereas those were only
governed, acted, or inspired by him, 
and instructed in the knowledge of
what was to happen. The third sort
were those that were cast into trances
or extasies, in which they lay like dead
men or asleep, deprived of all sense and 
motion; but after some time returning
to themselves, gave strange relations
of what they had seen and heard.

THEONOMANTIA [of Θεός ὂνομα
and μαντεια, Gr. divination] a sort of
divination by invocating the names of
God.

THEOREM [theorema, L. theorem, 
F. of Θεωρημα, Gr.] is a speculative
proposition, demonstrating the proper­
ties of any subject.

An universal THEOREM [with Ma­
thematicians] is one that extends uni­
versally to any quantity without res­
triction; as that the rectangle of the
sum, and difference of any two quan­
tities, is equal to the difference of their
squares.

A Particular THEOREM, is when, 
it extends only to a particular quantity.

A Negative THEOREM, is one that
demonstrates the impossibilities of an
assertion, as, that the sum of two bi­
quadrate numbers cannot make a
square.

A Local THEOREM, which relates
to a surface; as that triangles of the
same base and altitude are equal.

THEOREMATIGAL [θεωρηματιχός
Gr.] of or pertaining to theorems.

THEOREMATIST [of θεορηματιχός, 
Gr.] a finder out or producer of theo­
rems.

THEORETICK Physicians, such as
apply themselves to a careful study of
what relates to health and diseases, the
principles of the human body, its struc­
ture and parts, with their actions and
uses, and whatsoever befals the body, 
either naturally or preternaturally;
the differences of diseases, their na­
tures, causes, signs, indications. &c.
the properties of plants, drugs, and
other medicines.

THEORICAL Astronomy, is that
part of the science that considers the
true structure and dispositions of the
heavens and heavenly bodies, and ac­
counts for their various Phænomena
therefrom; in opposition to that which
considers their apparent structure, or
their disposition as viewed by the eye, 
which is called Spherical Astronomy.

THEORY [θεωρια, of θεωρέω Gr. to 
contemplate] a doctrine which termi­



nates in the sole speculation or conside­
ration of its subject, without any view
to the practice or application of it.

THEOXENIA [θεόξένια Gr.] a sa­
crifice that was offered to all the gods, 
observed chiefly by the Athenians, and
by the Romans stiled Dies Pandicularis
and Communicarius. The Athenians
consecrated them to the honour of
foreign gods, or the gods or Genii of
hospitality.

THERAPEUTÆ [of Θεραπευέιν, Gr.
to serve or minister, a word which
signifies a servant of God.] The name
of a sect among the Hebrews, of whom
Philo has describ'd the way of living, 
in his book of a contemplative Life.
Many of the ancient fathers have
thought, that they were Christians, and
that Philo observing their admirable
manner of life, had a mind that his
nation should have the credit of them.

They differed from the Essenians 
in this, that the Therapeutæ addicted
themselves to a contemplative Life, and
the Essenians to an active life.

THERAPEUTICE [therapeutica
ars, L. thera­
peutique, F. of θεραπευτιχή of θεραπέυειν, 
Gr. to heal] that part of physick that
teaches the method of curing diseases, 
or that is employ'd in finding out re­
medies against them, and prescribing 
and applying them.

THERAPEUTICK [therapeutica
ars, L. thera­
peutique, F. of θεραπευτιχή of θεραπέυειν, 
Gr. to heal] that part of physick that
teaches the method of curing diseases, 
or that is employ'd in finding out re­
medies against them, and prescribing 
and applying them.

THERAPEUTICKS, the same as
Therapeutice.

THERAPHIM [םיפרת which some
derive of חפד, Heb. he left, because
the people quitted every thing to con­
sult them] idols or images, which, 
some say, were made in the shape of
men, which, when raised upright, they
spake at certain hours, and under cer­
tain constellations, by the influences
of the heavenly bodies: Others say, 
that they were instruments made of
brass, which pointed out the hours and
minutes of future events, as directed
by the stars. Rabbi Eliezer relates, 
that, in the making of these: Teraphims, 
they killed a first-born child, clove the
head of it and season'd it with salt and
oil; that they wrote the name of an
impure spirit on a plate of gold, and
placed it under the tongue of the dead
child, having laid the head against a
wall; and, having lighted lamps before
it, pray'd to it, and it talk'd to them.
But whether Loban's teraphims were
thus made, is disputed by the learned.

THEREOF [ðaelig;rof, Sax.] of it.

THEREUPON [ðaelig;ron, Sax.] upon
that thing, &c.

THERMES [so called from Termi­
nus, the Roman god of
boundaries or land marks] certain re­
presentations of human figures, with
half bodies, as if they proceeded out
of a sheath or case, which were anci­
ently fix'd in the earth as land-marks.
In architecture they are used as a kind
of symbolical column.

TERMES [so called from Termi­
nus, the Roman god of
boundaries or land marks] certain re­
presentations of human figures, with
half bodies, as if they proceeded out
of a sheath or case, which were anci­
ently fix'd in the earth as land-marks.
In architecture they are used as a kind
of symbolical column.

THERMOPOTE [thermopota, L. of
θερμοπότα of θερμὸν and ππίνω, Gr.] a
drinker of hot liquors.

THERMOSCOPE [of θέρμη and σχό­
πος of σχέπτομαι, Gr.] an instrument
for the same use as the thermometer;
but some make this difference, that the
thermoscope shews the increase and
decrease of heat and cold in the air, 
but by the thermometer the heat and
cold of the air may be measured.

THESMOPHORIA [among the Athe­
nians] festivals, in which, after the
manner of the Egyptians, the women
fasted; so denominated of Ceres, call'd
θεσμοφόρος, or the law-giver, because, 
before she had invented bread-corn, 
men rov'd about without law.

THESMOPHORY [thesmophoria, L.
of θεσμοφορία, Gr.] law-giving or ma­
king.

THETA [Θ θ, Gr. this letter is said
to take its name from Death, it being
the first letter of Θανατος, Gr. Death, 
having in the midst of it a dart in token
of Death] was, by the ancients used to
signify Death; for judges set this letter
on their names or heads who were con­
demned to die; as likewise did captains
in their briefs, wherein were contained
the names of their soldiers, by which
a certain account could be given to
their sovereign how many were slain.

THETIS [of των πάντων θέτις Gr.]
the daughter of Nereus, whom when
Jupiter was about to have married, 
being told by Prometheus that the son
born of her would be greater than the
father, he broke off his suit, and she
was afterwards married to Peleus, and
bare him Achilles. She was painted as
a lady of a brown complexion, her
hair scattered about her shoulders, 
crowned with a coronet of periwinkle
and escallop shells, in a mantle of a sea-­
green, with chains and bracelets of
amber about her arms, and a branch
of red coral in her hand.

THEURGY [theurgia, L. of θεουργία
of Θεὸς, God, and ἒργον, Gr. work] ma­
gick operating by divine or celestial
means, or the power of doing extra­
ordinary and supernatural things by



lawful means, as prayer, invocation of 
God, &c. called by some white Magick.

THICKISH [of ðiccean, Sax. or
tickner, Dan.] somewhat thick.

THIEVERY [of ðeofian, Sax.]
stealing.

THINKING [of ðincan, Sax.] a ge­
neral name for any act or operation of
the mind, cogitations which bear seve­
ral names according to their various
modes, as, when an idea recurs to the
mind, without the object being present, 
it is called Remembrance. When the
mind seeks after it, and it is brought
again into view, it is called Recollec­
tion. When an idea is held long in the
mind under attentive consideration, it
is called Contemplation. When ideas
float in the mind, without regard or
reflection, it is called a Revery. When
ideas are taken express notice of, and, 
as it were, register'd in the memory, 
it is called Attention, And when the
mind fixes an idea in view, and con­
siders it on all sides, it is called Study
and Intention.

THIRD [in Musick] a concord result­
ing from a mixture of two sounds, 
containing an interval of two degrees.

THIRD Point [in Architect.] the
point of a section in the vertex of an
equilateral triangle.

THIRD-Night-Awn-hynd [Ant. Laws]
a guest who had lain three nights in
an inn, who was afterwards accounted
a domestick, and his host or landlord
was answerable for whatsoever offen­
ces he should commit.

THIRST [of  ðyrſt, Sax.] a dry­
ness of the throat, a painful sensation, 
occasioned by a preternatural vellifica­
tion of the nerves of the throat or
sauces, and producing a desire of drink­
ing.

THIRSTING [of ðyrſtan, Sax.]
being thirsty.

Knights of the THISTLE, a French
order of knights of the family of Bour­
bon, who bear this motto, Nemo me
impunè lacessit, i. e. None that provokes
me passes unpunished.

THISTLY [ðiſteliʒ full 
of thistles.

THITHERWARD [ðiðer-&wyn;earð, 
Sax.] towards that place.

THNETOPSYCHITES [of θνητὸς
mortal, and ψυχὴ, Gr. the soul] a sect 
who held that the soul of man was
perfectly like that of brutes, and died
with the body.

THOLUS [in Architect.] the roof of
a temple or church, the centre, scut­
cheon, or knot in the middle of an 
arched roof, the lanthorn or cupola of
a publick hall,

THOMÆANS, a certain sect among
the Indians in the East-Indies, who, 
according to tradition, receiv'd the
gospel from St. Thomas the apostle.

THOMISM, the doctrine of Thomas
Aquinas, and his followers, but chiefly
with respect to his opinions, as to pre­
destination and grace.

Image omitted.



THOR [Ðor, Sax.] a certain idol
highly esteemed by the Teutones and
ancient Saxons; they represented him
as a king crowned, sitting on a throne, 
majestically plac'd in a very large, spa­
cious hall, and there set as if he had
repos'd himself upon a bed; round his
crown, and in compass above and
about the same, were set or fixed
twelve bright burnished golden stars, 
and in his right hand he held a golden
scepter. They believ'd him to be of
marvellous power and might, and that
there was no people on the earth that
were not subject to him, and did not
owe him divine honour and service.
That he had the most extensive domi­
nion in Heaven and in earth. That in
the air he govern'd the winds and
clouds; and when he was displeased,



caus'd lightnings, thunders, and tem­
pests, with excessive rains, hail, and ill
weather; but being well pleased by
adoration, and sacrifice, and service of
his suppliants, he then bestow'd upon
them fair and seasonable weather; and
caus'd plenty of corn and fruits; and
defended them from plagues and all
other infectious diseases. The Lap­
landers represent him by the stump of a
tree, rudely form'd like the head of a
man, in which they stick a piece of
steel and flint, that he may strike fire
when he pleases; and a hammer lying
by him, which they fancy he uses
against evil spirits, as well as his bow
and arrows, and attribute to him the
sovereign authority of all the mischie­
vous and malevolent spirits that in­
habit the air, mountains and lakes.
They say the rainbow is his bow, 
wherewith he shoots, and they wor­
ship him as the author of life and
Death, and governour of all men.

Being thus accoutred, the image is
plac'd on a table or altar, that is gene­
rally behind their cabin, and round
this they generally stick branches of
pine-tree or birch, bordering the alley
or way that leads to it with branches
of the same.

They offer in sacrifice to him Rennes 
a sort of deer, and sometimes lambs, 
dogs, rats, and hens; and when they
have finish'd the sacrifices, they set
before the idol a sort of box, made of
the bark of the rind of trees, bits of
flesh taken from the body of the victim, 
with melted fat, taken from every
part, either for him to subsist on, or to
put him in mind of the last act of ado­
ration, till they offer up another.

From him Thursday takes its name.

THOROUGHLY [Ðruhlicʒ, Sax.]
after a thorough manner.

THOROUGH-fare [Ðruh-fare, 
Sax.] a passage thro' a place from one
street or place to another.

THOROUGH-lighted, [in Architect.]
a term used of rooms, which are said
to be so when they have windows at
both ends.

THOROUGH-stitch [Ðruʒh-ſtice, 
Sax.] as to go thorough-stitch, i. e. to
pursue a matter to the end or conclu­
sion.

THOROUGH-wax, an herb good in
ruptures.

THOUGHTLESS [Ðohtleaſ, Sax.] 
without thought.

THOUGHTLESLY [Ðohtleaſlice, 
Sax.] after a careless manner, unthink­
ingly.

THOUGHTLESNESS [Ðohtleaſ­
neſſe, Sax.] an unthinking faculty.

THREATS [of ðreatian, Sax.]
threatenings, menaces.

THREAD-BARE, worn so that the
threads appear.

To THREDDLE, to put thread in
the eye of a needle.

THREE-LEGGED Staff, an instru­
ment composed of wooden legs, made
with joints to shut all together, and to
take off in the middle for the more
convenient carriage, on the top of
which a ball or socket is commonly
fixed, to support and adjust the instru­
ments for surveying, astronomy, &c.

THRIPS, a little worm that breeds
in timber.

THROBBING [of θορυβείν, Gr. as
Minshew conjectures] beating, panting, 
or aching, as the heart or a swelling
does.

THROMBOSIS [θρόμβωσις, Gr.] a di­
sease in the bread, when the milk
grows to curds or grumous.

THROMBUS [with Surgeons] a small
swelling which arises after blood-let­
ting, when the orifice is made either
too small, or larger than the capaci­
ousness of the vessels will admit.

THROUGHLY [ðrhulic, Sax.]
thoroughly.

THROUGHOUT [ðrue-ute, Sax.]
thorough the whole.

A-Wind THRUSH, a bird so called
because in the beginning of winter it
comes into England in high winds.

A THRUST [prob of trusum of tru­
dere, L.] a push, shove, &c.

THULE, accounted by the ancient
poets, as Virgil, &c. to be the farthest
island or part of the world; some take
it to be Is-Land, lying beyond the Ork­
nies, and belonging to Norway. Camb­
den will have it to he Schetland, still by
seamen called Hyleusel.

THUMPING, a making a noise by
beating on a thing with the hand, &c.
also great, as a thumping lye. &c.

THUNDERING [of ðunnan, Sax.
donner, Dan. tonare, L. tonner, F.] mak­
ing a loud noise.

THUNDERING Barrels, are such as
are filled with bombs, grenades, and
other fire-works, to be rolled down a
breach.

THUNDER [ðunder Sax.] a
noise in the lowest region of the air, 
excited by a sudden kindling of sulphu­
reous exhalations; a rattling noise, 
which seems as if it passed through
arches.



THUNDROUS, of or pertaining to 
thunder. Milton.

THUNDER-BOLT [of ðunder­
bolt, Sax.] when any thing is broken
or fluttered by lightening, acting with
extraordinary violence, it is called a
Thunderbolt, and people imagine it to
be a hard body, and even a stone; but
the learned rather attribute it to the
subtilty, force, and penetrativeness of
the sulphureous matter. The pheno­
mena or effects of this supposed thun­
derbolt are very strange. It oftener
strikes on high places than on low; it
frequently burns persons clothes, with­
out touching their bodies; sometimes
breaks the bones, without leaving any
tokens of hurting the flesh and clothes, 
and has even melted a sword in the
scabbard, without hurting or seeming
to have touched the scabbard.

THUNDERINGLY, after the man­
ner of thunder, very noisy.

THY [ðine, Sax.] of or belonging
to thee.

THYME [thymus, L.θύμος, Gr.] the
herb commonly called Thyme.

THYMION a kind of wart, rag­
ged at the top like a
thyme leaf, or, as others will have it, 
of the colour of thyme flowers.

THYMIUM a kind of wart, rag­
ged at the top like a
thyme leaf, or, as others will have it, 
of the colour of thyme flowers.

THYRSUS [Θύρσος, Gr.] a rod or 
lance twisted round with ivy, which
was put into the hands of the soldiers
of Bacchus, or of those who celebrated
his festivals. Ovid describes them as
wound about with vine branches.

The Jews do at this day carry a sort
of Thyrsis, or something like them, in
the Feast of Tabernacles, and especially
in the Hosanna Rabba; they are bran­
ches of willow, myrtle and palm tree, 
bound up together with citrons or
oranges, which they wave or push in
a religious manner towards the four
quarters of the world.

TIARA, a high sharp pointed cap, 
anciently worn by sovereign princes, and
those of the blood royal among the
Persians.

The TICK [in Horses] a habit that
they take of pressing their teeth against
the manger, or all along the halter or
collar, as if they would bite it.

To go upon TICK, to go on score, to
take up goods, &c. upon trust or
credit.

TICKLISH, apt to be affected with
tickling or titillation, an action better
conceived than expressed; also ha­
zardous.

TICKLISH [with Horsemen] a horse
is said to be ticklish, that is too tender
upon the spur, and too sensible, that
does not freely fly the spur, but in some
measure resists them, throwing himself
up, when they come near and prick
his skin.

TICKLISHNESS, aptness to be
tickled; also hazardousness.

TID, nice, delicate, as a Tid-bit.

To TIDDLE, to indulge, or fondle, 
to make much of.

To bring the TIDE with them [Sea
Phrase] used when they are to go into
a harbour over a bar (i. e. a rock or
shelf) signifies that they will come in 
with the flood, that they may get over
the bar safely.

To flow TIDE and half TIDE [Sea
Phrase] is when the tide runs three
hours, which is four points of the com­
pass, in the Offing or open sea, longer
than it does by the shore; tho' at the
same time, by longer is not meant more
hours (because it always ebbs and flows
six hours) but that if it be high water
a-shore at twelve o'clock, it will not
be so in the Offing till three o'clock, 
which is the bound and time for run­
ning of a half tide.

Half TIDE and half Quarter [Sea 
Phrase] is when it flows more than tide
and half-tide, i. e. five points.

TIDINESS, cleverness, neatness, 
handiness.

TIDINGS [of betið or tiðan, Sax. 
to happen, q. d. things happening] an
account or relation of what has hap­
pened, or occurrences at a distance.

TIDY, clever, neat, tight in dress, 
transacting houshold affairs, &c. that
does business with cleverness and ad­
dress.

To TIE [of tian, Sax. or lier, F.
l mutato, in t of ligare, L.] to bind or
join together by a knot.

TIERCE [in Heraldry] signifies, that
the shield is divided into
three equal parts when
those parts, are of many
different colours or me­
tals; or if the Chief and
Base are both of the same
colour, when they are divided by a
Fesse, then the colour of the field is 
only to be express'd, and the Fesse men­
tioned. But if otherwise, it is proper
to say, Tierce en Fesse, and to mention
the first, second, or third colours or
metals; and if it be divided in Pale, to
say, Tierce en Pale, F.

Image omitted.



TIERCEL [with Falconers] a male 
hawk, so called, because it is
part less than the female in
and strength.



A TIFF, a small quantity of potable
liquors, as a tiff of punch, &c. also a
small fit of anger, &c.

To TIFF, to be angry, peevish, fret­
ful, or displeased at.

A TIGER [in Hieroglyphicks] repre­
sented a savage nature, and a hater of
all goodness, being accounted an animal
cruel and revengeful, and is reported
to fall into a violent rage when it
hears the found of a musical instru­
ment .

To TIGHTEN, to make straight, as
a line, cord, &c. also to dress after a
tight manner.

To TIGHY [a word framed from
the sound in laughing, as tè, hé, hé, hé]
to laugh childishly, wantonly, or in a
low tone.

TIGRINE [tigrinus, L. of τιγρινὸς, 
Gr.] of or like a tiger.

TIMAR [among the Turks] a fief, 
or possessions which the Grand Signior
grants to some of his subjects, who are
to serve him in his wars, the value of 
which may be 19999 aspers, but not to
exceed, for 20000 is the revenue of a
Zaim; for this the Timariots are o­
bliged to provide and equip a horseman
for every 3000 aspers per annum, and
are called Gibelines, and are formed
into regiments, having colonels, co­
lours and kettle drums; they are also
obliged to fight in person with the
Gibellines in the field, or at sea; nor are
they excused, altho' sick, being carried
in litters, and if they are children in
baskets, that they may be enured to
the fatigue of a camp from their child­
hood.

TIMARIOTS, Turkish soldiers who
enjoy the revenues of certain lands, 
allowed them by the Grand Signior to
serve in his armies.

TIMBER [timbre, Sax.] all those
kinds of trees, which being cut down
and seasoned, are useful for the car­
penter, joiner, or other workman to
work upon.

Rising TIMBERS [in a Ship] are
those thick planks that go both before
and behind on both sides, under the
ends of the beams and timber of the
second deck, to the third deck, half
deck, and quarter deck, so that the
timbers of the deck bear on them both
at the ship's sides.

Floor TIMBERS [in a Ship] are
those which
form the floor of it, that lie on the keel
and are fastened to it with bolts through
the keelson.

Ground TIMBERS [in a Ship] are
those which
form the floor of it, that lie on the keel
and are fastened to it with bolts through
the keelson.

TIMBRED, built, framed, made, as
light-timbred, made light; not heavy
and bulky in body, but fit for activity
and nimbleness.

TIME [tima, Sax. tempus, L. tems, 
F.] a certain measure or portion of
eternity, distinguished by the motion
of the sun, &c. or heavenly lumina­
ries, by which the distances and dura­
tion of sublunary affairs are measured.
Or time is otherwise defined to be a
succession of Phænomena, and the idea
that we have thereof consists in the or­
der of successive perceptions.

TIME [by the Ancients] was repre­
sented by an old man winged, or with
iron teeth; or by an old man bald, 
winged with a soythe and an hour-­
glass.

Astronomical TIME, simply taken
signifies the motion of the stars.

To TIME a thing well or ill, is to do
or transact it at a proper or improper
time.

TIME [in Fencing] is of three kinds, 
that of the sword, that of the foot, and 
that of the whole body.

TIME [with Horsemen] is sometimes
taken for the motion of a horse, that
observes measure and justness in the
manage; and sometimes it signifies the
time between two of his motions; also
the effect of one of the aids.

TIN [tin, Dan. étain, F. stannum, 
L.] a white metal. Chymists account
tin a middle metal between silver and
lead, and give it the name of defender
of metals, because that vessels tinned
over resist the fire better than others.
It is composed in the surface thereof
of white quick-silver, and inwardly of
red quick-silver and sulphur. Tin cal­
cined is heavier than it is uncalcined, 
which is contrary to all other bodies.

TIN [among Chymists] is called Ju­
piter.

Salt of Tin [with Chymists] is tin
calcined and distilled with vinegar
poured upon if, from which after­
wards passing through an operation by
fire, and being set in a cool place, a
very white salt is drawn.

Flower of TIN [in Chym.] a kind of
white Cosmetick or paint for the com­
plexion, drawn with Sal Armoniack by
sublimation.

Diaphoretick TIN [in Chym.] is fine
tin and regulus of antimony melted
twice, first together, and afterwards
with salt-petre, after which having
passed under various lotions or warn­
ings, a powder is procured.

Ceruss of TIN, a white powder made 
of tin, of which a Fucus is made, called
Spanish white.



Calx of TIN, the same as Bezoardi­
cum Joviale.

TINCAR, a sort of nitre or salt­
petre, Arabick.

TINCTILE [tinctilis, L.] that
wherewith a thing is dyed.

TINCTURE [in Chymistry] a disso­
lution of the most fine and volatile
parts of silver, made in spirits of wine;
by chymical writers it is expressed
by this character 🝈.

TINCTURE [m Heraldry] means
only the hue or colour of any thing;
and the two metals Or and Argent may
be comprehended under this denomina­
tion, because they are often represent­
ed by yellow and white.

TINCTURED [of tinctura, L.] co­
loured, stained, dyed; also having
gained an imperfect knowledge or
smattering of any art or science.

To TINGE [of  tingere, L.] to dip, to
colour, to give a tincture to, to dye
lightly.

TING-TANG, an imitative ex­
pression for the sound of a bell, &c.

To TINKER [of tinnire, L. to make
a tinkling noise] to mend vessels of
brass, copper, &c.

To TIP, to put on tips at the ends of
horns, brims of drinking-vessels, &c.
also to strike down nine-pins, &c. by
a cast of the bowl.

TIPPLER [prob. q. d. sippler, or
sipper, of sip] a frequent drinker, a
fuddle cap.

TIPPLING [q. d. sippling, or sipping]
frequent drinking, fuddling.

TIP-TOE [of tip and toe] standing
on the tips of the toes.

TIRE-Woman, a head-dresser, &c.

TIRE of Guns [prob. of tour, F.
or tuyer Du.] a row or
range.

TEER of Guns [prob. of tour, F.
or tuyer Du.] a row or
range.

TIRESIAS [of τέιρεα, Gr. the stars, 
because he made predictions by the
stars] a soothsayer of Thebes, of whom
it is related, that he saw two serpents
ingendering, and slew the female, 
whereupon he was turned into a wo­
man; and that seven years after, he
being present at the like engendering, 
slew the male, and was immediately
restored to his former shape. Jupiter
and Juno disputing together which had
the greater pleasure in coition, the
male or female, referred the matter to
his determination, because he had ex­
perience of both; and he giving his
opinion that the woman had the great­
est pleasure, Juno was so displeased
with him, that the struck him blind;
but Jupiter, to make him amends, gave 
him the gift of prophecy, and made 
him a god.

TIRESOME [of tirian, Sax.] wea­
risome, fatiguing.

TIRESOMNESS, fatiguingness, a 
wearisome quality.

TISICK [phthisis, L. phthisic, F.
φθίσις of φθέω, Gr.] an ulceration of the 
lungs, accompanied with an hectick
fever, and causing a consumption of
the whole body. See Phthisick.

TITAN [according to the Poets] the
son of Cælus and Vesta, the elder bro­
ther of Saturn, and the father of Hype­
rion. He, perceiving his mother and
sister inclining to the interest of his
brother, gave over his right of inhe­
ritance to his brother Saturn upon this
condition. That he should have no
male children educated or kept alive, 
but that the government should return
to him and his; but understanding af­
terwards, that by the subtlety of Ops
his sister, first Jupiter, and then Nep­
tune, and after that Pluto, were secret­
ly brought up, and by that means, he
and his were like to lose their inheri­
tance, he and his sons, the Titans, 
made war against his brother Saturn, 
and took him prisoner, and kept also
his wife and sister close prisoners, till
Jupiter came to age, and made war
upon the Titans, and released his fa­
ther.

It can hardly be doubted but this fa­
ble has some ancient history for its
foundation. Among the names of the
Titans we find Japhet, Gyges or Gog, 
Cottus, Chut or Cush, the son of Ham.
The name Titan may come from Do­
danum, the son of Japhet. 

The war of the giants against Hea­
ven may insinuate the wicked actions
of the first men before the deluge, and
those ancient and famous giants men­
tioned by Moses, who may be said to 
have declared war against God himself. 

The ancient Greeks and Phænicians
have disguised all old histories, by the
fictions which they have mingled with
them, and the poets have improved 
upon them in this; to adorn and em­
bellish their poetical compositions.

Father Pezron pretends, that the 
Titans were the ancient Celtæ or
Gauls. And that these were the Go­
marim, descended from Gomer the son
of Japhet. The first of their princes
was Acmon; the second Uranus, a very
warlike prince, who carried his con­
quests from lesser Asia as far as Spain,
the third was Saturn or Chronus, and
the fourth Jupiter.



He was the first of the Titans who
attempted to take the Diadem upon
him, and to give form to the empire
of the Titans.

His son Tensat, otherwise Mercury, is
he that after his unkle Dis, that is Pluto, 
settled the Titans in the provinces of 
Europe, and especially in Gaul, and
gave them laws. The empire of the
Titans continued about 300 years, in
the lesser Asia, in Greece, in Italy, and
the rest of Europe.

He fixes the beginning of this mo­
narchy about the time of the Patriarch
Terah.

He derives the name Titans from the
Celtick, Tit the earth, and Den a man, 
q. d. sons of the earth.

TITHES, were first established in
England, about the year 786.

Personal TITHES, those which are
due, accruing from the profits of labour, 
art, trade, navigation and industry of
man.

Prædial TITHES, are such as arise
from the fruits of the ground, as Corn, 
Hay, Hemp, Fruits, &c.

Mixt TITHES, are such as arise from
beasts and other animals, fed with the
fruits of the earth, as cheese, wool, 
lambs, calves, fowls, &c.

Great TITHES, are those of corn, 
hay, wood, &c.

Small TITHES, are those of flax, 
&c. which are prædial, and those of
wool, milk, cheese, lambs, &c. which
are mixt.

TITUBATION [in Astron.] a kind
of vibration or shaking, which the an­
cients attributed to the chrystalline
Heaven, to account for certain irregu­
larities they observed in the motion of
the planets.

TITULARY, a person invested
with a title, by virtue whereof he
holds an office or benefice, whether he
performs the functions thereof, or not.

TITULARNESS [of titularis, L.
and ness] a titular quality.

TITYUS [according to the Poets] a
giant, who, when Jupiter had defiled
his mother Elara, for fear of Juno, he
put her in a cave of the earth till she
was delivered of her son Tityus; but
when he became of age, Juno, to re­
venge herself, persuaded him to ravish
Latona, which he attempting, Jupiter 
struck him dead with his thunder bolt;
or, as others say, Apollo wounded him
with his dart, and so sent him to Hell, 
where he was adjudged to have a vul­
ture feed upon his liver, which grew
again according as the moon increased.

This giant is said also to reach over
nine acres of ground.

To TOAST [tostum of torrere, L.] to
make a toast of bread; also to propose
a health.

TOILSOME, full of labour, weari­
some.

TOILSOMENESS [of tirian, Sax.]
labouriousness, &c.

To TOL [of tollere, L. to take away]
in law signifies to defeat or take away, 
as to tol the Entry, is to take away the
right of Entry.

TOLERABLENESS [of tolerabilis, 
L. and ness] bearableness, passableness, 
indifferentness.

Civil TOLERATION, signifies im­
punity and safety in the state, for every
sect which does not maintain any doc­
trine inconsistent with the peace and
welfare of the state.

Ecclesiastical TOLERATION, is an
allowance of opinions, which, not be­
ing fundamentals, do not hinder those
who profess them, from being mem­
bers of the church.

TOLL, the sound of a bell, giving
notice of a death or funeral.

TOLL [according to some] a liberty
as well to take, as to be free from
Toll; for they who are infeoff'd of Toll
are custom free.

To TOLL on, to allure, entice, or
draw with fair words. O.

TOMB [tombe, F. of tumulus, L. an
heap, or of τύμβος, Gr.] a sepulchre.

Tombs were erected by the ancients
as honorary monuments of the de­
ceased, and as an inducement to others
to perform glorious actions. These
tombs were frequently in their own
lands, as among the Hebrews, &c. or
in the great roads among the Romans, 
all which about the city were adorned
with magnificent and costly monu­
ments or structures; for it was not
their custom to bury in their temples, 
they being reserved only for the ser­
vice of their gods; nor was it the cus­
tom of Christians to bury in churches, 
till some centuries after the establish­
ment of the Christian religion.

Tombs were frequently set off with
ornaments, and the effigies of the de­
ceased in several postures and habits, 
for which anciently there were settled
rules; as, 

Gentlemen who died in battel, and
on the victorious side, were represented
with their helmet on their head, their
shield on the left, and their sword on
the dexter side naked, and with the
point upwards.



Gentlemen who died in battle, on
the vanquished side, were represented
on their tombs without their coat
over their armour, with their feet
resting on a dead lion, having their
hands joined on their breast, their
visor lifted up, and their sword in the
scabbard. Those gentlemen, who
died prisoners, were represented with­
out helmet, sword, or spur.

A Gentleman that had served a great
part of his life in the army, and after­
wards became a religious person, was
represented upwards in the habit of the
order he professed, and below in com­
pleat armour.

A Gentleman or Knight who had
been vanquished or killed in single
combat, was represented in compleat
armour, and his battle-axe out of his
arms, and lying by him, and his left
arm a cross his right.

If a Gentleman or Knight had been
victorious, he was represented on his
tomb, armed on all points, with his
right arm a-cross over the left, and his
battle-axe in his arms.

A Knight or Gentleman that had
been accused of treason, murder, or a
rape, or of haying been an incendiary, 
had no monument, but was treated in
the vilest manner; his arms being bro­
ken, his body dragged on a hurdle, and
either hung upon a gallows, or cast out
to be devoured by the fowls of the air.

The son of a general or governor of
a castle, or fortified city, if he died
when the place was besieged, though
he was ever so young, was portray'd
in compleat armour, with his head
resting on an helmet, instead of a pil­
low.

Clergymen were represented in their
pontifical or sacerdotal habits.

Kings and princes, let them die after
what manner soever, were pourtray'd
on their tombs in their armour, with
their escutcheons, crown, crest, sup­
porters and all the other marks of
royality.

TOMENTITIOUS [tomentitius, L.] made of
flocks of wool.

TOMENTOUS [tomentitius, L.] made of
flocks of wool.

TOMICE [τομιχή, Gr.] the art of
carving in wood or ivory.

TOMOTOCIA [of τόμος, a section 
and τόχος, Gr. a birth] the cutting of a
child out of the womb, otherwise cal­
led Sectio Cæsaria and Hysterotomotocia.

TONDINO [in Architecture] a mem­
ber, a round moulding like a ring, that
incircles the bases, cornices, or archi­
trave, or pillars, according to the se­
veral orders,  Ital. the same as Astragal.

TONE [ton, F. tonus, L. τόνος, Gr.]
a state, frame or disposition, as the
tone of the nerves, &c.

TONE [in Musick] is a certain de­
gree of raising and sinking the voice, 
and is usually defined to be the sixth
part of an octave, said to be composed
of five tones and two semitones. A
Tone, or whole note, is also divided
into nine small parts, called comma's;
five of which are appropriated to the
greater semitone, and four to the
lesser.

To swallow the TONGUE [with
Horsemen] is said of a horse when he
turns it down his throat, which makes
him wheez as if he was short-winded.

Aid of the TONGUE [with Horsemen]
is a sort of agreeable clacking, or a
certain sound made by the rider, &c.
by striking the tongue against the roof
of his mouth, when he would animate
the horse, sustain him, and make him
work well in the manage.

TONIC [in Medicine] is applyed to
a certain motion of the muscles, where­
in the fibres, being extended, continue
their extension in such a manner, as
that the part seems immoveable, tho'
in reality it is in motion.

TONIC [tonicus, L. of τονιχός 
Gr.] belonging to the 
tone.

TONICK [tonicus, L. of τονιχός 
Gr.] belonging to the 
tone.

TONICAL [tonicus, L. of τονιχός 
Gr.] belonging to the 
tone.

TOOTHSOME [toðſume, Sax.]
pleasant to the taste.

TOOTHSOMNESS [toðſomneſſe
Sax.] pleasantness to the taste.

To TOP, to put a top on a thing;
also to exeeed or be higher than.

TOP-MASTS [in a Ship] are four, 
the Main-top-mast, the Fore-top-mast, the
Misen-top-mast, the Sprit sail-top mast, 
which are made fast and settled into
the heads of the Main-mast, Fore-mast, 
Misen-mast, Bow-sprit, respectively.

TOP a starboard [Sea Phrase] means
hale up the larboard side.

TOP gallant mast-ropes, are those
ropes which are used in striking the
top-masts of the main and fore-masts.

TOPARCHY [τοπαρχία Gr.] a small 
state or signiory, consisting of a few ci­
ties and towns; or a petty county go­
verned by a toparch.

TOPHET [תפה Heb. i. e. a drum]
Tophet is supposed to be the butchery, 
or place of slaughter at Jerusalem. It
is said, that a constant fire used to be
kept there, for burning the carcases
and other filthiness that was brought
thither from the city,



Others think, the name of Tophet is
given to the valley of Hinnom, because
of the sacrifices that were offered there
to the god Moloch, by bear of drum, 
which in Hebrew is called Toph.

It was in this manner that these sa­
crifices were offered; the statue of Mo­
loch was of brass, hollow within, with
its arms extended, and stooping a little
forward.

They lighted a great fire within the
statue, and another before it. Thay
put upon its arms the child they inten­
ded to sacrifice, which soon fell into
the fire at the foot of the statue, send­
ing forth cries, to stiffle the noise of
these cries and howlings, they made a
great rattling of drums and other in­
struments, that the spectators might
not be moved with compassion, by the
clamours of these innocent victims.

TOPIARY [topiaria, L.] the art of
making arbours, &c. with trees or
twigs, and herbs cut and planted.

TOPIC [in Rhetorick] a probable ar­
gument, drawn from the several cir­
cumstances and places of a fact, &c.

TOPICK [with Physicians] that
which is outwardly applyed to the pa­
tients body to cure him.

TOPICA [in Logick] the art of in­
venting and managing all kinds of argu­
mentations,  L.

TOPICKS [topica, L. τοπιχά of τοπος
Gr. a place] common places or heads
of discourse.

TOPIC [topicus, L. topique, F. 
of τοπιχος, Gr.] of, or
pertaining to a particular place or com­
mon head of a discourse.

TOPICK [topicus, L. topique, F. 
of τοπιχος, Gr.] of, or
pertaining to a particular place or com­
mon head of a discourse.

TOPOGRAPHICK Charts, are
draughts of some small parts of the
earth, or of some particular place, 
without regard to its relative situation;
as of London, Amsterdam, Paris, &c.

TORCHENESS [with Horsemen] a
long stick with a hole at the end of it, 
thro' which runs a strap of leather, the
two ends of which, being tied together
serve to straighten and closely tie up a
horse's nose, as long as the stick is
stayed upon the halter or snaffle.

TORE [in Architect.] a thick
round moulding used in
the base of columns.

TORUS [in Architect.] a thick
round moulding used in
the base of columns.

TORE [of tæran, Sax. to tear]
did tear, or was torn.

TORN [of tæran, Sax. to tear]
did tear, or was torn.

TOREUMA [τορευμα, Gr.] embossed
work,  L.

TOREUMATOGRAPHY [of τόρευμα
and γράφω, Gr.] the description or
knowledge of ancient sculptures and
Basso relievo's.

TORMENTINGNESS, a tormenting
quality or faculty.

TORNISOL [tournesol, F.] the sun­
flower.

TORPEDO, a sea-fish, famed for a
remarkable numbness, wherewith it is
said to strike the arm of those that touch
it.

TORPIDNESS [of torpidus, L.] be­
numbedness.

TORQUE [in Heraldry] a round roll
of cloth twisted, such as is the bandage
frequently seen in armories about the
heads of moors, savages, &c.

TORREFACTION [in Pharmacy] the
laying of a drug or other thing on a
plate of metal placed over coals, till it
becomes pliable to the finger.

TORRENT [in a figurative sense]
great heat, violence of passion, a swift 
stream of eloquence, &c.

TORRICELLIAN Instrument [of
Torricellius an Italian, the inventer of
it.] A glass tube or pipe of about three
foot long, and a quarter of an inch
bore, sealed or closed by fire at one
end, and quite filled at the other with
quick-silver; which unsealed end, being
stopp'd with the finger, is thrust down
into some quick-silver contained in a
vessel; and then the finger being taken
away, and the tube set upright, the
quick-silver will run out or descend till
it remains in the tube of the height of
between twenty eight and thirty one
inches, leaving an empty space in the
upper part.

The quick-silver, being thus suspend­
ed or hanged up, will increase or lessen
its height in the tube, according as the
weather alters for dry or wet; and be­
ing put into a frame with a plate of
divisions, shewing the several degrees, 
is called a Mercurial Barometer, or
quick-silver weather glass.

TORRIDNESS [of torriditas, L.]
scorchedness, scorchingness, parched­
ness, parchingness, driness.

To TORRIFY [torrefacere, L.] to
toast, roast, parch, or dry up.

TORSION, a turning, winding, 
writhing, or wresting,  L.

TORTILE [tortilis, L.] bent, bow­
ed, wrested, wreathed, wrinkled.

TORTIVE [tortivus, L.] wrung
out, pressed hard.

TORTNESS [spoken of a rope, &c.
straightness, tightness, by being hard
pulled; also writhiness, wrinkledness.

TORTOISE [Hieroglyph.] was by the
ancients represented swimming on the
top of a river, surrounded with the
hot beams of the noon-sun, to signify 



a poor wretch fallen into the power of
a tyrant, from whose hands he cannot
escape; for they say the sun beams do
so charm the tortoise, that it can scarce
move or change its residence. They
also used it to represent sloth, because
it is of a very lazy nature, and slow in
its march. They also by it represented
a man ready and armed against the de­
signs of such as would injure him, be­
cause the tortoise is always fortified
against the attempts of his enemies.

TORTUOUSNESS [of tortuosus, L.
tortueux, F. and ness] windingness or
the turning in and out.

TORTURE [torture, F.] torment, 
a grievous pain inflicted on a criminal
or person accused, to make him confess
the truth.

Preparative TORTURE, is ordered
to be judiciis manentibus, so that if the
accused do not confess, he cannot be
condemned to death, but only ad omnia
citra mortem.

Definitive TORTURE, is that a con­
demned criminal is put to, to make
him confess his accomplices.

TOTALNESS [totalitas, L.] the
wholeness or whole sum.

TOTTERING [of tealtrian, Sax.]
shaking, staggering, reeling, waving or
nodding to and fro, as tho' ready to fall.

TOTUM [with Logicians] i. e. the
whole, is used to signify such a whole as
is composed of several parts really dis­
tinct, whose parts are termed integral, 
parts, as the apartments of a house, 
the precincts of a city, or the provinces
of a kingdom; and this they distinguish
from another whole, which in Latin
is called Omne.

TOUCH [of toucher, F.] the sense of
feeling, is an external sense (dull and
inferior in respect to others; yet it is
most common, and very necessary to
us:) by means of this sense animals
receive tangible qualities. That there
is also an interval sense of Touching or
Feeling, is evident from pains of the
cholick, the nerves and fibres, which
are the organs of the senses, being dis­
persed on the inside as well as the out­
side of the body, and therefore the
veins, arteries, membranes, and their
appendages the coats, partake of this
sense.

TOUCHINESS, aptness to be offend­
ed with or angry at.

TOUPEE a peruke of a particular
make, worn by smarts
and beauxs.

TOUPET a peruke of a particular
make, worn by smarts
and beauxs.

TOUGHNESS [tohneſſe, Sax.]
strongness and unaptness to be broke 
or disjointed, the opposite to brittle­
ness.

TOUR, a lofty flight. Milton.

TOURNAMENT, an exercise of ho­
nour formerly practised, wherein
princes, noblemen and gentlemen, af­
forded specimens of their dexterity and
courage, in publick places; by entring
the lists and encountering all opposers.
They were well mounted on horse­
back, clad in armour, and accoutred
with lance, and sword, first tilted at
one another, and then drew their
swords and encountred hand to hand.

These exercises being designed to
make the practisers expert in the art
of war, and also to entertain the court, 
the arms were in a great measure dis­
abled, from killing the combatants, 
the points of the lances and swords
being broke off, to prevent their doing
execution; but notwithstanding this
precaution, frequent mischiefs hap­
pened, upon which the Popes prohi­
bited them, upon tho penalty of ex­
communication.

TOURNE [with French Heralds] is
us'd for what we call regardant, i. e.
looking back or behind.

TOURNING [with Hunters] a term
us'd of a roe, going to couple or ingen­
der.

TOUZED pulled about, tum­
bled, rumpled.

TOUZLED pulled about, tum­
bled, rumpled.

The Round TOWER, at Copenhagen
in Denmark, is not only remarkable for
its structure, but for its admirable con­
trivance; the manner of its ascent be­
ing such, that a coach may drive up to
the top thereof.

The TOWER of Morocco, is re­
ported to be so high, that the hills of
Azari, 130 miles distant from it, may­
be easily discern'd, and a person may
ride to the top on horseback.

The TOWER of Moscow, is famous 
for a bell in it, which weighs 176 tuns, 
tho' 200 tuns were allow'd for the
making of it: It is 24 foot high, the 
clapper 21 foot long, and weighs 7
tuns.

TOWERS [in Coat Armour] being
parts of cities and castles plac'd within
walls, may represent the constancy, 
magnanimity and generosity of men
who freely expose their bodies for the
defence of their country.

TOWN, is a place well furnished
with houses and inhabitants. To con­
stitute what may be properly call'd a
town, there must either have been, or
is now a church, and celebration of di­
vine service, sacraments and burials;



and tho' a town may by length of time
become so decay'd, as to have no hou­
ses standing, yet in law it is still a town.
In England and Wales there are 8800
towns or thereabouts, every borough
is a town, but every town is not a
borough.

TOWNS-Man, one born in the same
town.

TOWR [probably of tor, Sax. or 
Tower, on account of towers being 
usually high built] a high or lofty flight.

To TOWR, to soar a loft, to fly 
high; to aim at high things.

TOWRINGNESS, a lofty soaring, 
high aim, lofty carriage, haughtiness.

TOYISH, apt or given to toy with, 
caress, or use dalliance, &c.

TOYLET. See Toilet.

To TOZE, to pull asunder, to make
soft.

TOZYNESS, softness, like tozed
wool.

TRABEATED [trabeatus, L.] ha­
ving an Entablature, viz. a projecture
on the top of the wall, which supports
the timber-work of the roof.

TRABS [with Meteorologists] an im­
pression or meteor in the air, like a
beam.  L.

TRACE, a footstep, track, or print.

TRACED [tracé, F.] followed by 
the footsteps, also drawn out by lines 
on paper, &c. as the draught of an 
edifice, &c.

To TRACK [of tracer, F. or tractus, 
L.] to follow the trace, footsteps, or
mark, that any thing leaves behind it
in passing.

TRACTION, a drawing,  L.

TRACTRIX [in Geometry] a curve
line, called also Catenaria.

TRADER [of tratta, Ital. a trade, 
which Minshew conjectures to have
been derived of tradendo, L. delivering]
a dealer, a trafficker, a merchant.

TRADITIONS [in Theology] those 
laws, doctrines, relations, &c. which
have been handed down to us from our
forefathers, without being written.

Apostolical TRADITION [with the
Romanists] the unwritten word of god, 
which descended from the apostles to
us, through a continual succession of
the faithful.

Ecclesiastical TRADITIONS, are
certain statutes, ordinances, or regu­
lations concerning the rites and circum­
stances of religion, instituted since the
time of the apostles by councils, popes, 
&c. and that have continued to the
present time, through a constant obser­
vance of the church.

Written TRADITION [with the Ro­
manists] that of which there are some 
traces in the ancient fathers and doctors.

Unwritten TRADITIONS, is that of
which no signs or footsteps are to be
found in any of the fathers which are
now extant.

TRADITORES, traytors, a title 
given by the primitive Christians to
those who delivered up their bibles in
the time of persecution,  L.

TRADUCIANS, such who held that
original fin was transmitted from fa­
thers to children, or was communica­
ted by way of generation from the 
father to the child.

TRAGACANTH [tragacantha, L. of
τράγου ἄχανθα, Gr. i. e. goat's-thorn]
gum-dragon,  F.

TRAGEDY [tragædia, L. tragedie, 
F. τῤαγωδία, Gr.] a lofty sort of play, 
in which great persons are brought on
the stage: the subject matter of it is
always troublesome, and the conclusion
of it mournful. Tragedy is in imitation
of one just, great, and probable action, 
not told but represented; which, by
moving terror and pity, conduces to
purge the passions in the minds of men.
It is the principal part of dramatick
poetry, and the fable or design is the
principal part of tragedy. In Tragedy, 
it is not absolutely necessary that there
should be historical truths; but there
must always be a verisimility, and at
the same time, to make it wonderful, is
one of the most difficult tasks in poetry.
There are in it three unities required, 
viz. of action, time, and place; which
unities have been established by criticks
to bring the drama as near nature as
possible. 1. Unity of action. Two acti­
ons, that are different and independent, 
will distract the attention and a con­
cernment of the audience, and of conse­
quence destroy the poet's design, which 
is to move terror and pity. 2. Unity
of time. Mr. Dryden ascertains the
unity of time to be twenty four hours:
That one act must not take up half a
day, but the time of every act must be
equally divided. And Aristotle says, 
that the time of tragedy ought to be
included in that which the sun takes to
perform his career in, or very near it.
But Dacier says, that Aristotle meant
the course of the sun in a day, from
his rising to his setting, fourteen or fif­
teen hours time; and that, he says, is
too long: And that the most perfect:
pieces are those of Sophocles, which
require no longer time for the action
than the representation takes up,



which in Sophocles's best plays is not 
above four hours. 3. Unity of place [in
the Drama] Mr. Dryden says, requires
that the scene ought to be the same at
the end, that it was at the beginning
of the play, the same throughout. But
this unity is seldom observed in our
taking plays. If the poets were confi­
ned to that, they would want intrigue
room.

TRAGELAPHUS [τραγέλαφος of
τράγος, a goat, and ἔλαφυς, a hart, Gr.]
a goat-hart or great deer; a certain
beast found in the forests of Bohemia, 
and elsewhere, that has a breast and
shaggy hair like a goat, but otherwise
like a stag.  L.

TRAINED [trané, F.] brought up, 
instructed.

TRAITOROUSNESS [of traditorius, 
L. de traitre, F.] treasonablness, per­
fidiousness.

TRAMMELED [with Horsemen] a
horse is said to be so, that has blazes or
white marks upon the fore and hind-­
foot on one side, before and behind.

Cross TRAMMELED [with Horse­
men] is said of a horse that has white
marks in two of his feet, that stand
cross-ways like St. Andrew's cross, as
in the far fore-foot and the near hind
foot, or in the near fore-foot and the
far hind-foot.

TRANCHE [in French Heraldry] sig­
nifies a manner of counter 
changing in an escutcheon
of this form. But, by
English heralds, it is thus
blazoned; He bears per
pale Argent and Azure, 
per Bend counterchang'd.

Image omitted.



TRANGLE [in Heraldry] is the di­
minutive of a fess, and what the Eng­
lish heralds commonly call a bar.  F.

TRANQUILLITY [among the Ro­
mans] a deity adored at Rome, under
the name of Quiet, and whose temple
was without the city.

To TRANQUILLIZE [tranquilliser, 
F. tranqiullare, L.] to make quiet, still, 
or calm.

TRANQUILLOUSNESS [of tran­
quillus, L.] quietness, stilness, calm­
ness.

TRANSACTOR, one that negoti­
ates or manages an affair,  L.

TRANSANIMATION, the passing
of a soul out of one body into another.

TRANSCENDENCE [transcendentia, 
L.] surpassingness, excellence.

TRANSCENDENTAL [of transcen­
dant, F.] exceeding, going beyond, 
surpassing.

TRANSCENDENTAL [in Physicks]
something raised or elevated above
other things, or which passes and tran­
scends the reasons and circumstances of 
other inferior beings, so as not to be
intimately and essentially included un­
der them.

TRANSCENDENTAL Quantities 
[with Schoolmen] are particularly ap­
ply'd to the continuation of the exis­
tence, duration or time of a being.

TRANSCENDENTAL Quantities 
[with Geometricians] are undeterminate
quantities, or such as cannot be expres­
sed or affixed to any constant equation.

TRANSCOLATED [transcolatus, L.]
strained through.

TRANSCRIBER [transcriptor, L.] a
writer out or copier.

TRAN SEAT [School Term] i. e. let
it pass, used when they suppose a pro­
position to be true without granting it.

TRANSELEMENTATION [with
[Schoolmen] a change of the elements or
principles of one body into another.

TRANSFULGID [transfulgidus, L.]
shining through.

TRANSIENTNESS [of transiens, L.
and ness] a transient or fleeting nature 
or quality, shortness of continuance.

TRANSIRE, to go or pass over, a 
word used in the statutes for a warrant 
or let-pass.

TRANSITIVE [transitivus, L.] an
epithet given by Grammarians to such
verbs, as signify an action which passes 
from the doer to or upon the sufferer, 
or the subject that receives it.

TRANSITIVENESS [of transitivus, 
L. and ness] transientness or a transitive
nature.

TRANSLATION of Light and Na­
ture [with Astrologers] a phrase used
when a light planet separateds from one
that is more weighty, and perfectly
joins another that is more weighty; as
suppose Saturn to be in twenty degrees
of Aries, and Mars in 15 degrees of
Aries, and Mercury in 16 degrees of the
same sign; here Mercury, being a light
planet, separates from Mars, and tran­
slates his virtue to Saturn.

TRANSLATOR, one that turns out
of one language into another, or re­
moves out of one place into another;
also a new vamper of old shoes, &c.

TRANSLUCIDNESS [of transluci­
dus, L.] the quality of permitting light
to shine through.

TRANSMEABLE [transmeabilis, L.]
that may be passed through.

TRANSMISSION [in Opticks, &c.]
is the act of a transparent body, passing 



the rays of light thro' its substance, or
suffering them to pass.

TRANSMISSIBLE, that is capable
Of being conveyed.

To TRANSMOGRAPHIZE, to trans­ 
form or metamorphose.

TRANSMONTANE [transmontanus, 
L.] dwelling or growing beyond the
mountains.

TRANSMUTABLENESS [of trans
and mutabilis, L.] capableness of being
changed.

TRANSPARENT Bodies [with Phi­
losophers] or diaphanous bodies, are
such whose pores are all right, and
nearly perpendicular to the plane of
their surface, so as to let the rays of
light pass freely through them, with­
out being refracted; whereas the pores
of opacous bodies are in a crooked ob­
lique position, by which means the
beams of light cannot pass freely thro'
them, but are variously refracted and
lost.

To TRANSPECIATE [of trans and
species, L.] to change from one species
to another.

TRANSPIERCED [transperce, F.]
bored through.

TRANSPIRATION, the insensible
passage of excrementitious matter
through the pores of the skin; also
some authors use it for the entrance of
the air, vapours, &c. through the
pores of the skin into the body.

TRANSPIRING [of trans and spi­
rans, L.] breathing through, exhaling
vapours; also transpiration.

TRANSPLANTATION by a Mag­
net [in Natural Magick] is by mixing
the excrement of a patient up with
earth, to transplant the disease into a
vegetable, which shall arise from a seed
sown in the same compost, or by inclo­
sing the parings of the nails of a gouty
person in an augre-hole made in an
oak, &c.

TRANSPLANTATION by Approxi­
mation [in Natural Magick] which is
more properly called Approximation, 
is when a whitlow is upon a finger
and is cured by rubbing a cat's ear, 
which is supposed to receive the pain.

TRANSPOSITION of Equations 
{with Algebraists] is the putting over
any quantity to the other side of the
sign of equality, with a contrary sign
to what it had before, thus; suppose
a-2o=6o, then a=to 60-20, i. e. 40.

TRANSUBSTANTIATED [of trans
and substantia, L. or q. transire in sub­
stantiam] changed or passed into ano­
ther substance.

TRANSVERSE Axis [in Conick
Sections] is a third proportional to the
line called Abscissa, and any ordinate of
a Parabola.

TRANSUMPTIO [with Schoolmen]
a syllogism by concession or agreement, 
used where a question proposed is
transferred to another, with this condi­
tion, that the proof of this latter shall
be admitted for a proof of the former.
 L.

TRANSUMPTION, a taking from
one to another.

TRANSUMPTIVE [transumptivus, 
L.] taking from one to another.

TRAPEZOID [with Ge­
ometricians] an irregular
figure, that has all its four
sides and angles unequal, 
and no sides parallel.

Image omitted.



TRAPEZIUM [τραπέξιον, Gr.] a
quadrilateral or square figure, whose
four sides and angles are not equal, but
two of its sides are parallel.

TRAVADO, a hurricane or impe­
tuous and sudden wind, which is fre­
quent in the Atlantick ocean, between
Brasil and Africa, and about the Cape
of Good Hope, which turns all things
topsy turvy; before these Travadoes
begin there is a very great calm, and
a small cloud appears, called by sai­
lors an ox's eye, over one of the peaks
of the promontory, which soon de­
scending lower, covers the whole
summit: Upon the sight of which
the mariners immediately fall to
furling their sails, and get as far as
they can from the shoar, to avoid the
fury of it; for on a sudden a violent
and terrible wind rushes from the top
of the mountains, and destroys all ships
within its reach.

TRAVALLY [of reveiller, F. to 
awake] a beat of
drum in the morning, that summons the 
soldiers from their beds.

TRAVELLY [of reveiller, F. to 
awake] a beat of
drum in the morning, that summons the 
soldiers from their beds.

TRAVEE [in Architect.] a bay of
joists, the space between two beams,  L.

TRAVERSE [traversus, L, traverse, 
F.] a cross, a thwart.

To TRAVERSE [in Joinery] a term
used for plaining a board, or the like, 
cross the grain.

TRAVERSE [in Navigation] is the
variation or alteration of the ship's
course, upon the shifting of the winds, 
&c.

TRAVERSE [in Horsemanship] a
horse is said to traverse, when he cuts
his tread cross wise, throwing his
croupe to one side, and his head to
another.



TRAVERSE [in Heral.] is
a partition of an escutcheon
in the figure annexed, call'd
Parted per Pale Traverse.

Image omitted.



To TRAVERSE [in Law]
signifies to oppose, overthrow or quash;
to deny any part of the matter one is
charged with; to put the proof of it
upon the plaintiff.

A TRAVERSE [in Carpentry] a piece
of wood or iron placed transversly, to
strengthen and fortify another.

TRAVERSES [in Fortification] are
lines which return back from the ends
of the trenches, and run almost paral­
lel with the place attacked, called also
Coudee's.

TRAVERSE in a wet Foss [in Forti­
fication] is made by throwing into the
foss, over against the place where the
miner is to be put, to the foot of the
wall, abundance of saucissons, joists, 
and other pieces of wood, with fas­
cines, stones, earth, and all other
things that can help to fill up the foss, 
and be capable of carrying a gallery
for such as use it.

TRAVERSE [in Fortification] a name
given to a wall of earth, or stone, 
cross a work which is commanded, to
cover the men; as at Coehorn's work
at Namure, which lies on the side of a
high ground, and is open to the other
side of the Sambre, there are two high
traverses cross the work, one behind
another.

TRAVICE, a small inclosure or ob­
long quadrangle, consisting of four
pillars or posts, kept together by cross
poles, for keeping in, and holding un­
ruly horses in the time of shoeing, or
any other operation.

TRAUMA [τραῦμα, Gr.] a wound.

TRAUMATICA [τραῦματιχὰ of
τραυματιζω, Gr.] decoctions and potions
proper for fetching the serous and
sharp humours out of the body, and by
that means to thin the blood, so that it
may be the more easily brought to the
wounded, broken, or bruised parts;
also herbs or drugs proper for the
curing of wounds, called Vulneraries.

TRAYL-Baston [prob. so called 
of trailler, to 
draw, and Baston, a staff, F. because 
they had a staff delivered to them as a 
badge of their office] as justices of 
Trayl Baston were judges impowered 
by king Edward I. to make inquisition 
thro' the realm upon all officers; as 
sheriffs, mayors, escheators, &c. touch­
ing extortion, bribery; and intrusion 
into other men's lands; as also upon 
barretors, breakers of the peace, and 
other offenders.

TRYAL-Bastion [prob. so called 
of trailler, to 
draw, and Baston, a staff, F. because 
they had a staff delivered to them as a 
badge of their office] as justices of 
Trayl Baston were judges impowered 
by king Edward I. to make inquisition 
thro' the realm upon all officers; as 
sheriffs, mayors, escheators, &c. touch­
ing extortion, bribery; and intrusion 
into other men's lands; as also upon 
barretors, breakers of the peace, and 
other offenders.

TREADING, a term used for the
footing or tract of a boar.

TREADLES [of Sheep] their dung or
ordure.

TREADLES [of a Weaver's Loom]
are what they move with their feet.

TREASONABLENESS [of trahison, 
and ness] disloyalty, treacherousness, ei­
ther by imagination, word or deed; as
compassing or imagining the death of
the king, &c. levying war against him,
adhering to his enemies, coining false
money, counterfeiting the king's privy
seal, all which are high treason.

TREASURER [of Collegiate Churches]
a dignitary who anciently had the
charge of the vestments, plate, jewels, 
reliques, and other treasure belonging
to such churches.

TREASURERSHIP, the office or
dignity of a treasurer.

Lords of the TREASURY, certain
persons of honour appointed as com­
missioners to execute the office of trea­
surer of England, when it is not com­
mitted to a single person,

TREAT [prob. of tractus of 
trahere, L.] signifying 
taken out, or withdraw, as the juror 
was challenged, because he could not 
dispend 40 l. and therefore he was
Treate.

TREATE [prob. of tractus of 
trahere, L.] signifying 
taken out, or withdraw, as the juror 
was challenged, because he could not 
dispend 40 l. and therefore he was
Treate.

TREES, are distinguished into, 
1. Bacciferous, i e. such as bear ber­
ries. 2. Coniferous, or such as bear a
squamose or scaly fruit, of a kind of co­
nical figure, and of a woody and hard
substance, in which are many seeds.
3, Lanigerous ones, or such as bear a 
woolly, downy substance, such as bear 
their seeds (having an imperfect 
flower) in leafy membranes or cases. 
4 Pomiferous ones, as apples. 5. Nu­
ciferous, i. e. such as bear nuts. 6.
Pruniferous ones, whose fruit is pretty 
large and soft, with a stone in the
middle.

Dwarf-TREES, such as are kept
low, not being suffered to be above 
half a foot in stem.

Wall-TREES, are such whose branch­
es are spread on each side and nailed 
against walls.

TREES [in a Ship] are timbers of se­
veral sorts.

Chess-TREES, are the timbers en
each side of the ship, for the main tack
to run thro' and hale it down.

Cross-TREES, are pieces of timber 
bolted and let into one another 
a-cross at the head of the mast,



the use of which is to keep the top­
masts up.

Tressel-TREES, are those timbers of
the cross-trees that stand along ships
or fore and aft at the top of the mast.

Waste-TREES, are those timbers of
the ship that lie in the waste.

TREFFLE [in Heraldry] as a Cross-­
Treffle, is a cross whose
arms end in three semi-­
circles, each representing
the three leaved grass or
trefoil. This is by some
called St. Lazarus's Cross. See the
figure.

Image omitted.



TREFOILS [in Heraldry] called in
French, Treffles, are fre­
quently borne in coat ar­
mour, and represent three-­
leaved grass, and are ac­
counted next to the Fleur-­
de-lis. See the figure.

Image omitted.



To TRELLIS [treilliser, F.] to fur­
nish with a trellis, i. e. a sort of lattice-­
grate or wooden frame for supporting 
wall-trees.

TREMEBUND [tremebundus, L.]
fearful, trembling much.

TREMOR, a disease nearly a kin to
a convulsion, being  convulsive
and partly natural.

TRENCHING [tranchant, F. of
trancher, F. to cut] a digging or cut­
ting a ditch or trench in the earth.

TREPIDNESS [trepiditas, L.] trepi­
dity, fearfulness.

TREPIGNER [in Horsemanship] a
word importing the action of a horse, 
who beats the dust with his fore feet
in managing, without embracing the
volt; who makes his motions and time
short and near the ground, without
being put upon his haunches,  F.

General TRESPASS, is where force
or violence is used, otherwise called
Trespass vi & armis.

Special TRESPASS, one done with­
out force, called also Trespass upon the
Case.

Local TRESPASS [in Law] is that 
which is so annexed to the place cer­
tain, that if the defendant join issue 
upon the place, and traverse the place 
mentioned in the declaration and aver 
it, it is enough to defeat the action.

TRESSURE [in Heraldry] is the di­
minutive of an Orle, and is
usually accounted to be on­
ly one half of it, and is
commonly born Flory and
Counterflory, and it is also
often double, and sometimes treble.

Image omitted.



Transitory TRESPASS [in Law] is 
that which cannot be defeated by the
defendant's traverse of the place, be­
cause the place is not material.

TRIAL [prob. of tentare, L. tenter, 
F.] an essay, experiment, or endea­
vour; also a temptation.

TRIAL [in Law] the examination of
causes criminal or civil before a proper
judge, of which there are three sorts;
as matters of fact are to be tryed by
jurors, matters of law by the judges, 
and matters of record by the record
itself.

TRIANGLE [triangulum, 
L. un triangle, F.] a figure
that has three angles, and as
many sides, and is either
spherical.

Image omitted.



A plain TRIANGLE, is one that is
contained under three right lines.

A spherical TRIANGLE, is a triangle
that is contained under three arches
of a great circle or sphere.

A Right-angled TRIANGLE, is one
which has one right angle.

An Acute-angled TRIANGLE, is one
that has all its angles acute.

An Obtuse-angled TRIANGLE, is one
that has one obtuse angle.

An Oblique-angled TRIANGLE, is a
triangle that is not right angled.

Equilateral TRIANGLE, is one, all
whose sides are equal.

Isosceles TRIANGLE a triangle 
that has 
only two legs or sides equal.

Equilegged TRIANGLE a triangle 
that has 
only two legs or sides equal.

Scalenus TRIANGLE, one that has
not two sides equal.

TRIANGULAR Compasses, an in­
strument with three legs or feet, to
take off any triangle at once, used on
maps, globes, &c.

Similar TRIANGLES, are such as 
have all 
their three 
angles re­
spectively 
equal to one 
another: As 
if the angle A be equal to D, the angle
C equal to E, and the angle B equal to 
F, then is the triangle A, B, C similar
or like to D, F, E.

Two images omitted.



TRIANGULARNESS [of triangu­
laritas, L.] a triangular form.

TRIAS Harmonica [in Musick] a 
compound of three radical sounds
heard altogecher, of which two are a
fifth, and a third above the other,
which is a fundamental.

TRIARII [among the Romans] one 
of the four orders of soldiers, who 
were posted in the rear of the army,



and were to assist in time of dan­
ger.

TRIBUNE [tribunus, L.] two great
officers among the Romans; the first of
the people, whose business was to de­
fend their liberties; the other of the
soldiers, who was to see them well
armed and ordered.

TRIBUNESHIP, the office or dig­
nity of a tribune.

TRIBUTARINESS [of tributarius, 
L. tributaire, F.] the condition or state
of those that pay tribute.

TRIBUNICIAN [with Antiquaries, 
&c.] of, or pertaining to the office, 
dignity, or power of a tribune.

TRICAPSULAR [in Botan. Writ.]
divided into three partitions, as in Hy­
pericum or St. John's Wort,  L.

TRICKING [of tricherie, F.] cheat­
ing, beguiling, &c. by craft, wiles, 
&c.

TRICKISH guileful, crafty, wily.

TRICOCCOUS [τρίχοχχος of τρίς, 
three, and χόχχος, Gr. a grain] spoken 
of the fruits of plants, containing three
grains or kernels.

TRICORPORATE [tricorpor, L.]
that hath three
bodies.

TRICORPOROUS [tricorpor, L.]
that hath three 
bodies.

TRIDE [with Horsemen] short and 
swift.

TRIDE-Pace, is a going of short and
thick motions, tho' united and uneasy.

TRIDE-Career, a fast gallop that has
its times and motions short and nimble.

To work TRIDE [in Horsemanship]
upon volts, is to mark his time with
his haunches short and ready.

TRIDENT [so called by Sir Isaac
Newton] that kind of Parabola, by
which Des Cartes constructed equations
of six dimensions. This figure hath
four infinite legs, two of which are
hyperbolical, tending contrary ways, 
but placed about an asymptote, and the
other two are parabolical and con­
verging, and which, with the other
two, form the figure of the trident.

TRIDENTIFEROUS [tridentifer, 
L.j that bears a trident.

TRIETERICA [τριετηριχὰ, Gr.] cer­
tain feasts of Bacchus observed every
third year.

TRIFEROUS [trifer, L.] bearing
fruit three times a year.

TRIFLING [some derive it of trie­
care, Ital. others of treyfelen, Du.]
spending time or pains to little pur­
pose.

TRIFOLIATED [with Botan.] 
is a kind of digitated leaf, consisting of
three fingers, in clover-grass.

TRIFORMITY [of triformis, L.]
the having three forms or shapes.

TRIGLYPH [τρίγλυφος of τρεῖς,
three, and γλυφίς, Gr. sculpture] a tri­
angular gutter, which seems to have
been designed to convey the Guttæ or
drops that hang a little under them.

TRIGON [in Natural Magick] sig­
nifies a four-fold change of the starry
spirits, according to the number of the
four elements, each reigning and last­
ing two hundred years.

The Airy TRIGON [in Astrol.] the
airy triplicity, Gemini, Libra, and Aqua­
rius, beholding one another in a trine
aspect.

The Earthy TRIGON [in Astrol.] the
earthy triplicity, Taurus, Virgo, and
Capricornus, beholding one another in
a trine aspect.

Fiery TRIGON [with Astrol.] the
fiery triplicity, Aries, Leo, and Sagit­
tarius, beholding one another in a trine
aspect.

The Watery TRIGON [in Astrol.]
the watery triplicity, Cancer, Scorpio, 
and Pisces, beholding one another in a
trine aspect.

TRIGONOCRATORIES [of τρίγω­
νος and χρὰτος, Gr. dominion or
power] a name of the planets, on ac­
count of their being lords or governors
of trigons, as Saturn and Mercury of the
airy trigon, Venus and the Moon of the
earthy, the Sun and Jupiter of the
fiery, and Mars of the watery.

TRIGONOMETRICAL [of τρίγω­
νος, a triangle, and μετριχὸς, Gr. of
measure] of, or belonging to trigono­
metry.

Plain TRIGONOMETRY, treats of
rectilinear triangles, and teaches from
three given parts of a plain triangle to
find the rest.

Spherical TRIGONOMETRY, is an
art that teaches from three given parts
of a spherical triangle to find the rest.

TRILLION [in Arith.] the num­
ber of a billion of
billions.

TRILION [in Arith.] the num­
ber of a billion of
billions.

TRILUMINAR [triluminaris, 
L.] having
three lights.

TRILUMINOUS [triluminaris, 
L.] having
three lights.

To TRIM a Piece [in Carpentry, &c.]
signifies to fit a piece into other work.

TRIM, neat in clothes, spruce, fine.

TRIMMER, one who carries it fair
with two parties; also a setter off; also
a shaver.

TRIMMING, shaving the beard;
carrying it fair between two par­
ties; also laces, fringes, &c. the or­
naments of garments.



TRIMORION [τριμόριον, Gr.]
the joining toge­
ther of three signs that are very near
one another, whereby a square aspect
is made to the Apheta or giver of life
in the figure, which, when it comes to
that direction, is imagined commonly
to cut off the thread of life.

TRIMÆRION [τριμόριον, Gr.]
the joining toge­
ther of three signs that are very near
one another, whereby a square aspect
is made to the Apheta or giver of life
in the figure, which, when it comes to
that direction, is imagined commonly
to cut off the thread of life.

TRINITY, the herb Heart's-ease.

TRIOCTILE [with Astrol.] an aspect
or situation of two planets, with re­
gard to the earth, when they are
three octaves or eight parts of a circle
distant from each other.

TRIPETALODES [with Botanists]
is deeply cut into three parts, which
seem to be three distinct leaves, but are
all joined at the bottom.

TRIPHYLLOUS [τριφυλλον, Gr.] whose
leaf consists of three parts.

The TRIPLE-coloured Bow, the
rainbow. Milton.

The TRIPLE-Tree, the gallows.

TRIPLICATED [triplicatus, L.]
made or done three times.

TRIPOLY, the herb called turbith
or blue camomile.

TRIPOS [τριπους of τρεὶς, three, and
ποῦς, Gr. a foot] a three-footed stool, 
on which a priestess of Apollo at Del­
phos, used to sit, when she gave forth
her oracles. Tho' some say this was a
pot full of dust, thro' which the Afflatus
past into the virgin's belly, and thence
proceeded out of her mouth. Others, 
that it was a wide-mouthed brass pot
filled with pebbles, by the leaping of
which the prophetess made her con­
jectures. Others, that it was a large
vessel supported with three feet, into
which the prophetess plunged herself
when she expected to be inspired. But
the most common and best proved opi­
nion is, that it was not a vessel, but a
table or seat, upon which the Pythia
sat or leaned. The Scoliast upon
Aristophanes will have the three legs of
the Tripos to signify the knowledge of
the true God, as distinguished into three
parts of time, past, present, and to come.
The same Tripos was not always used.
The first was of brass, placed there by
the inhabitants of the neighbouring
country, when Pelops married Hippo­
damia, which Tripos was said to have
been made by Vulcan of brass. The
other was of gold, dedicated to Apollo 
on the following account: Certain
fishermen of Miletus, having sold their
next draught to some person that stood
by, cast their net into the water, and
drew up a golden Tripos; upon which 
there arose a hot contention between 
the fishermen and their chapman; who
at length submitted to the determina­
tion of Apollo, and coming to Delphos, 
he gave this answer. That they should
give it to the wisest. This oracle
being given at the time that the seven
wise men flourished in Greece, it was
presented to them all, one after ano­
ther; which they refusing, it was re­
solved, to present it to Apollo himself, 
as being the fountain of all wisdom.

TRIPOS [at Cambridge] the Præva­
ricator at the university, the same as
Terræ Filius at Oxford.

TRIPPANT [in Heraldry] tripping.

TRIPPING [prob. of tripudians, L.
or of trippen, Du.] walking nimbly
or lightly upon the toes; also stum­
bling with the feet; also faltering with
the tongue.

TRIPTOLEMUS, the son of Celeus, 
king of Attica, who, as it is said, first
espying corn to grow of its own accord
reaped it; and after that plowed and
sowed more, and grew so skilful, that
he wrote commentaries on tillage, and
sent them abroad into the world.
Upon which the poets have feigned, 
that he travelled over the world to
teach men to plant corn, and to abstain
from flesh. They also tell us, that he
was carried by a winged dragon, which
was no other but a long ship, in which
he sailed to the neighbouring isles. He
is said to have lived A. M. 1414. or as
others 1543. and left Athens three pre­
cepts. 1. To worship the Gods. 2.
To worship their parents. 3. To ab­
stain from flesh.

TRIPYRENOS [in Botan. Writ.]
which has three seeds or kernels, as
Berberis, Alaternus, &c.

TRIRODA Terræ [Old Rec.] a par­
cel of land containing three rods or
perches.

TRISACRAMENTALES those who
admit of three sacraments in the Chris­
tian religion, and no more.

TRISECTION, a dividing or cutting
a thing into the three parts.

TRISMUS [of τρίζω, Gr.] the 
grinding of the teeth, 
or the convulsion of the muscles of the
temples, which causes an involuntary 
gnashing of the teeth.

TRIGMUS [of τρίζω, Gr.] the 
grinding of the teeth, 
or the convulsion of the muscles of the
temples, which causes an involuntary 
gnashing of the teeth.

TRISOLYMPIONICES [of τρύς and
ολυμπιονίχης, Gr.] a person who had
three times bore away the prize at the 
Olympick games.

TRISPERMOS [in Botan. Writ.]
which bears these seeds, as Nasturtium 
Indicum, L.



TRITÆUS [with Physicians] an
ague that comes every third day, a
tertian,  L.

TRITON [τῶν τριων μετέχων, Gr. i. e.
of the Air, of the Water, and the 
Earth] according to the poets, the son
of Neptune and the nymph Calais. Nep­
tune's trumpeter, whom they feign to
have been a man upwards, as far as to
the middle, a dolphin below, and his
fore-feet like those of a horse, and two
circular tails. This monster, some say, 
was only a whale, by whom, many
having been overturned and drowned, 
at last he was superstituously adored
as the god of the sea. Triton was paint­
ed, &c. with a blue skin, and a purple
mantle, having a horn in his hand, and
the tail of a mermaid.

TRIUMPH [Hieroglyphically] is re­
presented by a chaplet of laurel on the
top of a Sella Curulis.

TRIUMPHAL Crown 
[among the Romans] was a
garland of laurel, granted
to be worn by generals that
had vanquished their ene­
mies, and on that account, to whom
the senate granted a triumph. The
original of using these crowns, in token
of triumph, is said to be from Apollo's
crowning his head with laurel, after
he had killed the serpent at Delphos.

Image omitted.



TRIUMPHANTNESS [of triumphans
L. and ness] a triumphant quality; also
boastingness, glorying.

TRIUMPHING [triumphans, L.]
making a triumphant procession; also
glorying.

TROCHANTERS [τροχατν῀ερες, Gr.]
two processes in the upper part of the
thigh-bone, otherwise called Rotator
major &c. minor, in which the tendons
of many muscles are terminated.

There is no unicode for Greek small letter epsilon with perispomeni. The unicode ε is for Greek small letter epsilon, and ῀ is for the perispomeni on top of ε.



TROCHITAE, a sort of figured fos­
sil stones, resembling plants, vulgarly
called St. Cuthbert's beard.

TROCHOID [with Geometricians] a 
figure made by the upper end of a dia­
meter of a circle, turned about a right
line.

TRONCONNEE [in He­
raldry] signifies a cross or
some other thing cut in
pieces; yet so that all the
pieces are so placed, as to
keep up the form, tho' set at a small dis­
tance one from the other, as a cross 
Tronconneé. See the figure.

Image omitted.



TROP [of troppe, ðroppe, 
Sax. a village] at the end 
of proper names of pla­
ces, denotes a village, as Cracanthorp.

TROD [of treðan, Sax. to tread]
did tread; also was trodden.

TROPE [in Rhetorick] the word is
derived from τρέπω, to turn. A trope
signifies the thing to which it is apply'd
only on account of the connection and
relation it has to that whose proper
name it is; or it is, when a word is
carried from a thing, which it signifies
properly, to another that it signifies but
indifferently. And tho' we may reckon
as many sorts of tropes, as we can de­
note different relations, yet Rhetoricians
have established but a few, as Metonymy
Synechdoche, Metanomasia, a Metaphor, 
an Allegory, a Litotes, an Hyperbole, an
Irony and Catachresis.

Tropes, when aptly used, are a lively
picture of the things treated of; as when
a great general is called the Thunder of
the War, the image of thunder is a sen­
sible representation of the courage and
power with which this general con­
quers. In using Tropes, great care
ought to be taken that there is always
a proportion between the natural idea
of the Trope, and that you would infuse
into those that hear or read it; especially
that it does not beget one quite contrary
to what you intended by it. The rich­
es of a language is said to consist in
Tropes; and as too much riches often­
times breeds disorders in government, 
so too many Tropes will occasion much
disorder in a discourse: they should not
be used, but to express something that
could not be expressed so well in the
common terms; and when we are obli­
ged by necessity to use them, they ought
to be clear, and proportioned to the
idea of which we would give an
image. As to the necessity of using
Tropes: if any person would give an 
idea of a rock of an extraordinary
height, the words great and high, being
words that are applied to rocks of a
common size and height, will not do;
but if he says, a rock that threatens the
skies, then the idea of the skies, that
are above all things else, and the idea
of threatning (that agrees with a man
that is above others) will form an idea
of the extraordinary height of the
rock, which could not well be expres­
sed any other way, but by this Hyper­
bole. Besides, as those Tropes are quick
expressions, foreign to the subject, 
which we are supplied with by use and
art, to be the signs not only of the emo­
tions of our thoughts, but of our wits;
so also the passions have a particular
character, by which they paint out
themselves in discourse, (See Passion.)



Though the barrenness of languages
frequently obliges us to make use of
tropick expressions, even when we are
calm, and in repose; yet the common
use of them (which generally makes
objects appear extraordinary) should
only be where ordinary terms will not
represent them so lively as we would
have them.

TROPHONIUS, a cunning sooth­
sayer, who made a great cave in Bæotia
whence he usually gave out his oracles.
After his death, a spirit was thought to
enter into it, which supplied his place
in giving oracles. The manner of con­
sulting this oracle is delivered to us by
Pausanius, to the purpose following:
He that goes into this cave, must first
make his abode in the chapel of Good 
Genius, and Good Fortune, employing
himself in performing of some ceremo­
nies by way of atonement for former
offences, and is to bathe in the river of
Hercyne. At his going down he Sacri­
fices to Trophonius and other deities, and
the priest consults the bowels of the
victim, and accordingly pronounces, 
whether the deity will give an auspici­
ous and satisfactory answer. Then the
consulter is brought after bathing by
the priest, to drink a dose of the water
of the river called Lethe or Oblivion:
and after that he takes the water of 
Mnemosyue or Remembrance, that he may
remember what shall be exhibited to
him in his descent. Among which is
exposed a statue adorned with admira­
ble carving, which is given out to have 
been the workmanship of Dædalus him­
self. Then having done obeysance, 
and muttered over a prayer or two, 
being clothed in a linnen habit, and set
off with ribbons, &c. he approaches
the oracle, whuh is situated within a
mountain near a grove, the foundation
of which is built spherical-wise, of
white stone, about the size and circum­
ference of a threshing floor, but scarce
two cubits high, supporting brazen obe­
lisks, encompassed round with liga­
ments of brass, between which there 
are doors that guide the passage into
the middle of the floor, where there
is a sort of a cave, not the product of
rude nature, but built with the nicest
accuracy of mechanism and propor­
tion: the form of it is like an oven, 
the breadth about nine cubits, the
depth eight, but there are no stairs;
but all that come bring with them a 
narrow light ladder, by which they
have descended to the bottom. There
is a cave between the roof and pave­
ment, having a very narrow entrances
at the mouth of which the person lies
all along, and shoves himself feet fore­
most into the cave, and then he thrusts
his knees; after a while the rest of his
body is rolled along, by a force not
unlike that of a great rapid river, 
which over-powering a man with its
vortex, tumbles him over head and
ears; and afterwards he returns the
same way back, with his feat foremost.
When the consultant is returned, the
priest places him on Mnemosyne's throne, 
which is not far from the shrine, and
enquires of him what he had seen
and heard, and relates it to others, he
being yet stupified, and full of amaze­
ment; then he carries him to the tem­
ple of Good Genius and Good Fortune, 
and sometime after he is restored to
his former senses.

TROPISTS, such as explain the
scripture altogether by tropes and fi­
gures.

TROPITES [of τρέπω, Gr. to turn]
a sect who maintained that the word
was turned into flesh or into man.

TROPOSCHEMATOLOGY [of τρό­
πος a manner, χῆμα a scheme, and
λέγω, Gr.] a treatise or discourse of the
method of drawing schemes.

TROT [with Horsemen] is the pace
or going of a horse, in which the mo­
tion is two legs in the air, and two up­
on the ground cross-wise; continuing
alternately to raise at once the hind-­
leg, of one side, and fore-leg of the
other, leaving the other hind and fore-­
leg upon the ground, till the former
come down.

TROUBADOURS, antient poets of
Provence in France.

TROUBLOUS [of troubler, F.] trou­
blesome, perplexing, or difficult.

TROUBLOUSNESS, disturbedness, 
perplexedness, &c.

To TROUL, to roll on smoothly.
Milton.

TROUSEQUEUE [with Horsemen]
a huge case of leather as long as the
dock of a horse's tail, which serves for
a covering for the tails of leaping hor­
ses.  F.

TROUSEQUIN [with Horsemen] a
piece of wood cut archwise, raised a­
bove the hinder bow of a great saddle, 
winch serves to keep the bolsters tight.

TROUT-coloured [spoken of Horses]
is white speckled with spots of black, 
bay, or sorrel, particularly about the
head and neck.

TROWLING [of troller, F.] mov­
ing or wandring about.



TRUANTISE, a truanting or play­ 
ing truant.

TRUDMOULDY a dirty drab, a
nasty slatternly 
woman.

TRUGMOULDY a dirty drab, a
nasty slatternly 
woman.

TRUCKLE-Bed, [of trochlea, L. a
pulley or wheel] a low bed with wheels
to run under another bed.

TRUCULENCE [of truculen­ 
tia, L.]
cruelty, savageness, sternness.

TRUCULENTNESS [of truculen­ 
tia, L.]
cruelty, savageness, sternness.

TRUENESS, genuineness, unfeign­
edness, certainness, faithfulness, trusti­
ness.

TRULLIZATION [in ancient Archi­
tecture] all kinds of couches or layers 
of mortar, wrought with the trowel 
in the inside of the vaults; or the hat­
ches made on the layers of mortar, to
retain the lying of the Striæ.

To TRUMP [prendre avec un trionfe, 
F.] to play a trump-card.

To TRUNCATE [truncatum, L.] to
cut shorter, to maim.

TRUNCATED Pyramid [with Geo­
metricians] one whose top is cut off by
a plane parallel to its base.

TRUNK [in Architecture] the fust or
shaft of a column.

TRUNK Roots [with Botanists] small
roots breaking or growing out of the
trunks of plants, which are of two
sorts.

1. Roots growing by a downright de­
scent, sometimes all along the trunk, 
as in mint, &c. sometimes only at the
ends or points, as in brambles.

2. Such roots as neither descend nor
ascend, but shoot forth at right angles
with the trunk.

TRUSSED [spoken of Horses] a horse
is said to be well missed, when his
thighs are large and proportioned to
the roundness of the croup.

TRUSSED [trousie, F.] tied or gird­
ed up; also hanged on a tree; also
snatched up, spoken of a leveret by an
eagle or bird of prey.

TRUTH [according to Mr. Lock]
consists in the joining or separating of
signs, as the things signified by them do
agree or disagree one with another.

TRUTH [treo&wyn;ðe, Sax.] trueness
in opposition of falsity; certainty, fi­
delity, faithfulness.

Metaphysical TRUTH, is the confor­
mity of the things with the divine an­
derstanding.

Logical TRUTH, is the conformity
of the thing with the idea itself. This
is seen in true propositions, such as
agree with their rule; which is the
things themselves of which they treat.

Moral TRUTH, is the conformity 
of words, gestures, and actions with
the heart, when a man's heart and
mouth go together; when he speaks
what he thinks, and is in reality what
he would appear to be by his show and
appearance,

TRUTH in Being [in Metaphysicks]
is the agreeableness of the essence of
any thing to the understanding of God.

TRUTH in signifying [in Metaphy­
sicks] is where there is an exact cor­
respondence between the sign and the
thing signified.

TRUTH in knowing [in Metaphy­
sicks] is when by its ideas the under­
standing represents the thing that is to
be understood exactly as it is.

Artificial TRUTH [in Metaphysicks]
is such a truth the immediate rule of
which is the understanding of the arti­
ficer.

Natural TRUTH [in Metaphysicks]
is such a truth, of which the under­
standing of God is the immediate rule.

TRUTH [in Hieroglyphicks] was re­
presented by a heart on the lips of a
man.

To lye a TRY [Sea Phrase] is when
the wind blows so hard, that the ship
cannot maintain or bear out the main­
sail, and they make her lie a Try under
the misen-sail only.

TUB of Vermilion, from three to
four hundred weight.

TUBE [tubus, L.] a conduit-pipe, 
any long pipe thro' which water or
other liquoris conveyed; also the pipe
or hollow trunk of a prospect glass.

TUBEROUS Root [by Botanists] is
defined to be such as consists of an uni­
form, fleshy substance, and is of a
roundish figure, as in a turnip, &c.

TUBEROSITY [with Surgeons] a
knot or tumour growing naturally on, 
any part, in opposition to tumours that
rise accidentally, or from any disease.

TUBEROUSNESS [tuberositas, L.
tuberosité, F.] knottiness, or being full
of knots, and bunches; also the bunch­
ing out of some parts of the body.

TUBILUSTRIUM [among the Ro­
mans] a ceremony or festival at the pu­
rification of their sacred trumpets.

TUBULATED [tubulatus, L.] made
hollow like a pipe.

TUBULOUSNESS [of tubulus, L. a
pipe] hollowness as a pipe.

TUFTED [of touffe, F.] having, or
trimmed with tufts.

TUISCO, is by some supposed to
have been one of Noah's great grand­
sons; according to the opinion of Ver­



stegan, the son of Ascenaz, the son of
Gomer, the son of Japhet, the son of
Noah, who settled in Germany; who
after his decease was adored by all his
posterity. The inhabitants of that
country are still called Tuitsh or Duytsh­
men from him; and a day of our week
is named Tuesday, because it was ap­
pointed for the adoration of that idol, 
as Verstegan says; but others say it
was called after Thesa, a certain god­
dess, the wife of the god Thor; which
Thesa was looked upon to be the god­
dess of justice. Sebastian Munster is of
opinion, that Tuisco was the son of Noah, 
by his wife Araza or Arezia (by others
called Tythia) born after the flood; and
that coming with his people out of Asia
into Europe, he extended his dominion
from the river Tanais unto the Rhine.

Image omitted.



TULIPÆMANIA, the tulip-mad­
ness, a name given to the extravagancy
of some persons, formerly giving ex­
cessive prices, as five, ten or more
pounds for a tulip-root.  L.

TUMIDNESS [timiditas, L.] swoln­
ness, or swellingness.

TUMOUR [tumor, L. tumeur, F.] a
rising or swelling caused by a settling of
humours in some parts of the body, 
when they are enlarged and stretched 
out beyond their due proportion, so
as to be rendred unfit to perform their
natural function.

TUMULATED [tumulatus, L.] bu­
ried, interred.

TUMULOSITY [tumulositas, L.]
hilliness,

TUMULTUARINESS [tumultuarius, 
L. tumultaire, F.] a tumultous quality, 
state, &c.

TUMULTUOUSNESS [of tumultuo­
sus, L. tumultueux, F. and ness] dis­
ordered, confused, troubled state or
condition.

TUN [of tun, Sax. a hedge or 
ditch, or any thing of that
kind surrounding a place to defend it]
at the end of names of places, by a me­
taphor, signifies a village, town, or
habitation. Nor is it improbable but
that the Saxon tun, might originally
come from the British Dun, which sig­
nifies a mountain, because anciently
towns were generally built upon hills.

TON [of tun, Sax. a hedge or 
ditch, or any thing of that
kind surrounding a place to defend it]
at the end of names of places, by a me­
taphor, signifies a village, town, or
habitation. Nor is it improbable but
that the Saxon tun, might originally
come from the British Dun, which sig­
nifies a mountain, because anciently
towns were generally built upon hills.

TUN-bellied, having a great belly
like a tun, gor bellied.

TUNE [tonus, L. of τόνος, Gr.] a­
greeableness in sound, a harmonious
composition.

Out of TUNE, out of order, frame, 
or temper.

TUNELESS, without any tune.

TUNEGREVE [tuneʒerefa, Sax.] 
a reeve or bailiff of a manour.

TUNICA [with Anat.] a tunick
membrane, or thin skin.  L.

TUNICA cornea, the horny tunic or
coat of the eye,  L.

TUNICA Retiformis [with Anat.]  
one of the tunicles or coats of the eye, 
winch resembles the figure of a net, 
and is the principal instrument of sight, 
called also the Retina,  L.

The TUNICLES [of the Eye] are four
noted viz. ones, the Corneous, the Cry­
stalline, the Vitreour, and the Uveous, 
which are answered by as many hu­
mours.

The TUNICLES [of the Testicles or
Cods] are four, viz. the Scrotum, the
Erythroides, the Epididymis, and the
Dartos.

TUNICULATED Root [with Bot.]
is that kind of bulbous root, which
consists of several coats involving one
another, as in an onion.

TUNNELING, a sort of fowling
with a tunnel-net.

TUPPING [of Tup a male sheep] a
ram's covering an ewe.

TURBIDNESS [turbiditas, L.] trou­
bledness, muddiness, also troublesom­
ness.



TURBINATION, a fashioning like
a top, a sharpening at one end.

TURBULENTNESS [of turbulentus, 
L. and ness] noisiness, troublesomeness, 
boisterousness, a blustering state, con­
dition or temper.

TURFINESS, the being turfy or a­
bounding with turf.

TURGESCENT [turgescens, L.]
swelling or growing big.

TURKEY. Turkies were first brought
into England in the fourteenth year of
king Henry VIII.

TURKISH Language, being original­
ly Tartarian, borrowed from the Ara­
bick their words of religion, from the
Persian, their words of state, and from
the Grecians, their words and terms of
war, and from the Italians, their terms
of navigation; and this is call'd the
Sclavonian Language. The Turkish cha­
racter is the same as the Arabick;
which language some authors say is so
inchanting, that it is usually said the
saints in Heaven and those in paradise
speak it.

TURLUPINADE, a low, dry jest
or witticism.

TURLUPINES, a sect or sort of
people who made a publick profession
of impudence, going naked without
covering so much as their privy parts, 
and were not ashamed to have to do
with women in the open market. They
call'd themselves the fraternity of the
poor, Dauphine and Savoy were the
principal places they appeared in.

Sea-TURN, a wind which upon 
some coasts blows all night from the
shore.

TURNERS, were in­
corporated Anno 1603:
they are a master, 2
wardens, 24 assistants, 
and 118 on the livery;
the livery fine 8 l. the
steward 12. Their ar­
morial ensigns are Sa­
ble, a Catherine wheel Or; their hall
is in Philpot-Lane.

Image omitted.



TURPENTINY [of terebinthinus, L.
terebinthine, F. of τερέβινθος, Gr.] of the
nature of, also dawbed or mixed
with turpentine.

TURQUOISE, a precious stone of
an azure or bluish colour, so called, 
because frequently brought to us from
the Turks.

TUSCAN Work [Architect.] is rarely 
used, except in vaults, in some rustick
edifices and huge piles of building, such
as the amphitheatres, &c.

TUSHES [tuxaſ, Sax.] the great 
standing out teeth of a
boar; also the fore teeth of a horse, 
seated beyond the corner teeth upon
the bars, where they shoot forth on
each side of the jaws, two above and
two below, about the age of three,
and three and an half, &c. and no milk
or foal-teeth ever come forth in the
place where they grow.

TUSKS [tuxaſ, Sax.] the great 
standing out teeth of a
boar; also the fore teeth of a horse, 
seated beyond the corner teeth upon
the bars, where they shoot forth on
each side of the jaws, two above and
two below, about the age of three,
and three and an half, &c. and no milk
or foal-teeth ever come forth in the
place where they grow.

TUSK [in Carpentry] a bevel shoul­
der made to strengthen the tenon of a
joist, which is let into the girder.

A TUSLE, a bustle, a striving with 
a person.

TUTORAGE [in the Civil Law] the 
same as Guardianship in the Common-­
Law, the office of a tutor.

TUTY [tutie, F.] the sparkles 
or soot of brass, which
sticks to the furnace while
melting, and is formed into
concave flakes, by chymical
writers is express'd by this
character.

Image omitted.



TUTTY [tutie, F.] the sparkles 
or soot of brass, which
sticks to the furnace while
melting, and is formed into
concave flakes, by chymical
writers is express'd by this
character.

Image omitted.



TUTULINA, a Pagan deity invok'd
for the preservation of their harvest, 
when they had got it home in their 
rick yards, that it might thenceforth
be kept safe.

TWANG, a root or forked branch
at the bottom of a great tooth.

TWAT, Pudendum Muliebre.

TWAT Scowerer, a surgeon or doc­
tor. E. Ward.

To TWATTLE [prob. of tattelen, 
Du.] to prate.

A TWEAGUE, vexation, perplex­
ity, trouble.

TWENTIETH [of t&wyn;entiʒ, Sax.]
the 20th or XXth.

TWIGGY [of t&wyn;iʒa, Sax. a twig]  
made of twigs.

A TWINGE [twinger, Dan.] a gripe, 
or pinch.

TWINING Stalk [with Botan.] a
stalk that twists about any prop with­
out the help of tendrels, as the kidney-­
bean.

TWINKLING [prob. of t&wyn;incelian,
Sax. to move quick] winking with the
eyes, or sparkling as the stars.

TWIRLING [prob. q. d. whirling, 
of ð&wyn;yrfan, Sax.] turning swiftly 
about.

TWIST [with Horsemen] the inside 
or flat part of a man's thigh, upon
which a true horseman rests on horse­
back.

TWISTED [of ʒet&wyn;iſan
wrung round; also complicated toge­
ther, as several threads.



TWISTING [with Horsemen] is the 
reducing a horse to the same state of 
impotence with a gelding, by the violent 
wringing or twisting of his testicles, 
twice about, which dries them up and
deprives them of nourishment.

TWITCHING [of t&wyn;iccian, Sax.]
pinching or given pinches, sudden pulls
or twinges.

TWITTERING [prob. of gitter, 
Teut.] sneering or laughing scornfully.

TWITTLE-TWATTLE, silly, 
childish prating.

TWO [t&wyn;a, Sax. duo, L. deux, F.]
2 or II. The number 2 is call'd the
father of even numbers, but the ruin
of unity, for to divide a thing is to
destroy it; but Zaratas, Pythagoras's
master, call'd 2 the mother of numbers, 
and 1 the father.

TYBER, the famous river of Italy, 
is represented in the Vatican at Rome by
the statue of a man with a grave
countenance, a long beard, with a gar­
land of flowers on his head, in marble, 
lying along, resting his right leg upon
an oar, and holding under his right
arm a she-wolf, with two small infants
sucking at her teats, leaning upon an
urn or pitcher, out of which its stream
issueth, In the left hand he holds a
Cornucopia of delicate fruits.

TYGER [Emblematically] signifies
swiftness, revenge, and falshood. The
ancients dedicated the tyger to Apollo, 
on account of its swiftness; and to
Bacchus, on account of its rabidness, 
because, when men have drank too
much wine, it makes them rave extra­
vagantly; but others give another rea­
son, for it, because wine mollifies some
savage tempers. It is reported that
those, that rob a tyger of her whelps, 
lay pieces of looking glass in the way
that she is to take in pursuing them, in
which she looking and seeing herself
stops, and by that means they have
time to escape.

TYCHONIC System [in Astronomy] so
called of Tycho Brahe a nobleman of
Denmark, this system like that of Ptole­
my has the earth placed in the middle
and is supposed to be immoveable, the
sun and moon revolving in orbits res­
pecting the same as a center; but ac­
cording to Copernicus the other five
planets are supposed to revolve round
the sun as their center.

TYPE [in Theology] a symbol, sign, 
or figure of something to come.

TYPHOMANIA [τυφωμανία, Gr.] a
delirium with a frenzy, a disease of the
brain, whereby the patient not being 
able to sleep, tho' greatly inclined to 
sleep, lies with his eyes shut, talks ab­
surdly, and tumbles and tosses.

TYPHON, an Egyptian deity. This
people admitted of two principles, the
one good and the other bad.

From the good principle proceeded
generation, and from the bad one pro­
ceeded the corruption of every thing.

The good principle had a superiority
over the evil one, but not so far as to
destroy it; and to hinder its operati­
ons.

Isis, Osiris and Orus were the good
principles; Typhon was the bad princi­
ple. Osiris was in the universe, what
reason is in man, and Typhon was ana­
logous to the passions that are contrary
to reason. In the human body a good
temperament proceeded from Osiris;
but diseases and indispositions came
from Typhon.

To him also were imputed tempests, 
inundations, earthquakes, eclipses of
the sun and moon, and every thing
that passed for an irregularity in na­
ture.

The ass was his symbol, as also the
crocodile. He had divine honours paid
to him, in the Canton of Egypt, call'd
Papremis.

Typhon was brother to Osiris, who
reigned in Egypt, with equity and ju­
stice; but Typhon was a violent and
cruel man, kill'd his brother, and cut
his body in 26 pieces, of which he
gave one to every one of those who
had conspired with him, to engage
them farther by that, and render them
equally, oblig'd to support him in his
usurpation of the kingdom of Egypt.

But Isis the wife and sister of Osiris, 
and Orus their son, revenged his death
upon Typhon, put him to death and all
that had conspired with him. He was
drowned in the river Orontes.

The poets say, he was buried under
the island of Sicily, which was hardly
sufficient to cover his body, it was of
so enormous a size.

Some Criticks say, that Typhon is the 
same as Shem, the son of Noah, and
that several particulars of his life and
death have great resemblance to those
of the king of Basan.

The Egyptians give to Typhon the
name of Seth.

The Egyptians gave to Shem who was 
blessed by Noah, the odious name of
the evil principle, and of an usurper, 
which would much better agree to
their founder Ham.



TYPICALNESS [of τυπιχὸς, Gr.]
typical quality.

TYRANNICALNESS [of tyrannis, 
L. tyrannie, F. of τύραννος, Gr.] a tyran­
nical nature, disposition, or behaviour.

TYRANT [tyrannus, L. τύραννος of
τον Υυῤῥἡνων Gr. i. e. the Tyrrhenians, 
who were a cruel people, or of Tyrrha, 
a city of Lysia, where Gyges first play'd
the tyrant; or, as others say, of τρύω, 
Gr. to oppress; or of τὸ τορειν τοὶς λανς
χλ` ἁνίας ἐπιφέρειν Gr. to vex the people, 
and bring trouble upon them] The
name tyrant was at first used in a good
sense: and the Greeks in old time call'd
the supreme governour of every city a
tyrant or king; but now it is generally
used in a bad sense, for one who go­
verns with cruelty and injustice; also
either for a rightful prince that misu­
ses his royal power in oppressing his
subjects, or for one who usurps the so­
vereign power in a state.

There is no unicode for the Greek small letter lamda with Greek accent varia on top. Therefore, its encoding should be done in two parts: unicode Greek accent varia "`" follows the Greek small letter lamda "λ".




V
V U v u, Roman; V u, Italick; U u, 
English; V U v, Saxon, are the
twentieth letters in order of their re­
spective alphabets; Υ υ, in Greek, ge­
nerall written by a Y y, in English, the
twentieth of the Greek alphabet, and
ו, Hebrew, the sixth of that.

The V consonant and U vowel ought
to be carefully distinguish'd in reading, 
as Vomit, Vulgar, Union, University, &c.
The U vowel is not heard in the words
Guards, Guinea, &c. and it very seldom
ends any English words.

V, in Latin numbers, stands for five.

V̅, with a dash at top, stands for
5000.

The dash is placed on top of letter V.



V. frequently stood for Vide, i.e.
See.

V. R. [with the Romans] was fre­
quently used for the phrase uti rogas, 
i. e. as thou askest or desirest, and was
a mark for a vote or suffrage in the
passing of a law.

VACANCY [in Law] a post or be­
nefice wanting a regular officer or in­
cumbent.

VACANT Effects [in Law] are such
as are abandoned for want of an heir, 
after the death or flight of their for­
mer owner.

VACANTNESS [of vacance, F. or
vacans, L. and ness] emptiness.

VACATION-Barristers, are such as
are newly call'd to the bar, who are 
obliged to attend the exercise of the
house for the six next long vacations, 
viz. in Lent and Summer, and are there­
fore so styled during these three years.

VACCARIUS [in ancient Deeds] a
herds-man that looks after the com­
mon herds of cows.

VACUITIES [with Physicians] those
days in which an imperfect or ill crisis
of a distemper often happens, viz. the
sixth, eighth, tenth, twelfth, sixteenth, 
and eighteenth, which days are also
call'd Medicinal Days, because medi­
cines may be given on them.

VACUNA [so call'd of vacando, i. e.
being at leisure, supposed to preside
over them that are at leisure] the god­
dess of rest, a Heathen deity worship­
ped by labourers, her festivals were
celebrated in winter, that they might
rest after their harvest.

VACUUM [with Physiologists] is sup­
posed to be a space devoid or empty of
all matter or body; and is distinguish­
ed by them into vacuum disseminatum, 
or interspersum, and vacuum coacervatum.

VACUUM Boyleanum, that approach
to a real Vacuum, which is arrived at by
means of an air pump.

VACUUM disseminatum are small
void spa­
ces interspersed about, between the
particles of all bodies: That there is
this Vacuum, appears from the follow­
ing argument: If some vacuities are
not supposed to be interspersed among
bodies, it will be very difficult to ac­
count for motion. For if there be an
absolute Plenum, the least body in na­
ture cannot move, but all bodies that
are must move with it; and yet into
what places they should move, when
all places are already full, is not easy
to conceive.

VACUUM interspersum are small
void spa­
ces interspersed about, between the
particles of all bodies: That there is
this Vacuum, appears from the follow­
ing argument: If some vacuities are
not supposed to be interspersed among
bodies, it will be very difficult to ac­
count for motion. For if there be an
absolute Plenum, the least body in na­
ture cannot move, but all bodies that
are must move with it; and yet into
what places they should move, when
all places are already full, is not easy
to conceive.

VADIARE duellum [in Ant. Writ.]
signifies to wage a combat; as, when a
person gave another a challenge to de­
cide a controversy by a camp fight or
duel, and threw down a gauntlet or the
like sign of defiance, if the other took
it up, that was Vadiare duellum, i. e.
both to give and take mutual pledges
of fighting.

VAFROUSNESS [vafrities, L.]
craftiness, sub­
tlety.

VAFRITY [vafrities, L.]
craftiness, sub­
tlety.

VAGABUND [vagabundus, L.] wan­
dering, roaming about.

VAGINA [in Architecture] a term
used for the lower part of a Terminus, 
so call'd on account of its resemblance
to a sheath, out of which the statue
seems to issue.



VAGITANS, a Pagan deity, imagin­
ed to preside over the first words, 
which children pronounce, to whom
altars were erected at Rome.

VAGRANTNESS [of vogus, wander­
ing, and errans, L. wandering, and ness]
vagrancy, an unsettled course of life.

VAILS [unde derivatur incertum, un­
less prob. of valedictio, q. d. money
given to servants by guests for saluta­
tions] gifts or profits given or allowed
to servants above their wages.

VAIN-GLORIOUSNESS [of vana
and gloria, L.] vain-glory, empty
boasting, &c.

VAIR [either of variè of variis
coloribus, i. e. various co­
lours; or, as some say of varius, the
name of an animal, whose back is a
blue grey, and its belly white] it is the
second sort of furr or doubling, for­
merly used for lining of the garments
of great men and knights of renown;
it is when a field of a coat of arms is
chequered into two colours by the fi­
gures of little bells; and if these two
colours are Argent and Azure; it is a
Vairy proper, and you need say no
more but Vairy; but if the colours are
any other, they must be expresly named
in blazoning the coat. See Verry.

VAIRY [either of variè of variis
coloribus, i. e. various co­
lours; or, as some say of varius, the
name of an animal, whose back is a
blue grey, and its belly white] it is the
second sort of furr or doubling, for­
merly used for lining of the garments
of great men and knights of renown;
it is when a field of a coat of arms is
chequered into two colours by the fi­
gures of little bells; and if these two
colours are Argent and Azure; it is a
Vairy proper, and you need say no
more but Vairy; but if the colours are
any other, they must be expresly named
in blazoning the coat. See Verry.

VARY Copy [in He­
raldry]
is a bearing, the form in
the escutcheon, and in bla­
zon the colours must be
express'd, as Azure and Argent.

Image omitted.



Potent Counter [in He­
raldry]
is a bearing, the form in
the escutcheon, and in bla­
zon the colours must be
express'd, as Azure and Argent.

Image omitted.



Contre VARY, is when the metals
and colours are so ranged, 
that the figure, which is
Azure, touches either with
its edge or foot another
Azure figure, being placed
and joined together, breech to breech, 
one upon another, the point of the
one tending towards the chief of the
escutcheon, and that of the other to­
wards the base, as in the figure.

Image omitted.



VAIRE en Pale, is when the figures
stand exactly one upon another, flat
upon the points.

VALE [vallis, L. val, F.] a hollow
place or space of ground, surrounded
with hills.

VALENTINIANS [so call'd of Va­
lentinian, their leader] a sect of Gno­
sticks in the second century: He col­
lected dreams of certain gods, to the
number of 30, whom he called Æones, 
i. e. ages, of whom he would have
15 to be male, and the rest female:
and that our Saviour sprung like an­
other Pandora, out of their correspon­ 
dence; and added, that he passed with
a body brought out of Heaven thro' the
virgin Mary, as a conduit or pipe; and
that all men should not rise to life
again.

VALESIANS [so called of Valens, 
their leader] a sect of Christians, who
admitted none into their society but
eunuchs.

VALET [with Horsemen] is a stick
armed at one end with a blunt point of
iron, to prick and aid a leaping horse.

VALET [un valet, F.] in an­
cient times was used
to signify a young
gentleman of good descent or quality;
and afterwards it was applied to the
rank of yeomen: And, in the account 
of the Inner Temple, it is understood of
a bencher's clerk or servant, which by
a corruption is called Varlet; also the
butler of the house.

VALECT [un valet, F.] in an­
cient times was used
to signify a young
gentleman of good descent or quality;
and afterwards it was applied to the
rank of yeomen: And, in the account 
of the Inner Temple, it is understood of
a bencher's clerk or servant, which by
a corruption is called Varlet; also the
butler of the house.

VADELECT [un valet, F.] in an­
cient times was used
to signify a young
gentleman of good descent or quality;
and afterwards it was applied to the
rank of yeomen: And, in the account 
of the Inner Temple, it is understood of
a bencher's clerk or servant, which by
a corruption is called Varlet; also the
butler of the house.

A VALETUDINARY [valetudina­
rius, L.] a person of a weak, sickly, or
crazy constitution, who is frequently
out of order.

VALIDNESS [validitas, L. validité, 
F.] validity, ability, power; also au­
thentickness, &c.

VALLAR Crown [in Heraldry] was
a crown given by the general of an
army, to him who first broke into an
enemies fortified camp, or
forced any place pallisaded, 
and it was in the form an­
nexed, representing palli­
sadoes standing up above
the circle.

Image omitted.



VALLARINE, of or pertaining to
Vallar.

VALLIES [in Architect.] the gutters
over the sleepers in the roof of a build­
ing.

VALVE [in Hydraulicks, &c.] a kind
of lid or cover of a tube, &c. opening
one way, which, the more forcibly it
is pressed the other, the more closely
it shuts the aperture.

VAMPLET, a piece of steel some­
times in the shape of a tunnel, used in
tilting spears, just before the hand, to
secure and defend it; it was made to
be taken off and put on at pleasure.

VAN-FOSS [in Fortific.] a ditch dug
without the counter-scarp, and running
all along the glacis, usually full of wa­
ter.

VANILLA, a little seed growing in
longish pods, a principal ingredient in
the composition of chocolate, to give
it strength and an agreeable flavour.

VANILOQUENT [vaniloquus, L.]
talking vainly.



VANQUISHER [vainqueur, F. victor, 
L.] a conqueror, &c.

VAPIDNESS [vapiditas, L.] dead­
ness, flatness, palledness of liquors.

VAPORIFEROUSNESS [of vapori­
fer, L. and ness] an exhaling or vapour-­
producing quality.

VAPOURING [of vaporans, L.]
huffing, hectoring, bragging, or boast­
ing.

VAPOURS [vapores, L.] are those
watery particles which are sever'd from
others, by the motion of the air, and
are carried about in several ways, ac­
cording to the wind or warmness of
the air. They derive their original, 
not only from the surface of the water, 
but from moist earth, clouds, snow, 
&c. for the parts of these bodies being
not firmly united, are easily disjoined, 
and so break forth into the air, there
meeting with them, because the air as
well as exhalations contribute much to
the violence of the winds.

VARDINGAL [vertugadin, F.] a
whale bone circle that ladies formerly
wore on their hips, and upon which
they tied their petticoats; a hoop-pet­
ticoat, a fardingal.

VARIABLE [in the new Doctrine of
Infinites] is a term apply'd by the fo­
reign Mathematicians to such quantities
as either increase or diminish, accord­
ing as some other quantities increase
or diminish.

VARIATION [in Aston.] a term
used by Tycho Brake, for the third ine­
quality in the motion of the moon, 
arising from her Apogæum's being
changed, as her system is carried round
the sun by the earth.

VARIATION [in Law] an altera­
tion or change of condition in a person
or thing; after some former concern
or transaction therewith.

VARIATION Chart, a chart design'd
by Dr. Halley: The projection of which
is according to Mercator's; and the
situation and form of the surface of the
terraqueous globe, as to its principal
parts, and the dimensions of the several
oceans are therein ascertained with the
utmost accuracy, as well from astrono­
mical observations, as from journals.

VARIATION [in Geography] the
deviation of the magnetical needle or
compass from the north point either
towards the east or west.

VARICES [with Anat.] the greater
veins of the hips, thighs, and stone, 
&c.  L.

VARIEGATION [with Florists] the
art of streaking or diversifying the
leaves of flowers or plants with seve­
ral colours.

VARIFORMITY [of varius and
forma, L.] variousness of form.

VARIORUM [in Classic Literature]
as Notis Variorum, a term used of those
Latin authors printed with the notes
or comments of various grammarians
or criticks.

VARNISH [with Medallists] a co­
lour or sort of gloss that medals have
gotten by lying in the earth.

VASA Concordiæ [in Hydraulicks]
two vessels so constructed, as that one
of them, tho' full of wine, will not run
a drop, unless the other, being full of
water, do run also,  L.

VASCULAR [vascularis, L.] is by
Anatomists apply'd to any thing consist­
ing of divers veins, vessels, arteries, 
&c.

VASE [of a Church Candlestick] the
middle of it, which is usually of a round
figure.

VASES [in Archit.] are ornaments
placed on cornices, socles, or pedestals, 
representing such vessels as the ancients
used in sacrifices, as incense-pots, &c.
often enrich'd with Basso Relievo's; also
the body of a Corinthian and Composite
capital, called the Tambour.

Rear-VASSAL, one who holds of a
lord who himself is vassal of another
lord.

VASSALEUS [in Law] a vassal who
is obliged to serve and shew respect to
his master, and yet is in a manner his
companion.

VASTELLUM [old Deeds] a wastel-­
bowl or piece of plate, anciently used
to be set at the upper end of an abbot's
table, with which he used to begin the
health or Grace-Cup to strangers, or to
his fraternity,  L.

VAUDOIS, a sect of Christians that
sprung up in the year 1160. followers
of Peter Vaud or Valdo, a rich merchant
of Lyons in France; who being at a
feast and seeing his friend die suddenly, 
was so affected, that he immediately
betook himself to seriousness and me­
ditation and the study of the scriptures;
by which means having discovered se­
veral errors in the church of Rome, he
communicated his discoveries to his
friends and the poor, whom he con­
stantly relieved bountifully. Upon his
discoveries gaining ground, the Clergy
excommunicated him and persecuted
some of his disciples, which caused
both him and them to fly into the val­
lies of Piedmont, where finding some
ancient Christians who were called



Vaudes, they ordained such of the inha­
bitants of the Lionnois who were capa­
ble of preaching, and spread themselves
into France, Italy, and Germany.

To VAULT a shoe [with Horsemen]
is to forge it hollow for horses that
have high and round soles, to the end
that the shoe may not bear upon the
sole that is then higher than the roof.

VAULTING [voltigeant, F.] leaping
or going cleverly over a wooden horse
or over any thing by laying one hand
on it and throwing over the body.

VAULTS [in Architect.] a piece of
masonry arched on the outside, and
supported in the air by the artful
placing of the stones which form it;
the principal use of which is for a
cover or shelter.

Master-VAULT, the chief vault in
a building, is the chief vault to distin­
guish it from others that are less vaults, 
which serve only to cover gates, win­
dows, passages, &c.

Double VAULTS, are such as are
built over other vaults to make the
beauty and decoration of the inside
consistent with that on the outside, a
chasm or vacancy being left between
the convexity of the one and the con­
cavity of the other, as it is in the ca­
thedral of St. Paul's at London.

The Key of a VAULT, is a stone or
brick in the middle of a vault in the
form of a truncated cone, serving to
bind or fasten all the rest.

The Reins of a VAULT, or the fil­
lings up, are the sides which sustain it.

The Pendentive of a VAULT, is the
part suspended between the arches or
ogives.

The Impost of a VAULT, is the stone
whereon the first Voussoir or stone of
the vault is laid.

UBI, where,  L. signifies the pre­
sence of a being in a place.

UBIETY [in Metaphysicks] is the
presence of any thing in the ubi or
place.

Infinite UBIETY [with Metaphysici­
ans] is the undetermined presence of a
thing in every place; this is the pro­
perty of God, and is the same as ubi­
quity.

Finite UBIETY [in Metaphysicks] is
the determinate presence of a being in
a place, and is either circumscriptive or
definitive.

Circumscriptive UBIETY [with Meta­
physicians] is that by which a thing is
exactly circumscrib'd in its ubi, and
this is properly call'd place; this is the
condition of all bodies.

Definitive UBIETY [in Metaphysicks]
is when a thing is so in a place without
any circumscription, as to be no where
else. After this manner Accidents, Ma­
terial Forms, and Spirits are in a place.
The title of a definitive is given to it, 
because it may be defined to be here, 
and not there.

UBIQUITARIES, a name given to
the Lutherans, who to maintain the
real presence, say that our Saviour's
body is every where, as well as his di­
vinity.

UBIQUITARINESS [of ubiquitaire, 
F. of ubiqué, L. and ness] an ubiquitary
temper or quality; also a being unset­
tled, a being here and there.

UBIQUITY [ubiquité, F. of ubique, 
L. every where] a quality of being
every where or in all places at the
same time; an attribute of God, 
whereby he is always intimately pre­
sent to all things, gives the Esse to all
things; knows, preserves, and works
all in all things.

VEGETATIVE Soul, that principle
whereby trees and plants live, grow, 
produce their kind, &c.

VEGETATIVENESS [of vegetati­
vus, L. vegetatif, F. and ness] a vegeta­
tive quality.

VEHICLE [with Anatomists] the Se­
rum or watery humour is said to be the
vehicle that conveys the small parts of
the blood, and disperses them all over
the body.

VEINS [with Anatomists] are long
and round pipes or canals, consisting of
four coats, viz. a nervous, a glandulous, 
a muscular, and a membranous one.
Their office is to receive the blood that
remains after nourishment is taken, and
to carry it back to the heart to be re­
vived and improved. These veins are
distinguished by several names, accord­
ing to the different parts they pass
thro', as the Axillary, the Basilisk, the
Cephalick, the Pulmonary, &c.

VEJUPITER [q. d. little Jupiter] a
mischievous god amongst the Romans, 
which they worshipped, not from any
hope of help from him, but lest he
should hurt them.

VELLIFICK [vellificus, L.] done or
performed with sails.

VELVETY, like velvet, soft, &c.

VENALNESS [venalitas, L.] a being
venal, saleableness.

VENEERING [with Cabinet Ma­
kers, &c.] a kind of
marquetry or inlaid work, whereby
several thin slices or leaves of fine
woods of different sorts are fastened
or glued on a ground of some common
wood.

VANEERING [with Cabinet Ma­
kers, &c.] a kind of
marquetry or inlaid work, whereby
several thin slices or leaves of fine
woods of different sorts are fastened



or glued on a ground of some common
wood.

VENEFICAL [veneficus, L.] veno­
mous, poisonous.

VENEFICKNESS [of veneficus, L.
and ness] poisonousness.

VENENIFEROUSNESS [of veneni­
fer, L. and ness] a poison-bringing qua­
lity or nature.

VENENOUSNESS [venenositas, L.]
fulness of poison.

VENERABLENESS [venerabilitas, 
L.] merit of reverence, worshipfulness.

VENEREALNESS [of venereus, 
L. and ness]
a venereal, lustful, leacherous quality
or constitution; also infectedness with
the venereal disease or French pox.

VENEREOUSNESS [of venereus, 
L. and ness]
a venereal, lustful, leacherous quality
or constitution; also infectedness with
the venereal disease or French pox.

VENERY [plasir venerien, F. appe­
titus venereus, L.] lustfulness; also coi­
tion or carnal copulation.

Beasts of VENERY, are of five kinds
the Hart, the Hind, the Hare, the Boar, 
and the Wolf; which are properly
beasts of the forest, where they keep
their shelter, avoiding as much as pos­
sible the coming out into the plains.

VENGEFUL, revengeful, prone to
take revenge.

VENGEFULNESS [of vengeance, F.
full and ness] a vindictive or revenge­
ful temper or nature.

VENIALNESS [of venialis, L. ve­
niel, F. and ness] pardonableness.

VENOUSNESS [of venosus, L. and
ness] fulness of, or having veins.

VENT [of ventus, L. the wind] a
vent-hole or spiracle, which is a little
hole pierced in vessels of liquor that
are tapp'd, to let in the air that the li­
quor may run out; also a small aper­
ture left in the tubes or pipes of foun­
tains, to facilitate the going out of the
wind, or to give them air that they
may not burst in frosty weather, &c.

To VENT, to disclose or reveal a se­
cret; to utter and declare the thoughts;
to vent the Passion, to let them break
out.

VENTER [with Anat.] a cavity in
the body of an animal, containing the
Viscera or other organs, necessary for
the performance of divers functions.
This they divide into three regions or
cavities; the first is the head, which
contains the brain; the second the
breast, as far as the Diaphragm, which
contains the organs of respiration; the
third is properly that which is called
the venter or belly, which contains the
intestines and organs of generation and
digestion, called the Abdomen.

VENTER [in our Customs] is us'd for 
the partition of the effects of a father
and mother, among children born or
accruing from different marriages.

VENTS [with Essayers, Glass-makers, 
&c.] is a term applied to the covers of
wind furnaces, by which the air en­
ters, which serve for bellows, and are
stopped with registers or flues, accord­
ing to what degree of heat is required.

VENTS [in Architect.] pipes of lead, 
or potters-ware, one end of which
opens into a cell of a necessary house, 
the other reaching to the roof of it, 
for the conveyance of the fetid air;
also apertures made in those walls that
sustain terrasses to furnish air, and to
give a passage for the waters.

VENTIDUCTS, spiracles or subter­
raneous passages, where fresh cool
winds being kept are made to commu­
nicate by means of ducts, funnels, or
vaults with the chambers or other
apartments of a house, to cool them in
sultry weather.

VENTOSENESS [ventositas, L.]
ventosity, windiness.

VENTRICE [ventriculus, L. i. e. the
lower belly] the stomach, a skinny
bowel, seated in the lower belly under
the midriff, between the liver and the
spleen. It is constituted of four tuni­
cles, viz. a nervous, a fibrous, a glandu­
lous, and a membranous one; the office
of which is to ferment or digest the
meat.

VENTRICULOSE [ventriculosus, L.]
paunch-bellied.

VENTRICULUS [with Surgeons] a
core in a botch or boil that is broken.

VENTRIFLUOUS [ventrifluus, L.]
laxative, purging the belly.

VENTRILOQUOUS, a term appli­
ed to a person who forms his speech by
drawing the air into the lungs, so that
the voice comes out of the Thorax, 
and to a by stander seems to come
from a distance.

VENTUROUS [aventureux, F.] da­
ring, bold, &c.

VENTUROUSNESS [of aventureux, 
F. and ness, &c.] adventurousness, 
boldness, daringness, hardiness.

VENUS [so called, as some say, of
veniendo, coming, because she comes
to every thing. But Varro derives
Venus of viendo, i. e. binding, because
she binds and unites souls together.
The Greeks call her Ἀφροδίτη of ἀφρος, 
froth, as being produced out of the
foam of the sea, as follows.] Some tell
us, that when Saturn had committed
an action full of impiety, and with
his graceless scythe had cut off the



genitals of his father Cœlus (by that
means to deprive him of the power of
begetting) he threw them into the
sea; where, by the continual agitation
of the waves, they found a favourable
womb among the froth, and out of
this bleeding substance Venus was pro­
duced. Again, other of the poets tell
us, that she was the daughter of Ju­
piter and the goddess Dione. The po­
ets also make mention of three Venus's:
The first, the daughter of Cœlus; the
second crept out of the froth of the sea
(as before); and the third the daugh­
ter of Jupiter and Dione, who was
married to Vulcan. Venus was the
goddess of love and pleasure, on ac­
count of her extraordinary beauty.
Her chariot was drawn by swans and
doves, accounted lascivious birds. The
poets ascribe to her several children, 
as Hymenæus, the god of marriages, and
the three Charities or Graces were her
daughters and companions; also the
two Cupids, the gods of love, the one
of honest love, and the other of un­
lawful and carnal pleasures; and that
infamous deity Priapus was accounted
her son; and also Æneas, but she
never had any children by her husband
Vulcan. Venus had several temples
built to her in the city of Rome. One
to Venus Erycina, where was the
statue of Amor Lætheus, dipping his 
arrows in a river; another to Venus
Libitina, where the urns and coffins of
the most considerable persons of Rome
were placed; another to Venus Verti­
cordia, who was called Venus Viriplaca, 
where the women appeared with their
husbands when there was any difference
between them, to find some way of re­
conciliation. The usual sacrifices offer­
ed to her were doves, swans, sparrows, 
&c. and to her was dedicated the rose, 
an inducement to love, and the myrtle, 
tree, a symbol of peace. Venus is often
painted with a beautiful countenance, 
golden hair, attired in a robe of
black, scarlet or dun colour, with her
son Cupid by her; and sometimes doves
and cypress trees; and sometimes in a
chariot drawn by swans or doves. It
is very probable that Venus was said
to have been born of the sea, for no
other reason than because the cause, 
that effects all things, requires moisture
and motion. And the sea has both
these in a very large degree. They
seem to be of this opinion, who say
she was the daughter of Diana; For
moisture is διερὀ῀ν i. e. something splen­
did and vivid. Αφρυδίτη, is that power
which produces male and female, as
αφρος, signifies froth, because the
seed of animals is frothy. Euripides
fetches it from hence, that those that
are captivated by Venus are, i. e.
foolish, mad and doating, Venus is
feigned to be extremely beautiful, be­
cause she affords men the pleasure of
coition, which they find to surpass by
far all things else. She is decorated
with the title of φιλομείδης, i. e. de­
lighted in laughter, because she is very
prone to laughter. The cause of this
epithet is, mirth and laughter frequent­
ly accompany the venereal act, and per­
sons are then very familiar. The Gra­
ces are represented as sitting by Venus, 
and are her companions and attendants
also Suadela and Mercury. But why?
Because those that are loved are plea­
sed with amorous orations and favour
(Love) or with the pleasure that Venus
affords in venereal embraces. She is
called Cytherea from χὺησις, i. e. im­
pregnation, which follows coition, or
because for the most part it uses to
slacken or lay venereal desires. She is
signified by these three ούρανία i. e. hea­
venly, πάναετία, i. e. vulgar or com­
mon, and παναετία, i. e. the cause of
all things; which intimate, that her
power and efficacy is conspicuous in
Heaven, earth, and sea. Among the
birds she delights in none so much as
the dove, because of its chastity and
amorous courtship; for the dove is
amorous, and the symbol of true love, 
on account of its manner of kissing; she
has an antipathy to swine, because of
their filthiness. Among plants the
myrtle is dedicated to Venus, because
the myrtle is accounted proper to en­
gage or promote love. And the Philyrea
is sacred to her, because it promotes
venery; and they make use of that
chiefly in making garlands, Phurnutius.

There is no unicode for Greek small letter omicron with psili and perispomeni. The unicode ὀ is for Greek small letter omicron with psili, and the unicode ῀ is for the diacritic perispomeni.



VENUS [with Astron.] is one of the
seven planets, the brightest of all the
stars, except the sun and moon: It
performs its periodical motion in 224
days 17 hours, and its motion round
its axis is performed in 23 hours. The
diameter of it is almost equal to the
diameter of the earth.

VENUS [with Astrol.] is accounted a
feminine planet, and the lesser fortune.

VENUS [with Chym.] is taken for
copper, and the character is ♀.

VENUSTNESS [venustas, L.]
beautifulness.

VENUSTITY [venustas, L.]
beautifulness.

VERB [verbum, L.] a word which
serves to express what we affirm of
any subject, as is, loves, hears, reads, &c.



Active VERB, is such an one as ex­
presses an action that passes on another
subject or object, as to love God, to
write a Letter, &c.

Passive VERB, is one which ex­
presses passion or suffering, or receives
the action of some agent, as I am loved.

Neuter VERB, is such as expresses an
action that has no particular object on
which to fall, as I run, I sleep, &c.

Substantive VERB, is such a one as
expresses the being or substance which
the mind forms to itself or supposes to
be in the object, whether it be there, 
or not, as I am, thou art, &c.

Auxiliary VERBS, are such as serve
in conjugating a ctive and passive verbs, 
as am, was, have, had, &c.

Regular VERBS, are such as are con­
jugated after some one manner, rule, 
or analogy.

Irregular VERBS, are such as have
something singular in their termina­
tion, or the formation of their tenses.

Impersonal VERBS, are such as have
only the third person, as it becometh.

VERBERATION [in Physicks] a
term used to express the cause of sound, 
which arises from a verberation of
the air, when struck in divers manners
on the several parts of the sonorous
body, first put into a vibratory motion.

VERBOSENESS [of verbosus, L. and
ness] verbosity, the using many words, 
fulness of words, prolixity in discourse.

VERDANTNESS [of verdoyant, q. d.
viridans, F. and ness] a flourishing, 
bright, or lively greenness.

A General VERDICT, is a verdict
that is brought in by a jury to the
Court in general terms as guilty of the
indictment, &c.

Special VERDICT, is one where the
jury find such or such facts to be done, 
and as to the law upon the facts, leave
it to the judgment of the court.

VERDUROUS, full of verdure, 
green.

VERECUNDNESS [verecundia, L.]
modesty, bashfulness, verecundity.

VERGE [of virga, L.] a wand, rod, 
or sergeant's mace.

VERGE [of vergere, L. to bend or
incline downward] the compass or
extent of judicature, &c.

Court of VERGE, is a court or tri­
bunal in the manner of a King's bench, 
which takes cognisance of all crimes
and misdemeanours committed within
the Verge of the King's court.

Tenant of the VERGE, a tenant, so
called, because he held a stick or rod
in his hand, when he was admitted a
tenant, and swore fealty to the lord of
the manour.

VERGENTNESS [of vergens, L. and
ness] bendingness, incliningness, either
from or to.

VERGETTE [in Heral­
dry] is what, by the English
heralds, is called a pallet
or small pale, i. e. several
small pales or pallets divi­
ding the shield into so many
parts, as in the figure annexed,  F.

Image omitted.



VERGILIÆ [in Astron.] constella­
tions, the appearance of which denotes
the approach of the spring,  L.

VERIDICALNESS [of veridicus, L.
veridique, F. and ness] truth speaking, 
or the quality or faculty of speaking
truth.

VERILOQUIOUS [veriloquus, 
speaking the truth.

VERISIMILAR [verisimilis, L.
vraysemblable, F.] likely, probable.

VERITAS, Truth [among the Ro­
mans] a goddess supposed to be the
daughter of Saturn and time, and the
mother of virtue.

She was represented by a handsome
woman of a modest countenance, 
shining with splendor and majesty;
but clad very plain.

VERMICULAR [vermicularis, L.]
of, pertaining to, or bearing a resem­
blance to a worm.

VERMIFUGOUS [of vermes and fu­
go, L. to chase or drive away] expel­
ling worms.

VERMINOUSNESS [of verminosus, 
L. and ness] fulness of worms, worm-­
eatenness.

VERMIPAROUSNESS [of vermes,
worms, and pario, L. to bring forth
young] a worm breeding quality.

VERMIVOROUSNESS [of vermes
and vorax, devouring, L. and ness] a
worm-devouring nature.

VERNACULARNESS [of vernacu­
lus, L. and ness] properness or peculi­
arness to one's own country.

VERNAL Signs [in Astron.] those
signs the sun is in, during the spring-­
season, viz. Aries, Taurus, and Gemini.

VERNANT [vernans, L.] springing,
growing green.

VERONICA [an abbreviation of
Vericonica, quasi vera icon, L. a true
image] those portraits or represen­
tations of the face of our Saviour on
handkerchiefs, which are said to be
impressed by Christ's wiping his face, 
as he carried the cross with the hand­
kerchief of St. Veronica, or laid over
it in the sepulchre.



VERRY [in Heraldry] is a sort of
chequer work, in the
shape of little bells; and if
it be Argent and Azure, it is
enough to say Verry alone;
but, if the colours are any
other, they must be ex­
press'd. See the Escutcheon.

Image omitted.



VARY [in Heraldry] is a sort of
chequer work, in the
shape of little bells; and if
it be Argent and Azure, it is
enough to say Verry alone;
but, if the colours are any
other, they must be ex­
press'd. See the Escutcheon.

Image omitted.



VERSATILENESS [of versatilis, L.
and ness] aptness to be turned or wound
any way.

VERS'D [versatus, L.] well skilled, 
instructed, &c. in any art or science.

VERSED Sine [in Mathemat.] is a
segment of the di­
ameter of a circle,
lying between the
right sine and the
lower extremity of
the arch, as in the figure; as A B is
the versed sine of the arch A C, and
D B the versed sine of the arch C D.

Image omitted.



VERSIFICATORY [versificatorius, 
L.] belonging to versifying.

VERSIFORM [versiformis, L.] that
changes its shape.

VERSUTILOQUOUS [versutiloquus, 
talking cunningly or craftily.

VERT [in Heraldry]
signifies green, and, in
graving, is expressed by
diagonal lines, drawn from
the dexter chief corner to
the sinister base. A green colour is
called Vert, in the blazon of the coats
of all under the degree of noble; but
in the coats of noblemen, it is called
Emerald, and in those of kings Venus.
See the Escutcheon. Heralds say, that
Vert, of Christian virtues, denotes
charity and hope; and, among secular
virtues, honour, civility, and courtesy;
also joy, love, and plenty; of the ele­
ments, the Earth; of the planets, 
Mercury, of precious stones, the Eme­
rald; of metals, Quicksilver; of con­
stitutions, the Phlegmatick; of the ages
of man, Youth; of the months of the
year, April and May. They say like­
wise, that those, who bear Vert in
their coat-armour, are obliged to sup­
port peasants and labourers, and par­
ticularly the poor that are oppressed.
Sylvanus Morgan says, Vert with Or sig­
nifies pleasure and joy, and with Argent, 
innocent love.

Image omitted.



VERTEBRA [with Anatomists] any
turning joint in the body; a joint of
the back-bone,  L.

VERTEBRAL [of vertebra, L.] be­
longing to the Vertebra or turning-­
joints of the body.

VERTIBLENESS [of vertibilis, L.
and ness] aptness or easiness to turn.

VERTICALNESS [of vertical, F.
verticalis, L. and ness] the being right
over one's head.

VERTICAL Plane [in Perspective] is
a plane perpendicular to the geome­
trical plane, passing thro' the eye and
cutting the perspective plane at right
angles.

Prime VERTICAL [in Astron.] is that
vertical circle or azimuth which passes
through the poles of the meridian, or
which is perpendicular to the meridian
and passes thro' the equinoctial points.

VERTICALURE [with Astron.] the
meridian-circle, so called, because it
passes through the Zenith or vertical
point.

VERTICORDIA [of vertere to turn, 
and corda, hearts, L.] one of the sur­
names of Venus, called also Urania and
Cœlestis, worshipped as a deity by the
ancients, that she would rid them of
their lascivious passions, and give them­
selves up altogether to the pleasures
of the mind and understanding. 

She had a temple built to her by the
Romans, by the advice of the book of
the Sibyls, to which young girls went
to offer their little babies, which they
played with when children.

VERTIGINOUSNESS [of vertigino­
sus, L. vertigineux, F. and ness] giddi­
ness.

VERTUE [virtus, L. vertu, F.] is
defined to be a firm purpose of doing
those things which reason tells us are
best; or, as others define it, a habit of
the soul, by which a man is inclined to
do good, and to shun evil: Moral ho­
nesty, good principles. And as it is a
common saying in the schools, all the
virtues are link'd together; so we may
conclude, that all the (cardinal) vir­
tues are helpful and assistant one to
the other; for it is impossible for any
one to be prudent, without being a
partaker of fortitude, temperance, and
justice. The ancients in Painting, &c.
represented vertue by Hercules, only
clothed with a lion's skin and his club, 
performing some one of his twelve la­
bours; as offering to strike a dragon
guarding an apple-tree, &c. or holding
in his hand three golden apples. His
being naked denoted the simplicity of
virtue; the dragon did signify all man­
ner of vices; the lion's skin was an
emblem of magnanimity; his oaken
club signified reason; the knottiness of
his club intimated the difficulty and la­
bour in seeking after virtue; and the
three golden apples were emblems of



the three virtues Moderation, Content, 
and Labour.

The Cardinal VERTUES [with Mo­
ralists] are Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, 
and Temperance.

All the VERTUES had temples built
to them by the ancients, and sacrifices
were performed to them, and festivals
solemnized; as the temples of Peace, 
Concord, Quietness, Liberty, Safety, 
Honour, Felicity, Piety, Charity, Cha­
stity, &c.

VERTUMNALES, festivals cele­
brated at Rome in honour of Vertumnus, 
they were held in autumn; because
that was the time when the fruit was
gathered, they returned thanks to him
for prcferving them to perfect matu­
rity.

VERTUMNUS [among the Romans]
an imaginary deity, supposed to be the
god of Change, and of Gardens; as also
an emblem of the year; he was wor­
shipped under a variety of forms; and
the poets make him the husband of
Pomona, the goddess of fruits, and the
Greeks call him Proteus.

VERTUOUSNESS [of virtuosus, L.
virtueux, F. and ness] incliningness to
virtue, a virtuous disposition.

VERU [with Meteorologists] a comet
that resembles a spit, being pretty
much of the same kind with the Lou­
chites, only its head is rounder, and
its tail longer, and sharper pointed,  L.

VERVAIN [verbena, L. verveine, F.]
an herb anciently used about sacred
rites and ceremonies, called also Holy-­
Herb, Pidgeon-grass and Juno's-tears.

A VEST [un vest, F.] a garment for
a child.

VESTA [so called of vestiendo, L.
clothing, because it clothes all things;
or, as others say, because vi sua stat, it
stands by its own power] a name given
to the earth, or the goddess of nature, 
under whose name the ancients wor­
shipped the earth. The goddess Vesta
was highly honoured by the Romans; 
they appointed to her particular sacri­
fices and temples, altho' the poets do
confound the name of Vesta with that
of Cybele. She was accounted the god­
dess of elemental fire, her temple was
round, and in it were two lamps conti­
nually burning. Some say that there
was in the innermost part of it, a fire
suspended in the air in pots of earth, 
kept always alive by the Vestal virgins;
and if it happened by any misfortune
to be extinct, some fearful accident
befel the Roman empire, and therefore
they punished the Vestal virgins, by
whose negligence the fire went out, in
a very cruel manner. Vesta was also
sometimes stiled Mater, and had her
statues standing in many porches, as
the chief of the houshold goddesses.
Her temple was magnificent, and in it
was deposited the Palladium or image
of Pallas, which Æneas is said to have
brought with him from Troy; this was
highly esteemed by the Romans, because
the oracle had pronounced, that the
safety of the empire, depended upon
the preservation of it. On the top of
Vesta's temple was placed her effigies
sitting, having little Jupiter in her
arms: her priestesses were to keep
their virginity thirty years, which
was the time appointed for their at­
tendance. They were had in such high
honour, that, if they casually met in
the streets an offender, they could pro­
cure his pardon, but, if they disho­
noured the service of their goddess by
carnal copulation with any man, they
were to die without mercy, being
condemned to be buried alive with
water and bread.

VESTALIA, feasts held on the 5th
of June, in honour of the goddess Vesta, 
which was kept in the streets before
their doors, from whence some chosen
messes were sent to the temples of this
goddess: There were likewise led about
the city several asses crowned with
flowers, and having collars of certain
bits of paste in the form of little round
cakes; the mules were often adorned
with nosegays, and there was no work
done that day: The Roman ladies went
barefoot to the temple of Vesta, and the
capitol, where there was an altar de­
dicated to Jupiter Pistor, i.e. the baker.

VESTALS, Vestal virgins, were cho­
sen out of the noblest families of Rome, 
for the keeping of the Vestal fire above-­
mentioned; which if it happened to
go out, it was not to be lighted again
by any fire but the beams of the sun.

VESTIGATED [vestigatus, L.] tra­
ced or followed by the track, searched
out diligently.

VESTU [in Heraldry] is
when there is in an ordi­
nary some division only by
lines, and signifies clothed, 
as tho' some garment were
laid upon it. See the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



VESTU a dextra [with
Heralds] i. e. clothed on
the right side, and Vestu a
sinistra, i. e. clothed on the
left side, are as represented
in the escutcheon, and é contra.

Image omitted.





VETUSTNESS [vetustas, L.] anci­
entness, antiquity.

The VIA lactea, this circle is called
the Galaxia or milky way. It was not
legal that Jupiter's sorts should obtain
heavenly honours, before they had
sucked Juno's breast. For which rea­
son they say Mercury brought Hercules, 
when he was new born, and put him
to Juno's breast, and that he did indeed
suck: but Juno apprehending the mat­
ter put him away, and so her milk
flowing out plentifully made this milky
circle. Eratosthenes.

VIALES [with Mythologists] a name
which the Romans gave to those deities, 
who, as they imagined, had the care
and guardianship of the roads and high
ways,  L.

VIATICUM, a name given by the
fathers and councils to Baptism, the
Eucharist and Absolution, administred
to dying persons to give them a better
assurance of their salvation. 

Baptism thus considered, relates only
to dying Catechumens. 

The Eucharist to dying persons in
full communion, whether they had
received absolution or not. 

Absolution went under this name with
respect to those who were under disci­
pline and not reconciled to the church, 
till at the point of death. 

In latter ages, not only Absolution but
the Eucharist is said to have been given
to penitents when past hopes of living, 
if they were in condition to receive it, 
without any consideration of a state of
discipline, which first occasioned this
practice. 

Persons under church discipline, in
ancient times were not in communion
with the church; and the transition
became very easy from not in the
church (in one sense of the word) to be
out of the church (in another sense of
the word) i. e. to be in a state of Dam­
nation; from which date Absolution and
the Eucharist was supposed to rescue
them.

VIBRATING Motion [with Natu­
ralists] is a very quick and short moti­
on of the solid parts of bodies, caused
by the pulse or stroke of some body
upon them. So the rays of light or
fire, striking upon the small particles
of bodies, do excite in them such vibra­
tions, and cause them to grow hot and
shine. For all fixed solid bodies, being
heated to a due degree will emit light
and shine; and bodies which abound
with earthy particles, and especially
such as are sulphureous, do emit light, 
which way soever their parts come to
be agitated into these vibrating motions
whether it be by Heat, by Rubbing or
Striking, or by Putrefaction, or some
animal or vital motion. Thus Quick­
silver emits a light, when shook in
vacuo. The sea water shines, or (as
they call it) burns in a storm; the
back of a cat or neck of a horse, when
rubbed with the hand in the dark.
Thus wet hay kindles: and thus va­
pours shine which arise from putrid
waters, as the Ignis fatuus.

VICAR [vicarius, L.] when paro­
chial tithes were much appropriated
under one pretence or other, by the
subtleties of the monks, the bishops
required the representation of a per­
son, who should perpetually reside upon
the spot; and they endowed him with
separate portions of the tithes and
oblations, manse and glebe. So that a
vicar is a settled, perpetual resident
priest, who has only such or such legal
particular profits, arising from the pa­
rish for supplying the cure.

VICARIOUSNESS [of vicarius, and
ness] subordinateness.

VICE [in Ethicks] an elective habit, 
deviating either in excess or defect
from a just medium, wherein virtue
is placed.

VICIOUSNESS [of vitiositas, L.] a
vicious nature, &c.

VICTIM [victima, L, victime, F. of
victoria, L.] a sacrifice properly such
as the ancient Romans offered to their
gods after a victory; and thence it is
figuratively applyed to a person that
suffers persecution or death, to satisfy
the revenge or passion of great men.

VICTORIA, the Romans during their
war with the Samnites built a temple
to the goddess Victory, and dedicated to
her the temple of Jupiter in the Capitol.

The Athenians also consecrated a
temple to her in their city, and painted
her without wings, that she might not
fly away from them, as the Lacedemo­
nians chained their image of Mars, that
they might keep him always with
them.

Sometimes she was represented arm­
ed, with a brisk countenance, all in a
sweat, and covered with dust, distribu­
ting the spoil and prisoners to the vic­
torious with bloody hands.

She was painted young and fair to
denote her vigour, and the charming
lustre of her glory; her sex and wings
shewed the inconstancy and doubtful
success of war, the laurel by the per­
petual verdure intimated the eternal 



renown of the victorious; and the
palm signified invincible courage. 

She was represented by the ancients
as a lady clad all in gold, holding a
helmet in one hand, and a pomegranate
in the other. The helmet was an em­
blem of love, and the pomegranate of
the unity of wit and council. Some­
times she was drawn with wings ready
to fly, standing upon a globe, with a
garland of bays, or a branch of palm in
one hand, and the coronet of the em­
peror, or white olive in the other.

VICTORIAL [victorialis, L.] be­
longing to victory.

VIEWLESS, invisible, not to be
viewed. Milton.

VIGESIMAL [vigesimalis, L.] the
twentieth.

VIGESIMATION [among the Ro­
mans] a putting to death every twen­
tieth man,  L.

VIGNERONS, the dressers or ow­
ners of vineyards,  F.

Tenants in VILLENAGE [in Law]
those which are now called copy-hol­
ders, who were bound to perform cer­
tain services agreed on between both
parties; as to plough the lord's ground
at certain times, to carry the lord's
dung, to plash his hedges, reap his
corn, &c.

VINACEOUS [of vinum, L.] of, 
pertaining to, or like wine, as of a vi­
naceous flavour.

VINCIBLENESS [of vincibilis, L.
and ness] capableness or liableness to
be conquered or overcome.

VINCTURE [vinctura, L.] a bind­
ing.

VINDICTA [among the Romans] a
rod or switch with which the Roman
prætor touch'd the head of a slave, 
when he was made free; and thence it
was taken to signify liberty or freedom
itself.

VINEGAR [vinaigre, q. vinum acre, 
i. e. acid wine, beer, &c. render'd
sour] by chymical writers is express'd
by this character x or 🜊, and distill'd
vinegar by this .x. or .x

VINEWY [prob. of evanidus, L.]
mouldy, hoary, musty.

VINEWINESS, mouldiness, hoari­
ness, mustiness.

VINOLENCE [vinolentia, L.]
drunkenness.

VINOLENTNESS [vinolentia, L.]
drunkenness.
 
VINOUSNESS [of vinosus, L. vineux, 
F. and ness] a winy quality, taste or
smell.

VIOL [with Mariners] a term used
of a three-stroud-rope, when it is bound
fast with nippers to the cable and
brought to the jeer-capstan, for the
better and more commodious weighing
of the anchor.

VIOLABLENESS [of violabilis, L.
and ness] capableness of being violated, 
&c.

VIOLENTNESS [violentia, L. and
ness,  F.] violence, forcibleness, vehe­
mence, sharpness, boisterousness, out­
rageousness.

VIOLIN [violon, F.] a fiddle.

VIOLIST, a player on a violin.

VIPER [vipera, L.] a poisonous rep­
tile of the serpent kind; an adder. Tho'
this serpent is one of the most dange­
rous poisons in the animal kingdom, 
yet the flesh is of very great use in
medicine. The body is of two co­
lours, ash-coloured or yellow, and the
ground speckled with longish brown
spots. It has scales under its belly
which look like well polished steel; the
male vipers have two sets of genital
instruments, and the females two ma­
trixes, &c. they don't lay eggs and
hatch them, but are viviparous, bring­
ing forth their young alive; which be­
ing wrapped up in thin skins, burst on
the third day, and they are set at liberty.
The ancients did believe that vipers
kill'd their mother upon their delivery;
but this has been found to be a mistake.
The number of young brought forth
in 20 days time, by the female, is 20;
but one on each day. As for the form
of this reptile, the head is the largest
and flattest of all the serpentine race, 
the snout resembling that of a hog;
they are usually half an ell long and
an inch thick.

It never leaps like other serpents, 
but creeps, and that slowly; but yet is
nimble enough to bite, when provok'd.
It has 16 immoveable teeth in each jaw;
but these are not those with which
they give the deadly bite, they being
two other large sharp teeth, hooked, 
hollow, and transparent, called Canine
Teeth. These are situated in the upper
jaw, one on each side. These teeth
are flexible in their articulations, and
usually lie flat along the jaw, the viper
never erecting them, but when it
would bite. These two teeth are en­
compass'd at the roots or basis with a
vesicle or bladder, which contains a
yellow, insipid, salivious juice, about
the quantity of a large drop. Its body
is not at all fetid, whereas the inward
parts of all other serpents are intole­
rably noisome.



A VIPER [Hieroglyphically] was put
to represent a wicked angel; for as the
poison of vipers is quick and powerful, 
so those destroying spirits were thought
to be quick and nimble in bringing
about the destruction of mankind It
was also used to represent the danger
of too much love and ingratitude be­
cause it is related that the female viper
destroys the male at the time of copu­
lation, and that the young ones revenge
the death of their sire, by gnawing out
the belly of their dam, and so opening
a passage into the world.

VIPEROUSNESS [of vipereus, L.
and ness] a viperous nature.

VIRGATE, was anciently no more
than a certain extent or compass of
ground, surrounded with such bounds
and limits; the same that was call'd a
yard-land, the quantity of which was
uncertain, according to the difference
of places and customs.

VIRGIN [virgineus, L.] of, or per­
taining to a virgin.

VIRGIN-Oil, is that which oozes
spontaneously out of the Olive, &c.
without pressing.

VIRGIN-Gold, is gold as it is gotten
out of the ore without any mixture or
alloy, in which state it is so soft that it
will take the impression of a seal.

VIRGIN-Copper, is that which has
never been melted down.

VIRGIN-Wax, is that which has ne­
ver been wrought, but remains as it
came out of the hive.

VIRGIN-Mercury, is that which is
found perfectly form'd and fluid in the
veins of mines, or that is gotten from
the mineral earth by lotion without
fire.

Knights of the Order of the VIRGIN
MARY, in mount Carmel, a French or­
der appointed by king Henry IV. in
1607, and consisting of one hundred
French gentlemen.

VIRGINAL Milk, a chymical com­
position, made by dissolving Saccharum
Saturni, in a great deal of water till it
turns as white as milk.

VIRGO. Hesiod in his Theogonia says, 
that she was the daughter of Jupiter
and Themis, and was called Δίχη. Arotus
in his history following him says, that
at first she was immortal, and dwelt on
earth, among men, and was call'd Δίχη
by them; but after men grew corrupt, 
and left off to observe justice, she for­
bare conversation with them, and
withdrew into the mountains. And
when seditions and war grew rife
among them, because of the dishonesty
that was generally practised, she in­
tirely forsook the earth and retir'd to
Heaven. There are many things re­
ported concerning her; some say she
was Ceres, because she held an ear of
corn; others that she was Isis, others
Atergatis, and some Fortune.

VIRGULA divina, a forked branch
in the form of a Y, cut off a hazle-­
tree, by means whereof some pretend
to discover mines, springs, &c. under­
ground.

VIROLLE [in French Heraldry] a
term us'd of the mouth of a hunting
horn, or such other like instruments to
be apply'd to a man's mouth, to be set
with some metal or colour different
from the horn itself.

VIRTUALITY [virtualitas, L.] is
by the Schoolmen defined to be some
mode or analogy in an object, which in
reality is the same with some other
mode, but out of regard to contradic­
tory predicates is looked on, as if
really distinct therefrom.

VIRTUE [virtus, L. virtu, F.] a firm
purpose of doing those things that rea­
son tells us are best.

Moral VIRTUE [in Ethicks] is an
elective habit placed in a mediocrity, 
determined by reason, and as a prudent
man would determine.

Intellectual VIRTUE [in Ethicks] is
a habit of the reasonable soul, where­
by it conceives or speaks the truth
either in affirming or denying.

VIRTUES [in Scripture] one of the
orders of angels, of the third rank or
choir.

VIRTUOUSNESS [virtuositas, L.] a
virtuous disposition or behaviour.

VIRTUE, was worshipped as a god­
dess, she had a temple dedicated to her
by Marcellus; she was represented as
an elderly matron sitting upon a square
stone: the way to the temple of Virtue
was the temple of Honour, to intimate
that true honour is attain'd by virtue.

VIRULENTNESS [of virulentus, L.
and ness] a poisonous nature; also ma­
liciousness, &c.

VISCERATED [visceratus, L.] ha­
ving the bowels taken out.

VISCOSE [viscosus, L.] clammy, 
sticky, glewy.

A VISCOUNT [vicecomes, L. vicom­
te, F.] a nobleman, next in degree to
a count or earl. There were no vis­
counts in England before the reign of
king Henry VI.

A VISCOUNT'S Coronet has neither
flowers nor points raised above the
circle, like those of the other superior



degrees, but only pearls 
placed on the circle itself, 
without any limited num­
ber, which is the prero­
gative of a viscount beyond
a baron, who is limited to six.

Image omitted.



VISCOUSNESS [viscositas, L. visco­
sité, F.] stickiness, clamminess.

Grand VIZIER [among the Turks]
a principal officer
and statesman next to the grand Seigni­
or, who governs the whole empire.

Prime VIZIER [among the Turks]
a principal officer
and statesman next to the grand Seigni­
or, who governs the whole empire.

VISION [in Opticks] the physical
cause of vision or sight seems to be, 
that the rays of light, striking on the
bottom of the eye, do there excite
certain vibrations in the Tunica Retina;
which vibrations being propagated, as
far as the brain by the solid Fibres of
the Optick Nerves, do there cause the
sense of Seeing. For as dense bodies
do retain their heat longest, and that
in proportion to their density, they re­
tain it longer as they are more dense;
so the vibrations of their particles are
of a more durable nature than those of
rarer bodies, and can be propagated to
greater distances: wherefore the solid
and dense fibres of the nerves, whose
matter is of an homogeneal and uni­
form nature, are very proper to trans­
mit to the brain such motions as are
impress'd on the external organs of
our senses. For that motion, which
can preserve itself a good while in one
and the same part of any body, can also
be propagated a great way from one
part of it to another; provided the
body be of an homogeneal nature, and
that the motion be not reflected, refra­
cted, interrupted, or disturbed by any
inequality in that body.

VISITING [visitans, L. visitant, F.]
going to see.

VISITING [in a Theological Sense]
afflicting, inflicting.

VISNE [in Law] a neighbouring
place, or a place near at hand. See
Venue.

VISOR [visiere, F.] the sight of an
head piece.

VITA, life, i. e. a kind of active, 
operative existence, and is therefore
conceived to consist in motion,  L.

VITAL Functions or Actions, are such
actions of the vital parts, whereby life
is effected, such as it cannot subsist
without; of these are the musculous
actions of the heart; the secretory ac­
tion of the Cerebellum; the respiratory
action of the Lungs; and the circula­
tion of the blood and spirits through
the Arteries, Veins and Nerves.

VITALNESS [vitalitas, L.] the spi­
rit of life whereby we live.

VITIOSITY [vitiositas, L.] naugh­
tiness, lewdness.

VITREOUSNESS [of vitreus, L. and
ness] glassiness.

VITRIFICABLE, capable of being
turned into glass.

VITRIFICATION [with Chymists]
the art of changing any natural body
into glass by the means of fire; which
they account to be the last action of
fire. So that (generally speaking) bo­
dies which have once gained the form
of glass continue in it, and are not ca­
pable of putting on any other form.

VITRIOL [in Chymical Writ.]
is express'd by this character. 🜖
White Vitriol by this.
Blue Vitriol by this.

The unicodes for "white vitriol" and "blue vitriol" are omitted in this word-entry.



VITUNA [among the Romans] a
goddess so call'd of Vita, life; because
she was believed to give life to chil­
dren in their mothers womb.

VIVIDNESS, liveliness in colour.

VIVIFICK [vivificus, L.] giving life.

VIVIFICATIVE [vivificans, L.
vivifiant, F.
quickening, making alive.

VIVIFYING [vivificans, L.
vivifiant, F.
quickening, making alive.

Simple ULCER, one which happens
in a good constitution, and proves easy
of cure.

Compound ULCER, is one which hap­
pening in a scorbutick, dropsical, or
scrophulous constitution, may be at­
tended with pain, a fever, and other
maladies.

Phagedænic ULCER, is one of a cor­
rosive nature, eating away the adjacent
parts all around, the lips of it remain­
ing tumefied.

Various ULCER, is one seated in the
veins, which, becoming painful and
inflammatory, swells up the parts it
possesses.

Sinuous ULCER, one which runs a­
slant or sideways from its orifice.

ULCEROUSNESS [of ulcerosus, L.
and ness] an ulcerous state, condition, 
or quality.

ULTERIOR, on the farther side.  L.

ULTERIOR [in Geography] is said
of those parts of a country, province, 
&c. situated on the farther side of a
river, mountain, or other boundary
which divides the country.



UMBEL [with Botan.] is the extre­
mity of a stalk or branch divided into
several pedicles or rays, beginning
from the same point, and opening in
such a manner as to form a kind of
inverted cone, as in a Parsnip; when
the pedicles, into which a stalk is divi­
ded are again divided into others of
the same form, upon which the flowers
are disposed; the first order is called
rays, and the second pedicles.

UMBELLATED [umbellatus, L.]
bossed. In Botan. Writ. is said of flow­
ers when many of them grow together, 
disposed somewhat like an Umbrella.
The make is a sort of broad, roundish
surface of the whole, supported by
many foot-stalks, as in the flowers of
Tansey, Helichrysum, some sorts of Star­
worts, Parsnips, &c.

UMBILICATED [in Botan. Writ.]
navelled, i. e. when the top of the
fruit sinks in a little, and there appear
in it some remains of the Calix of the
flower, as in apples, pomegranates, &c.

UMBRAGEOUS [umbrageux, F.]
shady. Milton.

UNABLENESS [of in and habilitas, 
L.] inability, incapableness, &c.

UNACCENDABLE [of un and ac­
censibilis, L.] that cannot be kindled
or lighted.

UNACCEPTABLENESS [of un, ac­
ceptabilis, L. and ness] displeasingness, 
unsuitableness to the desire, &c.

UNACCOMPANIABLE [of un and
compagnon, F.] that cannot be kept
company with, unsociable.

UNACTIVENESS, inactivity, idle­
ness, &c.

UNADMONISHED [of un and admo­
nitus, L.] not admonished, informed, 
or warned of. Milton.

UNAFFECTEDNESS, freeness from
affectation, simplicity.

UNAIDED [of un and aider, F.] not
helped or assisted.

UNALIENABLENESS, uncapable­
ness of being alienated.

UNALTERABLENESS, uncapable­
ness of being, or unlawfulness to be
altered.

UNAMAZED [of un and Maſe, 
Sax.] without amazement.

UNANSWERABLE [of un, Neg.
anſ&wyn;are, Sax. and able] that cannot
be answered.

UNANSWERABLENESS [of un, 
anſ&wyn;arian, able and neſſe, Sax.] un­
capableness of being answered.

UNAPPARENT [of un, and appa­
rens, L.] not appearing. Milton.

UNAPPEASABLE [of un, appaiser, 
F. and able] that cannot be appeased, 
implacable.

UNAPPEASABLENESS, implaca­
bleness, &c.

UNAPPROACHABLE [of un, ap­
procher, F. and able] inaccessible, that
cannot be approached.

UNAPT [ineptus, L.] unready, not
disposed to.

UNARGUED [of un and arguere, L.]
not argued, reasoned, or disposed.

UNARMED [inermis, L. sans armes, 
F.] without arms.

UNASSAYED [of un and essaye, F.]
unproved, untryed.

UNASSISTED [of un and assisté, F.]
without assistance.

UNASSWAGED [prob. of un and
suadeo, L.] unappeased.

UNATTAINABLE [of un attinere, 
L. and able] not to be attained.

UNATTEMPTED [of un and atten­
tare, L.] untried.

UNATTENTIVE [of un and atten­
tif, F.] not giving ear to, &c.

UNAVAILABLE [of un valere, L.
valoir, F. and able] that does not or
cannot avail or succeed.

UNAVAILABLENESS, the being
not conducive, successful, or prevail­
ing, unprofitableness.

UNAVOIDABLE [inevitabilis, L.]
inevitable.

To UNBAR [debarrer, F.] to take
away a bar.

UNBECOMING [of un and bequemen
Teut. or be and c&wyn;eman, Sax.] unseem­
ly, undecent.

UNBEFRIENDED [of un and
Freonð, Sax.] not dealt with friendly
not having friends.

UNBEGOTTEN [of un and beʒet­
tan, Sax.] not begotten.

UNBEGUN [of un and aʒinnan, 
Sax.] not begun.

UNBEHELD [of un and behealðian, 
Sax.] not seen or looked upon.

UNBELIEF [of un and ʒeleafa, 
Sax.] unbelieving, diffidence.

UNBELIEVER [of un and ʒeleafan, 
Sax. to believe] an infidel.

UNBENIGN [of un and benignus, 
L.] unfavoured, not bountiful. Milton.

UNBENT, slackened, made straight, 
&c.

UNBESEEMINGNESS [of un, be and
ſeon, Sax. or be&yogh;iemen, Teut.] unbe­
comingness.

UNBESOUGHT [of un and ʒeſecan
Sax.] without being beseeched or
sought to. Milton.

To UNBEWITCH [of un, be and
&wyn;ice, Sax.] to deliver from witchcraft.



UNBIDDEN [of un and beoðan, Sax.]
uncommanded, uninvited.

To UNBIND [of un and binðan, Sax.]
to loosen what is bound.

UNBLAMEABLE [of un and blama­
ble, F.] not to be found fault with, in­
nocent, &c.

UNBLEST [of un and bleſtian, 
Sax.] not blest. Milton.

UNBLOODY [of un and bloðiʒ, 
Sax.] not bloody.

UNBOILED [of un bouille, F.] not
boiled.

To UNBOLT [of un and bolt, Sax.]
to draw back a bolt.

UNBONED [of un and ban, Sax. or
been, Dan.] having the bones taken
out, without bones.

UNBORN [of un and bearan, Sax.]
not born.

To UNBOSOM [of un and boſom, 
Sax.] to open or declare the mind free­
ly.

UNBOUGHT [of un and boht, prob
of bycʒean, Sax. to buy] not bought.

UNBOUND [of un, and prob. bon­
ðen, of binðan, Sax.] loosened, not
tied up.

UNBOUNDED [of un and bornes, F.]
unlimited.

UNBRIDLED [of un and briðelian, 
Sax. debridé, F.] without a bridle, &c.
also unruly.

UNBROKEN [of un and brecan, 
Sax.] whole.

To UNBUCKLE [of deboucler, F.] to
loose a buckle.

UNBUILT, [of un and bytlian, Sax.]
not builded.

To UNBUNG [prob of un and
bunʒ, Sax. debondonner, F.] to take
out a bung.

UNBURIED [of un and bẏriʒean, 
Sax.] not buried.

To UNBURTHEN [of un and bẏr­
ðen, Sax.] to ease of a burthen.

To UNBUTTON [deboutonner, F.]
to undo buttons.

UNCALLED [of un and kalder, 
Dan.] not called.

UNCANONICALNESS [of un, cano­
nicus, L. and ness] the not being cano­
nical or conformable to the canons.

UNCAPABLENESS [incapacitas, L.l
incapacity.

To UNCASE [of un and casse, F. of
casa, L. a cottage, &c.] to take out of
the case.

UNCASING of a Fox [with Sports­
men] is the cutting it up, or fleaing it.

UNCAUGHT [prob. of un and cap­
tatus, L.] not caught.

UNCERTAIN [incertus, L. incer­ 
tain, F.] not certain, doubtful.

UNCERTAINTY [incertitude
F. of  L.] du­
biousness.

UNCERTAINNESS [incertitude
F. of  L.] du­
biousness.

To UNCHAIN [dechainer, F.] to
take off a chain.

UNCHANGEABLE [of un  chan­
geant, F.] immutable.

UNCHANGEABLENESS [of un, 
changeant, F. and ness] immutability.

UNCHARITABLE [of incharitable, 
F.] not charitable, &c.

UNCHARITABLENESS [of incha­
ritable, F. and ness] an uncharitable
disposition.

To UNCHARM [decharmer, F.] to
undo or take away a charm.

UNCHAST [of un, and chaste, F. of
incastus, L.] not endued with chastity.

UNCHASTNESS [of un, chasteté, F.
castitas, L. and ness] incontinency, 
lewdness.

UNCHEWED [of un and ceo&wyn;ian, 
Sax.] not chewed.

UNCHRISTENED [of un and chri­
stian] not baptized.

UNCHURCHED [of un and kerche, 
Teut. cẏric, Sax.] dissolved from be­
ing a church, excommunicated; also
not churched, as a woman that has
lain-in.

UNCIAL [with Antiquaries] an epi­
thet given to certain large sized letters
or characters, anciently used in inscrip­
tions, epitaphs, &c.

UNCIRCUMCISED [incircumcisus, 
L.] not circumcised.

UNCIRCUMCISION, an uncircum­
cised state.

UNCIRCUMSPECT [of un and cir­
cumspectus, L.] unwary.

UNCIRCUMSPECTION, uncir­
cumspectness, want of due care and
caution.

UNCIVILITY [incivilitas, L. in­
civilité, F.] un­
courteousness, rudeness.

UNCIVILNESS [incivilitas, L. in­
civilité, F.] un­
courteousness, rudeness.

UNCLAD [of un and 
clað or cla­
ðian, Sax.] without clothes.

To UNCLASP [of un and cleo&wyn;an,
Sax.] to unloose clasps.

UNCLE [avunculus, L. oncle, F.] a
father's or mother's brother.

UNCLEAN [of un and clæne, Sax.]
foul, polluted, &c.

UNCLEANNESS [of un and clæn­
neſſe, Sax.] filthiness, impurity.

UNCLEANSED [of un and clæn­
ſian, Sax.] not cleansed.

UNCLEFT [of un and cleofan,
Sax.] not cleaved or split.

To UNCLOSE [of un and clẏſan,
Sax.] to open.



UNCOLLECTED [of un and collec­
tus, L.] not gathered together.

UNCOMBED [of un and cæmban, 
Sax.] not combed.

UN-COME-AT-ABLE, not to be
come at or gotten.

UN-COME-AT-ABLENESS, unca­
pableness of being come at or attained
to.

UNCOMELINESS, unbeseeming­
ness, undecentness, unbeautifulness.

UNCOMELY, unseemly, unhand­
some.

UNCOMFORTABLE [of un, Neg.
comfortare, L. to strengthen, and able]
without comfort, ease, pleasure, or
satisfaction of mind.

UNCOMFORTABLENESS [of un, 
confort, F. of confortatio, L. and ness]
uneasiness, unpleasingness, unsatisfy­
ingness.

UNCOMMON [of un and communis, 
L.] unusual, rare.

UNCOMMONNESS, extraordinari­
ness, &c.

UNCOMPLETE [of un and comple­
tus, L.] not finished, imperfect.

UNCOMPOUNDED [of incompositus,
L.] not mixed, simple.

UNCOMPOUNDEDNESS [of un and
componere, L.] simple nature or qua­
lity, a being without mixture.

UNCONCEIVABLE [inconcevable, 
F.] not to be conceived or imagined.

UNCONCEIVABLENESS, incom­
prehensibleness.

UNCONCERNED [of un and con­
cerné, F.] not concerned, &c.

UNCONCERNEDNESS [of un, con­
cerné, F. and ness] indifference, regard­
lesness.

UNCONDEMNED [of un and con­
demnatus, L.] not condemned.

UNCONFORMABLE [of un, con­
formare, L. and able] that does not
conform.

UNCONFORMABLENESS, the not
conforming to, disagreeingness.

UNCONQUERABLENESS [of un, 
conquerir, F. able and ness] invincible­
ness.

UNCONSCIONABLE, unreasona­
ble, unjust, &c.

UNCONSCIONABLENESS [of un,
conscius, L. able and ness] want of con­
science, unreasonableness.

An UNCONSTANT Person [Hiero­
glyphically] was represented by a sea-­
mew, that bird being so light that it is
carried every way by the wind; and
such an one was also signified by a
crab fish, because it goes not always in
the same manner, but sometimes for­
wards, and sometimes backwards.

UNCONSTRAINED 
[of un and con­
straint, F.] uncompelled.

UNCONSUMED [inconsumptus, L.
or un and consumé, F.] not wasted, spent,
&c.

UNCONTAMINATED [incontami­
natus, L.] undefiled.

UNCONTEMNED [non contemptus, 
L.] not despised.

UNCONTROLLED [of un and con­
trolé, F.] without controul.

UNCORDED [of un and cordé, F.]
unbound, &c.

UNCOURTEOUSNESS [of un and
courtoise, F.] unaffable, uncivil, unkind, 
ill-bred behaviour.

UNCORRECTED [incorrectus, L.]
unpunished, unmended.

UNCORRUPTNESS, incorruption.

To UNCOVER [decouvrir, F.] to take
off a cover, &c.

To UNCOUPLE [decoupler, F.] to
separate.

UNCOUTHNESS [of uncuðneſſe, 
Sax.] hardness to be understood, un­
usualness, strangeness, roughness, 
harshness, barbarousness.

UNCREATED [increatus, L. incrée,
F.] not created.

UNCROWNED [of incoronatus, L.]
not crowned; also deprived of the
crown, deposed.

Extreme UNCTION [in the Roman
Church] it is called extreme, because
it is the last administred of all sacred
unctions.

The Roman Catholicks call it, the Sa­
crament of unction of the sick and weak:
Or, the Sacrament of such as are depart­
ing.

This is administred with more
prayers than any other of the Roman
Catholick Sacraments.

It is not then to be administred
when the person lies senseless; but
when his mind and reason are vigorous
enough to be fully sensible of what is
doing.

The parts to be anointed, are the
eyes, the ears, the nose, the mouth, 
the hand, the reins, and the feet, and
if the sick person recovers, this Sacra­
ment may be repeated.

Before Extreme Unction the Sacra­
ment of the Eucharist and absolution
must be given; and it is not every
priest, but only the parish priest, or
one whom he shall depute, which is to
administer it.

The matter with which they anoint
is plain oil, consecrated by the bishop,
and whatever part of the body the



priest anoints; he says, God forgive you
by this unction, whatsoever you have
sinned thro' your eyes, ears, &c.

UNCTUOUSNESS [of onctuosité, F.
unctio, L. and ness] oiliness, greasi­
ness.

UNCULTIVATED [incultus, L. in­
culté, F.] not tilled, &c.

UNCURABLENESS [of incurable, 
F. and ness] uncapableness of being
cured.

UNCUSTOMABLE [of un coûtume, 
F. and able] not liable to pay custom.

UNDAUNTED [indomitus, L. in­
domté, F.] not disheartened, intrepid.

UNDECAGON [ἐνδεχάγωνος, Gr.] a
regular polygon of eleven sides.

UNDECIDED [indecis, F. of un and
decisus, L.] not determined.

UNDECLINED [un and declinatus, 
L.] not declined.

UNDEFACEABLE [of un and de­
facer, F.] that cannot be disfigured or
erased.

UNDEFILED [of un, neg. and faul, 
Sax. foul] unpolluted.

To UNDER-BID [of unðer-biððan, 
Sax.] to bid less than the value.

To UNDER-BIND [of unðer-binðan, 
Sax.] to bind underneath.

UNDER-FOOT [of unðer-fot, 
Sax.] beneath the feet.

To UNDER-GIRD [of unðer-gẏr­
ðan, Sax.] to gird underneath.

To UNDER-GO [of unðer-ʒan, 
Sax.] to bear or suffer.

UNDER-HAND [unðer-hanð, Sax.]
clandestinely.

To UNDER-LAY [of unðer-lecʒan, 
Sax.] to put under.

UNDERMINED [of unðer, Sax.
and miné, F.] made hollow under­
neath; also circumvented.

UNDERMOST [unðer-mæſt, 
Sax.] the lowest.

UNDERNEATH [unðer-beneo&wyn;,
Sax.] below.

UNDER-PINNING [in Architect.] a
term used to express the bringing up a
building with stone under the ground­
sels.

To UNDER-PROP [onder-proppen]
to support with a prop.

To UNDER-SELL [of unðer and
prob. ſellan, Sax.] to sell cheaper
than the common price or value.

UNDER the Sun Beams [in Astrol.] is
when a planet is not full seventeen de­
grees distant from the body of the sun, 
either before or after it.

UNDERSTANDING, apprehension, 
knowledge.

UNDERSTANDING [in Ethicks] is
defined to be a faculty of the reason­
able soul, conversant about intelligible
things, considered as intelligible.

Active UNDERSTANDING, is that
faculty of the soul, by which the spe­
cies and images of intelligible things
are framed on occasion of the present
phantasms or appearances thereof.

Passive UNDERSTANDING, is that
which receives the species framed by
the active understanding, breaks forth
into actual knowledge.

UNDERSTANDING [in Hieroglyp.]
an understanding employed in the search
of sublime mysteries, was, by the an­
cients represented by an eagle.

UNDERTAKEN, enterprised; an­
swered for another, &c.

To UNDERVALUE [of unðer, Sax.
and valeur, F. and valor, L.] to esteem
or account less than the worth, &c.

UNDERVALUEMENT, a dispa­
ragement.

UNDER-WRITTEN [of unðer-­
&wyn;ritan, Sax.] subscribed.

UNDESERVED [of un neg. and de
and servi, F.] unmerited.

UNDETERMINABLE [of un and
determinare, L.] that cannot be deter­
mined.

UNDETERMINED [of indetermina­
tus, L. indeterminé, F.] not determined.

UNDIGESTIBLE [of un and digesti­
bilis, L.] that cannot be digested.

UNDIMINISHED [of un and diminué
F. of diminutus, L.] not lessened.

UNDISCHARGED [of un and de­
charge, F.] not discharged.

UNDISCIPLINED [of un and disci­
pliné, F.] uninstructed or taught, &c.

UNDISMAY'D [of un and desmayer, 
Span.] not dejected, discouraged, dis­
heartened.

UNDISTINGUISHED [of un and di­
tingué, F.] not discerned from others, 
&c.

UNDISTINGUISHABLENESS [of in­
distinguibilis, L. and ness] uncapableness
of being distinguished.

UNDISTURBED [of in and disturba­
tus, L.] not disturbed, let alone, quiet.

To UNDO a Boar [with Hunters] is
to dress it.

UNDONE [of unðoen, Sax] not
wrought, performed, &c. also ruined.

UNDOUBTED [indubitatus, L.] cer­
tain.

UNDREADED [of un and ðræð, 
Sax.] not greatly feared.

To UNDRESS [prob. of un and dres­
ser, F.] to pull off ones clothes.

UNDRESS, a dishabille.



UNDRIED [of un and aðriʒan, 
Sax.] not dried.

UNDUE [indue, F.] not due, unde­
served.

UNDULATION [in Physicks] a kind
of tremulous motion or vibration in a
liquid, or sort of wavy motion, where­
by a liquid alternately rises and falls
like the waves of the sea.

UNDULATION [in Surgery] a mo­
tion ensuing in the matter contained in
an abscess upon squeezing it.

UNDULATORY Motion, the same
as Undulation.

UNDUTIFULNESS [of un neg. deu
of devoir, F. and ness] disobedience to
parents, &c.

UNEARNED [of un and earnian, 
Sax.] not merited by labour.

UNEASINESS [of un neg. aise, F.
and ness] unquietness of mind, a being
in pain.

UNEASY [mal aisé, F.] pined, distur­
bed in mind.

UNEFFECTUAL [of inefficax, L.]
ineffectual.

UNELASTICK [of un and έλαστιχός, 
Gr.] not having a spungy or elastick
power.

UNEMPLOYED [of un and employé, 
F.] not used or employed.

UNENDOWED [of un neg. and
douairé, F.] having no dowry.

UNENVIED [of un and envié, F.]
not looked upon, &c. invidiously.

UNEQUALNESS [inæqualitas, L.
inegalité, F.] inequality.

UNERRING [of un, neg. and errans, 
L.] infallible.

UNESPY'D [of un and espié or epié, 
F.] not discovered by the sight.

UNEVENNESS [of un, æfen and
neſſe, Sax.] unequalness, a not hav­
ing plainness or smoothness.

UNEXAMPLED [of un and exem­
plum, L.] of which there has been no
example.

UNEXECUTED [of un and executé, 
F.] not executed.

UNEXPECTED [of un and expecta­
tus, L.] not looked for.

UNEXPECTEDNESS [of un, ex­
pectatus, L. and ness] the not being
looked for; surprizingness.

UNEXPERIENCED [of un and ex­
perientia L.] not having tryed.

INEXPERTNESS [inexpertus, L.
and ness] unskilfulness.

UNEXTINGUISHABLE [of inex­
tinguibilis, L. &c.] unquenchableness.

UNFAIR [of un and fæʒer, Sax.]
unjust, dishonest.

UNFAIRNESS [of un and fæʒer­
neſſe, Sax.] unjustness, dishonesty.

UNFAITHFULNESS [infidelité, F.
of  L.] infidelity.

UNFASHIONED [of un fa&cced;onné, F.]
unformed, &c.

To UNFASTEN [of un and anfasten, 
Teut.] to unloose or undo what was
fast.

UNFEATHERED [of un and fæ­
ðer, Sax.] not fledged or covered with
feathers.

UNFED [of un and feden, Dan. fe­
ðan, Sax.] not fed.

UNFEIGNED [of un feint, F. of
fingere, L.] sincere.

UNFEIGNEDNESS, sincerity.

UNFETTERED [of un and ʒefe­
terian, Sax.] without fetters, &c.

UNFINISHED [of un and fini, F. of
finitus, L.] not ended, &c.

UNFITNESS [prob. of un fait, F. 
and ness] unaptness, unmeetness.

UNFIXEDNESS [of un, neg. and
fixe, F. of fixus, L. and ness] an unfix­
ed state or temper, unsettledness.

To UNFOLD [of un and fealðan,     
Sax.] to lay open, to explain.

UNFORBID [of un and forbeoðan, 
Sax.] not prohibited.

UNFORCED [of un, neg. and forcé, 
F.] unconstrained.

UNFORESEEN [of un and fore­
ſeon, Sax.] not seen beforehand.

UNFOREWARNED [of un fore, 
and &wyn;ærnian, Sax.] not having caution
given beforehand,

UNFORTIFIED [of un and fortifié, 
F.] not fortified.

UNFORTUNATE [of infortune, F.
of infortunatus, L.] unlucky, unhappy.

UNFORTUNATENESS [infortuni­
tas, L. infortune, F. and ness] unhap­ 
piness, unluckiness.

UNFOUND [of un and finðan, 
Sax.] not found.

UNFREQUENTED [of un frequen­
tatus, L. frequenté, F.] not often gone
to.

UNFREQUENTNESS [infrequentia, 
L.] seldomness.

UNFRIENDLINESS [of un freonð­
lice, and neſſe Sax.] an unfriendly
disposition or treatment.

UNFRUITFULNESS [of un fruit, 
F. of fructus, L. and fullneſſe, Sax.]
sterility, barrenness,

UNFUMED [of un and fumeux, F.]
not artificially perfumed. Milton.

UNFURNISHED [of un and fourni, 
F.] without furniture.

UNGAINNESS, awkwardness.

UNGARNISHED [of un neg. and
garni, F.] not set of with garniture.



UNGATHERED [of un and ʒaðe­
rian, Sax.] not gathered.

UNGENTILENESS [of un and genti­
litas, L. gentilesse, F.] ungentility.

UNGENTLENESS [of un neg. and
gentilis, L.] untameness, rudeness, the
opposite to mildness.

To UNGIRD [of un and ʒẏrðan, 
Sax.] to loose nor untie a girdle, &c.

UNGIRT [of un and ʒẏrðel, Sax.]
ungirded.

To UNGLUE [of un and glutinare, 
L.] to unfasten what is glued.

UNGODLINESS [of un ʒoðlicneſſe
Sax.] impiousness, &c.

UNGOVERNABLENESS [of un gou­
verné, and habilite of habilitas, L.] an
ungovernable temper.

UNGRACIOUS [ungracieux, F. of
gratiosus, L.] void of grace.

UNGRACIOUSNESS [un gracieusité, 
F. gratiositas, L.] voidness of grace.

UNGRATEFULNESS [of ingratus, 
L. and fullneſſe, Sax.] ingratitude.

UNGRACEFUL [of un grace, F. and
full, Sax.] not having a good or be­
coming aspect, mien, air.

UNGUARDED [of un and garde, F.]
not defended or kept by a guard.

UNGUILTINESS [of un ʒilðan, 
Sax. to pay a fine, and neſſe, Sax.]
innocent state or condition.

UNGULED [in Heraldry] the hoofs
of tame beasts, when of a different
colour from the body, are said to be
unguled.

UNHABITABLE [of un neg. and
habitable, F. of  L.] not capable or fit
to be inhabited.

UNHABITABLENESS, an uninha­
bitable quality, &c.

To UNHAFT [of un and Hæft, 
Sax.] to take off the haft of a knife, 
&c.

UNHALLOWED [of un and halʒian
Sax.] unsanctified, prophane.

UNHALTERED [of un and halter, 
Du. halftre, Sax.] without a halter, 
&c.

UNHANDINESS [of un and handeg
Du. and ness] awkwardness.

UNHANDSOMENESS [incertæ Etym.
unless prob. of un neg. hanðſom and
neſſe, Sax. q. d. not done by any art­
ful hand] indecency, unbecomingness, 
rudeness.

UNHAPPINESS [of un, neg. and
prob. hapous, Brit, and ness] unfor­
tunateness, wretchedness, &c.

To UNHARBOUR [of un and here­
berʒa, Sax.] to dislodge.

UNHARMONIOUS [of in and har­
monieux, F.] not musical, nor agreeing
one with the other.

To UNHARNESS [of desharnacher, 
F.] to take off the harness.

To UNHASP [of un and hæſp, Sax.]
to undo a hasp.

UNHEALTHFULNESS [of un
hæl, and
fullneſſe, Sax.] fickleness, an un­
healthful quality or condition.

UNHEALTHINESS [of un
hæl, and
fullneſſe, Sax.] fickleness, an un­
healthful quality or condition.

UNHEARD [of un and Hẏran, Sax.
to hear] not heard.

UNHEEDED [of un and Heðan, 
Sax.] not minded or regarded.

UNHEEDFULNESS [of un Heðan, 
and fullneſſe, Sax.] carelesness, re­
gardlesness.

To UNHINGE [of un and hinge, Du.]
to take off the hinges; to disorder.

To UNHOARD [of un and Horð, 
Sax.] to take out of a hoard, to disclose; 
to steal. Milton.

UNHOLINESS [of un Haliʒ, and
neſſe, Sax.] unsanctifiedness, pro­
faneness.

UNHOPEFULNESS [of un Hopefull
and neſſe, Sax.] viciousness.

To UNHOODWINK [of un Hoð and
&wyn;incian, Sax.] to remove any thing
that obstructs the sight.

To UNHOOK [of un and Hoce, Sax.]
to take of from a hook.

To UNHORSE [of un and Horſe, 
Sax.] to pull off or from a horse.

To UNHOSE [of un and Hoſa, Sax.]
to pull off the hose or stockings.

UNHOSPITABLENESS [inhospitali­
tas, L.] inhospitable quality.

UNHUMAN [inhumanus, L.] unkind, 
barbarous, cruel.

UNHURT [of un and hyrt, Sax.]
having received no injury, &c.

UNHUSBANDED [of un huſ, an
house, and bonða, Sax. a husband] not
managed with good husbandry.

UNICAPSULAR [of unicapsularis, 
L.] having but one single seed vessel.

UNICORN [of unus one, and cornu, L.
a horn] is by some supposed to be a
very rare and beautiful beast, like an
horse, having one long horn in the
middle of the forehead twisted. But
this creature not being well attested to
have been seen, may well be thought
to exist rather from its being mention­
ed in scripture; some persons suppose
there must be such a creature, and
that it has long hair under the chin
like a goat, and cloven feet; that its
horn is an antidote against poison, and
therefore it dips the same in the wa­
ter before it drinks, and other hearts
for the same reason wait to see it drink
first; and that it is wonderful fond of
chaste persons, and therefore in order



to take it, a virgin is placed in its way, 
whom when the unicorn spies, he lies
down by her, and lays his head on her
lap, and so falls asleep; when the vir­
gin making a signal, the hunters come
in and take the beast, which could never
be caught any other way, because it
would rather cast itself headlong from
a rock and die.

Father Jerome Lobo says, that in
Ethiopia there is an animal called Arvo­
charis, which is extremely swift, has
but one horn, and much resembles a
roe-buck. John Gabriel a Portugueze, 
tells us, that in the kingdom of Damor, 
he saw an unicorn whicn had a beauti­
ful white horn on his forehead, of the
length of a foot and a half: the hair of
his neck and of his tail was black and
short, the animal was of the shape and
bigness of a Bayard.

Vincent le Blanc relates, that he saw
an unicorn in the seraglio of the king
of Pegu, whose tongue was very long
and rugged, its head was rather like
that of a stag than a horse.

Louis de Bartheme says, that at the
soldans of Mecca in Arabia he saw two
unicorns, that had been sent for a
present by a king of Ethiopia.

They were as large as a colt of 30
months old, of a dark colour, and had
heads much like that of a deer, a horn
of three fathoms long, short manes, 
small legs, the feet cloven, and hoofs
like a goat.

It is said also, that there are sea uni­
corns, one of which came a shore in
1644 at the island of Tortua, near St.
Domingo.

It follows plainly from all that hath
been said, either that the generality of
such accounts that mention unicorns
must be false, or that travellers have
blinded and confounded several species
of animals into one.

To UNHUSK [of un and husche, 
Du.] to take off husk or shell.

UNIFORMITY [uniformitas, L.]
regularity, a similitude or resemblance
as in figures of many sides and angles
respectively equal and answerable one
to the other.

UNIFORMLY [uniformiter, L. uni­
formement, F.] after an uniform man­
ner.

UNILABIATED (of unus one, and
labium, L. a lip] having but one lip, 
spoken of flowers.

UNIMAGINABLE [of un and ima­
ginable, F.] not to be imagined.

UNIMMORTAL [of un and immor­
talis, L.] not immortal, mortal. Milton.

UNIMPLOYED [of un and employé, 
F.] not made use of, &c.

UNINHABITED [of un and inhabita­
tus, L.] not dwelt in.

UNINTELLIGIBLENESS [of un­
intelligible, F. of  L. and ness] uncapa­
bleness of being understood.

UNINTERRUPTED [of un and in­
terruptus, L.] continual.

UNINTHRALL'D [of un, in and
ðræl Sax.] not enslaved or brought in
to thrall.

UNINVITED [of un and invité, F.
of  L.] not invited.

UNJOINED [of un and jointé, F.]
not joined together.

To UNJOINT [dejoindre, F.] to put
out of joint.

UNION, the combining or joining
several things into one society, con­
cord, or agreement, especially that
which arises from solemn leagues, of­
fensive and defensive, made by sove­
reign princes and states.

UNION [in an Ecclesiastical Sense] is
a combining or consolidating of two
churches into one.

UNION of Ascension, is when the
united benefice becomes a member and
accessory of the principal.

UNION by Confusion, is that where
the two titles are suppressed and a new
one created including both.

UNION [in Architect.] is the har­
mony between the colours in the ma­
terials of a building.

UNION [in Metaphysicks] is the con­
course of many Beings in order to make
one Individual.

Essential UNION [in Metaphysicks] is
when many compleat Beings, adapted
to one another, concur to make one
Essential Individual. Thus as in the
composition of a body, matter and form
are more essentially united; so the ele­
ments in all mixt bodies, are united by
an essential Union.

Personal UNION [in Metaphysicks]
is when two natures are so united as
to make one person. The union of
the divine and human nature, in the
person of our saviour Christ, is the
only instance that can be given of this
union.

Accidental UNION [in Metaphysicks]
is when many causes accidentally oc­
cur to make one thing by Accident.

Verbal UNION [in Metaphysicks]
consists only in the bare agreement of
words.

Real UNION [in Metaphysicks) is the
concourse of many distinct Beings, in
order to the forming one Individual.



UNION [in Painting] is the symme­
try or agreement between the several
parts of a piece of painting, so that
they apparently conspire to form one
thing.

UNITARIANS, a name given to
the Antitrinitarians; the Socinians are
also so call'd; their first settlement is
said to have been in Poland, where
they declared that they admitted of no
other creed but that of the apostles, 
rejecting that of Nice, and in a word
all those that were drawn up by gene­
ral councils, pretending they were not
agreeable to the word of God; they
deny the second person in the Trinity
to be the supreme being; tho' they
acknowledge him to be God; but hold
him to be inferior to the father, as
being produced by him and dependent
on him.

UNITED Provinces. Those coun­
tries lying about the mouths of the
river Meuse and Rhine, in the northern
part of the Low Countries, between the
territories of the king of Spain in Flan­
ders, being seven in number, viz.
Holland, Zealand, Lower Guelderland, 
and the county of Zutphen, Friezland, 
Over-Yssel, the lordship of Utrecht and
Groeningen, who being oppress'd by
the tyrannical government of the king
of Spain in Flanders, revolted in the
16th century, and uniting together
form'd themselves into a republick, 
perhaps the greatest in the world.
They are now generally called the
States General.

Commerce and manufactures have
rendred these people so powerful, that
they have footing in all parts of the
world. The province of Holland has
two famous companies of merchants, 
the one for the East, and the other for
the West-Indies, and is grown very
powerful, especially by sea.

UNITY, it is the abstract or quality
that constitutes or denominates a thing
unum or one.

UNITY [in God] is an incommuni­
cable attribute by which he is one and
no more.

UNITY [in Metaphysicks] is the In­
division of any being, i. e. the division
of its essence, implying such a contra­
diction, that, except a thing can be
divided from itself, it is impossible to
divide it.

Real UNITY [in Metaphysicks] is
that which, without any operation of
the mind, is really in every particular
being.

Rational UNITY [in Metaphysicks] is
that common nature that is diffus'd in
all the particulars or any kind, yet by
the operation of the understanding is
made one.

UNITY of Possession [in Law] a joint
possession of two rights by several ti­
tles; as when a man, holding land by
lease, afterwards buys the fee-simple, 
which extinguishes his lease, and he is
now become lord of the same.

UNITY [in Dramatick Performances]
is three-fold, of action, time, and
place. These unities have been esta­
blished by criticks, to bring the drama
as near nature as is possible.

UNITY of action, is the first of the
three unities appropriated to the dra­
ma; two actions that are different and
independent will distract the attention
and concernment of the auditors, and 
so of consequence frustrate the design
of the Poet, which is to move terror
and pity.

UNITY and Wisdom [Hieroglyphical­
ly] were represented by the sun and its
beautiful beams.

UNJUDGED [of un and judicatus, 
L.] not judged or tried.

UNIVALVE [of unus L. and valva, 
L.] having but one valve.

UNIVERSALNESS [universalité, F.
of  L.] universality.

Metaphysical UNIVERSALITY [with
Schoolmen] is that which excepts no­
thing, as every man is mortal.

Moral UNIVERSALITY [with
Schoolmen] is that which admits of some
exception, as all men are ambitious.

UNIVERSALS in causing [in Lo­
gick] are such as are the common effi­
cient causes of divers effects, as the
Sun, &c.

UNIVERSALS in distributing [in Lo­
gick] are common or universal signs, 
as all, none, &c.

UNIVERSALS in knowing [in Lo­
gick] are such as know all things, as
the understanding, &c.

UNIVERSALS in representing [in
Logick] are images or ideas of univer­
sal things, as a Man, a House, &c.

UNIVERSALS in signifying [in Lo­
gick] common words that signify many
things, as a Stone, an Animal.

UNIVERSALS in being or existing, 
[in Logick] are natures which exist in
several, as humanity in John, Thomas, 
&c.

UNIVERSALS in predicating [in Lo­
gick] are such as do exist in many
things, and are separately predicated
of them all, as unum, ens.



UNIVOCAL Generation [in Physicks]
the ancients held, that all perfect ani­
mals were produced by Univocal Gene­
ration, i. e. by the sole union or copu­
lation of male and female of the same
species; and that insects were produ­
ced by Equivocal Generation without 
any seeds, and merely by the corrup­
tion of the earth exhaled, and, as it
were, impregnated by the rays of the
sun.

UNJUST [injustus, L. injusté, F.]

UNJUSTNESS [injustitia, L. inju­
stice, F.] injustice.

UNKEMBED [of un and cæmban, 
Sax. incomptus, L.] not combed.

UNKINDNESS [of un, and prob.
cyn, Sax. or kind, Teut. and ness] un­
friendliness.

To UNKING [of un and cynge, or cynʒe
koninʒ, Sax.] to depose a king, to de­
spoil of royal authority.

UNKNIT [of un and cnyttan, Sax.]
not knitted.

UNKNOWN [of un and cna&wyn;an, 
Sax.] not known.

UNLABOURED [illaboratus, L.] not
having had pains taken about it.

To UNLADE [of un and hlaðian, 
Sax.] to unload.

UNLAMENTED [of un and lamente,
F. of lamentatus, L.] not bewailed.

UNLAWFULNESS [of un, laʒa, 
law, and fulneſſe, Sax.] illegality
illegitimateness.

UNLEARNEDNESS [of un, leornian
and neſſe, Sax.] voidness of erudition
or learning.

UNLEAVENED [sans levain, F.] not
fermented with leaven.

UNLIBIDINOUS [of un and libidi­
nosus, L.] not lustful, free from lust,
Milton.

UNLICENS'D [of un and licence, F.]
not having allowance or permission, 
Milton.

UNLIGHTSOME, obscure, Milton.

UNLIKE [of un and ʒelic, Sax.]
not like.

UNLIKELINESS, improbability.

UNLIKENESS [of un, ʒelic and
neſſe, Sax.] dissimilitude.

UNLIMITED Problem [in Geom.] is
such an one as is capable of infinite so­
lutions; as to divide a triangle given
into two equal parts, to make a circle
pass through two points assigned, &c.

To UNLOAD [of un and hlaðan,
Sax.] to unburthern.

To UNLOCK [of un and loc, of be­
lucan, Sax.] to open or undo a lock.

UNLOOKED for [of un and locian, 
Sax.] unexpected.

To UNLOOSE [of un and loosen, 
Du. leſan, Sax.] to loosen, to let
loose.

UNLOVELY [of un lufe and ʒelic, 
Sax.] unamiable.

UNLOVELI­
NESS [of un lufian and
neſſe, Sax.] unamiableness, unde­
servingness of love, unhandsomeness.

UNLUCKINESS [of un luck, Du.
and ness] unfortunateness.

UNMADE [of un and macan, Sax.]
not made.

To UNMAN [of un and man] to de­
prive of manhood; also to behave un­
becoming a man.

UNMANLINESS [of un Man and
ʒelicneſſe, Sax.] behaviour unbe­
coming a man.

UNMANNERLINESS [of un neg.
manieres, F. and likeness] undecent be­
haviour.

UNMANURED [of un and manou­
vrier, F.] uncultivated, undunged.

UNMARKED, not taken notice of
or observ'd. Milton.

UNMARRIED [demarié, F.] not
married, &c.

To UNMARRY [demarier, F.] to
dissolve the matrimonial contract.

To UNMASK [demasquer, F.] to take
off a mask, to expose openly.

UNMASTERED [of un and maître, 
F.] not overcome.

UNMASTED [demâte, F. or un and
Mæſt, Sax.] without masts.

UNMATCHED [of un and maet, 
Du. Maca, Sax. a companion] not cou­
pled, not paired, not equalled.

UNMEASURABLENESS [of un
mesurable, F. and ness] immenseness, 
uncapableness of being measured.

UNMEETNESS [of un Mæðe and
neſſe, Sax.] unfitness, &c.

UNMELTED [of un and myltan, 
Sax.] not made fluid.

UNMERCIFULNESS [of un merci, 
F. and fulness] cruelty.

UNMINDFULNESS [of un ʒemyn­
ðian, Sax. and neſſe] heedlesness, 
regardlesness.

UNMOLESTED [of un moleste, F.
of molestatus, L.] not disturbed.

To UNMOOR [demarer, F.] to weigh
anchor.

UNMOVED [immotus, L.] not mo­
ved.

To UNMUFFLE [of un muð, a
mouth, and fealðian, Sax. to hide] to
take off a muffler.

UNNATURALNESS [of un and
naturalis, L. and ness] repugnancy to
nature; also an unnatural or inhuman
behaviour or disposition.



UNNECESSARY [of un and neces­
saire, F. of  L.] not needful.

UNNUMBERED [of un and nombré, 
F. of numeratus, L.] not number'd.

UNOCCUPIED [of un and occupatus,
L. occupé, F.] unemployed, &c.

UNOPPOS'D [of un and opposé, F.]
without opposition, Milton.

UNORIGINAL, not original, Mil­
ton.

To UNPACK [of un and packen, 
Du.] to undo a pack or bundle.

UNPAID [of un and paye, F.] not
paid.

To UNPARREL a Yard [Sea Phrase]
is to take away the frames, called Par­
rels, which go round about the masts.

UNPARALLEL'D [of un and pa­
rallelus, L.] unequalled, unmatched.

UNPARDONABLE [impardonnable, 
F.] not to be forgiven.

UNPAWNED [of un and pfanden, 
Teut.] not put to pawn or pledge.

UNPEACEABLE [of un and paisa­
ble, F.] unquiet, troublesome.

UNPEACEABLENESS, unquietness, 
troublesomeness.

UNPEOPLED [depeuplé, F. depopu­
latus, L.] dispeopled.

UNPERCEIVABLE [imperceptible, 
F. of  L.] not to be perceived.

UNPERFORMING [of un and per­
formans, L.] not performing, inefficaci­
ous.

UNPERISHABLE [of un and perissi­
ble, F.] not capable of perishing.

To UNPIN [of un and pinðan, Sax.]
to take out a pin.

UNPLEASANT [deplaisante, F.]
displeasing.

UNPLEASANTNESS [qualité de­
plaisanté, F.] unpleasingness.

UNPLEASING [deplaisant, F.] dis­
pleasing.

UNPLEASINGNESS [of un plaisant, 
F. and ness] disagreeableness.

UNPLOWED [of un and Plog,
Dan.] not ploughed.

UNPOLISHEDNESS [impolitisse, F.
impolitia, L.] roughness.

UNPOLLED [of un and Pol, Du. a
head] the hair being uncut.

UNPOLLUTED [impollutus, L.]
undefiled.

UNPREJUDICED [non præjudicatus, 
L.] free from prejudice.

UNPRECEDENTED having no
precedent or
example.

UNPRESIDENTED having no
precedent or
example.

UNPREMEDITATED [of un præ­
meditatus, L.] not designed.

UNPREPARED [imparatus, L.] un­
ready.

UNPREVENTED, not prevented.
Milton.

UNPROFITABLE [of un and pro­
fitable, F.] yielding no profit.

UNPROFITABLENESS [of un pro­
fitable and ness] vainness, uselesness.

UNPROPERNESS [of un propre, F.
or improprietas, L.] impropriety.

UNPROPORTIONATE, not pro­
portional.

UNPROSPEROUS [of improsperus, 
L.] unsuccessful.

UNPROVIDED [depourveu, F.] not
furnished with, unready.

UNPUNISHED [impunis, L. impuni, 
F.] not punished.

UNPURG'D, not cleans'd. Milton.

UNQUAILED [of un and c&wyn;ellan, 
Sax.] not quelled, overcome, brought
under, conquered.

UNQUENCHABLE [of un c&wyn;encan, 
Sax. and habilis, L.] that cannot be
quenched.

UNQUESTIONABLE [of un quæstio
and habilis, L.] undoubted.

UNQUIET [un quiet, F. of  L.] trou­
blesome, disquiet.

UNQUIETNESS [of inquieté, F. of
inquietudo, L.] disturbance.

UNRAVELLED [of un and ravelen, 
Du.] to ensnare, or disentangle a thing
that is entangled; also to undo what
has been done.

UNREADINESS [of un and rhwydd, 
Brit. or ʒereða and neſſe, Sax.]
unpreparedness.

UNREAL [of un and realis, L.] not
real. Milton.

UNREASONABLENESS [of derai­
sonable, F. and ness] the being out of or
contrary to reason; injustice, &c.

UNREBUKABLE [prob. of rebou­
cher, F.] not capable of, or not deser­
ving reprehension.

UNRECLAIMED [of un and recla­
matus, L. or reclamé, F.] not called off
from or reformed from ill habits, vi­
ces, &c.

To UNREVE a Rope [Sea-Phrase] to
pull a rope out of a block or pulley.

UNRECOMPENSED [of un and re­
compensé, F.] unrewarded, not made
amends for.

UNREDEEMABLE [of un and redi­
mer, F. of  L.] that cannot be redeemed.

UNREFORMABLE [of un reforma­
tus, &c.] not to be reformed.

UNREGARDED [of un and regardé, 
F.] not heeded.

UNREGARDFUL, heedless.

UNREINED [of un and regere, L.]
not held in or govern'd with reins.
Milton.



UNRELENTING [of un and relen­
tant, F.] impenitent.

UNREMITTABLE [of un and re­
mittere, L.] that cannot be remitted or
forgiven.

UNREMITTED [of un neg. and re­
mitto, L.] not remitted or forgiven.

UNREMOVED [of un and remué, F.
immotus, L.] not taken out of its place.

UNREPAIRED [of un and reparatus, 
L.] not put into good repair.

UNREPRIEVED [of un and repren­
dre, F. of  L.] not reprieved, not re­
spited for a time, Milton.

UNREPROVABLE [of un reprouver, 
F. and able] unblameable.

UNRESOLVED [of irresolu, F.] not
determined or answered.

UNRESISTED [of un and resisté, F.
of  L.] not opposed.

UNRESPITED [of un and repit, F.]
not having any respit given, Milton.

UNREST [unreſt, Sax.] want of 
rest or sleep, disquiet, waking. Milton.

UNRESTORABLE [of un and re­
staurare, L.] that cannot be rendred
back again.

UNRESTRAINED [of un and re­
straint, F. of  L.] not limited.

UNREVENGED [of un re and vangé,
F.] not avenged.

UNREVOK'D [of irrevocatus, L.]
not recalled. Milton.

UNREWARDED [of un and re
&wyn;earð, Sax.] not recompenced.

UNRIDDLE [of un and areðan, 
to read] to explain or expound a riddle.

UNRIGGED [of un and &wyn;ihtan, 
Sax.] not having rigging, undress'd.

UNRIGHTEOUSNESS [of un &wyn;iht­
&wyn;iſe and neſſe, Sax.] injustice, ini­
quity.

UNRIPENESS [of un ripe and neſ­
ſe, Sax.] immaturity.

To UNRIVET [of un and riveter, 
F.] to undo a rivet.

UNRIVAL'D [of un and rivalis, L.]
not outdone, &c.

UNROLLED [derolé, F.] opened
from a roll.

 To UNROOST [of un and Hroſtan, 
Sax.] to disturb or take from the roost.

UNRULINESS [irregularité, F. of
 L.] ungovernableness.

To UNSADDLE [un and sadel, Brit.
ſaðl, Sax.] to take off a saddle.

UNSAFE [of un and sauf, F. of
salvus, L.] liable to danger.

UNSAID [of un and ſæʒan, Sax.]
not spoken.

UNSALEABLE [incertæ deriv.] not
fit for sale.

UNSALTED [of un and sali, of
salitus, L.] not salted.

UNSALUTED [insalutatus, L.] not
saluted.

UNSANCTIFIED [of un and sancti­
fié F. of  L.] unholy, not consecrated.

UNSATISFACTORINESS [of un
satisfactoire, F. of  L. and ness] unsatis­
fying quality.

UNSAVORINESS [of un savoureux, 
F. of saporus, L. and ness] insipidness.

To UNSAY [of un and ſæʒan, Sax.]
to say to the contrary of what one has
said.

UNSCALED [écaillé, F. or un and
ſceale Sax.] not having the scales
scraped off.

To UNSCREW [of un and écrou, F.
sckroeve, Du.] having the screw loo­
sened.

UNSCRIPTURAL [of un and scrip­
turalis, L.] not founded on the scrip­
ture.

UNSEALED [of un seellé, F. of sigil­
latus, L.] not founded on the scrip­
ture.

UNSEARCHABLENESS [of un re­
chercher, F. able and ness] inscrutable­
ness.

UNSEASONABLENESS [of un sai­
son, F. able and ness] the not being in
proper time.

UNSEASONED [of un and assaisonné,     
F.] not seasoned.

UNSEEN [of un and ſeon, Sax.]
not visible.

UNSENSIBLENESS [insensibilité, F.
of  L.] insensibility.

UNSEPARABLENESS [of insepara­
bilis, L. and ness] an inseparable qua­
lity.

UNSERVICEABLENESS [of un ser­
viable, F. and ness] unprofitableness.

UNSETTLEDNESS [prob. of un
ſettan or ſetl, Sax. a bench, &c.
and ness] an unsettled state, &c.

To UNSEW [of un and ſie&wyn;an, 
Sax.] to undo what was sewn.

UNSHADY [of un and ſcea&wyn;iʒ, 
Sax.] having no shade, open.

UNSHAKEN [of un and ſceacan, 
Sax.] not shaken.

UNSHAPEN [of un and ſcapen,
Sax.] unformed.

UNSHAVEN [of un and ſcafan,
Sax.] not shaved.

UNSHEATHED [of un and ſceað, 
Sax.] drawn out of the sheath.

UNSHARD' [of un and ſcẏrian,
Sax.] not divided into shares.

UNSHOD [of un ſceoð, Sax.] not
having the shoes on.

UNSHORN [of un and ſcearan,
Sax.] not having the wool clipp'd off.

UNSHUT [of un and ſcittan, 
Sax.] not closed up, &c.



UNSIGHTLY [of un and ʒeſiðe, 
Sax.] not pleasant or beautiful to the
sight.

UNSKILFULNESS, ignorance, un­
experiencedness.

To UNSLOUGH a boar, to rouze 
him out of his harbour.

UNSOCIABLE [insociabilis, L.] not
a good companion, &c.  F.

UNSOCIABLENESS, an insociable
humour.

UNSOUGHT [of un and ʒeſecan, 
Sax.] not sought or looked for.

To UNSOLDER [dessoudre, F.] to
take off solder.

UNSOLED [dessolé, F.] having the
soles taken off.

UNSOLID [of un neg. and solidus, 
L.] hollow.

UNSOUND [of un and ſunð, Sax.]
not solid, unhealthful, &c.

UNSOUNDNESS [of un ſunð and
neſſe, Sax] unhealthiness; also the
not being solid, right, or true.

UNSPARING [of un and ſparian, 
Sax.] free, liberal, generous, bounti­
ful.

UNSPEAKABLE [of un ſpæcan, 
Sax. and able] unutterable.

UNSPOTTED, having no spots, &c.

UNSTAIEDNESS [of un and etayé, 
F. and ness] want of sedateness, gra­
vity, &c. levity.

UNSTAINED [of un and disteint, F.]
having no stain, immaculate.

UNSTANCHED [of un and etanché, 
F.] (of blood) not stopped.

UNSTEADINESS [of un and
ſtæðineſ­,
ſe, Sax.] unconstancy, want of fixed­
ness and resolution.

UNSTEDFASTNESS [of un and
ſtæðineſ­,
ſe, Sax.] unconstancy, want of fixed­
ness and resolution.

UNSTEDFAST [of un and ſtæðiʒ, 
Sax.] unfixed, irresolute, &c.

UNSTIRRED [of un and ſtyran, 
Sax.] unmoved.

To UNSTITCH [of un and ſtice, 
Sax.] to pick out stitches.

To UNSTOCK a Gun, is to take off
the stock from the barrel.

To UNSTOP [of un and stopper, 
Dan. or entouper, F.] to open a stop­
page.

UNSTRUNG [of un and ſtrenʒ, 
Sax.] not furnished with strings.

UNSUBDUABLE [of un neg. and
subdere, L. and able] that cannot be
subdued.

UNSUBDUED [of un and subditus, 
L.] not brought under.

UNSUCCESSFUL [of un succez, F.
of un successus, L. and full] not succeed­
ing well.

UNSUFFERABLY, intolerably, un­
bearably, &c.

UNSUITABLE [of un suite, F. and
able] disagreeable.

UNSUITABLENESS [of un suite, of
suivre, F. able and ness] a disagreeable
quality, &c.

UNSULLIED [of un and sali, F.]
not soiled, the lustre not impaired.

UNSUPPORTED [of un supporté, F.
of  L.] not born up by any thing un­
derneath, or by any aid or assistance.

UNSURMOUNTABLE [of un sur­
monter, F. &c.] not to be surmounted
or gotten over.

UNSURPASSABLE [of un surpasser, 
F. &c.] that is not to be exceeded or
gone beyond.

UNSUSTAINED [of un and susten­
tatus, L.] not born or held up.

To UNSWADDLE [of un and ſ&wyn;e­
ðele, Sax.] to unloose swaddling cloths.

To UNSWATHE [of un and ſ&wyn;e­
ðan, Sax.] to undo swathes of childrens
rollers.

UNSWORN [of un and ſ&wyn;erian, 
Sax.] not deposed upon oath.

UNTAINTED [of un and teint, F.
or q. attinctus putredine, L.] not cor­
rupted.

UNTAKEN [of un and tager, Dan.]
not apprehended, &c.

UNTAMED [of un neg. and taman, 
Sax.] not made gentle, &c.

To UNTANGLE [prob. of un and
tanʒl, Sax.] to undo an entanglement.

UNTANNED [of un and ʒetan­
nan, Sax.] not tanned.

UNTASTED [of un and tasten, 
Teut. or taste, F.] not tasted.

UNTAUGHT [of un and tæcan, 
Sax.] not taught.

UNTEACHABLENES [of un tæcan, 
Sax. able of habilis, and neſſe, Sax.]
uncapableness of being taught.

UNTENABLE [of un and tenable, 
F. of tenere, L.] that cannot be held
or kept.

UNTHINKING, without thought.

UNTHINKINGNESS [of un ðincan, 
Sax. and neſſe] thoughtlesness.

UNTHOUGHT [of un ðoht, Sax.]
not thought of.

UNTHRIFTINESS [of un ðriftiʒ, 
and neſſe, Sax.] wastefulness, prodi­
gallity.

To UNTHRONE [of un and thronus, 
L. dethroner, F. of  L.] to dethrone.

To UNTIE [of un and tian, Sax.]
to loosen what was tied.

UNTILLED [of un and tilian, 
Sax.] uncultivated.

UNTIMELINESS [of un timelic
and neſſe, Sax.] the being out of
proper time.



UNTIRED [of un and tirian, Sax.]
unwearied.

UNTO [unto, Sax.]

UNTOLD [of un and tellan, Sax.]
not said or numbred.

UNTOUCHED [of un and touché, F.]
not touched or meddled with.

UNTOWARDLINESS [of un to­
&wyn;arðlic, and neſſe, Sax.] disobedience, 
stubbornness, naughtiness.

UNTRACTABLENESS [of intrac­
tabilis, and ness] want of capacity or
inclination to be managed, &c.

UNTRIED [prob. of un and tentatus
L.] not essayed.

UNTRIMMED [of un and ʒe­
trymmeð, Sax.] not adorned, unsha­
ven.

UNTROD [of un and treðan, Sax.]
not trodden upon.

UNTRUE [of un and tri&wyn;e, Sax.]
false.

UNTRUSTINESS [of un treo&wyn;e, 
and neſſe, Sax.] unfaithfulness.

UNTRUTH [of un and treo&wyn;ðe, 
Sax.] falsity,

To UNTUCK, to undo or loosen
that which was tucked up.

To UNTWIST [of un and ʒet&wyn;i­
ſan, Sax.] to undo what is twisted.

To UNVAIL [of devoiler, F. deve­
lare, L.] to uncover, &c.

UNVALUABLE [of un valeur, F.
valor, L. and able] inestimable.

UNVANQUISHED [invaincu, F.]
unconquered.

UNVARIABLE [invariabilis, L.]
not to be, or that cannot be varied.

UNVINCIBLE [invincibilis, L.] un­
conquerable, not to be overcome.

UNVISITED [of un and visité, F.]
not visited or gone to see.

UNUNIFORM [of un neg. and uni­
formis, L.] not uniform.

UNUSUALNESS [of un usualis, L.
and ness] rareness, uncommonness.

UNUTTERABLE [of un utter, 
Sax. and able] unspeakable.

UNWALLED [of un and &wyn;all, Sax.]
without walls.

UNWARLIKE [of un and &wyn;ærlic, 
Sax.] not like a warrior.

UNWARINESS [of un &wyn;æriʒ, and
neſſe, Sax.] uncautiousness.

UNWARNED [of un and &wyn;ernian, 
Sax.] not having had warning.

UNWARRANTED [of un and &wyn;æ­
rian, Sax,] not secured by authority,
&c.

UNWASHEN [of un and &wyn;æcſan, 
Sax.] not washed.

UNWATCHED [of un and &wyn;eccian, 
Sax.] not guarded by a watch, &c.

UNWATERED [of un and &wyn;æter, 
or &wyn;ætran, Sax.] not moistened, &c.
with water.

UNWEANED [of un and areneð, 
Sax.] not taken from the breast.

UNWEARIED [of un and &wyn;eriʒan, 
Sax.] untired.

To UNWEAVE [of un and &wyn;eafan
Sax.] to undo what was woven.

UNWEDDED [of un and &wyn;eððian, 
Sax.] unmarried.

UNWELCOMENESS [of un &wyn;ilcu­
mian and neſſe, Sax.] disagreeable­
ness to.

UNWHOLSOMENESS [of un hælo­
ſom and neſſe, Sax.] unhealthiness,
&c.

UNWIELDINESS [of un &wyn;ealðan
and neſſe, Sax.] unmanageableness, 
or unhandiness by reason of great bulk.

UNWILLINGNESS [of un &wyn;illunʒ, 
of &wyn;illan, and neſſe, Sax.] an un­
willing temper.

To UNWIND [of un and &wyn;inðan, 
Sax.] to undo what was wound.

UNWISHED [of un and ʒe&wyn;iſci­
an, Sax.] not desired, &c.

UNWITTING [of un and &wyn;ittan, 
Sax.] not knowing.

UNWONTED [of un and &wyn;unian, 
Sax.] unaccustomed.

UNWORKMANLIKE [of un &wyn;erc­
man and ʒelic, Sax.] bungling, not ar­
tificial.

UNWORN [of un and &wyn;eran, Sax.]
not worn.

UNWORTHINESS [of un &wyn;yrðic, 
and neſſe, Sax.] undeservingness.

UNWOUND [of un and a&wyn;inðan, 
Sax.] not wound up.

UNWOVEN [of un and &wyn;eafan, 
Sax.] not weaved.

UNWOUNDED [of un and &wyn;unðian, 
Sax.] having received no wound.

UNWREATHED [of un and &wyn;re­
oðian, Sax.] having the wreath un­
twisted; also without a wreath.

To UNWRINKLE [of un and &wyn;rin­
clian, Sax.] to smooth out wrinkles.

UNWRITHEN [of un and &wyn;ryðan,
Sax.] unwreathed, untwisted, straight­
ned.

UNWRITTEN [of un and &wyn;rẏtan, 
Sax.] not written.

UNWROUGHT [of un and &wyn;eor­
cian, Sax.] unworked.

To UNYOKE [of un and ʒeoc, Sax.]
to set free from the yoke.

VOCABULARY [vocabulaire, F. of
 L.] a word-book, a little dictionary
containing a collection of words.

VOCALLY [of vocaliter, L.] with
the voice.



VOCALNESS [vocalitas, L.] a vocal
quality.

VOCATION, a calling, an employ, 
a course of life to which one is appoin­
ted,  F. of  L.

VOCATION [in Theology] the grace
or favour which God does any one in
calling him out of the way of death, 
and putting him into the way of salva­
tion.

VOICE in general, signifies a sound or
noise, but in Musick more particularly
a human voice.  Ital.

VOCIFERATION, a bawling or
crying out a loud,  L.

VOICE [vox, L. vois, F.] a sound
proceeding out of the mouth, a cry;
also a vote; also the right of voting
upon any occasion.

VOICE of God [in a Spiritual Sense]
the divine command.

Articulate VOICES, are such, seve­
veral of which conspire together to
form some assemblage or little system
of sounds, as in expressing the letters
of the alphabet, several of which join­
ed together form words.

Inarricular VOICE, are such as are
not organized or assembled into words, 
as the barking of dogs, the braying of
asses, the lowing of oxen, the singing
of birds, the hissing of serpents, &c.

VOIDABLE, that may be voided.

VOIDANCE [in the Canon Law] the
want of an incumbent upon a benefice, 
and it is two-fold, either de juré, as
when one holds several benefices, which
are incompatible, or de facto, when the
incumbent is dead and actually depri­
ved.

VOIDED [in Heraldry] is
when an ordinary has no­
thing to shew its form, but
an edge, all the inward
part being supposed to be
evacuated or cut out, so that the field
appears through it, as a cross voided.
See the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



VOIDER [in Heraldry]
one whose figure is much
like that of the flask, or
flanch, only that it doth
not bend so much.

Image omitted.



A VOIDER, a table basket for plates, 
knives, &c. also a painted or japanned
vessel to hold services of sweet-meats,

VOIDING [vuidant, F.] discharging
or throwing out by stool, urine, or vo­
mit.

VOIDNESS [of vuide, F. and ness]
emptiness.

VOL [in Heraldry] signi­
fies both the wings of a
fowl.

Image omitted.



Un demi VOL [in Heral.]
signifies one wing.

VOLACIOUS [of volare, L.] apt or
fit to fly.

Camp VOLANT, a flying camp.  F.

VOLATILENESS [of volatile, F.] a
volatile nature, fleetingness; also a
property of bodies whose particles are
apt to evaporate with heat.

VOLATILIZATION [in Chymistry]
the act of rendring fixed bodies vola­
tile; or of resolving them, by fire into
fine subtil vapour or spirit, which
easily dissipates or flies away.

VOLLEY [prob. of voluntarius, L.
willing, free] a discharge of musquets
by a whole company, &c. or a party
at once.

Revers'd VOLT [with Horsemen] is a
tract of two treads, which a horse
makes with his head to the centre, and
his croup out; so that he goes side-­
ways upon a walk, trot, or gallop, and
traces out a small circumference with
his shoulders, and a larger one with
his croup.

Demi VOLT, is a demi round of one
tread or two, made by a horse at one
of the angles of the volt, or else at
the end of the line of the passade, so
that being near the end of this line, 
or else one of the corners of the volt, 
he changes hands to return by a semi-­
circle, to regain the same line.

To make VOLTS [in the 
Academies]
signifies to make a gate of two treads, 
by the horse going side-ways round the
centre, in such a manner, that these
two treads make parallel tracts, the
larger by the fore feet, and the smaller
by the hinder feet, the croup approach­
ing towards the center, and the shoul­
ders bearing outwards.

To manage upon VOLTS [in the 
Academies]
signifies to make a gate of two treads, 
by the horse going side-ways round the
centre, in such a manner, that these
two treads make parallel tracts, the
larger by the fore feet, and the smaller
by the hinder feet, the croup approach­
ing towards the center, and the shoul­
ders bearing outwards. 

Demi VOLTS, of the length of a horse, 
are semi-circles of two treads, which
a horse traces in working side-ways, 
the haunches low, and the head high, 
turning very narrow; so that having
formed a demi-round, he changes the
hand to make another, which is again
followed by another change of hand, 
and another demi-round that crosses
the first, and may be compared to a fi­
gure of 8.

VOLUBLENESS [volubilitas, L.] an
aptness to roll.

VOLUME [volumen, of volvere, L.
to roll; because the ancients used to
write on rolls] a book of a reasonable 



size fit to be bound up by itself; also a
part of a large book.  F.

VOLUMNUS [among the Romans] 2
deities, who as they imagined, governed
the wills and passions of men and wo­
men, and inclined them to virtue.
They wore adored the one by the
men, and the other by the women, as
favourable to matrimony, in maintain­
ing a good correspondence between the
husband and wife.

VOLUNTEERS, gentlemen who,
without having any certain post or
employ in the army, go upon war-­ 
like expeditions, and run into dangers
only to gain honour and preferment.

VOLUPIA [with the Romans] the
goddess of Pleasure, to whom they
built a temple, and represented her like
a young woman prettily drest and tread­
ing upon virtue.

VOLUPTABLE [voluptabilis, L.] de­
lightful, pleasurable.

VORTEX [in Meteorology] a sudden, 
rapid, violent motion of the air, in
gyres or circles,  L.

VOTING [votant, F.] giving his
vote, or suffrage at the election of a
magistrate, or making a law, &c.

VOTIVE [votivus, L.] of or belong­
ing to a vow.

VOTIVE Medals, [with Antiquaries]
those whereon the vows of the people
for the emperors or empresses are ex­
pressed.

VOUCHER, a person vouched at
law, or a person who is to warrant or
vouch for another, who in respect
hereof is called a Voucher.

VOUCHER [in Law] the tenant
who calls another person into court, 
bound to warranty him, and either to
defend the right agamst the demandant, 
or to yield him other lands, &c. to the
value.

Foreign VOUCHER [in Law] is when
the tenant being impleaded in a
particular jurisdiction, as at London or
elsewhere, vouches one to warranty, 
and prays he may be summoned in some
other county, out of the jurisdiction of
that court.

VOUCHER, a ledger-book, or book
of accompts, wherein are entred the
warrants for the accomptants dis­
charge.

VOUCHSAFING [of vouchant, of
voucher, and sauf, F.] condescending
graciously, granting.

VOUSSOIRS [in Architect.] the
stones, that form the arch.  F.

VOYAGING [voyageant, F.] travel­
ling or going by sea.

UPBRAIDING [of up-ʒeræðan, 
Sax.] twitting, reproaching.

UPHOLDERS were
incorporated a master, 
3 wardens, 31 assistants, 
121 on the livery; for
which the fine is 4 l.
10 s. and the stewards
11 l. Their arms are
on a chevron, between
3 tents as many roses. Their hall is
in Leaden hall-street.

Image omitted.



UPLANDISH [of up and lanð, Sax.]
belonging to the uplands or high-­
grounds.

UPPISHNESS, elevatedness of mind.

UPRIGHT [with He­
ralds] is a term used of
shell-fishes, when they
stand so in a coat of arms; 
for, because they want
fins, they cannot properly be said to
be hauriant, because that term pro­
perly belongs to scaly fishes. See the
Escutcheon.

Image omitted.



UP-SIDE [of up and ſiðe, Sax.] the
higher side.

UPSTAID [of up and etaye, F.]
supported or born up, Milton.

UPTURNS [of up and tẏrnan, 
Sax.] turns up, Milton.

UPWHIRL'D [of up and h&wyn;ẏrfan, 
Sax.] whirled upwards.

URANIA [of οὐρανος, Gr. Heaven]
the daughter of Jupiter and Mnemosyne
(according to the poets) to whom is
attributed the invention of astronomy.

URANIA [in Painting, &c.] is re­
presented as a beautiful lady in an
azure robe, having her head adorned
with a coronet of bright stars, and
holding in her right-hand the celestial
globe, and the terrestrial in her left.

URBANE [urbanus, L.] courteous, 
civil.

URBANENESS [urbanitas, L.] cour­
tesy, civility, civil behaviour, good
manners or breeding.

URDAE [in Heraldry]
as a Cross Urdæ, is a cross
that terminates in the man­
ner of a lozenge, as in the
escutcheon.

Image omitted.



URIM and THUMMIM. Spencer is
of opinion that these were two little
golden figures, which gave responses, 
which were shut up in the pectoral, as
in a purse, and which answered with
an articulate voice, to all such questi­
ons as were put to them by the high
priest.



He supports his opinion by the au­
thority of St. Jerome and of Cedrenus,
among the ancients, and of some Rab­
bins; of Cornelius a Lapide, and of
Louis de Dieu among the Moderns.
Plato seems to have had the same
thought: He says there were upon the
breast-plate two figures in embroidery
of great virtue; one of which repre­
sented Truth, and the other Manifesta­
tion.

Mr. Le Clere will have it, that Urim
and Thummim were the names of some
precious stones, that composed a great
collar, which hung down upon the
breast of the high priest, which might
be imitated from the Egyptians, among
whom the chief officer of justice wore
about his neck a figure of Truth, en­
graven upon precious stones, and
hanging on a golden chain.

Peter Vallensis, in a letter written
from Cairo, says, that he saw in Egypt a
very ancient mummy, with a great
collar hanging upon its breast, at the
end of which was a tablet of gold, 
whereon might be perceived the image
of a bird engraven.

It is not easy to say, whether the
Hebrews had imitated this from the
Egyptians, or whether the Egyptians
had taken their model from the He­
brews; but it may be conjectured, that
the Urim and Thummim of the Hebrews, 
might have some relation to the image
of Truth of the Egyptians.

However, it is not probable, that
Moses represented either in relief or
embroidery, or engraving any figure of
a man or other animal: But no ill
consequence can follow from suppo­
sing that he might represent there
some mysterious figure or hierogly­
phick, such as the Cherubims were.

URINE [urine, F. of urina, L. of
οὗρον, Gr.] by chymical writers it is ex­
press'd by this character 🝕.

URNA [with the Romans] a vessel
used to draw out of it the names of
those who were first to engage at the
publick plays; also into which they
threw notes, by which they gave their
votes in publick assemblies and courts
of justice.

Sepulchral URNS [among the Ro­
mans, &c.] vessels of earth commonly
in the form of an oil jarr, in which
were put the ashes of the dead after
the bodies had been burnt, these were
sometimes deposited under tomb stones, 
or within vaults or graves; and some­
times they were kept in houses by re­
lations of the deceased; tho' these
urns were generally made of earth, 
yet some great persons have had them
made of gold, silver, marble, &c.

URSA major. Hesiod tells us, she was
the daughter of Lycaon, and dwelt in
Arcadia, and was so devoted to the
study of hunting, as to be one of the
companions of Diana, in ranging the
mountains. And that after she had
been debauched by Jupiter, she con­
cealed it from the goddess; but her
belly growing big, she being near her
time, Diana discovered it, as she was
bathing herself, and being angry at
her, transformed her into a bear, and
she brought forth Arcas. And that
she, wandring on the mountains, was
found by some shepherds, and brought
to her father Lycaon, together with
her infant, for a present. Some time
after she entered the temple of Jupiter, 
which was unlawful for her to do;
and when her son Arcas and the Arca­
dians followed her to kill her, for vio­
lating the law, Jupiter, mindful of the
conversation he had had with her, 
snatched her away and placed her
among the stars, and called her Ursa, 
on account of what had happened.

URSA major [in Astron.] the great
Bear, a constellation in the northern
hemisphere, containing, some say, 35, 
others 36, but according to the Britan­
nick catalogue 215 stars.

USE and Custom [in anc. Law] is the
ordinary method of acting or proceed­
ing in any case, which by length of
time has obtained the force of a law.

USES and Customs [in Maritime Af­
fairs] are certain maxims, rules, or
usages, which make the base or ground­
work of maritime jurisprudence, by
which the policy of navigation and
commerce of the sea are regulated.

USHERSHIP [of huissier, F.] the of­
fice of an usher.

USUFRUCTUS [in the Civil
Law] is the en­
joyment or possession of any effect, or
the right of receiving the fruits and
profits of an inheritance or other thing, 
without the faculty of alienating or
damaging the property thereof.  L.

USURIOUSNESS [of usurarius, L.
and ness] an usurious or extortioning
quality or disposition.

USURIOUS Contract [in Law] a
bargain or contract, whereby a man is
obliged to pay more interest for money
than the statute allows.

USURPER [usurpator, L. usurpeur, 
F.] one who wrongfully seizes that
which is the right of another.



UTMOST [uttermeſt, Sax.] the
greatest power of ability; also the
farthest distance, &c.

UTTERABLE [of utter, Sax. and
able] capable of being uttered.

VULCAN [so called of volando fly­
ing, and candens growing hot, or of
majore vi ignis, and fulgere, q. Fulganus, 
Varro] according to the poets, was the
god of fire, and the son of Jupiter, by
his wife Juno, but being very deform­
ed, when Jupiter saw how ill-shapen
and ugly he was, he kicked him down
from Heaven, and by falling upon the
earth; the poor babe broke one of his
legs, whereof he halted ever after.
But Thetis and the nymphs took pity of 
him, and nursed him up: And when 
he came to be of years he followed
the trade of a blacksmith, and wrought
for the rest of the gods, especially for
Jupiter, for whom he made thunder-­
bolts; for that purpose he had several
forges or shops in the isles of Lemnos, 
Lipara, and in mount Ætna. He had
assistants or journeymen, that were
called Cyclops, because they had but
one great eye in the middle of their
forehead; the most noted of which
were Brontes, Steropes, Pyracmon. Vul­
can had two wives, Aglaiæ and Venus;
but Venus had no kindness for him, by
reason of his deformity; and therefore
sought satisfaction somewhere else, and
readily accepted of the embraces of
Mars: But Apollo gave notice of their
meeting to Vulcan, who found a way to
surprize Mars in the embraces of his
wife, and spreading his net all over
the place, caught them together; and
to put them to the greater shame, he
sent for all the gods to be witnesses of
their dishonesty and his dishonour.
To Vulcan is ascribed the making the
chariot of the sun, and the armour of
the gods and the heroes. His feasts
were named Protervia, in which the
Romans ran about with lighted torches
in honour of him. At the foot of
mount Ætna there was a temple e­
rected, and a grove planted in honour
of him, which was kept by a dog, who
(it is said) would tear the vicious in
pieces (if they offered to approach)
but would fawn upon such as were
virtuous and good. By Vulcan is un­
derstood to be meant natural heat; and
therefore the Egyptians, in their Hie­
roglyphicks, represented Vulcan by an
egg, proceeding out of the mouth of
Jupiter. There were several Vulcans;
the first was the son of Cœlus, the se­
cond of Nilus, named Otas, the third
of Jupiter and Juno, and the fourth the
son of Mænalius, who dwelt near Sici­
ly, in the islands called Vulcaniæ Insulæ.
The ancients painted him in a scarlet
robe, having an anvil standing by him.

VULGATE, a name given to a
Latin translation of the bible, which
is said to have been made from the
Hebrew about A. C. 400, which was
approved and authorized by the coun­
cil of Trent, as the only true version, 
and the Popes, Sixtus V. and Clement
VIII. took much care to have it publish­
ed correct in the year 1590. Neverthe­
less upon examination many imper­
fections were discovered; upon which
another edition was published in 1592, 
which is looked upon to be the model
of all the editions that have been pub­
lished since; and this edition is held as
authentick by the church of Rome; but
notwithstanding this, it is not denyed
by the most learned and skilful Roman
Catholick divines, that there are many
faults yet remaining in it; but they
say, that the correctors had good rea­
son not to amend them at that time.

VULNERABLENESS [of vulnerare, 
L. able and ness] capableness of being
wounded.

VULNING [in Heraldry] wounding, 
a term used of a pelican.

VULTURE [Hieroglyphically] was
by the Egyptians used to represent na­
ture; they having this notion, that
this bird does not conceive according
to the usual manner, by copulating
with a male, being all females; and
that they brought forth eggs by re­
ceiving into their bodies the northern
or western wind, which caused them
to conceive. The Vulture was also an
emblem of mercy; for the Naturalists
say, that she never seeks any prey, nor
flies from her nest, until the young
ones come to a considerable bigness, 
and in the mean time nourishes them
with her blood, which they suck out of
her thighs and breast.

VULVA [with Physicians] the Ute­
rus, the womb or matrix; also the
passage, or neck of the womb, &c.  L.

UXORIOUS [uxoriosus, L.] over­
fond of, or doting upon a wife.

UXORIOUSNESS [of uxorius, L.
and ness] over-fondness of a wife.

UXORIUM [among the Romans] a
mulct or forfeit paid for not marrying,
also money exacted by way of fine from
those who had no wives.              





W
W w, Roman; W w, Italick, W w, 
English; W &wyn;,Saxon; is the 21st
letter of the alphabet; it is a letter not
used by the ancients, either Asiaticks, 
Grecians, or Romans; but it was by the
northern nations, the Teutones, Ger­
mans, Saxons, &c. and at this day is
not used by the French, Spaniards, 
Portuguese, or Italians. It is com­
pounded of two V consonants. It loses
its sound after o, as cow, how, &c. and
before r, as wrath, wretch, write, 
wrong, wrung, &c.

WAGGING [of &wyn;aʒian, Sax.] mov­
ing, stirring, shaking.

WAGGONAGE, waggon-money, 
money paid for the hire of driving
waggons.

WAKE [Sea Term] the smooth wa­
ter that runs from a ship's stern when
she is under sail; a ship is said to stay to
the Weather of her Wake, when in her
staying she is so quick, that she does
not fall to the leeward upon a tack;
but that when she is tack'd, her Wake
(i. e. the smooth water a stern) is to
the leeward, which is a sign that she
feels her helm very well, and is quick
of steerage.

WAKES [of &wyn;acian, Sax. to keep
awake, because on the vigils of those
feasts the people were wont to awake
from sleep, at the several vigils of the
night, and go to prayers. But Spelman
rather derives them of ſac, drunken­
ness, because in celebrating them, they
generally ended in drunkenness] they
are vigils or country feasts, usually ob­
served on the sunday next after the
saint's day to whom the parish church
was dedicated, in which they used to
feast and dance all night. They took
their original from a letter that Gre­
rory the Great sent to Melitus the abbot, 
who came into England with St. Austin, 
in these words. "It may therefore
be permitted them on the dedication
days, or other solemn days of mar­
tyrs, to make them bowers about
the churches, and refreshing them­
selves, and feasting together after a
good religious sort; kill their oxen
now to the praise of God and in­
crease of charity, which before
they were wont to sacrifice to the
devil, &c." But now the feasting
part is all that is retained.

A Cock's WALK, a place where
fighting cocks are kept separate from
others.

WALK [with Horsemen] is the slowest
and least raised goings of a horse;
which the duke of Newcastle describes
by the two legs diametrically opposite
in the air, and two upon the ground at
the same time, in the form of St. An­
drew's cross; but other authors say, it
is a motion of two legs of a side, one
after the other, beginning with the
hind-leg first.

WALLOON Language, is supposed
to be that of the ancient Gauls. The
language spoken by the Walloons, the
inhabitants of a considerable part of
the Spanish Low countries, viz. those
of Artois, Hainault, Namur, Luxemburg, 
and part of Flanders and Brabant.

WANNESS, pale-facedness.

WANTING [of &wyn;anian, Sax.] defi­
cient, needy, &c.

WANTONNESS [incertæ etymologiæ, 
but perhaps of wentelen, Du. to turn
round about, wanton folks being frisky, 
unless you had rather, with Minshew.
derive it of want one, i. e. to want one
to play withal] waggishness, friskiness, 
lasciviousness.

WAPENTAKES [prob. of &wyn;apen,
armour, and ʒetæcan, Sax. to give up
or surrender, it being a custom for the
inhabitants to present their weapons to
their lord, in token of subjection; or a
custom, that when he that came to
take the government of a hundred, 
was met by the better sort of people,
they touched his weapon or lance
with their spears, by which ceremony
they were united together, and entred
into a mutual association] the same as
an hundred or division of a county.

WAR no more [Sea Phrase] is a direc­
tion to him at the helm, to keep the
ship as near the wind as possible.

WAR. The French are said to be like
a flea, quickly skipping into a country, 
and soon leaping out again. The Spa­
niard like a crab, creeping into a place
slowly, and not to be expelled without
great violence. The German like a
louse, slowly mastering, and as slowly
driven out.

Holy WAR, a war anciently main­
tain'd by leagues and croisades, for the
recovery of the holy land.

Civil WAR is that between sub­
jects of the same
realm, or parties in the same state.

Intestine WAR is that between sub­
jects of the same
realm, or parties in the same state.

Place of WAR, is a place fortified on
purpose to cover and defend a country,
and stop the incursion of an enemies



army: also a place wherein are the
magazines of provisions or stores of
war, for an army encamped in the
neighbourhood, or repair to for win­
ter quarters.

Council of WAR, is an assembly of
great officers call'd by a general or
commander, to deliberate with him on
enterprizes and attempts to be made.

WARD-Hook [with Gunners] a rod
or staff with an iron end, turned in a
serpentine manner, to draw the wads
or oakam out of a gun, when it is to
be unloaded.

WARDENSHIP, the office of a
warden of a company, &c.

WARPED [ʒe&wyn;erpeð of &wyn;eorpan,
Sax.] cast or bent, as boards not well
dry'd; also drawn out, as a weaver's
warp.

WARPEN [of &wyn;ar and penniʒ, 
Sax.] a contribution in the Saxon
times towards war, or for providing
arms.

WARRANT [with Horsemen] a joc­
key that sells an horse is by an inviola­
ble custom to warrant him, and in case
he sold him under such infirmities that
are not obviously discovered, and so
may escape the view of the buyer, as
pursiness, glanders, unsoundness, &c.
he is obliged in nine days, to refund
the money, and take back the horse;
but he does not warrant him clear of
such infirmities as may be seen and
discerned.

WARRANTABLENESS [of gua­ 
rant, Brit. or &wyn;erian, Sax. to defend, 
or of garantir, F. able and ness] justifia­
bleness, &c.

WARRANTED [garanti, F.] se­
cured by covenant; promised to be se­
cured or maintained, &c.

WARRANTERS [garandees, F.]
those that promise or covenant to secure
a thing purchased to the purchaser.

A WASH-BOWL [&wyn;æcſe-bolla, 
Sax.] a vessel to wash in.

WASHING [with Goldsmiths, &c.]
are the lotions whereby they draw the
particles of gold and silver out of the
ashes, earth, sweepings, &c.

WASHING [in Painting] is when a
design, drawn with a pencil or crayon, 
has some one colour laid over it with
a pencil as Indian Ink, Bistre, or the
like, to make it appear the more natu­
ral, by adding the shadows of promi­
nences, apertures, &c.

WASPISHNESS [&wyn;æſp, Sax. vespa, 
L. a wasp] peevishness, fretfulness, 
angriness.

WASSEL Bread, cakes and white
bread that were sopp'd in the Wassel
Bowl of wine that used to be set by
the abbots of St. Albans, to drink an
health to his fraternity.

WATCH and Ward, the custom of
keeping watch and ward in the night, 
in towns and cities, was first appointed
in the reign of Henry III. in the 13th
century.

WATER [&wyn;æter, Sax.] one of the
four elements, a congested mass of
particles which are very thin, smooth, 
and very flexible, disposed to bend and
yield every way; also a certain lustre
on silks, &c. imitating waves: also a
certain lustre of diamonds, &c.

WATERAGE, money paid for pas­
sage by water.

WATER-Budget [in He­
raldry] a sort of budget an­
ciently used by soldiers to
fetch water to the camp, 
they were different in form, 
one of which, is as represented in the
escutcheon, annexed.

Image omitted.



WATER [with Jewellers] a certain
lustre of pearls, diamonds, and other
precious stones; thus called, because
they were supposed by the ancients to
be formed or concreted of water.

WATER-Betony, cresses, &c. herbs.

WATER-Gage, a sea wall or bank
to keep off the current or over-flowing
of the water.

WATERMEN, this
company is very anci­
ent, though we find it
not incorporated till
the reign of Philip and
Mary: to these the
Lightermen have been
added. They are go­
verned by eight rulers for the former, 
and three for the latter, three auditors
of accounts, and sixty assistants, but no
livery, this company having no free­
dom in the city. Their hall is in Cole-­
Harbour. Their arms are Barry Wavy
of 6 Argent and Azure, a boat Or, on
a Chief of the 2d, a pair of oars saltire
ways of the 3d, between two cushions
of the 1st; the crest a hand proper, 
holding an oar, as the former; the
supporters two dolphins proper; the
motto, At command of our Superiors.

WATER of separation [with Refi­
ners] Aqua
Fortis, so denominated, because it sepa­
rates gold from silver.

WATER of depart [with Refi­
ners] Aqua
Fortis, so denominated, because it sepa­
rates gold from silver.

WATERISH [&wyn;æterlic, Sax.] like, 
or as having water.

WATERISHNESS, waterish or wa­
tery quality, &c.



WATERING [of Manufactures] is
the giving silks, tabbies, mohairs, stuffs, 
&c. a wavy lustre, by wetting them
lightly and then passing them thro' a
press or calender, whether hot or cold.

WATTLED [of &wyn;atelaſ, Sax.]
made with wattles or hurdles.

A WAVE [in Physicks] a cavity in
the surface of water or other fluid, 
with an elevation on the side thereof.

WAVERING [of &wyn;afian, Sax.] be­
ing in uncertainty or unresolved, fluc­
tuating in mind.

WAVY [of &wyn;aʒian or &wyn;afian, Sax.]
like waves of the sea.

WAVY [in Heraldry]
signifies representing the
waves rolling, which the
French call Ondée, and the
Latins, undulatus, undosus, 
&c. See the escutcheon.

Image omitted.



WAX [&wyn;eax, Sax. vaex, 
Dan.] a soft, yellowish
matter, wherewith the
bees form cells to receive
their honey; the artificial
wax is of several sorts, 
as Sealing-Wax, Shoemakers Wax, &c.
By chymical writers is express'd by
this character.

The image for the alchemical symbol is omitted. The unicode for this alchemical symbol for wax is 🝊.



WAX-Chandlers, 
were incorporated the
2d of Richard III. in
the year 1484. they
are a master, 2 war­
dens 23 assistants, 71
liverymen, and about
150 the whole com­
pany: their hall is in Maiden Lane.
Their arms are Azure on a chevron
Argent, between 3 lamps Or, as many
roses Gules.

Image omitted.



WAY'D Horse [with Horsemen] is one
who is already backed, suppled and
broken, and shews a disposition to the
manage.

WAY-Layer, a lyer in wait.

WAYWARDNESS, obstinacy, fro­
wardness, &c.

WAYWOD, a governor of a chief
place in the dominions of the Czar of
Muscovy.

WEALD [&wyn;ealð, Sax.] either sin­
gly or at the head of
names signify wood, fo­
rest or grove, and signify that the pla­
ces either are or were formerly stocked
with wood.

WALD [&wyn;ealð, Sax.] either sin­
gly or at the head of
names signify wood, fo­
rest or grove, and signify that the pla­
ces either are or were formerly stocked
with wood.

WALT [&wyn;ealð, Sax.] either sin­
gly or at the head of
names signify wood, fo­
rest or grove, and signify that the pla­
ces either are or were formerly stocked
with wood.

WEAPONLESS [of &wyn;æpen and leaſ, 
Sax.] having no weapon.

WEARD [of &wyn;earðan, Sax. to guard
or keep] in composition of proper
names, initial or final, signifies watch­
fulness or care.

WEARIED [of &wyn;eriʒan, Sax.] ti­
red.

WEARING [&wyn;eornian, Sax.] de­
caying.

WEARING [of &wyn;eran or &wyn;erian, 
Sax. to wear] being clothed with, or
cloathing, as wearing Apparel.

WEARISOM [of &wyn;eriʒ and ſom, 
Sax.] fatiguing, tiresome.

WEARISOMNESS [&wyn;eriʒ-ſom­
neſſe, Sax.] tiresomeness.

WEATHER [veder, Dan. &wyn;eðer, 
Sax.] the disposition of the air or sea­
son; the state and disposition of the
atmosphere, with respect to moisture
or drought, heat or cold, wind or calm, 
rain, hail, snow, fog, frost, &c.

WEATHER Boarding [in Carpentry]
is the nailing of boards against the out­
side of a building; also the boards
themselves.

To WEATHER a Point [Metaphori­
cally] is to overcome a difficulty.

WEATHER Tiling, is the covering
the upright sides of a house
with tiles.

WEAVERS, were
incorporated in the
time of Henry II. they
are 2 bailiffs, 2 war­
dens, 16 (more) assi­
stants, and an 186 live­
ry, &c. the fine is 6 l.
8 s. 4 d. their hall is in
Basing-lane. They bear for their arms
Azure on a chevron Argent, between
three leopards heads, having each a
shuttle in his mouth Or, as many ro­
ses Gules, seeded proper; their crest a
leopard's head, crowned with a ducal
coronet, and a shuttle as before; the
supporters two weeverns Ermin, wing­
ed Or, membered Gules; the motto, 
Weave truth with trust.

Image omitted.



Silk WEAVING, the devising and
bringing to perfection, the making all
manner of tufted cloth of tissue, vel­
vets, branched sattins, and other kinds
of curious silks, was first performed by
an Englishman, John Tyce in Shoreditch.

WEED [among Miners] the degene­
racy of a load or vein of fine metal
into an useless marcasite.

WEENING [of &wyn;enan, Sax.] think­
ing, supposing, &c.

WEEPING [of &wyn;eopan, Sax. to
weep] shedding tears.

WEIGHT [&wyn;iʒht or ʒe&wyn;iht, Sax.]
the ponderosity or heaviness of a thing;
a quality in natural bodies, whereby
they tend downwards towards the
earth; also the momentariness or
worth of a thing,



WEIGHT [in Mechanicks] any thing
that is to be sustained, raised or moved
by a machine, or any thing that in any
manner resists the motion that is to be
produced.

To WEIGH Anchor, is to draw up
the anchor out of the ground it had
been cast into, in order to set sail, to
quit a port, road, &c.

To WEILD [of &wyn;ealðan, Sax.] to
rule, manage, govern, &c. as to weild
a Sword, Scepter, &c.

To give one a WELCOME [&wyn;ilcumi­
an, Sax.] to bid one welcome.

WELDING-Heat [with Smiths] a de­
gree of heat that they give their iron
in the forge, when they have occasion
to double up the iron.

WELL-hole [in a Building] the hole
left for the stairs to come up.

WENCHING, following wenches, 
whoring.

WESAND. See Weasand.

WESTERLY [of &wyn;eſte&wyn;arðlice,
Sax.] towards the 
west, on the west part, &c.

WESTERN [of &wyn;eſte&wyn;arðlice,
Sax.] towards the 
west, on the west part, &c.

WESTERLINESS, the being, or
being seated towards the west.

WETTISH [of &wyn;æt, Sax.] some­
what wet.

WETSHOD [&wyn;et-ſceoð, Sax.] with
shoes taking water.

WHALE, a fish of a monstrous size, 
the largest of all sea animals, caught
chiefly for the sake of their oil and
fins, they have for the general no teeth, 
but only beards and whiskers on the
throat about 9 inches broad, which
terminate in fringes like the bristles of
a hog, which at top are set in the pa­
late, and ranged in order according to
their size, and which extend and con­
tract the cheeks of the fish.

The female is said to keep its young
always under its fins, till it is weaned, 
and tho' it has no udder, yet it has
nipples which the young suck, and
which afford so great plenty of milk, 
that the quantity of 2 hogsheads have
been drawn at one time.

Whales are not all alike, but there
are different sorts in different seas.
Those of Greenland have black backs
and white bellies; some have teeth and
no beards. Those in the seas of Japan
are generally of the largest size, and
have two great holes over their muz­
zles, through which they take in and
blow or spout out a great quantity of
water.

A WHEEDLE, a flattering, cajoling
expression.

WHEELER [of h&wyn;eeʒul, Sax.] a
wheelwright, &c.

WHEELWRIGHT [of h&wyn;eol and
&wyn;ryhta, Sax.] a maker of wheels of
carts, waggons, &c.

WHEEL, a punishment which is in­
flicted on great criminals, and especially
on assassines, parricides, and robbers on
the highway in France, Holland, Ger­
many, &c. they have their bones first
broken with an iron bar, on a scaffold, 
and then are placed on the circumfe­
rence of a wheel, and left there to
expire, sometimes their bones are bro­
ken on the wheel, &c.

WHEEZING [of h&wyn;eoſan, Sax.]
making a noise in the throat, as one
that has a cold.

WHELPISH [h&wyn;elpiſc, Sax.] like or
pertaining to a whelp.

WHEN [among Logicians] is the
eighth of the categories, and is what
answers to questions relating to time, 
as, When did he? Did be do it twenty
years ago? When was that done? Yester­
day.

WHENSOEVER [of h&wyn;une-ſ&wyn;a­
æfre, Sax.] at any time.

WHERE [with Logicians] is the sev­
venth of the categories, and is what
answers to questions that relate to
place, as to be at Rome, at Vienna, at
Paris, in the Closet, in a Chair, &c.

WHEREAS [of h&wyn;ær and aſ, Sax.]
seeing that.

WHEREBY [of h&wyn;ær and bi, Sax.]
by or with which.

WHEREFORE [of h&wyn;ær and for, 
Sax.] for which cause.

WHEREIN [of h&wyn;ær and in, Sax.]
in which.

WHEREOF [of h&wyn;ær and of, Sax.]
of which.

WHERESOEVER [of h&wyn;ær, s&wyn;a
and afre, Sax.] in any place.

WHERETO [of h&wyn;ær and to Sax.]
to what or which.

WHEREUPON [of h&wyn;ær and upon, 
Sax.] upon or after which.

WHEREWITH [of h&wyn;ær and &wyn;ið, 
Sax.] with which.

WHETTING [of h&wyn;ættan, Sax.]
sharpening.

WHILST [h&wyn;ile, Sax.] during the
time; also until.

WHIM-WHAM [prob. of Whimsy]
a gee-gaw, a bauble, a toy to play
withal.

WHIPPING [of h&wyn;oupan, Sax.]
scourging, lashing; also sewing after a
particular manner; also joining or
clubbing, as whipping a Six pence, &c.
at the tavern, &c.

A WHISK, a quick motion of a twig
&c.



To WHISK [prob. of bischer, Dan. 
or whischer, Teut.] to give a slight
brush by a swift motion, as a fox with
her tail, a woman with her petticoats.

WHITE-LIVERED [qu. white-lea­
thered] envious.

A WHITE-HEAT [with Smiths] a
degree of heat less than a Welding-heat, 
given to iron in the forge, when it hath
not got its form and size.

WHITENESS [h&wyn;itaneſſe, Sax.]
according to the hypothesis of Sir Isaac
Newton, is what is the result of the
mixture of all sorts of rays together.
But the opinion of Mr. Boyle is, that
it chiefly depends upon this. That the
surfaces of white bodies are separated
into innumerable superficies, which
being of a nature meerly specular, are
so placed, that some looking one way
and some another, do reflect the rays
of light falling on them, not towards
one another, but outwards towards
the spectators eye.

WHITISH [of h&wyn;ita, Sax.] incli­
ning to white.

WHITHER [h&wyn;æðer, Sax.] to what
place.

WHITHERSOEVER [h&wyn;aðer-ſ&wyn;a
æfer, Sax.] to what place soever.

The WHOLE, is that which is made
up of parts united in due order or dis­
position.

WHOLE [among Logicians] is two­
fold, one composed of several parts
really distinct, which in Latin is called
Totum, and the parts of it are termed
integral Parts, as the Apartments of a
house, the Precincts of a city or town, 
the Provinces of a kingdom; the other
Whole is called in Latin Omne, and the
parts of it are termed subjective or in­
ferior, because this Whole is a common
term, and its parts are comprized with­
in its extent, as the word Animal is a
Whole of its nature; the inferiors of
which, as Man or Beast, which are
comprized within its extent, are its
subjective Parts.

An Essential WHOLE [in Metaphys.]
is that which consists of such parts as
compleat the essence of that being; as
man is made of soul and body.

Integral WHOLE [in Metaphys.] is
that which has the same nature with
its parts, so every single drop of water
is water.

WHOMSOEVER [h&wyn;a-ſ&wyn;a-æfer, 
Sax.] any or every one.

A WHORE [Hieroglyphically] was by
the ancients represented by a lion with
a woman's head, because her counte­
nance is fair, her speech pleasant, and 
her allurements powerful, but her na­
ture fierce and cruel, and preys upon
both body and estate.

WHOREMONGER [of hure and
Manʒere, Sax. a merchant or trader]
one who follows whores.

WHORISH, inclinable to play the
whore, lascivious.

WHORISHNESS, whorish inclina­
tions and practices.

WI [&wyn;i, Sax.] in composition in pro­
per names signifies holy, as Wimund, ho­
ly peace, &c.

WICKLIFFITES, the followers of
John Wickliff of Merton college in
Oxford, where he took his doctors de­
gree with great reputation. King Ed­
ward III. sent him ambassador to the
pope.

He preached against the real presence, 
pilgrimages, purgatory, &c. so strenu­
ously at Oxford, that the monks pre­
vailed upon Simon Sudbury, arch-bishop
of Canterbury, to silence him.

He was rector of Lutterworth in
Liecestershire, and was much favoured
by the great men of his time, and may
justly be reckoned the first reformer.

His fame reached to Rome, and gave
occasion to Pope Gregory the XIth, to
write to King Richard the IId. to assist
the bishops in suppressing Wickliff and
his followers.

In the reign of King Henry IV his
books were condemned at Oxford; and
at last, when the council of Constance, 
met about the year 1428, they condemn­
ed him with this sentence, "that John
Wickliff, being a notorious heretick
and obstinate, and dying in his heresy, 
his body and bones, if they may be
discerned, from the bodies of other
faithful people, should be taken up
out of the ground, and thrown away
far from the burial of the church.

This sentence was executed by the
bishop of Lincoln, 41 years after his bu­
rial, and his ashes cast into a neighbour­
ing brook, called Swift.

The notions of Wickliff and his fol­
lowers were, that the scriptures ought
to be in the vulgar tongue, that they
contained all things necessary to salva­
tion, that they may be understood by
every well disposed person.

He declared against traditions; the
Popes authority; their power over the
temporalities of Kings; and he pro­
nounced the Pope to be the chief Anti­
christ.

He taught that the church of Rome
may err, he rejected merit of works;
and transubstantiation; he owned but



two Sacraments, was against images, 
auricular confession, pardons, indul­
gences, monastick vows, and approved
of the marriage of priests.

WIE [of &wyn;ic, Sax. a bay, bank,
or crooked turning of a
river, also a castle or fortress] in com­
pound proper names or places is to be
understood to signify one of those
things before mentioned.

WICH [of &wyn;ic, Sax. a bay, bank,
or crooked turning of a
river, also a castle or fortress] in com­
pound proper names or places is to be
understood to signify one of those
things before mentioned.

WIELDY, easy to be managed or go­
verned by the hand.

WIG [ignotæ Etym.] a cap of hair
for the head; also a sort of bun or cake.

A WILD, a wilderness, Milton.

WILDNESS [&wyn;ilð-neſſe, Sax.] un­
tamedness, furiousness, uninhabited.

A WILD-Boar is the emblem of war­
like fury, and merciless brutality, as
making havock wheresoever it comes:
It is often used in Heraldry in several
postures, and its head singly.

WILL [&wyn;illa, Sax.] a certain faculty
of the soul, or the act of it, &c.

WILL is taken in three senses: First
For the power or faculty of willing.
Second, For the act or exercise of the
power, as when we say, No man wills
Injury to himself. Third, For the habit
or a constant disposition or inclination
to do any thing, as Justice is a constant
will to give everyone what belongs to
him.

The WILL [with Moralists] is defi­
ned to be the internal guide of a man's
actions, so that when the objects are
proposed and known, this power can, 
by an intrinsick principle, and without
any physical necessity, move itself to­
wards them, and chuse that which
seems most agreeable and convenient, 
and reject that which appears unsuita­
ble and incommodious.

WILLING [of &wyn;illan, Sax. to will]
disposed in mind to.

WILLINGNESS, readiness or dispo­
sition of mind.

WIN {&wyn;in, Sax. war strength} 
the names of men beginning or ending
with these syllables, signify, either from
Win, the martial temper of the man, 
ao from Wine, that they were the fa­
vourites of the people, &c.

WINE {&wyn;ine, Sax. beloved dear}
the names of men beginning or ending
with these syllables, signify, either from
Win, the martial temper of the man, 
ao from Wine, that they were the fa­
vourites of the people, &c.

WIND [vind, Dan. &wyn;inð, Sax.] the 
current or stream of the air, together
with such vapours as the air carries a­
long with it, or wind may be defined
to be a vapour agitated and rarified, 
which passing from a narrow place,
wherein it was pent, into one more
large and wide, drives the air before it;
if it chance that there be a meeting of 
many vapours together, then, accor­
ding to the quantity of the matter, 
this wind is so much the greater.

To have the WIND of a Ship [Sea
Phrase] is to be to the windward of her.

To WIND [with Hunters] to scent
the game as dogs do.

Large WIND, a fair wind.

To carry in the WIND [with Horse­
men] is said of a horse that carries his
nose as high as his ears, and does not
carry handsomly.

WIND-Beam [in Carpentry] the same
as Collar-Beam.

WINDLASS a machine used to
raise huge weights
withal, as guns, stones, anchors, &c.
also to wind up, or draw things out of
a well. It is a roller of wood square
at each end, through which is either
cross holes for hand-spikes, or staves
across, to turn it round; by this means
it draws a cord, one end of which is
fastened to some weight which it raises
up. They are used in Gins, and
about Dutch Mortars, to help to ele­
vate them. See the figure.

Image omitted.



WINDLESS a machine used to
raise huge weights
withal, as guns, stones, anchors, &c.
also to wind up, or draw things out of
a well. It is a roller of wood square
at each end, through which is either
cross holes for hand-spikes, or staves
across, to turn it round; by this means
it draws a cord, one end of which is
fastened to some weight which it raises
up. They are used in Gins, and
about Dutch Mortars, to help to ele­
vate them. See the figure.

Image omitted.



Trade WINDS, are winds which
blow constantly from the east, between
the latitude of 30 degrees north and
south, in the Atlantick, Ethiopick and
Pacifick oceans.

Coasting-Trade WINDS, are such as
the southerly and southerly-west winds, 
which blow constantly all along the
coasts of Africa, on the southward of
the Equator, within the trade-wind
limits; and the northerly and north-­
westerly winds on the north side of
the Equator, blowing on the same
continent.

Shifting-Trade WINDS, are the same
as monsoons, and are periodical winds
in the Indian sea, that blow for half a
year one way, and the other half upon
the opposite points: And those points
and times of shifting are different in 



different parts of the ocean. And in
some places the wind is constant for
three months one way, then three
months more the contrary way, and so
all the year.

WINDWARD [of winð and to­
&wyn;arð, Sax.] towards the wind.

Natural WINE, is such as it comes
from the grape without any mixture
or sophistication.

Adulterated WINE, is that wherein
some drug is added to give it strength, 
fineness, flavour, briskness, or some
other qualification.

Prick'd or Eager WINE, is that
turned sourish.

Sulphur'd WINE, is that put in casks
wherein sulphur has been burnt, in
order to fit it for keeping, or for car­
riage by sea.

Colour WINE, is wine of a very
deep colour, serving to dye those wines
that are too pale.

Chip WINE, is that pour'd on chips
of beech wood to fine or soften it.

Rape WINE, is wine put into a cask
of fresh grapes picked, in order to re­
cover the strength, briskness, &c. that
it had lost.

WINGED Seeds [in Botany] are such
as have down or hairs on them, 
whereby the wind taking hold blows
them at a distance.

WINGS [in Heraldry]
are borne without the body
of the fowl, and sometimes
single, and sometimes dou­
ble; when they are dou­
ble, that are called Conjoined; when
the tips are upwards, they are called
Elevated; when downwards, Inverted.
See the Escutcheon.

Image omitted.



WINGS [with Gardeners] are such
branches of trees or other plants, as
grow up aside of each other.

WINTER Solstice [with Astronomers]
happens on the eleventh of December, 
when the sun comes to the tropick of
Capricorn, the day being at that time
shortest, and the night longest, that is
to say, in northern countries.

WISDOM [&wyn;iſðom, Sax.] know­
ledge of high matters; also discretion, 
judgment.

WISDOM [with Moralists] is defined 
to be such a disposition of the mind, 
by which a man is firmly inclined to
have right sentiments of things that
occur to his perception, and to make a
just examination of the actions that be­
long to his life.

WISDOM [in God] is a communica­
ble attribute, and considers the relation
of things one towards another, under
the notion of means and ends, and of
their fitness or unfitness, for the va­
rious purposes to which they are de­
signed.

WISDOM [Hieroglyphically] was re­
presented by the Egyptians, as a beau­
tiful woman with four ears and four
hands, and but one tongue, hid with­
in her lips that were shut close.

WISDOM [in Painting, &c.] is re­
presented in white robes, with a blue
mantle seeded with stars.

WIT [according to Mr. Lock] is dis­
tinguished from judgment, and he de­
fines it to be a quick and ready gather­
ing of ideas, and putting those together
with great ease and variety, in which
can be found any agreeableness or re­
semblance, so as to make up delightful
images, and pleasing pictures in the
fancy.

WITHER-BAND, is a piece of iron
or band, laid underneath a saddle, 
about four fingers above the withers
of a horse, to keep the two pieces of
wood that form the bow tight.

WITHER-WRUNG [with Horsem.]
a horse is said to be wither-wrung, 
when he has gotten a hurt in the wi­
thers.

WITHIN [wið-in, Sax.]

WITHOUT [wið-out, Sax.] on
the outside.

WITHOUT-BOARD [Sea Term]
without, or out of the ship.

WITTINESS [&wyn;ittiʒneſſe, Sax.]
fulness of wit.

WIVERN [in Heraldry]
an animal with the wings
and feet like a bird, but
the tail, &c. like a serpent, 
or a sort of flying serpent;
the upper part resembling a
dragon, and the lower a serpent.

Image omitted.



WOAD [&wyn;oð, Sax.] an herb used in
dying blue, and with which the ancient
Britains painted their bodies, especi­
ally their faces, with frightful figures, 
to make them look terrible to their
enemies.

WODEN [&wyn;oðen, Sax. i. e. fierce
or furious] was the first or chief god
of the ancient Teutones, Germans, Sax­
ons, and other northern nations: He
was, according to their notions, to be
appeas'd by sacrifices no less than hu­
man, and to be made propitious by
many barbarous rites. To him they
paid their devotions and made their
prayers before a battle; and when
they had obtained victory, they sacri­
ficed such prisoners to him as they had



taken in battle. From this idol the
fourth day of the week received its
name of Woðenſ-ðæʒ, which we
now call Wednesday. This Woden was
the father of Thor, or Jupiter (accord­
ing to some) and the Mars, or as
others say, the Mercury of the Romans.

WOLD [&wyn;olð, Sax.] a champain
land free from wood, a down. Hence, 
in composition in proper names, it de­
notes a prefect or governour, as Bert
&wyn;olð, Bert-wold, an illustrious gover­
nor, &c. also an herb.

WOLF, is a fierce creature, abiding
in forests, an enemy to cattle, rave­
nous, greedy, crafty, of an exquisite
quickness of smell, having an head
something square, and his hair inclined
to gray. It is commonly said, that
what makes him so voracious is, that
he has but one short gut, in which his
food stays but a short time. But this
is a popular error. His guts are as
long as other animals, or as a dog's, 
he being himself a kind of a wild dog.
There are several kinds of wolves, as
the morning wolf, that lives only on
carrion; the hare-wolf that lives upon
the prey that he catches by his swift­
ness; the deer-wolf, which some con­
found with the Lynx, and others with
the wild cat. Dogs carried from Europe
into new Spain, are said to degenerate
into wolves.

WOLF [&wyn;ulf, Sax.] is a cruel,
bloody, ravenous and watchful crea­
ture, able to endure hunger longer
than any other beast; but when prest
by it, breaks out and tears the first
flock it meets with; and is therefore
compared to a resolute commander,
who having been long besieged, being
at last reduced to famine, makes a
desperate sally upon his enemies and
drives all before him, and having van­
quished his opposers, returns into his
garrison laden with honour, plunder
and provisions. The ancients, who
believed the transmigration of souls,
thought that those of men given to
rob and plunder, at their death, pass'd
into wolves.

The old notion that it is a good sign
to have a wolf cross the way that one
is walking, and a bad one, if a hare
cross it, has no other reason for its
original, than that it may be esteemed
fortunate to escape the first, and a loss
to let the second escape us.

WOLF [Hieroglyphically] was by the
ancients used to signify the shameful
manners of a whore. Hence Lupa, L.
a she wolf] signifies an whore or im­
pudent woman; and thence bawdy-­
houses are called Lupanaria.

A WOLF held fast by the Ears, was
an emblem of a man encompassed with
difficulties and troubles.

WOLVES. This land was ancient­
ly very much infested with wolves;
but king Edgar, in the year 959, impo­
sing on the Welsh a tribute of 300
wolves, i.e. that they should kill so
many yearly, in time the land was
cleared of wolves.

WOLVISHNESS, ravenousness.

WOMANLINESS, woman-like be­
haviour.

WON [of &wyn;innan, Sax.] did win, &c.

WONDERS of the World. These
are generally accounted seven in num­
ber.

1. The Walls of Babylon, and the
pleasant pensil gardens planted on them
by Semiramis, built of a fat clay, only
found near the river Euphrates, and
was very large and high. Pliny speaks
of 200 feet in height, and some 250;
but the common opinion is, that they
were 50 cubits high, and so broad, that
two or three chariots might go upon
them in a breast without danger, the
compass of them about, is said to be
about 22 English miles; 300000 men



are said to have been employed; in
making this wall, many years; but
some say it was made in one year.

2. The Labyrinth of Egypt. See in
letter L.

3. The Pyramids of Egypt. See Py­
ramids.

4. The Mausoleum of Cariæ, which
queen Artemisia built as a sepulchre for
her deceased husband, tho' he was not
deposited there; for the queen had so
endeared affection for him, that she
caused the ashes of his consumed body
to be put into a cup of wine and drank
them, to give him a lodging in her
heart. See Mausoleum in letter M.

5. The Colossus of Rhodes. See Colos­
sus.

6. Jupiter Olympius, is said to have
been the nearest of all these works, 
made by Phidias, of 150 cubits high.
The head was of pure gold, but the
body was of brass. It was erected by
the Eleans, a people of Greece, and
placed in a temple dedicated to Jupiter
which was enriched afterwards with
many curious representations and ex­
cellent statues. This statue of Jupiter
was sitting in a chair half naked; but
from the girdle downwards he was
covered; in the right hand he held an
eagle, and in the left a scepter. The
upper part being uncovered, intimated
how he was known to the angels; and
the lower parts being covered, signifies
how God hides himself in his works
from the inferior creatures. The
emperor Caligula endeavoured to tran­
sport this statue to Rome; but those that
were employed about it, were frighted
from their enterprise by some unex­
pected accident.

7. The Temple of Diana at Ephesus, an
incomparable work, supported by 120
large pillars, every one the sole enter­
prize and work of a king, who was
resolved to make his piety and magnifi­
cence appear upon his pillar. See Diana.

WONDERS of the Peek [in Derby­
shire] 

The first of these wonders is Chats­
worth-House, &c. the noble seat of the
duke of Devonshire, where, besides
the stateliness of the edifice, and curio­
sities within it, too many here to be
described, there are pleasant gardens
adorned with exquisite water-works.
1. Neptune with his sea nymphs, which
seem to sport themselves in the wa­
ters, which appear to fall upon sea­
weeds. 2. A pond, where sea-horses
continually do roll. 3. A tree, exactly
resembling a willow, made of copper,
of which (by turning a cock) every
leaf continually distils drops of water, 
and so lively represents a shower of
rain. 4. A grove of cypress and a
cascade, at the top of which stand two
sea nymphs, with each a jar under her
arm, from whence the water falling
upon the cascade, produces a loud
rumbling noise, like the Egyptian or
Indian cataracts. At the bottom of
this cascade is another pond, in which
is an artificial rose, thro' which the
water ascends and hangs suspended in
the air, in the figure of that flower.
6. There is another pond, where there
is Mercury pointing at the gods and
throwing up water. 7. There are
several fine statues of gladiators, and
other curiosities.

The 2d is the mountain called Mam
Tor, which is almost continually shi­
vering down earth and great stones, 
in such plenty, and with so great a
noise, as often to frighten the neigh­
bouring inhabitants, and to be heard
at some miles distance, yet never visi­
bly grows less, tho' it has thus conti­
nued for several generations.

The 3d is Elden-Hole, a wide and
terrible chasm, about fourteen yards
in length, and seven in breadth. The
mouth of it craggy, but the inward
recesses contracted and intricate. It is
accounted bottomless, because it could
never yet be fathom'd by any art of
man, tho' divers attempts have been
made; tho' it has been plumbed to the
depth of 884 yards, 80 of which sunk 
into the water; and the earl of Leicester
hired a man to go down in a basket of
stones who was let down 300 ells, and
being pulled up, was both speechless
and senseless, and died within eight
days of a phrensy. It is usual for those
that go to see it, to throw down stones, 
and lay their ear to the mouth of the
pit, which make a great rattling and
noise for a long time, which is lessened
by degrees, till it gets beyond the
sphere of hearing.

The 4th is Buxton-Wells, in number
nine, the water of which is hot, sul­
phurous and saline, yet not fetid, but
very palatable. They spring out of a
bass like marble, and it is pleasant to
see the sulphurous halitus break out in
bubbles, and impregnate the water.
These waters are very salutiferous.

The 5th is Weeding Wall or Tides-­
Well, a spring that ebbs and flows like
the sea, sometimes two or three times
in an hour; and upon the sinking of
the water makes a guggling noise, like



the pouring of liquors out of bottles, 
but much louder. The diameter of
the spring is about a yard, and the
depth much the same, and the water
rises and falls about three quarters of
a yard.

The 6th is a remarkable cave, the
entrance of which is at the foot of a
large mountain, called Coitmoss, by a
small arch, so low, for several paces, 
that those who go into it are forced to
creep upon all fours for a while; but
then it opens a considerable height, not
unlike to the roof of a large cathedral.
On the right hand is an hollow cavern
called Pool's Chamber, whereby strik­
ing a stone upon the wall, a noisy echo
rebounds. Hence your guide conducts
you, with a candle, over ridges and
rocks of stone, and shews you many re­
presentations of art and nature, pro­
duced by the petrifying water continu­
ally dropping from the roof and sides
of the rock. There are the represen­
tations of the most curious fret-work, 
organ and choir-work, and in other
places the figures of animals, as the
body of a man, a lion, a dog, and many
other beasts, which a pregnant fancy
readily suggests, as also a chair, flitches
of bacon, a lanthorn, and many other
varieties. A little farther is a pillar, 
called the Queen of Scot's Pillar, clear
and bright as alabaster; and beyond
that a steep ascent of near a quarter of
a mile high, which terminates near
the roof in a hollow called the Needles
Eye, in which when the guide places
his candle, it represents a star in the
firmament. A pistol being fired off, 
near the queen of Scot's pillar, gives a
report near as loud as a cannon. You
return back a different way, passing
several currents of water. Some say
this cave takes its name of one Pool, a
notorious robber and outlaw, who fled
from justice; others, that he was some
hermit, who there lived a retired life.
A little distance from Pool's-Hole, is a
small clear brook, memorable for its
composition of hot and cold water, so
united in the same stream, that you
may at once put the finger and thumb
of the same hand, the one into the hot, 
and the other into the cold.

The 7th is the Devil's Arse or Peak's
Arse, a wide subterraneous cavern, 
running under the hill near Castleton, 
the entrance of which is large, but the
farther you go, the narrower it grows:
The top of it is very high, and appears
to the eye to be a most graceful arch, 
chequered with a diversity of coloured
stones, from which continually drops
a sparry water that petrifies. Within
this arch are several small buildings, 
which are inhabited by poor people, 
who lie there ready to attend travel­
lers who have the curiosity to come to
see these rarities. This cave, after
you are gotten a little way in it, is
very dark and slippery, by reason of a
current of water that runs along it, 
and you are forced to stoop, because
the rock hangs sloping so low; but
having passed this place, and a brook
adjoining (which is not to be waded
sometimes) the arch opens itself again, 
and brings you to a second current, 
with large banks of sand in and by it.
This current is passable; but in a little
time you come to a third current that
is impassable, and then the rock
closes.

WOOING [of &wyn;oʒan, Sax.] court­
ing or making love to.

WOOD, by microscopical observa­
tions, appears to be only an assemblage
of infinitely minute canals or hollow
fibres, some of which rise from the
root upwards, and are disposed in form
of a circle; and the others, which are
called insertions, tend horizontally
from the surface to the center; so that
they cross each other, and are inter­
woven like the threads of a weaver's
web. Dr. Grew.

WOODEN [of &wyn;uðu, Sax.] made of
wood.

WOODY [&wyn;uðiʒ, Sax.] full of woods
or trees.

WOOLLY [&wyn;ulliʒ, Sax.] made of
wool, &c.

WOOLLINESS, woolly quality.

WORDY [prob. of &wyn;orðiʒ, Sax.]
abounding in words, &c.

WORDINESS, talkativeness, &c.

To WORK a Horse, is to exercise
him at pace, trot or gallop, and to ride
him at the manage.

To WORK a Horse [in Horsemanship]
upon Volts, or Head, and Haunches, in
or between two heels, is to passage
him, or make him go side-ways upon
two parallel lines.

WORKING [of &wyn;eorcan, Sax.] la­
bouring, taking pains; also ferment­
ing, as beer, &c.

WORKMANLIKE [of &wyn;erc-man
and ʒelice, Sax.] artificially.

WORKMANSHIP [of &wyn;erc-man
and Ship, prob. of ſcẏpe, Sax.] the
thing produced by the artificer; also
art or artificialness.

WORLD [&wyn;orlð, Sax.] the uni­
verse; also the generality of the people;



the vulgar, in distinction to the more
knowing, learned or noble.

WORLD. The greatest part of the
ancient nations and kingdoms of which
we have any monuments remaining, 
differ from each other concerning the
duration of the world.

The Chaldeans, the Egyptians, the
Chinese, the Greeks, the Hebrews have
all different ways of computing the
years of the world; even the Chrono­
logers who follow the Hebrew text, and
the Vulgate, are not agreed among
themselves. It is known that the
Hebrew text of the Jews, and that of
the Samaritans differ from each other, 
and that the copies of the Septuagint, 
which are no other than translations
of the Hebrew text, are however very
different from that text.

According to the computation of
Usher, which is now generally received
and followed from the beginning of the
world to the birth of Christ, we reckon
just 4000 years. To this present year
1737 we reckon 5736 years compleat;
but the most skilful Chronologers, judg­
ing that the birth of Christ is here put
three years too late we must reckon it
5739 years compleat.

As to the duration of the world from
this time to its final determination or
dissolution, this is still much more doubt­
ful or uncertain. The Egyptians were
of opinion that after a revolution
of 36525 years all the planets would
be found in the same point, and that
then the world would be renovated, 
either by a deluge or an universal con­
flagration. They had a notion that the
world had been several times renewed
after this manner, and this sentiment
was even common among the Greeks
too: But they were not agreed about
the number of years, that this great
year or one intire revolution would
take up.

Aristarchus assigned it 2484 years, 
Aretes of Dyrachium 5552 years, Hera­
clitus and Linus 10800 years, or accord­
ing to others 18000, Dion 10881, Or­
pheus 100020 years, Cassander 3600000
years. Plato and his whole school, as
also Origen were persuaded that after
a certain number of years there was
to a succession of new worlds.

The Jews had an ancient tradition
which they say they had from Elijah
not the great Prophet; but another of
that name who lived after the capti­
vity of Babylon, and 154 years after the
building of the second temple: Ac­
cording to this tradition the world
was to continue 6ooo years, 2000 years
in the state of nature before the law, 
2000 under the law, and 2000 under
the Messiah. This tradition has been
adopted by many of the ancient fa­
thers.

According to this opinion, the world
must endure no longer than 260 years.

The WORLD [Hieroglyphically] was
by the ancients represented by a round
temple, because the divine majesty
hath created it for his own glory, to
receive in it the respects of all crea­
tures, and because it appears like a
large and beautiful edifice, excellently
well adorned, supported by the power
of God, covered with the Heavens, and
distinguished into several apartments.
See Serapis.

WORLD, the harmony of it [Hiero­
glyph.] or the rare corespondency that
is in the world between the several
parts that compose it, was represented
by the image of the god Pan, with two
horns upon his head, and a rank of se­
ven slender pipes in his hand, so joined
together that their musick could make
an harmonious consort. The two
horns were an emblem of the sun; he
had also a leopard's skin about his
shoulders, which represented the beau­
tiful variety of the stars.

WORLD [Hieroglyph.] the common
hieroglyphick of it, was a globe, on
which was represented the circles of
the Zodiack, with the signs in it, and
round about a multitude of stars. This
globe being supported on the shoulders
of a man upon his knees (called Atlas)
his knees being covered with his long
garment, intimates that the world is
upheld by the power of God, who
seems to be covered to the lower
ranks of creatures, with divers em­
blems and dark shadows.

WORLDLY-MINDED [of &wyn;orlð and
ʒeminðe, Sax. the mind] having the
mind fixed on the profits or pleasures
of the world; covetous.

WORM-EATEN [of &wyn;yrm and
ætan, Sax] eaten with worms.

WORSHIPFUL [&wyn;eorp-ſcypefull, 
Sax.] worthy of worship.

WORST [&wyn;yrſt, Sax.] the most
bad.

WORTHLESNESS, the being of no
value.

WOVEN [of &wyn;eafan or ʒe&wyn;efoð, 
Sax.] weaved.

WOUNDY, extreme, very great
exorbitant.

WRAPPER, a coarse cloth in which
bale goods are wrapped, &c.



WRAPPED [prob. of h&wyn;eorfian,
Sax. according to
Skinner] infolded, inclosed.

WRAPT [prob. of h&wyn;eorfian,
Sax. according to
Skinner] infolded, inclosed.

WRATHFULNESS, extreme anger.

WREAKING [of &wyn;ræcan, Sax.]
discharging, venting.

WREATH [in Heraldry] the repre­
sentation of a roll of fine linnen or silk
like that of a Turkish turbant, consist­
ing of the colours borne in the escut­
cheon, placed in achievements between
the helmet and the crest, and immedi­
ately supporting the crest.

WRESTLING [&wyn;ræſtlunʒ, Sax.]
striving, struggling earnestly to get the
mastery; a kind of combat or engage­
ment between two persons unarmed, 
body to body, to prove their strength
and dexterity, and to try which can
throw the other to the ground.

WRIGGLING [prob. of wicelian, 
Sax.] turning this way and that way, 
as a snake, eel, &c. screwing or insi­
nuating into favour, &c.

WRINGING [prob. of &wyn;rinʒunʒ, 
of &wyn;rinʒan, Sax.] pressing or squeez­
ing hard, pinching or griping.

WRINKLED [or &wyn;rincl, prob. of
&wyn;rinclian, Sax.] creased or rumpled in­
to creases, folds, &c. as a garment, 
the skin, &c.

WRITHEN [of &wyn;ryðan, Sax.]
wrung, twisted, wrested.

WROTE [of a&wyn;ritan, Sax.] did
write.

WRUNG [of &wyn;rinʒan, Sax.] squeez­
ed, griped, pinched, twisted, &c.

WYCHE, a salt spring.


X
X x, Roman; X x, Italick; X x, Eng­
lish; is the twenty second letter
of the alphabet, and Ξ ξ, the fourteenth
of the Greek, and the Hebrews have
it not; it is a compound letter of c
and s.

X in numbers stands for ten.

X̅ with a dash over it signified 10000.

The dash is placed on top of letter X.



XISUTHRUS a name supposed to
be given by the
Babylonians to Noah, who seemed to
have had some knowledge of the de­
luge, and that this Patriarch was
known to them by the name of Sisu­
thrus.

They say that Saturn appeared in a
dream to Sisuthrus, and informed him
that all mankind was to perish by a
flood.

He commanded him to write down
the originals, the progress and the com­
pletion of all things, and to bury them
in the ground in the city of Sipharis, 
and to build a vessel to go therein with
his relations and friends and to put out
into the deep sea.

Sisuthrus followed his orders, loaded
his vessel with all sorts of provisions, 
and caused all sorts of animals to go
in along with him. They say his ves­
sel was 5 stadia or 625 paces long and
2 stadia or 250 paces wide.

When the deluge came all those
were drowned, who were not with Si­
suthrus; when he perceived the waters
to abate, he let go a bird, which find­
ing no food, nor resting place, return­
ed to him again. Some time after he
sent out others, which returned with
their legs dawbed with mud. Lastly, 
a good while after he let others go,
which did not return any more.

Then he understood that the earth
was quite dry, he broke up his vessel
and went out with his wife, his daugh­
ter, and the pilot,

He went up into a mountain where
he worshipped, erected an altar and
sacrificed to the gods. After this he
appeared no longer upon the earth, 
neither himself nor those who went
out of the ark with him.

The others who continued in the
ark getting out likewise, sought every
where for Sisuthrus to no purpose, and
having called him several times, they
heard his voice, recommending piety to
them, and the worship of the gods.
These and some others seem to have
great conformity to Noah.

SISUTHRUS a name supposed to
be given by the
Babylonians to Noah, who seemed to
have had some knowledge of the de­
luge, and that this Patriarch was
known to them by the name of Sisu­
thrus.

They say that Saturn appeared in a
dream to Sisuthrus, and informed him
that all mankind was to perish by a
flood.

He commanded him to write down
the originals, the progress and the com­
pletion of all things, and to bury them
in the ground in the city of Sipharis, 
and to build a vessel to go therein with
his relations and friends and to put out
into the deep sea.

Sisuthrus followed his orders, loaded
his vessel with all sorts of provisions, 
and caused all sorts of animals to go
in along with him. They say his ves­
sel was 5 stadia or 625 paces long and
2 stadia or 250 paces wide.

When the deluge came all those
were drowned, who were not with Si­
suthrus; when he perceived the waters
to abate, he let go a bird, which find­
ing no food, nor resting place, return­
ed to him again. Some time after he
sent out others, which returned with
their legs dawbed with mud. Lastly, 
a good while after he let others go,
which did not return any more.

Then he understood that the earth
was quite dry, he broke up his vessel
and went out with his wife, his daugh­
ter, and the pilot,

He went up into a mountain where
he worshipped, erected an altar and
sacrificed to the gods. After this he
appeared no longer upon the earth, 
neither himself nor those who went
out of the ark with him.

The others who continued in the
ark getting out likewise, sought every
where for Sisuthrus to no purpose, and
having called him several times, they
heard his voice, recommending piety to
them, and the worship of the gods.
These and some others seem to have
great conformity to Noah.

XYLOPHORIA, a feast of the He­
brews, in which they brought wood
into the temple with great solemnity, 
for the support of the sacred fire, that
was continually burning upon the altar
of burnt sacrifices. Selden says, this
provision was laid up in the month Ab, 
answering to our July, others say it
was in Elul, i. e. August. The Rabbins
tell us, that they prepared the wood
that was to be burnt upon the altar
with great care, that they made it very
clean, and permitted no rottenness, 
corruption, or mouldiness to be amongst
it.

XYNOECIA [of ξυχνόω, Gr. to unite]
an Athenian festival, observed in com­
memoration of Theseus's uniting all the
petty communities of Attica into one
common-wealth.

XYSTUS [ξυστος, Gr.] an open
walking place, where
the Romans made entertainments; a long



isle or portico, sometimes roofed over
and at other times open, and ranged on
each side with trees, forming an agree­
able place for people to walk in; a knot, 
garden or parterre.

XYSTUM [ξυστος, Gr.] an open
walking place, where
the Romans made entertainments; a long
isle or portico, sometimes roofed over
and at other times open, and ranged on
each side with trees, forming an agree­
able place for people to walk in; a knot, 
garden or parterre.


Y
Y y, Roman; Y y, Italick; Y y, Eng­
lish, Y ẏ, Sax. is the 23d letter of
the alphabet; Υ υ, Greek the twentieth, 
and the Hebrews have not this letter.
Y has the sound of i or ie, and is con­
sonant before a vowel, as Year, Youth, 
&c. and a vowel after a consonant, as
Physick, Synagogue, &c. and is used in
words of a Greek derivation, and at the
end of English ones, as by, cry, sly ,&c.

Y was a numeral letter with the an­
cients, and signified 150, and

Y̅ with a dash at the top, signified
150000.

The dash is placed on top of letter Y.



YACHT [of yacht, F.] a pleasure
boat, or small ship with one deck, car­
rying four, eight or twelve guns and
thirty or forty men, and are in burden
from 30 to 160 tuns; contrived and
adorned, both within side and without, 
for carrying state passengers, and for
swiftness and pleasure.

YATCH, See Yacht.

YAWNING, gaping, oscitation, an
involuntary opening of the mouth, 
occasioned by a vapour or ventosity
endeavouring to escape, and indicating
an irksom weariness or inclination to
sleep.

YEAR [ʒear, Sax.] that space of
time that the sun is supposed to take up
in his passage thro' the several signs of
the zodiack, and with us consists of 12
unequal kalender months, which con­
tain 365 days, and once in 4 years 366, 
which day is intercalated between the
23d and 24th of February, St. Mathias's
day, or festival, being ordinarily obser­
ved the 24th of February, but in the
leap year on the 25th, the 24th being
the day added; so that February has
that year 29 days, but in common but
28 days. The beginning or first day of
the year has been very different, some
beginning on March the 1st, some on
December the 25th, some January the
1st, and some March the 25th, and
April the 25th, and these were obliged
to add for before or after Easter, to
signify or determine the beginning or
end of the year; these several differ­
ences were principally among the
French, to determine which Charles IX.
in 1564 published an arrest, the last
article of which ordered the year for
the time to come to be constantly and
universally begun, and wrote on from
January 1st. The English began their
year the 25th of December till William 
the Conqueror's time, and now on the
25th of March in the ecclesiastical and
civil courts; the Astronomers of later
years have more precisely determined
the quantity of time in the year, viz.
from the sun's departing from an assign­
ed point of the equator to his coming
to the same point again, to be 365 days, 
5 hours, 49 minutes.

The Egyptian year was Solar, con­
sisting of 12 months of 30 days each
month, and we find the Hebrew year
the same. Maimonides says, that the
years of the Jews were Solar, and their
months Lunar. Since the compleating
of the Talmud, they have made use of
years that are purely Lunar, having
alternately a full month of 30 days, 
and then a defective month of 29 days;
and to accommodate this Lunar year
to the course of the sun, at the end of
three years they intercalate a whole
month after Adar, which intercalated
month they call Veadar.

The civil year of the Hebrews was
always begun at autumn, at the month
they now call Tizri, which answers to
our September, and sometimes enters
into October, according as the lunations
happen. But their sacred year, by
which their festivals, assemblies, and
all other religious acts were regulated, 
begin in the spring at the month Nisan, 
which answers to March, and some­
times takes up a part of April, accord­
ing to the course of the moon.

Nothing is more equivocal among
the ancients than the term Year. Some
think, that from the beginning of the
world to the 160th year of Enoch, they
reckoned only by weeks, and that it
was the angel Uriel, who revealed to
Enoch, the use of months, years, the
revolutions of the stars, and the re­
turn of the seasons.

Some people heretofore made their
year to consist of one month, others of
4, others of 6, others of 10, others
of 12.

Some have divided one of our years
into two, and have made one year of
winter and another of summer.

Formerly the Egyptians allow'd but
one month to their year; then two, 
then four months, and lastly twelve
months. 



We do not know the form of the
ancient Chaldean year, because their
ancient history is unknown. They
boasted formerly of a prodigious anti­
quity, and pretended to have astrono­
mical observations for 472000 accord­
ing to Diodorus Siculus, or 470000 ac­
cording to Cicero, or for 720000 ac­
cording to Epigenes.

But when Calisthenes was at Babylon, 
and very inquisitive to know the truth
of this, he sent word to Aristotle, that
he could find no observations that
were beyond 1903 years, which pro­
ceeding backwards would bring us
nearly to the time of the building of
Babylon.

The Grecians at the beginning had
no fixed years, several people of Greece
made their year of four months, those
of Arcadia first made it of one month, 
only afterwards of three months.
Those of Caria and Acarnania made it
sometimes of one mouth, and some­
times of 6, but from the time of Homer
it appears to have been settled at 12
months.

Jubilee YEAR, was every seventh
Sabbatick year, or the 49th year.

Platonick YEAR, a space of time, at
the end whereof all the planets and
fixed stars return to the same point
from whence they set out, and have
the same aspects and configurations one
upon another, which some affirm to be
in 15000 common years, others in
36000; the ancient Heathens were of
opinion, that when this period was
compleated, the world would be renew­
ed again; and the departed souls re­
enter their bodies again, and go thro'
a second course.

The Sydereal YEAR, is that time in
which the sun, departing from any
fixed star, comes to it again; and this
is in 365 days, 6 hours, and almost ten
minutes, or (according to Sir Isaac
Newton) 365 days, 6 hours, 9 minutes, 
and 14 seconds.

The Climacterical YEAR, is the 63d
year, which is accounted a dangerous
year. The opinion proceeds from a
belief that the years of men are usu­
ally cast up by Septenaries, and every
seventh year is conceiv'd to carry some
altering character with it; as also the
moon (which governs man's body) is
suppos'd to be measured by sevens, and
so the numbers 7 and 9 which mul­
tiply'd into one another make 63, 
which is commonly call'd the Grand
Climacterick.

This notion is very ancient, Philo
the Jew having written several pages
with things relating to this number, 
and Pythagoras and Plato have been
great maintainers of it, in their nu­
merical computations.

YELLING [some derive it of schel­
len to sound; others of ghillen, Du. to
make a noise] making a horrible howl­
ing noise.

YELLOWNESS [ʒeale&wyn;e of ʒealla, 
Sax. the gall] the being of a yellow
colour.

YEOMAN [some derive it of Gema­
na, fellowship or company, or Ceonʒ 
Man, a young man; others of Cæme­
ne, a commoner, others of Eoman, 
Sax. a shepherd; But others define a
Yeoman, to be a free born Englishman, 
who may lay out of his own free land
in yearly revenue to the sum of 40 s.]
a freeholder who has land of his own, 
the first degree of commoners.

YEOMAN of the Guard, a sort of
foot guards to the king's person, of
larger stature than ordinary, every one
being required to be six foot high;
they are in number 100 in constant
duty, and 70 not in duty; the one half
wear harquebuses, and the other par­
tuisans; their attendance is on the so­
vereign's person both at home and
abroad; they are clad after the manner
of king Henry VIII's time.

YERKING [Minshew supposes it to
be from gercaen, Gothick] throwing
out the hind legs, as a horse; a term
used in the academy, of a leaping
horse, when he flings and kicks with
the whole hind quarters, stretching out
the two hinder legs near together and
even, to their full extent.

YESTERNIGHT [ʒeoſterniʒht,
Sax.] the night before the present day.

To YIELD [with Horsemen] is to slack
the hand, i. e. to slack the bridle, and
to give the horse his head.

YIELDINGNESS [prob. of ʒilðunʒ, 
and neſſe, Sax.] submissiveness, plia­
bleness, &c.

YOKE [Metaphorically] signifies bon­
dage or slavery.

Sea YOKE [with Sailors] is a term
used when the sea is so rough, that the
men cannot govern the helm with their
hands, and then they sieze two blocks
to the end of the helm, one on each
side, and reeving two small ropes thro'
them, which are made fast to the sides
of the ship, by having some men at
each tackle, they govern the helm ac­
cording to direction.

YOUL. It has been, and it is sup­
pos'd still is a custom on Malvernes hills



in Worcestershire, when people fan their
corn and want wind, they cry youl!
youl! youl! to invoke it, which word
Mr. Gadbury says is no doubt a corrup­
tion of Æolus, the heathen god of
the wind.

YPSILOIDES [on account of its re­
semblance of Y, the Greek Upsilon] the
third genuine suture of the cranium;
also a certain bone at the root of the
tongue.

YULE-Batch, a Christmass-Batch.

VULE-Block, a Christmass-­ Block.

YULE-Games, i. e. Christmass-Games
or gambols, have it is highly probable
taken their original from chains, be­
cause about Christmass time the Eastern
winds, said to be governed by Æolus, 
are then most prevalent.


Z
Z z, Roman and Saxon; Z z, Ita­
lick, Z z, English, is the last let­
ter of the alphabet; Ζ ζ, Greek, is the 
sixth, and ז; the seventh of the Hebrew; 
it has the sound of s, but is seldom used.

Z was a numeral letter signifying
2000.

Z̅ with a dash at the top, signified
2000 times 2000.

The dash is placed on top of letter Z.



ZAIRAGIAH [with the Arabs] a
kind of divination, performed by di­
vers wheels or circles concentrick to
each other, and noted with divers let­
ters, which are brought to answer to
each other, by moving the circles ac­
cording to certain rules.

ZEALAND, an island in Denmark of
a circular form, containing about 18
English miles in circumference, having
no bread corn in it but rye, has no
rivers, but about half a score small
brooks, but a great number of fine
lakes well stored with fish; the air but
indifferent, especially about Copenhagen, 
occasioned by the frequent fogs, and
its low situation; it has no sea ports
but Copenhagen, nor does it want any, 
having no commodities for exporta­
tion; the cattle are generally small
and lean, being forced to be kept hou­
sed about eight months in the year;
they have but two seasons in their
year, viz. summer and winter; for a
spring is never known, and autumn
very rarely; you immediately pass
from extremity of heat to extremity
of cold, and when winter's over from
cold to heat. Also the name of one of
the United Provinces lying between
Holland, Flanders, Brabant, and the
German Sea; the inhabitants are great
traders, and fish much; the princes of
Orange are hereditary governors of
this island.

ZEDOARY, a spicy plant some­
what like ginger in its leaves, but of a
sweeter scent, and not so biting.

ZELOTS, i. e. Zealots, a name
given to certain Jews, who appeared
in Judea, about the year 66 of the
vulgar Æra, and 4 or 5 years before
the taking of Jerusalem by the Romans.

They had the name of Zealots from
that furious and mad zeal, they pre­
tended to have for the liberty of their
country. They had also at the same
time the name of Sicarii or Assassines, 
because of the frequent butcheries
they commited with their short dag­
gers, call'd in Latin, Sica.

ZEMBLIANS, a people that inhabit
the northern part of the world about
the straights of Waigates, of a small
stature, but have great heads, large
faces, and small eyes, some without
beards, their hair generally black, and
their skin swarthy: they adore the sun
and moon, and images in the shape of
men, which they carve out of the
stumps of trees.

ZENITH [with Astronomers] the ver­
tex or point in the heavens, directly
over one's head. If we conceive a line
drawn thro' the observer and the centre
of the earth, which must necessarily
be perpendicular to the horizon, it will
reach to a point among the fixed stars, 
called the Zenith. Arab.

ZENSUS [with Arithmeticians] a
square number or the second power.

ZIZITH [תיצצ, Heb.] a name which
the Jews give to the tufts or fringes, 
that they wore heretofore at the four
quarters of their upper garments, and
which now they only wear under their
clothes, fixed to a square piece of cloth, 
which represents the garment they an­
ciently wore in their own country, 
before their dispersion.

The Zizith of the modern Jews is
a tuft made of 8 threads of yarn, spun
on purpose for this use, each having 5
knots, which take up half the length;
that which is not knotted being frizzled
out, makes a kind of tuft or fringe.

ZEUGMA [ἔυγμα of ζευγνύω, Gr. to
join] a figure in Grammar, when a
verb agreeing with divers nouns, or
an adjective with divers substantives, is
referred to one expressly, and to the
other by supplement, as Lust overcame
Shame, Boldness Fear, and Madness Rea­



son. If the verb be expressed in the
beginning, it is called Protozeugma, as
we went both I and he, and if in the
middle, Mesozeugma, as he went and I, 
and if in the end, Hypozeugma, as I and
he went. And the like is to be under­
stood of the adjective, Zeugma; which
is also made three ways; 1. in person
as I and you learn, 2 in gender, as
herus, & hera est irata: 3. in number, 
as hic illius arma, hic currus fuit.

ZOCCO [in Archit.] a small sort
of stand or pedestal, be­
ing a low, square piece
or member, serving to support a busto, 
statue, or the like, that needs to be
raised.

ZOCLE [in Archit.] a small sort
of stand or pedestal, be­
ing a low, square piece
or member, serving to support a busto, 
statue, or the like, that needs to be
raised.

SOCLE [in Archit.] a small sort
of stand or pedestal, be­
ing a low, square piece
or member, serving to support a busto, 
statue, or the like, that needs to be
raised.

ZOOPHORICK Column [Architecture]
a statuary column, or a column which
bears or supports the figure of an ani­
mal.

ZOPATA [of zapata, Span. a shoe]
a festival or ceremony observed in Italy
in the courts of certain princes on St.
Nicholas's day, wherein persons hide
presents in the shoes and slippers of
those they do honour to, in such man­
ner as may surprize them on the mor­
row when they come to dress. This is
done in imitation of the practice of
St. Nicholas, who used in the night
time to throw purses in at the win­
dows of poor maids, to be marriage
portions for them.

ZOROASTER, the learned are much
divided as to the time when Zoroaster
lived. The book of the philosopher
Giamasb says, that in the year 1300 af­ 
ter the deluge Zoroaster began to appear, 
and to instruct men in the worship and
adoration of fire; that after his death
Kistab king of Persia embraced his re­
ligion, and continued firmly attached to
it; under the reign of this prince, liv'd
the great philosopher Giamasb surnamed
the Magian, who in his book of the
great conjunctions says, that during the
great conjunction which happened 1300
years after the deluge, in the month
Schebat under the reign of Feredoun
king of Persia of the first dynasty, God
sent the Prophet Verdasche or Zoroaster.

He adds after Zoroaster and since the
building of the Pyræa or temples ap­
pointed for the worship of fire, there
happened the second conjunction called
a very great one, and there came then
out of the mountains of the third cli­
mate a person named the master of the
Virgin (meaning Moses) who founded
another religion differing from that of
Zoroaster.

From this Book, which is not account­
ed superstitious, and by another, which
is ascribed to Zoroaster himself, which
bears the name of Kesabal-Keranat, 
it is observed as well as the first, that
the master of the Virgin or Moses appear­
ed under the second great conjunction of
the planets; and they agree in this with
the sentiments of the ancient Persians, 
who all contend that Zoroaster, was
more ancient than Moses.

ZUINGLIANS [so called of Hudric
Zuinglius] a branch of ancient Refor­
mers or Protestants.








A COLLECTION OF WORDS AND PROPER NAMES, 
which occurred too late to be inserted in their proper
Places.


CEILING [prob. of cœlum, L.] the 
upper part of a room, &c.

COMETICAL [of cometa, L.] of or
pertaining to a comet.

COMPANIONABLE [of compagnon, 
F.] sociable, fit to be kept company
with.

COMPASSINGS [with Vintners] are
the transmutations or sophistications
of wines.

COTE [with Vintners] wine boiled
to the consumption of half.

The DISPERSION is used emphati­
cally to signify the separation of the
descendants of Noah after the flood, in
the time of Peleg or Heber, and their
departure from the plain of Shinaar, 
settling themselves in distant places, 
and planting colonies according to
their families.

DISRUPTION a burning asunder,  L.

HIEROPHANT [ἵεροφάντης of ἱερος sa­
cred, and φαίνω, Gr. to shew] an officer
that shews sacred places, reliques or
mysteries.

IMMISCIBILITY [of in and misceo, 
L.] that cannot be mixt with others.

IMPERVESTIGABLE [of im neg.
and pervestigo, L.] that cannot be
searched, or traced out by the foot­
steps.

INATTENTION, want of attention
or application, heedlesness,  F.

INCRIMINATING [of incriminor, 
L.] recriminating.

INODOROUSNESS [of inodorus, L.]
unsavouriness.

The LOUVRE at Paris, was former­
ly the royal seat of the kings of France, 
the front is of masonry, so enriched
with pillars, freezes, architraves and
all the arts of architecture, that the
beauty and symmetry of it, is fitter to
be admired than exactly set forth by
words.

It was begun by Francis I. finished by
Henry his son, augmented by Francis
II. and farther compleated with a most
beautiful gallery (a wonder of itself)
by Henry IV.

The house of NERO, called by him
Aurea Domus, had in its porch a statue
of Nero 120 foot in height, and con­
tain'd 3 galleries, each gallery a mile
in length.

Within it was a standing pool, like a
sea, surrounded with buildings, in the
form of a city, it contained also gardens, 
vineyards, fields and grotto's, and mul­
titudes of all, or at least most kinds of
beasts; all the parts were adorned with
gold and precious stones.

His supping room was roofed with
planks of ivory, made moveable for the
casting down sweet flowers, and a con­
veyance by pipes, for sprinkling of odo­
rous ointments; and this roof was made
round, with such artful contrivance, 
that in imitation of the Heaven, it
continually wheeled about.

NEUTRAL Salts, are fixed alkaline
salts, compleatly saturated with an
acid one.

ORGANISM, organical nature, as­
semblage, composition or construction.

ORUS, an Egyptian deity, he is of­
ten confounded with Apollo; he was the
son of Isis and Osiris, and was general­
ly represented as a child wrapped up
in swaddling clothes; and sometimes
by those of Coptos, as holding in one
hand the privities of Typhon.

OSIRIS, a famous god of the Egyp­
tians, which was said to be the son, 
the brother, and the husband of the
goddess Isis. There is some reason to
believe, that the Hebrews paid divine
worship to this deity, in the wilderness.

Osiris is said to have been the son of
Jupiter and Niobe, the daughter of
Phoroneus. He reigned at first in Argos, 
but being discontented with his sub­
jects, he left his crown with his son
Ægialus, and went into Egypt; there
he reigned with great equity and mild­
ness, and compil'd very good laws for
his subjects.

He married Io whom the Egyptians
called Isis.

It is said that he was pulled in pieces
by his enemies, and that his wife Isis
gathered all his parts together; buried
them honourably, and procured divine
honours to be paid to her husband.

It is pretended, that he was trans­
formed by the pods into an ox, and
that it is he whom the Egyptians adored
under the name of Apis and Serapis.

Hence proceeds the great veneration
that the Egyptians shew'd to a bull, and
the worship of the golden calf by the
Israelites in the desart, and by the sub­
jects of Jeroboam in the kingdom of
the 10 tribes.



Hence the images of Osiris with
horns, or with the head of an hawk, 
&c. because it was pretended he was
the sun.

The Egyptians gave the name of
Osiris to the Nile, and paid divine ho­
nours to it, as being the author of all
the fertility of Egypt.

It is said, that Osiris taught the Egyp­
tians agriculture, and many other use­
ful arts, which were the cause he was
so much honoured by them.

Hellanicus says, that the proper name
of this god was Arsaphes, and that the
priests gave him that of Osiris, Sir
John Masham thinks Osiris was Menes
or Ham, and Vossius takes him to be
Mizraim the son of Ham, and father of
the Egyptians. He has been taken for
the sun, for the planet Jupiter, for
Apis, for Athis, for Adonis, for Pluto, 
for Titan, for Apollo, for Mithras, for
Typhon, for the Ocean, &c.

OSSIFRAGA or OSPREY [so call'd
of Ossa bones and fraga of frango, L.
to break, because it is reported to
break the bones of animals to come at
the marrow.] It is thus describ'd, its
beak is exceeding crooked, and in the
place where it is hooked it is two fin­
gers broad, and about an handful long.
Its colour is like brown horn, inclining
to a dark blue.

The opening of its beak is about an
hands breadth, the tongue is like that
of a man and broad at the end, and on
the two sides it has two hooks, made
like fish hooks. Its head and neck are
covered with long, narrow feathers, 
and from its chin hang down small
hairs, like a beard. The ground of
its plumage is diversified with three
colours, whitish, dark and ruddy; the
great feathers are of a brown colour, 
a little inclining to chesnut.

The 12 feathers of its tail are a lit­
tle reddish, and spotted with black and
white. Its legs are covered with dark
feathers a little ruddy, so that there
remains but a small part of the legs
uncovered, of about the breadth of
two fingers.

This part that is uncovered, is of a
very fine yellow. Its talons are black
and shining.

It is said to dig up bodies in church
yards or burying places, to eat what it
finds in the bones.

PEDANTISM, pedantry, pedan­
tickness.

PERSPIRATIVE [of perspirare, L.]
of or pertaining to perspiring or
breathing through.

PERTINENCY [of pertinens, L.]
pertinentness, aptness to the purpose.

St. PETERS Church at Rome, is a
most noble structure, to which you
ascend by 24 marble steps, all the
length of the frontispiece of the church
is wide, there are five doors, which
give an entrance into the porch; each
door checked with vast round pillars, 
24 foot in compass, and 86 high.

Over these pillars runs the archi­
trave, and over that the lodge, or
great balcony where the pope is
crowned, and gives his benediction on
Easter day.

Over the lodge is a row of rails, on
which stand 13 vast statues, of our Sa­
viour and his apostles, cut in stone.

The porch is in length 289 feet, in
breadth 44, and in height 133. Against
the five doors of the porch are the
five doors of the church, one of which
is call'd Porta Sancta, which is only
open in the Jubilee year; the two
principal doors are call'd Valvæ Sancti
Petri, and are 45 foot high, and 13
foot wide.

The church is built cross-wise, 520
foot long, and 385 broad, excel­
ling the temple of Solomon in length, 
which was but 60 cubits long, and the
temple of Diana, which was 425; the
roof of the church is arched with
great squares, each square adorned
with a large gilded rose, and born up
by pillars, 105 feet in compass, and 40
distant from each other, crusted over
(or to be done) with white marble, on
that side that is next to the body of
the church; on the other side covered
with a reddish marble, best with the
heads of the primitive martyred popes, 
held up by two angels, and with the
pigeon of Innocent X.

In the middle of the cross building
is mounted the great Cupola, supported
by four large pillars, from which it
rises into such a high vault, as if it
seemed to penetrate the sky, and car­ 
ries the compass of 170 paces: Under
the Cupola is the high altar; the inside
of the Cupola is curiously painted with
pictures in Mosaic work; and this Cu­
pola is esteemed the boldest piece of
architecture, that perhaps the world
has seen, and was built at the charge
of Sixtus Quintus; the four pillars
upon which it rests, are each 120 feet
in compass, and capable of having
stairs within them: and sacristies for
Roman reliques above.

Over the altar, which stands upon
the tomb of St. Peter, are four stately



brass serpentine pillars, which bear
up a canopy fringed round all of the
same metal; over the corners of the
canopy stand four large angels of brass
gilded, and in the midst is mounted
high, having a cross of the same me­
tal upon it.

The Pilastri or four pillars of brass
are each as thick as three men, 50 feet
high from the ground, and weigh
each of them 25000 pound.

Before the church is an obelisk (a
large square stone, in the shape of a
pyramid) erected on a basis, and pe­
destal 26 foot high, consisting of one
intire stone, weighing 400 tuns, which
perhaps is the greatest weight in one
mass, that has been raised by the art
of man.

POLYGONAR [of  πολυγονος, Gr.]
having many corners or angles.

PRISCILLIANISTS [so called of
Priscillian a noble Spaniard, of a preg­
nant wit, much learning and eloquence]
a sect of Christian hereticks, in the
4th century, Mark an Egyptian having
disseminated the errors of the Gnosticks
in Gaul, travelled into Spain and there
likewise divulging his doctrine, the
principal articles of which were plea­
sure, he soon drew after him many
disciples, the chief of which was
Priscillian, who cloaking his vanity
under the appearance of a profound
humility; he taught besides the doc­
trines of the Gnosticks, that the soul, 
was of the same substance with God, 
and that descending to the earth thro'
7 Heavens, and certain other degrees
of principality it fell into the hands of
the evil one, who put it into the body, 
which he made to consist of 12 parts, 
over each of which presided a celestial
sign; he condemned marriage and the
eating of the flesh of animals, and
caused women to separate from their
husbands without their consent.

And according to his doctrine, the
will of man was subject to the power of
the stars. He counfounded the persons
of the Trinity after the manner of
Sabellius, commanded his followers to
fast upon Sunday and Christmass day;
because he pretended Jesus Christ had
not assumed true flesh. He tolerated
lying. There was by them a volume
composed, call'd Libra, because in the
12 questions in it, as in 12 ounces of
the pound Troy, the sum of their doc­
trine was explain'd.

PRISMATICAL, of or pertaining
to, or like a prism.

PROCLIANITES, a sect of Christian
hereticks in the 4th century, who de­
nied the incarnation of Jesus Christ, the
resurrection of the body, and the last
judgment.

PROPULSION, a driving forward
or keeping off.  L.

PROOF Spirit [with Distillers] is a
mixture of about equal parts of totally
inflammable spirit and water.

PROYNING, pruning, picking, set­
ting and trimming the feathers, spoken
of birds.

PSEUDOSTOMATA [ψευδόστομος, 
of ψευδος false, and στόμα, Gr. mouth]
false mouths or openings, especially
where rivers disembogue or empty
themselves.

PUDICITIA [i. e. Chastity] a heathen
goddess, adored in the shape of a wo­
man veiled, of an exceeding modest
countenance.

She had 2 temples erected to her at
Rome, the one belonging to the Roman
ladies, and the other to women of a
meaner quality, who worshipped her
in them.

The PYRAMIDS of Egypt were many
in number, but 3 of them of chief note.
The principal of which stands south
of the city of Memphis, and west of the
river Nile.

It is square at the bottom, and is in
compass 8 acres of ground, each square
side being 300 paces long, having on
the out-side an ascent of 225 steps:
(being hollow within) each step being
three foot high. The top consists but
of three stones; but these large enough
to hold 60 men standing, and is drawn
into so narrow a compass in respect of
the whole, that the ablest archer can­
not shoot beyond the verge of the
foundation or lowest step.

None of the stones are small enough
to be carried or borne by our English
carriages, yet were they all brought
notwithstanding from the mountains of
Arabia.

This is one of the seven wonders of
the world, and was built by Cheops an
Egyptian king, who employed in it
daily 366000 men for 20 years, and is
related to have prostituted his daughter, 
exacting a stone of every man who
enjoyed her, towards the building of it.

It is still standing, being the sepul­
chre of the Egyptian kings. And it is
also related, that his daughter by the
like exaction built a second, not much
unequal to the first.

QUALLY [with Vintners] term us'd
of wine, when it is turbulent and
foul.



REFLUENT [refluens, L.] flowing
back.

RHEA, called also Astarte, Ops, Pessi­
muntia, &c. feigned to be the daughter
of Numa and a Vestal virgin, in whose
person the ancients confounded several
heathen goddesses; tho' Apuleius will
have them to be rather a multitude of
names, than a multiplicity of deities, 
and she was indeed the Isis of the Egypt­
ians; tho' Diodorus makes Osiris or Isis
to be descended of her and Saturn.

To RUCKLE, to make a sort of ruck­
ling noise, as the water in the sea.

SALINOMETALLIC, of a compo­
sition of salt and metal, or something of
a metallic quality.

SALINOSAPONACIOUS, of a com­
position of salt and soap, or some­
thing of a soapy quality.

SAMARITANS, a sort of Jewish sect, 
who retained only the 5 books of
Moses, and adhering to the written
word, rejected all traditions. The
chief difference between them and the
Jews, was about the place of worship, 
which the Jews contended was at Je­
rusalem, but the Samaritans held to be
on mount Gerizzim.

The Jews likewise accused the Sa­
maritans of two pieces of idolatry, the
one of which was, that they worshipped
the image of a dove; and the other, 
that they paid adoration to certain
Teraphims or idols, hidden in their
mountain.

For the first, they descending from
the Assyrians, who worshipped a dove, 
gave them this handle of calumny.

The second was that Shechem, being
supposed to be at the foot of mount
Gerizzim, where Jacob buried Rachel's
Teraphim under the oak, they suggested
that they worshipped there on account
of those idols.

But both these charges were mere
calumnies, for after that the laws of
Moses wore brought among the Sama­
ritans, they became worshippers of the
true God, and as great abhorrers of
idolatry as the Jews, and in their re­
ligious ceremonies, differ very little
from them, tho' the Jews would have
no dealings with them.

SANCTUS [among the Sabines]
a deity which they
communicated to the
Romans. St. Austin thinks him to have
been the first king of the Sabines, 
whom they deified after his death, 
others supposed him to have been the
same as Hercules. Ovid calls him Semo, 
Sanctus and Fidius.

SANCUS [among the Sabines]
a deity which they
communicated to the
Romans. St. Austin thinks him to have
been the first king of the Sabines, 
whom they deified after his death, 
others supposed him to have been the
same as Hercules. Ovid calls him Semo, 
Sanctus and Fidius.

SANGUS [among the Sabines]
a deity which they
communicated to the
Romans. St. Austin thinks him to have
been the first king of the Sabines, 
whom they deified after his death, 
others supposed him to have been the
same as Hercules. Ovid calls him Semo, 
Sanctus and Fidius.

SATURN, has several strokes of re­
semblance to the patriarch Noah, and
as several false gods mentioned in scrip­
ture are the same as Saturn, according
to the opinion of several learned men, 
it will not be amiss to give this parti­
cular account of him.

It has been thought that Baal, that
Moloch, that Rephaim were the same as
Saturn, that the custom of sacrificing
human victims was derived from Sa­
turn, that he was confounded with A­
braham and with Israel.

The ancients speak of Saturn the
Phœnician, Saturn the African or Car­
thaginian, and of Saturn the Egyptian.

As to these marks of resemblance
between Noah and Saturn they are very
evident. He is represented with a
scythe, as the inventor of agriculture.
Noah is said to have began first to till
the ground.

The Saturnalia that were celebrated
with wine and licentiousness, and
where matters became equal to their
servants, shew the drunkenness of
Noah, and the curse that made Canaan
subject to his brethren, tho' he was
their equal by birth.

Saturn is said to have devoured all
his children except Jupiter, Neptune
and Pluto. Noah saw the waters of
the deluge destroy all the men of his
time, many of which were his rela­
tions, and younger than himself.

Jupiter they say, made his father an
eunuch. And Ham saw Noah's naked­
ness, and did not cover him.

Shew, Ham and Japhet are very plain­
ly Typhon or Pluto, Jupiter and Neptune.

Ham or Jupiter had Africa for his
portion. Japhet or Neptune had the
sea or islands. Shem or Pluto had Asia.

SCENTLESS [prob. of sentire, L.]
having no smell.

SEMIFLUID [of semi and fluide, F.
of fluo, L.] half fluid.

SERAPIES [among the ancient
Egyptians] a sort of houshold gods, 
some of whose idols they placed in
their magnificent pyramids, they sup­
posing their office to be to preserve the
corps deposited there, and to transport
the souls to Heaven.

These images were engraven from
top to bottom with Hieroglyphicks, 
which were accounted sacred by the
Egyptians.

SERAPIS, a god of the Egyptians.
Some pretend that the Egyptians adored
the Patriarch Joseph under the name
of Serapis.

This opinion is found in some an­



cient authors, as Julius Firmicus and Ru­
finus, and has been embrac'd by some
learned moderns, as Vossius Onzelius, 
Spencer, and same others.

They found their opinion upon se­
veral seeming coincidences between
Joseph and Serapis. It is said, that
Serapis had merited divine honours in
Egypt, for having delivered the coun­
try from a grievous famine; he is re­
presented in painting and sculpture
with a basket and ears of corn upon
his head.

They will have it, that Serapis is the
same as Apis, and that there is no more
difference between them, than between
an ox alive, and an ox dead, and put
into a coffin.

While the bull Apis was alive, he
was worshipped by the name of Apis;
but he was no sooner dead than they
gave him the name of Serapis, which
is as much as to say in Greek, Apis en
Soro, i. e. Apis in his coffin, or Soros
Apidis the coffin of Apis.

Serapis was also confounded with
Pluto, with Jupiter, with Osiris, with
the Sun, with Esculapius. Besides they
gave him an Hebrew etymology, which
is still more conformable to the cha­
racter of Joseph, Sar, דצס, in Hebrew
signifying a prince; Apis, the bull Apis;
or Sar Abir, the powerful prince.
And as between Joseph and Apis, or
Osiris, there are still found other
strokes of resemblance, they are per­
suaded that the Egyptians intended to
honour Joseph under the names of
these deities.

But others again endeavour to sub­
vert this whole Hypothesis; affirming
that Serapis was but an upstart deity in
Egypt.

Tacitus relates the history of his
translation from Sinope, a city of Pontus, 
to Alexandria, by Ptolemy the first king
of Egypt. And Origen speaking of this
god, says he was but a new comer into
Egypt, and that his story was long and
of little credit, and that he was not in
vogue till, Ptolemy brought him in, 
who attempted to introduce his wor­
ship into his kingdom, so that Joseph
being more ancient by several ages
than this Serapis, it cannot be affirmed
that the Egyptians intended to pay ado­
ration to Joseph under the name of
Serapis.

But then again, some say that there
were two Serapis's acknowledged in
Egypt, one more ancient, known long
before him who was brought from
Sinope, since he is the same as Apis and
Osiris; but the other more modern.

And Tacitus clearly distinguishes
these two deities, when he says that
king Ptolemy caus'd a magnificent tem­
ple to be built to Serapis at Rachotis, 
a place where formerly was a chapel
consecrated to Serapis and Isis; but
then again some imagine that Tacitus
has put Serapis and Isis instead of
Osiris and Isis.

SETHIANS. The Hereticks called
by this name, believed that Seth was
the Christ, and that Jesus Christ was
no other than this patriarch, who af­
ter having been transported out of the
world, did at last return into it a­
gain in a miraculous manner, and was
named Jesus.

They did not acknowledge his birth
of the Virgin Mary; but pretended he
appeared again in the world, in a
manner that was altogether miraculous.

Several impertinent books have been
ascrib'd to Seth. It is known what
Josephus says of the two columns
erected before the deluge, by the chil­
dren of Seth: one was of brick to
withstand the fire, and the other of
stone to withstand the water, upon
which they described their discoveries
in Astronomy.

Lambecius, cites a manuscript in the
emperor's library, call'd the astrono­
my, delivered by an angel to the pa­
triarch Seth.

Epiphanius says, that the Gnosticks
and Sethians had several books that
bore the name of Seth.

The Mahometans say, that God sent
Seth not less than 50 volumes, which
were brought him from Heaven.

The Arabians, the Ethiopians, and
the Samaritans, pretend also to have
the books of this ancient patriarch.

SIBYLS. Suetonius says, that in the
time of Vespesian, there was a constant
and general opinion propagated through
the whole east, that fate had decreed, 
that about that time should come forth
out of Judea those who should obtain
the empire of the world.

Josephus the historian, who is known
to have lived in the time of Vespasian, 
quotes in his history a passage from the
Sibyls, that mentioned the deluge.

Clemens Alexandrinus assures us, that
St. Paul in his preaching, sometimes
cited the Sibylline books, and referr'd
the Gentiles to them.

The ancient fathers of the church, 
such as Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, 
Theophilus of Antioch, Tertullian, Lac­
tanticus, Eusebius, St. Jerom, St. Austin,



and others, made good use of them
against the Pagans; and the frequent
use they made of them, occasioned the
name of Sibyllisis to be applyed to them.

She that was most famous of them
all, was that to whom the Greeks gave
the name of Erythræa, because she was
born in Eurythra in Ionia; and because
she left her country, and came to settle
at Cumæ in Italy, the Latins gave her
the name of Cumana.

Justin Martyr says, that it was pre­
tended that she was by extraction of
Babylonia, and daughter to Berosus the
Chaldean historian; who coming, it is
not known how, into Campania, there
she gave forth her oracles.

At a city called Cumæ, about six
miles from Baiæ, I have seen the place
(adds he) which is a large oratory, 
cut out of a rock, which must have cost
much labour to make; for it is very
well wrought, and very capacious.

There this Sibyl gave out her re­
sponses, as I am (says he) informed
by the inhabitants of the place, who
preserve the tradition from father to
son.

In the middle of the grotto they
shew'd me three hollow places, which
were also cut out of the rock, where
they said she used to bathe herself
when filled with water. After she had
dressed herself, she withdrew into the
most remote apartment of the grotto, 
which was a kind of cell, cut also out of
the rock; and there placing herself
upon an elevated seat, which jutted out
into the middle of the cell, she there
pronounced her oracles.

Some authors assert, that it was seen
in the same condition till the year
1539, at which time there was a great
earthquake, that shook the whole
country of Campania, and at Puteoli
threw out from the bottom of the sea
great mountains of sand, gravel and bi­
tuminous matter, which quite over­
whelmed this cave of the Sibyl.

Several authors relate, that under the
reign of Tarquinius Superbus there
came a strange woman to Rome, who
offered the king nine volumes of the
sibylline oracles, for which she de­
manded 300 pieces of gold, Tarquin
refused to give her this sum, upon
which she presently burnt three of the
nine volumns, and for the remaining
six she asked the same sum.

Tarquin continuing to refuse her
with great derision, she burnt three
more of them in his presence, and still
insisted upon having 300 pieces of gold
for the three volumns.

This extraordinary proceeding made
Tarquin suspect, that there must be
some mystery in it, he therefore sent
to inquire of the Augurs, who answer­
ed him that they found by certain
signs that what he had so despised, was
a present sent unto him by the gods;
and urged him to give the woman
what she asked for the three volumes.
He did so, the woman delivered him
the three, and advised that they might
be carefully preserved, as containing
the future destiny of Rome. After this
she withdrew, and it was not known
what became of her.

Tarquin caused these three books to
be shut up in a kind of stone chest, and
to be put into a subterraneous vault in
the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, and
committed the care of it to two per­
sons of the first quality in Rome, with a
charge to let no body read them, or take
a copy of them, without express orders
from the king.

After the abolition of kingly go­
vernment at Rome, they continued to
have the same regard for these books
as before, and the Romans made of
them one of their greatest secrets of
policy, making the people believe
what was proper to do was taken out
of these books, which were never
consulted or opened, but by an express
order of the senate.

While the civil war raged between
Marius and Sylla, the fire by chance
took hold of the capitol, and the Si­
bylline books were consumed by the
flames.

After some years, when the capitol
was rebuilt, Scribonius Curio the consul
proposed to the senate, to restore the
verses of the Sibyls.

They were inform'd that there were
some verses of the Erythrean Sibyl re­
maining in the city of Erythra, the
place of her nativity.

Three senators were deputed to go
thither, who there made a collection
of about a 1000 Greek verses, which
pass'd for the prophecies of this Sibyl.

They brought them to Rome, and at
the same time made several other col­
lections from several other places.
The whole were laid up in the capi­
tol, instead of those which the fire
had consumed.

But there being several copies of
these verses to be found, and as every
private person made such additions to
his own copy as he thought fit; to pre­
serve the credit of these books, 
the Romans forbid all persons upon



pain of death to keep any copies of
them at all.

These orders were but illy observ'd, 
and Augustus at the commencement of
his office of Pontifex Maximus, renew'd
the former prohibitions, and having
made a diligent search after those co­
pies, and examined them strictly, he
caus'd all those to be burnt that ap­
pear'd to be corrupted, and deposited
the others in the capitol, with those
that were there before.

Afterwards Tiberius made a new re­
view of them, and condemned several
volumes to the flames, and these Sibyl­
line oracles were still in vogue, till
about the year 399, when they were
intirely destroy'd.

That which gave occasion to this
event was this. Sometime before a
prophecy was handed about in Rome, 
taken as they pretended out of the
books of Sibyls, in which it was fore­
told, that the Christian Religion being
founded on the magical sorceries of
Peter, should not continue above 365
years, after which time it should sink
intirely.

This period fell upon the year 398
of Jesus Christ, yet the Christian reli­
gion continued then to be as prosperous
as ever.

The emperor Honorius therefore
taking occasion from this piece of Pa­
gun Malice, gave orders to Stilico the
year following, to cause all the books
of the Sibyls to be burnt, which was
executed in the year 399. And they
pull'd down the temple of Apollo to its
very foundation, wherein these pre­
tended prophesies were us'd to be kept.

Yet this has not prevented the ap­
pearing of a collection of Greek verses
in eight books, which are now to be
seen under the title of the oracles of
the Sibyls.

But this is neither the old book of
the Sibyls, known at Rome from the
time of Tarquin, nor the collection
made a little after the civil wars of
Marius and Sylla, nor that reform'd
and purified by Augustus.

That which we have at present, in­
cludes a part of the Sibylline oracles, 
as, in the time of Augustus and after­
wards; but the rest is a rhapsody put
together by some Christian, who had
a mind to impose upon the publick, by
the name of the ancient Sibyls; but
he has perform'd it with so little wit
and discretion, that the imposture
stares one in the face every moment.

As for example, he makes the Sibyl
say, that she was a wife to one of the
three sons of Noah, and that she had
liv'd with him in the Ark, during the
whole time of the deluge.

The author declares himself to be a
Christian, in a passage which begins
with these words; Nos igitur Christi
de stirpe creati. He speaks of the In­
carnation, the Birth, of the Circumci­
sion, of the Resurrection, of the Ascen­
sion of Jesus Christ, with as much ac­
curacy as the Evangelists.

And many other articles there are
which prove, that these books in the
state, we now have them, were com­
pos'd about the middle of the second
age of the church.

SIDEROXYLIS [of σίδερος, iron, and
ξηλον, Gr. wood] irony wood, a wood
used by the Indians, which being briskly
rubbed on another piece of the same,
yeilds sparks of fire, both more readily
and plentifully than our flint.

SIMILARITY [of similaris, L.] like­
ness.

St. SOPHIA'S Temple, built in Con­
stantinople, by the emperor Justinian;
of which a Greek historian has written
after the following manner; "the most
splendid and august temple of St.
Sophia, is the church of my God, a
terrestrial Paradise, which I believe
the Seraphims themselves with admi­
ration admire, and if God vouchsafes
to reside in works, rendred as polite
as possible by the hands of men, cer­
tainly he resides here or no where.

This church being divinely built, 
the ornament of the whole earth, 
most gloriously shines like another
sun, &c."

On the pedestal, in the midst of the
imperial fountain, before the church, 
Justinian caused the statue of Solomon
to be erected, as gazing on it, and
holding his finger in his mouth, as
tho' owning himself far exceeded in
this structure of the new Jerusalem.
Yet however the temple is adorn'd, it
is but a trifle, if compar'd as to big­ 
ness, with the ancient temple of Jeru­
salem, that was destroy'd by Titus.

But for the beauty and elegancy of
the building, it is thought by some to
exceed all the fabricks in the world, 
yet it is not above 300 foot long, and
200 broad, built of an oval form, 
surrounded with pillars of admirable
workmanship, adorn'd with spacious
and beautiful galleries; roofed all
over with Mosaic work, and the very
doors curiously wrought and plated;
one of which is believ'd by the super­



stitious people, to have been made of
the planks of Noah's ark.

It is now converted into a Turkish
mosque.

To SPECIFICATE, to distinguish or
render a thing a species of some genus.

STIMULATOR, a pricker or urger
of any motion or action,  L.

TARTAR, the pure essential salt of
wine. We find it delivered by Moses, 
that the earth was cursed after the
fall of Adam and Eve; but more par­
ticularly the vegetable kingdom there­
of, that is, says Paracelsus, all manner
of vegetable subjects had then a force
given them far superior to, or uncon­
querable by that of animal bodies;
whence it became impossible for us to
digest and assimilate some one part of
them into our own nature: and obser­
ving that there was a certain stone
contained in, or afforded by all kinds
of wine, or fermented vegetable juices, 
not easily dissolvable in any common li­
quor, he would needs have this stony
matter to be the Curse, and accordingly
called it Tartarus or Gehenna or Hell, 
at the same time asserting it to be the
immediate cause of the Gout, Stone, all
obstructions of the Viscera, and other
disorders.

THEODOTION, was according to
some of Synope in Pontus, and according
to others of Ephesus; he lived in the
reign of Commodus, about the year of
Christ 175. He first made profession of
Christianity, and was a disciple of Ti­
tian. Then he fell into the heresy of
Marcion, and afterwards being at vari­
ance with the Marcionites, he became
a Jew. Having learned the Hebrew
tongue, he undertook to translate the
Old Testament into Greek, and his tran­
slation is the third from that of the
Septuagint, that of Aquila is the second
and that of Sammachus the fourth.

Theodotion undertook his translation
in opposition to the Marcionites, whom
he had lately quitted. He observes a
middle way between the Septuagint and
Aquila. He doth not keep servilely to
the words, as Aquila had done, nor
taken the latitude of Symmachus, who
rather made a pharaphrase than a tran­
slation. He adheres chiefly to the Sep­
tuagint, says whose simple manner of
translation is imitated. He studied to
express the sense of the text in Greek
words, answering to those of the He­
brew, as far as the genius of the 2 lan­
guages would allow.

TRANSLUCENT [of translucere, L.]
shining through.

TRICKINGS [with Vintners, &c.] the
transmutation and sophistication of
wines.

VAPPIDITY [of vappa, L.] flatness, 
deadness of liquor.

VIRTUS, i. e. Virtue [among the
ancient Romans] whose temple adjoin'd
to that of Honour, and was so contrived, 
that there was no coming into the lat­
ter but by the first, to intimate that
virtue was the way to true honour.

This goddess was represented after
several manners; sometimes as a lady
of quality to intimate the veneration
that people ought to have for her.

At other times she was represented as
a grave and modest woman, clad in
plain white apparel, and seated upon a
square stone, to shew her candour, sim­
plicity and constancy.

Lucian describes Virtue as a goddess, 
afflicted, ill clad and abused by Fortune, 
so that she was forbid to appear before
Jupiter, i. e. to shew herself before
great persons, or aspire to honours.

Sometimes in the form of a venerable
old man, with a long beard, leaning up­
on a staff, and clothed with a lion's skin, 
his beard denoted wisdom, which is
generally the daughter of experience, 
the club strength and firmness, and the
lion's skin the generosity of the mind.

UNDISCHARGEABLE [of un neg.
decharger, F. and habilis, L.] uncapable
of, or that cannot be discharged.

UNDISTINGUISHABLE [of un dis­
tinguere, L. and habilis, L.] that is un­
capable, or cannot be distinguished.

UNINFLAMMABLE [of un and in­
flammable, F.] that cannot be inflamed
or put into a flame, or blaze.

UNTARTARIZED [in Chymistry]
not mixed with tartar.

WIT [some derive it of witz, or
witzen, Teut, to understand, others de­
rive it of videlicet, contracted into viz.
because instead thereof we say, to wit]






AN
Additional COLLECTION
OF THE
Proper Names of Persons and Places;
With their Etymologies.

A
ABCHURCH [St. Mary in the
ward of Candle-wick, London]
according to Mr. Stow was
formerly written Upchurch, 
(as he thinks) probably because it
stood so much above the houses in
Thames-street.

ADDLE-STREET [in Wood-street, 
London] a street anciently called King-­
Adel-street, of king Adelstan, who, as
tradition says, had a house at the east-­
end of the church of St. Alban's Wood-­
street, which house had a door into
Adel street.

ÆDULPH [of Eað ancient, and ulph, 
Sax. help] the name of a bishop of
Litchfield, A. D. 790.

St. ALBAN, the protomartyr of
England, a citizen of Verulam in Hert­
fordshire, where he suffered, Anno 303, 
in the persecution under Dioclesian.

ALDERMANBURY [in London] a
street, &c. in the ward of Cripplegate, 
so called from the bury or court of
aldermen, which was held there, be­
fore the building of Guild hall.

ALDERSGATE, takes its name from
its antiquity, being one of the four
gates that were built at the first setting
up of the city-wall; and as Aldgate or
Oldgate was so called from its age, so
this is, as being the older of the two;
but rather of Elders, i. e. ancient men.
This gate being become ruinous, was
rebuilt in the year 1617. The north-­
side of it is adorned with the figure of
king James I. on horseback in relievo, 
in the same posture that he came into
England, and made his publick entry
into London through that gate. On
each side is a niche; in which are the
figures of the prophets Jeremiah and
Samuel; Jeremiah on the east side, and
Samuel on the west; with references to
Jeremiah, the 17th chapter and 25th
verse, Then shall enter into the gates of
this city, kings and princes sitting upon
the throne of David, riding in chariots
and on horses, they and their princes the
men of Judah, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem and this city, shall remain for
ever. And the 12th chapter of the 1st
book of Samuel and 1st verse. And
Samuel said unto all Israel, behold, I
have hearkened unto your voice, in all
that ye have said unto me, and have made
a king over you.

Over the middle of the arch is the
arms of England, Scotland and Ireland
quartered.

On the south-side of the gate is the
effigies of king James I. sitting in his
chair of state in his royal robes; the
rooms over the gate are the dwelling
of the common cryer of the city for
the time being.

ALDGATE, St. Botolph's Aldgate, so
called from St. Botolph, a Briton, born
in Cornwall; of whom so many mira­
cles were said to have been wrought
by him, that he was sainted, and had
many churches in this city dedicated
to him. It was called Aldgate or Old­
gate from its antiquity, being one of
the first gates erected as an east-en­
trance into it. This gate was new
built in the year 1609; upon the top
of the gate eastward, stands a fair



golden sphere with a vane on it. On
the upper battlements are two ancient
soldiers, each holding a stone ball in
his hand, as denying entrance to any
bold enemy. Beneath in a large square, 
stands the figure of king James I. in
gilt armour; at his feet on one side is
a golden lion, and on the other side an
unicorn chained and couchant; the
first is the supporter for England, and
the unicorn for Scotland: Their being
in a couchant posture, is an emblem of
the union of the two kingdoms; as also
it denotes their awe and humility in
the presence of so great a prince. On
the west side of the gate, the highest of
all, is the figure of Fortune gilt with
gold, standing upon a maund or globe, 
with a prosperous sail spreading over
her head, and looking pleasantly on
the city. Beneath this figure, in a
large square, are placed the king's
arms somewhat lower; and to grace
each side of the gate, are placed two
female figures, the one the emblem of
Peace, with a dove upon one of her
hands, and a gilded wreath or garland
in the other; and on the north side
stands the figure of Charity with a child
at her breast, and another in her
hand, implying where Peace, Love and 
Charity prosper, and are embraced, 
that city shall be happy. The rooms
over this gate, are the dwelling-house
of one of the lord mayor's carvers.

ALHALLOWS, i. e. all-saints, q. d.
all the holy persons.

ALHALLOWS the More, or the
Great, was so called in distinction to
ALHALLOWS the Less, in the same
street. It was also called Alhallows ad
fænum in the Ropary (of fænum, L. hay)
because hay was sold near unto it, at
Hay Wharf, and ropes of old time were
made and sold in the high street.

ALHALLOWS the Less, was called
Alhallows on the Cellars, because it stood
on vaults; this church being burnt in
the year 1666 was not rebuilt, but was
united to Alhallows the Great.

ALICE [Adeliza, L. probably of
aeðel, Sax. noble] a woman's christian
name.

St. ALPHAGE, an arch-bishop of
Canterbury, who was stoned to death
by the Danes at Greenwich, in the year
1012.

ANAMIM [םימנע, Heb.] Bochar­
tus thinks his descendants were the
Ammonites, or the inhabitants of that
part of Libya, where stood the temple
of Jupiter Ammon. These were de­
scended, according to Herodotus, partly
from the Egyptians, and partly from
the Ethiopians.

ANANDALE [of War am, Brit. i. e.
upon the mother river] a place in
Scotland. Baxter.

ANDERSON [q. d. the son of Andrew]
a surname.

ANDERTON [probably for An­
drew's-town] a surname.

St. ANN, the mother of the Virgin
Mary.

ANNISEED CLARE at Hoxton, a
noted spring or pond, formerly called
Dame Annis the clear.

St. ANTHOLINS [in Watling-street, 
commonly called St. Anthonine's, and
for shortness Antlin's, was dedicated to
the memory of St. Anthony the Great a
monk, born in Egypt, A. D. 251, who
died in the year 356, aged 105 years.
He was called the holy abbot of the
monks of Egypt in the time of Constan­
tine the Great. King Henry II. of Eng­
land founded a cell to him, near this
church. He was much celebrated for
his miracles while living, and for his
holiness when dead.

St. ANTHONY the Great, a monk
born in Egypt, Anno Christi 251.

ANTIPATER [Ἀντιπατὴρ, of ἀντὶ a­
gainst, and πατὴρ, Gr. a father] a pro­
per name of men.

ANWICK [Ealn&wyn;ic, of the river
Aln and &wyn;ic, Sax. a
haven] a town in Northumberland, re­
markable for the captivity of William
and death of Malcolm III. kings of Scot­ 
land.

ALNWICK ">[Ealn&wyn;ic, of the river
Aln and &wyn;ic, Sax. a
haven] a town in Northumberland, re­
markable for the captivity of William
and death of Malcolm III. kings of Scot­ 
land.

APULDORE [of afulðre, i. e. an
apple-tree] a town in the county of
Kent.

ARAM [םדא, Heb.] the first son of
Shem, seems to have had for his lot
Mesopotamia and Syria, comprehending
the countries westward of Assyria, as
far as the Mediterranean sea (if we ex­
cept Phœnicia and Palestine.)

ARMOURY, within the tower of
London, is a most magnificent structure, 
wherein are arms laid up in a most
surprizing and beautiful order, in which
there are said to be arms sufficient to
arm 60000 men.

This structure is in length 390 feet, 
in depth about 60. At the east end of
this building are kept the imperial
crown, the mound, the scepter, and
other royal ornaments, called the Re­
galia, to be used at coronations, &c.

ARPHAXAD [דשבפדא, Heb.] the
son of Shem, is placed by some in Ar­
rapachitis, a province of Assyria, to­
wards the north part of that country;



but others settle him with his family
in Chaldea, where indeed we find his
descendants till the time of Abraham.
And could it be proved that the Chas­
dim or Chaldeans derive their name as
well as descent from that patriarch, as
Josephus affirms, there would be no
doubt of this last being the true opi­
nion.

Some who make but one and the
same person of Arshaxad and Cainan, 
who is inserted between him and Salah
in the Septuagint version, suppose him
to be the founder of the monarchy of
China.

ARTILLERY Lane in Bishopsgate-­
street, is so called of an artillery-ground
or field there formerly walled in, for
the gunners of the tower to perform
the exercise of shooting at buts, every
Thursday. This is now built into se­
veral fair streets and lanes.

ARTILLERY-Ground near Finsbury, 
here the artillery company and trained
bands of the city are exercised in the
art of military discipline. The artil­
lery company have the king for their
general. Out of this company the offi­
cers of the trained bands are often
chosen, being men well instructed in
military discipline.

ASHFORD [of the river Esh and ford
called Eshtisford] a place in the county
of Kent.

ASHUR [דושא, Heb.] was the second
son of Shem, his country at the disper­
sion lay next to Elam's, on the west or
north-west, called likewise after him
Ashur, and by the Greeks Assyria, at
present Curdestan, or the country of
the Curds.

Pezron supposes he was driven out
of Shinaar by Nimrod, Ham's grandson, 
which indeed seems to be the case
And that it was Ashur and not Nimrod,
who went out of Shinaar into Assyria, 
and built Nineveh and other cities, Pe­
rizonius has proved clearly.

ASHKENAZ [זנבשא, Heb.] the son of
Gomer. The plantations of Gomer's
sons may be presumed to be about
Phrygia. Ashkenaz, as it seems, should
be seated near Armenia, in the eastern
part of Asia Minor; for the scripture
among the nations, that were to be
called by the Medes under Cyrus to de­
stroy Babylon, mentions Ararat, Minni
and Ashkenaz. But if regard be had to
the footsteps found of the name, the
country which he planted seems to have
been in the north-west of that conti­
nent; for in Bithynia there was the
Arcadian lake, and a river called Asca­
nius, with a bay of the same name; and
there was also a city named Ascania
in lesser Phrygia or Troas, with isles on
the coasts, called the Ascanian islands;
and it is observed, that besides Ascanius
the son of Æneas, Homer mentions a
king of that name who was at the
siege of Troy.

And to prove that the Ashkenas men­
tioned by Jeremiah, were the people of
these parts, it is shewn out of Xenophon, 
that Hystaspes having conquered Phrygia, 
that lies on the Hellespont, brought
thence many of the horse and other
soldiers, which Cyrus carried with him
to the siege of Babylon.

In a word, the Pontus Euxinus or
Axinus, as it was first called by the
Greeks is supposed to be a corruption
of the sea of Ashkenaz.

The ATLANTII in Africa, of Atlas, 
the son of Uranus Atlas, the brother or
son of Japetus, Cumberland; but San­
choniatho says, the brother.

AUKLAND [of ac, Sax. an oak and
lanð, Sax.] a town in the county of
Durham, anciently called Bishops-Auk­
land, on account of a fine palace the
bishop had there.

AYLSFORD [Ealreſforð, Sax.] a
town in Kent, anciently called by the
Britons Sarsinaig Habail, because
they had overcome the Saxons there;
otherwise called Anglesford, because
Vortimer the Briton fell upon Hengist
and his Saxons, and routed them there.

St. MARY Axe, was called St. Mary
at Axe, of the sign of an axe over
against the east end of it.


B

BÆTILIA Stones, worshipped by
Phœnicians, on account of Jacob's
stone anointed at Bethel.

BARBICAN, a street on the north-­
west side of London, near Red-cross-­
street; it takes its name from a watch-­
tower corruptly called Barbican instead
of Burʒ-Kenninʒ, i. e. the kenning
or knowing of the city; because in old
time there was a tower so called, 
placed on high ground, and also raised
to a great height, such as a watch-­
tower, from whence a person might
have a view of the whole city towards
the south, and also see into Kent, 
Sussex and Surrey, and also every other
way, east, north and west: But the
king caused this to be pulled down in
the year 1267.



BASING-hall, or 
BASING-street anciently called
Basingis Hawe, 
of baſinʒ a cloak, and a&wyn;e an hall, 
Sax. q. a place for cloth of which
cloaks, &c. are made] a hall and street
near the Guild-Hall of London.

BATTAIL-Bridge, in St. Olave's-­
street, Southwark, was so called, be­
cause near that stood the inn or London
mansion-house of the abbot of Battail
in Kent.

BAYNARD's-Castle, in Thames street, 
was so called of an old castle, the man­
sion-house of one Baynard, a noble­
man, who came into England with
William the Conqueror.

BEAULY [beau lieu, i. e. a pleasant
place] a tract of land in Hampshire.

BEECH-Lane, so called from Nicholas
de la Beech, lieutenant of the tower in
the 13th of king Edward III. Stow.

BELUS, the successor of Ham in his
dominions in Africa, the same with
the Phut of Moses.

St. BENEDICT, an abbot, a founder
of the Benedictine Monks.

BERMUNDSEY i. e. Bermund's wa­
ter, commonly called Barnaby-street.

BETHLEHEM, the hospital of St.
Mary of Bethlehem formerly stood in
the street now called Old Bethlehem.
This hospital was first founded by Si­
mon Fitz Mary, one of the sheriffs of
London, in the year 1246. He founded
it to have been a priory of canons, 
with brethren and sisters, who were to
bear the token of a star on their copes
and mantles (called the Star of Bethle­
hem, and to say divine service for the
souls of their founders, and all Chri­
stian souls, and to receive the bishop
of Bethlehem, canons, brothers and
messengers of the church of Bethlehem, 
as often as they should come here.

This hospital king Henry VIII. gave
to the city. The church and chapel of
this hospital were taken down, in the
reign of queen Elizabeth, and houses
were built there by the governour of
Christ's Hospital, and it was made a
charitable house for the keeping and
care of lunaticks.

But this hospital being grown old, 
and much decay'd in its buildings, and
likewise its situation being close and
pent up with houses, the lord mayor
and court of aldermen erected another
more commodious and noble structure
in Moor fields.

BEVIES Marks, properly Bury's
Marks, here having formerly been a
court and gardens belonging to the
abbot of Bury in Southwark. Stow.

BILLETER-Lane, properly Belze­
ter's-lane, so called of one Belzeter the
builder and owner, which anciently
consisted of poor ordinary houses, 
where needy and beggarly people used
to inhabit; whence came the proverb, 
A bawdy beggar of Belzeter's Lane.

BIRCHIN-Lane, properly Birchover-­
lane, of one Birchover the builder and
owner.

BISHOP'S-GATE takes its name, as
is supposed, from some bishop of Lon­
don, and probably from Erkenwald son
of king Offa, and bishop of London, 
who died in the year 685; and there
being the effigies of two bishops on
this gate, as Erkenwald might be the
founder of it, so it is very probable
that it was repaired by William the
Norman, who was bishop of London in
the time of William the Conqueror;
both of which were great benefactors
to the city.

Over the gate-way, on the south and
north sides of the gate, were figures in
stone, perhaps of the greatest antiquity;
being probably as old as the gate, that
is, about 300 years.

The stone figure of a bishop on the
south side, which stood high, had a
long beard, eyes sunk, and an old mor­
tified face, the mitre on his head, but
both his hands beat or worn of by
time. On the north side of the gate was
another figure of a bishop of a larger
size, mitred, clothed in his Pontificalibus, 
his left hand with the crosier broken off, 
the right hand blessing with the two
fore fingers; his face smooth, and was
probably the courtly bishop William the
Norman, the favourite of William the
Conqueror, and the other was pro­
bably Erkenwald, who lived 400 years
before him. Also on the north side of
the gate on each side of the bishop, but
something higher, were two ancient
stone images; on his left hand a Saxon
king, very probably king Alfred, who
repaired the city after the Danes had
burnt it, and the other probably his
son-in-law Aldred earl of Mercia, to
whom he committed the custody of it.
The rooms over this gate were allowed
to one of the lord mayor's carvers.
This gate is now rebuilt in a magnifi­
cent manner.

BLACKWELL-Hall, probably of
Bakewell, but more anciently called
Basings Hall, of the family of the Ba­
sings, a family of great antiquity and
renown. This hall is now a market
and warehouse for woollen cloth.



BLOSSOMS Inn, in Laurence Lane, 
was so called, because the sign is St.
Laurence the deacon, within a border of
blossoms or flowers. Stow.

BLOW-Bladder-Street, is so called, 
because bladders were formerly sold 
there. Stow.

BOSS-Alley, over against Billinsgate, 
was so called of a boss (i. e. a gor-bel­
lied figure of a man) a spring of water
continually running over against this
alley.

BOTHAW, the parish church of St.
Mary Bothaw, or rather Boat-haw, was
so called of a Haw or yard, wherein
of old times boats were made, and also
landed from Dowgate to be mended.

St. BOTOLPH, a famous English
Saxon, born in Cornwall, in the time of
king Lucius, who built a monastery or
town in Lincolnshire, called Botolph's
town or Boston, who is reported to have
wrought many miracles, and to have
been buried there in the year 689.

St. Mary le BOW, this church in the
time of William the Conqueror, being
the first in the city built on arches of
stone, was therefore called New Mary's
church or St. Mary de Arcubus, in West
Cheaping, or of the stone arches or
bows upon the top of the steeple or
bell-tower of it.

BREAD Street ward, this ward takes
its name of bread in old time sold there, 
for it appears by records, that in the
year 1302, the bakers of London were
not allowed to sell any bread in their
shops, but in the markets, so that
Bread-street was at that time a market
for bread.

St. BRIDE's Church, is so called of
St. Bridget, an Irish woman, eminent
for holiness of life and conversation, 
tho' some fancy it dedicated to the prin­
cess Bridget of Sudia in Swedeland, 
who instituted the order of religious
persons called Brigidians; but this is
not likely, for she was canoniz'd but in
Anno 1391.

BRIDEWEL, as some pretend (tra­
ditionally) from a bride being drowned
there, the same day she was married, 
coming from St. Brides church to see
the kings palace, which was here till 
the reign of king Edward the VI, but
it is more probable, that whereas it
was common in superstitious tunes to
call wells after persons, that this well
was called after the saint.

BRIDEWELL-Hospital, so called of
Bridget's well. This was anciently
the London house of the kings of Eng­
land, to which they often removed
their courts from Westminster; till being
in decay, and long disused, king Edward
VI. gave it to the city, first for an har­
bour to harbourless people that lay
abroad in the streets. It was afterwards
improved to be a workhouse.

BRITAIN. Mr. Cambden has attemp­
ted to prove by several authorities, that
the ancient Britains painted their bo­
dies, and that Brith in the ancient Bri­
tish signifies painted, and τανία, in Greek
he supposes signifies a region or country
and from these two words he forms
Brithania or Britannia, i. e. a land or
country of painted men.

The learned Isaac Casaubon would
derive Britannia from Brydio, which in
British signifies fervere, æstuare, &c.
pointing out the heat and violent mo­
tion of the British sea.

Dr. Skinner derives it from Bri,
which in the British signifies noble; and
Tain, which in the same language sig­
nifies a river, so that it takes its name
from its abounding in excellent rivers.

Bochartus endeavours to prove that
the Phænicians came as far as the islands
call'd Casseterides [i. e. the Sicily Islands]
which abounded with tin, and Cornwall
being near the Casseterides, it is proba­
ble they came thither to that abounding
with tin, and so they called this island
Baratanack or Bratanack, i. e. a land of
tin.

Little BRITAIN near Aldersgate, 
took its name from the dukes of Britain
living there.

BRITHELMSTEAD [briʒhðeal­
meſtun, Sax. so named after St. Bright-­
helm] a town in Sussex.

BROAD-Street, so called on account
of its breadth.

BUDGE-Row, was so called of the
budg, fur, and skinners dwelling there.

BUCKLES-Bury, is so called of a
manour and tenements pertaining to
one Buckle a grocer, who took down an
ancient tower, which stood on the
north side of the street, which in the
time of king Edward III. was called
Cornet's tower and the king's house, 
and built it into a street.

BURFORD [beorferð, q. d. Beer­
ford] a town in Oxfordshire. The in­
habitants of this town have a custom
of making a dragon annually, and
carrying it up and down the town on
Midsummer Eve, and also the picture of
a giant; which is conjectured to have
been instituted in memory of a victory, 
in the year 750, by Cuthbert or Cuthred
a tributary king of the West-Saxons, 
over Ethelbert king of Mercia, whose



exactions were accounted insupporta­
ble, and who was vanquished near Bur­
ford, and Cuthbert also taking his ban­
ner, in which was painted a dragon of
a gold colour.


C
CAINAN or Arphaxad, (whom he
makes to be the same) was the
founder (according to some authors)
of the empire of China, and introduced
the sect of the Bonzes, and that the
Brachmans took their rise soon after
the arrival of that patriarch in the
country of Esham (where he was sent
with a colony by Noah) about the year
of the deluge 68.

The Alexandrian chronicle derives
the Sarmatians from Cainan; Eustathius
Antiochenus the Soggodians; George Syn­
cellus the Gaspheni, Epiphanius the Ca­
sani.

CANAAN [ךענכ, Heb.] the son of
Ham. His descendants the Jebusites, the
Amorites, the Girgashites, the Hittites, 
the Arkites, the Sinites, the Arvadites, 
the Zemarites, the Hamathites, they set­
tled in Phœnicia and Canaan.

CANDLEWICK-Ward, was so called
of Candlewick, or rather Candle-wright-­
street, as may be supposed either of
Candle-makers, both of wax or tallow, 
or of the wick, cotton or yarn of them, 
or of Wike, the place where they used
to work them.

CAPHTORIM [םידהפכ, Heb.] the
last of the offspring of Mizraim, are, as
Bochartus observes, by all the fathers
said to be the Cappadocians, and Cap­
thor Cappadocia, as the Septuagint hath
also rendered it. In this it is not to be
doubted, but that they follow the Jews, 
as do the three Chaldee paraphrasts;
but by Cappidocia in these writings in
not to be understood Cappadocia in Asia
Minor, as Bochartus, and perhaps the
rest judged, but in some place in Egypt, 
generally supposed by the Rabbins to
be Demyat or Damietta, commonly con­
founded with Pelusium.

One would be inclined to think the
Capthorim derived from Coptus a noted
city of the same country (which by
many is supposed to have taken its
name from them) if it was not that
Caphtor appears to have been an island, 
and more probably situated in the lake
of Tennis or Tanis, which extends
from Damietta or Tina, the true Pelu­
sium, or in the Arabic gulf, rather than
Crete.

CASLUHIM [םיתלסב, Heb.] sons of
Mizraim. The Casluhim are supposed
to have settled somewhere towards the
entrance of Egypt, about mount Cassius, 
in that part of the lower Egypt called
Cassiotts by Ptolemy and others, which
place it is thought bears some likeness
to the name; but not to rely on that
argument, they appear to have been
planted near the Caphtorim, because the
Philistins, as it appears, were descen­
ded from both these people, and conse­
quently in Egypt. Bochartus misled by
following the Jewish notion, fancies
them to be the inhabitants of Colchis, 
at present, called Mingrelia.

CAT-EATEN-Street, properly Cat­
te-street. Stow.

St. CATHARINE, a very virtuous
and beautiful virgin, descended from
the son of the Roman emperor Constan­
tius, and the daughter of the king of
Cyprus, who was beheaded about the
year 300.

CHARFORD [Cerðicforð, Sax, i. e.
king Cerdic's ford] a ford over the ri­
ver Avon in Hampshire, where king
Cerdic discomfited the Britons.

CHARTER-House 
[i. e. chartreux]
anciently a convent of Carthusian
monks; now a colledge, founded and
nobly endowed by Thomas Sutton, Esq.

CHEAPSIDE, formerly called West­
cheap [&wyn;eſt-cheping, of &wyn;eſt and
cepan, Sax. to buy, q. d. the west­
market] a street leading from the Poul­
try to St. Pauls.

CHILTERN [Ciltern, Sax. prob. of
cẏlt, Sax. clay] a town in Buckingham­
shire.

CHIPPENHAM [Cyppenham, q. d. a
market town, of cẏppan to cheapen and
Ham, Sax. an habitation] a town in
Wiltshire.

St. CLEMENT, is said to be the first
bishop of Rome after St. Peter.

CLERKENWELL, northward of
Smithfield and St. John's street, London.
The Church took its name of a well, 
curbed about square with hard stone, 
not far from the west end of the church, 
and the well was so called of the parish
clerks of London, who of old time
were accustomed to assemble there
yearly, and act a play of some history
of holy scripture. In the year 1390, 
in the 14th year of king Richard II. on
the 18th day of July, the parish-clerks
played interludes at a well called Skin­
ner's well, near to Clerkenwell, which
lasted for three days, the king, queen
and nobility being present at it. And
in the 10th year of king Henry IV. they



there play'd a play that lasted 8 days, 
of matter from the creation of the
world, at which were most of the no­
bility and gentry.

St. Mary COLE Church, in Cheap­
ward, was so called of one Cole the
builder.

The church of St. Katharine COLE­
MAN was so called of a haw or garden
belonging to one Coleman.

COMPTON in the Hole [of comb, 
Sax. a valley, q. a town in a valley or
hole, on account of its low situation] a
place in Warwickshire.

CORNHILL, in the city of London, so
called, because in ancient times a corn-­
market was kept there.

COVENT-Garden, so called of a con­
vent formerly there, vulgarly called
Common-Garden.

CREED-Lane, was so called, because
in this place, as well as Ave-Mary-Lane, 
Pater-noster-Row, &c. dwelt the wri­
ters of creeds, ave-mary's, absies, pater­
nosters, &c.

CRIPPLEGATE [so called of cripples
sitting there in ancient times to beg, or
of an hospital for lame people erected
there] a north gate of the city of Lon­
don.

CROSBY-Square, commonly called
Crosby place, was built by Sir John
Crosby, a grocer. This house was large
and beautiful, and the highest at that
time in London. He was one of the
sheriffs and aldermen of London in the
year 1470. Richard duke of Gloucester, 
lord protector, and afterwards king, by
the name of Richard the III, was lod­
ged in this house. While his nephew
Edward V. reigned, here he acted his
feats, and here the citizens came to him
to desire him to accept of the crown.

CRUTCHED or CROUCHED-Fryars 
so called of crossed-fryars, or fryars of
St. Cross, who wore a cross on their
garment and had a house here.

CUSH [שוכ, Heb.] the eldest son of
Ham, according to Josephus and the an­
cients, was the father of the Ethiopians, 
who, he says, were in his time called
Cusheans, not only by themselves, but
all Asia over. But it is not likely that
if Mizraim and Canaan settled them­
selves betwixt him and Shinaar, that
his son Nimrod would be found erecting
a monarchy so early in that country.

It is more probable, that he seated
himself in the south eastern part of
Babylonia, and in the adjoining part of
Susiana, still called Chuzestan or the
country of Chioz; from whence his
posterity in the succeding generations
might have pass'd into other countries.
That part of Arabia near the Red Sea
was named Cush, as appears in Scrip­
ture. 

Cusham and Midian are joined toge­
ther as the same neighbouring people, 
dwelling in tents; and in another place
the Arabs are made to border on the
Cushites, which therefore cannot be the
Ethiopians; to which may be added
other scriptural proofs: in a word, by
Cush in scripture is always to be under­
stood Arabia.

As for those texts, which are alledg'd
to prove, Cush is sometimes taken for
Ethiopia, they may be also expounded
of Arabia, Cush, according to the Arab
and Persian traditions, which name him
Cutha, was king of the territory of
Babel, and resided in Erak, where there
were two cities of his name; from
whence, among other reasons, Dr.
Hyde is of opinion, that Cush reigned
in Babylonia, and that his descendants
removed into Arabia, tho' it is hard to
fix the quarters of any of them, which
has given occasion to those who suppose
Cush to be Ethiopia, to spread them all
along the coast of Africa to the end of
Mauritania.


D

St. Clements DANES, this parish
church was surna­
med Danes (as some say) on account of
King Harold and other Danes being
buried there; but in a ledger belonging
to the abbey of Chertsey in Surry, is
the following relation.

In the reign of king Atheldred, the
monastery of Chertsey was destroyed;
90 monks of that house were destroyed
by the Danes.

William of Malmsbury relates, that
they burnt the church together with
the monks; but the Danes continuing
their fury (throughout the whole land)
being desirous to return home to Den­
mark, were by the just judgment of
God, all slain at London, in a place cal­
led the church of the Danes.

Others give another reason for the
surname; that the Danes being utterly
driven out of this kingdom, and none
but a few left, who were married to
English women, they were constrained
to inhabit between Westminster and Lon­
don, where they built a synagogue, 
which was called the church of St. Cle­
ments Danes.



DANPORT [of the river Dan
or Daven and port]
a town in Cheshire.

DAVENPORT [of the river Dan
or Daven and port]
a town in Cheshire.

DEDAN [והה, Heb.] the son of Ra­
mah. Some moderns mention a city not
far from Rhegama, called Daden, which
Dr. Wells does not doubt was the resi­
dence of Dedan, though others will
have Raamah and both his sons, Sheba
as well as Dedan to people the parts
adjacent to the Red Sea. They con­
clude Dedan to have been near Edom, 
because Ezekiel joins them together; as
Raamah must have been near Sheba, 
being mentioned as joint traders to
Tyre in spices by the same prophet; and
elsewhere Sheba and Seba are joined as
neighbours, tho' distinguished as diffe­
rent kingdoms: they seem to have
possessed a large part of Arabia. For
Pliny observes, that the Sabean nations
inhabited from sea to sea; that is, from
the Arabian to the Persian gulph. A
late writer supposes Seba lived on the
borders of the land of Midian, and
gave name to the country whose queen
in after ages went to visit Solomon. But
the Arabs say, the country of Seba lies
a great way more to the south in Yaman
as we call it Arabia Fælix, near the
Indian sea; the chief city of which was
formerly Seba, now called Mareb, and
founded, according to their tradition, 
by a descendant of Joktan or Kaktan.
And it must be confessed this seems to
be the country of Sheba, mentioned in
scripture, for the frankincense grows
thereabouts.

St. DENNIS [Dionysius, of Διονύσιος, 
Gr.] a bishop who came into France in
the reign of Decius, and there suffered
martyrdom, being beheaded, and was
chosen to be the patron-saint of France.

DEWSBOROUGH [of diw, C. Br.
god, and borough, q. d. god's town] a
town in Yorkshire.

DEVONSHIRE Square, so called of
the countess of Devonshire, who anci­
ently dwelt there, in great repute for
her hospitality.

DIKLAH [הלקד, Heb.] the son of
Joktan, signifying in the Chaldean or
Syriack language a palm tree, or a
country stored with palms.

St. DIONYSIUS the Areopagite, who
suffered martyrdom under Decius the
emperor.

DISTAFF Lane, properly Distar
Lane. Stow.

DOCTOR'S Commons, is so call'd of
the doctors, &c. of the civil law dwel­
ling and commoning there. Here were
anciently very fair tenements, which
went in leases by the name of Camera
Dianæ, i. e. Diana's Chamber. In this
Camera, or arched and vaulted structure, 
full of intricate ways and windings, 
king Henry II. as sometimes he did at
Woodstock, kept (or is supposed to have
kept) that jewel of his heart, fair Ro­
samond, and here called Diana: And
hence had this house that title.

Mr. Stow relates, that in his time
there were some remains of tedious
turnings and windings; as also a pas­
sage under ground from this house to
Baynard's castle, which was no doubt
the king's way from thence to his Ca­
mera Dianæ.

DODANIM [םיגדד, Heb.] the son of
Javan. It is not easy to find a place for
Dodanim the youngest of the sons, or
rather of the descendants of Javan, 
except we admit the change of the D
into R (which letters in the Hebrew
are very much alike) and call him Ro­
danim, as the Septuagint have done, in
order to settle the isle of Rhodes upon
him.

DOELITTLE Lane, near Knight-­
Rider-Street, was so called on account
of its not being formerly inhabited by
either shop-keepers or artificers.

DOWGATE, or rather Down-gate, 
was so called of a water-gate and ra­
pid descent of the city to the river
Thames, insomuch, that in the year
1574, a sudden and violent shower of
rain happening, the force of the wa­
ter was so great and rapid, that a
young lad of 13 years of age was
drown'd therein, by endeavouring to
leap over the channel, and had been
forc'd down into the Thames, had he
not been stopp'd by a cart.

DRUMMOND [Drum avon, of dwr
water and crig, C. Br. an inhabitant, 
q. d. a people of the sea-cost. Baxter.

DRURY Lane, so call'd, because here
was a great house belonging to the
Drurys.

St. DUNSTAN [of ðun high and
ſtane, Sax. a stone] born at Glasten­
bury, anno Ch. 233, and, as the monks
who wrote his life have it (he being an
admirable worker in iron and brass)
as he was making some iron trinkets, 
a Proteus devil appear'd to him in the
shape of a woman; which Dunstan
perceiving, pluck'd his tongs glowing
hot out of the fire, and with them kept
the devil a long time by the nose, 
roaring and bellowing. He was made
archbishop of Canterbury, and died
Anno 987.




E

EASTCHEAP [in the ward of Can­
dlewick, London] was so called of
being a sort of market for provisions;
of ceapan, Sax. to cheapen, buy or
sell; and it was anciently a place, 
where many cooks inhabited: for in
old time, when friends met, and were
dispos'd to be merry, they went not to
dine or sup at taverns (for they then
did not dress meat to sell) but to the
cooks. And in the year 1410, in the
time of Henry IV. the king's sons Tho­
mas and John went into Eastcheap to
dine.

EBER [דבע, Heb.] the son of Ar­
phaxad, in all probability settled in
Chaldea.

St. EDMUND the King, take its name
from Edmund, king of the East-Angles, 
who was martyred by the Danes at Ed­
mund's-Bury in Suffolk.

ELAM [םלוע, Heb.] the son of Shem, 
settled in the country of Elam, lying to
the south-east of Shinaar, in the time
of Daniel, Susiana or Khusestan, seems to
have been part of it; and before the
captivity, it does not appear that the
Jews call'd Persia by any other name.

ELYMÆ and Elymais are often menti­
oned by the ancients: Ptolemy, though
he makes Elymais a province of Media, 
yet he places the Elymæi (or which the
maps corruptly read Eldimæi) in Susia­
na, near the sea-coast.

Stephanas takes it to be a part of Assy­
ria, but Pliny and Josephus more pro­
perly of Persia, whose inhabitants this
latter tells us came from the Elamites:
and this seems to be the most easterly
bounds of the posterity of Shem: for
adjoining on the east was Media, sup­
posed to be possess'd by Madai, the third
son of Japhet.

ELISHA [השילא, Heb.] the son of
Javan, may be supposed to have found
a place in Asia Minor, about Ionia, 
near their father. The Æoles, who
inhabited Æolia to the north of Ionia, 
are by Josephus made to descend from
Elisha Javan's eldest son. But there is
a greater appearance of his name in
Hellas, the ancient name of Greece;
the isles of which seem to be those
called the isles of Elisha, by Ezekiel;
and most probably supply'd Tyre with
the purple and blue, wherewith, as
Bochartus proves at large, the coast
of Peloponnesus, and the isles adjacent
abounded. Peloponnesus, which may
well be comprehended among the isles, 
as being almost one, contained more­
over a city and province by the name
of Elei; and in Attica there was a
city Eleusis or Iliseus.

ENGLAND [Enʒelonð or Enʒelen­
lonð, Sax.] before called Britain, took
its name of the Angli or Angeli (as they
are called by Tacitus) who were a part
of the Suevi, a branch of the Cimbri;
and so of the same original with the
Saxons. Goropius Becanus derives their
name from Angelen or Anglen, fish-­
hooks, because they inhabited near the
sea-shore; but this seems both forced
and trifling. Others, as Camden, Ver­
stegan, &c. derive it from Angulus an
angle, corner, or narrow neck of land, 
the ancient country near Sleswick. Mr.
Sammes deduces it from ANG or ENG, 
which in the Teut. signifies a narrow
or streight place, and hereupon con­
cludes, that the Angeli or Angli were
so called, because they inhabited the
streight passages in the mountainous
parts of Germany; and. to confirm it, 
alledges that Angleven in Pomerania was
so named from the Angles that are si­
tuated in such narrow passes. Others
derive the name from Ingo or Engo, a
son of Woden, the great progenitor of
the English-Saxon kings. The poste­
rity of which Ingo were called Inglin­
gar or Inglings; and it is certain, that
the Byzantine historians, Nicetas and
Codinus, call the Angli, Ἰγγλινοί, i. e. 
Inglini or Inglins.

ELY Place, was so call'd of its being
the bishop of Ely's palace.

EPPING Forest [of Gueppones, a peo­
ple of the East Saxons, so call'd by the
Britons] a forest in the county of Essex.

St. ETHELBURGH, who this saint
was I do not find.

EUROPA [Εὐρυώπη, Gr. i. e. having
broad eyes; or of the Chaldee צדוה
אפא i. e. fair face; or of אפדא signify­
ing both a bull and a ship] the daugh­
ter of Agenor, king of Phœnicia, whom
(as the poets feign) Jupiter, in the
shape of a bull, ravished, and carried
over on his back through the sea to
Crete. Some think, that the truth of
the fiction is, that the ship wherein she
was carried, was tauriformis, i. e. like
a bull; others, that the name of the
master of the ship was Taurus, or that
a bull was the sign of the ship; others, 
that she was stolen away by a company
of men, who carried the picture of a
bull in their flag.



Old EXCHANGE near St. Paul's, was
so call'd, because there in old time the
king's exchange was kept, and bullion
was received for coinage.


F

FARRINGDON ward, was so call'd
of William Farringdon goldsmith, 
who purchased the aldermanry of this
ward, anno 1281.

FENNY about. See Fenchurch-street.

FENCHURCH Street, takes its name
of the church (call'd St. Gabriel's Fench-­
church, being dedicated to the angel
Gabriel) and a fen or marsh, or fenny, 
moorish ground in that place, made by
means of a bourn, or stream of water, 
which in old time broke out in that
street, and pass'd through it, which
bourn or stream, was call'd Lang bourn, 
and gives name to the ward; but
others say, that it took its name of
fœnum, hay, of a hay-market being
anciently kept there; as Grace-church
took its name of grass or herbs sold
there; but the former is the most ap­
proved by the best antiquities.

FETTER-Lane, properly Fewter's
Lane, because Fewters (or idle people)
lay there. Stow.

FIVE-foot-Lane, was so called, be­
cause it was but five foot in breadth.

Augustine FRIARS, the house, cloy­
ster and gardens belonging to the friars
of the order of St. Augustin.

Crutched FRIARS. See Crutched.

Black FRIARS, was so called of an
order of friars, who had their house
first in Holbourn, till they were, about
the year 1276, placed there by Robert
Kelway archbishop of Canterbury, who
built the cloysters there.

Grey FRIARS, &c. in this church, 
and in this house, cardinal Woolsey was
by parliament condemned in Præmunire.

White FRIARS, a convent of friars
near the Temple.

FRIDAY-Street so called of fishmon­
gers inhabiting there, whose principal
market days were on Fridays, they
being fish days.


G

GARLICK-Hill, and Garlick-Hithe, 
were so called, because in old
time, on the bank of the river Thames, 
near to this church garlick used to be
sold.

GETHER [דתנ, Heb.] the son of
Aram, according to Josephus, was prince
of the Bactrians; but Bactria lay out of
Shem's lot, as well as too far for the first
plantation, and if he be allowed a seat
about the river Contrites, between Ar­
menia and the Cardachs, as Bochartus
does, it is not because there is any affi­
nity in the names.

GILT-Spur-street so call'd of the gilt
spurs worn by the knights. See Knight-­
rider street.

GOMER [דמנ, Heb.] the eldest son
of Japhet, according to Josephus, was
the father of the Gomerites, who were
by the Greeks, called Galatians, who
were the Gauls of Asia Minor, inhabit­
ing part of Phrygia.

Of this opinion is Bochartus, and if
it be right, they that derive the Cim­
merians and Cimbri from Gomer, have
some ground for it; the Cimmerians
seeming to be the same people with the
Gauls or Celti, under a different name;
and it is observable, that the Welsh, 
who are descended from the Gauls, still
call themselves Cumero or Cymero and
Cumeri.

GRACE-Church-stree, properly Grass-­
Church-street, of a grass (i. e. herb
market) anciently kept here.

GRAYS Inn, an inn of court, for­
merly a mansion belonging to the lord
Gray.

GRESHAM College [in Bishopsgate-­
street, London] was the dwelling house
of Sir Thomas Gresham, queen Eliza­
beth's merchant, citizen, and of the
Mercer's company, who by his last will
and testament, did in the year 1575
give the Royal Exchange, and all the
buildings thereunto pertaining, the one
moiety to the mayor and commonalty
of London and their successors in trust, 
to find four persons to read lectures of
Divinity, Astronomy, Musick, and Geo­
metry, within his said dwelling-house, 
allowing them 50 pounds per annum
each, salary. The other moiety to the
Mercer's company, to find 3 readers, 
viz. Civil Law, Physick and Rhetorick, 
allowing them the same salaries each, 
which salaries are payable out of rents
of the Exchange; these lectures are
read daily in Term time, by every one
upon his day, in the morning between
9 and 10 in Latin, and in the afternoon
between 2 and 3 in English, except that
the Musick lecture is read in English
only on Thursday and Saturday in the
afternoon.

GUILD-HALL [ʒilð of ʒilðan, Sax.]
to pay, because of a common contribu­



tion, and Heal an hall, i. e. the com­
mon hall of the gilds, or companies, 
or incorporated citizens of London.
This hall was first built in the year
1411, by Thomas Knolls then mayor, 
the aldermen and citizens, but being
destroy'd by the great fire in 1666, it
was rebuilt more spacious, being in
length from east to west 170 foot, and
in breadth 68. It cost the city 40000
pounds; the 2 giants of terrible aspect
and monstrous height, that stand facing
the entrance of the hall, the one hold­
ing a pole-ax, the other a halbert, are
suppos'd, the former to represent an 
ancient Briton, and the other a Saxon.


H

HAM, the same as Cronus [of ודק, 
a horn or power] his Phœnician
title Belus or Baal, his Chaldean Mo­
loch and Milcom the same person, Baal
Berith signifies the same Cronus wor­
shipped at Berytus.

Marsham thinks Ham to be found in
profane history, under the names of
Hammon, Thamis, Thammuz, Adonis, 
Osiris, Baal, Belus, Jupiter and Saturn
the second.

Some suppose them to have been the
same as Zoroaster, as those authors, who
fancy a resemblance between them, have
upon account of the supposed similitude
of names made Ham Jupiter, and Ja­
phet Neptune, Shem must of conse­
quence be Pluto, but others make him
Typhon.

Ham, had a very numerous issue, 
he was the father of Cush, Mizraim, 
Phut and Canaan. It is believ'd that
he had all Africa for his inheritance, 
and that he peopled it with his chil­
dren. But he himself dwelt in Egypt, 
which is thought to be the most fruit­
ful part of Africa.

It is also believ'd that the Hammon
adored in Egypt, and Lybia was no
other than Ham, the son of Noah;
and some are of the opinion, that the
curse of Noah was upon Ham, caus'd
the skin of him and his posterity im­
mediately to become black.

Some again believe that the poste­
rity of Ham was the only, or at least
the principal cause of the building
the tower of Babel.

An Arabian author assures us, that
Ham was the first that spread idolatry
over the earth, who invented Horo­
scopes and Magick, and was the author
of divers superstitions, on account of
which he was call'd Zoroasiris or Adris
the prophet, that is to say; the image
of a star or fire, at all times giving
light.

Fabulous history has preserved some
footsteps of Ham's story. It is related
that on a certain day Myrrha, wife, or
as others say, nurse to Hammon, and
mother of Adonis, having her son in
her company found Cyniras sleeping in
his tent uncovered, and in an unde­
cent posture.

She ran immediately and inform'd
Hammon of it, and he gave notice of
it to his brothers, who to prevent the
confusion that Cyniras might be in
when he waked, to find himself naked, 
covered him with something.

Cyniras understanding what was pas­
sed, cursed Adonis, and pursued Myrrha
into Arabia, where after having wan­
dered nine months, she was turned
into a tree that bears Myrrh.

Hammon and Ham are the same per­
son, and so are Adonis and Canaan.

HAMMON, Jupiter Hammon. It is
an opinion almost generally received
among the criticks, that Jupiter Ammon
who was worshipped in Egypt, was the
same with Ham, whom his father Noah
cursed. The conformity of names and
many other circumstances borrowed
from history and fabulous accounts
have rendered this opinion very cur­
rent.

Egypt in scripture is frequently call'd
the land of Ham, and it is certain it
was peopled by Mizraim, one of the
sons of Ham, and that the neighbouring
countries were possessed by the descen­
dants of his other sons, Cush, Phut and
Canaan.

If Noah is the Saturn of the Heathens, 
Ham the youngest of his sons must be
their Jupiter. What the poets say of
Jupiter, and of the violence offered by
him to his father, bears a great relation
to the action of Ham.

Jupiter castrated his father; Ham did
not cover his father's nakedness; nay
the text may be interpreted he castra­
ted, instead of he told (דעיז) by chang­
ing the pointing, which is a new in­
vention.

Saturn is said to have divided the
whole world among his three sons; to
Jupiter he gave Heaven, to Neptune
the sea, and Hell to Pluto.

Noah gave Africa to Ham, Asia to
Slem, and Europe to Japhet. Africa
is thought to be the highest country, 
and nearest to Heaven.



Ham is believ'd to have introduc'd
idolatry in Egypt, and himself to have
received divine honours there.

Ammon is reckoned to be the sun, ac­
cording to the old pagan Theologists. 
Clemens Alexandrinus speaks of an A­
pollo, the son of Amman, and Apollo is
known to be the sun.

The Egyptians, before the time of
Alexander, and his dominions in Asia
and Egypt, knew nothing of the wor­
ship of the Grecian Jupiter; but these
having introduc'd their religion, with
their language and manners into Egypt, 
the Egyptians who were the most su­
perstitious of all people, easily receiv'd
the false worship of the Greeks, and
joining it with their old traditions
composed a monstrous medley of Egyp­
tian and Greek deities.

The Greeks were willing to find
their own gods in those of the Egypti­
ans, and the Egyptians upon some
inconsiderable mark of resemblance, 
made their gods pass for those of Greece.

Of Isis they made Diana, the Moon, 
Venus, Ceres, &c. Of Osiris, Apollo
and Adonis, &c. of Ammon, Jupiter and
the Sun, the greatest and principal of
the deities.

The temple of Jupiter Ammon was
thought to be one of the most ancient
in the world: no one was able to show
the original of it. It was situated in
the midst of a wood, consecrated to
this deity, and served as a strong fort
for the people round about.

Three large walls formed the inclo­
sure of it: in the first inclosure, there
was an old palace to be seen, which had
been formerly the dwelling of the
kings of that country. In the second
inclosure were apartments for the
wives and children of these kings, and
in the same were the temple and oracle
of Ammon. Lastly, the last court
contained lodgings for the princes, 
guards and soldiers.

Quintus Curtius tells, us that the priests
of Jupiter carried this deity in a vessel, 
on the 2 sides of which was hung a
great number of silver dishes.

Ammon was represented and adored
under the form of a Ram, or at least
with the head of a Ram, and the horns
of a Ram upon it.

HANG-MANS-Gayne, as it is cor­
ruptly called, instead of Hammes and
Guisnes, on account that many strangers
who had been inhabitants of Calais, 
Hammes and Guisnes, which places be­
ing lost in the days of queen Mary, the
people were glad to flee over into Eng­
land, and having a lane in St. Catha­
rine's allow'd them, they settled there, 
which being called Hammes and Guisnes, 
at length by corruption was called
Hang man's or Gaynes-Lane.

HANSON [of Han, a diminutive of
Randal and Son, as some suppose] a
surname.

HAVILAH [חליוח, the son of Ham, 
his descendants settled in all probability
somewhere about Chaldea, or the Ara­
bian Erak, it being watered by Pison.

HAZARMAVETH [תומדצח, Heb.]
the son of Joktan, or as it is written in
the vulgar Hasarmoth, is plainly found
in Hadbramant a province of Yaman, 
or Arabia Felix, both having the same
radicals, and signifying the coast or
country of death.

HADORAM [םדודה, Heb.] the son 
of Joktan seems to have been seated in
the Drimati of Pliny, the Persian gulph.

St. HELEN's, so called of a house
of
Nuns founded by Helena.

HUL [לוח, Heb.] the son of Aram.
It is very probable his seat was, as
Bochartus supposes in Cholobeténe, a
part of greater Armenia, where he
finds several places whose names begin
with Chol or Col.

HOG Lane, now called Petticoat Lane, 
is supposed to have been so called, on
account of the hogs that ran in the
fields thereabouts.

Alhallows HONEY-Lane, was so cal­
led on account of its sweetness, by rea­
son of the often washing and keeping
it clean.

HORSLYDOWN [in Southwark] is
said to have been so called, for that
the water, formerly overflowing it, 
was so effectually drawn off, that the
place became a plain green field, 
where horses and other cattle used to
pasture, and lye down before the street
was built.

HOUNDSDITCH, was so called, be­
cause in old time, many dogs and other
carrion were flung in there. Into
this filthy ditch, king Canutus com­
manded Edrick a noble Saxon, who had
basely slain his king and lord Edmund
Ironside, to be drawn by the heels
through the city, from Baynard's castle, 
and cast in, after he had been torment­
ed to death by lighted torches.

HUMPHREY [probably of ham, 
Sax. home, and freðe or frið, Sax.
peace, q. d. one who makes peace at
home.]

Duke HUMPHREY's, near Puddledock, 
so called from the duke's keeping his
court here (as many believe) and



there was in Mr. Stow's time, a house
that went by the name of duke Hum­
phrey's house; and perhaps some of
those lived here, who fancying them­
selves servants to Humphrey the duke
of Gloucester, used to meet every St.
Andrew's day at Sir John Beauchamp's
tomb at St. Paul's (which they mistook
for the duke's, he lying at St. Albans]
and there would strew flowers and
sprinkle water, in hopes of a good
dinner, which they returned without
(as they must needs) like superstitious
fools; the duke having made no pro­
vision for them, and thus probably
came the saying of Dining with Duke
Humphrey; used of such as had been
disappointed of a dinner.

HUSTINGS [of huſ, Sax. an house, 
and ðinʒaſ, Sax. things or causes]
this is reckoned the most ancient and
superior court of the city of London, 
which preserves the laws, franchises, 
customs and dignities of it. This
court is held in Guild-Hall, before the
lord mayor and sheriffs; and when a
cause is to be tryed, the recorder sits
and gives rules and judgment.


I

JAVAN [ןוי, Heb.] the son of Japhet, 
may probably be supposed to have
settled first near his brothers, in the
south west part of the lesser Asia, about 
Ionia, which contains the radical let­
ters of his name.

IDLE-Lane, near St. Dunstan's in the
East, is in old records called Idol-lane, 
probably because carvers of images or
idol-makers dwelt there, as in case of
Ave-Mary-Lane, Pater-noster-Row, &c.

JERAH [חדי, Heb.] the son of Jok­
tan. Bochartus discovers the name in
the island Hieracon (or of Henoki) in
the Arabian gulf, and a town so called
within land on the river Lar, near the
Omanitæ.

JEWEN Street or Jews-street, was
so called, because of old time there
was on the west side a place called the
Jews Garden, being the only burying-­
place appointed them in England.

St. Laurence JEWRY, called the Old
Jewry. This was so called, because
in old times many Jews inhabited
there, until the years 1209, that they
were banished the realm by king
Richard I. to the number of 15060 per­
sons.

The Arabians are, as they themselves
suppose, the defendants of JOKTAN.

St. JONES's, properly St. John's, of
the priory or mansion-house of the
knights of St. John of Jerusalem.

IRONMONGER-Lane, was so called
of Ironmongers formerly dwelling there.
Stow.

IVY-Lane [according to Mr. Stow]
was so called from ivy growing on the
walls of the houses of the prebenda­
ries of St. Paul's who dwelt there.


K

KITTIM [םיתב, Heb.] the son of
Javan. His descendants are sup­
posed to be seated on the west of
Tarshish. Homer mentions a people in
those parts called Cetis (from the river
Cetius) which is the word by which
the Septuagint have rendred Kittim.

In Ptolemy we find two provinces in
the western parts of Cilicia, one mari­
time, called Cetis, the other towards
the mountains called Citis.

Josephus will have the island of Cy­
prus to be the seat of Kittim, and the
town called Citium, which belongs to
it, to have taken its name from them;
but in the apocrypha, Mecedonia is
plainly denoted by the land of Chittim, 
Alexander being mentioned as coming
from thence, and Perseus king of Mace­
donia is called king of the Citims.

Nor do we see any thing amiss in
supposing that country to be the ori­
ginal plantation of the Kittims, at least
in the intention of Moses, since it comes
under the general denomination of the
Isles, which were to be the portion of
Japhet, at least of the posterity of
Javan.

KNIGHT-RIDER-Street, so called
(as is supposed) of knights well armed
and mounted at the Tower-Royal, rid­
ing from thence through the street, 
west of Creed-lane, and so out at Lud­
gate towards Smithfield, when they
were to journey, or otherwise shew
their activity before the king and states
of the realm.


L

LAMECH [ךמל, Heb. i. e. poor or
humbled] the son of Methuselah.

LANGBORN-WARD, one of the wards
of the city of London within the walls, 
was so called of a long bourn, brook



or stream of sweet water, which (of
old time) sprang up in Fenchurch-street, 
and ran down that street and Lombard
street, to the west-end of St. Mary
Woolnoth's church, and there turning
south, it broke into several small
shares, rills or streams, and so gave
name to Sharebourn-lane (now called
Sherburn-lane.)

St. LAURENCE, arch-deacon of the
church of Rome, who was broiled on a
gridiron, under the emperor Valerian,
in the year of Christ 260.

LEHABIM [םיבהל, Heb.] the son of
Mizraim. The Lehabim are supposed
to be the same with the Lubims, who
with the Sukkums and Cashites, came
out of Mizraim or Egypt with Shishak
to invade Judea: These therefore
may not improbably be judged to be
the Libyans of Cyreniaca, or proper
Libya near Egypt.

St. LEONARD, a bishop of Limoges
in France, born about the year 500.

LICKAPAN or Lickabone-street, is
properly Liquor-Pond-street. Stow.

LIME-Street, was so called of making
or selling lime there.

LONDON-STONE, in Canon street, 
overagainst St. Swithin's church, on the
south side of the way, near the chan­
nel, is pitched upright a great stone, 
called London-stone, which is fixed very
deep in the ground, and fastened with
bars of iron, and now with a handsome
stone-work inclosing it, hollowed
through with a circle; but so that the
upper part of the stone is visible, and
that it can receive no damage from
carts running against it or otherwise.

It is certain from history, that this
stone has been there ever since or be­
fore the conquest, which is now near
700 years; but the exact time is un­
known, and so also is the reason of its
being placed there; some are of opi­
nion, that it was set up as a precise
place to begin to measure their miles, 
from this city to the other parts of the
nation; others, that it was set for a
mark of the middle of the city within
the walls. And whereas this street
was anciently the chief street of London
(as Cheapside now is) some are of opi­
nion, that this stone was a place on
which the person stood, who published
proclamations, and gave publick no­
tices of things to the citizens; others
again are of opinion, that the stone
was set up there, as a place for the
rendering and making payments, by
debtors to their creditors, at their ap­
pointed days and times, till in after­
times payments were more usually
made at the font in Pont's church
(probably Paul's church) and now
usually at the Royal Exchange; Others
again are of opinion, that it was set
up by one John or Thomas, &c. Lon­
donstone, who dwelt over-against it.

LORETTO [Lauretum] stands about
three miles from the shoar of the Adri­
atick sea, 10 from Fermo to the north-­
west, 20 from Ancona to the south-east, 
and near 100 from Rome to the north-­
east. It is a little place, but very well
fortified, and has the title of a city and
bishoprick, erected by pope Sixtus V.
Anno 1586, to which the see of Raca­
nati was united, Anno 1591. Loretto
has been a famous place for a long
time, but because every body does not
particularly know the reason why it is
so, they must be put in mind; that it is
pretended that the house in which the
Virgin Mary is said to have been born, 
where she was betrothed and married
to Joseph, where the angel saluted her, 
and where the son of God was incar­
nated, was brought by the angels from
Nazareth to Dalmatia, and placed on
a little mountain called Tersatto, on
the 12th of May, 1291. That three 
years and seven months after it was
removed thence, and brought by them
to a forest in the territory of Recanati
in the Marca d'Ancona; from whence
after it had been eight months there, 
it was removed a mile further, to the
same hill where it now stands. But a
difference happening between two
brothers to whom the ground belong­
ed, it was removed some paces from
thence, and set down in the midst of a
high-way, from whence it has never
been stirred since. To prevent incon­
veniences that might happen, particu­
larly a new removal, they built a mag­
nificent church, in the midst of which
it remains secure against all assaults;
about which they have since built four
walls. The Sacra Casa consists of one
chamber, 44 spans long within, 18
broad, and 23 high; 1 1/2 palm, being 13
inches English measure. The holy ta­
bernacle stands east and west, and over
the little chimney in the chamber, in a
nich, stands the great lady of Loretto, 
about four foot high, made (as they
say) of cedar-wood, and wrought by
St. Luke. The ornaments with which
she is usually decked, especially the
mantle, which is adorned with an infi­
nite number of precious stones, are of
an inestimable value. She has a great
number of robes for change, and seven



different mourning habits for the holy
week. Her triple crown was presented
her by Lewis XIII. of France, who also
gave a little crown to the infant Jesus, 
both wonderful rich, the former being
all covered with precious stones. The
altar made by the hands of the apos­
tles, and the stone upon which St. Pe­
ter celebrated his first mass, were
transported at the same time with the
house. All round the statue there is
nothing but lamps, statues, busts, and
other figures of gold and silver; 28
candlesticks of silver and vermilion, 12
of massy gold, weighing 37 pound each.
'Tis incredible what vast numbers of
pilgrims come here to pay their devo­
tion, especially at Easter, and the Vir­
gin's nativity; (which is solemnized
in the month of September) insomuch
that in the years of greatest concourse, 
they have counted 20000 pilgrims and
upwards, during these two festivals.
The treasury-chamber is a spacious
room, having 17 large presses, with
folding-doors, instead of wainscot to
the walls; which are filled with pure
gold, jewels of the greatest value, and
vessels and ornaments more precious
than gold; for silver is not admitted
into these presses, but lies in confused
heaps, in several places till they have
occasion for it. It is impossible to ima­
gine the vast quantity and variety of
riches that are amass'd here; and it
would be in vain to attempt a parti­
cular account of them. They have
been bestowed by princes, states, and
people that own the papal supremacy, 
who have emulously strove who should
outdo one another. Nor is the trea­
sury all the riches that belong to this
place: There are settled revenues, 
and lands purchased out of sight, and
they have built not only a stately
church, but also a magnificent palace, 
and no doubt have chests full of money.
There is also an arsenal, but not very
considerable. In the publick place an
admirable beautiful fountain of white
marble, enriched with statues of brass, 
and a fine statue of pope Sixtus V.
erected by the inhabitants of Loretto, 
in acknowledgment of the privileges
they received from him. The prin­
cipal trade of this little city, consists in
medals, rosaries, sanctified beads, ima­
ges, Agnus Dei's, and such like com­
modities.

LUD [דול, Heb.] the son of Shem.
We can see no more reason than Sir
Walter Raleigh, why Lud should straggle
so far from his friends as Lydia, where
Josephus fixes him: Besides there is a
strong objection against this opinion, 
the Lydians having been first called
Mæones, as all the ancients agree, and
Lydians from Lydus the son of Atys, 
except we suppose the Greeks were de­
ceived, and that the name of Mæones
ceasing, they assumed their old name
of Lydians, which has often happened.
But even in that case, we ought per­
haps to consider Lydia as possessed by
the Lydians or posterity of Lud on a
second or third remove, and to look
for his settlement nearer his brothers.

LUDGATE, is a west gate of the
city of London, and the 6th principal
gate thereof; and was called Ludgate
(as Geoffry of Monmouth relates) be­
cause at first built by king Lud, a British
king, 66 years before the birth of Christ.
But others contend, that it was origin­
ally called Flood Gate, on account of
the flood or stream that ran from the
north of the city, into the canal now
called Fleet ditch.

LUDIM [םידול, Heb.] the son of
Mizraim. As to the nations descended
from Mizraim, the Ludim are judged
to be the people above Egypt, called by
the Greeks Ethiopians, and at present
Abyssines. This Bochartus endeavours to
prove by ten arguments. We rarely
find them called otherwise in scripture
than Lud, either from the name of the
founder or their country.


M

MACROBIUS [μαχρόβιος, of μαχρός
long, and βίος life, Gr. long-li­
ved] a proper name.

MADAI [ידמ, Heb.] the son of Ja­
phet. It is generally agreed that Madai
planted Media, and that the Medes are
always called by this name in scripture.

St. MAGNUS Parish, in the Bridge­
ward within. This church was dedi­
cated to St. Magnus or Magnes, who
suffered martyrdom under the emperor
Aurelian, in the year 276.

MAGOG [גוגמ, Heb.] the second son
of Japhet. Josephus, Jerom, and most
of the fathers, hold them to be the
Scythians about mount Caucasus, which
name, Bochartus supposes was made by
the Greeks oat of Gog Hasan, signifying
in Chaldee, Gods-Fort: but perhaps it
is a wrong pronunciation of Cuk-Kaf, 
which in Persian signifies the mountain
of Kef, as the Arabs call it. That this
plantation adjoined upon Meshek and



Tubal, appears from Ezekiel's making
Gog king of Magog to reign over the
other two, otherwise called Rhossi and
Moscuici: From these two people mi­
grating over Caucasus, it is supposed
the Russians or Muscovites are descen­
ded.

MAIN-AMBER, near Pensance, in the
county of Cornwall, was formerly a
stone of a prodigious bigness, yet was
so placed, that one might move it with
a finger; but it was thrown down in
the late civil wars. It is supposed to be 
so called of Main, which in the Cornish
language signifies a stone, and Amber, 
of one Ambiosius a Briton, that raised
it as a monument of some victory over
the Romans or others.

St. MARGARET, a holy-virgin of
Antioch, who was beheaded under the
emperor Decius, Anno Ch. 292.

Mark-Lane, properly Mart-lane, 
from a privilege formerly granted to
keep a mart or fair there.

St. MARTINS le Grand, was in an­
cient times a fair and large college of a
dean and secular canons or priests, 
which have had great privileges of san­
ctuary, and otherwise founded by Ingle­
ricus and Edvardus his brother, in the
year of Christ 1056. Here kings of
England were sometimes lodged and
held their courts. When this college
flourished a curfew bell was rung there, 
as at Bow, &c.

St. MARTIN, a bishop of Tours in
France.

St. MARTINS Outwich, but more
properly Oteswich, of Martin de Otes­
wich and his two brothers the founders.

St. MARY Matfelons, alias White-­
Chapel, formerly so called as some sup­
pose of ןלופטמ, metaphelon, Heb.
which they interpret, She that hath
lately brought forth a son (i. e. the Virgin
Mary) and probably her image anciently
stood in that church with a babe in her
arms.

Others say, that it was called Mat­
felon upon this occasion! About the
year 1428, a devout widow of that pa­
rish had long cherished and brought up
of alms a certain Frenchman, who un­
gratefully and cruelly murdered her in
the night, as she was sleeping in her
bed, and after fled with her money and
jewels; but being closely pursued, he
took to the church of St. George in
Southwark, and claimed the privilege
of sanctuary there, and so abjured the
king's land; and the constables having
charge of him brought him to London, 
in order to convey him eastward to­
wards the sea-side. When he came
into the parish of White-Chappel, where
he had committed the murder, the
women cast upon him so much filth and
ordure (that notwithstanding the best
resistance the constables could make)
they killed him, and on this account
they say the parish took the name of
Matfelon.

MASH [דשמ, Heb.] the fourth
son of Aram, is supposed
to fix in Armenia, about the mountain
Masius, the same with that commonly
held to be Ararat, and called by the
Armenians Masis. However, the Ar­
menians themselves do not lay claim to
any of Shem's line as their progenitor;
but say they are descended from Togar­
mah of Japhet's posterity.

MESHEK [דשמ, Heb.] the fourth
son of Aram, is supposed
to fix in Armenia, about the mountain
Masius, the same with that commonly
held to be Ararat, and called by the
Armenians Masis. However, the Ar­
menians themselves do not lay claim to
any of Shem's line as their progenitor;
but say they are descended from Togar­
mah of Japhet's posterity.

MELCHIZEDEC, is by some suppo­
sed to be the same with Shem. Josephus
makes him only a Canaantish king. 
The oriental Christians make him the
son of Phaleg. A learned Syrian au­
thor makes him the son of Shem.

St. MEWS, near Charing-Cross, a
place where the king's hawks were for­
merly kept, till in Henry the VIII's time
that the kings stables in Bloomsbury
being burnt down, there were new
ones built there by king Edward VI.
which have been used for the king's
horses ever since.

St. MILDRED, who she was is not
agreed upon, whether she was the
eldest daughter of Meroaldus king of
the West Mercians, as some think, or the
daughter of Ethelbert king of Kent, 
one of the founders of St. Paul's church
is uncertain.

MILICENT [of mille a thousand, and
centum an hundred, q. d. an hundred
thousand] a woman's name.

St. Leonard MILK-CHURCH, was
so called from one William Milker, a
chief builder thereof; but commonly
called St. Leonard's in East-cheap, be­
cause it stands at East cheap corner.

MINCING-Lane, properly Minchun's-­
lane, so called of tenements there be­
longing to the Minchun's or nuns of St.
Helen in Bishops-gate-street.

MIZRAIM [םורצמ, Heb.] stands in
the place of the second son of Ham;
for there is a great dispute, whether
this is the name of a single person, or
of a people, as having a dual termina­
tion.

The MONUMENT [monumentum of
monere, L. to warn, abolish, put in mind
&c.

On the east-side of Fish-street-hill,
stands the monument, situate in a square 



open to the street, in perpetual memo­
ry of the dreadful fire of London, that
happened on the second of September
1666; with inscriptions and divers fi­
gures, artificially cut in stone, import­
ing the history thereof.

This monument was by act of par­
liament ordered to be erected near the
place, where the conflagration began;
and accordingly was set up, where the
church of St. Margaret New fish street
stood, which is not above 130 foot trom
the very house, where the fire first
broke out.

This monument stands upon an as­
cent from the street, of three or four
steps of stone, upon a large vault of
stone arched; the column is of the
Dorick order, built all of excellent
Portland stone, the plinth of which is
27 feet square, the height is 202 feet
from the basis.

The inscriptions on it are in Latin;
that which gives a relation of this con­
flagration is to the purpose following.

This famous column was erected in per­
petual remembrance of the dreadful fire.
It consumed 89 churches, the city gates, 
many publick hospitals, schools, libraries, 
13200 houses, 400 streets; the ruins of
the city were 436 acres; and of the 26
wards, it utterly destroyed 15, and left
8 other shattered and half burnt.

The basis of the monument or co­
lumn, on that side towards the street, 
hath a representation of the destruction
of the city by fire, and the restitution
of it, by several curious engraven fi­
gures, in full proportion.

First is the figure of a woman, re­
presenting London, sitting on the ruins
in a most disconsolate posture; her
head hanging down, and her hair all
loose about her, the sword lying by her, 
and her left hand carelesly laid upon it.

A second figure is Time, with his
wings and bald head, coming behind
her, and gently lifting her up.

Another small figure on the other
side of her laying her hand upon her, 
and with her scepter winged in her
other hand directing her to look up­
wards, for it points to two beautiful
goddesses, sitting upon the clouds, one
leaning upon a Cornucopia, denoting
PLENTY, the other having a palm
branch in her hand, signifying VICTO­
RY or TRIUMPH.

Underneath this figure of London, 
in the midst of the ruins, is a Dragon
with his paw upon the shield of a red
cross, the arms of London. Over her
head is the description of houses burn­
ing, and flames breaking out through
the windows; behind her are citizens
looking on, and some lifting up their
hands. Opposite against these figures, 
is a pavement of stone, raised with
three or four steps; on which appears
king Charles II, in a Roman habit, hold­
ing a truncheon in his right hand, and
a laurel about his head, coming to­
wards the woman in the despairing
posture (which represents London) and
giving order to three others, to descend
the steps towards her: The first hath
wings on her head, and a crown of
naked boys dancing, and in her hand
something resembling an harp: Then
another figure, going down the steps, 
following her, resembling architecture, 
shewing a scheme or model in the right
hand, for rebuilding the city, and the
left holding a square and compasses.

Behind these two stands another, 
more obscurely, holding up an hat, 
denoting LIBERTY.

Next behind the king is the duke of
York, holding a garland ready to crown
the rising city; and a sword lifted up
in the other to defend her. Behind
this, another figure with an earl's co­
ronet on his head. The fourth figure
behind, holding a lion, with a bridle in
his mouth.

Over these figures is represented an 
house in building, and a labourer going
up a ladder, with a hod upon his back.

Lastly, underneath the stone pave­
ment, whereon the king stands, is a
good figure of ENVY peeping forth, 
gnawing an heart.

Round about the bottom of the pe­
destal, were deep cut in stone, in large
letters, a charge upon the papists of
burning the city. These remained till
about the accession of king James II. to
the crown, when they were cut out
and utterly defaced; but when king
William came to the crown, they were
cut again anew: The words are these.

This pillar was set up in perpetual
remembrance of the most dreadful burning
of this city; begun and carried on by
the treachery and malice of the Popish
faction, in the beginning of Septem­
ber, in the year of our Lord 1666, in
order to the effecting this horrid plot, for
the extirpating the Protestant Religion, 
and English Liberties, and to introduce
Popery and Slavery.

Upon the pedestal is the column
erected; the body or shaft of which is
fluted, and contains in length from the
pedestal to the balcony 133 feet, and
from the balcony 38 feet; and the



whole height of this monument from
the ground (besides the vault and foun­
dation) to the top of the flame is 202
feet; the circumference of the shaft is
47 feet and an half, its diameter is 15
feet, the hollow cylinder 9 feet diame­
ter; the thickness of the stone wall of
the cylinder or shaft is 3 feet; it hath
345 steps from the ground up to the
balcony; and there are niches in the
wall for people to rest themselves as
they go up; and from the balcony up­
wards, is a ladder of iron steps to go
into the urn; out of which issueth a
flame, all gilt with gold; and to the
stairs having an open navel, there is a
rail of iron to rest the hand upon all
the way up.

All this monument taken together is
a curious piece of workmanship; and
the charges of erecting it, amounted to
13000 l. and upwards.

MOORFIELDS, was so called, of a
moor or fen, which stretched out from
Bishopsgate as far as Cripplegate, Fins­
bury and Holywell, and was a long time
an unprofitable ground, being grown
over with flags, sedge and rushes, &c.
till the year 1617. That Sir Thomas Sey­
mour lord-mayor, caused sluices to be
made to convey the water over the
town ditch, into the course of Walbrook
and so into the Thames.

St. Margaret MOYSES, was so called
of one Moyses the builder and founder.

MUGWELL-Street, properly Monk's
well-street, so called of a well belonging
to the monks of a convent, called St.
James on the Wall, near adjoining.


N

NAPHTUHIM [םיהתפנ, Heb.]
sons of Mizraim, are thought to
have settled in Marmarica adjoining to
Cyreniaca. It is observed that the Egypti­
ans called all the skirts of a country and
promontories washed by the sea, Neph­
thys; and Bochartus places the Naph­
tuhims, rather on the coast of the Me­
diterranean, than on that of the Red Sea.
Some place the Naphtuhims about Noph
or Memphis in Egypt.

NEREUS, supposed by bishop Cum­
berland to be Japhet. Every one knows
Nereus, Pontus, Posidon or Neptune, re­
late to the sea.

Nereus and his issue came from Ura­
nus or Noah.

NEWGATE, a western gate of the
city of London so called because the
last built gate of the city.

St. NICHOLAS [Νιχολαυς, Gr. a con­
queror of the people] the son of Epi­
phanes a citizen of Pancras, sometime
bishop of Mira, who died Anno 343.

NIMROD. Some have confounded
Nimrod with Belus, the founder of the
kingdom of Babylon, and with Ninus
the founder of that of Nineveh; but
both these are much later than Nim­
rod.

Profane authors have imbellished
the history of Bacchus with several
circumstances taken from that of Nim­
rod. As for example, the name of
Nebrodeus or Nebrodus given to Bacchus, 
is evidently derived from Nembrod or
Nimrod, tho' the Greeks will have its
original from a goat's-skin, with which
they pretend Bacchus was clothed.

The name Bacchus may also be de­
rived from Bar-chus the son of Cush.

The Greeks give to Bacchus the name
of Hunter, just as Moses gives to Nimrod.

The expeditions of Bacchus into the 
Indies, are formed upon the wars that
Nimrod made in Babylon and Assyria.

Nimrod in Hebrew signifies a rebel, 
to him is imputed the first invention
of that idolatrous worship paid to
man.

The history of Nimrod is dressed up
with fables by the Persian authors.
Some confound him with Zohac the
first king of the Dynasty, of those prin­
ces that reigned immediately after the
deluge.

Others will have Nimrod to be the
same as Caicacus the second king of the
Second Persian Dynasty, called that of
the Cainaides.

The Persian historians make him to
have reigned above 150 years, and
affirm that he contrived the rash at­
tempt of scaling Heaven, i. e. by build­
ing the tower of Babel. A certain
author writes, that when Nimrod
saw the fire in which he had caused
Abraham to be cast, did him no damage
he resolved to ascend into Heaven, that
he might see that great God that
Abraham revealed to him. It was in
vain that his courtiers endeavoured to
divert him from his design, he being
resolutely bent to accomplish it.

At the same time he gave orders for
the building of a tower that might be
as high as possible; they worked upon
this for three years together; when he
went up to the top and was much sur­
prized to see himself as far from Hea­
ven as when he was upon the ground.

It is supposed that Moses makes Nim­
rod the immediate son of Cush. But



the Persians, make him the son of Ca­
naan and brother to Cush.

Eutychius says, that Nimrod was the
first author of the religion of the Ma­
gians.

NINEVEH, the capital city of Assyria, 
founded by Ashur son of Shem, or by 
Nimrod son of Cush.

It was one of the most ancient, the
most famous, the most potent and lar­
gest cities of the world.

It was situate on the banks of the
river Tigris, and in the time of the
prophet Jonas, who was sent thither
in the time of Jeroboam the second king
of Israel, and as it is judged under the 
reign of Pul, father of Sardanapalus
king of Assyria, Nineveh was a very
great city, its circuit being three days
journey. Diodorus Siculus says, it was
in length 150 stadia, and 90 stadia in
breadth, and 480 stadia in circuit, which
is about 7 leagues long, taking the
league at 3000 paces, about 3 leagues
broad and 18 leagues round. Its walls
were an hundred feet high and so
broad, that three chariots could drive
abreast upon them. Its towers, of
which there were 15000, were each
200 feet high.

Some pretend that NOAH is the Sa­
turn and the Uranus of the Pagans; and
that the stories that are told of Jupiter's
castrating his father Saturn, and Cronus
castrating his father Uranus, are bor­
rowed from this notion of Ham, Noah's
son discovering his father's nakedness.

NORTHUMBERLAND [norðan­
Humber-lanð, Sax. i. e. the land on 
the north side of the river Humber] a
northern county of England.

NORWICH [norð&wyn;ice, Sax. i. e.
the north harbour] a sea port in the
county of Norfolk.

NORTHUMBERLAND-Alley in Fen­
church-street, was so called of Northum­
berland house, belonging to Henry Pier­
cy earl of Northumberland, in the time
of king Henry VI.


O

OFFA's Dike, a mighty work con­ 
trived by Offa, king of the Mercians, 
who caused it to be cast up as a boun­
dary between the English and Welsh. It
runs through Herefordshire, over a part 
of Shropshire into Montgomeryshire;
then again into Shropshire, and from
thence through Denbighshire into Flint­
shire, and ends a little below Holywell.

OLD BOURN was so called of a
bourn or stream of
water, breaking out about the place
where now the bars stand, and ran
down the whole street to Holbourn-­
bridge.

HOLBOURN was so called of a
bourn or stream of
water, breaking out about the place
where now the bars stand, and ran
down the whole street to Holbourn-­
bridge.

OLD-SWAN, formerly called Ebgate-­
lane, probably so called from the sign
of the Swan near the watering place.

St. Mary OVERY [so called of Over
the Rie, or of ofer over, or ofer a
bank, and ea, Sax. water] because be­
fore the building of London bridge
there was a ferry in that place over the
Thames.


P

PAIN [payen, F. paganus, L. a pagan
or villager] a surname.

PARDON-church yard, a place for­
merly on the north side of St. Pauls
church; this was a large cloister, and
a chapel built by king Stephen, inviron­
ing a plot of ground; about this cloister
was artificially and richly painted the
dance of Machabray, or dance of Death, 
commonly called the dance of St. Paul's, 
the like of which was painted about St.
Innocents at Paris. The metres or
poesy of this dance were translated out
of French into English, by John Lidgate
monk of Bury, and with the picture of
death leading all estates, painted about
the cloister. The monuments in this
cloister, both for number and work­
manship, exceeded all that was in St.
Pauls church; all which were demol­
ished in the year 1549, by the command
of the duke of Somerset.

PATER-NOSTER-Row, was so cal­
led of stationers or text writers dwel­
ling there, who wrote and sold books
then in use, as A B C or Absies, and the
Pater-nosters, Ave-Maria's Creeds, Gra­
ces, &c.

PATHRUSIM [םיתדספ, Heb.] are
evidently the inhabitants of Pathros, 
which some wrongly take for Pelusium;
others more justly for Thebais, or the
Upper Egypt.

St. Margaret PATTINS Parish, [in 
Billingsgate ward, London] the church
took its name of St. Margaret an holy  
virgin of Antioch, who was beheaded
under the emperor Decius, A. C. 292,
and the parish was called Pattens, be­
cause of old time pattens were usually
made and sold there; but was after­
wards called Rood-lane, of a rood
there placed in the church-yard of



St. Margaret, while the church was
rebuilding.

St. PAUL'S School, built and well
endowed by Dr. John Collet, dean of
St. Paul's, and chaplain to king Henry
VIII. which school was dedicated by
the founder to St. Paul.

St. PETER the Poor, was so called
for a difference from others of that
name.

PHILISTIM [םיתשלפ, Heb.] who in
the Mosaick account of the dispersion, 
are derived from the Casluhim. Their
original settlement was in Egypt before
they removed into Canaan.

PHILPOT-Lane, so called of Sir John
Philpot, an eminent merchant, who
was the owner of it and dwelt there.

PHUT [טופ, Heb.] the third son of
Ham. Authors are not agreed about
the country where he planted himself.

Bochart endeavours to prove, that
Mizraim and he divided Africa between
them. But to this it may be objected, 
that Ezekiel mentions Phut with Cush
and Persia, as auxiliaries to the northern
enemies of the Jews, &c.

Bishop Cumberland supposes the third
son of Ham, the Phut of Moses, to be
the Apollo of the Greeks called Pythius, 
which in radical letters agrees with
Phut.

PICKADILLY [so called of Pickadil­
les, a sort of stiff collars of doublets in
the fashion of a band, made by one
Higgins a tailor, who got an estate by it
and built the street] a street near St.
James Westminster.

PICTS [picti, L. so called as some
imagine from painting themselves]
were a colony of Scythia or Germany, 
who landing in Scotland, settled there, 
being assisted by some of the natives, 
and at length by marrying Scotch wo­
men, in a manner became one people;
but at length animosities arising, they
parted, the Scotch possessing the moun­
tains and northern parts, and the Picts
the southern; and in time, by the assis­
tance of the Romans and Britons, expel­
led the Scots, the Scots retiring into the
islands, and Sweden, Denmark and Nor­
way. But at length the Picts, being
gauled by the Roman yoke, invited the
Scots again, who were expelled a se­
cond time, but at length the Picts were
totally routed, and their king siezed by
Kenneth II. An. 845.

PICTS Wall, a wall in Northumber­
land, extending from Newcastle upon
Tine to Carlisle in Northumberland, 86
miles in length, reaching from the
German to the Irish sea, in thickness 8
foot, in height 12, parting over several
cragged hills, with battlements all a­
long, and towers at convenient distan­
ces where soldiers were lodged. This
wall was built by the Romans to hinder
the incursions of the Picts and Scots.
It having been several times defaced in
many places was repaired again, and
at last was built with brick by Ælius a
Roman general, in the year 466, who
leaving Britain, it was ruined by the
Scots, and never more regarded, but
some vestiges of it are still to be seen
in Cumberland and Northumberland, with
Roman inscriptions.

St. Martins POMARY, is supposed to
take its name of Pomarium, L. an or­
chard, now called Iron monger-lane.

PORTLAND, so called, as some
think of one Portus a noted Saxon pirate;
or as others, of its lying over against
the port of Weymouth.

PORTSOKEN-ward, is so called of
porta, L. a gate, and ſoc, Sax. a fran­
chise or privilege of taking toll at the
gate of the city called Aldgate, granted
to 13 knights well beloved by the king
and realm for services that had been
done by them, about 700 years since, 
in the days of king Edgar, or, as others
say, Canutus the Dane.

A certain portion of land on the east
part of the city being left desolate and
forsaken by the inhabitants by rea­
son of too much servitude, these knights
having petitioned the king to grant
them this land with the liberty of a
guild for ever.

The king granted their request upon
the following conditions. That each
of them should victoriously accomplish
3 combats; one above ground, the
other under the ground, and the third
in the water; and after this, on a cer­
tain day in East Smithfield, should run
with spears against all comers.

All which they having gloriously
performed, the king named it Knighten
Guild, and set the bounds of it as fol­
lows: From Aldgate to the place
where the bars now stand towards the
east, and on both sides the street, and
towards the north to Bishopsgate to the
house of stone, since that time the lord
Bouchiers, and towards the south to
the river Thames, and so far into the
water, as a horseman entering the
same might throw a spear. So that
the hospital of St Catherine's, the mills, 
the outward stone wall, and the new
ditch of the tower belonged to this
Guild.

The POULTREY, was so called of



many poulterers formerly dwelling in
this street.

St. Laurence POULTNEYS or Pount­
neys lane The church was dedicated
to the memory or St. Laurence, arch­
deacon of the church of Rome, who
was broiled on a gridiron under the
emperor Valerian, in the year of Christ
260, and was called Poultney of John
Poultney, mayor.

PUDDING-Lane [near Billingsgate]
was so called, on account of the but­
chers of East-cheap, who had their
scalding house for hogs there, and their
puddings, with other filth of beasts were
voided down that way to their dung
boat on the Thames.

PUGH [q. ap Hugh, i. e. the son of
Hugh] a surname.

PYTHAGORAS, a famous philoso­
pher. Bishop Usher places his coming
into Egypt, in the year of the world
3457, under the reign of Amasis. He
continued there 22 years according to
Jamblicus. He was taken and carried
to Babylon, by the soldiers of Cambyses
in the year of the world 3479. He re­
turned into Italy at the time that Bru­
tus delivered his country from the
yoke of the Tarquins, in the year 3506.
Therefore it is not credible that Py­
thagoras had been the disciple of Ezekiel
the prophet, as some have fancied.

But the generallity of those who have
made mention of this philosopher, will
have him to have been the disciple of 
Zoroaster at Babylon, and that he deri­
ved all that fine knowledge from him,
by which he afterwards became so fa­
mous in the West.

For it is not much to be doubted, but 
that it was Zoroaster whom Porphyry
describes under the name Zabratus, or
Zaratus, and Clemens Alexandrinus un­
der the name of Nazaratus. He relates
the matter thus.

When Cambyses conquered Egypt, he
there met with Pythagoras, who had re­
paired thither with a design of instruc­
ting himself in the learning of the
country. He took him prisoner and
sent him with his other captives to
Babylon, where Zoroaster lived at that
time.

He committed himself to the disci­
pline of that great man "Zoroaster pu­
rified him from the defilements of
his life past, instructed him in such
things in which a virtuous man ought
to be free; he taught him what were
the principles of the universe, and
the secrets of nature.

He there learned arithmetick, musick
the knowledge of divine things, and par­
ticularly the doctrine of the immortali­
ty of the soul.

All the ancient Greek authors ac­
knowledge, that he was the first that
taught these important truths; but he
did not teach them in their native puri­
ty, but disfigured them with his notion
of a Metempsychosis, which he had bor­
rowed from the Indians, with whom he
is said to have conversed. He made
the soul's immortality to consist in a
certain revolution or transmigration.
of the soul out of one body into ano­
ther.

The Pythagoreans abstained from
meat, brought all their goods into a
common stock, eat nothing that had
life, rejected all anointing with oil, 
contemned pleasures, wore white
clothes, not linnen but woollen: ab­
stained from swearing, had a great ve­
neration for old men; never durst
make water before the sun, kept si­
lence for a long time in their schools, 
paid a very great deference to the sen­
timents of their masters.

Pythagoras acknowledged an unity
of principle, from whence proceeded
the duality in an indefinite manner.
He believed that all things proceeded
from this unity. He condemned all
images of the deity, and would have
his worship to be burthened with as
few ceremonies as might be. God was
the principal object of his worship and
studies.

The figurative and symbolical man­
ner in which he gave his instructions,
was borrowed from the Hebrews, and
other Orientals, who generally conceal
the mysteries of their knowledge un­
der allegories and parables.


Q

QUEEN's College [in Oxford] 
so named from queen Philippa, 
wife to king Edward III, being
founded by Robert Eglesfield her chap­
lain, A. D. 1340.


R

RAAMAH [המער, Heb.] the son
of Cush, may probably find a set­
tlement about a city called Rhegama by
Ptolemy on the Persian gulph.

RADCLIFF, so called of a red Cliff,



visible there; a little town wherein
lived many tailors. Camden.

RIPHATH [תפור, Heb.] the son of
Gomer, probably settled near his bro­
ther Ashkenaz. Josephus says, the Paph­
lagonians were originally called Riphæ­
ans from Riphath.

ROOD-Lane, was so called of a rood
(i e. the image of Christ upon the cross
there) placed in the church yard of St.
Margaret whilst the old church was ta­
ken down and new building, during
which time the oblations made to this
rood were employed in building the
church.

ROTHERHITHE [of yrodr, Br. a
bound, or threshold, and hithe, i. e.
the bank of the bound or limit] by rea­
son of the river Anton, dividing Kent
from the Trinobantes.


S

SABTAH [חתבס, Heb.] is supposed
to be seated near the Persian gulph.

SABTECHA [חבתבס, Heb.] the son
of Cush. Dr. Wells imagines that the
Saracens are the descendants of Sabte­
cha, which nation being stiled at first
by the Greeks Sabtaceni, that name was
afterwards softened to Saraceni.

SALAH [חלש,Heb.] the son of Ar­
phaxad is supposed to have settled in
Susiana or Khuzestan in Persia.

SALISBURY-Court, is so called, be­
cause formerly the inn or place of the
bishop of Salisbury.

SCALDING-Alley, was so called, or
Scalding-Wick, because that ground was
formerly employ'd by the poulterers in
the Poultry, for scalding their fowls
there.

SEBA [אבס, Heb.] Cush, is said to
have seated himself somewhere in the
south of Chaldea, or the Arabian Erak.

SERMON-Lane, Stow says, it is cor­
ruptly thus called, and that it was for­
merly known about the reign of king
Edward I. by the name of Shermonger's
Lane, i. e. such as did cut and round
the plate to be coined or stamped into
money, when the place of coinage was
the Old Change, near to this Lane.

St. Nicholas SHAMBLES. This church
was so called of a flesh market or sham­
bles near thereunto.

SHEM, those that seek to reconcile
the Heathen mythology with the Mosaic
history, are greatly at a loss to find
among the gods or heroes one who in
name or character hath any resem­
blance to Shem, and therefore are re­
duced to that ridiculous shift of making
him the god of Hell.

St. Bennet's SHEERHOG, alias Shorn, 
alias Shrog, but the most ancient is
Shorne, and is supposed to take that
name of one Benedict Shorne, some­
time citizen, and stock-fishmonger of
London, who new built the church, 
repaired it, and was a benefactor to it
in the reign of king Edward II.

SHERBURN Lane, was so called on
account of a long Bourn, or stream of
sweet water, which of old time break­
ing out into Fenchurch-street, ran down
the same street and Lombard street, to
the west end of St. Mary Woolnoth's
church, where running south, and
breaking into many small rills or
streams, it left the name of Share­
bourn-Lane.

SHOREDITCH, some fancy this so
called from a ditch or common shore
here, others from a fabulous story of
Jane Shore; but Mr. Weever says, it
had its name of Sir John Shoreditch, 
and his family lords thereof, in the
reign of king Edward III.

SITTINGBURN [Sittinʒbourn
of ſittan to sit and born, Sax. a
spring, q. d. the fountain of the na­
tives] a town in Kent.

SOAPER-Lane, which some suppose
to have been so called of soap being
made there, was (as Mr. Stow says)
rather so named of one Alleque la So­
par, because he says he had not read
of soap being made in the city of Lon­
don, till within 100 years before the
writing of his Survey. This city being
served with Castile soap from beyond
sea, and green soap speckled from Bri­
stol.

SPITTLE-Square-field, &c. near
Norton-Folgate stood the late dissolv'd
priory and hospital of St. Mary (call'd
for shortness the Spittle) founded by
Walter Brune and Rose his wife for ca­
nons regular.

Part of the church-yard belonging to
this hospital, had about 50 years since
a fair pulpit built of stone and wood in
the middle of it. And against the
said pulpit on the south side, before
the charnel and chapel of St. Edmund
the bishop, was a fair house for the
mayor, aldermen, sheriffs and ladies to
sit in; and also for the bishop of Lon­
don, and other prelates, there to hear
the sermon preach'd on holydays, 
and on the east side of the said pulpit, 
was a fair house built for the gover­
nours and children of Christ's hospital
to sit in, the children of the Blue Coat



Hospital using to repair to the Spittle as
they do now to St. Bride's church.

In the year 1599 queen Elizabeth
came to St. Mary Spittle in great state, 
attended by a 1000 men in harness, 
with shirts of mail, corslets and morice, 
and 10 great pieces of cannon, with
drums, flutes and trumpets sounding, 
and in a cart two white bears: but
upon what reason does not appear.

Alhallows STAYNING, or Stane-­
church (i. e. Stone-church) is supposed
to be so called for a difference from
other churches, which of old time
were commonly built of timber.

St. Dunstan STEPNEY, alias Stebun-­
Heath. King Edward I. in the 27th
year of his reign, held a parliament
there in the house of Henry Wallis
mayor of London, wherein the expor­
tation of sterling money was prohi­
bited.

STIL-YARD, more properly Steel-­
yard, near Queen-hithe, a place belong­
ing to the merchants Almains, who
used to bring wheat, rye, and other
grain, as also divers other kind of
merchandizes. It is still employ'd in
warehouses for steel, iron, &c.

STOCKS-Market, so called from a
pair of stocks set up there for the pu­
nishment of offenders.

St. SWITHIN, bishop of Winche­
ster, who died anno 806.


T

TARSHISH [שישרת, Heb.] the son
of Javan, according to Josephus
gave name not only to Tarsus, but to
all Cilicia.

TEMPLE, formerly the mansion or
inn of the knights templars.

THAMES [thamesis, L. so called on
account of the meeting together of the
two rivers Thame and Owse, or Isis]
the chief river of Great Britain, which
takes its rise in Gloucestershire, runs up
to Oxford, and thence to London. The
sea flows up it from the eastward gent­
ly eighty miles towards the west, al­
most as far as Kingston; and from
thence to Oxford, and many miles far­
ther; boats are drawn for above two
hundred.

THIEVING-Lane in Westminster, so
called, because while Westminster abbey
had privilege of sanctuary, thieves
were carried through that lane to the
gate-house, to avoid going into the
privilege of the abbey.

THREE-Needle-street, commonly
called Thread-needle-street.

TIRAS [סרות, Heb.] the son of Ja­
phet, according to Josephus peopled
Thrace.

TOGARMAH [חמרנת, Heb.] the last
son of Gomer, was probably seated to
the east of Riphath, some think to the
north of Armenia, among the Iberian.

TOWN-DITCH, near Christ's hos­
pital, so called, because the ditch which
surrounded the city of London formerly
occupied that place.

TOWER-Royal, at the east of St.
Michael Pater-noster in the Vintry, was
once a place of good defence, as ap­
pears, in that when the rebels beset
the tower of London, and got possession
thereof, taking from thence whom they
listed, king Richard II's mother being
forced to fly, came to this Tower Royal,
where she remain'd in safety. And it
appears by ancient records, that seve­
ral kings of England were lodg'd in
this Tower Royal.

TURN-AGAIN-Lane, so called, be­
cause no thorough fare.


V

St. VEDAST, a bishop of Arras in
the low countries, who died
anno 55.

VINTRY-Ward, takes its name of
vintners, and of the Vintry, a part of
the bank of the river Thames, where
the merchants of Bourdeaux landed and
sold their wines, where also was a
large building with vaults and cellars
for stowage of wines.

St. Andrew UNDERSHAFT of Port­
soken or Aldgate Ward, London. This
church took its name of Undershaft,
from a great shaft or may-pole which
was formerly set up in the middle of
the street, before the south-door of
the church; which shaft, when it was
erected, was higher than the steeple.
This shaft or may-pole had never been
erected after Evil May day (so called on
account of an insurrection of the ap­
prentices, &c. against aliens, in the
year 1517) but was laid on hooks, and
under the pent-houses of a row of
houses and alley-gate, called Shaft-Al­
ley in Lime-street ward, till in the reign
of king Edward VI. one Sir Stephen, 
a curate of St. Katharine's Creed-Church, 
preaching at St. Paul's-Cross, told the
people, that this shaft was made an
idol, by giving the name of Undershaft
to the church: Whereupon, in the
afternoon of that Sunday, the neigh­



bours, over whose doors the shaft
hung, having first dined to make them­
selves strong, took the shaft off from
the hooks, where it had hung for 32
years, and saw'd it in pieces, every
man taking so much as had lain over
his premises,

St. Laurence UPWEL, in the parish
of St. Olave's Jury was so called, be­
cause there was a well under the east
end of the church.

UZ [צוע, Heb.] the eldest son of A­
ram, built Damascus, and gave name to
the country about the city, which
seems to be different from Uz where
Job dwelt, it lying towards Edom.


W

Petty WALES, over against the cu­
stom-house, Wool Key and
Galley Key, there was in old time some
fine large stone buildings, some ruins of
which were remaining not long since, 
which are thought to have been some­
time the lodgings of the princes of
Wales, when they repaired to the city.
And therefore the street in that part, 
is still (says Mr. Stow) called Petty
Wales.

WALWICK [of vold vig, Brit. i. e.
the head of the flood, Baxter] the
name of a place.

WALWIN [of &wyn;ealðen, Sax. to go­
vern, and &wyn;innan to win] a proper
name or surname.

WARDWICK [of Huiccii or Iceni
and &wyn;earð, Sax. i. e. a garrison of the
people called Iceni, Baxter] the name
of a place.

St. Andrews WARDROBE in Castle-­
Baynard ward,  was so call'd from the
king's wardrobe kept there in a fair
building, not far from the church. In
this house king Richard III. was lodg'd
in the second year of his reign.

WATER-Lane, so called of a wa­
ter-gate near the custom-house, and a
water-gate at the end of the street.

WATLING Street [some suppose it
to be so called of Vitellianus a Roman;
but Somnerus supposes of &wyn;eðla, Sax. a
beggar or &wyn;eðlian, Sax. to beg, be­
cause beggars constantly sat in that
street to ask alms.] It was one of the
4 Roman streets or high-ways, dividing
London in the midst from south to north, 
reaching from Dover to London, Dun­
stable, Towcester, Atterston and the Se­
vern near the Wrekin in Shropshire, ex­
tending it self to Anglesey in Wales.
The three other Roman streets or ways
were Ikeneld street, Erminage street, and
the Fosse.

WESTMINSTER [Weſtminſtre, 
Sax.] took its name from its westward
situation, and a Minster or abbey, 
founded there by Sebert, king of the
East Saxons, out of a temple of Apollo, 
which stood there and fell by an earth­
quake, about the year of our Lord 605.

The Isle of WIGHT [called anciently
Whitlanð, Sax. i. e. white land, and
also Wic-ea, Sax. the Welsh called it
Guich, which signifies a division or
separation, because it was thought that
this island was formerly cut off and se­
parated from the rest of England by the
force of the sea.] An island over against
Portsmouth, and over against Southamp­
ton.

WIGTOWN [of vig, Brit. or &wyn;a­
ʒan, Sax. to wax, and tun, a town]
the name of a place.

WINCHESTER Street, was a large
garden, adjacent to as large an house, 
built in the reign of king Henry VIII.
and Edward VI. by the marquis of Win­
chester, lord high treasurer of England.

WOOL-CHURCH, the parish church
of St. Mary Woolchurch, was so called of
a beam plac'd there in the church-yard
for weighing of wool, which was thence
call'd Woolchurch haw, of the tronage
or weighing of wool there.

WOOD-Street. Mr. Stow says, this
street was probably call'd so, from its
being built with wood, contrary to
the order in the reign of king Richard
I. which enjoin'd houses to be built of
stone, as used for 200 years, or else
from Thomas Wood, one of the sheriffs
in 1491, who was a great benefactor
towards the building of St. Peter's
church, which was in Wood Street.

St. Mary WOOLNOTH, of the Na­
tivity, probably so called, because this
church was dedicated to the Virgin
Mary, with the infant Jesus in her
arms; and Woolnoth of beams for
weighing wool having been anciently
near it.


Y

YORK Buildings, so called from be­
ing the seat of the archbishop of
York, after king Henry the VIII. had
taken White-hall (or York Place) from
cardinal Woolsey, who was archbishop
of York.







A COLLECTION of the CANTING WORDS and
TERMS, both ancient and modern, used by BEGGARS,
GYPSIES, CHEATS, HOUSE-BREAKERS, SHOP-LIFTERS,
FOOT-PADS, HIGHWAY-MEN, &c.

A

ABRAM, Naked, or having scarce
Cloaths enough to hide Naked­
ness.

This column is headed by a misleading wordgroup "AL".



ABRAM-COVE, a lusty Ro­
gue, with hardly any Cloaths on his
Back; a Tatterdemallion.

ABRAM-MEN, otherwise called
Toms of Bedlam, shabby Beggars, patch­ 
ed and trick'd up with Ribbons, Red-­
Tape, Fox-tails, Rags or various Co­
lours; pretending to be besides them­
selves, to palliate their Thefts of Poul­
try, Linnen, &c. A sort of itinerant
Hedge-Robbers, and Strippers of Chil­
dren, &c.

ACADEMY, a Bawdy-House; a Re­
ceptacle for all sorts of Villains, where
the young Ones are initiated in the
Canting Language, and all manner of
Cheats and Impostures, and sorted into
Tribes and Bands, according to their
several Capacities for mischief.

ADAM-TILER, the Comerade of a
Pick pocket, who receives stollen
Goods or Money, and scours off with
them, Tip the coal to Adam Tiler; i. e.
give the Money, Watch, &c. to a run­
ning Companion, that the Pick Pocket
may have nothing found upon him, 
when he is apprehended.

AFFIDAVIT-MEN, Knights of the
Post: mercenary and abandoned Wret­
ches, who used to frequent the Temple
and other Inns of Court, in order to be
in Readiness to swear any thing that
was proposed to them.

ALSATIA the Higher; White-Fryars, 
once a privileged Place, as the Mint
was lately; but suppressed, on Account
of the notorious Abuses committed in
it.

ALSATIA the Lower, the Mint in
Southwark.

ALSATIANS, the Inhabitants of
these two Places, such as broken
Tradesmen, extravagant Spendthrifts.

ALTEMAL. Vide Dutch Reckon­
ing.

AMBIDEXTER, one that goes snacks
in Gaming with both Parties; also a
Lawyer that takes Fees of Plaintiff and
Defendant at once.

This column is headed by a misleading wordgroup "AR".



To AMUSE [in a Canting sense] to
fling Dust in the Eyes; also to invent
strange Tales to delude Shop-keepers
and others, from being upon their
Guard.

AMUSEMENT, a blind, or feint.

AMUSERS, who were wont to have
their Pockets filled with Dust, which
they would throw into the Eyes of
People they had a mind to rob, and so
run away, while their Comerade, who
followed them, under the Notion of
pitying the half blinded Person, laid
his Hand on whatever came next.

ANGLERS, alias HOOKERS; petty
Thieves, who have a Stick with a
Hook at the End, wherewith they
pluck Things out of Windows, Grates, 
&c. Make ready your Angling Stick; a
Word of Command used by these pet­
ty Villains, to get ready the Stick with
which they perform their Pranks, and
as a Signal of a Prey in Sight. In the
Day-time they beg from house to
House, to spy best where to plant their
Designs, which at Night they put in
Execution.

ANTICKS, such as dress themselves
up with Ribbons, mismatched Colours, 
Feathers, &c.

ANTIQUATED, an old Rogue, or
one who has forgot, or left off his
Trade of thieving, is said so to be.

ARCH ROGUE, the Dimber-Damber
Uprightman or Chief of a Gang; as
Arch-Dell, or Arch-Doxy signifies the
same Degree in Rank among the Fe­
male Canters and Gypsies.

ARK, a Boat or Wherry.

ARK-RUFFIANS, Rogues, who in
Conjunction with Watermen, &c. rob
and sometimes murder on the Water;
by picking a Quarrel with the Passenger
and then plundering, stripping and
throwing him or her over board, &c.
A Species of Badgers.

ASSIG. an Assignation, Appointment
or Meeting.



AUNT, a Bawd, or Procuress; a Ti­
tle of Eminence for the Senior Dells, 
who serve for Instructresses, Midwives, 
&c. to the Morts.

AUTEM, a Church; also married.

AUTEM-BAWLER, a Preacher, or
Parson, of any Sect.

AUTEM-CACKLERS Dissenters
of any De­
nomination.

AUTEM-PRICKEARS Dissenters
of any De­
nomination.

AUTEM-CACKLETUB, a Conven­
ticle, a Meeting-house for Dissenters.

AUTEM-DIPPERS, Anabaptists.

AUTEM-DIVERS, Church-Pick-­
pockets; also Church-wardens, Over­
seers of the Poor.

AUTEM-GOGGLERS, pretended
French Prophets.

AUTEM-MORT, a marry'd Wo­
man; also one who travels up and
down the Country, with one Child in
their Arms, another on her Back, 
and often leading a third in her Hand.

AUTEM-QUAVERS, Quakers.

AUTEM-QUA-VERTUE, a Quaker's 
Meeting-House.


B
BACKED, dead; as He wishes the Se­
nior backed, i. e. He longs to have
his Father upon Six Mens Shoulders. His
Backs up, a taunting Expression.

BACON, the Prize, of whatever kind
which Robbers make in their Enter­
prizes, He has saved his Bacon; i. e. He
has himself escaped with the Prize,
whence it is commonly used for any 
narrow Escape. The Cove has a bien 
Squawl to maund Bacon; i. e. he has a
good Voice to beg Bacon; used to jeer
a bad Voice, or an indifferent Singer.
The Bacon-Sweard rakes in his Throttle;
i. e. the Sweard of the Bacon sticks in
his Throat; used to a person who has
Hoarseness, or one, who at their Mer­
ry-Meetings, excuses himself from
Singing, on pretence of a Cold.

BADGE, is used in a Canting Sense, 
for Burning in the Hand or Cheek (as
it used to be) as He has got his Badge and
piked away; He has been burned in the
Hand, &c. and is just set at Liberty.

BADGE-COVES, Parish-Pensioners.

BADGERS, a Crew of desperate Vil­
lains, who rob and kill near rivers, and
then throw the dead bodies therein.

BAGGAGE, as the heavy Baggage, 
the Children and Women who are un­
able to travel fast in Gangs of Gypsies, 
and Strowlers.

BALSOM, Money: The Cove has se­
cured the Balsom, i. e. He has seized the
Money.

A BAM, a Sham or Cheat; a knavish
Contrivance to amuse or deceive.

BANBURY story, of a Cock and a
Bull, an idle Relation, in order to pick
Acquaintance on the Road, till a con­
venient Place or Opportunity offer to
rob or plunder.

BANDITTI, Highwaymen, Horse or
Foot, now used for Rogues of any kind, 
but strictly Italian Rapparees.

BANDOG, a Bailiff or his Follower;
a Sergeant or his Yeoman.

BANTLING, a Child.

BARKER, a Salesman's Servant that
walks before the Shop, to invite cus­
tomers.

BARNACLE, a good Job, or a Snack
easily got; so called from the Gratuity
given to Jockeys, for buying and selling
Horses.

BARNACLES, the Irons worn in
Goal by Felons. A Pair of Spectacles
is also called Barnacles; as I saw the
Cuffin Quire with his Nose Barnacled, 
making out the Cove's Dispatches, i. e. I
saw the Justice of Peace with his Spec­
tacles on making out his Mittimus.

BAR-WIG, between a bob and a
long one.

To BASTE, to beat.

BASTONADING, a Cudgelling.

BATTEN, to fatten; to keep up a
Fowl, &c. till it is fit for eating.

BATTENER, an Ox; The Cove has
hushed the Battener; i. e. He has killed
the Ox, in revenge on some Farmer,
who, perhaps, got him sent to the
House of Correction.

BATTERED BULLY, an old well
cudgelled and bruised huffing fellow.

BAUBEE, an Halfpenny; as The Cove
tipt the Maund but a single Baubee let's
souse him for it i. e. The Gentleman
has given the Beggar but a single Half­
penny; lets plunder him for his Nig­
gardliness.

BAUBELS, or BAWBLES, Jewels, 
Tweezers, Snuff-boxes, any sort of
Gold or Silver Trinkets.

BAWD, a Female Procuress.

BAWDY-BASKETS; a sort of di­
minutive Pedlars, who sell Obscene
Books, Pins, Tape, &c. but live more
by pilfering and stealing.

BAWDY-HOUSE-BOTTLE, a very
small one.

BEAR-GARDEN-DISCOURSE, com­
mon, filthy, nasty talk.

BEARD-SPLITTER, a Whore-mas­
ter.

BEAU-TRAPS; an Order of



Villains, Genteel-dressed Sharpers, 
who lie in wait to insnare and draw in
young Heirs, raw Country Squires and
ignorant Fops.

BECK, or HARMANBECK, a Beadle.

BEEF, to alarm, as They have cryed
Beef upon us; they have discovered, 
us and are in Pursuit of us.

BELCH, any sort of Malt-liquor so
called.

BELLY-CHEAT, an Apron.

A BEN, a foolish Fellow, a Simple­
ton.

BENISH, foolish, simple.

BENAR, better.

BENE or BIEN, good, Pike on the
Bene, i. e. Run away as fast as you can.

BENE-BOWSE, strong Liquor.

BENE-COVE, a good Fellow, a mer­
ry companion.

BENE-DARKMANS, good Night.

BENESHIP, very good, very well.
Beneshiply Worshipfully.

BENEFEAKERS, Counterfeiters of
Bills, Bonds, Notes, Receipts, &c.

BENEFEAKERS OF GYBES, Coun­
terfeiters of Passes.

BESS, Bring Bess and Glym; i. e.
Forget not the Instrument to break
open the Dour, and the Dark Lan­
thorn.

BET, as secure the Bet, secure the
Prize.

BETTY or BESS, a small Engine to
force open the Doors of houses; Mill
the Gig with your Betty; i. e. Break
open the Door with your Instrument.

BEVER, an Afternoons Lunchion.

BEVERAGE, Garnish-money.

BIDDY, a Chicken.

BILK, to cheat or deceive. Bilk the
Rattling Cove; Sharp the Coachman of
his Hire.

BILL or BILBOA, a Sword. Bite
the Bill from the Cull; i. e. Whip the
Sword from his Side.

BILL of Sale, a Bandore, or Widow's
Peak.

To BING, to go, &c.

BING-AWAST, Get you hence: Be­
gone; haste away; He Bing'd awast in a
Darkmans, i.e. He Stole away in the
Night-time. Bing we to Rum vile? i. e.
Go we to London.

BINGO, Geneva, or Brandy.

BINGO-BOY, a great Geneva Drink­
er.

BINGO-CLUB, a Club of Geneva
Drinkers.

BINGO-MORT, a She Brandy Drin­
ker.

BIRDS OF A FEATHER, Rogues
of the same Gang.

BIRD-WITTED, hare-brained; not
solid or stayed.

BIT, Robbed, Cheated or Out-Wit­
ted. Also Drunk, as He has bit his
Grannum; He is very Drunk. Bit the
Blow, performed the Theft, played the
Cheat, You have bit a great Blow; You
have robbed somebody of or to a con­
siderable Value.

BITE, a Rogue, Sharper or Cheat;
also a Woman's Privities, as The Cull
wapt the Morts Bite; i. e. The Fellow
enjoyed the Woman briskly. Bite
the Biter, rob the Rogue, sharp the
Sharper, or Cheat the Cheater. Bite
the Cully, put the Cheat on a silly
Fellow. Bite the Roger, steal the
Portmanteau. Bite the Wiper, steal
the Handkerchief. He will not Bite or
swallow the Bait; He wont be drawn
in. To Bite on the Bit; To be pinched
or reduced to hard Meat; a scanty or
sorry sort of Living.

BLACK and WHITE, under one's
Hand, or in Writing.

BLAB, one that is not to be confided
in upon an Enterprize or Intrigue.

BLACK-BOX, a Lawyer.

BLACK-COAT, a Parson.

BLACK-GUARD, dirty, nasty, tat­
terred roguish Boys, that formerly
were wont to attend at the Horse-­
Guards to wipe Shoes, and clean Boots.

BLACK-JACK, a leather-Jug to
drink in.

BLACK-INDIES, Newcastle, from
whence the Coals are brought.

BLACKMUNS, Hoods and Scarves of
Alamode and Lustrings.

BLACK-SPY, the Devil.

BLANK, down-looked, sheepish,
guilty.

BLEACH, as The Mort lay last Night a
Bleaching; the Wench looks very fair
to Day.

BLEATERS, they that are cheated
by Jack in a Box.

BLEATING-CHEAT, a Sheep.

BLEED, as, To bleed freely, i. e. To
part with their Money easily.

BLEEDING-CULLY, an easy Fellow, 
that is profuse with his Money, or
persuaded to support all the Extrava­
gancies of his Companion or Mistress, 
at his own Expence.

BLEW-JOHN, Wash, or After-­
wort.

A BLIND, a Feint, a Pretence, a
shift.

A BLIND ALE-HOUSE, one fit to
conceal a pursued or hunted Villain.

BLIND-CHEEKS, the Breech.

BLIND-HARPERS, Canters, who



counterfeit Blindness, strowl about with
Harps, Fiddles, Bagpipes, &c. led by
a Dog or Boy.

BLOCK-HOUSES, Prisons, houses
of Correction, &c.

BLOSS, a Shop-lifter; also a Bully's
pretended Wife, or Mistress, whom he
guards, while she supports him; also a
Whore.

To BLOT the Skrip, and jark it, i. e.
to stand engaged, or be bound for any
Body.

BLOW, as He has bit his blow, he has
stollen the Goods, &c.

BLOWER, a Mistress; also a
Whore.

To BLOW off the Groundsils, i e. To
lie with a Woman on the floor or
Stairs.

To BLOW off the loose Corns; To lie
now and then with a woman.

BLUBBER, the Mouth, I've stopt the
Culls Blubber, I've stopt the Fellow's
Mouth; meant either by gagging or
murdering him.

BLUBBERING, much Crying.

To look BLUFF; To look big or
like Bull-beef.

BLUFFER, an Inn-keeper or victu­
aller.

BLUNDERBUS, an awkward Fel­
low.

A BLUSTRING Fellow, a rude rat­
ling Hector.

BOARDING-School, Briedwell or
New Prison; or any Work-house, or
House of Correction, for Vagrants, 
Beggars and Villains, &c.

BOARDING Scholars, Bridewell-­
Birds.

BOB, a Shop-lifts Comerade, Assis­
tant or Receiver. Bob also signifies
Safety.

It is all BOB, i. e. All is Safe.

BOBBED, cheated, tricked, baulked.

BOB-TAIL, a light woman, also an
Eunuch or impotent Fellow.

BOG-LANDERS, Irish Men.

BOB-TROTTERS, Scotch or North
Country Moss troopers, or Highway-­
Men.

BOLTER of White Fryars, one that
peeps out, but dares not venture abroad.

BOLTSPRIT, the nose, He has broke
his Boltsprit; He has lost his Nose by
the Pox.

To BONE, to apprehend, sieze, take
or arrest. I'll Bone ye; I'll cause you
to be arrested. We shall be Boned, we
shall be apprehended for the Robbery.
The Cove is Boned and gone to the Whit;
the Rogue is taken up and carried to
Newgate. The Cull has Boned the Fen
(for Fence) or Bloss that hit the Blow, 

The Man has taken the Thief that
robbed his House or Shop, or picked
his Pocket. If he be Boned he must shove
the Tumbler: If he be taken he'll be
whipt at the Cart's-tail. I have Boned
her Dudds, Fagged and Brushed; I have
taken away my Mistress's cloaths, beat
her and am trooped off. Boning the
Fence; finding the Goods where con­
cealed and seizing them. He made no
Bones of it.

BONNY-CLAPPER, sowre Butter­
milk.

BOOTH, a house, as Heave the Booth;
Rob the House.

To Play BOOTY, to play with a De­
sign to lose.

BOOZE, Vide BOWSE.

BORDE, a Shilling, Half a Borde, 
Six-pence.

BOTTLE-HEAD, void of Wit.

BOUGHS; as He is up in the Boughs,
said of one upon the Rant, or in a great
Ferment.

BOUNCE, as a meer Bounce, a swag­
gering Fellow.

BOUNCER, a Bully.

BOUNCING-Cheat, a Bottle.

BOWMAN; as a Bowman-Prigg, an
eminent Thief or Villain; a dextrous
Cheat, or House-breaker.

BOWSE, Drink, or to drink; see
Benbowse and Rumbowse.

BOWSY, Drunk.

BOWSING KEN; an Ale-house.

BRACKET-FACE, ugly, homely, 
ill-favoured.

BRAT, a little Child.

BRAVADO , a vapouring, or boun­
cing.

BRAVO, a mercenary Murderer, 
that will kill any body.

BRIM, or Brimstone, a very impu­
dent, lewd Woman.

BROTHER of the Blade, a Sword­
man or Soldier.

BROTHER of the Gussit, a Pimp, 
Procurer; also a Whore-master.

BROTHER-STARLING, that lies
with the same Woman or builds in the
same Nest.

BROTHER of the String, a Fidler, 
or Harper.

To BRUSH, to flee, or run away.
The Cully is brushed or robbed The Fel­
low is marched off or broke. Bought a
Brush, run away.

BRUSHER, a very full Glass of Li­
quor.

BUB, Drink. Rumbub very good
Tipple.

BUBBER, a drinking Bowl; also a



great Drinker, also one who steals plate
from publick Houses.

BUBE, the Pox. The Mort tipt the
Bube upon the Cully; The Wench has
clapped the Fellow.

To BUBBLE, To cheat or decieve. A
Bubble, an easy soft Fellow, one that is
fit to be imposed on, deluded, or
cheated.

BUCK, as a Bold Buck.

BUCK-FITCHES, old leacherous
Fellows.

BUCK'S-FACE, a Cuckold.

A BUDGE, one that slips into an
House in the Dark, and taking what
comes next to Hand, marches off with
it. If he meets with any body, he
asks, if such a Gentleman or Woman
be within; and is told, they know no
such Person, he begs Pardon, and says, 
he was mistaken in the House, imme­
diately marches off, and will not stay
for a Reply. To Budge, also signifies to
stir or move.

BUFF, a Dog.

How dost do my BUFF, a familiar
Salutation among the Canting Tribe.

To stand BUFF, is a Phrase used of
an obstinate hardened Rogue, who in a
Robbery will not be daunted at Ressis­
tance or Opposition, or leave his Com­
rogues in the Lurch, or a hardened
Rogue who will confess nothing.

BUFFER, a Rogue that kills good
sound Horses, only for their skins, by
running a long wire into them, and
sometimes knocking them on the Head.

BUFF-KNAPPER, a Dog-stealer, 
that trades in all Sorts of Dogs, selling
them at a round Rate, and himself or
Partner stealing them the first Oppor­
tunity.

BUFFERS-NAB, a Dog's-Head, used
in a counterfeit Seal to a false Pass.

BUGGING, taking Money by Bailiffs
and Serjeants of the Defendant not to
arrest him.

BUGHER, a Dog.

BULCHIN, a chubbingly Boy or Lad.

BULL, as, a Town Bull, a Whore­
master.

To look like BULL beef, to look big
and grim.

BULK, an Assistant to a File or Pick-­
Pocket, who jostles a Person up against
the Wall, while the other picks his
Pocket.

BULKER, one that lodges all Night
on Shop windows and Bulkheads.

BULLS-EYE, a Crown or Five Shil­
ling Piece.

BULLY, a supposed Husband to a
Bawd, or Whore; also a huffing Fel­
low, a pretended Bravo, but a Coward
at the Bottom.

BULLY-FOP, a maggot-pated, huf­
fing, silly, rattling Fellow.

BULLY-HUFF, a poor sorry Rogue, 
that haunts Bawdy-houses, and pre­
tends to get Money out of Gentlemen
and others, rattling and swearing the
Whore is his Wife.

BULLY-COCK, a Hector or Bravo
who sets on People to quarrel, pre­
tending to be a Second to them; and
then making Advantage of both.

BULLY-RUFFINS, Highway-men, 
or Foot-Pads, who attack with Oaths
and Curses, plunder without Mercy, 
and frequently murder without Ne­
cessity.

BULLY-TRAP, a Trapan, a Sharp­
er or Cheat.

BUM, a Bailiff or Serjeant.

BUNDLE-TAIL, a short, fat, or
squat Lass.

BUNG, a Purse, Pocket or Fob.

BUNG-NIPPERS, Cut-purses, who
with a short sharp Knife, and a horn
Thumb, used to cut Purses. Since the
wearing of Purses is out of Fashion, 
they are called Files or Pick-Pockets.

BUNTING-TIME, when the Grass
is high enough to hide the young Men
and Maids.

BUNTLINGS, Petticoats. Hale up
the main Buntings, throw up the Wo­
man's Petticoats.

BURNT, poxed, or clapt.

To BURN the Ken, is when Strollers
leave an Alehouse, without paying
their Quarters.

BURR, a Hanger on or Dependant.

BUTTER, to double or treble the
the Bet or Wager, in order to recover
all Losses.

To BUTTER, signifies also, to cheat
or defraud in a smooth or plausible
Manner; as, He'll not be Buttered;
He's aware of your Design, He's upon
his Guard, &c.

BUTTER BOXES, Dutchmen.

BUTTERED-BUN, lying with a
Woman that has been just lain with by
another Man.

BUTTOCK, a Whore.

BUTTOCK-Broker, a Bawd, also
a Match-maker.

A BUTTOCK and File, both Whore
and Pickpocket.

BUTTOCK and Twang, or a down­
right Buttock and sham File, a common
Whore, but no Pickpocket.

BUZZARD, a foolish, soft Fellow, 
drawn in and culled or tricked.

BY-BLOW, a Bastard.





C

CACKLE, to discover, The Cull
Cackles, The Rogue tells all.

CACKLING-CHEATS, Chickens, 
Cocks or Hens.

CACKLING-FARTS, Eggs.

CALLE, a Cloak or Gown.

CAMBRIDGE-FORTUNE, a Wo­
man without any Substance.

CAMESA, a Shirt or Shift.

CAMPAIGN-COAT , in a Canting
Sense, the ragged, tatter'd, patch'd
Coat, worn by Beggers and Gypsies, in
order to move Compassion.

CANARY-BIRD, a little arch or
knavish Boy; a Rogue or Whore
taken, and clapp'd into the Cage or
Round-house.

CANE upon ABEL, a good Stick or
Cudgel, well-favouredly laid on a
Man's Shoulders.

CANK, Dumb. The Cull's Cank;
The Rogue's Dumb; a Term used by
Canters, when one of their Fraternity, 
being apprehended, upon Examina­
tion, confesses nothing.

CANNIKIN, the Plague.

A CANT, an Hypocrite, a Dissem­
bler, a double-tongu'd, whining Per­
son.

CANTING, the mysterious Lan­
guage of Rogues, Gypsies, Beggars, 
Thieves, &c.

CANTING CREW, Beggars, Gypsies.

To CAP, to Swear. I will Cap
downright, I will Swear home.

CAPTAIN-HACKUM, a fighting, 
blustering Bully.

CAPTAIN-QUEERNABS, a Fellow
in poor Cloaths, or Shabby.

CAPTAIN-SHARP, a great Cheat;
also a huffing, yet freaking, cowardly
Bully.

CAPTAIN-TOM, a Leader of the
Mob; also the Mob itself.

CARAVAN, a good round Sum of
Money about a Man; also him that is
cheated of it.

CARRIERS, a Set of Rogues, who
are employ'd to look out, and watch
upon the Roads, at Inns, &c. in order
to carry Information to their respec­
tive Gangs, of a Booty in Prospect.

CARTED-WHORE, whipp'd pub­
lickly, and pack'd out of Town.

CASE, a House, Shop, or Ware­
house; also a Bawdy-house. As Toute
the Cose, view, mark, or eye the House
or Shop. 'Tis all Bob; now let us dub
the Gigg of the Case; now the Coast is
clear, let us fall on, and break open
the door of the house.

A CASE-VROW, a Whore that
plies in a Bawdy-house.

CASH, or Cassan, Cheese.

CASTER, a cloak.

CAT, a common Whore or Prosti­
tute. Who shall hang the Bell about the
Cat's Neck? Who shall begin the At­
tack first? said of a desperate Under­
taking.

CATCH-FART, a Foot-boy.

CATCHING-HARVEST, a preca­
rious Time for Robbery; when many
People are out upon the Road, by
means of any adjacent Fair, Horse-­
race, &c.

CATCH-POLL, a Serjeant, or Bay­
liff, that arrests People.

CATHARPIN-FASHION, when
People in Company drink cross, and
not round about from the Right to
the Left, or according to the Sun's
Motion.

CATTING, drawing a Fellow thro'
a Pond with a Cat. Also whoring.

CATMATCH, when a Rook or
Cully is engag'd amongst bad Bowlers,

CAVAULTING SCHOOL, a Bawdy-­
house.

CAUDGE-PAW'D, Left-handed.

CAW-HANDED, awkward, not
dextrous, ready or nimble.

CHAF'D, well beaten or bang'd.

CHAPT, dry or thirsty.

CHARACTERED, Burnt in the Hand;
as, They have pawm'd the Character upon
him; i. e. They have burnt the Rogue
in the Hand.

CHATES, the Gallows.

CHATTS, Lice. To Squeeze the
Clatts; To crack or kill those Vermin.

CHICKEN, a feeble little Creature, 
of mean Spirit.

CHINK, Money, so call'd because it
chinks in the Pocket.

A CHIP, a Child. As, A Chip of the
old Block; A Son that is his Father's
likeness.

CHIRPING-MERRY, very pleasant
over a Glass of good Liquor.

CHIT, a Dandyprat, or Durgen, a
little trifling-Fellow.

CHITTIFACE, a little puny Child.

CHIVE, a Knife, File or Saw.

To CHIVE his Darbies, To saw asun­
der his Irons or Fetters.

To CHOP, to change or barter. Also
a Job, or Booty, as, A Chop by Chance, 
a rare Booty, when 'twas not expected.

To CHOP, is also used to make Dis­
patch, to slubber over in Post-haste, as,



The Autem-Bawler, will soon quit the
Hums, for he chops up the Whiners; i. e.
The Parson will soon have dispatch'd
the Congregation, for he huddles over
the Prayers.

To CHOUSE, to cheat or trick.

CHUB, He is a young Chub, or a meer
Chub, very ignorant or unexperienc'd
in Gaming, not at all acquainted with
Sharping. A Good Chub, said by the
Butchers, when they have bit a silly raw
Customer.

CHUCK-FARTHING, a Parish Clerk.

CLACK, a Woman's Tongue.

CLAN, a Family, Tribe, Faction, 
or Party, in Scotland chiefly, but now
any where else.

CLANK, a Silver-tankard.

CLANKER, a swinging Lye.

CLANK NAPPER, a Silver-tankard
Stealer. See Rumbubber.

CLAPPERDOGEON, a Beggar born
and bred.

CLAW'D-OFF, lustily lash'd. Also
swingingly pox'd or clap'd.

CLEAR, very Drunk. The Cull is
clear, let's Bite him. The Fellow is
very drunk, let's Sharp him.

CLEAVE; as, One that will cleave;
used of a wanton Woman. Vide Clo­
ven.

CLENCH, a Pun or Quibble.

To CLENCH, to nick a Business by
timing it; as, The Cull has clench'd
the Job at a Pinch. The Rogue has
nick'd the Time, before any Passen­
gers came by, who might have rescu'd
the plunder'd Person.

CLEYMS, Sores without Pain, rai­
sed on Beggars Bodies, by their own
Artifice and Cunning, (to move Cha­
rity) by bruising Crows-foot, Spear­
wort, and Salt together, and clapping
them on the Place, which frets the
Skin; then with a Linnen Rag, which
sticks close to it, they tear off the Skin, 
and strew on it a little Powder'd Ars­
nick, which makes it look angrily or
ill-favouredly, as if it were a real
Sore.

CLERK'D, soothed, funn'd, imposed
on; The Cull will not be Clerk'd, i. e.
He will not be caught or taken by fair
Words.

To CLICK, to Snatch. I have Clickt
the Nab from the Cull; I whipt the Hat
from the Man's Head. Click the rum
Topping. Snatch that Woman's fine
Commode, or Head-Dress.

CLICKER [among the Canters.] He
whom they intrust to divide their
Spoils, and proportion to every one
his Share.

CLICKET, Copulation of Foxes, and
thence used in a Canting Sense, for that
of Men and Women; as The Cull and 
the Mort are at Clicket in the Dyke.

CLICKETING, the Act of Fruition.

CLINKER, a crafty Fellow.

CLINKERS, the Irons-Felons wear
in Goals.

CLOAK-TWITCHERS, Villains
who lurk in by and dark Places, to
snatch them off of the Wearer's Shoul­
ders.

CLOD-HOPPER, a Ploughman.

CLOUD, Tobacco. Will you raise a
Cloud? Will you smoak a Pipe?

CLOVEN, Cleave or Cleft, used of a
young Woman who passes for a Maid, 
and is not one.

CLOUT, a Handkerchief.

To CLOY, to Steal. Cloy the Clout;
steal the Money.

CLOYERS, Thieves, Robbers, 
Rogues.

CLOYING, Stealing, Thieving, 
Robbing.

CLOWES, Rogues.

To CLUCK, a Wench's Propension
to Male-Conversation, by her romping
and playfulness; when they say, The
Mort Clucks.

CLUMP, a Heap or Lump.

CLUMPISH, Lumpish.

CLUNCH, a clumsy Clown, an awk­
ward or unhandy Fellow.

CLY, Money. To cly the Jerk, to
be Whipt. Let's strike his Cly; Let's
get his Money from him. Also a
Pocket, as, Filed a Cly, Pick'd a Pocket.

COACH-WHEEL, as, A Fore-Coach-­
Wheel, Half a Crown. A Hind-Coach-­
Wheel, a Crown or Five-shilling Piece.

COB, an Irish Dollar.

COBBLE-COLTER, a Turkey. A
rum Cobble-colter, a fat, large Cock-­
Turkey.

COCK-BAWD, a Man who follows
that base Employment, of procuring;
a Pimp.

COCKISH, wanton, uppish, forward.

COCK-PIMP, a supposed Husband to
a Bawd.

COCK-ROBBIN, a soft easy Fellow.

COCK-SURE, very sure.

COD, a good Sum of Money; also a
Fool. A meer Cod, a silly, shallow
Fellow. A rum Cod; a good round
Sum of Money. An honest Cod; a trusty
Friend.

COD's-Head, a Fool.

COFE, as COVE. Which See.

To COG, to cheat at Dice. To Cog a
Die; to conceal or secure a Die; also
the Money or whatever the Sweetners



drop, to draw in the Bubbles: Also to
wheedle.

To COG a Dinner, to wheedle one
out of a Dinner.

COG a Clout; or, Cog a Sneezer; Beg
an Handkerchief, or Snuff-box.

COGUE, of brandy, a small Cup or
Dram.

COKER, a Lye. Rum-Coker, a whisk­
ing Lye.

COLD-Tea, Brandy. A couple of cold
Words, a Curtain-Lecture.

Cold Iron, 
a derisory Periphrasis for a Sword.

COLE, Money.

COLLEGE, Newgate; New College, 
the Royal-Exchange.

COLLEGIATES, the Prisoners of
the one, and the Shop-keepers of the
other of those Places.

To COLLOGUE, wheedle.

COLQUARRON, a Man's Neck; as, 
His Colquarron is just about to be twisted.
He is just going to be turn'd off.

COLT, an Inn-keeper that lends a
Horse to a Highway-man, or to Gen­
tlemen Beggars; also a Lad newly
initiated into Roguery.

COLT-BOWL, laid short of the
Jack, by a
COLT-BOWLER, a raw or unex­
perienced Person.

To COME, to lend. Has he come it?
Has he lent it you?

COMING-Women, such as are free of
their Flesh; also breeding Women.

COMMISSION, a shirt.

COMMON-Garden-Gout, or rather
Covent-Garden-Gout, the Foul Disease.

COMFORTABLE-Importance, a
Wife.

CONFECT, counterfeit, feigned.

CONTENT, I beat him to his Heart's
Content; till he had enough of Fighting.
Also to murder a Person, who resists
being robb'd. The Cull's Content; i. e.
He is past complaining.

CONTRE-TEMPS, a fruitless At­
tempt, or at an unseasonable Time.

CONVENIENT, a Mistress; also a
Whore.

CONVENIENCY, a Wife; also a
Mistress.

CONUNDRUMS, Whims, Maggots, 
and such like.

CONY, or Tom Cony, a silly Fellow;
A meer Cony, very silly indeed.

A COLD-COOK, an Undertaker of
Funerals.

COOK-RUFFIN, the Devil of a
Cook; or a very bad one.

COOL-CRAPE, When a Person dies, 
he is said to be put into his Cool-crape.

COOLER, a Woman.

COOL-LADY, a Wench that sells
Brandy (in Camps) a Suttler.

COOL-NANTZ, Brandy.

CORK-BRAIN'D, silly, foolish.

CORINTHIAN, a very impudent, 
harden'd, brazen-fac'd Fellow.

COSTARD, the Head. I'll give ye a
Knock on the Costard; I'll hit ye a Blow
on the Pate.

COTTON, They don't cotton; They
don't agree well.

To COUCH, to lie down, as, To
Couch a Hogshead; To go to Bed.

COVE, a Man, a Fellow, also a
Rogue. The Cove was Bit; The Rogue
was outsharped or out-witted. The
Cove has bit the Cole; The Rogue has
stollen the Money. That Cove's a rum
Diver; That Fellow is a clever Pick-­
pocket.

COVEY of Whores, a well-fill'd Baw­
dy-house.

COUNTERFEIT-CRANK, a gen­
teel Cheat, a Sham or Impostor, ap­
pearing in divers Shapes: one who
sometimes counterfeits Mens hands, or
forges Writings; at others personates
other Men: is sometimes a Clipper or
Coiner; at others a Dealer in Counter­
feit Jewels. Sometimes a strowling
Mountebank: To Day he is a Clergy­
man in Distress; to Morrow a reduced
Gentleman.

COURT-Card, a gay, fluttering
Fellow.

COURT-Holy-Water fair Speech­
es without
Performance.

COURT-Promises fair Speech­
es without
Performance.

COURT-Tricks, State-Policy, &c.

COWS-BABY, a Calf.

CRACK, a Whore.

To CRACK, is also used to break
open; as, To Crack up a Door; To
break a Door open.

CRACKER, the Backside; also Crust.

CRACKING, boasting, vapouring.

CRACKISH, whorish.

CRACKMANS, Hedges; as, The Cull
thought to have lop'd, by breaking thro'
the Crackmans; but we fetch'd him back
by a Nope on the Costard, which made
him silent; i.e. The Gentleman thought
to escape, by breaking through the
Hedges; but we brought him back by
a great Blow on the Head, which laid
him for Dead.

CRAG, a Neck; also the Stomach, 
or Womb.

CRAMP-RINGS, Bolts or Shackles.

CRAMP-WORDS, Sentence of
Death passed upon a Criminal by the
Judge; as, He has just undergone the



Cramp-Word; i. e. Sentence is just 
passed upon him.

CRANK, brisk, pert.

CRAP, Money. Nim the Crap; Steal
the Money. Wheedle for Crap; To
coax Money out of any Body.

CRASH, to Kill. Crash the Cull; i. e.
Kill the Fellow.

CRASHING-Cheats, Teeth.

CREATURES, Men raised by others, 
and their Tools ever after.

To CREEME, to slip or slide any
Thing into another's Hand.

CREW, a Knot or Gang; as, A
Crew of Rogues, &c.

CRIMP; as, To play Crimp, to lay or
bet on one Side, and (by foul Play) to
let the other win, having a Share of
the Purchase.

Run a CRIMP, to run a Race or
Horse-match foully or knavishly.

He CRIMPS it, He plays booty. A
crimping fellow, a sneaking Cur.

CRINKUMS, the foul Disease.

CROCKERS, Fore-stallers, Regra­
ters; otherwise called Kidders and
Tranters.

CROKER, a Groat or Fourpence.
The Cull tipt me a Croker, the Fellow 
gave me a Groat.

CRONY, a Comerade [in a Canting 
Sense.] Two or Three Rogues, who 
agree to beg or rob in Partnership, call 
one another Crony; as, Such a one is
my Crony; as much as to say, He and I
go Snacks.

CROP, Mony.

CROPPIN, the Tail, as, The Crop­
pin of the Rotan, The Tail of the Cart.

CROPPIN-KEN, a Privy or Bog-­
house.

To CROSS-BITE, to draw in a Friend,
yet snack with the Sharper; also to 
countermine or disappoint.

CROWN Office; as, He is got into
the Crown Office, i. e. He's got drunk.

CRUISERS, Beggars; also Highway 
Spies, who traverse the Road, to give
Intelligence of a Booty, &c.

CRUMP, one that helps Sollicitors
to Affidavit-Men.

CRUSTY-BEAU, one that lies with
a Cover over his Face all Night, and
uses Washes, Paint, &c.

Young CUB, a new Gamester drawn
in to be rook'd.

CUCUMBERS, Taylors.

CUDGELLIERS, a Mob rudely
arm'd; also Cudgel-Players.

CUFFIN, a Man.

CUFFIN-QUIRE. See Quire Cuffin.

CULP, a Kick or Blow.

CULL, a Man, either Honest, or
otherwise. A Bob-Cull, a Sweet-hu­
mour'd Man to a Wench. The Cull
naps us; The Person robb'd apprehends
us. A curst Cull, an ill-natur'd Fellow,
a Churl to a Woman.

CULLY, a Fop, a Fool, One who is
easily drawn in and cheated by Whores
and Rogues.

CUNNING-Shaver, a sharp Fellow, 
one that sharps or shaves (as they call
it) close.

CUP-SHOT, Drunk.

CUP of the Creature, strong-Liquor.

CURLE, Clippings of money.

CURSITORS, reduced Lawyers, as­
suming to themselves the Knowledge
of the Quirks and Quiddities of the
Law, and are perpetually fomenting liti­
gious Brawls, and insignificant Conten­
tions, among the Scum of the Vulgar.

CURTAILS, whose Practice is to
cut off Pieces of Silk, Cloth, Linnen 
or Stuff, that hang out at the Shop-­
Windows of Mercers, Drapers, &c.
as also sometimes the Tails of Wo­
mens Gowns, their Hoods, Scarves, 
Pinners, &c. if richly Lac'd.

CURTAIL'D, cut off, dock'd, shor­
ten'd, reduced.

CURTAIN-Lecture, Womens im­
pertinent scolding at their Husbands
behind the Curtain.

CURTEZAN, a genteel fine Miss,
or Quality Whore.

CUT, Drunk. Deep Cut, very
Drunk. Cut in the Leg or Sack, the
same. To Cut, also signifies to speak.
To Cut bene, to speak gently, civilly or
kindly; To Cut bene (or benar) Whidds,
to give good Words. To Cut queere
Whidds, to give ill Language. A Blow
with a Stick or Crane, is also called a
Cut. As, I took him a Cut cross the
Shoulders.


D

DAB, expert, well vers'd in
Roguery. A Rum Dab, a very
dextrous Fellow at Thieving, Cheat­
ing, Sharping, &c.

DACE, Two-pence; Tip me a
Dace, Lend me Two-pence, or pay
so much for me.

DAG, a Gun.

DAMBER, a Rascal. See Dimber.

DAMME-BOY, a roaring, mad, 
blustring Fellow, a Scourer of the
Streets.

DANCERS, Stairs.

DANDYPRAT, a little puny Fellow.



DARBY, ready Money; as, The Cull 
tipp'd us at the Darby; The Fellow gave 
us all his ready Money.

DARBIES, Irons, Shackles or Fet­
ters.

DARK Cully, a married Man, who
keeps a Mistress, and creeps to her in
the Night, for fear of Discovery.

DARKMANS, the Night; The Child
of Darkmans or Darkness, a Bell-man.

DARKMANS-Budge, one that slides
into a house in the Dusk, to let in
more Rogues to rob.

DASH, a Tavern-Drawer.

DAWB, a Bribe, a Reward for
secret Service; as, The Cull was gybbed, 
because he could not dawb. The Rogue
was punished, because he had no Pence
to bribe off his Sentence.

DEAD Cargo, a Term used by
Rogues, when they are disappointed in
the Value of their Booty.

DEAD-MEN, empty Pots or Bottles
on a Tavern Table.

DEAR Joyes, Irishmen.

DECUS, a Crown or Five Shilling
Piece.

DEFT Fellow, a tidy, neat, little
Man.

DEGEN, a Sword. Nim the Degen, 
whip the Sword from the Gentleman's
side.

DELLS, young bucksome Wenches, 
ripe and prone to Venery, but who
have not lost their Virginity, which
the Upright-Man pretends to, and
seizes: Then she is free for any of the
Fraternity. Also a common Strumpet.

DEVIL-drawer, a sorry Painter.

DEUSEAVILE, the Country.

DEUSEAVILE-Stampers, Country
Carriers.

DEWS-wins, or Deux-wins, Two-­
Pence.

DIDDLE, Geneva, a Liquor very
much drank by the lowest Rank of
People.

DIMBER, pretty.

DIMBER-Cove, a pretty Fellow.

DIMBER-Damher, a Top Man or
Prince amongst the Canting Crew;
also the chief Rogue of the Gang, or
the compleatest Cheat.

DIMBER-Mort, a pretty Wench.

To DING, to knock down.

DING-boy, a Rogue, a Hector, a
Bully, a Sharper.

DING-Dong, helter-skelter.

DIPT, engag'd or in Debt, pawn'd
or mortgag'd.

DISMAL-Ditty, a Psalm at the Gal­
lows.

DISPATCHES, a Mittimus, a Justice
of Peace's Warrant to send a Rogue
to Prison, &c.

To DIVE, to pick a Pocket.

DIVER, a Pick-pocket. See File.

DOASH, a Cloak.

To DOCK, to lie with a Woman. 
The Cull Docks the Dell in the Darkmans;
the Rogue lay with the Wench all
Night.

DOCTOR, a false Die that will run
but two or three Chances. They put
the Doctor upon him; they cheated him
with false Dice.

DOMERARS, or DROMMERARS, 
Rogues, pretending to have had their
Tongues cut out, or to be born Dumb
and Deaf, who artificially turn their
Tip of their Tongues into their
Throat, and with a Stick making it
bleed.

DOSE, Burglary, a breaking open a
House, Lock, Door, &c. as, He is cast
for Felon and Dose; i. e. found Guilty
of Felony and Burglary.

DOWN-HILLS, Dice that run low.

DOXIES, She-beggars, Wenches, 
Whores.

DRAB, a Whore, or Slut; a dirty
Drab, a very nasty Slut.

DRAWERS, Stockens.

DRAW-Latches, Robbers of Houses
that were fastened only by Latches.

DRIPPER, a sort of Clap, or vene­
real Gleet.

DROMEDARY, a heavy, bungling
Thief or Rogue. A purple Dromedary;
a Bungler or a dull Fellow at Thieving.

DROMMERARS. See Domerars.

DROP a Cog, to let fall (with Design
to draw in and cheat) a Piece of Gold;
also the Piece itself.

DROP in his Eye, almost drunk.

DRUMBELO, a dull, heavy Fellow.

DRY-Bob, a smart or sharp Repar­
tee.

DRY-Boots, a sly, close cunning
Fellow.

DUB, a pick-lock Key.

DUB, the Gigger, open the Door.
We'll strike it upon the Dub, We will
rob that Place.

DUBBER, a Picker of Locks.

A DUCE, Two-pence.

DUDDS, Cloaths or Goods. Rum
Dudds; fine or rich Cloaths or Goods.

DUDD-Cheats, Cloaths and things
stollen. Abraham Cove has wonne, (or
bit) Rum Dudds; the poor Fellow
has stollen very costly Cloaths.

To DUM-found, to beat soundly.

DUNAKER, a Stealer of Cows, or
Calves, &c.



DUDDERING Rake, a thundering
Rake, or of the first Rank, one devil­
ishly lewd.

DUP, to enter, or open a Door:
Dup the Ken, Enter the house. Dup
the Boozing Ken and booz a Gage, Go
into the Ale-house and drink a Pot.

DUST, Money; Down with your
Dust, Deposite your Money.

DUST it away, Drink quick about.

DUTCH-Reckoning, or Alte-mall, a
verbal or lump Accompt, without Par­
ticulars; as brought in at Spunging-­
Houses, at Bawdy Houses, and other
such like Places of ill Repute.


E

EAGLE, a winning Gamester.

EARNEST, Part or Share. Tip
me my Earnest, Give me my Snack or
Dividend.

EASY, facile, supple, pliable, ma­
nageable. As make the Cull easy; Gagg
him, that he may make no Noise;
sometimes used for murdering a Person
robbed, for fear of Discovery.

EBB water, when there is but little
Money in the Pocket.

EDGE; as, Fall Back, fall Edge; i. e.
At all Adventures; used to express a
villainous and dating Resolution for
Mischief, whatever may be the Con­
sequence.

To EDGE, or, as 'tis vulgarly call'd, 
To EGG one on; to stimulate, provoke, 
push forwards, to sharpen, or whet on
for Mischief.

ELBOW-shaker, a Gamester or Shar­
per.

ELF, little.

EMPTY, as, The Cull looks Empty;
or, 'Tis all Empty: i. e. the Person or
House has not the Riches reported, or
is not worth attempting.

ENGLISH Manufacture, Ale, Beer, 
or Cyder.

EQUIPT, rich; also having new
Cloaths. Well equipt, plump in the
Pocket, or very full of Money; also
Very well drest. The Cull equipt me
with a Brace of Meggs, The Gentleman
furnish'd me with a Couple of Gui­
neas.

ERIFFS, Rogues just initiated, and 
beginning to practise.

EVES, Hen-Roosts.

EVES-Dropper, one that lurks about 
to rob or steal.

EWE, or, The white Ewe, a Top-­
woman very beautiful.


F

FACER, a Bumper without Lip-­
room.

FADGE, as, It won't fadge or do.

FAG, to Beat; as, Fag the Bloss, 
Bang the Wench; Fag the Fen, Drub
the Whore. Whence
To FAGGOT, to bind Hand and
Foot; as Faggot the Culls; i. e. Bind
the Men.

FAIR-Roe-Buck, a Woman in the
Bloom of her Beauty.

FAMBLE-Cheats, Gold Rings, or
Gloves.

FAMBLERS, Villains that go up and
down selling counterfeit rings, &c.

FAMBLES, Rings; also the Hands.

To FAMGRASP, to agree or make
up a Difference. Famgrasp the Cove, 
to agree with the Adversary.

FAMILY of Love, Lew'd Women, 
Whores; also a Sect.

FAMMS, Hands.

FARTING-Crackers, Breeches.

FASTNER, a Warrant.

FASTNESSES, Boggs.

FAT, rich, as, A Fat Cull; a rich
Fellow.

FAULKNER, a Tumbler, a Jug­
gler, a Shewer of Tricks, &c.

FAYTORS, or FATORS, A kind
of Gypsies, pretending to tell People
their Fate or Destiny, or what they
were born to.

FEATHER-bed-lane, any bad Road, 
bar particularly that betwixt Dunchurch
and Daintry. To Feather his Nest, to
inrich himself by indirect Means, or
at the Expence of others.

FEINTING, an Attempt on one part
of a House, or Road, &c. when their
chief Stress or Attempt lies in another.

FEN, a Strumpet, or Bawd, a com­
mon prostitute.

To FENCE, to spend, Fence his Hog, 
spend his Shilling.

A FENCE, is also a Receiver and
Securer of Stollen Goods.

FENCEING-Cully, the same.

FENCING-Ken, a Warehouse, 
where Stollen Goods are secured.

FERME, a Hole.

FERMERLY-Beggars, all those that
have not the sham Sores or Cleymes.

FERRET, a Pawn-broker, or
Tradesman that sells Goods upon Trust
at excessive Rates, and then hunts
them, and often throws them into
Goal, where they perish for his Debt.



FERRETED, cheated.

FETCH, a Trick or Wheedle. A
meer Fetch.

To FIB, to beat; Fib the Cove's
Quarron in the Rumpad, for the Lour in
his Bung. Beat the Man in the High­
way for the Money in his Purse.

FIDDLE, a Writ to Arrest.

FIDLERS-Pay, Thanks and Wine.

To FILCH, to Steal.

A FILCH, a Staff, with a Hole thro'
and a Spike at the Bottom, to pluck
Cloaths from a Hedge or any thing out
of a Casement.

FILCHERS, the same with AN­
GLERS.

FILCHING-Cove, a Man-Thief.

FILCHING-Mort, a Woman-Thief.

To FILE, to Rob, or Cheat.

A FILE, or Bungnipper, Pick-pockets, 
who generally go in Company with a
Rogue, called a Bulk or Bulker, whose
Business 'tis to jostle the Person against
the Wall, while the File picks his
Pocket; and generally gives it to an
Adam tiler, who scowers off with it.

FILE-Cloy, a Pick-pocket, Thief or
Rogue; the same as FILE.

FIRE-Ship a Pockey Whore.

FLAG, a Groat; The Flag of Defi­
ance is cut, (among the Tarrs) the
Fellow's Face is very red, and he is
drunk.

FLAM, a Trick or Sham Story.

FLANDERS-Fortunes, of small Sub­
stance.

FLANDERS-Pieces, Pictures that
look fair at a Distance, but coarser
near at Hand.

FLAP DRAGON, a Clap or Pox.

FLASH, a Peruke. Rum Flash, a
long, full, high-priz'd Wig. Queer-­
Flash, a sorry weather-beaten Wig.

FLASH-Ken, a house were Thieves
use, and are connived at.

FLAW'D, Drunk.

To FLEECE, to Rob, Plunder or
Strip.

FLESH Broker, a Match-maker;
also a Bawd.

FLIBUSTIERS, West Indian Pirates, 
or Buckaneers, Free-booters.

FLICKER, a Drinking Glass. The
Flicker snapt, the Glass is broken. Nim
the Flicker. Steal the Glass. Rum
Flicker, a large Glass or Rummer.
Queer Flicker, a green, or ordinary
Glass.

FLICKING, to cut, cutting, as, Flick
me some Panam and Cassam; Cut me
some Bread and Cheese. And, Flick
the Peter, cut off the Clock-bag or
Portmanteau.

FLOGG, to Whip.

FLOGG'D, severely lash'd.

FLOGG'D at the Tumbler, whipt at
the Cart's Arse.

FLOGGING, a naked Woman's
whipping with Rods an old (usually)
and (sometimes) a young Letcher.
The Prancer drew the Queer Cove, at
the Crop-pin of the Rotan, through the
Rum Pads of the Rumvile, and was
Flogg'd by the Rum Cove, i. e. The
Rogue was dragg'd at the Cart's tail
through the chief Streets of London, 
and was soundly whipt by the Hang­
man.

FLOGGING-Cove, the Beadle, or
Whipper in Bridewell, or any such
Place.

FLOGGING-Cully, an old Letcher, 
who, to stimulate himself to Venery, 
causes himself to be whipp'd with
Rods.

FLOGGING-Stake, a whipping
Post.

FLORENCE, a Wench that is
touz'd and ruffled.

FLUSH in the Pocket, full of Money.
The Cull is Flush in the Fob, the Spark's
Pocket is well lin'd with Money.

FLUSTER'D, Drunk.

FLUTE, the Recorder of London, 
or of any other Town.

FLYERS, Shoes.

FLYING-Camps, Beggars plying in
Bodies at Funerals.

FOB, a Cheat, or Trick.

FOB off, slily to cheat or deceive.

FOG, Smoke.

FOGUS, Tobacco. Tip me a Gage of
Fogus, Give me a Pipe of Tobacco.

FOOTMAN'S Mawn'd, an artificial
Sore made with unslack'd Lime, Soap, 
and the Rust of old Iron, on the Back
of a Beggar's Hand, as if hurt by the
Bite or Kick of a Horse.

FOOT-Pads, or LOW Pads; a Crew
of Villains, who rob on Foot, some
of them using long Poles or Staves, 
with an Iron Hook at the End, with
which they either pull Gentlemen from
their Horses, or knock them down: At
other Times, they skulk under Hedges
or behind Banks in the Road, and sud­
denly starting out from their Covert, 
one seizes the Bridle, while the other
dismounts the Passenger: and so rob, 
and often murder him.

FORMAN of the Jury, one that en­
grosses all the Talk to himself.

To FORSTALL, to antedate or
anticipate.

FORK, a Pick-pocket. Lets Fork
him; Let us pick that Man's Pocket.



It is done by thrusting the Fingers, 
strait, stiff, open and very quick into
the Pocket, and so closing them, hook
what can be held between them.

A FORK, is also used for a Spend­
thrift.

FORLORN-Hope, losing Gamesters.

FORTUNE-Hunters, Irishmen, Pur­
suers of rich Heiresses, &c. to obtain
them in Marriage. A Creature of For­
tune, one that lives by his Wit.

FORTUNE-Tellers, the Judges of
Life and Death.

FOUNDLING, a Child dropt in the
Streets for the Parish to keep.

A FOX, a sharp, cunning Fellow.

FOXED, Drunk.

FOYST, a Cheat, a Rogue.

FRATERS, such as beg with sham
Patents or Briefs for Spitals, Prisons, 
Fires, Inundations, &c.

FREE-Booters, lawless Robbers, and Plunderers; also Soldiers serving for
that Privilege without Pay, Inroaders.

FREEHOLDER, he whose Wife goes
with him to the Alehouse.

FREEZE, a thin, small, hard Cyder, 
much used by Vintners and Coopers in
parting their Wines, to lower the
Price of them, and to advance their
Gain. A Freezing Vintner, a Vintner
that balderdashes his Wine.

FRENCH Gout, the Pox. A Blow
with a French Faggot stick, when the
Nose is fallen by the Pox.

FRENCHIFIED, clapt or Poxt.

FRIGOT well rigged, a Woman well
drest and genteel.

FROE, for Vrowe, (Dutch) a Wife, 
Mistress, or Whore, Brush to your Froe
(or Bloss) and wheedle for Crap, whip
to your Mistress, and speak her fair
to give, or lend you some Money.

FROG-Landers, Dutchmen.

FRUMMAGEMM'D, choaked, stran­ 
gled, or hanged.

FRUMP, a dry Rob, or Jest.

FUDDLE, Drink. This is rum Fud­
dle, This is excellent Tipple.

FUDDLE-Cap, a Drunkard.

FUN, a Cheat, or slippery Trick;
What do you fun me? Do you think to
sharp or trick me? He put the fun upon
the Cull; he sharped the Fellow.

FUN, is also used for the Backside;
as, I'll kick your Fun; i. e. I'll kick your
Breech. Likewise for Game or Diver­
sion; as We had rare Fun with him.

FUNK, Tobacco Smoak.

FUR-Men, Aldermen.

FUSSOCKS, as A meer Fussocks, a lazy
fat Wench. A fat Fussocks, a fat ful­
som, strapping Woman.

FUSTILUGGS, a fulsom, beastly,
nasty Woman.


G

GAG, to put iron Pins into the
Mouths of the Robbed, to hinder
them from crying out.

GAGE, a Pot or Pipe, Tip me a Gage, 
give me a Pot or Pipe.

GAME, Bubbles drawn in to be
cheated; also at a Bawdy-house, lewd
Women. Have ye any Game Mother?
Have ye any Whores, Mistress-Bawd.

GAN, a Mouth.

GANS, the Lips.

GANG, an Ill Knot or Crew of
Thieves, Pick-pockets or Miscreants.

GAOLERS-Coach, a Hurdle.

GARNISH-Money, what is customari­
ly spent among the Prisoners at first
coming in.

GEE; as It won't Gee, it won't hit, 
or go.

GELT, or Gelt, Money.

GENTRY-Cove, a Gentleman.

GENTRY-Cove-Ken, a Nobleman's 
or Gentleman's House.

GENTRY-Mort, a Gentlewoman.

GEORGE, a Half-Crown piece.

GIG, a Nose; also a Woman's Privi­
ties. Snichel the Gig, fillip the Fellow
on the Nose. A young Gig, a wanton
Lass.

GIGGER, a Door, Dub the Gigger, 
that we may ravage the Ken, i. e. Open
the Door with the Pick-lock, that we
go in and rob the House.

GIGGLERS, wanton Women.


GILL, a Quartern (of Brandy, Wine
&c.) also a homely Woman.

GILL-FLURT, a proud Minks; also
a Slut or light Housewife.

GILT, or Rum-dubber, a Picklock, so
called from Gilt, or Key; many of them
are so expert, that from a Church-­
Door, to the smallest Cabinet or Trunk
they will find means to open it. They
generally pretending Business of Se­
cresy, covet to go up Stairs with their
Company, in a Publick-house or Ta­
vern, and then prying about, open any
Door, Trunk or Cabinet that they
think will afford them Booty, and so
march off.

GIMCRACK, a spruce Wench.

GINGER-Bread, Money.

GINGERLY, gently, soft, easily.

GINGUMBOBS, Toys or Baubles.

GINNY, an Instrument to lift up a
Grate, the better to steal what is in the
Window.



To GLAVER to fawn and flatter.

GLAZE, a Window.

GLAZIER, one that creeps in at
Casements, or unrips Glass-Windows
to filch and steal.

GLAZIERS, Eyes. The Cove has
rum Glaziers.

GLIB, smooth, without a Rub.

GLIM, a Dark-Lanthorn used in rob­
bing Houses; also to burn in the Hand
as if the Cull was Glimmed, he'll gang to
the Nub; i. e. if the Fellow has been
burnt in the Hand, he'll be hanged
now.

GLIMFENDERS, Andirons. Rum
Glimfenders, silver Andirons.

GLIMFLASHY, angry or in a Passion.
The Cull is Glimflashy, the Fellow is in 
a Heat.

GLIMJACK, a Link-boy.

GLIMMER, Fire.

GLIMMERER, such as with sham
Licences, pretend to Losses by Fire
&c.

GLIMSTICK, a Candle-stick. Rum
Glimsticks, Silver Candlesticks. Queer
Glimsticks, Brass, Pewter or Iron Can­
dlesticks.

GOADS, those that wheedle in Chap­
men for Horse-coursers.

GOAT, a Letcher, or very lascivious
Person.

GOATISH, letcherous, wanton, lust­
full.

GOB, the Mouth; also a Bit or
Morsel; hence Gobbets, now in use for
Bits; Gift of the Gob, a wide, open
Mouth; also a good Songster, or Sing­
ing Master.

GOBBLER, a Turkey-Cock.

GOING upon the Dub, Breaking a
House with Picklocks.

GOLD-Droppers, Sweetners, Cheats, 
Sharpers.

GOLD-Finch, he that has often a
Purse of Gold in his Fob.

GOLD-Finders, Emptiers of Jakes or
Houses of Office.

GOOD Fellow, a Pot Companion or
Friend of the Bottle.

GOOSE, or Goose cap, a Fool. A
Taylors Goose roasted, a Red-hot
smoothing Iron, to close the seams.
Hot and heavy like a Taylors Goose. ap­
plied to a passionate Coxcomb.

GOREE, Money but chiefly Gold.

GRAFTED, made a Cuckold of.

GRANNAM, Corn.

GRANNAM Gold, old hoarded Coin.

GREEN Bag, a Lawyer.

GREEN-Gown, a throwing of young
Lasses on the Grass, and kissing them.

GREEN Head, a very raw Novice,
or unexperienced Fellow.

GRIG, a Farthing; A merry Grig, a
merry Fellow.

GRINDERS, Teeth.

GROPERS, blind Men.

GROUND-Sweat, a Grave.

To GRUB, to eat, to dine, &c.

GRUB, Victuals.

GRUB-street-News, false, forg'd News.

GRUMBLING of the Gizzard, mur­
muring, muttering, repining.

GRUNTER, a sucking Pig.

GRUNTING-Cheat, a Pig.

GRUNTING-Peck, Pork.

GULL, a Cheat.

GULLED, cheated, rooked, sharped.

GULL-Gropers, a By-stander that
lends Money to the Gamesters.

GUN, as He's in the Gun; he's in Li­
quor.

A GUN, a Lie.

GUNDIGUTS, a fat, pursy Fellow.

GUN-Powder, an old Woman.

GUT-foundered, exceeding hungry.

GUTLING, eating much.

GUTS, a very fat, gross Person.

GUTTER-Lane, the Throat.

GUTTING an House, rifling it, clear­
ing it.

GUTTING, an Oyster, eating it.

GUZZLE, Drink.

GUZZLING, drinking much.

GYBE or JYBE, any Writing or Pass
sealed.

GYBING, jeering or jerking.

GYPSIES. They endeavour to per­
suade the Ignorant, that they derive
their Origin from the Egyptians, a Peo­
ple heretofore very famous for Astrono­
my, Natural Magick, the art of Divinati­
on, &c. and therefore are great Pre­
tenders to Fortune-telling. To colour
their Impostures, they artificially dis­
colour their Faces, and rove up and
down the Country in a Tatterdemalion
Habit, deluding the ignorant Vulgar, 
and often stealing from them what is
not too hot for their Fingers, or too
heavy to carry off.

It is the Custom of these Wretches
to swear all that are admitted into their
Fraternity, by a Form and Articles
annexed to it, administred by the Prin­
cipal Maunder or Roguish Strowler, and
which they generally observe invio­
lably. The Manner of admitting a
new Member, together with the said
Oath and Articles, are as follows.

The Name of the Person is first de­
manded, and a Nick-name is then given
him in its stead, by which he is ever
after called, and in Time, his other



Name is quite forgotten. Then stand­
ing up in the middle of the Fraternity, 
and directing his Face to the Dimber-­
Damber, or Prince of the Gang, he
swears in this Manner, as is dictated to
him by one of the most experienced,

"I Crank-Cuffin do swear to be a
True Brother, and will in all Things, 
obey the Commands of the great
Tawny Prince, and keep his Councel, 
and not divulge the Secrets of my
Brethren.

I will never leave nor forsake this
Company, but observe and keep all
the Times of Appointments, either
by Day or by Night, in any Place
whatsoever.

I will not teach any one to cant;
nor will I disclose ought of our
Mysteries to them, although they
flog me to death.

I will take my Prince's Part against
all that shall oppose him, or any of
us, according to the utmost of my
Ability; nor will I suffer him, or
any belonging to us, to be abused by
any strange, Abrams, Rufflers, Hook­
ers, Palliards, Swadlers, Irish-Toyls,
Swig-men, Whip-Jacks, Jark-men,
Bawdy-Baskets, Dommerars, Clapper-­
dogeons, Patricoes or Curtals, but will
defend him or them as much as I can
against all other Outlyers whatever.

I will not conceal ought I win out
of Libkins, or from the Ruffmans; but
will preserve it for the Use of the
company.

Lastly, I will cleave to my Doxy
Wap stiffly, and will bring her Duds, 
Margery, Praters, Goblet, Grunting-­
cheats, or Tibs of the Buttery, or
any thing else I can come at, as Win­
nings for her Wappings."

The Canters have, it seems a Tra­
dition, that from the Three first ar­
ticles of this Oath, the first Founders
of a certain boastful, worshipful Fra­
ternity, who pretend to derive there
Origin from the earliest Times, bor­
rowed of them, both the Hint and form
of their Establishment. And that their
pretended Derivation from the first
Adam, is a Forgery, it being only from
the first Adam Tiler. See ADAM TI­
LER.

At the Admission of a new Brother, 
a. general Stock is raised for Booze, or
Drink, to make themselves merry on
the Occasion. As for Peckage, or Ea­
tables, they can procure it without
Money; for while some are sent to
break the Ruffmans, or Woods and
Bushes, for Firing, others are detached
to filch Geese, Chickens, Hens, Ducks
or Mallards, and Pigs. Their Morts
are their Butchers, who presently make
bloody Work with what living Things
are brought them, and having made
Holes in the Ground, under some re­
mote Hedge in an obscure Place, they
make a fire, and broil or boil their
Food, and when 'tis enough, fall to
work, Tooth and Nail, and having
eaten more like Beasts than Men, they
drink more like Swine than human
Creatures, entertaining one another
all the Time with Songs in the Canting
Dialect.

As they live, so they lie together pro­
miscuously, and know not how to claim
a Property either in their Goods or
Children, and this general Interest ties
them more firmly together, than if
all their Rags were twisted into Ropes
to bind them indissolubly from a Sepa­
ration; which detestable Union is far­
ther consolidated by the above Oath.

They strowl up and down all Sum­
mer time in Droves, and dextrously pick
Pockets, while they are telling of For­
tunes; and the Money, Rings, Silver-­
Thimbles, &c. which they get, are
instantly conveyed from one Hand, to
another, till the remotest Person of the
Gang, who is not suspected, because
they come not near the Person robbed, 
gets Possession of it, so that in the stric­
test Search, it is almost impossible to
recover it, while the Wretches with
Imprecations, Oaths and Protestations, 
disclaim the Thievery. That by
which they are said to get the most
Money, is, when young Gentlewoman
of good Families and Reputation have
happenned to be with Child before
Marriage, a round Sum is often bes­
towed among the Gypsies, for some one
Mort to take the Child; and as that
is never heard of more by the true
Mother and Family, so the Disgrace
is kept concealed from the World, and
if the Child lives, it never known its
Parents.


H

HABERDASHER of Nouns and Pro­
nouns, a Schoolmaster or Usher.

HACK, and Hue, to cut in pieces.

HACKS or Hackneys, Hirelings.

HACKUM, a fighting Fellow.

HADDUMS, The Shark has been at
Hoddums; He is clapt or poxed.

HALFBORD, Six-Pence.



HALF a Hog, Six-Pence.

HALF an Ounce. Half a Crown.

HALF Seas over, almost drunk.

HAMS, Breeches.

HAMLET, a High Constable.

HANDY-Blows, Fifty-cuffs.

HANG-it-up, speaking of the Rec­
koning at a Bowsing-Ken score it up.

HANK, He has a Hank upon him; He
has an Advantage, or will make him do
what he pleases.

HANKTELO, a silly Fellow, a meer
Codshead.

HANS-en-kelder, Jack in the Box, 
Child in the Womb.

HARE; as he has swallowed a Hare, 
he is very drunk.

HARKING, whispering on one side
to borrow Money.

HARMAN, a Constable.

HARMANS, the Stocks.

HARMANBECK, a Beadle.

HARRIDAN, one that is half a
Whore, half a Bawd, also a notorious
Shrew, or noisy old Woman.

HARTFORDSHIRE Kindness, drink­
ing to the same Man again.

HATCHET Faced, hard favoured, 
homely.

HATCHES, as, Under the Hatches, in
Trouble or Prison.

To HAZLE Geld, to beat any one
with a Hazle Stick or Plant.

HEAD Cully of the Pass, or Passage
Bank, the Top Tilter of that Gang, 
throughout the whole Army, who de­
mands and receives Contribution from
all the Pass-Banks in the Camp.

HEARING-Cheats, Ears.

HEARTS-Ease, a Twenty Shilling
Piece.

HEATHEN Philosopher, a sorry poor
tattered Fellow, whose Breech may
be seen through his Pocket-holes.

To HEAVE, to rob.

HEAVE a Cough, to rob a House.

HEAVER, the Breast.

HECTOR, a vapouring, swaggering
Coward.

To HEDGE, to secure a desperate Bet, 
Wager or Debt. By Hedge or by stile, 
By Hook or by Crook.

HEDGE-Bird, a scoundrel or sorry
Fellow.

HEDGE-Creeper, a Robber of Hed­
ges.

HEDGE-Priest, a sorry hackney Un­
derling, an Vagabond. See Patrico.

HEDGE-Tavern or Alehouse, a jilting, 
sharping Tavern, or blind Ale-house.

HELL, the Place where the Taylors
lay up their Cabbage, or Remnants.

HELL-born-babe, a lewd, graceless,
notorious Youth.

HELL-Cat, a very lewd Woman.

HELL-Driver, a Coachman.

HELL-Hound, a profligate, lewd
Fellow.

HEMPEN-Widow, one whose Hus­
band was hanged.

HEN-peckt-Frigot, whose Comman­
der and Officers are absolutely swayed
by their Wives.

HENPECT-Husband, whose Wife
wears the Breeches.

HICK, any Person from whom a
Booty is taken, a silly Country Fellow;
a Booby.

HIGH-Flyers, impudent, forward, 
loose, light Women, also bold Adven­
turers.

HIGHJINKS, a Play at Dice who
Drinks.

HIGH-PADS, Highway-men or Bully-­
Ruffins, an Order of Villains, and the
boldest of all others. Before they com­
mence, they furnish themselves, with
good Horses, Swords, Pistols, &c. and
sometimes singly, but mostly in Compa­
ny, commit their execrable Robberies.
They have a Vizor-Mask, and two or
three Perukes of different Colours and
Make, the better to conceal themselves.
When they meet a Prize upon the
Road, they have a Watch-Word, 
among them, which is no sooner pro­
nounced, but every one falls on. It is
usually the Rule among them, that the
strongest and bold seize first; the
Weaker generally bid stand, and fall
in afterwards as Occasion requires. The
Instructions given them, are, to catch
the Bridle in the Left-Hand, and to
have the Sword or Pistol in the Right, 
and, if Opposition be made, or they
are likely to be overpowered, to kill
as fast as they can, and then, either
with Booty or without, to make off
with all Expedition; and if they are
pursued by an Hue or Cry, to conceal
themselves in some By place, and let
it pass by them.

HIGH-Shoon, or Clouted-Shoon a
Country Clown.

A HIGHTE-TITY, a Romp or rude
Girl.

HIGH Tide, when the Pocket is full
of Money.

HOB, a plain Country fellow or
Clown.

HOBINAL, the same.

HOBBY, as Sir Posthumus Hobby, one
that draws on his Breeches with a
Shoeing-horn; a Fellow that is nice
and whimsical in the Set of his Cloaths.

HOB-Nail, a High-shoon or Country
Clown.



HOCUS, disguised in Liquor; drunk.

HODGE, a Country Clown, also
Roger.

HODGE-podge; See Hotch-Potch.

HOG, a Shilling; You Darkman
Budge, wilt you Fence your Hog at the
next Boozing Ken? you House-Creeper, 
will you spend your Shilling at the
next Ale-house.

HOG-Grubber, a close-fisted, narrow-­
soul'd sneaking Fellow.

HOLD his Nose to the Grind stone, to
keep him under, or tie him Neck and
Heels into the Bargain.

HOLIDAY Bowler, a very bad Bow­
ler. Blind Man's Holiday, when it is
Night.

HONEY-Moon, the first Month of
Marriage.

HOOD-wink'd, Blind-folded or Bluf­
fed.

To HOOF it, or beat it on the Hoof, 
to walk on Foot.

HOOKERS. See Anglers.

HOOKT, over reached, snapt, 
trickt.

HOP-Merchant, a Dancing-Master.

HORN-mad, stark staring mad be­
cause Cuckolded.

It revives the COCKLES of my Heart, 
said of agreeable News, or a Cup of
Comfort, Wine or Cordial Water.

In HUCKSTER'S Hands, at a despe­
rate Pass, or Condition, or in a fair
way to be lost.

HUED, severely lash'd or flogg'd.
The Cove was Hued in the Natkin, The
Rogue was severely lasht in Bridewell.

A HUFF, a Bullying Fellow.

HULVER-head, a silly foolish Fellow.

HUM-Box, a Pulpit.

HUM-Cap, old, mellow, and very
strong Beer.

HUM-Drums, or Hums, a Society of
Gentlemen, who meet near the Char­
ter-house, or at the King's Head in St.
John's Street. Less of Mystery, and
more of Pleasantry than the Free Ma­
sons.

HUMMING Liquor, Double Ale, 
Stout, Pharaoh.

HUMMER, a great Lye, a Rapper.

HUMMUMS, a Bagnio.

HUMPTEY-Dumptey, Ale boil'd with
Brandy.

HUMS, Persons at Church; as, There
it a great Number of Hums in the Autem;
i. e. There is a great Congregation.

HUNTING, decoying, or drawing
others into Play.

HUSH'D, murder'd, &c.

HUSH-Money, Money given to hush
up, or conceal a Robbery or Theft, or
to take off an Evidence from appearing
against a Criminal, &c.

HUSKY-Lour, a Jobe, or Guinea.


I

JACK, a Farthing; He wou'd not
tip me a Jack, Not a Farthing
wou'd he give me.

JACK-ADAMS Parish, Clerkenwell.

JACK-KETCH, the Hangman, once
of that Name, but now all his Succes­
sors.

JACK in a Box, a Sharper, or Cheat.

JACKMEN. See Jarkmen.

JACK-sprat, a Dwarf, or very little
Fellow, a Hop-on-my-thumb.

JACK at a Pinch, a poor Hackney
Parson.

JACOBITES, Sham or Collar Shirts.

JAGUE, a Ditch.

JANIZARIES, the Mob, sometimes
so called, and Bailiffs, Serjeants-Fol­
lowers, Yeomen, Setters, and any
lewd Gang depending upon others.

JARKE, a Seal.

JARKE-MEN, Those who make
Counterfeit Licences and Passes, and
are well paid by the other Beggars for
their Pains.

JASON's Fleece, a Citizen cheated of
his Gold.

JAYL-Birds, Prisoners.

JEM, a Gold Ring; Rum-Jem, a
Diamond one.

JENNY, an Instrument to lift up a
Grate, and whip any thing out of a
Shop-window.

JET, a Lawyer.

Autem JET, a Parson.

JEW, any over-reaching Dealer, or
hard, sharp Fellow. He treated me like
a Jew; He used me very barbarously.

JEWS, Brokers behind St. Clement's
Church in London, so called by (their
Brethren) the Taylors.

JIG, a Trick; A pleasant Jig, a wit­
ty arch Trick.

JILT, a tricking Woman.

JILTED, abus'ed by such a one; also
deceived or defeated in one's Expecta­
tion, especially in Amours.

JINGLE-Boxes, Leathern Jacks tipt
and hung with Silver Bells, formerly
in use among Fuddle-caps.

JINGLERS, Horse-Coursers fre­
quenting Country Fairs.

JINGLE Brains, a Maggot-pated
Fellow.

ILL Fortune, a Nine-pence.



IMPOST-Taker, one that stands by, 
and lends Money to the Gamester at a
very high Interest or Premium.

INCHING In, Encroaching upon.

INLAYED, Well inlayed, at Ease in
his Fortune, or full of Money.

JOBE, a Guinea, Twenty Shillings, 
or a Piece. Half a Jobe, Half a Guinea.

JOCK or Jockum-cloy, to copulate
with a Woman.

JOCKUM-Gage, a Chamberpot. Tip
me the Jockum-Gage, Give or hand me
the Looking-Glass. Rum Jockum-Gage, 
a Silver Chamber-Pot.

JORDAIN, a great Blow or Staff;
also a Chamber-Pot. I'll tip him a Jor­
dain, if I transnear; I will give him a
Blow with my Staff, if I get up to him.

JOSEPH, a Cloak or Coat. A Rum
Joseph, a good Cloak or Coat. A Queer
Joseph, a coarse ordinary Cloak or
Coat; also an old or tatter'd One.

IRISH-Toyles, Rogues, &c. carrying
Pins, Points, Laces, and such like
Wares about, and, under pretence of
selling them, commit Thefts and Rob­
beries.

IRON-Doublet, a Prison.

ITCH-Land, Scotland.

JUKRUM, a Licence.

JUMBLE-Gut-Lane, any very bad or
rough Road.

JUSTICE, I'll do Justice, Child; I
will Peach, or rather Impeach, or
discover the whole Gang, and so save
my own Bacon.


K

KATE, a Pick-lock, 'Tis a Rum
Kate; She is a clever Pick-lock.

KEEL-Bullies, Lightermen that carry
coals to and from the Ships, so called
in Derision.

KEEPING Cully, one that maintains
a Mistress, and parts with his Money
very generously to her.

KEFFAL, a Horse.

KELTER, as, Out of Kelter, Out of
sorts.

KEN, a House. A bob Ken, or a
Bowman-ken, a good or well furnished
House; also a House that harbours
Rogues and Thieves. Biting the Ken, 
robbing the House, 'tis a bob Ken, Brush
upon the Sneak, i. e. 'Tis a good House, 
go in and tread softly. We have bit the
Ken, The House is robb'd, or the Bu­
siness is done.

KEN-Miller, a House
-breaker, who
usually, by getting into an empty
House, finds Means to enter into the
Gutters of Houses inhabited, and so
in at the Windows, &c.

KICK, Six-pence: Two, Three, Four, 
&c. and a Kick; Two, Three, Four, 
&c. Shillings and Six-pence.

KICK'D, gone, fled, departed; as, 
The Rum Cull kick'd away, i. e. The
Rogue made his Escape.

KICKS, Breeches. Tip us your Kicks, 
we'll have them as well as your Lour;
Pull off your Breeches, for we must
have them as well as your Money.

KID, a Child.

KIDLAYS, an Order of Rogues, who
meeting a Youth with a Bundle or
Parcel of Goods, wheedle him by fair
Words, and whipping Six-pence into
his Hand, to step on a short and sham
Errand, in the mean Time run away
with the Goods.

KIDNAPPER, one that decoys or
spirits (as it is commonly called) Chil­
dren away, and sells them for the
Plantations.

KILKENNY, an old sorry Frize
Coat.

KILL-Devil, Rum.

To KIMBAW to Trick, Sharp, or
Cheat; also to Beat severely, or to
Bully. Let's Kimbaw the Cull, Let's
beat that Fellow, and get his Money
(by huffing and bullying) from him.

KIN, a Thief: He's one of the Kin, 
let him pike; said of a Brother Rogue
whom one of the Gang knows to be a
Villain, tho' not one of their own
Crew.

KINCHIN, a little Child.

KINCHIN-Coves, little Children whose
Parents are dead, having been Beggars;
as also young Lads running from their
Masters, who are first taught Canting, 
then Thieving.

KINCHIN-Cove, a little Man.

KINCHIN-Morts, Girls of a Year or
two old, whom the Morts (their Mo­
thers) carry at their Backs in Slates
(Sheets) and if they have no Children
of their own, they borrow or steal
them from others.

KING of the Gypsies, the Captain, 
Chief, or Ringleader of the Gang, the
Master of Misrule, otherwise called
Uprightman. Vide Gypsies.

KING's Head Inn, or the Chequer-Inn
in Newgate-street, the Prison of New­
gate.

KING's Pictures, Money.

KIT, a Dancing Master.

A KNACK Shop, a Toy-shop,
freighted with pretty Devices to pick
Pockets.



KNAVE in Grain, one of the First
Rate.

KNIGHT of the Blade, a Hector or
Bully.

KNIGHT of the Post, a mercenary
common Swearer, a Prostitute to every
Cause, an Irish Evidence.

KNIGHT of the Road, the chief
Highwayman, best mounted and armed, 
the stoutest Fellow among them.

KNOB, the Head or Skull.

KNOCK Down, very strong Ale or
Beer.

To KNOCK off, to give over Thiev­
ing.

KNOT, a Crew or Gang of Villains.


L

LAC'D Mutton, a Woman.

LACING, beating, drubbing;
I'll Lace your Coat, Sirrah! I will beat
you soundly!

LADY, a very crooked, deformed
and ill-shapen Woman.

LADY-birds, light, or lewd Wo­
men.

LAG, Water; also last.

LAG a-dudds, a Buck of Cloths; as, 
We'll cloy the Lag of Dudds: Come, let
us steal that Buck of Cloths.

To LAMBASTE, to beat soundly.

LAMB-Pye, beating or drubbing.

LAMB-Skin Men, the Judges of the
several Courts.

LAND-Lopers, or Land-lubbers, Va­
gabonds that beg and steal about the
Country.

LAND Pyrates, Highwaymen or any
other Robbers.

LAND, as, How lies the Land? How
stands the Reckoning? Who has any
Land in Appleby? a Question ask'd the
Man, at whose Door the Glass stands
long.

LANSPRESADO, He that comes in­
to Company with but Two-pence in
his Pocket.

LANTERN-jaw'd, a very lean, thin-­
faced Fellow.

A Dark LANTHORN, the Servant
or Agent that receives the Bribe (at
Court).

LAP, Pottage, Butter-milk, or
Whey.

LARE-Over, said when the true
Name of the Things must (in Decency)
be concealed.

LATCH, let in.

LAY, an Enterprise, or Attempt;
To be sick of the Lay, To be tir'd in
waiting for an Opportunity to effect
their Purposes. Also an Hazard or
Chance; as, He stands a queer Lay; He
stands an odd Chance, or is in great
Danger.

LAY'D Up in Lavender, pawn'd or
dipt for present Money.

LEATHER-Head, a Thick-skull'd, 
Heavy-headed Fellow.

LEATHERN Convenience, (by the
Quakers) a Coach.

LET's take an Ark and Winns, Let's
hire a Skuller.

LET's buy a Brush, or Let's lope, Let
us scour off, and make what Shift we
can to secure our selves from being
apprehended.

LEVITE, a Priest or Parson.

To LIB, to tumble or lie together.

LIBBEN, a private Dwelling-House.

LIBBEGE, a Bed.

LIBKIN, a House to lie in; also a
Lodging.

LICKT, as Women's Faces with a
Wash.

LIFTER, a Crutch.

LIG, See Lib.

LIGHT Finger'd, Thievish.

LIGHT-Mans, the Day or Day-­
break.

LIGHT-Frigate, a Whore; also a
Cruiser.

LILLY White, a Chimney-Sweeper.

LINE of the old Author, a Dram of
Brandy.

LINNEN Armorers, Taylors.

LITTLE Barbary, Wapping.

LOAP'D, run away; He loap'd up the
Dancers; He whipt up the Stairs.

LOB-Cock, a heavy, dull Fellow.

In LOP's Pound, laid by the Heels, 
or clap'd up in Jail.

LOBSTER, a red Coat Soldier.

LOCK, as, He stood a queer Lock;
i. e. He stood an indifferent Chance, 
&c.

LOCK all fast, one that buys and
conceals stollen Goods.

The LOCK, the Warehouse whither
the Thieves carry stollen Goods. Also
an Hospital for pocky Folks in South­
wark, &c.

LOCKRAM Jaw'd, thin, lean, 
sharp-visag'd.

LOGE, a Watch. As Filed a Cly
of a Loge, or Scout, Pickt a Pocket of 
a Watch. Biting a Loge, or a Scout,
the same.

LOLPOOP, a lazy idle Drone.

LONG-Meg, a very tall Woman.

LONG-Shanks, long-legged.

LOOKING-Glass, a Chamber-pot.

A LOON, a Lout. A false Loon, a



true Scotch Man; or Knave of any Na­
tion.

LOON-Slate, a Thirteen-pence 
Half-penny.

LORD, a very crooked deformed, or
ill-shapen Person.

LOUR, Money.

LOUSE Land, Scotland.

LOUSE Trap, a Comb.

LOW Pad, a Foot-Pad.

LOW Tide, when there's no Money
in a Man's Pocket.

LUD's Bulwark, Ludgate Prison.

LUGGS, Ears.

LULLABY-Cheat, a Child.

LUMB, too much.

LURCHED, beaten at any Game.

LURRIES, Money, Watches, Rings, 
or other Moveables.


M

A MACKAREL, a Bawd.

A MACKAREL-Back, a very
tall, lank Person.

MADAM Van, a Whore; The Cull
has been with Madam Van, The Fellow
has enjoyed such a one.

MADE, stollen. I made this Knife
at a Heat, I stole it cleverly.

MAD Tom, alias of Bedlam; other­
wise called Abram-men.

MAIDEN-Sessions, when none are
hang'd.

MAKE, a Half-penny.

To MAKE, to steal; seize; to run
away with.

MALKINTRASH, one in a rueful
Dress, enough to fright one.

MALMSEY-Nose, a jolly red Nose.

MAN o'th' Town, a lewd Spark, or
very Debauchee.

MANUFACTURE, any Liquor made
of the Fruits of English Growth, as
Ale, Beer, Cyder, &c.

MARGERY Prater, a Hen.

MARINATED, transported into
some Foreign Plantation.

MARRIAGE Musick, Childrens Cries.

MASONS Mawn'd, a Sham Sore
above the Elbow; to counterfeit a
broken Arm, by a Fall from a Scaf­
fold.

MAUL'D, swingingly drunk, or
soundly beat.

MAUNDERS, Beggars.

MAUNDING, begging.

MAUNDRING-Broth, Scolding.

MAWDLIN, weepingly drunk.

MEGGS, Guineas. We forked the
rum Cull's Meggs to the Tune of Fifty;
We pickt the Gentleman's Pocket of 
full Fifty Guineas.

To MELT, to spend Money. Will
you melt a Borde? Will you spend your
Shilling? The Cull melted a Couple of
Decusses upon us; The Gentleman spent
Ten Shillings upon us.

MILCH-Kine, a Term us'd by Goa­
lers, when their Prisoners will bleed
freely to have some Favour, or to be
at large.

To MILL, to steal, rob, or kill. Mill
the Gig with a Dub, open the Door
with a Pick-lock, or false Key.

To MILL a Bleating Cheat, to kill a
Sheep.

MILL-Clapper, a Woman's Tongue.

To MILL a Crackmans, to break a
Hedge.

To MILL a Grunter, to kill a Pig.

To MILL a Ken, to rob a House;
Milling the Gig with a Betty, Breaking
open the Door with an Iron Crow.

MILL-Ken, a House-Breaker.

MILL the Glaze, break open the
Window.

MILL Them, kill them.

MILLER, a Killer or Murderer.

MINT, Gold.

MISH, Shirt, Smock, or Sheet.

MISH-Topper, a Coat or Petticoat.

MISS, a Whore of Quality.

MOABITES, Serjeants, Bailiffs and
their Crew.

MOB, or MAB, a Wench or Harlot.

MONGREL, a Hanger-on among
the Cheats, a Spunger.

MOON-Curser, a Link boy, or one
that, under Colour of lighting Men, 
(especially they who get in Drink, or
have the Fields, or any uninhabited or
By place, to go over) robs or leads
them to a Gang of Rogues, that will
do it for him.

MOON-Men, Gypsies.

MOPSIE, a Dowdy, or homely
Woman.

MOP'D, maz'd.

MOPUS, a Half-penny or Farthing.

MORGLAG, a Watchman's brown
Bill; as Glaives, are Bills or Swords.

To MORRIS, to hang dangling in the
Air, to be executed.

MORTS. Yeomens Daughters; also
a Wife, Woman, or Wench.

MOTHER, a Bawd.

MOTHER Midnight, a Midwife (of­
ten a Bawd.)

MOUCHETS, Patches for Ladies
Faces.

MOVEABLES, Rings, Watches, 
Swords, and such Toys of Value.



MOUSE-Trap, as, The Parson's
Mouse-Trap, Marriage.

MOUTH, a noisy Fellow. Mouth
half cockt, gaping and staring at every
Thing they see,

MOWER, a Cow.

MOW-Heater, a Drover.

MUCK, Money, Wealth.

MUFF, a Woman's Secrets, To the
well wearing of your Muff, Mort; To
the happy Consummation of your Mar­
riage, Madam. A Health.

MUFFLING-Cheat, a Napkin.

MUM for-that, not a Word of the
Pudding.

MUM Chance, one that sits mute.

MUM Glass, the Monument, erected
at the City Charge, in Memory of the
dreadful Fire 1666, which consumed
the greatest part of the City.

MUMPERS, genteel Beggars, who
will not accept of Victuals, but of
Money or Cloaths. The Male Mum­
per often appears with an Apron before
him, and a Cap on his Head, pretending
to be a decayed Tradesman, who ha­
ving been a long Time sick, hath spent
all his remaining Stock, and is so weak
he cannot work. At other times he
appears like a decayed Gentleman, who, 
especially since the fatal South Sea
Scheme, has been undone, and reduced
to the Necessity of imploring good Peo­
ple's Charity.

The Female Mumper will confidently
knock at the Door of a house, and de­
sire to speak with the Mistress, and
after apologizing for her Boldness, she
acquaints her how urgent her Necessity
is: That she has a Husband and two
small Children lying at the Point of
Death: That she was a Gentlewoman
born; but marrying against her Friends
Consent, was by them disowned, and
so by her Husbands Sickness, is reduced
to this miserable Condition. Some­
times she appears big with Child, and
begs Cloaths or Linnen to make Clouts
of. The Word Mumper is now gene­
rally used to denote all sorts of Beg­
gars.

MUMPERS Hall, several Ale-houses
in and about this City and Suburbs, in
Alleys, and By-places, much used by
them, and resorted to in the Evening, 
where they will be very merry, drunk, 
and frolicksome.

MUNNS, the Face; Toute his Muns, 
Note his Phiz, or, Mark his Face well.
Pay his Muns, i. e. Strike him in the
Face, &c.

MUSICK. The Watch-word among
High-way-men, to let the Company
they were to rob, alone, in return to
some Courtesy from some Gentlemen
among them.

MUTTON-Monger, a Lover of
Women; also a Sheep-stealer.

MUTTON-in-long-coats, Women.
A Leg of Mutton in a Silk Stocking, a
Woman's Leg.

MUZZLE, a Beard, (usually) long
and nasty.

MYRMIDONS, the Constable's At­
tendants, or those whom he commands
(in the King's Name) to aid and assist
him: also the Watchmen.


N

NAB, a Hat, Cap, or Head, also a
Coxcomb. Ill nab ye, I'll have
your Hat or Cap. Nim the Nab, steal
the Hat or Cap. Nabbed apprehended, 
taken or arrested.

NAB Cheat, a Hat.

NAB-Girder, a Bridle.

NAN, a Servant maid.

NANNY-House, a Bawdy-house.

To NAP, by cheating with the Dice
to secure one Chance; also a Clap or
Pox, and a short sleep, Nap the Wiper, 
steal the Handkerchief. You have napt
it, You are Clapt.

NAPPER, a Cheat, or Thief.

NAPPER, of Naps, a sheep-stealer.

NAPPY-Ale, very strong, heady.

NASK, or Naskin, a Prison or Bride­
well. The new Nask, Clerkenwell
Bridewell: Tuttle Nask, the Bridewell
in Tuttle-Fields: He napt it at the
Nask; He was lasht at Bridewell.

NATURAL, a Mistress, a Wench.

NAY-Word, a By-word, or Proverb.

NAZIE, Drunken.

NAZIE-Cove, a Drunkard.

NAZY-Mort, a she Drunkard.

NAZY-Nabs, Drunken Coxcombs.

NECK-Stamper, the Pot-Boy at a
Tavern or Alehouse.

NEEDLE-Point, a Sharper.

NETTLED, tiezed, provoked, made
uneasy.

To NICK it, to win at Dice, to hit
the Mark.

NICKUM, a Sharper, also a rooking
Ale-house or Inn-keeper, Vintner, or
any Retailer.

NICKUM-Poop, a Fool, also a silly, 
soft, uxorious Fellow.

NICK Ninny, an empty Fellow, a
meer Cods-head.

NIG, the Clippings of Money.

NIGGING, Clipping.



NIGGLER, a Clipper.

NIGGLING, accompanying with a
Woman.

NIGHT-Magistrate, a Constable.

Night-Walker, a Bellman; also a
light Woman; a Thief, a Rogue.

NIGIT, qu. an Ideot, i. e. a Fool.

NIGMENOG, a very silly Fellow.

NIKIN, a Natural, or very soft
Creature.

To NIM, to steal.

To NIM, or whip off or away any
thing; To Nim a Togeman, to steal a
Cloak. To Nim a Cloak, to cut off the
Buttons in a Crowd, to whip it off a
Man's Shoulders.

NIM Gimmer, a Doctor, Surgeon, 
Apothecary, or any one that cures a
Clap or a Pox.

NINNY, a canting, whining Beggar;
also a Fool.

NIP, a Cheat.

To NIP to pinch or sharp any thing.
Nip a Bung, to cut a Purse.

NIPPS, the Shears with which
Money was wont to be clipt.

NIZY, a Fool or Coxcomb.

NOB, a Head.

NOCKY, a silly, dull Fellow.

NODDLE, the Head.

NODDY, a Fool. Knave Noddy, a
Game on the Cards.

NOOZED, or caught in a Nooze, 
married; also hanged.

NOPE, a Blow, a Knock on the
Pate; as We hit him a Nope on the Cos­
tard.

NOSE-Gent, a Recluse or Nun.

NUB, the Neck; also Coition.

NUBBING, hanging. To be nubbed, 
to be hanged.

NUBBING-Cheat, the Gallows.

NUBBING-Cove the Hangman.

NUBBING-Ken, the Sessions House.

NUG, a Word of Love, as my Dear
Nig, My dear Love.

NUMMS, a sham, or Collar-shirt,
to hide the other when dirty.

NUT-crackers, a Pillory, The Cull
lookt thro' the Nut-crackers, i.e. The
Rogue stood in the Pillory.


O

OAK, a rich Man, of good Substance
and Credit.

OGLES, Eyes Rum Ogles, fine, bright
clear, piercing Eyes.

OLD-Dog at it, good or expert.

OLD Dog at Common-Prayer, a poor
Hackney Parson that can read but not
preach well.

OLD-Harry, a Composition used by
Vintners when they bedevil their
Wines.

OLD-Mr-Gory a Piece of Gold.

OLD Roger, the Devil.

OLD Toast, a brisk old Fellow.

OLIVERS Skull, a Chamber Pot.

ONE in Ten, a Parson.

ONE of my Cousins, a Wench.

OS-Chives, Bone handled Knives.

OUT-At Heels, or Elbows, in a de­
clining Condition going down the
Wind.

OYL of Barley, strong Drink.

OX House. He must go thro' the Ox­
house to Bed, said of an old Fellow that
marries a young Woman.


P

PAD, the Highway; also a Robber
thereon.

PADDINGTON-Fair, an Execution
of Malefactors at Tyburn.

Ill cut your PAINTER for ye; I'll
prevent your doing me any Mischief:
the Tar Cant when they quarrel one
with another.

PALLIARDS, those whose Fathers
were Clapperdogeons, or born Beggars, 
and who themselves follow the same
Trade. The Female sort of these
Wretches frequently borrow Children
if they have none of their own, and
planting them about them in Straw, 
draw the greater Pity from the Spec­
tators, screwing their Faces to the
moving Postures, and crying at Plea­
sure, and making the Children also
cry by pinching them, or otherwise;
mean time her Com rogue, the Male
Palliard, lies begging in the Fields, 
with Cleymes or artificial Sores, which
he makes by Spere-wort, or Arsnick, 
which draws them into Blisters.

PANAM, Bread.

PANTER, a Heart.

PANTLER, a Butler.

PAPLER, Milk-Pottage.

PARINGS, the Clippings of Money.

PATRI-COVES, or Pater Cove strol­
ling Priests that marry under a Hedge, 
without Gospel or Common-prayer
Book: The couple standing on each
side a dead Beast, are bid to live toge­
ther till Death them does part; so
shaking Hands the Wedding is ended, 
also any Minister, or Parson.

PAUME. See Palm.

PAW, a Hand.

PAWN, the same as Palm, which
see.



PEAK, any kind of Lace.

PECK, or Peckage, Meat. Rum Peck
good eating.

PECULIAR, a Mistress; also parti­
cular, private, proper.

PED, a Basket.

PEEPERS, a Looking-glass. Track
the Dancers and Pike with the Peepers;
Whip up the Stairs, and trip off with
the Looking-glasses.

PEEPERS, Eyes.

PEERY, fearful, shy, sly. The Cull's
Peery; The Rogue's afraid to venture.
There's a Peery, 'tis snitch, there are a
great many People, there's no good to
be done.

PEETER, a Portmanteau, or Cloak-­
bag. Bite the Peeter, to whip off the
Cloak-bag.

PEG-Trantums, as Cone to Peg-Tran­
tums, dead.

PELTING Village, blind, obscure.

PENNANCE Board, a Pillory.

PENTHOUSE Nab, a very broad
brimmed hat.

PEPPERED off, soundly clapt or
Poxt.

PERIWINKLE, a Peruke, or Perri­
wig.

PETER Lay, Rogues who follow
petty Thefts; such as cutting Portman­
teau's, &c. from behind Coaches, 
breaking shop Glasses, &c.

PETER Lug, Who is Peter Lug? who
let's the Glass stand at his Door.

PETTICOAT Pensioner, a Gallant
maintained for secret Service.

PHARAOH, very strong Malt Drink.

PHENIX Men. See Firedrakes.

PHILISTINES, Serjeants, Bailiffs and
their Crew. also Drunkards. I fell
among the Philistines, I chopt upon a
Knot of drunken Fellows.

PICKING, little Stealing, Pilfering
Petty Larceny.

PICKAROON, a very shabby poor
Fellow.

PICKLED, very arch or waggish. In
Pickle, Poxt. Rods in Pickle, or Re­
venge in Lavender.

PIG, six-pence. The Cull tipt me a
Pig, The Man gave me Six-pence.

PIG-Widgeon, a silly Fellow.

To PIKE, to run away, flee, quit or
leave the Place; also to die, Pike on the
Been, run away as fast as you can.
Pik'd off, run away, fled, broke; also
dead. To pass the Pikes, to be out of
Danger. There's a Cull knows us; if we
dont pike, he'll bone us, that Fellow sees
us; if we dont scour off, he'll appre­
hend us. Then we'll pike, 'tis all Bow­
man; we'll be gone, all is well, the
Coast is clear.

PIMP-Whiskin, a top Trader in
pimping.

To PINCH, to steal or convey slily
any Thing away. To pinch on the Par­
sons side; to sharp him of his Tithes.
At a Pinch, upon a Push or Exigence.

PINK'D, pricked with a Sword in a
re-encounter or Duel. He pinked his
Dubblet, he run him through.

PIT, the Hole under the Gallows, 
into which those that pay not the Fee, 
(viz. 6 s. 8 d.) are cast and buried.

PIT a Pat, or Pintle de Pantledy, sad­
ly scared, greviously frighted.

PLANT, to lay, place or hide.
Plant your Whids and stow them, Be
wary what you say or let slip.

PLAISTER of hot Guts, one warm
Belly clapt to another.

PLATE Fleet comes in, when the
Money comes to Hand.

PLATTER-Faced Jade, a very broad
ordinary faced Woman.

PLAY it off, to play Booty; also to
throw away, at Gaming, so much and
no more. He Plays it off, he cheats.

PLUCK the Ribbon, Ring the Bell at
the Tavern.

PLUMP in the Pocket, flush of Mo­
ney.

PLYER, a Crutch; also a Trader.

POKER, a Sword.

POLT on the Pate, a good Rap there.

POPS, Pistols, To pop, to fire a Pistol, 
&c.

PORKER, a Sword.

POST, as From Pillar to Pofi, from
Constable to Constable.

POT-Valiant, Drunk.

POULAIN, a Bubo.

POWDERING-Tub, the pocky Hos­
pital at Kingsland near London.

POISONED, big with Child.

POISON Pate, red Haired.

PRANCER, a Horse.

PRANCER's Nab, a Horse's Head, 
used in a sham Seal to such a Pass.

PRATTS, the Thighs or Buttocks;
also a Tinder-box or Touch-box.

PRATING-Cheat, a Tongue.

PRATE-Roast, a Talking Boy.

PREY, Money.

PRICKEAR'D Fellow, a Crop whose
Ears are longer than his Hair.

PRICK Louse, a Taylor.

PRIEST Linked, married.

PRIG, a Thief, a Cheat: also a nice, 
beauish, silly Fellow, is called a meer
Prig.

PRIGGERS, Thieves.

PRIGGING, lying with a Woman.

PRIGSTAR, a Rival in Love.



PRIGGISH, Thievish.

PRIG Napper, a Horse-stealer; also a
Thief-Taker.

PRIGGERS of the Caklers, Poultry-­
stealers.

PRIGGERS of Prancers, Horse-steal­
ers, who carry a Bridle in their Poc­
kets, and a small pad Saddle in their
Breeches.

PRINCE Prig, a King of the Gypsies;
also Top-Thief, or Receiver General.

PRINCOCK, a pert, forward Fellow.

PRINKING, nicely dressing. Prinked
up, set up on the Cupboards head, in
their best Clothes, or in State. Stiff-­
starched.

Mistress PRINCUM-Prancum, such a
stiff, overnice precise Madam.

PROG, Meat. Rum Prog, nice eat­
ing. The Cull tipt us rum Prog; the
Gentleman treated us very high.

PROPERTY, a meer Tool or Imple­
ment, to serve a Turn; a Cats's Foot.

To PUMMEL, to beat, I pummelled
his Sides-for him, I beat him soundly.

To PUMP, to wheedle Secrets out
of any one.

PUNCH-Houses, Bawdy-houses.

PUNK, a little Whore.

PUPIL Mongers, Tutors at the Uni­
versities.

PURE, a Mistress.

PUREST-Pure, a Top-Mistress or
fine Woman.

PURL-Royal, Canary with a Dash of
Wormwood.

PUSHING-School, a Fencing-School;
also a Bawdy house.

PUT, A Country Put, a silly, shallow
pated, Fellow. Put to it, beset.


Q

QACKING-Cheat, a Duck.

QUAIL-Pipe, a Woman's Tongue.

QUAKING Cheat, a Calf or Sheep.

QUARREL Picker, a Glazier.

QUARRON, a Body.

QUEAN, a Whore or Slut. A dirty
Quean, a Puzzle or Slut.

QUEERE, or Quire, base, roguish, 
naught. How queerely the Cull Trouts?
How roguishly the Fellow looks.

QUEERE-Birds, such as having got
loose, return to their old Trade of
roguing and thieving.

QUEERE Bluffer, a sneaking sharping, 
Cut-throat Ale-house Man or Inn­
keeper.

QUEERE-Bung, an empty Purse.

QUEERE-Clout, a sorry old Handker­
chief, not worth nimming.

QUEERE-Cole, clipt, counterfeit
Money.

QUEERE Cole-maker, a false Coiner.

QUEERE Cole fencer, a Receiver and
Putter off of false Money.

QUEERE-Cove, a Rogue.

QUEERE-Cuffin, a Justice of Peace;
also a churl.

QUEERE-Cull, a Fop or Fool, a
Cods-head; also a shabby poor Fellow.

QUEERE Degen, an Iron, Steel or
Brass hilted Sword.

QUEERE-Diver, a bungling Pick­
pocket.

QUEERE-Doxy, a jilting Jade, a sor­
ry shabby Wench.

QUEERE-Drawers, Yarn, or coarse
Worsted, ordinary or old Stockings.

QUEERE-Duke, a poor decayed
Gentleman, also a lean, thin, half-­
starved Fellow.

QUEERE-Fun, a bungling Cheat or
Trick; also Game or Merriment.

QUEERE-Ken, an ill house, a Prison
or a place of Correction.

QUEERE-Kicks, coarse ordinary or
old tattered Breeches.

QUEERE-Mort, a dirty Drab, a jilt­
ing Wench, a pocky Jade.

QUEERE, Nab, a Felt, Carolina Cloth
or ordinary Hat.

QUEERE-Peepers, old-fashioned, 
ordinary or common Looking glasses.

QUEERE-Prancer, a foundered Jade, 
an ordinary low prized Horse: also a
cowardly or faint hearted Horse-­
stealer.

QUEERE-Topping, sorry Head-dres­
ses.

To QUIBBLE, to trifle or pun.

Sir QUIBBLE Queere, a trifling, silly
shatter-brained Fellow; a meer Wittol
or Punster, likewise a Whiffler.

QUIDDS, Cash, or ready Money.
Can you tip me any Quidds? Can you
lend me any Money.

QUOD, Newgate; also a Prison, tho'
generally for Debt. The Poor Dabs in
the Quod, the poor Rogue is in Lim­
bo.

QUOTA, Snack, Share, Part, Pro­
portion or Dividend.


R

RABBET-Suckers, young Unthrifts
taking Goods on Tick of Pawn­
brokers or Tallymen, at excessive
Rates.



RABBITS, wooden Cans to drink
out of, once used on the Roads, now
almost laid by.

RAG, a Farthing. Not a Rag left; I
have lost or spent all my Money.

RAGAMUFFIN, a Taterdemallion.

RAG-Water, a common sort of strong
Water.

RAKE, Rake-hell, Rake-shame, a
lewd Spark or Debauchee.

RALPH-Spooner, a Fool.

RANGING, intriguing, and enjoying
many Women.

RANK-Rider, a Highwayman; also
a Jockey.

RANTIPOLE, a rude wild Boy or
Girl.

RAP, to swop or exchange a Horse
or Goods; also a Polt on the Pate.

RAPPER, a swinging great Lye.

RAREE-SHOW-Men, poor Savoy­
ards strolling up and down with porta­
ble Boxes of Puppet-shows at their
Backs; Pedlars of Puppets.

RAT, a drunken Man or Woman
taken up by the Watch, and carried
by the Constable to the Compter. To
smell a Rat, To suspect; a Trick.

RATTLER, a Coach.

RATTLING Cove, a Coach-man.

RATTLING-Mumpers, such as run
after, or ply Coaches, &c.

To RATTLE, to move off, or be
gone. We'll take Rattle, We must not
tarry, but whip away.

READY Rhino, Money in Possession.

RECRUITS, Money (expected.) Have
you rais'd the Recruits? Is the Money
come in?

RED-Fustian, Claret, or red Port-­
Wine.

RED-Letter-Man, a Roman Catho­
lick.

RED-Rag, a Tongue

REMEMBER Parson Malham, q. d.
Pray Sir drink about. A Norfolk
Phrase.

RHINO, ready Money.

RHINOCERICAL, full of Money.
The Cull is Rhinocerical; The Fop is
full of Money.

RIBBIN, Money. The Ribbin runs
thick; His Breeches are well lined
with Money. The Ribbin runs thin, 
He has but little Cash about him.

RICH-Face, a red-Face.

RIDG-Cully, a Gold-Smith.

RIFF-Raff, the Rabble or Scum of
the People, Tagrag and Longtail.

RIG, Game, Diversion, Ridicule.
See Fun.

RIGGING, Cloaths. I'll unrig the
Bloss; 1 will strip the Wench.

Rum RIGGING, fine Cloaths. The
Cull has Rum Rigging, let's ding him, 
mill him, and pike; The Man has very
good Cloaths, let us knock him down, 
kill him, and scour off.

RING, Money extorted by Rogues
on the Highway, or by Gentlemen
Beggars.

ROAST-Meat-Cloaths, Holiday-­
Cloaths. To rule the Roast, To be Ma­
ster or Paramount. Roasted, Arrested.
I'll Roast the Dab, I will arrest the
Rascal: To Roast, signifies also to rally, 
to teize, to hunt, or banter.

ROBERDS-Men, mighty Thieves, 
like Robin Hood.

ROCHESTER-Portion, two torn
Smocks, and what Nature gave.

ROGER, a Portmanteau, a Goose;
also a Man's Yard. likewise a Thief-­
taker.

ROGUE, a Name which includes all
the other Denominations,

ROMBOYL'D, sought after with a
Warrant.

ROMBOYLES, Watch and Ward.

ROMER, a drinking Glass; also
wider.

ROOK, a Cheat, a Knave. To Rook, 
To cheat or play the Knave.

ROSY-Gills, sanguine or fresh co­
lour'd.

ROTAN, a Coach, or Waggon, any
thing that runs upon Wheels; but
principally a Cart.

ROT-Gut, very small or thin Beer.

ROVERS, Pyrates, Wanderers, Va­
gabonds.

ROUGH, as, To lie Rough, to lie in
one's cloaths all Night.

ROYSTERS, rude, roaring Rogues.

To RUB, to run away. A Rub, an
Impediment, Obstacle, Hinderance, 
Stop, Hardship, or Difficulty. Rub on, 
to live indifferently. Rub'd off, broke
and run away. Rub through the World, 
to live tolerably well in it.

He RUBS us to the Whit, He sends us
to Newgate.

RUFF, an old-fashioned double
Band; from whence the Pillory is cal­
led, The Wooden Ruff.

RUFFIN, the Devil; as, The Ruffin
nab the Cuffin Quere, and let the Har­
man-beck trine with his Kinchins about
his Col quarron; i. e. Let the Devil take
the Justice, and let the Constable hang
with his Children about his Neck.

RUFFLERS, notorious Rogues, 
who, under Pretence of being maimed
Soldiers or Seamen, implore the Cha­
rity of well disposed Persons, and fail
not to watch Opportunities either to



steal, break open houses, or even
commit Murder.

RUFFMANS, the Woods or Bushes.

RUFF-Peck, Bacon.

RUG. It's all Rug, The Game is
secured.

RUM, gallant, fine, rich, best or
excellent.

RUM-Beck, any Justice of the Peace.

RUM-Bite, a clever Cheat, a neat
Trick.

RUM-Bleating Cheat, a very fat
Weather.

RUM-Blower, a very handsom Mis­
tress, kept by a particular Man.

RUM-Bluffer, a jolly Host, Inn-kee­
per, or Victualler.

RUMBO, a Prison or Goal.

RUM-Bob, a young Apprentice;
also a sharp, sly Trick. Likewise a
pretty short Wig.

RUM-Boile, a Ward or Watch.

RUM-Booze, Wine; also very good
or strong Drink.

RUM-Boozing-Welts, Bunches of
Grapes.

RUM Bubber, a dexterous Fellow at
stealing Silver Tankards from Publick
houses.

RUM-Bughar, a very pretty and
valuable Dog.

RUM-Bung, a full Purse.

RUMLY, bravely, cleverly, deli­
cately, &c.

RUM-Chub, which is (among the
Butchers) an ignorant Market-man or
Woman, that is bit by them.

RUM-Clank, a large Silver Tankard.
Tip me a Rum Clank of Bowse; i. e. Give
me a Double-tankard of Drink.

RUM-Clout, a Silk, fine Cambrick, 
or Holland Handkerchief.

RUM-Cod, a good Purse of Gold, or
round Sum of Money.

RUM-Cole, new Money, or Medals
curiously coin'd.

RUM-Cove, a great Rogue.

RUM-Cull, a rich Fool, that can be
easily bit, or cheated by any body;
also one that is very generous and kind
so a Mistress.

RUM Degen, a Silver-hilted or in­
laid Sword.

RUM-Dell, the same as, Rum-Doxy.

RUM Diver, a compleat or clever
Pick-pocket, The same with Files or
Bung-nippers. Which see.

RUM-Doxy, a beautiful Woman, 
or light Lady.

RUM-Drawers, Silk Stockings, or
very fine worsted Hose.

RUM-Dropper, a Vintner.

RUM-Dabber, an experienc'd or
expert Picker of Locks. The same
with GILT, which see.

RUM-Duke, a jolly handsome Man, 
Rum-Dukes, the boldest or stoutest Fel­
lows (lately) amongst the Alsatians,
Minters, Savoyards, &c. sent for to
remove and guard the Goods of such
Bankrupts as intended to take Sanctua­
ry in those Places.

RUM-Dutchess, a jolly handsome
Woman.

RUM File, the same as Rum-diver.

RUMFORD-Lyon, a Calf.

RUM-Fun, a clever Cheat or sharp
Trick.

RUM-Gelt, the same as Rum-Cole.

RUM-Glimmer, the King or Chief
of the Linkboys.

RUM Gutlers, Canary-Wine; also
fine Eating.

RUM Hopper, a Drawer. Rum-hop­
per, tip us presently a Boozing-cheat of
Rum gutlers; Drawer, fill us presently
a Bottle of the best Canary.

RUM Kicks, Silver or Gold Brocade
Breeches, or very rich with Gold or
Silver Galloon.

RUM-Mawnd, one that counterfeits
himself a Fool.

RUM-Mort, a Queen, or great Lady.

RUM-Nab, a Beaver, or very good
Hat.

RUM-Nantz, true French Brandy.

RUM-Ned, a very silly Fellow.

RUM-Pad, the Highway.

RUM-Padders, the better Sort of
Highwayman, well mounted and arm­
ed. See High Pad.

RUM-Peepers, a Silver Looking-­
glass.

RUMP and Kidney Men, Fidlers that
play at Feasts, Fairs, Weddings, &c.
and live chiefly on the Remnants of
Victuals.

RUM-Prancer, a very beautiful
Horse.

RUM-Quidds, a great Booty, or 
large Snack.

RUM-Ruff-Peck, Westphalia-Ham.

RUM-Squeeze, much Wine or good
Liquor given among the Fidlers.

RUM Snitch, a good Fillip on the
Nose.

RUM-Tol, the same as Rum-degen, 
being the newest Cant Word of the
two.

RUM-Tilter, the same as Rum-tol, 
or Rum-degen.

RUM-Topping, a rich Head-dress.

RUM-Ville, London.

RUM-Wiper, the same as Rum-Clout.

To RUN-Riot to turn Spark, and
run out of all.



RUNNING Stationers, Hawkers, or
those that cry News and Books about
the Streets.

RUNNER, the same as Budge.
Which see.

RUSTYGUTS, an old blunt Fellow.


S

SACK, a Pocket. To Dive into his
Sack; To pick his Pocket.

SACK, also signifies to be drunk; 
As, He bought the Sack; i. e. He got
drunk.

SALEMAN'S Dog, the same as Bar­
ker.

SALAMON, the Beggar's Sacrament
or Oath.

SCAB, a sorry Wench, or scoun­
drel Fellow.

SCANDALOUS, a sorry Perriwig.

SCANDAL-Proof, a thorough-pac'd 
Alsatian, or Minter; one harden'd, or
past Shame.

SCEW. See Skew.

SCHOOL of Venus, a Bawdy-house.

SCONCE. To build a large Sconce;
To run deep upon Tick or Trust.

SCOTCH Fiddle, the Itch.

SCOTCH-Mist, a sober, soaking
Rain.

SCOUNDREL, a Hedge bird or sorry
Scab.

To SCOURE, to wear. To Scoure the
Cramp-rings; To wear Bolts. also
to run away. See Scowre

To SCOWRE, to run away or scam­
per.

SCOWRERS, Drunkards beating
the Watch, breaking Windows, clear­
ing the Streets, &c.

SCRAN, a Reckoning at a Boozing-­
ken, &c.

SCRAP, a Design, a purpos'd Vil­
lainy, a vile Intention; also a perpe­
trated Roguery: He whiddles the whole
Scrap: He discovers all he knows.

SCRIP, a Shred or Scrap of Paper.
As, The Cully did freely blot the Scrip, 
and tipt me 40 Hogs; One enter'd into
Bond with me for 40 Shillings.

SCRUB, a Ragamuffin.

SCRUBADO, the Itch.

To SCREW, to copulate with a
Woman.

A SCREW, a Strumpet, a common
Prostitute.

SCUM, the Riff-raff, or Tagrag and
Longtail.

SEALER, one that gives Bonds and
Judgment for Goods and Money.

SECRET, as, Let into the Secret;
When one is drawn in at Horse-racing, 
Cock-fighting, Bowling, and other
such Sports or Games, and bit.

SEEDY, poor, Money-less, exhaust­
ed.

SERAGLIO, a Bawdy-house; so
called from the Great Turk's Palace.

SERAGLIETTO, a lousy, vile, 
sorry Bawdy-house, a meer Dog-hole.

SET, as Dead Set, a Term used by
Thief-catchers when they have a Cer­
tainty of seizing some of their Clients, 
in order to bring them to Justice.

SETTERS, or Setting-dogs, they
that draw in Bubbles, for old Game­
sters to rook; also a Serjeant's Yeo­
man, or Bailiff's Follower, or Second.
Also an Excise Officer.

To SETTLE, to stun, or knock
down; as, We settled the Cull by a
Stoter on his Nob; i. e. We took him
such a Blow on the Head, as quite
stunn'd him.

SHABBY, in poor sorry Rigging.

SLABBEROON, a Ragamuffin.

SHAB'D-Off, sneak'd, or fled away.

SHAG-Bag, a poor shabby Fellow.

SHAM, a Cheat, or Trick. To Cut a
Sham; To play a Rogue's Trick.

SHAMBLE-Legg'd, one that goes
wide, and shuffles his Feet about, 
Shake your Shambles; Haste, be gone.

SHAPPEAU, or Shappo, for Chap­ 
peau, F. a Hat.

SHARPER, a Cheat, one that lives
by his Wits.

SHARPERS Tools, false Dice.

SHAVER. A cunning Shaver; A
subtle, smart Fellow. He Shaves close;
He gripes, squeezes, or extorts very
severely.

SHAVINGS, the Chippings of Mo­
ney.

SHE-Napper, a Woman Thief-catch­
er; also a Hen-bawd, or Procuress;
a Debaucher of young Virgins; a
Maiden head-jobber.

SHOP, a Prison.

SHOP List, one that Steals under
pretence of cheap'ning.

SHOPT, imprison'd.

SHOT, as, To pay one's Shot; To
pay one's Club or Proportion.

SHOT 'twixt Wind and Water; 
Clapt or Pox'd.

SHOULDER-Clapper, a Serjeant or
Bailiff.

SHOULDER-Sham, a Partner to a
File.

SHRED, a Taylor.

SHUFFLER, or Shuffling Fellow, a
slippery, shifting Fellow.



SHURK, a Shark or Sharper.

SICE. Six-pence.

To SILENT a Man, to knock him
down, so as to stun him: To lay him
down for dead. See the Cull is Silent, 
is also us'd by desperate Villains, for
cutting the Throat, or shooting the
unhappy Person who falls in their way.

SILK Snatchers, a Set of Varlets, 
who snatch Hoods, Scarves, Handker­
chiefs, or any Thing they can come at.

SIMKIN, a Fool.

SIMON, Six-pence.

SINGLE-Ten, a very foolish, silly
Fellow.

SIR JOHN, the Country-Vicar or
Parson.

SIR TIMOTHY, one that treats
every Body, and pays the Reckonings
every where.

SKEW, a Beggar's wooden Dish.

SKIN-Flint, a griping, sharping, 
close-fisted Fellow.

SKINKER, that fills the Glass or Cup.
Who Skinks? Who pours out the Li­
guor.

SKIP-Jacks, Youngsters that ride
Horses for Sale.

SKIPPER, a Barn.

SKRIP, Paper.

SLAM, a Trick; also a Game in­
tirely lost, without getting one on that
Side.

SLAT, a Sheet.

SLATE, a half Crown; also the
same as Slat.

SLEEPING-House, without Shop, 
Warehouse, or Cellar, only for a pri­
vate Family.

SLOUCH. See Zlouch.

SLUBBER-Degullion, a slovenly, 
dirty, nasty Fellow.

SLUR, a Cheat at Dice; also a slight
Scandal or Affront.

SLY-Boots, a seeming silly, but sub­
tle Fellow.

SMACKING-Cove, a Coachman.

To SMASH, to quell, to beat or
abuse violently; to kill.

SMASH, to smite, to kick down
Stairs. The Chubs tout the Blosses, they
smash them, and make them brush; The
Sharpers catch their Mistresses at the
Tavern, making merry without them, 
kick them down Stairs, and force
them to rub off.

SMEAR, a Painter or Plaisterer, 
&c.

SMELLER, a Nose.

SMELLIN-Cheat, a Nose-gay; also
an Orchard or Garden.

SMELTS, Half-Guineas.

SMITER, an Arm.

To SMOKE, to suspect or smell a De­
sign. It is smok'd It is made Publick, all
have Notice.

SMOKER, a Tobacconist.

SMOKY, Jealous, as, He is a smoky
Cull; He is a suspicious Fellow.

SMUG, a Blacksmith.

SMUGGLING-KEN, a Bawdy-house.

SMUTTY, Bawdy.

SNACK, Share or Part. To go snacks.
To go halves, or Share and Share alike.

To SNABBLE, to rifle, to strip, or
plunder. To Snabble a Poll, to run
away with a Peruke or Head-dress.

To SNAFFLE, to steal, to rob, to
purloin. A Snaffler of Prancers; a
Horse-Stealer. Snaffle, is also a High­
wayman that has got a Booty.

SNAPT, taken, caught.

SNEAK. He goes upon the Sneak at
Darkmans, He privately gets into Houses
or Shops at Night and Steals undisco­
vered.

A SNEAKING Budge, one that robs
alone, and deals chiefly in petty Lar­
cenies.

To SNIC, to cut.

To SNILCH, to eye or see any Body.
The Cull Snilches; the Man eyes or sees
you.

SNIP, a Cheat; To snip, to cheat.

SNITCH, or Snitchel, a Filip on the
Nose.

SNITE, to wipe, or flap. Snite his
Snitch; wipe his Nose, or give him a
good Flap on the Face.

SNOUT, a Hogshead.

SNOW-Broth, Snow-water.

SNUDGE, one that lurks under a
Bed, to watch an Opportunity to rob
the House.

SNUG: All's snug; All's quiet, used
by Villains, when every thing is silent
and they hear no body stir to oppose
their intended Rogueries.

SOCK, a Pocket. Not a Rag in my
Sock; I han't a Farthing in my Poc­
ket. Also beat; I'll Sock ye; I'll drub
ye tightly.

SOCKET-Money, demanded and
spent upon Marriage.

SOLDIERS-Bottle, a large one.

SOLOMON, or Salomon, the Mass.

SON of Apollo, a Scholar.

SON of Mars, a Soldier.

SON of Venus , a Lover of Women.

SON of Mercury, a Wit. Also a 
Thief.

SON of Prattlement, a Lawyer.

SOUL-Driver, a Parson.

A SOUL, one that loves Brandy.

SOULDIER's Mawnd, a counterfeit
Sore or Wound in the left Arm.



SOUSE. Not a Souse; not a Penny.
From Sous, French Money.

To SOUSE, to fall upon, to beat
cruelly; also to plunder or kill.

SOUTH-SEA, a strong distill'd Li­
quor, so called by the Inhabitants and
Clients of Newgate, &c.

SOUTH-SEA Mountain, Geneva.

SOW's-Baby, a Pig.

SOWSE-Crown, a Fool.

SOW-Child, a Female Child.

To SOWR, to beat violently, &c.
As, Sowr the Cull; i. e. knock him
down: Beat him without Mercy, &c.

SPANGLES, Ends of Gold or Silver.

SPANISH-Gout, the Pox.

SPANISH-Money, fair Words and
Compliments.

SPANKS, Money, Gold or Silver.

To SPEAK with, to steal.

SPECKT-Wiper, a coloured Hand­
kerchief.

To SPIRIT-Away the same as Kid­
nap.

SPIRITUAL-Flesh Broker, a Par­
son.

SPLIT-Fig, a Grocer.

SPLITTER-of-Causes, a Lawyer.

To SPRING a Partridge, to draw a
Person in to be bit. To spring Par­
tridges; to raise a Crowd in order to
rob or pick Pockets.

To SPUNGE, to drink at others Cost.

SPUNGING-House, a By-prison.

A SPUNGING Fellow, one that lives
upon the rest, and pays nothing.

SQUAB, a very fat, truss Person; a
new-hatch'd Chick; also a Couch.

SQUAWL, a Voice; as, The Cove has
a bien Squawl; The Fellow has a good
Voice.

To SQUEEK, to discovcr, or im­
peach; also to cry out. They squeek
Beef upon us; They cry out Highway­
men or Thieves after us. The Cull
squeeks; The Rogue peaches,

SQUEEKER, a Barboy; also a Bas­
tard, or any other Child. Stifle the
Squeeker; Murder the Child, and
throw it into a House of Office.

SQUEEZING of Wax, being bound
for any Body; also sealing of Wri­
tings.

SQUINTE-Fuego, one that squints
very much.

SQUIRE of Alsatia, a Man of For­
tune, drawn in, cheated, and ruin'd by
a Pack of poor, lowsy, spunging Fel­
lows, that lived (formerly) in White-­
Fryars. The Squire, a Sir Timothy
Treat-all; also a Sap-Pate. A fat
Squire; A rich Fool.

SQUIRISH, foolish; also one that
pretends to pay all Reckonings, and is
not strong enough in the Pocket.

STAG, a Term (inverting Quali­
ties) used for an Enemy, a Pursuer;
as, I spy a Stag, used by that notorious
young Robber Shepherd, lately exe­
cuted, when he first saw the Turnkey
of Newgate, who pursu'd and took
him after his first Escape from the Con­
demn'd Hold.

STALE Jest, old, dull.

STALE Maid, at her last Prayers.

STALLION, a Whore-Master; so
called from a Stone-horse kept to co­
ver Mares.

STALL-Whimper, a Bastard.

STALLING, making or ordaining.

STALLING Ken, a Broker's Shop, 
or any House that receives stollen
Goods.

To STAM-Flesh, to Cant; as, The
Cully Stamfleshes rumly; He cants very
well.

STAMMEL, or Strammel, a brawny, 
lusty, strapping Wench.

STAMPS, Legs.

STAMPERS, Shoes; also Carriers.

STARTER, a Question; also a Flin­
cher. I am no Starter; I shan't flinch, 
or cry to go home.

STICK Flams, a Pair of Gloves.

STINGO, humming, strong Liquor.

STITCH-Back, very strong Ale.

STOCK-Drawers, Stockings.

STONE-Dead, quite dead.

STONE Doublet, a Prison.

STOP; as, I have stopt his Blubber;
I have stopt his Mouth.

STOP-Hole Abbey, the Nick-name of
the chief Rendezvous of the Canting
Crew of Gypsies, Beggars, Cheats, 
Thieves, &c.

STOTER, a great Blow. Stoter
him, or, Tip him a Stoter; Settle him;
give him a swinging Blow.

STOW, i. e. You have said enough.
Stow you, bene Cove; Hold your Peace, 
good Fellow. Stow your Whids and
plant them; for the Cove of the Ken can
cant them; Take care what you say;
for the Man of the house understands
you.

STRAPPING, lying with a Wench.

STRAPPING-Lass, a swinging two-­
handed Woman.

STRETCHING, hanging. He will
stretch for it; He will be hang'd.

To STRETCH, to tell a Lye; as.
He stretcht hard; He told a whisking
Lye.

STRIKE, to beg, to rob; also to
borrow Money. Strike all the Cheats;
Rob all you meet. Strike the Cull;



Beg of that Gentleman. Strike the
Cloy; Get the Fellow's Money from
him. He has struck the Quidds; He has
got the Money from him. He strikes
every Body; He borrows Money every
where; he runs in every one's Debt.

To STRIP, to rob or gut a House, 
to unrig any Body; or to bite them of
their Money.

To STRIP the Ken; To gut the
House.

To STRIP the Table; To win all
the Money on the Place. We have stript
the Cull; We have got all the Fool's
Money. The Cove's stript; The Rogue
has not a Jack left to help himself.

STROMMEL, Straw, or Hair, as, 
She hath good Store of Strommel on her
Nob.

STROWLERS, Vagabonds, Itine­
rants, Men of no settled Abode, of a
precarious Life, Wanderers of For­
tune, such as Gypsies, Beggars, Ped­
lars, Hawkers, Mountebanks, Fidlers, 
Country-Players, Rope-dancers. Jug­
lers, Tumblers, Shewers of Tricks, 
and Raree-show-men.

STROWLING-Morts, who, pre­
tending to be Widows, often travel
the Countries, making Laces upon
Yews, Beggar's-tape, &c. Are light-­
finger'd, subtle, hypocritical, cruel, 
and often dangerous to meet, especially
when a Ruffler is with them.

STRUM, a Perriwig. Rum-strum;
A long Wig. Also a handsome Wench, 
or Strumpet.

STUBBLE-It; Hold your Tongue.

STULING-Ken, the same as Stal­
ling Ken. Which see.

SUCK, Wine or strong Drink. This
is rum Suck; It is excellent Tipple.
We'll go and Sunk our Faces; but if they
toute us, we'll take Rattle, and brush;
Let's go to drink and be merry; but if
we be smelt by the People of the
house, we must scowre off. He loves
to Suck his Face; He delights in Drink­
ing.

SUCKY, drunkish, maudling, half
Seas over.

SUIT and Cloak, good Store of
Brandy or any agreeable Liquor.

SUN Burnt, clapt.

SUNNY-Bank, a good, rousing
Winter-Fire.

SUPERNACULUM, not so much as
a Drop left to be poured upon the
Thumb nail, so cleverly was the Li­
quor tipt off.

SU-POUCH, an Hostess or Landlady.

SUTLER, he that pockets up Gloves, 
Knives, Handkerchiefs, Snuff and To­
bacco-boxes, and other lesser Movea­
bles.

SWADDLERS, Rogues, who, not
content to rob and plunder, beat and
barbarously abuse, and often murder
the Passengers. Hence, To Swaddle;
To beat lustily with a Cane, &c.

SWAG, a Shop. Rum Swag; Full
of rich Goods.

To SWAGGER, to vapour or
bounce.

SWEET, easy to be taken in: also
expert, dexterous, clever: As, Sweet's
your Hand; said of one who has the
Knack of stealing by Sleight of Hand.

SWEETNERS, Guinea-droppers, 
Cheats, Sharpers. To Sweeten; To
decoy, draw in, and bite. To be sweet
upon; To coax, wheedle, entice or
allure.

SWIG, a Draught of Liquor; To
swig it off; To drink it all up.

SWIG-Men, carrying small Haber­
dashery-Wares about, pretending to
sell them, to colour their Roguery.
Fellows crying Old Shoes, Boots, or
Brooms; and those pretending to buy
Old Suits, Hats or Cloaks, are also
called Swig-Men, and oftentimes, if
an Opportunity offers, make all Fish
that comes to Net.

SWINDGING-Clap, Swindging Fel­
low; Swindging-Lye, a very great one.

To SWINGE one off, to beat him
soundly.


T

TACKLE, a Mistress; also good
Cloaths. The Cull has tipt his Tac­
kle Rum-rigging, or has tipt his Bloss
Rum Tackle; The keeping Coxcomb
has given his Mistress very fine Cloaths.

TAKE the Culls in, Seize the Men
in order to rob them.

TALE-Tellers, a sort of Servants in
use with the great Men in Ireland, to
lull them asleep with Stories of a Cock
and a Bull, &c.

TALESMAN; as, I tell you my Tale, 
and my talesman, or Author.

TALL-Boy, a Pottle or two Quart
Pot.

TALLY-Men, Brokers that let out
Cloaths to wear per Week, Month or
Year. See Robber-Suckers.

TAP, a Blow; a small Tap, &c.

TAPE, Red or White; Geneva, 
Aniseed, Clove water, so called by
Canters and Villains, and the Renters



of the Tap, &c. in Newgate, and other
Prisons.

TAPLASH, wretched, sorry Drink, 
or Hogwash.

TART Dames, sharp, quick, pert.

TARTAR, a notorious Rogue or
Sharper, who sticks not to rob his
Brother Rogue. Hence To catch a
Tartar, is said, among the Canting
Varlets, when a Rogue attacks one
that he thinks a Passenger, but proves
to be of this Class of Villains, who in
his Turn having overcome the Assail­
ant, robs, plunders, and binds him.

TATTER-De-mallion, a tattered
Beggar, sometimes half naked, with
Design to move Charity, having better
Cloaths at Home. In Tatters; in Rags.
Tattered and Torn; rent and torn.

TATTLE, or Tattler, an Alarum, 
or stiking Watch; or indeed any
other Watch.

TATS, false Dice.

TAT-Monger, a sharper or Cheat, 
using false Dice.

TAUDRY, garish, gawdy, with
Lace, or mismatched and staring Co­
lours: A Term borrow'd from those
Times when they trick'd and bedeck'd
the Shrines and Altars of the Saints, as
being at Emulation with each other
upon that Occasion. The Votaries of
St. Andery (an Isle of Ely Saint) ex­
ceeding all the rest in the Dress and
Equipage of their Altar, it grew into a
By-word, upon any thing very gawdy, 
that it was All Taudry; as much as to
say, All St. Audery.

TAYLE, a Sword.

TAYLE-Drawers, Sword-Stealers.
The same as Wiper Drainers. He drew
the Cull's Tayle Rumly; He whipt away
the Gentlemans Sword cleverly.

TEAGUE-Land, Ireland.

TEAGUE Landers, Irishmen.

TEARS of the Tankard, Drops of
the good Liquor that fall beside.

TEMPLE Pickling, the Pumping of
Bailiffs, Bums, Setters, Pick-Pockets, 
&c.

TENDER-Parnel, a very nicely edu­
cated Creature, apt to catch cold on
the least Puff of Wind.

TERCEL-Gentle, a Knight or Gen­
tleman of a good Estate; also any
rich Man.

TERRA-Firma, an Estate in Land;
Has the Cull any Terra Firma? Has the
Fool got any Land.

THE Dragon upon St. George; the
Woman uppermost.

THIEF-Takers, who make a Trade
of helping People (for a Gratuity) to
their lost Goods and sometimes, for
Interest, or Envy, mapping the Rogues
themselves, being usually in Fee with
them, and acquainted with their Haunts.

THOROUGH-Cough, farting and
coughing at the same time.

THOROUGH Passage, in at one Ear
and out at t'other.

THOROUGH Stitch, over Shoes, 
over Boots.

THREE Legged Stool, or Three legged
Mare, Tyburn.

THREE Threads, half common Ale, 
and half Stout or double Beer.

THREPPS, Three-pence.

THROTTLE, Throat or Gullet; He
seized his Throttle: i. e. He took him
by the Throat.

THRUMS, Three Pence. Tip me
Thrums; Lend me Three Pence.

THUMMIKINS, a Punishment (in
Scotland) by hard squeezing or pres­
sing of the Thumbs, to extort Confes­
sion, which stretches them prodigi­
ously, and is very painful. In Camps, 
and on Board of Ships, lighted Matches
are clapt between the Fingers to the
same Intent.

THWACK, to beat with a Stick or
Cudgel.

TIB, a young Lass.

TIB of the Buttery, a Goose.

TICK, as to run on Tick; To go on
the Score, or Trust.

TICKLE-Pitcher, a Tosspot, or Pot-­
companion. A lewd Man or Woman.

TICKRUM, a Licence.

TIFFING, lying with a Wench, also
Drinking.

TILTER, a Sword. To Tilt, to fight
with a Rapier. Run a Tilt; a swift
Pursuit.

TINT for Tant, Hit for Hit, Dash
for Dash.

TIP, to give or lend; Tip your Lour
or Cole or I'll mill ye; Give me your
Money, or I'll kill ye. Tip the Culls a
Sock for they are sawcy; Knock down
the Men for resisting. Tip the Cole to
Adam Tiler; Give your Pick-pocket
Money presently to your running
Comrade. Tip the Mish; Give me the
Shirt. Tip me a Hog; Lend me a Shil­
ling. Tip it all off; Drink it all off at
a Draught. Don't spoil his Tip; Don't
baulk his Draught. A Tub of good Tip;
(for Tipple) a Cask of strong Drink.
To tip off, also signifies to die.

TIPLER, a Fuddle-cap, or Toss pot.

TIPSY, almost drunk.

TIT, a Horse; also a young prim
Lass.

TIT-Bit, a fine Snack, or choice
Morsel.



TITTLE-Tattle, idle, impertinent
Talk.

To TITTER, to laugh at a Feather.

TITTER-Totter, one ready to reel, 
at every Jog, or Blast of Wind.

TOGE, a Coat.

TOGEMANS, a Gown, or Cloak. I
have bit the Togemans; I have stole the
Cloak. Tis a Rum Togemans lets nim it;
'Tis a good Camblet-Cloak; lets whip
it off.

TOKENS the Plague; also Presents
from one to another; also a Farthing.
Not a Token left; Not a Farthing re­
maining. Tom Fools Token; Money.

TOL Toledo, a Sword. Bite the
Tol; Steal the Sword. A Rum Tol;
A silver hilted Sword. A Queere Tol;
A Brass or Steel-hilted or ordinary
Sword.

TOM-Boy, a Tom Rig, or Romp.

TOM of Bedlam, the same as Abram-­
Man. Which see.

TOM-Cony, a very silly Fellow.

TOM-Thumb, a Dwarf or diminu­
tive Fellow.

TOM-Long, tedious; as Come by
Tom Long the Carrier; or what is very
long a coming.

TONGUE-Pad, a smooth, glib-ton­
gued, insinuating Fellow.

TONY, a silly Fellow or Ninny. A
meer Tony; a meer Simpleton.

TOOL, an Implement fit for any
Turn, the Creature of any Cause or
Faction; a meer Property, or Cat's
Foot.

To TOP, to cheat or trick any one;
also to insult. What, do you top upon
me? Do you stick a little Wax to the
Dice to keep them together, to get the
Chance you would have? He thought to
have topt upon me; He designed to have
put upon, sharped, bullied, or affronted
me.

TOP-Diver, a Lover of Women.

To TOPE, to drink. An old Toper;
a staunch Drunkard. To tope it about, 
or Dust it about; To drink briskly
about.

TOP-Heavy, Drunk.

TOPPING-Fellow, who has reach'd
the Pitch and greatest Eminence in any
Art; the Master, and the Cock of his
Profession.

TOPPING-Cheat, the Gallows.

TOPPING-Cove, the Hangman.

TORCH-Cul, Bum-fodder.

TORIES, Irish Thieves or Rapparees.

To TOST, or Toast, to name or
begin a new Health. Who tosts now?
Who Christens the Health? An old Toft;
A pert, pleasant, old Fellow.

TOTTY-Headed, giddy-headed
hare-brained.

To TOUR to look out sharp, to be
upon one's Guard. Who
touts? Who looks out sharp? Tout the
Culls; Eye those Folks which way they
take. Do you tout and bulk, and I'll
file; If you'll eye and jostle him, I will
pick his Pocket.

To TOUT to look out sharp, to be
upon one's Guard. Who
touts? Who looks out sharp? Tout the
Culls; Eye those Folks which way they
take. Do you tout and bulk, and I'll
file; If you'll eye and jostle him, I will
pick his Pocket

TOUTING-Ken, a Tavern or Ale­
house Bar.

TOWER-Hill-Play, a Slap on the
Face and a Kick on the Breech.

TOWN-Bull, one that rides all the
Women he meets.

TOWER, a Cant Word, used to de­
note bad, or clipped Money: as, They
have been round the Tower with it; the
Piece of Money has been clipt.

TRACK, to go. Track up the Dan­
cers; Whip up the Stairs.

TRANSNEAR, to come up with any
Body.

TRANSLATORS, Sellers of old
Shoes and Boots, between Shoemakers
and Coblers; also that turn or tran­
slate out of one Language into another.

TRANSMOGRIFY, or rather Trans­
migrafy, to alter or new vamp.

TRANTER. See Crocker.

TRAPAN, he that draws in or
wheedles a Cull, and Bites him. Tra­
pann'd; sharp'd, ensnar'd.

TRAPES, a dangling Slattern.

TRES-WINS, Three Pence.

TRIGRY-Mate, an idle She-compa­
nion.

TRIB, a Prison. He is in Trib, for
Tribulation; He is laid by the Heels, 
or in a great deal of Trouble.

TRIM, Dress. In a sad Trim; dirty, 
undress'd. A Trim Lad; A spruce, 
neat, well trick'd Man.

TRIMMING, cheating People of
their Money.

To TRINE, to hang; also Tyburn.

TRINING, hanging.

TRINKETS, Toys and Trifles.

TRINGUM-TRANGUM, a Whim
or Maggot.

TRIPE, the Bally or Guts.

TRIP, a short Voyage or Journey;
also an Error of the Tongue, or Pen;
a Stumble, a false Step, a Miscarriage.
Also Bastard.

TROT, as, An old Trot, A sorry, 
base, old Woman. A Dog Trot; A
pretty Pace.

TROTTERS, Feet, usually Sheeps.
Shake your Trotters; Troop off, be
gone.

To TROLL About, to staunter, loiter, 
or wander about.



TROLLOP. A great Trollop, a lusty
coarse Romp.

TROOPER, a half Crown.

TROUNCED, troubled, cast in Law
punished.

TRUG, a dirty Puzzle, an ordinary
sorry Woman.

TRULL, a Whore, also a Tinker's
travelling Wife or Wench.

TRUMPERY, old Ware, old Stuff.

TRUNDLERS, Pease.

TRUNK, a Nose: How fares your
old Trunk? Does your Nose stand fast?

TRUSTY-Trojan, or Trusty Trout, 
a sure Friend or Confident.

TUCK'D, hang'd.

TUMBLER, a Cart. To shove the
Tumbler; To be whipt at the Cart's
Tail; also one that decoys, or draws
others into play; and one that shews
Tricks with and without a Hoop.

TURK, any cruel hard-hearted
Man.

TURKEY Merchants, Drivers of
Turkeys.

Turkish-Shore, Lambeth, South­
wark and Rotherhith Side of the Wa­
ter.

TURKISH-Treatment, very sharp or
ill dealing in Business.

TURN-Coat, he that quits one and
embraces another Party.

TURNIP Pate, white or Fair-hair'd.

TWEAK, as In a Tweak; in a heavy
Taking, much vexed or very angry.

TWELVER, a Shilling.

To TWIG, to disingage, to sunder, 
to snap, to break off; as, To twig the
Darbies; To knock off the Irons.

TWIST, half Tea, half Coffee:
Likewise Brandy and Eggs mixed, Hot­
Pot. Also to Eat; as, To twist lustily;
To feed like a Farmer.

To TWIST, to eat heartily.

TWISTED, executed, hanged.

To TWIT, to hit in the Teeth.

To TWITTER, to laugh much
with little Noise; also to tremble.


V

VAGARIES, wild Rambles, extra­
vagant Frolicks.

VAGRANT, a wandering Rogue, a
strolling Vagabond.

VAIN-Glorious, or Ostentatious Man,  
one that boasts without Reason, or, as
the Canters say, pisses more than he
drinks.

VALET, a Servant.

To VAMP, to pawn any thing. I'll
Vamp, and tip you the Cole; I'll pawn
my Cloaths, but I'll raise the Money
for you. To Vamp; To new dress, 
liquer, refresh or rub up old Hats, 
Boots, Shoes, &c. Also a Sock.

VAMPERS, Stockings.

VAN; as, Madam Van. See Madam.

VARLETS, now Rogues, Rascals, 
&c. tho' formerly Yeomens Servants.

To VAULT, as, To Vault, to commit
Acts of Debauchery.

VAULTING-School, a Bawdy-­
house.

VELVET, a Tongue. Tip the Vel­
vet; To tongue a Woman.

VINEGAR, a Cloak; also the Fel­
low that makes a Ring, and keeps
Order amongst Wrestlers, Cudgel-­
Players, &c.

VIRAGO, a masculine Woman, or
a great two-handed Female.

UNRIG'D, stripp'd, undres'd Un­
rig the Drab; pull all the Whore's
Cloaths off.

UNTWISTED, undone, ruin'd.

UNWASH'D Bawdry, rank, fulsom
Bawdry.

UPHILS, high Dice.

VOUCHERS, that put off false Mo­
ney for sham Coiners. Also one that
warrants Gagers or under Officers Ac­
compts, either at the Excise Office;
or elsewhere.

UPPISH, rampant, crowing, full of
Money. He is very Uppish; He is well-­
lined in the Fob; also brisk.

UPRIGHT-MEN, As an Upright-man, 
signifies the Chief or Principal of a
Crew. The vilest stoutest Rogue in
the Pack, is generally chosen to this
Post, and he has the sole Right to the
first Night's Lodging with the Dells,
who afterwards are used in common
among the whole Fraternity. He
carries a short Truncheon in his
Hand, which he calls his Filchman, and
has a larger Share than ordinary of
whatsoever is gotten in the Society.
He often travels in Company with 30
or 40 Males and Females, Abram-men, 
and others, over whom he presides ar­
bitrarily; and sometimes the Women
and Children, who are unable to tra­
vel, or fatigued, are by Turns carry'd
in Panniers by an Ass or two, or by
some poor Jades which they procure
for that Purpose. Go Upright, said by
Taylors and Shoemakers, to their
Servants, when any Money is given
to make them drink, and signifies,
Bring it all out in Drink, tho' the Do­
nor intended less, and expects Change,
or some Return of Money.



UPSTARTS, new raised to Honour.

URCHIN, a little sorry Fellow; also
a Hedge-hog.

URINAL of the Planets, Ireland, with
us, because of its frequent and great
Rins; as Heidelberg, and Cologn in
Germany, have the same Name upon
the same Account; also a Chamber­
pot, or Glass.


W

To WADDLE, to go like a Duck.

WAG, Waggish, arch, game­
some, pleasant.

WAG-Tail, a light Woman.

WALLOWISH, a malkish, ill Taste.

To WAP, to lie with a Man. If she
won't wap for a Win, let her trine for a
Make; if she won't lie with a Man for
a Penny, let her hang for a Half­
penny. Mort wap-apace; a Woman
of Experience, or very expert at the
Sport.

WAPPER-Eyed, that has sore or
running Eyes.

WAPPING, the Act of Coition.

WARM, well lined or flush in the
Pocket.

WARMING Pan, an old fashion'd
large Watch. A Scotch Warming-Pan;
a She-bed-fellow.

WARREN, he that is Security for
Goods taken up on Credit, by extra­
vagant young Gentlemen; also a
Boarding-school, or a Bawdy-house,
which are too much the same Thing.

WASH, Paint for Faces.

WASPISH, peevish,

WATER-Pad, one that robs Ships, 
Hoys, Lighters, Barges or Boats in the
River of Thames. A Sort of BAD­
GERS. Which see.

WATTLES, Ears; also Sheep-folds.

WEB, Cloth of any Sort.

WEDGE, Plate, or Silver or Gold
Moveables and Trinkets: also Money.

WELSH Fiddle, or Scotch-Fiddle, 
the Itch.

WESTMINSTER-Wedding, a
Whore and a Rogue married together.

WET-Quaker, a Drunkard of that
Sect.

WHEADLE, a Sharper. To cut a
Wheadle; to decoy, by Fawning and
Insinuation.

WHEEL-Band in the Nick, regular
drinking over the left Thumb.

WHETSTONE'S Park, a Lane be­
twixt Holbourn and Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, 
formerly a noted Nest for Whores, 
now dispark'd.

WHIDS, Words.

To WHIDDLE, to enter into a Par­
ley, to compound with, or take off by
a Bribe; as, Did you Whiddle with the
Cull? Did you bribe or compound with
the Evidence? Also to impeach, or
discover; as, He Whiddles; He Peach­
es. He Whiddles the whole Scrap; He
discovers all he knows. The Cull has
whiddled, because we would not tip him
a Snack; The Dog has discovered be­
cause we did not give him a Share.
They Whiddle Thief, and we must Brush;
They cry out Thieves, and we must
fly.

WHIDDLER, a Peacher (or rather
Impeacher) of his Gang.

WHIG-Land, Scotland.

WHINERS, Prayers, Supplications, 
&c.

WHIP-Shire, Yorkshire.

WHIPSTER, a sharp, or subtle
Fellow.

To WHIP off, to steal, to drink cle­
verly, to snatch and to run away.
Whipt through the Lungs; Run through
the Body with a Sword. Whipt in at
the Glaze; Got in at the Window.

WHIM, a Maggot.

WHIMSICAL, maggotish.

WHIMPER, a low or small Cry.

WHINDLE, a low or feigned Cry.

To WHINE, to cry squeekingly.

WHINYARD, a Sword.

WHIPPER-Snapper, a very small
sprightly Boy.

WHIP-Jacks, counterfeit Mariners
begging with false Passes, pretending
Ship-wrecks, great Losses at Sea, nar­
row Escapes, &c. telling dismal Sto­
ries, having learnt Tar-Terms on pur­
pose; but are meer Cheats, and will
not stick to rob a Booth at a Fair, or
an house in some By-road. They
often carry their Morts or Wenches, 
which they pretend to be their Wives, 
whom they miraculousiy saved in the
Shipwreck, altho' all their Children
were drowned, the Ship splitting on
a Rock near the Lands-End, with such
like Forgeries.

WHIRLEGIGS, Testicles.

WHISK, a little inconsiderable, im­
pertinent Fellow.

WHISKER, a great Lye.

WHISKINS, shallow, brown Bowls
to drink out of.

WHISTLE, the Throat. Wet your
Whistle: liquor your Throat.

WHIT, Newgate. As, Five Rum-­
padders, are rub'd in the Darkmans out
of the Whit, and are pik'd into the Deu­
seaville; Five Highway-men in the



Night broke Newgate, and are gone 
into the Country.

WHITE-Chappel-Portion, two torn
Smocks, and what Nature gave.

WHITE Tape. See Tape.

WHITE Wool, Silver.

WHITHER-D'ye go, an insolent
prescribing, very, Wife.

WHORE's Kitling, or Whore's Son, a
Bastard.

WHOW-Ball, a Milk-maid.

WIBBLE, sad Drink.

WICKET, a Casement, also a little
Door. As, Tout through the Wicket, 
and see where a Cully pikes with his
Gentry mart, whose Muns are the Rum­
mest I ever touted before; Look through
the Casement, and see where the Man
walks with a Gentlewoman, whose
Face is the fairest, I have ever seen,

WICHER-Cully. See Witcher-Cully.

WIDOWS-Weeds, mourning
Cloaths. A Grass-Widow; One that
pretends to have been married, but
never was, yet has Children.

WILD Rogues, such as are trained
up from Children to Nim golden or
silver Buttons off of Coats, to creep in
at Cellar and Shop-windows, and to
slip in at Doors behind People; also
that have been whipt, burnt in the
Fist, and often in Prison for Roguery.

WILES, Tricks, Intrigues, cunning
Stratagems.

WILY, cunning, crafty, intriguing.

WILLING-Tit, a little Horse that 
Travels chearfully; also a coming 
Girl.

WILLOW, poor, and of no Reputa­
tion.

WIN, a Penny. To win; 
To steal. 
Won; Stollen. The Cull has won a
Couple of rum Glimstocks; The Rogue
has stole a pair of Silver Candlesticks.

WIND-Fall, a great Fortune fallen
unexpectedly by the Death of a Friend.

WINDY-Fellow, without Sense or
Reason.

WIND-Mills in the Head, empty
Projects.

WINK, a Signal or Intimation. He
tipt the Wink; He gave the Sign or Sig­
nal.

WINNINGS, Money, or Reward:
Winnings for Wapping; Money given a
Woman for lying with her. 

WIPE, a Blow; also a Reflection.
He tipt him a rum Wipe; He gave him
a swinging Blow. I gave him a Wipe;
I spoke something that cut him, or
gull'd him.

WIPER, a Handkerchief. Nim the
Wiper; To steal the Handkerchief.

WIPER-Drawer, a Handkerchief-­
stealer. He drew a broad, narrow, cam, 
or speck'd Wiper; He pick'd Pockets of
a broad, or narrow, Ghenting, Cam­
brick, or colour'd Handkerchief.

WIRE-Draw, a Fetch or Trick to
wheedle in Bubbles; also to screw, 
over-reach, or deal hard with. Wire-­
drawn; so served or treated.

WISE Man of Gotham, a Fool.

To WIT, to know or understand.

The WIT, Newgate, New Prison, or
Bridewell. The same as Whit.

WITCHER, Silver.

WITCHER-Bubber, a Silver Bowl.
The Cull is piked with the Witcher-bub­
ber; The Rogue is marched off with
the Silver-bowl.

WITCHER-Cully, a Silver-smith.

WITCHER-Tilter, a Silver-hilted
Sword. He has bit, or drawn tte
Witcher-tilter; He has stole the Silver-­
hilted Sword.

To WOBBLE, to boil. The Pot wob­
bles; i.e. The Pot boils; the Meat is
enough.

WOMAN of the Town, a Prostitute, 
or common Harlot.

WOMBLE-Ty-Cropt, the Indisposi­
tion of a Drunkard after a Debauch in
Wine or other Liquors: As, He is
womble ty Cropt; He is Cropsick, &c.

WOODEN-Ruff, a Pillory. He wore
the Wooden-ruff; He stood in the Pillo­
ry.

WOOD-Pecker, a By-stander that
bets, while others game.

In a WOOD, or, In a Maze; In a
Peck of Troubles; being in a Doubt;
or at a Loss, what Course to tak, by
Reason of some very critical Turn in
one's Affairs; or, among Canters, by
being surpriz'd, and in great Danger
of being taken, in a Robbery, or any
other unlawful Act.

WOOLLY-Crown, a soft-headed
Fellow.

WOOL-Gathering; as, Your Wits
are a Wool gathering; said of a Person
in a serious, or, as 'tis called, in a 
brown Study; or who knows not
what he does.

WORD-Pecker, one that plays with
Words: A Punster.

WORM'D, undermined, rooked, 
charted, tricked: Wormed out of, in­
veigled out of, or deluded.




X

XANTIPPE, a Scold; the Name of
Socrates's scolding Wife; who
never cold move his Patience, tho' by
premeditated and repeated Injuries.
Whence it is used for any Shrew, or
scolding, brawling Woman.


Y

To YAM, to eat heartily, to stuff
lustily.

YARMOUTH-Capon, a red Herring.

YARMOUTH-Coach, a sorry low
Cart to ride on, drawn by one Horse.

YARMOUTH-Pye, made of Her­
rings, highly spic'd, and presented by
the City of Norwich annually to the
King, on Pain of forfeiting their Char­
ter.

YARUM, Milk, or Food made of
Milk.

YEA-and-Nay-Men, a Phrase origi­
nally applied to Quakers; but now
used for any simple Fellow.

YELLOW, at first used by the Can­
ters only, but now in common Speech; 
for being jealous.

YELLOW-Boy, a Guinea, or Piece
of Gold of any Coin.

To YELP (from the Yelping of a Dog)
to cry, to bawl, to complain.

YELPER, a Town-Cryer; also, one
subject to complain, or make pitiful
Lamentation for trifling Incidents.

YEST, a Diminutive of Yesterday; a
Day ago.

YOAK'D, married,

YORKSHIRE-Tike, a Yorkshire Man­
ner of Man.


Z

ZAD, crooked, like the Letter Z;
as, A meer Zad, used of any
bandy-legg'd, crouch back'd, or de­
formed Person

ZANY, a Mountebank's Merry-­
Andrew, or Jester, to distinguish him
from a Lord's Fool.

ZLOUCH, or Slouch, a slovenly un­
genteel Man.

ZNEES, Frost, or Frozen; Zneesy
Weather; Frosty Weather.

ZNUZ, the same as Znees.





ABBREVIATIONS made Use of in the foregoing Work.


A. for Arabick.

B. British.

C. Br. Welsh.

Ch. Chaldee.

C. L. Civil Law.

C. T. Chymical Term.

Dan. Danish.

Du. Dutch.

F. or Fr. French.

F. L. Forest Law.

F. of L. French of Latin.

Gr. Greek.

Heb. Hebrew.

H P. Hunting Phrase.

H T. Hunting Term.

Ital. Italian.

L. Latin.

L. P. Law Phrase.

L. T. Law Term.

M. P. Military Phrase.

M. T. Military Term.

O. Old Word.

O. F. Old French.

O. L. Old Latin.

O. P. Old Phrase.

O. R. Old Records.

O. S. Old Statute.

P. T. Physical Term.

P. W. Poetical Word.

Sax. Saxon.

Sc. Scotch.

S. L. Statute Law.

Span. Spanish.

S. P. Sea Phrase.

S. T. Sea Term.

S. W. Scripture Word.

Syr. Syriac.

Teut. Teutonic or An­
cient German.


FINIS.


