



l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

C a m b r i d g e U n i v e r s i t y L i b r a r y F f . I . 1 5

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )





english wordes usuall in
the marches of wales.



Evens. or staves evens. timber quartered out for stafes but not made 
into Staves.

yevil. a muckyevil. or muck forke.

"mucky-evil" not found in OED, but see "muck-fork," n.



Glat. a gate. 

a sharde. a gate.

Orses. ollers. alder trees.

a Sheame of wood. an horse loade of woode Summagium /

"Sheame" not found in OED.



a Dingle. a peece of ground scituate betwixt two hils.

a Rise. or etheringe.

a By-let, a peece of ground compassed about with water

"By-let" not found in OED.



a nooke of errable lande, some say it is the land euer that lyeth fallowe yet I have
seen motion made of ij nookes of errable lande, a noke is the 
4th. parte of a yd land & containeth of the most parte about 15 acres.

See OED, "nook," 4b.



a darke man, a blinde man.

"darke man" not in the OED in this sense.



a twil. linnen cloth the web & wofe being one of teere & the other of hardes. qiury twi=file?

a fongell of corne. a handful of leasinges of corne /

"fongell" not found in OED.



a lownd or yoking, is as much as a teame can plowe in a day as much as
3 bushels of barli wil so 

a Fine, or Finestal. vinestallum a place where thei lai wood for their buleries
in droitwich /

"fine" not found in OED in this sense, and "finistal" not found there.



a wauling. or Bullery of salt water in droit wich.

a underne, eveninge.

a lewne. alevy of monye taxation or assesment.

a folde, a courte or yarde.

in Hole or childbed.

See OED, "hole," n. 8.



tacke. taking of cattle to tacke, or aqishing of cattle /

"tack" in this sense (pasture) antedates the first OED citation (1804; see OED, "tack," n.2, 4).



tensty. an yreli summe of moni paid in gdsal att Shuffenhal in countie Salop.

"tensty" not found in OED.



a leaker or hedlond.

"leaker" not found in OED in this sense.



laudskerred & meered out. per landscarnd carnedd is an heape of stones & in meaning out 
y dividing of landes thei cast in the meers smal heapes of stones in wales. landscarred
qui eam yntant etc land=skarres.

Possibly "landskerred", "landscarned", and "landscarred" are "land-scarred" (not in OED).



Hagard: or ricke

Dinders. old Roman coine. nota there is a hil in herefordshire so called
Leetefieldes or comms fieldes.

"Dinders" antedates the earliest OED citation (1751).



a Gladmer is a device made of dry lether & sowyd vp to gether
round & hollowe like a fut
bal set uppon a staf & filled with little stones This being shaken maketh 
so feareful a noise to rattle that thei wil not endure with in the noice
therof.

"Gladmer" (?="gladdener") not found in OED.



a teale of pilcorme :? 

"teale" and "pilcorme" have an unclear meaning here, "teal" seems to be a water-fowl, and "pilcorn" is oats. 












Northwals mesures



peckied. a pecke.

anherob. per hanum hobed

"hobed" antedates the first OED citation of "hobbit," n. (1863).



hobed. a bushel or 4 pecks

nelied. 2 bushels.











