



....

They haue a language among themselues, composed
of omnium gatherum; a glimmering whereof one of late
daies hath endeuoured to manifest, as farre as his Au­
thour is pleased to be an intelligencer; The substance
whereof, he leaueth for those that will dilate thereof, en­
ough for him to haue the praise, other the paines, not­
withstanding Harmans ghost continually clogging his
conscience with Sic vos non vobis.

....



....

Suppose now by this the greatest part of them are
sayling on the blacke Sea, what will become of them,
how they arriued, how entertained by the Inhabitants 
there, and of their prosperous voyage, you shall heare at 
the next boat-post. In the meane time, because the Bel­
man entreateth any that is more rich in canting, to lend
him better or more with variety, he will repay his loue
double: I haue thought good not only to shew his errour
in some places in setting downe olde wordes vsed fortie
yeeres agoe before he was borne; for wordes that are
vsed in these dayes (although he is bold to call me an v­
surper (for so he doth in his last round) and not able to
maintayne the title) But haue enlarged his Dictionary
(or Master Harmans) with such wordes as I thinke hee
neuer heard of (and yet in vse too) but not out of vaine
glorie, as his ambition is, but indeede as an experienced
souldier that hath deerely paid for it: and therefore it
shall be honour good enough for him (if not too good) to
come vp with the Reare (I doe but shoote your owne ar­
row backe againe) and not to haue the leadyng of the 
Van as he meanes to doe, although small credite in the 
end will redound to eyther.

You shall know the wordes not set in eyther his Dic­
tionaries by this marke §: and for shewing the errour
in his words, and true englishing of the same and other,
this marke ¶ shall serue.


§ Abram  madde.



§ He maunds Abram,  he begs as a madde man. 

Autem  the Church. 

Autem mort,  a married woman. 

¶ Bung  is now vsed for a pocket, heretofore for a purse. 

Boord  a shilling. 

Halfe a Boord,  sixepence. 

Bowse  drinke. 

Bowsing ken,  an Ale-house

Ben  good. 

Benship  very good. 

Buffa  a Dogge. 

Bing a wast,  get you hence. 

§ Budge a beake,  runne away. 

§ A Bite,   secreta () mulierum.

Caster  a Clocke. 

§ Crackmans  the hedge. 

Comission  a shirt. 

§ To Castell,  to see or looke. 

§ A Roome Cuttle,  a sword. 

§ A Cuttle bung,  a knife to cut a purse. 

§ Chepemans,  Cheape-side market. 

To Cut , to tell or call. 

¶ Cut me ben whids,  tell me truth. 

¶ To Cut quire whids,  to lie. 

Crashing Cheates,  Apples. 

¶ Chates,  the Gallowes: here he mistakes both the sim­
ple word, because he so found it printed, not knowing 
the true originall thereof, and also in the compound;
as for Chates it should be Cheates, which word is vsed
generally for things, as Tip me that Cheate, Giue me
that thing: so that if you will make a word for the 
Gallous, you must put thereto this word Treyning,
which signifies hanging; and so Treyning Cheate is as
much to say, hanging things, or the Gallous, and not
Chates.

Coue  a man. 



¶ Cowch a Hogshead,  to lie downe and sleepe: this phrase
is like an Alminacke that is out of date: now the 
duch word to slope is with them vsed, to sleepe, and lig­
gen to lie downe. 

§ Crancke,  the falling sickenesse: and thereupon your
Rogues that counterfeit the falling sickenes, are cal­
led counterfeit Crancks. 

To Cly the Iarke,  to be whipped. 

Drawers  Hosen. 

Dudes  Clothes. 

Darkemans  the night. 

Dewsauell  the Countrey. 

Dup the gigger,  open the doore. 

§ A fflicke  a Theefe. 

Fambles  hands. 

Fambling Cheates,  Rings. 

§ Famblers,  a paire of Gloues. 

§ To Filch,  to beate. 

§ A Filchman,   a cudgell or staffe. 

Flag,  a groate. 

§ To Fence  properly, to sell any thing that is stolne. 

§ To Foyst,  to picke a pocket. 

§ A Feager of Loges  one that beggeth with counterfeit
writings. 

Glasiers,  eyes. 

§ Greenemans  the fields. 

Gan  a mouth. 

Gage  a quart pot. 

Granam  Corne. 

Glymmer  Fire. 

Gigger  a doore. 

§ Gilkes for the gigger,  false keyes for the doore or pick­
lockes. 

§ Gracemans,  Gratious streete market. 

Gentry mort,  a Gentlewoman. 

Gentry Cous ken,  a Gentlemans house. 



Harman becke   the Constable. 

Harmons  the stockes. 

§ Iockam  a mans yard. 

§ Ian  a purse. 

§ Iere  a Turd. 

Ken  an house. 

Stawling ken,  a house to receiue stolne goods, or a dwel­
ling house. 

§ Lugges  eares. 

Lagge of dudes,  a bucke of clothes. 

§ Loges  a passe or warrant. 

§ A Feager of loges,   one that beggeth with false passes. 

Lybbeg  a bedde. 

Lower  money. 

Lybkin  a house to lodge people. 

Lagge   water or pisse. 

Lightmans  the day. 

Mynt   gold. 

The Muggill,   the Beadle. 

Make  an halfpenny. 

Maunding  begging. 

§ What maund doe you breake,  what kind of begging vse
you? 

§ Ile myll your maund,  Ile spoyle your begging. 

§ To nip a Ian,  to cut a purse. 

§ Nab  a head. 

§ Nab cheate  an hat. 

§ Numans  Newgate market. 

Nigling,  company keeping with a woman: this word
is not vsed now, but wapping, and thereof comes the
name wapping morts Whoores. 

Prat  a Buttocke. 

§ Your prat whids Romely,  you fart lustily. 

Pecke  meate, pecke is not meate but peckage, pecke is
taken to eate or byte: as the Buffa peckes me by the 
stampes, the dogge bites me by the shinnes. 



Ruff peck   Bacon. 

§ Peckage   meat or Scroofe scraps. 

§ To Plant  to hide. 

§ Stow your whids and plant  

§ The Coue of the ken can kant.  

Prauncer  an horse. 

Prigging  riding. 

Patrico  a Priest. 

Pad  a Way. 

§ Padder  an high-way robber or purse taker. 

§ Quire,  this word is alwayes taken in il sense for naught

§ Quire ken  a prison house. 

§ Quire bowse  bad drinke. 

§ What a quire whidding keepe you,  what a scolding keep 
you? 

Quarroms  the body, or armes, or backe. 

Roome vile  a great towne, commonly taken for London. 

Roome bowse  wine: this word is alwayes taken in the
best sense, to shew a thing extraordinary or excellent. 

§ Roome bowsin ken,  a Tauerne. 

Roome mort  a Queene or Gentlewoman, and so Roome
Coue a Gentleman. 

¶ Ruffmans,  not the hedge or bushes as heretofore: but
now the eauesing of houses or roofes: Cragmans is
now vsed for the hedge. 

Ruffian  the diuell. 

§ Scrappes, fatte and glorious bittes:  sound blowes and 
bangings. 

§ The muggill will tip you fat scraps and glorious bits,   the
Beadle will well bumbast you. 

Stampes  legges. 

Stampers  shooes. 

Slate  a sheete. 

Scew  a Cuppe or Glasse, a Dish or any thing to drinke
in. 

Skipper  a barne. 



¶ Salomon  the masse: Now when many doe presse the
poore rogues so earnestly to sweare by the Salomon, doe
not blame them though they refuse it; for although you
know not what it meanes, yet they very well know:
Many men I haue heard take this word Soloman to be
the chiefe commander among the beggers; but to put
them out of doubt, this is not he: marry there was one
Soloman in K.HENRY the eights time that was a iol­
ly fellow among them, who kept his Court most an end
at Foxe Hall at the vpper end of Lambeth (if it be true
as their Records make mention) who was Succes­
sour to Cocke Lorrell: of him and his successors much
is to bee spoken if licence may be graunted, and of
whose Ruannagate race I could frame a whole trea­
tise: but here enough. 

§ A Stander,  he that stands sentinel vpon the Pad or high­
way to robbe. 

Stromell  the straw. 

§ Spreader  butter. 

¶ Smellar  a garden, not Smelling cheate, for thats a Nose­
gay. 

§ Treyning  hanging. 

§ Treyning cheate  the gallous. 

§ To tip  to giue. 

§ Tip a make ben Roome Coue,  giue a halfepeny good
Gentleman. 

To tower or Castell  to see. 

§ To whid  to speake. 

§ A Winne  a penny. 

§ Whittington  Newgate. 
Not in OED

Yarrim  pottage or milke. 


And thus haue I runne ouer the Canters Dictiona­
ry, to speake more at large, would aske more time then
I haue allotted me, yet in this short time that I haue, I
meane to sing song for song with the Belman, ere I 
wholly leaue him.



....

He [Puffing Dicke] gaue termes to robbers by the high way,
such as robbe on horse-backe were called high lawy­
ers, and those who robbed on fote, he called Padders:  
the difference of these two sorts of villanes is this.

The first sort are called Gent. robbers or theeues;
and these ride on horses well appointed, and goe in shew
like honest men: the other robbe on foote, and haue no 
other helpe but a paire of light heeles and a thicke woode. 



....


