



l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 2 4 3 5 9

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )





The na­
mes of herbes in
Greke, Latin, Englishe
Duche & Frenche wyth
the commune names
that Herbaries
and Apoteca­
ries vse.

Gathered by Wil­
liam Tur­
ner.















To the mooste
noble & mighty Prince Edward
by the grace of God Duke of Summerset
Erle of Hertforde, vicount beuchamp, lord
Semour vncle vnto the Kynges highnesse
of Englande, gouernour of his moste roy­
all person and Protectour of al his realmes
dominions and subiectes, lieuetenaunt ge­
nerall of al his maiesties armies boeth by
lande and sea, Treasurer and Erlmarshal
of Englande, Gouernoure of the Iles
of Gernesey and Jersey, Knyght of
the garter, William Turner his
seruaunte wisheth prosperi­
tie boeth of bodie
and soule.

IN a certain litle boke
whiche I set furth.iiii.yeres
ago and somthynge more,
which I dedicated vnto the
Kynges Grace that nowe
is,I promised that if I perceyued that he
woulde take in good worth that litle trea­
ties, to set furth an herbal & an other boke
also of fishes. Partly to fulfyl this my pro­
mise streight way after, I began to labour





to make vp a latin herbal, whiche thynge I
haue finished .ii. yeres ago, but when I had
intended this yere to haue set it furth, & axed
the aduise of Phisicianes in thys matter,
their aduise was that I shoulde cease from
settynge out of this boke in latin tyll I had
sent those places of Englande, wherein is
moste plentie of herbes, that I might in my
herbal declare to the greate honoure of our
countre what numbre of souereine & strang
herbes were in Englande that were not in
other nations, whose counsell I haue folo­
wed deferryng to set out my herbal in latin,
tyl that I haue sene the west countrey, which
I neuer sawe yet in al my lyfe, which coun­
trey of al places of England, as I heare say
is moste richely replenished wyth al kindes
of straunge and wonderfull workes & giftes
of nature, as are stones, herbes, fishes and
metalles when as they that moued me to
the settyng furth of my latin herbal, hearde
this so reasonable an excuse they moued me
to set out an herbal in Englishe as Fuchsi­
us dyd in latine wyth the discriptions, fi­
gures and properties of as many herbes,
as I had sene and knewe, to whom I could
make no other answere but that I had no
such leasure in this vocation and place that
I am now in, as is necessary for a man that
shoulde take in hande suche an interprise.





But thys excuse coulde not be admitted for
both certeine scholars, poticaries, and also
surgeans, required of me if that I woulde
not set furth my latin herbal, before I haue
sene the west partes, and haue no leasure in
thys place and vocation to write so great a
worke, at the least to set furth my iudgement
of the names of so many herbes as I knew
whose request I haue accomplished, and haue
made a litle boke, which is no more but a ta­
ble or regestre of suche bokes as I intende
by the grace of God to set furth here after,
if that I may obteine by your graces healp
such libertie & leasure with a conuenient place,
as shall be necessary for suche a purpose.

Thyse litle boke conteineth the names of the
moste parte of herbes, that all auncient au­
thours write of both in Greke, Lattin, En­
glishe, Duche and Frenche, I haue set to
also the names whiche be common herbaries. I haue
tolde also the degrees of so many herbes as
Galene the chiefe Doctour of al phisicians 
hath written of, and because men should not
thynke that I write of it that I neuer sawe,
and that Poticaries shoulde be excuselesse
when as the ryghte herbes are required of
them, I haue shewed in what places of Eng­
lande, Germany & Italy the herbes growe





and may be had for laboure and money,
whereof I declare and teache the names in
thys present treates. Whiche howe profita­
ble it shall be vnto al the sicke folke of thys
Realme, I referre the matter vnto all them
whiche are of a ryght iudgement in phisicke.
Thys small boke of myne I dedicate vnto
your grace, signifiyng therby, onely what
mynde I beare vnto your grace, desirynge
you to take thys in good worth tyll that
I maye haue leasure and occasion to
write some greater & more wor­
thy worke to your highnesse,
whom almightie God long
continue in all vertue
and honoure to
his pleasure
Amen.

From your graces house at Syon
Anno Dom. M.CCCCCxlviij.
Martii.xv.









Abies.
ABies is called in
greke Elate, in en­
glish a firre tree, in
duch, Ein dannen,
in french Sapin, it
groweth in the al­
pes naturally and
in certeyne gardi­
nes planted and set
by mannes hande boeth in Englande and
in Germanie.


Abrotonum.
Abrotonum is called in greke, Abrotonon,
in englishe Sothernwod, in duche Affrush,
in frenche Auronne. There are two kyndes
of Sothernwod, the male and the female.
The male groweth plentuously in gardi­
nes in Englande, but the female dyd I ne­
uer see growing in Englande, it is founde
in Italy in plentie inough. Sothernwod is
hote and dry in the thirde degree.


Absinthium.
Absinthium is called in greke. Apsinthi­
on, in englishe wormwod, in Duche wer­
mout, in french, Absince or Aluyne. There
are three kyndes of wormwod, beside the
commune wormwod, wormwod pontike,
called in latin Absinthium ponticum, in en­





glishe maye be also called wormwod gen­
tle, it is called of Mesue and of the Pote­
caries of Germany Absinthium romanum
the Coloners call it graue erut, the Freses
call it wylde rosmary. The beste kynde of
thys wormwode gentle or pontike that I
haue sene came from Rome, an other kynde
of the same is to be had in Anwerp and tho­
rowe al Germany in plentie The seconde
kynde is called in latin Absinthium mari­
num and Seryphum, it groweth commonly
in diches whereinto, the salte water vseth at
certeyne tymes to come, it is plentuous in
Northumberlande by holy Ilande, and in
Northfolke beside Lin, at Barrowe in Bra­
bant, and at Norden in est freslande. Some
take thys herbe agaynst the trueth for pon­
tike wormwod. The thirde kynde is called
in latin Absinthium santonicum, I neuer se
the herbe but ones, it maye be called in en­
glishe frenche wormwod. Oure commune
wormwod is called in latine Absinthium
rusticum. And here is to be marked that
they are farre deceiued that vse this for pon­
tike wormwod. I report me to Galene (xi.
Methodi medendi) whether it be so or no.
Pontike wormwod, is hote in the fyrste de­
grie and dry in the thirde. Sea wormwod
is hote in the seconde degree and dry in the





fyrste, frenche wormwod is weaker then
Sea wormwod is.


Acanthium.
Acanthium is called in greke Acanthion,
it is named of some herbaries carduus asi­
ninus, I haue not hearde the name of it in
englishe, but I thynke it maye be called in
englishe otethistle, because the seedes are
like vnto rough otes, or gum thistle, or cot­
ten thistle, because it is gummy and the lea­
ues haue in them a thynge lyke cotten, which
appeareth when they are broken. It groweth
in gardines in Bonony, I haue also sene it
in England in gardines, but neuer a brode.
The herbe is of an hote & a subtile nature.


Acanthus.
Acanthus is called in greke Acantha, in
englishe Branke vrsin, in duche welshe bea­
renklawe, in frenche branke vrsine, branca
vrsina groweth in many places of Englande
in gardines and in the greatest plentie that
I euer sawe it, I did see it in my Lorde Pro­
tectours graces gardine at Syon, some erre
sore whiche abuse for thys herbe berefote.
The rote of brankeursine drieth and cutteth
humours lyghtly, and is of subtile partes,
the leaues haue power metely to dryue hu­
mours to their places.

"branke vrsine" antedates earliest OED citation (1551).




Aconitum.





There are .ii. kindes of the herbe called
Aconitum, the one kynde is called Pardali­
anches, whiche we may call in englishe Li­
bardbayne or one bery. It is much in Nor­
thumberland in a wodde besyde Morpeth
called Cottingwod. It hath foure leaues
lyke vnto great plantaine, & in the ouermost
top a litle blacke bery lyke a blacke morbe­
ry, but blacker & greater. The other kynde
is called Lycoctonum, & in englishe it maye
be called wolfes bayne. But this kynde is
deuided into two other kyndes, of whiche
I neuer sawe any kynde in Englande, the
one hath leaues lyke crowfote, and blewe
floures lyke hodes, and it is called muench
kappen in duche, and it maye be called in
englishe monkes coule or blewe wolfsbaine.
The other kinde hath leaues like a playne
tree or like Palma christi & yelowe floures,
thys maye be called in Englishe yelowe
wolfesbayn. I haue sene the former kind in
great plentie vpon the alpes betwene Cla­
uena & Spelunca, and in manye gardines
in Brabant, the latter kynde dyd I neuer se
but in gardines.


Acorus.
Acorus groweth not in England, wher­
fore they are farre deceued that vse the ye­
lowe flourdeluce, whiche some call gladen,





for Acorus, for Acorus is hote, bytinge and
opening, but gladen is colde, vnsauery and
astringent. I thynke that the great Galan­
ga is the true Acorus. If they haue not it
they maye vse Calamus aromaticus, or A­
sarabacca for Acorus. Acorus is hote and
dry in the thirde degree.

"asarabacca" antedates earliest OED citation (1551).




Adiantum.
Adiantum is called in greke Adianton,
in duche iunkfrawen hare, of the herbaries
Capillus veneris & groweth not in england
for it that is taken here for Adiantum is tri­
chomanes in Dioscorides. Howe be it ye
may vse trichomanes for Adianto, for they
are of lyke vertue. Adiantum groweth in
Italy in welles, and in the alpes in watery
or drepyng rockes, and especially whereas
the first water begynneth to stande, if that
a rocke lyke a browe, hange ouer the wel or
water, it may be named in englishe Venus
heir or Colonder maidens heir. Venus heir
is in a meane tempre betwene hote & colde.

"Trichomanes" antedates earliest OED citation (by Turner in 1562).




Agaricus.
Agaricus is called in greke agaricos, in
english agarike, in duch dannensthawm. A­
garike groweth not in England, but in the
alpes which deuide Germany & Fraunce
from Italy. Agarike is hote & dryueth awaye
and breaketh in smal pieces, humours.






Albucus.
Albucum is called also Hastula regia,
and in greke asphodelos, asphodillus gro­
weth not in Englande. It groweth in gar­
dines in Anwerp, it maye be named in en­
glishe whyte affodil, or duche daffodil, this
that we take for daffodil is a kinde of Nar­
cissus mentioned in plinie, it dryueth away
humours and sendeth them abrode.


Alcea.
Alcea is called in greke alcea, in Duche
sigmarswories, of the Herbaries Herba
Hungarica, in frenche guimane, it hath no
name in englishe that I knowe, it maye be
named Veruen mallowe, or cut mallowe.
It groweth plentuously in Germanie at
Bon by the Rhene side.

"cut mallowe" antedates earliest OED citation (1565-73).




Allium.
Allium is called in greke scorodom, in En­
glishe garlike, in duche knobloch, in french
aulouanx, it is deuided into three kyndes,
the first kynde is the common garlike, the se­
conde kynde is called allium anguinum in
latin, and ophioscorodom in greke, in englishe
crowe garlike, or wylde garlike. The third
kinde is called in latin Allium vrsinum, and
in englishe Ramsey, or bucrammes or rammes.
The first kynde groweth in gardines one­
ly. The seconde kynde groweth in the fiel­





des. The .iii. kind groweth also in gardines
Garlyke is hote & dry in the fourth degree.

"wylde garlike" antedates earliest OED citation (a1552).




Alnus.
Alnus is called in greke Clethra, in En­
glishe an alder tree or an aller tree, in duche
erlinbaum, it groweth by water sydes and
in marrishe middowes.


Aloe.
Aloe is so called in greke, latin & english,
It groweth not in Englande but by the sea
side & in Ilandes, I have sene it in gardines
in Italy, but it dureth not in gardines a­
boue three yeres. Aloe is after Paulus hote
in the first degree and dry in the third. Me­
sue sayeth that it is hote in the seconde and
dry in the thirde, but thys is so to be vnder­
stande that it is very hote in the first degree
and meanly hote in the seconde.


Alsine.
Alsine is called in englishe chike weede,
in duch vogell craute, in frenche mauron, of
the herbaries Morsus galline, it is moyste
and colde, it groweth on olde houses and in
al places all most in summer.


Altercum.
Altercum, siue Apollinaris is named in
greke hyosciamos, in englishe Henbane, in
duch bylsen craute, in french Alahanbane, of the
Poticaries Iusquiamus. It is colde in the
thirde degree.






Althea.
Althea called also Hibiscus, and Euis­
cus, is named in greeke althaia, in Englishe
marish mallowe or water mallowe, in duch
ibish, it groweth in watery places, some
take not as they should do holyhoke for al­
thea, Mershe mallowe.

"Hibiscus" antedates earliest OED citation (1706).




Alysson Plinij.
Alyscon Plinij is a rare herbe whiche I
coulde neuer see but once in Englande and
that was a litle from Syon. It had leaues
lyke madder and purple floures, it maye be
named in englishe purple goosgrase.


Amarantus.
There are two kindes of Amarantus, the
one kynde is called in greeke of Discorides
Helichryson, and thys kynde is founde in
Italy. The other kynde is called here in
Englande of some purple veluet floure, of
other flouramore.


Amygdala.
Amygdala is called in greke amygdale,
in englishe an almon tree, in duche en man­
del baum, in frenche amander, it groweth in
Italy and in high Germany in the fieldes,
but in England, only in gardines. Almon­
des haue a temparate heate.


Ami.
Ami is called in englishe amy, of the po­





ticaries ammeos, it groweth not in Eng­
lande, it groweth in many gardines in Ita­
ly and in Germany. It is hote and dry in
the thirde degree.


Amomum.
Amomum were Rosa hierecuntis if it sa­
uoured well, but for lacke of that, thys rose
of hierico semeth to be amomis.


Anagallis.
Anagallis, siue Corchorus, is called in
englishe pympernel, in duche gauchheyl, in
french morgelina, it groweth commonly a­
monge the corne. The male hath a crim­
sin floure, & the female hath a blewe floure.
They are somethynge hote and dry.


Anagyris.
Anagyris groweth not in Englande, it
hath seede lyke a beane and I haue sene it in
Bonony, it maye be called stynkynge tri­
foly in englishe, or beane tree. It is hote of
complexion.

"beane tree" antedates earliest OED citation (1600).




Anchuse.
Anchusa groweth in sandy groundes and
somtyme amonge the corne wyth a red ruse
and leaues like Buglos, it is called in french
orchanet, it may be named in englishe wilde
Buglos or orchanet, as the french men do.
The herbe is colde and dry.

"wilde Buglos" not found in OED "bugloss".




Androsaemon.





Androsaemon.
Androsaemon is the herbe (as I dooe gesse)
whiche we call totsan, and the Poticaries
falsly cal Agnus castus, it groweth in gar­
dines in Englande and no where elles that
I haue sene, it drieth by his natural power.


Anemone.
Anemone groweth muche about Bon in
Germany, I haue not sene it in Englande,
it is called of the common herbaries Herba ven­
ti, it may be called in english rose perseley.

"Anemone" antedates earliest OED citation (Turner, 1551).




Anethum.
Anethum is called in greeke anethon, in
englishe and duche, dill, in french anet, anet
is hote far in the seconde degree and is dul­
ler in drines in the same degree, Anethum
is wronge englished, of some, anise.


Anisum.
Anisum is called in greke anison, in En­
glishe anise, the anise whiche we vse nowe
adayes is not so hote as Galen sayeth that
his anise is, for he sayeth that anise is hote
and dry in the thirde degree.


Anonis.
anonis called also Ononis is called of
the herbaries Resta bouis, Remora aratri,
and acutella, and in duche hawhekell & stal­
craute, and in frenche Bugraues, in Cam­
bryge Shyre a whyne, it groweth in many





places aboute cambryge. The roote of this
herbe is of an hote nature.


Aparine.
Aparine siue Philanthropos, siue Om­
phacocarpos is called in english goosgrasse
or Goosehareth, in Duche Klebkraute, in
frenche Grateron, the herbe scoureth away
and dryeth.


Anthenus.
Anthenus siue Chamaemelon is called in
englishe Cammomyle, in duch camillen, in
frenche camomille, Camomilla is deuided
into three kyndes, the firste kynde is called
leucanthemon because it hath a whyte floure
and of the commune herbaries Camomilla
romana, and in englishe cammomyle, thys
herbe groweth on Rychmund grene, and in
Handsley heth in great plentie. The second
is called in greke chrysanthemon because it
hath a golden floure. I founde it once in a
corne fielde betwene Basyle and Surike,
and haue neuer sene it any where els in all
my lyfe, it maye be called in englishe yea­
lowe camomyle. The thirde kynde is na­
med in greeke Eranthemon because it gro­
weth in the sprynge of the yere. I haue sene
it in Englande but very rare, some call it
amariseam rubeam, and they call it in En­
glishe red mathes, alij, red mayde wed, alij,





purple camomyle. Camomyle is hote and
drye in the fyrste degree


Antirrhinon.
antirrhinon is of two sortes, the one is
described of Plinie wyth leaues lyke flax,
and the other is described of Dioscorides
with the leaues of pimpernel, Plinies antir­
rhinon groweth in many places of Germa­
ny in the corne fieldes, and it maye be called
in englishe calfe snoute. The other kynde
haue I in my gardine whose seede came from
Italy, it maye be called brode calfe snoute.


Apios.
Apios is called also Ischas, chamebala­
nos, and carica, it is called in englishe an er­
nute or an earth nute, it groweth plentu­
ouslye in Northumberland, beside morpeth
& in Germany betwene Redkyrke & Colon.


Apiastrum.
Apiastrum siue Citrago, is named in greke 
Melissophillon, aut Meliphillon, in english
Baume, in duche Melessen oder Hertes
kraut and Confili, in frenche Melesse. The
Baume that we haue in Englande here is
not the ryghte Melissophyllon, but it gro­
weth in Germany in many gardines, and
hath a greate deell better smell then thys
common Melissa hath, it may be called in en­
glishe Baum gentle, Baume is hote in the





seconde degree, but it dryeth not so muche.


Apium.
Apium is named Selinon, in english Per­
seley, in duch Peterlinge either Petersely, in
french Persil It is hote in the second degree
and dry in the middest of the thyrde. Some
vse for it wyth an errour Paludapio, that is
Smallage for apio. Perseley groweth no
where that I knowe, but only in gardines.


Aristolochia.
Aristolocia is of three sortes. The fyrst
is called in latin aristolochia rotunda, and it
may be named in englishe round Osterlu­
ci astrolochia, or round hertworte. Some
abuse for thys herbe, Holwort, whiche is in
Pleni Capnos phragmites. But their error
is easely perceyued by the readynge of the
discription of Dioscorides. This kind gro­
weth not in Englande, but in Italy and in
Fraunce plentuously. The second is called
aristolochia longa, and it groweth very li­
tle in Englande that I haue sene, but about
Bon in Germany it groweth in many hed­
ges by the vineyardes, but there it bringeth
furth no fruite, but besyde Lake decome, it
bryngeth furth fruite lyke blacke peares
and seede lyke mennes hertes, thys kynde
may be called in englishe longe Hertworth
or longe Astolochia The third kinde is cal­





led Clematites & it may be called in english
small Hertworte, it groweth in high Alma­
ny, in Basile. Herteworte is hote and drye
about the thirde degree.


Armoracia.
Armorathia is named in greke Raphanis
it groweth not in England that I wotte of,
but it groweth in Italy and it is called Lar­
moratia, it myght be called in englishe if we
had it, wyld Radish, it is hote of complexion.

"wyld Radish" antedates earliest OED citation (1597).




Arum.
Arum is called in greke aron, in english
Cuckopintell, Wake Robin, or Rampe, in
duche Psaffen bynde, in frenche Didchaen,
the Poticarie calleth it Pes vituli, Serpen­
taria minor, Luph minus groweth in euery
hedge almost in Englande about townes
in the spryng of the yere. Some wryte that
it is but hote & drie in the fyrst degree, howe
be it our aron is hote in the thirde degree.

"Arum" antedates the earliest OED citation (Turner, 1551).




Arbutus.
Arbutus groweth in Italy, it hath leaues
like Quickentree, a fruite lyke a strawbery,
wherfore it may be called in english straw­
bery tree, or an arbute tree.

"Arbutus" and "arbute tree" antedate the earliest OED citation (Turner, 1551).




Arthemisia.
Arthemisia otherwyse called Parthenis,
is commonly called in englishe mugworte,
and in duch Bifusse, it is not the very same





that Dioscorides describeth. I saw the right
Mugwort in an Ilande beside Venice, and
it may be called in englishe litle Mugwort.
Arthemisia is of three sortes, the fyrst is the
herbe that I cal sea Mugworte, the seconde
kynde after Fuchsius, is Feuerfew, and the 
thyrde kynde Tansey. Thys brode and com­
mon kynde maye be vsed for the ryght tyll
we maye get better. Mugworte heateth in
the seconde degree, and dryeth either vehe­
mently in the ende of the fyrst degree, or els
lyghtly in the begynnyng of the seconde.


Arundo.
Arundo is called in greeke Calamos, in
englishe a reed, in duch Ein ror oder ried, in
frenche nug roseau, it groweth in water sy­
des, & in fennes, & such other watery places


Asarum.
Asarum is named in greke asaron, in en­
glishe azarabacca or Folefote, in duche Ha­
selwortz, in frenche Cabaret, it is hote and
dry in the third degree. It groweth in Ger­
many wylde vnder Hasell trees, wherupon
it hath the name. It groweth in Englande
onely in gardines that I wotte of.

"azarabacca" antedates earliest OED citation (1551).




Ascyron.
Ascyron is not very common in England,
howe be it I sawe it thys last yere in Syon
parck, it hath a foursquared stalke, & is like





saynte Iohans grasse, but it is greater and
not wyth suche holes as are in saynte Io­
hans grasse, wherefore it maye be called in
english square saint Iohans grasse or great
saynt Iohans grasse.

"English square St. John's grass" antedates earliest OED citation (1659) but quotations for "St. John's grass" extend from 1538 to 1597).




Asclepias.
Asclepias is called of the Herbaries Hi­
rundinaria, of the duche men Schwalben­
wurt, and of some poticaries Vincetoricum.
It groweth in Germany in highe moun­
taynes, and in stony grounde amonge bu­
sshes I haue not sene it in England, it may
be called in englishe, Swallowurt.

"Asclepias" antedates earliest OED citation (1578).




Asparagus.
Asparagus is of .ii. kyndes, the one kinde
is called in latin asparagus altilis, or aspa­
ragus alone, of the Poticaries sparagus, in
Englishe Sperage, in Duche Spargen, in
french Esperage, it groweth very plentu­
ously in the Ilandes of east Freeseland, but
in Englande it groweth no where els that
I knowe, but in gardines. The other is na­
med in latin Corruda or asparagus sylue­
stris. I neuer sawe thys kynde but onely in
Italy in the mounte apenine, it maye be cal­
led in englishe pricky Sperage, because it is
all full of pryckes.


Asplenum.
Asplenum or asplenium named in greke





asplenon, or Scolopendrion, in duche Stein­
ferne, is called of the poticaries Citterache.
It maye be called in englishe Citterach, or
Scaleferne, or Fingerferne. Thys herbe
groweth communely in greate rockes and
in moyste walles, it is very muche in highe
Germany besyde Embis bath, and besyde
S. Goweris. I heare say that it is also plen­
tuous in the west countrey here in England.

"Citterach" antedates earliest OED citation (1551, by Turner).




Astragalus.
Astragalus is called in lowe duchelande
Erde nut, & in Berglande Erdeklin, it may
be called in english peaserthnut. It groweth
in the mountaynes of Germany, and hath
leaues and stalkes lyke a pease, blacke litle
rotes with knoppes lyke acornes, Fuchsius
toke thys herbe to be apios, but the discrip­
tion agreeth not. Astragalus hath a nature
to drye, I haue sene thys herbe of late in
Coome parke more astringent then it of Ger­
manie.


Atractilis altera.
Atractilis altera, named of the potica­
ries Cardo benedictus, and so is it also na­
med in Englishe, it groweth no where in
Englande that I knowe, but in gardines.
It dryeth humours by nature.


Atriplex.
Atriplex called in greke atraphaxys, or





Chrysolachanon, in english Orech or Orege,
in Duche Milten, in Frenche arroches, is
moyste in the seconde degree and colde in
the fyrste, it groweth in gardines & in some
Cornefieldes.


Auena.
auena named in greeke Bromos, in en­
glishe Otes or hauer, in duche Haber or ha­
uer, in french auoine, is somthing of a colde
nature and a stoppyng.




Bacchar.
Bacchar or Baccaris is the herbe (as I
thynke) that we cal in english Sage of Hie­
rusalem, but I wyll determine nothynge in
thys matter tyl I haue sene further. Let ler­
ned men examine and iudge.

"Bacchar" antedates earliest OED citation (1551 by Turner).




Balanus myreplica.
Balanus myreplica, is called of the Po­
ticaries Ben, and so maye it be also named
in englishe, it scoureth and cutteth wyth a
certeyne astriction. It groweth not in Eu­
ropa that I haue hearde tel of.

"Ben" or "Behen",  evidently antedating earliest OED citation (1559).




Ballote.
Ballote named of some marrubiastrum
or marrubium nigrum is named in english
stynkyng Horehound or blacke Horehound
in duche stynkend andorne, in frenche mar­
rubin nore, it groweth in hedges commune­
ly in euery countrey.






Barba Hirci.
Barba Hirci named in greeke Trago­
pogon or Come, groweth in the fieldes a­
boute London plentuously, and it groweth
muche in the middowes of Colon and in
many places in duch land. The duch herbe
hath some bitternes in the roote & a whyte
seede, but oures is swete and hath blacke
seede, therfore oures is the better herbe. It
maye be called in englishe gotes bearde.


Bellis.
Bellis or Bellius named in Englishe a
Dasie, is called of the Herbaries Consolida
minor, in duch Massible and Cleyti Izitlo­
ssen, in french Margarites or Petit consyre.
Dasies growe in al grene places in greate
plentie.


Beta.
Beta named in greeke Seutlon & Teut­
lon, is called in Englishe a Bete, in Duche
Mangolt, in frenche Porree, on Iotte. It is
called of Plenie and Theophrastus, Sicu­
la. Betes growe in England, as farre as I
knowe in gardines only.


Betonica.
Betonica called in Greeke Cestron or
Psychotrophion, is named in englishe Beto­
ny or Beton, in duche Betonien, in frenche
Betoine, it groweth muche in woddes and





wylde forestes. Betony is hote and drye.


Betonica Pauli aeginete.
Betonica Pauli, is a litle herbe growing
not higher then Peny ryal wyth leaues al­
so lyke Peny ryal wyth seedes in coddes
lyke Bursa pastoris, it groweth plentuously
in Germany about Bon, and in Englande
in a parke besyde London, it maye be called
in englishe Paules Betony or wodde Pe­
ny ryal.

"St. Paul's betony" antedates earliest OED citation (1736).




Betula.
Betula or as some wryte it, betulla, is
called in greeke Semida, in englishe a birch
tree or a birke tree, in duche ein birck baum,
in frenche bouleau ou beula. It groweth in
woddes and forestes.


Blitum.
Blitum is named in greeke bliton or bleton
in duch maier, in french dublite, I neuer saw
it in England but in my lordes gardine, and
there it was unknowen. It may be named a
blete. Blete after Galene is colde & moyste
in the seconde degree.


Botrys.
Botrys is called in english Oke of Hie­
rusalem, in duche trauben kraute, in frenche
pijmen as some teache. It groweth in gar­
dines muche in Englande.

"oak of Jerusalem" antedates earliest OED citation (1551).




Brassica.
Brassica is named in greeke krambe, in





englishe colewurtes, cole or keele, in duche
kol, in frenche chauls, in the Poticaries latin
caulis.


Brassica marina.
Brassica marina is called in greke krambe
thalastia, in duche meer kole, in frenche sol­
dana. I haue not seene it in England, but I
thynke that it groweth plenntuously in Eng­
lande It may be called in english seafolfote
it groweth plentuously in east Freeslande
about the bankes of diches whereinto the 
salt water reacth at euery rysynge tyde, it
groweth also much in middowes by the sea­
syde, whiche are somtyme ouerflowed with
the salte water.


Brassica syluestris.
Brassica syluestus groweth in Douer
cliffes where as I haue onely seene it in al
my life. It may be named in english sea cole


Bryon thalassion.
Bryon thalassion named in latin Muscus
marinus is of two sortes, the one is descri­
bed of Dioscorides to be very small after
the maner of heires, thys kynde is of two
sortes. The one kynde is called Vsnea ma­
rina, & it may be called in english sea mosse,
it groweth aboute stones and shelles in the
sea. An other of the same kynde is called of
certeyne Herbaries Corallina. Both these





haue very smal braunches, the first like wod,
the other lyke stone. The other kynde is de­
scribed of Plenie & Theophrastus to haue
leaues lyke letties, and thys kynde is called
in englishe slauke. It groweth in the sea a­
bout shelles and stones also. It coleth and
byndeth.


Bryonia.
Bryonia called in greeke Ampelos leuce
in english bryonie or wylde Neppe, in duch
wylde Kurteufels Kirs, it is named
in frenche Couleuree and de fen ardant. It
groweth in many places of Englande in
hedges. It scoureth awaye and dryeth vp.


Buglossum.
Buglossum called of the Poticaries bo­
rago, is called in englishe borage, in duche
borretsch, in french borache, borage is moyst
and warme. I heare saye that there is a bet­
ter kynde of Buglosse founde of late in
Spayne, but I haue not seene that kynde as
yet. The commune buglosse that we vse, is
not cirsion, as afterwardes I shal declare
but a certeyne kynde of ryght bug losse.


Bulbine.
Bulbine called in Duche hundes vllich
maye be called in englishe dogges Leike, it
groweth much about Bon in Germany. It
hath a rounde roote and a yealowe flower.






Bunium.
Bunium is a rare herbe in Englande, to
me at the least, for I coulde neuer fynde it
here, but Lucas the reader of Dioscorides in
Bonony shewed it me. It maye be called in
englishe square perseley. Bunium is hote of
complexion.


Buthalmus.
Buthalmus is lyke Chrysanthemon, but
the floure is a greate deele greater. I haue
seene it in Italy and in high Germany, but
no where in Englande. It may be called in
englishe Oxeye.

"Chrysanthemon" antedates the earliest OED citation (1578).




Buxus.
Buxus named in greeke Pyxos is called in
englishe box, in duch bucksz baume, and in
frenche bouys.




Calamintha.
Calamintha is of three kyndes, the firste
kynde is lyke wilde Meriorum and it gro­
weth muche about Syon in Englande, and
by Bon in Germany. It maye be called in
englishe bush calamint, because it groweth
euer amonge the busshes, or hore calamynt.
The seconde kynde groweth muche in the
corne, and therfore it is called in duch corne­
mynt. It is also called in english corne mint
and calamynt. The thyrde kynde is called
in latin Nepeta, in englishe Nepe, in Duche





Katzenkraute oder Katzenmuntz, in frenche
herbe Ouchat. Calamynt is hote and dry in
the third degree.

"bush calamint" and "hore calamint" not found in OED (but see "horemint," n.); and "corne mint" antedates earliest OED citation (1551). 




Caltha.
Caltha is called of the Herbaries calen­
dula, in englishe a Marygolde, in Duche
Ringebloumen, in frenche Soulsie.

"caltha" antedates the earliest OED citation (1599).




Canabis.
Canabis is called in Englishe Hemp, in
duche Hanffe in french chanure.


Cantabrica.
Cantabrica of Plenie is called in english
wylde Gelouer or gelefloure, in duch wyl­
der neglebloum, in frenche Armoris. Some
cal the same herbe Garyophillatan siluestren.

"wild gillyflower" not found in OED "gillyfower", n..




Capnos.
Capnos called in latin Fumaria, and in
englishe Fumitarie, in duche Keruell oder
Erdrauch, in frenche fumiterre, it groweth
amonge the corne, and it hath a sharp and a
bytter qualitie.


Capnos phragmites.
Capnos prior Plinij, or Capnos phrag­
mites in Theophrastus, is called in duche,
Holewurte, and falsly of the commune sorte
Aristolochia rotunda. It groweth plentu­
ously in Germany aboute Bon in the hed­
ges, it may be called in englishe Holewurte

"holewort" antedates earliest OED citation (1578).




Capparis.





Capparis or Inturis is called in english
Capers, in duche Kappers, in frenche Ca­
pres. Capers is hote in the seconde degree,
and dry in the thirde after Auerois.


Carduus.
Carduus called in latin Scolimus after
Galene, Aetius & Paulus is a sundry herbe
from Cinara. But other authours make only
thys difference that Carduus shoulde be
wylde Archichoke and Cinara shoulde be
the gardin Archichoke.

Neither "wild artichoke" nor "garden artichoke" appear explicitly as names in OED "artichoke," n..




Careum.
Careum called also Carium, and in greeke
Karos, is called in englishe Carruwayes,
in high duch Weisz kymmer, in lowe duch
Hoffe cumyn, in frenche Carui, the potica­
ries cal it also Carui, it is almoste hote and
dry in the thyrde degree.


Carex.
Carex is called in englishe a Sege, it gro­
weth in fennes and in watery places, it is
called in Northumberland Shearegrasse be­
cause it cutteth mennes handes that touche it.


Cassutha.
Cassutha called in greke Cassitas, is na­
med in english Doder, in duch Filtz kraut,
Doder, and wrang, in french Goute de line,
the Poticaries cal it Cuscutam and Poda­
gram lini. Some abuse thys herbe when it





groweth aboute smal grasse, or Tyme, or
Sauery for Epithymo of the olde writers.
Howe be it they are deceyued. For the Do­
der that groweth about Tyme is only E­
pithymum Mesues, and not Galeni and
Dioscoridis. Doder groweth aboute Flax,
Tares, Nettels, Tyme, Sauery, Hoppes,
and many other suche lyke, it is much more
plentuous in Germany then it is in Englande.


Castanea.
Castanea called Castonos in greke, and
of some Diosbalanos, is named in englishe
a Chesnut tree, in duche en Kesten baum, in
frenche Castaiginey.


Celtis.
Celtis named in greke Lotos is called in
frenche as Gesnere sayeth, Algsier or Ledo­
mier, but how that it is called in english and
in duche I can not tel, for I neuer sawe it nei­
ther in Germany nor in Englande, but I
haue seene it in Italy, it hath a leafe lyke a
Nettel, therfore it may be called in englishe
Nettel tree or Lote tree.


Centaurium.
Centaurium is of two sortes, the one is
called centaurium magnum and it is called
of the Poticaries Ruponticum, and in En­
glishe Rupontike. It groweth onely in gar­
dines, I neuer sawe it sauying only in Italy





and Germany. The seconde kynde is called
in latin Centarimum minus, in englishe Cen­
torie, in duch Cusent gulden, in french Fiel
de terre. Centorie scoureth away & dryeth up.



Centunculus.
Centunculus named in greke Gnapha­
tion is named in duche Kurkraut and in en­
glishe in some places Cartaphilago. Howe
be it that is an other herbe as afterwardes
I shal declare. It maye be called in englishe
Chafweede, it is called in Yorke shyre cud­
weede.

"Cartaphilago" antedates the earliest OED citation (1551 by Turner).




Cepe.
Cepe or Cepa called in greke Crommy­
on is of diuerse sortes, the first kynde is cal­
led in latin Cepa ascaloma, in greke Crom­
myon askalomon, and in english a Scalion.
The seconde is called Crommyon Schifton,
in englishe in some place Hose leke, it were
better to call it Wynteronyon, because it
hath blades as Onions and not like leekes
and endureth all the wynter. The Duche
cal thys Onyon Seec or Suer. I see it no
where elles but in gardines. Onyons are
hote in the fourth degree.


Cepaea.
Cepaea is diuersly described of Diosco­
rides & Plini, Cepaea that Dioscorides de­





scribeth as I iudge is the herbe whiche is
called in englishe Brooklem, and in Duche
Bauchbung. It groweth in water sydes,
and by brookes, & sprynges. Cepaea Plinij
groweth by the sea syde, and because it is
very lyke Purcellayne, it maye be called in
englishe sea Purcellayne.


Chamaecyparissus.
Chamaecyparissus is supposed of some
men to be the herbe that we cal Lauander
cotton, whose opinion as I do not vtterly
reiect, yet I founde an herbe in the moun­
taynes aboue Bon, which being in al poyn­
tes much more lyke a Cypres tree, then La­
uander cotten is, me thynke is rather Cha­
maecyparissus then it is, it may be called in
englishe heath Cypres, because it groweth
amonge heath, or dwarfe Cypres.


Camedrys.
Chamedrys called in latin Trissago, in
englishe Germander or englishe Triacle, in
duche Gamanderlin, in frenche Geliman­
dre. It is called of the Potecaries Chame­
dryos. Germander groweth in the rockes
of Germany ouer agaynste Byng besyde
Crenfielde. In England I sawe it no where
sauyng onely in gardines. It is hote & drye
in the thyrde degree.


Chameleuce.





Chameleuce named in latine Populago,
Farfagium and Farranum is called in Nor­
thumberlande a Lucken gollande. It gro­
weth in watery middowes with a leafe like
a water Rose, wherfore it may be called al­
so Petie nunefar.


Chamepence.
Chamepence is a very rare herbe, whiche
I neuer sawe growyng, sauyng only in the
alpes, it boweth lyke the eare of rye, where­
fore it may be called in englishe Alpeare or
Petie Larix.

"alpeare" from this quotation appears in OED under "larix", n. 2, but there is no entry for Turner's apparent invention "alp-ear."




Chamepitys.
Chamepitys called in latin Aiuga, and
of the Poticaries Iua muscata, is called in
duche Ye leuger, and in french Iue muscate
and it maye be called in englishe Grounde
pyne. It groweth muche in the mount Ap­
penine besyde Bonony and aboue Bon in
Germany. I haue not seene it in Englande.
It is drye in the thyrde degree and hote in
the seconde.

"Grounde pyne" antedates earliest OED citation (1551).




Chondrilla.
Chondrilla is not in Englande that I
haue seene, it is muche in highe Germany
and because it hath leaues lyke Succorye,
and stalkes lyke Rysshes, it maye be named
in englishe Ryshe Succory or gum Succo­
ry because it hath a clammy humour in it.






Cicerbita.
Cicerbita is named in greeke Sogthas,
in englishe a Sowthistle, in duche Halen­
koel or gensz distel, in frenche Latteron, it gro­
weth commune inough in al countreis. The
nature of the herbe is to coole.


Cicer.
Cicer is called in greeke Erebinthos, in
duche Kicherus, kicherbs and Zisserne, in
frenche Cich ou Pois ciches Cicer is much
in Italy and in Germany. I haue sene them
but seldom in Englande. Cicer may be na­
med in english Cich, or ciche pease, after the
frenche tonge.


Cicercula.
Cicercula named in greeke Lathyros, gro­
weth in Germany in greate plentie aboue
Bon, the puls maye be called in Englishe
cichlynge, or litle or Petie ciche.


Cicera.
Cicera & cicercula diffre by these markes.
Cicercula hath whyte seede and ful of squa­
res, and Cicera hath blacke seedes. Cicera
maye be called in englishe blacke cichlynge.


Cicuta.
Cicuta is called in greeke Contion, in
englishe Homlocke or Hemlocke, in duche
Sheirlynge, in frenche Cigne or setu. The
leaves of our Hemlocke are not so smal, as





Dioscorides requireth in his cicuta. Henlocke
is cold in the extremitie, that is in the fourth
degree.


Cingulum.
Cingulum is named in greeke Zoster, it
groweth in the sea, & is like a gyrdel, wher­
fore it maye be named in englishe, fysshers
gyrdle or sea gyrdel, or sea belte. I haue sene
it in east Freslande by the sea syde.


Cirsium.
Cirsium named in greeke Cirsion hath
ben supposed of many to be pure Buglosse,
but they are deceyued. I thynke that oure
Langdebefe shoulde be the ryghte Cirsion,
if it had purple floures, as it hath yealowe.
Howbeit I thynke that it is the right Cirs­
on, for the coloure of the flour is diuerse in
diuerse places.


Cisthus.
Cisthus groweth plentuously in Italy,
and one kinde of cisthus groweth in myn lor­
des gardine in Syon. Cisthus is called of
some Herbaries Rosa canina and rosago. It
that groweth in Italy, whiche I sawe in
Ferraria hath shorter leaues, then thys ci­
sthus that groweth in Syon. Cisthus may
be named in english cistsage or bushsage, for
the lykenes that it hath with sage. Cisthus
bindeth and dryeth.

For "cistsage" and "bushsage", see OED entry for "cistus."








Cistus ladanifera.
Cisthus ladanifera hath longer and smal­
ler leaues, then hath the other cisthus, it gro­
weth muche in Spayne and also in Italy,
whereas I haue sene it, it maye be named in
England, Laudan or Ladonshrub. It is al­
most hote in the seconde degree and bindeth
somthynge.

See OED, "ladanum," n.




Clematis daphnoides.
Clematis daphnoides is called of the la­
tin wryters Vinca peruinca, and in englishe
Perewincle, in duche ingrien, and in frenche
peruitica.


Clematis altera.
Clematis altera is not wythwynde, as
Ruellius, but an other herbe far vn­
lyke, which I sawe once in Farraria, it hath
sharper & longer leaues then peruinca hath. It
may be named in englishe bush Perewincle.

"bush Perewincle" not found in OED.




Cliopodium.
Clinopodium groweth plentuously a­
boute Bon by the Rhene syde. I heare saye
that it groweth also about Oxford. It may
be called in englishe horse Tyme, because it
is like great Tyme, it is hote and dry in the
thyrde degree.


Clymenum.
Clymenum semeth not to be al one herbe
in Plinie & Dioscorides, clymenum of Di­





oscorides, is water Betonie as I suppose
called of some Herbaries Scrofularia ma­
ior. Clymenos of Plinie semeth to be an
herbe called in duche aboute Colon, saynte
Johns kraute, it groweth in wodes aboute
hedges, and the other kynde groweth euer
in water sydes.


Cnecus.
Cnecus or cuicus is called in greeke cue­
cos, in englishe Bastarde saffron or mocke
saffron, in duche wylde saffron, in frenche
saffran bastarde, it is hote in the thyrde de­
gree. It is muche in highe Germany sowen
in fieldes, as saffron is set here. The Poti­
caries call thys herbe carthamus.


Cholchicum.
Cholchicum is abused of some Potica­
ries for Hermodactylus. Cholchicum hath
leaues and seedes in sommer, and flowres
lyke saffron flowres about Mihelmesse. It
is muche in Germany about Bon in moyst
middowes and in woddes. It maye be cal­
led in englishe, wylde saffron.


Colocasia.
Colocasia called in greeke Cyamos ae­
gyptios and in latin Faba, also Egyptia, it
may be called in english a Bene of Egypt.
I haue sene the right colocasia in Italy, and
a kynde of the same in Germany.






Colutea.
Colutea as Ruellius iudgeth is the tree,
which is called of the Poticaries Sene, and
in englishe Sene, I haue sene it a litle from
Bonony in the mount Appennine.

"Colutea" here antedates earliest OED citation (1664). Note Turner's pun.




Coniza.

Coniza is of two sortes, the greater and
the lesse. I haue sene both the kyndes in Ita­
ly betwene Cremona and Farraria by the
Padus banke, the lesse groweth muche in
Germany by the Rhene, they are both hote
and dry in the thyrde degree. Coniza maye
be called in englishe Flebayne.


Consiligo.
Consiligo whereof is made mention in
Columella and Plenie, is the herbe whiche
is called in english bearfot, in duch Christ­
wurtz, in frenche Pate de lyon.


Conuoluulus.
Conuoluulus called in greeke Helxine
Cissartipelos, it is the herbe which is called
of the herbaries Volubilis, in english with­
wynde or byndeweede, in duche Winden,
in french Lizet, lizeron, or campanet. Conuol­
uulus wyndeth it selfe aboute herbes and
busshes.

"Convolvulus" antedates earliest OED citation (1551 by Turner).




Coriandrum.
Coriandrum or Corianum is called in greeke
Corion & corianon, in englishe Colander or cori­





ander, in duch koriander, & in french coriandre.
It is hote in the fyrst degree after Auerrho­
is, I thynke that he meaneth of the seede


Cornus.
Cornus is called in greke crania, in duch
thierlinbaume, in french Cormier or cormer,
the male of thys kynde haue I sene ofte in
Germany, but neuer yet in Englande. It
maye be called in englishe longe chery tree.
The female is plentuous in Englande & the
buchers make prickes of it, some cal it Ga­
drise or dog tree, howe be it there is an other
tree that they cal dogrise also.

"Cornus" antedates earliest OED citation (1846), but see its entry on "cherry-tree."




Coronopus.
Coronopus named in greke coronopous
is called in Cambryge, herbe Iue, and it
myghte also wel be named crowfote weyr­
breade, it groweth muche aboute Shene a­
boue London, it loueth wel to growe by the
sea bankes also.


Corylus.
Corylus called in greeke Carya Pontike,
is called in englishe an Hasyle tree, in duche
Ein haselstand, in french couldre. The fruite
of thys is called in latin, Auellana.


Crataeogonum.
Cataeogonum siue crataegonum, is the
herbe which the herbaries name Parsicari­
am, englishe men cal Arssmerte, duche men





floechkraut, and frenche men Rassel and cu­
rage, it groweth in watery & moyst places.

"arsesmart" antedates earliest OED citation (1551).




Crithmus.
Crithmus named also crithamus & Ba­
tis is called in englishe Sampere, it is na­
med of some Herbaries creta marina, it gro­
weth much in rockes & cliffes beside Douer


Crocus.
Crocus is named in greeke Crokos, in
englishe Saffron or safforne, in duche, Sa­
ffran, in frenche Safrone, it is hote in the se­
conde degree and dry in the fyrst.


Cucumis.
Cucumis is called in greeke Sicyos or
Sicys, in english a cucummer, in duch Cu­
cumren, in french a concombre. It is in a ma­
ner colde and moyst in the seconde degree.


Cucumis syluestris.
Cucumis syluestris called in greeke Si­
cys agrios, & of other cucumis auguinus, of
the common Herbaries Asininus, groweth plen­
tuously aboute Bonony in Italy, & in some
gardines in Englande. It maye be called in
englishe wylde cucummer or leapyng cucu­
mer. It is hote in the seconde degree.


Cucurbita.
Cucurbita is called in greeke Colocyn­
the, in englishe a Gourde, in duche Kurbsz,
in frenche Courge, a Gourde is colde and





moyste in the seconde degree.


Cucurbita syluestris.
Cucurbita syluestris is called in greeke
Colocynthis, it is called in englishe, and of
the apoticaries coloquintida. It groweth in
certeyne gardines in Germany.


Cuminum.
Cuminum is called in greeke Cyminon
in englishe cummyn, in duche cummich or
cumyn, in frenche cumyne. Cumine is hote
in the thyrd degree, it groweth in Candy, I
haue not sene it in Englande.


Cupressus.
Cupressus is named in greeke Eypa­
rissos, in englishe a cypresse tree. Cypresses
growe in great plentie in my Lordes graces
gardine at Syon.


Cyanus.
Cyanus is named in greeke Cyanos, in
english Blewbottel or blewblaw, in duch
Blaw Cornblowmen, in french Blaueole, or
blanet, the herbe groweth among the corne.


Cyclaminus.
Cyclaminus otherwyse called Ichthy­
oteron, Rapum terre, vmbilicus terre, pa­
nis porcinus, is named in duche erd apsel.
senbrot, in french payne de porceu, it gro­
weth plentuously besyde Bonony in the
mount Appenine, and in swechyrlande be­





side Wallense, I heare saye that it groweth
also in the west countrey of Englande, but
I haue not hearde yet the englishe name of
it. Me thynke that it might wel be called in
englishe Rape Violet because it hath a roote
lyke a Rape & floores lyke a Violet or sow­
brede. It is hote and dry in the begynnynge
of the thyrde degree.


Cynaglossus.
Cynaglossus the second of Plenie, which
he describeth to haue litle bures, is the common
cynaglossus, whiche the Paticaries vse, and
is called in englishe Houndes tong or dogs
tonge. It groweth in sandy groundes and
about cities & townes, I haue not sene that
I wotte of yet cynaglossum Dioscoridis,
whiche hath no stalke at al.


Cynorrhodus.
Cynorrhodus named of the latines Ro­
sa canina, is called in englishe a swete brere
or an Eglentyne, in duche wylde Rosen or
Eglenter, in frenche Rose sauage or eglen­
tier. It groweth in Germany muche in the
fieldes and in gardines in Englande.


Cyperus.
Cyperus is called in latin Iuncus angu­
losus, in english, englishe Galangal, in duch
wyld Galgen, in french Souchet. The best &
rightest Cyperus groweth in Rome in cer­





teyne gardines. One kynde of it which we
call Galangal groweth in many gardines
in Englande. Cyperus Babilonicus is the
commune Balanga solde in the Poticaries
shoppes, after Ruellus and after the same,
cyperus indicus is a roote called of the Po­
ticaries curcuma. Cyperus is hote & dry.


Cytisus.
Cytisus groweth plentuously in mount
Appennine, I haue had it also growyng in
my gardine in high Germany, I haue not
sene it in Englande. Cytisus may be called
in englishe tretrifoly.

"tretrifoly" antedates earliest OED citation (1552).






Daphnoides.
Daphnoides called of the commune sort
Laureola, in englishe, Lauriel, Lorel or Lou­
ry, groweth plentuously in hedges in Eng­
land, and some abuse the seede of it for coc­
rognidio.


Daucus.
There are many kyndes of Daucus af­
ter Dioscorides, three at the least, wherof I
knowe none suerly but one, whiche is called
in latin pastinaca syluestris, in english wild
carot, & in greeke Staphilitios agrios, for
the other kindes ye may vse carawey seede,
or carot seede. Some learned men not with­
out a cause hold that both the Saxifrages,
that is the englishe, and the Italion may be





occupied for dauco. Daucus is sharpe and
heateth.


Dictamnus.
Dictamnus groweth in Candy and hath
rounde thicke rough leaues, I haue not sene
It growyng, but dry ofte. It may be had in
Venice & at Anwerp. Some abuse for thys
Trarmella, Dictamnus maye be named in
englishe righte Dittany, for some cal Lepi­
dium also Dittany.


Dipsacos.
Dipsacos called in latin Labrum Vene­
ris, is called in english wilde Tasel, in duch
Karten distel, in french Chardon a Carder.
it groweth by dich sides & in watery groun-
des, it is dry in the second degree. The common
Herbaries cal this herbe Virgam pastoris.


Dracunculus.
Dracunculus is named in greeke Dra­
contia, in englishe Dragon, in duche grosse
naterwurtz, in french Serpentarie. The Po­
ticaries cal it Serpentarian maiorem. It gro­
weth onely in gardines in Englande, it is
sharper then Aron.


Dryopteris.
Dryopteris groweth in olde Okes and
in olde walles with wal Saxifrage & Tri­
chomanes in Louan and Anwerp. Some ab­
use it for ryght Venus heir. I haue founde





it in bushe rootes ofte tymes in Germany,
it may be called in englishe petie Ferne, or
oke ferne.

"wall saxifrage" not found in OED.






Ebulus.
Ebulus is called in greeke Chameacte,
in english Walwurt or Danewurt, in duch
Attich, in frenche Hieble, it groweth abrode
in Cambryge fieldes in great plentie.


Elatine.
Elatine is lyke wythwynde, but it hath
seedes and floures lyke Buckwheate, it gro­
weth amonge the corne & in hedges, it maye
be named in englishe running Buckwheate
or bynde corne, it is colde in the roote.

"bindcorn" antedates earliest OED citation (1574).




Elioselinum.
Elioselinum is called in latin Paludapi­
um of Gaza, it is called in englishe Smal­
lage, it groweth in watery places and also
in gardines. Some haue taken thys for A­
pio, but the errour was not very greate be­
cause they are lyke in strength.


Ephemerum non lethale.
Ephemerum is called in duch meyblumle,
in french Muguet. It groweth plentuously
in Germany, but not in England that euer
I coulde see, sauynge in my Lordes gardine
at Syon. The Poticaries in Germany do
name it Lilium connallium, it maye be called
in englishe May Lilies.






Erice.
Erice is called in greeke Ereice, it is na­
med in english Heth hather, or ling, in duch
Heyd, in french Bruyer, it groweth on Hethes
and wyld mores, some vse to make brusshes
of heath both in England and in Germany.


Eruca.
Eruca is named in greeke Euzomos, in
englishe rokket, in duch also rokket, in french
Roquette. After Dioscorides & Plinie there
are two kyndes of rokket. The one is gar­
dine Rokket, whiche is muche greater then
the other, & it hath a white leafe, some abuse
thys for whyte mustarde. The other kynde
called in latin Eruca syluestris, is commune­
ly called in englishe Rokket, it hath a yea­
lowe floure, & both these kyndes are founde
no where in Englande, sauynge onely in
gardines.


Eruilia.
Eruilia groweth in Italy, I haue had it
also growynge in my gardine in Colon. It
is lyke a pease, the shale is roughe wythin,
and the seede hath litle blacke spottes in it.
It maye be called in englishe pease eruyle.

"eruyle" antedates earliest OED citation (1551).




Eruum.
Eruum is named in greeke Orobes, it
groweth in Italy and in highe Germany
aboute Mense, it is greater & bytterer then





a Fych, it maye be called in englishe bitter
Fyche. Bitter Fyche dryeth farre in the se­
conde degree, and is hote in the fyrst.

"Bitter Fyche" antedates earliest OED citation for bitter-fitch or bitter-vetch (1551).




Eryngium.
Eryngium is named in englishe sea Hul­
uer or sea Hully, it groweth plentuously in
Englande by the sea syde. The herbes that
Fuchsius and Riffius paint for Eryngium
are not the true Eryngium.


Euonymos.
Euonymus is called of some wryters
Fusago or Fusaria, it is a very brytel tree
yealow within & the yonge braunches which
come streyghte from the roote are al foure
square, wherfore some cal it Euonomum, I
haue sene it betwene Barkway and Ware
in the hedges. It maye be called in englishe
Spyndle tree or square tree.


Eupatorium.
Eupatorium named in greeke Eupato­
rion, is called in english Agrimony, in duch
Agrimonien, in frenche Aigremoine. Thys
is not Eupatorium Mesues, for that is cal­
led in englishe Maudlene. It is hote in the
fyrst degree.

"Eupatorium" antedates earliest OED citation (1578).






Faba.
Faba is named in greeke Cyamos. in en­
glishe a beane, in duche Ein bon, in frenche





Febue. Beanes growe in al countreis in plen­
tie inough.


Fagus.
Fagus is named in greeke Phegos, in
duch Ein buchbaume, in french Fan. Bech
trees growe plentuously in many places of
England. Two of the greatest that euer I
sawe, growe at Morpeth on .ij. hylles right
ouer the Castle.


Ferula.
Ferula is called in greeke Narthex, but
howe that it is named in englishe, as yet I
can not tel, for I neuer sawe it in Englande
but in Germany in diuerse places. It maye
be named in englishe herbe Sagapene or
Fenel gyante, it is hote and maketh suttle.

"Fenel gyante" antedates earliest OED citation (1578).




Ficus.
Ficus is called in greke Syce, in english
a fig tree, in duch Ein fygen baume, in french
vng figuer. There are diuers Fyg trees in
Englande in gardines, but no where els.


Ficus Aegyptia.
Ficus Aegyptia is called also Morus
Aegyptia and Sycomorus, it is one tree, ha­
uyng a name of a Fyg tree and a Mulbery
tree, wherefore it may be called a Mulbery
fyg tree, it is to be found in Aegypt, but not
in thys parte of Europa that I knowe of.

"Mulbery fyg tree" -- Turner's suggestion -- is not found in OED.




Filix.





Filix is called in greeke Pteris, in english 
a Ferne or a brake, in duche Ein walt farn, 
in frenche Fauchier. There are two kindes
of brakes. The one kynde is called in latin 
Filix mascula and in greeke Pteris, it gro­
weth communely vpon stones, it is al ful of 
litle wynges euen from the roote. The se­
conde kynde is called in greeke Thelypte­
ris, in latine Filix femina, thys is the com­
mune Ferne or brake, whiche the Northerne 
men cal a bracon. It hath a long bare stalke 
and the leaues onely on the toppe of that.


Filicula.
Filicula is called in greeke Polypodion in 
inglishe Polipodium or walferne, in duche 
Engelsuet, in french Polypody. It groweth 
in Oke trees, and in olde walles. It dryeth 
wythout bytyng.


Feniculum.
Feniculum is called in greke Marathron, 
in english Fenel or fenkel, in duch Fenchel, 
in french Fenoul. Fenel is hote in the
thyrd degree and dry in the fyrst. Fenel groweth 
in gardines in al countreis.


Fenum grecum.
Fenum grecum is called in greeke Te­
lis, in englishe Fenegreeke, in duche Buks­
horne, in frenche Fenecreke. It groweth in 
Italy, and in Germany. Fenegreke is hote





in the seconde degree and dry in the fyrste.


Fragraria.
Fragraria is called in english a strawbe­
ry leafe, whose fruite is called in englishe a 
strawbery, in duche Erdeber, in frenche 
Fraysne. Euery man knoweth wel inough 
where strawberies growe.


Fraxinus.
Fraxinus is called in greeke Melia, in 
english an Ashe tree, in duch an Ashe baume 
in frenche Fraisne. Asshes growe in euery
countrey.




Galion.
Galion or gallion is named in englishe 
in the North countrey Maydens heire, in 
duch Bethstrowe, in french Petit Muguet. 
It groweth muche in busshes and it is lyke 
Goosgrasse or gooshareth.

"Goosehareth" antedates earliest OED citation for "goose-hairif" (1551).




Galeoisis.
Galeopsis after my iudgemente is the 
herbe, whiche is called in englishe red Ar­
chaungel. It is lyke Archaungel, but it hath 
a purple floure, and lesse leaues and shorter. 
It groweth in hedges.


Genista.
Genista is named in englishe Broume, 
in duch Genist, in french Dugenet. Broume 
groweth in al countreis of England, where 
as I haue ben. Genista is not Spartum, as 





I shall proue in my latine Herball.

"Spartum" (1555).




Gentiana.
Gentiana called in greeke Gentiane, is 
called in englishe Gentiane, in duche Enti­
an, in french de la entienne. It groweth much
in the Alpes, and a basterde kinde of it gro­
weth in the middowes about Bon.


Geranium.
Geranium is of two kyndes. The one 
kynde is called Pinke nedle or Cranes byl, 
the other is called Pes columbinus of the 
commune Herbaries, and it maye be called 
in englishe Douefote.


Gethium.
Gethium is called in englishe a Syue, a 
chiue, or a ciuet, in duche Suitlauch, in french 
Ciues & cucions. Ciues growe only in gar­
dines that I know of, in England, but a litle 
aboue Bon they growe in great plentie by 
the Rhene syde vnset or sowen.


Geum.
Geum is called in englishe Auennes, in 
duch Benedicten kraut, in french Salmond. 
It is named of the herbaries Garyophylla­
ta Sanamunda and benedicta. It groweth 
communely about hedges.


Gingidium.
Gingidium except I be deceyued with a 
great sort of learned men, is the herbe whiche 





is called in englishe Cheruel, in duche Ker­
uel oder korbel kraute, in frenche Cerfuile. 
Cheruel is called of some wryters Chere­
phillum, & of the comune sorte Cerefolium.


Git.
Git is named in greeke Melanthion, in 
englishe herbe Git or Nigella romana, in 
duche Schwartz kummich, in frenche Niel. 
It groweth in gardines onely that I haue 
sene, sauynge that in Germany there gro­
weth in the corne fieldes after the corne is 
caried away a certeyne kinde of Git which 
hath a good sauour, & is in al poyntes lyke 
the gardine Nigella, sauynge that the ve­
selles whiche holde the blacke seede are not 
al in one, as the other haue, and smelleth
not so wel ful out, as the other do. It is hote & 
dry in the thyrde degree.


Glastum.
Glastum is called in greke Isatis, in english 
wad, & not Ode as some corrupters of the 
englishe tonge do nikename it, in duch waid
or weld, in french Guesde. Wad is common in 
Iuliker land, & some is now set in England. 
The wild wad groweth pletuously in Ger­
many beside the Rhene, & in many corne fiel­
des in hye Almany. Wyld wad is called in 
englishe ashe of Hierusalem. It dryeth muche.

"Glastum" antedates earliest OED citation (?c1550); and "Ode" (presumably from French "ouate").




Glaux.





Glaux is very straunge in Englande, 
for I neuer sawe the ryghte Glaux in Eng­
land, sauing it that was brought out of Ita­
ly by Iohn Falconer. It groweth in Flaun­
ders by the sea syde, as I remembre .iij. myles 
from Dunkyrke. It may be called in englishe 
sea Trifoly.


Glycyrrhiza.
Glycyrrhiza called in latin Radix dulcis 
is named in english Lycores, in duch Suesz­
holtz, or Lycoris or Clarish, in frenche Ecu­
lisse or Rigolisse. It groweth in the Roc­
kes of Germany wythout any settynge or 
sowyng. It is warme and in a manner hote.


Gossipium.
Gossipium is called of Barbarus wryters, 
Bombax and Cotonum, in englishe Coton 
in greeke Xylon, in duche Baumewoll, in 
frenche ducotton. I neuer sawe it growyng 
sauyng onely in Bonony.


Gramen.
Gramen is called in greeke Agrostis, in 
english great grasse, in duch, grasse. Some 
take Stichwurt for the true grasse, but they 
are deceyued. The best Gramen and moste 
agreyng with Dioscoridis description, dyd 
I see in Germany with other maner of roo­
tes, then the commune grasse hath.




Halimus.





Halimus groweth plentuously in the Ilan­
des of east Freselande where as the inhabi­
ters make veriuce of the red beries. I haue 
sene it also in Flaunders by the sea syde. It 
may be called in englishe sea wyllowe or 
prickwylowe because it hath the leaues of 
a wylowe and prickes lyke a thorne.

"prick willow" not found in OED.




Heliotropium.
Heliotropium called also scorpyuros gro­
weth plentuously aboute Bonony. I haue 
had it growynge muche in my gardine in 
Germany. They are foully deceyued and 
shamefully deceyue other whiche holde in 
their wrytynges that our Marigold is He­
liotropium Dioscoridis. Heliotropium mai 
be called in englishe Scorpiones tayle. It is 
hote in the thyrde degree and dry in the second.


Helxine.
Helxine or pardition is called in englishe 
Parietorie or Pelletorie of the wal, in duche 
saynt Peters kraut, or Tag vnd naught, in 
frenche Du parietaire. The Herbaries cal 
it Parietariam. It groweth on walles.


Hieracium.
Hieracium is of two kyndes. The one is called in latin Hieracium magnum. It may 
be called in englishe greate Haukweede or
yealowe Succory. It groweth in Germa­
ny about Colon. The second is like Dande­





lyon, it groweth in many myddowes in 
Germany. I thynke it maye be founde also 
in Englande. It maye be called in englishe 
lesse Hauke weede.

"Hieracium" antedates the earliest OED citation (1664); neither "greate Haukweede" nor "lesse Hauke weede" found in OED "hawkweed," n.




Hippoglossum.
Hippoglossum is called of the Poticaries 
and the Herbaries of Germany and Italy 
Vuularia, in duche Zaflinkraut. I haue not 
sene it in England. It is called of some wri­
ters Laurus alixandrina. It maye be called 
in english Tonge Laurel because it hath li­
tle leaues lyke tonges growyng out of the 
greater leafe, whiche is lyke a Laurel leafe. 
It is manifestly hote.

"Tonge Laurel" -- another of Turner's suggestions -- is not found in OED.




Hirundiraria.
Hirundinaria called in greeke Chelido­
nion is of .ij. kyndes. The one kinde, that is 
the greater, is called in english Selendine, in
duch Schelwurtz, in frenche Chelidoine or 
Esclere. It groweth in hedges in the spring 
& hath yealowe iuce. The second kynde cal­
led in latin Chelidonium minus, is called in 
englishe Fygwurte, it groweth vnder the 
shaddowes of ashe trees. It is one of the 
fyrst herbes that hath floures in the spring. 
Celendine is hote & dry in the thyrd degree. 
Hirundinaria minor is hote in the fourth 
degree.


Hordeum.





Hordeum called in greeke Crithe, in en­
glishe Barley, in duche Gerst, in frenche 
Orge, it is of diuerse kyndes. The fyrste 
kinde is called in latin Hordeum distichum 
in englishe Barley. The seconde kynde is 
called in latin Hordeum tetrastichum, in en­
glishe Byg Barley or beare, or byg alone. 
Thys kynde groweth muche in the North 
countrey. The thyrde kynde is called in lat­
in Hordeum Hexastichum, I haue not sene 
thys kynde in Englande, but ofte tymes in 
high Germany, wherfore it maye be called 
in englishe duch Barley. The fourth kynde 
is called of Galene in the greeke tonge, 
Gymnochrithon, in latin Hordeum nudum, 
of other some Hordeum mundum. It maye 
be called in englishe wheate Barley
because it hath no mo Huskes on it them wheat hath. 
It groweth in Italy.

Turner's suggested name -- "wheate Barley" -- antedates earliest OED citation (1578).




Hordeum murinum.
Hordeum murinum, whiche Plenie cal­
leth also Phenicea semeth to be in Diosco­
rides Phenix, as touchynge the name, but 
in the thynge they seme somewhat to vary, 
for Phenicea or Hordeum murinum of Ple­
nie, is the wal Barley, whiche groweth on 
mud walles. Phenix Dioscoridis semeth to 
be the herbe which is called in Cambrig­
shire Way bent. It is like vnto barlei in the eare.






Hyacinthus
Hyacinthus verus groweth plentuously 
in the mount Appennine. The commune Hya­
cinthus is muche in Englande aboute Sy­
on and Shene, and it is called in Englishe 
crowtoes, and in the North partes Craw­
tees. Some vse the rootes for glue.

"crowtoes" antedates earliest OED citation (1562).




Hyosiris.
Hyosiris is a litle rough herbe like Dan­
delyon, lesse than litle Haukweede. It gro­
weth in baron groundes & in sandy diches.

"litle Haukweede" not in OED, "hawkweed," n.




Hypericon.
Hypericon is called of barbarus writers 
Fuga demonum, in englishe saynte Iohans 
wurte or saynt Iohans grasse, in duch saynt
Iohans kraute. It groweth communely in al 
places of Englande, & especially in woddes.


Hissopus.
Hissopus is called in englishe Hysope, in 
duch Ispe, in french Dehysope. Hysope gro­
weth in gardines onely, in Englande as far
as I haue sene.




Iasme.
Iasminum otherwyse called Iasme, is cal­
led in englishe Gethsamyne, in frenche Ia­
smin. It groweth communely in gardines 
about London.


Iberis.
Iberis otherwyse named Kardamantike 





groweth plentuously in Germany aboute 
Bon where as it is called Besemkraute. It 
groweth in greate plentie in east Freselande 
aboute the sea bankes. Fuchsius taketh the
herbe which I take for Iberis, to be Thla­
spi secundum.

"Iberis" antedates the earliest OED citation (1768).




Intubus.
Intubus whiche is named in greeke Se­
ris, is of two sortes. The one is called Intu­
bus hortensis, and the other is called Inty­
bus syluestris. Intybus hortensis is of two 
sortes, the one is called Endyue, or whyte 
Endyue, & the other is called gardine Suc­
cory. Intybus syluestris is of two sortes, 
the one is called in latin Cichorium, and in 
englishe Succory or hardewes, and the o­
ther is called of Theophrastus Aphaca, of 
Plinie Hedypnois, in englishe Dan de lyon 
or priestes crowne, in duche Pfaffenblat, it 
groweth euery where. These kyndes are 
colde and dry aboute the seconde degree.

"white endive" not found in OED.




Inula.
Inula is called in greeke Helenion, in en­
glishe Alecampane, or Elecampane, in duch 
Alantz wutz, in frenche, and in the Potica­
ies shoppes Enula canpana is hote and 
dry in the seconde degree.

"Inula" antedates the earliest OED citation (1813).




Irio.
Irio is named in greeke Erisimon, in en­





glishe wynter cresse, it groweth about tow­
nes and aboute water sydes, but not where 
as the water cometh, as watercresse doeth. 
The Coloners cal this herbe winter Keisse.


Iuglans.
Iuglans called also Nux regia, & in greke 
Carya Basilica is called in english a Wal­
nut tree, in duche Ein nosz baume, in french 
Vng noier.


Iuncus odoratus.
Iuncus odoratus siue rotundus, is called 
in greeke Schenos, in englishe squinant, in 
duche Kamelhewe, in the Poticaries shop­
pes Squinantum. It is measurably hote & 
byndynge.


Iuniperus.
Iuniperus is called in greke Arceuthos 
in englishe ieneper or iuniper, in duche Rek­
holterbaume, in frenche Geneure. It gro­
weth muche in Germany and in many pla­
ces of Englande also. It is hote and drye in 
the thyrde degree.




Labrusca.
Labrusca whiche is called in greeke Am­
pelos agria or Omphax, is of two sortes, 
the one kynde is so wylde that it hath onely 
floures and goeth no further, and thys is 
called Enanthe. The other hath floures and 
also litle grapes. I haue sene of both the sor­





tes plentuously in Italy in diuerse places, by 
the floude Padus, and in highe Almany al­
so. It may be called in englishe a wild vine.

"enanthe" not found in OED. For "wild vine," see OED, "vine," n., C3.a.




Lactuca.
Lactuca called in greeke Thridax, in en­
glishe Lettis, in duch Lattich, in french Vng laictue, is of diuerse sortes. One is called in 
latin Lactuca
capitata, and in english Cab­
bage lettis, an other is called in latin Lactu­
ca sessilis, in englishe spredynge Lettis. The 
thyrde sorte is called in latin Lactuca sylues­
tris, in englishe greene Endyue, the Potica­
ries haue longe abused thys herbe for right 
Endyue, but they haue bene deceyued. It is
measurably colde and moyst.

"spreading lettuce" not found in OED.




Lagopus
Lagopus called also Logopyros gro­
weth much among the corne, it hath a rough 
toppe lyke Doune, and leaues lyke a Cla­
uer, wherfore it maye be named in englishe 
rough Trifoly or harefote, the duch men cal 
it, Katzenklee, the french men Pede de leure. 
It dryeth manifestly.


Lamium.
Lamium called also Vrtica iners and A­
nonium, is named in englishe dead nettle or 
whyte nettle, in duche Weiszueslen, in french 
Ortie morte, it groweth commonly in hedges

"Lamium" antedates the earliest OED citation (1682); and "white nettle" also (1767).




Lampsana.





Lampsana Plinij, semeth to be the weede 
that we cal communely in englishe wylde 
Cole, and in other places Carlocke, it gro­
weth communely amonge the corne. Diosco­
rides describeth one wyth smouther leaues
whiche I haue sene in Bonony and in Co­
lon also.

"wild cole" antedates earliest OED citation (?1749).




Larix.
Larix or larex groweth in the highest top­
pes of the Alpes higher then the firres do, 
the duch men cal Laricem ein larchen baume, 
the frenche men cal it Dularge. It maye be 
called in englishe a Larche tree.

"Larix" antedates the earliest OED citation (1572).




Laserpitium gallicum.
Laserpitium gallicum as Ruellius iud­
geth, is the herbe called of the Herbaries 
Angelica, but I rather holde wyth Fuchsi­
us whiche sayeth that the herbe, whiche en­
glishe men cal Pillitorie of Spayne, the duch 
men Meisterwurtz, the Herbaries Ostur­
tium and magistrancia, is Laserpitium gal­
licum, for the leaues of it are lyke vnto 
Perseley.

"Angelica" antedates the earliest OED citation (1578).




Lathyris.
Lathyris is called in englishe commune­
ly Spourge, in duch Sprynkorner, in french 
Espurge. It is called of some Esula maior.
Thys kynde of Spurge hath swete seedes 
as witnes Dioscorides and Plinie.

"common spourge" not found in OED as a combination.








Lauer.
Lauer or Sion is called of some englishe 
men Bellragges, of other some yealowe 
watercresses. Howe be it there is an other 
herbe lyke Rocket whiche groweth in the 
waters and brokes which is the ryght wa­
tercresse. Yealowe water cresse groweth in 
water sydes and in sprynges & wel heades.


Laurus.
Laurus is called in englishe a Baye tree, 
or a Laurel tree, in greeke Daphne, in duche 
a Lorber baume, in french Vng laurier. Bay 
trees are commune in gardines in the South 
parte of Englande, but they are very skarse
in Germany. It is vehemently hote & drye.


Lens.
Lens is named in greeke Phacos, in en­
glishe Lentil, in duche Linses, in french Len­
tille. Lentilles are sowen in come fieldes and 
growe as Tares do.


Lens palustris.
Lens palustris called in greeke Phacos 
epiton teimato, is called in english Duckes 
meate or water Lentilles, in duch wasser rinse


Lentiscus.
Lentiscus is called in greeke Schinos, in 
duche Mastix baume, in frenche Lentisque, 
I neuer sawe it sauynge onely in Italy. It 
maye be called in englishe Mastike tree.






Lepidium.
Lepidium is wel knowen in Englande 
and is called wyth a false name Dittany, 
duche men cal it Pfefferkraut, it groweth in 
Morpeth in Northumberlande by a water 
called Wanspeke in great plentie alone with­
out any settyng or sowyng. It is hote in the 
fourth degree.


Libanotis.
Libanotis called in latin Rosmarinus is 
of .iij. kyndes, where we haue none sauyng 
only Rosmarinum Coronarium, which we 
cal in englishe Rosmary, whiche groweth 
plentuously in gardines in Englande. It is 
hote in the second degree and dry in the fyrst.


Lichen.
Lichen is called in englise Liuerwurte, in 
duch Steinliberkraut, in french Hepatique, 
the Poticaries cal it Hepaticam. It groweth
vpon stones and moyst groundes, & where 
as the sunne cometh not.

"Lichen" antedates earliest OED citation (1601).




Ligusticum.
Ligusticum or Libysticum groweth nei­
ther in England nor Germany that euer I 
could see or heare tel of. I haue sene it in I­
taly, but no where els. It maye be called in 
englishe Lumbardy Louage, it is manifest­
ly hote.


Ligustrum.
Ligustrum is called in greke Cypros, in 





englishe Prim print or Priuet, though Eli­
ote more boldely then lernedly, defended the 
contrary as I shal proue in my latin herbal 
when it shal be set fourth.

"Ligustrum" antedates earliest OED citation (1664).




Lilium.
Lilium is named in greke Crinon, in en­
glishe a Lily, in duche Ein gilgen, in french 
Vng Lis.


Limorium.
Limonium named of the Herbaries Py­
rola, is named in duch wintergrune, it gro­
weth in woddes in Germany in great plen­
tie, and in an Iland of east Freseland called 
Nordeney. It maye be called in englishe 
wyntergrene.


Linum.
Linum is called in englishe Flax, lyne or 
lynte, in duche Flachs, in frenche du lyne.


Lithospermon.
Lithospermon is called of the Herbaries 
Milium solis, in englishe Grummel, but it 
shoulde be called Gray myle, in duch steen­
somen, in frenche Gre myl. It groweth plen­
tuously aboute woddes and busshes.

"Lithospermon" antedates earliest OED citation (1646).




Lolium.
Lolium is named in greke Aera, in english 
Darnel, in duch Kuweitzen or Lolch, or dort 
in frrench. Some take cockel for lolio, but thei 
are far deceyued as I shal declare at large





if God wil, in my latin herbal. Darnel gro­
weth amonge the corne and the corne goeth 
out of kynde into Darnel.


Lotus vrbana.
Lotus vrbana called in greeke Lotos 
emeros is not growynge in Englande that 
euer I could spie. It groweth in Ferraria in 
the blacke friers gardine, and in clauena, it 
is lyke cuckowes meate, but that it hath a 
yealowe floure. It maye be named in english 
gardine Clauer or gardine Trifoly.


Lotus syluestris.
Lotus syluestris is called in greke Lotus 
agrios, in duche stund kraute, in Freseland, 
wyt Nardus. It groweth muche in east Freselande in gardines, of thys kynde are 
the herbes whiche are called here in english 
Melilotes. Thys herbe groweth nowe in 
Syon gardine. It maye be called in english 
wylde lote.


Lupus salictarius.
Lupus salictarius is named in greeke 
Bryon, in englishe hoppes, in duche hopfen 
in frenche Hupelon. Hoppes do growe by 
hedges and busshes both set and vnset.


Lycopsis.
Lycopsis Dioscoridis semeth to be vnto 
Ruellius, and to diuerse other learned men 
Cynaglossa, of the Poticaries which is cal­





led in englishe Houndes tonge, & after my 
iudgemente the description in al poyntes a­
greeth wel sauyng that there is no mention 
made of the burres in the toppes.


Lycopus.
Lycopus is called of the commune Her­
baries Cardiaca, in englishe Motherwurt, 
in duche Hertzgespan, in frenche Agri pal­
ma. It groweth in hedges & about walles.


Lysimachia.
Lysimachia is of two sortes. The one is 
described of Dioscorides, and it hath a yea­
lowe floure. Some cal it Lycimachian lu­
team, it groweth by the Temes syde beside 
Shene, it may be called in englishe yealow 
Lousstryfe or herbe Wylowe. The other 
kynde is described of Plinie, and it is called Lysimachia purpurea, it groweth by water 
sydes, also and maye be called in englishe 
red loosstryfe, or purple losestryfe.

"Lysimachia" antedates the earliest OED citation (1578).






Malua.
Malua is called in greeke Malache, in 
englishe a Mallowe or a Mallo. Malua 
is deuided into Maluam hortensem and syl­
uestrem. Malua hortensis is of two kindes. 
The one is called alone in greeke Malache 
in englishe Holyhoke, and of thys sort is the 
iagged mallowe. The other kynde as Pli­
nie sayeth is called in greeke Molloche, or





malope, it is called in englishe french Mal­
lowe. Malua syluestris is of .ij. sortes. The 
one is called in latin Malua syluestris, in 
greeke Malache Chersaia, in Englishe a 
wylde Mallowe, in duche Halen pappel, in 
frenche Malue sauage. The other kynde 
is called of Dioscorides Althea & Hibiscus, 
of Plinie Aristalthea, of Galene Anaden­
dron, of Etius Dendromalache, in englishe 
marrishe Mallowe.


Mandragoras.
Mandragoras is called in english a Man­
drage, Mandrage is wel knowen in England, 
& it groweth in diuerse gardines. The duch
men cal it Alram. Mandrage is colde in the 
thyrde degree, but the Apples haue some 
heate in them.


Marrubium.
Marrubium is called in greeke Prasion, 
in englishe Horehound, in duch witen Au­
dorn, in french Du marrubium, it groweth
aboute townes and villages. It is hote in 
the seconde degree and dry in the thyrde.


Medical.
I haue not sene Medicam growe in England, 
wherfore I knowe no englishe name that it 
hath. It hath leaues like a clauer and horned 
cods wherin it hath sede somthing facioned 
lyke Fenegreeke. Therfore it maye be cal­





led in englishe horned Clauer or snail Tri­
foly because the coddes are so wrythen in a­
gayne as a water snayle or saynte corniliu­
sses horne. It groweth in many places of 
Italy.


Malus.
Malus is named in greke Melea, in en­
glishe an Apple tree, in duche Ein Opfel 
baume, in frenche Vn pommier.

"Malus" antedates earliest OED citation (1706).




Malus medica.
Malus medica otherwise called Malus 
Assyria, or Citrus is called an Orenge tree 
and vnder the name of Citrus are contey­
ned both Limones & also Cytrones & Oren­
ges. These trees growe in Spayne & Italy.


Malus Cotonea.
Malus Cotonea is called in greeke Me­
lea Cydomos, in englishe Quince tree, in 
duch Kutten baume or ein quidden baume, in 
frenche Vn Coignier.


Malus Persica.
Malus persica is called in greeke Me­
lea Persice, in englishe a Peche tree, in duch 
Ein pfersike baume, in french vn Perchier.


Malus punica.
Malus Punica is called in greeke Roia 
in englishe a Pomgranat tree, in duche Ein 
Granat baume, in french Vng Pomier des
grenades, Pomgranat trees growe plen­





tuously in Italy and in Spayne, and there are 
certayne in my Lordes gardine at Sy­
on, but their fruite cometh neuer vnto per­
fection. The poticaries cal the fruite of this 
tree Pomum granatum.


Malus armeniaca.
Malus armeniaca is called in Greeke, 
Melea armeniace, in highe duche Land ein 
amarel baume, in the dioses of Colon kardu­
melker baume, in french Vng abricottier, and 
some englishe men cal the fruite an Abricok. 
Me thynke seinge that we haue very fewe 
of these trees as yet, it were better to cal it, 
an hasty Peche tree because it is lyke a pech 
and it is a great whyle rype before the pech 
trees, wherfore the fruite of thys tree is cal­
led malum precox. There are in Colon great 
plentie of hasty peche trees.

"hasty peach tree" -- Turner's suggestion -- not found in OED; and "abricok" antedates the earliest OED citation (1562)..




Melfrugum.
Melfrugum named in greeke Meleas, sitos groweth muche in
Germany besyde Bon, 
and that alwayes amonge the corne 
it is very lyke the commune Melilote, but 
that it hath whyte floures. It maye be cal­
led in englishe whyte melilote.


Mentha.
Mentha is called in greeke Ediosmos, 
in englishe Mynte, in duche muntzen, in 
french de la ment, Mynt is common inough in 





al countreis. Mynte is hote in the thyrde 
degree.

"Mentha" antedates earliest OED citation (1564).




Menthastrum.
Menthastrum is called in greeke Edi­
osmos agrios, in englishe wylde mynte, it 
groweth in watery places wyth a rounde 
leafe & thycke with a longe eare in the top.

"wylde mynte" antedates earliest OED citation (1562; see "scolopender," n.).




Mercurialis.
Mercurialis is called in greeke Ermou­
poa or Linozostis, in englishe Mercury, in 
duche Recroute and Bingelkraute, in french
mercuriallo. The herbe whiche is commune­
ly called in englishe mercury hath nothyng 
to do wyth mercurialis, whereof I spake
nowe. Let the Poticaries vse thys mercury 
and let the commune mercury alone. Mer­
cury is as commune about Colon in the gar­
dines, as any weede is commune in gar­
dines in England. It is hote and dry in the 
fyrste degre.


Mespilus.
Mespilus called in greeke mespile, is of 
two sortes, the one hath three stones in the 
fruite, and that kynde is not wyth vs. The 
other kynde hath in the fruite, fyue stones, 
and thys kynde is commune in Englande, 
and it is called in englishe a medler tree or 
an open ars tree.


Meum.





Meum called of the grecians Meon and 
Meion is called of the Poticaries Meu, in 
duch Bearwurtz. Some Poticaries in An­
werpe vse thys herbe for Peucedano and so 
they cal it. I neuer sawe this herbe in Eng­
lande sauynge once at saynte Oswarldes 
where as the inhabiters called it Speknel, 
it groweth in greate plentie eighte myle a­
boue Bon in a fielde besyde Slyde in Ger­
many. It may be called in englishe mewe 
or duche Dyl. The rootes are hote in the 
thyrde degree and dry in the seconde.


Milium.
Milium is called in greeke Cegchros, & 
Piston, in duch Hirsz, in french Du millet. 
I haue not sene it in Englande, but very
muche in high Germany. It maye be called 
in englishe Hirse or millet.


Milium indicum.
Milium indicum is nowe muche sowen 
in Italy, and it is in some gardines in Ger­
many where as it is called turkishe corne, 
and some cal it in Englande wheate of tur­
key. Howe be it there is an other thynge 
that is the true turkish wheate, it were bet­
ter to cal it after my iudgment turkish millet

"wheat of Turkey" antedates earliest OED citation (1598; see "turkey wheat, n.").




Morus.
Morus is called in greeke morea, in eng­
lish a mulbery tree, in duch maulberbaum 





in french murier, it groweth in diuerse gar­
dines in Englande.


Myrica.
Myrica, otherwyse named tamarix, and 
of the Herbaries Tamariscus is named in 
duche tamariske, in frenche tameris. I dyd 
neuer see thys tree in Englande, but ofte in 
high Germany, and in Italy. The Potica­
ries of Colon before I gaue them warning 
vsed for thys, the bowes of vghe, & the Po­
ticaries of London vse nowe for thys quik 
tree, the scholemaisters in Englande haue 
of longe tyme called myrican heath, or lyng, 
but so longe haue they bene deceyued al to­
gether. It maye be called in englishe, Ta­
marik.


Myrrhis.
Myrrhis is called in Cambryge­
shyre casshes, in other places mockecheruel, in duche 
wilder Peterlin, in frenche Persil de asne. It 
groweth in hedges in euery countrey, but 
the best that euer I sawe was in Germany 
besyde Bon.


Myrtus.
Myrtus is called in greeke myrrine, in 
english a myrtle tree, or a myrt tree, in french 
meurte. Myrt trees growe in great plentie 
in Italy in the mount Appenine besyde Bo­
nony. Some abuse a litle shrub called Gal 





in englishe, whiche groweth in fennes and 
waterish mores for myrto, but they are far 
deceyued.

"myrto" might be emended to "myrte."






Napus.
Napus is named in greeke Bounias, in 
duche Stekruben, in french Rauonet or na­
ueau, I haue hearde sume cal it in englishe a 
turnepe, and other some a naued or a nauet, 
it maye be called also longe Rape or nauet 
gentle, as a rape hath a round roote, so hath
a nauet a longe roote and somthynge yea­
lowishe. Thys herbe groweth plentuously 
at Andernake in Germany.


Narcissus.
Narcissus is of diuerse sortes. There is 
one wyth a purple floure, whiche I neuer 
sawe, & an other wyth a white floure, which 
groweth plentuously in my Lordes gardine 
in Syon, and it is called of diuerse, whyte 
Laus tibi, it maye be called also whyte da­
ffadyl. Plinie maketh mention of a kynde 
called Narcissus herbaceus, whiche is after 
my iudgement our yealowe daffodyl.


Nardus.
Nardus is named in greeke Nardos, in englishe 
Spyknarde, the Potecaries name 
it Spicam Nardi, it groweth not in Euro­
pa that I haue heard tel of. It is hote in the 
fyrst degree and dry in the seconde.






Nardus celtica.
Nardus celtica, otherwyse called Sali­
unca, is in great plentie growyng in the al­
pes. The Germanes cal it mariend magda­
lene kraut, it may be called in englishe french 
spiknarde, when the indish spiknard is olde 
and dusty and rotten, it is better to vse thys 
in medicines then it.

"French spikenard" antedates the earliest OED citation (1597; "Spikenard," n.). 




Nasturtium.
Nasturtium is called in greeke Carda­
mon, in englishe Cresse or Kerse, in duche 
Cressich, in frenche Cresson, Aleuois, and
nasuorte. Cresses growe no where, but in 
gardines. It is drye and hote in the fourth 
degree after Auerrois.


Nerion.
Nerion otherwyse called Rhododendron, 
and Rhododaphne, is named in duch Olan­
der, in frenche Rosage. I neuer sawe it but
in Italy. It maye be called in englishe Rose 
bay tree or rose Laurel. This tree is named 
of some oleander.


Nux castanea.
Nux castanea is called in greeke Casta­
non, in englishe a Chesnut tree, in duch Ca­
stenen, in french, Vng Chastagne. Chesnuttes 
growe in diuerse places of Englande. The 
maniest that I haue sene was in Kent.


Nymphea.





Nymphea is also named in greeke nym­
phaia, & madonais & is called in english wa­
ter Roses, & some wyth the Poticaries cal it 
nenufar. The duch men cal thys herbe See­
blumen. Boeth the kyndes of water Roses 
growe in standyng waters.




Ocymum.
Ocymum is called in englishe Basyl, in 
duche Basilien, in frenche du basilike, the 
Poticaries cal it Basilicon. It groweth in 
Englande onely in gardines. It is hote in 
the seconde degree.

"Ocymum" antedates earliest OED citation ("ocyme," n. 1583).




Oenanthe.
Oenanthe is called boeth of the Herba­
ries and of al our countrey men Filipendu­
la, in duch Rotensteynbrech. Some say that 
the same herbe is called Phellandryon in 
Plinie. Filipendula groweth in great plen­
tie beside Syon & Shene in the middowes.


Olea.
Olea or oliua is called in greeke Elaia, in 
englishe an Olyue tree, in duche Ein ol­
beaume, in french Vng oliuerier. Oliue trees
growe plentuously in Italy.


Olus atrum.
Olus atrum is called in greeke Hypose­
linon, in english Alexander, in duch schwartz, 
Petersily or grosse eppich, in frenche mei­
cheron or Alexandry. Some poticaries though 





falsly, cal it Petroselinum macedonicum.


Opulus.
Opulus is a tree commune in Italy & Ger­
many, but I haue not sene it that I remem­
bre in Englande. It is called in frenche as 
Gesnere sayeth opier, and so maye it be also 
called in english tyl we fynde a better name


Origanum.
Origanum is called in englishe organ, 
howe be it I neuer sawe the trewe organ in 
England. I haue sene diuerse times organe 
whiche grewe in Candy, muche hotter then 
thys our commune organ is, whiche is cal­
led origanum syluestre in latin, and in some
places in England wylde mergerum. It is 
hote and dry in the thyrde degree.


Orminum.
Orminum is called in english Clarie, in 
duche Scharlach, in french oruali, howe be 
it the description of Dioscorides doeth not
in al poyntes agree, some cal thys herbe 
sclaream. Orminum syluestre is supposed to be 
the herbe, whiche is called oculus Christi.


Ornithigalum.
Ornithigalum is called in Colon Hondes 
vllich, but I can not tel howe that it is cal­
led in englishe, for I neuer sawe it in Eng­
lande, sauyng onely besyde Shene herde by 
the Temmes syde, howe be it after the fo­





lowynge of the duche tonge it may be cal­
led dogleke or dogges onion.


Orobanche.
Orobanche is so rare an herbe in Eng­
lande, that I neuer sawe it in al Englande, 
but in Northumberlande, where as it was 
called newe chappel floure. It may be of his 
propertie called Chokeweede, because it de­
stroyeth and choketh the herbes that it ty­
eth and claspeth wyth his roote. It is colde 
and dry in the fyrst degree.

"newe chappel floure" not found in OED.




Oryza.
Oryza is called in english Ryse, in duch 
and french ryze. Ryse groweth plentuously 
in watery myddowes betwene Myllane 
and Pauia.


Osyris.
Osyris or osyrias groweth plentuously 
in Englande, but I do not remembre what 
name it hath. If it haue no name it maye be
called in englishe Lynary or todes flax, for 
the Poticaries cal it Linariam, and the duch 
cal it Krotenflaks.

"Osyris" antedates earliest OED citation (1562), as does "todes flax" (1578).




Oxyacartha.
Oxyacantha is called in englishe as it is 
named of the poticaries berberes. Of some, 
pipriges, in duch Sanrich, in frenche Espi­
neniuet, or de Berberis. Berberies growe 
wylde in the hedges and woddes in Ger­





many, but in Englande onely in gardines.


Oxyphenix.
Oxyphenix is called of the Poticaries 
Tamarindus, and it maye be called in en­
glishe a tamarinde. I neuer sawe the tree it 
selfe, but the fruite alone. It is colde in the 
thyrde and dry in the seconde degree.


Oxys.
Oxys is called in english Allelua, Coc­
kowes meate, and wod sorel, in duche Ha­
sen ampfer in frenche payne de Coquu. It 
groweth in woddes aboute tree rootes and 
amonge busshes.




Peonia.
Peonia is also named in greeke Glicysi­
de, it is called in englishe peony or pyony, in 
duch peonienrose, in french penoisne and pi­
noine. Peony the female groweth in euery 
countrey, but I neuer sawe the male sauing 
only in Anwerp. Peony roote is hote in the 
fyrst and dry in the thyrde degree.


Palma.
Palma is called in greeke phenix, in en­
glish a Date tree, in duch Ein dattel baume 
in french Ung arbri diet palme. I neuer saw 
any perfit date tree yet, but onely a litle one 
that neuer came to perfection. Date trees 
growe in Asia in great plentie, but none in 
Europa, whiche brynge furth any fruite.






Panicum.
Panicum is called in greeke Elymos or 
melinos, in duche Fenike, in french paniz. I 
haue not sene it in Englande, sauyng in my 
Lordes gardine at Syon, but it may be cal­
led Panike, it groweth in Italy and in high 
Almany in the fieldes.


Papauer.
Papauer is called in greeke Mecon, in 
englishe Poppy or Chesboul, in duch mag­
som or maulom, in french du pauot. It gro­
weth sowen in gardines.


Papauer erraticum.
Papauer erraticum is called in greeke Ro­
ias, in englishe Redcornrose or wylde popy, 
in duche wilde man, korne rosen, or klapper
rosen.


Papauer corniculatum.
Papauer corniculatum is called in greke 
mecoon ceratites, in englishe horned poppy 
or yealow poppy, in duch Gaelman. It gro­
weth in Douer clyffes, and in many other 
places by the sea syde. It is cold in the furth 
degree.


Papyros.
Papyrus groweth not in Englande, it hath 
the facion of a greate Docke. I haue sene it 
diuerse tymes in Anwerp, wherein was su­
ger and diuerse other marchaundise wrap­





ped. It maye be called in englishe water pa­
per, or herbe paper.


Parthenium.
Parthenium after the mynde of Hermo­
laus, Ruellius and diuerse other lerned men, 
is the herbe which is called in barbarus la­
tin Matricaria, in english feuerfew, in duch 
Mater, whose iudgement I rather alowe in 
this matter, then the iudgement of Fuchsius 
whiche would Parthenium to be stynkyng 
maydweede.


Pastinaca.
Pastinaca is called in greke Staphilinos 
in englishe a Carot, in duche pasteney, in 
frenche Cariottes. Carettes growe in al
countreis in plentie.


Peplis.
Peplis groweth by the sea syde, not far 
from Venice. It is very like vnto wartwort 
but that it is shorter, thicker and spred vpon 
the grounde. It may be called in english 
sea wartwurt.


Peplum.
I neuer sawe peplum but once in Bono­
ny, it had litle smal leaues lyke tyme, and in 
other facion lyke spourge, wherfore it may 
be called spourge tyme in englishe, tyl we can 
fynde a better name.


Periclymenum.





Periclymenum is called of the herbaries 
and poticaries Caprifolium and Matrisyl­
ua, in english wod bynde and Honysuccles, 
in duch walt gylgen, in french Cheure fuelle. 
Wodbyne, is commune in euery wodde.


Personata.
Personata is called in greeke Arceion or 
prosopion, in english a Bur, in duche grosse 
kletten, in frenche Gletteron or Gluteron.
The Herbaries cal it Lappam maiorem. It 
groweth commonly about
townes & villages.


Petasites.
Petasites is called in the South partes 
of Englande a Butter bur, in the North, it 
is called about Morpeth Eldeus, the duch 
cal it pestilentz kraute. It groweth in broke 
sydes and in moyste middowes whiche are 
ouerflowen some tyme wyth the water. It
dryeth in the thyrde degre.

"eldeus" not found in OED.




Petroselinum.
Petroselinum named in latine Apium 
saxatile is not our commune persely, as many 
haue beleued, but it is an other herbe, as I 
do thynke, whiche is called in some places 
of Italy Imperatoria. Whiche may be cal­
led in englishe stone persely or Lumberdy
parsely. I neuer sawe it in England neither 
in Germany, sauynge onely dry, I proued 
often in Germany, but I coulde neuer make 





the seede growe there. For lacke of thys men 
maye vse the seede of pilletory of Spayne 
called masterwurt, or the seede of Angelical.
Stone perseley hath seede hote and drye in 
the thyrde degree.

"Lomberdy parsely" not found in OED.




Peucedanum.
Peucedanum is called in duch harstrang 
it groweth plentuously in Germany beside 
Erensfielde ouer agaynste Byng, and also 
in the middowes beside Mence, called other 
wyse Maguncia.


Phalaris.
Phalaris is founde in many places of I­
taly. It hath seede like Panicum, wherfore 
it maye be called in englishe petie panicke,
or because it is partly lyke grasse and part­
lyl lyke corne, it maye be called grasse corne.


Plasiolus.
Phasiolus otherwyse called Dolichos, 
maye be called in englishe longe peasen or 
faselles, in duche it is called Welshe bonem 
or faeselen, in frenche phaseoles. Faselles 
grow in great plentie in Italy about Pauia.

"longe peasen" not found in OED.




Phu.
Phu is called in englishe setwal, of other 
some Capones tayle, in duche Garten bal­
driane, in frenche Vertentrete. The potica­
ries in Germany cal it Valerianam. There 
are two other kyndes of Valeriane besyde 





thys. Of the whiche, the one is growing a­
bout water sides, and in the moyst plasshes 
and in morish groundes, and it is called in 
englishe wylde Valerian. The other kynde 
is called Valeriana greca, and thys is oure 
commune Valerian that we vse agaynste 
cuttes wyth a blewe floure.

"commune Valerian" antedates earliest OED citation (1872).




Phyllitis.
Phyllitis as Cordus iudgeth, is the herbe 
whiche we cal in englishe Hartes tonge, the 
duch cal Hirtzen zumgen, the french men Lang 
de Cerfe, the poticaries Linguam ceruinam. 
To whose iudgemente I rather assent, then 
to Ruellius & Fuchsius. Hartes tonge gro­
weth in welles and olde walles.


Picea.
Picea is called in greeke as Theodore 
Gaza turneth, pitys, & after Ruellius peuce 
and it is called in duch rotten Dan, wherfore
it maye be called in englishe a red firre tree.

"red firre tree" antedates earliest OED citation (1614).




Pinus.
Pinus as Theodore translateth, is called 
in greeke Peuce, in englishe a pyne tree, in 
duch Ein forthen, in french Vng pin. Pines 
growe fayrest in gardines. There groweth 
one fayre one in Richmund. Pine nuttes are 
hote and dry.


Piperitis.
Piperitis called also Siliquastram after





the iudgemente of Fuchsius is the Herbe 
whiche is called in englishe Indishe peper,
in duche indisshouer pfefer. If thys herbe 
be not it that it is taken for, the yealow seedes 
whiche mighte to be whyte do onely hyn­
der. The herbe groweth in certeyne gardines in Englande.


Pistacia.
Pistacia are called of the poticaries Fi­
stica, they may be called in english Fistikes 
or Festike nuttes. I neuer sawe the Fistike
tre sauing only in Bonony, the leaues were 
somthyng rounde and ful of red spottes.


Pisum.
Pisum is called in greeke Lecithos, in en­
glish a pease, in duch Erbes, or Erwiten, in 
frenche Pois. They growe communely in
the fieldes.


Pityusa.
Pityusa is called of some Herbaries E­
sula minor, and in englishe Spourge, but it 
oughte to be called litle Spourge, or Lint­
spourge, for it hath smal leaues like Flax, or 
an other herbe called Linaria, whereby the 
one is ofte taken for the other, but the diffe­
rence is knowen by thys verse. Esula lac­
tescit, Linaria lac dare nescit. The other 
kinde of this whiche groweth almoste into 
the heighte of a smal tree, groweth a myle





beneth Colon in a watery closse whiche is 
ofte ouerflowen wyth the Rhene. It maye 
be called in englishe, Spourge gyant.

"Linaria" antedates earliest OED citation (1597); "spourge gyant" not found in OED.




Plantago.
Plantago is called in greeke Arnoglo­
ssos. There are two sortes of Plantaginis, 
the one is called in englishe alone Plantaine 
or waybread, or great waybread. The other 
is called Rybwurte, or Rybgrasse, and of 
some Herbaries Lancea lata. They are cold 
and dry in the seconde degree.

"great waybread" antedates earliest OED citation (1562).




Platanus.
>Platanus is called in englishe a playne 
tree, in french playne. I neuer saw any plaine 
tree in Englande sauing once in Northum­
berlande besyde Morpeth, and an other at 
Barnwel Abbay besyde Cambryge.


Polium.
I haue sene Polium of two sortes, the 
one had hore leaues with the figure of time, 
and the other had leaues lyke wyld Tyme, 
but they were a greate dele longer and grea­
ter. Polium maye be called in englishe Po­
ly. The fyrst kynde dyd I see in Italy. The 
second in the Alpes of Rhetia beside Cure. 
It is hote in the second and dry in the third.

"wyld Tyme" antedates earliest OED citation (1558; "serpille," n.).




Polygonatum.
Polygonatum is called of Herbaries Si­
gillum Solomonis, in englishe Scala celi, 





in duch wisz wurtz. It maye be called in en­
glishe white wurte, it groweth plentuously 
in the woddes of Germany, but I neuer 
sawe it out of a gardine in Englande.

"Polygonatum" and "whitewort" antedate earliest OED citation (1597, 1578); "Scala Caeli" not in OED in this sense.




Polygonum.
Polygonum is called in latine Sangui­
naria. There are two kindes of Polygonum, 
the former kinde is called in englishe knot­
grasse, or swyne grasse, in duche Weggrasz 
wegdrat or wegtede, in frenche de la corri­
giole. The seconde kynde, whiche is called
Polygonum femina is called in Englishe 
thycke Shauegrasse, or short Shaue grasse. 
The firste kynde groweth in highe wayes, 
the seconde kynde groweth in many places 
by water sides, & some time among the corne. 
Knotgrasse is colde in the seconde degree.

"Polygonum" antedates the earliest OED citation (1562).




Populus.
Populus is of two kyndes, the fyrste 
kynde is called in greeke Leuce, in latin Po­
pulus alba, in englishe whyte Popler or 
white Esptree, in duch wisz sarbach. Thys 
kynde is commune about the bankes of the 
floude Padus. The seconde kynde is called 
in greeke Aigeiros, in englishe alone, a po­
pler, or an Asp tree, or a blacke popler.

"whyte Popler" antedates earliest OED citation (1562, 1578).




Porrum.
Porrum is named in greeke prason, in en­
glishe a Leke, in duche Ein lauch, in frenche





Vng porreau. Besyde the commune Leke
there are two other kyndes, the one is cal­
led in latine porrum sectiuum, in englishe a 
frenche Leke. The other kynde is called in 
greeke Ampelo prason, in latine porrum 
syluestre, in duch wyld Lauch. I neuer sawe 
thys kynde but in certeyne closes in Ger­
many aboute Bon. Lekes are hote in the 
fourth degree.


Potamogeton.
Potamogeton is called in duche Sam­
kraute, it maye be named in englishe Pond­
plantayne, or swymmynge plantayne, be­
cause it swymmeth aboue pondes and stan­
dyng waters.

"Potamogeton" antedates earliest OED citation (1601); "pond plantain" and "swimming plantain" not found in OED..




Portulaca.
Portulaca is called in english purcellaine, 
in greeke Andrachne, in duch Burgel gren­
sel, and in neither land purcellane, in french
porcellina.


Prunus.
Prunus is called in greeke Coccimelea, 
in englishe a plum tree, in duche ein pslau­
men baume, in frenche Vun prunier. Pru­
nus syluestris is called in english a slo tree, 
or a sle tree.

"Prunus" antedates earliest OED citation (1577).




Psyllium.
Psyllium is called in duch psilien kraut, 
in french herbe puces or herbe a pulce, it gro­





weth plentuously in Italy and in certeyne
gardines in Germany. It may be called in 
englishe Flewurte. Flewurt is colde in the 
seconde degree, and is in a meane tempre in 
dryinge and moyst makyng.


Pulegium.
Pulegium is called in greeke Glechoon, 
in englishe Penyryal or puddyng grasse, in 
duche poley, in french du pouliote. Peny ry­
al groweth in suche diches and watery pla­
ces as are ful of water in wynter, and are 
dyred vp in the begynnyng of Summer.


Pyrus.
Pyrus is called in greeke Apios, in en­
glishe a Peare tree, in duche ein byrbaume, 
in frenche Vng poprier.

"Pyrus" antedates earliest OED citation (1567).






Quercus.
Quercus is named in greeke Drys, in 
english an Oke or an Eke tree, in duche ein 
eich baume, in frenche vng Chesne.


Quinquefolium.
Quinquefolium is called in greke Pen­
taphyllon, in english Cynkfoly or fyue fyn­
gred grasse, in duche Funffynger kraute, in
frenche quinte fuele. Cynkfoly is commune 
in al places.

"fyue fyngred grasse" antedates earliest OED citation (1562).






Radicula.
Radicula called otherwyse Lanaria, is 
called in greeke struthion, and of the com­





mune Herbaries it is called Saponaria and 
Herba fullonum, it groweth in certeine gar­
dines of Germany, but I neuer sawe it in 
England, therfore I know no englishe name 
for it. Howebeit, if we had it here, it myghte 
be called in english sopewurt or skowrwurt. 
It is hote and drye in the thyrde degree.


Radix.
Radix is called in greeke Raphanos, in 
englishe a radice or radishe, in duche rattich, 
in frenche raforte. There are two kindes of 
radice, the one is the commune radice wyth 
the longe roote, and that is called in latine 
Radix Cleonea and algidensis radix. The o­
ther kynde hath a rounde roote lyke a rape, 
and thys is called radix Beotia and radix 
Syriaca. The former kynde groweth com­
munely in Englande, but I haue sene the 
seconde kynde no where els sauynge onely 
in high Almany, thys maye be called in en­
glishe, an Alman radice, or rape radice. Ra­
dice is hote in the thyrde degree and dry in 
the seconde.

"Alman radice" not found in OED.




Ranunculus.
Ranunculus is called in greeke Batra­
chion, in englishe Crowfote or a Golland. 
The kyndes of crowfote are al wel inough 
knowen sauyng the seconde, whiche if it be 
vnknowen, it maketh no matter, for it hath 





more hurte then goodnesse in it.


Rapum.
Rapum or rapa is called in greeke strog­
gyle, in englishe a rape, in duche ein ruben. 
Rapes are commune in al countreis.


Rhamnus.
Rhamnus groweth in the mount Appe­
nine aboue Bonony, it hath very sharppe 
prickes, rounde leaues and fruite lyke a li­
tle buckeler. The inhabiters cal it there spi­
na Christi. Wherefore it maye be called in 
english Christes thorne, or buckeler thorne.

"Rhamnus", "Christ's thorn", and "buckler thorn" antedate earliest OED citation (1562).




Rhus.
Rhus after Dioscorides is but of one 
kynde, but Galene in the boke of the com­
position of medicines according to the places 
nameth two kyndes, the one he calleth Cu­
linaria, and the other Coriaria. Plinie ma­
keth three kyndes of Rhois, of the whiche 
kyndes I knowe one certaynly, whiche is 
called of the Poticaries Sumache, and it 
maye be so called also in Englishe. I haue 
sene it growyng besyde Bonony in certeine 
gardines besyde the blacke frieres. I thinke 
that I knowe also Rhoa Coriarian, for I sup­
pose that the shrubbe which the Italians a­
boute Bonony cal Scotonum and aboute
Cremona cal Rhous, is Rhus Coriaria, for 
the Italians vse the same to tanne lethre





wyth. Thys kynde dyd I firste see in Bo­
nony afterwarde besyde Cremona, laste in 
the rockes besyde Lake de Come. Rhus is 
drye in the thyrde, and colde in the seconde 
degree.


Ricinus.
Ricinus is called in greeke Cici or Cro­
toon, in english Palma Christi, or ticke sede 
because it is lyke a tycke, it is called in duch
wunden baume, kreutz baume and Zekken 
corner, in french Palma Christi. It groweth 
onely in gardines that I haue sene.

"ticke sede" antedates earliest OED citation (1562).




Rosa.
Rosa is called in greeke Rhodon, in en­
glish a Rose, in duch ein rosen, in french vne 
rose. It is cold and drye in the fyrst degree.


Rubia.
Rubia is called in greeke Erythrodanon, 
in englishe madder, in duche rot, in frenche 
Garance. Rubia groweth in diuerse places
of Germany in the fieldes in greate plentie 
both set and vnset. Wilde madder groweth 
in diuerse wods of Germany, & in greatest
plentie about Bon. It is hote in the seconde 
degree and dry in the thyrde.


Rubus.
Rubus siue sentis is called in greke Ba­
tos, in englishe a Bramble or a blacke bery 
bush, in duche ein bromber, in frenche ronce.

"blacke bery bush" antedates earliest OED citation (1560).








Rubus canis.
Rubus canis is called in greeke Cynos­
batos, in englishe a Brier tree or an Hep 
tree, in duche wylde rosen.


Rubus ideus.
>Rubus ideus is called in greeke Batos 
idaia, in englishe raspeses or hyndberies, in 
duch hyndberen, in frenche framboise. Ra­
speses growe most plentuously in the wod­
des of east Freselande besyde Aurik, and in 
the mountaynes besyde Bon, they growe 
also in certayne gardines of Englande.


Rumex.
Rumex is called in greeke Lapathon, in english a Docke or a docken. There are .iiij. 
kyndes of Dockes. The fyrst kynde is cal­
led in greeke Oxylapathon, in englishe Wa­
terdocke or sharpdocke. Thys is lesse then 
Pacience and wyth a sharper toppe or ende 
of the leafe, and groweth in cliches & slowe 
runnyng waters, The second kynde is cal­
led Rumex satiuus, thys is called in barba­
rus latine Reubarbarum monachorum. The 
thirde kynde is the litle commune Docke. 
The fourth kinde called in greeke Oxalis, 
in barbarus latin Acetosa or Acidula, in en­
glishe Sorel or sourdocke, in duche saur 
ampsfer.

"Rumex" antedates earliest OED citation (1565).








Ruscus.
Ruscus is called of the Poticeries Brus­
cum, in english buchers brome or Petigrue. 
Petigrue groweth in Kent wilde by hedge
sydes, but it beareth no fruite as it doeth in 
Italy.

"buchers brome" antedates earliest OED citation (1562).




Ruta.
>Ruta is called in greeke Peganon, in en­
glishe and frenche, Rue and herbe grace, in 
duche Ruten. Rue is hote and drye in the
seconde degree, but wylde Rue is hote and 
drye in the fourth degree.




Sabina.
Sabina is called in greeke Brathy, in 
englishe Sauyne, in duche seuinbaume, in 
frenche sauinera or du sauiner. Sauin gro­
weth in many gardines in Englande. It is 
hote and drye in the thyrde degree.


Sambucus.
Sambucus or as some wryte Sabucus 
is called in greeke Acte, in englishe an El­
der tree or a Boure tree, in duche Holde or
Hollender, in frenche Vng Suseau.


Salix.
Salix is called in greeke Itea, in english 
a wylow tree, a salowe tree or a saugh tree, 
in duch weidenbaume, in french Vng saulge.
Salix as Columella wryteth is deuided 
into two principal kyndes the one is cal­





led Perticalis, and the other is called Vi­
minalis. Particalis salix is the greate Wy­
lowe tree whyche hath longe roddes and 
staues growynge in it. Viminalis is an 
Osyer tree, suche as bryngeth furth rod­
des that baskettes are made of. Vimina­
lis is of diuerse sortes, the fyrste is called 
salix greca, the seconde gallica, the thyrde sa­
bina. Salix greca whiche is yealowe in co­
loure groweth in east Freselande aboute a 
Citie called Aurik. Salix gallica whiche 
hath red twigges groweth in many places 
of Englande. Salix sabina whiche is also 
called amerina groweth in Italy and in cer­
teyne places of east Freselande.

"Salix" antedates earliest OED citation (1775); "great willow tree" not found in OED.




Saluia.
Saluia is called in greeke Elelisphacos, 
in englishe sage or sauge, in duche salbey or 
selue, in french saulge. It heateth and som­
thynge stoppeth.


Satureia.
Satureia is called in greeke thymbra, in 
englishe saueray or sauery, in duch saturei, 
in frenche sarriette. It is hote and drye in the 
thyrde degree.


Satyrion.
Satyrion is very commune in Germa­
ny, and a certeyne ryghte kynde of the same 
groweth besyde Syon, it bryngeth furth





whyte floures in the ende of harueste, and it 
is called Lady traces. The great Satyrion 
may be called in englishe whyte satyrion or 
great satyrion. There is an other kynde of 
Satyrion whiche is called satyrion regale 
in latine, in duche Kreutzblumen, in frenche 
du satyrion royal. Thys maye be called in 
englishe satyrion Ryal or hand satyrion, be­
cause it is like a mannes hande in the roote.
Satyrion is hote & very moyste.

"satyrion ryal" and "hand satyrion" not found in OED "satyrion", n-.




Scandix.
Scandix groweth in Germany among 
the corne. The greatest plentie of it that euer 
I sawe, was betwene Bon and Popelsdorp 
in a corne fielde. It may be called in english 
corne Cheruel. It is hote & dry in the thirde 
degree.

"corne Cheruel" not found in OED.




Secale.
Secale is called in englishe Rye, in duche 
Roggen or rug, in frenche Segle. There is 
plentie inough of rye in al countreis, and no 
where more then in Germany, that I wot of.

"Secale" antedates earliest OED citation (1584).




Scilla.
Scilla is named of the Poticaries squil­
la, in english a sea Onion, and in some pla­
ces, a french Onyon, in duch Meusz Zwy­
beln. Squilles growe in the sea coste of 
Spayne in greate plentie. Scilla is hote in 
the seconde degree.






Scirpus.
Scirpus siue Iuncus is called in greeke 
Scoinos Eleos, in english a rishe or a rashe, 
in duche Bauchbint, in frenche Ione.


Scordium.
Scordium groweth in diuerse places of 
Germany, & is solde at Franckeforde mart 
in greate plentie, & I heare saye that it gro­
weth also besyde Oxforde. It is called in 
duche Wasser batenig, and it maye be cal­
led in englishe water Germander or Gar­
leke Germander.



Scordotis.
Scordotis altera wherof Plinie maketh 
mention, is in leaues muche lyke a Nettle, 
but deeper endented wyth a foure squared
stalke, and wyth a somthynge sharpe taste, 
it groweth aboute the Rhene syde. Some 
take thys for Verbena recta, but it hath no
purple floures, wherfore they are deceyued. 
It maye be called in englishe banke Nettle.

"banke Nettle" not found in OED.




Securidaca.
Securidaca called in greeke Edysaron 
and Pelecinos, is so vnknowen in England, 
and in Germany that I neuer sawe it in ei­
ther of these regions, but I haue sene it in 
Italy dyuerse tymes, and it maye be called in 
englishe Axfiche or Hachetfiche, because the 
seede resembleth an Hatchet.

"ax-fitch" and "hatchet-fitch" antedate earliest OED citation (1562, 1611).








Sedum.
Sedum is called in greke Aeizooon, and 
the fyrste kynde and moste spoken of, of wri­
ters, is called in englishe Housleke or syn­
grene. The seconde kinde is called in En­
glish thryft or stoncroppe The thyrd kinde 
is called in Englishe Mouse tayle or litle
stoncroppe, and in duche Maur pfeffer. Al 
these kyndes growe on walles and houses. 
It is colde in the thyrde degree.


Senecio.
Senecio is called in greke Erigeroon, in 
english Groundswel or Groundsel, in duch 
Gryntkraut, in frenche du Senesson.

"Senecio" antedates the earliest OED citation (1562).




Serpyllum.
Serpyllum called in greeke Erpyllon, is 
of .ij. sortes. The one is called in latine ser­
pyllum Hortense, and in englishe runnyng
tyme. The seconde kynde is called in latine 
serpyllum syluestre, and in englishe wylde 
tyme. The one groweth in gardines & the
other in sandy fieldes and bare groundes.

"wylde tyme" antedates earliest OED citation (1558; "serpille," n.).




Sertula campana.
Sertula campana siue corona regia, is cal­
led in greeke Melilootos, in duch Gulden­
kle, in Welsher, steyncle, in french du Me­
lilote. I neuer sawe the ryghte Melilote yet 
in England, but I haue sene the right Me­
lilote which groweth in Italy, & hath seedes





in litle hornes. This herbe whiche ye vse in 
Englande for Melilote, is a kynde of Lo­
tus syluestris. This ryght Melilotus may 
be called in englishe Melilote, or right Me­
lilote, or Lumberdy Melilote. Melilote is 
hote and dry en the fyrst degree.

"Lumberdy Melilote" not found in OED.




Sesama.
Sesamain dyd I neuer see in England, 
but I haue sene it in Italy, and it maye be 
called in englishe, sesame or oyle seede, for of 
al seede it is moste oylie.


Seseli massiliense.
Seseli massiliense is called in the Potica­
ries shoppes, siler montanum, it may be cal­
led in englishe, siler montayne. The seede 
of thys herbe is commune in euery Potica­
ries shoppe.

"siler montain" not found in OED.




Siligo.
Siligo is not as the commune sorte of 
grammarians and phisicians suppose, the 
corne called in englishe Rye, and in duche 
Rog, but it is a kynde of ryghte wheate, as 
Columella and Plinie do testifie. Therfore 
let it be called in englishe lyght wheate.

"lyght wheate" not found in OED.




Sideritis.
Sideritis prima, groweth vpon Colon 
walles and also in sandy groundes aboute 
Colon. It is called in duch Gliderant, and 
may be called in englishe walsage or stoni­





sage. Sideritis secunda, is most lyke to Os­
munde of the Poticaries, of al herbes that 
euer I sawe, and nothyng is contrary vnto 
the description sauynge onely the seedes. 
Sideritis tertia semeth to be the herbe cal­
led in englishe, herbe Roberte wyth the lea­
ues lyke Colander.


Siliqua.
Siliqua is not as the commune sort take 
it for the shale onely of a peascod, or of such 
lyke pulse, but it is taken for a certeine tree,
and fruite which is called in greke Ceretia, 
or Ceratonia, in Italian Carobe, in duche 
saynte Iohans Brot. I met wyth certeyne
Grecians whiche dwelled in Pelopeneso, 
that called it in their speache Xyloceraion. It 
may be called in english a Carobe tree, and 
the fruite Carobes or Carobbeanes. I se in 
Colon one litle Carobe tree, and no where 
els that I remembre.


Sinapi.
Sinapi is called in greeke sinepi, in en­
glishe Mustarde, in duche senfe, in frenche 
Mustarde. It groweth in al countreis in 
plentie.


Sisaron.
Sisaron sine siser, is called in englishe a 
Persnepe, in duche grosse Zammoren, and 
also Pinsternach. Fuchsius rekoneth that





our skyrwort, or skyrwit is a kynde of siser. 
Persnepes, and skirwortes are commune in 
Englande.


Sison.
Sison called of other Sinon, is the herbe 
whose seede the Poticaries in Anwerp vse 
for Amomo. Ther groweth a kinde of this 
besyde Shene, and it maye be called in en­
glishe wylde Perseley. The best kinde gro­
weth in Anthony the Poticaries gardine of
Anwerp.


Sisymbrium.
Sisymbrium hortense is called in englishe 
baume Mynte, or water Mynte, in duche 
fishe Mynt, or wasser Muntz. Many lear­
ned men contayne the red Mynt that groweth 
by water sydes, and is called of some horse 
Mynt vnder sisymbrio. It is hote and drye 
in the thyrde degree.

"Sisymbrium" and "baum-mint" antedate earliest OED citation (1562).




Sisymbrium alterum.
Sisymbrium alterum is called also Car­
damine, and in english water cresses, or roc­
ket water cresses, in duche wasserkressich, in
frenche du Cresson. Thys is not the herbe 
with leaues lyke Perseley communely cal­
led water Cresses, but it is the true water
Cresse wyth leaues lyke Rocket, and some 
cal it in latine Nasturtium aquaticum. It gro­
weth muche in brokes and water sydes.

Cardamine antedates earliest OED citation (1753).








Smilax hortersis.
Smilax hortensis is called in duch welshe 
arbs or welshe Bonen, in frenche as some 
wryte Phaseole. It may be called in english
Kydney beane, because the seede is lyke a 
Kydney, or arber beanes, because they serue 
to couer an arber for the tyme of Summer.


Smilax aspera.
Smilax aspera groweth not in Englande 
that euer I coulde see, I haue sene it in Ger­
many where it is called grosse Stechend 
wynde, or shraffe wynde. It maye be called 
in englishe Pryckewynde or Sharpbynde.


Smyrnium.
Smyrnium is neither Angelica nor yet Lo­
uage. I dyd see it once in Bonony. It maye 
be called in englishe blacke Louage, because
it hath leaues lyke Louage, and yet blacke 
seede. It is hote & dry in the thirde degree.


Solanum hortense.
Solanum hortense which is called in greke 
Strichnos Cepaios is called in Englishe 
Nyghtshade, or pety morel, in duche Nach­
shat, in frenche Morel. The Poticaries cal 
it Solatrum.


Solarum vesicarium.
Solanum vesicarium is called in greeke 
Strichnos halicacabos, in Poticarie latin 
Alkakenge, in englishe Alcakeng or wyn­





ter cheries, in duche Iudenkyrse, in frenche 
Baganauldes. Thys herbe groweth much 
in my Lordes gardine at Syon.


Sorbus.
There are foure kyndes of sorbus after 
Plinie, of the which I knowe three kyndes. 
The fyrst kynde that I knowe is commune
aboute Bon. It hath leaues lyke a quicken 
tree, and a fruite lyke a litle Peare, the duch 
cal it ein speirlyng, and ein sporopfel. This 
tree maye be called in englishe a sorb tree, 
and the fruite a sorb Appel. The seconde 
kynde is called in duche ein Hauer ashe, in 
Englishe a rountree or a Quicken tree. The 
third kinde that I knowe of sorbus and the 
fourth kynde in Plinie is called sorbus tor­
minalis, in englishe a seruice tree.

"Sorbus" antedates earliest OED citation (1706).




Spartium frutex.
Spartium or spartum is not the Broume 
that we make besomes of in Englande, 
but it is a bushe called of some gardiners 
frenche brome. It groweth naturally by it 
selfe in mount Appennine, and it is founde 
nowe in many gardines in England, in my 
Lordes gardine at Shene, and in my Lorde 
Cobbains gardin a litle from
Graues Ende.


Spartum herba.
Spartum is also an herbe as Plinie wry­
teth, by whose description I gather that it





is the rishe that the Fig frayles be made of, 
I haue sene the rishe in the Ilandes of east 
Freseland, and the people there make ropes 
of that rishe thach their houses also wyth 
the same. It may be called in english Frail­
bente.


Sphondilium.
Sphondilium is called in duche wylde 
Pasteney, or wylde Berenklawe, in frenche 
Panate sauage. It may be called in englishe 
Cowpersnepe or rough Persnepe. It gro­
weth in watery middowes and in ranke 
groundes about hedges.


Spina alba.
Spina alba mentioned in Columella is 
spina Appendix in Plinie, and it is called in 
englishe an Hawthorne tree, or a whyte 
thorne, in duche ein wissen dorne, or ein Ha­
gendorne.

"whitethorn tree" antedates earliest OED citation (1562).




Stachys.
Stachys semeth to Gesner to be the herbe 
that we cal in english Ambrose, & I deni not 
but that it may be a kynde of it. Howe be it 
I haue sene the true Italian staches, whiche 
hath narower and whyter leaues then Am­
brose hath. It maye be named in englishe li­
tle Horehounde or strayte Horehound. It is 
hote in the thyrde degree.

"Stachys" antedates earliest OED citation (1562).




Staphis agria.





Staphis agria is called in englishe sta­
ues aker, in duch Bisz muntz or Lanshraut, 
in frenche de lee staues agrie. I haue sene it
growyng in certeyne gardines in Italy.


Stechas.
I haue sene in Italy diuerse kyndes of 
Stichados growyng. One was called ste­
chas montana, an other stechas prouincialis, 
and the thyrd stechas arabica. I neuer sawe 
any of these kyndes growyng in England, 
but I haue had them growynge in my gar­
dines in Germany. The herbe may be cal­
led in english stichas or Lauander gentle, the 
Poticaries cal thys herbe stichados. I sup­
pose that our lauander is a kinde of stichas. It 
is hote in the first degree & dry in the second.


Symphytum.
Symphytum is of two sortes, the for­
mer is called Symphytum petreum, and 
this herbe groweth about Syon, seuen my­
les aboue London. It is lyke vnto wylde 
Mergerum, but it is neither so hote neither 
so wel smellyng. It may be called in english 
vnsauery Mergerum. The other kynde cal­
led in latin Symphytum alterum, is called 
in englishe comfrey or Blackewurt, and in 
duche walde wurtz, or schwartz wurtz, in 
frenche de la confire.

"wylde mergerum" and "Blackewort" antedate earliest OED citation (?1550, 1597).






Tarchon.





Tarchon is wel knowen in Englande, 
and is called wyth vs Tarragon. Some cal 
thys same herbe Draconem hortense in. Some
other do put thys herbe vnto the kyndes of 
Sauery.


Taxus.
Taxus is called in greke Smilax or tax­
es, in englishe an Vghe tree, or an yew tree, 
in duch ein Iben baume, in french Yff. The
beste Vghe groweth in the Alpes. Commune 
Vghe, groweth in diuerse partes of Yorke 
shyre.


Thapsia.
Thapsia groweth in diuerse places of 
Italy that I haue sene, and the beste learned 
of that countrey thynke that Mesues tur­
bit is Thapsia. Thapsia maye be called in 
englishe thapfenel, or thapsia.

"thapfenel" not found in OED.




Thlaspi.
Thlaspi or thlaspium is called in duche 
Baurenfenfe It groweth wonders plentu­
ously about Bon in the corne fieldes, and a­
mong the corne. It groweth also plentuously 
besyde Syon. It may be named in englishe 
dyshmustard, or triacle Mustard, or Bou­
res Mustard, because the seede is lyke mu­
stard seede in colour and in tast, and the ve­
ssel that conteyneth the seede is lyke a disshe.
There is yet an other kinde of thlaspie men­





tioned of Dioscorides and called thlaspi al­
terum & sinapi perficuum. This kynde gro­
weth in Morpeth in Northumberland and 
there it is called Redco. It shoulde be called 
after the olde saxon englishe Rettihcol, that 
is Radishe colle. The high Germans cal it 
mere Rettich.

"Thlaspi" antedates earliest OED citation (1562); "Radish colle" not found in OED.




Thymus.
We gather boeth by Dioscorides & Pli­
nie, that there are two kyndes of Thyme, 
whereof I see but one kinde as yet in Eng­
lande, for that runnyng thyme that we take 
for thymo, is serpyllum and not thymus. 
The greate kynde of thyme, wherof Dio­
scorides maketh mention of in Epithymo, is 
called nowe Venetian thyme, and the blacke 
kynde that Plinie speaketh of, is oure com­
mune thyme that groweth ryght vp in our 
gardines. Thyme is hote in the thyrde de­
gree.


Tussilago.
Tussilago is called in greeke Bechion, in 
englishe Bulfote or horsehofe, in duche Ro­
shub or horse lattich, in french Pas de Asne,
the Poticaries cal it Vngulam caballinam. 
Thys herbe groweth by water sydes, and 
in marishe groundes.

"Bulfote" antedates earliest OED citation (1562).




Typha.
Typha groweth in fennes & water sy­





des among the reedes, it hath a blacke thinge 
Almost at the head of the stalke lyke blacke 
veluet. It is called in englishe cattes tayle, 
or a Reedmace, in Duche Narren Kolb, or 
Mosz Kolb.




Verbascum.
Verbascum is called in greke Phlomos, 
in englishe Mullen higgis taper or Longe 
wurt, the Poticaries cal it tapsus barbatus.

"Verbascum" antedates earliest OED citation (1562).




Verbasculum.
There are .iij. Verbascula called in greke 
Phlomides. The fyrste is called in barba­
rus latin Arthritica, and in englishe a Pri­
merose. The seconde is called in barbarus 
latin Paralysis, and in englishe a Cowslip, 
or a Cowslap, or a Pagle. The third is cal­
led Thryallis, and Rosecampi in englishe.


Verbenaca.
Verbenaca recta is called in greeke Pe­
ristereon yphos, in english Vernine, in duch 
Eiser kraute, in frenche Veruayne. Thys 
herbe groweth in many places of England. 
Verbena supina, is harde to fynde in Eng­
lande I neuer sawe it in any place sauynge 
in Swycherland. It is lyke Bugle, but the 
leaues are deaplyer endented & grener then 
bugle leaues be. It may be called in english 
geagged Bugle. It groweth in shadowye 
places about tree rootes.






Veratru.
Veratrum is called in greke Helleborus 
in duche Neisz wurtes, in frenche Viraire. 
It maye be called in englishe Nesewurte. 
There are two kyndes of Helleborus, the 
one is called Veratrum album, and it is cal­
ed in duche Wisz Neiszwurtes, in englishe 
Nesewurt or whyte Nesewurt. This kinde 
groweth in Syon Parcke in Englande, in 
the woddes of Bon in Germany, in the Al­
es betwene Cureland and Lumberdy, but 
it that groweth in England, and in Germa­
ny hath not the strength that it hath whiche 
groweth in the Alpes. The other kynde is 
called Veratrum nigrum. I haue not sene 
thys herbe in Germany, neither in Eng­
lande. For the herbe called in englishe bear­
fote, in duche Christwurte, which hath bene 
hytherto taken for blacke Nisewurt, or Ve­
ratrum nigrum: is Consiligo in Columel 
and Plinie, and not veratrum nigrum.

"bearfoot" antedates earliest OED citation (1551).




Vicia.
Vicia is called in greeke Bicion, in En­
glishe a Fiche, in duche Wicken, in frenche 
La vesce.


Viola alta.
Viola alba is called in greeke Leucoion. 
There are diuerse sortes of Leucoion. 
One is called in english Cheiry, Hertes ease or wal­





Gelefloure, it groweth vpon the walles, 
and in the sprynge of the yere, it hath yea­
lowe floures. The Arabians cal it Cheiri. 
An other kynde hath whyte floures, whiche 
some cal whyte stocke gelefloure, or Gele­
uoures. The other haue purple and blewe 
floures, and are called purple & blew stock­
gelefloures.

"whyte stocke gelefoure" not found in OED "stock-gillyflower," n.




Viola nigra.
Viola nigra sine purpurea is called in 
greeke Ion melan, in englishe a Violet, in 
duche violen, Viole or Violetten, in frenche
Violet martie. It is colde and moyste in the 
seconde degree.


Viola flammea.
Viola flommea otherwyse called Phlox 
or Phlogion is the herbe as Gesner thyn­
keth, whiche is called in duche Fluelblum, 
and in englishe veluet floure or french Ma­
rigoulde.

"Phlox" antedates earliest OED citation (1754).




Viscum.
Viscum is called in greeke Ixos, in en­
glish Miscelto or Misceldin, in duch Mis­
cel, Vogellym, and Affoler in french. This 
shrub groweth only in trees & no where els


Vitex.
Vitex is called in greeke Agnos, of the 
Poticaries of Italy Agnus castus, the Po­
ticaries of Germany in netherlande abuse 





Ligustro for Agno. And we abuse Tutsan 
for Vitice. The true Agnus or Vitex gro­
weth in the blacke friers in Farraria where 
as I saw it, and it groweth in diuerse other 
places of Italy, as I heare saye. It is a tree 
and hath leaues lyke Hemp, euer fyue gro­
wyng together. Wherfore it may be called 
in englishe Hemp tree, or Chast tree, or Ag­
nus tree. It is hote and drye in the thyrde 
degree.

"Vitex" and "chast tree" antedate earliest OED citation (1608 and 1562). 
G8v and H1r do not appear in EEBO: this text is 
checked only against James Britten's edition of 1881
for the English Dialect Society. 




Vitis vinifera vrbara.
Vitis vrbana is called in greke Ampelos 
emeros or oinophoros, in english a vyne, in 
duche in win reb, in french vn vigne cultiue.

G8v and H1r do not appear in EEBO: this text is 
checked only against James Britten's edition of 1881
for the English Dialect Society. 




Vitis syluestris.
Vitis syluestris solani folijs is called in 
greeke Ampelos agria, in duche Melcu, in 
frenche Vlorne, and Haide. It maye be cal­
led in englishe Hedguine, or Downiuine. It 
groweth plentuously betwene ware and 
Barckway in the hedges, whiche in sum­
mer are in many places al whyte wyth the 
downe of thys Vine.

G8v and H1r do not appear in EEBO: this text is 
checked only against James Britten's edition of 1881
for the English Dialect Society. 




Vlmus.
Vlmus is called in greeke Ptelea, in en­
glishe an Elme tree, or a Wich tree, in duch 
ein vlme baume, or Ylmen or Rust baume, 
in frenche Orme.

"Elme tree" antedates earliest OED citation (1562).
G8v and H1r do not appear in EEBO: this text is 
checked only against James Britten's edition of 1881
for the English Dialect Society. 




Vrtica.





Vrtica is called in Greeke Acalyphe or 
Cnide, in english a Nettle, in duche ein Nes­
sel, in lowe duche ein Netel, in frenche Or­
tie. The true Netel groweth not in Eng­
lande out of gardines, but it groweth in I­
taly & at Mense in Germany vnset or so­
wen abrode in the fieldes and hedges.

"Urtica" antedates earliest OED citation (a1682).
G8v and H1r do not appear in EEBO: this text is 
checked only against James Britten's edition of 1881
for the English Dialect Society. 






Xanthium.
Xanthium is called in english Dichebur 
or Clotbur, in duch Betlersleusz kleyn klet­
ten, in frenche glowteron.

G8v and H1r do not appear in EEBO: this text is 
checked only against James Britten's edition of 1881
for the English Dialect Society. 






Zizypha.
Zizypha or Serica are called in frenche 
Iuiubes, the Poticaries cal the fruite Iuiu­
ba. It maye be called in english Iuiuba tree 
and the fruite Iuiubeis. I neuer sawe mo 
trees of this kynde, but one, in Ferraria.

G8v and H1r do not appear in EEBO: this text is 
checked only against James Britten's edition of 1881
for the English Dialect Society. 






Names of newe founde Herbes, 
wherof is no mention in any olde aun­
cient wryter.



[[Alchimilla]]
ALchimilla other wyse called 
Pes leonis, is called in english 
our Ladies Mantel or syndow. 
It groweth in middowes lyke 
a Mallowe.

"Ladies Mantel" antedates earliest OED citation (1578).
G8v and H1r do not appear in EEBO: this text is 
checked only against James Britten's edition of 1881
for the English Dialect Society. 




Alliaria.
Alliaria is called in english Sauce alone 
or Iacke of the hedges. Some dotyng Pol­





ticaries in Germany abuse thys herbe for 
Scordio. Thys herbe groweth in hedges 
and diches in the sprynge of the yere.

G8v and H1r do not appear in EEBO: this text is 
checked only against James Britten's edition of 1881
for the English Dialect Society.




Balsamine.
Balsamine is called of other Pomum Hie­
rosolymitanum, & Pomum mirabile. Some 
cal it Charatia. It is called in duch Balsam 
kraute, it maye be named in englishe Bal­
sam aple. It groweth muche in Italy and in 
some places of Germany, but onely in gar­
dines.

"Balsam aple" antedates earliest OED citation (1578).




Barbare herba.
Barbare herba groweth aboute Brokes 
and water sydes. It hath leaues lyke Roc­
ket, wherefore it maye be called in englishe 
wound-rocket, for it is good for a wounde. 
Some cal thys Carpentariam.


Bipennella Italica.
Bipennella or bipenula Italica, is called 
in english Burnet. It groweth much about 
Syon and Shene, and in many other pla­
ces of England. The Poticaries cal it Pim­
pinellam.


Bipennula Germanica.
Bipennula Germanica, is Saxifragia 
Italorum, and it is called in englishe Pim­
pinel, the duche cal it Bibinellen.


Bistorta.
Bistorta is called of the Northerne men





Betes, in the South countrey Astrologia, 
in east Freselande Leuercraut. Thys herbe
groweth in Englande onely in gardines, in 
the woddes of Freseland, it groweth with­
out any settyng alone.


Bursa pastoris.
Bursa pastoris is also called in englishe 
of many Bursa pastoris & of other Shep­
herdes bag or Shepherdes purse. It gro­
weth by high wayes, almost in euery place.

"Bursa pastoris" not found in OED as an English word (see "shepherd's purse," n.).




Cartafilago.
Cartafilago otherwise called Ceratophi­
lax, is called in english Cudwurt or Chafe­
wurte. It groweth gladly where as turues 
haue been digged.

"Cartafilago" antedates earliest OED citation (1551); and "Chafewurte" must be "chaffweed," n. in OED.




Consolida media.
Consolida media is called in english Bu­
gle. It is a blacke herbe and it groweth in 
shaddowy places and moyst groundes.


Cornu ceruinum.
Cornu ceruinum is the name of three her­
bes. The fyrst is Coronopus, the seconde is 
Hartes horne lyke a rishe, the thyrd is common 
in the dioces of Colon, which is so called, be­
cause it hath leaues lyke an Hartes horne.

"Hartes horne" antedates earliest OED citation (1578).




Christophoriana.
Christophoriana groweth plentuously in 
the woddes aboute Bon, but I haue not 
hearde any duche name that it hath. It may





be called in englishe Grapewurt, because it 
hath many blacke beries in the toppes lyke 
Grapes.


Cenetimorbia.
Centimorbia otherwise called Nummu­
laria, is called in duche Pfenikraute and 
schlanghraute. It may be called in englishe 
Herbe .ij. pence or two penigrasse because 
it hath two and two leaues standyng toge­
ther of ech syde of the stalke lyke pence. It 
groweth in moyste groundes and in diches 
whereas water hath stande in wynter, and 
are drye in summer agayne.


Digitalis.
>Digitalis is called in english Foxgloue. 
It groweth in hedge sydes, in woddes and 
wylde places.

"Digitalis" antedates earliest OED citation (1568).




Eufragia.
Eufragia or Opthalmica is thoughte 
to haue bene called of the later Grecians 
Euphrasyne. It is called in englishe Eye 
bryghte, and in duche Ougen troit.


Eupatorium vulgare.
Eupatorium vulgare, whiche the Poti­
caries vse in many places is not Eupator­
ium Dioscoridis. It may be called in english 
water Hemp, because it groweth about wa­
tersydes, and hath leaues lyke Hemp.

"water Hemp" antedates earliest OED citation (1597).




Flamula.





Flamula is the herbe whiche we cal in 
englishe Sperewurte or spergrasse. It gro­
weth in moyste places.


Genistella.
Genistella is a litle herbe wyth leaues, 
floures and coddes like Broume, but many 
partes lesse, and it is ful of prickes. I haue 
not sene it in England sauyng once besyde 
Coome parcke, but often in Germany by 
the Rhen side, whereas it is called stechend 
gnist. It maye be called in englishe Thorn­
broume or prickly broume.

"Thornbroume" and "prickly broume" antedate earliest OED citation (1578 and 1597).




Lunaria.
Lunaria is of two kyndes, the one is cal­
led in latine Lunaria maior, which hath lea­
ues lyke wylde Cucumer & coddes rounde
almost as the mone, and as thyn as a Cole 
leafe. It maye be called in englishe great Lu­
nari. Some cal it Shabub. The other kinde
is called in latin Lunaria minor, which may 
be called in englishe litle Lunary or Maye 
Grapes, the duch cal this herbe Monkraut 
and meydrunen. The former herbe groweth 
onely in gardines, the other in middowes 
and pastur groundes.


Lingua serpentina.
Lingua senpertina groweth in many pla­
ces of England. It may be called in greeke 
Ophioglosson, in englishe Adders tonge, 





the duch cal it Natter Zunglin. It groweth 
plentuously in middowes where as Lunary 
groweth.


Leuisticum.
Leuisticum is called in englishe Louage 
in duche Lubstocke or Lieb stokel, in french 
Liueshe. It groweth onely in gardines so 
muche as I haue sene.


Martagon.
Martagon is an herbe wyth two leaues 
onely, one of ech syde. It groweth in many 
places of Englande in watery middowes 
and in woddes. It is also called in englishe 
Martagon.


Perfoliata.
Perfoliata is an herbe wyth a leafe lyke 
a pease, & litle blacke seedes in the top. The 
Germans cal it Durchwassz. It maye be 
called in englishe Thorowwax, because the 
stalke waxeth thorowe the leaues.


Pes anserinus.
Pes anserinus is called in duch geusz fusz 
and it may be called in englishe Goosefote. 
It groweth in the fieldes of Germany a­
mong the corne and aboute townes & cities.


Pilosella.
Pilosella is of two kyndes, the one hath 
a yealowe floure and is communely called 
in english Mouseare, and for difference sake 





it may be called in english yealowe mouse­
eare. The other kynde hath purple floures 
mengled wyth whyte altogether, and thys 
groweth in heathes where as Ling or heath 
groweth, and may be called in english pur­
ple Mouseare or litle Mouseare.

"yealowe mouse-eare", "purple Mouseare", and "litle Mouseare" 
not found in OED "mouse-ear," n., but the colour words presumably do not describe a variant type.




Portentilla.
Portentilla or as some write Potentilla, is 
named also Tanacetum syluestre. It is na­
med in englishe wylde Tansey, in duche 
Genserich, & in french Taunasi Saluage.


Regalicum.
Regalicum is also named Ruta cararia, 
Galega, & Gaiarda. It groweth very plen­
tuously about the bankes of Padus in Ita­
ly. It maye be called in englishe mocke Li­
cores, because the leaues are lyke Licores.


Rhibes.
Rhibes is called in duche saynte Iohans 
Treublin, and it is called in some places of 
Englande a Rasin tree.


Sanicula.
Sanicula is named in englishe Sanicle, 
in duche Sanikel or Sharnikel. It groweth 
communely in woddes.


Saluia vita.
Saluia vita or Ruta muralis is called in 
duche Maurranten & steinrauten. It maye 
be called in english Stone Rue, or wal Rue





Some haue vsed this for Capillo Veneris.


Solidago saracenica.
Solidago seracenica, otherwyse called 
Herba fortis or Herba Iudaica, is called in 
duch Heidnishe wuntkraut. I haue not sene
it in Englande, but diuerse tymes in duch­
land. It may be called in english Wounde­
wurte.


Scabiosa.
Scabiosa is called in englishe Scabious 
or Matfellon, in duche Scabiosen, in french 
la scabieuse.


Saxifragia.
There are foure herbes, whiche al are 
called saxifragia. The englishe mens Sax­
ifragia, which they cal Saxifrage, hath lea­
ues lyke smal perseley, & it groweth in mid­
dowes. The Italians saxifragia is lyke the 
same, but it hath rougher leaues and grea­
ter, & an hotter roote. The Germayns haue 
two Saxifrages, whiche other countreis
know not by those names. The greater hath 
greate leaues, lyke smallage, and yealowe 
iuice in the stalke, and this is called of other
wryters Viride Marcum. It maye be called 
in englishe, grene Marke. Thys groweth 
muche by the Temmes syde about Shene.
The other duche saxifrage hath leaues lyke 
Tyme & it may be called in english Time­





stonebreake. I haue not sene it in England.
It groweth in sandy groundes aboute the 
Rhene.


Tormentilla.
Tormentilla is called in greeke Hepta­
phyllon, in englishe Tormentil, or Torme­
rik, in duche Tormentil. It groweth in Mo­
res and Heathes.


Trinitaria or Trinitatis herba.
Trinitatis herba, is of two sortes. The one 
hath leaues lyke a Clauer, and it gro­
weth in the Alpes, and other highe moun­
taynes. It may be called in english mount­
trifoly. The other kinde is called in english 
two faces in a hoode or panses. Thys is 
like vnto a Violet in the floures, and it gro­
weth ofte amonge the corne.


Vua crispa.
Vua crispa is also called Grossularia, in 
english a Groser bushe, a Goosebery bush. 
It groweth onely that I haue sene in England,
in gardines, but I haue sene it in Ger­
many abrode in the fieldes amonge other 
busshes.


Veronica.
Veronica groweth in many places of 
England, and it is called in englishe Fluel­
lyng, in duche Erenprise.


Vuluaria.





Vuluaria is a stynkyng herbe creapynge 
by the grounde with leaues of Mergerum 
or Organe. It groweth muche aboute the 
walles of Bon in Germany. I did se it also 
in my Lorde Cobbain's gardine at Calice.






A table for the commune english 
names vsed nowe in al countreis of 
Englande.


ALoe, Agarik, Auenes, Arssmert 
Astrologia, Adders tong, Ap­
ple tree, Abrecok, Alexander, 
Alkakenge

Baye tree, Barley, Basyll, Burnette, 
Broume pricki, Broume, Belragges, Brier 
brake, Bramble, Bulfote, Butter bur, Bu­
chers broume, Bulfot, Branke vrsine Baume 
Baume, Mynte, Birche, Bene, Brokelein, 
Beech tree, Blewblawe, Bynde corne. 

Camamil, Chickeweede, Citterach, Cen­
tory, Capers, Cuckowe pintle, Caraweis, 
Caret wylde, Corne Mynte, Comyn, Cot­
ton, Cheruel, Celendine, Crowe toes, Car­
locke, Cresse of the gardine, Cresse of the 
water, Chesnut, Clarie, Cuckowes meate, 
Comfery.

Duckes meate, Dittany, Dittany of Can­
dy, Darnel, Dragon, Datetree, Dogges 





tonge, Docke, Daffadyl, Daffadyl duche, 
Dasy, Doder. 

Ehu tree, Earthnut, Eglentine, Endyue
Elecampane.

Foxgloue, Fluellin, Filipendula, Fiche, 
Firtree, Flouramor, Fumitory, Figtree, 
Ferne, Finel, Fenegreke.

Galanga, Garleke, Garleke wyld, wilde 
Goosegrasse, Gotesbearde, Gourd, Genti­
ane, Gooseberies, Grasse, Gethsamyne, 
Grummell, Groundsel.

Hartes horne, Hysope, Hoppes, Hore­
hounde, Honisuccles, Hartes tonge, House­
leke, Henbayne, Horehounde stinkyng, Hum­
locke, Herbe Iue, Hasel, Heath, Huluer or 
Holy of the sea.

Iacke of the hedge, Iuniper.

Knotgrasse.

Ladies mantel, Lunary, Louage, Licores, 
Lettes, Laurel, Lauriel, Lentilles, Liuerwurt, 
Louage of Lumberdy, Litle licke, Lange de
beefe, Ladies traces.

Mallowe, Mallowe verueyn, Mosse, 
Mynt, corne Marygolde, Mayden heire, 
Martagon, Mouseare, Mastike tree, Man­
dragge, Mynt, Mercury, Medler, Mewe, 
Mulbery, Melilote, Mustarde, Mullein,
Muscelto.





Nigella romana, Nettel, Nighteshade, 
Nepe, ¶ Orege, Orenge, Otes, Oke, Oke 
of Hierusalem, Onyon, Organ.

Prymet, Pomgarnat, Piony, Popy, Pa­
pyre, Pyneaple, Pease, Plantaine, Popler, 
Purcellaine, Plaine tree, Penirial, Peartree,
Palma Christi, Pech tree, Persnepe.

Quicken tree.

Rasin tree, Rosemary, Ryse, Radice, 
Rape, Rosa, Raspises, Rue, Rye, Ryshes, 
Rampions, Ramses, Rampes, Reede, Rocket.

Sowthistle, Saynte Iohans grasse, 
Spourge, Sperage, Slauke, Saffron, Set­
wall, Saffron wylde, Sene, Sampere, 
Stoncrop, Strawbery, Syues, Shepher-
des bag, Sanicle, Saxifrage, Staues aker 
Succory, setwal, Scala celi, Sauine, Sal­
lowe, Sage, Sauery, Satyrion.

Twopeny grasse, Thorowwax, Tor
mentil, Two faces in a hode, Tamariske, 
Turnepe, Tyme, wylde Tyme, Thorne
tree, Tarragon, Thistle cotton, Trifoly, 
Tutsan, Tasel wylde.

Wormwodde, Wulfes bayne Venus 
heire, Veluet floure purple, water lyly, Wa
ter betony, Wodbyne, Vinde, Wad, Wal­
wurt, Weybent, Walnut, Vine wild, Wa­
ter rose, waybrade, Whyte roote, Wy­
lowe, Vghe, Verueyne, Violet.


Finis.








Fautes escaped in the prin­
tyng.

Errata section omitted; corrections inserted
in the text itself





Errata section omitted; corrections inserted
in the text itself



Imprinted
at London by Iohn Day
and Wyllyam Seres, dwel­
lynge in Sepulchres Parish
at the signe of the Resur­
rection a litle aboue Hol­
bourne Conduite.

Cum gratia & priuilegio 
ad imprimendum solum.






