



DEFINITIONS.



CHRONOLOGY is the Doctrin of Times, and 
Epocha's.

An AGE or CENTURY  is the Space of a 
hundred Years, or a hundred Solar Revolutions.



LUSTRUM  is the Space of five Years. This 
Word is seldom us'd, unless in Poetry.

OLYMPIAD  is the Space of four Years, which 
the Grecians reckon'd from one Celebration of the Olym­
pick Games to another. The first Olympiad begun the 
Year of the World 3174. 776 Years before the Christian 
Æra or Birth of Christ. Olympiads were the Epocha's of the 
Grecians; their Name is derived from the Olympick 
Games, instituted by Iphitus to the Honour of Hercules. 
They were celebrated every fifth Year about the Sum­
mer Solstice or the 19th of Iuly, at a Town of Elis in 
the Peleponesus (now the Morea) called Olympia. Some 
are of Opinion, That Iphitus was not the Instituter, 
but only the Restorer of those Games, after they had 
been neglected and laid aside for some time.

However, after he had once fixed them, they were 
since solemnized, without Interruption, at the begin­
ning of every fifth Year. The ancientest and most 
esteemed of those Exercises was the Race, to which 
Wrestling was afterwards added; and because the 
Athletes did Wrestle naked, neither the Laws nor De­
cency did suffer Women to be there Spectators. The 
Prize given to the Victor, was a Garland of 
Laurel. Corebus, a Cook, according to Atheneus, car­
ried the Price of the Race, at the first Olympiad.

EPOCHA  is a fixed Point, or a certain and re­
markable Time in History, made use of in Chronology 
to begin to compute Years, and which is generally 
grounded upon some great and signal Event.

ÆRA is the same Thing with Epocha, since it signi­
fies also a fixed and determined Point among Histori­
ans, to begin to reckon Years. The Word Æra comes 
from the Latin Æs, because they used to mark Years 
with little Copper Studs. Perhaps it has its Original 
from the Ignorance of some Amanuenses, who, finding 
these Letters A.E.R.A. Annus erat Regni Augusti, did 
make but one Word of them, Æra. Some are of Opi­
nion, That this Word was introduced by the Spaniards, 
who had drawn it from a Tribute which the Emperor 
Augustus had made them liable to; so that Æra must 
come from Ære.



We have, at present, two different Christian Æra's. 
The first is the Vulgar Æra, whose Author is Dionysius, 
sirnam'd Exiguus, a Learned Monk that flourish'd about 
the beginning of the Sixth Century, who, out of respect 
to our Saviour's Birth, thought it fit that Christians 
should begin to reckon their Years from the coming of 
the Messiah. His Design was approv'd of and follow'd. 
And hence it is that we use this Form in publick Busi­
ness and Writings, In the Year of our Lord, or The Year 
of our Redemption, 1698. But this Dionysius, notwith­
standing that he was a Man of Learning and Integrity, 
has committed a Mistake of four Years; for 'tis certain, 
That our Vulgar Æra is so much short of the Birth of 
JESUS CHRIST.

The second Christian Æra is the true one, which be­
gins four Years before the Vulgar; so that this present 
Year, instead of 1698. we ought to reckon 1702. from 
the Birth of our Saviour. But although this last be the 
true Ærara, we shall nevertheless follow that of Dionysius, 
only to comply with common Usage. But lest we 
lead any Body into an Error, instead of saying, for 
Example, this present Year from the Birth of Iesus 
Christ, 1698. which is false by four Years, we shall 
say of the Vulgar Ærara, 1698. and then all is right; 
provided we take this along with us, viz. That the 
first Year of the Vulgar Ærara begins at the fifth of our 
Saviour. We shall observe all along the same Exact­
ness upon a like Occasion.

There are three sorts of Epocha's. The First is Sa­
cred; the Second Ecclesiastical; and the Third Civil or 
Politick.

I. Sacred Epocha's are those we gather from the Bible, 
and which particularly concern the History of the 
Iews. As, 
1. The Creation. 
2. The Deluge, in the Year of the World, 1656. 
3. The Calling of Abraham, 2023. 
4. The Iews coming out of Egypt, 2453. 
5. The Foundation of the Temple of Solomon, 2933. 
6. The Liberty granted to the Iews by Cyrus, 3419. 

 

7. The Birth of the Messiah, the Salvation of the 
Iews, and the enlightening of the Gentiles, 3948 or 50.

8. The Destruction of the Temple of Ierusalem, and 
the Dispersion of the Iews, the Year of the World, 
3969. of JESUS CHRIST, 74. and of the Vulgar 
Ærara, 70.

II. Ecclesiastical Epocha's are those which we take out 
of the Authors who have writ the History of the Church 
since the Birth of our Saviour, viz. 

1. The Martyrdom of Peter and Paul at Rome, in 
the Year of the Vulgar Ærara, 67. 

2. The Ærara of Dioclesian, or of the Martyrs, 302.

3. Peace given to the Church by Constantine the 
Great, the first Christian Emperor, 312. 

4. The Council of Nice, called against the Heresy 
of Arius, 325.

III. Civil or Political Epocha's are those which regard 
the Empires and Monarchies of the World; such as, 

1. The taking of Troy by the Grecians the Year of the 
World, 2767. before the Vulgar Christian Ærara, 1183 
Years, and 407 before the first Olympiad. 

2. The Building of Rome, according to Fabius Pi­
ctor, who wrote first about Roman Affairs, is fixed a lit­
tle before the VIIIth Olympiad, on the 13th of the Ka­
lends of May; that is, in the Year of the World, 3198. 
and 752. Years before the Vulgar Ærara.

Nevertheless Varro places it five whole Years higher, 
viz. in the Year of the World, 3193.

3. The Ærara of the Seleucides, from whence the Ma­
cedonians began to reckon their Years, is also called 
the Grecian Years, chiefly used by the Iews since they 
were subjected to the Macedonians. This Ærara begins 
at the Reign of Seleucus Nicanor, one of the Captain 
of Alexander the Great, in the Year of the World, 3638 
and 312 Years before the Vulgar Ærara. 

4. The first Iulian Year. This Year begins at the 
Reformation of the Roman Kalendar, made by Iulius 
Cæsar. The Times of the Roman Fasti were so con­
founded, through the Negligence of the High-Priests 
that Iulius Cæsar, being himself raised to that Dignity



thought it his Duty to correct the Abuses which his 
Predecessors had tolerated. His first Care, assoon as he 
came to be Head of the Republick, was to regulate all 
Things belonging to Religion. He made use of the 
Skill of Sosigenes, an excellent Astronomer, in order to 
reform the Kalendar; and assigned the Year as many 
Days as the Sun takes up in passing through the XII 
Signs of the Zodiack; since that time the common Year 
consists of 365 Days. This Reformation was made in 
the Year of the World, 3905. and 45 before the Vul­
gar Ærara.

5. The Hegira or Flight of Mahomet: When that Im­
postor had for some Years been propagating his false 
Doctrin at Mecca, and had gain'd a large Party to his 
Side, they became Insolent and gave Offence to the 
Government, which occasion'd the Magistrates to op­
pose that growing Faction, and thereby oblig'd Maho­
met to quit that Place, and fly to a neighbouring Town 
where his Party were more powerful. From this Flight 
of their Prophet, which happen'd on the 16th of Iuly, 
in the Year of the Vulgar Æra, 622. the Turks date their 
Writings; which they first took up on occasion of a 
Quarrel concerning a Payment; for a Debtor had given 
his Obligation to pay a Sum of Mony on such a Day 
of such a Month; which Month being past at the time 
of the Demand, the Debtor alledg'd it was not before 
the next Year that he was to Pay; which being brought 
before Omar III. Emperor of the Saracens, he found 
the Inconvenience of not having a Method of ascer­
taining the Year, and accordingly instituted the Hegira 
for an Epocha.

SOLAR CYCLE, is the Revolution of 28 Years, after 
which the Letters that mark the Sundays and other 
Holy-days, return to the same Order they were in at 
first. The Sun has nothing to do with this Revolution, 
which is called Solar, only because the Sunday, whose 
Letter we are principally in quest of, is called by the 
Astronomers Dies Solis, the Day of the Sun.

LVNAR CYCLE, or GOLDEN NVMBER, is a Pe­
riod of 19 Years, invented by Methon an Athenian, who 
observ'd that at the end of that time, the Moon began 
the same Lunations over again.

"lunar cycle" antedates the OED's first citation (1704).





INDICTION is a way of Computing, used formerly 
among the Romans, which contains a Revolution of 
15 Years. It is still in use in Apostolical Bulls and 
Rescripts.

ANACHRONISM, is an Error or Mistake in the Com­
putation of Time. Thus Virgil is guilty of an Anachro­
nism in his Æneis, by making Æneas and Dido Cotem­
poraries, whereas they lived 300 Years distant one 
from another. For Æneas is placed about the Year of 
the World 2820. and Dido about the Year, 3112.

SYNCRONISME, is a View of all Cotemporary 
History.

THE IVLIAN PERIOD, is a space of Time con­
taining 7980 Years. Iulius Scaliger, the Inventer of it, 
composed it of the Solar Cycle of 28 Years, of the Lunar 
Cycle of 19, and of the Indiction of 15. for these three 
Numbers multiplied together, make up 7980.

We suppose, in Chronology, this Period to be 765 
Years older than the World.


I have had no regard, in all this Work, to the Iulian 
Period, with which it is not proper to trouble and puzzle 
those who study Chronology, only in their way to History. 
Therefore I have fitted all the Epocha's to the Years of 
the World, and the Years either before or after the 
Vulgar Æra, the beginning of which I place (according 
to the most skilful in this sort of Study) in the Year of 
the World, 4004. One can never be too careful in re­
moving Difficulties from a Subject, which is so intricate 
of it self. For after all, if you tell young People, and 
even those that are come to Man's Estate, That the Iu­
lian Period begins 765 Years before the World, you'll 
amaze them to that degree, that tho' you tell them 
afterwards, That this is but a Supposition; you will 
have much ado to bring them back again to themselves. 
Now this Period was invented to no other purpose, than 
to square by it all the other Epocha's, and reconcile, if 
possible, Chronologers one to another; and therefore it 
does not concern those who have only a Mind to learn 
History, and whom it were unjust to engage in minute 
Punctilio's of Chronology, which have been ever look'd 
upon as Thorns very difficult and troublesome to 
handle.

