



An
ABRIDGMENT 
OF THE 
ARCHITECTURE
OF Vitrivius.
CONTAINING
A System of the Whole WORKS
of that Author.

Illustrated with divers Copper Plates, curi­
ously engraved; with a Table of Explanation,

To which is added in this Edition

The Etymology and Derivation of the 
Terms used in Architecture.

First done in French by Monsieur Perrault, of the
Academy of Paris, and now Englished, with Ad­
ditions.

LONDON: Printed for Abel Swall and T. Child,
at the Vnicorn in St. Paul's C hurch-yard. 1692.






Explication of the Hardest 
Terms in Architecture.



A
ABacus, from ἄβαξ ; which signifies a square 
Trencher: In French it's called Talloir; 
it's that quadrangular Piece commonly ac­
companied with a Cymatium, and serves in­
stead of a Drip or Corona to the Capital. It 
supports the nether Face of the Architrave 
and whole Trabeation. In the Corinthian and 
the Compound Orders, its Corners are called 
the Horns, the intermediate Sweep and Cur­
vature; the Arch, which his commonly a 
Rose carved in the middle.

Acroteria or Acroter's from ἀκρόν , Summa pars; 
they may be properly called Pinnacles, for 
Pins and Battlements were made sometimes 
more towring; but when they stood in Ran­
ges with Rails and Balisters: Upon flat Buil­
ding they still retained their Name, with this 
only difference, that such as were placed be­
tween the Angular Points, were stiled the 
Median, or middle Acroteria. 


Annulets, are little square Parts turned round in 
the Corinthian Capital, under the Quarter-­
Round, called Echinus. 

Ante, is a square Pillaster, which the Ancients 
placed at the corners of the Walls of the 
Temples. 



Amphiprostyle, from αμζἲ , Circa, and ςύλοσ ; 
Columna was a sort of a Temple which had 
four Columns in the Front of the Temple, 
and four in the Face behind.

"amphisprostyle" antedates the earliest OED citation (1706).



Architrave, from a Mungril Compound of two 
Languages, αρχι Principalis, and Trabs; it's 
the first Member of that which we call Enta­
blature; in Chimnies the Architrave is the 
Mantle; over the Jambs of the Doors and 
Lintels of Windows, it's called the Hyper­
thron, from the Greek ὑὣρ, super, and δύρα, 
Janua or Ostium. 

Astragal, from the Greek word Αςράγαλος; 
which signifies the Vertebræ, or little Joints 
in the Neck or Heel; hence the French call 
it Talon, or the Heel itself: It's a Member 
of Architecture joyned to Bases, Cornices, Archi­
traves, &c. it's round like a Ring, and there­
fore it's called by the Italians Tondino. 

Attique signifies after the manner of the City of 
Athens. In Vitruvius it's the Name of the 
Basis which the Moderns have given to the 
Dorick Pillar. We call Attique in our Buil­
dings, a little Order placed upon another 
much greater; for instead of Pillars, this little 
Order has commonly nothing but Pillasters 
of a particular Fashion and Order, which we 
call Attique 

Apophyges, vide Conge.



V

BAsilica, from the Greek word Βασιλοκε , 
Rex or King among the Ancients. It 
was a great Hall which had two Ranges of 
Pillars, and had two Isles or Wings, upon 



which were Galleries: These Halls, which 
at first were made for the Palaces of Kings, 
were afterwards turned into Courts of Ju­
stice, and after that into Churches; which 
Form has always been observed.

Ballustre is the lateral part of the Jonick Capi­
tal. Our Workmen have given it that name, 
because it somewhat resembles a Balluster.



C

CHanel, in the Jonick Capital, is that part 
which is under the Abacus, and lies upon 
Echinus or Egg, and which has its Contours 
or Turnings on every side to make the Vo­
luta's 

Cariatides are Statues of Women, which serve 
instead of Pillars.

Cincture is that part which makes the middle 
of the Ballustre of the Jonick Voluta. 

Congé in French, in Latin Apophyges, from the 
Greek word ὰπὶφυγν , because that part of the 
Pillar taking as it were a rise, seems to 
emerge and fly from the Basis like the Pro­
celtus of a Bone in a mans Leg, In short, it's 
no more than the Rings or Ferils heretofore 
used at the Extremities of wooden Pillars, to 
preserve them from splitting, afterwards imi­
tated in Stone-work.

"congé" antedates the earliest OED citation (1703).

 

Corona is properly that part of the Cornice 
which the French call Larmer or Drip, be­
cause it defends the rest of the Work from 
Wind and Weather: It is often taken by Vi­
truvius for all the Cornice. 

Corona, called the Plat or flat Crown, is a par­
ticular Member in the Dorick Gate; it's 



made by so extraordinary enlargement of the 
Face of the Corona or Drip, that it has six 
times more Breadth than Projecture. This 
sort of Corona is no where found among the 
Ancients, but only in the Writings of Vi­
truvius.

Cymatium, from κυμάτον , which signifies a rou­
ling Wave; is a Member of Architecture, of 
which the one half is Convex and the other 
Concave, the one being hollow above, and 
the other below. There are two sorts of 
them, the one called the Gola or Throats, or 
the Doucine, whose advanced part is Concave; 
and the other is called by the French the Ta­
lon or Heel, whose advanced part is hollow 
below, as the first is above.


D
DiE is the middle of the Pedestals, viz. that 
which is between their Basis and their Cor­
nice. It's so called, because it's for the most 
part of a Cubit form, as Die's are that are 
used in play.

Dentils, or Teeth, is a Member of the Jonick 
Cornice, which is square, and cut our at con­
venient distances, which gives it the form 
of a Set or Gang of Teeth. 

Diastyle, from δια and ςυλοσ: Columna is a sort 
of Edifice where the Pillars are distanced one 
from another the breadth of 3 Diameters of 
the Pillar. 

Diptere, from διε and πτέοεν: Ala signifies that 
which has a double Isle or Wing; the Anci­
ents called so the Temples, which were sur­
rounded with two Ranges of Pillars, for there 



two Ranges made two Portico's, which they 
called Wings, we Isles, from the French word 
Ailes, which signifies Wings, because as 
Wings are on the sides of Birds, so these of 
Edifices.

"dipteros" antedates the earliest OED citation (1706).




E
EChinus, from ἐστὸ τοσ ἐχίνοσ , a Hedg-hog; it is a 
Member of Architecture, which we call a 
Quarter-round; it has its name from the 
roughness of its Carving, resembling the 
prickly Rhind of the Chesnut, and not un­
like the Hedg-hog; it's commonly next to 
the Abacus, and carved with Ovals and Darts, 
sometimes called Eggs and Anchors, because 
these pretended Chesnuts are cut in an Oval 
form. 

Entablature signifies properly the Flooring or
Lofting with Boards; it comes from the 
Latin word Tabulatum. In Architecture 
it's that part which is composed of the Archi­
trave, Frise, and Cornice, for in effect this 
part is the extream part of the Flooring, 
which is supported by Pillars, or by a Wall 
if it have no Pillars. 

Eye is the middle of the Jonick Volute, which 
is cut in the form of a little Rose. 

Eurythmie, from ὲν bene, and αριδμὸς numera: 
it signifies Proportion; it's taken in its gene­
ral signification in Architecture; for in its 
particular signification it signifies the true 
measure that is observed in Dancing after 
Musick. 

Eustyle, from  bene, and  a Pillar; its 
the Order where Pillars are rightly placed, 



the Intercolumniations being two Diameters 
and a quarter.


F
FAce is a Member of Architecture, which has 
a great Breadth and a small Projecture; it's 
in Architraves. 

Filet is a little square streight Member. 

Fresco, and to paint in Fresco or Freth, is an 
Italian Phrase, and it signifies the Painting 
which is made upon the Plaistering before it 
be dry.

Frise is that part which is between the Archi­
trave and the Cornice.


G
GNomonick is the Art of making Sun-dials; 
it's derived from the Greek γνὸμων, which 
signifies that which shews a thing, as the 
Cock or Pin of the Dyal shews what a clock 
it is. 

Gorge, or the Gule or Neck, is the narrowest 
part of the Dorick Capital, which is between 
the Astragal, above the Shaft of the Pillar 
and the Annulets.

"gorge" antedates the earliest OED citation (1706).

 

Gatte, or Drops, are little parts, which to the 
number of six are put below every Triglyph 
in the Architrave of the Dorick Order.


H
Hydraulick, from the Greek ὕδωρ ; which 
signifies Water, is an Engine that plays by 
the help of Water, especially where there 
are Pipes and Flutes. 

Hyperthre, from όπὸ suo and αιθὺρ æther; signi­



fies a Building whose inside is exposed to the 
Rain and open Air. The Ancients called so 
all Temples that had no Roof.

"Hyperthre" not found in OED.



Hyperthyron, for υπέρ , super, and θύρα Janua, a 
Gate or Door: It signifies that which is a­
bove the Gate; it's a large Table, which is 
upon the Dorick Gates in the manner of a 
Frise.

"hyperthyron" not found in OED as a headword but within two quotations.




I
IChnographie, from ἲκνοσ vestigium, and γράφω 
Scribo, or Insculpo; which properly signifies 
the Figure that the Plane of the  Foot im­
presses upon the Earth. By it in Archite­
cture is understood that which is commonly 
called the Plan of the Edifice.


L
LAcuner, or Platfond, is the Flooring or Plan­
ching above the Portico's. 

Laconicum was a dry Stove to sweat in: It was 
so called, because it was much used by the 
Lacedemonians. 

Larmier or Drip, vide Corona.



MEtope, from μετ and ὸπη , foramen, inter­
vallum. Signifies the Front; it's the 
Name of the empty spaces in Freeze of the 
Dorick Order, between the Triglyphs. 

Modillion signifies in Italian a little Model, a 
little Measure: It's that part which is so of­
ten repeated in the Corinthian and Compound 
Cornice, which supports the Projecture of 
the Larmier or Drip. This part is called the 



little Model in respect of the great Model, 
which is the Diameter of the Pillar; for as 
the Proportion of an Edifice depends on the 
Diameter of the Pillar, so the greatness of the 
Modellians, their number, and their space 
or distances, must have a just Proportion or 
true Relation to the whole Fabrick.

Module or Model is a measure that is made use 
of to regulate all the Proportion of the Fa­
brick: In the Dorick Order it's half the Dia­
meter of the Pillar; in other Orders the Mo­
dule is the whole Diameter. 

Monoptere, from μονοσ solus, and πτὲρον ala; is 
that which has but one Wing or Isle; it was 
a sort of a round Temple, whose Roof was 
supported by Pillars only. 

Mutuli, from μτιλοσ , which signifies defect, as 
being made thinner, and more abated above 
than below. It's a sort of a Modellion in the 
Cornice of the Dorick Order.


N
NOyan is the middle part of the Flooring of 
the Ancients. They made it with Ci­
ment, which they put betwixt a Lay or Bed 
of Pibbles, cimented with Mortar made of 
Lime and Sand.

"noyan" not found in the OED or otherwise identified.




O
ORchestra, from όρχὲομαι salto; signified the 
place where they danced; it was the 
lowest place in the Theatre, which was be­
tween the Scene, viz. the place where the 
Players acted, and the Seats where the Spe­
ctators sate. It was in this place where the 
Greek Comedians were wont to dance. 



Order, those Fabricks are said to be of different 
Orders, when the Proportion which is be­
tween the thickness of the Pillars and their 
height, with all other things which are re­
quired to this Proportion, are different.

Ornaments, Vitruvius so calls the Architrave, 
Frise, and Cornice. 

Oval, vide Echinus.


P
PArascenium, from παρὰ and σκειὴ tentonum, 
is the back part of the Theatre or Scene. 

Periptere, from  circum, and πτὲορν ala, which 
has a Wing round about. This was a sort of 
a Temple, which had Pillars on all the four 
Parts, which was different from the Prostyle, 
which had only Pillars before. or In the 
Front, and from the Amphiprostyle, which had 
only Pillars before and behind, and none on 
the sides. 

Peristyle, from παρὰ circum, and ςὺλοσ columna; 
signifies that which has Pillars round about: 
It differs from the Periptere in this, that the 
Pillars of the Peristyle are within, as it were 
round about a Court, and those of the Pe­
riptere are without, as in the Temples of the 
Ancients. 

Pedestal, is that part which supports the Pil­
lar. 

Pied-droit is a square Pillar, which is in part 
within the Wall. 

Pillaster is the same, with this Difference; that 
the Pillaster has a Base and a Capital, as 
a Pillar hath, which the Pied-droit has not. 

Platt-band is a square Member, which termi­
nates the Architrave of the Dorick Order, 



and passes immediately under the Tri­
glyphs.

Plinthus signifies a Brick or square Tile. It's in 
Architecture taken for that square Member 
which makes the Foundation of the Base of 
the Pillar. 

Posticum is the back Gate of a Fabrick. 

Portico is a long place covered with a Floor or 
Flatfond, supported by Pillars. 

Proscenium, from προ and σκενιν tentorium; it 
signifies the forepart of the Scene; it was an 
Edifice as high as the last Portico of the Thea­
tre, whose Face or Front was adorned with 
many Ranges of Pillars. 

Prostyle from προ and ςὺλοσ, signifies that which 
has Pillars before only. This was one sort of 
the Temples of the Ancients. 

Pseudodiptere, ψευδὺς: mendax, δὶς bis, and πτὲρον 
ala; signifies a false Diptere. This was a kind 
of a Temple among the Ancients, which had 
Porticoes round about, which were every one 
as large as the double Portico of the Di­
ptere. 

Pseudoperiptere, from ψευδὺς mendax, and περὶ, and 
πτὲρον ala, was a sort of a Temple, where the 
Side-Pillars were part in the Wall of the in­
ner side of the Temple, which was enlarged 
sufficiently to enclose within the space which 
was allowed the Porticoes of the Peri­
ptere. 

Pulpit was the place upon which the Comedi­
ans acted, which we now call the Stage. 

Picnostyle, from πὺκνοσ dentus, and ςὺλοσ co­
lumna; signifies a Building where the Pillars 
were very close one to another; so that the 



Intercolumniation had but a Diameter and a 
half of the Pillar.


R
RVdus was a sort of gross Mortar, which was 
made use of for smoothing, and equally 
filling and levelling the Superfices of the 
Walls, before the fine Plaister was laid on: 
It was likewise made use of for the second 
Bed or Lay of the Flooring.

"RVdus" not found in OED as a headword.




S
SCene signifies a Tabernacle, Tent, or Pavil­
lion, from the Greek σκενὺ . It was in the 
Theatre of the Ancients a great Face or Front 
of Building, adjoyned with Pillars and Sta­
tues, which had three great Openings, in which 
were Pictures in Perspective, which repre­
sented the Lodgings where the Tragedians 
and Comedians dwelt. 

Sabliere is a piece of Wood as long as a Beam, 
but not so thick. 

Scotia, from σκτζοσ tenebræ, Darkness, is a 
Member of Architecture, hollowed as a De­
mi-channel: It's particularly affected in the 
Bases where it's placed, between the Torus 
and the Astragals; it's sometimes put under 
the Drip, in the Cornice of the Dorick Order. 

Statumen signifies generally whatsoever is made 
use of to support any thing in Architecture; 
it is Mortar mixt with Pibbles, which served 
for the first Lay or Bed in Flooring.

"statumen" not found in OED as a headword but identified in early quotations.

 

Systyle, from σὺνοσ con, and ςὺλ columna; signi­
fies building where the Pillars seem to be 
joyned together, for the Intercolumniation is 
but of two Diameters of the Pillars.




T
TOrus is a Member in the Base which is 
round, in the form of a great Ring; it 
comes from the Latin word Torus, which sig­
nifies a Bed.

Tringle is a little square Member, which is di­
rectly upon every Triglyph, under the Platt-­
band of the Architrave, from whence hang 
down the Guttæ, or pendant Drops in the 
Dorick Order. 

Triglyph, from τρις , ter, and γλυφοσ sculptura; 
because it's divided into three parts, and en­
graved, it is a Member in the Freeze of the 
Dorick Order, directly upon every Pillar, and 
in certain spaces in the Intercolumniations. 

Tympan signifies a Drum; it's that part of the 
bottom of the Frontons which answers the 
naked of the Freeze; it is triangular, and 
placed upon the Cornice of the Entablature, 
and covered over again with two other Cor­
nices which slope a little.

"tympan" antedates the earliest OED citation in this sense (1704).




V
VOlute signifies wreathed, and turned about 
from Volvendo; it's a part of the Capitals 
of the Jonick, Corinthian, and Compound Or­
ders, which represents the Bark of a Tree 
twisted and turned into a Spiral line.



XYste, from the Greek ζυτοσ , which signifies 
scraped; it was the place where the Wre­
stlers exercised; it was so called because they 
made their skins be scraped and rubbed 
smooth, to make the Sweat fall, and to make 
their Bodies more slippery, that their Adver­
saries might have the less hold of them when 
they closed.

"XYste" not found in OED.





