




A Short Table of some hard
words, and phrases, with a few
briefe notes.


I Haue so nearly as I could, and euen as much
as TIBERIVS CÆSAR himselfe (who
would not endure the word Monopoly, be­
cause it was not LATIN) auoided all ende­
nization of words: which hath mooued me in
most places of my Booke to adde other more cleare, to inter­
pret by them such as may seeme to thee obscure, as thou
may'st euery-where obserue: for albeit (as in my Epistle) I
wish such a Reader as need not an Interpreter, yet I must
not neglect such as I haue. Though there are scarce any
words of mine (howsoeuer they may perhaps seeme strange)
which other writers in our language haue not formerly
made familiar, and these few which are not altogether so
(for the which also I haue more then once askt pardon in my
Booke it selfe) I haue heere for thy vses, collected, and (by
conference with the learned) so farre onely interpreted, as is
necessary to vnderstand my meaning in the places where I
vse them: for to interprete them at large, and in all their
senses were to take SCAPVLA'S, or THOMASIVS offices
out of their hands. My care is chiefly to haue thee know
mine.


FARE-WELL.




A.

APOSTRO­
PHE.
An abrupt, or sodaine turning of our speech from one
matter, or person to another. Poets, and Orators, are full
of that vehement kinde of figure: and Strophe, and An­
tistrophe (in the GREEKE Lyricks) doe signifie other
turnings, or changes of speech, and station, as wee are
taught. GR.




ANALOGIE.
The iust proportion, correspondence, and measure
which the obiect, or subiect holds with the true reason
required therein: An agreement, harmonie, or apt an­
swering of the Thing to the considerations proper
therevnto. GR.


ANALYSIS.
A resoluing, or distribution of the whole into the
parts. GR.


ANTITHESIS
A contrary position, or an opposition. GR.


AVTOMS.
The word imports artificiall bodies made by DÆ­
DALVS, or by any other of like skill, which moue alone,
or houer of themselues in the ayre, without the support
of any other thing. Such were not the Horti pensiles, or
Hanging gardens of SEMIRAMIS, for they stood vpon
pillars: Nor the ICARVS in OVID, or in SVETONIVS; for the
one was but (as the fable of PHAETON) a picture of vn­
fortunate ambition; the other the true story of the break­
neck fall of SIMON MAGVS the Sorcerer, vnder the name
of ICARVS, at ROME: Nor MAHOMET'S yron coffin at
MECCA: for that (as the fame, or fable is) it hangs in
the Temple, by reason of certaine proportionable quan­
tities of Load-stone which hold it vp by equall attracti­
ons. The perpetuall motion (when it is found) is such. 


ATOMIE.
As Anatomie is a resection, or such a cutting-vp as
Surgeons vse in humane bodyes at their Hall, so Ato­
mies are those things, of which, by reason of their inex­
plicable smallnesse there cannot bee any section. The
LATINS calls it Indiuiduum, and LVCRETIVS semen rerum:
Indiuiduum, because it was so little as it could not bee
parted, or diuided, and semen rerum (seed of things)
for that they were (according to the conceit of EPI­
CVRVS) the common mater of all things. 


ARTICK.
That which is of, or appertaineth to the Northern
signe of the Cælestial Beare. So the ARCTICK Circle is
the bound of the Cold Zone vpon Earth, and of the Nor­
thern constellations in Heauen. The whole North is de­
nominated of that imagined figure. The fable of that



Beare is famous among Poets. So the Artick Hemi­
sphear is that halfe of the world which is betweene the
North-pole, and theÆquinoctiall Line. GRE.


ANTARC­
TICK.
* Contrary, or opposite to Arctick. Southern. GR.


ARGO.
The name of the Ship, or Argose, in which IASON sail'd
to CHOLCHIS for conquest of the golden Fleece, and
which by the power of Poesie is turnd to an Asterism,
or a Cælestiall figure of Starres in the South-sky. The
Armorists ARGO, is in my meaning, no more, but the bu­
sinesse of Armorie which is in handling, and in which
Sir AMIAS is shipt, or embarked. 


ARRAS.
Cloath of Arras, Tapistrie, or hangings wrought at
the Cittie of ARRAS in ARTOIS, one of the seuenteene
Prouinces, and at this present is vnder the ARCHDVKES
ALBERTVS and his wife ISABELLA. 



B.

BASIS.
A word in Architecture. The bottom-part of a Co­
lumne, or Pillar, and figuratiuely the supporture, stay,
ground-worke or foundation of any thing. 


BEVIL.
Euery Carpenter can tell you what it is. Beeing a
Squire, or Square of two equall pieces, and moouing
vpon a ioynt, or pinne from the Angle wherein they
are ioyned. 



C.

CHAOS.
OVID calls the rude, and vndigested first heape of
naturall Elements, Chaos. In the Impresse, Symbol, or
Deuise vpon the front of my Booke, I haue followed the
common placing of the foure common Simples, and
Elements; about the which, in so many Scucheons, are
set the seauen chiefe Armoriall Colours, which men may
obserue in the naturall Elements. In fire, yellow, redde,



and Purple: In aër; white: In water; blew: In earth, greene,
and sable. The sentence is out of some the first verses
in the Metamorphosis, where it is said

Vnus erat toto naturæ vultus in orbe,
Quem dixere CHAOS ---

The sense of the whole Imprese is plain. 


COCKET.
A certificate from the customer of a Port that the par­
cels comprehended in that Certificate, or Bill haue bene
customed, or haue paid custome. The word is dearly wel­
knowne to Marchant-venturers. 


CONVEX.
Conuexity is the out-side of an hollow body, as conca­
uity the inside. In a painted Globe of the world the de­
scriptions are vppon the conuexitie therof, and that face is
conuex, the rest is bellie or concaue. 


CORYPHAE.
The Chief, or principal in any kinde. GR. 



D

DIALLELS.
As Parallels are lines running one by the other without
meeting, so Diallels are lines which runne one through
the other, that is, do crosse, intersecate, or cutt. G.R. 


DIAGONAL.
Is a line which passeth from one corner or one angle of
a Geometrical body to another corner or angle of the
same. GR. 


DEIPNOSO­
PHISTS.
ATHENAEVS his great learned books carry that title, im­
porting a conference, discourse, or Inter-speach among
wise-men at a supper. 


DIAMETER.
EVCLYD(who best knewe) defineth it thus.
The diameter of a circle, is a certain straight line
drawne through the center, and of both sides bounded in the
compasse of the circle, which cutts, or deuides the circle into
two portions. 





E.

EQUIVOCAL.
An Equiuocal word is that which conteyneth more sig­
nifications then one, or that which in the sense, or mea­
ning thereof doth equally extend it selfe as wel to one as
to another. As the word (Armes) in our vulgar vse ther­
of doth equally signifie those parts of our body so called,
or weapons, or tokens of honour, and with an aspiration
(which is an ELENCK, or deceit in the Accent) Harms.


EMPYRAEAN.
Fierie. It is among the old Diuines taken for the Sphære
of the blessed, or the Heauen of the triumphant. 



F

FOLKMOTE.
A meeting of the people, which the LATINS called Concio,
and in a more spacious word Comitia. For Concio was
any auditory, before, or vnto whome a speach was vsed,
aswell as the speach it selfe, both which Concio signified;
but Comitia did import a generall assembly of the people
of ROME to make lawes &c. Our FOLKMOTE may bee
either.



G

GEMINELS.
Twins, Pairs, Matches, or Likes.


GOVRMONS.
Great eaters; Gluttons, Norman, Gourmon, is a speach (I
heare) by which the Normans are taxed for great fee­
ding, and gourmondize. 


GRAMMAR.
Who knowes not that this word signifies the Art of let­
ters, and speach? Yet it is meere GREEK in the originall;
but now so familiar in our tongue, euen in the most vp­
landish, countries as it need no Interpreter.

Those who will perswade vs to turne backe to our old
language for auoyding the loan of words, and phrases,
may from hence learn, that vse makes all things familiar;
Friuolous it is to wish (when thinges are dayly new) to



dreame of a certaine state of words, or speach; that is, That
the number of ENGLISH wordes should be definite, and
certaine.

And what shall wee say of reuiuing old and forgotten
words? That cannot auoyd obscurity but will induce it ra­
ther, our helps being fewer to vnderstand them, then the
GREEK, LATIN, or other famous languages: It is our sloath
which suffers so many of our owne wordes to liue onely
among the Arts, and Mysteries where they are common­
ly knowne, like DVTCH coynes which are not current out
of their owne Citties, or Territories, Industry, and Wise­
dome would that wee should not borrow till our owne
store were empty, or worne bare, which is to our selues
vnknowne for want of obseruation. Therefore I could
wish there were a Tribunal, and Magistrate for wordes,
that it might not be in euery witts-will, donare ciuitate
ANGLICANA, to make words, & phrases free of ENG­
LAND.



H

HIEROGLI­
PHICKS.
Hallowed Engrauements, or sacred Sculptures; as Hiera­
ticall figures are sacred figures; and Hierogramms sacred
letters or writings. In all which words the mysticall cy­
phers or records of the AEGIPTIAN rites, and Philosophie,
were signified to be comprised. 


HYPERBO­
REANS. HORD.
Septentrional. Due North: Vnder the North-pole.

A TARTARIAN word: and as (I thinke) doth import a Clan,
Race, or Familie vnder some one Chiefe or other, which
conducts the troup after their barbarous vsage from coun­
ty and country.


HORD
is the whole company of so many TARTARS flit­
ting vp, and downe where they can find new feedings. 


HONORARY.
That which is made for honour, more then for vse. 





I

IMBRICATE.
Square, and bent like to a Roofe-tile, which the LATINS
cal Imbrex.


INLAYES.
At Saint OLAVES in SOVTHWARK you shall learn among the
Ioyners what Inlayes and Marquetrie meane. Inlay (as
the word imports) is a laying of colour'd wood in their
Wainscoat works, Bed-steds, Cupbords, Chayres and the
like.



L

LANDSKEP.
The same that Parergon, which in one word I call By-­
work; wherein though I render the GREEK Parergon ful­
ly, and truly, yet (for that it is not receiued in such a sense
among vs) it doth not shew the thing.

All that, which in a picture is not of the body, or argu­
ment thereof, is LANDSKEP, Parergon, or By-work. As in
the table of our Sauiours passion; The picture of CHRIST
vpon the Rood (which is the proper ENGLISH word for
Crosse) the two Theeues, the blessed Virgin MARIE, and
Saint IOHN, are the argument: But the Cittie IERVSALEM,
the country about, the Clowdes, and the like are By-­
work.


LAVREATED 
LETTERS.
Leters bound about with laurell, which the ROMAN
Generals sent to the Senat when their contents were
victory, and conquest newly by them obtained. 


LABARVM.
EVSEBIVS PAMPHILVS in his first booke of the life of
great CONSTANTINE describes this peculiar Standard very
curiously. The common forme thou maist behold in the
163. page of my Elements. In the LABARVM these things
are more. First the Banner was of Purple, where the pic­
tures of the Emperour and his Children were wrought in
gold, and stone of wonderfull value and beauty; aboue
the crosse-beam, or trauerse-staffe of the banner stood



those two first GREEKE Capitals of CHRISTE'S name
which you may see in my Elements, and on the point, or
toppe of the Launce, or Staffe imperiall, was aduanced
a crowne of gold set with pretious stone. All in honor of
his miraculous conuersion vpon the apparition of the
CROSSE. Which as it consisted of shining light, and was
seene abooue the Sunne, it beeing now past Noone, so
there was very lately in our time seene by honorable
personages, and others at Saint LEONARD's by NEWARKE
vpon TRENT, the like figure of the Crosse aboue the
Moone at night, in colour brighter then the Moone,
whose paler body was betweene their sight, and the
lower part of the long beame of the Crosse.



M.

MOTT.
Is (in generall) FRENCH for (a Word) but in a restrai­
ned sense is properly now among vs the Word, or Sen­
tence applide to an Impresse, or Heroick Deuise. 


MYTHOLO­
LOGERS.
Morall Interpreters of Poeticall Histories, or of the
wise Fables of ÆSOP, which sort of inuention the
GREEKES call an Apologus. GR.


MIZRAIM.
The Hebrew, or MOSAICAL name of the ÆGYPTIANS,
which I vse, the rather to signifie thereby those ÆGYP­
TIANS that were of the oldest times. HEB.


MATHEMA­
TICAL.
Sciential. Mathemata are generally all sorts of liberall
knowledges, but for their excellencie appropriated more
specially to these foure, ARITHMETICK, MVSICK, GEO­
METRIE, ASTRONOMIE. GR.


MARQVETRY
See INLAY. 



N.

NOMENCLA­
TOR.
An Officer among the ROMANS whose it was to call,
cite, or rehearse euery one of the Senatours, Guests, &c.
by their seuerall names. LAT.


NEGRO.
A black Moore, whom the DVTCH call a Swart, and
NEGRO's in the plural, Swarts





O.

OVAL.
A figure round like an Egge, an oblong round. 



P.

PERIMETER.
The out-most line of any solid body, or other figure.
The Compasse, or bounding Tract. 


PYTHAGO­
RACISM.
In my sense is an imitation of PYTHAGORAS his super­
stitions in numbers; to the which PYTHAGORAS attribu­
ted too much. 


PHYSIOLO­
GERS.
Naturall Philosophers; or discoursers of naturall
matters. 


PHYSICKS.
Naturall Philosophy. Naturall.

The word Physitian we do vulgarly abuse (as we doe
very many other) for a Leech, or Medicus, but not alto­
gether intollerably, because it is a trite, and a true saying,
that  Vbi definit Philosophus incipit Medicus, where the
Naturalist (for there the word Philosopher stands for a
Physiologer) ends, there the Medicus begins; so as if an
expert Leech must needs be expert in the Physicks (that
is, in those speculations which concerne the workes of
nature) the nearest word to fall with our tongue, yet not
farre from the thing, was Physitian, for Medicus could
not well brooke any flexion among vs. 



R.

RENEGADO.
One that renyes, or renounceth the faith, that is (in the
receiued sense of the word) the CHRISTIAN faith. An
Apostata: by which word the Emperour IVLIANVS for his
speciall malice to CHRISTIANITIE, was surnamed. 



S.

SAND.
Here it signifies that famous place which the ROMANS
by a LATIN word of the same signification called Arena,
for that it (being the ground within an Amphitheater)
was sanded ouer both for sure footing, and the sooner to
drinke vp the bloud of men, & beasts their shed in sight
for entertainment of the people. Figuratiuely, it is taken
for any subiect of Trial, as Prouince for a businesse. 


SYMBOL.
Of all our ENGLISH words, none comes nearer to ex­
presse it, then TOKEN, so as we vnderstand thereby such a
TOKEN, as in which there is alwayes some pourtraict,



figure, or image. Symbol (in my sense) is a figure, or shape
which relateth to some cause, reason, qualitie, nature, or
Historie, proper to this, or that Bearer, or family. To sym­
bolize, is so to beetoken, or so, and in that sort, to answer,
or agree-with. Many frauds you shall read in PLAVTVS,
plotted, and acted by counterfetting, and slie conueiance
of these Symbols, or Tokens, wherein there was euer some
image, or other. So the Symbol of AMPHITRVON in that
Tragicomedie was, Sol cum quadrigis, The Sunne in his
Chariot drawne with foure horse, PYRGOPOLINICES, the
bragging Soldier, had his owne louely selfe with great
Decorum, drawne in his Signet for a Symbol. Symbolical
Philosophie therefore is that kinde of learning, and wis­
dome, which knowing the causes, and proprieties of
 things naturall, and supernaturall, doth teach how to
make, or to expound those mystical, and artificial bodies,
called Symbols, of what kinde soeuer. 


SKELETON.
Is that which the vulgar call an Anatomie: Skeleton is
the whole Fabrick, or dry frame of humane Bones. The
dry carcasse of a man, or woman, without Arteries, Mus­
cles, or other naturall appurtenances.

Skeletos in GREEKE is bony, or dry as a Bone. 


SVRCOAT.
A Coate of Armes to were ouer Armour. 



T.

TABERD.
VERSTEGAN'S words in his antient ENGLISH Alphabet
are these. A Tabert, anciently a short gowne, that reached
no further then to the mid-legge, In ENGLAND it is now
the name onely of an Heralds Coate. 


THOLES.
Places in Temples where Donaries, and such gifts as
are presented there, be hung vp. 

     

FINIS.




