






A
Chymical Dictionary,
OR,
An Explanation of the hard
words and termes of Art
which are used in The
Holy Guide.




ACquisitio, Amissio, Albus, are figures of 
Geomancy, ♈ or Aries, a figure of
Astromancy, and they are names that signify
the Nature of the Medicines, and you shall
find them in Order, there being used
19. Figures of Astromancy, viz. ♄ Saturne,
♃ Jupiter, ♂ Mars, ☉ Sol, ♀ Venus, ☿ Mer­
cury, ☽ the Moon, or Luna, ♉ Taurus, ♊ Ge­
mini, ♋ Cancer, ♌ Leo, ♍ Virgo, ♎ Libra, 
♏ Scorpio, ♐ Sagittary, ♑ Capricorn, ♒ Aqua­
rius, ♓ Pisces. And 16. (Carcer, Tristitia, For­
tuna Major, Fortuna Minor, Puer, Puella, Con­
junctio, Rubeus, Lætitia, Caput Draconis,
Cauda Draconis, Populus, via) of Geomancy.

Amalgamation is a Calcining or Cor­
roding Mettals with Quicksilver, and it is




done thus; take any Mettall except Iron,
beaten into leafes, or very small Powder,
mixt with about eight parts of Quick­
silver (which may the better be done, if
both be healed first) that they may become
one uniform Mass, evaporate the Quick­
silver over the fire, and the Mettall will be
left in the bottom as a thin Calx.

Aqua is the water.

Aries and Aquarius signes in Astromancy.

Acquisitio, Amissio, and Albus figures of
Geomancy.

Astromancy is Heavenly knowledge, and
Geomancy is Earthly knowledge.


C.

Calcination is a reducing any thing into
Calx, and making it fryable; and it may
be done two wayes, by firing, by reducing
into ashes, by reverberating, by Corrosion,
by Amalgamation, Precipitation, Fumiga­
tion or vaporation, Cementation or strati­
fication.

Caput Draconis, Cauda Draconis,
Coniunctio, and Cancer figures of Geomancy.

Circulation, is when any liquor is so
placed in digestion, that it shall rise up
and fall down, and rise up and fall down,
and so do continually, and thereby become
more digested and mature, for which use
for the most part we use a Pelican.

Clarification, is the separating of the
poste feces from any decoction or juice;




and it is done three wayes, by the white of
an Egge, by digestion, by filtration.

Cure all, is Aurum Potabile.

Coagulation, is the reducing of any liquid
thing to a thicker substance by evaporating
the humidity.

Cohobation, is the frequent abstraction of
any liquor poured oft-times on the feces
from whence it was distilled, by distillati­
on. Cancer and Capricorn, signes in Astro­
mancy.

Congelation, is when any liquor being de­
cocted to the height, is afterward by set­
ling into any cold place turned into a 
transparent substance like unto Ice.

Corrosion, is the Calcining of bodies by cor­
rosive things.

Cure the great is the Pantarva.


D.

Decantation, is the pouring off any li­
quor which hath a setling, by inclination.

Deliquium, the dissoluing of a hard body
into a liquor, as salt, or the powder of
any calcined matter, &c. in a moist, cold
place.

Descension, is when the essential juice
dissolved from the matter to be distilled
doth descend, or fall downward.

Despumation, is the taking off the froth




that floats on the top with a spoon or fea­
ther, or by percolation.

Distillation, is the extracting of the hu­
mid part of things by vertue of heat, being
first resolved into a vapour, and then con­
densed again by cold. Thus it is generally
taken; but how more particularly, I shall
afterward shew.

Digestion, is a concocting, or maturation
of crude things by an easie and gentle heat.

Dissolution, is the turning of bodies into
a liquor by the addition of some humidity.

Dulcoration, or Dulcification, is either
the washing off the salt from any matter
that was calcined therewith, with warm
water, in which the salt is dissolved, and
the matter dulcified: or it is sweetning of
things with sugar, or honey, or syrup.


E.

Elevation, is the rising of any matter in
manner of fume, or vapour, by vertue of
heat.

Evaporation, or Exhalation, is the va­
pouring away of any moisture.

Exaltation, is when any matter doth by
digestion attain to a greater purity

Expression, is the extracting of any li­
quor by the hand, or by a presse.

Extraction, is the drawing forth of an
essence from a corporeal matter by some




fit liquor, as spirit of wine; the feces re­
main in the bottome.


F.

Fermentation, is when any thing is resol­
ved into it self, and is rarified, and ripe­
ned: whether it be done by any ferment
added to it, or by digestion only.

Fortuna Major is a figure of Geomancy.

Filtration, is the separation of any liquid
matter from its feces by making it run
through a brown paper made like a tunnel,
or a little bag of woollen cloth, or through
shreds.

Fixation, is the making of any volatile,
spiritual body endure the fire, and not flye
away, whether it be done by often reitera­
ted distillations, or sublimations, or by
the adding of some fixing thing to it.

Fortuna Minor a Figure of Geomancy.

Fumigation, is the calcining of bodies by
the fume of sharp spirits, whether vegeta­
ble or mineral, the bodies being laid over 
the mouth of the vessel wherein the sharp
spirits are.





Gemini, a Figure of Geomancy.


H.

Humectation, or Irrigation, is a sprinkling
of moisture upon any thing.


I.

Imbibition, is when any dry body drinks




in any moisture that is put upon it.

Jupiter, a planet of Astromancy

Impregnation, is when any dry body hath
drank in so much moisture that it will ad­
mit of no more.

Incorporation, is a mixtion of a dry and
moist body together, so as to make an uni­
form masse of them.

Infusion, is the putting of any hard matter
into liquor, for the vertue thereof to be
Extracted.

Insolation, is the digesting of things in
the Sun.


L.

Levigation, is the reducing of any hard
matter into a most fine powder.

Lætitia, of Geomancy.

Leo and Libra figures of Astromancy.

Liquation, is a melting or making any
thing fluid.

Lutation, is either the stopping of the
orifices of vessels, that no vapour passe out,
or the coating of any vessell to preserve it
from breaking in the fire.


M.

Mars, Mercury, and the Moon, Planets of
Astromancy.

Maceration, is the same as Digestion.

Maturation, is the exalting of a substance




that is immature and crude, to be ripened
and concocted.

Menstrum, is any liquor that serves for
the extracting the essence of any thing.


P.

Precipitation, is when bodies corroded
by corrosive spirits, either by the evaporat­
ing of the spirits remain in the bottome,
or by pouring something upon the spirits,
as oil of Tartar, or a good quantity of
water, do fall to the bottom.

Puer, Puella & Populus, figures of Geomancy.

Pisces a figure in Astromancy.

Purification, is a separation of any Li­
quor from its feces, whether it be done by
clarification, filtration, or digestion.

Putrefaction, is the resolution of a mixt
body into it self, by a natural gentle
heat.


Q.

Quintessence, is an absolute, pure and
well digested medicine, drawn from any
substance, eithe animal, vegetable or mi­
neral.


R.

Rubeus, a figure of Geomancy.

Rectification, is either the drawing of the
flegm from the spirits, or of the spirits from
the flegm, or the exaltation of any Liquor
by a reiterated distillation.




Reverberation, is the reducing of bodies
into a Calx, by a reflecting flame.


S.

Saturne, Sol, Scorpio, and Sagittary, Planets
and signes in Astromancy.

Solution, is a dissolving or attenuating
of bodies.

Stratification, is a strewing of corroding
powder on plates of metall by course.

Sublimation, is an elevating, or raising of
the matter to the upper part of the vessell
by way of a subtle powder.

Subtiliation, is the turning of a body into
a Liquor, or into a fine powder.


T.

Taurus, a figures of Astromancy.

Transmutation, is the changing of a thing
in substance, colour, and quality.
 

V.

Venus, Virgo, figures of Astromancy.

Volatile, is that which flyeth the fire.





