 


LATHAMS 
FALCONRY 
OR 
The Faulcons Lure, and Cure: 
IN TWO BOOKES.

The First, concerning the ordering and training vp of all 
Hawkes in generall; especially the HAGGARD 
FAVLCON GENTLE.

The second, teaching approued medicines for the cure 
of all Diseases in them.

Gathered by long practice and experience, and published 
for the delight of noble mindes, and instruction of 
young Faulconers in things pertaining 
to this Princely Art.

By SYMON LATHAM. Gent.

Printed at London for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop 
neere Fleet-street Conduit, 1614.





An Explanation of 
the wordes of art contained in
this Booke.

B
BAthing is when you set your Hawke to the water, to wash
or bath her selfe, either abroad or in the house.

Batting, or to batte is when a Hawk fluttereth with her wings
either from the pearch or the mans fist, stryuing as it were to flie
away, or get liberty.

Bousing is when a Hawke drinketh often, and seemes to be
continually thirsty.


C
CReance is a fine small long line of strong and euen twound
Packthreed, which is fastened to the Hawks leash, when she
i first lured.

Ceasing is when a Hawke taketh any thing into her foot,
and gripeth or holdeth it fast.

Checke or to kill, Checke is when Crowes, Rookes, Pies, or 



other birds comming in the view of the Hawke, shee forsaketh
her naturall flight to flie at them. 

Casting, is any thing that you giue your Hawk to clense her
gorge with, whether it be flannell, thrummes, feathers, or such
like. 

To cast a Hawke, is to take her in your hands before the pini-
ons of her wings, and to hold her from bating or striuing, when
you administer any thing vnto her. 

Cadge, is taken for that on which Faulconers carry many
Hawkes, together when they bring them to sell. 


D
DRopping is when a Hawke muteth directly downeward,
in seuerall drops, and ierketh it not longwaies from her. 

Disclosed, is when young Hawkes are newly hatch'd, and as
it were disclosed from their shels. 


E
ERie is the nest or place where a Hawke buildeth and brin-
geth vp her young ones, whether in woods, rockes, or any
other places. 

Endew,  is when a Hawke digesteth her meat, not onely put-
ting it ouer from her gorge, but also cleansing her pannell. 


G
GOrge, is that part of the Hawke which first receiueth the
meat, and is called the Craw or crop in other fowles. 

Gurgiting, is when a Hawke is stuft or sufforated with any
thing, be it meat or otherwise. 




I

INke, whether it be of Partridge, fowle, doues, or any
other pray, is the necke from the head to the body. 

Intermew'd is from the first exchaunge of a Hawkes
coat, or from her first mewing, till shee come to bee a white
Hawke. 

Iesses, are those short straps of leather, which are fastned
to the Hawks legs, & so to the lease by varuels, anlets, or such
like. 


L
LVer is that whereto Faulconers call their young Hawkes
by casting it vp in the aire, being made of feathers and 
leather in such wise that in the motion it lookes not vnlike a
fowle. 

Lease or leashe is a small long thong of leather, by which
the Faulconer holdeth his Hawke fast, folding it many times
about their fingers. 

Lice, are a small kind of white vermin, running amongst
the feathers of the Hawke. 


M
MVting is the excrements or order which comes from
Hawkes, and containeth both dunge and vrine. 

A Make-hawke  is an old staunche flying Hawke, which
being inur'd to her flight, wil easily instruct a younger Hawk
to be waining in her pray. 

Managing, is to handle any thing with cunning accor-
ding to the true nature thereof. 



Mew, is that place, whether it be abroad or in the house
where you set downe your Hawke, during the time that shee
raseth her feathers. 

Mites, are a kind of vermine smaller then Lice, and most
about the heads and nares of Hawkes. 


P
PLumming, is when a Hawke ceaseth a fowle, and pul-
leth the feathers from the body. 

Plummage are small downie feather which the Hawke
takes, or are giuen her for casting. 

Pelt, is the dead body of any fowle howsoeuer dismem-
bred. 

Pill, and pelfe of a fowle, is that refuse and broken re-
maines, which are left after the Hawke hath beene releiued. 

Plume is the generall colour or mixtures of feathers in a 
Hawke, which sheweth her constitution. 

Pearch, is any thing whereon you set your Hawke, when
shee is from your fist. 

Pray, is any thing that a Hawke killeth, and feedeth her
selfe thereupon. 

Pannell
 is that part of the Hawke next to the fundament
whither the Hawke disgesteth her meat from her body. 


Q
QVarrie, is taken for the fowle which is flowne at, and
slaine at any time, especially when young Hawkes are
flowne thereunto. 




R
RVfter-hood is the first hood which a Hawke weareth,
being large, wide, and open behind. 

Reclaiming is to tame, make gentle, or to bring a Hawke
to familiaritie with the man. 

Raised in flesh, is when a Hawke growes fat, or prospe-
eth in flesh. 

Ramage is when a Hawke is wild, coy, or disdainfull to
the man, and contrary to be reclaimed. 


S
SLiming, is when a Hawke muteth from her longwaies
in one intire substance, and doth not drop any part there-
of. 

Stooping, is when a Hawke being vpon her wings at the
height of her pitch, bendeth violentlie downe to strike the
fowle or any other pray. 

Summ'd is when a Hawke hath all her feathers, and is
fit either to be taken from the Crie or Mew. 

Setting downe, is when a Hawke is put into the Mew

Sore-hawke, is from the first taking of her from the eiry,
till shee haue mewed her feathers. 

"sore-hawk" not in OED as a phrasal noun.




T
TRussing is when a Hawke raseth a fowle aloft, and so
descendeth downe with it to the ground, 




V
VNgumm'd is when a Hawkes feathers are not come
forth, or els not com'd home to their full length. 


W
WEathering is when you set your Hawke abroad to
take the aire, either by day or night, in the frost, or in
the sunne, or at any other season. 




