



A
Physical Dictionary;
In which, all the
TERMS
Relating either to
ANATOMY, CHIRURGERY,
PHARMACY, or CHYMISTRY,
are very accurately explain'd.

By STEPHEN BLANCARD,
M.D. and Physick-Professor at 
Middleburgh in Zeeland.

LONDON;
Printed by J.D. and are to be sold by
John Gellibrand at the Golden-Ball in
St. Paul's Church-yard, M.DC.LXXXIV.








TO
My honoured Friend,
Mr. William Moulins.
SIR,
BEing very unwil­
ling to be singu­
lar, as to send this 
Book into the World
without either Epi­
stle or Preface, would
certainly be, I resol­
ved from the time of
my setting it to Press,



to send it out with
both; and had no 
sooner made that Re­
solution, but present­
ly pitcht on a Patron
under whom to shelter
it. I now humbly de­
dicate it to yourself;
and beg of you to be­
live that I am in all
sincerity,
Sir,
Your very humble
Servant,
J.G.





Courteous Reader;
THe ensuing Dictiona­
ry was compil'd in La­
tin, by the eminently
Learned and Famous Phy­
sician, Dr. Stephen Blan­
card, now Physick-Professor
at Middleburgh in Zee­
land; in which he hath taken
that pains, and done it with
such Accurateness, that the
like has never yet been ex­
tant. The Authors he has
consulted (and out of which
he has made the following
Dictionary) you have a Ca­



talogue of, ensuing this Pre­
face. But chiefly, and most
of all, he has extracted the
most useful of all the Terms in
Anatomy, Pharmacy, Chi­
rurgery, and Chymistry, out of
ancient Authors, as Eroti­
an, Galen, and others; and
from the more modern, as
Gorræus, Fœsius, Castellus,
and others; out of whole Wri­
tings he has not omitted any
one useful term in the whole
art of Physick. I am certain,
that things of this nature are
extremely wanting, that so
the terms (in which all, or the
most part of Mankind has
daily occasion to use) may not



be talkt by rote; but may give
a rational account of their
discourse, than which, no­
thing is more rational or de­
monstrative than this of Phy­
sick.

That the Publick-Good
has all along been drove at in
this Affair, both by the Au­
thor and Bookseller, is very
apparent, in that it might
have made a Book of three
times the price, and the mat­
ter spun out to a far great­
er bulk; but in things of this
nature, the Buyer's Interest
ought to be, and has been
consulted.

Vale.









THE
Physical Dictionary
OF
STEPHEN BLANCARD



ABaptista, see Modiolus.

Abdomen, which Juvenal
calls sumen & equaliculus, is
the lowermost Belly, con­
taining the Liver, Spleen,
Reins, Stomach, Intestines,
Bladder, &c. The innermost
part of it is begirt with a 
Membrane called the Perito­
næum, the foremost part is divided into the Epi­
gastrum, the right and left Hypochondres and the
Navel, and the lowermost Region or part is cal­
led Hypogastrium.

Ablactatio is when a Child of one or two years
of Age is weaned.

Abortus is the bearing of a Fœtus before
the Female have gone out its full time, which hap­
pens either through the abundance of nutritious
juice, or defect or depravation of it; as likewise



it may come by a fall, a blow, a sudden fright,
diuritics, &c.

Abscessus, see Apostema.

Abstemius is he who abstains from whatsoever
meats and drinks his Physician has forbid him
the use of.

Abstergentia are those things which consisting of
rugged, hard, and sharp particles, do as it were
shave and scour off all filth from the superficies,
and the pores and passages of bodies, where
they are frequently put into various fermentati­
ons from the spirits, and other elements lodged in
those parts.

Acamatos signifies the best constitution and fi­
guration of humane body, as also one that takes
no pains, and a person that is not tired with it.

Acantabolus is a Chyrurgeons Tool called Vulsel­
la, which is to take out Thorns, or any such
prickly substance that shall chance to stick in 
the œsophagus or Gullet.

Acautha is the most backward protuberance of
the Vertebres, called spina dorsi, as also the Thorn
of Trees or Plants.

Accessio, see Paroxismus.

Accidens, see Symptoma.

Acetabulum is that cavity in the Huckle-bone
which is appointed to receive the head of the
thigh-bone within it: Also certain glandules in
the Chorion are called Acetabula, concerning
which see Cotyledones.

Achylus is a certain dark distemper of the eye;
it is reckoned amongst the species of Amblyopia, or
dimness of sight.



Achor is a sort of crusted Scab which makes
an itching and stink on the surface of the head,
and is occasioned by a serous, salt and sharp mat­
ter; the difference betwixt an Achor and Favus
consists in this, that in Achors the holes or Cavi­
ties are small, and sometimes not visible; but in a 
Favus they are more large and conspicuous.

Achroi are men that have lost their colour, such 
as are melancholly persons, men of an ill habit of
body, and they who are troubled with the Jaun­
dies.

Acia Celsi, the same that Fibula Chyrurgcrum.

Acida dyspepsia, see dyspepsia.

Acidulæ, see Balanæum.

Acinefia is the immobility of the body, or of a­
ny part thereof, as in a Palsie, Apoplexy, swound­
ing, &c.

Acini are small grains; whether they grow by
themselves, as Elder-Berries; or shut up in a husk,
as Grape-stones; nay, sometimes they are taken
for the Grapes themselves.

Acmastica the same with Synochus.

Acme is the height of a disease : Many distem­
pers have four Periods, the first is called ὰρχὴ or
the beginning, when the matter is but yet raw,
as it were, and unripe; the second is ὰνάβασις the
growth or increase, when the morbifick matter
becomes a little digested and ripened; the third
is ὰνμή, when 'tis fully and compleatly so; the
fourth is παρανμὴ, or the declension of a distemper
when its rage is abated, and the Patient is judged
beyond danger, for none die in the declension of a
disease : This diversity of periods arises from the
bloods imbibing of crude juices, which have their



times of crudity, maturation, or ripening, de­
section, and volatility; and thus the case may be
said to stand in Fevers and other distempers.

Acopum is a medicine which applied by fomen­
tation, allays the sence of weariness, contracted by
a too violent motion of the body, compounded
of warming and mollifying ingredients.

Acosinia is an ill state of health, joined with the
loss of colour in the face.

Acoustica are medicines which help the hearing.

Acrasia is the excess or predominancy of
one quality above another in mixture.

Acrisia is when a distemper is in so uncertain
and fluctuating a condition, that the Physitian
can hardly pass a right Iudgment upon it.

Acrochodum is a species of warts.

Acromium is the upper process, or increase of
the shoulder-blade, or the top of the shoulder
where the neck-bones are joined with the shoul­
der-blades.

Acromphalum is the middle of the Navel.

Acros is the height and vigor of diseases, as also
it signifies the prominency of bones, the tops of 
fingers, and of plants.

Acrotes is the vigor, top, and extremity of any
thing, as sulphureous and saline particles exalted
ad ὰ ηρόζντας that is, brought to the most exalted
vigour their nature is capable of.

Actio is an Operation or Function, which men
perform either by the body alone, or by both body
and mind; and it is either animal, which de­
pends upon the brain; or natural, which is owing
to the Cerebellum.



Acutus morbus, an acute disease, is that which
is over in a little time, but not without imminent
danger; and it is either very acute,  or most acute;
the later is meant when the distemper is over in
three or four days; but the former is that which
continues till the seventh day; or else a disease is
called simply acute, when it lasts fourteen, or it
may be twenty days; or lastly acute ex decidentia,
which lasts forty days at most.

Aden is a glandule, which is either conglobated
as the glandules of the Mesentery of the Groin,
and the Pinealis, whose office is to dispense the
separated humour to the veins, or conglomerated,
like a Cluster, as the salival glandules, the Pan­
creas, or Sweet-bread, &c. which convey their
juice by their own proper channels into some  no­
table cavities of the body; they are made up seve­
ral little bladders, and fibres, or little hollow con­
duits disposed in a confused manner: Aden some­
times also signifies the same with bubo.

Adephagia. is the greediness of children, who e­
ver now and then fall to fresh feeding before their
former victuals are digested.

Adeps, or Pinguedo, fat is a similar part, made of
earthy and sulphereous blood, white, soft, insensible,
apt to preserve natural heat, and  nourish the bo­
dy in time of need: The eye-lids, the lips, the 
yard, the Scrotum, or outward skin of the cods,
the membranes of the testicles, the brain, the
tendons, the nerves, the bones, &c. are destitute
of fat by nature. Adeps and Pinguedo differ in this,
that Adeps is a thicker, harder, and more earthly
substance than Pinguedo, the fat which is particu­
larly meant by Adeps, flows from the blood through



peculiar vessels into little bags or bladders appro­
priate thereunto, as is plain from the observation
of Malphighius.

Adiapneustia is a different perspiration through
the insensible pores of the body.

Adnata tunica is the common membrane of
the eye, called Conjunctive; it springs from the
skull, grows to the exterior part of the tunica cor­
nea; and that the visible species may pass there,
leaves a round cavitie forward, to which is annex­
ed another tunic, without any particular name
made up of the tendons of those muscles which
move the eye; by reason of its whiteness 'tis cal­
led Albuginia.

Aegilops, Angilops, and Anchylops, is a little swel­
ling about the glandule of the eye called Carancu­
la major, for the most part accompanied with an
inflamation; Anchylops, and Aegilops are often used
indifferently; yet some for distinction's sake say,
that Anchylops is a swelling betwixt the greater cor­
ner of the eye, and the nose, not yet open; but
that aegylops is a swelling betwixt the nose and an­
gle of the eye, which if it be not seasonably o­
pened, the bone underneath grows putrified; Ae­
gilops is often taken for the Fistula lachrymalis; it
signifies likewise a sort of grass that is destructive
of Barley.

Aeipathia is a passion of long continuance.

Aeromeli is Manna, or aerial honey; for in Cala­
bria and other places the air is impregnated with
several delicious particles which in the night time
cleave to trees, leaves, or any other thing they meet
with; and in the day time, are farther concocted 
and condensated by the heat of the Sun.



Aetas is part of the duration of life, wherein
from the continual action and fermentation of the
blood and spirits, the temperature of humane bo­
dies undergo a considerable and sensible change;
and it is sixfold, Pueritia, childhood, which is
reckoned to the fifth year of our age, is distin­
guished into the time before, at, and after breed­
ing of teeth. 2. Adolescentia, Youth, reckoned to the
eighteenth, and youth properly so called to the
twenty fifth year. 3. Fuventus, reckoned from
the twenty fifth to the thirty fifth. 4. Virilis Aitas,
manhood, from the thirty fifth to the fiftieth.
5. Senectus, old age, from fifty to sixty. 6. De­
crepita Aitas, decrepit age follows, which at last is
all swallowed up in death.

Aetiologia is the cause or reason which is given
of natural and preternatural contingencies in hu­
mane bodies; whence Aetilogica is part of Physick,
which explains the causes of diseases and health.

Aetiologica, see Aetiologia.

Affectio Hypochondriaca; see Hypochondriacus af­
fectus.

Affectus, the same with Pathema.

Agerazia is growing old.

Agonia is fear and sadness of mind.

Agonia is barrenness, or impotence of the
Womb, whereby the mans feed corrupts.

Agrippa is one who is born with his feet fore­
most.

Agrypnia signifies watching, or a dreaming
slumber which proceeds from a too great agitati­
on, or attension of the animal spirits in the pores
of the brain, whence it happens that the pores are
not permitted to close and wet.



Agripnocoma, the same that Coma Vigil.

Agyrta is a Mountebank, one who vends his
Empyrical Receits to the Rabble that surrounds
him.

Aisthesis, or Sence, is either external, as seeing,
hearing, smelling, tast, and touch; or internal, as
the common sensory, (as 'tis usually called) the
Fancy, the estimative faculty, and the memory; but
two of them will serve the turn, the fancy and
the memory; Aisthesis or sence, is a reception
whereby motion from external objects being im­
pressed upon the slender strings or fibres of the
nerves, is communicated to the common sensory,
or to the beginning of the medulla oblongata in the
brain, by the mediation or continued motion of 
the animal spirits in the same nerves.

Aisteterium is the common sensory: which Car­
tesius and others his Abettors make the glandula
pinealis; but the common sensory ought rather to
be placed where the Nerves of the external senses
are terminated, which is not in the glandula pine­
alis, but (as the most ingenious Willis has demon­
strated) about the beginning of the medulla ob­
longata (or top of the spinal marrow) in the 
Corpus striatum.

Alæ, signifies the sides of the Nose; the little
fins, as it were, of the nymphæ, or the lips of a
Womans private parts; the upper part of the
ear, the Arm-pits, and the process of the bone,
Sphenoides.

Alantoides, see Allantoides.

Albaras nigra, see lepra Græcorum.

Albaras al­
ba, see Leuce.



Albuginea oculi, is a white tunic of the Eye,
which proceeds from the pericranium, grows
to the tunica cornea, and leaves a hole forward
for the opening of the Apple of the Eye; see tu­
nica adnata.

Albuginea testis, is the membrane which im­
mediately involves the testicles.

Albugo oculi, is the same with album oculi, the
white of the Eye; it signifies also a white speck in 
the tunica cornea, which proceeds either from hu­
mours, or a scar, or ulceration.

Album oculi, is that part of the Eye, where
the tunica adnata, and the albuginea grows to the
tunica sclerotes.

Albumen oculi, or albugo, the same with album oculi.

Alcali, is all such Salt as is extracted from the
ashes of any substance by a boiled lixivium, or
Lie, proper for any thing liquid as well as solid.
'Tis said to borrow its name from the herb Kali,
with whose Salt the Egyptians, as well as we, make
glass.

Alchymia, is the same with Chymia.

Alcohol, is the purer substance of any thing sepa­
rated from the impurer; it signifies also most sub­
til and refined dust; and sometimes a most high­
ly rectified Spirit, in so much that if it be set on
fire, it shall burn all away without any dregs or
phlegm at the bottom.

Alcol, the same with Alcohol.

Alcool, the same that Alcohol.

Alembicus, or Alembicum, is a Chymical In­
strument used in Stilling. It has the shape of an
helmet, concave within, and convex without;
and towards the bottom is placed a beek or nose,



about a cubit long, by which the vapours de­
scend; if they be made without a nose, they are
rather used in circulatory vessels; they are made of
Brass, Pewter, or Glass.

Alexipharmacum, is a medicine which expels poy­
son, so that it shall not be hurtful to the Body; they
are most commonly such things as attenuate the
Blood, that it cannot be coagulated with Poyson
in the Air, as Acids.

Alexiterium, is a remedy which preserves the 
Body, that it not take Poyson.

Algema, pain, is a sad troublesome Sensation,
impress'd upon the Brain from a smart Vexatious
irritation of the Nerves; it arises from either a 
sensible or insensible solution of the Continuum.

Algematodes, the same with Algema.

Alhasef, the same with Hydroa.

Alkahest, signifies an universal Menstruum or
liquor, which resolves Bodies into their first matter,
still preserving the virtues or their seeds and es­
sential form: a thing of great fame, if of equal
virtue, which every one estimates according to
his success in the Operation. Some take it for
prepared Mercury, others for Tartar.

Aliformes processus, are the prominencies of the
Os Cuneiforme, from the sore part.

Alimentum, is a Body so convenient for, and
adapt to the nature of an animal, that it may be
digested by its heat and fermentation, and assimi­
lated into its own nature; and it is either Meat
or Drink. Upon the account of its different
degrees, it is taken three ways by Hippocrates;
one is for future nourishment, which passes from
the Mouth into the Ventricle or stomach: another 



is for that which is as it were nourishment, and
that is the arterious Blood and animal Spirits.
The third is true or proper nourishment, that
which fastens to the parts, and at last is assimi­
lated into their nature,

Alindesis, is an exercitation of the Body,
wherein people first anointed with Oil, were
wont afterwards to rowl themselves in the dust.

Alipasma, is a small dust, which mixt with
Oil is used to be soaked into the Body to hinder
sweating.

Alitura, is the action of a live Body, where­
by the perpetual waste of Blood, Spirits, and
substance, is as continually repaired by the acces­
sion of new nutritious juice, rightly prepared and
fermentated, and then stuck upon the parts that
are to be nourished.

Allantoides, is the urinary tunic, placed betwixt
the Amnion and the Chorion, which by the Na­
vel and Urachus, (or passage by which the
Urine is conveyed from the Infant in the Womb),
receives the urine that comes out of the Bladder.
'Tis called likewise Farciminalis, because that
in many brutes 'tis of the shape of a gut-pud­
ding; but in man and some other few animals, it 
is round, and like the thin soft skin which wrappeth
the Child in the Womb.

Allioticum, is a Medicine which by Fermen­
tation and cleansing alters and purifies the Blood;
boiled up for the most part of the root of Sow­
thistle, Cichory, Fennel, Endive, Lettice, &c.

Allogotrophia, is a disproportionate nutrition,
when one part of the Body is nourished dispropor­
tionately to another.



Alopecia is a shedding of the Hair, occasioned
by the Pox, or otherwise. So called from a Fox,
ἀλώπνξ, whose Urine is said to make places bald
and barren for a year, as the Scholiast of Calli­
machus observes; or from a disease peculiar to a
Fox. It is called likewise, ὀριασις from the figure,
because that the parts smooth and destitute of
Hair, look winding like a Serpent, in Greek ὂρις.
Its common to both these Distempers that the
hair falls, or Areatem, by shedding, whence in
general this Disease is called Area.

Alphus is described by Celcus, to be a Distem­
per wherein the white colour of the skin is some­
what rough, but not continued, like so many se­
veral drops: Sometimes it disperses it self wider,
and with some intermissions. Alphus is likewise cal­
led morphæa; it differs from Leuce, in that it
penetrates not so deep.

Alterantia, the same with Alliotica.

Alteratio is a depuration, or a preparation
and expurgation of the Blood by breathing a
Vein, or purging.

Alvearium is the cavity of the inward Ear,
near the passage which conveys the sound where
that yellow and bitter excrementitious stuff is
bred.

Alvi fluxus, the same with Diarrhæa.

Amalgamatio is the corrosion of metal by
Mercury.

Amaurosis is a dimness of sight, whether the
object be placed near or at a distance; but so, that
no external fault appear in the Eye, if you in­
spect it never so narrowly; the defect consists in
the obstruction of the optick nerve; it is called also
gutta serena.



Ambe is a superficial jutting out of the Bones:
also a Chyrurgeons Instrument with which dis­
jointed Bones are set again.

Amblotica are Medicines which make abortive,
as are all diureticks.

Amblyopia is dulness of sight, which is fourfold;
Myopia, Presbytia, Nyctalopia, and Amaurosis, of
which in their proper place.

Ambonæ, the same with ambe.

Ambrosia is a solid Medicine, but prepared as
grateful and pleasant as can be; it seems to take
its name from the meat of the gods, because the 
gods eat Ambrosia, and drink Nectar.

Ambustio is a solution of the Continuum, caused
by some external burning matter, which offends
the inward thin skin always, oftentimes the out­
ward thick skin, and sometimes also the muscles,
veins, arteries, nerves and tendons.

Amethodicum is that which is done without
any methodical rational prescription, as your Em­
puricks, or Quacks do.

Amma, or Bracherium, is a sort of a girdle, useful
to those who are troubled with a Rupture in the
Belly, wherewith the privy parts are closely con­
nected with the Abdomen, the Ribs, and the
Loins, lest the intestines should fall out. It seems to 
have took its name of Bracherium, from the girdles
which are made for the Reins and Loins, which
Isidorus calls the Amber Monkish Bracelet; it is
called Brachile or Brachiale, tho it be not any gir­
dle belonging to the Arms, but the Reins. Cas­
sianus calls it rebrachiatorum, whence without
doubt the Bracherium of the Chyrugeons had
its rise; that girdle or swathe which they



use in Ruptures of the Belly.

Amnion is the membrane with which the
fœtus in the Womb is most immediately clad,
which with the rest of the secundinæ, the chori­
on and alantois, is ejected after the birth; it
is whiter and thinner than the chorion. It con­
tains not only the fœtus, but the nutritious hu­
mour, whence the fœtus by the Mouth and
Throat sucks its nourishment. It is outwardly
clothed with the urinary membrane, and the cho­
rion, which sometimes stick to close to one another,
that they can scarce be separated.

Amolyntum is a Medicine which will not de­
file the hands that touch it.

Amphemerinus is a Quotidian distemper.

Amphiblestroides, or the tunica retina of the
Eye, is a soft, white, and slimy substance, which
is so named, because that being thrown in the
water, it resembles a net. It shoots from the ve­
ry center of the optick nerve; and expanding it
self over the vitreous humour, is extended as
far as the ligament of the Eye-lids; this tunic, in
that it is whitish and of a marrowy substance,
seems to proceed from the very marrowy and fi­
brous substance of the optick nerve; so that it is
as it were an expansion of nervous fibres, which
are there gathered into one bundle, into a con­
texture made like a net; and indeed if the whole 
eye were taken for a flower which grows to the
brain by the stalk, as I may call it, of the optick­
nerve, the tunica retina would be the very flower
it self, and the two former be only in the nature
of a stem; They receive the sensible species



within the bed of the eye much after the same
manner as a whited wall in a darkned chamber
receives and represents the visible species which
are intromitted through a little hole.

Amphibranchia are places about those glandules
in the jaws which moisten the Aspera Arteria, Sto­
mach, &c.

Amphidæum is the top of the mouth of the
Womb, like the lips of a cupping-glass.

Amphismela is an anatomical instrument, use­
ful in the dissection of bodies.

Amulatum is the same with Periamma.

Amygdalæ, the same with Antias and Paristh­
mia.

Amigdalatum is an artificial milk, or an emul­
sion made of almonds, and other things.

Ana is an equal portion of different ingredients
in the same receit.

Anabasis is the increase of diseases.

Anabatica, see Synochus.

Anabrochismus is when any thing superfluous
and corrupted is taken up by the letting down of
a band fit for that purpose; it is likewise a way of 
drawing out the inverted prickling hairs of the
eye-lids, by the help of a thread of fine silk in the
eye of a needle; which when you have doubled,
you put the hair through, and draw it out.

Anabrosis is a consuming or wast of any part of
the body by sharp humours.

Anacatharsis is a medicine that discharges na­
ture by some of the upper parts; as any thing
that provokes to vomit, to sneezing, to salivation,
&c.



Anacollema, is a sort of ointment, or dry me­
dicine, either applied to the forehead and nostrils
to stop bleeding; it signifies likewise a medicine
that will breed flesh, and conglutinate the parts.

Anadiplosis is a frequent reduplication of Fe­
vers.

Anadosis is whatsoever tends upward in the bo­
dy, as the distribution of Chyle, or a Vomit.

Anaisthesia in defect of sensation, as in paraly­
tick and blasted persons.

Analeptica are medicines which cherish and re­
new the strength; it signifies also a part of Hygiei­
na, or art of preserving health, whereby weak per­
sons are recovered.

Analgesia signifies indolency, or absence of pain 
and grief.

Analogia, see Analogismus.

Analogismus is a comparison and perception of
causes that help by likeness.

Analysis is the reduction of a body into its first
principles; also it is an Anatomical demonstrati­
on of the parts of mans body, which is perfor­
med by insisting upon the parts severally.

Anamnestica are medicines which restore the
memory, as all spirituous things do.

Anaplerosis is part of Chyrurgery, whereby
that which either Nature has denied, or has by
chance decayed, is restored by art.

Anarrhopus is the same with Anodosis.

Anasarcha is a white, soft, yielding tumor of
the whole outward body, or of some of its parts,
which dints in by compressing the flesh; it is
caused by the blood upon a double account; first,
when it does not rightly sanguifie, or assimilate



the Chyle; and again, when it is not rightly ac­
cended in the Lungs. The blood thus perverted,
pours forth the Serum at the extremities of the
Arteries in greater quantity than it can receive
and reduce by the Veins and Lympheducts, or 
expel by the Veins and Pores, and other passages
that send it forth. If the humours be too viscous,
it is called Leucophlegmatia.

Anastoichiasis is a Chymical resolution of bo­
dies. 

Anastomasis is an effluxion of the Blood, the
Lympha or Chyle, at the meeting of Vessels that
close not narrowly. It is also taken for the mu­
tual opening of Veins and Arteries into one ano­
ther, as some long ago dream't, though they were
awake; for this were to offer violence to the Laws
of Circulation: yet it is not impossible neither,
since Veins open into Veins, and Arteries into Ar­
teries; as is plain in the Spermatick Vessels; the
Plexus Choroides, rete mirabile, &c.

Anastomotica are Medicines which open the
Pores and Passages, as Purgatives, Sudoriferous
things, and Diuretics.

Anatasis is the extention of the Body towards
the upper parts.

Anatica portio, See ana.

Anatomia is a neat Dissection of an Animal, es­
pecially Man, whereby the Parts are severally
discovered and explained, for the use of Physick
and Natural Philosophy.

Anatomicus is a Physitian that is skilful in Dis­
sections.

Anatripsis is a bruising or Comminution of the
Stone, or a Bone.



Anchoralis processus, See Ancyroides.

Anchyle is a contraction of a Ioynt, or the back
part of the Knee. 

Anchylops, the same that Aegilops.

Ancon, or the top of the Elbow, is strictly ta­
ken for the backward and greater shooting forth
of that Bone of the Cubit which is called Ulna.

Anconæus, See in Ancon.

Ancyle is the contraction of the Ham. See
Anchyle.

Ancyloblepharum is the growing of the Eye-lid
to the tunica cornea, or to the Albuginea, or when
as it sometimes happens, both the Eye lids grow 
together: this concretion sometimes happens be­
fore the delivery of a Child, and then 'tis the
fault of the Birth.

Ancyloglossum is when the little string under the
Tongue is too straitly tied, which causes difficulty
of utterance.

Ancyroides is the shooting forth of the Shoulder­
bone like a beek, which is called Coracoides, An­
choralis, and Cornicularis.

Androgynus, or an Hermaphrodite, is one who
hath both Man and Womans Members: also one
who has had his Members cut out; also Effemi­
nate.

Aneurisma is a dilatation or bursting of the Ar­
teries, always beating, and swelling sometimes to
the bigness of an Egg, which yields, if you com­
press it, but recoils presently.

Angina is an Inflamation of the Jaws or Throat,
attended with a continual Fever, and a difficulty
of respiration and swallowing: and it is two-fold;
either Spuria or Exquisita, a bastard or a true



Squincie: the later is again four-fold, Synanche, 
Parasynanche, Cynanche, and Parachynanche: of all
which in their proper place.

Anhelatio, See Asthma.

Ani procidentia, See Procidentia ani.

Animalis facultas, the Animal Faculty, is an
Action whereby a man exercises Sense, Motion,
and the principle functions of the Mind, which 
are three, Imagination, Ratiocination, and Memo­
ry.

Ανω purgare, to discharge upwards, as in a Vo­
mit, &c. opposite whereunto is Καζω purgare, to
do it downwards.

Anodynum is a Medicine that allays Pain.

Anœa is Madness, or an extinction of the Ima­
gination and Judgment.

Anomeomeres is the same with Heterogeneus; or
that which consists of several and different Par­
ticles.

Anorexia is a loathing of Meat, arising from
an ill disposition of the Stomach.

Antagonista is the opposite Situation of Mus­
cles, as may be seen betwixt the Adductor and
Abductor, that which contracts and expands the
Arm.

Antarthriticam is a Medicine against the Gout.

Antasthmatica are Medicines proper for Asth­
matic people.

Antecedens causa, See Proegumena.

Antecedentia signa, Antecedent Signs are such
as are observed before a Disease, as an ill disposi­
tion of the Pancreatic Juice, or the Bile, is an
Antecedent cause to infinite Diseases.

Antemetica are such things as hinder Vomiting 
too much.



Antendaxis is a Countre-indication, or a con­
tradictory  indication, which forbids that to be
used which the former indication suggested as
proper: as for instance abundance of ill juice in 
blood requires Evacuation; but then again the
weakness of the Patient may forbid it.

Antepileptica are Medicines against the Falling­
sickness.

Anthelix is the Protuberance of the Ear, or
the inward brink of the outward Ear.

Antherum is any thing that's florid in our Bo­
dies. Anthera are also the tops in the middle of
Flowers, which lean upon little hairy threads.

Anthracosis oculi is a scalie corrosive Ulcer of
the Eye, attended with a Defluxion and fear of
the whole Body, especially about the Eyes. The
Cause is now and then an Inflamation of the Eye
from a Malignant Fever.


Anthrax, Carbo, Pruna, or Carbunculus, is defined
to be a Tumor that arises in several places, sur­
rounded with hot fiery and most sharp Pimples,
accompanied with acute Pain, but without ever
being suppurated; and when it spreads it self
farther, it burns the Flesh, throws off lobes of
it when it is rotten, and leaves an Ulcer behind
it, as if it had been burnt in with an Iron.

Anthypnotica are Medicines which hinder Sleep.

Anthysterica are Medicines good against the
Fits of the Mother.

Antias, in the Plural Antiades, Tonsillæ, Glan­
dules of the Neck, which Chyrurgeons commonly
call Almonds, which they do not too much re­
semble neither. They are two Glandules, which 
in reality make but up one Body, placed at the



sides of the Epiglottis, or cover of the Wind­
pipe; its substance is similar, and made like sepa­
rate Grains, just like Honey or Oyl, hardned with
cold; but that they stick closer together, as if they
were joyned by a Membrane; 'tis of somewhat a
yellowish Colour, and soft; it has on each side
one common large oval hollow passage which
opens into the Mouth within the skirt, whereof
it contains two somewhat big, and several less
Cavities. Its use is to collect the snotty viscous
Matter, and to moisten the adjacent parts there­
with. It signifies also, the Inflamations of these
parts. See Paristhmia.

Antiballomena are Medicines of a like strength,
which are now and then used in the defect of one
another: Apothecaries call them quid pro quo.

Anticardium is a cavity in the Breast above the
region or place of the Heart.

Anticnemium is the former part of the Leg.

Antidotum is a Medicine against deadly Poy­
son.

Antinephritica are Medicines which Cure the
Distempers of the Reins.

Antipathia is a Contrariety and Repugnancy
in the Body, or in Medicines: also a loathing and
abhorrence of any thing without a manifest
cause.

Antiperistasis is the surrounding of the Air, as 
in the Hay that is cocked and made up into Ricks too
moist. Hippocrates the first great Author of Phy­
sick, says in his Aphorisms, That Bodies are hotter
in Winter, and colder in Summer. I interpret it
thus, That this does not come onely from the
Antiperistasis of the Air, but from the Nitre with  



which the Air in Winter-time is impregnated;
especially, when the North-Wind blows; so that
when we come to breathe, the Sulphureous Blood
is more fermentated and inflamed in the Lungs.

Antipharmacum is a Remedy against Poyson;
or a Remedy against any other Disease.

Antipleuriticum signifies any Remedy against a
Pleurisie.

Antipyreuticum, or antipureticum, is a Medicine
that temperates and allays too much heat in
Fevers, as any acides do.

Antiqui morbi, old Diseases, are such as from the
fourth day continue often many Years, and there­
fore they are called also inveterate.

Antipasis is a revulsion of a Disease; that is,
when Humours which flow into some one part,
are turned into another by the opening of a
Vein in a remote part.

Antispasmodicum is a Medicine that hinders
contractions.

Antispasticum is a Medicine that diverts Distem­
pers to other parts.

Antitasis is an opposite placing of parts in the
Body, as the Liver, and the Spleen.

Antrum buccinosum, the same with Cochlea.

Anus is the extremity of the intestinum rectum;
it consists of Three Muscles, two called levatores,
which distend and open it in time of necessity;
and one called Sphincter, which shuts it, and keeps
it so. It is also a cavity in the Brain, which ari­
ses from the contact of four Truncs of the Spi­
nal Marrow; also the Skin which goes over the
Navel, which when wrinkled, are a sign of old
Age.



Aorta, or the great Arterie, is a Vessel which
proceeds from the left Ventricle of the Heart,
consisting of four Tunics, a Nerveous, Glandulous,
Muscular, and Membraneous, or Internal one; it
beats continually, and distributes Blood into the
whole Body for nourishment. The branches 
which creep from the Heart to the Brain, are cal­
led Carotites: those which run laterally towards
the Arms, are called Humeraris: as the Trunc of 
it discends, the Branches extend themselves to­
wards the Bowels: and going further on to the
Thighs and Feet, it ends.

Apagma is the thrusting of a Bone or other
part out of its proper place.

Apanthismus is the Obliteration of a part in the
Body, so that it can be no more found; as it of­
ten happens to a little Arterious Pipe about the
Heart.

Apathia is an utter want of Passions.

Apepsia is when the Stomach has no Concocti­
on.

Απεπζὰ φὺμααζ are Crude Wheals or Knobs
in the Body, not yet ripe.

Aperientia, opening things, are those which con­
sisting of sharp, small Particles, penetrate the Bo­
dy profoundly, and by attenuating and expelling
the more crass and gross, open the Pores and
Passages of the Body and its Vessels.

Aperistatos is a holow Ulcer.

Aphœresis is a part of Chyrurgery so called;
which teaches to take away superfluities.

Aphonia is want of Voice.

Aphorismus is a short determinative sentence.

Aphrodisius morbus, the same with Lues Venerea.



Aphthæ are Wheals or Pimples about the In­
ternal parts of the Mouth; as also about the
Ventricle and Guts, which when they come to 
be ripe, fall off by piece-meal, and are often ac­
companied with a Fever in those of riper Years.
In new-born Children, I believe it arises from some
Impurities which the Mass of Blood contracts
in the Mothers Womb; for the Blood for want
of Eventilation there, being more impure, pre­
sently after the birth of the Fœtus begins to flou­
rish and refine. Celsus's Aphthæ are otherwise
described; but, says He, There are extream dan­
gerous Ulcers in Children, which the Greeks call
Αφθας, for they often kill them. There is not the
same danger in Men and Women. These Ulcers
begin in the Gums, then by little and little spread
over the Palate and the whole Mouth; and then 
at last descend to the Epiglottis, or cover of the
Wind pipe, and the upper part of the Throat,
which being once Infected, the Child hardly re­
covers.

Apnæa is a suppression of Respiration, either
wholly, or at least to Sense.

Apochylisma, called Succago, Robub, and Rob, is
the boiling and thickning of any juice with Su­
gar and Honey, into a kind of hard consistence.

Apocope is the cutting off of a part.

Apocrusticum is any thing that helps by vertue
of binding and repelling.

Apodacryticum is a Medicine that provokes
Tears.

Apolepsis is the interception of Blood and Ani­
mal Spirits.

Apomeli, is Oxymel, or a Decoction of Honey
and Vinegar.



Aponeurosis is the end, tail, or string of Muscles;
it is called also a Tendon. Chyrurgeons take it
falsly for a Nerve.

Apoflegmatica, see Apophlegmatismus.

Apoflegmatismus, Commansum, some Physicians
call it in Barbarous Language Masticatorium; it
is a Medicine which being kept in the Mouth, and
often also chewed, draws forth Pituitous Humors,
which are excited at the Mouth, made of the Root
of bastard Pellitory, Salt, Holly, Mastich, Wax, &c.
when it is used in this solid Form, it is called
Masticatorium: it is used also in a Liquid Form,
and is of the Nature of a Gargarism, made up
of Cephalics, and attenuating Ingredients, boiled
and prepared.

Apophthora is an Abortion, or the Birth of a
Fœtus before its due time.

Apophysis, Probole, Echphysis, Processus, Productio,
Projectura, & Protuberantia, is a part of a Bone
that is not contiguous, as an Epiphysis is, but
continuous with the Bone, and stretching it self
beyond a plain surface.

Apoplecta is the Jugular Vein, which the An­
cients falsly called, the Soporalis, or Sleepy Vein.

Apoplexia, Attonitus stupor, Sideratio, and Mor­
bus attonitus, is a profound Sleep, wherein the
Patient being vehemently shaken, tossed, and prick­
ed, yet perceives nothing, nor affords any sign of
Action; accompanied with a difficulty of Respi­
ration for the most part, and sometimes with 
none at all: it arises frequently from viscous Blood,
which obstructs the least Pores of the Brain: or
from Blood Extravasated about the Basis of the
Brain, which oppresses and straitens the Carotidal
Arteries, or the Brain.



Aporrhoæ are Vapours, and Sulphureous Efflu­
viums which exhale through the pores of the bo­
dy, and other breathing holes.

Apositia is a loathing of Meat.

Apospasma is when the unity of Organical com­
pounded parts is dissolved, and those things which
were of different natures, yet naturally compacted
together, are disjoyned by the Rupture of those
Ligaments, and little Fibrous Threads or Fil­
ments which held them together: as when the
Skin is separated from a Membrane, a Membrane
from a Muscle, one Muscle from another; and in
short, any one part from another, which natu­
rally adhered to it.

Apostasis, see Apostema.

Apostema, which Pliny calls Apostasis, Hippocra­
tes Metastasis, and Celsus, Abscessus; is an Exul­
ceration left after a Crisis: but Apostasis, and
Metastasis sometimes differ in this, That the for­
mer is meant of an Acurate Crisis, the later of
the translation of a Disease from one part to ano­
ther.

Aposurma is a shaving away of the Skin, or
Bone.

Apotherapia is a Cure, or Remedy: also an Ex­
ercitation, which both Purges the Excrements,
and secures from Weariness.

Apothermus, the same with Apochilysma.

Apozema, the Apothecaries call it a Decoction,
is a Decoction of Roots, Woods, Barks, Herbs,
Flowers, Fruits, Seeds, &c. which is boiled down
commonly to Twelve, Fifteen, or Twenty Oun­
ces. It is either Purging, Loosning, Altering, or
Drying, Cephalic (for the Head) Stomachic, Diu­



retic, Splenetic, or Hepatic, (good for the Liver.)

Appetitus alimentarius, or Hunger, is a certain
Constitution of the Phansie, arising from the Mo­
Inter­
costal, which for want of Nourishment, is moved
inordinately in the Stomach; whereby we are
impell'd for Animal Spirits, to those Motions of our
Members which are most conducive to the pro­
curing of Nourishment. It is occasioned in as
much as the Animal Spirits being any way exci­
ted about the middle of the Brain, shoot thencey
towards the body of the Nerves: or it may be
thus defin'd, appetitus alimentarius is an incitement
to seek Nourishment, proceeding from an acid
Humor which arises from a ferment in the Sto­
mach, with which the Nerves being vellicated, they
communicate the sense of want of Nourishment
to the Brain; which want, the Brain naturally
judges ought to be supplied.

Apsychia is a Deliquium of the Mind.

Aptystus is want of Spittle, so that a Man can­
not spit.

Apyrexia is an intermission, or cooling of Fe­
vers: the cause of it is, that all the Morbific Mat­
ter is spent in one Fit, and it intermits till new
come, and begin to swell and ferment as the other.

Aqua distillata, distilled Water, is such as is
drawn out by Distilling, consisting of Watery and
Spirituous Parts, but more of Watery.

Aqua inter cutim, Water betwixt the Skin; the
same with Anasarca.

Aqualiculus, or the lowest part of the Belly;
the same with Hypogastrium.

Aquæus humor, the Watery Humor, see Hu­
mores Oculi.



Arachnoides is the Cristalyne tunic of the Eye;
so called from its likeness to a Spiders Web.

Aræotica, see Rarefacientia.

Aranea tunica, or Cristalyna, is that which sur­
rounds the Cristalyne humour, by reason of its
light thin contexture, like the workmanship of a 
Spider, it has the name of Aranea.

Arcanum Theophrasto is the Quintessence of a 
thing most highly exalted, or, as He says, it is the
vertue of a thing Refined by a thousand Exaltations.
He boasts of four Arcana especially; 1. The Ar­
canum of the First Matter. 2. Of the Philosophers
Stone. 3. Of the Mercury of Life. 4. Of Tincture.
Others call it an Extract specially so called.

Arche is the beginning of a Disease.

Archeus is the highest, and exalted, and invisible
Spirit, which is separated from Bodies, is Exalted
and Ascends, an hidden Vertue of Nature com­
mon to all things; an Artist, a Physitian. Also
Archiatios, or the Chief Physitian of Nature, which
distributes to every thing, and to every Mem­
ber its peculiar Archeus occultly by the Air. Al­
so Archeus the first in Nature, is a most occult
quality, which produces all things from Iliastes,
being onely immediately sustained by the Divine
Vertue it self.

Arcuatus Morbus, see Icterus.

Ardentes febres, burning Fevers, are those which
are accompanied with a great Heat and Thirst,
by reason of a too high Exaltation of the Sulphur;
as in that called causus, and lipiria.

Ardor is a very intense acute Heat raised in our Bo­
dies by a too high Exaltation of Sulphur or Spirits.

Ardor ventriculi, that which we call Heart­



burning, is a particular sort of Pain in the Sto­
mach which at the same time molests the whole
Gullet; some call it a Fervent Heat of the Sto­
mach; some an Ebullition, and a boiling bubling
heat of the Stomach; when a certain fiery Pain
is felt in the Ventricle, and the Throat, as if it
burnt; it happens often to people that are in good
Health enough, and that either Feeding or Fasting;
especially when they belch, as if there were a fie­
ry sort of Blast closely pent up, and which could
not break out. Yet it happens sometimes in Fe­
vers too. It is caused by a certain effervescence of
little, very sharp bileous particles, with Sulphureous,
whence is perceived that Ebullition, or bubling
heat of the Stomach.

Area; Celsus reckons two sorts of Areas. This
is common to both of them, that the uppermost
little Skin being decayed, the hairs are first lessen'd,
and then fall off: and if the place be beat, it sends
forth a liquid matter of an ill savor; both of them
spread in some swiftly, in others slowly; that is
the worst that makes the Skin thick, fattish, and
perfectly bald: That which is called ἀλοπενία
dilates it self in any shape, it happens both in the 
Head, and in the Beard; the former is called,
ὀρίασις from its resembling a Serpent, it begins at
the hinder part of the Head, exceeds not the
breadth of two fingers, spreads it self towards the
Ears in two branches, in some to the Fore-head,
till they both joyn in the fore-part of the Head:
the one Distemper is incident to any Age; the
other common to Infants. The former is scarce
ever cured, the later often ends of his own accord.

Arena, Gravel, is a thing bred in the body of



a great deal of Salt and Earth, which often grows
up into a Stone.

Argemon is a little Ulcer of the Eye in that circle
of it which is called Iris, comprehending part of
the white and black.

Arilli, the same with acini.

Aroma is any Odoriferous Spice, as Cloves,
Cinnamon, Galangal, &c.

Arquatus, the same with Icterus.

Arteria trachea, or Aspera, the Wind-pipe, is a 
Cartilaginous Vessel implanted in the Lungs, and
consisting of various rings and parts: the fore­
part of it is full of ligaments, and depressed for
the better passing of the Gullet; its upper part
is called Larynx, and the lower Bronchius: its
use is for the Voice and taking in breath.

Arteria aorta, or magna, the great Arterie, is
a Vessel that beats continually, fastned to the left
Ventricle of the Heart: it consists of four tunics,
and receives the Blood in the Lungs, which is
sent from the Heart, and Elaborated by the Nitre
in the Air, and diffuses it through the whole Body
for its Nourishment.

Arteria cæliaca, see cæliaca arteria.

Arteriaca, see Arteria.

Arteriotomia is an Artificial opening of an Ar­
terie, for the Letting of Blood in an inveterate
Head-ach, Madness, Falling-sickness, Pain and
Inflamation in the Eyes and Ears. The Section
is made in the Fore-head, Temples, or behind
the Ears: the manner of it is thus, After the li­
gatures made in the Arms or Neck, the Arterie is
cut just as a Vein is, and when the blood is Emit­
ted, you apply a very Astringent Plaister, with



a Leaden Plate, to the Orifice, and then swathe
it well; the Cure is performed in Seven or Nine
days time.

Arthritica, see in Arthritis,

Arthritis, or Morbus articularis, the Gout,
exercises its Tyranny about two or three, or more
Joynts; and it is defined to be a pain about the
Joynts, proceeding from an effervescence of the
Nervous Acid Juice, with the fixed Saline Particles
of the Blood, whence the Nerves, Tendons, Liga­
ments, the thin Membrances about the Bones, are
contracted, and miserably Tormented; whence
proceeds Swellings, Redness, hard sandy concreti­
ons in several parts of the Body, and other symp­
toms that accompany it. It is fourfold, Chira­
gia, the Gout in the Hands; Ischias, in or about
that Bone which is connected to the Os Ilium:
Gonagra, in the Knees; and Podagra, in the Feet,
almost an incurable Distemper.

Arthritis vaga, a Wandering Gout, is a Disease
in the Joynts that creates pain sometimes in one
Limb, sometimes in another. It proceeds from a
double cause. We may suppose in this Disease a 
great many heaps, as it were, of fixed Salt thrust
out from the Mass of the Blood, to be placed like
so many Nests here and there about the Limbs
and Joynts, which being treasured up in several di­
stinct Cells, or Repositories, like the Spawn of Fish,
or the Seed of Women; the lower recrements of
the Nervous Juice comes afterwards, like the Man's 
Seed, and Impregnates them; and hence from the
mutual Effervescence of these two, the Membranes
and Nervous Fibers being vellicated and contracted
cause an extraordinary quick and acute Pain. It



is called vaga, wandring, because 'tis not con­
stant to one and the same place, as the true Gout
is.

Arthrodia is the joyning of Bones, when the
cavity that receives the Bone is in the Surface, and
the little head or top of the Bone that is received,
is depressed: as in the lower Jaw-bone, with the
Bone of the Temples.

Arthon is a Joynt, or Connexion of Bones, pro­
per for the performing of Motion. Articuli are
sometimes the Knuckles of the Fingers.

Anthropologia is the Doctrine of Man: which
Batholine distinguishes into two parts: Anato­
mie, which Treats of the Bodie and its Parts; and
Psucologie, which Treats of the Soul.

Arthrosis, the same that Articulatio.

Articularis morbus, see Arthritis.

Articulatio is a Conjunction of Limbs for the
performing of Motion: and it is twofold, Diar­
throsis, or a more loose Articulation: and Synar­
throsis, or a closer.

Articulus, see Arthron.

Artomeli is Broth made of honey and bread.

Artus are Members growing to Cavities in 
the body, and distinguished by Joynts.

Arytænoides are two Cartilages, which with others
make up the top of the Larynx; it is taken also
for certain Muscles of the Larynx.

Arythmus is a Pulse lost to sense.

Ass, or Assis, is the least piece of Money that's
Currant, and in Weight a Pound.

Asaphia is a lowness of Voice, which proceeds
from a loose or ill constitution or contemporation
of the Organs.



Ascaris, or Ascarides, are little worms which
breed in the Intestinum rectum, and then tickle
and trouble it. They are bred of some Excre­
ments which stay longer than they ought, and there
putrifie.

Ascites is a Dropsie or swelling of the Abdomen,
and consequently of the Scrotum, Thighs, and
Feet, proceeding from a Serous, and sometimes
Lymphatic or Chylous Matter, like the wash­
ing of flesh, collected in the cavity of those parts.

Asef, the same with Hydroa.

Asema is a Crisis beyond hope, happening with­
out any previous indication by signs.

Asitia is a loathing of Meat.

Asodes, see Assodes.

Aspera Arteria, or Trachea, is an Oblong Pipe,
consisting of various Cartilages and Membranes,
which begin at the Throat, or lower part of the
Jaws, lies upon the Gullet, descends into the
Lungs, and is dispersed by manifold Ramifications
or Branches through their whole substance: the
upper part is called Larynx, and the lower Bron­
chus, to which Malpighius adds a third, or lowest,
called by him Vesicular: It is subservient to Speech
and Respiration.

Asphyxia is a pulse that is sensibly decayed.

Assodes signifies a continual Fever, wherein
the outward parts are moderately warm, but
with a great heat within, an insatiable drought,
perpetual tossing, watching, and raving.

Asthma is a frequent respiration, joyned with
a hissing, a sound, and a cough, especially in
the Night-time. The causes thereof are a sharp
and scorbutic blood, which too much vellicates



the Organs of respiration, and puts them into a 
meer convulsive motion, whereby the Lungs are
puft up, and the Circulation of the Blood is
hindred; whence suffocations, swounds, and coughs
easily proceed.

Astragalus is the first and most principal Bone,
which together with other little bones in the Foot,
make up that little part of the Foot which im­
mediately succeedeth the Leg in Beasts, called the
Pastern.

Astringentia, binding things, are those which with
the thickness and figure of their Particles, force
and bind together the parts of the body.

Astrologia is a reasoning about the Vertues of
the Stars; not so necessary to Physicians, as the
Ancients imagined.

Astronomia is a naming of the Stars, or a know­
ledge of the laws and rules of Stars and Constel­
lations; or a knowledge concerning, or about the
Stars.

Ataxia is a confounding of Critical Days.

Atecnia, the same with Agonia.

Atheroma is a tumor contained within its own
coat, arising from a pappy humour, without pain,
not easily yielding to the Fingers, nor leaving
any dint after 'tis compressed.

Athymia is a Defection or Anxiety of the Mind.

Atlas is the first Vertebre under the Head;
so called, because it seems to hold up the Head;
it wants Marrow.

Atomus is a Body so small, that it is not capa­
ble of being divided into lesser parts, as are the
Elementary Particles of Spirit, Salt, Sulphur, Wa­
ter, and Earth. 



Atonia is a faintness, infirmity, defect of strength.

Atra Bilis is a sulphureous, and saline, earthy,
adust and black blood, which is bred in the bo­
dy, and gathered in the Spleen; for there it is
volatilized, and exalted into a ferment fit to mix
with the blood.

Atretus is one whose Fundament or privy
parts are not perforated.

Atrophia, or Tabes, is when the whole body, or
any one part of it is not nourished but gradually
withers and decays away. Tabes is often taken
only for an Ulcer in the Lungs, whereby the whole
body by little and little perishes and decays.

Atta, says Festus, is one who by reason of the
tenderness of, or other defects in his Feet, touches
the ground, rather than treads it.

Attenuantia, or incidentia, are those things which
opening the Pores with their acute Particles, cut
the thick and viscous humours in the body.

Attonitus morbus, the same with an apoplexy;
Celsus takes it for Blasting.

Attrahentia, drawing things, are those which
opening the Pores with their little Particles, and
dilating the humours, and expelling them, where
their resistance is weaker, not onely swell the
parts, and make them red; but by driving more
vapours and humours out of the Skin and Flesh
than can make their way through a thick inner
Skin, gather them under it, and swell it into lit­
tle bladders.

Auctio is Nutrition, whereby more is restored
than was lost.

Auditus, Hearing, is a Sense wherein sounds
from the various trembling Motion of the circum­



ambient Air, beating the Drum of the Ear, are
communicated to the common sensory by the au­
ditory Nerve, and are there felt and perceived.

Augmentum Fabricum, or incrementum, is a com­
putation from what time the heat of a continual
Fever has seised upon the whole Mass of Blood,
till it hath arrived at the height.

Aureus is a sort of Weight amongst the Ara­
bians, of a Dram, and a Seventh part; the same
with Denarius.

Auricula infima, the same with Lobus auris.

Auricula cordis, Ear of the Heart; there are
two of them, the right and the left; the right
receives the blood from the vena cava, or great
Vein, which is carried into the right Ventricle,
and then enters the Lungs: the left is that which
receives the blood rightly prepared and fermen­
ted by the Nitrous Air from the Lungs, that it 
may be discharged by the left Ventricle into the
great Arterie, and thence be distributed into every
part of the body.

Aurigo, the same with Icterus.

Auris, the Ear, is the Organ of hearing,
which is either External, whose upper part is called Pin­
na, or Ala; and the under Lobus, the Lobe, or Au­
ricula infima, the lowest part of the Ear: its Ex­
ternal circumference is called Helix; the Internal,
Anthelix, or internal; in which you may consider
the Drum, the four little Bones, with the little
Muscles, the Concha, or Hollowness, the Fora­
men Ovale, the Oval hole, the Labyrinth.

Automatos is that which moves of its own ac­
cord, as the Motion of the Heart, the digestions
and fermentations of the bowels.



Autopyros is bread made of whole Grains, with­
out any bran taken from it, or added to it. This
sort of bread is preferr'd before any other, because
the Bran is cleansing.

Auxilium, or remedium, is whatsoever is good
against a Disease by a contrary vertue; and it is
three-fold, Diet, Medicine, and Chyrurgery.

Axilla is the Arm-pit, hairy in adult people.

Axioma is a proposition built upon the Autho­
rity of Hippocrates, or Galen; but of little validity,
now that Physick is built upon Reason and Ex­
perience.

Axis is the third Vertebre from the Scull.

Axungia is the fat or tallow of an Hog.

Azoth sometimes signifies the Mercury of any
Metallic body, sometimes an Universal Remedy,
as 'tis thought, made of Mercury, and prepared
with Gold and Silver; a few years ago, it was
famous amongst the Vulgar, and Persons of Qua­
lity too; of different colour, according to the di­
versity of the preparation, which was often too 
troublesome, whence it begun to decrease both in
price and repute.

Azygos is a famous Vein about the Heart, called
sine pari, or jugo, which reaches to the Vertebres,
and proceeds from the Vena Cava, the great hal­
low Vein.

Azymus is unleavened, unwholesome Bread.


B.

BAcilli, are called those Medicines which are of 
a long, round Figure, like a stick or Pillar.

Balanæum, or Balneum, is properly a washing



of the whole Body; yet it is sometimes taken for
a washing of the lower parts only, which they
commonly call Nisessus, and semicupia; and it is ei­
ther dry, or moist; the dry are prepared of Ashes,
common Salt, Sand, filed Steel, &c. the moist are
either vaporous or watery. The former are made
of the boiling of Roots, Herbs, Flowers, Seeds, &c.
the Vapour whereof is all that's taken. The wa­
tery, are either artificial, which are made of Phy­
sical Decoctions; or Natural, which are called 
Thermæ Bathes, whose Waters are either Alumi­
nous, Ironish, Copperish, Nitrous, Sulphureous,
Bituminous, Vitriolie, &c. all which Waters are
called Acidulæ.

Balanus, or glans, is the Nut of the Yard, co­
vered with the Fore-skin; also the Clitoris of a 
Woman. Also all Fruits and Roots that have
round Heads, as a Walnut; also an Acorn, an 
earth-Chesnut: also a Suppository.

Balneum, the same with Balaneum.

Balsamus, or balsamum; the Word Balsame is
used very differently in the Shops. 1. It signifies 
a certain sort of Perfume, of somewhat a thick
Consistence, like an Ointment; and this is its most
usual signification; as for instance, Balsame of
Roses, Apoplectic, and the like. 2. There are a
sort of Liquors distilled from Gum, and resinous
Substances, with spirit of Wine, which are anointed
outwardly, and these are called Balsams too; as
Nervous Balsame, Sciatic, &c. 3. It signifies a
Liquor that is anointed into the Body, thicker than
Oyl, and more Liquid than an Ointment. 4. Salt
things funded and melted, are called Balsame, as
the Balsame of Salt of Jewels. 5. There are a 



sort of particular preparations called Balsams,
as the balsam of Sulphur, &c. 6. and Lastly, some
Gums of Trees are called Balsams.

Bamma is a Tincture, or a Liquor, wherein any
thing is tinged or moistned, as bread sopt in 
broth.

Barycoja is heaviness of hearing.

Basilareos, see basis.

Basilica is the inner Vein of the Arm, called
Hepatica, the Liver vein.

Basilicum is a rich precious Medicine, that ex­
cels all others.

Basioglossum is a pair of Muscles that depress
the Tongue.

Basis is the upper part of the Heart, which is
opposite to the point; it is also the ground or
foundation of the bone Hyoides, for the use of the
Tongue: also the principal Ingredient in a pre­
scription.

Bathmis is a Cavity in the bone of the Arm 
or Shoulder, on each side one; whereinto, when
the whole hand is stretched forth and bended,
the process of the undermost and lesser of the
two long bones of the Cubit, enters.

Batrachus is a Tumor under the Tongue, which
makes one croak like a Toad, when they speak.

Bechica are Medicines good against a Cough.

Belenoides is the process or shooting forth of a 
bone, called Aliformis, made like a wing, which is
fixed in the Basis of the Scull.

Benignus morbus, a favourable disease, is that
which has no dreadful Symptoms, but such as
are consonant to its nature.

Bicongius is a measure which contains Twelve



Sextaries, one of which is just our Pint and an
half.

Bilis, the gall, is a Sulphureous Saline Excre­
ment of the blood, separated in the Liver by means
of little Glandules, and is sent either into the lit­
tle bag that contains the Gall, or into the Gut
called Duodenum, by the Ductus Hepaticus, that it
may farther promote the fermentation of the victu­
als, and carry off the Dregs that are left behind
when the Chyle is separated from the whole Mass.
The Gall consists of Sulphur, Adust Salt, and a
little Serum; it is naturally yellow: preterna­
turally it is of the Colour of the yolk of an
Egg, green like a Leek, rustie, and sky-coloured;
all which variety of colours proceed onely from
different degrees of Heat and Fermentation. Syl­
vius maintained, That the Bile ascended to the 
Heart by the ductus hepaticus; but this Opinion, as
it is neither consonant to Experience, nor Reason,
so nor to Truth neither; this excrement is not
called Bile, but when it is separated from the Blood;
and therefore the Opinion of the Ancients con­
cerning this Bilious Humour, is quite out of
doors, since that Circulation of the Blood was
found out. See Humores Sanguinei

Billychnion is Natural Heat, which is commu­
nicated to the Fœtus from the Parents; but when
it is brought forth, the heat gradually decays, after
that the Blood and Spirits of the Child are alter­
ed, fermented, and accended by nourishment and
nitrous Air. They do but babble who tell us, that
this Heat lasts for many years; for if it be Heat,
it is in continual Motion, and is therefore dispel­
led as other Fires and Heats are.



Blæsitas is a stammering in speech which pro­
ceeds from the ill make or temperature of the
Tongue.

Blæsus is one that has an Impediment in his
Speech. Also a Bandy-legg'd Person: or one
whose Back-bone is bended, either forward or
backward; also a Paralitic Person.

Blenna is a thick Snot which distills through the
little holes of the Palat, and the Nostrils, and pro­
ceeds from the Ventricles of the Brain, by the
Processes, called Maniformes, like Teats.

Bocium, the same with Bronchocele.

Bolus is a Medicine taken inwardly, of a con­
sistence something thicker than Honey, and in
quantity for one Dose, as much as may be con­
veniently taken at a mouthful.

Bovina fames, the same with Bulimus.

Bothor signifies Pimples in the Face, which don't
spread, but are easily suppurated, and vanish. It is 
besides a general Appellation for Pimples in the
Face, Lungs, or other parts. The Arabians al­
so call the small Pox and the Measels Bothor.

Bracherium, the same with Amma.

Brachiale, the same with Carpus.

Brachiæus, see Lacertus.

Brachium, or Lacertus, is a Member that con­
sists of the Arm properly so called, the cubit,
and the hand.

Brachylogia, of the same signification with Bra­
chylogus.

Brachylogus is one who gives his positive Opi­
nion in few words. Brachylogia is a curt expressi­
on: as for instance, the Aphorisms of Hippocrates.

Bradypepsia is slow digestion, proceeding from



a depraved disposition of the Acid ferment in the
Stomach.

Branchus is a hoarsness in the Throat.

Bregma, or Pregma, is the bone of the Fore­
head.

Brochi are blubber lip'd persons: also a sort of
Chyrurgeons cord, or halter.

Bronchocele is a Tumor in the top, or the mid­
dle fistulous part of the Wind-pipe.

Bronchotomia, is a Section of the Wind-pipe, in a
membranous part betwixt two of the Rings; it is
used to prevent suffocation in people troubled with
a Quinsie.

Bronchus is the middle Fistulous part of the
Wind pipe, whose fore-part is made up of so ma­
ny little Rings; the upper part is called Larynx,
and the under Vesicularis; it is used in the voice, and
in respiration.

Bubo is the Groin, or place from the bending of
the Thigh to the Privy-parts: also a Tumor in
the Groins, proceeding from the Pox, or Pestilence.

Bubonocele is a Rupture; when the Intestines
fall into the Groin, or the outermost skin of the
Cods: sometimes it is taken for a Bubo or Swel­
ling.

Bucca is the inferior lax part of the Face,
that may be swoln or puft up, as appears in
Trumpeters.

Buccinator is the round Muscle of the Cheeks,
like a Circle, thin and membranous, interwoven
with various Fibers, and inseparably girt about 
with the Tunic of the Mouth. Casserius has ob­
served, a certain strong band that grows outward­
ly in the Center of the Muscle, which spreading



it self about the Cheek-bone, is terminated in a lit­
tle slender Muscle directly opposite to that part
of the Face called Bucca: it arises from the up­
per Jaw-bone, and is fastned in the lower, at the
Roots of the Gums. Its use is to move the Cheeks
with the Lips; and serves as a hand to the Teeth,
whilest it tosses the Meat to and fro, and throws
it upon the Teeth, that it may be more exactly 
chawed.

Buccula is the fleshy part under the Chin.

Bulimia, the same with Bulimus.

Bulimiasis, the same that Bulimus.

Bulimus signifies an extraordinary Appetite, of­
ten accompanied with a defection of Spirits: it
proceeds sometimes from a too sharp Ferment
of the Stomach, whence the Membranous Tu­
nics and Nerves being irritated, the Animal seeks
after Nourishment for a remedy.


C.

CAcatoria febris is an intermittent Fever, (so
called by the famous Sylvius de le Boe) ac­
companied with a violent Purging, which is some­
times griping, and very painful, extreamly afflict­
ing, and weakning the Patient when it comes.

Chachecticus is one that has an ill Habit of Bo­
dy.

Cachexia is an ill Habit of Body, proceeding
from an ill disposition of the Humours of the Bo­
dy; whence lingring Fevers, Consumptions, and
Dropsies are contracted: in this Disease the Face
is often pale, and discoloured, and the Body big,
and swoln: Cachexia taken in a large sense is op­



posed to ὀνἐξία, and as a good Habit of Body is
common to all sound parts, so an ill one is pro­
pagated by all the ill parts. Strictly Cachexia
is onely taken from an ill disposition of the Ha­
bit of the Body; and Euexia on the contrary for
a good disposition of the Humors, or Blood, and
Body.

Cacochymia is the abundance of ill Humors in
the Blood: and it is either Ulcerous, Bilious, Pi­
tuitous, Melancholic, Acid, Salt, or Sharp.

Cacoethes, Chironium ulcus, or Telephium, is a Dis­
ease or Ulcer beyond Cure, which is called Ma­
lignant Ulcer; this happens when an Ulcer is 
callous, or sinuous, under which there sometimes
lie little putrified bones that have fallen down.

Cacophonia is an ill voice, proceeding from an
ill constitution of Organs.

Cacotrophia is an ill Nutriment, proceeding from 
a fault in the blood; as in a Leprosie, Ring­
worms, &c.

Caducus morbus, see Epilepsia.

Casarea sectio, the same with Hystertomotocia.

Calamus Scriptorius is a certain Dilatation, about
the fourth Ventricle of the brain, which is after­
wards pointed, from which shape it has its Name.

Calcaneus is the same with Calx.

Calchoidea are three little bones in the Foot,
which with others make up that part of the Foot
which succeeds the Ancle: and Fallopius calls
them Cuneiformia, made like Wedges.

Calcinatio is the solution of a mix'd body into
powder by fire, or any coroding things; as Mer­
cury, Aquafortis, &c.

Caldarium, the same with Laconicum.



Calculus the Stone, is an hard præternatural
concretion in a Mans body, which is often bred
in the Reins, Testicles, and other parts, from Sa­
line and Earthy Particles concreted together.

Calidum innatum, see Emphitum thermum, or
Biolychnium.

Callicreas, or Pancreas, is a conglomerated Glan­
dule, placed under the hinder part of the Ventri­
cle, about the length of three or four fingers in
a Man; it is clotted with a thin Membrane from
the Peritonæum: it is terminated in Man near the
common Ductus, or Passage of the Bile into the
Gut duodenum, and distils a volatile inspipid sort of
a juice: but Sylvius de le Boe, and de Graaf affirm,
That they have found an Acid and a somewhat 
Acid juice there; nay, sometimes an austere and
a sweet one; thence also they bring the Original
of all Diseases: but we must know, that this possi­
bly was observed, when scarce one in twenty which
they dissected was found exactly sound. Con­
cerning this question, see my Anat. of things, l. I.
c. 21. Its use is, to temperate the Chyle, which 
is something Acid, and the bitterness of the Gall
with its Volatile Juice, that it may at last enter the 
Lacteals with a sweet taste.

Callus is a kind of swelling without pain, like 
Skin contracted by too much labour.

Calor nativus, see Biolychnium.

Calva is the Scull, also the upper hairy part
of the Head, which either by Disease, or old Age,
grows Bald first.

Calvaria, the same with Calva.

Calvitium is that Baldness which is naturally
incident to old Age.



Calx is the second Bone in that part of the Foot
which succeeds the Ancle, bigger and stronger
than the rest; oblong, and grows backward, that
a man may stand more strongly upon it, and not
fall so easily backward. Calx also is that which
by Calcining, is either turn'd into Alcool, as
Calx Saturni, or at least is made friable, as Harts­
horn burnt.

Camarium, see Fornix.

Camarosis is a blow upon the Scull, whereby
some part of the Bone is left suspended, like an
Arch.

Cambium is a secundary humour according to
Avicen, which yet is reckoned amongst the Hu­
mours, and its use was said to be to nourish the
parts: the first was called the nameless humour:
the second Glew; and the fourth, which was very
near converted into Nourishment, was called 
Cambium: but these figments are quite Exploded
since we found out the Circulation of the Blood,
by the Fibres.

Cameratio the same with Camerosis.

Capulum is the Contortion of the Eye-lids, or
its Hairs.

Canales are passages by which the Juices of the
Body flow: as those which serve for the Spittle,
the Bile; that in the Liver, Pancreas, &c.

Canaliculus Arteriosus, is a Vessel betwixt that
Arterious Veins of the Lungs, and the great Ar­
tery in Fœtus's; for 'tis obliterated in Adult per­
sons: its use in Fœtus's, is, that the Blood may be
discharged by this Ductus out of the Arterious
Vein, into the great Artery, because that the Blood
is not accended in their Lungs, for want of Respi­
ration in the Womb.


