





l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 1 7 3 3 6

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )


A
SHORT TABLE,
expounding all the hard words
in this Booke.

A

AVripigmentum or Orpment , is a yellow hard
substance to be bought at the Pothecaries. 

Aristolochia-longa, otherwise called red Mad­
der, is an hearbe growing almost in euery field. 

Aristolochia-rotunda,is the hearbe called Galingale.

Agrimonie or Egrimonie, is an vsuall and knowne
hearbe. 

Ameos or Comin-royall, is an hearbe of some called
Bulwort, Bishops-weed, or hearbe-William.

Anyse is that hearbe which beares Ani-seeds.

Anet, of some called Dill, is an hearbe like Fenell,
onely the seeds are broad like Orenge seeds. 

Agnus Castus, of some called Tutesaine, is an hearbe
with reddish leaues, and sinewie like Plantaine.

Ægyptiacum, is a reddish vnguent, to be bought at
the Pothecaries, and is soueraine for Fistulas. 
OED "remollitive"






Assafœtida a stinking strong gumme to be bought
at the Pothecaries. 

Adraces or Adarces is that Salt which is ingendred
on the salt marshes by the violence of the Sunnes
heat after the tide is gone away. 
Not in OED

Asterion is an hearbe growing amongst stones, as on
walles, or such like, it appeareth best by night, it hath
yellow flowers like Foxegloues, and the leaues are round
and blewish. 

Aloes is a bitter gumme to be bought at the Pothe­
caries. 


B

B
Etin or Beets is an hearbe with long broad leaues
indented, and growes in hedge-rowes. 
"betin" not in OED

Bolarmoniake is a red hard earthy substance, to be 
bought at the Pothecaries, and is of a cold and bin­
ting nature. 

Broomewort is an hearbe with browne coloured
leaues, and beareth a blew flower, and most com­
monly groweth in woods. 


C

CResses are two kindes of water-Cresses, and land­
Cresses: they haue broad smoath leaues, and the 
first growes in moyst places, the latter in Gardens,
or by high-waies. 

Comin, see Ameos.

Carthamus is an hearbe in taste like Saffron, and is
called bastard-Saffron, or mocke-Saffron.






Calamint is an ordinary hearbe, and groweth by
ditches sides, by high waies, and sometimes in Gar­
dens. 

Coleander is an hearbe which beareth a round little
seede. 

Chiues are a small round hearbe growing in Gar­
dens, like little young Onions or Scallions not aboue
a weeke old. 


D

D
Iapente a soueraine powder made of fiue equall sim­
ples, as Bay-berries, Iuory, Aristolochia-rotunda,
Mirrhe, and Gentiana, and may be bought of the 
Pothecary. 

Dettonie is an hearbe called Pepper-wort, or horse­
Radish, and groweth in many open fields. 

Dragons is an hearbe common in euery Garden. 


E

ELecampana is an hearbe of some called Horse­
helme, and growes almost in euery field , and eue­
ry Garden, 

Eyebright is an hearbe growing in euery meadow. 


F

FEnnegreeke is an hearbe which hath a long slender
trayling stalke, hollow within, and sowne in Gar­
dens, but easiest to be had at the Pothecaries. 






Ferne Osmund is an hearbe, of some called Water­
Ferne, hath a trianguler stalke, and is like Polipody, and
it growes in boggs, and in hollow grounds. 


G

GAlingale, see Aristolochia-rotunda.


H

HOrsemint is an hearbe that growes by waters
sides, and is called Water-mint, or Brooke-mint.

Horsehelme, see Elecampana.

Houseleeke is a weede which growes on the toppes
of houses that are thacht, and is like vnto a small
Hartichoke.

Hearbe-Robert hath leaues like hearbe-Bennet, and
small flowers of a purple colour, and growes in most 
common Fields and Gardens. 


I

IVory is the shauings of the Elephants tooth, or the 
old Harts or Stagges horne, being the smooth white 
thereof. 


K

KNot-grasse is a long running weede with little round
smoth leaues, and the stalke very knotty and rough,
winding and wreathing one seame into another very
confusedly, and groweth for the most part in very moist
places. 







L

LEttice, is a common sallet-hearbe in euery Gar­
den. 

Lollium is that weede which we call Cockell, and
groweth amongst the corne in euery field. 
"lollium" not in OED

Liuerwort, is a common hearbe in euery Garden. 


M

MAythe, is a weede that growes amongst corne,
and is called of some Hogs-Fennell.

Mirrhe, is a gumme to be bought at the Pothecaries. 

Mandragg, is an hearbe which growes in Gardens,
and beareth certaine yealow Apples, from whence the 
Pothecaries draw a soueraine oyle for broken bones. 


N

NEepe, see Calaminte.


O

ORiganum, is an hearbe called wilde-Marioram, and
growes both in open fields, or in low copses. 

Orifice is the mouth, hole, or open passage, of any
wound or vlcer. 

Opoponax, a drugge, vsuall to be bought at the Po­
thecaries. 


P

PItch of Burgundy is Rossen, and the blacker the
better. 
Antedates earliest OED citation ("Burgundy" 5 [1678])

Plantayne is a flat leafe and sinowie, growing close
to the ground, and is called Whay-bred leafe. 






Pulioll-royall, is an hearbe that groweth both in
fields and gardens, and is best when it flowreth. 

Patch-grease is that tallow which is gotten from the
boyling of Shoemakers shreads. 
Only OED citation


Q

QVnquefolio of some  called Cinquefoyle is that
hearbe which is called Fiue-leaued grasse.


R

REd-Oaker is a hard red stone which we call Raddle
Orell, marking-stone. 


S

SEllondine or Tetterwort is a weede growing in the 
bottome of hedges, which being broke, a yellow
iuyce will drop and runne out of it. 

Shirwit is an hearbe with many small leaues, and
growes most in Gardens. 
Not found in OED

Stubwort is an hearbe which growes in wooddy
places, and is called wood-Sorrell.

Sanguis Draconis, is an hard red gumme to be
bought at the Pothecaries. 
Not in OED

Stonecrop is a greene weede growing on the tops of 
walles. 

Sparma-Cætæ is the seed of the Whale, excellent for
inward bruises, and to be bought at the Pothecaries. 

Salarmoniake is a drugge vsuall to be bought at the
Pothecaries. 







T

TVssilaginis is that weede which we call Colts-foot.

Treapharmicon a composition made of three
simples, and to be bought at the Pothecaries. 
Not in OED

Turmericke, is a yealow simple, of strong sauour, to
be bought at the Pothecaries. 


V

VErdi-greese is a greene fatty gumme drawne from
Copper, and is to be bought at the Pothecaries. 


W

WOodrose or wilde-Eglantine, is that small thin
flower which growes vpon Bryars in woods
or hedge-rowes. 


Y

YArrow, is an hearbe called the water-Violet, and
growes in Lakes or marrish grounds. 



F I N I S.


Thine Geruase Markhame.




