




A
COLLECTION
OF
English WORDS,

Not Generally used, with their
Significations and Original, in two
Alphabetical Catalogues,

The one of such as are proper to
the Northern, the other to the
Southern Counties.

With Catalogues of English Birds
and Fishes: And an Account of the
preparing and refining such Metals
and Minerals as are gotten
in England.


By J##sp##O##sp##H##sp##N R##sp##A##sp##Y Fellow of the
R##sp##O##sp##Y##sp##A##sp##L S##sp##O##sp##C##sp##I##sp##E##sp##T##sp##Y.

L##sp##O##sp##N##sp##D##sp##O##sp##N,
Printed by H. Bruges for Tho. Burrell at the
Golden-Ball under St. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet, 1674.








TO HIS

Honoured Friend

P##sp##E##sp##T##sp##E##sp##R C##sp##O##sp##U##sp##R##sp##T##sp##H##sp##O##sp##P##sp##E

OF

Danny in Sussex Esquire.

SIR,

THough I need no o­
ther Motive to in­
duce me to present
you with this Col­
lection of English
Words, but that I
might take occasion publickly to own
my Obligations to you, as well for
your long continued Friendship, as



for the Assistance you have some­
time afforded me in those Studies to
which I am I think naturally in­
clined, yet one Circumstance did
more especially lead me to make
choice of you for its Patron; and
that is, that you were the first that
Contributed to it, and indeed the
Person that put me upon it; and
so it being in good measure your
own, I have reason to hope that you
will Favourably accept it. I
confess the Work is so inconside­
rable, that I am somewhat ashamed
to prefix your name before it, but
having nothing else left of my own,
which I design to trouble the World
with, as not knowing whether I may
live so long as to perfect my intended
Method and History of Plants; I



chuse rather to present you with this,
then lose the Honour of being known to
have such a Friend, or neglect the duty
of making acknowledgments where
they are due, especially having already
made Presents of this Nature to others
of my Friends, which is enough to ex­
cuse this Dedication intended to no o­
ther purposes by

Sir,

Your very humble Servant,

JO. RAY.









TO THE

R##sp##E##sp##A##sp##D##sp##E##sp##R.


IN my travels through seve­
ral parts of England, besides
other things, which I princi­
pally minded and pursued, I
could not but take notice of the
difference of Dialect, and variety
of Local words (for so I will take
leave to call such as are not of
general use) in divers Counties,
by Reason whereof in many
places, especially of the North,
the Language of the common
people, is to a stranger very dif­
ficult to be understood. Where­



upon I thought it might be worth
the while to make a Collection
of such words for my own use,
and began first to set down those
that occurred to me in common
discourse. But making short
stayes in particular places, and
conversing but with few persons,
I found that what I could take
notice of my self would be but
an inconsiderable part of what
were in use among the vulgar.

Therefore I desired my friends
and acquaintance living in se­
veral Countreys to communicate
to me what they had observed
each of their own Countrey
words, or should afterwards ga­
ther up out of the mouths of the
people; which divers of them



accordingly did. To whose
contributions I must acknow­
ledge my self to owe the greatest
part of the words, I now present
the Reader with, in these Cata­
logues. The considerations
which induced me to make them
publick were. First, because I
knew not of anything that hath
been already done in this kind.
2. Because I conceive, they may
be of some use to them who
shall have occasion to travel the
Northern Counties, in helping
them to understand the common
language there. 3. Because they
may also afford some diversion
to the curious, and give them
occasion of making many con­
siderable remarks.



As for the sence and import
of these words, I am confident
I am not therein mistaken, ha­
ving received it from persons
that well understand the force
and meaning of them in the
places where they are used. But
of their original or Etymology,
for want of sufficient skill in the
Saxon, Dutch and Danish Lan­
guages, I have not been able to
give so good an account as I de­
sired, and by those helps might
have done. For what I have per­
formed in this kind, I acknow­
ledge my self to have been for
the most part beholden to Dr.
Skinner's Etymologicon Linguæ An­
glicanæ, and Mr. Somners Saxon
Dictionary, by turning over



which last work I find a great
part of these words to be pure
Saxon, or manifestly derived
thence; and I doubt not but
many of the rest, which occur
not in that Dictionary (which
being collected out of but a few
Books and fragments that remain
of that Language, cannot be con­
ceived to comprehend near all
the words in common use) are
of like Original.

I am sensible that this Col­
lection is far from Perfect, not
conteining perchance more then
one moiety of the Local words
used in all the several Counties
of England. But it is as full as
I can at present easily make it,
and may give occasion to the



curious in each Countrey to sup­
ply what are wanting, and so
make the work compleat.


I have added hereto, 1. a Ca­
talogue of English Birds, as well
such as continually abide and
breed with us; as those they call
Birds of passage, that come
and go at certain seasons, ad­
mitting also some which fre­
quent our coasts only upon oc­
casion of hard Winters or other
accidents, all which either my
Self or Mr. Francis Willughby
have both seen and described.
Since this Catalogue was sent
away to the Press, among some
Pictures of Birds which I have
received from the Learned and
deservedly Famous Sr. Thomas



Brown of Norwich, I find two or
three English Birds by me omit­
ted, as whereof I was not then
certain, 1. Oedicnemus Bellonii,
by him also first observed in
England. Upon the Picture of
it sent me by Sr. Tho. I find
inscribed, A stone Curlew, from
about Thetford, whereabout they
breed. It hath a Remarkeable eye
and note somewhat like a green plo­
ver,
2. A shear-water inscribed,
Larus niger, pectore albido, rostro
adunco, 3. The Barker, a marsh
Bird with a long bill, to which
there was no Latine name added,Not found in OED except possibly at "barker," n. 1, 3.
4. Mergulos melanoleucos rostro
acuto brevi, 5. A little Bird of
a tawney colour on the back, and
a blew head, yellow bill, black



legs, shot in an Osiar yard, cal­
led by Sir Tho. for distinction
sake Silerella.Not found in OED.


2. Two Catalogues of fishes,
one of all our English fresh
water fishes; the other of such
sea-fish as are taken about Pen­
sans in Carnwal.

3. Several relations of the
manner of smelting, refining
and preparing such metals and
minerals as are found in England,
according to the best informa­
tion I could get in the places
where they are wrought.






A

Collection
OF
LOCAL WORDS
PROPER
To the North and South
COUNTREYS.


A

TO Adle or Addle; to
Earn, from the ancient
Saxon word Ed-lean, a
reward, recompence or
requital.

Agate; Ches. Just
going, as I am Agate.
Gate in the Northern
Dialect signifies a way, so that  Agate is at
or upon the way.



A mell; Among, betwixt, contracted from
a midle; Some pronounce it ameld.

Anauntrins; If so be. I know not what
the Original of this should be, unless it be
from An, for if, and Auntrins contracted
from Peradventure.

Anent; Over against, concerning, A word
of frequent use among the Scots. Some de­
duce it from the Greek ενανπ εναντίον Op­
positum. Nec male sane (inquit Skinnerus in
Etymologico Linguæ Anglicanæ) si vel soni
vel sensus convenientiam respicias. Sed quo
commercio Græci Scotis totius Europæ
longitudine difficilis vocabula impertiri potu­
erurit? Mallem igitur deducere ab AS Nean
Propé, additâ particulà initiali otiosa AS.

An Arain: a Spider. a Lat. Aranea, it is used
only for the larger kind of Spiders. Not­
tinghamshire.

An Ark; A large Chest to put corn or
fruit in like the Bing of a Buttery; from the
Latin word Archa.

Arles or Earles; Earnest, An Arles-penny,
An Earnest penny, from the Latin word Arrha.

An Asker; a Newt, or Eft, Salamandra
aquatica.

2. Astite; Anon, shortly, or As soon.
i. e. As Tide, Tide in the North signifies
soon, and tider or titter sooner. The tider
(that is the sooner) you come the tider you'll



goe; from the Saxon Tid signifying time,
which is still in use, as in Shrove-tide, Whit­
sun-tide, &c."as tide" not found in OED as adverb.

1. As Asly; As willingly."asly" not found as OED variant for "easily."

An Attercop; A Spider. Cum­
berl.


Average; The breaking of corn fields;
Eddish, Roughings. Average in Law signifies
either the beasts which tenants and vassals
were to provide their Lords for certain ser­
vices, or that money that was laid out by
Merchants to repair the losses suffered by
Shipwrack; and so it is deduced from the
old word Aver [Averium] signifying a
labouring beast: or Averia signifying Goods
or Chattels, from the French Avoir to have
or possess. But in the sence we have used it,
it may possibly come from Haver signifying
Oates; or from Averia, beasts, being as
much as feeding for cattal, pasturage.

An Aumbry or Ambry or Aumery. A
Pantry or Cupboard to set victuals in:
Skinner makes it to Signify a Cupboards
head, or side-table: super quam vasa men­
saria & tota argentea supellex ad usum con­
vivioram exponitur: a Fr. G. Aumoire,
Armaire & Armoire, It. Armaro idem fig­
nantibus, q. d. Latine Armarium. Prov.
No sooner up, but the head in the Aumbry,



and nose in the cup; in which sentence it must
needs signifie a Cup-board for Victuals."cupboard head" not found in OED.

Aunters: Peradventure, or, in case, if it
chance. I guess it to be contracted from
Adventure, which was first mollified into
Auventure, and then easily contracted into
Aunter.

The Aunder, or as they pronounce it
in Cheshire Oneder; The afternoon.


B.

BAin; Willing, Forward: opposed to
Lither.

The Balk or Bawk: The Summer-beam.
Balks, Bawks: Poles laid over a stable or
other building for the roof, à Belgico &
Teuton. Balk, Trabs, tignum.

 A Balk staffe: A Quarter-staffe, A great
staffe like a Pole or Beam.

A Bannock, An Oat-cake kneaded with
water only and baked in the Embers. In
Lancashire, and other parts of the North,
they make several sorts of Oaten bread, which
they call by several names: as 1. Thar­
cakes, the same with Bannocks, viz. Cakes
made of Oat-meal as it comes from the mill
and fair water, without Yeast or leaven, and



so baked. 2. Clap-bread: Thin hard Oat­
cakes. 3. Kitchiness-bread: Thin soft Oat­
cakes made of thin batter. 4. Riddle-cakes:
thick Sour-cakes, from which differs little
that which they call Hand-hoven Bread,
having but little leaven, and being kneaded
stiffer. 5. Jannock, Oaten bread made up
in loaves."kitchiness-bread" not found in OED.

A Bargh, A Horseway up a steep hill.
York-shire.

A Barn or Bearn: A Child: it is an an­
cient Saxon word. In the ancient Teutonick
Barn signifies a son, derived perchance from
the Syriack Bar, Filius.

Bearn-teams, Broods of Children, as they
expounded it to me. I find that Bearn-team
in the Saxon, signifies Issue, offspring, Chil­
dren, from team, soboles, and Bearn."bearn-team" not found in OED.

Bearing with Child: Breeding, gravid.
York-shire.

A Beck: a small brook: a word common
to the ancient Saxon, High and low Dutch
and Danish.

Beer or Birre q. Beare:  Force, might.
Withaw my beer. Chesh. i. e. with all my
force.

Beight of the Elbow:  Bending of the
Elbow. Chesh. A substantive from the pre­
terperfect tense of Bend, as Bought of the
like signification, from Bow.



Belive: Anon, by and by, or towards
night. By the Eve.

To Bensel: To bang or beat. Vox rustica
Ebor.

To Berry: to Thresh.

Biggening: I wish you a good biggen­
ing: i. e. A good getting up again after ly­
ing in. Votum pro puerpera.

Bizen'd: Skinner writes it Beesen or
Beezen or Bison: Blinded. From by signi­
fying besides, and the Dutch word Sin sig­
nifying Sence. q. d. Sensu omnium nobilis­
simo orbatus: saith he.

Cow-blakes: Casings, Cow-dung dried,
used for Fewel.

Bleit or Blate: Bashful. A toom purse
makes a bleit Merchant. Scot. Prov. That is,
an empty purse makes a shamefac't Merchant.
Fortass q. bleak or blank.

Bloten: Fond, as Children are of their
nurses. Chesh.

To Bluffe: To blindfold.

A Body: A Simpleton. York-sh."body" in this sense not found in OED.

To Boke at one:  to Point at one. Chesh.
i. e. to Poke at one.

To Boke, to Nauseate, to be ready to
vomit, also to Belch. Vox agro Lincolniensi
familiaris (inquit Skinnerus) Alludit saltem
Hispan. Bessar vomere, Baquear oscitare seu
Pandiculari; vel possit deflecti a Latino evo­



care, vel melius à Belg. Boocken, Boken pul­
sare, vel Fuycken Trudere, protrudere. Vo­
mitus enim est rerum vomitu rejectarum
quædam protrusio seu extrusio.

The Boor: The Parlour, Bed-chamber or
inner room. Cumb.

A Boose: an Oxe, or Cow-stall. ab AS.
Bosih. v. Ox-boose.

To Boun and unboun; to dress and undress.
Porte i Belgico Bouwen, to build or manure.
which word also substantively signifies a
womans garment.

To Bourd; to Jest, used most in Scotland.
Bourd [Jest] neither with me nor with my
honour, Prov. Scot.

Bout: Without. Chesh. To be bout as
Barrow was, i. e. to be without as, &c.
Prov.

Braken: Brakes, Fern. [var. Dial.]
Brakes is a word of General use all England
over.

Bragget, A sort of compound drink made
up with honey, Spices, &c. in Cheshire,
Lancashire, &c. Minshew derives it from
the Welsh Bragod signifying the same sorte
q. d. Potus Galliæ braccatæ. The Author
of the English Dictionary set forth in the
Year, 1658. Deduces it from the Welsh
word Brag signifying Malt, and Gors a Honey
Comb.



A Brandrith; a Trevet or other iron to
set any vessel on, over the fire, from the Saxon
Brandred, a Brand iron,

Bratt; Vox agro Lincolniensi usitata, sic
autem appellatur Semicinctium ex panno
vilissimo ab AS Bratt panniculus; hoc a
verbo Brittan. Gebrittan, frangere, q. d.
Panni fragmenta. Skinner."bratt" not found in OED in this sense.

Braughwham; A dish made of Cheese,
Egges, Clap-bread and Butter boyled toge­
ther, Lancash."braughwham" not found in OED.

To Breade; i. e. to make broad, to spread,
ab AS. Brædan.

To Bree; to Frighten.

To Breid or brade of; to be like in con­
ditions, from breeding, because those that
are bred of others are for the most part like
them. Ye breid of the Millers dog, ye lick
your mouth or the poke be ope. Prov.
Scot.

Brichoe; Brittle. Var. Dial. Chesh.

Broach; a Spit, it is a French word:
From its similitude whereto a Spire-steeple
is called a Broach-steeple, as an Obelisk is
denominated from, ζξελοσ a spit. It signifies
also a Butchers-prick.

Hat Bruarts; Hat brims. Cheshire, Var.
Dial.

A Buer; a Gnat."buer" not found in OED.

Bullen; Hempstalks pilled.



Bulkar; Vox agro Lincoln. usitatissima,
proculdubio à Dan. Bielcker, n. pl. trabes,
Bielck, Tignum, Trabs. Skinner."bulkar" not found in OED.


C.

CAnt; strong, lusty, very cant, God
yield you, i. e. Very strong and harty,
God reward you, Chesh.

To Cant; to Recover or Mend. A health
to the good wives canting, i. e. her recover­
ing after lying in,

Canting; Auctio.

A Capo; a working horse. Chesh."capo" not found in OED.

A Carl-cat; a Bore or He-cat, from the
old Saxon Carle a male, and Cat.

A Carre; a hollow place where water
stands.

The Carr-sick; The Kennel; a word used
in Sheffield, York-sh.

To Carve or Kerve; to grow sowre, spo­
ken of cream, Chesh.Neither "carve" nor "kerve" in this sense found in OED.

Casings: Dryed cowes dung used for
fewel, from the Dutch Koth, fimus, cænum,
q. d. Cothings, Skinner.

A Char: a particular business or taske,
from the word charge. That Char is chard,
&c. That business is dispatcht. I have a little



Char for you, &c. A Char is also the name
of a Fish of the trout-kind found in Win­
ander-mere in Westmerland, and in a lake
in Carnarvanshire by the back of Snow­
don.

To Chare: to stop: as char the cow, i. e.
Stop or turn her.

A Chaundler: A Candlestick, Shef­
field.

To Chieve: to succeed: as, It chieves
nought with him: So, Fair chieve you, I
wish you good luck, good speed or success,
from Atchieve per Aphæresin: or perchance
from the French word Chevir, to obtain.

To Cleam: a word of frequent use in
Lincolnshire, signifying to glue together, to
fasten with glue. Ab AS. Clæmian, beclæmian.
Oblinere, unde nostrum clammy. AS clam,
Plasma, emplastrum: Danic. Kliiner, Glutino.
Nescio autem an verbum clæmian & Nom.
Clam orta sint à Lat. Limus, Limus enim
propter lentorem admotis corporibus ad­
hæret, Skinner.

Clem'd or clam'd:  Starved, because by
famine the guts and bowels are as it were
clammed or stuck together. Sometimes it
signifies thirsty, and we know in thirst the
mouth is very often clammy.

Clough: a valley between two steep hills,



it is an ancient Saxon word, derived (as Skin­
ner saith) from the verb to cleave.

Clumps: Idle, lazy, unhandy, ineptus, a
word of common use in Lincolnshire, à vet.
Fr. G. Cloppe, claudus, vel à Belg. Klonte,
Klonter, vel potius Klompe, Teut. Klamp,
Massa, q. d. Carnis massa, spiritus & ingenij
expers, vel à Belg. Lompsch, Stupidus, piger,
hoc fort. à Lompe, Clompe massa ob rationem
jam dictam: vel forte clumps contr. & corr.
a nostro clownish, Skinner.

A Clussum'd hand, A clumsy hand, Chesh.
per metathesin literarum."clussum'd": see OED, "`clumsome," a. (1876), meaning clumsy-handed (from Whitby Gloss.).

Cobby: Stout, Hearty, Brisk.

Cocket: Brisk, malapert. Dicimus autem
(verba funt Skinneri) He is very cocket, de
homini valetudinario qui jam meliuscule se
habet & convalescere incipit, q. d. Est instar
Galli alacer, non ut prius languidus. vel à
Fr. G. Coqueter, Glocitare instar Galli 
gallinas suas vocantis, vel superbe ince­
dere iustar galli in suo sterquilinio.

A Cod; a Pillow: a Pin-cod, a Pin­
cushion."pin cod" found in OED only in its quotation of this word-entry ("cod," n. 2). 

Coke: Pit-coal or Sea-cole charred: it
is now become a word of general use, à Lat.
coquere, q. d. Carbo coctus.

Cole or Keal: Potage: Colewort: Po­
tage-herb, Potage was so denominated from
the herb Colewort, because it was usually



thereof made, and Colewort from the Latine
word Caulis Κατ έξοχὼ, signifying Bra­
sica.

A Collock: A great piggin.

To Cope a wall:  to cover it, the Coping:
the top or roof of the wall. ab AS. Coppe,
Apex, Culmen, fastigium hoc, a Cop, Caput.
This is a word of general use, and not proper
to the North Countrey only.

Counterfeits and trinkets: Porringers and
Sausers, Chesh."counterfeit" in this sense not found in OED.

A Cranny lad: Chesh. A jovial, brisk,
lusty Lad.

A Crassantly lad:  a coward. Chesh. in
Lancashire they say Craddanly.

To Cream: to mantle, spoken of drink:
it is a metaphor taken from milk.

Creem it into my hand:  Put it in slily or
secretly, Chesh.

Crowse: Brisk, budge, lively, jolly. As
crowse as a new washen louse, Prov.




D.

To DAcker: to waver, stagger or totter,
a word used in Lincolnshire, parum
deflexo sensu a Belg. Dacckeren, motare,
motitare, volitare, hoc à nomine Daeck,
Nebula: Vapores enim nebulosi huc illuc
vel minimo venti flatu impelluntur. Skin­
ner.

To Daffe: to Daunt.

A Daffock: a Dawkin."daffock" not found in OED.

Daft: Stupid, blockish, daunted, a verbo
Daffe.

Dare: Harm or pain. Dare in the An­
cient Saxon signifies Hurt, harm, loss. It does
me no dare: i. e. no harm. So in Essex we
say, It dares me, i. e. it pains me.

To Daw or Dow: to thrive. He neither
dees nor daws, i. e. He neither dies nor mends.
He'll never dow, i. e. He will never be good.
a Teut. Dauwen, Verdauwen, concoquere,
vel potius a Deyen, Gedeyen, Augescere,
increscere, proficere, AS. Dean, Proficere,
vigere, Skinner.

A Dawgos or Dawkin: a dirty, flatter­
ing woman.

A Dayes man: An Arbitrator.



Dazed bread:  Dough-baked.

I's dazed: I am very cold.

Deafely: Lonely, solitary, far from neigh­
bours.

Dearn: signifies the same.

To Deg: v. Leck.

To Didder: to quiver with cold, à Belg.
Sitteren, Teut. Zittern: omnia a stridulo
sono, quem frigore horrentes & trementes
dentibus edimus, Skinner.

Dight: Dressed: ill dight, ill dressed,
from the Saxon Dihtan, parare, instruere.

To Dight: Cheshire, to foule or dirty
one.

To Ding: to Beat: forte à Teut. Drin­
gen, urgere premere, elisa literâ r.

A Dingle: A small clough or valley be­
tween two steep hills.

To Dize: to put tow on a distaffe.

Dizen'd: Drest.

A Donnaught or Donnat: [i. e. Doe­
naught:] Naught, good for nothing:
idle Persons being commonly such, York­
shire.

A Dole or Dool:  A long narrow green in
a plowed field left unplowed.

2. Doundrins: Derb: Afternoons drink­
ings: Aunder there signifying the After­
noon."doudrins" not found in OED: cf 'undern'.

1. A Dosome beast: Chesh. That will be



content with nothing, also thriving, that comes
on well."dosome" not found in OED.

A Drape: a farrow cow, or cow whose
milk is dried up. Drape-Sheep, Oves reij­
culæ, credo ab AS. Drefe, Expulsio, Skin­
ner.

Dree: Long, seeming tedious beyond ex­
pectation, spoken of a way. A hard bar­
gainer, spoken of a person. I suppose it is
Originally no more then dry, though there
be hardly any word of more frequent use in
the North Countrey, in the sence menti­
oned.

Drozen: Fond, ςεργων."drozen" or its variants not found in OED in this sense.

A Dub: a Pool of water.




E.

EAm, mine Eam: My Unkle, also gen­
erally my Gossip, my Compere, my
friend. Ab AS. Eam, Teut, Ohm, Belg.
Oom, Avunculus. Omnia a Latino Amita,
fort. & ant. Amitus, Hin Dan. & Teut.
Amme, Nutrix: Materteræ enum seu Amitæ
nepotes suos nutrire solent & fovere, Skin­
ner.

To Earn: to run as cheese doth. Earning,
cheese-rennet or rening. Var. Dialect.

The Easter: The back of the chimney,
or chimney-stock.

To Eckle or Ettle: to Aim, intend, de­
sign.

Eddish: Roughings, ab. AS Edisc Gra­
men serotinum & hoc à Præp. loquelari
AS. Ed. rursus, denuo. q. d. Gramen quod
denuo crescit.

To Eem, Chesh. as I cannot Eem, I have
no leisure, I cannot spare time.

Eever: Chesh. Corner or quarter. The
wind is in a cold eever, i. e. a cold corner
or quarter.

An El mother, Cumb. A step mother."el mother" not found in OED.



The Elder: the Udder: it signifies the
same thing in the Low Dutch.

Elden: Fewel for fire ab AS. Æled,
ignis, Ælan, accendere.

An Eshin: a Pail or Kit.

Skeer the Esse: Chesh. Separate the dead
ashes from the Embers.


F.

FAin; Glad. Fair words make fools fain
Prov. From the Saxon Fægan, Lætus
hilaris, Fægnian, gaudere.

Fantome corn; Lank or light corn: Fan­
tome flesh: when it hangs loose on the bones.
The French call a spirit appearing by night
or a Ghost, a Fantosme, from Phantasma,
spectrum. So then Phantosme corn is corn
that hath as little bulk or solidity in it as a
Spirit or Spectre.

Farantly: handsome. Fair and farantly:
Fair and handsome.

To Feal: to Hide. He that feales can find.
Prov. i. e. He that hides, &c.

Feg: Fair, handsome, clean, from the
Saxon Fæger by Apocope: to Feg, to flag
or tire."feg" in this sense not found in OED.



To Fend: to Shift for, from defend, per
aphæresin.

To Fettle: to set or goe about any thing,
to dress, or prepare.

To Few, to change."few" in this sense not found in OED.

To Fey or Feigh it:  to doe any thing no­
tably: to Fey meadowes is to cleanse them:
to Fey a pond, to empty it.

A Flacket; a Bottle made in fashion of a
barrel.

A Fleack: a Gate to set up in a gap.

Fluish: q. Fluid, washy, tender, weak,
perchance from the Low Dutch Flaun, faint,
feeble.

To Flizze: to Fly off, from the Low
Dutch Flitsen to Fly and Flitse an Arrow
or Shaft.

A Flizzing: a Splinter, of the same o­
riginal, they seem to be made from the sound
per ὀνοματοπίαν.

To Flite: to Scold or brawle, from the
Saxon Flitan, to contend, strive or brawle.

Fogge: Long Grass remaining in pastures
till winter.

To Format or Formel: to bespeak any
thing: from Fare and mal (as I suppose)
signifying in the ancient Danish a word, sermo
Formal or Formal in the Saxon signifies a
Bargain, a Treaty, an Agreement, a cove­
nant.



Forthen and Forthy: therefore.

Fow: Chesh. Foul. var. Dial.

Freelege: Sheffield. Privilege, Immuni­
tas.

Frem'd or Fremt; Far off, not related to,
or strange, at enmity. From the Saxon and
Dutch Fremb'd, advena, exterus, alienigena,
a stranger or alien from the Preposition Fram
Fra From.

Frim: Handsome, rank, well liking, in
good case, as a Frim tree or beast, i. e. a
thriving tree or beast: a Wallico Frum:
vel fort. ab AS. Fremian: valere pro­
desse.

To Frist: to trust for a time. Fristen in
Dutch is to give respit, to make a truce.
ab AS. Fyrstan: ejusdem significationis.

A Fudder: a Load. It relates properly to
Lead, and signifies a certain weight, viz. 8
pigs or 1600 l. from the high Dutch Fuder
signifying a Cart-Load. Hoc fortè (inquit
Skinner) à Teut. Fuehren, vehere, ducere,
& tandem omnia credo æ Lat. vehere.

Fukes: Chesh. Locks of hair.

Where Fured you? Cumb. Whither went
you?

Fuzzen or Fuzen: Nourishment, the same
with Fizon or Foison used in Suffolk, sig­
nifying there the natural juice or moisture of



any thing, the heart and strength of it. Else­
where it signifies plenty, abundance, and is a
pure French word. v. Skinner.


G.

The GAil or Gaile- dish; The Tun­
dish.

Gail-clear; a Tub for wort.

Gain: Not. applied to things is conveni­
ent, to persons active, expert, to a way near
short. The word is used in many parts of
England.

To Gang; to goe or walk, from the Low
Dutch Gangen, both originally from the Sa­
xon Gan, signifying to goe.

To Garre; to make, cause or force: from
the Danish word Gior, to make.

A Garth: a Yard or Backside, a croft: from
the Saxon Geard a Yard.

A Gate: a way or path: in Low Dutch
Gat. In Danish Gade, from the Saxon Gan,
to goe.

A Gaule: Lanc. a Leaver, ab AS Geafle,
Palanga, Vectis."gaule" in this sense not found in OED.

A Gawn or Goan, Chesh. a Gallon, by con­
traction of the word.

To Ghybe or Gibe: to Scold,



A Gibbon: a Nut-hook.

A Gib-staffe: a Quarter-staffe.

Giddy: mad with anger. The word Giddy
is common all England over, to signifie Dizzy
or by a metaphor unconstant, Giddy-headed:
but not to signify furious or intoxicated with
anger, in which sence the word Mad is else­
where used.

A Gimmer-lamb:  an Ew-lamb: fort. q.
a Gammer-lamb: Gammer is a contraction
of Godmother, and is the usual compellation
of the common sort of Women.

Gin, gif: In the old Saxon is Gif, from
whence the word If is made per aphæresin
literæ G. Gif from the verb Gifan dare, and
is as much as Dato.

To Glaffer or Glaver; Chesh. To Flat­
ter.

Glatton: Welsh-flannel."glatton" not found in OED.

Glob'd: Chesh. Wedded to, fond of."glob'd" not found in OED.

Glotten'd: Chesher. Surprised, startled."glotten'd" not found in OED in this sense.

To be Glum: to look sadly or sowrly,
to frown, contracted from Gloomy. A word
common to the Vulgar both in the North and
South.

To Gly: Lincoln. to look a-squint. Limis
seu distortis oculis instar Strabonis contueri,
forte ab AS. Gleyan, Belg. Gloeyen, Teut.
Gluen, ignescere, candescere, q. d. incensis &



præ ira flammantibus oculis conspicere. Skin­
ner.

To Goam: to Grasp or clasp: in Yorksh.
to mind or look at.

A Gool: a Ditch, Lincolns: lacuna, fort.
à Belg. Gouw, Agger, Aquagium, vel a Fr.
G. Jaule, Gaiole, Latine Caveola, quoniam
ubi in fossam, scrobem seu lacunam hujus­
modi incidimus, eâ tanquam cavea aut carcere
detinemur, &c. Skin.

Greathly: Handsomely, towardly. In
Greath: Well.

Grees or Griece: Stairs: from the French
Grez and both from the Latine Gradus. in
Norfolk they call them Grissens.

To Greit or Greet: to weep or cry: it
seems to come from the Italian Gridare, to
cry or weep. Vox Scotis usitatissima. To
Greet and Yowl, Cumberland, to weep and
cry.

A Grip, or Gripe: a little ditch or trench,
fossula, ab AS. Græp, fossula Cuniculus,
This word is of general use all over Eng­
land.

A Grove, Lincolns: à Belg. Groeve
Fossa. to Grove: to Grave à Belg. Graven,
Fodere.

Grout: Wort of the last running. Skinner
makes it to signify Condimentum cerevisiæ,
mustum cerevisiæ, ab AS. Grut. Ale before



it be fully brewed or sod, new Ale. It signi­
fies also millet.

I Grow: I am troubled.

To Growze: to be chill before the begin­
ning of an ague-fit.

To Guill, to Dazle: spoken of the eyes.
Chesh."guill" not found as a word-entry headword in OED.

A Gun: a great Flagon of Ale sold for
3d. or 4d.


H.

A HAck, Lincolns, forte. ab AS. Hegge,
Hæ, Sepes, Septum, vel Hæca,
Belg. Heck. Pessulus, repagulum, vel Locus
repagulis seu cancellis clausus: nobis autem
parum deflexo sensu Fæni conditorium, seu
Præsepe cancellatum signat; a Rack. Skin­
ner.

It Haggles: It hails, Var. Dial. ab AS.
Hægale, hægle, Grando.The verb "haggle" in this sense not found in OED.

Haghes, Haws:  Var. Dial. ab AS. Ha­
gan, Haws.

Hanty: Wanton, unruly: spoken of a
Horse or the like when provender pricks
him.

To Happe: to cover for warmth, from
Heap as I suppose, to heap cloathes on one.



Happa: Hap ye: Think you?"happa" not found in OED.

To Harden: as, the Market Hardens,
i. e. Things grow dear.

Harns, Cumb. Brains.

A Sea Harr: Lincoln. Tempestas à mari
ingruens. fort. ab. AS. Hærn, Flustrum, æstus.
Skin.

A Haspat or Haspenald lad:  Between a
Man and a Boy."haspat" and "haspenald" not found in OED: see Alexander Bell, "Further Glossarial Notes on Gaimar's Estoire des Engleis," Modern Language Review 49 (1954): 319. The first syllable of both words is a curtailed form of "half-."

Hattle: Chesh. Wild, skittish, harmful.
Tye the hattle Ky by the horn. i. the skit­
tish Cow."hattle" not found in OED.

A Hattock: a shock containing 12 sheaves
of corn.

Haver: Cumb. Oats, it is a Low Dutch
word.

The Hause or Hose: the throat: ab AS.
Hals, collum.

An Haust or Hoste: a Dry cough, to
Hoste: to cough from the Low Dutch word
Hoesten to cough, and Hoest a cough: ab
AS. Hwostan, tussire, to cough.

To Hose: to Hug or carry in the
arms."hose" (v) cited by OED under "halse," v.2 from Ray.

To Heald: as when you powr out of a
pot.

A Bed-Healing: Derb. a coverlet: it is
also called absolutely a Hylling in many
places, to Heale signifies to cover in the South



v. Suss: from the Saxon word Helan, to hide,
cover or heale."bed-healing" not found in OED except in a citation of this entry in "heling, healing," vbl. n. 2.

An Heck: a Rack for cattel to feed at,
v. Hack.

Helder: Rather, before.

Heloe or Helaw: Bashful, a word of com­
mon use. Helo in the old Saxon signifies
Health, safety.

Heppen or Heply: Neat, handsome. York­
shire, Skinner expounds it dexter, agilis, and
saith it is used in Lincolnshire, fort. ab AS.
Hæplic, compar: vel potius Belg. Hebbelick,
habilis, decens, aptus: vel q. d. Helply i. e.
helpful."heppen" found in OED only in entry on "unheppen," a.

Hetter: Eager, earnest, keen.

Hight; called; ab AS. Haten, gehaten,
Vocatus a verbo Hatan dicere, jubere, Teut.
Heissen, nominari, cluere.

To Hight; Cumb. To Promise, or vow;
as also the Saxon verb Hatan sometimes sig­
nifies, teste Somnero in Dictionario Saxonico­
Latino-Anglico, so it seems to be used in the
English Meeter of the 14th. Verse of Psalm
116. I to the Lord will pay my vows, which
I to him behight.

Hind-berries; Raspberries: ab AS.
Hind berian. Forte sic dicta; quia inter hin­
nulos & cervos, i. e. in Sylvis & altibus
crescunt.

Hine, Hence Cumb. Var. Dial.



The Hob; The back of the Chimney.

Hoo, he; in the Northwest parts of Eng­
land most frequently used for she: ab AS.
Heo, Hio, à Lat. Ea fortasse.

A Hoop; A measure containing a Peck or
quarter of a Strike, York-sh.

A Horpet; A little Handbasket. Nescio
an a Corbet, saith Skinner, addita term. dim.
& asperam caninam literam r propter eu­
phoniam elidendo, & quod satis frequens est
C initiali in Spiritum & B in P mutando.

The House: the Room called the Hall.

A Gill-houter: Chesh. an Owl.

Hure: Hair: Var. Dial."hure" not found in this sense in OED.

To Hype at one:  to pull the mouth a­
wry, to do one a mischief or displeasure."hype" in this sense not found in OED.


I.

JAnnock: Oaten bread made into great
loaves.

An Ing: A Common pasture, a Meadow,
a word borrowed frome the Danes, Ing in
that language signifying a Meadow.

Ingle: Cumb. Fire, a blaze or flame, à
Lat. Ignis.

To Incense; to inform, a pretty word
used about Sheffieild in York-sh.




K.

KAle or Cale: turn, vicem, Che­
shire."kale" and "cale" in this sense not found in OED.

Kazzardly: Cattel subject to die, ha­
zardous, subject to casualties."kazzardly" not found in OED.

A Keale: Lincoln, a Cold, tussis à frigore
contracta, ab AS, Celan, Frigescere.

To Keeve a cart, Chesh. to overthrow it,
or to turn out the dung.

Kenspecked: marked, or branded, nota in­
signitus; q. d. maculatus seu maculis distin­
ctus ut cognoscatur: ab AS. Kennan scire,
& Specce macula, Skinner.

To Keppen: to Hoodwinck."keppen" may be an early form of "keep" (see sense 25).

A Kid: A small faggot of underwood or
brushwood: forte a cædendo, q. d. fasciculus
ligni cædui, Skinner.

A Kidcrow: A place for a sucking Calf to
lie in, Chesh.

A Kimnel or Kemlin: a Poudring Tub.

A Kit: a milking pail like a Churn with
two ears and a cover, à Belg. Kitte.

A Kite: a Belly: Cumb.

To Klick up; Lincoln, to catch up, cele­
riter corripere: nescio an à Belg. Klacken,



Klutsen, Quatere, vel à Latino clepere, hoc à
Græco κλέπω, Skinner.

A Knightle man:  an active or skilful
man.

A Knoll: a little round hill, ab AS. Cnol­
le. The top or cop of a hill or mountain.

Kye:  Kine, Var. Dial.OED records "kye" as northern variant for "cow" (n. 1).


L.

To LAke: to Play, a word common to all
the North Country, vel (inquit Skin­
nerus) ab AS, Plægan, ludere, rejecto P.
æ Dipthong. in simpl a & g in c vel k mutatis,
vel à Teuton. & Belg. Lachen ridere vel
quod cæteris longe verisimilius est à Dan.
Leeger Ludo. Ideo autem hæc vox in Sep­
tentrionali Angliæ regione, non in aliis invaluit,
quia Dani illam partem primam invaserunt &
penitus occuparunt, uno vel altero seculo
priusquam reliquam Angliam subjuge­
runt.

The Langot of the Shooe; The latchet of
the shooe from Languet Lingula, a little
tongue or slip.

Land; Urine, Piss, it is an ancient Saxon
word, used to this day in Lancashire, Som­
ner.



Lat: q. late, slow, tedious, Lat weather;
wet or otherwise unseasonable weather.

Latching: catching, infecting.

To Late, Cumb. to seek.

A Lathe: a Barn, fort, à verbo Lade,
quia frugibus oneratur, Skinner.

Lathe: Ease or rest, ab AS Latian, dif­
ferre, tardare, cunctari.

Lathing: Entreaty or invitation. You
need no lathing: You need no invitation or
urging: ab AS. Gelahdian, to bid, invite, de­
sire to come.

The Lave: all the rest, Cumb.

A Lawn: a place in the midst of a wood
free from wood, a Laund in a Park, a Fr. G.
Lande, Hisp. Landa: inculta planities.

Lazy: Naught, bad.

A Leaden or Lidden; a noise or din: ab
AS. Hyldan, clamare, garrire, tumultuari, to
make a noise or outcry, to babble, to chatter,
to be tumultuous; Hyld, tumult, noise.

To Lean nothing:  to conceal nothing q. leave
nothing, or from the old Saxon word Lean­
ne, to shun, avoid, decline.

To Lear: to Learn, Var. Dial.

Leath: ceasing, intermission: as no Leath
of pain, from the word leave, no leaving of
pain.

Leck on; powr on more, Liquor, v. g.

Leeten you: Chesh. Make your self, pre­



tend to be. You are not so mad as you lee­
ten you.

Leethwake: Limber, pliable.

Leftal: saleable that weighs well in the
hand, that is heavy in lifting, from the verb
lift, as I suppose.

To Lig: to lye, Var. Dial. it is near the
Saxon Licgan to lye.

To Lippen: to Rely on or trust to, Scot.

Lither: Lazy, idle, slothful. A word of
general use, ab AS. Lidh, Liedh, Lenis. Al­
ludit Gr Λιςὸσ Lævis, glaber, & Λιτὸσ, sim­
plex, tenuis, Skinner.

Lithing: Chesh. Thickening, spoken of a
pot of broth, as Lithe the pot, i. e. put Oat­
meal into it.

A Lite: a few, a little per Apocopen.

To Lite on:  to Rely on.

Liten: a Garden.

A Loe: a little round hill, a great heap of
stones: ab AS Hæwe, Agger, acervus, cumu­
lus, tumulus, a Law, Low, Loo or high
ground, not suddenly rising as an hill, but by
little and little tillable also, and without wood.
Hence that name given to many hillocks and
heaps of earth, to be found in all parts of
England, being no other but so much con­
gested Earth, brought in a way of burial
used of the Ancients, thrown upon the bodies
of the dead. Somner in Distinction. Saxon.



A Loom: an Instrument or tool in general.
Chesh.

Loert: q. Lord, Gaffer, Lady, Gammer,
used in the Peak of Derbysh.

To Lope, Lincoln, to leap, Var. Dial.

A Lop: a Flea, ab AS, Loppe, from leap­
ing.

Lowe: Flame, and to Lowe; to flame
from the high Dutch Lohe.

To Lowk: i. e. to weed corn, to look out
weeds: so in other Countrys, to look ones
head, i. e. to look out fleas or lice there.

The Lufe: the open hand.


M.

MAke: match, makeless, matchless, ab
AS. Maca, a Peer, an equal, a com­
panion, consort, mate.

A Marrow: a Companion or fellow. A
pair of gloves or shooes are not marrows, i. e.
fellows. Vox generalis.

A Maund: a handbasket with two lids,
ab AS. Mand. Fr. G. Mande. Ital. Madia,
corbis ansatus, utrumque à Lat. Manus quia
propter ansas manucommodè circumferri po­
test, Skinner.



Meath; Vox agro Lincoln. usitatissima, ut
ubi dicimus, I give thee the meath of the buy­
ing, i. e. ribi optionem & plenariam potesta­
tem pretii seu emptionis facio, ab AS. Mædh,
Mæht, Mædgh, Mægen, Potentia, potestas;
hoc à verbo Magan posse, Skinner.

My Meaugh: My Wives brother or Sisters
husband.

Meedless: Unruly.Antedates earliest OED citation for this sense (1703).

Meet or Mete: Measure. Vox general.
Meet now, just now.

Meeterly, Meetherly, Meederly: hand­
somely, modestly; As bow meeterly, from
meet, fit.

Meny; a Family: As we be six or seven a
meny, i. e. six or seven in Family, from
the ancient French Mesnie signifying a Fami­
ly, v. Skinner.

Menseful: comely, graceful, crediting a
man, York-sh.

Merry bauks: a cold Posset, Derb.

A Met: a strike or four pecks, ab AS 
Midi modius.

A Midding: a Dunghil, it is an ancient
Saxon word; a nomine mud fortè.

A Midge: a Gnat, ab AS. Mycg, Mycge,
Belg. Mugge, Teut. Muck, Dan. Myg, Om­
nia a Lat. Musca.

Mill-holms: Watery places about a
Mill damme.



Milwyn: Lancash. Greenfish, fort. à
Milvo q. piscis milvinus.

To Mint at a thing:  to aim at it, to have a
mind to it.

To Ming at one, to mention, ab AS. My­
negung an admonition, warning or minding;
so it is usually said I had a minging, suppose of
an Ague or the like disease, that is not a per­
fect fit, but so much as to put me in mind
of it.

Minginater: One that makes Fretwork;
it is a rustick word used in some part of York­
shire, corrupted perchance from engine."minginater" not found in OED. See A. L. Mayhew, "MINGINATER," Notes and Queries, ser. 6, 2 (1880): 310.

Miscreed: descryed, This I suppose is also
only a rustick word, and nothing else but the
word descried corrupted.

A Mizzy: a Quagmire.

Molter: the toll of a mill, à Latino
Mola.

Mores: i. e. Hills: hence the hilly part
of Staffordshire is called the Morelands:
Hence also the County of Westmorland had
its name, q. The land or Countrey of the
Western mores or hills: and many hills in
the North are called mores, as Stanemores
&c. from the old Saxon word Mor a hill or
Mountain.

Welly moyder'd: almost distracted Che­
shire.



Muck: Lincolns. moist, wet, à Belg.
Muyck, Mollis, lenis, mitis. Mollities enim
humiditatem sequitur.

Mullock: Dirt or rubbish.

Murk: Dark, Murklins: in the dark,
à Dan. Morck, Fuscus, Morcker: infusco:
item tenebræ. Occurrit & Ant. Lat. Murcidus,
Murcus, quæ Festo idem sonant quod ignavus,
iners. This word is also used in the South
but more rarely.

A Murth of corn: abundance of corn.
forte. a More.


N.

A NApkin; a Pocket Hand-Kerchief,
so called about Sheffield in York­
shire.

Nash or Nesh: Washy, tender, weak,
puling. Skinner makes it proper to Worcester­
shire, and to be the same in sence and original
with Nice. But I am sure it is used in many
other Counties, I believe all over the North­
West part of England, and also in the mid­
land, as in Warwick-shire. As for the Ety­
mology of it, it is doubtless no other then
the Ancient Saxon word Nesc, signifying
soft, tender, delicate, effeminate, tame, gentle,



mild. Hence our Nescook in the same sence,
i. e. a tenderling, Somner."nescook" not found in OED. Cf. "nesh," adj., n., and adv.

Nearre, Lincoln. in use for neather. ab AS.
Nerran, posterior.

A Neive or Neiffe: a Fist.

A Neckabout: any womans neck linnen.
Sheffield.

To Nigh a thing: to touch it. I did not
nigh it: i. e. I came not nigh it.

Nitle: Handy, neat, handsome. fort. ab
AS. Nytlic, profitable, commodious.

Nything: much valuing, sparing of, as
Nithing of his pains: i. e. Sparing of his
pains.

A Noggin: a little Piggin holding about
a pint, à Teut: Nossel.

Nor: Then more Nor I, i. e. more
then I.

To Note: to push, strike or goar with
the horn as a Bull or Ram. ab AS. Hnitan
ejusdam signification. Lancash, Somner.




O.

OMy; mellow, spoken of Land.

Oneder, v. Aunder.

Orndorn: Cumberland. Afternoons drink­
ing.'orndorn' not found in OED: cf "undern," n., 4 ("aandorn," "ounder," etc.).

To Osse: to Offer to doe, to aim at or
intend to doe, ossing comes to bossing. Prov.
Chesh. I did not osse to meddle with it.
i. e. I did not dare, &c. fortè ab Audeo,
Ausui.

An Ox-boose: an Ox-stall, or Cow-stall
where they stand all night in the Winter,
ab AS. Bosih, Præsepe, a stall.

An Oxter: an Armpit, Axilla.


P.

PArtlets; Ruffes or Bands for women.
Chesh. Vetus vox (inquit Skinnerus)
pro Sudario, præsertim quod circa collum
gestatur. Minshew dictum putat quasi Por­
telet, quod circumfertur, vel, ut melius divinat
Cowel, à verbo to part, quia facile separatur à
corpore, Skinner.



A Mad Pash: a mad-brain. Chesh.

Peale the pot; cool the pot.

Peed Blind of one eye: He pees: He
looks with one eye.

Peevish: Witty, subtill.

A Penbauk: a Beggers can."penbauk" not found in OED; possibly related to "pan," n. 1, or "back," n. 2?

A Piggin; a little pail or tub with an erect
handle.

It's Pine q. pein to tell; it is difficult to
tell, ab AS. Pin.

A Pingle; a small croft or Picle.

A Pleck; a Place York-sh. Lanc. ab AS.
Plæce, a street, a Place.

Poops; Gulps in drinking.

To Pote the clothes off; to kick all off;
to push or put out, from the French Pousser
or Poser, pulsare, or ponere, to put.

Prattily; softly.

Prich: Thin drink.

A Princock: a pert, forward fellow.
Minshew deflectit à Præcox, q. d. Adolescens
præcocis ingenij: quod licet non absurdum
sit, tamen quia sono minus discrepat, puto
potius dictum quali jam primum Gallus,
quia sci, non ita pridem pubertatem attigit,
& recens Veneris stimulos percepit, Skin­
ner.




R.

To RAck or Reck: to care, never Rack
you; i. e. Take you no thought
or care. From the Ancient Saxon word Recc,
care, and Reccan to care for. Chaucer hath
recketh, for careth. Hence Retchless and
Retchlessness, for Careless and Carelessness;
as in the Saxon.

Radlings; Windings of the wall.

To Rame; to Reach; perchance from
Rome.Antedates earliest OED citation for this sense ("ream," v., 2b).

To Reem; to Cry: Lancashire, ab AS.
Hræman, Plorare, clamare, ejulare, to weep
with crying and bewayling, Hream, ejula­
tus.

To Rejumble: Lincoln. as it rejumbles up­
on my stomack Fr. G. Il regimbe sur mon
estomac, i. e. calcitrat. Sic autem dicimus ubi
cibus in ventriculo fluctuat & nauseam parit.
Verb, aut Fr. G. à Præp. Re, & Fr. G. Jam­
be, It. Gamba ortum ducit. Skinner.

To Remble: Lincoln. to move or remove,
q. d. Remobiliare, a Reward or good Re­
ward; a good colour or ruddiness in the
face, used about Sheffield in Yorksh.



To Rine: to touch: ab AS. Hrinan, to

touch or feel.

To Ripple flax: to wipe off the seed-vessels.

A Roop: a Hoarsness.

To Rowt or Rawt; to lowe like an Ox or
Cow. The old Saxon word Hrutan, signi­
fies to snort, snore or rout in sleeping.

A Runge: a Flasket.

Runnel: Pollard wood, from running up
apace.

He Rutes it: Chesh. spoken of a Child, he
cries fiercely, i. e. He rowts it, he bellows.

Rynt ye: By your leave, stand handsom­
ly. As Rynt you witch, quoth Besse Locket

to her Mother, Proverb, Chesh.


S.

SAckless: innocent, faultless, without
crime or accusation; a pure Saxon word,
from the noun Sae, Saca, a Cause, strife, suit,
quarrel, &c. and the Præposition leas, with­
out.

Saur-pool: a stinking puddle.

Scarr: the cliff of a Rock, or a naked
Rock on the dry land, from the Saxon Carre,
cautes. This word gave denomination to the
Town of Scarborough.



Loxia.

The House-sparrow: Passer domesticus.

The Chaffe-finch: Fringilla.

The Bramble or brambling: or Mountain­
finch: Fringilla montana.

The Gold-finch: Carduelis, Acanthis.

The common Linnet: Linaria vulgaris.

The greater red-headed Linnet; Linaria
rubra major.

The lesser red-headed Linnet: Linaria ru­
bra minor.

The Siskin: Spinus sive Ligurinus.


Birds having a hard protuberancy in
the upper chap.

The Bunting: Emberiza alba, Gesn.

The Yellow-hammer, or amber: Emberiza
flava, Gesn.

The Reed-sparrow: Passer arundinaceus.




Water Fowl:
Such as have their toes divided,
and that only wade in the Water,
or frequent watry places.

The Greater kind.

THe Crane: Grus.

The common Heron or Heron-shaw: Ardea
cinerea major.

The Bittern: Ardea Stellaris.


The middle and lesser kinds.
Such as have slender and very long bills:

The Woodcock: Scolopax.

The Snipe: Gallinago minor.

The Gid or Jack-snipe: Gallinago mi­
nima.



The Godwit or Stone-plover: an Fedoa
Gesn.

The Stone-Curlew: These Birds are like
one to the other, and have bills longer then
the Woodcock.

The Curlew: Arquata, Numenius.

The Sea-pie: Hæmatopus Bellonii.

The Redshank: Such as have slender bills
of a middle length. An Callidrys Bellonii?
Gallinula crythropus major, Gesn.

Sand-piper: ------Tringa major. Tringa minor.

The Knot: Canuti avis; Cinclus Bellonii.

The Ruffe and Reeve: Avis pugnax Al­
drov.

The Sanderling or Curwillot; so called a­
bout Pensans, it is a bout the bigness of the
lesser Tringa or Sand-piper, and wants the
back claw, by which note it may easily be
known from all others of its kind.

The Stint.
To these I may add (though he hath very
short legs, and wades not.)


The King-fisher. Ispida.




Such as have short Bills.

The Lapwing: Capella sive Vanellus.

The Green-plover: Pluvialis viridi.

The Grey-plover: Pluvialis cinerea.

The Sea-Lark: Charadrius sive Hiati­
cula: This also wants the back claw.

The Turn-stone: an Cinclus Turneri.
This bird we observed on the coast of Corn­
wall: it is lesser then a Plover, and somewhat
bigger then a Black-bird.



Of such as Swim in the
WATER.
Such whose toes are divided, which I
may call Fin-toed.

Colymbus christatus: The crested Diver.Not found in OED.

The Didapper or Dob-chich: Colymbus 
minor."dob-chich" not found in OED.

The common Weter-hen or More-hen:
 Gallinula chloropus.

The Velvet Runner: Gallinula Serica.Antedates earliest OED citation (1678).



The Coot: Fulica Mr. Johnson of Brigna
near Crota bridg York-sh. shew'd me a bird of
the Cootkind scollop-toed not much bigger
then a Black-bird.


Whole or Web-footed.
Such as have all four toes webbed
together.

The Soland-Goose: Anser Bassanus.

The Cormorant: Corvus aquaticus.

The Shagge: Graculus palmipes.


Such as want the Back-toe.

The Pope, called in some places Puffins: 
Anas Arctica Clus.

The Rasor-bill: Auk or Murre: Alka
Hoieri & Womii.

The Guilliam, Cuillemor Kiddaw: Lom­
wia insula Ferræ.




Such as have slender bills sharp­
pointed.

The greatest Diver: Colymbus maxi­
mus, an Lum?

The Herring-gull  or greatest ash-coloured
Mew: Larus cinereus maximus."herring-gull" antedates earliest OED citation (1857).

The lesser ash-coloured Sea-cob or Mew:
Larus cinereus minor.

The great Gray Gull: an Wagel Cornubi­
ensium?
Of this Bird the Cornish men about Pen­
sans report, that he pursues and strikes at the
small Gull so long, till out of fear it mutes;
The Wagell presently follows and greedily
devours the excrement, catching it sometimes
before it be fallen to the water. This seve­
ral Seamen affirmed themselves to have often­
times seen.

The great black and white Gull: Larus
maximus ex albo & nigro varius.

The Gannet, An Catarractes. We saw
about St. Ives in Cornwal many of these
birds flying. It hath long wings, and a long
neck, and flyeth strongly, it prys upon Pil­
chards; the Scoles whereof great numbers of
this fowl constantly frequent and pursue.



It casts it self down with great violence upon
its prey, insomuch that they say one way to
catch it is by fastning a Pilchard to a deal
board a little under water, upon which it will
precipitate it self with such vehemency, that
it will dash out its own brains against the
board."cataract" (bird) antedates earliest OED citation (1868).

The Coddy moddy or lesser grey Gull: an
Larus major Aldrov?"coddy-moddy" antedates earliest OED citation (1676).

The Pewit or Sea-crow: Larus albus
minor.

The Tarrock: Cornub: Larus cinereus
Bellonii.

The Sea-swallow: Hirundo marina.

The small black Gull: Larus niger, vel
Larus piscator.

The Puffin  or Curviere: Puffinus An­
glorum.
This bird builds on a little Island called
the calf of Man at the South end of the Isle
of Man, and also upon the Silly Islands, but is
nothing such a thing as is described in Al­
drovandus: for that is feather'd and can fly
swiftly.Erratum not included. The word "curviere" was not found in OED.

Avosetta Italorum:  Recurvirostra.


such as have toothed-bills.

The Gossander or Bergander:  Merganset
Aldr.



The lesser tooth-bill'd Diver: Mergus ci­
nereus fuscus.


Albellus alter Aldrov. Mergus glacialis
Gesneri.
This hath no English name known to me,
unless it be that which Dr. Merret in his Pi­
nax calls by the name of Nun: The Germans
call it the White Nun. The cock and hen in
this and the Gossander differ so much in co­
lour, that Authors have made four distinct
species of them.


Broad-billed Birds.

The Swan: Cygnus.

The Elk, Hooper, or wild Swan: Cygnus
ferus, this bird is specifically distinct from the
tame Swan; as is manifest from that one note
alone, that in this the winde-pipe enters into
the breast-bone, and is therein reflected,
which it doth not in the tame Swan.

The Goose: Anser.

The Wild-Goose: Anser ferus.

The road-Goose, or small Wild Goose. 

The Bernacle: Bernicla.

The common Wild Duck: Boschas major.

The tame Duck: Anas domestica.

The Shelldrake: Tadorna Belonii.

The Gadwell or Gray: Boschas minor
orquata.



The Sea Pheasant: Anas caudacuta.

The Wigeon: Penelope Aldrov. Anas
fistularis.

The Pochard: Anas fera fusca. Rothals,
Gesn.

Mergus cirratus minor, Gesn.

Caporosso Venetiis dicta.

The Teal: Querquedula.

Quattro occhis Venetiis: Clangula.

The Shoveler: Anas platyrynchos, sive
clypeata Germanica Aldr.

The Scoter: Anas niger.

Anatis nigræ aliam speciem nobis ostendit
D. Johnson Eboracensis.

The Cuthbert Duck: Anas S. Cuthberti,
building only on the Farn Islands upon the
coast of Northumberland.








A.
CATALOGUE
OF
FISHES

Taken about Pensans and St.
Ives in Cornwall given us by
one of the Ancientest and most
experienced fishermen, the most
whereof we saw during our
stay there.


Of the Cetaceous Kind.

 1. THe Whale, Cetus, Balæna: of
what sort he could not tell us.
Vulgus enim non distinguit.

 2. The Porpesse: Phocæna
Rondel.



These Fishes have lungs and breathe like
quadrupeds, are also viviparous and give
suck to their young.


Of the Cartilagineous kind,
Long..

 3. Blew Sharks; Glaucus.

 4. White Sharks.

 5. Topes; An Mustelus lævis secundus seu
Canosa Salviani?Antedates earliest OED citation (1686).

 6. Picked Dogs; Catulus spinax.

 7. Rough Hounds; Mustelus, an lævis
primus Salviani?

 8. Morgay; Catulus major Salviani.


Broad or Flat.

 9. Thornback; Raia clavata.

10. Flair or Ray; Raia lævis.

11. Monk-fish: which either is or ought
to be called Skate, if we follow the Ety­
mology of the word; Squatina. The Ita­
lians call it Pesce Angelo, The Angel­
Fish.



12. The Piper, Raio-squatina Rondel.
I am not ignorant that the Cornish men call
another Fish, viz. A sort of Cuculus or
Gurnard by the name of Piper: wherefore
this Homonymy is to be carefully noted to
avoid confusion.

13. Pesc mollan; the Frog-fish, or Sea­
Divel: Rana piscatrix.



Spinous or Bony Fishes.
Flat-Fishes that swim sideways and
lye most part grovelling at the
bottome.

14. Holibut or Halibut; the biggest
of all this kind, an Hippoglossus Ron­
del?

15. Turbot Rhombus. These names of
Turbot and Halibut are confounded in several
Countreys. What in the North they call
the Halibut in the North they call the Turbot;
and the Turbot the Bret, nay in some parts
of the West of England they call the Tur­
bot Bret and the Halibut Turbot.

16. The Plaise; Passer maculosus.



17. Flukes or Flounders, called in some
places Buts, Passer lævis vulgaris.

18. The Dab: Passer asper, seu squamosus
Rondel.

19. Lanterns: Lug aleth Cornubiensi­
bus.

20. Queens: a Fish thinner than a Plaise.
Of these two last we know nothing but the
names, having never seen the Fishes.

21. Soles: Solea, Lingulaca.


Of Fishes that swim upright, which
at present we will distinguish into
1 Long and narrow. 2. Broad
or deep.
Of long Fishes.
Such as have three fins upon the Ridge of
their Backs which I call properly the Cod­
kind.
"codkind" not found in OED. 

22. The Common Cod-fish: Asellus vul­
garis, Cabiliau."cabiliau" antedates earliest OED citation (1696).

23. The Whiting-Pollack.

24. The Ræwlin-Pollack.



25. The Haddock: Asinus Antiquo­
rum.

26. The Bib or Blinds.

27. The Bulcard.

28. The Whiting: Asellus mollis.

Of these fishes we saw and described all,
save the Bulcard: several of them we judge
not yet described by any Authour extant in
print: indeed the writers of natural History
of Animals living far from the Ocean, and
so having never had opportunity of seeing
these kinds of Fishes, which are proper to the
Ocean and not found in the Mediterranean
Sea, write very confusedly and obscurely
concerning them.
To these may be referred two other Fishes,
which have not three fins on the back, because
their flesh is like that of the precedent, and
they are usually salted and dried in like man­
ner, viz.

29. Ling: by some called Asellus longus,
and by some Asellus Islandicus.

30. Hake: Asellus alter, sive Merlucius,
Aldrov.




Of the Gurnard kind, having
as it were fingers before the fins on
their Bellies.


31. Gray Gurnard or Snowd: Cucu­
lus."snowd" not found in OED.

32. Red Gurnard.

33. Tub-fish or Piper. Lyra prior Ron­
del.


Of the Herring-kind.


34. Herrings: Harengus.

35. Pilchard: Harengus minor. This
Fish, though not so great as the Herring,
yet seemed to us of a more Delicate tast.

36. Alose: called in other places Shads, 
which are of the Anadromi, coming up Ri­
vers, commonly taken in the Rivers of
Thames and Severn, called in Latine Clupeæ
& Alosæ. They are the biggest of this
kind, growing to be far greater then a Her­
ring.




Of the Mackrel-kind.


37. Tunny, called there Spanish Mackrel, 
of which we saw a large one taken at Pen­
sans.

38. Scad; Trachurus.

39. Mackrel; Scomber.


Miscellaneous long Fishes of Sev­
eral Kinds.


40. Mullet; Mugil.

41. Basse

42. Old-wives; which I saw not but by
the description made of it I guess it to be a
kind of Turdus.

43. Wrasse; another sort of Turdus: in
Careys description of Cornwal this is called
a Wroth.Antedates earliest OED citation (1750).

44. Sur-Mullet; Mullus Antiquo­
rum.

45. Cuckow-Fish; That sort of Turdus
called by Salvianus Pavo.Antedates earliest OED citation ("cuckoo," 6., 1848).

46. Girrock: Acus major, called else­
where Horn-Fish and Needle-Fish.



47. Skipper; Acus minor.

48. Conger or Sea-Eel: Congrus.

49.Calken; i. e. Weaver or Wiver, Draco
sive Araneus.This sense of "weaver" and "wiver" not found in OED.

50. Salmon; Salmo.

51. Smelt; Violacea.

52. Sand-Eels or Launces; Ammodytes
Gesneri, so called because they dig them
out of the Sand when the Tide is out.Antedates earliest OED citation of "sand-eel" (a1705).

53. Whistle-Fish; Mustelus.

54. Mulgronock; Alauda marina.

55. Father-Lasher Cornubiensibus pueris
dictus: Scorpæna Bellony.

56. Butter-Fish:

57. Sea-Adder; 
These two last are very
small Fishes, and not described or mentioned
by any Authour I know of.


58. Rock-Fish; Gobius marinus.

59. A Gid; A scaly Fish lesser than a
Pilchard: this we saw not.




Broad or Deep-Fishes.

60. Gilt-Heads; Aurata, Chrysophrys.

61. Sea-Bream, Chad; Pagrus Aldrov.

62. Dory; Faber piscis.

63. Sun-Fish; Mola Salviani.




Shell-Fish.
Crustaceous.

64. Black Crabfish.

65. White Crab: Pagurus.Not found in OED.

66. Scottish Crab:Not found in OED.

67. Spanish Crab: Tragezawt: Cancer
maias."tragezawt" not found in OED.


Besides all these we observed two other
sorts of small Crabs.


68. Lobster: Astacus.

69. Long Oyster: Sea-gar, Red Crab:
Locusta marina. The name long Oyster is no
doubt a Corruption of Locusta.

70. Shrimp, Beehan boohan Cornub.
Squilla.




Testaceous.

71. Cockle: Pestunculus.

72. Muscle: Mitylus.

73. Oyster: Ostrea.

74. Limpet: Patella.

75. Shorts: Echini marini.Not found in OED.

76. Wrinkles or Periwinkles:  Cochleæ
marinæ: Of which there are found several

species.



Fish called in Latine Exanguia
aquatica mollia.

77. Cuttle Fish: Lolligo.

78. Call" Sepia.Not found in OED.

79. Mulgouly: a sort of Urtica soluts
or Blubber, round and finely coloured with
rayes on one side, from the center to the cir­
cumference.Not found in OED.

80. Star-Fishes of several sorts, Stellæ
marinæ.



On the Rocks near the Lands end they
often find the Phocæ (which they call Soils)
sleeping. Sometimes they kill them by strik­
ing them cross the snout with a pole, other­
whiles they shoot them. Some of these
Soils (they say) grow to the bigness of a
heifer of two years old, and they are of
divers Colours. They defend themselves by
casting stones backward with their feet upon
those that come near them. Being shot dead
the male they say sinks down presently to
the bottom of the water, but the female
flotes or swims: which is not to be credi­
ted.

They distinguish between Soils and Sieles:
 the Siele they affirm to be a Fish and no Am­
phibium, much less then the soile, and not
taken upon our Coasts.





A
CATALOGUE
OF
Fresh water Fish found
IN
England.


Anadromi: Sea fish that come up
Rivers at certain Seasons.

THe Sturgeon: Sturio, Acipen­
ser.

The Salmon: Salmo.

The Shad or Alose: Clupea
Alosa.

The Smelt: Violacea, Eperlanus Ron­
del.




Lacustres: such as are found only
in Lakes or Meres.

The Charre of Winander-mere in West­
morland: This I take to be the same with
the Welsh Torgoch, taken in the lake of
Llanberis near Snowdon-hill, and in other
pools in Carnarvanshire. The same I saw
and described at Zug in Switzerland, by the
name of Reutell: which the fisher men, there,
said was proper to their lake. Of this fish
there are two sorts taken in Winander-mere.
The greater having a red belly they call the
red Charre: and the lesser having a white
belly, which they call the Gilt or Gelt
Charre.

The Guiniad: found in the lake of Bala
in Merionethshire in Wales. This is the same
with the Farra of the lake of Geneva, dis­
cribed in Aldrovandus, and the Alberlin of
the lake of Zurich in Switzerland. It is
found also in a lake in Cumberland five miles
from Pereth called Huls water: where they
call it the Schelley.Antedates earliest OED citation (1740).




Fluviatiles: River Fishes, and
such as live in standing pools
and ponds of Water.
Squamosi; Scaly.

THe Trout; Trutta. Of these there
are said to be several sorts: as the
Lincoln-shire Shard, the Salmon­
trout: The Bull-trout: Grey-trout,
or Skurf. But to me these differences are not
well known."Lincolnshire shard" not found in OED. See Charles Earle Raven, English Naturalists from Neckam to Ray, p., 324 ("shoat" or "Shote").

The Samlet: a small Fish of the trout-kind
taken in Hereford River.

The Grayling: Thymalus. I take this to
be the same Fish, which in some places of the
North they call the Umber.

The Pike, Pickrell or Jack: for these
are but several names of the same Fish accor­
ding to its age or bigness, Lucius.

The Carp: Cyprinus. This Fish, though
now there is none more common with us,
was but lately brought over into England.
Leonard Mascall in his book of Fishing



saith that he himself was the first that brought
in Carps and Pippins.

The Bream: Cyprnius latus; Abra­
mis.

The Perch: Perca, this Fish at Huls
Water before mentioned they called the
Basse.

The Ruffe: Perca aurata.

The Tench: Tinca.

The Barble: Barbus.

The Chub or Chevin:  Capito, Cephalus
fluv.

The Dace or Dare: Leuciscus.

The Bleak or Bley:  Alburnus.

The Roche: Rubellio.

The Gudgeon: Gobio fluviatilis.


Fluviatiles læves; River Fish
without scales.

The Eel: Anguilla.

The Eel-pout or Burbot: Mustela.

The Lampern: Lampetra minor.

The Minow, Minim or Pink: Varius
sive Phoximus lævis.



The Loche: Cobites barbatula.

The Stickle-Back or Banstickle: Pun­
gitius piscis. Of this there are two kinds:
One that hath only three prickles on the
ridge of the back: another that hath six or
more.

The Bull-head or Millers thumb: Gobio
capitatus, Cottus Rondel.




FINIS.







THE
Smelting and Refining
OF
SILVER,
AT
The Silver Mills in
CARDIGANSHIRE.




THe Oare beaten into small Pieces is
brought from the mine to the Smel­
ting House, and there melted with
black and white Coal; i. e. With
Charcoale and wood slit into small pieces
and dried in a kiln, for that purpose. The
reason why they mix black and white Coal
is because black alone makes too vehe­



ment a Fire, and the white too gentle, but
mixt together they make a just temper of
heat. After the fire is made the mine is cast
on the coales; and so interchangeably mine
and Coales. The mine when melted runs
down into the Sump, i. e. a round pit of stone
covered over with clay within. Thence it is
laded out and cast into long square bars with
smaller ends fit to lift and carry them by.

These bars they bring to the refining Fur­
nace, which is covered with a thick cap of
stone bound about with Iron and moveable,
that so they may lift it up, and make the test
at the bottome anew (which they doe every
refining) In the middle of the cap there is
a hole in which the barr of metal hangs in
Iron slings above the Furnace, that so it may
be let down by degrees as it melts off. Besides
this they have another hole in the side of the
Furnace parallel to the Horizon, and bottomed
with Iron. At this hole they thrust in ano­
ther barr. The test is of an oval Figure, and
occupies all the bottome of the Furnace.
The fire is put in by the side of the bellows.
When the Furnace is come to a true temper
of heat, the lead converted into Litharge is
cast off by the blowing of the bellows, the
Silver subsiding into the bottome of the test.



The blast blows the lead converted into Li­
tharge off the Silver after the manner that
Cream is blown off Milk.

As soon as all the glut of Litharge (for
so they call it)  is cast off, the Silver in the
bottome of the Cuple grows cold, and the
same degree of heat will not keep it melted
as before. The Cake of Silver after it grows
cold springs or rises up into branches.

The test is made of marrow-bones burnt
to small pieces, afterward stamped to pouder,
and with water tempered into a past. The
test is about a foot thick laid in Iron. After
the cake of silver is taken out, that part of
the test which is discoloured they mingle with
the Oare to be melted: the rest they stamp
and use again for test.

The Litharge is brought to a reducing
Furnace, and there with Charcoale only mel­
ted into Lead. The Litharge is cast upon
the Charcoale in the bing of the Furnace,
and as the Charcoale burns away and the
Litharge melts, more Charcoale thrown
on and Litharge put upon it as at first smel­
ting.



Another Furnace they have, which they
call an Almond Furnace, in which they melt
the slags or refuse of the Litharge (not
stamped) with Charcoale only.

The slags or cinders of the first smelting
they beat small with great stamps lifted up
by a wheel moved with water, and falling by
their own weight. First they are stamped
with dry stamps, then sifted with an Iron
sieve in water. That which lies at the bot­
tome of the sieve is returned to the smelting
Furnace without more adoe. That which
swims over the sieve is beaten with wet
stamp.

That which passeth through the sieve, as
also that which after it hath been beaten with
the wet stamps passes through a fine grate
or strainer of Iron, goeth to the Buddle,
which is a vessel made like to a shallow tum­
brel, standing a little shelving.

Thereon the matter is laid, and water run­
ning constantly over it, moved to and fro
with an Iron rake or how, and so the water
carries away the earth and dross, the metal
remaining behind. That which is thus Bud­
led they lue with a thick hair sieve close



wrought in a tub of water, rolling the sieve
about and enclining it this way and that way
with their hands. The light which swims
over the sieve is returned again to the Buddle.
That which subsides is fit for the smelting
Furnace.

They have besides an Assay-Furnace,
wherewith they try the value of the metal,
i. e. what proportion the lead bears to the
Silver, cutting a piece off every bar and mel­
ting it in a small Cupel.Antedates earliest OED citation (1707). First they weigh
the piece cut off, then after the lead is sepa­
rated the Silver. A tun of metal will yield
10, sometimes 15, and if it be rich 20 l.
weight of Silver. All lead oar dig'd in Eng­
land hath a proportion of silver mixt with it,
but some so little that it will not quit cost to
refine it.

At the first smelting they mingle several
sorts of oare, some richer, some poorer, else
they will not melt so kindly.

The Silver made here is exceeding fine and
good.

These six mountains in Cardiganshire not
far distant from each other afford Silver oar,



Talabont, Geginnon, Comsomlack, Gedarren,
Bromesloid and Cummer.

At our being there they dig'd only at Ta­
labont.

They sink a perpendicular square hole or
shaft, the sides whereof they strengthen round
from top to bottome with wood that the earth
fall not in.

The transverse pieces of wood, they call
stemples and upon these catching hold with
their Hands and Feet they descend without
using any rope. They dig the Oar thus,
one holds a little picque or punch of Iron,
having a long handle of wood, which they
call a Gad;  another with a great Iron ham­
mer or sledge drives it into the vein.

The vein of metal runs East and West,
it riseth North and slopes or dips to the
South. There is a white Fluor about the
vein, which they call Spar, and a black which
they call blinds. This last covers the vein
of Oare, and when it appears they are sure
to find Oare.



They sell the Oare for 3 l. or 4 l. the tun,
more or less as it is in goodness, or as it is
more rare or plentiful.

This information and ac­
count we had from Major Hill,
1662. Who was then master
of the silver mills.

The History of these Silver-works may
be seen in Dr. Fullers Worthies of Wales
General, p. 3.

The smelting of Lead is the same with
the smelting of Silver Oare, and therefore no
need that any thing be said of it.







The preparing and smelting, or
blowing of Tin in Cornwall.




THe tinners find the Mine by the Shoad
(or as they call it Squad) which is
loose stones of tin mixed with the
Earth, of which they give you this account.

The load or vein of tin before the flood
came up to the Superficies of the Earth. The
flood washing the upper part of it as of the
whole earth, brake it off from the load, and
confounded or mixed it with the earth to such
a depth. They observe that the deeper the
shoad lies, the nearer is the main load, and the
shallower the further off. Sometimes it
comes up to the exterior Superficies of the
earth. The main load begins at the East and
runs Westward, shelving still deeper and
deeper; and sometimes descending almost
perpendicularly. Besides the main load,
they have little branches that run from it
North and South, and to other points which
they call Countrey.  The vein or load is
sometimes less, sometimes greater, sometimes
not a foot thick, sometimes three foot or
more. When they have digged a good way
they sink an air-shaft, else they cannot
breathe nor keep their candles light. The
shoad commonly descends a hill side. There



is a kind of fluor which they call Spar next
the vein, and which sometimes encompas­
seth it. In this are often found the Cornish
Diamonds. Above the Spar lies another
kind of substance like a white soft stone, which
they call Kellus.  They get out the Mine with
a Pick-ax, but when it is hard they use a Gad
[a tool like a Smiths punch] which they
drive in with one end of their Pick-ax made
like a hammer. When they have gotten out
of the Mine, they break it with a hammer in­
to small pieces, the biggest not exceeding
half a pound or a pound, and then bring it to
the stamps. [The stamps are onely two at
one place, lifted up by a wheel moved with
water as the Silver Mills] There it is put in­
to a square open box into which a spout of
water continually runs and therein the stamps
beat it to powder. One side of the box men­
tioned is made of an iron-plate perforated with
small holes like a grate, by which the water
runs out, and carries away with it the Mine
that is pounded small enough to pass the
holes, dross and all together, in a long gut­
ter or trough made of wood. The dross
and earth (as being lighter) is carried all a­
long the trough to a pit or vessel into which
the trough delivers it, called a loob: the tin as
being heavier, subsides and staies behind
in the trough: and besides at a good di­



stance from the stamps they put a turf in the
trough to stop the tin that it run not further.

The tin remaining in the trough they take
out and carry to the buddle [a Vessel descri­
bed in the Silver work] where the sand and
earth is washed from it by the water
running over it, the tinners stirring and
working it both with a shovel, and with their
feet. In the buddle the rough tin (as they
call it) falls behind; the head tin lies upper­
most or foremost. The head tin passes to the
wreck, where they work it with a wooden
rake in Vessels almost like the buddling Ves­
sels, water running also over it. In the
wreck the head tin lies again foremost, and
that is finished and fit for the blowing house,
and is called black tin, being black of colour,
and as fine as sand. The rough tin lies next,
that as also that in the buddle they sift to se­
parate the course, and dross, and stones from
it, which is returned to the stamps to be new
beaten. The fine is lewed in a fine sierce
moved and waved to and fro in the water, as
is described in the Silver work; the oar sub­
siding to the bottom, the sand, earth and other
dross flows over the rimme of the sierce with
the water: that which remains in the sierce
they sift through a fine sieve, and what passes
through they call black tin. In like manner
they order the wast tin that falls hindmost in



the Buddle and wreck, which they call the
tail, , as also that which falls into the loob, pit
or sump, viz. washing and sifting of it, which
they call stripping of it, returning the rough
and course to the stamps, and the finer to the
wreck.

With the rough tin that is returned to the
stamps they mingle new ore, else it will not
work, but fur up the stamps. The tin in the
loob they let lie a while, and the longer the
better, for, say they, it grows and encreases
by lying.

The black tin is smelted at the blowing
house with Charcoal only, first throwing on
Charcoal, then upon that black tin, and so
interchangeably into a very deep bing (which
they call the house) broader at the top and
narrower at the bottom. They make the
fire very vehement, blowing the coals conti­
nually with a pair of great bellows moved by
water, as in the smelting of other metals.
The melting tin together with the dross or
slag runs out at a hole at the bottom of the
bing into a large trough made of stone. The
cinder or slag swims on the top of it like
scum, and hardens presently.

This they take off with a shovel and lay it
by.

When they have got a sufficient heap of it
they sell it to be stamped, budled and lued.



They get a good quantity of tin out of it.
Formerly it was thrown away to mend high
wayes, as nothing worth. When they have
a sufficient quantity of the melted metal they
cast it into oblong square pieces in a mould
made of Moore-stone. The lesser pieces
they call slabs, the greater blocks. Two
pound of black tin ordinarily yields a pound
of white or more.

The tin after it is melted is coyned, i. e.
marked by the Kings Officer with the Lion
Rampant. The Kings custom is four shil­
lings on every hundred pound weight. O­
ther particulars concerning the tin-works I
omit, because they may be seen in Carewy's
survey of Cornwal. But the manner of pre­
paring the tin for blowing or smelting is
now much different from what it was in his 
time.

Tin-oar is so different in colour and ap­
pearance from tin, that one would wonder
that the one should come out of the other: and
somewhat strange it is that tin being so like to
lead, tin-oar should be so unlike to Lead-oar
being very like to the lead that is melted out
of it.




The manner of the Iron-work at
the Furnace.


THe Iron-mine lies sometimes deeper,
sometimes shallower in the Earth
from 4 foot to 40. and upward.
There are several sorts of mine,
some hard, some gentle, some rich, some
courser. The Iron-masters always mix dif­
ferent sorts of mine together, otherwise they
will not melt to advantage.

When the mine is brought in, they take
small cole and lay a row of small cole and
upon it a row of mine, and so alternately,
S.S.S. one above another, and setting the coles
on fire therewith burn the mine.

The use of this burning is to mollifie it,
that so it may be broke in small pieces:
otherwise if it should be put into the furnace
as it comes out of the Earth, it would not
melt but come away whole.

Care also must be taken that it be not too
much burned, for then it will loop, i. e. melt
and run together in a mass. After it is burnt,
they beat it into small pieces with an Iron
sledge, and then put it into the Furnace (which



is before charged with coles) casting it upon
the top of the coles, where it melts and falls
into the hearth in the space of about twelve
hours more or less, and then it is run into a
Sow.

The hearth or bottome of the furnace is
made of a Sand-stone, and the sides round
to the height of a Yard or thereabout, the
rest of the Furnace is lined up to the top with
Brick.

When they begin upon a new furnace,
They put fire for a day or two before they
begin to blow.

Then they blow gently and increase by
degrees till they come to the height in ten
weeks or more.

Every six days they call a Founday,  in
which space they make 8 tun of Iron, if you
divide the whole summ of Iron made by the
Foundays: for at first they make less in a
Founday, at last more.

The hearth by the force of the fire con­
tinually blown grows wider and wider, so
that if at first it contains so much as will
make a Sow of 600 or 700 pound weight,
at last it will contain so much as will make
a Sow of 2000 l. The lesser pieces of 1000
pound or under they call Pigs. 



Of 24 loads of coals they expect 8 tun
of Sows to every load of coals, which con­
sists of 11 quarters they put a load of mine
which contains 18 bushels.
A Hearth ordinarily if made of good stone
will last 40 Foundays, that is 40 weeks, dur­
ing which time the fire is never let go out.
They never blow twice upon one hearth
though they go upon it not above five or six
Foundays.

The cinder like scum swims upon the mel­
ted metal in the hearth, and is let out once or
twice before a Sow is cast.


The manner of working the Iron at
the Forge or  Hammer.


IN every forge or hammer there are two
fires at least, the one they call the Finery,
the other the Chafery. 

At the Finery by the working of the
hammer they bring it into Blooms and An­
conies, thus.

The sow at first they roll into the fire, and
melt off a piece of about three fourths of a
hundred weight, which, so soon as it is broken
off, is called a Loop.



This Loop they take out with their shing­
ling tongs, and beat it with Iron sledges upon
an Iron plate near the fire, that so it may not
fall in pieces but be in a capacity to be car­
ried under the hammer. Under which they
then remove it, and drawing a little water,
beat it with the hammer very gently, which
forces cinder and dross out of the matter,
afterwards by degrees drawing more water
they beat it thicker and stronger till they bring
it to a Bloom, which is a four-square mass of
about two foot long. This operation they
call Shingling the Loop.

This done they immediately return it to
the Finery again, and after two or three
heats and working they bring it to an Ancony,
the figure whereof is in the middle, a barr
about 3 feet long of that shape they intend
the whole barr to be made of it: at both ends
a square piece left rough to be wrought at
the Chafery.

Note, At the Finery 3 load of the big­
gest coals goe to make one tun of Iron.

At the Chafery they only draw out the
2 ends sutable to what was drawn out at
the Finery in the middle, and so finish the
barr.

Note, 1. One load of the smaller coals
will draw out one tun of Iron at the Cha­
fery.



2. They expect that one man and a boy
at the Finery should make 2 tuns of Iron in
a week: two men at the Chafery should take
up, i. e. make or work five or six tun in a
week.

3. If into the hearth where they work
the Iron-sowes (whether the Chafery or the
Finery) you cast upon the Iron a piece of
Brass it will hinder the metal from working,
causing it to spatter about, so that it cannot be
brought into a Solid piece.





This account of the whole process of the
Iron-work I had from one of the chief Iron­
masters in Sussex, my honoured friend Walter
Burrell of Cuck-field Esquire deceased. And
now that I have had occasion to mention this
worthy Gentleman give me leave by the by
to insert a few observations referring to Hus­
bandry communicated by him in occasional
discourse on those Subjects.

1. In removing and transplanting young
Oakes you must be sure not to cut off or
wound that part of the root, which descends
down-right (which in some Countreys they
call the tap-root) but dig it up to the bot­
tome, and prepare your hole deep enough
to set it: else if you perswade it to live you

hinder the growth of it half in half.

2. Corn or any other grain, the longer



it continues in the ground, or the earlier it is
sown, cæteris paribus, the better laden it is,
and the berry more plump, full and weighty
and of stronger nourishment, as for example,
winter Oats better then summer Oats, Beans
set in February then those set in March,
& c.

3. The most effectual way to prevent
smutting or burning of any corn is to lime
it before you sow it, as is found by daily
experience in Sussex, where, since this practise
of liming, they have no burnt corn, whereas
before they had abundance. They lime it
thus, first they wet the corn a little to make
it stick and then sift or sprinkle poudered lime
upon it.

4. He uses to plow with his Oxen end­
wayes or all in one file, and not to Yoke
them by pairs, whereby he finds a double
advantage. 1. He by this means loseth no
part of the strength of any Oxe, whereas
breastwise, it is very hard so evenly to match
them, as that a great part of the strength of
some of them be not rendred useless. 2. In
this way a wet and clay ground is not so much
poached by the feet of the Oxen.

5. He hath practised to burn the ends of
all the posts which he sets into the ground
to a coal on the outside, whereby they con­



tinue a long time without rotting, which
otherwise would suddainly decay.

This observation I also find mentioned in
an Extract of a Letter, written by David
von-der beck a German Philosopher and
Physitian at Minden to Dr. Langelot, &c.
Registred in the Philosophic: Transact.
Numb. 92. Pag. 5185. In these words,

Hence also they sleightly burn the ends of
timber to be set in the ground, that so by the
fusion made by fire, the volatile Salts, which
by the accession of the moisture of the earth
would easily be consumed to the corruption
of the timber may catch and fix one ano­
ther.


6. He first introduced the use of Fern for
burning of lime, which serves that purpose
as well as wood, (the flame thereof being very
vehement) and is far cheaper.

7. Bucks if gelded when they have cast
their head, their horns never grow again,
if when their horns are grown they never
cast them, in brief their horns never grow
after they are gelded.

This Observation, expressed in almost the
same words, I find in the Summary of a
Book of Francesco Rodi the Italian, called
Esperienze intorno a diverse cose naturali, &c.
Delivered in the Philosophical Transactions
Numb. 92. Pag. 6005.



8. Rooks, if they infest your corn, are
more terrified if in their sight you take a
Rook and plucking it limbe from limbe, cast
the several limbes about your Field, then
if you hang up half a dozen dead Rooks
in it.

9. Rooks when they make their nests, one
of the pair always sits by to watch it, while
the other goes to fetch materials to build
it. Else if both goe and leave it unfinished,
their Fellow-Rooks, ere they return again
will have carried away toward their several
nests all the sticks and materials they had got
together. Hence perhaps the word Rooking
for cheating and abusing.





The manner of the Wire-work at
Tintern in Monmoth-shire.



THey take little square bars, made
like bars of steel, which they call
Osborn-Iron, wrought on pur­
pose for this manufacture; and
strain i. e.Not found in OED. draw them at a Furnace with a
hammer moved by water (like those at the
Iron Forges but lesser) into square rods of
about the bigness of ones little finger, or
less, and bow them round. When that is done



they put them into a furnace, and neal them
with a pretty strong fire for about 12 hours:
after they are nealed they lay them in water
for a month or two (the longer the better)
then the Rippers take them and draw them
into wire through two or three holes.

Then they neal them again for six hours
or more, and water them the second time
about a week, then they are carried to the
Rippers who draw them to a two-bond wire
as big as a great packthread.

Then again they are nealed the third time
and watered about a week as before, and
delivered to the small wire drawers, whom
there they call Overhouse-men, I suppose
only because they work in an upper room.Not found in OED but in later dictionaries.

In the mill, where the Rippers work, the
wheel moves several Engins like little barrels,
which they also call Barrels hoopt with Iron.
The Barrel hath two hooks on the upper
side, upon each whereof hang two links
standing a-cross, and fastned to the two ends
of the tongs, which catch hold of the wire
and draw it through the hole. The Axis on
which the barrel moves runs not through
the center, but is placed towards one side, viz.
that on which the hooks are.Underneath is
fastned to the barrel a spoke of wood, which
they call a Swingle, which is drawn back
a good way by the calms or cogs in the



Axis of the wheel, and draws back the bar­
rel, which falls to again by its own weight.
The tongs, hanging on the hooks of the bar­
rel, are by the workmen fastned on the wire,
and by the force of the wheel the hooks
being drawn back draw the wire through the
holes.

They anoint the wire with train-oil, to
make it run the easier. The plate, wherein
the holes are, is on the outside Iron, on the
inside steel.

The holes are bigger on the Iron side,
because the wire finds more resistance from
the steel and is streigthned by degrees.

There is another mill where the small wire
is drawn which with one wheel moves three
Axes that run the length of the house on 3
floors one above another.

The Description whereof would be tedi­
ous and difficult to understand without 
a Scheme, and therefore I shall omit it.








Modus faciendi Vitriolum coctile
in Anglia.

Worm. Mus. Sect. 2. Cap. 13.
p. 89.


LApides ex quibus Vitriolum ex­
coquitur ad litus Orientale infulæ
Shepey reperiuntur. Ubi ingen­
tem horum copiam collegerunt
per spatiosam areterræ mistos spargunt, donec
imbrium illuvie, accedente Solis æstu & calore
in terram seu pulverem redigantur subti­
lissimum, nitrosum, sulphureum odore præ­
tereuntes offendentem. Interea aqua per hanc
terram percolata in Subjecta vasa per tubulos
& canales derivata in vase plumbeo amplo
sex vel septem dierum spatio coquitur ad
justam consistentiam, tum in aliud vas plum­
beum effenditur immissis asseribus aliquot,
quibus adhærens concrescat vitriolum omni­
bus refrigeratis. Nullo alio vase coqui aut
contineri hoc lixivium potest quàm plumbeo;
cui ut facilius ebulliat ferri injiciunt parti­
culas, quæ à lixivio plane consumuntur.



We saw the manner of making Vitriol or
Copperas at Bricklesey in Essex. They lay
the stones upon a large bed or floor prepared
in the open air, underneath which there are
gutters or troughs disposed to receive and
carry away the liquor impregnate with the
mineral to a Cistern where it is Reserved.
[For the air and weather dissolving the stones,

the Rain falling upon them carries away
with it the Vitrioline juice or salt dissol­
ved,]

This liquor they boil in large leaden pans
putting in a good quantity of Old Iron.
When it is sufficiently evaporated they pour
it out into large troughs wherein it cools,
the Vitriol crystallizing to the sides of the
troughs and to cross barrs put into them.

The liquor that remains after the Vitriol
is Crystallized they call the mother, and
reserve it to be again evaporated by boy­
ling.

They gather of these stones in several pla­
ces besides the coast of the Island of Shepey. I
have observed people gathering them on the
Sea-shore near to Bright Helmston in Sus­
sex.



The manner of making Vitriol in Italy is
something different from ours in England,
which take in Matthiolu his words.

Mineræ glebas in acervos mediocres con­
jectos igne suppsito accendunt. Sponte au­
tem urunt semel accensæ, donec in calcem seu
cineres maxima ex parte reducantur. Mine­
ram cubustam in piscinas aquæ plenas obru­
unt, agitando, miscendoque eam, ut aqua im­
buatur substantiâ Vitrioli. Aquam hanc Vi­
triolatam a sedimento claram hauriunt; & in
caldaria plumbea transfundunt, quam igne
supposito decoquunt. Verum dum ebullit,
in medio cocturæ vel parum supra vel infra
addunt modicum ferri veteris vel glebæ æris
juxta intentionem operantis. Aquam Vi­
triolatam decoctam in vasa lignea transfundunt
in quibus frigescens congelatur in vitrio­
lum.







The making of Minium or
Red Lead.



FIrst they take Lead and waste it in an
Oven or Furnace: that is bring it to a
Substance almost like a Litharge, by stirring
it with an iron rake or how. This they grind
with two pair of stones which deliver it from
one to another: the first grind it courser, the
second finer [There is a mill so contrived
as that it moves at once six pair of these
stones] Thus reduced to powder and washed
it is put into an Oven or reverberating Fur­
nace, and, by continual stirring with the iron
rake or how, it is brought to the right colour
in two or three dayes. The fire must not be
extreme all this while, else it will clod toge­
ther and change colour. The iron rake
wherewith it is stirred is hung or poised on an
iron hook, else it is so heavy that it could not
be moved by one man.







The Allom Work at Whitby in
Yorkshire.



THe process of making Allom, as we
partly saw, and partly received from
the Workmen, was as followeth.

First they take the Mine picked from the
Dosse or Rock, and laying it on great heaps
burn it with whins and wood till it be white.
When it is sufficiently burned, they barrow
it into a pit made on purpose some ten feet
long, six foot broad, and seven fourths of a
yard deep, where it is steeped in water for
the space of eight or ten hours. Then they
draw out the Liquor, (which is but a Lixi­
vium impregnated with the Allom-mine) in­
to troughs by which it is conveyed to the
Allom-house, into a deep Cistern of about
twenty yards circumference, and three yards
and half deep. After this first water is
drawn off the Mine in the pits, they do not
presently cast away the mine, but pour fresh
water on it the second time, and after the se­
cond water is drawn off (which is much wea­
ker than the first) they cast out the Mine and
put in new, and pour on fresh water as before.

Out of the Cistern they convey the Lixi­
vium by troughs into the pans, where it is



boiled for the space of twenty four hours or­
dinarily. Then they take off the Liquor out
of the pans, and examine it by weight, to
know how much Lee made of kelp it will re­
quire, which is for the most part six inches of
the pans depth.

Which being put in so soon as the Liquor
boils or flows up by the putting in of an iron
cole-rake, or other iron Instrument, they
draw it off into a settler, and there let it stand
about an hour, that so the Sulphur and other
dregs may settle to the bottom, which being
done it is drawn off into coolers, where it
continues about for days and nights. The
cooler being drawn about half full, they
pour into it a quantity of Urine, viz. about
eight gallons into a cooler that contains about
two half tuns.

Having thus stood four days and nights,
it is quite cool, and the Allom crystallized
to the sides of the cooler. Then they
scope out the Liquor (which they call the
Mother) into a Cistern, and put it into the
pans again with new Lixivium to be evapo­
rated by boiling, &c. The Allom that is
shotten and crystallized on the sides of the
cooler they scrape off and wash with fair



Spring water; then throw it into a bing,
where the water drains from it. Thence it is
taken and cast into a pan, which they call the
rocking pan, and there melted, it is scoped
out and conveyed by troughs into tuns, in
which it stands about ten days untill it be per­
fectly cool and condensed. Then they un­
hoop and stave the tuns, and taking out the
Allom, chip it and carry it into the Store­
house.

We failed to enquire exactly what propor­
tion of kelp they put in. For though they
told us six inches of the pans depth, yet they
told us not how deep the pans are
made.







The making of Salt at Nampt­
wych in Cheshire.



THe Salt-spring or (as they call it)
the Brine-pitis near the River, and is
so plentiful that were all the water
boil'd out that it would afford (as they told
us) it would yield Salt enough for all
England. The Lords of the pit appoint
how much shall be boiled as they see occasi­
on, that the Trade be not clogged.

Divers persons have interest in the Brine­
pit, so that it belongs not all to one Lord;
Some have one Lead-walling, some two,
some three, some four or more. [N. B.
A Lead-walling is the Brine of twenty four
hours boiling for one house.]

Two hundred and sixteen Lead-wallings or
thereabout belong to all the Owners of the
pit. No Tradesman, Bachelor or Widow
can Rent more then eighteen Lead-wall­
ings.

They have four sworn Officers chosen



yearly, which they call Occupiers of Wall­
ing,whose duty it is to see equal dealing be­
tween Lord and Tenant, and all persons con­
cerned. They appoint how many Houses
shall Work at a time, and that is twelve at
the most. When there is occasion for Salt
to be made, they cause a Cryer to make
Proclamation, that so all Parties concerned
may put to their fires at the same time; and
so when they shall cease at a determinate
hour, at which they must give over; else
they cause their Salt to be marred by casting
dirt into it, or the like.

There are in the Town about fifty
houses, and every house hath four pans,
which the Rulers are to see be exactly of the
same measure.

Salt-water taken out of the Brine-pit in
two hours & a quarter boiling, will be evapo­
rated and boil'd up into Salt. When the Li­
quor is more then lukewarm, they take
strong Ale, bullocks blood and whites of
Eggs mixt together with Brine in this pro­
portion; of blood one Egg-shell full, the
white of one Egg and a pint of Ale, and put it
into a pan of twenty four gallons or therea­
bouts. The whites of the Eggs and the



bloud serve to clarifie the Brine by raising the
scum, which they take off just upon the
boiling of the pans, otherwise it will boil in,
and spoil the Salt. The older the bloud is,
the better it is; cateris paribus. They do
not always put in bloud, viz. when there is
danger of the Liquors boiling too fast. If
the Liquor happens to boil too fast, they
take to allay it Brine that had been boil'd and
drain'd from the Salt: Crude Brine, they
say, will diminish their Salt. The Ale serves
(they said) to harden the Corn of the
Salt.

After one hour boiling the Brine will be­
gin to Corn: then they take a small quan­
tity of clear Ale, and sprinkle thereof into the
pan about one Egg-shell full [N. if you put
in too much it will make the broth boil over
the pan.] Ale the while before they put in the
last Ale they cause the pan to boil as fast as
they can; Afterwards very gently till the
Salt be almost dry. They do not evaporate
ad siccitatem, but leave about a pottle or gal­
lon of Brine in the pan, lest the Salt should
burn and stick to the sides of the pan.

The Brine thus sufficiently boil'd and e­
vaporated, they take out the Salt and put it



into Conical Baskets, (which they call
barrows) and in them let the water drain
from it an hour, more or less, and then set it
to dry in the Hot-house behind the Fur­
nace.Antedates earliest OED citation (1686).

A barrow containing six pecks is sold
there for 1 s. 4 d.

Out of two pans of forty eight gallons they
expect seven pecks of Salt, Winchester-mea­
sure.

N. The house in which the Salt is boil'd
is called the Wych-house, whence may be
guessed what Wych signifies, and why all
those Towns where there are Salt-Springs
and Salt made are called by the name of
Wych, viz. Namptwych, Northwych,
Middlewych, Droitwych. The Vessel
whereinto the Brine is by troughs convey­
ed from the Brine-pit is called the ship. It is
raised up out of the pit by a pump. Be­
tween the Furnace and the Chimney tun­
nels which convey up the smoke is the Hot­
house where they set their Salt to dry, along the
floor whereof run two Funnels from the Fur­
naces almost parallel to the Horizon, and then
arise perpendicularly; in these the flame



and smoke running along from the Furnaces
heat the Room by the way.

At Droitwych in Worcestershire the Salt
is boil'd in shallow leaden pans. They
first put in Salt-water out of the Brine­
pit.

After one hours boiling they fill up the
pan with water that drains from the Salt set
to dry in barrows: after a second hours
boiling they fill up the pan again with the
same.

In five hours space the pan boils dry, and
they take out the Salt.

In twenty four hours they boil out five
pans: and then draw out the ashes: After
the ashes are drawn out, they put in the
white of an Egg, to cause the scum to arise
[viz. the dust and ash that fell into the pans
while the ashes were drawing out] which
they take off with a scummer. After four
hours they begin to take out the Salt; and
once in twenty four hours they take out a
cake which sticks to the bottom of the pan
(which they call clod Salt) otherwise the pan



would melt. They told me that they use
neither Bloud nor Ale. The Salt made
here is extraordinarily white and fine.





The manner of making Salt of Sea­
sand in Lancashire.



IN Summer time in dry weather they
Skimme or pare off the upper part of the
Sand in the flats and washes that are covered
at full Sea, and bare when the Tide is out,
and lay it up on great heaps.

Of this Sand they take and put in troughs
bored with holes at the bottom, and there­
on pour Water, as Laundresses do upon
Ashes to make a Lixivium, which Water
draining through the Sand, carries the Salt
therein contained down with it into Vessels
placed underneath to receive it. So long as
this liquor is strong enough to bear an Egg
they pour on more water; as soon as the



Egg begins to sink they cast the sand out of
the troughs, and put in new.

This water thus impregnate with Salt they
boil in leaden pans, wherein the water evapo­
rating the Salt remains behind.

There is also at Newcastle, Preston pans
in Scotland, Whithaven in Cumberland and
elsewhere great plenty of Salt made of Sea­
water by boiling and evaporating in like
manner, wherein they make use of Oxes
Bloud.





FINIS.



ERRATA.


All errata but several noted are entered into the text entries.



