



A TREATISE
NAMED LVCARSOLACE
DEVIDED INTO FOWER BOOKES,
which in part are collected out of diuerse authors in
diuerse languages, and in part deuised by
Cyprian Lvcar Gentleman.





IN THE NAME OF GOD AMEN.

THE FIRST BOOKE OF
LVCARSOLACE, CONTAINING DEFINITI&SHY;
ONS OF DIVERS WORDS AND TERMES, NAMES
and lengthes of diuerse English measures, a true difference betweene an acar of 
land measured with a pearch of 12.foote, 18.foote, 20.foote, or 24.foote in length
and an acar of land measured with a pearch of 16. foote and 1/2 foote in length.
Names & tipes of diuers Geometrical instruments: Names and dwelling pla­
ces of workmen which can make and do sell such instruments: Meanes to de­
scerne whether or no the edge of a ruler be right; and infallible instructions by
which an ingenious reader may easily measure vpon any smooth table, drums
head, stoole, or other superficies, measurable lengthes, bredthes, heightes, and
depthes apply knowne lengthes, bredthes, heigths, and depths to many good
purposes, know recorded heigthes, lengthes, & bredthes of some famous mo­
numents in Sarum, in Westminister, and in the honorable cittie of London: 
know the antiquitie of the said citie of London: draw the true plat of any place,
make a fit scale for any plat or mappe, reduce many plats into one faire mappe, reduce a map
from a bigge forme to a lesse forme, & from a lesse former to a bigge forme, and learne to note
the commodities and discommodities of places, in part collected and translated out of 
diuerse authors in diuerse languages, and in the greatest part deuised
by CYPRIAN LVCAR GENTLEMAN.




CHAP. I.

Definitions collected out of Euclide and other Authors of diuerse words
and termes recited in this Treatise.



A PRICKE, signe, or point , is that which hath no part,
as is this pricke, signe, or point marked vnder A.

The numbers of these definitions, noted in the margin from 1 to 48, are omitted here.



A line is length without bredth, as is this line,
A ------- B

The ends or limits of a line are points, as the points
A B are the ends of this line A ------- B

A right line is that which lieth equally betweene
his points, as the whole line A B lieth straight & equal­
ly betweene the points A ---- B without any going vp or comming downe
on either side. 

All lines which go not right forth from point to point, but bow any way ,




are crooked lines, and though of them there are innumerable diuersities, I haue
for examples set here some crooked lines of diuers fashions. 

A superficies is that which hath onely length and bredth. 

Extreames of a superficies are lines. 

A plaine superficies is that which lieth equally betweene his lines, as this
superficies lieth equally and smooth betweene the
two lines A C and B D, or betweene the two lines
A B and C D, so that no part thereof either swelleth
vpwards, or is depressed downwards. 

A plaine angle is an inclination or bowing of two
lines the one to the other, and the one touching the 
other, and not being directly ioyned togither, as do
the two lines A B and B C. 

If the lines which containe the angle be right lines,
then it is called a right angle , as is the angle A B C in the former figure: where
note that an angle is for the most part described by three letters, of which the 
second or middle letter representeth the verie angle, and therefore is set at the
angle. 

When a right line standing vpon a right line ma­
keth the angles on either side equall, then either of
those angles is a right angle, and the right line which
standeth erected is called a perpendicular or plumbe
line to that vpon which it standeth. 

A squier line is that which cutteth or toucheth any
line or thing squierwise, as in the figure belonging to
theleuenth definition, the line A B is a squier line, be­
cause it cutteth the line C D squierwise: and in the fi­
gure belonging to this twelft definition, the line A B 
is a squire line, because it toucheth the line C B squire­
wise: and the line C B is also a squier line because it
toucheth the line B A squierwise. 




A limite or terme is the end of euerie thing. 

A figure is that which is contained vnder one limite or terme, or manie, as
in the examples following the figure A is contained vnder one limit or terme
which is the round line. Also the figure B is contained vnder three lines, and
the figure C is contained vnder foure lines, and so of others which are their
limits or terms. 

A circle is a plaine figure contained vnder one line, which is called circum­
ference, as is the circle A in the former example. 

The point set in the middest of a circle (as is the point A in the former cir­
cle)  is called the center of the circle. 

A diameter of a circle is a right line, which drawne 
by the center therof, and ending at the circumference
on either side, deuideth the circle into two equal parts,
as the line B A C is the diameter of this circle. 

All straight lines besides the diameter in any circle
pulled from one part of the circumference to the other, 
are called cords: as for example in this circle folowing 
the lines D E F G are cords. 

A semicircle is a figure which is contained vnder the diameter, and vnder
that part of the circumference which is cut off by the
diameter, as in A B C D the circle following the fi­
gure A B C is a semicircle, because it is contained of
the right line B G C which is the diameter, and of the 
arke or arch line A B C, being that part of the cir­
cumference which is cut off by the diameter B G C.
So likewise the other part of the circle, namely B D C
is a semicircle. 

A section or portion of a circle is a figure which is conteined vnder a right




line and a part of the circumference, greater or lesse
than the semicircle, as A B C in the circle following is
a portion of that circle though it be greater than halfe
the circle. And likewise A D C is a portion of that cir­
cle, though it be lesse then the halfe circle. 

Rightlined figures are such as are contained vnder
right lines: and of them some are contained vnder three right lines, some vn­
der foure, some vnder fiue, and some vnder mo.

Three sided figures or figures of three sides  are such
as are contained vnder three right lines, as the figure 
A B C in the example following, is a figure of three
sides, because it is contained vnder three right lines,
namely, vnder the lines A B, B C, C A. 

Foure sided figures, or figures of foure sides , are such
as are contained vnder foure right lines, as the figure here set is a figure of
foure sides, for that it is comprehended vnder foure right lines: namely A B,
B D, D C, C A. 

Many sided figures are such as haue mo sides than foure. 

Here note ye, that euerie right lined figure hath as many angles as it hath
sides, and taketh his denomination as well of the number of his angles, as of
the number of his sides. As a figure contained vnder three right lines of the 
number of his three sides is called a three sided figure, so of the number of his
three angles it is called a triangle. Likewise a figure contained vnder foure




right lines, by reason of the number of his sides is called a fouresided figure,
and by reason of the number of his angles, it is called a quadrangled figure, &
so of others.

Of three sided figures or triangles , an equilater tri­
angle is that which hath three equall sides, as is the tri­
angle A in this example. 

Isosceles is a triangle which hath onely two sides
equall, as are the triangles B C and D in these exam­
ples. 

Scalenum is a triangle, whose three sides are all vnequall, as are the trian­
gles E F in these examples. 

Againe of triangles an Orthigonium or a right an­
gled triangle , is a triangle which hath a right angle:
as the triangle B C D , of which the angle B C D is a
right angle. 

An Ambligonium, or an obtuse angled tri­
angle , is a triangle which hath an obtuse angle,
as is the triangle B, whose angle A C D is an
obtuse angle. 

"ambligonium: no separate entry in OED.






An Oxigonium or an acute angled triangle , is a triangle which hath all his
three angles acute, as are these triangles A C A. 

Of foure sided figures a quadrate or square is that
whose sides are equall, and his angles right, as is this
foure sided figure, A B C D. 

A figure on the one side longer, or square-like, or as some call it a long
square , is that which hath right angles and not equall sides: as for example in
the figure following the angles are right angles, and the two sides therof A B,
and C D, are longer than the other two sides A C and B D. 

Rhombus or a diamond , is a figure hauing foure
equall sides, but it is not right angled: as in this figure
following the foure sides A B, B C, C D, D A, be
equall, and the angles thereof are not right angles. 

Rhomboides or a diamond like , is a figure
whose opposite sides are equall, and whose
opposite sides are also equall, but it hath
neither equal sides nor right angles, as is this
figure A B C D. 




All other figures of foure sides besides these , are called Trapezia, tables, or
irregular figures, as are the figures A B C. 

Paralell or equidistant right lines are such which being in one and the selfe
same superficies, and produced infinitely on both sides, do neuer in any part
concurre or meete, as are the lines A B and C D in this example. 

The horizon is a circle which deuideth and parteth that part of the world
which we see, from that which doth not appeare: & which parteth the world
in two equall parts, in such fashion, as the one halfe is euer aboue the earth, the
other alwayes vnder. 

An horizontall distance is a distance lying in a leuell or paralell line to the
horizon. 

An hipothenusall distance, or (which is all one) a diamentrall distance , is a li­
nearie length higher at one end then at the other, and of some is called a slope
distance. 

The Area of a figure , is that space which is contai­
ned within the sides of the figure: as for example, the
area of this figure next following, is the space be­
tweene A B, B D, D C, and C A, the fower sides
thereof. 

The circuite or compasse of a figure , is a line com­
posed of all the sides thereof. 

One side of a plaine figure is equall to another, and
so generally one right line is equall to another, when the one being applied to
the other, their extremes agree together. 

A parallelogramme is a figure of fower sides, whose two opposite or con­
trarie sides are equall the one to the other, and of parallelogrammes there are
fower kinds: that is to say, a square, a figure of one side longer, a Rhombus or
diamond, and a Rhomboides or diamond like figure: and of these fower sorts,
the square, and the figure of one side longer, are onely right angled Parallelo­
grammes for that all their angles are right angles. 




That angle is said to subtend a side of a triangle , which is placed directly
opposite and against that side, and that side is said to subtend an angle which 
is opposite to the angle: for euery angle of a triangle is contained of two sides
of the triangle, and is subtended to the third side. 

A sector of a circle is (an angle being set at the center of a circle) a figure
contained vnder the right lines which make that angle,
and the part of the circumference receaued of them: as
here the figure A B C is a sector of a circle, for that it
hath an angle at the center, namely the angle, B A C, 
and is contained of the two right lines A B and A C,
which containe that angle, and the circumference recea­
ued by them. 

A scale is a measure deuided into many equall parts, made at the will of the 
measurer great or litle, and to be named by what denomination he pleaseth, to
set forth heights, depths, breadthes, lengths, & the plat of any peece of ground
in true proportion and symetrie vpon paper or any other superficies. 

Symetrie is a conuenient agreement betweene the members or parts of a­
ny thing aunswering in euery part separate vnto the proportion of the whole
figure. 

A poligonon figure is a figure consisting of many sides. 


CHAP. II.


The names and lengthes of diuers English measures, and a true difference betweene
an acar of land measured with a pearch of 12. foote, 18. foote, 20. foote, or 
24. foote in length, and an acar of land measured with a 
pearch of 16. foote and 1/2. foote in length.

THREE barley cornes drie and round do make an inch of assise, 12.
inches of assise make a foot of assise, one foot & a half foot of assise
make a cubite, 3. feete of assise or 2 cubits make a meating yard,
2. meating yards make a fadome, 5. meating yards and 1/2. meating 
yeard make a statute pearch; one statute pearch in breadth, and 
4. statute pearches in length make a day worke, 10. day workes make a rood, or
(as some name it) a farthendele, or (which is all one) a quarter of an acar, one
statute pearch in bredth, & 160. statute pearches in length make an acar, which
doth containe 6272640. square inches. 4. acars (as Fabian in his chronicle and
historie of king William Conqueror hath written) make a yard of land, 5. yards
of land make a hide of land, and 8. hides of land make a Knights fee, which (as
the said Fabian hath also written) is a plough till a yeare. Moreouer note that 
16. english elles in length make 20. meating yards in length, 20. meating yards 
in length make a score, 40. statute pearches in length an English furlong, 8.
English furlongs in length an English mile, and that the number of inches of




assise, feete of assise, cubites, meating yardes, english elles, fadomes, statute
pearches, and scores which are in an english mile, doth here followe.

63360. inches of assise
5280. feete of assise
3520. cubites
1760. meating yards			
1408. English elles
880. fadomes
320. statute pearches
88. score in length make an English mile.

I haue in this chapter made mention of english miles and statute pearches ,
because the Italian mile containing in length 5000. feete, differeth from our
english mile comprehending in it 5280. feete, and because our statute pearch
which is ordained by a statute made in the 33. yeare of king Edward the first,
varieth from a pearch of 12. foote in length, called by some tenantright, and
by others curtmeasure, wherewith medow grounds in diuerse places of En­
gland are measured to the intollerable losses of buyers, and for that our said
statute pearch hath no equalitie with a pearch of 18. foote in length, called of 
some a woodland pearch, or with a pearch of 20. foot in length, or with a pearch
of 24. foot in length, which are also vsed in many places of this realme by mea­
surers of wood lands to the manifold disaduantages of sellers. For whosoeuer
will compare the said vnequall pearches one with the other, shall find that a­
cars of land measured with the said vnequall pearches do thus differ. 

"tenant-right" not found in OED in this sense; and "curt measure" and "woodland perch" are also not found.



Two roods of a statute acar , one day worke of a statute acar, and 76/121. of a 
statute pearch, do containe one acar measured with a pearch of 12. foot in length. 

One acar measured with a pearch of 18. foote in length , doth containe one
statute acar, seuen dayworks of a statute acar, two statute perches, and 50/121. of
a statute pearch. 

One acar measured with a pearch of 20. foote in length doth containe one
statute acar, one roode of a statute acar, three statute pearches and 603/1089. of a 
statute pearch. 

One acar measured with a pearch of 24. foote in length , doth containe two 
statute acars, foure dayworks of a statute acar, two statute pearches, and 62/121.
of a statute pearch. 



A sharpe poin­
ted peece of
blacke lead is
called among
Painters a kee­
ler.
 
 "keeler" not found in OED in this sense.

 







 
