





l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 1 3 2 2 1

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )




The Annotacions in forme of a 
Table after the order of the Alphabete, contay­
nynge the exposytion of many woordes, Histo­
ries, Fables, sytuacions of places, and des­
cription of Countreyes, seruynge to
the more easye vnderstandynge 
of the presente Hy­
storye.


A.

AChilles,  was one of the most valyaunt 
Capitaynes of the Greakes, againste
Troy, Sone of Peleus King of Thra­
ce, & Thetis the Doughter of Chrion,
by whom he was enstructed, in the fea­
tes of Armes. He was slayne by Pa­
ris, the Sone of Priamus, and Hecu­
ba, at Troy the Grete, in the Temple of Apollo: into the whi­
che, he was come, during the truce betwene the Gre­
kes, & Troians, vnder assuraunce, to marye Polixena
the Doughter of Priamus. In al partes of his body, he
was without daauger of wounding, sauing in the sole of 
the foote. By the which, his mother Thetis held him, when
she plonged him, for the same purpose, within Stix, one of 
thinfernal floodes. In the same part of his foote, not plon­
ged, did Paris wounde him, whereof he died. And was
buried in a litle hil called Sigeum, hard by Troy, wher,
during the siege, the Greekes, encamped. In the warre
betwene the Greekes, and the Troyans, he slew Hec­
tor, & Troilus, the Sones of Priamus, and Hecuba, &
Bretherne of the said Paris. He was in heighte (as
Licophron wryteth.) vii. cubites.

Adolescencie  is the age betwene Childehood, and
mans age: that is betwene .xiiii. and .xxi. yeres. Ser­
uius the Gramarien, & Varro, hath deuided the Ages, in
to Infaancie, Boies age, Adolescencie, Youth, & olde age,
without any mencion of the perfect age of mans estate.
The whiche, after the same diuision, is conteyned be­
twene youthe, and olde age. Infancie endureth vnto
vii. yeres. Boyes age vnto .xiiii. complete.




But Seruius Tullius, a King of the Romaynes, rec­
kened all those which were vnder the age of .xvii. yea­
res to be Boyes, and after .xvii. yeres, vntyll .xlvi. to
be yonge men, and them he called olde men, whyche 
were aboue .xlvi. yeres of age. Beyonde that is the 
age decrepite, vncertayne, and doubtfull. 

Aethiope:  loke on this worde Libye.

Alexander the grete,  was the Sone of Philyp, king
of Macedonye, and Olympias. In his tender age, be
was enstructed in learning. And after that, by the space
of .x. yeres, brought vp in Philosophy, vnder Aristo­
tle, the most excellent Philosopher of all his time. Af­
ter the death of hys Father, coueting to be Lord of all
the worlde, he apparayled his Armye, against Dari­
us the Kinge of Persia: who wyth his predecessours,
had bene the auncient enemyes of Grece. Hym dyd
Alexander vanquishe in sundry batayles, and depry­
ued of the Persian Kyngdome. But after he had ob­
tained many notable victories, in the .xxx. yere of hys
age, he dyed by poyson, at Babylon, as Justin writeth.
Neuerthelesse, Plutarche affirmeth the contrary, say­
enge that he died of an Ague, very vehement, wherin
was no suspicion of Poyson. The Prouinces, and 
Countreyes, by him Conquered, did Perdicas, (vnto
whome at his deathe withoute any more wordes, he
delyuered hys Rynge) distribute amonges many Go­
uernours: who altered their offices of gouernaunce, in
to Royaulnes, and made them selues Kynges. And so
was Thempyre of Alexander broughte into manye
Kyngedomes. The resydue of hys lyfe, ye may rede
in Plutarche, and Quintus Curtius.

Alexandrye,  whereof Herodian speaketh in the
thirde Booke, is a Citye in Siria, hard by a reflexion
of the Sea, called Sinus Issicus, wherefore loke vpon
thiese wordes, Issicus Sinus. There is an other Ci­
tye called Alexandrye, in the Region of Troas, where
Troye the greate stode, as Plinie writeth, in the .xxx.
Chapiter of hys .v. Booke.




An other Cytye, named Alexandrie, is in Egypte, sci­
tuate vpon the Sea side, oueraneanste the Isle Pha­
rus, as sayth Plinie in the .xxxi. Chapiter of the same
boke. Thys Cytye is the principall of all Egypte, as
London is of England. Into the whiche Ptolomeus
the kyng of Egypte, desyred to be remitted by the Re­
maines, as it appeareth by many Epistles, of Cicero,
vnto Lentulus, in the fyrste booke of hys familiar
Epistles. Of thys Cytye, doth Herodian make menci­
on in the .iiii. booke of his Historye, and of the Trea­
son wrought agaynst the Citezins thereof, by Anto­
nyne. There is another Cytye named Alexandrie, by
the mountaynes of Casxij, in the Realme of Sogdia, 
nygh vnto the Bactrians, whych hath on the South
the mountaigne Cacausus. Another Alexandrie, buyl­
ded lykewyse by Alexander the great, standeth in the 
Region called Margiana, of a Ryuers name, whiche
is Margus. The same hathe on the West side Hir­
cania, on the East the Bactrians, and on the South,
the Realmes of Parthia, and Aria. Thys Citie was
destroyed by the Barbarous people, and in the same
place was a new buylded, by Seleucus the Sonne of 
Antiochus, who named it Selencia, as recordeth Pli­
nie, in the xvi. Chapyter of his .vi. boke. Another citie
called Alexandrie, in the Countreye of Carmania in
Inde, boundynge vpon Persia. Of theise Cityes and
countreyes loke Ptolomeus and Plinie.

Altinum  loke thys worde Aquileia.

Amphitheater,  is a place made to behold plaies in, the
which is in fourme round, as yf it were buylded of .ii.
Theaters, and therfore is called Amphitheater.

A Theater  is made halfe in compasse, betwene the 
ij. corners wherof, is played that whiche men behold,
called of the Latinystes Scena. The nexte place vnto
it, is called Orchestra, where the Senatours & straunge
Ambassadours do sit. In the middes of the Theater, 
are the Seates for Knightes, and that place, is named
Canea. Rounde aboute the Theater withinfurth are
degrees, and steppes, so made, that the hygher they as­
cend, the longer, and larger they are. Vpon the which




the people do sit, as euery man can get him place. Marcus
Scaurus (as witnesseth Plinie in the .xxxiii. boke, the
xv. chap.) for one Playe, which endured .xxx. dayes on­
ly, dyd buylde a Theater, the greatest of all other, that
were euer made by mans handes. The Scene where­
of, was of thre stages, & had. iii.C.lx. Pyllers of mar­
ble of Affrique: of the whiche, the higher were of one
piece, and xxxviii. fote in height. The lower parte of the
Scene was of Marble, and the stage in the myddes of 
Glasse, which neuer man heard of before. There was
besydes, for the more gorgious beautyfyeng of it .iii.M.
Images of Copper, with so much rychesse, Tapistrie
of golde, and Tables of auncient & notable pictures, that
it is almoste incredible to beleue, as wryteth Plinie.
The greeces wheron men sate in the same, did receiue
lxxx.M. persons. Caius Iulius Cesar, fyrst of all, buil­
ded an Amphitheater, in the fyelde called Campus
Martius: whyche Augustus pulled downe, and in the 
same place, made a Tombe.

Antioche,  is a parte of Siria, boundynge vpon the 
Royalme of Cilicia, as sayeth Plinie, in the xii. chap.
of hys fyfth boke. In thys part, is a Cytye of the same
name, as wryteth Ptolomeus, in the fourth Table of 
Asya. Thys is the Cytye, to the whyche Antonyne
went, and from thence, to Alexandrie in Egypt. Ther
is another Antyoche in the countrey of Assyrya, where
Alexander vanquyshed Darius: the whych is next vn
to Syrya (as wytnesseth Plinye, in the .xiii. chapyter
of hys .vi. boke. Amonges the Isles of the Asyan Sea,
Plynye in hys .v. booke, the .xxi. Chapyter, sayeth,
there is one called Antyoche, whyche standeth in the 
Sea of Pamphilia.

Apoplexie,  as sayeth Galien in the .v. chapyter of hys
thyrde booke of the places affected, is a disease, by the 
whych, all a mans synewes, and vaynes, do lose theyr
force, of fealynge, and mouynge. Thys dysease com­
meth sodeynlye, and by the same, a man shall vnethes 
fetche brethe.




Affryke.  The Cosmographers do deuide the Earth into
thre partes. That is to wete, Europe, Asie, & Affryke.
Europe is seperated from Asia, by the Ryuer Tanais
and the Lakes called Meotides, wythin the whiche Ta­
nais doeth fall. And it is desseuered from Asie, by the 
Sea Mediterrane, so named, for that it is in the myd­
des of the earthe, or elles, because it is enclosed wyth
earth on euery syde, sauynge where he hath his yssue,
betwene the pyllers of Hercules: wherof, the one is in
Mauritania, the other in Spayne. Betwene the whi­
che, Hercules made waie, and passage for the Mediter­
rane Sea, to ioyne with Thocean. And it hathe none
other yssue, then betwene those two pyllers. It exten­
deth towardes the Easte, as farre as Siria, whiche is 
in Asia. Towardes the Northe, vnto the lakes Meoti­
des. On the Southe parte, it hath alwaies Aphrique,
which is sequestred from Asie, by an arme of the Sea,
called Sinus Arabicus. That is the Redde Sea, wher
by the children of Israell, passed out of Egypte, into 
the Desertes of Arabie. Europe is muche Northe,
and so is it West in respecte of Asie. And it is the least
of the thre partes: conteynynge the Isles of England,
and Scotlande, and the nexte Isles thervnto, Spaine,
Fraunce, Almayne, Italye, & Grece, wyth the Isles
theyr neyghbours.

Asie  conteyneth Asie the lesse, Lydia, Caria, Bythy­
nia, Galatia, Capadocia, Armenia, Cilicia, Sarma­
tia, Assiria, Arabia, Persia, Hircania, Media, Iudea, 
the two Yndes, and all the other countreyes, whych
Ptolome describeth in hys twelue Tables.

Aphrique  which is South, conteyneth, Mauritanya,
Numidia, the countrey of Carthage (whyche so longe
tyme, helde warre wyth the Romaynes) Libia, Ethi­
ope, and Egypt. The Sea, called the great Ocean, en­
uironeth all these thre partes rounde aboute.

Aquileia  is a Cytye scituate in the tenth part of Italye,
after the deuision, whyche Plinie maketh thereof, in
the xviij. Chapyter of the thyrde booke of hys natural 
Hystorye, sayinge thus.




Here foloweth tenth region of Italie, named Venise,
adiacent vnto the Sea Hadriatyque. In this Region,
there is a Ryuer called Silix, commynge oute of the
Taurisane mountaignes, a Towne called Altinum, 
with a Riuer called Liquentia, descendyng out of the 
mountaygnes Opitergines, and a Hauen of the same
name. A towne called Concordia, wyth a Ryuer, & a Ha­
uen named Romantinum. The greate and lytle Tilla­
uentum. Anassum another towne, whereby passeth the
Ryuer Varannus. And the Ryuers Alsa, Natison,
and Turrus, do passe by Aquileia, whiche Citie is di­
staunt from the Sea .xij. miles. For the reste, haue re­
course to the Text.

Arabie.  There are .iij. Arabies. Thone called Fertile,
or happye. Another called Rockye. And the thyrd, na­
med Desert. All thre verye nygh togethers, as sayeth 
Ptolomee. And they are in Asia, nygh vnto the redde
Sea, through the which the chyldren of Israell depar­
tynge oute of Egypte passed, and immedyatlye ente­
red into the Dersertes of Arabie.

Armenie  is a Realme of Asia. The lesse Armenie ioy­
neth wyth Capadocia, on the Weste parte. And there
is nothyng betwene them, sauyng the mountaignes.
On the East part, it is ioyned withe Armenie the great:
hauynge no more, but the Ryuer of Euphrates be­
twene them.

Towardes the Southe, is the mountaygne Taurus:
whych maketh separation of Armenia and Cilicia.
Towards the North, is the Sea Mediterrane, which 
in the streyte there, is called Pontus Euxinus. The 
great Armeny is beyond Euphrates. And hath on the 
East part the Hircanian Sea, & the mountaygne cal­
led Caspius. On the Northe aboue it, the Realmes of
Colchis, Iberie, and Albanie. And towards the South,
Mesapotamia, as Ptolome hathe described it, in the .iij.
Table of Asia.

Asia.  Loke on thys word Aphrique.

Atreniens,  are people of Arabie, as sayeth Plinie in
the .xxiiij. chap. of the vi. boke of hys natural historye.






BIthinie  is a Royalme of Asia, nigh vnto Thrace
betwene whome, & it, ther is nothing, but a streite
goulfe of the Sea. In this Royaulme, are many 
goodly Cities, as Chalcedon, Nicomedia, Apamea, He­
raclea, Nicea, & other, as sayen Plyen, & Ptolomee.

Bizantium,  as it appeareth by the Texte, in the 
beginning of Herodians thyrde Booke, is a Cytye of 
Thrace, of the whiche, the scituacion, and commodi­
ties, are sufficiently described in the sayde Booke It
is the same, which we at this day, call Constantinople.


C.

Capitol   is a Hill in Rome, the which in olde time
was called the Mounte of Tarpeyus, wherin when
thei dygged, to laye the fundacion of Iupiters Tem­
ple which was there buylded fowre square on euery
syde a hundreth foote in heighte, in the tyme of Tar­
quinius the proude, laste Kynge of the Romaynes)
thei founde a mans heade wyth the face hole vnperys­
shed. The Latins call a head, Caput, whereof the place
is called Capitole. The Mounte called Tarpeius, had
two lytle Hylles. On the one stode the Temple
of Iupiter, & on the other, the Fortresse, or Palaice of
Rome, whiche thei called Arx Capitolina.

Cappadoce  is a Royaulme of Asie, adiacent on the west
part to the Region called Galatia. And on the East, to Ar­
menie, thus dooth Ptolomee describe it in the first Ta­
ble of Asye.

Carie.  Looke on this worde Ionie.

Carre  is a Citye of Mesopotamia, as sayeth the 
Text, which is renowned, & spoke of, thrugh the ouer­
throw of Marcus Crassus, who was slaine, & his Ar­
my vanquished by the Parthians, nigh vnto the said Ci­
tie, as writeth Plutarch in the life of Marcus Crassus.

Carting  was an ="vnde">vndecent exercise, wherin voluptu­
ouse Emperours gretely delited. The forme thereof, 
was to ryde in a Chariot, & with whipping, cause the 
horses which drew the same, to run very fast to and fro
as it liked them. We may call it Chariotting also: other
name haue I not for the laten worde of it, whiche is 
Aurigatio.




Chalcedon  is a City of Bithynia, vpon the Sea side,
righte ouer aneanst Thrace, and the Citye of Con­
stantinople. There is no more betwene them, as say­
eth the Authoure, but a strait of the Sea, called Bos­
phorus Thracius, or Propontius, or Helespontus,
which are all one, making seperation of Europe, & Asie,

Circenses  were certaine exercises, plaied, and she­
wed in a place called Circus, whiche was compassed
rounde about with a stone wall. In thiese plaies thei
vsed to runne with horses, & to wrastle. Thei were called
Circenses, as if it were circum enses, that is to saye enui­
ronned on euery syde with Swordes. For in olde tyme,
al the Running, Iusting, Wrastling, and Combates
of the Romaynes were in places enclosed, on the one
side with Riuers, & on the other syde with Swordes,
Glayus, and Hallebardes, to the ende that Cowar­
des, & Dastardes shuld not flea away without daunger.

Cohorte Pretoriane,  are suche men at Armes, as
garde the person of any Capitayne, Duke, Consull, 
King, or Emperour. For this name Pretor, is often ti­
mes taken for a King, Emperour, or Consull.

Colossus.  The Latins called euery greate, and huge
Image, Collossus. This Colossus, whereof Hero­
dian speaketh in his firste Booke, was made by a 
notable workeman named Zenodorus, at the comaum­
dement of Nero Emperour of Rome. And it was his
Image, beynge a hundreth and ten foote in heighte.
The same Image was dedicated to the honour of the 
Sonne, after that the actes of Nero were condempned,
and infringed for his cruell Tirrany, as saieth Ply­
nie in the .xxxiii. booke the .vii. Chapiter. Ther was an
other Colossus at Rome, which Domitian caused to 
be made, standing vpon great pillers of Marble.

In the Capitole there was an other Colossus, re­
presentinge the Image of Apollo, whiche was .xxxi.
cubytes of height, transported thither, by Marcus Lu­
cullus, from a Citie called Apollonia in the Royalme
of Pontus. Amonges all such huge Images, Plinye,




in the last cited Booke, and Chapiter, saieth that in Rho­
des, there was the Image of the Sone, passed al other
in greatnes, made by Chares of Lidia, disciple vnto
Lisippus. The same was .lxx. cubites in heighte. And
fell downe by a meruailouse erthquake .lvi. yeres, af­
ter it was made. And althoughe it be broken, yet is it
at this present, a thing wonderful to behold. The Thombe
therof, a man can vnethe fadome. And his fingers are
as bigge as great Images. In the same city of Rhodes,
there are an .C. more Colossi. But not so bygge as
this, although the leste of them, were sufficient, to win
fame, and renowne to the City. For those, & more des­
cripcion of the other, haue recourse to the aforenamed
Booke, and Chapiter of Plynie.

Constantinople.  Loke on this worde Bizantium.

Cyrus.  King of Persia, was the Sone of one Cam­
bises, of an obscure familie in Persia, & Mandane the 
doughter of Astiages King of Media. Who after ther
position of his dreame (by the whiche he vnderstode that
his doughters Sone shuld be King of all Asye, & that
him self shuld lose his Royalme) caused Circus, imme­
diatly after he was borne, to be put furth, & lefte alone
in a Forest, to the ende, he might be deuoured of wylde
beastes. But there a Bitche gaue him sucke, & defen­
ded hym from Beastes, and Byrdes, vntyll that the 
Kynges Sheperde founde hym, caryed hym home to 
hys wyfe, and gaue her the charge to nouryshe hym.
The woman was afterwardes called Spaeon, be­
cause amonges the Persyans, a Dogge is so named.
After that he waxed greate, he was called Cyrus, by
the Sheperdes his Companions, knowen to be Asti­
ages doughters Sone, and sente into Persia: where
he obtained much credite, and aucthority. Finally, he
assembled an Armye, to make warre vpon Astyages,
his Grandefather, from whom he berefte the Royalme
of Media, vnto the which the Persians were subiect.
And by thys meanes Cyrus became Kynge of 
Perse, and Media. Before hys tyme the Persians




had no Kinges, but were subiecte vnto other Royaul­
mes. After his victorie against Astiages, he vanquis­
shed, & toke prisoner, Croesus the King Lidia, which
was so riche. But in conclusion him selfe, was ouer­
comen, and slayne, by Thomyris Quene of Scithia,
when he had reigned .xxx. yeres. Vnto hym, succeded
Cambises, his Sone, as Iustin, in his first booke men­
cioneth. Eusebius sayeth, that Cambises reygned .viii.
yeres. Vnder Cirus Kynge of Persia, by hys owne
permission, began the reparacion of the Temple of Hierusalem:
which notwithstanding was discontinued many yeres after.
And at the last finished the .vi. yeare of Darius Reigne
Kinge likewise of Persya, as witnesseth the .vi. & .vii.
Chapiters of Esdras in the Bible, and Sabellyque in
the .vii. Booke of his seconde Enneade. After Camby­
ses, two Brethern called Magi, vsurped the kingdom .vii.
Monethes. After whom Darius raigned .xxxvi. yeres.
And in the seconde yere of his Reigne, Zorobabell, by
his permission, renewed the reparacion of the Temple of
Hierusalem. This Darius, was nat he, that Alexander the 
great vanquished: but that was the .x. king after him,
called Darius also. In whom the Royaulme of Persia
toke hys eande.

Cyzicum  is a Citye of Asye, vpon the Sea syde, in
a Royaulme called Misia the lesse, as witnesseth Pto­
lomee in the fyrst Table of Asie. And so sayeth Plinie
in the .xxxii. Chapiter of his .vi. Booke.


D.

DAnubie, or Danowe.  Loke on Ister.

Darius  loke on these wordes, Alexander, & Cirus.

Dionisus the Elder,  was a Tirant of Sicile, & Son
of Hermocrates, as saieth Sabellique. He was verye
well learned, as writeth Plinie: who preferreth none
before him, sauing Plato in Philosophye, & Philopenus
in Poetrie, two the notablest men of learning in all his
time. In the same yere that the Kingdom of Athenes ended,
and Darius Kynge of Perse dyed, Dionisus loste his
Royalme, as sayeth Sabellique, in the nynthe Booke
of hys fyrste Enneade. Wherein he agreeth not




wyth Eusebius. Dyonisius Sonne was likewyse na­
med Dyonisius the yonger, who was also a Tirante
of Sicile, and raygned in a citye called Siracuses: out
of the whiche he was expulsed twyse, ones by Dion:
And the second tyme by Timoleon, sent agaynst hym
by the Corynthians. After thys seconde expulsion, he
kept a schole, and taught yonge chyldren at Corynthe,
as wryteth Valerius Maximus.


E.

Eridanus  is a Ryuer of Italye, otherwyse called
Padrus, whych cometh (as sayth Plinie in the  .xvi.
chap. the .iij. boke of his natural History) out of a
mountaigne called Vesulus. After that, he hideth him
selfe in the grounde, and issueth out againe in the con­
fynes of the Foruibienses. Of all Ryuers ther is none
more renowned. The Grekes cal it Eridanus. There
is no Riuer besydes, that encreaseth greater, wythin
so lytle space. For it hathe a merueylous abundaunce
of water, falling into the Sea Adriatique. Betwene the
cytyes of Rauenna, and Altinum, it is verye domage­
able vnto the Countrey. For by the space of .vi. skore
myles (as sayeth Plinie) it doeth seperate it selfe, into
many Riuers, & Lakes. And because that euerye Ry­
uer is large, and great, they call the same seuen Seas,
as witnesseth Herodyan, in hys eyght boke.

Euphrates.  Loke on thys worde Syrye.

Europe.  Loke on thys worde Aphryque.


G.

Galatians,  are those whiche enhabit the realme of
Galatia, which is in Asya, betwene Bithinia &
Capadocia, as sayen Plinye in the laste chap. of hys
fyfth boke, and Ptolome in the fyrst Table of Asye. The
same Realme is called also Gallogretia, and the peo­
ple Gallogreci: because, that when the Gaules came




to the ayde, and succour of the kyng of Bythynie, they
helde and possessed that part of the Royalme. Where­
fore it is so named, as wryteth Sabellique.

Gallus  a Ryuer. Looke on theyse wordes Goddesse
Pesynuntyne.

Ganymedes  was Son of Tros king of Phrigia, who
had Issue, Ilus, Assacus, and Ganimedes. The Fa­
bles surmise (which is the most common opinion) that Iu­
piter rauished Ganimedes for his beauty, by an Egle.
But Sabellique in the .x. boke of hys fyrste Enneade,
sayth, that Ganymedes the Son of Tros, was rauished
by Tantalus kynge of Paphlagenie, to abuse hym.
Whereby there arose great warre, betwene the two
kynges. And it is most lyke, that being very yonge, he
was iniuriously rauished by Tantalus, vnder the signe
of the Egle, were the battayles fought vpon the land,
or Sea. Whych hath bene cause of the inuention of the 
Fable, that sayeth that the Egle, by ordynaunce of 
Iupiter, rauyshed hym.

Gaule or Fraunce.  Cesar in his commentaries saith,
that Gaule is deuided into thre partes, wherof the Bel­
ges helde the one, the Celtes another, and the Aqui­
tans inhabited the thyrd. The Aquitans are seperated
from the Celtes, by the Ryuer of Garumna. The Cel­
tes are sequestred from the Belges, by the Ryuers of
Marne and Seyn. And the Belges are sundred frome
the Almaignes by the Rheyn. In the which diuision,
Gaule Narbonique is not comprised. Ptolomee in
hys fourth Table of Europe, and in the chapyters of
the same, dothe deuyde Gaule into foure partes: ap­
poyntynge Gaule Aquitanyque, to extende as farre
as the Ryuer of Loyre. And from Loyre, to the Ry­
uers of Seyn, and Marne, is Gaule named Lugdu­
nensis. And from Seyn, vnto Rheyn, Gaule Narbo­
nique extendeth it selfe, vnto the Sea Mediterrane­
an, beyonde the Alpes, and the Ryuer Varus, vnto 
the Pyrrhenyan Mountaignes. Gaule the rounded,




or otherwyse called Lumberdye, is in the Lymytes
of Italye, and is the same countreye, whyche is na­
named Liguria, nexte vnto the Alpes, and the Sea. All
the other Gaule, or Fraunce, is called Gaule bering
bushe. Gaule Narbonique, was before tyme named
Brachata, as sayeth Plinie, in the thyrde boke, and
the fourth chapyter.

Goddesse Pesynuntyne,  is the same that Cicero in hys
bokes of the lawes, calleth the Moother Idea, whyche
is the selfe same, that the Romaynes name the Moo­
ther of the Goddes, and doo greatlye reuerence.

Liuie in the .ix. booke of hys seconde ware Pu­
nique, sayth that they founde in the Sybyline bokes,
(whyche were perused and redde ouer, because of the 
often raynynge of stones the same yeare) that when so
euer anye straunger, and forreyne enemye, shoulde
moue warre agaynste Italye, he myghte be vanquys­
shed, and expelled thence, yf the Moother Idea were
transported to Rome, from a fyelde of Phrigia named
Pesinus. The whyche to do, the Romaynes sent fiue
Ambassadours, wyth fyue greate shyppes, called
Cynqueremes, to Atalus king of Asie. Who led them
to the place called Pesynus, delyuered them the holye
stone, whych the inhabitauntes there, called the Moo­
ther of the Goddes, and appoynted theym to carye it
vnto Rome. It was receyued at the Hauen of Ho­
stia, by Publius Scipio, beynge iudged at that tyme,
the worthyest manne in all the Cytye, to do the same,
caryed vnto Rome, and sette in the Temple if Victo­
rye, wythin the Palayce, the .xiij. daye of Apryll,
whyche was celebrated, and solempnyzed wyth see­
stes, and gyftes, that the people in greate aboundance
offered vnto the Goddesse. Whych playes the Romay­
nes called Megalesia.

The same Goddesse is called Oys, whome they sup­
pose to be the wyfe of Saturne, called Rhea, by the why­
che they vnderstande the earth, that geueth affluence
and abundaunce of all thynge.




She is otherwise named Cybele, of the name of a Hyl
and cytye, of Phrigia where her sacrifices were fyrst 
instituted. Or she is called Cybele, of Cimbals, which
signifyeth the Instrumentes, and Soundes, they vsed
in the sacryfyces. The Poetes sayen, that she roade in
a Chariot, and had a crown of Towers: wherby they
sygnyfye, that the earthe hangeth in the ayre, and the
world tourneth alwayes rounde aboute and that the
earth hathe vpon it Cytyes, and Townes, wherein be
Towers.

She is called Moother of the Goddes, because she en­
gendreth all thyng. She is also called Pales, for that she
is the Goddesse of sheperdes, & her feastes are called Pa­
lilia. And she is also surnamed Berecinthia, of a moun­
taygne of Phrigie called Berecynthes. According to
the diuersytye of her names, she hath dyuers powers,
dyuers sacryfyces, and dyuers ministers.

Vnder theyse names, Cybele, Berecynthia, Goddesse
Pesynuntyne, & Moother Idea, because they came
of names of places in Phrigia, from whence thys
Goddesse was broughte to Rome, is no diuersitie of
puyssaunce sygnified.

Thys Goddesse hathe Priestes, and Ministers, called
Gallj, by the name of a Riuer, named Gallus in Phri­
gia. The water wherof, causeth theym to be mad that
drynke it. Those Priestes be gelded, who beyng stur­
red wyth madnesse, noddynge theyr heades, vp and
downe, wyth great noyse of small Belles, whych they
caryed, did prophesye, and tell of thynges to come,
in that madnesse. They were otherwyse called Cor­
ybantes.


I.

ILium  is the same Cytye, that we call Troye the 
great. Ilus son of Tros, in the countrey called Troas
dyd buylde thys citye Ilium, so called of his name. And
of the countrey wherin it stode, it was named Troye,
as wytnesseth Sabellique, in the fyfth booke of hys
fyrst Enneade. The Countrey is ioynyng vnto Phri­




gia on the East, and towardes the west it hath the Sea
Hellespontique, as Ptolomee hathe described it, in hys
first Table of Asie.

Illiria.  The Royalme of Illiria, described by Ptolomee
in his .v. Table of Europe, hath on the North Coste, the .ii.
Pannonies: on the west, the country called Istria. Towards
the East, it hath the high Misia. And towards the South, a
part of Macedonia. This Roialme is also named Libur­
nia, & the part which extendeth towards the high Misia, is cal­
led Dalinatia. At this present, the Illiria Region is called
Sclauonia. Loke Ptolome in the said .v. table of Europe.

India.  There are .ii. Indes, both in Asia, & ioyning to­
githers, wherof thone maketh an ende of Asie, towards
thorient, & is called Inde, beyonde the Riuer of Ganges.
On this side the Riuer, is Inde, called Inde on this side
Ganges, which hath on the East syde, the same Riuer.

On the west, the Royalmes of Paropanisades Aracho­
sia, & Gedrosia. On the North, the mountaine Amaus. And on
the Southe the Indian Sea, as sayeth Ptolome in the
fyrste Chapiter of the .x. Table of Asye.

Iocasta  was the wife of Laius King of Thebes. After
whose deceasse, she maried her own Sone Oedipus, vn­
wares. And had by him .ii. children, Etheocles, & Polini­
ces: who fought togithers, after Oedipus death, for the 
Royalme of Thebes. And in the same combate, both the Bre­
therne slew one an other, as saieth Sabellique, in the .vij.
Booke of his first Eineade. For this cause, did the Alera­
driens, in mocquerie, call Antonines Mother Iocasta:
because Antonyne, for to obtayne Thempyre alone, had
slayne hys Brother Geia, as the .ij. Sones of Iocasta,
slewe one an other, for the Royalme of Thebes.

Ionie.  Plyne in the .v. Booke, the .xxix. Chapi. sayeth,
that the Countrey of Lydia, watered ouer wyth the 
Riuer of Meander, very croked, and full of tourninges,
doth extende aboue Ionie: hauing on the East syde Phri­
gia, on the North Misia, and on the Southe Caria.
The which Countrey of Lidia, was before called Meo­
nie. By the description, that Ptolomee maketh in the firste Ta­
ble of Asie. Ionie is the self same Region, that is called Lidye,
or Meonye. At the lest wise, it is a parte therof: bounding




vpon the Sea, whiche for that cause is called Ionyan.
The same Ionian Sea, dothe extende from the Bankes of
Ionie, vnto the bankes of thysle of Sicile. Plinye in the
iiij. booke, the .xi. Chap. sayeth, that the Greekes deuy­
ded the Ionian Sea, into the Sea of Sicile, and the Sea
of Crete, so called, bicause of the nigh Isles. Ptolome in
the .v. boke, the seconde Capiter, sayeth, that the Region
proprelie called Asia, hath on the North syde Bithinia.
On the West, a part of Propontis, the Sea Hellespon­
tique, the Sea Icarian, & the Sea Myrtoique. On the East,
the Regions of Licia, Pamphilia, & Galacia. And on the
Southe, the Sea of the Rhodes. In this Region, are con­
prised. Lidia, & Caria, & other small Royalmes. In Li­
nia is Ionia, as it is before saied. And Ionie is ryght o­
uer aneanst an Isle, called Icarie: whereof, the Sea
there, is named Icariam. And it is the same, which is cal­
led Ionian. Caria is betwene Lidie, & the Sea of the Rho­
des. On the West it hath the Sea Icarian, or Myrtoi­
que. And on the East is Licia, ioyned to Pamphilia.

Issicus Sinus,  is a reflexion, & bendinge of the Sea,
which hath on the West, thysle of Cipres. And on the
East, Siria, ioyned vnto the Bankes of Siria. And on
the Northe syde, is the Countrey of Cilicia. In the plaine
by the same tourning of the Sea, is the Citye of Alexan­
drie, builded by Alexander the grete, in memorie of the batail
by him wonne, against Darius King of Persia. In this
place also, was the battayle betwene Seuerus, & Niger.

Ister  is a great, and meruaylouse Ryuer, otherwyse
called Danubrie, or Danowe: comming oute of a moun­
tayne of Almayne, named Arnoba. Beyonde the Alpes,
it passeth by Innumerable Countreis. The further it
runneth, the more it encreaseth, reteining the name of
Danow, vntyll it commeth by the Countrey of Illiria,
nowe called Sclauonie, where he chaungeth hys name,
and is called Ister. And receyuinge hys encrease, of .lx.
Riuers, which fall into hym, he departeth from the earth,
and entreth into the Sea Pontique, by .vi. grete armes,
as sayeth Plynye, in the .iiii. booke, the .xi. Chapiter, of 
his Historie naturall.


L.




LAodicea,  is a Cytye of Siria, nighe vnto the Sea,
and not very farre distant from Antioche: whyche
is also in Siria, but further from the Sea, as wyt­
nesseth Ptolomee, in the .iiii. Table of Asye.

Latium,  is a parte of Italye, in the whyche standen
Rome, Tusculum, Preneste, Ardea, Tibur, and many
other Cities, as writeth Ptolomee, in the fyrste Chapi­
ter, of the syxte Table of Europe. Those that enhabyte 
this parte of Italy, are by the Romaynes called Latini.

Laurentum  is a Cytye of Italye, in the same parte
that is called Latium, nighe vnto Hostia. By Lauren­
tum, there is a forest, sacred vnto the Sonne, as sayeth 
Plynye, in the .v. Chapiter of his thyrde booke.

Liber Pater,  in Englyshe Free father, is the selfe
same God, that we call Apollo, as saieth Macrobius, in
his Saturnales, after Aristotle, for diuerse causes: and 
amonges other, bicause that in Thrace, there is a Tem­
ple, and Oratory, dedicated vnot Liber: wherin answe­
res, and Prophesyes, are rendered. But in the same
Temple, those whyche oughte to Prophecie, do drinke
wyne excessiuely, as they whyche render oracles in the
Cytye of Clarium, after thei haue dronke muche wa­
ter. The Lacedemonyens, in the sacryfyces whyche
they made to Apollo, ware Garlandes of Iuve, as yf
they dyd sacrifyce to Bacchus. The Boetians,
affyrmynge that the Hyll Parnassus was sacred vn­
to Apollo, dyd alwayes there kepe the Oracle of Del­
phus, and the Caues of Bacchus, dedicated vnto the 
same GOD. For thys cause, in that Hyll, were the sa­
cryfyces made vnto Apollo, and Liber Pater.

In thys Hyll also, where the Bacchana­
les celebrated, ones in two yeare: whyche shewed, that 
Apollo, Lyber, and Bacchus, were but one GOD.
And he was called Lyber, that is to saye Frea,
bycause the Sonne, whyche we call Apollo, dothe




frealy, and without subiection, tourne, & compasse the
worlde: beynge sometimes highe, and sometymes lowe,
and kepynge his course diuerse wayes.

Lybie  is a Region of Aphrique: And it is expedient to
know, that there are .ii. Libies. For Ptolomee in the .v.
Chapitre of his .iiii. Table of Aphrique, setteth one Li­
bye, ioyned with Egipte, & the Marmarike Region.
And saieth that Egipt, & the Marmarike Region, haue on
the West part, the Royalme of Cirenia: folowynge the
continuation of one Lyne, whiche draweth by a Citye
called Darins, that standeth vpon the Egiptian Sea.
And in the .vi. Chapi. of the .iiii. Table of Aphrique, he
setteth an other Libye, called Libye the Inner, whiche
hath on the North, the seconde Mauritanie, Aphrique the
lesse, & the Cirenayake Region. On the Easte, a parte of
the Marmarike Region, & Ethiope, whiche is vnder E­
gipt. Towardes the south, it hath Ethiope the Inner.

And towardes the west, it hath the west Sea. For more des­
cription hereof. looke Ptolome in the forsaid Chap. & tables.

Lydie  is a Countrie of Asia, vpon the Egean Sea, be­
twene Phrigia, & Caria. This Contrey hath. ii. Riuers
of great fame. The one of them, is on the Northe coste,
& called Pactolus, wherin are founde many vaynes of
Golde. And thother is in the South syde, & called Mean­
der, which is very croked, & bending in & oute. Loke Pto­
lome, in the fyrste Table of Asye.


M.

MAuritanie.  Ptolomene in his first Table of Affrike
appointeth .ii. Mauritanies. Thone whereof, is
more West, right ouer aneanst Spaine Betique, and
called Mauritania Triganica. Thother beinge more
nere Thorient, is named Mauritania Cesariensis, and
on the Easte parte ioyned vnto Numidia.

Medes,  be the people of the Royaulme called Media.
Ptolomee in his .vi. booke, the seconde Chap. sayeth that
this Region hath on the North cost, a part of the Hircanian 
Sea. On the West, the grete Armonie, and Assirie. On




On the Easte Hircanie, & Parthie. And towardes the
Southe, it hath the region called Corinthena. Thus is
this region described in the .v. table of Asie. Plinie in the
vi. booke, the .xxvij. chap. sayeth that Marcus Agrippa
sayd, that Media, Parthia, & the countrey of Persie, had on
the East the riuer Indus. On the West the ryuer Ty­
gris. On the Northe Taurus, & Cacausas. And on the 
South the redde Sea.

Media.  Looke on the worde Medes.

Mesapotamie,  is a royalme of Asie, betwene the riuers
of Euphrates, & Tigris, as sayth Plinie, in the .xii. chap.
of the .v. boke. And in the .vi. boke, the .xxv. chap. he say­
eth, that all the countreye of Mesapotamie was subiect
vnto the Affricans. Looke more on thys worde Syrys.

Misiens.  The hygh Misie, as Ptolomee hath described
it, in the ninth table of Europe, is bounding vpon Thrace
on the East part. On the South vnto a lytle Royalme
named Dardania, which is aboue Macedonia. And on
North vnto the Ryuer of Danowe. The lowe Misie is
nygh vnto the falling of Danowe, in the sea called Pon­
tus Euxinus. Loke on this word Propontys. The
Misiens are those, which inhabit these .ii. regions. Pli­
nie in the .xxvi. chap. the thyrde boke, called these royal­
mes Misia. Ther are .ij. other in Asie, after the descrip­
tion that Ptolomee maketh in the fyrste Table of Asie.
Thone called Misia the more, & thother Misia the lesse:
both ioyning to Phrigia, vpon the Hellespontian Sea.


N.

NIcea  is a cytye of Bithyme, as sayen Ptolomee,
and Plinie.

Nicomedia  is a Cytye nygh vnto the Sea, in the
Royalme of Bithynye.

Numidia  is a countrey in Affrike, betwene Maurita­
nie, & the countrey of Carthage, after the description of
Ptolome, in the .ij. table of Affryke. Thys countrey was
very much renowned, through the vertue of Masinissa
who was king sometyme therof. Thinhabitauntes are
called Numidians, or Nomades, because that often tumes
they chaunge theyr habitations, & cary theyr housholdes
from one place to another in wagons, as saith Plinie in the




thyrd chap. the .v. boke of hys naturall Hystorye, & Sa­
bellique in the fyrst boke of hys .v. Enneade. 


O.

Orgia  be sacrifices, made aswell vnto the Moother
of the Goddes, as vnto Bacchus, & other Goddes,
by the pryestes called Galli, that are madde.

Ocean  is the great Sea, that enuironeth al the earthe,
and ioyneth hym self with the Mediterrane Sea, betwene
the pyllers of Hercules. Thone wherof is in Maurita­
nia, & called Avilla. And thother in Spayne named Cal
pe. The Mediterrane Sea, is enclosed with earth on euery
syde: that is to say, on the right side wyth Affryke, and
on the lefte syde, wyth Europe and Asie.


P.

Pannonie.  Ptolome in the .v. table of Europe, doth
describe .ii. Pannonies, ioyning one to another.
Thone of them called the high Pannonie, boondeth
on the West, vpon a royalme of olde time called Noricum,
& at this present Bauiers. Thother called the low Pan­
nonie, nigh ioyninge vnto the higher, stretcheth to the
ryuer of Danow. Of the which riuer, declinyng towards
the South, that part which receaueth the ryuer Saus,
doth eand the lower Pannonie on the East. And on the
South, drawyng towardes the Hadriatique Sea, are the
roialmes of Illiria, or Sclauonie, & Dalmatic. In these
regions, there be .ij. ryuers, Drauus, & Saus. Drauus, 
which is the more swyft, commeth out of the countrey of
bauiers. And Saus which runneth more slowely, out
of the Alpes Carnicyan, as saith Plinie, in the thyrd boke
the .xxv. chap. of hys naturall Hystorye.

Panthers  are beastes very cruel, as the coniunction of the
word doth sufficiently shew: which signifieth all cruel.
The skyns of these beastes are spotted ouer, with rounde
white spots. And there is no beast so notably spotted, as
the Panther, & the Tigre. These Panthers do sauour wonder­
ful swete. And for their sauoure, other beastes, resorte
vnto them. But yet they are afeard of the Panthers fyerce
loke. Wherfore the Panther hideth his head, & suffreth al
the rest of his bodie to be loked on, that he mai the better take
his pray of the other beastes being amased. There is no
great difference betwene the Panther, & the Leopard, sa­
uyng that the Panther is more white. And Plinie in hys




viij. boke, the .xvi. chap. sayth that he coulde neuer fynde
other difference. In the same chap. He telleth a meruay­
lous tale of a Panther, which remembred the good turne
that a man had before done vnto him. In Sirie, and in
Affryke there be many of these beastes.

Parthians.  The royalme of Parthia, as Ptolomee
describeth it, in his .v. Table of Asie, stretcheth on the
North vnto Hircanie, & to the mountaignes betwene them.
On the South it hath Carmanie On the East the Ariens.
On the West the Medes. And this region is enuironed with
hils on al partes. So saith Plinie, in the .vi. boke the xxv.
chap. Who saith also, that the Parthians haue .xviii. kyng­
doms. And their Prouinces are betwene the red sea, on
the South, & the Hircanian sea on the North. Xi. of them be be­
yond Armenie, & the mountaignes called Caspii, & do ex­
tend along by the Caspian sea, vnto the Seithians: dra­
wing towardes the sea. And these realmes be called the high
realmes. Thother the low realmes. The Parthians, whi­
che are not in the firste description, are called Nomades.

Patroclus  the frend of Achylles, was in the warres
betwene the Grekes, & the Troyans, & there slayne by
Hector the sonne of Priamus kynge of Troy.

Perynthiens  are a people of Thrace, wherin standeth
a citie called Perinthus, within the which ther is a fortresse
called Bizia, some time belonging to the kings of Thrace.
In this royalme, there are no Swalowes, for the offence
of Tereus kyng of Thrace, as saith Plinie, in the .xi. cap.
the .iiij. boke of his naturall history. Thoffence was this.
His wife named Progne, the king of Athenes doughter,
had a sister which hight Philomela: whom she greatly
desired to see. And Tereus to please her withall, promysed
to fetche her sister. In bringing of her, he defloured her.
And to that end, she shuld not disclose it to any person, he cut
out her tonge, shut her vp in a secret place, & told Progne
that she died by the way. But Philomela wrote with blode in a
kerchief all the matter, & sent it vnto Progne her sister.
Who being chaufed with ire for the same, slew a litle childe
called Itis, which she had by Tereus, & presented it him
to eate. Tereus perceauing the matter, pursued her. And
she fleing away was turned into a Swalowe, Tereus 
him selfe into a Lapwinge, and Itis into a Fesaunte.




Pesynus.  Loke on these wordes Goddesse Pesinuntine.

Phari.  Pharus is an Isle in the sea of Egypt, wherein 
standeth a cytye buylded by Alexander the great, ouer
aneanst Alexandrie, which was lykewyse buylded by the
same Alexander. The Isle Pharus is so nyghe vnto E­
gypt & Alexandrie, that at thys day, there is no more be­
twene them, but a bridge to passe from thone to thother, as
sayth Plinie, in the .xi. chap. of hys thyrde boke. In the
cytye of Pharus, Ptolomeus Philadelphus the kyng,
made a meruaylous hygh Tower, whyche is numbred
amonges the meruayles of the world: vpon the whyche
there is alwayes a great burnyng light, to shew the ha­
uen vnto them that saile by night on the Seas. And be­
cause that thys lyght is so renowned, many doo call all
other Towers, whiche haue fyre and lyght in them after
that sort, Phari, as our present Authour doth him selfe.

Phenices.  Looke on thys worde Syrye.

Phrigie  is a countrey of Asie, whyche boundeth on the
West vpon the countrey of Troye the great. And as sayth
Plinie, in the .v. boke, the .xxxii. chap. Thys countrey is
ioynynge to Galatia on the Northe. On the Southe it
hath Lycaonie, Pysidie, and Mygdonie. And on the East
it toucheth the countrey of Cappadoce. Ptolome descri­
beth thys countrey in the fyrst Table of Asie, and dothe
not a lot vnto it so great a compasse.

Pitanite  is as muche to saye, as Laconique, or Lace­
demonien: because Pytanas was the father of Thrasi­
bulus the Lacedemonien, who was slayne in fyghting
valiauntlye in the warre. After hys decease, Pytanas
shewed hym selfe very graue, and prudent, saying that
it was a rare thyng to dye so well. Wherfore he wylled
hys countrey men, not to weepe for hys death, because
he dyed valyauntlye as it became a Lacedemonian. So
sayth Ausonius the Poete in an Epigrame. Ther was
another Thrasybulus of Athenes, whyche had a voyce
very loude, and bygge, of whome Plutarque speaketh
in the lyfe of Alcybyades.

Pontus.  Loke on thys worde Propontis.

Proconsull.  In the tyme that Posthumus Albus, and
Spurius Fulsius, were Consulles, and warre was




made against the people called Equi dwelling in Italy,
which warre was vnfortunate to the Romaines, Titus
Quintus, was fyrst created Proconsal, to goo and ayde
one of the Consulles, whiche was besieged: to the ende,
that the other Consull mighte remayne at Rome, & leuy
more men. And this Proconsull, had .vi. Sergeants goeng
before him, with mases. His owne ornamentes were like
vnto the Consulles. Fron that tyme forwardes, it was
ordeined, that those which had bene Consulles one yere,
shuld the next yere foloweng be Proconsulles, for to go
into the Prouinces. And euery of them had hys Liuete­
naunt, which was called Legatus, to assiste him in hys
affaires. The Proconsull had iurisdiction onely in the
Prouince giuen vnto him, but that was nat voluntary,
as to infranchyse a bondeman. The fyrst day of Ianua­
ry yerely, did the Romaines chose two Consulles, which
during thole yere folowing, had asmuche authoritee, as
Themperour. And because thei coulde not be in al pla­
ces, when neade requyred, thei sent their Proconsulles
into the Prouinces, which had there as greate authori­
tee, as if the Consulles had bene present. This word Pro­
consull also sygnifyeth hym, whyche is in steade of the 
Consull, and dothe that, that the Consull shoulde doo,
as sayeth Fenestella, and Pomponius Letus, of the Ro­
mayne Magistrates.

Prodigiouse tokens,  were signes, which often times hap­
pened naturally. Neuerthelesse thei betokened one my­
shap, or other. Wherfore some do saye the prodigiouse is
deryued of that whyche oughte to be feared, as the
songe of the Harpie called Eeleno, whereof Virgile spen­
keth. Such are the singinge of a Rauen, & the meetinge
of a weesel, when a man goeth forth of his house. Thiese,
and suche other lyke, did men in olde time, accompte mon­
struouse, and signifieng some calamytie to ensue.

Propontis  is a part of the Mediterrane Sea, whiche
is deuided into diuerse partes. For Pontus is a parte of 
the same Sea, & Propontis is a part of Pontus. Plinie in
the .iiii. boke, the .xij. Chapiter, saieth that the firste straite of
the Sea, which is betwene Thrace & Asie, (where Xerx­
es made a Bridge to passe ouer his Army, is called Helies­




pontus. And that is, a small arme of the Sea, very strayte.
After that it is somewhat brode, & then retourneth into a
narowe strayte again. This Sea, that is the broder parte,
is called Propontis, and the streite is named Bosphorus
Thracius: beynge in bredthe .v. paces onely. Ouer thys
streite, Darius king of Serse, & father of Xerxes, passed
his army vpon a Brydge. In extending further towards
the North, beyonde Bosphorus Thracius, the Sea doth
enlarge him selfe wonderfully, & is called Pontus Eux­
inus. And after that it retourneth to a strait again, & is cal­
led Bosphorus Cimmerius, whiche is thissue of one of 
the Lakes Meotides, that is the last part of the Mediterrane
Sea, towardes the Northe. All thiese Seas aboue spe­
cifyed, are partes of the Sea Pontus.

Ptolomeus,  after he had expelled Antigonus the Sone
of Demetrius, helde the Royalme of Macedonie, as sai­
eth Sabbelique, in the .viij. booke of his .iiij. Emeade.
He fayned him selfe to be amorouse of hys owne Sister
Arsinde, and that he desyred to haue her to wyfe. But
when she had condiscended to the same, he shewed ap­
parauntly, after his receite into the City of Cassandra,
that his purpose was, to bereue his syster of the Citye,
and to slea the chyldren that she hadde by Lysymachus
her fyrste husbande: whome he slewe in their Mothers
armes. At the laste, he was vanquished by the Gaules,
vnder the leading of Belgius theyr Capitaine, taken pri­
soner, and beheaded, and his heade pitched vpon a polle,
to feare the Macedones withall.

Pyrrhichius  is a foote, or measure, composed of two
shorte sillables, so called, by the name of Pirrhus, king
of the Royaulme called Epyrus, whiche is nyghe vnto
Thessalie, and beneth Macedonie. For that by him was
inuented a kynde of daunsynge, called Pyrrichius, as
sayeth Plinye in, the .vj. Chap. of the .vij. Booke. The
which leaping, or daunsing, was by mouyng, and mea­
sure of two short syllables, whereof Herodian in hys
fourthe Booke, maketh mencion.


R.

Rhenus.  Looke on this woorde. The Rheyn.


S.




Sarmates  are the people, and enhabitauntes of the
Regions, Sarmatiques, Plinye, and Ptolome say­
en there are two Sarmaties, one in Europe, ano­
ther in Asie. And bothe nighe vnto the Ryuer Tanais
whych diuideth Europe, and Asye, and nyghe vnto the
Lakes Meotides, whereinto Tanais dothe fall. Pto­
lomee in the .v. Chapiter of hys .iiii. Booke sayeth,
that Sarmatie of Europe, extendeth towards the North,
as farre as the great Ocean, which in that part is cal­
led the Sarmatique Ocean. Towards the West, vnto
the Riuer named Vistula. Towardes the Southe, vnto
the mountaynes Sarmatiques, which make separacion
of Sarmatie, and the countrey of Dace, and the lower
Misye. Towards the East, vnto a streite plot of yearth,
named Isthmus of the Lake, or Riuer, Bicis. And it hath
on the one syde, the lakes Meotides, and the Ryuer of
Tanais. And in the .v. Booke, the .ix. Chapiter Ptolo­
mee saieth that Sarmatie which is in Asie, hathe on the 
Northe, a Lande vnknowen. On the West it hath Sar­
matie of Europe, vnto the heade, and the Ryuer selfe of
Tanais. On the Easte the Lakes Meotides, vnto the
streyte of the Sea, called Cimmerius. On the Southe,
it hathe a parte of the Mediterrane Sea, called Euri­
nus Pontus, which is verye nygh vnto the Lakes Meo­
tides, and its stretcheth from thence, vnto the Riuer Co­
rar. And from the Riuer Corar, aboue the Regions of 
Colchis, Iberie, & Albanie, vnto the Hircanien Sea, whi­
che is otherwyse named the Caspian Sea. And on the
East it hath a part of the same Hircanyen Sea, and the
Riuer of Rha, vntyll that it entreth into Sarmatye,
where Sarmatie stretcheth vnto the Scithians. Ply­
nye, in the .iiii. booke the .xii. Chapiter sayeth that the
Greekes dothe call them Saromates, that we name
Sarmates, and that the name of Scithians, passeth vn­
to the Sarmates, and to the Almaynes.

Saturnales  were feastes, and sacrifices of Saturne
instituted, and ordeined fyrste by Ianus, to the honour
of Saturne, who taughte hym to tyll the earthe. And
after Saturnes decease, he dedycated an aultare,
and sacrifices vnto hym, which are called Saturnales.




The auncient fathers did solempnize thiese feastes one
day only in the yere, that is to weete, in December, the
xiiij. Calendes of Ianuary. But after the Ceasar had ad­
ded .ij. dayes more vnto that moneth, the feastes were
celebrated, the .xxvi. Calendes of Ianuary. Which cau­
sed, that the common people, beyng ignoraunt of those
daies, did celebrate the feastes many tymes in the yere.
Many Authours do affirme, that in olde tyme, the Pa­
turnales endured .vij. dayes, during the which feastes,
the Seruauntes, & Bondemen, had as grete aucthoritie
as their Maisters, and had lycence, to doo what lyked
them selues beste. So saieth Macrobius, in the firste
Booke, the .vi. Chap. of hys Saturnales.

Peculer playes were celebrated ones in three ages,
whyche was thre hundred yeres.

Septentrion.  It is certayne, as sayeth Aulus Gel­
lius in the seconde Booke, the .xxij. Chapiter of his At­
tique nyghtes, that the heauen hathe foure Regions.
That is to saye the Oriente, Occidente, Meridionall,
and Septentrion. The Meridionall, or South, & Septen­
trion, or Northe, are alwayes remayning in their own
places. And the Northe, is in that place of the Heauen,
which is ryght opposite to the South, whiche is in the
middes betwene the Oriente, and the Occident where
the Sonne neuer commeth. The Orient is very variable.
For in the Somer the Sonne ryseth in that place, from
whence commeth the wynde Bize, whyche is some­
what towardes the Northe. In the myddle, or meane
dayes, the Sonne ryseth where the wynde Eurus is,
And in the shortest daies, it ryseth towards the South,
in the same part, that the winde called Vulturnus, or other
wyse Euronotus is. And as there are .iii. risinges, eue so
are there thre settinges, or descendinges, likewyse men­
cioned, and thre windes cumming from the same thre set­
tinges. That is to weete Taurus, named by the Greekes
Argestes, blowing righte againste the wynde Bize.
Fauonius, or Zephirus, againste Eurus. And Afri­
cus, named by the Greekes Libs; against Vulturnus.




The wynde which commeth from the South, because that the
South Chaungeth not, is one, & in Latin called Auster, in
Greeke Notus, bicause it is moyste. The Northe parte,
by like reason, hath one onely wynde, which bloweth a­
gainst Auster. This name Septenrtrion, as saieth Au­
lus Gellius, in the Chapiter last cited, commeth of that,
that .vij. starres doo make a signe in the heauen in forme
of a wayne, & oxen yoked to labour, or elles bicause the
iii. next starres, that a man may se, in the Northe, nigh
one vnto an other, do make as it were a triangle, and
thys sygne is ryght opposite vnto the Southe.

Sirmium  is a Cytye of the lower Pannonie to­
wardes the hygh Misye, drawinge to the East. It is be­
yonde the Ryuer of Danowe, as saieth Ptolomee in the .
xvi. Chap. of hys thyrd boke Plynie, in the .xxv. chap. of
his thyrde boke, saieth that a Riuer called Bacuntius ente­
reth into the Ryuer, Paus, nygh vnto the City Sirmium.

Syrie,  as Ptolome descrybeth it in the .iiii. Table
of Asye is seperated from Armenye on the Northe, by
the mountaigne Taurus. On the South is Arabie: on that 
West stretchyng towardes the Isle of Cypre, is the Sea of
Sirie, which is now called the Sea of Phoenicia. And on
the East is Mesapotamye, Plynie in the .v. booke the .xii.
Chapiter sayeth that Syrie was the greatest of all the
Prouinces, & therfore had the name of al Royalmes, which
wer subiect vnto it. For towards Arabi it was called Iu­
dea, of Iury Palestine, Phoenice: & more inwarde Da­
mascene. In stretching towards the South, it is called Ba­
bilone. And betwene the Riuers of Tigris, & Euphrates,
it is named Mesapotamie. Beyond the Mountain Taurus, it
is called Sophene, where Euphrates is deuided into .ij.
partes. And beyond Armenie it is called Assyrye. On the 
part where it boundeth vpon Cilicia, it is called Antioche.
The part of Syrya, which lyeth along the sea coast, are
the countreyes of Idumea, & Iudea. And in stretchinge
more hygher towardes the Northe, is the countrey of
Phoenice. And after it is more nere Euphrates, it is cal­
led Sirie, as saith Plinie, in deuiding Sirie more exqui­
sitely. All the Sea which is nygh thys part, is called the
Phenician Sea. The people of Phoenicia, hathe bene




meruaylouslye renowned, for that they were the fyrste
Inuenters of letters, of Astrologie, & of making shyps,
and all engens of warre.


T.

TAurus  is a Mountaygne in Asie, meruaylouse
huge, & great, as sayeth Plinie, in the .xxvij. chap.
the .v. boke, of hys natural historye. For he saith,
that hys begynnynge is vpon the bancke of the Orien­
tal Sea, and passeth from thence by many peoples, and
Countreys: makyng separation betwene them. At his
begynnyng, which is at the Indian Sea, he hath on the
ryght syde the North, and on the lefte syde the Southe,
stretchynge towards to the West, by the middes of Asie,
sauynge where he encountreth the Sea. After that, he
bendeth towardes the North, and fetcheth a great com­
passe, on thone syde. Then he stretcheth towardes the
Phoenician Sea. On thother side, towards the Pontian 
Sea, and on another parte, to the Hircanian Sea. And
he goeth verye nygh vnto the Lake Meotide. And after
he hathe verye muche bowed, and tourned hym selfe, he
ioyneth wyth the Mountaygnes Riphees, whyche are
in the North. And all the way as he passeth, he hath di­
uers names. For in India, where he begynneth, he is
named Imaus, after that, Paropanisus, Circius, Cha­
nibades, and manye other names. Where he is moste
hyghest, he is called Cacausus, which is aboue the royal­
mes of Colchis, Iberie, & Albanie. And where he stret­
cheth out hys armes, as yf he woulde embrace the Sea,
he is named Sarpedon, Coracesius, & Cragus. Wher he
hath portes for seperation, and passage, albeit the same
be trenched, & naturally opened, yet is it all one Moun­
taygne. Those portes are called in one place Armeni­
en, which is Armenie. In another parte they are called
Caspien, nighe vnto the people called Caspij, who are
betwene Armenie the great, & the Medes. And they are
in another place called the Portes of Cylycye. And al­
though it hath in diuers places dyuers names, yet is it
in Greke called by one name, the mountaygnes Ceran­
ques. Thus sayeth Plinye, in the place afore alledged.
Lyuie, & thother Historyens, sayen that thys mountaigne




doeth appoynte the lymyttes, and boundes of the Ro­
mayne Empyre.

Theater.  Loke on thys worde Amphitheater.

The Aegean sea,  parte of the Mediterrane sea, is be­
twene Asie, & Macedonie, and is called Aegean, because
that in the same Sea are manye Isles, so nygh one ano­
ther, that a farre of, they seame to be Goates, which the
Grekes call Egas, or because that Aegea Queene
of the Amazones was therein drowned, or elles for that
Aegeus the father of Theseus, threwe hym selfe head­
longe into it, as sayth Sextus Pompeius.

The Ionian sea.  Loke on thys worde Ionie.

The Rhein.  Cesar in hys commentaryes sayth, that
Gaule Belgique extendeth on the East, vnto the Rhe­
in. And beyonde it, are the Almaygnes, and thereby the 
Rhein doeth deuyde Gaule Belgique, from the Al­
maygnes. In Gaule Belgique are comprised the coun­
treyes of Lorrayne, Luxenbourg, Guelders, & Flaun­
ders. Thys Ryuer commeth out of the Alpes, and fal­
leth into the Sea of Flaunders. Before his entery into
the Sea, he maketh an Isle, whyche is the countrey of
Hollande, nyghe vnto the whyche, is the countrey of
Guelders, bendyng towardes the head of the same Ry­
uer. Beyonde it is Luxenbourg, and Lorrayne, whych
is seperated from Luxenbourg, by the Riuer of Meselle
whych cometh out of the mountaygne Vogesus, and fal­
leth into the Rhein. Out of the same mountaygne com­
meth the Meuse, whyche runneth lykewyse into the 
Flemyshe sea. Betwene the Meuse, and the Ryuer of
Somme towardes the Sea, is the countreye of Flaun­
ders, whyche is seperated from Fraunce, by the sayde
Ryuer of Somme, as it is apparauntlye described, and
fygured, in the newe Table adioyned vnto the Tables
of Ptolomee.

The men at armes Pretorian.  Loke on these wordes
Cohorte Pretoryan.

The seuen Seas.  Looke on thys worde
Eridanus.

The Tygre.  Loke on thys worde Tygris.

The Tirrhenian Sea,  is the low Sea, which extendeth 




alonge by Italie nigh vnto the coste of Hostie. And is so
called by the name of Tyrrhenus, sonne of Atys, and
brother of Lidus, kyng of Lydie, who came into Italy:
and with his people inhabited that part of Italy, which
is vpon the lowe sea, whereby the Region is also cal­
led Tyrrhenie. After, it was called Tuscie, and Hetru­
rie, as sayeth Sabellique.

Thrace  is Royalme of Europe, in the furthest part
therof, towardes the Orient. The which Realme, hath
on the North the lower Misie. On the West the higher
Mysie, and a part of Macedonie. On the East, the sea
named Propontis, and the streyte of the sea called Bos­
phorus Thracius, whiche maketh seperation betwene
Europe, and Asie, as sayth Ptolomee in the .xi. chapter
of the nynth Table of Europe.

Tribune  is asmuch to saye, as Maister, Gouernour,
or Capitayne. And it commeth of this word Tribus, for
that the people of Rome, was fyrst deuyded into partes,
which they called Tribus. And the chiefe Gouernours
and Capitaines of the men at armes, elected out of those
partes, were called Tribuni, as saith Varro treatinge
of the Latyn tonge saith. Vegecius in the .iij. boke, & the
vij. chap. of the feates of warre. A Tribune of men at ar­
mes, had the charge of a band in an armie, wherin were
as many horsmen as fote men. As of the fyrst Cohort of
a Legion: which Cohorte, was the greatest, the princi­
pal, and the best fylled wyth sage, discret, valyaunt, and
experte warryours. In the same were .xi. C. fote men,
and .C.xxxij. men at armes on horsebacke.

The Capytayne of thys Cohorte, was called the Tri­
bune of the men at armes: who had vnder hym other
Capytaynes, and Centuryons, as well of fotemen, as
of horsemen. The other Cohortes of a Legion, whyche
were nyne, lesse then the fyrste, were conducted eyther
by the Tribunes, or by the Prouostes. Budens in hys
commentarye vpon the Pandectes, or Digestes, sayeth
that we maye call a Trybune of men at armes, a Mar­
shall. Vegecius in the seconde booke, the twelueth cha­
pyter, sayeth, that the honour of the Trybune of men at
armes, was when the men at armes were honestly, and




cleanelye apparelled, well armed, and theyr harnes wel
fourbyshed, and shynynge bryghte, and when they
were well enstructed, & exercised in the feates of warre.
The aucthorytye and power of thys Magystrate, was
for a whyle so greate, that the Trybunes of the men at
armes, had ones the gouernaunce, and administration,
of the Romayne common wealthe. And there was no
Magystrate, or Dygnytye more hygher then thys.
When there were no Consulles, whyche was aboute
thre score and ten yeres, after the kynges were expelled
oute of Rome, the Common weale was ruled fiue yea­
res by the Trybunes. After the fyue yeares were ex­
pyred, Consulles were agayne created, as sayeth Pom­
ponyus Letus. Dyuers tymes the Trybunes were re­
stored vnto dygnytye agayne, a sayth Tytus Liuius,
and they had the aucthorytye of the Consulles.

Fyrste they were thre, then foure, then tenne, and then
twentye, some tyme lesse, some tyme more. In Rome
there were other Trybunes, whiche were named Tri­
bunes of the people, who were created the yeare, that
Aulus Virginius, & Titus Vetusius Geminius, were
Consulles, whyche was the .xvj. yeare after the expul­
sion of the kinges. At which time the common people, be­
ynge ouercharged, and vexed wyth debtes (after that
the Senatours and noble men of Rome, had often ty­
mes promysed to release, and discharge theym thereof,
and then deceyued theym) seperated them selues from
the Senatours. But Menenius Agrippa, one of the
tenne Ambassadours sente vnto the people, whyche
were assembled in the fielde, reduced them by an oracion
into amitye, created the Tribunes of the people, who were
chosen out of the common people them selues. This dig­
nite was sacred, & inuiolable, not subiect vnto the Con­
sulles, as other officers were. The Tribunes of the peo­
ple sate in the Senate house, at the very entry thereof.

And that, that the Consulles decreed, thei sometyme a­
lowed, and sometime reiected. And bicause thei vpheld,
and mayntained the people, and styrred them oftenty­
mes againste the Senatours, and noble men of Rome,
there rase many Ciuyle batayles betwene them. In the




tyme of the Kinges, there were Tribunes whiche were
Captaines of a hundred horsemen, and were called Tri­
buni Celerum. Ther were also other Tribunes which
had the Charge of the Receit, & Custody, of all Trybute
money, and were called Tribum Aerarij, as muche to
saye, as the Tribunes of the Tresoure.

Tigris  is a Riuer, which hath his beginnyng in the
Royalme of Armenie the great. At the first he runneth
slowly, and where he beginneth to be swifte, he is called
Tigris, for so do the Medes call an Arowe. He falleth in
to a Lake, called Arethusa, but yet it medleth nat with the
course of this Riuer, neither do the fyshe of them bothe
come togithers. But the Riuer passeth throughe, clene
vnlyke the Lake, either in course, or coloure. At his me­
ting with the Mountaine Taurus, he hydeth hym selfe with­
in the earth, and runneth vnder the Mountayne, & then
apeareth agayne on the other Syde. The place is called
Zoroanda. And that it is the same Riuer, whiche hydde
hym selfe in the grounde, it doth manifestly apeare. For
when he commeth furth agayne, he bringeth any thing
with hym, that was cast into hym, on the other syde the
Hyll. He passeth afterwardes, by an other Lake named
Thesbidis, and then hideth him self in the earth again.
After his next comming furthe, he is deuided into two
partes, wherof thone runneth into Euphrates, and so
into the Persian Sea. This Riuer maketh manye tor­
nynges, and reflexyons, and separateth Mesapotannye
from Assirie. Loke Plinie, the .vi. Boke, the .xxvii. Chap.

Tyrus  is a Cytie of Phoenice, vppon the same Sea,
that Laodicea is. All the same Sea, is attributed vnto
the Phoenicians, as it is sayd in this word Syrie.


V.

VEsta  is a Goddesse, which was doughter of Sa­
turne, vnto whom the Virgines vestalles were con­
secrated. Numa Pompilius did firste institute in
Rome those Virgins, neuertheles the same Relygi­
on was so auncient, that it came from the Troyans, to
the Albaynes, and from them to the Romaynes.




Theyr office, & profession, was to make sacrifice for the
Romayne people, vnto the Goddesse Vesta. And to garde
the eternall & inextinguible fyre. Ther were .ij. Goddes­
ses of thys name Vesta. The one was Moether of Sa­
turne, by the which we vnderstand the earth. Thother
was doughter of Saturne, which is she, that thei name
the Vyrgyn, by whome we vnderstande the fyre, as
sayth Ouide. Vnderstand nothinge by Vesta(sayth he)
but the liuely, & burning fyre, whereof thou seest no bo­
dy to be engendred. She is therfore accompted a Virgin,
because she doth not engender. The Romaines sent as
far as Phrigia, for the Image of this Goddesse Vesta,
the which was brought, & set in the Temple of Victorye,
which is in the Palaice, vnto whom those vyrgyns were
sacred, that had theyr house harde by the Temple. And
were .xx. in numbre. Aulus Gellius in the .xij. chap. the
fyrst boke of his Attique nightes sayeth, that the high Bi­
shop toke that Vyrgyn whiche should be sacred, by the
hand, called her Amata (because the fyrst virgyn, insti­
tuted by Numa Pompilius, was so named) and did set
her into the College of the Vestall vyrgyns: where, from
thence forwarde, she was without emancipation, exempte
from her fathers rule, & had power to make her Testa­
ment. Yf ye wil know, of what age, of what parentes, &
of what stature, with the qualitie of her person, and vn­
der what wordes, the highe Bishoppe dyd admitte
a Vestale Vyrgyn into the order, Looke Aulus
Gellius, in the sayde Booke
and Chapyter.



The ende of the Anno­
tations.





Imprynted at London, in Fletestrete, by
Wyllyam Coplande, at the Sygne
of the Rose Garlande.

Cum gratia et priuilegio regali ad im­
primendum solum.





