





A most copious and exact Dictionarie in
Italian and English.



A
A , The first letter of the al­
phabet, and the first
vowell.

A, a preposition or sign of
the Datiue case, to, vnto,
at, at the, to the.

A, a preposition or signe of the accusatiue
case, by, through, for, per.

A, a preposition or signe of the ablatiue case, namely comming after verbes of priuation, as Tógliere, Rubbáre, &c. from, from of, of.

A, a preposition gouerning the infinitiue moode of verbes; to, for, for to.

A, about, being before any number or noune numerall as Erano a diéci, they were about ten.

A, by, veggéndosi consumáre a Gótti, seeing themselues wasted by the Gothes: a cénto a cénto by hundred and hundred, a dúo a dúo, by two and two: a permissione, by permission.

A, vsed for after or according to, as Amódo mío, a sénno súo: after my manner.

A, being ioined with the article la, and any noune of profession, becomes an aduerbe of qualitie or similitude, as ala francése, after the French fashion, alla soldáta, soldier-like. Ala scolástica, scolastically.

A, at, giuocáne a scácchi, to play at chesse, lui e a cása, he is at home.

A, at the, or in the, as a nóme, at the or in the name.

A, on, as, a cauállo & a piédi, on horsebacke, and on foot, a credito, on credite.

A, with, as abachétta, with a wand or staffe, a fórza, with force, or forcibly, a sufficiénza, with sufficience, or sufficiently.

Ab, vsed before, antiquo, esperto, eterno, by, from, of.

Abacáre, as Abbacáre,

Abacchiére, a caster of accounts.

Abachísta, idem.

A'baco, as A'bbaco.

Abacináre, as  Abbacináre.

Abacinaménto, as Abbacinaménto.

Abacchétta, with a wand or commanding staffe of auctoritie.

Abáculi, counting rundles, or counters.

Abáda, as Abbáda.

Abadáre, as Abbadáre.

Abadéssa, an Abbesse.

Abadía, an abbie.

Abadiále, abbot-like.

Abaiaménti, as Abbaiaménti.

Abaiáre, as Abbaiáre.

Abalroáre, as Balroáre.

Abampáre, as Abbampáre.

Abampóso, as Abbampóso.

Abandonáre, as Abbandonáre.

Abandóno, as Abbandóno.

Abantíquo, of old, of yore, in ancient time, from antiquity.

Abardósso, bare-backt, without a saddle.

Abaruffáre, to ruffle together, to bicker.

Abásso, below, beneath.

Abastánza, enough, sufficiently.

Abastáre, to suffice, to be enough.

Abáte, an abbot.

Abatéssa, an abbesse.

Abatía, an abbie.

Abattúta, orderlie, in proportion, as musitians keepe time.

Abauáre, to slauer, to driuell.

A'bba, a Syrian word, father, or dad.

Abbabáre, to astonish, to amaze, also to loiter about idely.

Abbacáre, to number or cast account, also to prie into or seeke out with diligence.

Abbachiére, an arithmetician or caster of accounts.

Abbachísta, idem.

Abbacinaménto, a blinding, a dazeling, a glimmering, a blearing.

Abbacinánza, idem.

Abbacináre, to blinde, to dazle, to glimmer, to glimpse, to bleare, to dim.

A'bbaco, arithmeticke. Also a deske, a cabinet, or a casket. Also a court-cupboord, or counting table. Also a chesseboord, a paire of playing-tables, also a quadrant, or base, or square of a pillar below, which may serue to sit vpon. Also a merchants booke of accounts, a shop-booke, or counter.

Abbáda, at a bay, at a stay, in delay, in hope, aloofe of; leasurely, with expectation.

Abbadáre, to keepe at a bay or stay, or delay; also to delay, to demurre, to prolong, to hold or put off; also to attend or wait on.

Abbadéssa, an abbesse, or Ladie of an abbie.

Abbadía, an abbie.

Abbagliággine, as Abbacinaménto.

Abbagliaménto, idem.

Abbagliáre, as Abbacináre.

Abbái, barkings, houlings, or bayings of a dog. Also malitious railings, idle pratings, vaine brags, detractions, skoldings.

Abbáia, as Abbái.

Abbaiaménti, as Abbái.

Abbaiáre, to barke, to boule, to bay or quest as a dog, also by metaphor to prate or speake, or brag idely, also to raile or detract, to skold at.

Abbaiatóre, a barker, a houler, a baier, or quester as a dog; also a pratler, a boaster, a railer, a detractor, an idle speaker, a skolder.

Abbalordiménto, as Balordía.

Abbalordíre, dísco, díto, as Balordíre.

Abbambagiáre, to bumbast, also to stuffe or quilt with bumbasin or such like.

Abbampáre, to flame, to flash, to blaze.

Abbampóso, flamie, blazing, flashie.

Abbandonáre, to abandon, to forsake, to leaue, to refuse, to cast off.

Abbandonatíssimo, vtterly abandoned, most forsaken, wholly for lorne.

Abbandóno, abandoning, refusall, leauing off, forsaking. Also at randon, in for saken or vnregarded manner.

Abbarbagliaménto, as Abbacinaménto.

Abbarbagliáre, as Abbacináre.

Abbarbáglio, as Abbacinaménto.

Abbarbicáre, to take root, to clinch or twine about.

Abbardáre, to bard, to trap, or caparison a herse.

Abbáre, as Abbaiáre.

Abbarráre, to barre, to embarre, to baricado.

Abbaruffaménto, a bickering, or falling to blowes. Also a towzing or ruffling. Also a singing, a scorching or smoking with fire.



Abbaruffáre, to cause or breed a quarrell, to set together by the eares; also to touze or rufle; also to singe, to scorche or smoke with fire. 

Abbassaménto, an abasing, a depressing, a bringing low, an humbling.

Abbassáre, to abase, to depresse, to suppresse, to bring low, to stoope, to decline, to bend downe, to descend, to humble, to submit, to prostrate, to alay.

Abbasséuole, that may be abased, or brought low.

Abbastardiménto, a bastardizing, an adulterating, a degenerating.

Abbastardíre, dísco, díto, to bastardize, to degenerate, to adulterate.

Abbastionáre, to embastion, to entrench, to enskónce, to emblocke.

Abbastionéuole, that may be entrenched, enskonced, or emblocked.

Abbáte, an abbot.

Abbateggiáre, to play the abbot or lazie Churchman.

Abbatéssà, an abbesse.

Abbatiále, abbot-like, or belonging to an abbie.

Abbáttere, bátto, battéi, battúto, to abate, to beat, throw, or cast downe, to depresse, to suppresse, to ouerthrow; also to meet, to light, to fall, to come, or happen on, with, or vpon by chance, and casually.

Abbáttersi con qualcúno, to meet with some body by chance.

Abbattiménto, an abatement, an encounter, an assault, a fight, a combat, an ouerthrow, a depressing; also a meeting with, or lighting vpon by chance, also a chance, a hap or casualty.

Abbattitóre, an encounter, a combatant, an abater, an ouerthrower.

Abbatutaménte, met by chance, or casually, also ouerthrowingly.

Abbauáre, to slauer or driuell.

Abbegliaménti, as Abbigliaménti.

Abbegliáre, as Abbigliáre.

Abbelláre, as Abbellíre, also to sooth vp, or please ones mind.

Abbelliménto, an embellishment, a beautifying. Also painting that women vse.

Abbellîre, lísco, líto, to embellish, to beautifie, to decke, to adorne, to decore, to make faire.

Abbeluardáre, to embulwarke, to fortifie, to enskonce.

Abbendáre, as Bendáre.

Abbentáre, to rest, to be quiet, to be glad, to reioice, to enioy.

Abberfáre, to besprinkle, to spirt.

Abberfatióne, a be sprinkling, an asperging, a spirting.

Abbergáre, as Albergáre.

Abbergo, as Albergo.

Abbersagliáre, as Bersagliáre.

Abbestiáre, to embeast, or become beast.

Abbeueráre, to water cattell.

Abbeueratóio, a watring place, or trough for cattell. 

Abbiadáto, prouendred, fed with oats.

Abbianchíre, chísco, chíto, to whiten, to blanch.

Abbicáre, to heape together as haycocks.

Abbiccáre, idem.

Abbici, an a, b, c, booke for children to learne, an alphabet.

Abbiendo, hauing.

Abbientáre, to enable, to make capable or fit for.

Abbiente, able, capable.

Abbiettáre, to abiect, to reiect.

Abbiettióne, abiection, vilitie, basenesse of courage.

Abbietto, abiect, base, vile.

Abbigiáre, to make or become gray.

Abbigliaménti, raiments, attires, apparrells, clothings, ornaments, embellishments.

Abbigliáre, to array, to attire, to apparrell, to cloth, to adorne, to embellish, to make red.

Abbisognáre, to need, or be needfull.

Abbisognáto, needed, brought or made needy.

Abbisógno, need or necessity.

Abbisognóso, needy, full of want.

Abbiosciággine, deiection, cowardise, faint-heartednesse.

Abbiosciáre, to deiect, to make or become faint hearted.

Abbiosciáto, deiected, made or become faint hearted.

Abbissáre, to engulphe, to sinke or throw downe as into hell, or deepe and bottomlesse pit.

Abbísso, an abisse, a hell, a gulphe, a bottomlesse pit, a deepe, an infinit gathering of water.

Abbitumáre, to bepitch, to ciment, or clam together.

Abboccaménto, a parly, an enteruiew, a meeting face to face, or mouth to mouth, a speaking face to face. Also an en-mouthing.

Abboccáre, to parly or speake together, to come mouth to mouth, or face to face. Also to enmouth, or put to the mouth.

Abboccatóio, the mouth of a limbecke or furnace.

Abboccatóre, a broker, a daies-man, one that brings men to speake together.

Abbocconáre, to morsell, to mince, or shred in peeces.

Abbollire, lísco, líto, to abolish, to abrogate, to disanull, to cancell.

Abbollitióne, an abolishing, an abrogation, a cancelling, a disanulling.

Abbominándo, abhominable, loathsome, detestable.

Abbominánza, abhomination, detestation, loathsomnesse.

Abbommáre, to abbor, to haue in abhomination, to loath, to detest.

Abbominatióne, idem.

Abbominéuole, as Abbominando.

Abbomínio, as Abbominánza.

Abbominóso, as Abbominándo.

Abbonacciáre, to calme, to appease, to asswage, to quiet.

Abbonaménto, a making good, a ripening. Also an asswaging, a calming.

Abbonáre, idem; also to make good, or seasonable. Also to ripen.

Abbonéuole, that may be made good, or that may be calmed.

Abboniménto, as Abbonaménto.

Abboníre, nisco, nito, as Abbonare.

Abbordáre, to goe neere the shore. Also to bond or grapple with a ship.

Abbórdo, a boording or grapling of ships.

Abborracciaménto, a stuffing, or quilting, a botching or clouting, a bungling of any thing, a hudling vp. Also a mumbling or thicke speaking. Also a being drunke.

Abborracciáre, as Abborráre; also to make or become drunke.

Abborraménto, as Abboracciaménto.

Abborráre, to stuffe or quilt, to botch, or bungle, to huddle vp; also to mumble in speech, or speake faltringly.

Abbortáre, to be deliuered abortiuely, to cast vntimely, to be borne out of time.

Abbortióne, an abort or vntimelie birth.

Abbortíre, tísco, títo, as Abbortáre.

Abbortíuo, abortiue, vnseasonable monstrous, vntimely borne, out of time.

Abbórto, idem.

Abbottare, to swell or become toad-like. Also to puffe vp with spite or pride.

Abbottinaménto, a mutiny, an vprore, a disordering; also a boot-haling, or booty.

Abbottinare, to mutiny, to praie, to rob, to spoile, to seduce, to goe a freebooting.

Abbottinatóre, a mutinous or seditious man.

Abbozzaménto, a first, rough, or imperfect draught; also a swelling to a bile or botch.

Abbozzáre, to rough-hew or cast any first draught, to bungle vp ill fauouredly. Also to swell as a byle or botch.

Abbozzatóre, a rough, vnskilfull caster or drawer of any thing.

Abbozzatúra, as Abbozzaménto.

Abbózzo, as Abbozzaménto.

Abbracciaménti, embracements, claspings, collings, huggings. 



Abbracciáre, to embrace, to claspe, to coll, to hug.

Abbraciáta, an embracing, an armefull.

Abbracciatóie, a kind of tongs, mullets, or pincers, that gold smiths vse.

Abbráccii, as Abbracciaménti.

Abbragiáre, to set on fire, to glow, to burne to embers, to enkindle.

Abbreuiaménto, an abbreuiating.

Abbreuiáre, to abreuiate, to shorten, to abridge.

Abbreuiatióne, an abreuiation.

Abbreuiatúra, idem.

Abbrigliaménto, a brideling, a curbing, a snaffling.

Abbrigliáre, to bridle, to curbe, to snaffle.

Abbrigliatúra, idem.

Abbriuidáre, to benum or stiffen with cold.

Abbronzacchiáre, to sunne-burne, to tanne, to skorche, to singe, to skald, to parch, to blast; also to haue the meat sticke to the pot, for want of liquer.

Abbronzacchiáto, sunne-burnt, tanned, skorched, singed, skalded, parched.

Abbronzáre, as Abbronzacchiáre.

Abbrugiáre, as Abrusciáre, to burne.

Abbruníre, nísco, níto, to burnish, to make or become browne, duskie, or darke.

Abbruscáre, to ensowre; also to frowne or skoule; also to skorche or singe.

Abbrusciáre, to burne, as Abrusciáre.

Abbrustáre, as Abbrustoláre.

Abbrustíre, tísco, títo, as Abbrustoláre.

Abbrustoláre, to burne, to singe, to tost, to skorche, to blast, to seare, to parche.

Abbrutáre, to make or become brutish.

Abbruttáre, to foule, to defile, to pollute.

Abbuiáre, to darken, to obscure, to duskie.

Abbuíre, ísco, íto, as Abbuiáre.

Abbuoníre, nísco, níto, as Abbonáre.

Abburattáre, to bolt meale.

Abburattaménto, a boulting.

Abburattóio, a bolter.

Abdicáre, to forsake or renounce.

Abdicatióne, a renouncing or forsaking.

Abdómen, the outward part of the belly betweene the nauell and priuie members, and couereth all the entrailes. Also the fat or sewet of a sow that is found between the flanke, and body.

Abdúto, led, remooued or caried away. Also lawlesse, or exempt from lawes.

Abecè, the A, B, C, or Criscrosse-row.

Abecedáre, to alphabet or abee-cee.

Abecedário, a teacher or learner of A, B, C. Also a horne-booke, or A-beecee-booke.

Abedário, as Abecedário.

Abedáre, as Abecedáre.

A bell'ágio, at faire leasure, leasurely.

A bella pósta, for the verie nonce, purposely, wittinglie, expreslie.

A bel stúdio, as A bella pósta.

Abellíne, a kind of fill-birds, or smallnuts.

Abenchè, although, albeit.

A bendelle, with bendlets in armory.

Abentáre, as Abbentáre.

Abénto, vsed for Atténto.

Aberráre, to stray or wander vp and downe.

A bertolótto, scotfree, without paiment, fidlers fare, meat, drinke and mony.

Ab esperto, by experience, by proofe.

Abestóne, a kind of blackish stone.

Abete, the tree or wood called Firre.

Abeto, idem.

Ab eterno, of yore, from all eternitie.

Abgiuráre, to abiure, to forsweare.

Abgiuratióne, an abiuring, or forswearing.

Abhorréuole, loathsome, to be abhorred.

Abhorriménto, abhorring, loathsomnesse.

Abhorríre, rísco, ríto, to abhorre, to loath.

Abiccáre, as Abbiccáre.

Abiettaménte, abiectly, basely, contemptibly, scornfully.

Abiettáre, to abiect, to dispise, to scorne, to outcast, to contemne.

Abiettióne, abiection, basenesse, scorne, contempt.

Abietto, abiect, base, vile, out cast, scorned.

Abíga, Iuie, or ground frankinsense.

Abigáre, to twine or bind about, as Iuie.

A'bile, able, sufficient.

Abilità, ablenesse, abilitie.

Abilitáre, to enable.

Abileo, a kind of fine, soft, and best spunge.

Ab initio, from the beginning.

Abisdóslo, bare-backt, looke Caualcáre.

Abissáre, as Abbissáre.

Abísso, as Abbísso.

Abísto, a stone which being once heated keepes his heat eight daies.

Abitábile, enhabitable.

Abitácolo, an habitation, a dwelling.

Abitánte, a dweller, an enhabitant.

Abitánza, a dwelling, an inhabitation.

Abitáre, to dwell, to inhabit, to win.

Abitatióne, a dwelling, an habitation.

Abitatíuo, inhabiting, dwelling.

Abitello, any kind of little weede or habit.

A'bito, as Hábito.

Abitúdine, as Habitúdine.

Abitúro, as Habitúro.

Ablatíuo, the Ablatiue case of taking away.

Abláto, caried away by force, or violently.

Abnegáre, to deny, to abiure.

Abnegatione, a denying, an abiuring.

A bócca, by word of mouth, by mouth.

A bócca piéna, with full mouth.

A bócca baciáta, as easie as to kisse my mouth, that is to say with thanks.

Abócco, a kind of waight or coine.

Abolatíuo, looke verme.

Abólla, a Senators habite, a furred garment vsed anciently by Kings and Philosophers.

Abollíre, as Abbollíre.

Abollitióne, as Abbollitióne.

Abómba, is properly the place, where children playing hide themselues, as at a play called king by your leaue. Some call it Gióstra prigioniéra: it is also prouerbially vsed of them that in hard enterprises keepe their wits about them. It is also a mans home or dwelling. Also as we vse to say. Home againe home againe, market is done. Also soked or laid in steepe.

Abombáre, to steepe or lay in soke, looke Abomba.

Abominándo, as Abbominándo.

Abominánza, as Abbominánza.

Abomináre, as Abbomináre.

Abominatióne, as Abbominatióne.

Abominéuole, as Abbominéuole.

Abomínio, as Abbomínio.

Abominóso, as Abbominóso.

Abonaménto, as Abbonaménto.

Abonáre, as Abbonáre.

Abondánte, abundant, plenteous.

Abondanteménte, abundantly, plenteously.

Abondánza, abundance, plenty, store.

Abondanziére, one that hath the charge to looke to the store of victualls in a citty or campe, and to prouide plenty of prouision, a victualer.

Abondáre, to abound, to haue plenty.

Abondéuole, abundant, plentifull.

Abondóso, abundant, plenteous.

Abonéuole, that may be made good.

Abordáre, as Abbordáre.

Abórdo, as Abbórdo.

Aborráre, to stuffe or guilt. Also to abhorre.

Abortáre, as Abbortáre.

Abortíre, as Abbortáre.

Abortióne, as Abbortióne.

Abortíuo, as Abbortiuo.

Abosimáre, as Bosimáre.

Abotáre, to vowe or promise vnto.

A bótta, made like the back of a toad, as some breast plates be.

A bótta di fíco, look Tiráre a botta di fíco.



Abottinaménto, as Abbottinaménto.

Abottináre, as Abbottináre.

Abottíno, mutinously, aboot-haling, a freebooting.

Abozzaménto, as Abbozzaménto.

Abozzatóre, as Abbozzatóre.

Abozzatúra, as Abbozzatúra.

A bráccia aperte, with open armes.

A bráccia quádre, with vnfolded armes.

A brága, with a breeche, as some pieces are.

Abráme, a fish called a breame.

A bráno, by piece-meale, by mamocks.

A bráno Abráno, idem.

Abrenúzzo, as Abronúntio.

A bríglia sciólta, in full speed, vnbrideledly.

Abriólo, a singing Canary bird.

Abristicáre, as Abbrustoláre.

Abrócca. Nemíco abrócca, an enemy from the lance to the bodkin or nailes point.

Abrocáre, to become hoarce. Also to snort.

Abrodieto, fine, delicate and sumptuous.

Abrogáre, as Abbollíre.

Abrogatióne, as Abbollitióne.

Abronúntia, hath beene vsed for a whirret on the eare, or any other meanes to rid one away, as one would say, a casting of.

Abrostína, a kind of wild wine or grape.

Abrótano, the herb southernwood.

Abruciáre, as Abrusciáre.

Abruggiáre, to burne, as Abrusciáre.

A brúno, vestíto a brúno, clad in mourning or blacke.

Abrúsca, any wild wine or grape.

Abruscáre, to make sowre or sharpe. Also to seare, to parch, to scorch, to singe.

Abrusciáre, to burne or consume with fire. Also to itch or smart.

Abrusciaménto, a burning.

Abrusciéuole, that may burne.

Abrustíre, as Abbrustoláre.

Abrutáre, as Abbrutáre.

Abruttaménte, abruptly, out of order, without preface or due course.

Abrútto, abrupt, disordered, out of course.

Absentáre, to absent.

Absénza, absence.

Absíde, the point wherein any planet is furthest from the earth.

Absíde supréma, the highest point of any planet.

Absíde ínfima, the lowest point of any planet.

Absínthio, the herbe wormewood. Also a kind of blackish stone.

Absinthino, made, or tasting of wormewood.

Absíte, a kind of pretious stone.

Absoléto, out of vse, vtterly abolished.

Absólto, as Assólto.

Absóluere, as Assóluere.

Absolutióne, as Assolutióne.

Absolúto, as Assolúto.

Absóno, dissonant, vntuned.

Absórbere, sórbo, sorbéi, sorbúto, sórto, to swallow, or glut vp.

Absordità, absurdity, inconuenience.

Absórdo, absurd, inconuenient, against reason.

Abstenére, to abstaine.

Abstergere, to cleanse or wipe away.

Abstertíuo, scouring, cleansing, or wiping away.

Abstinente, abstinent.

Abstinenza, abstinence.

Abstrárre, to abstract, or draw from.

Abstrattióne, abstraction.

Abstrúso, abstruse, secret, inward, darke to be vnderstood.

Absurdaménte, absurdly, vnorderly.

Abstirdità, absurdity, inconuenience.

Absúrdo, absurd, against reason.

Abucciuólo, looke Innestáre.

Abuóna derráta, good cheape, cheapefull.

Abuóna lúna, in a luckie time of the moone, as we say in a good houre.

Abuóna ragióne, vpon good reason, good reason why, rightfully.

Abuón barátto, cheape, good cheape.

Abuon cónto, in part of paiment, toward the reckoning.

Abuón hóra, early, timely, betimes.

Abuón hótta, idem.

Abuón mercáto, cheape, good cheape.

Aburattáre, to bolt or siftmeale.

Abusáre, to abuse, to misorder.

Abuséuole, that may be abused.

Abusióne, abusion, misordre.

Abusiuaménte, abusiuely, misorderly.

Abusíuo, abusiue, improper.

Abúso, abuse, misorder.

Abúso, from vse or custome.

Abuzzágo, a kind of buzzard, kite or puttocke.

Acáccia, a hunting, a hawking, a fowling, a chasing, a driuing.

Acácia, a shrub called the Egyptian thorne. Also a certaine iuice made of apples and other things. Also a kind of thorny plant bearing great timber.

Academia, an academie or vniuersitie where studies are professed.

Academiánte, of or pertaining to an vniuersitie, an academian.

Academico, academicall, a student in any vniuersity.

Acagióne, by occasion, because.

Acalzóppo, skipping or hopping vpon one foot.

Acámbio, by exchange, mutually.

A cámmera locánda, in or at an hired chamber.

Acaníno, a casting bottle. Also an ewer.

Acáno, the sea-holy. Some take it for licorice.

Acantáuola, an instrument that Chirurgions vse to pull out bones with.

Acánte, the hearb grounswell. Also a dumb grashopper. Also the bird Linnet or Siskin.

Acanthicéne, the thistle-masticke.

Acánthio, the brazell-tree or wood.

Acántica, a kind of gum or drug.

Acántida, as Acánte.

A cánto, neere, by, ioining or close vnto. Also the hearb Beare-foot, Beares-breech, or Brank-ursin.

Acánzi, soldiers among the Turkes that only to get themselues honor goe to the wars on their owne charges.

Acapnóne, a kind of hony gathered without smoke.

A cápo, to the head, or end, or conclusion.

Acápo chíno, with head bending, that is reuerently stooping or louting.

Acápo erto, with an vpright head, or vndanted looke.

Acáporítto, idem.

Acapríccio, to yeshly, humorously.

Acaremónde, the root of Ossimirsine.

Acarionágrio, the hearb Ossimirsine.

Acamo, a sea fish hauing a great head and skales like gold.

A cáro, deer, acceptably, gladly, pleasing to one: mind. Also wild Mirtle or Gow. Also a kind of little worme or mite.

Acaróne, a kind of Mirtle with indiuisible branches.

A casa, at home, home, in the house.

A casáccio, by ill or filthy chance.

A cáso, by chance, by fortune, by hap, casually.

Acáta. Acáte, an agath stone.

A catafáscío, in hudling or rumbling fashion.

A catía, a kind of drug so called.

A caualcióni, stradling as men ride.

A caualliére, as topping ouer or mounted vpon. Looke Caualliére.

A cauállo, on horseback mounted vpon.

A cauállo a cauállo, in post-hast, a snatch and away. Also a certaine march that trumpetters vse to sound in giuing a suddaine alarum.

Acáusa, because, by occasion.

Acáusa chè, because, that.

A'cca, the letter H.

Accadére, cádo, cáddi, cadúto, to befall, to happen.

Accadéuole, that may befall, or happen.

Accadúto, befalne, hapned, chanced.

Accaffáre, as Acceffáre.



Accagionáre, as Occasionáre, to blame, to lay to ones charge, to impute.

Accagliáre, to crud or crudle.

Accaglióso, cruddy, full of cruds.

Accaláre, as Caláre.

Accaldáre, to heat, to warme.

Accalonniáre, as Calonniáre.

Accambiáre, to exchange, as Cambiáre.

Accambiatóre, as Cambiatóre.

Accampanáre, to frame as a bell.

Accampanáto, fashioned as a bell.

Accampáre, to encampe, to beleagre, to besiege. Also to place a cote vpon any field or Skutcheon.

Accanalatúra, a chanfuring, a chaneling.

Accanáre, Accanáto, as Accaníre.

Accaneggiáre, to bait with dogs.

Accanelláre, to dresse with cinamond.

Accaníre, nísco, níto, to chamfure, to enchanell, to make gutter-wise.

Accaníre, nísco, níto, to make or become dogged, currish, churlish, cruell, or remorcelesse, to enrage as a mad dog.

Accaníto, endogged, currish, enraged as a mad dog. Also set on by dogs.

Accannáre, to pricke or strike with canes, or reeds. Also to glut to the throte.

Accanneggiáre, as Accannáre.

Accánto, a Goldfinch or Linnet as some take it.

Accantonáre, as Cantonáre.

Accantonáto, cornered, angled. Also cosened, cheated or left in a corner.

Accantoniére, as Cantoniére.

Accapacciáto, entangled in businesse, busied in mind and bodie.

Accapére, to cull, to chuse.

Accapestráre, as Capestráre.

Accapezzáre, to put in a maund or hutch.

Accaponáre, to capon, to geld, to lib, to splaie.

Accappáre, to snatch, to catch, or seaze vpon.

Accapparisonáre, to caparison a horse.

Accapparisonáto, caparisoned.

Accappiáre, to make in sliding knots. Also to entangle, to ensnare, to entramell.

Accappiatúra, an entangling, an entrameling, an ensnaring.

Accappigliáre, to tug or touze by the haire, to hind vp a womans haire. Also to ioine battell, to set together by the haires, to bind, to tie, to knit.

Accappucciáre, to grow round as a cabadge.

Accappucciáta lattúca, a hard cabidge letuce.

Accapricciársi, to take a mood or humor in ones head. Also to looke staringlie, to be affrighted till ones haire stand for feare.

Accarezzaménto, any cherishing or cockering or making much of.

Accarezzáre, to cherish, to cocker, to make much of, to entertaine louingly.

Accarieráre, to teach a horse to cariere.

Accarnáre, to flesh, to incarnate, to entre a dog.

Accárno, as Acárno.

Accarpionáre, to souse or dresse fish with vinegre to bee eaten cold, to marle fish.

Accartocciáre, to wrap or fold vp in coffins of paper.

Accasáre, to house, to build or store with houses, to ioine house to house, to lodge, to harborough. Also to marry or allie house to house.

Accascáre, to befall, to happen.

Accasciáre, to crudle as cheese. Also to bruse, to squease or make flat. Also to weare flat, to diminish, to bruise or squat in falling.

Accastiáre, as Accasciáre.

Accatta-bríghe, as Catta-bríghe.

Accattalíngua, a getter of the word, a purchaser of audience.

Accattaménti, borrowings, gettings, findings or shiftings.

Accattáre, to borrow, to get, to sheft for, to acquire. Also to beg vp and downe.

Accattáre in préstito, to get by borrowing.

Accattaráto, as Accattarróso.

Accattarróso, rheumatick, full of catarrhs.

Accattastáre, to pile or range orderly.

Accattatóre, a shifter, a getter, a borrower.

Accattatózzi, a begger of scraps.

Accátti, gettings, gaines, vailes, borowings, or shiftings for.

Accattítia, a kind of grose furmentie gurts.

Accaualláre, to set or mount on horseback. Also to mount ordinance.

Accauigliáre, to stringe silke or giue it a glasse.

Accauigliatóre, a stringer of silke.

Accecaménto, a blinding.

Accecáre, to blind.

Accédere, cedo, cedéi, cedúto, to accede, to aproch or haue accesse vnto. Also to assent vnto.

Acceffáre, to take by the snout. Also to busse or beake as a hog doth.

Acceffo, a taking by the snout. Also a bussing of beake to beake.

Accégia, a moore hen.

Acceleránza, haste or quicke speed.

Acceleráre, to hasten, to make speed.

Acceleratióne, haste or quick speed.

Accencíre, císco, cíto, to reduce vnto tatters or rags. Accencíre úna dónna, to thrum a wench.

Accendere, accendo, accési, accéso, to kindle, to enflame, to set on fire, to light. Also to prouoke or egge-on. Also in Florence to curse, to banne, to chafe, to sweare.

Accendénole, that may be enkindled.

Accendiménto, an enkindling, a prouoking.

Acceneríre, rísco, ríto, to consume or burne to ashes or cinders, to encinder.

Accennáre, to nod, to becken, to make a signe, to giue an inkling. Also by some signe to glance at anie thing a far of by speech or action.

Accennaménto, a nod, a beck, an inkling. Also a signe or glancing at anie thing.

Accensióne, an enkindling, an enflaming.

Accenso, enflamed, enkindled. Also such a one as is appointed in the place of a dead man.

Accentáre, to accent or giue the due sound to any letter or word.

Accento, an accent or point ouer anie letter to giue it a due sound.

Accentuáre, as Accentáre.

Accerchiáre, to hoope or circle about. Also to encompasse round.

Accerchiéuole, compassable, that may be hooped.

Accerrimo, cruell, fell, moodie.

Accertaménto, an assurance, a warrant.

Accertánza, assurance, a warrant.

Accertáre, to assure, to ascertaine, to warrant.

Accertatióne, an assurance, a certificate.

Accerto, certes, certainlie.

Acceruíre, vísco, vito, to heape or huddle together.

Acceruo, a heape, a hudle, a round masse.

Acceso, enflamed, enkindled, set on fire.

Accessíbile, accessible, that accesse may be had vnto.

Accessióne, an accession, an eeking, an augmentation. Also as Accesso.

Accessíuo, accessiue, aproachable.

Accesso, accesse or aproach vnto. Also an encrease or flowing vnto. Also a fit or accesse of an ague or any other sicknesse, a qualme. Also a skonce.

Accessóre, accessarie or a consenter.

Accessoriaménte, accessiuelie, by his owne seeking.

Accessório, accessorie, consenting vnto.

Accettábile, acceptable.

Accettábolo, the pan or hollownesse wherein the huckle bone turneth. Also a iuglers box. Also a certaine measure. Also a kind of musicall instrument. 


Also a kind of plant.

Accettáre, to accept, to take.

Accettár l'inuíto, to accept an offer or inuitation, to see the vie at any plaie.

Accettatióne, an acceptation.

Accettéuole, acceptable.

Accetteuolézza, acceptation.

Accettíssimo, most acceptable.

Accetto, accepted. Also acceptable, gratefull, in good worth.

Acchéggia, a moore hen.

Acchenea, a hackney or ambling nag.

Acchetáre, to quiet, to hush, to still, to appease, to calme.

Acchetatióne, a quieting, a hushing, a stilling, an appeasing, a calming.

Acchetéuole, that may be quieted, husht or calmed.

Acchiappáre, to catch by the buttocks. Also to take or ouertake or catch in running.

Acchinea, a hackney or ambling nag.

Acchiocciáto, become lustie and strouting as a cackling hen about her chickens.

A'ccia, anie yarne to be wouen, any spinning, or statute yarne in skeanes. Also a hatchet, an axe, a chip-axe, or chopping knife.

Acciaccáre, to stampe or punne in a morter, to hauock, to spoile or destroie. Also to offer some affront or suddaine iniurie vpon ods and aduantage.

Acciácco, a hauock, a spoile. Also an affront or iniurie offered vnto another vpon anie ods and aduantage. Also a stamping or punning and brusing in a morter.

Acciaffáre, to snatch or hooke away.

Acciáio, Acciále, steele.

Accialáre, to steele.

Acciále, anie kind of steele.

Accialíno, a steele to strike fire. Also the swiuell of a chaine.

Acciapináre, to miche, to shrug or sneake in some corner, and with pouting lips to shew anger as an ape being beaten and grinning with his teeth.

Acciáre, to reduce into skeanes as spinning yarne. Also to hatch or chop.

Acciárpa, botchinglie, bunglinglie.

Acciarpáre, to botch or bungle.

Accidentalità, casualtie, chance, hap.

Accidentále, accidentall, casuall.

Accidentalménte, by chance, accidentallie.

Accidente, an accident, a chance, a hap. Also a fit of an ague or other sicknesse.

Accidentário, accidentall, casuall.

Accídia, sloth, idlenesse, lazinesse.

Accidióso, slothfull, idle, lazie.

Acciecáre, to blind, to hoodwinke.

Acciecatúra, a blinding.

Accieffáre, as Acciuffáre.

Accigliáre, to seele a pigeons eies. Also to looke staring lie or musinglie.

Accimáre, to sheare clothes. Also to clip, to pare, to top or lop trees. Also to trim, to dresse or pranke vp. Also to gird or prepare for something.

Accimatúra, as Cimatúra.

Accíngere, cíngo, cínsi, cínto, to gird about. Also to prepare to doe something.

Accíno, a grape-stone, a kernell, a graine or seed of anie fruit. Also the wheele of anie well wherein the chaine goes. Also a crane to draw vp anie waight.

Accinóso, full of kernells, graines or seeds.

Acciò, that, to the end, to that purpose.

A'ccio, being added to any positiue noune it makes it great, vnhandsome, ruinous, as Homáccio, caualláccio, casáccia, donnáccia.

Accioccáre, to tuffe, to tassell, to flake, to reduce into locks, tuffes, tassells, or flakes. Also to put a handfull of wooll or flax vpon a distaffe. Also to make or become hoarce in speaking. Also to reduce to a block, a stump or logge of wood. Also to catch by a tuffe of haires.

Accióchè, that, to the end that, least that or enaunter.

Acciócchè, idem.

Acciócche vióle, a kind of double violets.

Acciò fratánto, that in the meane time.

Accióne, being added to anie noune positiue, as Homaccióne, Cauallaccióne, Casaccióne, Donnaccióne, il makes it foule and great, huge and ruinous, lubbardlike and vnhandsomelie big.

Accipensero, a fish hauing the skales turned toward the head, and swimmeth against the streame. Some take it for the Sturgeon, the Elops or the Stuer.

Accircondáre, to encircle, to compasse about.

Acciríre, rísco, ríto, to dight, to prepare, to set in order.

Acciríto, prepared, dight, set out.

Accismáre, to molest, to vex, to afflict, to grieue, to trouble. Also to make or become obstinate, wilfull and headstrong. Also to deulde.

Accitáre, to cite vnto, to summon.

Accitatióne, a citation, a summoning.

Accitatóre, a summoner, a citator.

Acciúcche, trifles, toies, vanities.

Acciuffáre, to gripe, to seaze, to catch or to clinch by the snout, or muzzle. Also to catch by the haires or forelocks.

Acciúga, a fish like a Sprat called Anchioues. Also a kind of fruit. Also a kind of hashie or minced meat or galimafrie.

Acciuiménto, an atchieuement, a bringing to passe. Also a shifting for. Also a bartering, a trucking, a corcing. Also a storing with.

Acciuíre, uísco, uíto, to atchieue, to bring to passe, to shift for. Also to bartre, to truck, to change or corce for profit. Also to furnish or store with.

Acclamáre, to call vnto, to crie out, to exclaime.

Acclamatióne, an acclamation, a calling vnto, a hue and crie.

Acclináre, to encline, to bend or stoope vnto.

Acclinatióne, an inclination or bending vnto.

Acclíno, enclined or bended vnto.

Accliuáre, to bend, to encline or pitch downward as a hill.

Accliuità, a bending downward, an enclining disposition, a hillinesse.

Acclíuo, bending downe, steepie, enclining, hillie.

Accobalísta, as Balísta.

Accoccáre, to set in the nock, to nocke. Also to stick or cleaue vnto. Also to fasten a iest vpon one, or to make one swallow a gudgion. Also to strike or smite vpon.

Accoccatúra, a nocking, a fastning vnto a sticking or cleauing vnto. Also fastning a iest vpon one. A gudion giuen.

Accoccoláre, to coure or squat to the ground.

Accodáre, to set or fasten a taile vnto.

Accodunánza, an assemblance.

Accodunáre, to gather or assemble together.

Accógliere, cólgo, cólsi, cólto, to gather or collect together. Also to receiue or embrace friendly, or to entertaine a friend with loue and affection.

Accoglienza, a collecting together. Also a friendly embracing and louing entertainment.

Accogliménto, idem.

Accóla, a sea Swallow or a sea Bat, or a sea Reare mouse.

Accoláre, to glue vnto or together.

Accolatíccio, gluish, or clammie.

Accoliticciáre, to gather together pell mell, confusedly or tumultuouslie.

Accolitíccia gente, people gathered together pell mell and confusedlie.

Accolíto, as Acolíto.

Accollanáre, to enchain or hang a chain of gold about ones neck.

Accolláre, to hug, to coll or embrace about the neck.

Accolláta, a colling or embracing about the neck.

Accollatúra, idem.

Accoltelláre, to fence or fight with cutting weapons.



Accoltelláta, a wound or blow with a sword or cutting weapon.

Accoltellatóre, a sencer or fighter.

Accólto, collected. Also receiued and embraced with loue and affection.

Accománda, a recommendation vnto.

Accomadagióne, a recommending.

Accomandáre, to recommend or bequeath vnto.

Accombiatáre, as Accomiatáre.

Accomiatáre, to dismisse, to giue licence to depart.

Accomitáre, to accompanie, to associate.

Accoinodábile, that may be accomodated.

Accomodáre, to accomodate, to ease, to place, to stowe. Also to lend vnto.

Accomodaménto, an easing, a setling, a placing. Also a lending vnto.

Accómodo, commodiouslie, at ease.

Accompagnaménto, an accompanying.

Accompagnáre, to accompanie.

Accompagnatúra, idem, a coupling.

Accompiacére, to please vnto.

Accompíre, písco, píto, to accomplish.

Accomunáre, to make commune.

Acconciaménto, a mending, a dressing, a making handsome, a reforming.

Acconcia-pelle, a dresser of leather, a tanner, a currier.

Acconciáre, to mend, to dresse, to order, to settle, to repaire, to make handsome.

Acconciársr, for a man to settle, place, accord, or reconcile himselfe.

Accóncia-stagni, a mender of pewter.

Acconciatam énte, handsomlie, orderly.

Acconciatóre, a mender, a setler.

Acconciatúra, as Acconciaménto.

Acconcíme, a mending, a repairing.

Accóncio, a dighting, a making fit or readie, handsome, set led, drest, conuenient.

Accóne, a fish called in Latine Agonus.

Acconsentiente, a consenter vnto.

Acconsentiménto, a consenting vnto.

Acconsentíre, to consent vnto.

Accontaménto, acquaintance. Also accounting.

Accontáre, to acquaint. Also to accountor put into number.

Accontáto, acquainted. Also accounted, or put in the number.

Accontentáre, to giue content vnto.

Accontéuole, acquaintable. Also accountable.

Accónto, acquainted. Also as Acónto.

Acconueníre, to be conuenient. Also to come with or vnto.

Accoppáre, to knock on the head and kill as a butcher doth an oxe.

Accoppiáre, to couple vnto. 

Accoppiatúra, a coupling vnto.

Accopuláre, to couple vnto.

Accoráre, to grieue to the heart.

Accoratággine, griefe at the heart.

Accoráto, toucht or grieued at the heart.

Accorciaménto, as Accorciatúra.

Accorciáre, to shorten, to curtall.

Accorciatúra, a shortning, a curtalling.

Accorciéuole, that may be shortned.

Accordaménto, an according, an agreement, an atonement.

Accordáre, to accord or agree vnto. Also to tune an instrument, to attone.

Accordáre col fornáio., to agree with the baker. By metaphor to be well to liue, to haue no need of bread, to keepe the wolfe from the dore. Also to die and goe out of this world.

Accordellatíno, a kind of corded or striped stuffe worne in doublets.

Accordéuole, that may be accorded, tunable.

Accórdo, an accord, an attonement.

Accórgere, córgo, córsi, córto, to perceiue, to be aware of.

Accorgiménto, warinesse, perceiuing.

Accórrere, to run or flie vnto.

Accórri, helps, assistances.

Accórri huómo, hue and crie for helpe.

Accorroláre, to roule vp one within an other.

Accortaménte, warilie, with foresight.

Accortaménto, a shortning, a curtalling.

Accortáre, to curtall, to shorten.

Accortézza, warinesse, foresight.

Accórto, aware, perceiued. Also wise, wittie, wilie, craftie, foreseeing.

Accorncciáre, to anger, to be wroth.

Accorrucciéuole, subiect to anger.

Accorruccióso, angrie, fretfull.

Accosciáre, to thigh, to coure down.

Accostáre, to accost, to ioine side to side, to approach, to come neere.

Accostaménto, an acosting, an approaching, a ioining side to side.

Accostánte, acosting, familiar, easie to be acquainted with. Also a kind of briske and well-relishing wine. Also aproaching vnto.

Accostéuole, aproachable, familiar.

Accostiáre, as Accosciáre.

Accostiataménte, cowring downe.

Accósto, neere, by, close vnto.

Accostumáre, to accustome, to enure, to be wont. Also to nurture or bring vp in good manners or ciuill fashions.

Accostumánza, custome, vse, vre. Also nurture, ciuilitie, manners.

Accostumatézza, idem.

Accostumataménte, customarilie. Also mannerly, ciuillie.

Accostumáto, accustomed, vsed, wont, enured. Also well brought vp, ciuill, mannerlie.

Accostuméuole, customable, vsuall.

Accottonáre, to cotton or set a nappe vpon.

Accouáre, to hatch or couie as a hen her chickens. Also to squat or cowre downe.

Accoueráre, to recouer or haue recourse vnto. Also to get shelter or protection.

Accozzaménto, an entershocking or butting together. Also a ioining or fitting together.

Accozzáre, to butte, to shock, as rams doe. Also to ioine, to fit or put close together.

Accozzatúra, as Accozzaménto.

Accreditáre, to make or become of credit and reputation in the world.

Accréscere, crésco, crebbi, cresciúto, to accrease, to augment, to accrue.

Accresciménto, an accrease, an accruing, an angmenting, a growing vnto.

Accrestáre, to crest or coxcomb.

Accrestiménto, as Accresciménto.

Accriuelláto, hackt, hewed or cut full of holes. Also sifted, or made siue-wise.

Accrostáre, to bring to a crust, to crust.

Accubiáre, to couple as dogs, to leash.

Accuíre, ísco, íto, to sharpen.

Accumáre, as Accumuláre.

Accumulánza, a heaping or hording vp.

Accumuláre, to heape together or hord vp in store.

Accumulatióne, as Accumulánza.

Accumulatóre, a heaper or horder vp.

Accupáre, to occupie or put to vse.

Accupatóre, an occupier.

Accuráre, to care with diligence, exactnesse or curiositie.

Accurataménte, diligently, curiouslie, exactlie, carefullie.

Accuratézza, exactnesse, diligence, curious carefulnesse.

Accuratissimaménte, most exactlie.

Accuráto, carefullie diligent, curiouslie exact, warilie precise.

Accurbáre, to bend or make crooked.

Accúsa, an accusation.

Accusáre, to accuse.

Accusatióne, an accusation.

Accusatíuo, the accusatiue case.

Accusatóre, an accuser.

Accuséuole, that may be accused.

A cénso, at rent. Also in fee-farme.

A cento, by hundreds, by a hundred.

Acentináia, by hundreds.

Acedóne mele, a kind of vnctuous and excellent honie.

Aceráte, a kind of snailes without hornes.

Acerbáre, to ensowre, to ensharpen. Also to exasperate or make eagre.

Acerbaménte, sowrelie, sharplie. Also 



cruellie or eagerlie.

Acerbezza, sowrenesse, sharpnesse, tartnesse. Also eagernesse, or crueltie.

Acerbíre, bílco, bíto, as Acerbare.

Acerbità, as Acerbézza.

Acerbo, sowre, sharpe, tart, vnripe. Also cruell, seuere, eager, bitter.

Acérco, about, circling, wheeling.

A'cero, the maple tree or wood.

Acerrimo, most eagre, sharpe, sowre, fell, cruell, fierce, or vehement.

Aceruíre, uísco, uíto, as Acerbáre.

Aceruo, as Acerbo.

Acesíno, a kind of naturall borax vsed in physicke.

Acetábulo, as Accetábolo.

Acetáre, to make or grow sowre as vinegre.

Acetaríe, all manner of salades.

Acctíre, tísco, títo, to become vinegre.

Acéto, vinegre, or alliger.

Acetósa, the hearb Sourell or Sorell.

Acetosella, idem.

Acetosità, sowrenesse or sharpnesse.

Acetóso, full of sowrenesse or sharpnesse.

Achánte, as Acánte.

A chè, to what? to what end? wherefore? at what? whereto?

A chè égli è déntro?, o? in or out? fast or loose?

A chè égli è suóra, out or in?

A chè effetto?, to what end or effect?

A chè fáre?, what to doe?

A chè fíne?, to what end?

A chè guísa?, how? in what sort?

Acheméne, Acheménide, an hearb of the colour of Amber, which as some write being cast into an armie will make the soldiers be in feare and run away.

Achemenidóne, idem.

A chèmódo?, how? in what manner?

A chè propósito?, to what purpose?

A chè siámo?, how are we? how is it with vs?

Achetáre, to quiet, to whosh, to still.

Achéte, a kind of grashopper that sings verie loud.

Achéto, still, quiet, husht, calme.

Achì?, to whom? at whom?

A'chia, a fish called a Mullet.

Achiamáta, at call, within call, at hand.

Achilea, the hearb Yarrow, All-heale, Nose-bleed, or Milfoile.

Achilee, images of naked men wrestling.

Achiócciole, snaile wise, as a paire of winding staires.

Achináre, to encline, to stoope. Also to abase or bring low.

Achíno, enclined, stooped. Also abased or brought low.

Achiráde, a kind of hearb.

A chì tócca?, to whose turne falls it?

A chì tóccasúo dánno, at his perill be it on whom it lights.

A chiúnque módo, in what manner soeuer, howsoeuer.

Achiúsi ócchij, blindfold, hoodwinkt.

Aciáio, Aciáro, steele.

Acialáre, to steele.

Acialíno, a steele to strike fire.

Aciauatáre, to cobble or plaie the souter. Also to stuffe or quilt.

Acícula, a horne fish, or horneback.

Acidále pére, a kind of peares.

Acidári, a kind of hat, broad about the brim, but sharpe and winding vpward.

Acidíre, dísco, díto, to grow sowre or tart.

A'cido, soure, tart or sharpe in rellish.

A'cie, the front of an armie, a battell-araie, a squadron or maine battell. Also the edge or point of anie weapon or toole.

A cilóffo, Andáre a cilóffo, to go sleep, short, fizzle and fiste.

Aciliáca, an ague proceeding of corruption of humors.

Acilóne, the akehorne or mast of the Ilex or Huluer-tree.

Acíme, by tops or chiefs.

Acíno, as Accíno. Also a kind of hearb neuer bearing flowre, like to Basill.

Acinóso, as Accinóso.

A cínta, Acíntola, idely as one holding his hand vnder his girdle.

Acipensero, as Accipensero.

A'co, A'go, anie kind of needle.

A'co a pómo, a pin with a head.

A'co da pómolo, a pin with a head.

A códa di róndine, like a Swallowes taile. Also a kind of combining or cimenting of stones in mazonrie so called.

Acóda rítta, with a standing taile.

Acolásto, a prodigall, riotous, sensualler lecherous person.

Acólito, a resolute man, one that will not be brought from an opinion or will.

Acólla, glue colour, or wrought with glue.

A compagnía, in companie as partners that share alike.

Acomparáre, to compare together.

A comparatione, in comparison.

A compásso, by compasse, line or measure.

A compiacenza, at will and pleasure.

A compiaciménto, idem.

A compiménto, at full, in complete manner.

Acompitáre, to spell or read distinctlie.

A compíto, distinctlie, sillable by syllable.

A concorrenza, striuinglie, incompetencie.

Aconiáre, to billettie in armorie.

Acónij, billetie in armorie.

Acónito, the hearb wolues-bane.

A conscienza rítta, with a readie conscience. Also with a stiffe-standing pricke.

Acóntia, a blazing starre or firie impression in the aire that shaketh and brandisheth like a dart or speare with great swiftnesse. Also a kind of swift gliding serpent of a greene colour.

Acónto, as Abuón cónto.

Acópa, a medicine, plaster or ointment to cure wearinesse or vnlustinesse of the bodie. Also a kind of pretious stone.

Acópi; Acópici, as Acópa.

Acópo, Acópu, as Acópa. Also an hearb.

Acoratággine, as Accoratággine.

Acoratággini, sobs, pantings, or blubrings drawne from the heart.

Acórna, a thistle called Mans blood.

Acórpo di cauállo, within the length of a horse.

Acóro, the sweet Cane, or as some thinke the great Galingale or false Calamus.

Acorr'huómo, with hue and crie.

A córsa, running, in full speed.

A'cqua, anie kind of water.

A'cqua bollente, scalding or boiling water.

A'cqua di fiúme, riuer water.

A'cqua di látte, clarifide whaie of milke.

Acqua d' órgio, tysane or barlie water.

A'cquaferráta, smiths water wherein iron was quenched.

A'cquagliáre, to crud or crudle.

A'cquaglióso, cruddie, full of cruds.

Acquáia, as Acquázzo.

Acquáio, a cesterne, a waterish place.

A'cqua inrosáta, rose water.

Acquaiuóle, a kind of wind gattes full of water in a horse.

Acquaiuóle herbe, almanner of hearbs growing by or in the waters.

Acquaiuóli, water-bearers, tankard-bearers.

A'cqua maestra, the master-water. Saltpeeter men call it mother of Salt peeter.

A'cquamaníle, an ewer to giue water with.

A'cqua mórta, anie dead or standing water.

A'cqua nánfa, sweet washing water.

A'cqua orgiáta, barlie water.

A'cqua perpetua, a still standing water.

A'cqua pioggiána, raine water.

A'cqua piouána, raine water.

A'cqua queta, a still water. Also a close, 



slie, lurking knaue, a stil sow as we say.

Acquáre, to water, to ouerflow.

Acquarella, a little brooke or water. Also washt or water colours. Also thin waterish matter running from sores.

Acquarello, an ewer. Also a kind of small weake wine.

Acquaríno, waterish, borne vnder Aquarius. Also tasting of water.

Acquário, one of the twelue signes in the Zodiack named Aquarius. Also anie place for water, an eawerie.

A'cqua rósa, rose water.

Acquaruólo, a water man, a waterbearer.

A'cqua stante, anie standing water.

A'cqua stilláta, Aquauitæ, or Rosasolis.

Acquastríno, that groweth or liueth in the water.

Acquatelle, a kind of fresh water fish.

Acquático, waterish, plashie, moist, fennie, moorish, full of water. Vccello acquático, anie kind of water or sea-foule. Also a kind of smallest wine.

Acquatíle, as Acquático.

Acquáto, a kind of small waterish wine.

Acquattáre, to squat to the ground, to cowre downe as it were to hide himselfe.

A'cqua víte, Aquauite, water of life.

A'cqua víua, running-spring water.

Acquazzáre, to plash or slough or pudle.

Acquázzo, a pudle, a plash, or sinke where filthie water is cast, a flood of waters.

Acquazzóne, as Acquázzo.

Acquazzóso, watrish, plashie, moorish.

Acquedótto, a water conduit.

Acqueo, waterish, of the nature of water, water-bred. Also a waterie colour.

Acquetáre, to quiet, to whish, to still, to appease, to calme, to pacifie.

Acquétta, a little water or brooke.

Acquidóccio, a water conduit or pipe.

Acquiescere, esco, escéi, esciúto, to still, to quiet, to whish.

Acquiesciménto, a quietting, a whishing.

Acquietáre, to quiet, to still, to whish.

Acquifóglio, to hollie, Holme or Huluer-tree.

Acquidóso, moist, waterish, plashie.

Acquidótto, a water conduit.

Acquisitióne, an acquisition, a purchasing.

Acquisíto, acquired, gotten, purchased.

Acquistáre, to acquire, to purchase.

Acquistaménto, a purchase, an acquiring.

Acquistéuole, acquirable, purchasable.

Acquísto, a purchase, an acquisition.

Acquittánza, an acquittance. 

Acquóne, a great water. Also a fish called in Latine Agonus.

Acquosità, waterishnesse.

Acquóso, watrish, full of water.

A'cre, sowre, sharp, tart, eagre.

Acredenza, at or vpon trust or credit.

Acreditáre, to credit or trust.

Acredito, vpon credit or trust.

Acreménte, sowrely, sharply, eagrelie.

A crépa cuóre, at hearts ease, as a mans heart would wish, hold bellie hold. Some take it in the contrarie sense, against ones heart, vntill ones heart burst.

A crépa fégato, idem.

Acrepa páncia, idem.

Acrestáre, as Accrestáre.

Acrézza, eagrenesse, sharpnesse, sowrenesse.

Acrída, by cries or proclamation.

Acrilogía, sowre or bitter speaking.

Acrilógo, a sowre or bitter speaker.

Acrimónia, as Agrimónia.

Acrimónio, as Agrimónio.

Acrimonióso, full of sharpnesse or tartnesse.

Acrísia, want of iudgement or wit.

Acrità, sharpnesse, eagrenesse, sowrenesse.

A'cro, sowre, eagre, sharpe, tart.

Acrocétte, with croslets in armorie.

Acrocordóne, a kind of wartes so small at the roots that they seeme to hang by sinewes.

Acrocoríno, a kind of Onion or Bulbous plant.

Acronicaménte, looke Acronícto.

Acrónico, as Acronícto.

Acronícto, voce astronómica, cioè, estrémo princípio della nótte. , 

Acróre, eagrenesse, sharpnesse, sowrenesse.

Acrúme, as Agrúme.

Acúglia, an Eagle. Also a needle.

Acuíno, a horne fish or horneback.

Acuíre, ísco, íto, to make sharp pointed.

Aculeáre, to prick or sting, as Acuíre.

Aculeo, a sting, a prick, a thorne.

Acúme, sharpnesse of wit or sight.

Acumináre, to make sharp-peinted. Also to stir vp ones wit, to set in full sight.

Acuráto, as Accuráto.

Acutángolo, a sharpe corner or angle.

Acutáre, to make sharp pointed.

Acutézza, sharpnesse. Also subtiltie of wit, or viuacitie of sight.

Acúto, sharp pointed, keene. Also witty, subtile, politick, ingenious. Also anie sharpe pin, or peg of wood.

Ad, euen as A in the second, third, fourth, and sixt line of A.

Adacquábile, that may be watred.

Adacquáre, to water as men doe wine, gardines, hearbs, or cattell. 

Adadunephósio, a kind of pretious stone named of the kidnies.

Adagiáre, to case, to accomodate, to settle.

Adágio, at case, at leasure, faire and softlie, leasurelie. Also an adage or prouerb.

Adamánte, the adamant-stone. Also a Diamond. Also an hearb vsed in enchantments.

Adamántida, an hearb that makes Lions loose their strength, and fall to the ground if they come neere vnto it.

Adamantíno, adamantine. Also hard, sterne, fell, inexorable.

Adámbe máni, with both hands.

Adámi, a kind of Ducke or wigin.

Adánda, a kind of deuiding in arithmetick vsed by marchants.

Adána, as Adéna.

Adáre, to be aware or circumspect, to perceiue, to forecast, to foresee.

Adarea, a kind of reed called Calamachne. Also a certaine beast liuing in the water.

Ad árma cóllo, with or at an armed neck. Also hugging about the necke.

Adastáre, to spite, to vex, to prouoke, or set on. Also to striue or contend.

Adastiaménto, spite, vexation, prouocation. Also strife or rancor.

Adastiáre, as Adastáre.

Adásto, as Adastiaménto.

Adattaménte, aptlie, fitlie, warilie.

Adattáre, as Addattáre.

Adátto, apt, proper, readie for all assaies.

Adberfáre, to sprinkle, to asperge, to spirt.

Adberfatióne, a sprinkling, an asperging.

A'dda, a kind of root.

Addáce, a kind of Roe-buck in Affrica.

Addagiáre, as Adagiáre.

Addágio, as Adágio.

Addáre, as Adáre, but properlie to become or beseeme well vnto, to be conuenient.

Addáto, wise, warie, circumspect. Also beseemed well vnto, fitting, conuenient.

Addattaménte, aptlie, fitlie, properly.

Addattáre, to fit, to adapt, to apropriate.

Addebolíre, lísco, líto, to weaken.

Addegnáre, to daigne, to vouchsafe. Also to make worthie.

Adémmo, as Auedémmo, we foresaw or perceiued, of Auedére.

Addempiménto, an accomplishment.

Addempíre, písco, píto, to fulfill, to accomplish.

Addensaménto, a condensing, a thickning.

Addensáre, to thicken, to condense.


Addentáre, to season, to catch hold, to pinch or nip with the teeth as a dog                                                                                                                        

                                                                                                                                                   doth a doth a Deare, or with any tonges or pincers. Also to indent any worke. Also to engraile or indent in armorie.

Addentelláte paróle, biting, sharpe words.

Addestráre, to fit, to adapt or sute vnto. Also to enable, to make nimble, to tame. Also to place, to be or to goe on the right hand of one. Also to sooth ones humor.

Addì, Adì, on the daie.

Addiacciáre, to freeze or become frost.

Addimanda, a demand, a question.

Addimándáre, to demand, to aske. Also to name, to nominate, or call by name.

Addíre, to wit, id est, that is to saie.

Addirizzare, to addresse, to direct. Also to leuell or make straight. Also to redresse.

Addíscere, to learne.

Additáre, to point at with ones fingers.

Additióne, an addition, or adiunct.

Addíto, to be pointed at, at gaze, in view.

Addobbaménti, enrobings, ornaments, costlie raiments, furnitures, or dightings.

Addobbáre, to enrobe, to arraie, to adorne, to dight or set forth with ornaments.

Addóbbo, any dressing or dighting.

Addocchiáre, to eie, to gaze on, to take view of.

Addogáre, to border about, as some armes be, to pane, or to pale about.

Addogliáre, to grieue or afflict with sorow, smart or vexation.

Addolciáre, to sweeten, to enmilden.

Addolcíre, cisco, cíto, as Addolciáre.

Addoloráre, as Addogliáre.

Addománda, a demand, a question.

Addomandáre, as Addimandáre.

Addomesticáre, to tame, to make familiar.

Addonáre, to giue vnto, to adict.

Addoppiáre, to double.

Addormentáre, to lull or fall asleepe.

Addormíre, idem.

Addossáre, to laie on ones back, to heape vpon.

Addósso, on, vpon, or about ones backe.

Addottáre, as Adottáre.

Addottoraménto, a doctoring.

Addottoráre, to take or giue the degree of a doctor, to doctorate.

Addótto, alledged, produced, brought.

Addottrináre, to endoctrine, to instruct.

Addouináre, to diuine, to guesse.

Addozzenáre, to make vp in dozens.

Addrizzáre, as Addirizzáre.

Adduáre, to put two and two to double.

Addúcere, dúco, dússi, dútto, dótto, to lead or bring vnto. Also to alledge.

Adduggiáre, to moisten or make humid. Also to obscure or darken. Also to bewitch, to forspeake, to make or become vnluckie.

Adduggiatóre, a witch, a sorcerer.

Adduggióso, humid, full of moistnesse. Also darkesome. Also full of charmes or witchcraft.

Adduráre, to harden, to obdurate.

Addúrre, as Addúcere.

Addútto, Addótto, led or brought vnto. Also obledged.

Adeguánza, an equalling, a matching.

Adeguáre, to equall, to euen, to match.

Adeguatióne, an equall computation.

Adello, a fish called Attilus in Latine.

Adelphíde, a kind of Date as it were sister to others.

Adempiménto, an accomplishment.

Adempíre, to fulfill, to accomplish.

Adéna, as Adello.

Adentáre, as Addentáre.

Adentáto, embattelled or as some say engrailed, or endented in armorie.

Adentelláre, to vnderprop, to support. Also among masons, to leaue stones or timbers ends ietting out in vnfinished buildings, that they may the easier be continued or ended.

Adentelláto, an out iutting of an vnfinished worke. Also vnderpropt.

Adenti, engrailed in armory.

Adentráre, to enter far in, to inward.

Adentro, within, far in.

Adérgere, as Ergere.

Adersáre, to addresse or direct vnto.

Aderso, adressed or directed vnto.

Adescaménto, an embaiting, an allurement.

Adescáre, to embait. Also to allure or entice.

Adescáre un pezzo, to prime a piece.

Adescatúra, as Adescaménto.

Adesso, now, at this instant.

Adess'adesso, euen now, by and by.

Adestáre, to awaken.

Adestráre, as Addestráre.

Adestro, fitly, prosperously, adue.

Adétta, by, or vpon report.

Adextra, from without, without.

Adherbáre, to grow or goe to grasse.

Adherente, adherent, coherent.

Adherenza, adherency, affinity.

Adheríre, rísco, ríto, to adhere, or take part with.

Adhóra, now, at this houre. Also at times, at houres, or sometimes.

Adhóra adhora, euen now at this houre.

Adhorríre, rísco, ríto, to bee or put in horror.

Adhótta ad hótta, as Adhóra ad hóra.

Adhúggere, úggo, uggéi, uggiúto, to swallow vp with greedinesse. Also to parch and consume with heat. Also to darken or obscure.

Adhuggiáre, as Adduggiáre.

Adiacente, adiacent neere bounding.

Adiánto, the hearb Maidens haire.

Adiáto, idem.

Adícto, Adítto, one doomed to serue, such debters as by an ancient law were adiudged to serue their creditors as slaues being vnable to pay them.

Adietro, behind, after, also heretofore.

Adietrouía, behind, afterward.

Adiettíuo, a noune adiectiue.

Adigiúno, fasting, before feeding.

Adiguazzáre, to dash or dable in water, to plash. Also to make good cheere.

Adiguázzo, dashingly. Also making good cheere with full dishes.

Adiligióne, in mockery, in derision.

Adilóngo, at length, forth right.

Adimáino, a beast in India as big as an Asse, with wooll and hornes like a sheepe.

Adíma, low, sunken to the ground.

Adimáre, to descend or sinke downe.

Adimesticáre, to tame or make familiar.

Adiméuole, that may be brought low.

Adímo, close vnto, neere adioining.

Adímo adímo, very close vnto.

Adinamóne, a kind of wine made of spices.

Ad instánza, at the instance, or entreaty.

Ad intentióne, with intention or purpose.

Adíntra, from within, withinward.

Adinueníre, to meet or find by the way.

Adío, adue, to God, fare ye well.

Adío non piáccia, God for bid.

Adípe, the sewet or seame of a sow.

Adipéne postéme, as Adipína.

Adipína, a bile or impostume or sore full of fatty matter and corruption.

Adipóso, a kind of Date or Date tree.

Adipsatóne, a kind of prickie shrub.

Adipsóne, an hearb that alaieth hunger and thirst.

Adipsóso, as Adipóso.

Adiráre, to anger, to wroth, to enrage.

Adirataménte, angerly, irefully.

Adirítto, forthright, directly on.

Adirittúra, as A dirítto.

Adirizzáre, to adresse or direct vnto.

Adirízzo, an addresse, an addressement.

Adiróso, irefull, wrathfull, angry.

Adirupáre, to tumble downe ruinously as from a rock.

Adirúpo, ruinously tumbling downe.

Adismisúra, beiond measure.

Adispetto, in despight, maugre ones will.

Adistésa, out stretchedly, forthright.

Aditáre, to point at with ones finger.

Adito, to be pointed at, at view, at gaze.

A'dito, accesse, aproach or way vnto. 



Adítto, adicted or giuen vnto.

Adiueniménto, a comming vnto, or to passe.

Adiueníre, to come vnto, to come to passe.

Adiuénne, it hapned, it came to passe.

Adiuráre, to abiure.

Adiuratióne, an abiuration.

Adiustáre, as Aggiustáre.

Adiuuánte, help-affording, helping.

Adméttere, to admit.

Adminícolo, a help, a stay, a support.

Administráre, to administer.

Administratióne, an administration.

Administratóre, an administrator.

Admissióne, an admission.

Admistiáre, to mix or mingle vnto.

Admistióne, a mixing or blending vnto.

Adobbaménti, as Addobbaménti.

Adobbáre, as Addobbáre.

Adóbbo, a kind of dressing of meat.

Adocchiáre, as Addocchiáre.

Adócchio, by the eie, by sight. Also looke Inestáre.

Adócchio veggente, manifestly as an eie witnesse.

Adoganiere as Doganiere.

Adógnihóra, at all houres.

Adogáre, to border about in armory.

Adóghe, bendy or bordered in armory.

Adógnimódo, by any meanes howsoeuer.

Adógnipregio, at any rate or price.

Adógnipruóua, at all assaies.

Adógni tempo, at all times.

Adógo, that tenure of land, which we call in Knights seruice.

Adógo, quasi adunaménto di feudatárij, beneuolence of subiects to their Prince.

Adolescere, lesco, lescéi, lesciúto, to grow in age, to wax ripe or come to his flowre.

Adolomáto, hauing a crick, or wrench in the neck or backe.

Adoloráre, as Addoloráre.

Adolescente, a yong child or lad.

Adolescenza, childhood, youth.

Adománda, a demand, a question.

Adomandáre, as Addimandáre.

Adombráre, to shade, to shadow, to ouershadow a picture. Also to start or giue back for feare as some horses. Also to suspect or mistrust and as we say to take pepper in the nose. Also to couer, to hide a thing or meaning, or to figure a matter, to glance at any thing in speech.

Adonáre, to giue vnto. Also to tame or danton.

Adonáto, giuen or enclined vnto.

Adóncia, by ounces.

Adóncia ad óncia, ounce by ounce.

Adóne, a fish that hath a voice, and sleepeth on dry land.

Adonestare, to make honest.

Adónio, the Adonis flowre.

Adónta, in despight or reproch.

Adontáre, to despight, to shame, to reproach.

Adontáto, spighted, shamed, wronged.

Adoperare, to vse, to occupie, to employ in any manner of worke.

Adoperaménto, a vsing or occupying.

Adoperatíuo, as Adoperéuole.

Adoperéuole, that may be vsed, emploied or occupied about any worke.

Adoppiáre, to double.

Adóppio, doubly, two fold.

Adopráre, as Adoperáre.

Adopraménto, as Adoperaménto.

Adopratíuo, as Adoperéuole.

Adopréuole, as Adoperéuole.

Adorando, to be adored or worshipped.

Adoránza, as Adoratióne.

Adoráre, to worship, to adore.

Adoratióne, worship, adoration.

Adoratóre, a worshipper, an adorer.

Adorbággine, blindnesse.

Adorbáre, to blind, to make blind.

Adórbo, blindly, as a blind man, carelesly, hand ouer head.

Adorcáre, to grub or harrow the earth.

Adorea, the glory and honour belonging to corne in generall.

Adoreo, red bearded wheat, so called in old times.

Adoréuole, that may be worshipped.

Adorezzáre, to ouershade with trees or leaues. Also to blow as the wind.

Adormentáre, to bring or fall asleep.

Adormíre, as Adormentáre.

Adornaméntiornaments, deckings, dightings, trimmings, embellishments.

Adornáre, to adorne, to deck, to dight, to trim, to embellish.

Adornatúra, any kind of ornament or adorning.

Adornézza, as Adornatúra.

Adossáre, to lay on ones backe.

Adósso, on, about, or vpon one, backe.

Adottióne, adoption or endowment.

Adottíuo, adoptiue or fostered.

Adottáre, to adopt, to endow, or foster vp.

Adottoráre, to doctor, to doctorate.

Adottrináre, to endoctrine, to instruct.

Adouráre, as Adoperáre.

Adráchne, as Aráchnen.

Adrastía, the ineuitable law of Fate, or reuenger of arrogance and insolence.

Adrítto, rightly, by right. Also leuell or point blank.

Adrizzáre, to adresse or direct vnto.

A'dro, as A'tro.

Adúa, A dúe, A dúo, by two and two. Also a dewce at tennice.

Aduáre, to double two and two. 

Aducdére, as Auuedére.

Aduentitio, as Auuentítio.

Aduénto, a comming vnto, an aduent.

Aduerbialménte, aduerbially.

Aduerbio, an aduerbe.

Aduersario, an aduersary.

Aduersità, aduersity.

Aduerso, aduerse.

Aduggiáre, as Adduggiáre.

Aduggioso, as Adduggióso.

Aduicináre, to aproach or come neere vnto.

Aduilíre, lisco, líto, as Auilíre.

Aduíncere, as Auíncere.

Aduínto, as Auínto.

Aduláre, to flatter, to blandish.

Adulatióne, flattery, adulation.

Adulatóre, a flatterer, a clawbacke.

Adulatório, flattering, blandishing.

Adulatríce, a shee-flatterer.

Adúlta, a woman mariageable.

Adulteránza, as Adulteratióne.

Adulteráre, to commit adulterie, to adulterate. Also to falsifie or corrupt.

Adulteratióne, an adulterating or falsifying, or corrupting of any thing.

Adulteríno, adulterate, a bastard.

Adulterio, adultery, vncleannesse of life.

Adúltero, an adulterer. Also false, counterfet, or sophisticated.

Adúlto, a man well growne and sprung vp.

Adúna, together, in company, with. Also at once. Also one by one.

Ad úna ad úna, one by one.

Adunánza, an assembly.

Adunáre, to assemble together.

Adunatióne, an assembly.

Aduncáre, to bend or make crooked.

Adúnco, crooked or bending like an Eagles beake.

Adunghiáre, to catch, sease on, or take hold with nailes, clawes or pounces.

Adúno ad úno, by one and one.

Adúnque, then, therefore.

Ad un trátto, at once, at a cast, at a draught, at a throw.

Adúo, as Adúa.

Adúo a dúo,, by two and two.

Aduocáre, as Auocáre.

Aduocáto, as Auocáto.

A duólo, in mourning weeds.

Adusánza, according to custome.

Adusáre, to vse, to accustome, to enure.

Adúso, according to vse or custome.

A dustáre, to burne, to parch, to scorch, to tanne with heat.

Adustibile, that may be burnt, parched, scorched or tanned.

Adustióne, parching or scorching heat.

Adustíuo, burning or parching.

Adústo, adust, burnt, skorched.

A'e, for Ha, he or she hath.

Aelio, a kind of hawke. 



Aello, the name of a dog, tempest.

Aeráre, to aire, to weather.

A'ere, the aire. Also an aspect, a countenance, a cheere, a looke or apparance in the face of man or woman. Also a tune or aire of a song or ditty. Also a kind of wood good to make oares with.

Aereo, airy, of the nature of aire.

Aeróide, a pretious stone of a skie colour.

Aeróne, a Hearon.

Aeróso, airie, full of aire. Also cheerefull in aspect, full of countenance.

Aerománte, a diuiner by the aire.

Aeromantía, a diuination by the aire.

Aetíte, a stone found in an eagles neast, it is also vsed for Borax to solder mettals with.

A'fa, a sultry faint heat, when the sunne is ouercast with clouds, presaging some vnseasonable weather. Also tediousnesse or wearinesse of time. Also molestation, lazines, or anxiety of mind.

Afáca, a kind of weed among corne.

Afáccia a fáccia, face to face.

Afáme, by famine or hunger.

Afáre? Afáre sia, is it so? then do your worst, doe what you can.

Afatíca, with labour, hardly.

Afátto, wholly, altogether, vtterly.

Afè Aféde, in good faith, faithfully.

Aferro, to the sword.

Aferro di cauallo, looke Briglio.

Aferro & fuóco, to fire and sword.

Afestóne, leafe-worke, looke Festóne.

Afétte, by slices or collops.

Affábile, affable, curteous, gratious.

Affabilíre, lísco, líto, to make or become affable, curteous, gratious and gentle.

Affabilità, affability, curtesie, kindnesse.

Affabilménte, curteously, gently, kindlie.

Affáccia affaccia, face to face.

Affacciáre, to face, to outface. Also to come before ones face. Also to appeare or looke out of a window or from of some high place, to shew ones face.

Affacchinársi, to become a Porter; to become base minded, to become a slaue.

Affacendáto, busied, full of affaires.

Affácere, as Confáre.

Affagiauáre, to en-phesant, to dresse pheasant-like.

Affalcáre, is properly when a horse stops and staies vpon his hinder parts.

Affaldáre, to fold vp, to pucker, to plait, to wrinkle.

Affaldatúra, a folding, a pleiting, a puckering or wrinkling in clothes.

Affalsare, to falsifie, to forge.

Affamáre, to famish, or hunger starue.

Affamático, greedy, hunger starued.

Affangáre, to bemire, to bemud. 

Affannáre, to grieue or molest in mind.

Affánno, griefe, vexation, sorrow or trouble of mind, dreriment.

Affannóso, full of griefe, sorrow or vexation of mind, drerie.

Affardelláre, to packe, or fardle vp, to trusse or fold vp together.

Affáre, as Confáre. Also emploiment or businesse, huómo di gránde affáre.

Affarináre, to floure with meale. Also to reduce or grind to meale.

Affársi, to beseeme, to sute together.

Affasciáre, to swathe or bind about, to bundle or fardle vp, to sheafe up corne.

Affascinaménto, as Affascinatióne.

Affascináre, to charme, or for-speake or bewitch with lookes and words.

Affascinatióne, a bewitching or forspeaking with lookes and words.

Affascinatóre, a bewitcher with lookes and words.

Affasgianáre, as Affagianáre.

Affastelláre, to bundle or fardle vp.

Affastidíre, dísco, díto, to trouble, to vex, to be tedious or fasheous vnto.

Affatáre, to enchant as Fairies doe.

Affatíca, hardly, with labour.

Affaticánte, a labouring man. Also labouring, or suffering.

Affaticáre, to labour, to put to labour, to weary, to toile, to moile. Also to endeuour.

Affatichéuole, as Affaticánte.

Affatocchiáre, to charme or bewitch.

Affatocchiéra, a witch, a sorceresse.

Affatucchiáre, to bewitch, to charme.

Affatucchiéra, a witch, a charmer.

Affaturáre, to be witch, to charme.

Affátto, wholly, vtterly, throughly.

Affe Afféde, in good faith.

Affebbráre, to take or haue an ague.

Affedáre, to trust, to affie. Also to warrant. Also enfeoffe, to commit vnto trust.

Afféde, in good faith or sooth.

Afferési, a figure which taketh a letter or sillable from the beginning of a word.

Affermagióne, an affirmation. Also a fixing vnto as a signet or seale.

Affermáre, to affirme. Also to affix vnto.

Affermataménte, affirmatiuely.

Affermatióne, as Affermagióne.

Affermatiuaménte, affirmatiuely.

Affermatíuo, affirmatiue.

Afferránte, grapling or clinching. Also a horse for seruice or for battell.

Afferráre, to gripe, to grapple, to clinch or seaze on violently.

Affettáre, to affect, to desire, to wish. Also to imitate curiously. Also to slice or cut into collops. 

Affettatióne, affectation, curiosity, a desire of that which nature hath not giuen.

Affettatóio, a curious affecting fellow.

Affertatúzzo, a nice, ouercurious, too much affected and ouerweening fellow.

Affettéuole, affectable, that may bee affected.

Affettionáre, to affectionate, to loue or beare good will vnto.

Affettionatíssimo, most affectionate.

Affettionáto, affectionated, adicted.

Affettióne, affection, good will, loue.

Affetríuo, affecting, affectiue.

Affetto, an effect, a motiue, a disposition, a passion, a loue or good will vnto. Also affected, enclined, adicted, or liable vnto.

Affettuosaménte, very affectionately.

Affettuóso, affectionate, following the disposition or passion of another.

A'ffia, A'fia, a kind of fish.

Affiatáre, to breath, or draw breath.

Affiáto, as Affláto.

Affibbiáglio, a buckle or buckling place.

Affibbiaménto, a buckling, a clasping.

Affibbiáre, to buckle. Also to claspe.

Affibiatúre, a buckling, a clasping.

Afficcáre, to affix. Also to thrust in.

Affidánza, affiance, trust.

Affidáre, to affie, to trust vnto.

Affiebolíre, as Affieuolíre.

Affielíre, lísco, líto, to engall or enbitter.

Affieníre, nísco, níto, to become hay.

Affieuolire, lisco, líto, to enfeeble.

Affieuolézza, feeblenesse, weaknesse.

Affíggere, fíggo, físsi, físso , or fítto, to affix, to fasten or stick vnto.

Affiguráre, to marke, to view or to take notice of.

Affílo, as Afíla.

Affiláre, to spin, to thrid. Also to set an edge vpon. Also to put into files or ranks.

Affiláto, spun. Also sharpe or edged. Also put into files or ranks. Also straight as a line.

Affilatúra, a spinning, a thriding. Also a setting of an edge. Also a girdle.

Affináre, to refine. Also to giue ouer and make an end. Also as Affiláre.

Affinatóre, a refiner. Also a shearegrinder.

Affinimúndo, to the worlds end.

Affiníre, nísco, níto, as Affináre.

Affído, a kinsman by mariage or bobtaile.

Affioccaménte, in flaking manner. Pell mell, thicke and threefold. Also horcely. Also droopingly, faintly, or languishingly.

Affioccáre, to flake as snow doth. Also to betassell, to tuffe, or hang with



locks. Also to flocke or come thicke and threefold together. Also to burst out in laughter. Also to make or become hoarse in speaking. Also to droupe and wither away. Also to make or become faint and languishing.

Affirmáre, to affirme or affix vnto.

Affirmatióne, an affirmation.

Affissáre, to affix vnto.

Affisso, affixed or fastned vnto. Also an affix, or thing fixt to another.

Affittagióne, a fee-farme, a demising or letting or renting of lands.

Affittaiuólo, as Affittuále.

Affittáre, to demise, to farme, to rent or hire any lands or houses, to feefarme.

Affittaruólo, as Affittatóre.

Affittatióne, as Affittagióne.

Affittatóre, a Farmer, a Landlord. Also a tenant of lands.

Affittéuole, rentable, that is or may be let or rented.

Affítti, rents, reuenewes or profits of lands or houses.

Affítto, by rent, in fee-farme, by lease, for rent. Also a fee-farme or rent. Also as Affisso.

Affittuário, of or belonging to farming, letting, or renting.

Affittuále, a Land-lord. Also a Tenant.

Affiubáre, to buckle or claspe together.

Afflábile, that may be blowne, breathed or enspired.

Affláre, to blow, to breath vnto, to fill with winde. Also to enspire or to puffe vp.

Affláto, filled or puffed vp with winde. Also breath or winde. Also breathing aire.

Affláto, a blast, a winde, a breathing, a blowing. Also an inspiration.

Afflíggere, flíggo, flíssi, flítto, to afflict, to molest, to vex, to trouble.

Afflittióne, affliction, trouble, vexation, calamity.

Afflittíno, afflicting, full of affliction. Also that afflicteth.

Affluente, affluent, flowing, or abounding in wealth.

Affluenza, affluence, abundance.

Affluíre, ísco, íto, to flow vnto. Also to abound in wealth.

Affocáre, to set on fire, to kindle. Also to neale red whot. Also to stifle or smother.

Affocáto, set on fire, nealed red whot, stifled, smothered. Also a sorell colour of a horse.

Affocatíccio, firie, full of fire, easie to be set on fire.

Affodello, the Daffodill or Affodil.

Affodíllo, idem.

Affogágine, a stifling or choaking. Also a curse, as we say, a pockes choake you.

Affogáre, to stifle, to smother, to choake. Also to drowne.

Affoggiáre, to fashion vnto.

Affolláre, to croud or presse thicke together. Also to blow, to pant or gaspe.

Affoltaménto, as Affoltáta.

Affoltáre, to presse, to thrust or croud together. Also to hudle vp thicke or in heapes. Also to speake mery, thicke and fast.

Affoltata, a presse, a croud, a thrust, a hudling vp in heapes. Also a thicktold tale, a hudling or fast speech.

Affondaménto, a sinking or plunging to the bottome.

Affondáre, to sinke or plunge downe to the bottome, to ouerwhelme.

Affondatióne, idem.

Affóndere, as Fóndere.

Affóndo, to the bottome, very deepe.

Afforísmo, as Aphorísmo.

Afforticáre, to trusse or tucke vp.

Affortificáre, to fortifie, to strengthen.

Affórza, by force, forcibly, vpon compulsion, by maine strength

Afforzaménto, an enforcement.

Afforzáre, to re-enforce, to strengthen, to fortifie, to vnite, to force, to gather or adde strength. Also to force or compell.

Affoscáre, to make or become duskie, foggie, mistie or darke.

Affossaménto, a ditching, an entrenching.

Affossáre, to enditch, to entrench, to dike. Also ditch or mote about, to pit.

Affra, Afra, a kinde of fish.

Affraccassáre, as Fraccassáre.

Affradelláre, as Affratelláre.

Affrancáre, to enfranchise, or make free.

Affrancatióne, an enfranchising.

Affrángere, as Frangere.

Affránto, as Fránto.

Affrappáre, as Frappáre.

Affrappatóre, as Frappatóre.

Affiatellánza, a fraternity or brotherhood.

Affratelláre, to become as breathren, to embrother.

Affreddáre, to coole, to take cold.

Affrenáre, to bridle, to curbe. Also to rule, to keepe in awe, to restraine.

Affréno, bridled, in awe, in feare.

Affrésco, a Painters worke called wash or water-colours.

Affrettaménto, a hastning or making speed.

Affrettáre, to hasten or make speed.

Affrezzoláre, idem.

A'ffrica, idest. coldles, or alwaies whot.

A'ffrico, the winde South-west and by West. 

Affrico áustro, the winde South west. and by South.

Affrittelláre, to frie as fritters.

Affrittióne, affliction, sorrow.

Affrítto, afflicted, grieued.

Affrodisiáce, a stone which once heated keepes his heat seuen daies.

Affrontagióne, as Affrónto.

Affrontaménto, as Affrónto.

Affrontáre, to affront, to face, to out face, to encounter. Also to cheate or cunnicatch.

Affrontáta, as Affrónto.

Affrontatóre, an affronter, a facer. Also a cheater, a cozener, a conicatcher

Affrónte, face to face, ouer against.

Affrónto, an affront, an onset, a bold part, an iniury. Also a cozening. cheating tricke.

Affrustáre, as Frustáre. Also to breake or shiuer in peeces.

Affrústo, by peecemeale, by scraps.

Affrustráre, as Frustráre.

Affumáre, to besmoake, to drie in the smoake as bacon, to blote hearings.

Affumáte, blote hearings, dried sprate.

Affumicáre, as Affumáre.

Affuocáre, as Affocáre.

Affuriáte, to enfury, to enrage.

Affusáre, to spindle, to make as a spindle.

Affuseláre, idem. Also to stretch vpon a frame as Painters doe canuase to paint vpon it.

Affusoláre, as Affuseláre.

Affusoláte gámbe, spindle shankes.

Affusoláto, smale, spinie, like a spindie Also spruce, fine, smugge, or trickt vp.

Affustáre, to stocke or mount peeces.

A'fia, a kinde of fish.

A fiácca cóllo, to the vtmost danger, to the breaking of ones necke.

A fíla, in files, in roes, in rankes as soldiers march.

Afiláre, to put into files, or roes, Also to set an edge vpon any weapon.

A fílo di spáda, to the edge of the sword.

A fílo, leuell, by line and thrid.

Afinimóndi, to the worlds end.

A fittáre, as Affittáre.

Afítto, as Affitto.

Afláre, as Affláre.

Aflíggere, Aflítto, as Afflíggere.

Aflittióne, as Afflittióne.

Afluente, Afluenza, as Affluente.

A fóndo, to the bottome, deepe.

Aforisticaménte., briefly, succinctly.

Afórza, as Affórza.

A fracásso, in ruine, to hauocke.

A fréno, bridled, in awe, in feare.

A frésco, as Affrésco.

A frónte, face to face, ouer against.

A fuóco, to the fire, with fire.

A fuóco et ferro, with fire and sword.

A fúria, in fury, furiously. 



A furóre, in fury. Also furiously.

Afusóne, spindled. shanked, staued.

Agabbaménto, a mocking, a flouting.

Agabbáre, to mocke, to flout, to iest.

Agábbo, in mockery, in iest.

Agacciáre identi, to set ones teeth an edge.

Agaglíno, a kind of coine in Italy.

Agála, a flote, floting as corke vpon the water.

Agaláre, to flote lightly vpon the water.

Agálma, an image, a statue. Also a cifer or mysterious obscure caracter.

Agalmaría, a place where images are kept.

Agalmóne, any obscure or mysticall language.

Agalmónico, obscure, mysterious, alluding to some other thing, equiuocall.

Agámo, a batcheler, an vnmarried man.

Aganciáre, to make sharpe-pointed, or keene.

Agáncio, sharpe-pointed, keene.

Aganipídi, hath been vsed for the nine Muses.

Agápi, a yellow stone that cureth the stinging of Serpents.

A gára, striuingly, for the maistery.

A gárico, a white fungous excrescence growing out of trees, vsed in physicke. Agarike.

Agasílli, the hearb whereof Ammonike is made.

Agasóne, is properly a leader of wilde beasts when they are tame.

A'gata, an Agate stone.

A'gato, the needle-fish.

Agatóne, a crafty, slie, suttle fellow.

Agauignáre, to claspe fast, to tugge, to touze, to wrestle or clinch about.

Agauocciáre, as Gauocciáre.

Ageláre, to freeze.

Agelásto, a man that neuer laughs.

Agemma, looke Innestáre.

Agente, acting, working Also an agent, a factor, a doer, a negotiator.

Agenza sp. Haziénda., 

Ageráto, an hearb of the Ferula kind.

Ageuoláre, to make easie or facile.

Agéuole, easie, facile Also tractable, gentle, nimble, light, ethe.

Ageuolissimaménte, most easily.

Ageuolménte, easily, with facility.

Ageuolézza, facility, easinesse. Also agility, dexterity, nimblenesse.

Aggabbáre, to mocke, to flout, to iest.

Aggábbo, in mockery, in iest.

Aggaffáre, to catch or snatch vp.

Aggarbáre, as Garbeggiáre.

Aggarbáto, as Garbáto.

Aggarbatúra, as Garbézza.

Aggarbeggiáre, as Garbeggiáre.

Aggárbo, as Gárbo.

Aggecchírsi, chísco, chíto, to grow faint hearted, to become a coward or a dastard, to loose ones courage.

Aggéggia, a moore-hen.

Aggegnáre, to frame any kind of carpenters, ioiners or smiths work or building, so that it may be taken asunder and set vp againe, to engine together.

Aggeláre, to freeze.

Aggeráto, the hearb Cotton-weed, Stechado, or Moth-weed.

Aggettáre, to abiect, to reiect or cast from.

Aggettíuo, a noune adiectiue.

Aggetto, abiect, outcast, despised, base.

Agghiacciáre, to freeze, to become frost.

Agghiadáre, idem.

Aggiaccársi, to put on a iacket, or shirt of maile. Also as Aggecchírsi.

Aggiaccáto, with a iacket or shirt of maile on. Also become faint hearted or a coward.

Aggiacente, adiacent, neere-lying.

Aggiacére, to lie neere vnto, to neighbour.

Aggiacciáre, to freeze or grow to frost or ice. Also to vnderprop, or make sure.

Aggialláre, to make or become yellow.

Aggieláre, to freeze or grow to frost.

Aggiogáre, to yoke vnto.

Aggióngere, as Aggiúgnere.

Aggiontáre, as Giontáre.

Aggiónta, as Aggiúnta.

Aggiontatóre, as Giontatóre.

Aggiontióne, an adiunct, an addition.

Aggiónto, adioined, annexed, added vnto. Also ouertaken or ouer-reached, or ouer gone. Also arriued or come to any place. Also an addition or adiunct.

Aggiornaménto, an adiourning. Also a proroguing to a day. Also a summoning.

Aggiornáre, to adiorne, to summon. Also to wax day. Also to prorogue to a day.

Aggiornatóre, an apparitor, a summoner.

Aggiraménti, as Giraménti.

Aggiráre, as Giráre.

Aggirársi in váno, to loose labour, to go about had I wist.

Aggiráta, a winding, a turning or walking about.

Aggiróne, a kind of hat or cap.

Aggiudicáre, to adiudge, to doome.

Aggiúgnere, gióngo, giónsi, giónto,or giúnto, to adioine, to annex, to adde vnto. Also to reach vnto or ouertake. Also to outgo, to ouer-reach, to ouergoe. Also to ariue, to come, or reach to any place.

Aggiúngere, as Aggiúgnere.

Aggiúnta, an addition or annexing vnto. Also reaching or ouertaking. Also an arriuing or comming to a place. Also the vantage that Bakers or any other man that selleth a thing giueth to the buier in euery dozen or hundred.

Aggiuntáre, Aggiuntatóre, as Giontáre.

Aggiúnto, as Aggiónto.

Aggiuráre, to adiure, to vrge.

Aggiustáre, to make iust, euen or leuell.

Aggiustáre vn pezzo, to leuell a piece.

Aggiustéuole, that may be made iust.

Agglobáre, to en-globe or make round.

Agglomeraménto, a winding vp as a bottom or clue of thrid.

Agglomeráre, as Aggomiccioláre.

Agglutináre, to glue vnto.

Aggobbáre, as Gobbáre.

Aggoluppáre, as Goluppáre.

Aggomiccioláre, to wind vp round as a clue of thrid.

Aggomícciolo, a clue or bottom of thrid. Also any round bundle.

Aggomitoláre, as Aggomicciolare.

Aggomítolo, as Aggomícciolo.

Aggottáre, to drop. Also to swell or puffe as one full of wind or dropsie.

Aggottóso, full of drops. Also swolne or puft vp as with wind or dropsie.

Aggradáre, as Gradíre.

Aggradíre, as Gradíre.

Aggraffáre, as Aggraffiáre.

Aggraffiáre, to scratch. Also to scramble.

Aggranchiáre, to seaze on, to gripe or take hold of with clawes, to crampe or haue the cramp. Also to stiffen or benum with cold. Also to scratch or to torture.

Aggrandiménto, a making or becomming great.

Aggrandíre, dísco, díto, to make or become great.

Aggrappaménto, a grapling, a griping. Also a shrinking. Also a clammering.

Aggrappáre, to graple, to gripe. Also to shrinke vp. Also to clammer or rampe.

Aggrappéuole, that may bee grapled, griped, or taken hold of.

Aggratiáre, to grace.

Aggratáre, as Gradíre.

Aggratiatíno, gratious, or comely.

Aggratiáto, gracefull, graced, full of grace and comelinesse.

Aggrátta, as Gráta. Also a watch towre.

Aggrattáre, to scratch.

Aggrattigliáre, as Aggratticciáre. Also to tickle with clawing or scratching. Also vsed for to sooth vp and flatter a man with faire words.

Aggratticciáre, to make hurdle or great wise. Also to clinch, to graple or gripe fast. Also to broile vpon a gridiron. Also to be entangled in some grate or hurdle.

Aggrauaménto, as Aggráuio.

Aggrauáre, to aggrauate. Also to har­



den as Pharaoes heart was.

Aggráuio, a grieuance, a burthening.

Aggrauóso, grieuous, burthen some.

Aggregáre, to aggregate, to assemble.

Aggregatióne, an assembly or aggregation.

Aggregáto, as Aggregatióne.

Aggreggiáre, to flocke, to troupe, to heard.

Aggreuaménto, a grieuance.

Aggricciaménti, astonishments, starings of ones haires.

Aggricciáre, to a stony, to affright or make ones haire stand an end.

Aggriccioláre, to become toish, humorous or phantasticall.

Aggrigiáre, to make or become gray.

Aggrinzáre, to wither, to wrinkle.

Aggroppaménto, as Aggricciáre.

Aggroppaméento, a fast knotting.

Aggroppáre, to knot together fast. Also to shrinke as it were in a knot.

Aggroppársi, is properly when a horse knits himselfe close together to shew the strength of his backe. Also to shrinke backe.

Aggrottáre, to make or become rugged or craggie.

Aggrottáre le cíglia, to froun, to skoule, to lowre or looke grim.

Aggrumáre, to heape or scrape together. Also to make sharpe. Also to roule or wind vp as a clue of thrid. Also to make or become soure, sharpe, or tart in tast.

Aggruppáre, as Aggroppáre.

Agguagliánza, an equalling or matching.

Agguagliáre, to equall, to compare.

Agguáglio, an equalling, a paragon.

Agguardáre, to regard, to behold.

Agguatáre, to watch at an aduantage.

Agguáto, a watch set for entrapping.

Agguattáre, as Acquattáre.

Agguazzáre, as Guazzáre.

Agguerríre, as Aguerríre.

Agguindoláre, to reele or wind silke.

Agguindolatóre, a reeler of silk or yarne.

Aghedáre, to freeze.

Agherbíno, the South-west wind.

Aghiadáre, to freeze.

Aghiádo, with or by the sword. Also benummed with cold. Also vpon colde blood. Also perforce or vpon constraint.

Aghiróne, an Hearon.

Agiámbo, a kind of steele so called.

Agiaménto, any kind of casement. Also a priuie.

Agiáre, to ease, to accomodate, to place at ease. Also to grow a God.

Agiaróso, sandie, grauelly, grettie.

Agiataménte, easily, comodiouslie. Also agedly.

Agiáto, eased, setled comodiously. Also able to liue, or wealthie. Also aged.

Agíbile, that may be acted or done.

Agíes, an hearb in India where of they make good bread, and yet the iuice is poison.

A'gile, agile, easie, nimble, light.

Agilità, agility, nimblenesse, facilitie, dexterity.

Agilitáre, to make easie or nimble.

Agimína, a kind of tapistrie worke or damaske worke in Persian blades.

Aginína, a kind of networke worne ouer tinsell or cloth of gold to make it shew clinkant.

A'gio, ease, leasure while, conueniencie, comodity. Also age.

Agióccia, by drops, droppingly.

Agiocciáre, to drop, to trill.

Agióco, in sport, in game, in iest. Also sea-room, la náue và agióco the ship hath sea-roome. Also l'uccello è agióco, that is when a hawke hath no manner of let but may flie at his pleasure.

Agiogáre, to yoke or couple together.

Agiógo, by yokes or couples.

Agiósa, plenteouslie, store, enough and to spare, hold belly hold.

Agiótto, an Eagle called an Ospraie.

Agirábile, that may be turned about.

Agiraménti, as Aggiraménti.

Agiráre, as Aggiráre or Giráre.

Agirónda, about and about.

Agiróne, an Hearon.

Agiróni, geronie in armorie.

Agitáre, to mooue or stir or tosse vp and downe. Also to perturbe the mind.

Agitatióne, agitation, motion or tossing vp and downe. Also perturbation of mind.

Agitéuole, that may be agitated.

Agitílla, a white stone with blacke streakes in it.

A'gito, a kind of waight in India.

A gítto, at a cast, at once, at a throw. Also framed by casting as great ordenance. Also a sport that children vse in Italie called Alle óssa, that is with vs at ninepinnes or heeles, and what one doth cast downe at the first throw they say, fárlo a gítto.

A'giúre, by or according to law.

A'gla, a kind of flat fish like a Flounder.

Aglaphotíno, an hearb vsed of enchanters.

Agláudo, a dogs name, White tooth.

Agliado, as Aghiádo.

Agliáta, a meat made of garlicke.

Agliétti, yong or little Garlickes.

A'glio, Garlicke.

Aglióna, as Agliáta.

Aglióne, as Agliata.

Aglióso, full, or tasting of Garlicke.

A'gna, an eaw Lamb.

Agnatióne, kindred by the fathers side Also growing out of natures course.

Agnáto, a kinsman by the fathers side Also growne beyond natures course.

Agnelláre, to yeane as an eawe.

Agnellátto, as Agnello.

Agnello, a Lambe.

Agni, lambes. Also a kind of little fish.

Agnista piombína, as Ossifrágo.

Agnitióne, agnition, acknowledgement.

Agniún módo, by no meanes, in no manner.

A'gno, an he lambe. Also a fellon in one finger.

A'gnocásto, looke Agrifólio.

Agnolétto, a little lamb in.

A'gnolo, an Angell. Also a kind of bird.

Agnóme, a sirname, a nicke name.

Agnomináre, to sirname, to nickename.

Agnominatióne, agnomination.

Agnóne, the chast tree or willow.

Agnún módo, by no means, in no maner.

A'gnus dei, a lambe with a crosse. Also a kind of rauenous sea-foule. Guardáre in agnus dei, that is to look back, because the agnus dei in Saint Iohan Baptist doth so. It is also taken for to looke or be harmlesse and innocent.

A'go, a needle, a sharp sting or prick. Also the Needle-fish or hornebacke. Also the chaffe comming from winnowed or bolted corne.

A'go a pómo, a pin with a head.

A'go da pomella, idem.

A'go da sácchi, a packe-needle.

Agóge, a trench or conduit that miners make to draine the waters they meete withall.

Agognánte dámma, a Doe embost.

Agognánti cáni, dogs panting and lilling out their tongues.

Agognáre, to wish, to desire, to couet or long for with sighing. Also to pant and bee out of breath or lill out the tongue as a dog that is weary, to embosse as a deare.

Agógno, carke or care of mind. Also sighingly, desirous and longing for.

Agolpíre, písco, pito, to enfox or become foxe-like.

Agoluppare, as Goluppáre.

Agolúppo, as Golúppo.

Agomitoláre, as Gomitoláre.

Agóne, a place in Rome to ride horses in, now called Piazza nauóna. Also a campe, a battell, a combat.

Agóni, a kind of dainty fish.

Agonia, agonie, trembling for feare.

Agonióso, full of agony or anguish.

Agonísta, a champion, a publike fighter.

Agonizzánte, anguishing, languishing in agony. Also panting for breath, as we say embossed.

Agonizzáre, to anguish, to be or languish in agony. Also to fight a publike combat. Also to pant for breath. 



Agóno, a fish called in latine Agonus.

Agónta, a kinde of ancient coine in Italie.

Agónzi, certaine broad sleeues as those of a gowne, of a master of Art in Oxford.

Agóra, all manner of needles.

Agorgogliáre, as Gorgogliáre.

Agosello, as Agufeo.

Agostáne, a kinde of August plum.

Agostáro, an ancient coine of Augustus.

Agósto, Aósto, the moneth August.

Agotile, a kinde of strange bird.

Ago vóto, an emptie needle.

Agozzíno, a Seriant, a Catchpole, a Beadle, a Prouest marshall, a Surueior of good orders. Also a captaine ouer slaues in a galley. Also an executioner or hangman. Also a clerk of the market.

Agracchiáre, as Gracchiáre.

Agradáre, as Gradíre.

Agradire, as Gradíre.

Agrádo, acceptablie in good worth.

Agraménte, eagerly, sharply.

Agramónia, as Agrimónia.

Agranchiáre, as Aggranchiáre.

Agrandelláre, to burle with fury.

A grán fatíca, with much labour.

A grán giornáte, by long iorneis.

A grán péna, with much paine.

A grán pezze, by a great deale or while.

A grantorto, most wrongfully.

A grán vóce, with a high voice, loudlie.

Agrária, of or pertaining to lands. Also a law made for the distributing of lands among the people.

Agrário, a field-man. Also a fauourer of that law.

Agratíáre, to grace.

Agratiáto, graced. Also gracefull.

Agraticciáre, to scratch, to scrape.

Agrauáre, to agrauate, to oppresse.

Agráuio, grieuance, oppression.

Agrédine, sharpnesse, sourenesse,

Agregánza, an assemblie or aggregation.

Agregáre, to assemble, to aggregate.

Agregatióne, as Agregánza.

Agresto, Agresta, vnripe grapes. Also vertiuice or alligar. Also water cresses, or waterkarnes, or Nosesmart. Also a soure surly fellow.

Agreste, rusticall, rurall, clounish. Also a swine or vplandish man.

Agrestína, a kinde of sourish sauce.

Agrétto, sourish. Also water-creasses. Also soure wig. Also butter-milke.

Agreuaménto, a grieuance.

Agrézza, egernesse, sourenesse.

A'grico, rusticall, rurall, clownish.

Agrícola, a till-man, a Ploughman, a husband-man.

Agricoltóre, as Agrícola,

Agricoltúra, tillage, plowing, husbandrie, harrowing.

Agrifólio, the Holly, or Huluer-tree. Also a kinde of Withie or willow, called in Latine Agnus castus, and in English Parke-leaues, Abrahams balme, the Clust or Hemp-tree.

Agrimónia, the hearbe Agrimony or Liuer-wort. Also tartnesse or sharpnesse on the tongue.

Agrimónio, tarte or biting the tongue.

Agrinciáre, to wrinkle, to wither.

A'grio, Sauage, belonging to the fields. Also a kind of wilde Spikenard.

Agrióne, a kind of radishroote, horseradish. Also a kinde of Nitre.

Agriophági, people that feede on Panthers or Lions.

Agríppa, a child borne with his feete forward. Also a wilde Oliue. Also an hearbe.

Agríre, grísco, gríto, to make or become eager, sharpe, or soure. Also to exasperate.

A'gro, eager, soure, tart, vnripe. Also fierce and cruell. Also a field. Also the winde Garbino.

Agroppársi, as Aggroppársi.

Agrósto, Stitchwort or Dogsgrasse.

Agrótto maríno, a bird like a swan, braying like an Asse.

Agrumáre, as Aggrumáre.

Agrúme, eagernesse, sourenesse, tartnes. Also any kind of soure meate, or sauce.

Agruzzo, the frounze in a hauke.

Agruzzoláre, to scrape together.

Aguagliánza, equaling, comparision.

Aguáio, woe or affliction.

Aguaíre, ísco, íto, to enwo, or afflict.

Aguále, equall, euen.

Aguatáre, as Guatáre.

Aguáti, watchings, lurkings, scoutes, wiles. Also ambushes.

Aguazzáre, as Guazzáre.

Aguázzo, in wading manner. Also plashingly. Also wash or water coloures.

Agúcchía, a Needle, any sharpe pricke or sting. Also a spire of a steeple, or sharp pinacle, a sharpe pointed piramides. Also knit or wrought with needles. Also amongst gunners a pricker or pruning iron.

Agúcchia da pómo, a Pine with a head.

Agúcchia rampináta, a crooked Iron that gunners vse to finde the thicknes of chambred peeces of the breach.

Agucchiáre, to thrid a nedle, to needle, to pin with pins. Also to make sharpe as a needle. Also to knit or worke with needles.

Aggucchiáro, as Agucchiaruólo.

Agucchiaruólo, a nedlemaker. Also a pinner or pinmaker. 

Agucchiáto, needled, or knit with needles.

Agueffáre, to match or ioyne together.

Aguerríre, rísco, ríto, to enwar, to enure, or traine vp to war, to make or become a warrior.

Agufeo, an celepout, or as some thinke a kinde of dog-fish.

Agugióne, as Aguglióne.

Agúglia, as Agúcchia. Also an Eagle.

Agugliáre, as Agucchiáre.

Aguglíno, a kind of graine in Italy.

Aguglionáre, to needle, to make sharpe pointed. Also to pricke, to sting, or to goade.

Aguglióne, a great Agúcchia. Also a great Eagle. Also a spike of iron. Also a pricker or pruning or priming Iron.

Agugnáre, as Agognáre.

Agúgno, as Agógno.

Aguifólio, as Agrifólio.

Aguísa, in manner, guise or fashion.

Aguisáre, to enure, to accustome.

Agúlla, a fish called a roch.

Aguluppáre, as Goluppáre.

Agulúppo, as Golúppo.

Agunánza, an assembly.

Agunáre, to assemble together.

Agúra, Aguro, Agúrio, as Augúrio.

Aguráre, as Auguráre.

Aguróso, as Auguróso.

Aguseo, as Agufeo.

Agúto, as Acúto.

Agutézza, as Acutézza.

Aguzzáre, to make sharpe pointed. Also to whet, to make keene or to set an edge vpon. Also to set on, to ensharpen, to entice.

Agúzza coltelli, a whetter of kniues.

Aguzzatóre, a grinder, or whetter of any weapon. Also a sharper.

Aguzzétta, as Agozzíno.

Aguzzíno, as Agozzíno.

Agúzzo, as Acuto, sharpe, keene.

A'h, alas, oh, aye me, welledaie. Also instead of an answer when one is called, ah? what? what now?

Ahessia, the hearbe orchanet or Alkanet.

Ahí, Ahimé, alas, aye me, oh.

Ahótta, now at this time, at this houre. Also at some houres, sometimes.

Ahumiliáre, to humble, to enmeeken.

Ahuómo per huómo, man by man, or man for man.

Ai, to the, by the. Also from the.

Ai'a, a court yard or plot of ground desseigned for any building, an open meeting place in a citie where Marchants resort and meete as in the Exchange at London, the floore of a house or barne, a threshing floore. Also a voide space in some figures. Also a plot a bed, a quarter or broad banke in a garden. Also a round circle about a 



starre. Mettersi in aie, a prouerbe, as much to say as for one to put him self into a pecke of troubles, or to meddle with what belongs not to him, to put his oare into another mans boate, &c.

Aiáce, a flower so called.

Aiáre, to floore any roome or low foundation. Also to thresh or tread corne. Also to make into beds, quarters or plats as gardens are. Also to loiter and gaze vp, and downeidly, to houer and linger about as a kite about his pray.

Aiáto, looke Andáre aiáto.

Aíere, as A'ere or A'ria.

Aieróso, airy, as Aeróso.

Aierótta, the breath of man or woman.

Aiétta, a buzzard, or a puttocke.

Aigléuco víno, sweet hollocke wine.

Aimé, ay me, alas, woe is me.

A'io, a fosterer, an ouerseer, a ruler, a bringer vp. Also a cuckoe-bird. Also a long-tongued knaue, one that vttereth all be knowes. Also a darling, a minion, a fauorite.

Aiólo, as Aiuólo.

Aióne, Aiáto, looke Andár'aióne.

Aiósa, store, good plentie, hold bellie hold.

A'ira, A'ire, as A'ere.

Airemánte, a deuiner by the aire.

Airemantía, diuination by the aire.

Airóne, an hearon.

Aíssa, as Aízza.

Aissáre, as Aizzáre.

Aissatóre, as Aizzatóre.

Aíta, aide, helpe, succour.

Aitánte, aiding, helpfull. Also lusty or that can helpe himselfe.

Aitáo,  an officer in China, who is chiefe president of the Counsell of warre.

Aitáre, to aide, to helpe, to succor.

Aitatóre, an ayder, a helper.

Aitéuole, helpfull, that may helpe.

Aitoreáre, to helpe for ward.

Aitório, aide, helpe, succor.

Aiuóla, as A'ia, a little A'ia.

Aiuoláre, as Aiáre.

Aiúolo, a kinde of net to catch birdes with.

Aiutánte, as Aitánte.

Aiutánte di cammera, a Groome of a chamber.

Aiutáre, to aide, to helpe, to succor.

Aiutatóre, a helper, an aider.

Aiutéuole, helpefull, that may helpe.

Aiúto, aid, helpe, succour.

Aiutóre, an aider, an helper.

Aiutórij, the arme-bones of a man.

Aiutório, aide, helpe, succor.

Aiutríce, a she helper.

Aízza, a prouocation or egging on. Also anger or wrath. Also a hissing.

Aizzáre, to prouoke, to set or egge on, to hisse on as they doe dogges vpon Beares.

Aizzatóre, a prouoker, an egger or hisser or setter on, angry, or reuengefull.

Aizzóne, houselecke, sea greene, Mosetale, or Prickmadam.

Aizzóso, ful of prouocation or hissing on, quarellous reuengefull.

Aizzótto, as Aizzóne.

Al, a signe of the Datiue, to the, at the.

A'la, a signe of the Ablatiue, from the, from him.

Al, a signe of swearing, by, Al córpo, by the body, Alsangue, by the blood.

A'la, a wing of any foule, a wing of a squadron, the wing of a doublet, the brime of a hat, the flap of any wing, the fin of a fish, the breade or flat of an oare. Also a side troupe or wing of men, the flot of a Water-mill-wheele. Also the drinke Ale. Also the measure called an Ell. Also a great or common hall. Also the datiue case to hir, or to the. Also the signe of the Ablatiue from hir or from the. Also ioyned to any noune of profession, it makes the same an Aduerbe of quality or profession or similitude, as A' la francése, after the French fashion, Ala scolástica, Scholler-like, in which kinde you may vse Alla.

Alabandíno, a kinde of ruby or carbuncle stone.

Alabárba, before or in disgrace of ones beard.

Alabárda, a holbard.

Alabardáre, to strike with holbards.

Alabardáro, a holbardier, or maker.

Alabardería, the vocation or troupe of holbardiers

Alabárdica, a kinde of whitish rose.

Alabardiére, a holbardier.

Alabardína, a little holbard. Also a yellow stone which being drunk in powder is good against poison, but it causeth the bloody flux.

A la bárra, at the barre or barriers.

Alabastríno, made of Alleblaster.

Alabastríte, the Onix stone.

Alabástro, the Alabaster stone. Also a white and shining minerall or stone found in Mines of siluer, vsed, in Physike, called by Paracelsus Antimonium.

A la buóna, plainely, with a good intent.

A la búsca, in proling or shifting maner.

A la cáecia, a hunting a chasing.

A la carlóna, plainely, Dunstable-way.

Alacrità, alacritie, cheerefulnesse of spirit.

Aláce, a meate made of spaunes of fishes.

Alacciaménti, as Allacciamént.

Alacciáre, as Allacciáre.

Aláda, Armísa, in Latine.

A'la di búe, the wing of an Oxe, by metaphore, an Epicure or tall trencherman that makes no more of the shoulder of an Oxe then of the wing of a Capon.

A la distésa, at large, out stretchedly.

A la féde buóna, in good faith.

Aláffio, a kinde of Pomegranet.

Alafía, a kinde of whistling of a Maister or Masters-mate of a ship when be can not be heard speake, but would command attention and ceasing from labour.

Alagáre, to ouerflow or turne to a Lake.

Alagaménto, an enlaking or ouerflowing.

Alággio, the alloye or value of coine as it is allowed by a Prince. Also the losse of mony by exchange.

Alágna, vsed for Germany.

Alamána, an Almane in musicke.

Alamári, such long-loope buttens as are commonly worne on cloakes or gounes.

Alámbicáre, to distill in a Limbecke.

Alambíco, a Limbeck or still.

A la moderna, after the modern fashion.

Alánda, a Larke, also a Bunting.

Alamói, a certain sound in Musicke raised aboue others.

Aláno, a mastiue dog.

Al'antíca, after the ancient fashion.

Alántide, the filme that compasseth the skin wherein the infant is wrapped.

Ala pedóna, like a footman.

Al'aperta, openly, manifestly.

Alardáre, to lard, to inlard.

Aláre, wing or set wings on.

Alári, andirons set in chimneis.

Alárma, an alaram in time of war. Also to armes or weapons. also the name of march or warning sounded vpon drum or trumpet.

A la riuerscia, waiwardly, inside outward, contrarie, topsituruy.

A la sboccáta, as Alla sboccáta.

A la sgangeráta, rashly out of frame.

Alasignéte, a kinde of hearbe.

A la spiegáta, at large, displeiedly.

A lasprouedúta, extempore suddenly.

A la sprouísta, idem, vnprouidedly.

Alaterno, a tree like an Oliue or Holme tree.

Aláto, winged, hauing wings. Also neere vnto, hard by, close to ones side. Also in regard, or in respect. Also as Pégaso, a signe in heauen so called of the horse Pégasus.

Al'auentáta, furiously, headlong.

Alavóga, as Alafía, but that this encourageth the Mariners to worke and labour lustily.

A'lba, the dawne or breake of day. Also a white sow.

A'lba delle mósche, cleare daie-light. 



Albagía, fondnesse, peeuishnesse. Also a toyish conceit, a proud selfe will, a humour.

Albána, a kinde of Malmesia.

Abanello, a puttocke, or buzard. Also a kind of delicate small wine in Italie.

Albáno, a kinde of tree. Also a coine. Also a kind of excellent wine in Albania.

Albára, a kind of pitch-tree.

Albarello, agali-pot. Also a little measure. Also a Limbecke or stillatorie.

Albári, a kinde of seafishes.

A'lba spína, the white thorne. Also the white or Ladie-thistle.

Albátro, the Strawbery tree. Also a kind of wild sowre Orenge.

Albazzáno, a stone to make lime with.

Albédine, as Albúgine.

Albeggiáre, to dawne or whiten as the morning at breake of day.

Albendúccio, a let, an impediment.

Albeo, as Alueo. Also a Pitch-tree.

Alberáre, to grow to a tree. Also to set vpright or pitch an end. Also to shaft or staue any weapon as a holbard. Also to enstaffe as a Streamer or banner. Also to put an hardle or shaft to any toole. Also to furnish a ship with masts. Also to make or reduce into, or couer with trees, boughes or branches as an arbor or bowre. Also to furnish or set any place with trees.

Alberáre il pezzo, to set a piece vpright.

Alberáre le sbárre, to pitch an end or set the barres vpright.

Alberáre la cázza, to hold the ladle vpright in charging of a piece.

Alberáre la pícca, to aduance the pike.

Alberáta, an arbor or bowre of boughs.

Alberello, as Albarello.

Alberétto, a little tree.

Albergaménto, a lodging, a dwelling.

Albergáre, to lodge, to harborow, to dwell.

Albergatóre, a lodger, an harbenger.

Alberges, a kind of fruit in Italie.

Alberghétto, any little roome or lodging.

Albergo, a dwelling, an harborow.

A'lbero, any kind of tree. Also the shaft or staffe of any weapon or banner. Also the mast of a ship. Also a stemme or pedigree of any house or name. Also the Poplar tree in particular, a monstrous sea-fish, called the Sea-tree.

A'lbero maríno, a monstrous great fish called a Sea-tree.

Albícere, a kind of whitish Oliues.

Albichísta, as Abbacchiére.

A'lbio, a pigs trough. Also a racke to fodder cattell in. Also a certaine toole that smiths vse. Also a fish called in Latine Aburnus.

Albipéde, white footed.

Albiteráti, a kind of whitish figs.

Albitráre, as Arbitráre.

Albitráro, an arbitrator.

Albitratóre, as Arbitratóre,

A'lbitro, as A'rbitro.

Albítrio, as Arbítrio.

A'lbo, white, whitish. Also a fish called in Latin Orfum or Capitonus.

Albogalero, a hat like a myter which Iupiters Priests were wont to weare.

Alboráre, looke Alberáre.

Alboráta, an arbor of boughs or trees.

Alboráto, set with, or full of trees, looke Alberáre.

A'lbore, as A'lbero.

Albóre, the dawne or peepe of day. Also whitishnesse.

Alboréto, a groue or thicket of trees.

Alborétto, idem. Also a yong tree.

Albúco, the white or dutch Daffodill.

Albuela víte, a kind of vine or grape.

Albúgine, whitenesse. Also a white blemish in the eie. Also the white of an egge.

Albúine, as Albúgine.

Albuólo, a pigs trough, a kneading tub, a washing-boule, a wooden tray.

Albuscello, any kind of shrub or yong tree.

Albúra, whitishnesse. Also as Albúrno.

Albúrno, a fish called a Blaie or Bleake. Also the white, the sappe or softest part of any timber subiect to wormeeating. Also that whitish colour of womens haire which we call an Alburne or A burne colour.

Alcachéngi, the winter Chery.

Alcáido, a Captaine, a chiefe gouernor, or chiefe Iusticer, with vs a Sheriffe.

Alcatrázzi, a bird as big as a Goose, a kind of Sea-gull.

A'lce, a beast called an Elke. Also as Alice.

Alcea, as Alímo.

Alchè, to which, at which.

Alchímia, the art of Alchimie.

Alchimista, an Alchimist, a chimicke.

Alchiteráno, a kind of drug.

Alcibíade, the vipers hearbe or Buglosse.

Alcibióne, as Alcibíade.

Alcióne, a bird called a Kings fisher, which makes her nest by the sea side, and then is it a signe of faire weather.

Alcionei giórni, quiet and calme daies.

Al conspetto, in presence, in view.

Al contrário, on the contrary.

Al conuenéuole, decently, conueniently.

Al conuerso, arsi-uersie, contrary.

Alcoráno, the booke of the Turkish lawes or institutions called the Alcoron.

Al córpo di mè, by the body of me.

Al cospetto, in the presence or view.

Alcunaménte, in some sort, some way. 

Alcúna quálche vólta, at sometime or other.

Alcúna vólta, some times.

Alcúno, some one, some body, any, anie one.

Alcun cotánto, any other so much.

Aldárga, a kind of target among the Mores in Barbarie.

Aldasézzo, at last, in fine, at the end.

Aldea, a village, a towne, a hamlet.

Al di déntro, in ward. Also within.

Al di diétro, behind-ward.

Al di fuóri, outwardly, without.

Al di longo, at length, forth-right.

Al dirítto, forth-right, directly, right on.

Al di sópra, aboue, ouer, or vpon.

Al disótto, vnder, vnderneath, below.

Al dispetto, in despight, maugre ones will.

Al distéso, at large, with extention.

Al disúso, against vse or custome.

A'ldo, vsed for Io ódo, I heare.

Alea, an allie or walking place.

Aléce, as Alíce.

Alechsalàm, a turkish salutation.

Alédia, as Alíce.

Alefángine, a kind of pills so called. Also all manner of spices.

Aleffe, the first Moresco letter, as Alfa.

A'lega, as A'lga.

Alegáre, to alleadge, as Allegáre.

A leggere, to elect, to chuse.

A leggiáre, to feede vpon wings.

Aleghéuole, that may be alleadged.

Alegória, an allegorie.

Alegoricaménte, allegoricallie.

Alegorizzáre, to vse allegories.

Alegráre, as Allegráre.

Alegrétti, as Allegrétti.

Alegrézza, as Allegrézza.

Alenáre, to giue or take breath, to enseame a horse, to breath, to bring in breath.

Alénza, by or with a net, looke lénza.

Alepárdo, a Leopard.

Alepe, the name of a fish. Also of an hearbe.

Aleppe, the first Hebrew letter. Also the beginner of all things.

Al'erta, heedfully prepared against dangers, watchfull at all aduantages.

Alési, usáto per grádo o gíro del ciélo,

Alessandrína, the hearbe Perwinckle.

Alessáre, to boile, or seeth meat.

Alessiphármaca, counter-poisons or antidotes.

Alésso, boiled or sodden meat.

Alestíre, as Allestíre.

Alétte, little wings, &c. looke A'la.

A lettere discátole, as plaine to be seen or heard as are the great letters vpon boxes in Apothecaries shops.

Alettéria, a stone of the bignesse of a beane found in the maw of a cocke.

Alettóridi, certaine birds with long bills 



liuing in garden-hedges or vineyards.

Alettório, Aletório, Alettéria. , 

Alettólópho, the hearbe Coxcombe.

A'lfa, the first Greeke letter, a beginning.

A'lfa & oméga, the first and last letter of the Greeke Alphabet.

Alfabeto, an Alphabet or A,B,C.

Alfabetico, in order of letters.

Alfáique, as one would say wise, or learned in Mahomets law, skilfull in diuine matters.

Alfána, a breeding wild Mare.

Alfár del giórno, by peepe or breake of day.

Alféste, a kind of fish.

Alfero, as Alfiero.

Alfiero, an ensigne bearer. Also a Bishop at chesse.

Alfíno, as Alfiero.

Alfío, the hearbe Liuerwort. Also a spauin in a horse. Also a tetter or ringworme.

Alfonsíno, a certaine coine in Naples.

Alfórdio, a kind of venemous Serpent.

A'lga, sea-grasse, Reete, Rites. Also Ducke-weede. Also Speltcorne.

Algebra, the arte of figuratiue numbers or Arithmeticke. Also the art of bonesetting.

Algebrísta, an arithmetician. Also a hone-setter.

Algense, any kind of fish that breedeth in, or feedeth vpon Sea-weede or Rite.

Algente, cold, chill, freezing.

Algere, álgo, álsi, to chill for cold.

Alghebra, as Algebra.

Alghebrísta, as Algebrísta.

Algíro, turning or wheeling round. Also in Latine Dianapharum.

Algiróni, a kind of cormorant.

Algorísmo, the art of numbring.

Algóso, full of sea-grasse or Rite.

Algrósso, in grosse, by great.

Algúno, vsed as Alcúno.

Algúra, as Augúrio.

Alguráre, as Auguráre.

Alguzzíno, as Agozzino.

Alheppe, for Alehebbe, he had wings.

Alhór', Alhóra, then, at that houre.

Alhótta, then, at that houre.

A'li, wings. Also among armorers called lamms.

Alia, a wing, as Ala.

A'li aperte, displaid in armorie.

Aliáre, to sore or houer vp and downe as a hawke. Also to sneake about.

Alibánti, such as die for want of moistnesse.

Alibea, a kind of hearbe.

Alíbile, nourishable, nourishing. Also lawfull or allowable.

Alibíre, bísco, bíto, to nourish, or giue nourishment vnto. Also to make lawfull.

Alibíto, quelled, ouercome, and put to silence.

A'lica, as Alga.

Alicástro, the wheat called Far.

Alíce, a Pilcher or sprat fish. Also a kind of fish sauce.

Alichíno, the name of a deuill in Dant, that is, inclination to vice and sinne.

Alicórno, an Vnicorne. Also the Vnicornes horne.

Alicúbi, some where, in any place.

A'lido, stale, flie-bitten or tainted meat.

Alidáre, to taint, or become stale meat.

A'lie, the plurall of A'la, wings.

Alienáre, to alienate, to estrange.

Alienatióne, alienation, estranging.

Alienigenáre, to alien, to estrange.

Alienigéno, an alien, a forrene.

Alieno, an aliene, a forraine, a frenne.

Aliéta, a kind of Eagle which alone fixeth her eies against the sunne.

Aliétte, the little wings or finnes of fishes.

Alieua, in lifting or raising manner.

Alieuare, to lift, heaue, or raise vp.

A'liga, as Alga.

Aligáre, to tie or bind vnto.

Alígero, bearing wings.

Alígi, a blew Lilly flowre.

Aligóso, as Algóso.

Aligósta, a kind of dainty fish.

Alíma, an hearb, which being eaten keeps one a long time from hunger.

Alimáre, to place or shoot leuell or pointblanke.

Alimentáre, to nourish and sustaine.

Aliménto, nourishment, sustenance.

Alímo, a kind of Sea-wort, brackish in taste.

Alimóne, a nourisher, a fosterer. Also a kind of hear be as Alima.

Alimonía, any nourishment or sustenance.

Al'impensáta, extempore, not thought on.

Al'imprescia, in great haste.

Al'improuíso, vnprouided for, extempore.

Al'improuísta, idem.

Al'impúra, impurely, vnchastly.

Al'incánto, at who giues most, or sold by a common crier.

Al'incóntro, ouer against, opposite.

Alino, a kind of Liquorish.

Alióssi, at keeles, skales or nine pinnes.

Alípo, a weede growing on rockes by the sea.

Alipóne, idem.

Aliquánta, párte che non misúra il tutto.

Aliquóta, párte che misúra il tútto.

Aliquóto, some or certaine, in aliquóta párte in some part.

Alísma, a weede growing in fennes or marishes like to a Planten, a water docke. 

Alíso, a blew Lilly flowre.

Alísto, cottized in armory.

Alísso, Alissóne, an hearbe or reede called Allison, some take it for the woodrose.

Alíta, a kind of praing bird with a long beake and hooked tallons.

Alitáre, to pant or draw breath.

A'lito, breath, respiration, or panting.

Aliuelláre, to leuell, or make euen.

Aliuelláta, a leuelling or euen-nesse.

Aliuello, leuell, point-blanke.

Aliúngia, the plant Spikenard.

Alizzáre, to feede vpon wings.

A'lla, to the, at the, with verbes of priuation, from the. Also the measure called an Ell. Also a hall, a common or guildhall. Also being ioined to any noune it makes the same an aduerbe of quality or similitude, as Ala, as like, according vnto, after the fashion.

A'lla affrontáta, in affronting manner.

Alla buóna, in good fashion.

Alla buón hóra, in a good houre.

A'lla capricciósa, phantastically, rashly.

Allacciaménti, lacings, snarings, tramelings, entanglings, knittings. Also enwrappings, allurements, enueaglings, entrappings.

Allacciáre, to lace, to bind or tie vnto, to ensnare, to entangle, to entramell, to knit, to enwrap. Also to allure, to enueagle or wind in with flattery.

A'lla cerca, in searche or pursuit.

A'lla cieca, blindly, blindfold.

A'lla chína, bending or stoopingly.

A'lla confúsa, confusedly, pell mell.

A'lla cróce, by the crosse.

A'lla diffíla, stragglingly, scatteringly.

Alla dirótta, outright, mainly.

Alla disdóss, a, bare-backt, without a saddle.

Alla dissiláta, as Alla diffíla.

Alla distésa, at length, extendedly.

A'lla disperáta, desperately.

A'lla facchína, basely, porter-like.

A'lla fíla, in files, in roes, in rankes.

A'lla fíne, at last, in the end, in fine.

A'lla fin fíne, in fine, when all is done.

A'lla fóggia, after the fashion, like as.

A'lla fuggíta, cursory-wise, running away.

Allagàre, to enlake, to ouerflow. Also to dilate or extend.

Allagaménto, an ouerflowing. Also a dilating or extending.

Allagatióne, as Allagaménto.

Alla gemína, a kinde of damaske-worke vpon iron or steele wrought with gold.

Alla ginétta, in fashion of a ginnet.

Alla giornáta, dailie, daie by daie.

Alla gránde, according to greatnesse. Also magnificently or sumptuously.

Alla gróssa, grosely, homely, clounishly. 



Alla grossolána, idem.

Alla ingiù, downeward.

Alla infínta, fainedly.

Alla leggiera, lightly, slightly.

Alla líbera, freely, frankely, sans feare.

Alla lónga, at length, at large, in time. Also after the long fashion.

Alla mal' hóra, in an ill houre.

Alla máno, at hand, readily.

Allámbra, Alhámbra, a strong hold, or pallace for a King.

Alla mescoláta, confusedly, pell mell.

Alla minella, a play at nine or twelue holes.

Alla múta, dumbly, mutely.

Allancáre, to sobbe, to throbbe, to blubber.

Allanciáre, to hurle with violence.

Alla nón pensáta, extempore, vnthought on.

Alla perfíne, at last, in fine, in the end.

Alla piggióre, at the worst.

Alla piú trista, at worst, if the worst come.

Alla príma, at first, firstly.

Alla ráffa, in rifling maner, at rifling.

Alla ráppa, rap and runne, shiftingly, snatchingly, higledy, pegledy.

Alla rása, razed or shaued smoothly.

Allardáre, to larde, to enlard.

Allargáre, to enlarge, to spread.

Alla recísa, cuttingly, hackingly.

All reále, royally, magnificently.

Allárga la máno, a spend all, a wastgood.

Allargaménto, an enlargement, an enlarging, an amplifying.

Allargatúra, an enlarging, a spreading.

Allária, the hearbe Sauce alone or Iacke of the wood or hedge, it tasts of garlike.

Alla rifrescáta, in Autum time when it beginneth to be cold.

Alla rincóntra, front vnto, face to face.

Alla rinfúsa, confusedly, helterskelter.

Alla ritrátta, in retyring maner.

Alla Romána, after the Roman fashion.

Alla rótta, in rout, in broken manner.

Alla sbardelláta, roistingly, swaggeringly.

Alla sboccáta, impudently, shamelesly.

Alla sbracáta, beastly, without shame.

Alla scamisciáta, loosely, nakedly, rashlie.

Alla scapestráta, riotously, headlongly.

Alla scatenáta, furiously, desperately.

Alla schietta, plainely, simply.

Allasciare, to slacken, to loosen, to vnbinde.

Alla scondescésa, rumbling downe as from a rocke.

Alla scoperta, openly, in view of all.

Alla sfiláta, scatteringly, straglingly. 

Alla secónda, in seconding, or southing manner.

Alla sfuggiásca, as Alla sfuggíta.

Alla sfuggíta, running-away, a snatch and away, without stay, cursory.

Alla sicúra, securely, vndoubtedly.

Alla spaparáta, openly, with open breasts.

Alla spianaccláta, plainely, openly.

Alla spiccioláta, scatteringly. Also in lurking manner as souldiers go a shifting and freebooting.

Alláslero, an hearbe yeelding bitterish Sugar.

Alla stagliáta, cuttingly, hackingly.

Alla strácca, to the point of wearinesse.

Allastricáre, to paue with flat stones.

Allatíuo, as Ablatíuo.

Alláto, as Alato, in respect, in comparison.

A'lla trísta, poorely, wretchedly.

Allattáre, to giue sucke, to feed with milke, to milke, to sucke.

Allattánte, sucking, or giuing milke.

Alla túa bárba, in sight, or spite of thy beard.

Alla tuliána, eloquently, Ciceronianlike.

All'auenánte, ratably, sutably.

All'auenente, in fitting or seemely maner.

Alla vísta, in view, in full sight.

Alla vólta, towards, toward.

All'auuiluppáta, confusedly, intricatelie.

Alla zemina, as Alla gemína.

A'lle, to the, at the, but plurally. Also a kinde of birde.

Alle bótte, at times, sometimes. Also at blowes, at handicuffes, at stroakes.

Alleccáre, as Allecchiáre.

Allecchiam énti, lickings, sleekings. Also faunings, enticements, or blandishments.

Allecchiáre, to licke, to sleeke, to smooth, to licke and wash himselfe as a cat doth, to stroake ones beard. Also to faune, to flatter, to entice or allure with blandishments.

Alle fiáte, at times, sometimes.

Alleficáre, to foster, to feede or nourish.

Allegánza, a combining or aliance.

Allegáre, to alleage, to cite. Also to adresse vnto. Also to allie to combine to binde together or vnto and confederate. Also to set ones teeth an edge by some soure taste.

Allegáti dénti, teeth set on edge.

Allegatióne, an alleaging, an allegation.

Alleggeraménto, an eating, a refreshing.

Alleggeríre, rísco, ríto, to lighten, to ease, to disburden. Also to refresh.

Alleggiaménto, an easing, a lightening, a disburdening.

Alleggiáre, as Alleggeríre.

Allegránza, as Allegrézza.

Allegraménte, gladly, merily, iocondly.

Allegráre, to glad, to reioice, to blithe, to make or wax merry and frolike.

Allegratíuo, make merrie and glad.

Allegrétti, an hearbe good in salets.

Allegrézza, mirth, gladnesse, ioy, solace, pastime, glee. Also a march sounded on trumpet and drume in signe of victory.

Allegría, as Allegrézza.

Allegrissimaménte, most ioyfully or gladly.

Allégro, glad, merry, iocond, ioyfull, pleasant, blithfull, frolike.

Alle guagnelle, an oath that country people sweare by, as we say, by the Masse, by the holy Gospell.

Allelúia, praise to God, God be praised. Also the hearbe wood-sorell.

Allemáni, together by the eares, in hands.

Allenáre, as Alenáre.

Alleníre, nísco, níto, to aswage, to relent.

Allentánza, a slacking, a relenting.

Allentáre, to slacke, to relent, to slow.

All' entráta, at the entrance.

Alle ósse, a game called, at che-ripit.

Alle póme, Giocáre alle póme, looke póme.

Alle riscósse, ready to releeue, to redeem, to rescue or helpe of.

Allessáre, as Aléssáre.

Allésso, as Alésso.

Allestíre, tísco, títo, to make nimble, slie, or quicke, or dight with aquilitie.

Alle strétte, at grapling, or handy gripes.

Allesto, nimble, quicke, riquilant.

Allétta, a fish called a mullet.

Allettaménti, enticements, allurements.

Allettánza, allurement, inticement.

Allettáre, to entice or allure vnto.

Allétte, shelters, shrouds, hosteries.

Alletteráre, to enliterate.

Alletteráto, literated, learned.

Allettéuole, that may be allured.

Alle túllie, Ciceronian like, eloquently.

Alleúare, to foster, to breed or bring vp.

Alleuatríce, a foster-mother, a midwife.

Alleuiaménto, a lightning, a disburdening.

Alleuiáre, to lighten, to disburden.

Alle vólte, at times, sometimes.

All'hóra, then, at that houre or time.

All'hótta, then, at that houre or time.

Alliária, as Allária.

Allíbile, as Alíbile.

Allibíre, as Alibíre.

Allignáre, to take roote, to prosper in growing, to follow kinne.

Allieuáre, as Alleuáre.



Alliéuo, a foster childe or seruant of ones bringing vp.

Alligáre, as Allegáre.

Allimbrátto, foully, filthily.

All'incánto, as Al'incánto.

All'inánzi, forward.

All'incóntro, as Al'incóntro.

All'indiétro, backward.

All'infuóra, outwardly.

All'in grósso, in grosse, by great.

All'instánte, at the instant, or instance.

Allisciáre, as Lisciáre or Allecchiáre.

Alliuelláre, as Aliuelláre.

Alliuelláta, as Aliuelláta.

Alliuello, as Aliuello.

A'llo, to the, at the. Also from the.

Allocáre, as Allogáre.

Alloccáre, to play the owle, to make an owlet of.

Allocánda, that is to be hired or rented. Also vsed for a bawde.

Allodétta, a little larke.

Allodiáre, to rent or farme for profit.

Allodiále, rentable, or finable.

Allódola, a Larke, looke Dare l'allódola.

Allogáre, to place, to settle. Also to let to farme or demise. Also to hire for monie.

Allogagióni, placings, farmings, lettings.

Alloggiáre, to lodge. Also to quarter a campe.

Alloggiaménto, a lodging. Also a place where a campe or soldiers bee quartered.

Allóggio, a lodge, a lodging. Also a skollers house, as the halls in Oxford, that haue no lands, but all liue of themselues.

Allo indietro, backward.

Allo ingiù, downward.

Allo insù, vpward.

Allongáre, to lengthen, to prolong.

Allongaménto, a lengthning, a prolonging.

Allongársi, as Allontanársi.

Allongoandáre, in processe of time.

Allontanánza, an elonging or farre distance, or going far of.

Allontanáre, to elong or goe far of.

Alloppiáre, to bring a sleepe by art, by drugs or potions, as with Opium.

Alloppiáto víno, wine opiated.

Allóra, then, at that houre.

Allóro, the lawrell or Baie tree. Also to them, at them, or from them. Also a crying of boies calling one to another to see some strange sight, as wee say, Now, now.

Allo scórcio, at last, at the cutting of.

Allo spropósito, arcie-uersie, cleane from the purpose.

Allucciare, to looke earnestly vpon a thing with a greedy desire to haue it, it is commonly taken in ill part. 

Allúdere, lúdo, lúsi, lúso, to allude or haue reference vnto. Also to plaie with.

Allúi, to him. Also from him.

Allumáre, to light, to enkindle. Also to allome or steepe in allome.

Allumatióne, an enlightning.

Allumináre, as Allumáre. Also to illuminate. Also to limme in water colours.

Alluminatóre, an enlightner. Also a limmer.

Alluminatióne, illumination.

Allunáre, to arch, to bow or bend as the moone.

Allungáre, as Allongáre.

Allúngo andáre, in processe or tract of time.

All'uscita, at the going out.

Allusingáre, to flatter, to blandish.

Allusióne, allusion or reference vnto.

A'lma, the soule of man.

Almadéu, a strange name that nigromants vse to call vpon.

Almadía, a little boat or wherrie.

Almagésta, as much to say as perfect, the booke of Ptolemies great mathematicke is so called.

Almagesto, a kind of mathematicall instrument.

Almeglio, at, or to the best.

Almánco, at least.

Almén', Alméno, at least.

Alméntre, whilst, whilst that.

Almicanthári, circles imagined to passe through euery degree of the meridian, paralell to the horizon vp to the Zenith.

Almiráglio, an Admirall at sea.

Almiránta, an admirall-ship.

Almiránte, an admirall at sea.

A'lmo, high, omnipotent, life-giuer, sustainer, holy. Also an elder-tree. Also a foster-father, the husband of ones nurse. Also vsed for nourishment.

Almocohól, a kind of Borax.

Almoniáca, an Apricocke plumbe.

Almoniáco, an Apricocke-tree.

Almosarifáto, sp. the customer-ship of any place.

Almucábala, as Algébra.

Almugímo, a kind of pretious wood mentioned in the old Testament, some take it for Brazill wood.

A'lna, the measure called an Ell.

A'lno, an Aller or Elder tree.

Alno négro, the blacke Elder-tree.

A'lo, the Crow-garlicke. Also the hearbe Comfrie of the rocke.

Aloccággine, gullishnesse, owlishnesse.

Aloccáre, to play the owle or gull.

Alócco, an owle, an owlet. Also a simple gull.

Aloè, the bitter drug Aloes, whereof are diuers kinds. Also an hearbe so called. 

Alóe cauallíno, the cource kind of Aloes.

Aloétta, a Larke.

Alógia, want of reason, blockishnesse. Also excesse in banquetting or riotous feasting.

Alongiáre, to elong, to goe or put far of.

Alóngo and áre;, in processe or tract of time.

Alopáce, a kind of vine or grape.

Alopacero, the hearbe Fox-tale.

Alopacéia, the hearbe Fox-taile.

Alopecia, the falling away or shedding of haire through diseases. Also a fish.

Alopiáre, as Alloppiáre.

Al'oppósito, opposite, ouer against.

A lor sénno, at their will or pleasure.

Alósa, a fish that killeth the Tunnie to haue a vaine in his iawes. Also as Laccia.

A lo spícchio delsóle, at rise of sunne.

Alósso, the hearbe Madder.

Alostendórdo, a march on drumme or trumpet so called.

A'lpa, an instrument called a harpe.

Al palése, publikely, manifestly.

Al pári, euen, alike, matched.

A'lpe, A'lpi, alpes or high mountaines.

Alpédica perníce, a kind of partridge breeding on mountaines.

Alpeggio andáre, if the worst fall out.

Alpestre, alpish, craggie, mountanous.

Alpestrézza, cragginesse, ruggednesse.

A'lphí, a kind of vlceration. Also the morphew or staining of the skin.

Alphitománte, a diuiner by corne.

Alphitomantía, diuination by corne.

Alpicórdi, as Arpicórdi.

Al piè Alpiéde, at the foot, below.

Alpigiáno, borne or bredde vpon the Alpes.

Alpisáno, borne or bred on the Alpes.

Alpiù, at the most, at the vtmost.

Alpiù alpiù, at the very most.

Al possíbile, to the vtmost possibility.

Al postútto, in the end, after all. Also to the vtmost of all possibility.

Alpresente, now, at this present.

Alquánti, some, some few in number.

Alquánto, some, somewhat in quantity.

Alquitrána, a kind of liquid pitch or tar.

Alrádo, sildome or rarely.

A'lse, did freeze or chill.

Al segréto, secretly, priuily.

A'lsi, also, moreouer, eftsoones.

Al seréno, in the cleare or open aire.

Alsid énie, Ciues, Cibolls, or Onions.

Alsína, Chicke-weede or Ducke-weede.

Alsióso, cold, chill, freezing.

Alsórdio, a venemous Serpent.

Al súbito, at the suddaine, suddainly.

Altabásso, as Altobásso.

Altaléna, a kind of fish or Serpent. Also a kind of game. 



Altána, a high roofe window.

Altáni, certaine winds rising suddainly out of the earth.

Altáno, a pleasant gale of wind.

Altánto, as much more.

Altárd, late, lately.

Altáre, an Altar. Also an oyle-mill. Also a certaine signe in Heauen.

Altarello, some what or a little high. Also a little Altar.

Altea, the hearbe smallage.

Altarúccio, a little, silly Alter.

Alteluógo, in Lat. Colophon.

Alterábile, changeable, alterable.

Alterabilità, change, alteration.

Alteraménte, haughtily, proudly, statelie.

Alteraménto, alterating, changing.

Alteráre, to alter, to change. Also to make one become angry.

Alteránte, altering, changeing.

Alteratióne, alteration, change.

Alteratíuo, subiect to alteration.

Altercangéno, the hearbe henbane.

Altercáre, to wrangle, to brabble, to debate, to brawle, to chide.

Altercatióne, a wrangling, a brabling, an altrecation, a brawling.

Alterco, the hearbe Henbane.

Alteréuole, alterable, changeable.

Altereggiáre, to state it in proud or haughty manner.

Altero, haughty, proud, high minded.

Alterézza, haughtinesse pride.

Alterígia, as Alterézza.

Alterio, as Alterézza.

Alteritá, an altering, an othernes, an instant of alteration or change.

Alternáre, to doe by course or turne. Also to change or be inconstant.

Alternaménte, by turnes, by courses, enterchangeably.

Alternatióne, enterchangeablenesse.

Alternatiuaménte, as Alternaménte.

Alternatíuo, that doth or may alter. Also enterchangeable.

Alterno, alternall, enterchangeable.

Altersi, as Altresi.

Altézza, height, highnesse.

Altezzóso, as Altero.

Althea, the Marsh-mallowes.

Altieraménte, haughtily, proudly.

Altierézza, haughtinesse, pride.

Altiero, hautie, proud, highminded.

Altimetra, a measure of altitudes.

Altimetría, measuring of height.

Altinánico, a venemous Serpent.

Altíno, high, or proceeding from on high.

Altitonánte, high thundring.

Altitonáre, to high or loud thunder.

Altitúdine, altitude, height.

Altizzóso, proud in burning manner.

A'lto, high, eminent, lofty. Also a treble voice in musike. 

Altobácche, vsed for broad, Panno álto, broad cloath.

Altobácche, a kinde of great cart or wane.

Altobásso, high and low. Also a kinde of high and low wrought or figured veluet. Also a certain musical instrument with strings.

Altoleuáre, to aduance or raise high.

Altouolánte, high-flying.

Altouoláre, to flie high.

Altouolente, high willing.

Altra cósa alcúna, any other thing.

Altraménte, otherwise.

Altravólta, another time.

Altrési, also, eke, moreouer, besides, eftsoones, likewise, withall, as much besides.

Altretále, such another in quality.

Altretánto, as much more in quantity.

Altre vólte, other times.

Altríce, a nurce, a foster-mother.

A'ltri, others.

Altriménte, otherwise.

Altrílo, a wren.

A'ltró, other, also, ought else, or any other thing. Also except.

A'ltro alcúno, any other.

Altrochè, except, if not, sauing, or there then.

Altro cinuóle, something else is required.

Altro móndo, another world or Countrie.

Altrónde, elsewhere, from elsewhere.

Altróue, elsewhere, some where else.

Altrúi, other mens, to others, others, of or from others.

Altúra, hight, depth, altitude.

Altútto, wholy, altogether.

Aluála, an acquittance, a bill, a warrant a ticket, a cedula.

A lúca ti viddi, prou. , those daies are past I know you no more.

Alúccia, any little wing. looke Ala.

Alueário, a beehiue. Also a place where beehiues be kept.

Alueo, a beehiue. Also a shelter vnder a roofe, a couer or a roofe. Also the channell or bed of a running riuer, or the pipe of any Conduite. Also a vain in any body. Also a baching tub, that is couered. Also a bulke or belly or bottom of a ship.

Aluerde, prou. , almost at an end, as we say burning in the socket.

Aluíno, to the quicke or life, liuely.

A lumáca, made winding vpward like a Snaile or wrinkle. Scala a Lumáca, a winding paire of staires.

Alumáre, as Allumáre.

Alúme, Allome, whereof are diuers sorts.

Alúme catíno, a kinde of Allome, or ashes of the hearbe Bali and Salicornia burnt.

Alúme di piúma, a kinde of Allome.

Alúme di rócca, roch Allome.

Alumóso, full, or tasting of Allome.

A lúna príma, at the quarter of the Moone.

A lúna secónda, at the second quarter of the Moone.

A lúna piéna, at the full of the Moone.

A lúna terza, at the third quarter of the Moone.

A lúna scéma, at the wane of the Moone.

A lúngo andáre, in processe or tract of time.

Alúnno, a nurse or foster-child, a child kept for Godsake.

A'luo, a wombe. Also a tombe or Sepulcher. Also the bed or channell of a riuer.

Alutáre, to lute as Alchimists doe their pots or glasses.

Alutatióne, a luting or lutation.

A'lza, as Alzáta.

Alzabára, a kinde of drugge.

Alzaménto, as Alzáta.

Alzána, a halse or cable to toe or draw boates, barges or shipes withall. Also a crane to hoise vp any great waight.

Alzaniere, a halsier or he that haleth or toeth a ship or boate by a rope, a halse or halsier in a ship.

Alzare, to aduance, to raise, to hoise, to heaue, to rere, to eleuate, or lift vp.

Alzare al cielo, to raise to the heauens. Also to commend highly.

Alzáre il fiánco, proú, to farewell, to make good cheere, to haue the world at will.

Alzáre véla, to hoise vp sailes.

Alzáta, a raising, an aduancing, a heauing or lifting vp.

Alzéuole, that may be raised or lifted.

Amábile, amiable, louely, to be loued. Also a kind of wine in Italie so called.

Amabilitá, amiablenesse, louelinesse.

Ammácco, dog-cheape, plentie. Also scotfree or at other mens charges.

Amaccáre, to bruise, to batter.

Amadeo, some part of a ship.

Amadríadi, wood nimphes.

Amáglie, wrought with oylet-holes.

Amaináre, to strike the maine-yard.

Amaláre, to sicken, to fall sicke.

Amalatíccio, sickish, crazed in health.

Amaláto, sicke, diseased.

Amalgáme, a drugge vsed by Alchimists.

A mal partíto, in an ill plight, in bad state.

A mal in córpo, against ones stomacke.

Amanáre, to leade or bring vnto.

A mancánza di lúna, at the waine of the Moone.

Amannáre, as Ammannáre.



A máno, at hand, ready by, with hand.

A máno a máno, by and by, anon. Also in order, orderly.

Amanchítide, a stone vsed to coniure vp spirites.

Amán destra, on the right hand.

Amandío, a stone of diuers colours, good against poison, which maketh him victorious that weares it about him, and teacheth to interpret dreames, or riddles.

Amándola, an Almond.

Amandoláta, meat or milke of Almonds.

Amándolo, an Almond tree.

A man giónte, with ioined hands.

Amaniménti, dressings, dightings.

Amaníre, nísco, níto, to dresse, to dight, to adorne or to dresse handsomely.

Amaníre, nísco, níto, to seaze or lay bands on. Also to accomplish.

Amaníto, handsomely drest or dighted.

A mán mánca, on the left hand.

A mán piene, with full hands, fullhanded.

A mán sálua, safely, without danger.

Amantare, to enmantle, to enrobe.

Amánte, a louer. Also louing.

Amanticída, a killer of louers.

Amanticídio, murthering of louers.

Amántici rámi, shady or spreading boughs.

Amantílla, the hearbe Valerian, Capons taile or Setwall.

Amantíno, as Amandío.

Amánto, a mantle, a robe.

A mán vuóte, empty handed.

Amánza, a mistrisse, a loue, a sweeteheart.

Amaracíno, oile of Marioram. Also bitterish.

Amaracoccoláto, oile of Marioram.

Amaráco, great sweet Marioram.

Amarancíno, oile of Marioram.

Amaránto, the hearbe Maudlin. Also the flowre gentle or Passeuelours.

Amaránto giállo, Goldilockes, Godsflowre, or Gold-flowre.

A marauíglia, wonderously.

Amáre, to loue, to be in loue.

Amareggiáre, to make or taste bitter. Also to grow or flow to a sea.

Amarella, the hearbe Mugwort, some take it for Feuerfew.

Amarétto, bitterish, some what bitter.

Amarézza, bitternesse.

A María órba, as A mósca cieca.

Amaricáre, to embitter, to make bitter.

Amarigliáre, to embitter, to looke bitter.

Amaricciáre, to make or tast bitter.

Amaríccio, bitterish.

Amaríglio, bitterish, sowre looking.

Amarína, the twig Withie or Osier.

Amaríne, the first Cheries that come. 

Amaríre, rísco, ríto, to make bitter.

Amaritúdine, bitternesse.

Amár meglio, to loue or wish rather.

Amáro, bitter, breame. Also spightfull.

Amarógnolo, bitterish, sowrish.

Amarore, bitternesse.

Amártora, a beast called a Martin.

Amartello, looke toccár' a martello.

Amarulente, bitter, spightfull.

Amarulenza, bitternesse, spightfulnesse.

Amárze, looke Innestáre.

Amásia, a louers loue or sweet heart, a mistrisse or paramour.

A masnáde, by troupes, by companies.

A mássa, by heapes, Gods plenty.

Amassaménti, amassings together.

Amassáre, to amasse, to heape vp.

Amatáco, the great sweet Marioram.

Amatíle, louely, to be loued.

Amatináre, to become or grow morning

Amatísto, an Amathist or Hematite stone.

Amatíuo, louely or to be beloued.

Amatore, a louer, one that loueth.

Amatório, louing or loue-causing.

Amatríce, a woman louer.

Amaturáre, to ripen, to grow ripe.

Amazzácchera, by stealth, in killing sort. Also as Amazzáta.

Amazzáre, to kill, to slaie, to murther.

Amazzaménti, killings, murthers, slaughters.

Amazzáta, a killing, a slaughtering. Also a standing starke stiffe as one key-cold. Also a fishing or angling rodde. Also to be taken in a bait or lure.

Amazóna, in Greeke signifies, without a dug, or teat, or pap-lesse.

A'mba, a kind of fruit like a big Oliue.

Amb áge, an ambiguity or rabble of words, making the sense doubtfull. Also a dizzinesse in the head.

Ambagía, an extasie or passion of the mind. Also a qualme ouer the stomack, an extasie, or shortnesse of ones breath. Also noise, griefe, vexation, or dismay.

Ambagiáre, to speake doubtfully, to equiuocate.

Ambagióso, full of ambiguity or equiuocation, doubtfull in speech.

Ambáscia, as Ambagía.

Ambasciadóre, an Ambassador.

Ambasciáre, to grieue, to vex, to molest. Also to fall into a sowne or loose ones breath.

Ambasciaria, an ambassage.

Ambasciáta, an embassage.

Ambasciatóre, an Ambassador.

Ambasciatório, belonging to an embassador.

Abascióso, as Ambagióso
.

Ambastióso, as Ambagióso.

Ambássi, ames-ace, two aces at a cast.

Ambástia, as Ambagía.

A'mbe, both.

Ambe dúe. Ambe dúo,  both.

A'mbi. Ambi dúo, both.

Ambiánté, ambling, pacing easily.

Ambiáre, to amble, to pace it easily.

Ambiatúra, an ambling pace.

Ambidói, both. Also a swift runner.

Ambiente, going or wandring about, enuironing. Also aspiring or seeking after with ambition.

Ambiguità, ambiguity, doubtfulnesse.

Ambíguo, ambiguous, doubtfull in sense.

A'mbio, an ambling pace.

Ambíre, bísco, bito, to aspire vnto or seeke after with ambition. Also to enuiron, to compasse, to goe or wrap about.

Ambíto, aspired vnto or sought after with ambition. Also enuironed, compassed or gone about to obtaine.

A'mbito, a circuit or round compassing, a round walke or walking, a circumference. Also an ambitious seeking vnlawfull suing or canuasing for offices.

Ambitióne, an ambition or immoderate desire. Also a circuit or compassing.

Ambitiosétto, somewhat ambitious.

Ambitióso, ambitious, desirus of honour.

Ambligónio, blunt-cornered.

Ambo, Ambo dúo, both.

Ambodestro, that vseth both hands.

Amboláre, to steale or slinke away.

Ambra, amber. Also amber-grecce. Also the sperme of a Whale called Spormaceti. Also vsed for a blue Turguestone.

Ambracanáto, perfumed with ambergreece.

Ambracáne, amber-greece.

Ambracáni, Pomanders of ambergreece.

Ambragátta, amber-greece.

Ambra giálla, yellow or stone-amber.

Ambra grígia, amber-greece.

Ambrattóte, a kind of Greeke wine.

Ambre, Ambro, as Ambra.

Ambríci, roofe-tiles, gutter-tiles.

Ambrógíno, a kind of coine in Italy.

Ambrógo, sweet, pleasant, delectable.

Ambrósia, a meat that the Gods are by Poets fained to feed vpon called Ambrósia. Also the hearbe called Oke of Ierusalem or of Capadocia. Also Houseleeke, Sen-greene or Liue-euer.

Ambrosiána víte, a kind of vine.

Ambrósíne, a kind of plumbe. Also a kind of almonds. Also as Ambubeia.

Ambubeia, a kind of wild Endiue, or common Cycorie. Also the Dandelion, the Priests-crowne, the Monks-head. or Dogs-teeth.

Ambubégia, as Ambubeia.

Ambúgia, as Ambubeia.



Ambuláre, to walke or goe by steps.

Ambulatióne, a walking by steps. Also a walking place, an ally, or gallery.

Ambulatóre, a walker by steps.

Ambustióne, a burning, a parching.

Ambústo, burnt or parched about.

Amé, as Amén. Also to me, at me, or from me.

A'meda, an Aunt, a mothers or fathers sister.

Amedáno, as Antáno.

Amello, a weede growing in the water.

Amemoránza, remembrance.

Amemoráre, to remember or put in minde.

Amemoratióne, remembrance.

Amemoréuole, memorable, memorious.

Amén, Amenne, Amen, so be it.

Amén, Améno, at least, within lesse.

Amenadíto, at fingers end, by rote.

A menáre, to leade, to bring.

A menáte, by handfuls, plenty.

A menazampétto, as A menadíto.

Amenazzáre, to driue or droue cattell. Also to threaten.

Aménda, amends, satisfaction, correction, amendment. Also a fine paide for an offence or taske or imposition. Also vsed for Améntia.

Amendáre, to amend, to correct, redresse. Also to fine for any offence.

Amendatióne, amendment.

Améndola, an almond.

Amendoláta, Almond-milke or meate.

Améndolo, an Almond-tree.

Amendúa, dúe, dúi, dúo, both.

Amendúni, both together.

Amenità, pleasant to the eie.

Améno, pleasant or delight some to the eie or in situation. Also at least.

Amentáre, to remember or put in minde. Also to be made, furious or raging.

A ménte, in minde, by rote, by heart.

Améntia, madnesse, rage, as out of wits.

Aménto, a strap of leather in the midest of a dart thereby to hold and fling it.

Amerimnóne, Sengreene, Housleeke.

Ameríne, a kinde of Withie or Osier to tie vines. Also a kinde of bitterish sweet peare. Also the first cheries that come.

Ameríno, idem. Also somewhat bitterish yet pleasant in taste.

Amerláre, to vary in armory. Also to make battlement-wise in building.

A merli, varied in armory.

Amerochíta, a fish in Lat. Notola.

A'meta, an Aunt.

Améte, pilie in armory.

Ametistíno, a kinde of Azure that Painters vse, of an amathist colour.

Ametísto, an Amathist or Hematite stone.

Amezza cása, in the midst of the house. 

Amezzáre, to part, to share or deuide in the middle or at halfes. Also to meditate. Vsed also for to diminish or make lesse.

Amezzadóre, a mediator betweene two.

A mezzo, by halfes, or as we say in common betweene two Parteners. Also demye in armorie. Also right ouer, or oueragainst.

A mezzo tempo, the time of the yeere when it is neither hot nor cold but indifferent.

Amfisbena, as Anfisbena.

Amfíscij, as Amphiscij.

Amfodíllo, the Affodill or Daffodill flower.

A'mia, a fish like a Tunnie, without shales, hauing swallowed a hooke it nibleth the same in sunder, and so escapeth, it is said to grow very fast.

Amiámo, a stone so soft that it is spun and wouen into cloath: it endureth the fire as a Salamander, in such were the Egiptians wont to enwrape their deceased Kings that so they might burne them and keepe their ashes. Also a kinde of Alum. Also let vs loue, or we loue.

Amiánto, as Amiámo.

Amíca, a she freind.

Amicábile, freindly, that may be freinded.

Amicáre, to make or becom a freind. Also to crum or crumble.

Amichéuole, freindly, kinde as a freind.

Amicíssimo, a most inward freind.

Amicítia, amity, freindship, good will.

Amíco, a freind, also a louer.

Amicocída, a freind-killer.

Amicocídio, the murther of a freind.

A'mida, 'an Aunt also as Amia.

Amidále, Amiddále, Almonds, tonsils or kernels rising in ones throat, or body, and sometimes at the roote of the tongue by falling of humors.

Amidáre, to starch.

A'mido, starch. Also a kinde of graine or rise.

Amigdelíte, a kinde of Tithimale.

A migliáia, by thousands.

A'milo, fine starch-flowre.

Aminea, a kinde of grape earely ripe.

A minúto, by retaile, smaly, distinctly.

A mío módo, after my fashion.

A mio sénno, after my will and pleasure.

Amír, a kinde of drug or fruit in India.

Amiránte, a Sirian word importing a mighty man, an Admirall, a chiefe Baron.

Amissióne, a losse, or leesing.

Amísso, lost.

Amistá, freindship, amity.

Amistánza, freindship, amity.

Amistáre, to befreind, to make freinds. 

Amistéuole, freindly, kinde.

Amisteuolézza, freindlinesse, amity.

A'mita, an Aunte, a fathers or mothers sister.

Amitáre, to starch.

Amitatríce, a starcher.

Amitermini, a kind of turneproote.

A'mito, starch, or starch-floure.

A'mma, a lath or thin smale boorde.

Ammaccáre, to bruse or frush together.

Ammaccatúra, a bruseing or frushing.

Ammacchiáre, as Macchiáre. Also to hide, to squat, to lurke or crouch in some bush or brake.

Ammaestránza, as Ammaestraménto.

Ammaestráre, to teach to instruct.

Ammaestraménto, a teaching or instruction.

Ammaestréuole, that may be instructed.

Ammagliáre, to worke into maile as a shirt of maile, to quilt as a iacket or iacke. Also to bruse, to frush, to clatter, destroy. Also to charme or bewitch.

Ammagríre, grísco, gríto, to make or become leane, to take downe ones fat.

Ammalatíccio, as Amalatíccio.

Ammaliáre, to bewitch, to charme, to forespeake.

Ammandráre, to reduce into heards or droues.

Ammaníre, nísco, níto, to prepare or make ready for ones hand, to prouide.

Ammannáre, to prepare, to set in order. Also to gather in, hale or strike saile suddainly. Also to gather together by handfuls as gleaners doe corne.

Ammanníre, as Ammaníre.

Ammantáre, to enmantle to inrobe.

Ammantelláre, as Ammantáre.

Ammantíno, a precious stone of many coloures.

Ammánto, a mantle or vpper robe.

Ammarcíre, císco, cíto, to rot, to putrifie.

Ammareggiáre, as Amareggiáre.

Ammargináre, to enmargine, to side. Also to marginate, to heale or close vp a wound.

Ammaricáre, to bewaile bitterly.

Ammaríre, rísco, ríto, to make bitter.

Ammartelláre, to hammer, to forge. Also to appassionat with ielousie or doubt till ones heart pant.

Ammartelláto, passionated with loue, doubt or ielousie. Also hammered or forged.

Ammascaráre, to enmaske, to disguise.

Ammasciáre, as Ammassáre.

Ammassáre, to amasse or gather together.

Ammassaménto, as Ammásso.

Ammassatóre, a heaper, a gatherer. 



Ammasséuole, that may be amassed.

Ammassicchiáre, as Ammassáre.

Ammassicciáre, to make massie or tough. Also to enure to all hardnesse.

Ammásso, an amasse, a gathered heape.

Ammattassáre, to reduce into skanes as thrid. Also to roule vp into bundles.

Ammattíre, tísco, títo, to run mad.

Ammattonáre, to brìcke. Also to paue.

Ammattonáto, paued, or bricked.

Ammazzáre, to kill, to slea, to murther.

Ammazzaménti, killings, murtherings.

Ammazzacchera, as Amazzácchera.

Ammazzáta, as Amazzáta.

Ammazzatóre, a killer, a murtherer.

Ammazzoláre, to bundle into sheafes or handfulls.

Amme, Amen, so be it.

Ammeláre, to enhony or make sweete.

Ammeláto, honied. Also a dun collour.

Amménda, as Aménda.

Ammendábile, that may be amended.

Ammendaménto, amendment.

Ammendáre, as Amendáre.

Ammendatióne, amendment.

Ammendéuole, that may be amended.

Ammentánza, memory, remembrance.

Ammentáre, to remember, to call to mind.

Ammessióne, an admission, an allowing.

Ammésso, admitted, allowed, auowed.

Amméttere, métto, mísi, mésso, to admit, to allow, to auow.

Ammezzáre, as Amezzáre.

A'mmi, a kind of cummin, called the roial cummin, or as som say the hearb Ammié, Ameos, hearb William, Bullwort, or Bíshops weed.

Ammicáre, to marke, to note, to point, to glance or nod at, to becken or make signes at any thing namely with winking of the eies. Also to beslaber, to fowle or grease as it were with filthy and greasie broth or drosse.

Ammíccáre, as Ammicáre.

Ammigliáre, to reduce into thousands.

Amminea, a kind of early ripe grape.

Amminículo, any kind of helpe, furtherance, aide or assistance.

Amministragióne, an administration.

Amministránza, an administration.

Amministráre, to administer.

Amministratióne, in administration.

Amministratóre, an administrator.

Amministréuole, administrable.

Ammirábile, admirable, wondrous.

Ammirabóndo, full of wonder and admiration.

Ammiráglia, an admirall or chiefe ship.

Ammiragliáto, the office of an Admirall.

Ammiráglio, an Admirall or chiefe commander at sea. Also a looking glasse or mirror. 

Ammirándo, admirable, to be wondred at.

Ammiránte, as Ammiráglio.

Ammiráre, to admire or wonder at.

Ammiratióne, admiration, wondring.

Ammiratiuaménte, with admiration.

Ammiratíuo, wonder breeding.

Ammiréuole, admirable, wondrous.

Ammissário, a stallion horse.

Ammissibile, that may be admitted.

Ammistiáre, to mingle, to mash, or mix.

Ammistióne, a mash, a mixture or blending.

Ammoehríso, a stone seeming to haue sand and gold in it.

Ammodernáre, to bring or reduce to late or new fashions.

Ammodíte, a kind of snake or serpent.

Ammogliáre, to wiue, to wed, to mary.

Ammogliaménto, a wiuing or mariage.

Ammogliáto, maried, a maried man.

Ammollare, as Ammollíre.

Ammollíre, lísco, líto, to molifie, to soften. Also to steepe in water.

Ammollitiáre, to make or become soft, wanton, delicate or effeminate.

Ammóne, as Ammíno.

Ammoniáco, a iuice or gum that commeth from the hearb Agasilli.

Ammoniménto, an admonishing.

Ammoníre, nísco, níto, to admonish, to warne.

Ammonitióne, a warning or admonition.

Ammonitóre, an admonisher, a warner.

Ammonitro, a composition of sand and nitre vsed to make glasse with.

Ammon sichiáre, as Ammontáre.

Ammontáre, to amount, to ascend, to heape vp as haicocks. Also to leape a sheepe as rams and other beasts doe, to line a bitch or couer a mare.

Ammóntonáre, as Ammontáre.

Ammonzicchiáre, as Ammontáre.

Ammorbáre, to infect, to contagion.

Ammorbidaménto, a softning, a smoothing, or becomming ranke in growing.

Ammorbidáre, to soften, to smooth. Also to make or become ranke in growing.

Ammorbidíre, dísco, díto, as Ammorbidáre.

Ammorbóso, infectious, contagious.

Ammorciáre, to quench, to extinguish.

Ammortáre, as Ammorciáre.

Ammorzábile, quenchable.

Ammorzáre, as Ammorciáre.

Ammosciáre, to droope, to languish.

Ammosciaménto, a languishing, a fainting.

Ammostáre, to become ripe as grapes ready to goe to the presse and to haue new wine.

Ammostíre, tísco, títo, as Ammostáre.

Ammotináre, to mutiny, to rebell.

Ammotinóso, mutinous, rebellious.

Ammóuere, muóuo, móssi, mósso, to moue vnto.

Ammouíbile, moueable vnto.

Ammucchiáre, to heape or hord vp.

Ammúcchio, a heape or hording vp.

Ammucchiettáre, as Ammucchiáre.

Ammuffáre, to grow musty or mouldy. Also to skip or leape. Also to peepe foorth.

Ammuffíre, físco, fíto, as Ammuffáre.

Ammurcáre, to snort. Also to calke a ship.

Ammusaménto, an amusing. Also a muzling.

Ammusáre, to muse, to amuse. Also to muzle. Also to snout or bill. Also to rout as a pig.

Ammutáre, to change vnto. Also to make or become mute, dumbe or silent.

Ammutináre, to mutiny or rebell.

Ammutinaménto, a mutiny, an insurrection.

Ammutinóso, mutinous, rebellious.

Ammutíre, tísco, títo, as Ammutáre.

Ammutolíre, lísco, líto, as Ammutáre.

Amnestía, forgetfulnesse of things past.

A'mo, a fishing hooke. Also I loue.

Amodíte, a kind of serpent or snake.

A moises, as Mosaico worke.

Amo meglio, I loue or I had rather.

Amoláre, as Moláre, to grind vpon a wheele. Also to frub or furbush.

Amóe, as Amò, he loued or did loue.

Amómo, our ladies rose, the rose of Ierusalem, or garden pepper.

Amónte, to swig at cards. Also to prooue voide.

Amoráccio, filthy loue or lust.

Amórchia, as Amúrca.

Amorchiáre, as Amurcáre.

Amor cornúto, the flowre Monkes hood.

Amóre, loue, lust, affection, sake.

Amóre Dei, gratis, for Gods sake.

Amóre d'hortoláno, Goosegrasse, Gooseshare, Cleuer or Cleuer grasse.

Amoreggiáre, to court with lust, to make loue, to play the louer.

Amorétto, an amoret, a little loue.

Amoréuole, kind, louing, affable.

Amoreuolézza, kindnesse, louingnesse.

Amorífero, loue bearing, loue bringing.

Amoríno, a little loue or Amoret.

Amorósa, a she louer or amorous.

Amorosaménto, amorously.

Amorosánza, louingnesse, amorousnesse.

Amorosétto, louely, gratious, full of louelinesse.

Amorosità, louingnesse, amourousnesse.

Amoróso, amorous, a he loue or louer.

Amorsále, some thing about a ship.

A mórso a mórso, bit by bit or morsell.

Amortáre, to quench or put to death. 



A mórte, to death, mortally.

A mósca cieca, a game where one is hoodwinkt and who being hit must guesse who did it, as we say at hote cockles, or hoodman blinde.

Amoscíre, scísco, scíto, as Ammosciáre.

Amostánte, a chiefe or ring-leader.

Amótto a mótto, word by word, verbatim.

Ampaludáre, as Impaludáre.

Amparáre, to learne.

Ampelíte, an earth in Syria that kils the wormes rubbing the veines with it.

Amperlo, the Hawthorne or Berberie tree.

Ampelodesma, a vine binde.

Ampelopráto, the Porret wine or leeke vine.

Ampeloságria, a kinde of wilde vine.

Ampelosencéno, idem, Also white Brionie.

Amphamerióne, a kind of quotidian ague.

Amphesibéna, as Anfisbéna.

Amphíbio, that liueth in water and on land.

Amphicóne, a kind of pretious stone.

Amphibología, equiuocation or doubtfull meaning.

Amphibológico, equiuocall, ambiguous.

Amphibráco, a foote of a verse, the first and third sillable short, and the middle long.

Amphícirto, the state of the moone not yet come to the halfe compasse bending on both sides.

Amphídeo, the head of the wombes mouth.

Amphiláne, as Chrisocótta.

Amphimálij, certaine mantles shaggie within and without.

Amphimácro, a kinde of lasciuious verse vsed at wanton weddings.

Amphíscij, those that haue their shadowes cast on both sides of them, as they that dwell within the fierie Zone whose shadow sometimes goe North and sometimes South.

Amphisbéna, as Anfisbéna.

Amphitheátrica, the ancient name of Paper made in Rome.

Amphiteátro, an amphitheatre.

Amphitióni, an ancient vniuersall Magistrate in Greece.

Amphodillo, the Affodill or Daffodill flower.

Amphitríte, the maine Ocean? the Sea, or watry kingdome.

Amphora, a measure hauing on either side a cane to hold by, containing about eight gallons of ours. Also a kind of great glasse now vsed in Italie. 

Amphorísmi, as Aphorísmi.

Ampiaménte, amply, at large.

Ampiamáno, plentiously, abundantly.

Ampiáre, to amplifie, to enlarge.

Ampiézza, amplenesse, scope, largnesse.

A'mpio, ample, scopefull, large.

Amplacee, a kind of great Peares.

Ampléare, to amplifie, to enlarge.

Amplaménte, amply, largely.

Amplessáre, to embrace with loue and fauour.

Amplessi, embracements, clippings or collings with loue and fauour.

Ampliáre, to amplifie, to enlarge.

Ampliatióne, amplenesse, scope, largènesse.

Amplificáre, to amplifie, to augment.

Amplificatióne, amplification, encrease.

Amplitúdine, amplenesse, largenesse. Also dignitie, auctoritie, or spreading power.

A'mplo, ample, scopefull, large.

A'mpo, more, more largely, moreouer.

Ampólla, a thin viole-glasse.

Ampollaree, a kinde of great Peares.

Ampollétta da hóre, an houre-glasse.

Ampollosaménte, puffingly. Also vaine gloriously, like a bubling glasse.

Ampollóse paróle, bubling, puffing or windie words without substance.

Ampollúzza, a little very thin viole-glasse.

Amputáre, to cut or pare away that which is superfluous.

Amputatióne, a cutting away or paring about.

Amucchiáre, to heape or horde vp.

A múcchio, by heapes, by hudles.

A múda, by turnes, by changes by shifts.

Amuleto, an amulet worne against plague or charmes.

Amulináre, to wheele about as a mill.

A múrca, the dregs or grounds of oyle.

Amurcáre, to come to dregs as oyle doth.

Amusáre, to ammuse or plod vpon.

A múta, by courses, by turnes, by shifts.

Amutánza, by shifts or changes.

Amutáre, to dumbe or put to silence.

Amutáta, an entremewed hawke.

Amutíre, tísco, títo, as Ammutíre.

An?, ah? how? what? quoth you?

A'na, a word vsed in phisicions bils, signifying of each a like quantitie.

Anabási, the hearbe horsetaile.

Anabattísta, an Anabaptist.

Anacampsenotémo, as Anacapsiróte.

Anacángris páschi, a bird in India whose dung smelleth as Ambergreece.

Anaccáre, to share in rogues language.

Anacárdio, a tree in India bearing a fruit like a birds heart, yeelding a iuice as read as blood, and of the fruit proceedeth a kind of honie that exulcerateth where it toucheth.

Anacapsiróte, an hearbe that makes one remember old forgotten loue.

Anachíte, a stone good against poison and madnesse, some take it for a Diamond.

Anacíthide, as Amanchítide.

Anacoréso, an hermitage or solitarinesse.

Anacoríta, an anchorite or perfect hermite.

Anacquáre, to water or sprinkle with water.

Anacrísi, an examination of a matter.

Anacronismo, an imitation of Anacreon the lyrique Poet.

Anacreóntici, verses deuised by Anacreon.

A'nada, a Ducke.

Anadíno, a duckling or mallard.

Anadioméne, a surname of Venus, as much to say, rising out of the Sea.

Anadiplossía, a doubling of wordes.

Anadrótti, ducks or mallards.

Anaffiáre, to sprinkle with water.

Anagállide, see purslaine or brookelime.

Anagállo, as Anagállide.

Anagíri, the hearbe heane trifolie.

Anagiróne, as Anagíri.

Anagogía, the high and subtle vnderstanding of the Scriptures or other things.

Anagógica stráda, a way leading in and out or here and there.

Anagógico, full of high and misterious vnderstanding. Also proportionable.

Analesía, a disease taking away the senses from all parts of the head.

Analettico, a forme of dyet to nourish him that is lately recouered from sicknesse.

Analísi, resolution, determination.

Analítico, resolute, determined.

Analogía, proportion, conuenience.

Análogo, an answering in proportion.

Ananchítide, a stone vsed by enchanters in raising of spirits.

Anapestici, a verse with the first syllable short and the two last long.

Anáphora, a figure called repetition Also ninetie degrees from the ascendant or erection of ones natiuitie, or an ascension of the Planets from the East by daily course of the firmament.

Anapolitanáto, spruce, neapolitanized.

Anaráncio, an orenge tree or fruit.

Anarchía, a confused common-wealth.

Anárco, without Prince or beginning.

Anári, the nostrils of ones nose.

Anasárca, dropsie ouer the whole body.

Anasáre, to nose, to smell, or sent.

A náso, by sent or smell of the nose.

Anaspaménto, a reeling or winding.

Anaspáre, to reele or winde yarne.

Anastomósi, a coniunction of two veines in one, or of an arterie and a veine. 



Also a bleeding by a broken veine.

Anathéma, a man which in times past was giuen to the deuill, one that is excommunicated, accursed or execrated.

Anathemizzáre, to sweare, to ban, to curse, to execrate or giue himselfe to the deuill.

Anathemizzatióne, a making or being made accursed or execrable.

Anatomía, an Anatomie.

Anatomísta, an anatomist.

Anatomizzáre, to anatomize.

A'natra, a Ducke.

Anatrário, a Hauke that kils Ducks.

Anátria, as Anatrário.

A'nca, a hanch or hip. Also the loyne. Also the ankle bone.

Ancarella, a little hanch. Also a tripping or hopping.

Ancella, a damzell or waiting woman.

A'nche, as Ancóra. Also hanches.

Ancheggiáre, is when a horse coruets with a quicke time bearing himselfe vpon his hanches.

Anchióue, the fish Anchoues.

Anchiróide, the interior processes of the shoulder-blade.

Anchúsa, as Ancúsa.

Anciána, as Alzána.

Anciáno, as Anziáno.

Ancianità, ancientnesse.

Ancidáre, to slea, to kill.

Ancídere, cído, císi, císo, to slea, to kill.

Ancíli, certaine shields that the Romans vsed when they danced.

Ancílla, as Ancella.

Ancinelli, little hookes or claspes.

Ancíno, a water vrchin or hedgehog.

Ancíno di pésce, a fish-hooke.

Ancióue, the fish Anchoues.

Ancípite, wauering or doubtfull which part to take. Also sharpe, keene cutting.

Anclúde, a pilchard or sperlin fish.

Ancó Ancói, this day, to day.

A'nco, as Ancóra. Also a certaine great waight. Also the naue of a wheele.

Ancóne, a nooke, a coyne, a corner.

Ancóra, also, moreouer, besides, eke, to, with all. Also yet, anew, or againe.

A'ncora, an anchor for a ship.

Ancóra ancóra, yet, moreouer.

Ancóra chè, howbeit, although.

Ancoráio, an ancher maker or master.

Ancoráre, to anchor, to ride at anchor.

Ancórchè, albeit, although.

Ancoreggiáre, to ride at anchor.

Ancróia, a common whore, a filthy iadish rampe.

Ancúde, an anuill.

Ancúdine, an anuill.

Ancudináre, to forge on an anuill.

Ancuó, this day, to day.

Ancúsa, the hearbe Orcanet or Alkanet. Also the gentle thistle.

Andaménti, goings or walkings. Also proceedings or behauiours.

Andánte, passant in armorie.

Andánti, trauellers, way faring, goers.

Andáre, vádo, andár, andáto, to goe, to wend, to walke, to march, to pace.

Andár'a cáccia, to goe a hunting, a chasing, a coursing, a hawking or a fouling.

Andár'a contrafár'i mórti, to go sleepe.

Andár'a fíla, to march in rankes or files.

Andár'a gála, to flote or run a drift.

Andár'aiáto, to goe idlie loytering and gaping vp and downe loosing of time.

Andár'aióne, as Andar'aiáto.

Andár'a la ára, to lay to pawne, as we say to lay in lauander.

Andár' al bósco, to goe to the wood, that is to take the dyet drinke for the Poxe.

Andár'al cápo, to goe to the head of a matter.

Andáre álla búsca, to goe a free booting, to goe seeking and shifting for.

Andár' álla cáccia, as Andár'a cáccia.

Andár'álla crociáta, to goe or come home by weeping crosse.

Andar' álla mázza, to go to the slaughter.

Andár' al' oscúro, to walke in ignorance.

Andár'a mónte, to put vp the cardes, to swig or deale againe, to goe to the stocke. Also to prooue vaine, to fall voide, to prooue nothing.

Andár'a ónde, to goe reeling, to stagger, to make Indentures as a drunken man.

Andár'a pisciáre, a game at cardes.

Andár'a ripórre, to goe put vp ones pipes, for one to goe hide himselfe.

Andár'a rúba, to goe a filching or freebooting.

Andár'a saccománno, to be ransacked.

Andár'a secónda, to follow the tyde, to second or sooth one.

Andár'a scósse,  to reele as a drunken man

Andár'a sinístra, to miscarrie.

Andár'a sól do, to serue for pay in war

Andár'a spásso, to goe a solacing.

Andár'a váanga, to fadge or prosper with.

Andár'a verso, to goe luckily as ones byas. Also to follow or please ones humore.

Andár'a voltolóne, to goe rouling or rumbling.

Andár báando, a Proclamation to goe.

Andár carpóne, to goe crawling.

Andár del córpo, to goe to the stoole.

Andár di mále, to miscary to goe to wrake.

Andár di pálo in frásca, to goe from one matter to another, to skip from bough to branch. 

Andár di portánte, to amble easily.

Andár disfiláto, to goe in a right line without turning on any side. Also among souldiers to goe out of aray or ranke, as it were stragling.

Andár di trótto, to goe a trotting pace.

Andáre doue ne Pápa ne Imperatóre puó mand ár Imbasciatóre, to goe pisse or shite.

Andár dóue vánnoi Sáui & mátti, to die, to goe to ones last home.

Andár fallíta, to prooue effectlesse.

Andár gatrolone, to goe fumbling in the darke.

Andár' in amóre, to goe to rut, to goe a catterwalling.

Andár' in barbería, to be laid of the pox.

Andár in búsca, to goe a filching.

Andár in Carnafáu, to goe a wenching.

Andár in Cornouáglia sénza bárca., to be cuckolded.

Andár' in córse, to goe a rouing.

Andár' in dozzéna, to goe among the common sort as a liuery horse.

Andár in fréga, to goe a caterwalling.

Andár' in máschera, to goe a masking.

Andár palpegóne, to goe a groping.

Andár' in piccardía, to goe to be hanged.

Andár' in pellicciería, to goe to the racke.

Andár' in sincopi, to fall in a swoune.

Andár'in stiázzo, to goe a shifting.

Andár'in vólta, to goe rouing vp and downe.

Andár la rónda, to goe the round.

Andár méno, to goe lesse at Primero.

Andár péna, aforfeiture or paine to goe vpon it.

Andár per il móndo, to wander, to trauell vp and downe the world.

Andár raméngo, to goe wandring.

Andár tapinándo, to goe a begging.

Andár tentóne, to goe groping.

Andár vuóto, to misse of purpose.

Andáta, a going, a walking, a waifaring iourney. Also a departure.

Andatóre, a goer, a wender.

Andatura, a going or manner of going.

A'ndi, as Váda, let him or her goe.

Andiriniéni, a pasport to goe and come. Also as Fagioláta.

Andiueníre, to goe and come to and fro.

Andiuiéni, goings and commings to and fro.

A'ndito, a going, a way, an entry, a passage, an accesse vnto. Also a porch or portall.

A'ndo, a rising hill that hath neither dale nor vally about it.

Andrachnéno, as Arachnéno. 

Andragóne, a manly woman, a virago. 



Andríno, a iadish blacke horse.

A'ndrio, a kind of venemous serpent.

Androdáma, as Andrománte.

Androdamánte, as Andrománte.

Androgíno, one of both sexes and kinds, both man and woman.

Andromáda, as Andrománte.

Andrománte, a pretious stone, hard and ponderous, bright like siluer, which it drawes vnto it as the adament doth iron, some take it for a bloodstone.

Andrómeda, a certaine signe in heauen.

Andróna, an entry or space between two walles as a passage. Also a chamber for houshold men seruants. Also a priuy, a sinke or sew for water. Also a narrow lane, or straight ally.

Andrónica, the vertue, fortitude of mind.

Andrónico, stout and stedfast of courage.

Androsáce, a white hearb, growing in the sea, without leaues, with greene huskes in the tufts.

Androsémo, Saint Iohns wort, or Tutsane, with which if you touch your hands it dies them as it were with blood.

Androsemóne, as Androsémo.

Anebbiáre, as Annebbiáre.

A'nedra, any kind of ducke.

Anegliáre, to rarifie or make thin.

Anelatióne, a respiration, a breathing.

Anelitáre, to breath, to pant, to respire.

Anelíto, naturall respiration.

Anella, all manner of rings.

Anelláre, to ring, or put on rings.

Anelláro, a ring maker.

Anellétti, little rings.

Anelli, rings or links of chaines.

Anelliére, a ring maker.

Anello, any kind of ring.

Anello da bólla, a seale ring.

Anemóne, or Anemónia, Rosepersly, windflowre, Coquelourds, Passeuolors, some take it for wild Poppy, and others for the gentle thistle.

A'nera, any kind of ducke.

Anéro, with blacke or mourning weeds.

Anéto, Anétho, the hearb Dill or Anet.

A'netra, A'nitra, a duck.

Anfanaménti, foolish rauings or vanities.

Anfanáre, to raue, to loiter idly.

Anfanatóre, a rauer, a foolish loitrer.

Anfaníe, as Anfanaménti.

Anfibología, as Amphibología.

Anfibológico, as Amphibológico.

Anfisbéna, a venemous serpent with two heads one before, and another in his taile.

Anfíscij, as Amphíscij.

Anfitáno, a stone of the vertue of the Adamant, and makes gold to grow in quantity. 

Anfitríte, as Amphitríte.

A'nfora, as A'mphora.

Anfodello, the Affodill or Daffodill flowre.

Anfrángere, frángo, fránsi, fránto, to breake or frush.

Anfránto, broken, or frushed.

Anfrosíno, a dissembling puritane, a saint seeming man.

Ansuságlia, base people, common as spindles.

Angaráio, an imposer of taxes or toles.

Angareggiáre, as Angariáre.

Angariáre, to tax, to oppresse with taxes.

Angaríe, taxes, toles, impositions, imposts.

A'nge, a kind of water snake. Also vexeth.

Angelésco, angell like, angelicall.

Angelétto, a little Angell.

Angellótto, a great Angell, a coine.

Angelica, the hearb Angelica, Angelicall.

Angelíno, a kind of drinking glasse. Also a little drinking glasse.

A'ngelo, an Angell.

Angelúzzo, a poore, little orphane Angell.

A'ngere, ángo, ánsi, ánto, to vex, to molest, to grieue, to fret, to anguish, to smart.

Angeróna, the Goddesse of silence.

Anghiórno, a certaine little bird.

Anghiróne, a hearon.

Angiolíni, sp , as Pálle inramáte.

Angiolíno, a little Angell.

Angína, a squinancy in the throat. Also Dodder or with wind.

A'ngio, vsed for A'nzi.

Angióne, an angle, a corner, a nooke.

Angipórto, a narrow lane or ally with one entrance, and many windings.

A'nglio, a bile, a blane, a sore bunch.

Angoella, as Anguella.

Angoláre, cornered. Also to corner.

A'ngolo, an angle, a corner, a nooke.

Angolóso, angled, full of corners.

Angonára, a clue or bottom of yarne.

Angonía, as Angóscia.

Angoniáre, as Angosciáre.

Angonióso, as Angoscióso.

Angonizzánte, as Agonizzánte.

Angonizzáre, as Agonizzáre.

Angóre, an anguish in the throate with choking and stifling.

Angóscia, anguish, agony, hearts trembling.

Angosciáre, to anguish, or be in agony.

Angoscióso, full of anguish or agony.

A'ngra, a nooke, an angle, a baye.

A'ngue, a snake, or an adder.

Anguello, a fish in Latine Lauaronis.

Anguettáre, to wriggle as a snake.

Anguílla, an Eele or Eelepond.

Anguináglia, as Anguináia.

Anguináia, the groine or inside of the thigh. Also a disease or rupture in that place. Also a disease in the inside of a horses hinder legs.

Anguíno, snake kind, snake wise.

Anguistara, a glasse with a winding necke.

Anguláre, angular, cornered.

A'ngulo, an angle, a nooke, a corner.

Angulóso, angled, full of corners.

Angúria, a kind of cucumber good to eat raw.

Angusella, as Angusígola.

Angusígola, a needle fish, a horne fish. Also a needle or sharpe pin.

Angústia, straitnesse, narrownesse.

Angustiáre, to straiten, to pinch, to bring to a narrow passe.

Angustióso, full of straitnesse, or narrownesse. Also pinching or full of anguish.

Anheláre, to pant or fetch wind with paine. Also to aspire or gape after earnestly.

Anhelánti cáni, dogs out of breath and panting. Also embost as a weary Deare.

Anhelatióne, panting, painfull respiration.

Anhelitáre, as Anheláre.

Anhelitánte, as Anhelánte.

Anhélo, panting or shortnesse of breath.

A'nice, Aniseed.

Anichilábile, that may be disanulled.

Anichiláre, to disanull or bring to nothing.

Anichilatióne, a disanulling.

A'nici, as A'nisi.

Anidáre, to nest, to roost, to nuzzle.

Anidiáre, as Anidáre.

A'nidro, the hearb mad or raging nightshade.

Aniello, the swiuell of a chaine. Also a steele to strike fire.

Anientíre, tísco, títo, to bring to nothing.

Aníle, of or pertaining to old age.

Anilíta, old doting age.

A'nima, the soule of mankind. Also the core or kernell of any fruit. Also a cuirace or brestplate, so called because it armeth the heart.

A'nima della cámmera, the hollow, or cilinder of any peece of ordinance.

A'nima della cánna, idem.

A'nima del pezzo, idem.

A'nima di créta, a long bar of iron luted with clay set vpright in the mold wherein ordinance is cast, called by our gunners the Niuell or Niwell, which formes the hollow or cilinder of the peece.

A'nima dí ferro, a bar or croe of iron that gunners vse in great peeces to put into or through the axeltree to streng­



then the same in the cariage.

Animaduertere, verto, versi, verso, to heed, to consider, to mind, to regard.

Animaduersióne, heed, consideration, mindfulnesse, regard.

Animaláccio, any filthy creature.

Animále, any liuing or breathing creature. Also the breathing or vitall part of any body.

Animále sentácchio, a sitting, squatting, cowring or groueling creature.

Animalità, the life, the essence or spirit of any liuing creature.

Animalménte, of or belonging to a liuing creature, animally, or soulelike.

Animánte, breathing or hauing a soule.

Animánti, all manner of liuing or breathing creatures.

Animáre, to ensoule, to giue soule or life vnto. Also to animate or encourage.

Animástico, that concerneth the soule.

Animatióne, an ensouling or giuing life vnto. Also an animating.

Animáto, created with or hauing a soule. Also animated or encouraged. Also hardy and bold.

Animauuertere, as Animaduertere.

Animauuersióne, as Animaduersióne.

Animella, the kernell of any nut or stone.

Animella, the bellowes of a pump.

Animella di vitello, the burre or sweetbread of a Calfe. Vsed also for a Calfes chaudron, because it is full of kernels.

Animétta, a little pretty soule.

Animétto, a little silly minde or courage.

A'nimo, a minde, a spirit, or courage.

Animosità, courage, hardinesse, stoutnesse. Also selfe conceite or selfe opinion.

Animóso, hardy, spiritefull, couragious.

Animúccia, a poore wretched soule.

Aníppa, a tree from which distilleth a certaine water that in Pegu they drinke instead of wine.

Anír, or Aníre, some kind of drug.

A'nisi, A'niso, the hearb or seed Anise. Also Anise comfits.

Anístro, a kind of garmed mentioned by Celius.

Anitiáne, a kind of preseruing peares.

A'nitra, a ducke. Also a wigin. Also a barnicle hanging vpon old ships.

Anitráro, a keeper or seller of duckes.

Anitrella, a ducklin. Also a teale.

Anítrio, the neighing of a horse.

Anitríre, trísco, tríto, to neigh as a horse.

Anitrócolo, a ducklin, or yong drake.

A niún cónto, by no meanes, no way.

A niún módo, by no meanes, no way.

A'nna, as A'na.

Annacquáre, as Anaffiáre.

Annaffiáre, as Anaffiáre.

Annaffiatóio, a garden, or watering pot.

Annále, yeerly, annuall.

Annáli, annales, histories of yeeres.

Annalísta, a writer of annalls.

Annalménte, annually, yeerly.

Annarinóne, the hearb Calues-snout.

Annasáre, to smell or sent vnto.

Annáre, hath been vsed for Andáre, to goe.

Annaspaménto, a reeling or winding vp.

Annaspáre, to reele or wind yarne.

Annáta, a yeeres season, time, profit, rents, fruits or gouernment.

Annatomía, an anathomy.

Anatomísta, an anatomist.

Annatomizzáre, to anatomize.

Annebbiáre, to bemist, to grow foggy, to be ouercast with clouds. Also to blast fruits.

Annebbiatíno, a smug, spruce, effeminate, sweet smelling minion.

Annegáre, to drowne or stifle in water.

Annegatíccio, drownable, sinking.

Anneghitíre, tísco, títo, to make or become idle, slothfull or lazie.

Anneggiáre, as Annegáre.

Annegráre, to make or become blacke.

Annegríre, grísco, gríto, as Annegráre.

Annelláre, to ring, to circle. Also to curle or frizle.

Annella, rings, or linkes of chaines.

Annelláti críni, curled or frizled haires.

Annelle, thin plates of iron made like rings, called of our gunners washers, they serue to keepe the pin of the axletree from wearing the naue.

Annelletti, all manner of little rings.

Annello, any manner of ring.

Annellóni, great rings whereunto ropes are fastned to draw artillery.

Annemb áre, to ouer cloud, to bemist.

Annemb áto tempo, ouerclowded weather.

Anneráre, to make or become blacke.

Anneraménto, a making or becomming blacke.

Anneríre, rísco, ríto, as Anneráre.

Annessáre, to annex or adde vnto.

Annessióne, an annexing or adding vnto.

Annesso, annexed or added vnto.

Annestáre, to engraffe or insert.

Annestatióne, an engraffing.

Annestatóre, an engraffer, a graffer.

Annettáre, to make cleane or neat.

Anneuáre, to ensnow, to fill with snow.

A'nni, yeeres, twelue months.

Annicchiáre, to neigh for ioy as horses when they meet with another horse or mare. Also as Ranicchiáre.

Annichilábile, that may be disanulled. 

Annichiláre, to annull or bring to nothing.

Annichilársi, for a man to humble or abase himselfe lowly.

Annichilatióne, a disanulling.

Annícolo, a yeerling, of one yeere.

Annidáre, to nest, to roost, to nuzle.

Annidiáre, as Annidáre.

Annído, a nest, a shroud, a shelter.

Anniegáre, to drowne or be drowned.

Annífero, bearing euery yeere.

Annighitíre, tísco, títo, as Impigríre.

Annihiláre, to bring to nothing.

Annihilábile, that may be disanulled.

Annihilatióne, a disanulling.

Annitríte, trísco, tríto, to neigh as a horse.

Anniversário, from yeere to yeere, downe euery yeere at a certaine time.

Anno, a yeere, a tweluemonth.

Annoále, yeerly, annuall.

Annobilíre, lísco, líto, to ennoble.

Annobilitáre, to make noble.

A'nnocisi, as Ci si hánno, there are had.

Annodáre, to ty vnto with knots.

Annodatúra, a knotting.

A'nno dómini, the yeere of our Lord.

Annóia, annoy, tediousnesse.

Annoiánza, annoiance, irksomnesse.

Annoiáre, to annoy, to molest.

Annoláre, as Noláre.

Annolíno, as Annícolo. Also a bird.

Annóna, prouision of corne and other sustenance for the whole yeere.

Annontiáre, as Annuntiáre.

Annontiatióne, as Annuntiáta.

Annontiáta, as Annuntiáta.

Annóntio, as Annúntio.

Annóso, aged, full of yeeres.

Annotáre, to note, to marke.

Annotatióne, an annotation, or noting.

Annottáre, to darken or grow night.

Annouále, yeerly, annuall.

Annoueráre, to number, to tell, to count.

Annoueratióne, a numeration.

Annoueréuole, numerable.

Annuále, yeerly, annuall.

Annualménte, annually, yeerly.

Annubiláre, to mist or ouerclowd.

Annubilatióne, an ouerclowding.

Annubilóso, clowdy, misty, foggy.

Annullábile, disanullable.

Annullaménto, a disanulling.

Annulláre, to disanull, to frustrate.

Annullatióne, circular, round as a ring.

Annulláre, a disanulling.

Annullíre, lísco, líto, as Annulláre.

Annullità, as Nullità.

Annumeráre, to number, to count, to tell.

Annuntiáre, to anounce or deliuer in message vnto, to bring glad tidings.

Annuntiáta, the annuntiation or our Lady day in Lent, a glad tiding. 



Annuntiatióne, as Annuntiáta.

Annuntiatóre, a denouncer, a messenger, a bringer of glad tidings.

Annúntio, a message or embassage, a tidings.

A'nnuo, annuall, yeerely.

A'no, a mans fundament or bum.

Anódide, Restharow, or Pettiewhin.

Anodíni, medicines which prouoking sleepe put away paine and griefe.

A nóia hauére, to loath or be weary of.

Anoláre, to hire as a horse or ship.

Anólo, at hire, or hired.

Anomále, without rule, irregulare.

A nóme altrúi, in the name of others.

A nóna, at noone, about midday.

A non cále, A non calénte, as A non calére.

A non calére, at naught, carelesly.

Anóní, Restharow or Pettiewhin.

Anónimo, namelesse. Also Bugle or Self-heale.

Anormále, orderlesse, irregulare.

Anotáre, to note or make.

Anotatióne, a note or annotation.

Anphiscij, as Amphiscij.

A'nsa, scope, liberty, a far extent.

Ansáre, to pant, to gaspe, to breath. Also to toyle and moile with labour and care. Also to long or desire till one be out of breath.

Ansatióne, a purcinesse or shortnesse of breath. Also a disease in the lungs of a horse.

Ansciáre, as Ansáre.

Ansegnáre, to teach, to instruct.

A'nsera, a goose.

A'nsero, a gander.

A'nsia, as Ansietà.

Ansiáre, as Ansáre.

Ansietà, anxiety, curiosity, alonging desire, a sorrowing care.

A'nsima, a bird that braieth as an Asse with three feathers in his wings like hornes and one on his head with which he defendeth himselfe from wilde beastes, being so great and heauy that he cannot flie

A'nsio, A'nscio, as Ansióso.

Ansióso, anxious, curious, carefully, sorowfull, doubtfully, longing.

A'nta, an addition to euery tenth number aboue thirty, as Quaránta, Cinquánta, Sessánta, &c. as we say she is in hir tenees, so say the Italians she is in hir Anta.

Antacháte, a kinde of Agath-stone.

Antagonísta, an opposite or one that encounters an aduersary.

Antálio, a shrube bearing a fruit like a Medlar.

Antáno, a kinde of tree growing in fenny places good for nothing.

Antártico, the antartike pole.

A'nte, before, rather, sooner, and much vsed in compositions of words. Also a wilde beast in India as big as an Asse with round eares and nether lipt like a trumpet, which is neuer seene to goe but by night.

Antecedente, an antecedent. Also going before.

Antecedenza, antecedency, priority, precedency.

Antec édere, cédo, cessi, cesso, cedúto, to proceed, to goe or take place before.

Antecellente, fore excellent, excelling al.

Antecessóre, a predecessor, a foregoer.

Antecóre, a griping or pinching at the heart. Also a disease in a horses brest.

Ante cúra, a care before hand.

Ante détto, foresaid. Also a foresaying.

Anteláus, a monsterous beast with great hornes and so sharpe that it will saw and cut downe any tree with them.

Antelucáno, before breake of day.

Antelúcere, lúco, luc éi, luciúto, to foreshine.

Anteméttere, métto, mísi, mésso, to put or place before.

Antenáscere, násco, nácqui, náto, to be borne before.

Antenáti, forefathers, progenitors, ancestors, predecessors.

Anténna, the maine or saile yard of a ship. Also a long pole or great speare.

Antenóti, as Pederétti.

Antepassáti, as Antenáti.

Antepásto, as Antipásto,

Antepenúltimo, last sauing two.

Antephitheátro, an Amphitheater.

Anteponeré, póngo, pósi, pósto, to set or put before, to prefer.

Anteproueníre, vengo, venni, venúto, to come beforehand, to preuent.

Antéride, a buttres, a post or prop to shore or vnder set any thing.

Anterióre, former or foregoing.

Anteriorità, priority, for ranke, antecedency.

Anteróti, a kind of bright Amatist-stone.

Antesignáni, those that goe next before the standard or banner to fight and defend it.

Antesignáno, chiefe or principall.

Anteueníre, as Anteproueníre.

Anteuenúto, come before preuented.

Anthálio, as Antherísco.

Anthedóni, a kinde of great Medlers.

Anthea, as A'ntia.

Anthéma, an Anthem sung in a Church.

Anthémo, a kinde of gentle thistle. Also Camomill.

A'nthera, a kind of medicinable composition.

Anthericóne, the stem of Asphodelo, good to eat. 

Antherísco, Cheruill or sheapheards needle.

Anthía, as Antía.

Anthíno méle, Flower, hony.

A'ntho, a bird, enemy to the bird Egitho.

Anthrísco, as Antheriscóne.

A'nti, as the word Ante, before, sooner, or rather, as Anticámera, afore chamber. Also a greeke word vsed much in composition signifying against or contrariety, as Antichrísto.

Antía, a kind of broad flat fish very subtill and wary, and neigheth as a horse.

Antiáde, as Amiddáli.

Antianità, ancientnesse, seniority.

Antiáno, an ancient, a senior, an Alderman.

Antibáchio, a foote of a verse of three silables the two first long and the last short.

Antíca, that part that is toward the East.

Anticáglie, antiquities, old monuments.

Anticaménte, anciently, of old of yore.

Antic ámera, an outward chamber.

Anticáre, to make or become ancient. Also to settle in a place.

Anticáro, Anticáio, an Antiquary.

Anticategoría, pleading when one accuseth the other.

Anticáto, setled, antiquated.

Anticatóni, bookes against Cato.

Antic épho, head against head.

Anticédere, as Antecédere.

Anticessóre, as Antecessóre.

Antíchi, elders, ancients, ancestors.

Antichissimaménte, most anciently.

Antichità, antiquity ancientnesse.

Antichristianità, Antichristianity.

Antichrísto, contrary to Christ.

Antichthóna, ground against ground.

Anticipáre, to anticipat, to preuent, to supplant.

Anticipataménte, preuentingly, supplantingly, by way of anticipation.

Anticipatóne, anticipation, preuention, supplanting.

Anticipatóre, a preuenter, a supplanter.

Anticiricóne, a graine called Sesamoide.

Anticiróne, as Anticiricóne.

Antíca, ancient, old, Senior, aged.

Antícoli, as Antiési.

Anticórrere, to sore-run.

Anticorritóre, aforerunner.

Antictóna, any part of the earth that is directly one against the other an opposite.

Antictóni, people dwelling on the earth directly against vs where euer we be. 



Anticuóre, as Antecóre.

Antidispositióne, an antidisposition, or precedent in clination.

Antídoto, an antidote or counterpoison.

Antiéne, a kind of lasting peares.

Antiési, those that dwell vnder one halfe Meridian and Paralell of like distance from the Equator, the one Northward the other Southward.

Antifána, an Anthem in the Church.

Antifáte, a kind of blacke stone.

Antífrasi, a figure where a word hath a contrary meaning.

Antigonísta, as Antagonísta.

Antigrádo, afore-step.

Antiguárdia, a vangard or foreward.

Antilegoména, all manner of contradictions. Also flowre gatherings.

Antilésina, the art of spending, and that is contrary to thriuing.

Antilesinánte, a spendthrift, a wast good.

Antílli, an hearb like to Lentils.

Antíllida, idem.

Antillióne, idem.

Antilogía, contradiction, gainsaying.

Antiméttere, as Anteméttere.

Antimónio, the minerall Antimonium. Also as Larbasóne.

Antimurále, a forewall, a parapet.

Antimuráre, to counter skarfe.

Antimúro, a forewall, a counterskarfe.

Antinepóte, a great grand child or nephew.

Antinomía, a repugnance between two lawes.

Antipásto, any thing serued in or eaten first to prouoke apetite.

Antipáte, a kind of blacke stone.

Antipathía, a contrariety in naturall qualities.

Antipathizzáre, to be contrary in naturall qualities.

Antiperistasía, a repulsion on euery part, whereby any thing is made more strong in it selfe, by the restraining of the contrary.

Antipetto, a stomacher. Also as Anticóne.

Antiphóna, an anthem sung in a Church.

Antípodi, the Antipodes vnder vs.

Antipórta, afore dore or gate.

Antipórto, a porch or a portall.

Antiquáglie, as Anticáglie.

Antiquáre, as Anticáre.

Antiquário, an antiquary.

Antiquáto, as Anticáto.

Antiquità, antiquity, oldnesse.

Antíquo, ancient, eld, old.

Antiquóri, some part of a ship.

Antiracíno, as Antracíno.

Antirríno, as Antirrinóne.

Antirrinóne, an hearb which a scorpion seeing he looseth his venome and becommeth senselesse, some take it for Calues snout or Muzle.

Antisapére, to fore know.

Antisapienza, fore knowledge.

Antiscordóne, a kind of garlicke.

Antisimíte, a figure in rethoricke.

Antisophísta, an aduers sophister.

Antispási, a turning to the contrary way.

Antispódo, a kind of physicke or any thing mixt with spodium or hauing the faculty of it.

Antísta, a prelate, a president ouer sacred things, one excelling others.

Antístite, as Antísta.
 
Antithesi, a figure in rethoricke opposing one contrary against another.

Antítosi, a figure when one case stands for another.

Antitrinárij, heretickes that deuide the holy trinity.

Antitrinit árij, idem.

Antiued ére, to foresee.

Antiuediménto, foresight.

Antiuedúto, foreseen, a foreseeing man.

Antiuísto, foreseen.

Antiueníre, to preuent or come before.

Antócci, as Antiési.

Antomáta, one that changeth from one kind to another.

Antonomáde, as Antomáta.

Antonomasía, a word that without setting downe any proper name, yet some proper name shall be vnderstood, as by Arma virumque cano, AEneas is vnderstood.

Antonomía, the changing from one shape to another to be sometimes of one kind and sometimes of another, as silkewormes and such like.

Antóra, the helmet flowre or Monkeshood.

Antracíno, cole blacke.

Antracítide, a stone wherein seeme to be sparkes of fire, cast water on it, it kindleth, put it in the fire, it quencheth. Also a kind of blacke bloodstone.

Antrióne, the north part of the world. Also the North wind.

A'ntro, a caue, a den, a hole, a cauerne.

Antropofágo, an eater of men.

Antropográfo, a describer of men.

Antropomorfíti, men that thought God to haue humane shape and lims.

Antróso, full of holes, dens or cauernes.

Anúbe, the name of a God among the Egyptians.

Anugále, the hearb Pimpernell.

Anuláre, any ones little finger. Also a white mixt with carnation that painters vse.

A nuólo, at hire as an hired horse.

A nuóto, swimming, by swimming.

A'nza, a kind of water snake. 

Anzáre, as Ansáre.

A'nzi, rather, sooner, but.

Anziáno, as Antiáno.

Anzianità, as Antianíta.

A'nzi chè, rather then, sooner then.

A'nzi chè lontáno, neere not far of.

A'nzi chè nò, rather so then not.

A'nzi più, rather more.

A'nzi púre, rather so then not.

A'nzolo, that part of a bell whereto the clapper hangeth. Also the name of a small saile in a ship.

A occhiétti, with maile or oylet holes.

A ócchio, by sight, looke Annestáre.

A ogni guísa, how soeuer, euery way.

A ogni módo, euery manner of way.

A ogni pátto, how soeuer euery way.

Aólio, wrought in oile, oile worke.

Aombráre, to shadow. Also to start as a horse.

Aóncia, by ounces, by retaile.

Aonciáre, to waigh by ounces or inches.

Aondáre, to waue.

A ónde, made wauing, wauy, or ondy.

Aonestáre, to make honest.

Aonghiáre, to catch with ones nailes. Also to tip with horne.

A ónta, in spite, or disgrace.

Aontáre, as Adontàre.

Aontáto, wronged dispighted.

Aoperáre, as Adoperáre.

A orécchio téso, attentiuely.

Aornello, a wild Ash-tree.

Aórno, birdlesse, without birds.

Aórta, the chiefest artery in any creature, the root whereof is fastened to the gristle-bone in the heart, it is called the mother of all arteries.

A órza, sailing with a quarter winde.

Aorzáre, to saile with a quarter wind.

A ótto, put to any day it makes it that day senight. Lunedi a ótto.

Apacciáre, to patch or fasten together.

Apáce, the hearbe Dent de chion, Dogstooth or Quoich. Also a kind of gentle thistle.

Apaiáre, to paire or couple together.

A páli, paly in armory.

Apallattáre, to rowle or run away roundly, vsed properly of a drunken mans tongue that neuer standeth still.

Apanciólle, merily, hold belly hold.

A paragóne, in comparison or respect.

Apareggiáre, to equall to match.

Aparienza, as Appariscenza.

Aparíne, Goosegrasse or Erith.

A páro, equaly euenhand. Also in comparison or respect. Also as Aparuólo.

A páro a páro, euenhand. Also by paines.

Apartáre, as Appartáre.

A párte, seuerally, a part. Also sharing. 



A párte a párte, part by part.

Apartenente, appertaining, belonging.

Apertenentia, an apurtenance.

Apartenére, tengo, ténui, tenúto, to appertaine or belong vnto.

Ap ártia, the North-winde.

A partíte, partie in armorie, as partie per pale, per fess, per chief, per saltier, per bend, &c.

A partíte di bénda, partie per bend.

A partíte di cróce, partie per saltier.

A partíte di fáscie, partie per fesse.

A partíte di páli, partie per pale.

A partíte di sópra, parted in chiefe.

A partíto, put to voices, or in question.

A paruólo, a bee-keeper. Also a greene bird with some red feathers, who feeds on bees called a Moodwall.

A pásso lénto, with a slow pace.

A pásso, by steps, by paces.

Apáthi, men without affection, neuer laughing, neuer sorrowing, but euer of one countenance.

Apathía, wanting or voidnesse of affection.

Apático, one that hath a weake liuer.

A pátti, vpon bargaine or couenant.

A pátto verúno, vpon no condition.

A'pe, a bee.A'pi, bees.

Apeciáre, to bepitch, to marke with pitch.

A peggio, at or to the worst.

Apelióte, the Easter wind.

Apelli, circumcised.

A pélo, euen, leuell, by the haire.

A péna, vpon paine or forfeiture. Also scarcely, hardly, vnneth, scantly.

Apenáre, to paine or put to paine.

Apendiáre, to bend or hang downe ward

Apendio, Apendo, downe-hanging.

Apenello, curiously, exquisitely, by line and measure as done or drawen with pensell.

Aperiménto, an opening, an ouerture.

Aperíre, as Apríre.

A perpendículo, downe right or leuell.

Aperitíuo, opening or soluble in operation.

A perpetuo, in perpetuitie.

Apersióne, a share, a portion, a partition.

Aperta, as Apertúra.

Apertíssimo, most open, most manifest.

Aperto, open, opened. Also a man burst.

Apertúra, an opening, an ouerture, a gap. Also a breach made by assault. Also a leake in a ship. Also a bursting of a mans cods.

A pésce spína, a kinde of worke called hearing-bone.

A péso traboccánte, full or downe waight.

A petenza, a greedie desiring or coueting.

Apétere, péto, petéi, petúto, to long for, or haue an appetite vnto, to couet, or wish for.

Apetíbile, to be wished or longed for.

Apetíre, tísco, títo, as Apétere.

Apetitéuole, as Apetitíuo.

Apetitióne, at the request or instance.

Apetitiuaménte, with a good appetite.

Apetitíuo, sauorie, pleasing the appetite

Apetíto, a stomake or an appetite.

Apetitóso, that hath an appetite.

Apettáre, to fasten or cling vnto. Also when a horse doth carie his head so low that he toucheth his breast with it. Also to breast or bosome vnto.

A petto, in comparison, in respect. Also a pursinesse or shortnesse of breath or winde. Also front to front or right ouer against.

A petto a petto, front, breast to breast.

A pezza, a while since.

Apezzáre, to piece vnto.

A pezzo, by pieces.

A pezzo a pezzo, piece by piece.

Apháce, as Apáce.

Apharáce, a tree like Aræhnen that beareth twice a yeare.

Apheréma, the coursest starch floure.

Apherési, a figure that taketh a letter or syllable from the beginning of a word.

A'phia, a kinde of great seafish.

A'phro, a kind of wild Poppie.

Aphorísmo, a generall rule or prescription or position in Phisicke. Also a briefe document or sentence.

Apro di siáce, a stone red and white.

Aphronítro, the fome of Saltpeter.

Aphroscorodóne, a kind of Garelyke.

A'pi, all manner of bees.

A piacére, at pleasure. Also pleasure.

A piaciménto, at will and pleasure.

A piána víte, a kind of vine.

A pián piáno, very slowly and softly.

A piaría, a place where bees are kept. Also the trade of keeping bees and making of hony.

A pián pásso, with a slow pace.

Apiástra, as Apáruolo.

A piástra armáto, armed at all assaies.

Apiástro, the hearb Ealme, or Balme gentle. Also the wild Ach.

Apiáte, resembling bees or flies.

Apíbre, a kind of wild Boeuf or Oxe.

Apibúe, a strange beast of some Pagans deemed a Prophet and adored as a God.

Apicciáre, as Appicciáre.

Apíce, a teg or sheepe with a little head and wooll vnder it's belly. Also a place where one setteth his foot. Also a footstoole.

A pícco, adv. hewen or pect as milstones are with hammers.

A piè, A piédi, on foot. Also at the foot. Also neere vnto or hard by. 

A piéde asciútto, dry footed.

A piédi d'óca, as the foot of a goose.

A piéne véle, with full spred sailes.

A piéno, at full, fully, throughly.

A piéno arbítrio, at full free will.

A pién pópolo, in view of all men.

A piè núdo, bare footed on bare feet.

A piè sciútto, dry foot.

A piè smontáre, to light on foot.

Apífero, bee-bringing or bee bearing.

Apigionáre, to farme, to rent, to demise.

A pigióne, at rent, in farine, to hire.

Apihuólo, a filly gull, a foolish noddy.

Apilásco, gold ore punned an beaten in morters before it can be molten.

Apilottáre, as Appilottáre.

A'pio, as A'ppio.

Appiólo, a kind of green apple.

A piombíno, leuell, by line and measure.

A piómbo, downe right, perpendicular.

A pir ámidi, Pily in armory.

Apirinóne, a kind of Pomegranate.

Apirócolo, absurd, vnexperienced.

Apiróne, vnrefined gold ore. Also Sulpher-vif or quicke brimstone.

Apiróto, a Ruby or Carbunkle stone.

Apisso, a blacke stone pointed with blew veines, which once heated keeps his heat seauen daies after.

Apitacóre, a tree that beareth Amber.

A più módi, many manner of waies.

A più non pósso, with might and maine.

A più potére, with all might and maine.

A più tempo, with more time and leasure.

A plácito, at will and pleasure.

Apláudere, as Appláudere.

Apláuso, as Appláuso.

Aplísie, a kind of course rugged spunge.

Apocalíssi, a reuelation or a vision.

Apocalíttico, that speaketh of visions.

Apocíno, a kind of hearb or weed.

Apocinóne, a certaine bone that represseth the fury of mad dogs.

A póco, by little, within a little.

A póco a póco, by little and little.

Apócopa, an abridging of the last letter or sillable of a word.

Apocopáre, to cut of the last sillable or letter of a word.

Apócopo, vsed for a man gelded.

Apócrifa, a thing hidden, the originall whereof is not knowen.

Apóda, a kind of Martinet without feet.

Apogei, winds rising out of the ground.

Apogeo, that point of heauen wherein the Sunne or any other planet is furthest from the center of the earth.

Apoglicármi, a disease in the gums or teeth.

Apográfo, a copy, a draught, or extract.

Apolétto, the greatest kind of the Tunny. Also a piece of Tunny sold in the market. 



Apolinári, the hearb Henbane.

Apología, an excuse or purgation.

Apólog, ó, a tale or lesson for good maners.

Apóna, a medicine helping without paine.

Apophiáde, certaine strings hanging to the entrailes.

Apophísi, that part of a bone which the Anatomists call the prousses.

Apoplessía, an vnsensiblenesse or numnesse, an apoplexy, a taking away of mouing, breathing and feeling.

Apopletica véna, the veine to be opened in an apoplexy, but whether of the tongue, or nose, or iugular, or head veine in the arme, or in the ankle, is a question.

Apopletico, one subiect to apoplexies.

Aporogíe, certaine impressions in the aire, falling or shooting of stars.

Apossessionáre, to empossesse.

A pósta, for the nonce, expresly.

A pósta fátta, of set purpose or apointment.

Apostataménte, of purpose set a part.

Apostáre, as Appostáre.

Apostasía, a backesliding or reuolting from one religion to another.

Apóstata, a renouncer of his religion.

Apostatáre, to abiure ones religion.

Apostema, an impostume.

Apostemáre, to impostumate.

Aposte parnísmo, a cutting away of a bone with a wound.

Aposticciáre, to counterfait by art.

A postíccio, counterfait, made by Art.

Apostoláto, an Apostleship.

Apostólico, Apostle-like, Apostolicall.

Apostolizzáre, to preach, or play the Apostle.

Apóstolo, an Apostle.

Apóstrophe Apóstrofe, a signe denoting the taking away the last or first vowell of a word. Also a figure in speech as when one conuerteth his speach from one partie to another, as from the present to the absent.

Apostrofáre, looke Apóstrofe.

Apotéca, any kind of shop.

Apotecário, of or belonging to a shop.

Apotecáro, a shop-keeper.

Apotegma, a short or wittie sentence.

Apotelesma, a calculation or declaration of the starres at ones natiuitie.

Apotheósi, a canonization, or consecration.

Apotósi, a disease when the haires about ones body fall and shed.

Appaciaménto, an appasing.

Appaciáre, to appease, to pacifie.

Appaciéuole, that may be appeased.

Appadulaménto, an enmarishing.

Appaduláre, as Impaludáre.

Appagáre, to appay, to content, to satisfie. 

Appágo, appaide, content, satisfied.

Appaiáre, to paire, to couple vnto.

Appalesare, to reueale, to manifest.

Appalottoláre, to make or reduce into round balls. Also to clam or sticke close vnto.

Appaltaménto, a farming, a demising.

Appaltáre, to farme, to demise.

Appaltatóre, a farmer or renter.

Appaltaruólo, idem.

Appálto, a demise, a fee farming.

Appaludaménto, an enmarishing.

Appaludáre, as Impaludáre.

Appamóndo, the map of the world.

Appannáre, to stop or dim the light. Also to couer or cloke with clothes.

Appannáte, drawing bord windowes.

Appannatótto, pampred, wellfed, plum fat.

Apparaménto, any making ready Also as Apparáto.

Apparáre, to learne. Also as Apparecchiáre.

Apparáre sénno, to learne wit.

Apparáto, learned. Also prepared.

Apparáto, a preparation, a garnishment. Also any abillment of war.

Apparecchiaménto, a preparing, or making ready.

Apparecchiáre, to prepare, to dight, to set in order. Also to couer or lay the bord.

Apparécchio, a preparing, a dighting or making ready.

Appareggiáre, to equall, to match.

Apparentáre, to ally by mariage.

Apparente, apparant, manifest.

Apparenteménte, apparantly.

Apparentissimaménte, most apparently.

Apparenza, apparance, apparition.

Apparere, páro, pársi, párso, to appeare, to seeme vnto.

Appariménto, an appearing, a seeming.

Apparíre, rísco, ríto, to appeare.

Appariscente, apparant, appearing. Also comely, seemly, of a good presence.

Appariscenza, apparance. Also an apparition or illusion. Also comelinesse or seemlinesse.

Apparitióne, an apparition.

Apparitóre, an apparitor, a peritor, a sumner. Also a catchpole, a beadle.

Apparitória, the hearb pelitory of the wall.

Apparsióne, an appearing or apparition.

Appartáre, to part, to withdraw a part.

Appartaménto, a diuidence, a separation.

Appartataménte, seuerally, apart.

Appartáto, parted, seuerall, a sunder.

Appartenente, appertaining or belonging vnto.

Appartenenza, appurtenance, belonging. 

Appartenére, to belong, or pertaine vnto.

Appartíre, tísco. títo, as Appartáre.

Appassáre, to wither, to saere or fade away.

Appassionáre, to appassionate.

Appassire, sisco, síto, as Appassáre.

Appastáre, to knead or make paste. Also to be paste. Also to lay in paste. Also to bait a hooke. Also to cram, to mew or fatten any poultry. Also to make clammy.

Appastáto cappóne, a crammed Capon.

Appatumáre, to appease or whosht vp. Also to patch or botch together.

Appellábile, that may be appealed.

Appellagióne, an appeale or a chalenge.

Appelláre, to appeale, to call, to chalenge.

Appellatióne, an appellation.

Appellatíuo, that may be appealed.

Appello, an appeale, a chalenge.

Appendere, péndo, pési, pendúto, to hange on.

Appendíce, an appendix, a penthouse.

Appendio, sloping, downe-hanging.

Appensióne, a downe-hangin, a penthowse.

Appertenente, pertaining, belonging vnto.

Appertenenza, appurtenance, belonging.

Appertenére, to pertaine and belong vnto.

Appestáre, to infect with contagion.

Appetenza, as Apetenza.

Appetíbile, as Apetíbile.

Appetíre, as Apétere.

Appetitíuo, as Apetitíuo.

Appetíto, as Apetíto.

Appetitóso, as Apetitóso.

Appettáre, as Apettáre.

Appetto, as A petto.

Appeueráre, to season with pepper.

Appeueráta, a sauce or potage of pepper.

A'ppia, a kinde of very good apple.

Appiacére, in sport, at pleasure.

Appianáre, to make plaine or leuill.

Appiáno, a colour vsed by Painters.

Appiastráre, as Appiastricci áre.

Appiastricciáre, to bedawbe, to beplaister, to belome. Also to clam or sticke together.

Appiattáre, to squat or lie downe flat.

Appiátto, squat, flat, close lurking.

Appicc áre, to hang, to fasten, to cleaue vnto.

Appiccárla a qualcuno, to fasten a iest vpon one, to make one swallow a gudgion.

Appiccatíccio, clammy, gluish, burrish. 



Appiccatúra, a fastening vnto, a hanging.

Appicciáre, to enkindle, to inflame. Also to pitch or settle in battell array.

Appicciár cámpo, to pitch a field.

Appiccioláre, to lessen to make little.

Appícco, a fastening, a holdfast.

Appiè, as A piè.

Appigionáre, as Apigionáre.

Appigióne, as Apigióne.

Appigliáre, to take hold of.

Appigríre, to make or become slothfull.

Appilottáre, to binde, to fetter to manickle.

A'ppio, Smallage. Also Parsley.

A'ppio cauallíno, the hearbe. Alisanders.

A'ppio císca, wilde or horse-redish.

Appláudere, pláudo, pláusi, pláuso, to applaud or clap hands for ioy.

Applaudiménto, an applauding.

Appláuso, an applause or clapping of hands.

Applicábile, that may be applied.

Applicáre, to apply or refer vnto.

Applicatióne, an application.

Applúda, the chaffe of Panicke.

A'ppo, by neare. Also in respect, in comparison. Also with or in.

Appoderáre, to giue might vnto.

Appodestáre, to giue authority vnto.

Appogáre, to stifle, to smother.

Appoggiáre, to leane vnto, to rest vpon.

Appoggiatóio, a stay or leaning prop.

Appóggio, a rest, a stay or leaning vpon.

Appoióso, leaning or staying vpon. Also a gull, a ninie, a silly foole.

Appónere, as Appórre.

Apponitóre, an obiecter, an imputer.

Appontáre, as Appuntáre.

Appontaménto, as Appuntaménto.

Appónto, point by point, pat, iumpt, in the nicke, euen, so iust.

Appoplessia, as Apoplessía.

Appopletico, as Apopletico.

Appopoláre, to people to store.

Appórre, póngo, pósi, pósto, to appone, to appose. Also to obiect, to impute or charge with. Also to hit or guesse a truth. Also to lay against.

Apportáre, to bring or beare vnto.

Apportatóre, a bringer or bearer vnto.

Appositióne, an apposing or laying against. Also a charge or imputation. Also a guessing of a truth.

Appositiuo, that which may be opposed, or laid vnto. Also supposed.

Appositíuo padre, a supposed father.

Appossessionáre, to empossesse.

Appósta, as Apósta.

Appostáre, to heede, to marke, Also to appoint or prefix.

Apposticciáre, as Aposticciáre.

Appostíccio pádre, a supposed father.

Apposto, apponed, laid vnto. Also guessed.

Appóstolo, an Apostle.

Appostúmo, as Posthúmo.

App, ozzáre, to plunge vnder water.

Appregiáre, as Apprezzáre.

Appréndere, préndo, prési, préso, to learne. Also to take hold of, to apprehend.

Apprendim énto, a learning.

Apprenditóre, a learner an Apprentise.

Apprensióne, apprehension.

Apprensíua, apprehension or conceit.

Apprensíuo, apprehensiue.

Apprehéndere, to apprehend.

Apprehendiménto, an apprehending.

Apprehensióne, apprehension.

Apprehensibile, that may be apprehended.

Apprehensíuo, apprehensiue.

Appresentáre, to present vnto.

Appréso, learned. Also taken hold of Also crudled as soure milke.

Appressaménto, an approaching.

Appressáre, to approach or come neere.

Appresso, by neere. Also after or behind. Also beside, or more ouer. Also in respect.

Apprestaménto, any preparation.

Apprestáre, to prepare, to make ready. Also to speed or dispatch.

Apprésto, any making ready.

Appretiáre, as Apprezzáre.

Apprezzáre, to prise, to esteeme. Also to rate or sease prises or men.

Apprezzo, at a price, for mony hire or reward. Also at a rate.

Appriccióso, as Capriccióso.

Appriuáre, to make priuate or familiar.

Appriuatióne, a priuacy a taming.

Approbábile, allowable.

Approbáre, to approoue, to allow.

Approbatíone, an approbation.

Approcciáre, to approach or come neere.

Approcciéuole, that may be approached.

Approdáre, to make or become valerous as one full of prowes. Also to doe one much good when he eateth. Also to come to shore. Also to bord and graple as ships. Also to helpe, to reseue, succour, or as sea-men say to come vp to one.

Approfittáre, to profit.

Approsumáre, to perfume.

Appropiáre, to appropriate, to fit.

Appropiatióne, an appropriation.

Appropiatissimo, most proper, most fit. 

Appropinquáre, to approach, to come neere.

Appropinquatióne, an approaching vnto.

Appropinquéuole, approachable.

Appropriábile, appropriable.

Appropriáre, to appropriate.

Appropriatióne, an appropriation.

Appropriáto, appropriated, fit for.

Approssim ánte, approaching.

Approssimáre, to approach, to neighbour.

Approssimatióne, neerenesse proximitie.

Approssiméuole, approachable.

Approuagióne, an approbation.

Approuánza, an approbation.

Approuáre, to allow to approoue.

Approuatióne, an approbation.

Approuéuole, allowable.

Appugnáre, as Oppugnáre.

Appuleráre, to make faire, to beautifie.

Appúlso, a naturall impulsion. Also an arriuing, an appreaching or comming in.

Appuntaménto, an appointment.

Appuntáre, to appoint, to prefix. Also to set ones feete against any thing. Also to vnderprop or stay vp. Also to tie or binde fast vnto. Also to lay to ones charge, to be captious in finding faultes, or to carpe at euery trifle. Also to make sharpe, pointed.

Appuntáre vn Pezzo, to set a peece leuill.

Appuntatóre, as Appuntíno.

Appuntelláre, to vnderprop.

Appuntíno, a nice finde-fault, a carper, a Momus. Also to the vtmost point.

Appúnto, sost, the moment of any time.

Apputidíre, dísco, díto, adve, right so, point by point.

Apputidíre, dísco, díto, as Appuzzáre.

Appuzzáre, to be stinke, to fill with a stinke.

Appuzzoláre, as Appuzzáre.

Aprendere, as Appréndere.

Aprenditóre, a learner.

Aprehendere, as Apprehendere.

Aprehensióne, an apprehension.

Aprensíbile, that may be apprehended.

Aprensíuo, apprehensiue, conceitfull.

Apressáre, to approach or come neere.

Apresso, as Appresso.

Apretiáre, as Apprezzáre.

A pretio, at a price, at a rate.

A prezzo, at a price, or for hire.

Apricità, the Sunne shining in winter.

Apríco, wide open to the sunne, bleake.

A priéghi, at the earnest sute or request.

Apríle, the moneth of Aprill.

Aprilíno, of the moneth of Aprill. 



A príma, at first. Also at primero.

A príma giúnta, at the first comming.

Apriménto, an opening, an ouerture.

Aprína, flesh or venison of wildbore.

Apríre, ápro, aprij & apersi. Aperto, to open, to set open. Also to declare, to expound.

Apritíuo, opening in operation.

Apritóre, an opener.

Apritúra, as Apertúra.

Apriuáre, as Appriuáre.

A'pro, a kind of beast with great teeth, some take it for a wilde Boare.

Aprónia, the blacke Brionie. Also a kind of wild blacke vine or grape.

Aproniáne, a kind of Plum-chery.

Aproportióne, proportionably.

Apropriáre, to appropriate.

Apropriatióne, an appropriation.

Apróssi, an hearbe that drawes fire vnto it.

Aprúgno, the loyne of a wild boare or hogge.

A pruóua, for the nonce, expresly. Also vpon proofe or triall. Also in striuing or contending manner. Also to the vtmost of ones power.

Apsitóne, a stone that being once hote keepes his heate seauen daies after.

Aptóto, without case, as some nounes.

A'pua. Aphiéno, a kind of fish engendred of raine and showers.

A puntaménto, an appointment.

Apuntáre, as Appuntáre.

Apuntataménte, exactly, point by point.

Apuntíno, point by point, distinctly.

Apúnto, as Appónto.

Apuzzelláre, to wound, to hurt, to plague, to mischiefe.

A quadrétti, losengie in armorie.

A qualúngue módo, howsoeuer.

A quándo, against when, sometimes.

A quándo a quándo, now and then, sometimes.

A quárti, quarterly in armorie,

A quartieri, quartered as armes be.

Aquattáre, as Appiattáre.

A quáttro, by foure and foure.

A quattr'ócchi, face to face, boldly.

A quello chè, by that, as for as.

A quello, by that, as farre as.

A quésta vólta, at this time. Also this way, or toward this way.

A quésti dí, in these daies.

A quésto, by this, as farre as.

Aquetáre, to quiet, to whosht.

Aquéto, quietly, in quiet manner.

Aquì, here, hither, hitherto.

Aquiceli, confected kernels of Pine-apples.

Aquifólio, the Holy, or Huluer tree, the Ilex or Mast-holme tree.

A'quila, any kinde of Eagle. Also a star called the Eagle star. Also a kinde of fish. Also a coyne in Germanie.

A'quila marína, an Ospraie Eagle.

Aquilástro, a Buzzard.

Aquilegia, Setwall or Columbine.

Aquilina, as Aquilegia.

Aquilino, eagle-like, naso a quilino, a long beaket or hooked nose. Also colombine colour.

Aquilóne, the Northren parts, the North-winde. Also a great eagle. Also a fish much esteemed in Rome.

Aquilonáre, of, or belonging to the northren parts or windes.

A quínci, hence, or hence-from.

A quínci quíndi, hence and thence.

A quíndi, thence, or thence from.

A quíndi quínci, thence and hence.

A quíui, there or thither.

A quíui intórno, there abouts.

Aquosità, waterishnesse, moistnesse.

A'ra, as A'ia. Also an Altar or sanctuary. Also a star neere Scorpio, called the Alter star.

Arabáscio, a souldiours cassocke or mandilion.

Arabbiáre, as Arrabbiáre.

Arábica, a kind of gum. Also enraged.

Arábile, arable land, ploughable.

Arabíce, a kind of poore leane Date.

Arabísmo, tasting of Arabia.

Arábo, an arabian horse, man or stone.

Aráca, a kind of venemous serpent.

Aracelle, a kind of mushrom todestoole.

Aráchnen, the wild Purcelane. Also a kind of wild tree.

Aracnóide, a thin skin of the eie.

Aráco, an hearb good to eat in Egypt.

A racólta, by gathering or collection as haruest is gathered in, looke Sonáre.

A ragátta, striuingly, as at musse.

A ragióne, reasonably, good cause why, with reason, iustly, lawfully. Also according to right, tale, waight or measure.

Arágna, a spiders web, a fowlers net.

Arágno, a spinning spider.

Aráldo, a herald, an interpreter.

Aranáta, a beast in India, bearded as a goat; mouthed, and footed as an ape.

Arancáre, to skud away. Also to swagger or lash out, to wast or lauish.

Arancatóre, a swagrer, a lauisher.

Aráncia, Arángia, an orenge.

Aranciáta, orangiado. Also balme or balme gentle.

Aráncio, Arángio, a Orenge tree.

Arancadíre, dísco, díto, as Rancíre.

Aráncido, as Ráncido.

Arancire, císco, cíto, as Rancíre.

A ránda, hardly, with much adoe.

A ránda a ránda, anenst, close vnto.

A randello, looke Randello.

Aranea, the fourth cote or tunicle of the eies.

Araneo, a crab fish called Saint Bernard the hermit.

Aráre, to plough or harrow ground.

Arasáre, to shaue, as Rasáre.

A ráso, plaine as it were shauen.

A rastello, with labels in armory.

A ráta, ratably, shauingly.

A ráta portióne, by equall portion.

Arátij, a kind of figs.

Aratióne, ploughing, tilling.

Aratíuo, arable, ploughable.

Arátolo, a shallow stitch or ploughing.

Aratóre, a harrower, an aker man, a ploughman. Also a kind of fish, which who toucheth hath presently an ague, and let goe is presently healed.

Aratráre, as Artoráre.

Arátro, a plough. Also a harrow.

Aratúra, a harrowing, a ploughing.

Arazzaménti, hangings of Aras.

Arazzáre, to tapistry with Aras works.

Arazzaríe, Aras workes.

Arázzi, Aras hangings.

Arbágio, a kind of course wollen stuffe.

Arbalestra, a crosse how, a stone bow.

Arbatráffa, a kind of venemous serpent.

A'rbe, a kind of grashopper or locust.

A'rbero, as A'lbero.

A'rbia. 

Arbicócche, the fruit Apricots.

Arbíntro, vsed for Laberínto.

Arbitráre, to award, to arbitrate. Also to thinke or suppose.

Arbitrário, arbitrary.

Arbitráto, arbitrated. Also a compromise.

Arbitratóre, an arbitrator, a iudge.

Arbítrio, arbitrement, an award.

A'rbitro, an awarder, an arbitrator.

Arbolíno, a fish called a Bleake.

Arboráre, as Alboráre.

Arborário, of or belonging to a tree.

Arboráta, an arbor or bowre of trees.

A'rbore, as A'lbero.

Arboreggiáre, to branch, as Alberáre.

Arbereo, branchy or tree spreading.

Arborífero, plant or tree bearing.

Arboróso, branchie or full of trees.

Arbricócolo, an apricot tree or fruit.

Arbuscello, any shrub or yong tree.

Arbústo, any shrub, bramble, brake or brier. Also any yong groue, cops or thicket. Also a kind of litle Cedar tree.

Arbustóso, shrubbie, full of bushes.

Arbúto, an arbute or strawberrie tree.

A'rca, an Arke, an Arch, a Chest. Also a tombe or a vault.

A'rca dí Nóe, Noes Arke. Also a certaine signe in heauen.

Arcadóre, an archer, a bowman.

Arcaíto, a Captaine or keeper of a castle.

Arcále, as Forcella.

Arcámo, the backe or chine bone of any creature. Also any rib bone without flesh.

Arcanaménte, secretly in hidden manner. 



Arcángelo, an Arke-angell.

Arcáni, the secrets or secrecies of heauen.

A'rca panária, as Madía.

Arcáre, to arch or bend as a bow.

Arcáro, a Bowier. Also an Archer.

Arcáse, a bird called a Curlue.

Arcáta, a blow or shot of a bow. Also an arch of a bridge, a bending.

Arcatóre, an archer, a bow-man.

Arcáuola, a great grandmothers mother.

Arcáuolo, a great grandfathers father.

Arcazzéne, a rauenous sea-fowle.

Arcera, a Woodcock, or a Snite.

Arcelle, a kind of Scallop or such shell fish. Also a kind of mushrom todestoole

Archeggiáre, to bend or arch as a bow. Also to professe archery.

Archeláide, a kinde of Date full of good liquor.

Archetípo, after the originall coppy.

Archétto, a little bow, a fidling-sticke. Also a racket. Also a spring to catch birds.

Archezostína, a kinde of wilde white grape or vine. Also the hearb Briony.

Archibugiáre, to shoote, hit, or kill with any kind of gun, calieuer, or pistoll.

Archibugiáro, a gun or calieuer maker.

Archibugiáta, a blow or shot with any gun or caliuer.

Archibugiere, a gunner, an harquebushier, a muskettier, a shot.

Archibugiería, shot or harquebusery.

Archibugiétto, a small harquebut, petronell, pistoll, dag or horse mans piece.

Archibúgio, a harquebuse, a caliuer, a gun, a musket, a pistoll.

Archibúgio à míccio, a snaphance piece.

Archibúgio da bráccio, a shooting or fowling piece.

Archibúgio da crócco, a harquebut a crocke.

Archibúgio da focíle, idem.

Archibúgio da ruóta, idem.

Archibúgióne da pósta, a musket of rest.

Archiciócco, an Artichocke.

Archicióffo, an artichocke.

Archiconfraternità, a chiefe fraternity or brotherhood.

Archidiácono, an archdeacon.

Archidiáscolo, a principall disciple.

Archidiáuolo, an archdiuell.

Archididáscolo, a chiefe disciple.

Archidúca, an archduke.

Archiducáto, an archdukedome.

Archiduchéssa, an archduchesse.

Archiéra, a spike hole to shoot out at.

Archiero, an archer, a bow man.

Archigerónte, a chiefe in auctority among old men, or that hath the chiefe ouersight of the prouision of a Princes houshold. Also one that hath the ouersight and suruay or controuling of a Princes workes.

Archilóco, a chiefe place or situation.

Archilogía, idle prating or speaking.

Archílogo, a chiefe pratler, an idle speaker.

Archilóici, a kind of verses.

Archimandríta, a gouernor, a rector, a chiefe Prior or Prelate.

Archímia, as Alchímia.

Archimímo, a chiefe plaier of a comedy.

Archimísta, an alchimist, a chimicke.

Archipastóre, a chiefe shepheard.

Archipéndolo, a plummet that carpenters vse to leuell werke by.

Archipendoláre, to leuell by a plummet.

Archipénzolo, as Archipéndolo.

Archipenzoláre, as Archipendoláre.

Archipezzolo, as Archipéndolo.

Archipiráta, an arch or chiefe pirate.

Archiposía, the onset of drinking.

Archisátrapo, as Arcisátrapo.

Archisinagógo, an arch priest or chiefe ruler in the synagogues.

Architettáre, to build according to rule.

Architétto, a builder, an architect.

Architettónico, pertaining to the master carpenter or chiefe deuiser of any worke.

Architettóniche árti, artes that are the foundations of other arts, fundamentall arts.

Architettóre, a builder, an architect.

Architettúra, architecture, building.

Archithalásso, a chiefe. Admirall at sea, a chiefe generall of a Fleet.

Architicliuo, as Architriclíuo.

Architráue, as Arcotráue.

Architriclíuo, a master of a house, or chiefe ruler of a feast, a sewer. Also a marshall of the great hall or of the houshold.

Archiuescouáto, an Archbishopricke.

Archiuéscouo, an Archbishop.

Archíuio, as Arcíuo.

Archiuísta, a keeper of monuments, rowles or ancient records.

Archíuo, as Arcíuo.

Archiuoltáre, to archroofe, to archualt.

Archiuólto, an arch or valted roofe. Also arch roofed or valted.

A'rcia, a woodcocke, or a snite.

Arciádna, an hearb in Egypt good to eat.

Arciásino, an arch asse.

Arciáuola, as Arcáuola, a dopchickin.

Arciáuolo, as Arcáuolo.

Arcicánna, an archpipe or throate, tu ménti per le arcicánne della góla, thou lyest in thy very great archthroate.

Arcichiáro, most cleare or manifest.

Arciciócchi, Artichockes.

Arcicióffi, artichockes.

Arcidiácono, an archdeacon. 

Arcidiaconáto, an archdeaconry.

Arcidúca, an archduke.

Arciducáto, an archdukedome.

Arciduchéssa, an archdutchesse.

Arciere, an archer, a bowman, vsed also for such as be of a kings or Princes gard. Also a kind of dry measure.

Arcifanfána, a hobgoblin, a robingoodfellow, an illusion, a hag.

Arcifanfanáre, to play the hobgoblin. Also to play the gull.

Arcifanfáno, a chiefe gull, an archcoxcombe, a chiefe find fault.

Arcifánfo, as Arcifanfáno.

Arcifelíce, most happy.

Arcifelíce buonissimassimo, most happy good and chiefe.

Arcignáre, to loure, to bend, to frowne, to skoule, to pout, to grim.

Arcígno, lowring, frowning, skouling, pouting, grim, sowre looking.

Arcignóso, as Arcígno.

Arcigolóso, an archglutton, a gormand.

Arcigolosità, arch glottony.

A'rcio, the Glote or clot-burne.

Arcioháta, any archroofe, or valted frame, the vpper part of an ouen or coach.

Arcióne, the arson or sadle bow.

Arcipánca, vsed of Cato for a Prince of formes or stooles, a chiefe scholler of a schoole.

Arcipoltróne, an arch knaue or villen.

Arcipresso, a kind of chiefe cipresse tree.

Arcipréte, an archpriest.

Arcipretería, the order of chiefe priest hood.

Arcipréuedo, an Archpriest.

Arcirodomontáta, an arch bragging.

Arcirodomontéuole, arch boasting.

Arcisagrestáno, a chiefe sexton.

Arcisátrapo, a chiefe great ruler, president or Captaine, a chiefe peere of a realme.

Arcisátripo, as Arcisátrapo.

Arcíssa, a kind of wagon, coach or cart.

Arciuescouále, belonging to an Archbishop.

Arciuescouáto, an archbishopricke.

Arciuescouo, an archbishop.

Arciuísta, as Archruíst.

Arcíuo, a treasury of monuments, charters or rowles, a place where records or euidences be kept. Also the chancery or exchequer office, or the office of the master of the rowles. Also the Arches or spirituall court.

A'rco, any kind of bow, a tiller of a bow. Also an arch. Also a kind of racke or torture vsed in Italy to make men confesse.

A'rco baléno, Iris, or the raine bow.

Arcobalísta, a crosse bow, a steelebow.

Arcobugiáre, as Archibugiáre.

Arcobugiáta, as Archibugiáta.



Arcobugiáro, as Archibugiáro.

Arcobugiére, as Archibugiére.

Arcobugiería, as Archibugiería.

Arcobúgio, looke well Archibúgio.

A'rco celeste, the raine bow or Iris.

A'rco dell' ósso, the ridge bone of the backe.

Arcoíno, bending, bow like.

Arcolágio, as Arcoláio.

Arcoláio, a reele or rice for yarne.

Arcolái, foolish humors, castles in the aire, rauing fancies.

A'rcolo, as Arcoláio.

Arconcelli, little arches or bowes.

Arcónti, the name of an ancient magistrate in Athens.

Arcónticì, certaine heretickes that denied the resurrection of the flesh, and said the world was made by Princes.

Arcopágo, a chiefe senate of excellent men in Athens of no certaine number.

Arcopendolo, as Archipendolo. Also a fish called in Latine Zygæna.

Arcóra, the plurall of A'rco.

Arcoráno, as Alcoráno.

Arcotráne, any crosse or chiefe beame.

Arcotriomphánte, a pageant or triumphant charriot.

Arcouólta, an arch or vault.

Arcouoltáre, to arch or vault.

Arctúro, a star by the taile of Vrsa Maior.

Arcuíno, crooked, bow-like.

Ardea, a Moore-hen. Also a Hearon.

Ardelia, a medling or curiosity of mens affaires.

Ardelio, a busie-body, medler in others matters, one that hath an oare in others boates.

Ardente, burning, ardent, hote.

Ardenza, burning, ardency, heate.

Ardeolo, a Hearon.

A'rdere, árdo, ársi, árso, to burne.

Ardíbile, that may burne.

Ardiménto, daring, hardinesse.

Ardimentóso, full of daring or hardinesse.

Ardíre, dísco, díto, to dare. Also daring, courage, stoutnesse, hardinesse.

Arditaménte, daringly, boldly, hardilie.

Arditánza, courage, daringnesse, hardinesse.

Arditello, a malepert saucy fellow.

Arditézza, hardinesse, daringnesse.

Ardíto, bould, hardy, daring. Also dared.

Ardoésa, a precious stone wherein are naturally the pictures of beasts and birds.

A'rdola, as Ardoésa.

Ardóre, heate, burning ardency.

Arduità, difficulty, hardinesse or vneasinesse to climbe or reach vnto.

A'rduo, hard, difficult, vneasie or painfull to be attained.

Area, as Aiuóla. Also a word vsed in law importing a mans land from the ground vp to the skies. Also the surface or vppermost part of any thing. Also the field or ground of any skutchion or armes.

Area circoláre, the name of a starre or signe in heauen.

Arecáre, to reach vnto. Also to bring vnto. Also to take vnto.

Arefátto, drie skorched by the Sunne, parched through heate.

Arégano, Origan or wilde Mariorum.

Aregáta, Aregázza, a piot or woodpie.

Aremólco, Aremóldo., looke Remúlco.

Aremúlco., looke Remúlco.

Aréna, any grauel or sand.

Arenaceo, any thing liuing or breeding in sand or grauell. Also that is of the colour or quality of grauell or sand.

Arenále, grauelly, sandy, gritty.

Arenáre, to grauell, to engrauell, to run or sticke in sands as some shipes.

Arendaménto, a yeelding, the fruites or rents that any thing yeeldeth.

Arendáre, to demise, to farme, to let.

Arendatóre, a Farmer. Also a Tenant.

Aréndere, as Réndere.

Arendiménto, as Arendaménto,

Arénga, an Oration, an harangue, a set speech. Also an hearing fish.

Arengáre, to make a set speech.

Arengatóre, an Orator, a publicke speaker.

Areníno, as Armelíno.

Arenóso, grauelly, sandy, gritty.

Arente, anenst, a nenst, very neere vnto.

Areóla, as Aiuóla. Also a little bed, square or plot in a garden.

Areóla, a greeke weight of two graines.

Areopaíta, a Iudge or Iustice in Athens.

A reguisitióne, at the request or intreaty.

Aresigáre, as Arrischiáre.

Arésigo, as Arríschio.

Aresiuersi, arsieuersie, contrary.

Aresta, the pricke of an eare of corne. Also the small bone of any fish.

Arestaménto, as Arrestaménto.

Arestáre, as Arrestáre.

Aresto, as Arresto.

A retáglio, by retale, as hucsters sell.

Aretáre, to en-net, to catch in a net.

Aréte, net-wrought, net-worke. Also fretty in armony.

Areticáre, to vex or aflict in minde.

Arétio, an hearbe or weed. 

Aretráre, to retreate, to recoile.

Arétro, back-ward. Also behinde.

Arezzáre, to shade cooly.

Arézzo, as Rézzo, a coole shade.

Arfílo, a Bishop at chesse.

Arfitápo, a kinde of ancient garment described by Lucilius.

Arganáre, to draw or mount vp with a crane or any other engine.

Arganello, as Arganétto.

Arganétto, a crane, a mounting engine or pully vsed to mount or remooue any waight. Also a trucke or sled with low wheeles. Also a wyer-drawers bench.

A'rgano, any crane or mounting engine. Also a Caston to weigh ancors with, or Crab as mariners call it being fastned at shore. Also a Gold-smith or Weyer-drawers engine or bench.

Argáta, a broad Skarfe worne about the arme in signe of honour by some chiefe man.

Argatíle, a kinde of bird very cunning in making hir nest.

Argéma, the white of any eie. Also a disease in the eie, whith being in the blacke of the eie is white, and being in the white is blacke.

Argenóne, as Argéma. Also wilde tansie or siluerwort.

A'rgene, as A'rgine.

Argenóne, a kinde of precious stone.

Argentáre, to siluer.

Argentaría, all manner of Siluer-plate, or Siluer-worke. Also a Gold-smiths row, as Cheape-side. Also a kinde of Siluer-oare, or Chalke or white Clay glistring as siluer.

Argentário, the mettell Tin or Puter.

Argentáta, wilde tansie or siluerwort. Also lip-salue. Also a painting for womens faces.

Argente., Vsed for Algente.

Argenteo, as Argentíno.

Argentería, as Argentaría.

Argentiere, a Siluer-smith, a banke or mony keeper. Also a stuard, a spender, or Cater.

Argentífero, Siluerbearing or bringing.

Argentína, stone-ferne or finger-ferne. Also tanzie or Siluer-wort. Also a kinde of fish.

Argentíno, Siluery. Also Siluer-colour, like Siluer. Also of a shril-Siluer sound.

Argentíssimo, most Siluer-like, or cleere and shrill-sounding.

Argento, siluer. Also mony or coine.

Argentóso, full of Siluer, Siluery.

Argento Solimáto, sublimate.

Argento víuo, quick-siluer.

Argeste, the North-west or Western parts. 



A'rghe, a wilde beast faced like a woman.

Argílla, Potters-clay.

Argillóso, Clayish. Also fatty or fertill.

Argíllo, as Arzéglio.

Argináre, to banke, to trench, to fortifie or rampire against the fury of water.

A'rgine, any banke or fence against water. Also embost or reared worke.

Arginóso, full of fences against waters.

Argiráspidi, souldiers armed with siluer-shilds, and their horses trapt with siluer.

Argiríte, a fome comming of lead tryed. Also litharge or fome of siluer.

Argiritíno, as Argiríte.

Argirodáma, a white precious stone.

Argiróne, a bearon.

Argíuo, a Grecian, one of Greece.

A'rgo, watchfull, cleare-sighted as Argus. Also the name of a starre or signe in heauen.

Argoíre, ísco, íto, to argue, to dispute.

Argólici, as Argonáuti.

Agomentáre, to argue, to dispute.

Argoménto, an argument. Also a signe a reason. Also a remedy. Also a glister.

Argoménto della larghezza della lúna, termine astronómico.

Argoménto medio, Véro, o visibile della larghézza della lúna.

Argonáui, as Argonáuti.

Argonáuti, the noble Greeke that went with Iason for the golden fleece.

Arguíre, ísco, íio, to argue to dispute.

Argúme, as Agrúme.

Argusella, a horne-fish, or hornebacke.

Argutaménte, subtilly, craftily, wililie.

Argútia, a wile, a craft, a subtilty.

Argutiétta, a prety wile, slight, or tricke.

Argúto, wily, crafty, subtill witty.

A'ria, as A'ere, the Aire.

Ariádna, the name of a star.

Ariámide, an hearbe of a firy colour.

Ariánide, as Ariámide.

Ariarárcha, a Prince of warfare.

Aricamáre, to embroder. Also to make or worke needle-worke.

Aricamatóre, an embrotherer or worker with the needle.

A ricámbio, by or vpon double exchange.

A richiesta, at the sute or request.

Aricíno, a kinde of Cole or Cabage-Cole.

A ricólta., looke Sonare A ricólta.

Aricordánza, remembrance. 

Aricordáre, to remember.

Aricordéuole, mindfull.

A ricórdo d'huómo, in mans memorie.

A'rida, the whole element of the Earth.

Aridaménte, barrenly, drily.

Aridáre, to make or become barren.

Aridézza, as Aridità.

Aridíre, dísco, díto, as Aridáre.

Aridità, barrennesse, sterility.

A'rido, dry, sterill, barran.

Aridóle, a kinde of leane dry dates.

A ridósso, looke Caualc áre.

Aridrom áda, a precious stone square as a dye.

Ariéna, a kind of great fig growing vpon the tree Pala.

Ariento, as Argento.

Arietáre, to ram, to batter with a ram.

Ariete, a Ram, a Tup. Also a warlike instrument to battre walles, one of the twelue signes.

Ariete nottúrno, the Autumne or fall of the leafe.

Arietíni, the Chiches called Bamchiches.

Arietíno, a litle Ram. Also one borne vnder Aries. Also rammish.

Ariétro, backward. Also behind.

Arifúso, enough and to refuse and spare.

Arigátta, as Agára. Also striuing as children play at musse.

Arigógoli, as Arzigógoli.

A riguárdo, in regard. Also in view.

A rilento, slackly, slowly, relentingly.

Arimáspi, people that haue but one eye, and that in their forehead.

Arimetica, Arithmetike.

Arimetico, an Arithmetician.

Arimpetto, ouer against, breast to breast

Arínca, a kind of Rice or Amelcorne.

Arincóntro, ouer against, opposite.

Aríne, bee-hiues.

Arinella, a wrinkle, a pleit, a pucker.

Arinelláre, to wrinkle, to pleit to pucker.

Arínga, as 
Arénga, or 
Arrínga.

Aringáre, as Arengáre.

Aringatóre, as Arengatóre.

Arínghe insaláte, pickled hearings.

Aríngo, as 
Arríngo.

Arioláre, to deuine, to soothsay.

Ariolatióne, diuination, sooth saying.

Ariólo, a Deuiner, a Soothsaier.

Arióso, as 
Aeróso.

Ariotíno, a litle wren.

Ariouisto., 

Aripáro, against, in defence. see deffendendo.

Arisáro, wakerobin or cukopintle.

Arischiáre, to hazzard, to ieopard.

Arischí, o, in hazard, or ieopardie.

Arischióso, hazardous, ieopardous.

Arisigáre, as Arischiáre.

Arísigo, as 
Aríschio.

Arisigóso, as 
Arischióso.

Arismetica, Arithmetike. 

Arismetico, an Arithmetician.

Arispetto, in respect, in comparison.

Arísta, a sharpe pricke or thorne, a spill.

Aristalthea, a kind of Marsh-docke.

Arístida, an hearbe to draw out spils.

Aristocratía, a gouernment of good men.

Aristogitóne, a vulnerarie hearbe.

Aristolochía, hartwort or birthwort.

Aristología, as Aristolochía.

Arístula, as Arísta.

A ritáglio, by retaile, as hucksters sell.

Arithmánte, a deuiner by numbers.

Arithmantía, diuination by numbers.

Arithmetica, Arithmeticke.

Arithmetico, an Arithmetician.

Arithmo Aritmo, a meeter, a rime.

Aritrátta, looke sonáre a ricólta.

Aritróso, akeward, frowardly, crossely.

A riua'l mare, by the sea-shore.

Ariuoltolóne, in tumbling manner.

Arizóne, Houseleeke, or Sengreene.

Arizzáre, to reare vpright.

Arlásso, an affront, a cheating tricke.

Arlótta, a proud, filthy common whore.

Arlóttare, to play the foolish priest or whore.

Arlótto, a lack-latin or hedge-priest.

A'rma, any weapon, or armour. Also any armes or badge.

A'rma sémplice, a single coat of armes.

Arma partíta, a partie coat in armes.

Armacóllo, a gorget that armes the neck.

Armadura, the guard that enfoldes the child in the mothers wombe.

Armáio, an armorie. Also a cupboord, a presse, an ambrie, a wardrobe.

Armaiuólo, a litle 
Armaio.

Armamentaría, an armorie or store house for armes.

Armaménto, a compleat arming.

Armaniáco, an Apricok tree or fruit.

Armaráro, an Armorer.

Armáre, to arme, to weapon.

Armáre di suóra, as Fare chiomàzzuóli.

Armáre la galèa, a kind of Christmas game.

Armaría, armorie.

Armáro, as 
Armáio.

Armaruólo, an Armorer.

Armáta, an armie, a nauie, a fleete.

Armáta máno, by force of armes, with armed hand.

Armatúra, any armor or arming.

A'rme, armes, weapons. Also badges.

A'rme auree, the chiefe shoulder bones in a horse.

Armeggiaménto, any exercise at armes.

Armeggiáre, to follow, to exercise or professe armes. Also to giue armes. Also to blazon or speake of armes or heraldry. Also in iesting manner to raue or range from the purpose, to speake idlely and nothing to the matter, tu



arméggi, thwart, wide.

Armeggiaríe, all sorts of armes.

Armeggiáta, a meeting or practising of armes among armed men and knights.

Armeggiatóre, a professor of armes.

Arméggio, any manner of arming. Also any figure that chargeth a field in armorie.

Armelle, Apricok-plums.

Armellína, an Apricok plum.

Armellíno, an hermine or hermelin. Also an apricok tree. Also a colour of a horse. Also hermine or Erminois in armorie.

Arména, a kind of venemous Serpent.

Armeniáco, an apricok tree or plum.

Arménio, a kind of marble. Also a colour called verd d'azur.

Armentáio, a drouer, a heardsman.

Armentále, of or pertaining to heards or droues. Also a stalion for mares.

Arménto, a heard or droue of cattell.

Arménto múto, all sorts of fishes.

Armentóso, stoned with heards or droues

Armería, profession of armorie.

Armerísta, a Herald or professor of armes.

Arménole, that may be armed. Also the name of a bird.

A'rmi, all manner of armes or weapons.

Armiero, an Armorer.

Armiére, the whole armour of a mans bodie.

Armífero, armes-bearing or bringing.

Armígero, a bearer or professor of armes.

Armiggiáre, as Armeggiáre.

Armíggio, as 
Arméggio.

Armílla, any bracelet or wrist-band. Also an astronomers instrument made of hollow circles.

A'rmi manésche, all hand-weapons.

Armínij, Ermine or Erminois in armorie.

Armipotente, mightie in armes.

Armólla, the hearbe Orage or Orache.

Armomantía, a kind of diuination by obseruing the shoulders of beasts.

Armóne, a kind of radish roote. Also a Princes or noblemans chiefe coate of armes, or great Scutcheon of armes.

Armoneggiáre, as Armonizzare.

Armonía, harmonie, accord in musicke.

Armoniáca, an apricok plum.

Armoniáco, an apricok tree. Also a kind of salt that Chimiks vse.

Armónico, harmonicall melodious.

Armonióso, harmonious, melodious.

Armonizzánte, harmonious.

Armonizzáre, to make harmonie.

Armoriáce, a kind of radish roote.

Arnábo, a kind of tree in India.

Arnáso, any kind of long vessell.

A'rne. 

Arnése, all manner of harnesse, furniture or implement. 

A'rnie, bee-hiues, honie-houses.

Arnióne del porcástro, a chine of porke.

Arnióni, the raines of the backe. Also the kidneies. Also a chine of any beast.

Arnísio, a kind of Greeke wine.

Arnoglóssa, ribwort, lambes tongue, waybreed, or plantaine the lesse.

A'ro, as Aróne.

Arobatía., 

Arogánte, arrogant, saucie, malepert.

Arogántia, arrogancie, sawcinesse.

Arogáre, as Arrogáre.

Arogatióne, as Arrogatióne.

Aroggiáre, as Arrossire.

Aromatáio, a Perfumer, an apothecarie.

Aromático, aromaticall, sweate smelling.

Aromatíte, a stone smelling of mirrhe.

Aromatizzánte, as Aromático.

Aromatizzáre, to perfume sweet.

Aromáto, as Aromático.

A rómbo, maseled or lozengie in armorie.

A romóre, in an vprore or hurly burly.

Aronáno, a kind of litle fish.

Arondella, a Swallow. Also a Sea-bat.

Aróne, cukopintle or wake-robin.

A rónfa, a play at trump or ruff.

Arosegáre, to gnaw to fret or nible.

Arosigáre, as Arosegáre.

Arostíre, tísco, títo, to roste to toste.

Arostíta, a toste.

Arósto, any rosted meate. Also rosted.

Arotáre, to wheele about, to grind sharpe.

Arotatóre, as Arrotatóre.

Aroteáre, to wheele about.

Arotoláre, to roule or rumble.

A rotolóne, rouling or rumbling.

Arouelláre, for a man to consume and fret himselfe with rage. Also as Arrouelláre.

Arouersciam énto, an ouerturning.

Arouersciáre, to reuerse, to ouerturne.

Arouerscio, inside outward, arsiuersie.

Arouerscióne, as Arouerscio.

Arouescio, as Arouerscio.

Arouescióne, as Arouerscio.

A'rpa, any kind of harpe. Also a Sea-gull

Arpágo, a harping iron, a great hooke, dragging hooke, flesh hooke, weeding hooke, or pot-hooke. Also a grubber.

Arpagonáre, as Arpegáre.

Arpagóne, as Arpágo.

Arpegáre, to drag, to hooke, to grub.

Arpegóne, as Arpágo.

Arpesétti, little claspets of iron to ioine stones in walles.

Arpía, a monster called a Harpie.

Arpicáre, to grub or harrow.

Arpicéri, certaine guts in any bodie.

Arpicórdo, an instrument like Clarigols called a harpers cord.

Arpicóne, as Arpàgo.

Arpígia, greedinesse, rauenousnesse.

Arpináre, as Arpegáre.

Arpíno, as Arpágo.

Arpionare, as Arpegáre.

Arpióne, the hooke whereon a dore hangeth. Also any kind of great hooke.

Arpioncelli, tentre-hookes or tacks.

Arpocráte, the God of silence.

Arquáta, as Auosétta. Also a Curlue.

Arquáto, the yellow Iaundise so called because it is cured with honied wine.

A'rra, a gods pennie, an earnest pennie.

Arrabatársi, to shrug or crinch together.

Arrabbiáre, to enrage or grow franticke.

Arrabbiataménte, ragingly frantickly

Arraffáre, to plucke or snatch foorth.

Arragiáto, a horse that hath the laske.

Arramacciáre, to cut off branches to spoile.

Arrampáre, to rampe or climbe vp.

Arrampegáre, as Arrampáre.

Arrampináre, as Arrampáre.

Arrancáre, to hurle or twirle about. Also to goe or trudge or skud away in haste.

Arrancáta, a hurling. Also a trudging.

Arrancigliáre, as Arrampáre.

Arrandeila, a sticke to winde a cord about.

Arrandelláre, to fling with violence.

Arrangoláre, to hurle or fling with violence. Also to wrangle or chafe aloud.

Arrangolóso, wrangling, quarellous.

Arrapire, píseo, píto, as Arrappáre.

Arrappáre, to plucke or snatch by force, to rapine.

Arrasp áre, as Raspáre.

Arrecáre, as Arecáre, to reach vnto.

Arredáre, to dight, to decke, to garnish.

Arrédi, all manner of garnishments.

Arrenáre, as Arenáre, to grauell.

Arrenáto, troubled with grauell.

Arrendaménto, as Arendaménto.

Arrendáre, as Arendáre.

Arrendelláre, to hurle with violence.

Arrendere, rendo, rési, reso, to render, to yeeld vnto, to restore.

Arrendéuole, yeelding, pliable.

Arréndi, yeeldings, reuenues.

Arrendiménto, a yeelding or rendring.

Arrendolóne, in hurling manner.

Arrequiáre, to quiet, to asswage.

Arréso, yeelded, rendred, restored.

Arrestáre, to arrest, to rest, to detaine. Also to affirme, to iudge, to decree. Also to stay vpon. Also to set a lance in the rest.

Arresto, an arrest, a stay, a detaining. Also a let or impediment. Also a decree or ordinance giuen by law.

Arreticáre, to ensnare, or en-net, to entramell. Also to catch by craft.

Artetítio, a pore or vnseene hole. Also that which creepeth in priuily. Also that is pulled by violence of a diuell



or spirit.

Arretráre, to retreat or recoile backe.

Arretrattáre, to retract, to retreat.

Arrétro, backward, behind.

Arrezzáre, as Arizzáre.

Arribáre, as Arriuáre.

Arricchíre, chísco, chíto, to enrich.

Arricciáre, to curle, to frizle. Also ones haire to stare or stand an end, to brizle. Also to rough cast any worke with lome or morter. Also to reare vpright.

Arríccia cápo, as Capríccio.

Arricordánza, remembrance.

Arricordáre, to remember, to record.

Arricordéuole, to be remembred.

Arricórdo, a remembrance, a warning.

Arrídere, rído, rísi, ríso, to smile at.

Arrínga, a set speech or declamation. Also an aray or arange. Also a hearing fish.

Arringáre, to make a set speech in publike. Also to arange or set in aray. Also to run at tilt.

Arringatóre, a common speaker. Also a tilter.

Arringhiéra, as Arríngo.

Arríngo, a pulpit. Also a riding place, a tilt yard. Also a common set speech.

Arrischiáre, to hazard, to ieopard.

Arrischiéuole, that may be hazarded.

Arríschio, in hazard or ieopardy.

Arrischióso, hazardous, ieopardous.

Arriuáre, to ariue or come vnto.

Arriuáta, an ariuing, a comming vnto.

Arríuo, an ariuall or comming vnto.

Arrizzáre, to reare vpright.

Arróba, a waight of fiue and twenty of our pounds. Also a kind of barell or measure in Spaine.

Arrobináre, to enruby, to make ruddy. Also to swill and swell with drinking.

Arrocáre, to be or become hoarse. Also to snore or snort.

Arrocchiáre, as Arrocáre. Also as we say to ly for the whetstone.

Arrochisíre, sisco, síto, as Arrocáre.

Arrogánte, arrogant, saucy.

Arrogánza, arogancy, saucinesse.

Arrogáre, to arrogate or presume ouerboldly. Also to be or become hoarse.

Arrogáta voce, a hoarse voice.

Arrogatióne, arrogation, presumption.

Arrógere, rógo, rogéi, rogiúto, as Arrogáre. Also to yeeld or ad vnto. Also to afford helpe.

Arroginire, nísco, níto, to rust.

Arroginóso, rusty, full of rust.

Arroláre, as Arrolláre.

Arrolláre, to enroule as soldiers be in checke roule or in the mustar book. Also to register or put vpon the files or records.

Arrolláto, enrouled vpon checke roule.

Arrombáre, to set vp sea markes for mariners by the sea side. Also looke Rombo

Arroncáre, as Roncáre.

Arroncigliáre, to gripe, to filch or seaze on violently, to snatch. Also to snort.

Arróre, hath been vsed for Erróre.

Arrosigáre, to gnaw, to fret, to nible.

Arrossáre, to blush or grow red.

Arrossiménto, a blushing red.

Arrossíre, sísco, síto, to blush or grow red.

Arrossóre, a blush or blushing.

Arrostáre, to rost or to tost. Also to make wind with some boughts. Also to turne round.

Arrostíre, tísco, títo, to rost, or to tost.

Arrostíta, a rosting. Also a tost.

Arrósto, any kind of rost meat.

Arróta, as Arróto.

Arrotáre, to grind or make sharpe and keene, to set an edge vpon. Also to gnash with ones teeth. Also to set ones teeth an edge. Also to incense, to stir vp or prouoke. Also to refine or purifie as it were with grinding. Also to roule or wheele about. Also make round as a wheele. Also to clip mony.

Arrotatóre, a grinder, a refiner. Also a mony clipper.

Arróto, an addition to helpe to follow another, a supply, an assistant.

Arroueláre, to wheele about. Also to wrangle, to dodge, or chafe aloud, to fret with anger and consume with rage, to grow moody.

Arrouersciáre, as Arouersciáre.

Arrouerscio, as Arouerscio.

Arrouerscióne, as Arouerscio.

Arrouesciáre, as Arouersciáre.

Arrouescio, as Ariuerscio.

Arrouescióne, as Ariuerscio.

Arrozzáre, to become iadish.

Arrozzíre, zísco, zíto, to become rude.

Arrúba, as Arúba.

Arrubbáre, to steale or rob.

Arrubináre, to enruby, to make ruddy.

Arrubiníre, nísco, níto, as Arrubináre.

Arrudáre, to make or become rude.

Arruffáre, to ruffle, to bristle, to stare with ones haire, to frounce. Also to strut as a turkie cocke. Also to touze or tug.

Arrugáre, to wrinkle, to pucker.

Arrúgia, a kind of working or digging vnder ground in mines for gold or siluer.

Arruginíre, nísco, níto, to rust.

Arruotáre, as Arrotáre.

Arruotatóre, a sheare or knife grinder.

Arruóto, in wheeling manner.

Arsenále, a storehouse for munition. Also a place for war like exercise.

Arsénico, Arsnike, Rats bane, or Orpine. Also a make strife. 

Arséno, the white Mandrage.

Arsibile, that may burne.

Arsicciáre, to scorch, to parch, to blast, to tan in the sunne, to singe, to burne.

Arsíccio, scorched, blasted, burnt, tand.

Arsílio, vsed for an axle tree.

Arsinico, as Arsénico.

Arsinei, a certaine attire or ornament for womens heads.

Arsióne, a burning, a flame. Also an inflamation. Also Mildew, Hotplanet or Blasting.

Arsionáre, to blast, to mildew, to Planet strike. Also to scorch, to parch.

Arsíuo, burning, scorching, parching.

A'rsis, the raising of a voice in singing.

Arso, burnt, consumed with fire.

Arsúra, as Arsióne. Also a burning feuer.

Arsuráre, as Arsionáre.

Artaménte, as Artataménte.

Artáno spáde, a diuelish caracter that nigromants vse.

Artáre, to make narrow or straight.

Artataménte, craftely, with wit and arte, skilfully. Also in bond or strict manner, pinchingly, straightly, narowly.

A'rte, any kind of art, trade, science or occupation. Also a whole company of any trade in any city or corporation towne.

Artebacchettería, the arte of measuring with the wand as coniurers and Astrologers vse.

Artéfice, an artificer, a tradesman.

Arte architettónica, the arte of architecture or building.

Artéfice minóre, a kind of hornet.

Arteficiále, artificiall.

Arteficiáto, made by arte, artefide.

Arefício, art, skill, workmanship.

Arteficiosaménte, arteficially.

Arteficióso, skilfull, full of art.

Artegiáno, an artificer, a tradesman.

Arteggiáre, to liue by an arte, to professe an art, to artize, to shew arte and skill.

Artegliería, as Artigliería.

Artegliero, as Artigliero.

Artelaría, as Artigliería.

A'rte mágna, as Algebra.

A'rte metrica, the arte of measuring.

Artemísia, motherwort or mugwort.

Arténne, a kind of cormorant.

Artéria, an artery, the beating or panting or pulse of a mans veine. Also the wind pipe.

Arteriáco, a kind of opiate confection.

Arteriále, belonging to the arteries. Also a composition in physicke made of mulberies.

Arteriáto, full of arteries, arteried.

Arterióso, full of arteries.

Artesáno, an artificer, an artisan.

Artética, a disease in a hawke. 



Artézza, narrownesse, straightnesse.

Arthabatíti, a kind of people that wander vp and downe woods like foure footed beasts.

Arthenogonóne, an extraordinary lust or wanton desire to venery.

Arthírico, that hath the gout in his ioints, gowty.

Arthrítici dolóri, griefs possessing the ioints as the gouts doe.

A'rti, arts, trades, occupations. Also the whole companies of tradesmen in a corporation towne.

A'rtico, the Pole articke Northward.

Articoláre, to articulate, to distinguish, or speake distinctly. Also to condition, to couenant or come to articles and points. Also to distinguish ioint by ioint. Also pertaining to the ioints. Also a painfull swelling or gout in ioints. Also the Primrose or Cowslip.

Articolataménte, articulatly, distinctly from point to point, ioint by ioint.

Articoláta vóce, a distinct articulated voice.

Articolatióne, an articulating. Also a barrennesse in vines when they loose their spring in the ioints.

Artícoli, articles. Also the ioints in the branches of vines, looke in my rules what and which be the Articles.

Artícolo, an article. Also a naturall composition of bones or ioints. Also a ioint, a knuckle. Also a sinew.

Articuláre, as Articoláre.

Articulataménte, as Articolataménte.

Articuláta vóce, as Articoláta vóce,.

Articulatióne, as Articolatióne.

Artículi, as Artícoli.

Artículo, as Artícolo.

Artificiále, artificiall, full of Art.

Artificiáto, made by art or skill.

Artífice, an artificer, a tradesman.

Artifícij, cunning shifts, or sleights.

Artifício, Art, skill, workmanship.

Artificiosaménte, artificially.

Artificióso, skilfull, full of Art.

Artigiáno, an artisan, a tradesman.

Artigliáre, to catch or seaze on with tallons or clawes, to gripe.

Artigliería, all manner of artillery or ordinance.

Artigliéro, a gunner, an artillery man. Also a founder of ordinance, a bombardier.

Artígli, the tallons, clawes or pounces of any hawke or praying fowle, and by a metaphor the bands of loue.

Artiglióso, full of tallons or clawes.

Artimóne, the maine or foresaile of a ship. Also the sterne or rudder of a ship.

Artióne, the Clot bur.

Artísta, an artist, or artificer.

A'rto, narrow, straight, pinching. 

Artolágano, looke Páne.

Artómo, a beast like a hedghog, hauing the shape of a Mouse and a Beare.

Arthophiláce, the Charles-waine, or Beare-star in heauen, the taile of vrsa maior or Bootes.

Artoptício, looke Páne.

Artoráre, to turne corne in the blade into the ground to make it grow the thicker, a fashion that is now out of vse.

Artúro, as Arctúro. Also the Clot-bur.

A rúba, by stealth, filchingly.

A rúba andáre, to goe a stealing.

Arúe, foolish, idle, loytring sports.

Aruggiáre, to make red or ruddie.

A'rule, seates equidistant one from another in gardinesse.

Arúnco, the tuft of haire like a beard vnder a Goates chin.

Arundúco, a kind of venemous serpent.

A ruóta, wheelingly.

Aruótare, as Arrotáre.

Aruspicína, that diuination among the Pagans, which they were wont to take by obseruing the forme, the situation and colours of the entrails of such beasts as they were to sacrifice.

Aruspício, the effect of Aruspicina.

Aruspíco, a professor of Aruspicina.

Arzána, as Alzana.

Arzanà, a store house for munition of warre.

Arzanále, as Arzanà.

Arzáuola, a ducklin, or dobchicken.

A'rze, Arsenária , or Colonia in Latin.

Arzéglio, a horse with a white foote on the further side.

Arzenále, as Arsenále.

Arzente, burning, scorching.

A'rzere, to burne or consume with fire.

Arzigógalo, a lifter, a heauer, a leauer, a shorer, an vnderprop. Also a foolish silly gull.

Arzigogoláre, to raue or be franticke.

Arzigógoli, fond humors, sudaine fantzies.

Arzílla, clay, tough or clammie earth.

Arzinanello, a kind of water-snake.

Arzúra, as Arsióne.

A's, or Æ's, was the first mony or coine the Romans had, and it waighed a pound of Copper.

Asáceo, to the spoile, sackt or ransackt.

Asaccománo, as Asácco.

Asalóna, a hauke called a Merlin.

A sálto a sálto, leape by leape, a skiping.

A saluaménto, safely, in safty.

Asaluáre, to saue stakes, or rest at play.

A sáluo, safely, in safety.

A saluumme fac, safely, without danger.

Asánzo, a game at tables so called. 

Asáro, foles-foot, or wilde spikenard. Also a kind of coine in Ormuz.

A satierà, with saciety, hold-belly-hold, gluttingly.

Asbaccáre, to haue plenty, to be careles.

Asbácco, hand ouer head, enough to spare.

Asbaragliáre, to hauocke and confound.

A sbaráglio, in confusion or Lauoke.

Asbergáre, to arme with a vant-plate.

Asbergo, a vant-plate, a brest-plate.

Asbestino, a web or flax resisting fire.

Asbesto, a stone which once kindled will neuer be quenched againe.

A'sca, a rafter or single quarter. Also a stub, a stump, a stocke or pile. Also a chip, or a lathe:

A scácchi, checquy in armory. Also at chesse.

A scacchi acuti, maskled or lozengy.

Ascalabóte, a lizard called a stellion.

Ascália, the seed of a kinde of Thistle.

Ascalógne, Ciues, Cibols, or Scalions.

Ascalónie, as Acalógne.

Ascapezzáre, to multiply by broken numbers.

Ascapezzo, a multiplying by broken numbers.

Ascáride, are se-wormes or gut-wormes.

A scatafáscio, at randon, hand ouer head.

A scauezzacóllo, headlong furiously.

Ascella, the arme boles or armepits.

Ascendente, assendent, mounting vp.

Ascendenza, an ascending or mounting

Ascendere, scendo, scési, scéso, to ascend.

Ascendéuole, that may be ascended.

Ascendiménto, an ascending or mounting.

Ascenso, an ascent or mounting vp.

Ascentio, worme-wood.

Ascentióne, Ascension day.

Ascésa, an ascending or mounting.

Ascéso, ascended or mounted.

Aschembáre, to go a thwart or a wry.

Aschembo, a thwart, a skew, a wry.

Aschéna d'ásino., Asse-backe. Looke. Cásse.

A scherzo, in ieast, ieastingly.

A scherno, in scorne or contempt.

A schiere, in troupes or squadrons.

A schífo, loathsome, in abhomination.

A schimbícci, in crooked manner.

Aschinciáre, to reele or stagger.

Aschíncio, reeling or staggering.

A'schio, spight, malice, rancor, rage, enuy

Aschióso, spighteful, full of rancor or venum.

Aschíte, a kinde of dropsie when much watery humor is heaped vp betweene peritoneum and the bowels and makes the belly swell

Aschíuo, as A schífo.



Aschrembo, as Aschembo.

A'scia, an adze, a chipax. Also a board. Also a Carpenters plaine.

Asciáre, to worke with a chipax. Also to boorde or planke. Also to plaine.

A scielta súa, at his owne choise.

Asciente, wittingly, vpon knowledge.

Ascientiáre, to enskill, to ensciénce.

Asciógliere, sciólgo, sciólsi, sciólto, to assoile, to acquit, to loosen, to free.

Asciólto, assoiled, acquit, set free.

Ascióluere, scióluo, scioluéi, scióluúto, to breake ones fast, to disiune. to eat something in the morning betimes. Also as Asciógliere.

Ascioluóne, a good or full breakefast. Also a good tale feeder or breakefast man.

Ascioméne, an hearbe that makes wilde beastes loose their fiercenesse.

Ascíro, a plant, in Latine Ascirum.

Asciróide, as Androsemóne.

Asciróne, as Androsemóne.

Ascísa, as Assisa.

Ascita, as Aschíte.

Ascíto, as Androsemóne.

Asciugáre, to dry or wipe dry.

Asciugatóio, a wiper or a towell.

Asciughéuole, that may be dried.

Asciuttáre, to dry or wipe dry.

Asciútto, wiped dry, dry, barren.

Asclepiáde, an hearbe with leaues like Iuie.

Asclopíadi, a kind of verse or meeter.

Asclépio, a kinde of Panáce.

A'scole, the flotes of a Water-wheele.

Ascólta, a skout, a sentinell.

Ascoltáre, to harken, to listen, to shout.

Ascoltatióne, a listening, a skouting.

Ascoltatóre, a barkner, a listner.

Ascóncio, troublesome, with trouble.

Ascondaregli, lurking or hidingholes.

Ascóndere, cóndo, cósi, cóso, to hide from.

Ascondiménto, a hiding.

Ascóne, a kinde of blazing star.

A scoperto, openly discoueredly.

A scóppia córpo, houldbelly-hould.

A scóppia cuóre, idem.

A scórno, in scorne, in derision.

A scórno préndere, to take in scorne.

Ascóso, hidden, hid, lurked.

Ascósto, hid, hidden, secret.

A scósse, in shaking or faltering manner.

A scótto, scotfree, at others charges.

Ascrittítio, a writer, a registrer.

Ascríuere, to ascribe.

Ascrítto, ascribed.

A sctócco, scot-free in shifting sort.

A sdégno, in disdaine, in contempt.

A sécco, dry. Looke Caricáreil Pezzo.

A secónda, with winde and tide.

A sénno, wittingly, purposely.

Aselle, the arme-pits or arme-holes.

Asella, Cod-fish, or Hadock-fish.

Asequio, obsequie, funerals.

A séra, late in the euening.

A sesta, iustly, according to compasse.

A sesto., idem.

Asfadello, Affodill or Daffodill.

Asfálto, the English Galingale. Also our Ladies rose, or rose of Ierusalem. Also a kinde of gum, or medicament of that gum.

Asfodillo, as Asfadello.

Asghembáre, to byace or goe sideling.

Asghémbo, sideling, byace, a skew.

Asguázzo, as Aguázzo.

A'sia, a fish which brought in sight of fire is presently enough and fit to be eaten, else very harde.

Asiáti, a kinde of wigin or teale.
h
A sicurtà, vpon assurance, surely.

Asiéme, with or together.

A'sile, the hearbe Crueley, or Margellane.

Asiláre, to stingue or pricke with a goade.
h
A'silo, a racke or cratch to fodder cattle in. Also a sanctuary, a franchise or place of priuiledge. Also the Gad-bee or Horse-flie. Also a goade or the stinge of any waspe.

Asíllo, as A'silo.

A'sima, a pursinesse or cough in the lunges, a painefull drawing of the breath with a wheezing or puffing. Also a disease in a horse growing in the lungs.

Asimigliánza, as, like, resembling.

A símile, likewise, like vnto. Also from the like.

A similitúdine, in resemblance, as.

A'sina, a shee-Asse.

Asinággine, assishnesse, blockishnesse.

Asinaría, assishnesse, foolishnesse.

Asináto, cheese made of Asses-milke.

Asináro, a driuer or keeper of Asses.

Asindicáre, as Assindicáre.

A'sine, certaine starres neere vnto Cancer.

Asineggiáre, to play the Asse.

Asinelli, two starres called the little Asses.

Asinello, a little Asse. Also a Codfish.

Asinesco, assish, asse-like.

Asiníne, a kinde of Asse-plum or horseplum.

Asiníno, a little Asse. Also assish.

A sinístra, on the left hand a thwart.

Asiníre, nísco, níto, to become an Asse.

Asinità, Assishnesse, blockishnesse.

A'sino, an Asse. Also a Cod-fish.

Asinocída, a killer of Asses. 

Asinocídio, murthering of Asses.

Asinóne, an engine to mount a peece of Ordinance. Also a great Asse.

A'sio, a stone called eat-flesh, because that dead bodies laid therein are consumed away in forty daies. Also a kinde of owle called the Horne-coute, with feathers on each side of his head like eares.

Asióne, as A'sio.

A'sma, as Asíma.

Asmático, pursie, short or broken winded.

Asmodeo, a friend or louer of lechery.

A sofficienza, inough, sufficiently.

A solázzo, a sporting, a solacing.

A sólco, by furrowes, chamfurred.

A sóldo, in pay or for hire.

A'soli, a kinde of fishes.

A sólo a sólo, alone, all alone.

A sommóssa, at the instigation.

A sómmo stúdio, on set purpose.

A sonáglio, a game that children vse.

A sórte, by chance, by lot.

A spáda trátta, to swords drawing.

Aspagnoláto, spegnolized, braging.

Aspaláce, an hearbe or plant.

Aspaláto, as Asfálto.

A spálle, behinde ones shoulders.

Aspálto, as Asfálto.

Aspáragi, the plant sparages.

Aspáre, to reele into a scaine.

A spásso, to walke, to solace, to sport.

A'spe, as A'spide.

Aspecchio, in opposite view, ouer against.

Asperella, a weed growing in the water.

Asperge, as Aspergolo.

Aspergere, pergo, persi, perso, to sprinkle.

Aspergolo, a sprinckling brush.

Asperíno, a budge which beareth a rich blackefurre. Also a coine in Turky.

Asperità, sharpnesse, sourenesse, eagernesse. Also roughnesse, seuerity, ruggednesse, craggednesse, surlinesse rigor, seuerity, austerity, churlishnesse, stubornnesse, rudenesse, cruelty, harshnesse, fiercenesse.

Aspernábile, contemptible, to be scorned.

Aspernere, sperno speruéi, spernúto, to contemne, to scorne, to reiect.

A'spero, sharpe, soure, eager. Also rough, seuere, rugged, craggie, surlie, rigorous, austere, churlish, stubborne, rude, cruell, harsh, fierce, stinging. Also a coine in Turkie. Also a kind of twining brier or weede.

Aspersióne, an aspersion, a besprinkling.

Aspero, sprinkled, bedeawed.

Aspersório, a sprinkling brush.

Aspésedi, at the charges of.

Aspettáre, to tarry, to expect, to waite



on, to looke for. Also to appertaine or belong vnto.

Aspettatióne, tariance, expectation.

Aspettatíua, an expecting or tariance.

Aspettéuole, that may be expected.

Aspetto, aspect, countenance, presence.

A spezzacóllo, in breake necke manner.

Asphodelo, Affodill or Daffodill.

A spícchio, made pointed-wise, like the streakes of the Sunne or the cloues of Garlyke.

A'spide, an aspike or aspe. Also a shrew or wrinch. Also deafe as an adder. Also a short piece of ordinance called a mortar or chamber-piece.

A'spidochilóne, a fish that swims in the water, flies in the aire, and creepeth on the ground.

Aspiláte, a stone like siluer and fierie.

A spíne, engrailed in armorie.

Aspiráre, to aspire, to aime at, to breath at. Also to giue an aspiration vnto.

Aspiratióne, an aspiration.

Aspizzicchino, by odde ends or scantlings. Also minzingly.

Aspléno, Ceterach, Waleferne, Miltwast, Stoneferne, Scaleferne, or Fingerferne.

A'spo, a reele or rice to winde yarne. Also a whirroll for a spindle.

Aspoláre, to reele threed or yarne.

A'spolo, as A'spo.

Aspónere, as Espónere.

Aspositióne, as Espositióne.

Aspositóre, as Espositóre.

Aspraménte, sharply, sowrely, eagerly.

Asprédo, a Goldefish or Ruffefish

Aspreggiáre, to exasperate, to abuse sharpely, to handle roughly.

Asprézza, as Asperità.

Asprézzi, those that carpenters or carters call capsquires.

Asprínio, a coine in Naples and Turkie.

Asprissimaménte, most sharply or cruely.

A'spro, as A'spero.

A sprón battúti, in great spurring haste.

Aspróne, a kind of soft rugged stone vsed about Rome in buildings.

A spróni d'óro, of or with golden spurr's.

A spropósito, against purpose or reason.

Aspróso, full of sowrenesse or eagernesse. Also rugged, craggie, looke A'spero.

Asprúso, besprinkled, bedeawed.

A squádra, by troupes or squadrons. Also leuell, by rule or squire.

A squárzo, in hauock or rending maner.

Assabíno, the Cinamond-tree.

Assaccheggiáre, to sacke, to ransacke.

A'ssa dólce, Benzoni or Beniamin gum.

A'ssa fétida, a kind of stinking liquor.

Assaggiáre, to assay, to taste, to try.

Assaggiatóre, an assaier, a tastar.

Assaggiéuole, that may be tasted.

Assággio, a taste, an assay or essay.

Assaiáre, to make enough. Also to taste.

Assái, enough, mickle, much, many. 

Assaipiù, much, more.

Assái vólte, many times or turnes.

Assaissimo, very much or enough.

Assaiuólo, a Schreech, or harme owle.

Assaldáre, to stanch blood, to close vp a wound, to solder mettals.

Assaldatúra, a stanching, a soldring.

Assále, an Axell-tree.

Assaliménto, an assailing.

Assalíre, lísco, líto, as Assaltáre

Assalitóre, an assaulter, an assailer.

Assalóne, a kind of bird.

Assaltáre, to assault, to assaile, to set or leape vpon, to onset.

Assaltéuole, that may be assaulted.

Assálto, an assault, an on set.

Assannáre, to bite or hold with tuskes.

Assánno, a pinch, or biting with tuskes.

Assapére, to wit, to know, that's to say.

Assaporaménto, a sauoring, a seasoning.

Assaporáre, to sauour, to sauce, to taste.

Assaporíre, rísco rito, as Assaporáre.

Assáppi, yoong, new or fresh soldiers that neuer serued before among the Turkes.

Assarabácca, the hearbe Folefoot or Hazelwort.

Assaro, the hearbe Folefoote.

Assassinaménto, a murther, a robberie.

Assassináre, to murther and rob together

Assassinaría, a murtherous robberie.

Assassinatóre, as Assassíno.

Assassíno, a robbing murtherer a highway theefe.

A'sse, any boord or planke. Also any axeltree. Also the diameter of the world. Also a hooke whereon a doore hangeth Also a wilde beast in India with a speckled skin. Also the ioint or axeltree of a bit.

Asseccáre, to dry vp.

Assecuráre, to assure, to secure.

Assedaménto, a swaging, a mitigating.

Assedáre, to swage, to mitigate, to qualifie.

Assedére, to sit neare vnto or by.

Assediáre, to besiege, to beleagre.

A'ssediferro, any iron plate.

Assedio, a siege, a league.

Assedio lóngo, a lingring siege.

Asseggere, seggo, sísi, síso, to sit downe, to seate. Also to place or pitch in some place.

Asseggiáre, to sit downe, to seate by.

Assegnaménto, an assignment.

Assegnáre, to assigne, to appoint.

Assegnataménte, assignedly, appointedly.

Assegnatióne, an assignation.

Asseguiménto, an atchieument. Also an obtaining by sute and following.

Asseguíre, guisco, guíto, to atchieue, to accomplish, to bring to passe, to obtaine by sute.

Asseguitione, as Asseguiménto.

Asselláre véna, a large veine being a branch of Vena caua.

Assello, a kind of bird.

Assembláre, to assemble. Also to resemble.

Assemblea, an assemblie.

Assembraménto, an assembling.

Assembránza, an assembling.

Assembráre, to assemble, to resemble.

Assembrea, an assemblie.

Assembro, an example, a patterne.

Assempiáre, to example, to patterne.

Assempio, an example, a patterne.

Assempláre, to example, to patterne.

Assemplo, an example, a patterne.

Assempráre, to eternize, to make for euer. Also to example, to patterne. Also to assemble.

Assempro, an example, a patterne.

Assennáre, to teach wit, to instruct. Also to nod, to becken or winke at.

Assensióne, an ascension, an ascending.

Assénso, an assent or consenting vnto.

Assentáre, to assent or yeeld vnto. Also to absent or bee absent. Also to sit downe.

Assentaménto, an assenting, an assent. Also an absenting.

Assentatióne, an assenting. Also an absenting.

Assentatóre, an assenter, a consenter.

Assentiále, absent, absently.

Assente, absence.

Assentia, Assenza, absence.

Assentiménto, an assenting vnto.

Assentio, wormewood. Also incense.

Assentióne, an ascention, or ascending.

Assentire, to assent or yeeld vnto.

Assentíto, assented. Also vigilant.

Assentóre, an assenter, an auoucher.

Assepáre, to hedge or fence with hedges

Assepatóre, a hedger.

Assepiáre, to hedge about.

Assepiatóre, a hedger.

Asserelli, thin boords, planks, or panels.

Asserenáre, to cleare or brighten.

Asseríre, rísco, ríto, to insist, to affirme, to auouch, to auerre, to assert.

Asserráre, to enshut or close in fast.

Asserragliáre, to enclose or shut in. Also to compasse with strength, to hedge in.

Assertióne, an assertion, an auouching.

Assertiuaménte, auouchedly, assertiuely.

Assertiuo, auouchable, affirmatiue.

Asserto, asserted, auouched.

Assertore, an assertor, an auoucher.

Assessáre, to assesse, to taxe, to assise.

A ssessinaménto, a murthering.

Assessináre, to murther and rob.

Assessíno, a murtherer and robber.

Assesso, an assise, or a taxing.

Assessóre, an assessor, a taxer.

Assestáre, to measure or set by the compasse.

Assetáre, to long or be thirstie for.

Assetáto, thirstie, full of thirst. 



Assétta, a little boorde, or thin lath.

Assettáre, to settle, to sute, to adapte.

Assettatúra, a setling. Also a fishing line.

Assettatúzzo, a spruce affected fellow.

Assetto, setled, seated, drest. In assetto, handsom, in order, drest vp. Also forme or order.

Asseueráre, to auouch, to affirme.

Asseueratióne, asseueration, swearing.

A'ssi, boordes. Also a kind of Serpent.

Assibiláre, to hisse like a Serpent.

Assicella, a lath, a little boord, a splint or speall of wood or stone.

Assicuraménto, an assuring.

Assicuránza, assurance.

Assicuráre, to assure, to secure.

Assicurtà, boldly, vpon assurance.

Assidenza, the act of setting downe.

Assideráre, to stiffen or benum with colde. Also to enterfer as horses doe, or to gaule and rub of the skin. Also to blast or streeke with a planet. Also to grow starke stiffe.

Assideratióne, a benumming with cold. Also an enterferring, a rubbing or gaulling of the skin, a blasting or planet streeking.

Assídere, to sit downe, to situate,

Assídi, as Epicícli.

Assiduáre, to continue with diligence

Assiduíssimo, neuer ceasing, still-labouring.

Assiduità, continuance, daily labour.

Assíduo, carefull, laborously, diligent.

Assiéme, with, together.

Assiepáre, to hedge about or in.

Assiepatóre, a hedger.

Assignaménto, an assignement.

Assignáre, to assigne, to appoint.

Assignatióne, an assignation.

Assiguíre, as Asseguíre.

Assíle, an exel-tree

Assilláre, to bite with a horsefly. Also to leape and skip as an Ox stung with flies.

Assíllo, a waspe or horsefly. Also a sharpe goade or stingue of a waspe.

Assimigliánza, a resembling.

Assimigliáre, to resemble.

Assimigliéuo le, resemblable.

Assimilare, to resemble, to compare.

Assimilatíóne, a resemblance.

Assindicáre, to iudge by order of law.

Assinghiozzáre, to sobe, to throbe.

Assinghiozzáti sospíri, throbbing sighes.

Assíno, a kinde of Muske cat.

Assinománte, a deuiner by hatchets.

Assinomantía, deuination by hatchets.

Assióma, a maxime, a principle, a generall rule or ground of any arte.

Assiomáre, to reduce to maximes, principals or generall rules.

Assiomáti, maximes, or generall rules. 

Assísa, an assise, or seassing also painters size. Also a liuerie or formall fashion.

Assisáre, to sise, to assise. Also to size Also to sute or put into liuerie.

Assísero, they beset or besieged.

Assíso, seated, sitten, situated. Also seyant in armorie.

Assistente, an assistant, helping.

Assistenza, assistance, helpe.

Assístere, sísto, túto, to assist.

Assíto, a beame, a iauine, or quarter.

Assituáre, to situate, to seate.

Assituatióne, a site, a situation.

Assituáto, seated, situated.

Assiuólo, as Assaiuólo.

A'sso, an ace, one alone, a nothing.

A'sso & ásso, one and one, single.

A'sso, o sei, ace or sixe vpon the dice, the most or least, as we say in english a man or a mouse.

Associáre, to associate, to accompanie.

Assodábile, that may be made solide.

Assodamènto, a making fast and solide.

Assodáre, to make solide, fast, or hard.

Assógna, seame, sewet, or tallow.

Assognáre, to grease, to tallow. Also to dreame, or to raue.

Assoláto, soled, setled vpon feete.

Assoláre, to sole.

Assoldáre, to presse or take into pay.

Assóluere, soluo, soluéi, sólto, to absolue, acquit, to assoile, to discharge.

Assolutaménte, absolutely.

Assolutióne, absolution, assoiling.

Assolutézza, absolutenesse.

Assolúto, absolued. Also absolute.

Assolutório, pertaining to absolution.

Assomigliánte, resembling.

Assomigliánza, resemblance.

Assomigliáre, to resemble.

Assomigliéuole, resemblable.

Assommáre, to summe or heape vp. Also to raise to the height.

Assóngia, sewet or hogs grease.

Assongiáre, to grease or tallow.

Assonnáre, to slumber or fall a sleepe. Also to cease from labour.

Assontióne, assumption.

Assónto, assumed. Also mounted vp. Also a charge or vndertaking.

Assopiménto, a supling, a swaging.

Assopíre, písco, píto, to suple, to asswage.

Assorbíre, bísco, bíto, to sip vp.

Assordággine, deafenesse.

Assordáre, to make deafe.

Assordafórni, a common skold or railer.

Assordidáre, to beray sluttishly.

Assordidézza, foule sluttishnesse.

Assordità, absurditie, vnreasonablenesse.

Assórdo, absurd, against reason, foolish.

Assórgere, sórgo, sórsi, sórto, to rise vp.

Assortáre, to sort, to consort together Also to chance or fall out by lots. Also to allot.

Assortiménto, an allotting by chance. 

Assortire, tísco, títo, as Assortáre.

Assórto, swallowed or sipped vp. Also risen or raised vp.

Assossiegáto, looke Sossiegáre.

Assottigliánza, a thinning, a mincing.

Assottigliáre, to subtilise, to make small, thin, or slender. Also to weaken or empaire.

Assottigliatóre, a mincer of any thing.

Assúmere, súmo, súnsi, súnto, to assume.

Assuntióne, an assuming, an assumption.

Assúnto, assumed, as Assónto.

Assurdíslimo, most absurd, vnreasonable

Assurditá, absurditie, vnreasonablenes.

Assúrgere, súrgo, súrsi, súrto, to rise vp.

A'sta, any long staffe, speare, pike or pole.

Astáce, a creuise, a crab.

A stafféta, in post haste or running.

A'sta foderáta, an armed pike.

Astále árma, a shafted weapon.

Astalláre, to stable, to set in a stable.

Astánti, by-standers, being present.

Astaphíde, a kind of grape.

Astaphiságria, staphisacre.

Astáre, to shaft, to arme with a speare.

Astáse, a creuise or Sea-crab.

Astéci, as Astáse.

Astenente, abstment, abstaining.

Astenenza, abstinence, temperance.

Astenére, tengo, ténui, tenúto, to abstaine.

A sténto, piningly, languishingly.

Astenuáre, to extenuate, or make thin.

Astenuáto, leane, meagre, gaunt, lanke.

Astenuatióne, extenuation.

Astera, a kind of Terra sigilláta.

Asterático, a skie colour. Also a stone.

Astere, an hearbe that is a present remedy against tumores in the share.

Astéria, a stone called also Girasolióne. Also a foule called a Bittour.

Astérico, the hearb Parietary.

Asteríte, a kind of sparkling stone.

Asterni, a kind of people neere the riuer Ganges that haue no mouth, but liue by breathing, and are hairy all their bodies ouer.

Astersióne, a cleansing or wiping away.

Astersíuo, that will cleanse and dry vp.

Astése, a kind of creuise or crab.

A'sti, mony in rogues language.

A'stice, as Astése.

Asticciuóla, any little staffe or speare.

Astífero, lance bearing or bringing.

Astílida, a kind of Cabage lectuce.

Astinente, abstinent, forbearing.

Astinenza, abstinence, temperance.

A'stio, as A'schio.

Astióso, as Aschióso.

Astipuláre, as Stipuláre.

Astipulatóre, one according with another.

Astiuóla, as Asticciuóla.

A stoccáta, with a thrust or stoccado.

Astolfeida, a presuming to doe that by 



wit and worth which a man doth by chance, as Astolfo did by his enchanted speare.

Astóre, Astórre, a Gosse hauke.

Astorella, a tassell of a Gosse hauke.

Astórmo, in troupe, stormingly.

Astrabácca, as Assarabácca.

Astrácca, to the vtmost till one be weary.

Astrácco, a fretted floore or seeling.

Astragálo, a huckle bone. Also the necke bone. Also the hearbe Peasearthnut. Also a word in Architecture.

Astragalizónte, a boy playing at dice.

Astragalománte, a deuiner by dice.

Astragalomantía, a kind of diuination with casting of dice or buckle bones.

A strahóra, out of season or due time.

Astrále, starry, planetary.

Astrálago, the hearbe Peaseartlmot.

Astrápia, a whitish and greenish stone from which seem to shoot raies of lightning.

A strapiè, in haste, a snatch and away.

Astrárre, trággo, trássi, tratto, to abstract.

A strátio, tearingly, tormentingly.

A strattézza, an abstractnesse. Also a strange far fetcht conceit or deuice.

Astrattióne, an abstraction.

Astrátto, abstracted. Also, an abstract.

Astrea, taken for iustice the daughter of Astrea and Aurora.

Astreggiáre, to twinkle as the stars.

Astrérta, a griping at the heart.

Astrettíuo, as Astríngere.

Astrétto, constrained or compelled vnto.

Astricáre, to paue.

A strico, a pauement.

Astrifero, star bearing or bringing.

Astrígnere, as Astríngere.

Astringente, rostringent, enforcing, such things as bind the body or any part thereof.

Astríngere, stríngo, strínsi, strétto, to restringe, to constraine, to bind and enforce.

A'strio, a stone with a star in it.

A stro, a star, a planet. Also a celestiall signe compact of many stars.

Astrobolóne, as Astróide.

Astroccomusiáre, to worke fretted workes.

Astroccomusiáto, seeled with frets.

Astróide, a stone which laid vpon marble wet with vineger doth stir and creepe away.

Astrolábio, an astrolobe or instrument whereby the motions of the stars is gathered.

Astrologáre, to play the Astrologer.

Astrologástro, a foolish lying astrologer.

Astrología, prediction of things to come by the course of stars.

Astrólogo, a foreteller of things to come by the course of stars, an astrologer. 

Astrónamo, an astronomer, a professor of the knowledge of heauenly motions.

Astronomáre, to professe the knowledge of heauenly motions.

Astronomía, astronomy, knowledge of heauenly motions.

Astronómico, astronomicall.

Astronomizzarc, as Astronomáre.

Astrónomo, as Astrónamo.

Astropicciáre, to rub or claw hard.

Astroso, starry. Also borne vnder some vnluckie planet.

A strozzáre, as Strozzáre.

Astrúso, as Abstrúso.

Astúccio, an estuife a pocket cace or little sheath with cizers, bodkin, penknife and such things in it.

A stúdio, for the nonce, expresly.

Astuólo, by troopes, in flockes in heards.

Astúra, a shell fish called a Nakre.

Astúrco, an ambling genet of Spaine.

Asturcóne, as Astúrco.

Astútia, craft, wilinesse, subtilty of wit.

Astúto, wily, crafty, witty, shrewde.

A sua pósta, at his pleasure or perill.

A sua scelta, at his choice.

Asuefáre, to accustome to enure.

Asuefattione, custome, wont, vre.

Asuefátto, accustomed, wont, enured.

Asueto, accustomed, enured, wonted.

Asuetúdine, custome, vre, wont.

Asussiciénza, sufficiently, enough.

A su dánno, at his perill and danger.

A suólo a suólo, ranged or piled in order.

A suo malgrádo, maugre him.

A suón di trómba, by the sound of trumpet.

Asuo potére, with all the power he can.

Asuo sénno, after his owne wit.

Atabállo., 

Atábulo, a winde blowing much in Affrica.

Atagliáre, as Attagliáre.

Atáglio, by rule or due proportion.

Atalánte, as Antaride.

Atál chè, so that, then.

A tál fóggia, in such fashion.

A talhóra, at such or sometimes.

A tanáto, the hearbe Rosecampion.

A tál partíto, at such a passe or state.

Atamatizzáre, to excommunicate or declare one an Anathem. Looke Anathéma.

Atanási, Tansie or siluerwort.

Atánte, helping, aiding.

Atánto, then, insomuch, so farfoorth.

Atántochè, so that then, whilest that.

A tánto il dí, at so much a day.

Atapezzáre, to tapistry, to trim vp.

Atapezzíre, zisco, zíto, idem.

Atarántola, as Tarántola.

Atarantoláto, bitten with a Tarántola.

Atáre, to helpe, to aide. Also to fit vnto.

Atastáre, as Attastáre.

Atastonáre, to grope in the darke.

Atastóne, gropingly, fimblingly.

Atectnea, an ignorance of any Arte.

Atelábo, a kinde of Locust without wings.

Atellanáre, as Attellanáre.

Atelláni, as Attelláni.

Atempera, with temper or well tempering.

A tempo, in time, timely. Also for time.

Atempo e luógo, in due time, and place.

Atentáre, to attempt or vndertake.

Atentióne, attention, heed.

Aténto, attentiue, heedy. Also attempted.

Aténto chè, since or seeing that.

Atentonáre, to grope as in the darke.

A tentóne, gropeing on all foure in the darke.

Ateo, as Atheísta, or Atheo.

Ateramóne, a weed that killeth beanes.

Atergáre, to put behinde ones backe.

Atergo, behinde, behinde ones backe.

Aterina, a fish in Latine, Atherína.

A termine, for tearme of time.

A terra, on land, on the ground.

A theismo, atheisme, miscreancy.

Atheista, an Atheist, a miscreant.

Atheo, one that thinkes there is no God.

Athéra, a decoction or gruell of Olira.

Athilóne, a bird that euer hateth and pursueth the foxe.

Athleta, a wrestler with hand and foote.

A'timo, an atome, or indiuisible thing. Also a moment of time.

Atizzóne, a stone glittring as siluer.

Atlantióne, the first spondile, ioynt or knot of the ridge-bone.

Atleta, a wrestler. Also a champion.

Atócio, any medicine that hindereth conception.

A'tomo, as A'timo. Also the first Incense that falles from the tree.

Atondáre, as Attondare.

Atóndo, roundly, in a round.

Atornáre, to turne, to wheele about.

A tóppo, giuócare a tóppo, to play at gresco or hazzarde, and then to set at euery chance or cast, or to set and cast at the by.

Atórno, about, touching, concerning.

Atórno fátto, made by a turner.

Atórto, wrongfully, against right.

Atoscáre, to poison, to entoxicate.

Atossic áre, to poison, to enuenome.

Atrábile, atractiue, that may be drawen

Atrabiliáre, lat. Atrabiliaria, quasi Atra bili corpora obnoxia.

Atrabilità, atractiuenesse. 



Atradigióne, as A tradiménto.

Atradiménto, treacherously, by treason

Atraménto, blacke inke. Also a kind of dying or colouring. Also a kind of minerall salt or vitrioll.

Atraménto sntório, copperas or vitrioll. Also shoemakers blacke.

Atramítica, the second kind of wild Mirrhe.

Atramontána, toward the North.

Atrauersáre, to trauerse, to crosse, to thwart.

Atrauerso, acrosse, athwart.

Atrebíci, a kind of hearbe.

Atresse, barrie or barried in armorie.

Atrigóni, a word of Herauldrie.

A'trio, the first entrance into a house, a court-yard or comming into a Porch, a court before a house or Pallace.

Atripélo, blacke haire, or blacke haired.

Atrípide, black-footed.

Atríple, Orache or Golden-hearbe.

Atríplice, Dent de chien. Quoich or Dogs tooth.

Atristáre, as Attristáre.

Atrità, blacknesse, pitchinesse, darknesse. suttines. Also crueltie, gastlines.

Atritáre, as Tritáre, to mince small.

Atritióne, as Attritióne.

Atríto, as Tríto. Also worne small.

A'tro, darke, blacke, sable, pitchie, suttie, gloomie. Also gastly, grisly, deadly, horrible, cruell.

A tróce, fierce, fell, cruell, seuere.

Atrochíte, as Astroíde].

Atrocíre, císco, cíto, to grow fierce.

Atrocissimaménte, most eagerly or fiercely.

Atrocità, fiercenes, felnes, crueltie.

Atróphe, those parts of the bodie that receiue no nourishment.

Atrophía, a disease when one through feare eateth lesse, or through much greedinesse eateth more than he ought, whereupon followeth a consumption which causeth the bodie to fall & pine away, some take it also for a disease in the eies.

Atrópho, he to whom the meate that he eateth doth no good, or he that pineth away and is in a consumption.

A'tta, the hearbe Watlewort.

Attaccáre, to tacke, to attache, to cleaue, to ioyne or fasten vnto.

Attaccáre batáglia, to ioyne battell.

Attaccáre l'uncíno, to fasten a hooke vnto, but metaphorically vsed by Boccace for to iumble a wench roundly and faston an occupying vpon her.

Atraccáre un zimbello ad úno, to fasten on, or publish some fault not knowen before in some bodie to his shame and reproach, to lay a blame on one.

Attaccatíccio, clammie or cleauing vnto

Attaccatúra, a fastning or tacking vnto, a cleauing or clamming vnto.

Attaccáre l'uncíno, to cope with a woman, or to commit rem in ré.

Attácco, a fastening vnto, a hanging vnto. Also an imputation laid to one. Also a kinde of Grashopper called a Solean. Also a kind of bird.

Attafanáto, a flie-bitten coloured horse.

Attagéne, a Godwit. Also a Moore-hen.

Atagliáre, to fit, to square, to cut or sute vnto. Also to sooth vp or make good what one sayes.

Attalentáre, to assent to ones minde.

Attalianáto, Italianated, Italianized.

Attálico, a kinde of cloth of gold.

Attaménte, aptly, fitly, conueniently.

Attanagliáre, to tanacle, to pinch.

Attapezzáre, to tapistrie, to triumph.

Attáre, to make apt or fit, to act.

Attargáre, to arme or shield with targets.

Attasentáre, to silence, to still, to husht.

Attastáre, to taste, to assay. Also to tent or prooue a sore. Also to grope and feele.

Attásti, the frets of any instrument.

Attauanáto, as Attafanáto.

Attea, as A'tta.

Attediáre, to weary with tediousnesse.

Attegáre, to goe or dance on ropes.

Attegatóre, a dancer on ropes. Also a tumbler, an actiue man or teacher of nimblenesse.

Atteggiare, to make docile or actiue, to tumble or be nimble.

Atteggiatóre, an actiue man, a tumbler.

Attelána, a comedie deuided into actes. Also a play of Atteláni.

Attelanáre, looke Atteláni.

Atteláni, men that with fowle mouthes, vnseemely speeches, disfigured faces, minike gestures and strange actions professe to procure laughter.

Atteláre, to place in forme or due order.

Attempáre, to grow in yeares or time.

Attempáto, in yeares, aged, olde, timed.

Attendáre, to encampe or pitch tents.

Attedente, attending, an attendant.

Attendenza, attendance, waiting.

Attendere, tendo, tesi, téso, to attend to waite, to stay, to abide, to tarie, to expect: Also to solicite, to apply, to harken, to regard.

Attenente, belonging or pertaining vnto.

Attenenti, allies, kinsmen. Also fast holdings.

Attenenza, a belonging or pertaining vnto. Also affinity or alliance in blood or kindred. Also a holding by, or dependency.

Attenére, tengo, ténni, tenúto, to hold by. Also to pertaine or belong vnto. Also to keepe fast or close vnto.

Attenitóre, an attainer. Also an executer of a mans goods. 

Atténta, attendance or waiting on.

Attentáre, to attempt, to vndertake.

Attentáto, attempted, vndertaken. Also according to Grisóni, when a horse goeth so warily that he dareth not tread one foot on another.

Attentióne, attention, attendance.

Attentiuo, attentiue, attending, heedfull, diligent, vigilant, prone, ready.

Attento, as Attentíuo. Also an intent or purpose.

Attento che, since that, sithence, sith.

Attentóne, as Atentóne, gropingly.

Attenuáre, to extenuate, to make leane.

Attenuatione, extenuation, leannesse.

Attenuire, ísco, íto, as Attenuáre.

Attergáre, to put behind ones shoulders.

Atterráre, to suppresse or fell to the ground. Also to fill or dam vp with earth.

Atterriménto, a deterring, an affrighting, a terrifying.

Atterríre, rísco, rito, to deter, to affright, to terrifie.

Atterzáre, to ioine three and three. Also to packe or pricke the cardes.

Attéso, attended, waited, looke Attendere.

Attésoche, sithence or since that.

Attestáre, to attest, to testifie. Also to make head or grow to a head.

Attestatióne, a testimony, an attestation, a growing to a head. Also to encounter.

Attestáto, attested, testified. Also made head or gathered to a head. Also one that is of the formost ranke and makes head against others.

Attézza, aptnes, aptitude, dexterity.

A'tti, acts, deeds, doings. Also statutes, decrees or lawes.

A'ttica, the Atticke Greeke tongue.

Atticciáre, as Attizzáre.

Attidúdine, as Attitúdine.

Attígnere, as Attíngere.

Attilláre, to grace or make handsome.

Attilánte, spruce, neat or fine in clothes.

Attilataménte, neatly, cleanly.

Attilatézza, neatlinesse, sprucenesse in clothes.

Attiláto, spruce, smug, or fine in clothes.

Attilatúra, as Attilatézza.

Attilatúzzo, sprucely selfe conceited.

A'ttilo, a kind of fish in the riuer Po.

A'ttimo, as A'timo.

Attmáre, to tunne or barrell vp. Also to fit for any action.

Attinente, as Attenente.

Attinenza, pertinency or belonging vnto.

Attíngere, tíngo, tínsi, tínto, to dip in. Also to draw or keach water. Also to dy into any colour.

Attíno, Attínio, a kind of Elme-tree.

Attínto, dipped in. Also reached ketched or drawne water. Also dyed into any



colour. Also when a horse is hurt or tainted or ouer reacheth one foot with another and withall doth hurt a sinnew, some say also that it is a taint or ouer reach in the backe or shanke of a horse.

Attióne, an action. Also a deed.

Attiráre, to draw vnto. Also to allure.

Attissimaménte, most aptly or fitly.

Attitudinále, according to actitude.

Attitúdine, aptnesse, fitnesse, dexterity.

Attiuità, actiuity, doing, actiuenesse.

Attíuo, actiue, doing, actuall.

Attizzabríghe, a picke quarell, a busie body.

Attizzaménto, a prouoking or stirring vp.

Attizzáre, to stir vp the fire. Also to enkindle. Also to prouoke to anger.

Attizzatóio, a fire forke to stir vp the fire. Also a kindling place.

Attizzéuole, that may be enkindled.

Attizzonáre, as Attizzáre.

A'tto, an act, a deed, an action. Also a gesture, a part, a tricke. Also apt, meet, ready, fit, prone, able, prepared. Also so much land as two oxen can plough in one tract without resting.

Attondáre, to make or goe round. Also a herse to close vp his turne roundly.

Attondáre dispróni, to helpe with both spurs, at one time to make a horse to close vp his turne iust.

Attoniáre, as Attorniáre.

Attoniménto, astonishment.

Attoníre, nísco, níto, to astonish.

Attónito, astonished, amazed.

Attórcere, tórco, torcéi, tórto, or torciúto, to twist or wind vp together. Also to bend or make crooked. Also to wind about as with a with. Also to racke.

Attorcicchiáre, as Attortigliáre.

Attorcigliáre, as Attottigliáre.

Attorciménto, a twisting or winding vp. Also a bending or making crooked.

Attóre, an actor, a doer, a factor. Also a chalenger or demandant in any quarell. Also a plaintife or accuser. Also a plaier in a comedy. Also a bailife in husbandry.

Attorneáre, to enuiron, to encircle, to compasse, to gird about.

Attorneggiáre, as Artorneáre.

Attorniáre, as Attorneáre.

Attórno, about, concerning.

Attortigliáre, to roule vp. Also to curle or entangle.

Attórto., looke Attórcere.

Attoscáre, to poyson, to entoxicate.

Attossic áre, to poison, to enuenome.

Attrábile, that may attract or be attractated.

Attrabilità, attractiuenesse.

Attraente, attracting or alluring vnto. 

Attrággere, trággo, trássi, trátto, to attract or draw vnto. Also to abstract. Also to allure or entice. Also to benum or shrinke vp the sinewes.

Attrahente, as Attraente.

Attrárre, as Attrággere.

Attrattíle, as Attraente. Also a kinde of Bur or Thistle good against the biting of Scorpions, some take it for the bastard Saffron whereof good oyle is made.

Attratilida, as Attrattíle.

Attrattióne, attraction, or drawing vnto.

Attrattíre, tísco, títo, to abstract or shrinke vp the limmes.

Attrattíto, lame or shrunken in limmes.

Attrattíuo, attractiue, alluring vnto.

Attrátto, attracted, drawen out from. Also shrunken in the limmes and lame. Also allured or enticed. Also an abstract.

Attrattóre, a Surgions instrument.

Attrauersaménto, a thwarting, a crossing.

Attrauersáre, to crosse, to thwart.

Attrauerso, a thwart, a crosse.

Attrecciáre, as Intrecciáre.

Attribuíre, ísco, íto, to attribute, to ascribe.

Attribuitióne, attribution.

Attribuláre, to trouble, to molest.

Attribúto, an attribute.

Attríplice, as Atríplice.

Attristáre, to make or become sad or pensiue in minde, to ensorrow. Also to empaire or make and become naught.

Attristatióne, sadnesse, sorrowing.

Attritáre, as Tritáre.

Attritióne, Attrittióne, attrition, that is a remorce proceeding of seruile feare fearing either punishment or losse of something, a faigned contrition. Also a rubbing, a freting or gaulling the skinne off.

Attríto, touch with remorse or feare of punishment.

Attropicaménto, a stumbling.

Attropicáre, to stumble.

Attrouáre, to finde out.

Attuále, actuall, sensible.

Attualità, actuality, effecting.

Attualménte, actually, sensibly.

Attuáre, presently to come to action, to actuate, as it were to giue life vnto.

Attúccio, a feate, a tricke, a slight.

Attuffáre, to duske, or plunge vnder water.

Attuffatúra, a ducking or plungeing or diuing vnder water.

Attuiáre, to obscure, to blemish.

Attuíre, ísco, íto, as Attuiáre.

Atturáccio, a stople. Also a scowring sticke.

Atturáre, to stop, to damme vp. 

Atturatóio, as Atturáccio.

Attustáre, to smother or stifle.

Attutáre, to asswage, to appease, to whosht, to extinguish, to qualifie. Also to diue or plunge vnder water. Also to assure or warrant.

Attutíre, tísco, títo, to make one perforce to hold his peace.

Attuttáre, to summe or cast vp all together. Also as Attutáre.

A tua pósta, at thy perill or pleasure.

Atúrfo, the Tamariske-tree.

A tútta bríglia, in full speed, vnbridledly.

A tútta oltránza, with might and maine.

A tútta passáta, all the way long.

A tútta pósta, at all assaies. Also to cast or play at all that is set.

A tútta pruóua, with might and maine.

A tútta vóce, as loude as may be.

A tútte véle, with full spread sailes.

A túttiimódi, howsoeuer, by all meanes.

A tútt' hóre, euer at all houres.

A túttipátti, by all meanes.

A tútto córso, a maine-gallop, without post, or let.

A tútto pásto, all the meale through.

A tútto tránsito, with might and maine.

Au, hath beene vsed for Quándo.

A'ua, a grandmother, a grandame.

Auacciámento, a speeding, a dispatching.

Auacciáre, to dispatch, to hasten.

Auáccio, quickly, speedily, hastily.

Auaccióso, full of speed or haste.

Auagoleggiaménti, as Vagellamenti.

Auagoleggiáre, as Vagelláre.

Auále, now, by and by, euen now.

Aualére, vágho, válsi, valúto, to auaile, to preuaile. Also to serue ones turne.

Auálido, equall, with the worth.

Auálla, on, goe to, away, adue, of, encor.

Aualláre, to enually, or make a vally. Also to swallow downe. Also to stoope or light downe. Also to vaile downe. Also to encompasse round as in a vally. Also to sinke downe. Also to depresse, or bring low.

A válle, below, beneath. Also vnder.

Aualoráre, to encourage, to make or become valerous, to hearten.

Auampáre, to blaze or set on a flame.

Auampatíccio, subiect to flaming.

Auangáre, to goade or pricke. Also to digge with a mattocke. Also to thriue to succeed or prosper well in any businesse.

Auanguárdia, a vantgarde.

Auanía, an vndeserued wrong, a secret



grudge, an insulting iniurie.

Auaniáre, to wrong vndeseruedly, to grudge at, iniuriously to insult vpon one.

Auantaggiáre, to aduantage, to excell.

Auantaggiáto, aduantaged.

Auantággio, aduantage, ods.

Auantaggióso, aduantageous, hauing ods.

Auantaggiosíssimo, most aduantageous.

Auantáre, to vaunt, to brag, to boast.

Auantatóre, a vaunter, a boaster, a bragger.

Auánte, before, afore, tofore.

Auánt'hiéri, the day before yesterday.

Auánti, before, tofore, afore.

Auantichè, before hand, before that.

Auánticuóre, as Anticuóre.

Auántio, a nick name, for one that to get something will euer be last in companie.

Auánto, a boast, a vaunt, a brag, a crack.

Auanuára, hand ouer head, at randan, at hab or nab, at all aduenture.

Auanzaménto, aduancement, as Auanzo.

Auanzánte, excelling. Also ouerplus.

Auanzáre, to encrease, to augment. Also to aduance, to prefer. Also to outgoe, to excell or surmount. Also to get or profit any thing before hand. Also to haue to spare, and to leaue ouerplus.

Auanzatícci, as Auánzi.

Auánzi, leauings, scraps, shreds, reliques. Also vailes, profits or gainings, residues.

Auánzo, an encrease, an ouerplus, a gaine or getting. Also moreouer, besides or aboue. Also a rest at Primero. Also as Auántio.

Auanzúgli, as Auánzi.

Auarítia, auarice, couetice, niggardise.

Auáro, couetous, nigard, miser.

Auaróne, a pinchpenny, a niggardly chuffe.

Aubidiente, obedient, brought to obedience.

Aubidienza, obedience, bringing to obedience.

Aubidíre, disco, díto, to obey, or bring to obedience.

Auccelláre, as Vccelláre.

Audáce, audacious, daring, hardy.

Audaceménte, audaciously, daringly.

Audácia, audacity, daring, boldnesse.

Audacità, as Audácia.

Audíbile, loud, that may be heard, audible.

Audientia, audience, hearing.

Audíre, ódo, udij, udíto, to heare, to listen.

Auditióne, a hearing. Also an audite.

Audíto, the organe or sense of hearing.

Anditóre, a hearer, an auditor.

Auditório, an auditorie. Also a place of audience. 

A'ue, allhaile, godspeed, be thou glad.

Auéce, in the name, place, turne or stead of another.

Auedére, vèdo, or véggo, víddi, vedúto or vísto, to perceiue or be aware, to aduise, or foresee.

Auediménto, warinesse, perceiuing, discretion, forecast.

Auedúta, by sight, as an eye witnesse.

Auedutaménte, warily, aduisedly, discreetly.

Auedúto, aware, perceiued, foreseene. Also warie, aduised, vigilant or soreseeing.

Aneggente ócchio, as an eye witnesse.

Auégnachè, albeit, howbeit, although.

Auégnadiochè, idem.

Aucláre, to vaile, to shadow ouer.

Auelenáre, to enuenome, to poison.

Auelia, a kind of water-fowle.

Auelanatóre, a poisoner, an enuenemor.

Aueleníre, as Auelenáre.

Aueleniménto, a poisoning, an enuenoming.

Aeullána, a Filbert or Hazelnut.

Auelláno, a Filbert or Hazellnut-tree.

A véle piéne, with full spread sailes.

Auellere, as Suellere.

Auello, a hollow vault or sepulchre.

Auelutáre, to enueluet or make nappie.

Auelutáto cuóio, spruce leather.

A'ue maría, an Auemarie. Also euensong, or euening praier time.

Auéna, Oates. Also an oaten-pipe.

Auéna gréca, Bolimoni or prouander corne.

Auenánte, as Auenente. Also a rate.

Auenáro, Auenário, an Auenor, one that hath the charge of Oates or prouander. Also a kind of Grashopper liuing in corne, namely among Oates.

Auenenáre, to enuenom, to empoison.

Auenente, comely, seemely, handsome.

Auenentézza, as Auenentia.

Auenentia, comelinesse, seemelinesse, wellbecomming, handsomnesse.

Auenéuole, comely, wellbecomming, seemely. Also that may come to passe.

Auengachè, albeit, howbeit, although.

Auengadiochè, idem.

Auenga quel che si vóglia, happen what will.

Aueniménto, a comming vnto. Also a hapning, a chance, an euent, an accident.

Aueníre, vengo, vénni, venúto, to come vnto, to happen, to come to passe, to chance. Also to meete with. Also hereafter or time to come.

Auenitíccio, a stranger or foraine going and comming. Also a Soiorner.

Auentáre, to hurle, to fling, to dart or cast with violence. Also to leape or seaze greedily vpon, to souze doune as a hauke, also to fill or puffe with winde 

Auentáta, a hurling, looke Auentáre.

Auentáto, one full of windie wordes.

Auentatório, that may be hurled.

Auentítio, happening or chancing. Also a stranger a friend.

Auentítij béni, goods that come by chance.

Auénto, an Aduent. Also a comming or a passage vnto.

Auentóre, a customer, a commer or a frequentor to a place.

Auentúra, aduenture, chance, fortune, lucke, hazard.

Auenturáre, to aduenture, to hazard.

Auenturário, an aduenturer, a hazarder.

Auenturataménte, aduenturously, fortunately. Also by lucke or fortune.

Auenturáto, fortunate, luckie.

Auenturiére, as Auenturário.

Auenturóso, aduentrous, fortunate.

Auenza, all one hath, a mans wealth.

Aueráre, to auerre, to verifie, to affirme.

Auerbiále, aduerbiall.

Auerbialménte, aduerbially.

Auerbio, an Aduerbe.

Auére, as Hauére.

Auerenza, an auerring, a verifying.

Aueréuole, that may be auerred.

Auérghe, barrie or barried in armorie.

Auernáre, to winter, to become winter.

Auersáre, to aduerse, to oppose.

Auersário, an aduersarie, an opponent.

Auersatíssimo, most crosse or aduerse.

Auersatiuaménte, aduersely, contrarily.

Auersióne, an auerting, a contrarietie.

Auersità, aduersitie, contrarietie.

Auerso, aduerse, contrarie.

Auerso, according to byasse.

Auertasi, let it be marked or heeded.

Auertente, warie, heedfull, warning.

Auertenza, aduertisement, aduisednesse.

Auertere, verto, , vertij, títo, as Auertíre.

Auertiménto, an aduertisement.

Auertíre, tísco, títo, to aduertise, to warne, to heed, to looke vnto, to note.

Auertíto, warned, aduertised, heeded, looked vnto. Also as Auedúto.

Auerto, as Aperto.

Auertúra, as Apertúra.

A vettúra, at liuerie, looke vettára.

Auezzaménto, an enuring, acustome.

Auezzáre, to accustome, to enure.

Auezzáto, enured, wont, accustomed.

Auézzo, accustomed, wont, enured.

A'uge, the highest point of any Planet.

Augei, all manner of birdes.

Augellare, as Vccelláre.

Augelláccio, any filthy bird, a Cuckow, a gull.

Augello, any kind of bird or fowle.

Augellétto, any little bird.

Auggiáre, to ouershadow from sight. Also to hinder from growing. Also as Vggiáre.



Auggióso, full of shadow or darknesse, looke Vggióso.

Augíta, a Turques stone.

Augumentáre, to augment to encrease.

Augumentatióne, an augmentation.

Auguménto, an augmentation.

Augurále, that by which any thing may be guessed. Also the ornaments of a Soothsaier, of or belonging to soothsaing.

Auguráre, to augure, to forebode, to soothsay, to deuine, to foreguesse.

Augúrio, an agure, a soothsaying, a prediction, a foreboding, a foreguessing, a foresigne, a coniecture, a diuination, a bad or ill hap.

Augúro, an augure, a Soothsayer, a deuiner, a foreboder, guesser, or teller, or a coniecturer by the feeding, chirping, noise or voices of birdes.

Augústa, the chiefe kind of Eagle that is.

Augustále, the Kings pauillion or tent in warres. Also a Princes Court or Pallace.

Augústo, consecrate, imperiall, maiesticall, holy, royall, full of maiestie or regard, worshipfull, sanctified, of great magnificence. Also the Augustus lawrell.

Auiaménto, an adressing in the way.

Auiáre, to adresse or set in the way.

Auiatióne, a setting in the right way.

Auicenda, mutually by turnes.

Auicendáre, to busie with businesse. Also to change by turnes.

Auicendáto, full of businesse. Also changed by turnes.

Auicináre, to aproach or come neere.

Auicinéuole, aproachable.

Auiculadei, a kind of bird that hath no feet, which some take for the Paradise bird.

Auidità, greedinesse, rauenousnesse.

A'uido, greedy, rauenous, couetous.

Auífero, bird bearing, foule bringing.

Auignáre, to plant or grow as vines.

Auignáto, a place where vines be set.

Auíle, in scorne, in contempt, vily.

Auiliménto, a scorning, a debasing, a vilifying, a dishonouring.

Auilíre, lísco, líto, to vilifie, to scorne, to debase, to dishonor, to disgrace.

Auiluppaménto, an enwrapping.

Auiluppáre, to enwrap, to entangle.

Auilúppo, a bundle, an enwrapping.

Auinacciárc, to enwine, or make drunke.

Auinacciáto, enwined, or made drunke.

Auináre, to enwine or become wine.

Auináto, a kind of ripe grape colour.

Auinazzáre, as Auinacciáre.

Auíncere, vínco, vínsi, vínto, to embrace or claspe about as the vine or Iuy doth, to clinch.

Auinchiaménto, a binding or clasping hard.

Auinchiáre, as Auíncere.

Auinciáre, as Auíncere.

Auincigliáre, as Auíncere.

Auincoláre, as Auíncere.

Auinghiáre, as Auíncere.

Auínto, embraced or clasped about.

Auiságlia, any suddain sight, aduise, discouery or encounter.

Auisaménto, an aduising, as Auíso.

Auisáre, to aduise, to aduertise, to informe. Also to heed, to deem, to imagine. Also to come or bring face to face.

Auisataménte, aduisedly, heedfully.

Auisatóre, an aduiser, an aduertiser.

Auíso, an aduise, an aduertisement. Also a seeming or deeming a thought.

A uíso aperto, with an open face.

A uíso a víso, face to face, ouer against.

A uíso essere, to be of opinion or aduise.

A uíso inánzi, vndantedly, boldly.

A uísta, in sight, in view, before.

Auíta, during life, for life.

Auíta & mórte, during life and death.

Auiticchiáre, as Auincere.

A'uito, ancient, left by ancestors.

A uiua fórza, by maine force.

Auiuáre, to quicken or giue life vnto.

Auiuatióne, a quickning.

Auiuatóio, a gold smiths or gilders toole.

Aúla, a Kings Court. Also a great hall.

Auleta, a piper, or plaier on a flute.

Auletica, piping musicke.

Auleticóne, a pipe cane, through hollow.

Aúli, a kind of shell fish.

Aúlico, a courtier. Also Court like. Also a Court counsellor.

Aulimentáre, as Alimentáre.

Auliménto, as Aliménto.

Aumentáre, to augment, to encrease.

Aumentatióne, an augmentation.

Aumentatíuo, giuing augmentation.

Aumentéuole, that may be augmented.

Auménto, an augmenting or encrease.

Auménto, a sore or disease in the eies.

Aumiliáre, to humble, to meeke.

Aumiliatióne, an humiliation.

Aunánza, an assembly by one and one.

Aúna per ciascúna, one by one.

Aunáre, to assemble one by one.

Auncináre, to hooke.

A un cólpo, at one stroke, at once.

A un gran pezzo, by a great while.

A úno a úno, one by one.

A un párto, at one bearing or birth.

A un portáto, as A un párto.

A un púnto, at once, at one point.

A un sórso, at one draught.

A un tempo, at one time.

A un trátto, at one cast, at once.

A un vólger d'ócchi, in the twinkling of an eie.

A'uo, a grandsire, a grandfather.

Auocáre, to call vnto, to aduocate.

Auocaría, a bar where lawiers pleade. Also the profession of aduocates.

Auocáto, called vnto, or pleaded. Also an Aduocate or an atturny.

Auocatóre, an aduocate, an atturny.

A uóce álta, loudly, with a high voice.

Auocoláre, to blind or depriue of sight.

Auócolo, blind, sightlesse.

Auogadáre, as Auocáre.

A vóglia, at will and pleasure.

A'uola, a grandame, a grandmother.

Auólgere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, to wind, to roule or bundle vp, to enwrap.

Auolgiménto, a rouling or entangling.

Auóllere, as Auólgere.

A'uolo, a grandsire, a grandfather.

A uólo, flying, by flight, speedily.

Auolontà, at will and pleasure.

Auolontáre, to enwill or make willing.

Auolontataménte, voluntarily, willingly.

Auolpacchiáre, to play the fox, to deale subtly, to become a fox.

Auolpíre, písco, píto, idem.

Auoltacchiáre, as Auoltáre.

Auólta, vaulted, or vaulte wise, arched.

Avólta per vólta, time by time.

A vólte, at times, sometimes, by turnes.

Auoltáre, to ouerwhelme, to ouerturne. Also to roule, to wind or turne vp. Also to range or wander about.

Auoltatíuo, one of the eight kinds of wormes breeding in horses.

Auolteráre, to commit adultery.

A uolterio, adultery.

Auóltero, an adulterer.

Auoltóio, a gripe or a vulture. Also a Geire or Geire faulkon.

Auólto, ouerturned, ouerwhelmed. Also rouled or wound vp. Also ranged or wandred about. Also entangled or enwrapped.

Auoltoláre, as Auoltáre.

Auoltoráre, to wallow or swelter in durt as swine.

Auoltóre, as Auoltóio.

Auoltráre, to deuoure as a vulture.

Auoltratóre, a greedy deuourer.

Auório, yuory, elephants tooth.

Auórnio, a shrub whereof Bees will not taste.

Auoserta, as Auosétta.

Auosétta, a foule like a storke, white in colour, and a bill bending vp.

Auotáre, to vow vnto. Also to empty.

Auóto, empty, in vaine. Also vowedly.

Auotíre, tísco, títo, to vow vnto.

Aúra, the sweet morning breath or wind. Also a blast or pleasant gale of wind.

Auráco, of gold, or glittring as gold.

Auráre, to decke with gold, to gild.

Aurea, a golden crowne or coronet.

Aureggiánte, glistring as gold.

Aureggiáre, to shine as gold.

Aurelia, Mothweed, Golden weed, Cudmeed, Flowre amour, or Golden 



stechados.

Aurelio, golden or glistring like gold. Also the little wing of a butter flie.

Aureo, golden, of a golden hew.

Aureo d'Allessándro, an antidote against poison.

Aureola, a golden coronet.

Aureoláre, to crowne with a golden coronet.

Auricálco, latten mettall. Also a trumpet.

Auricoláre, auricular. Also a certaine veine in ones body. Also the finger next to the little finger.

Auricóme, a sun shine colour, gold like, or golden haires.

Aurícole, two small appendances growing like little eares to the seat of the heart, called the Auricles.

Aurífero, gold bearing or bringing.

Auriflámma, golden flowre, vsed also for a Princes chiefe standard.

Aurifrígio, a kind of foule.

Auríga, a wagoner, a coach or wane man.

Aurína, as Vrina because it is yellow.

Auripigménto, orpiment.

Auripotente, gold puissant.

Auríre, áuro, auersi, auerto, to open.

Aurispíco, as Aruspíco.

Aurispicína, as Aruspicína.

Aurispício, as Aruspício.

Aúro, gold. Also an hearb.

Auróra, the morne or daune of day.

Auróso, luckie, fortunate.

A'usa, daring, bold, hardy.

Ausánte, daring, that dareth.

Ausánza, vse, vre, custome.

Ausáre, to dare, to be hardy.

Ausáre, to enure, to vse, to accustome.

A úscio a úscio, from dore to dore.

Ausiliáre, to helpe, to releeue, to succour.

Ausiliáre, helpfull, releeuing, auxiliar.

Ausiliári soldáti, aiding souldiers.

Ausílio, help, succour, releefe.

Ausilióso, helpfull, releeuing.

A'uso, daring. Also dared.

A úso, after the vse or wont.

Ausónio, an Italian.

Auspicáre, to begin to consult by diuination. Also to begin an enterprise with hope of good successe, prosperously to presage.

Auspicáto, luckily, prosperous.

A úspice, a deuiner, a soothsaier. Also a luckie guide or director. Also be that giues a woman to the Priest to be maried.

Auspício, a foresigne or diuination, a luckie guide or fortunate direction, a prosperous presage. Also the conduct, the gouernment or direction of a chiefe or Captaine. Also the man that couples a man and a woman when they are either contracted or maried. 

Aúspico, that hath power to dispose things.

Austerità, austerity, harshnesse.

Austero, austerne, harsh as vnripe fruit.

Austrále, of or belonging to the South

Austríno, of or comming from the South.

Austríta, as Atramítica.

Aústro, the South wind, or part of the world.

Autenticáre, to aprooue or make autenticke and lawfull.

Autentichíssimo, most autenticall.

Autentico, authentike, lawfull, aproued, auctorised.

Aúto, as Hauúto, had.

Autónno, the fall of the leafe. Autumne.

Autoráre, to giue auctority or free will.

Autóre, an author or beginner or doer.

Autoréuole, powerfull, in auctority.

Autorità, auctority, freewill, sway.

Autorizzáre, to giue freewill or authority.

Autríce, a she author or doer.

A'utro, hath heen vsed for Altro.

Autropíro, leauened bread, as it were downe right made.

Autunnále, belonging to Autumne.

Autúnno, the fall of the leafe, Autumne.

Auúnculo, an vnckle.

Note that wheresoeuer AV, commeth before any vowell, the sqV may euer be written and pronounced double or single, as pleaseth the writer or speaker; for you may euer write and say Auuacciáre, Auuedére, Auualoráre, Auuampáre, Auueníre, Auuolontáre, Auunacciáre, &c.

Auzzáre, as Aguzzáre, to sharpen.

Aúzzo, sharp pointed. Also keene.

Azaireth, a kinde of Physicall pill.

Azára, the game at dice called hazard.

Azári, chanses at dice called hazards.

Azazella, a Scape-goate.

Azeróle, a kinde of dainty peares.

A'zitno, vnleauened-bread.

Azimínthi, great circles, meeting in the Zenith point, and passing through all the degrees of the Horizon.

Azimúccio, one troubled with A'sima.

A'zio, the dog-fish or of that kinde.

Azomperio, sway or auctority by way of scorne or contempt.

Azizáre, to settle, to dresse, to reforme.

Azurráre, to die blew or azure.

Azurrígno, some what bluish, or azure.

Azurríno, a blew colour called Bisse.

Azúrro, the colour azure or blew.

Azurróso, full of blew or azure.

A'zza, as A'ccia.

Azzále, the Mettale Steele.

Azzalíno, a steele to strike fire.

Azzampáto, hauing clawes or fangs. Also caught with clawes or griped.

Azzannáre, to catch or bite with tuskes.

Azzémia, as Azzimíno.

Azzéuia, a fish like a soale.

Azziccáre, to prouoke, to entice, to set on, to tickle vnto, to dandle. Also to start.

Azzicchétto, an enticing, tickling vnto, a dandling. Also a suddaine starting.

Azzimáre, as Accimáre. Also to dight to adorne, to refine or make handsome. Looke Zíma.

Azzími, a kinde of Marchpane stuffe.

Azzimíno, a kinde of damaskin worke vpon blades and corselets vsed in Persia.

Azzolláre, to clod together. Also to bange, to cudgell or rib-baste.

Azzoppáre, to hault, or become criple.

Azzopegáre, as Azzoppáre.

Azzuffáre, to bicker, to cope or graple together, to fight, to quarell. Also to put or set together by the eares.

Axíno, a wilde beast which sone take for the Muske-cat, or Siuet-cat.

Axinománte, a diuiner by hatchets.

Axinomantía, diuination by hatchets. 


B.
Baaráse, an hearbe of a firy colour.

Babel, Babelle, confusion.

Babbionáre, to play the Babuine. Also to play the Monkey, or gull or sot.

Babbióne, a Babuine, a gull, a sot.

Bábbo, a bab, a dad, a father.

Babboláre, to play the baby, or trifle as children doe.

Bábbole, trifles, toyes, bables, nifles.

Babbolóne, a great baby. Also a lubbard. Also babishly or lubbardly.

Babbuásso, as Babbióne.

Babbuíno, a Babuine. Also a gull, a foole. Also a stammering fellow.

Babilónia, a place of confusion.

Babóso, as Bauóso.

Baboináre, to play the Babuine.

Bacáno, as Baccáno.

Bacatelle, as Bagatelle.

Bácca, hath beene vsed for Vácca.

Baccaláre, a swaggerer, a furious swashbuckler. Also something about a Ship.

Baccaláro, a Batcheler or Licentiate in any Arte. Also a fond selfe-conceited fellow. Also vsed for a Knight Batcheler.

Baccálio, a kinde of Laurell or Bayes.

Baccána, a Wine-tauerne or Tiplinghouse.

Baccanáli giuóchi, wakes, feastes, or sports for Bacchus sake. 

Baccáno, a Forrest in Italy where many  



robberies and murthers are committed.

Baccánti, as Baccanáli.

Báccara, our Ladies-gloues, Londons pride or buttons. Also the Ploughmans Spike-nard.

Baccáro, vsed for Vaccáro.

Baccáta, a furious or drunken woman. Also the Plough-mans Spike-nard.

Baccatióne, a free-drinking or celebrating some Bacchus feast.

Baccáto, drunken. Also a Baccus Priest. Also a mad, foolish drunkard.

Baccatóre, a common daily drunkard.

Baccelliére, as Baccaláro. Also a yeoman, or Swaine.

Baccellería, the Batchelry. Also the Yeomandry of a Country.

Baccerelli, Silke-wormes ready to spinne.

Bácche, Beries of Laurell or Iuniper.

Bacchea, a meary drinking feast.

Bacchelle, the kirnels in any fruite.

Bacchétta, any wand or sticke or rod. Also a magistrates rod or staffe of office. Also a lintstocke. Also a skouring sticke. Also a drummers stiske.

Bacchétta da vino, a Tauerne-bush.

Bacchettóne, any kinde of great Bacchétta.

Bácchi, spinning-silkewormes.

Bacchiále ósso, the chiefe-bone of an arme.

Bacchíca, a kinde of Iuy.

Bacchio, a staffe, a cudgell or a bat. Also a foote of a verse of on sillable short and two long. Also as Pàcchio.

Bacchionáre, as Bastonáre.

Bacchionáta, as Bastonáta.

Bacchióne, as Bastóne.

Baccilétto, a little Bason. Also a kinde of little basket.

Báccio, hath beene vsed for, quickly, out of hand.

Bácco, Bacchus, he whom we count the God of wine, as much to say a master of heauenly mysteries, a deuiser of som new religion, an inuentor of things necessary for humane life, as chiefely bread and wine. Also a spinning silkeworme. Also a Cod-fish. Also a furious swaggering ruffling fellow, one giuen to drunkennesse.

Bacelláre, to cod as Beanes or Peason.

Bacelláto, codded, husked, shaled.

Bacello, any codde, huske or shale as of beanes. Also yongue beanes. Also a gull or shallow-pate. Also a pilliecocke.

Bacellóso, coddy, full of cods or huskes.

Bachéca, a silly gull a ninnihammer.

Bacherózzoli, all manner of crawling wormes, namely silke-wormes. 

Bacheráme, a kind of stuffe called buckram.

Báchi, as Bacherózzoli.

Baciamáno, a kisse of the hands, a besolas manos.

Baciáre, to kisse, to smacker.

Bacicáre, to fumble. Also to labour or canuase for any office.

Bacielliére, as Baccaláro.

Baciellería, as Baccellería.

Baciello, as Bacello.

Bacíle, a bason. Also a timbrell.

Bacinétto, a little bason. Also a skull or celate or such head-piece.

Bacíno, a bason. Also a timbrell.

Bácio, a kisse, a smackring.

Bacióre, that part of any bill or highplace exposed to the West or North.

Baciózzo, a smacking kisse.

Báco, any kinde of silke-worme. Also boe-peepe, or vaine-feare.

Báco báco, to play boe-peepe.

Bacócche, as. Bácche. Also Apricocks.

Bácolo, any cudgell, staffe, or bat.

Bácolo Astronómico, an Astronomers staffe.

Bácolo di Giacób, a Iacobs staffe.

Bácolo mensório, a measuring-staffe.

Bacueco, a cratch, a manger, an Oxestall.

Báculo, as Bácolo.

Báda, delay, lingring, losse of time. Tenére á báda, to keepe at a bay or in delay.

Badagliáre, to yaune, to gape. Also to gaze and loyter idlely about.

Badáglio, as Badalóne.

Badaglióne, as Badalóne.

Badalonáre, as Balloccáre.

Badalóne, an idle, lazie, slothfull, dull, loytring fellow, a lubbard, a lither, a loger head.

Badaluccáre, as Balloccáre. Also looke Badalúcco.

Badalúcco, an hooboob, an alarame, or suddaine crie and vprore in time of war to amaze and terrifie the enemy. Also a fight or suddaine skirmish. Also a certaine instrument of warre. Also loitring pleasure, lazie delight or idle gaping about.

Badáre, to stay, to tary, to linger, to attend. Also to loose time or gape idly vp and downe.

Badeggiatóre, an earnest wooer a suter.

Baderlo, as Badalóne.

Badéssa, an Ash-tree, a Prioresse.

Badessále, like, of, or belonging to an Abbesse.

Badía, an Abby, a Priory.

Badiále, Abot-like. Also loitringly.

Badiláta, a shouell or spadefull. Also a blow giuen with a spade or shouell.

Badíle, a spade, a digging spade, a skoope.

Bádo, a stay or trifling of time away. 

Baéna, a kind of hearbe.

Baffétta, a kind of paste meate fried in a frying pan.

Bága, a ring. Also a pinte measure. Có rere alla bága, to runne at thering.

Bagággio, as Bagaglióni.

Bagaglie, baggage stuffe, lugage, bag and baggage or cariage of an armie.

Bagagliuóle, small Bagáglie.

Bagaglióni, idle fellowes, as souldiers boyes that follow a campe or court and carrie their masters stuffe. Also sumpter horses to carrie luggage.

Bagagliúme, all manner of luggage or cariage following a campe or court.

Bagáia, the Whitethorne, Hauthorne tree or landouers may-bush, some take it for the Barberie tree.

Bagaíro, as Bagáia.

Bagáncie, as Bagáglie.

Bagáro, a mite or least coine that is.

Bagáscia, a baggage, a strumpet, a whore.

Bagasciáre, to play the strumpet.

Bagascióne, a whoremonger, a ruffian.

Bagasciuólo, a wanton boy, an ingle.

Bagatella, as Bagatelliere.

Bagatellàre, to iugle, or play leger de maine, to trifle.

Bagatellaría, a iugling or trifling tricke.

Bagatelliere, a iugler, a trifler.

Bagatelle, iugling trickes, trifles, toyes, driblets, legerdemaines.

Bagatello, a iugler, a trifler.

Bagatíno, a little coine in Italie. Also a kitlin, or as we say a pug, a pusse.

Bagattíno, as Bagatino.

Baggea, as Badalóne.

Baggiáne, looke Dáre panzáne.

Bagiá, as Basciá.

Bagianótta, hoosht, close, squatting, mum.

Báglia, a she-nurse.

Bagliáre, to dazle or glimmer the eyes.

Bagliáto, a baliwicke.

Báglio, a he-nurse. Also a Bailife.

Baglióre, a glimmering, a dazeling. Also a suddaine flashing or lightning.

Baglióri, drouzinesse, enticements to sleepe.

Baglíua, as Baglíuo.

Baglíuo, a baliwicke or Bailifs office, a baliage.

Bagnaménto, a wetting, a bathing

Bagnáre, to wet. Also to bathe.

Bagnáruólo, a Bath-keeper.

Bagnatóre, a master of a Bath.

Bágno, a Baith, a baine, a bathing-house

Bágnolo, a litle Baith. Also a fomentation, or supling medicine.

Bágno maría, a kind of Limbech.

Bagoláro, a Lote tree, or Nettle tree.

Bagordáre, to maske, to mum, to reuell. Also to tilt, to ioust, or fight at Barriers for sport.

Bagórdi, mummings, reuelings. Also 


 tiltings, ioustings, barriers for recreation.

Bagordiere, a mummer, a reueller. Also a tilter, a iouster, a fighter at barriers.

Bágulo, a male or budget.

Báia, a trifle, a iest, a toy. Also a litle basket fastened to the muzzle of moiles or asses with hay or prouander therein, that they may eate as they trauell. Also a mocke, a flout, or a frumpe.

Baiáccia, as Fagioláta.

Baiána, any cod, huske or shell.

Baiánte., looke Da baiánte a ferránte.

Baiárda, a common scold or railer.

Baiáre, to barke, to bay, to quest or houle as a dog. Also to yaune, or to gape. Also to mocke, to flout or frump. Also to toy or trifle the time away.

Baiarelle, trifling, foolish or idle toyes.

Baiáta, a barking or baying of a dog. Also a gaping or a yauning. Also a toying, a iesting, a mocking, a flouting or trifling.

Baícolo, a fish called a Basse.

Baiella, a small trifle or toy.

Baiétta, bayes or penistone for linings.

Baígua, an hearbe the iuice whereof cast into a water makes fishes so drunk that as dead they flote vpon the water, some say verbasco will doe so.

Báila, a woman-nurce, a foster-mother.

Baíle, as Badíle, a Baliage.

Bailiuáto, a bailiewike.

Báilo, a hee nurce, a foster-father, a tutor, an ouerseer. Also an agent, an embassador. Also a bailife, a gouernour or ouerseer.

Báio, a bay colour. Also an Abbot.

Báio cástagno, a bay chesnut colour.

Báio doráto, a bright bay colour.

Báio ferránte, a broune bay colour.

Báio scúro, a darke bay colour.

Baioccáre, to snap, to click or flurt with ones fingers as moresco dancers.

Baiócco, a snap, a click or flurt. Also a mite or such like coine.

Baioláre, to beare burthens as Porters.

Baiólo, a Porter or burthen-bearer.

Baionáccio, a notable or egregious noddie.

Baióne, a silly gull, a foolish noddie.

Baiúcche, toyes, trifles, iestings.

Baiuláre, as Baioláre.

Baiúlo, as Baiólo.

Baladóre, the ouerlope or ouer deck of a ship.

Balagústi, little marble pillers.

Balalíschio, as Basilísco.

Balamíno, oyle or ointment of Ben.

Balamíte, a stone of sundry colours.

Baláncia, as Biláncia.

Balanciáre, as Bilanciáre.

Baláne, a kind of Chesnuts. Also long bulbs sticking vnto rootes.

Baláno, a kind of wild Date. Also a kind of shell fish.

Balánte, breathing, panting or gasping. Also yauning or gaping. Also bleating.

Baláre, to pant, to breath, or gaspe. Also to yaune or gape. Also bleate as a sheepe.

Balarína, a wagtaile.

Baláscio Balásso, a pretious stone.

Balátro, a pratling raskall, a greasie slouen, a railing iester.

Balatróni, dashings of durt sticking to ones clothes. Also clods of carth.

Baláusto, a Pomegranet floure.

Balaustíno, a kind of mixt colour.

Balaustráre, to set with pillers of marble.

Balaustráta, an open gallerie set with many pillers of marble.

Balbeggiáre, to stammer, to stutter, to maffle. Also to lispe and not pronounce the letter. R.

Balbettáre, as Balbeggíáre.

Balbezzáre, as Balbeggiáre.

Balbézza, a stammering, a stutting or maffling in speech. Also a lisping.

Balbíne, a bulbous red roote called in Latin Bulbium.

Bálbo, a stutterer, a stammerer, one that is tongue tied, a lisper. Also a barble fish.

Balbottéuole, stutting, stammoring, maffling, lisping.

Balbutiente, as Balbottéu le.

Balbutimento, as Balbézza.

Balbutíre, tísco, títo, as Balbeggiáre.

Balbuzzáre, as Balbeggiáre.

Bálchi, monie in the roguish language.

Bálco, an out ietting corner of a house. Also a skaffold or stage. Also as Balcóne.

Balconáte, the portes of a ship.

Balconáto, windowed.

Balcóne, any window, namely a bay window. Also a bulke or stall of a shop.

Balconiera, an idle window-gazer. Also as Balconáte.

Balcoráre, to burglarie, to hooke and pilfor out at windowes.

Balcoráro, a Burglarier, a hooker out at windowes.

Baldácca, a tipling-house, a common tauerne, it was wont to be the name of an Inne or common tauerne in Florence, it is also taken for Babilon or the whore of Babilon.

Baldácco, as Baldácca.

Baldachíno, a Canapie or cloth of state.

Baldaménte, bouldly, saucily.

Baldánza, boldnesse, saucinesse, hardinesse.

Baldanzosaménte, boldly, vndauntedly

Baldanzóso, bolde, saucie, presumptuous.

Baldézza, as Baldánza.

Baldigráno, a retailer, one that sels small wares and by retaile.

Báldo, as Baldanzóso.

Baldocchíno, as Baldachíno.

Baldória, a great bonefire or feude ioy, or suddaine great flash and flame which suddenly passeth away. Also as Baldánza.

Baldósa, bolde, saucie. Also a kind of croud or country fiddle. Also a certain country dance.

Baldosaménte, boldly, presumptuously.

Baldrácca, as Baldácca. Also a common strumpet or filthy whore.

Balduíre, ísco, íto, to stuttre, to stammer or lispe in speach.

Balduità, a stammering or stutting or lisping in speach.

Baléna, a great whale-fish.

Balenáre, to twinkle, to mooue or stir in haste as lightning doth, to flash, to glimmer, to glimps, to sparkle, to glitter, to lighten. Also to stammer with fast speaking.

Balenáti, little or yoong whales.

Baleniéra, a kind of light Pinnace.

Baléno, a twinkling, a lightning, a glimpes, a suddaine flashing. Also a suddaine.

Balestra, any kind of Crosse-bow or tillar. Also a certaine engine of warre to batter walles.

Balestráre, to shoote in or with a crossebow.

Balestráro, a crosse or stonebow-maker.

Balestráta, a blow with a crosse bow.

Balestratóre, a shooter in a crosse bow.

Balestriéra, any spike or loopehole.

Balestriére, a crosse-bow man.

Balestrína, a litle stonebow. Also a certaine instrument vsed by Pilots.

Balestrúcci, a kind of martinets or swallowes.

Balía, freewill, auctoritie, choise, freepower.

Bália, a she nurse or foster-mother.

Baliággio, a bailiage or bailiwike.

Baliáto, as Baliággio.

Balíce, any kind of male or clokebag.

Balína, a kind of hearbe.

Bálio, a he-nurce. Also a Bailife, a gouernour.

Balióso, strong or sturdie in bodily strength.

Balíre, lísco, líto, to bleate as a sheepe.

Balísta, a stockbow, a crossebow, a tillar Also a sling. Also a warlike engine to throw stones.

Balistáre, to shut or batter with a Balista

Balistário, a crossebow-man, or a slinger.

Bálla, any kind of ball or bullet. Also a bundle, a rowle or packe of any thing.

Balladóre, an vpperdecke or Ourelope.

Bálla gátte, a kind of ship or flatboate.

Ballanzuóla, a kind of fouling net.

Balláre, to dance, to hop, to skip. 



Ballaríno, a dancer, or teacher to dance.

Balláta, a ballad or roundlay.

Ballatóio, any broad and flat place, terrace or floore, a flat foote pace.

Ballatóre, as Ballaríno or Baladóre.

Balleríno, as Ballaríno. Also hee that giues or leades a bride to her husband in Venice.

Balliero, a tennis-ball-maker.

Ballíni, as Ballotini.

Bállo, a ball or any kind of dance.

Balloccággine, idle or foolish droning or gaping about.

Balloccaménto, as Balloccággine.

Balloccáre, to gaze or loiter about.

Balloccióri, rosted chesnuts.

Ballócco, as Badalóne.

Bállo d'ácqua, a kind of moore-hen.

Bállo della bótte, a Christmas game.

Ballonáro, as Balloniére.

Ballónchio, a hand-ball or a foote-ball. Also a country hopping round or morice dance.

Ballonciuólo, a merry skipping dance.

Ballóne, any ballone or great ball.

Balloniére, a Ballonier, or ballone-maker.

Ballordón ballerdóni, simply, gullishly.

Ballóse, a kind of light puft cake-bread.

Ballótta, a round bullet. Also a voice.

Ballottadóre, a caster or drawer of lots or voices by bullets.

Ballottáre, to chuse or draw by lots, voices or bullets.

Ballótte, bullets. Also stinking Horesound.

Ballottíni, litle bullets, rundles or bubles. Also bird shot or haile shot.

Ballótto, a round ignorant meacocke.

Ballóttola, as Ballottíni. Also a weazell

Ballucináre, as Abbagliáre.

Ballucínio, as Abbagliaménto.

Baloardáre, to embulwarke.

Baloardáto, fortified with bulwarkes.

Baloárdo, a bulwarke.

Baloccáre, as Balloccáre.

Balócco, as Ballócco.

Balóne, a kind of hearb.

Balordággine, as Balordía.

Balordézza, as Balordía.

Balordía, dizzinesse, giddinesse or simplicity of wit. Also the staggers in cattle.

Balordiménto, as Balordía.

Balordíre, dísco, díto, to make or become dizzie or giddy or staggering.

Balórdo, a dizzard, a giddy head.

Balordón balordóne, dizzardly, giddily. Also dingle dangle.

Balottára, a stone bow to shoot bullets.

Balouáre, a bulwarke.

Balrauénto, paróla marinarésca.

Balroáre, paróla marinarésca.

Balsamáre, to embalme, to enspice.

Balsamína, a kind of twining weed. 

Balsamíta, Maudline or Costemary.

Bálsamo, sweet balme or the tree that yeeldeth balme.

Balsamóde, a kind of Cassia or Canell.

Balsáte, a kind of blacke stone.

Balsimáre, as Balsamáre.

Bálsimo, as Bálsamo.

Bálso, a little hole in any caue or den.

Balsoláre, to afright or make one start with feare.

Balsoláta, a starting through feare, a quandary for feare to loose any thing.

Balteáre, to belt or girdle about.

Balteo, a belt. Also an arming girdle.

Baltrésca, as Beltrésca.

Baltróni, as Balatróni.

Baluard are, to embulwarke.

Baluárdo, a bulwarke, a sconce.

Baluárte, as Baluárdo.

Balúce, small peeces of gold found in mines.

Bálza, a cliffe or crag of a mountaine. Also a locke or fetter for a horse. Also a certaine head attire that women in Italy vse.

Balzacchíni, buskins.

Balzáno, a horse with white feet.

Balzano ceruello, a skipping, a light or iumping wit.

Balzáre, to bound, to iumpe, to skip, to hop.

Balzelláre, as Angareggiáre.

Balzello, as Bargello. Also as Angaría.

Bálzi, washing sope balles.

Bálzo, a bound of a ball. Also as Bálza.

Balzíno, balsamum or balme.

Bámba, a baby or a puppet. Also a doting woman. Also vaine and childish.

Bambáce, bumbace or cotton.

Bambacello, a kind of painting that women vse on their faces.

Bambacína, as Bambagiuóla.

Bambágia, bumbace or soft cotten.

Bambagína, bumbasine. Also a flanell wastcote.

Bambagióso, soft, nappy, downy.

Bambagiótta, a plum, soft, round, white and dainty kind woman.

Bambagiuóla, bumbasine stuffe.

Bambáro, a childish or foolish baby wit.

Bambasína, bumbasine stuffe.

Bambína, a little babe, baby or puppet.

Bambinésco, babish, childish.

Bambíno, a yong baby or boy child.

Bambíre, bísco, bíto, to dote as a child.

Bámbo, a dotard, a babish gull.

Bambóccia, a cotton cod. Also as Bámbola.

Bambóccio, as Bambíno.

Bambócciolo, as Bambíno.

Bámbola, a baby, a puppet. Also the case of a looking glasse. Also as Bámbolo.

Bamboláre, to play the baby, to dote. Also to foile or lead a looking glasse.

Bamboleggiaménto, as Bambolità.

Bamboleggiáre, to dote, or play the baby. Also to sparkle.

Bambolíno, a little yong babe, or baby.

Bambolità, dotishnesse, babishnesse.

Bámbolo, a yong babe. Also an old dotard. Also the foile or lead of a looking glasse.

Bámpa, a suddaine blaze, or cleane flame.

Bampáre, to blaze or flame cleare.

Bampóso, blazing or flaming cleare.

Bánca, any bench or forme, looke Passáre. Also a banke.

Bancáccia, any filthy bench or forme. Also a certaine engine to mount ordinance.

Bancáli, all manner of benches and formes. Also bench carpets, seat couerings.

Bancarótta, a bankrupt marchant.

Banchétta, any little bench, and in fortification it is a banke left at the foot of the wall and counterskarpe to keepe the earth from falling into the ditch.

Banchettáre, to banket or to feast.

Banchettiére, a feaster or banketter.

Banchétto, a banket or a feast. Also a cushion stoole or bench in a chamber.

Banchiére, a banker or mony lender. Also a bencher.

Banchierótto, a bankerupt marchant.

Bánco, any bench or forme. Also a marchants banke, counter or counting house. Also a bulke or butchers stall. Also a kind of sea fish.

Bánco fallíto, a game at cards so called.

Bánda, any side or shore. Also a skarfe, a swathe or rowler. Also any garding. Also a troupe or band of men. Also a bend in armory. Also any thin plate of mettall to bind.

Bandáre, to gard with any gardings. Also to skarfe or swathe. Also to side or bandy. Also as Bendáre.

Bandaruóla, a banneroll or streamer. Also a fane or weathercocke.

Bandeggiáre, to banish, or cry by proclamation. Also to side or bandy together.

Bandéla, a ring or hammer of a dore. Also a bolt or bar. Also a hinge of a dore.

Bandelle, side corners in a house. Also any bandels. Also those irons or claspes that masons vse to fasten and ioine great stones in walls, vsed also for staples of dores.

Banderáio, an ensigne or standard bearer. Also a crier of a proclamation.

Banderále, as Banderáio.

Banderella, a little streamer or bandroll, a little fane or weathercocke.

Banderése, a knight baneret.

Banderuóla, as Banderella.

Bandiéra, a banner, a standard, an en­



signe, a streamer.

Bandieráio, as Banderáio.

Bandigióne, as Imbandigióne.

Bandiménto, a banishing, a proclaiming.

Bandináre, to make a layband of a skeane. Also to bring a thing to a certaine end.

Bándine, the layband of a skeane.

Bandinella, as Bándine. Also the hinge of a dore. Also a little box or cabinet.

Bandíre, disco, díto, to publish or cry by proclamation. Also to banish, or exile.

Bandíre hóste, to proclaime war.

Bandíti, outlawes, rebels, fugitiues.

Bandíto, proclaimed. Also banished, tenér córte bandíta, to keepe open house.

Banditóre, a proclaimer, a crier. Also a banisher.

Bándo, a proclamation, an act of law published. Also a banishment.

Bándo la testa, when a man is proclaimed for to loose his head.

Bándolo, as Bándine.

Bandóni diferro, plates or bends of iron vsed about cart wheeles.

Bandória, as Baldória.

Banerétto, a knight baneret.

Bángue, a composition made chiefly of the iuice of a plant in India called Bángue, much like hemp, and diuers other pretious ingredients, vsed by the Kings of India to make them mery and drunken, which hath a secret propriety to represent vnto the imagination the things it most loueth and desireth, and to appropriate it selfe vnto the affection and passion of him that takes it.

Banzuóla, any little bench, stoole or seat.

Baobáo, boepeep, or peepingly.

Bápta, a sweet smelling pretious stone.

Bár, a kind of great waight in Ormuz.

Bára, a beare or coffin for a dead corps.

Bára caualleréccia, a horse litter.

Barádra, a bird called in Latin Rubetra.

Barafrazáre, as Paraphrasáre.

Baragella, a publicke market place.

Baragóne, a great long tassell hanging at the end of a doctors hood.

Baráre, as Barráre.

Barátta, a fight, a fray. Also a battell.

Barattáre, to barter, to trucke, to mart, to chaffer or chop and change one thing for another. Also to meddle with, or sell things forbidden by law. Also to bribe or vse indirect meanes for the obtaining ones purpose. Also to forfet or doe against law. Also to scatter or put to rout. Also to play the bareter.

Barattatóre, a corrupt lawyer, one that giueth or taketh bribes.

Barattería, bartring or chaffring one thing for another. Also medling with things forbidden by law, bribing or dealing in hugger mugger. Also buying or selling that for bribes which should be done or giuen gratis; among lay men it is properly that which among Church men is called Symony, indirect dealing, vsed among lawyers. Also forfeitures. Also a scattering. Also a dicing or cheating house. Also a cogging or conycatching tricke.

Barattiére, a marter, a trucker, a martner, a chaffrer, a broker, a fripper. Also a bareter, a briber, a bribe taker. Also a cheater, a false gamester, a cozener, a conycatcher, a foister, a fogger, a cogger, a prouler, &c.

Barátto, a chaffring, a trucking, &c.

Baráttoli, Barattolíni, little pots for muske or drugs. Also a kind of rauenous sea fowle.

Barattolóne, the fifth moode of the first figure of syllogismes.

Barattóro, a little gally or earthenpot.

Barátro, a pit, a depth, a darke deepe, a whirle-poole. Also an insatiate throat or weasand-pipe. Also an vnthrifity spend-all, or wast-good, in bellycheere.

Barba, a beard. Also an Vnckle. Also the curbe-place or chin of a horse.

Barbacáne, a toole that Chirurgions vse to pull out teeth. Also a toole that Masons and Carpenters vse. Also a ietty or out nooke in any building called a Barbicane.

Barbacápri, the hearbe Maides-sweet or Medow-sweet.

Barbachéppo, a Goate with a great beard. Also vsed for a great Ape with a beard.

Barbacíno, a watch or sentinell.

Bárba d' álbero, the knurs or knots, or snagges of the roote of any tree.

Bárba di bécco, as Bárba cápri.

Bárba di Gióue, a kind of thick-growing shrub good to make Arbors.

Bárba del parapetto, the surface of a parapet where the Artillery is planted.

Barbaccíno, a little man both in quality and stature, a dandiprat.

Bárba di gátto., Looke in Bárba di gátto.

Barbágia, a common baudy house.

Barbagiánni, a Screech-owle.

Barbágio, barbarous, rude, heathen.

Barbagliaménto, a dazeling of the sight. Also a confusion or hurliburlie.

Barbaglíáre, to dazle the sight.

Barbáglio, as Barbagliaménto.

Bárbagrígia, a gray-beard.

Barbáio, a Barble-fish.

Barbaniccáre, to play the base fellow. 

Barbanícchi, the rascally base people.

Barbáno, a great Vnckle.

Barbánte, as Furfánte.

Barbanteríe, as Furfanteríe.

Bárba rabbuffáta, a rough or staring beard.

Barbaraménte, barbarously.

Bárbara vóce, corne-flower, blewbottle or hurt-sickle.

Barbáre, to beard. Also to take fast hould as a roote in the ground.

Barbarésco, barbarous. Also a Barbary horse. Also a kinde of Barbary worke or painting.

Barbarésmo, as Barbarísmo.

Barbaríccia, a grim, shagged, Goatish beard. Also fraud, guile, or cheating.

Barbárico, as Barbarésco.

Barbárie, insiuility, barbarousnesse.

Barbarísmo, barbarisme. Also corrupt forme of speaking.

Bárbaro, barbarous, inciuill. Also a Barbary horse. Also a Wood-pecker.

Bárbaróssa, a red beard.

Barbásco, as Verbásco.

Barbásso, a Mariners or Fishers frocke.

Barbassóre, a man that is not, but would seeme old and wise. Also as Valuasóre.

Barbastrello, a night-bat, a rearemouse.

Barbatáccio, a filthy bearded fellow.

Barbazzále, the curb of a horses bitte.

Barbéggia, an old doting woman that hath a foule, wide and driueling mouth, or a filthy and bearded chin.

Barbégghie, a kind of hairy Caterpiller.

Barbello, a Barble-fish. Also a kinde of butter-flie. Also the name of a birde.

Barbería, a Barbers-shop.

Barbéro, a Barbary-horse.

Barberótto, an vnder Barber, or chiefe iournyman of a Barbers-shop.

Barbétta, any little or prety beard.

Barbétto, a rough shagged spaniell.

Barbicane, as Barbacáne.

Barbicáre, as Abbarbicáre.

Barbiccíne, the filaments of rootes.

Barbiéra, a shee-barber. Also a strumpet.

Barbiére, a Barber.

Barbiéria, a Barbers-shop.

Barbiglióni, the haires lor roughnesse about a mans or womans priuities.

Barbíne, a certaine ornament or carcanet about a womans head.

Bárbio, Barbióne, a Barble-fish.

Barbitón, a musicall instrument called a Dulcimer. 

Bárbitonsóre, a Barber. 



Bárbo, a Barble-fish.

Barbócche, a kinde of Apricocke plumbes.

Barbógia, doting or childish folly.

Barbogiáre, to dote as an old man.

Barbógio, a dotard, a dotrel. Also roughbearded or slouenly bearded.

Bárbola, the barbles in a horse.

Barbolíne, the fillaments of rootes.

Bárbolo, a Barble. fish.

Barbóne, a great beard. Also a great rough, and shagged spaniell. Also a Barble-fish.

Barboncelli, the barbes or little teates in the mouth of some horses.

Bárboro, a Barble-fish.

Bárbossáre, to stutter, to stammer, or maffle in speech. Also to mumble, or grumble.

Barbossóso, a stutter. Also a mumbler.

Barbottáre, as Barbossáre.

Barbótto, as Barbózzo.

Berbozzále, a curb for a horse. Also an vnder-lip or chap.

Barbózzo, the chin where a mans beard groweth. Also a horses vnder-lip.

Barbózzolo, as Barbózzo.

Barbozzúto, that hath a great chin.

Barbugliáre, as Barbossáre. Also to garboile or entangle.

Barbúglio, a huddle a garboile.

Barbúta, the beauer of a head-peece. Also a kinde of Eagle like an Ospraie.

Bárbúti, bearded, in Florence they were wont to call their men at armes so.

Barbúto, bearded, hauing a beard.

Bárca, any kinde of Barke, Barge, or Boate.

Barcarízzo, that part of the Ship where the Cocke-bote is fastened.

Barcaruólo, a Barge-man, a Boateman.

Barcáta, a fraught or Boate-lading.

Bárca vérgola, a kinde of gondola.

Barcheggiáre, to goe by Boate or Barge.

Barcoétta, a little Boate or Wherry.

Barchiére, a Boat-man, Wherry-man

Bárco, a Shipping or imbarkeing. Also a Parke. Also as Várco.

Barcolláre, to shake the necke.

Barcóllo, a shakeing of the necke.

Barcóne, any great Barke or Ship.

Barcóso, full of Ships.

Bárda, a barding or trapping for a horse.

Bardáre, to bard or trap a horse.

Bardáscia, an ingle or buggering boy.

Bardasciáre, to ingle, to bugger.

Bardascióne, as Bardáscia.

Bardatúra, a barding of a horse.

Bárde, the bards of a horse.

Bardella, a pad vsed for coults at their first backing, vntil they becom tractable.

Bardelláccia, a Mules pack-saddle.

Bardelláre, to put one a pack-sadle.

Bardellétte, the labels of a miter.

Bardello, a silly noddy, a foolish gull.

Bardíglio, Friers-gray.

Bárdo, light, nimble, saucy, bould.

Bardócco, a gull, a sot, a noddy.

Bardoelle, vsed for Bandelle.

Bardósso, bare-backe without a saddle.

Bareggiáre, to cheat or cog at play.

Bareggiatóre, as Bárro.

Barella, a hand or wheele-barrow.

Barelláre, to carry in a wheele-barrow.

Bargagnáre, to bargaine.

Bargágno, a bargaine.

Barganello, a kinde of bird.

Bargello, a Prouost Marshall, or Captaine of Serieants and Catchpoles.

Bargelli, Silke-wormes.

Bargellíno, a Serieant or Catch-pole. Also an ancient coine in Florance.

Bargieli, the barbes or spurs of Cockes.

Bariáre, to fight at Barriers.

Baricáre, to baricardo, or fortifie with timber or barrels full of stones.

Baricáta, a baricado.

Baricócoli, Apricok-plumbs. Also a boyes play vsed in Italie.

Barícola, a little wheele-barrow. Also a Butter-flie or Lady-bird.

Barigello, as Bargello.

Barigliétto, a run-let or little barrell.

Bariglióne, a great barrell.

Bariláre, to embarrell, to barrell vp.

Baríldo, a colour that Painters vse.

Baríle, any kinde of barrell or such vessell. Also an ancient coine in Italy.

Barilétta, a picture. Also a fashion.

Barilétto, a barrilet, a firkin. Also a pitcher.

Barilótto, as Barlótto.

Barinello, a kinde of Ship or Barke.

Baripto, a kinde of stone like an Agatte.

Baríre, rísco, ríto, as Barríre.

Barlaccáre, to play the gull and foole.

Barlácco, a silly foole or gull.

Barlaffáre, to skar, to gash, or slash.

Barleffo, a skar, a cut, a gash, a slash.

Barlétto, a rundlet, or little barrell.

Barlióne, any kinde of barellet.

Barlótto, a good big barrell or runlet.

Barlúme, a duskie or twilight, a foggynesse or vntransparent light.

Barníre, nísco, nito, as Barríre.

Barnoccáre, to thumpe, to streake.

Barnócco, a thumpe, a knocke, a stroake. 

Barnúffo, as Barbétto.

Barócco, any shift made for good cheere, any thing gotten by hooke or crooke.

Baronáccio, a cheater a cozening companion, a knight of the poste.

Baronággio, the Barony, or Nobility. Also a Barony or his calling.

Baroncello, a Lord, or petty Baron, that hath lands but no title, a Lord.

Baróne, a Baron, a Lord of a Barony.

Baróne di cámpo di fióre, such cozeners in Rome as the Knights of the post in London.

Baróne difráncia, taken in ill part for one that hath the grand pox.

Baróne dimercáto, a cut-purse, a chiefe rogue, a canter that frequents markets.

Baroneggiáre, to play the Baron. Also to cheat, to cunnicatch, to play the rogue.

Baronésimo, the Baronry.

Baronía, a Barony, a Lordship.

Barónzi, cloathes, rags, tatters, clouts. Also foolish teachers.

Barónzola, a play that boyes vse in Italie.

Barópi, a precious stone red and blacke.

Baropiéno, as Barópi.

Barózza, a hand or wheele-barrow.

Bárra, any kinde of barre or stang. Also that part of the neather iaw where the bit resteth one the gum.

Barracchio, the hearb Crow-foote.

Barráre, to barre to embarre, to stang. Also to cheate, to cog, or cozen at any game, namely at dice.

Barraría, a cheating-howse.

Barrattáre, as Barattáre.

Barrattería, as Barattería.

Barrattiére, as Barattiére.

Barrattóre, a Cheater with false dice.

Bárre, looke le bárre.

Barrigello, as Bargello.

Barriéra, a barre where pleading or fighting at barriers is vsed.

Barriére, a Barrister or pleader at a bar Also a fighter at barriers.

Barríre, rísco, ríto, to bray as an Asse or an Elephant.

Barríto, the braying of an Asse.

Bárro, Báro, a cheater at dice.

Barróne, as Mascalzóne, as Barro.

Barroniére, as Tauolaccíno, a base seruant or vnder officer to attend and be commanded.

Bartaldáre, to teazell clothes.

Bartáldi, teazels.

Barúffa, a brabling fray, a bickering, a quarrell, a hurlieburlie.

Baruffáre, to make a brabling fray, to be together by the eares.

Baruóla, as Barútola. Also the name of a bone in the roote of a horse taile.

Barutáre, to boult or siftmeale. 



Barúto, a boulter or boulting cloth.

Barútola, a churning fat. Also a cheesefat.

Bárza, a kind of hulke or great lighter for burden.

Barzellétte, a kind of country gigges or songs or madrigals.

Barzuóle, casting stones for a hauke.

Bása, the base or foundation of any frame, namely of a piller, a ground worke.

Basalísco, as Basilísco.

Basalténo, a kind of marble colured and hard as iron.

Basaménto, as Bása.

Basaníte, a kind of very smooth and partie coloured whetstone.

Basár, a Beozars stone.

Basarúcco, a kind of coine in Goa.

Báschi, running footemen of the country of Baske. Also common raskally people.

Baschiéra, a womans priuitie.

Bascià, a Bashaw, that is viceroy, chiefe gouernour or counsellor to the Turke.

Basciábile, that may be kissed, to be kissed.

Bascialamáno, a besolasmanos.

Basciáre, to kisse, to busse.

Báscio, a kisse, a busse.

Bascióso, kissing, full of kisses.

Basciózzo, a smacking kisse.

Basciuccáre, to kisse smackingly.

Basciucchiáre, to kisse smackingly.

Báse, as Bása. Also a socket in a candlesticke. Also the drug predominant in any compound.

Basíggia, the hearbe Basill.

Basílica, a Kings house, a Princes pallace or Court. Also the liuer veine of any bodie.

Basílico, the hearbe Basill.

Basilicóne, a nut called the Royall nut.

Basilínda, a play called one penny onepenny or come after me.

Basilísco, a Basiliske. Also a great piece of Ordinance so called.

Basiótto, any wooden-boule or beggars drinking-dish.

Basóffia, a kinde of gruel or pottage. Also any kind of light stuffe.

Basíre, sísco, síto, to gaspe the last, to yeeld vp the Ghost, to swoune.

Básole, a kinde of fine drinking glasse.

Basóso, on in a swoune as it were yeelding vp the ghost.

Bássa, any bottom, vally or low dale.

Bassárco, a name giuen to Bacchus.

Bassáre, to abase, to stoope, to descend.

Bassétta, a play at cardes vsed in Italy.

Bassétto, a low base voice or instrument.

Bassézza, basenesse, lownesse.

Bassilíco, the hear be Basill.

Básso, low, base, below, deepe. Also a base in singing. Also narrow, as Pánno básso.

Bassótta, a kinde of Cake-bread.

Bassótto, a good pleasing base-voice.

Bassúra, as Bassézza.

Básta, it is enough, it sufficeth.

Bastagiáre, to play the Porter.

Bastágio, a Porter, a Burden-bearer.

Bastángo, a forke-fish, a puffin-fish.

Bastánte, sufficient, able, enough.

Bastánza, sufficiency, enough.

Bastardáccio, a filthy rogish bastard.

Bastardáre, as Abbastardíre.

Bastardello, as Bastárdolo.

Bastárdi, certain bastard peeces that are neither Cannons nor Culuerings, but differ from both in height and mettale.

Bastardía, bastardy.

Bastardíre, as Abbastardíre.

Bastárdo, a bastard, a mungrell. Also a bastard-piece. Also a wine so called.

Bastárdolo, a blotting-booke, a daiebooke, a house-booke to write euery thing in.

Bastardúme, Bastadize, mungrelisme, vnlawfulnesse.

Bastare, to suffice, to be enough.

Bastáre l'ánimo, to dare, to haue the heart.

Bastáre la vísta, to dare, to haue the courage, to out looke.

Bastáro, a maker of pad or pack-sadles.

Basteggiáre, to put on a pack-sadle. Also to beare burdens or play the Porter.

Basterna, a tumbrell, a dung-cart. Also a little Chariot or Pageant.

Bastétta, a kinde of Potage or boiled meat.

Bastéuole, able, sufficient, enough.

Bástia, a bastion, a skonce, a block-house a keepe in a Castle.

Bastiáre, as Bastionáre.

Bastiére, on that makes Pack-sadles.

Bastína, a packe or Asses sadle.

Bastináre, to sadle with a pack-sadle.

Bastionáre, to ensconce, to blocke, to bastion, to rampire, to flanke.

Bastióne, as Bástia.

Bastíta, as Battifólle.

Básto, a panell, a pad or packesaddle, a dosser. Also a doublet in rogues language.

Bastonágo, as Bastángo.

Bastonáre, to cudgell, to bastonado.

Bastonáta, a bastonado, or cudgell blow.

Bastoncello, as Bastonétto.

Bastoncíni, little stickes. Also billet worke.

Bastóne, a cudgell, a batton, a truncheon, a waster, a staffe.

Bastoneggiáre, as Bastonáre.

Bastonétto, a little cudgell, or staffe or sticke. Also the bastonet of a bridle. 

Bastonieri, whiflers that make roome with their staues.

Bastóso, a porter, a loadesman.

Báta, a raye or skeat fish. Also a bird like a bunting.

Bátalo, a kind of miniuer hood, worne of Doctors in signe of honor. Also a haukes hood.

Batanísmo, a setled time for weeding of corne.

Batátas, a fruit so called in India.

Batedóre, as Battitóre.

Batelláro, a boat maker, or wright.

Batelliére, a boat man, a ferry man.

Batello, any little boat or wherry.

Batéssa, an Abbesse.

Báti, the wild bazill.

Batía, an Abby.

Batícca, a kind of washing tub.

Batinhortensiána, a kind of sperage.

Batinmaría, Crestmarin or Sampier.

Báto, a house bath. Also a certaine measure for liquid things.

Bátolo, as Bátalo.

Batósta, knauish sport, foolish pastime.

Batrachíde, a kind of garment mentioned by Varro.

Batráchio, a kind of sea fish called in French Diable de mer. Also a stone coloured like a frog found in a toades head. Also a kind of vernish or colour to paint vizards with. Also a swelling growing vnder the tongue with an inflamation. Also the hearb Crowfoot.

Batrachíte, as Batráchio.

Battacchiáre, as Barnoccáre.

Battacchiáta, as Barnócco.

Battácchio, a cudgell, a staffe or a batton. Also the hearb Crowfoot or butterflowre. Also as Battáglio.

Battáglia, a battell, a fight.

Battagliáre, to battell, to fight.

Battagliere, a warrier, a man at armes, a fighter. Also a battlement vpon a wall, but properly a flat roofe vpon any house for people to stand and fight.

Battaglierésco, of or pertaining to battells, to war, or fighting.

Battagliéuole márte, warlike or battellous Mars.

Battáglio, a bell clapper. Also a hammer vpon dores to knocke with, a knocker, a clapper. Also a belly clapper.

Battaglióne, a battalion, a maine battell, a great squadron.

Battaglióso, quarelous, battelous.

Battálo, as Bátalo.

Battáta, the Potato roots. Also taken for Sampier.

Batteggiáre, as Battezzáre, it hath also been vsed for Báttere.

Battente, beating, panting.

Báttere, bátto, battéi, battúto, to beat, 



to smite, to streake, to thump, to batter.

Báttere denári, to mint or coine mony.

Bátter de gl'ócchij, a twinkling of the eies.

Báttere il cuóre, to part the heart.

Battería, a battery.

Battesimále, of or belonging to baptisme.

Battésimo, baptisme, christning. Also an ancient coine in Florence.

Battezzáre, to baptize, to christen.

Battezzatóre, a baptizer, a christner.

Batticuóre, a panting of the heart, an anxiety, a suddaine passion.

Batticúli, the tases or bases that horsemen vse behind.

Battifólle, a skonce, a rampier, a bulwarke, a blocke house. Also an ancient engine to batter walls. Also vsed for a belly clapper.

Báttiferro, a forger or iron beater.

Battifuóco, a tinder box. Also the flint or steele belonging to it. Also a gunners lint stocke.

Battifuóra, a gold beaters flat hammer.

Battígia, a strange fit or rauing of mad folkes or such as haue the falling sicknesse.

Battigióso, full of strange or rauing fits.

Battigliuóla, a mill clapper.

Battigráno, a corne thresher.

Battilána, a wooll winder or dresser.

Batti l'oro, a gold beater.

Battimáno, a kind of great waight in some part of Italy. Also a clapping of hands.

Battiménto, a beating. Also a fighting.

Battiménto di cuóre, a panting of the heart.

Battiménto di pólso, the beating of the pulse.

Battíno, as Battimáno.

Battipáli, as Battipónti.

Battipónti, great commanders or beetles of brasse to beat piles into the ground.

Battipótta, a Crampe fish, look Sgramfo.

Battiráme, a brazier, a copper smith.

Battisécula, as Battiségola.

Battiségola, the weed blewbottle, Corneflower, or hurtsickle. Also a zaphire stone.

Battismále, as Battesimále.

Battisóffia, a suddaine feare that makes one to blow and his heart to pant.

Battisoffiáre, to be so dismaid as ones heart panteth and he can hardly draw his breath.

Battísta, a baptizer. Also fine cambricke or lawne.

Battistáre, to baptise, to christen.

Battisteo, a font to batize in. Also a clapper.

Battisterio, as Battisteo.

Battistína, finest lawne or cambricke.

Battisuócere, a kind of hearb or weed.

Battitóio, as Battáglio.

Battitóre, a beater, a smiter, a streaker, a clapper. Also a thresher. Also a threshing flaile. Also a cudgell or staffe. Also a Paper mill. Also a Printers presse-man.

Battitúra, a beating, a thumping.

Bátto, a king of ship or barke, or hulke.

Battocchiáre, to knocke, to clap, to thumpe.

Battócchio, as Battáglio.

Báttola, a possenet or a pipkin. Also as Bátalo.

Battúta, a beating or keeping time in musicke.

Battúto, beaten, smitten, strooken, thumpt battred, knockt, threshen. Also a floore, a pauement, an open terrasse, a causie, a trodden high way, the hard ground. Also a bowling alley.

Báu, as báu báu.

Báua, slauer or driuell at the mouth. Also sleaue or raw silke.

Bauagliuoláre, to embib a childe.

Bauagliuólo, a childes bib.

Baualísso, a piece called a Basilisco.

Bauáre, to slauer or driuell at the mouth.

Báuaro, a childes bib. Also a beauer. Also a friers cowle, or cape of any garment.

Báubáu, boe-peepe. Also a Bugbeare.

Bauccáre, to play boe-peepe. Also to maske or muffle. Also to pry closely into.

Baúcco, a womans maske or muffler.

Baúcco baúcco, as báubáu.

Bauella, any kind of sleaue or raw silke. Also sattin a Briges.

Bauelláre, to rauell as raw silke. Also to picke silke.

Bauelláro, a picker of raw silke.

Báuero, as Báuaro. Also a Beauer or Brocke. Also a stuffe made of raw silke as curled cipers.

Bauiéra, the chinpiece of a caske.

Bauísi, the finnes of any fish.

Báulo, a trunke or chest of leather.

Bauonáre úna náue, to dresse or rub a ship ouer with grease to make it glide the faster.

Bauóso, slauerie, driuely, sluttish, slimie, Also an old apish slauering fellow.

Baurách, a kind of Boraxe or nitre.

Baúrda, a kind of rauenous foule.

Bazaráre, to cheate or conicatch, to shift.

Bazáro, a shifter, a cheater, a coniecatcher.

Bazzárro, an accord, an agreement.

Bazzegáre, to stutter, to stammer, to maffle. Also to lispe. Also to filch, to proule, to purloine. Also to sneake about in hugger mugger. Also to nible. Also to practise or shift for.

Bazzésco, base, vulgare, plebeian.

Bázzica, as Bazzicatúre.

Bazzicáre, as Bazzegáre.

Bazzicatóre, a stutter, a stammerer. Also a shifting companion, a slie theefe or filcher.

Bazzicatúre, filchings, prowlings, purloinings. Also all manner of trash, baggage, luggage, or worne old stuffe. Also cunning shifts and subtile practises.

Bazzichiáre, to shake betweene two hands, to play at handie dandie.

Bazzigáre, as Bazzegáre.

Bázzo, a coine in Germanie of three pence.

Bazzótto, vnperfect, vnpolished, rough hewen.

Bdelio, a tree in Arabia. Also the gum of that tree which is sweete in sauour but very bitter in taste.

Bè, well? how now? how goes it?

Bebbe, vsed for béuue, he dranke.

Be, Be', Bei, vsed for Belli, faire.

Beáre, to blesse or make happie.

Beatificáre, to blesse or make happie.

Beatificatióne, a blessed happinesse.

Beatificatíuo, that maketh blessed.

Beatífico, making happie.

Beatità, blessednesse, happinesse.

Beatitúdine, blessednesse, happinesse.

Beatissimaménte, most blessedly.

Beáto, happie, blessed, blest.

Beatóre, one that makes happie.

Beatríce, a she happie-maker.

Bebbe, vsed of Dante for he dranke.

Bebúlbi, all plants that be bulbous.

Bécabúnga, brookelime, seapurcelane.

Bécca, a skarfe or any fauour else worne about ones arme for his mistresse sake.

Beccacénere, a fireforke.

Beccáccia, a Woodcocke.

Beccaccíni, Snites.

Beccaccióne, a great nodle or big-skonce

Beccafíco, a bird called a Fig snapper.

Beccafíchi maríni, a kind of daintie litle sea-fish.

Beccáio, a butcher, a slaughterer.

Beccaincáuo, a fish whose gall healeth scars of wounds and superfluous flesh in the eyes.

Beccalíte, as Cattabríghe.

Beccaménto, a pecking, a billing.

Beccamórti, as Beccarelli.

Beccáre, to bill or pecke as birdes doe.

Beccáre della padróna, to haue a snatch or billing at his mistris.

Beccarelli, such as helpe to search, to carie and burie the dead. Also Pit or or graue-makers. Also a kind of daintie foule.

Beccarócchi, Woodpeckers or snappers.

Baccaría, a shambles or flesh-market.

Beccarouéglia, the passenger Faulkon that will pray for her selfe.

Beccársi il ceruello, to studie or weary ones wit about any matter.

Beccársi il cuóre, to fret ones heart. 



Beccastríno, a Mattocke or two tined forke. Also a kinde of coopers adze.

Béccati sú quésta, cracke me this nut, swallow this gudgeon.

Baccáta, a pecking, a mouthfull.

Beccatelli, litle batlements that stand vpon walles.

Beccatúra, a biting or pecking.

Beccheggiáre, to play the he goate. Also to cuckold it. Also to goe to rut.

Becchéra, the beake or bill of a hauke.

Becchería, a shambles, a butchers-row.

Becchétto, any little beake or bill. Also a yoong little kid. Also the littlepoint of a friers hood.

Bécchi, bucks, he goates. Also cuckolds Also as Beccarelli.

Becchiétti, a kind of bird. Also a fruit.

Becchígno, goatish, buckish, rammish.

Becchína, a womans priuitie or quaint.

Becchíni, as Beccarelli.

Beccicóso, goate-eyde. Also walle-eyde.

Béccilo, weake, feeble, faint, tired.

Bécco, the beake or bill of any bird. Also a bucke or he goate. Also the beake of a ship or any thing else. Also the socket of a candlesticke. Also a Cuckold.

Bécco di óca, wilde Tansey or Siluer hearbe.

Bécco mal guardáto, a Christmas game.

Becconáccio, a filthy Cuckold.

Beccóne, a gull, a patch, a great cuckold.

Bécco-páppá, a wittoly-cuckold.

Beccorella, as Auosétta.

Bécco-manomésso, a game in Italie so called.

Bécco stórto, as Auosétta.

Becéchi, blazing starres all shaggie compassed with a kind of maine or hairie fringe.

Bechíche, a kinde of pills against the cough.

Béchio, Allhose, Polefoote or Horsehoofe.

Bechióne, Coughwort.

Béde, Saint Maries thistle.

Bedegnáro, as Béde.

Bedóllo, Bédolo, a Birch-tree.

Béen, wilde sage, or horsemint.

Beffa, a iest, a flout, a mocke, a scoffe.

Beffána, a bug-beare, a scarcrow, a mockbegger, a toy to mocke an ape.

Beffanía, as Beffána. Also as Epifanía. but spoken in mockerie.

Beffardáre, as Beffáre.

Beffárdo, a flouter, a mocker, a scoffer.

Beffáre, to stout, to mocke, to skoffe, to frumpe.

Beffatóre, as Beffárdo.

Beffe, as Beffa.

Beffeggiáre, as Beffáre.

Beffeggiatóre, as Beffárdo.

Beffiáre, as Beffáre.

Beffiárdo, as Beffárdo.

Beffiatóre, as Beffárdo.

Béga, an humming bee.

Beghináre, to bighin. Also to cloath in course gray cloth.

Beghíno, a childes bighin. Also a kinde of course gray cloth that poore religious men were, but properly a lay man that in life and manners will seeme to be a puritane, and dissembles religion.

Behemóth, the name of a deuell in Dante, as one would say beast.

Belaménto, the bleating of a sheepe.

Belaníte, a kind of Chesnuts.

Beláre, to bleate as a sheepe.

Belbello, faire and softly, very gently.

Belché, a goodly thing, a faire what.

Beléna, a he whale-fish.

Belétta, as Belletta.

Belfegóre, the name of a deuill.

Belgimí, the drug or gum Beniamin.

Belginí, Belgioíni, as Belgimí.

Beliál, as it were free from bondage, without yoake or commander. Also the deuill. Also an Apostata. Vsed also for a Prophet.

Beliále, as Beliál.

Belído pliniáno, as Cóppa di Gióue.

Belicáto, hauing a nauell or middle.

Belíco, as Bellícolo.

Beligemma, a kinde of precious stone.

Belin-belíno, gently, faire, and softly.

Beliócchio, as Bélo.

Bella bellína, a womans quaint or priuitie.

Bellaménte, faire and softly, fairely. Also conueniently or with dexteritie.

Bellétta, mire, mud, or dead water. Also a pimple or wheale in the skin.

Bellettáre, to paint or make faire. Also to mud or mire.

Bellettatríce, a woman that paints her selfe.

Bellettiera, a woman that professeth, teacheth, or selleth painting.

Bellétto, painting for womens faces.

Bellettóso, muddy, miry, boggy.

Bellézza, beauty, fairenesse.

Bellíco, as Bellícolo.

Bellíco, warlike, marshall.

Bellíco di vénere, an hearbe.

Bellícolo, the middle, nauell, or belly of any thing.

Bellicóso, warlike, marshall.

Bellificáre, to beautifie.

Belliherba, the Daisy hearbe.

Bellíno, pretty and faire.

Bellióne, a Daisie that hath a yellow cup of fiue and fifty little leaues.

Bellírici, a kinde of plumbe or prune.

Bellís, the white Daisie.

Bello, faire, beautifull, sheene. Also womens painting or faces, complection. Also vsed for fit occasion or opportunity. 

Belloardáre, to embull-worke to blocke.

Belloárdo, a bul-worke, a block-house.

Bello che pensáto, faire and throughly thought.

Bellóccío, handsomly faire, pretty, and faire.

Bello e fátto, faire and fully finished.

Bello in piázza, a boaster, a vaunter.

Bello e nuóuo, faire and new.

Bellóne, a needle-fish or Horne-backe.

Bellóra, a weazell.

Bellóre, beautie, fairenesse, sheenenesse.

Bellózza, handsome, smug and faire.

Belo, a white stone with a spot glittering like gold in the midst. Also the bleating of a sheepe.

Beltà, Beltáde, beautie, fairenesse.

Bel témpo hauére, to haue or leade a mery life.

Beltrámo, faire, goodly, handsome.

Beltresche, skaffolds, woodden Castles, Block-houses, or military engines of timber.

Beltro, a mixt greene white and red.

Belua, a wilde beast or dreadfull monster.

Beluardáre, to embulworke.

Beluárdo, a bulworke, block-house.

Beluedére, a faire sight, a place of a faire prospect. Also the toadeyflax or flax-weede.

Belzoíno, the gum beniamine.

Belzebù, as much to say, a man ouer flies or sinning soules.

Bembè, very well, goe to, good enough.

Bémbéne, as Bembe.

Bemína, a measure of about a pinte.

Ben ad órdine, handsomly drest.

Benággia, well may he fare.

Benandáta, a freewill, giuen at going.

Benauenturáto, luckie, happy.

Benauenturóso, luckie, fortunate.

Benauráre, to make luckie or happy.

Benáuro, good lucke, a happy gale.

Benauróso, luckie, fortunate.

Ben-bè, as Ben-béne.

Ben-béne, very well, good enough.

Bénchè, howbeit, albeit, although.

Bénda, a skarfe, a fillit, a swath. Also a haire-lace. Also a bend in armory. Also a mitre, a circlet, a diademe. Also a hose-garter.

Bendáre, to skarfe, to swath. Also to hood-winke or blindfolde, to bend in armory. Also to encircle, to mitre to crowne.

Bendella, a fillet, a ribband, a tape, a bandell, a bandlet, a swathe, a rowler.

Bendelláre, to bandle, to enskarfe, to swath. Also to goe stagring or reeling as a drunkard. 



Bendóni, the labels of a mitre.

Bene, well. Also a mans good or geare.

Béne affetto, well affected.

Benedicente, well speakeing, eloquent.

Benedicenza, eloquence, well speakeing.

Benedícite, a thankesgiuing or grace after meat.

Benedétto, blest, blessed, happy.

Benedíre, díco, díssi, détto, to blesse.

Benedittióne, a blisse, a blessing.

Benefattóre, a benefactor, a well doer.

Beneficáre, to benefite or do well vnto.

Beneficiáto, beneficed, that hath a lot.

Beneficiále, beneficiall.

Beneficiáre, to benefice.

Beneficenza, a benefite, or well doing.

Beneficiário, he that receiueth a good turne. Also on that liueth vpon anothers exhibition or allowance, a pencioner.

Beneficio, a benefice. Also a benefite or good turne. Also a lot in a Lottery.

Benéfico, well doing, good acting.

Benehábbia, well may betyde him.

Benhabbiáto, well had, or well gotten.

Béne in cóncio, handsomly drest.

Bene meritáre, to deserue well.

Benemérito, well deseruing.

Beneplaciménto, well pleasing.

Beneplácito, good will and pleasure.

Benespésso, very often, very thicke.

Benessere, the well-fare, or wealth of any man.

Benestánte, well to liue, rich.

Beneuolenza, beneuolence, good will.

Bengiuì Bengioíno, a perfume so called.

Bengódi, well-fare your heart. Also a faigned name of a country where there is such plenty of all pleasures, that nothing is wanting.

Benguì, as Bengiuì.

Béni, all manner of goods, geare or chattle.

Beni castrénsi, good gotten in war.

Benífero, good bearing or bringing.

Benignità, benignity, kindnesse.

Benigno, kind, benigne, louing.

Benigníssimo, most kind and louing.

Beninánza, bounty, good-will, benignity.

Beníno, as Benígno.

Beníssimo, exceeding well.

Beniuolénza, beneuolence, good will.

Beníuolo, as Benígno.

Ben montáto, well mounted.

Beniuogliénte, well willing. Also a well willer.

Benparlánte, well speaking or spoken.

Ben per lui, well for him.

Ben per tempo, early, very timely.

Bén piéno, very full.

Ben sái, well thou wottest. 

Benseruíto, well serued. Also wel pleased. It is also vsed for a testimony in writing or passeport for the discharge of a seruant.

Ben tornáto, well returned.

Ben trouáto, well met or found.

Bentrattáre, to treat or vse well.

Benuedére, to looke cheerfully vpon.

Benuedúto, well regarded or respected, cheerfully looked vpon.

Benueníre, to welcome.

Ben vénga, welcome.

Benuenúta, a welcome.

Benuenúto, welcome.

Ben venúto & buón' ánno, welcome and a good yeere withall.

Ben vísto, as Bén vedúto.

Benuogliente, wel willing, a wel willer.

Benuoglienza, beneuolence, good will.

Benuolére, to affect, or beare good wil vnto.

Benuolúto, affected, beloued.

Bénna, a kind of tumbrell or dungcart.

Bennánica, a kind of vine or grape.

Bénnola, a wad of clouts or straw to cary with vpon the head. Also the stalke of a cucumber.

Benzoíno, a perfuming gum so called.

Beóne, an Ale knight, a tossepol, a good drinker, a great quaffer.

Béra, a drone, a hornet, a humming bee.

Berbéna, the hearb verueine.

Berbenaca, the hearb verueine.

Berberi, the barbery fruits.

Berbíci, all manner of sheep, vsed for heegoates also.

Berbiciáro, a shepheard.

Bercella, an instrument of war made like an iron beame to batter downe walls.

Bére, bé, o, béuo, béuui, beuúto, to drinke.

Berétta, any cap or bonet.

Berétta da prete, a Priests cap. Also the broad leafed water docke.

Berétta diprete, a kind of new deuised, flat or square fortification.

Berettáre, to cap or put on a cap.

Berettáro, a capper, a capmaker.

Berettáta, a capping, a bonneting.

Berettína, a little cap or bonnet.

Berettino, a night cap. Also a little cap. Also gray or ash colour.

Berettóne, a great cap or bonet. Also a Cap of maintenance as the Maior of London hath caried before him, as also the Duke of Venice.

Bergamótte, a kind of excellent peares.

Bergantíno, a Brigandine or Pinnace.

Berghmella, a tipling houswife, a skolding harlot, a pratling whore.

Berghinelláre, to gad abrode a gossoping as a pratling loue-pot woman.

Bergogliére, as Bergolo.

Bergola, a sheepe that hath the staggers. 

Bergolare, to wrangle, to brabble.

Bergolo, a wrangler, a brabler.

Bergumella, a silly wretched woman.

Berilla, water persley, or yellow cresses.

Beríllo, a berill or seawater-stone.

Beringózzo, as Berlingózzo.

Berleggiaménto, a iogging, a rocking, or wagging vp and downs.

Berleggiáre, to iogge, to rocke, or wag vp and downe.

Berlengáre, to haunt bas Tauerns.

Berléngo, a common tipling-house.

Berlésche, drawing-windowes. Also out baie-windowes. Also skaffolds.

Berli, little lockes, tuffes or bushes of haires.

Berlína, a pillery. Also a cucking-stoole, heretofore called a tombrell.

Berlincióne, a simple gull, an idiot.

Berlínga, as Berlinghiéra.

Berlingacciáre, to feast and make good cheere as it were euery Shrouetide.

Berlingáccio, the thursday before shroue Sunday, when euery man giues himselfe to sport and good cheere, so called. in Florence.

Berlingaccióne, one that loueth to shroue euer and make good cheere.

Berlingáre, to prattle, to skolde, to raile.

Berlinghiéra, a pratling or skolding woman.

Berlingózzo, a kind of simnel or sugar bread. Also a drunken or three mens song. Also the winde or wezell-pipe. Also a bird. Also a tansie made of egs.

Bernácche, barnacles vpon ships.

Bernásso, a sheapheards frocke, with a hoode. Also a thrumbed hat.

Bernia, an Irish or seamans rugge.

Bernoccáre, as Barnoccáre.

Bernócco, as Barnásso.

Bernóccoli, little knobs in wainescot worke. Also swelling of any thumpe or knocke, a bunch.

Béro., a kinde of venemous Serpent.

Berrétta, any cap or bonnet.

Berrettáre, as Berettáre.

Berrettáro, as Berettáro.

Berrettáta, as Berettáta.

Berrettíno, as Berettíno.

Berrettóne, as Berettóne.

Berri, horse-traces, draughts, or fore-cariages for great ordinance.

Berricócoli, Apricock-plumbes.

Berrína, larde. Also a larding-sticke.

Berriuóla, a nightcap worn vnder a hat.

Berrouréri, such Catch-poles or Serieants as attend the Maior or Shrifes of London.

Berro, a tuffe or locke of haire.

Bersagliáre, to hit or shoote at a marke. Also to confine, to limite or bound to a place. 

Bérsagliére, a leueller or shooter at a marke. 



Berságlio, a but or marke to shoot at.

Bersela, to swallow a gudgeon, to pocket vp a wrong.

Berta, as Beffa. Also a Iaye, Dáre la berta, to giue one a flout or a mocke.

Berteggiáre, as Beffáre.

Berteggiatóre, as Beffatóre.

Bertésche, as Beltrésche.

Bertíno, a deepe gray, an iron gray.

Bertolótto, any shift made for victuals. Also a silly gull or noddie.

Bertola, a satchell, a budget or wallet.

Bertoláre, to shift for meate and drinke.

Bertonáre, to abuse maried folkes beds.

Bertóne, a maried mans, or wedded womans secret louer, leman, or adulterer. Also a kind of hulke or ship of warre.

Bertonéga, a kind of hearbe.

Bertoneggiáre, as Bertonáre.

Bertúccia, a monkie, a marmoset.

Bertuccióne, a great Ape or Monkie.

Berúso, as Béro.

Berzagliáre, as Bersagliáre.

Berzagliére, as Bersagliére.

Berzáglio, as Berságlio.

Berzáre, to leaue the markes of stripes or lashes. Also to stalke at with long legs.

Berze, the blew markes of stripes, or prints of lashes. Also long shankes or stalking legs. Also the soles of ones feet.

Besegníni, a kind of rauenous sea-fowle.

Béscio, hath beene vsed of Boccace, for a beast, a gull, a noddie, &c.

Besénfio, swollen, puffed vp. Also pursie or broken winded.

Bésola, a wedge or vnderlaier to shore vp any thing.

Besoláre, to vnderlay or shore vp with any wedge or stay.

Bessa, as Bessería.

Bessaggíne, foolish simplicitie. Also lisping, maffling or faltring in speach. Also as Bessería.

Bessáre, to stut, to stammer, to lispe.

Bessería, any ioy or mirth or feasting made in contempt and scorne of others.

B'esso, a stutting foole.

Beste, in Latin Hirium.

Bestémmia, blasphemie, curse.

Bestemmiáre, to blaspheme, to banne.

Bestemmiatóre, a blasphemer, a curser.

Bestia, any kind of beast. Also a mans priuie parts. Also a Buls pizell.

Bestiáccia, a filthy beast.

Bestiággine, as Bestialità.

Bestiále, beastly, vnreasonable.

Bestialetta, a little or pretty beast.

estialità, beastlinesse, vnreasonablenesse.

Bestialíssimo, most beastly.

Bestiáme, all kind of cattell.

Bestiíssimo, most-most beastly.

Bestífero, beast-bearing or bringing.

Bestióne, a great beast.

Bestióso, full of cattell, or cattell yealding. 

Bestiuóle, all manner of little beasts or vermine, as fleaes, lice, flyes, wormes, &c.

Béstrica, the rogues language, pedlers french, gibrish, fustian tongue.

Betél, an hearbe in India which the Indians chew to voide rheume.

Betetráro, a kind of wine.

Bétilo, a stone in Latin Betilus.

Betónica, as Bettónica.

Bettifrédo, a litle house vpon a towne wall for sentinell. Also a blockhouse.

Bettíno, a page, a knauish, wag, the deminitiue of Benedètto, a Benet.

Béttola, a tap or tipling house, a dicing house.

Bettolánte, as Bettoliére.

Bettoláre, to haunt ale-houses or tauerns.

Bettoleggiáre, to haunt or liue in base tipling houses.

Bettoláro, a keeper of an alehouse or tipling house.

Bettoliére, a common quaffer, an aleknight, a haunter of alehouses.

Bettolináre, an alehouse-keeper.

Bettónica, Betonie, Speedwell, Groundhale or hearbe Fluellin.

Betúlla, the brome-shrub.

Bétulo, a Birch-tree. Also as Ceuránia.

Béua, a beauie.

Beuacchiáre, to quaff, to tiple, to bouze.

Beuacchiatóre, a quaffer, a drunkard.

Beuacchióne, as Beuacehiatóre.

Beuánda, a drinke, a drench, a beuerage. Also a potion.

Beuánda aurea, a decoction made of Sopewort or Fullers weede.

Beuatella, a small draught or drinking.

Beuel tútto, a sound quaffer, or all drinker.

Beuerággio, a beuerage. Also drinking money.

Beueratóio, a watering place for cattell. Also a workemans apron or bib.

Béuere, béuo, béuui, beuúto, to drinke.

Béuer la bríghia, when a horse drawes vp the bit with his tongue.

Béuero, a beauer, a gray, a badger. Also a poole, a pond, or watering pit.

Beueróne, a drench or mash for a horse, swilling for swine. Also a drunkard.

Beuíbile, that may be drunke.

Beuicáre, as Beuacchiáre.

Beuitóre, a bibber, a drinker, a quaffer.

Beuitríce, a woman-tipler or drinker.

Beuóne, a quaffer, a great drinker.

Beuúta, a drinking.

Beuúto, or Beúto, drunke.

Bézar, Bezoar, the Bezoar stone.

Bezúca, an old monkie. Also a withred face.

Bezzaruólo, a pennieman.

Bezzicáre, to pinch, to nip, to pricke, to sting. Also to prouoke or allure. Also to pecke, to bill. 

Bezzicáta, a pinching, a nipping. Also an alluring, or enueagling.

Bezzicatúra, as Bezzicáta.

Bezzo, a small coine in Venice.

Biácca, Ceruce or Spanish white.

Biácca ársa, Ceruse or Spanish white.

Biaccáre, to white or paint with Ceruce.

Biáda, all kind of corne or graine. Also a blade of corne. Also prouander for horses.

Biadáre, to feede or prouander a horse.

Biadífero, corne-bearing.

Biadóso, grainie, full of corne.

Biánca, a blanke. Also a lotterie. Also a coine in Spaine.

Biancáre, to white, to whiten, to blanch.

Biancaría, naperie or white linnen.

Biancastronáccio, a lustie beardlesse lad, a liuely stripling, a sturdie wencher.

Biánche, blanks. Also blankets.

Biancheggiánte, whitish.

Biancheggiáre, to grow white. Also to raile at one secretly and yet to speake him faire.

Bianchétta, a blanket.

Bianchétto, as Biácca. Also somewhat white or whitish. Also a Dace-fish, a Merlane or a Menow fish.

Bianchézza, whitenesse, hoarinsse.

Bianchí, a kinde of small coine called blankes.

Bianchíccio, whitish, sallow coloured.

Bianchiménto, a whitning, a blanching Also any white linnen.

Bianchíne, fine thin blankets.

Bianchíre, chísco, chíto, to whiten.

Bianciárdo, as Bianchíccio.

Biánco, white, pale, blanke, wan. Also a blanke. Also argent in armorie. Also the name of a worme breeding in horses. Also a disease in a horses knee. Also a smelt fish. Also a kind of small coine called a blanke.

Biánco dell' ócchio, the white of the eie.

Biánco dell'vuóuo, the white of an egge.

Biánco mangiáre, a kind of white meate

Biancóne, a great milke sop.

Biancóso, whitish, full of white.

Biancúre, the monthly flowers of women.

Biáos, a tree with whose leaues they couer houses in India.

Biasciáre, to smacker in chewing. Also to mumble as a toothlesse woman.

Biasimábile, blame-worthy.

Biasimaménto, blame, reproach.

Biasimáre, to blame, to checke.

Biasiméuole, blame-worthy.

Biásimo, blame, reproach.

Biasmaménto, a blaming.

Biasmáre, to blame, to reproach.

Biasméuole, blame-worthy.

Biásmo, blame, reproach.

Biassáre, as Biasciáre.

Biastémmia, as Bestémmia.

Biastemmiáre, as Bestemmiáre.



Biáua, as Biáda.

Biáuo, a pale yellow colour.

Biauóso, as Biadóso.

Bibáce, a great drinker, drinking.

Bibía, Bíbbia, the Bible or holy writ. Also the funnell of a but. Also dregges of wine.

Bibliopóla, a Stationer or seller of Bookes.

Bibliothéca, a Library or Study of bookes.

Bibliothecário, a keeper of a Library. Also a Stationer of bookes.

Bíca, a'heape, a masse, a hay-cocke, a stacke or ricke of corne. Also anger or pepper in the nose.

Bícca, as Bica.

Bichiácchie, toyes, fangles, flimflams. Also smackrings.

Bichiácco, a smackering with the tongue.

Bicchieráio, a drinking glasse maker.

Bicchiere, any drinking glasse.

Bicchigno, rammish or goatish.

Bicchignolo, the socket of a Candlesticke.

Biccicálla-cálla, a game vsed in Italie.

Bicípite, two headed.

Bicócca, a hamlet, or little village.

Bicócche, the principall feathers of a hawke.

Bicóllo, a coule-staffe to carry behinde and before.

Bicompósto, twice or double composed.

Bicórnia, a kinde of crooked anuile that Gold-smiths vse.

Biccórno, hauing two hornes. Also taken for strong or forcible.

Bicornúto, twice or double horned.

Bicorpóreo, double bodied.

Bidále. 

Bidellio, a blacke tree, leaued like an Oake, bearing a kinde of gum and wilde-figge.

Bidello, a beadle.

Bidente, a pitch-forke with two teeth.

Bidétto, a nagge, a tit, or little horse.

Biéccole, the hearbe called beetes.

Biéco, sideling, thwart, squinty.

Biéco átto, an vnlawfull thwart act.

Biedóne, blit, blits, or beetes. Also the drugges of hony.

Biellétta, a stone or shel that the Ichneumon vseth to kill the Crokodill with.

Biestémmia, a blasphemy or curse.

Biestemmiáre, to blaspheme, to ban.

Biéta, the pothearbe beetes or blits.

Biétole, beetes, blits, or blit.

Bietolóne, a shallow pated gull.

Biétta, a wedge to cleaue wood with.

Biéttola, as Bettola.

Bíffara, a fidle, a croud.

Biffáre, to fidle, to croud. 

Biffáro, a fidler, a minstrell.

Bíffera, a contrarietie of windes, a blustering, a gust or bery of windes.

Bífera, as Bíffera. Also a woman that hath two husbands.

Bifida-língua, a clouen tongue.

Bifóglio, Bifolie, or Twaie-blade.

Bifólca di cámpo, as much land as a yoake of Oxen can plough in a day.

Bifolcáto, twoforked.

Bifólco, a plough-man, a heards-man.

Bifórca, a pitchforke.

Biforcáto, two forked, forked.

Bifórco piéde, a clouen foote.

Biforcúto, as Biforcáto.

Bifórme, of two shapes or formes.

Bifrónte, bifronted, double fronted.

Bifúlca, any land twise ploughed.

Bíga, a Tumbrill or dung-cart.

Bigamía, the mariage of two wiues.

Bígamo, a man twise maried.

Bigáto, a coine stamped with a Coach drawen by two horses.

Bigátti, all maner of Silke-wormes.

Bigello, a naturall gray, or sheepes-russet.

Bigerógnolo, graish, a word of disgrace, as one would say a gray asse.

Bigheráio, a skoffer, a railer, a Court iester.

Bigiáccio, sheepes-russet or friars gray.

Bighétto, as Cédula, or Bolettíno.

Bígio, homespun-cloath, sheepes-russet.

Bigiócco, as Bizócco.

Bigiuccia, a graish or claish colour.

Bígolo, stem or stalke of any hearbe or flowre. Also as Bicóllo.

Bigóncia, a pulpit or chaire for a common speaker. Also as Bigóncio.

Bigóncio, Bigónzo, a certain great measure that they sell wine by in Florence.

Bigónzolo, as Bicóllo.

Bigóldo. 

Biláncia, a ballance, a paire of skales. Also a square fishing net that is fixed vpon foure stickes or poles.

Bilanciáre, to ballence, to weigh.

Bilanciéro, a waigher, a balancer. Also an ouerseer of waights and skales.

Biláncio, a balancing or making iust weight.

Bíle, gall, anger, choler, melancholie.

Bilicáre, as Bilanciáre.

Bilicáto, hauing a nauell or middle.

Bilíco, the nauell of any body, the midle of any thing. Also a Mill-clapper. Also a paire of ballences or skales.

Biligáto, part of a Wiredrawers bench.

Bilíngue, double tongued, or languaged.

Bilióso, colericke; easily angry.

Biliotátto, billeted in armory. 

Billiárdo, a billiard board.

Bílli bílli, close whispering words.

Bíllio, a play called billiards.

Biltà, beauty, farenesse.

Bilústro, ten yeeres, that is two lustres.

Bimámma, a kinde of vine.

Bímba, a bab, a baby. Also a puppy.

Bimembre, of two members or parts.

Bimembrùto, double limmed.

Bimense, of two monthes. Also the space of two monthes.

Bimento, a double-chin.

Bimestre, a kind of wheate that is ripe fourty daies after it is sowen.

Bímole, of the age of two yeeres.

Binángolo, hauing two angles or corners.

Bináre, to couple and yoake together.

Bináscere, to be twise borne.

Binascenza, a twise or double birth.

Binati, twinnes, or else borne together.

Bináto, twiseborne, twinned, coupled.

Bínda, as Bénda.

Bindáglio, a skarfe. Also a swath.

Bindáre, as Bendáre.

Bíndella, as Bendella.

Bindelláre, as Bendáre.

Bindelláro, a ribond weauer or maker.

Bíno, two and two, two-fould.

Binóme, a double name.

Binómio, that hath two names.

Biócca, as Bicócca.

Bioccáre, as Bioccoláre.

Bioccoláre, to flake as snow. Also to tuffe or tassell.

Biócco, vsed for Biéco, as Bióccoli.

Bióccoli, locks or fleeces of wooll. Also flakes of snow.

Bioccolóso, snotty, sniuely slauery. Also full of flakes of snow.

Biolca, as Bifólca.

Biólco, as Bifólco.

Biónda, wash or lie for womens haire.

Biondáre, to wash or paint womens haires.

Biondeggiánte, shining yellow.

Biondeggiáre, to shine yellow.

Biondello, a goldy-locke yongue man.

Biondella, the hearbe Centory, so called because washing ones head with it, it makes ones haire yellow. Also a goldylocke wench.

Biondézza, sunne-shine colour.

Bióne víno, a kinde of salt-wine made of Palmes.

Bióua, raine or drizle.

Bioúato, rained, drizled.

Bipálio, a grubbing axe.

Bipálmo, two handfull broad or long.

Bipánne, as Bip énne.

Bipara, that hath brought foorth twise.

Bipartíre, to deuide in two parts.

Bipartíto, deuided in two parts.

Bipedále, two foot broad, wide or long. 



Bipéde, two footed, hauing two feet.

Bipénne, a twale or twybill. Also hauing two wings.

Bírba, a close or slie knauish tricke.

Birbáre, to play the slie knaue.

Birbilegio, as Priuilegio, a priuiledge.

Birb óne, a wandring rogue.

Birbóso, full of crafty knauery.

Birciáre, to become or looke wall eide.

Bírcio, wall eide.

Biréme, a gally with two ranges of oares.

Birétta, as Berétta.

Birettíno, as Berettíno.

Birgándro, a kind of wild goose.

Biricócoli, Apricok plums.

Birlingáre, as Berlingáre.

Birlinghiera, as Berlinghiéra.

Biróldo, a kind of haggas or pudding.


Bírra, the drinke we call beere.

Birraría, a brew house, a beere house. Also the whole company of serieants, or place where serieants, catchpoles and knaues meet together.

Birráro, a beere brewer.

Birreggiáre, as Birroneggiáre.

Birrésco, serieant like, raskaly.

Bírro, a serieant, a catchpole, a paritor.

Birróne, a knauish serieant. Also a subtle knaue, a cheater, a conycatching cantler.

Birroneggiáre, to play the Birróne.

Bírsa, a cheurell skin to make purses.

Bísa, a cold frost bringing wind.

Bisáccia, a wallet, a scrip.

Bisacciáre, to packe or put into a wallet.

Bisacúto, toothpicke or cheruill weed.

Bisánte, a kind of coine in Greece.

Bisarcipoltroncionacciosíssimo. 

Bisáua, a great grandmother, an arch knaue in the highest degree.

Bisáuo, a great grandfather.

Bisbigliáre, to whisper, to buz.

Bisbíglio, a whispring, a buzzing.

Bisbiglióne, a whisprer, a mutterer.

Bísca, a brothell or bawdy house. Also a riotous place where nought but whoring, rioting, gaming, drinking and all licentiousnesse is vsed.

Biscacciáre, to vse or frequent a Bísca, to lauish or riot vnthriftily in whoring and dicing houses.

Biscantáre, to sing and sing againe.

Biscázza, any riotous spending, vnthriftinesse.

Biscazzáre, as Biscacciáre.

Bischénco, a wilyiest, a knauish tricke.

Bíscheri, lute pins or pegs, virginall keies Also a childs pillycocke or pricke. Also a childs hobby horse or riding sticke.

Bischicciáre, to agnominate in words.

Bischíccio, an agnomination of words or concordance as pinche un tóro tíra.

Bischiére, as Bíscheri. Also a harrow or a rake. Also a furner or maulkin.

Bischizzáre, to agnominate or accord words together. Also to draw the first draught of any writing. Also to bespirt.

Bischizzo, as Agnominatióne.

Bischizzóso, phantasticall, doubtfull, full of agnominations.

Biscia, a snake, an adder.

Bíscia scutáia, a tortoise.

Biscia scuteláia, a tortoise.

Bisciáre, as Serpeggiáre.

Bíscio, as Bígio.

Bisco, slime, birdlime.

Biscóso, slimy, clammy.

Biscottáre, to bake, to seeth or rost twise. Also to walme, to simper, or parboile.

Biscottáta, a twise baking, boiling or rosting. Also a walme or parboiling.

Biscottáto, biscuited, baked twise. Also crafty, wily, slie and knauish.

Biscottelli, little bisket comfits.

Biscótto, bisket. Also twise sod or rosted.

Biscúglie, chips, shreds. Also dry shrubs or sprigs.

Bisdósso, bare backt, without a saddle.

Biselli, yong or greene peason.

Bisestáre, to change as the leape yeere.

Bisestíle, the leape yeere.

Bisesto, one day added in foure yeeres, the leape yeere, that yeere that the month of Frebruary hath nine and twenty daies.

Bisgiello, home spun, or sheepes russet cloth.

Bisigaráre, as Bisigáre.

Bisigáre, to be busie or meddle with any thing.

Bisguezzo, as Agnominatióne.

Bisinelle, trifles, or fangles, toies.

Bislácco, a vaine light headed man.

Bisleggiante, sightly, hansome.

Bislíngua, as Bonifácia.

Bislongo, twise long, a slangrell.

Bismálua, marsh mallowes.

Bisnepóte, a great grand nephew or child.

Bíso, as Bígio. Also a pease.

Bisógna, a businesse, an affaire. Also it behooueth, or it must be.

Bisognáre, to haue need, to behoue.

Bisógne, businesses, affaires.

Bisognéuole, needy, needfull.

Bisógni, new leuied souldiers such as come needy to the wars. Also ones needs.

Bisógno, need, want. Also a fresh needy souldier.

Bisógno mi è, it behooueth me. Also I haue need of.

Bisognóso, needy, necessitous.

Bisólco, as Bifólco.

Bisónte, a beast in Polonia like a horse.

Bisónto, a slouenly greasie fellow.

Bisquizzáre, as Bischizzáre.

Bisuntóne, as Bisónto.

Bíssa, as Bíscia.

Bissacconi, great wooll sackes.

Bissilaba, of a double or two sillables. 

Bissino, a kind of fine flax or silke growing in Egipt called Bísse.

Bísso, as Bissino.

Bistárda, a bistard or bastard.

Bistendáre., 

Bistentáre, tediously to carke and care, to pine and languish, looke Stentáre.

Bisténto, tedious care or languishment, looke Sténto.

Bisticciáre, to discourse of things not pleasing, and with a troubled mind, to falter in speech as a guilty conscience. Also to equiuocate in words. Also to vse agnomination in words. Also to quip or skoffe at with doubtfull words.

Bisticciárla con qualcúno, to keepe tacke with one, to stand out, or not to yeeld.

Bistíccio, a bistike. Also an equiuocation, an agnomination. Also a faltring speech.

Bisticcióso, full of equiuocation, doubtfull speeches, or ambiguity.

Bistigiáre, as Bisticciáre.

Bistígio, as Bistíccio.

Bistigióso, as Bisticcióso.

Bísto, a kind of waight or bundle.

Bistórta, snakeweede, bistort, oysterloite, or adderwort.

Bistórto, twise crooked, very crooked.

Bistrattáre, to misuse or euill entreat.

Bisuccíso, twise killed.

Bisúlco, forked or clouen footed.

Bithímo, hony of both sorts of thime.

Bitontóni, a kind of great figs.

Bitórze, swellings of stripes, knobs, bunches.

Bitorzoláre, to goe or make crankling.

Bitórzolo, a crankling in and out.

Bitorzolúto, crankling, full of windings. Also knobby, crabbed, or clustry.

Bíttia, a kind of serpent.

Bittóre, a fowle called a Bittor.

Bitumáre, to ciment or clam together.

Bitúme, ciment, lime, clay, pitch, tar, rosin or any burning, slimy, or clammy sulphrous matter.

Bituminóso, pitchy, clammy, claish, sulphury.

Bitúro, a kind of beast that gnaweth vines in Campania. Also buttre.

Biuáluo, two fold or opening two waies. Also that hath double skales or huskes.

Bíuio, a high way parting in two.

Bíui, a swallow.

Biúmbe, a kind of croud or fidle.

Biúta, any face painting or bedawbing.

Biúto, as Beuúto, drunke.

Bíze, a coine in India worth halfe a crowne.

Bizzarraménte, madly, phantastically.

Bizzarría, toyishnesse, phantasticalnesse.

Bizzarríre, rísco, ríto, to grow or become humorous, toyish or phantasticall.

Bizzárro, phantasticall, humorous, toyish, fangled, selfe conceited. 



Bizzeffi, pelfe, trash, id est, mony.

Bizzer, vsed for Messére, sir, Master.

Bizzicáre, to pinch, to snip.

Bizzócca, a puritane dissembling woman.

Bizzoccáre, to play the dissembling puritane.

Bizzócco, a frier of the third order of Saint Francis, but taken for a dissembling puritane.

Bizzúcche, monkies, apes, pugs.

Bladiséri, as Fióre campése.

Blandiménti, blandishments, flattrings, fawnings.

Blandíno, a kind of plate candlesticke to fasten to a wall.

Blandíre, dísco, díto, to blandish, to fawne vpon, to flatter.

Blandítie, as Blandiménti.

Blándo, blandishing, gamesome, blith, fawning, flattring.

Blapsigonía, an abortiue or vnperfect hiue of bees.

Blasonáre, to blazon or display armes.

Blasóne, a blazon of armes.

Blasonería, blazonry of armes.

Blasoniere, a blazoner of armes.

Blátta, a blind beetle.

Blattária, the hearb Purple, Moth mullein, Langwort, or Taper wort.

Blatteráre, to bleat as a Lambe. Also to cry as a Camell. Also to noise or clatter.

Blechnóne, a kind of Ferne.

Blecónia, penny roiall or pudding grasse.

Blennóri, a kind of Mullet fish.

Blesággine, a stammering or maffling.

Blesare, to stammer or maffle in speech.

Bléso, tongue tide or stammering.

Blesúra, as Blesággine.

Blínda, a blinding bord for a curst cow, but properly a certaine fence made for skouts and sentinells of bundels of reeds, canes or Osiers to hide them from being seene of the enemy, called of our soldiers a blind.

Blíto, Blit, Blits or Orach hearb.

Bóa, Bóra, mud, bog, or mire. Also a kind of venemous serpent. Also a disease like the purples, red gums, or meazels rising in little blisters.

Boáccia, a filthy mud or quagmire.

Boáccio, a great beast like an oxe.

Boáre, a cow to calue, a cow to goe to bull. Also to bellow as an oxe.

Boarína, a titmouse or siskin.

Boáro, an oxe or cow heard.

Boázzo, a filthy oxe. Also bull beefe.

Bóba, mud, mire, bog, puddle, quag.

Bobólco, as Bifólco.

Bobólge, a wallet, bag or satchell.

Bóca, a sea fish that belloweth as a bull.

Bocasía, a kind of malmesie wine.

Bócca, a mouth, the mouth of a hauen.

Bócca, looke tiráre di bócca.

Bócca del córno, the hornes mouth. Also the North starre.

Bócca del fórno, an ouens mouth. Also a filthy mouthed knaue.

Bócca d'óro, golden mouth. Also monie.

Boccadúra, the mouth or mouthing of any thing. Also the mouth, height or diameter of any peece of Ordenance.

Bócca in cápo, a fish, in Latine Callionimus.

Boccála di ferro, a little iron hoope with in the naue of a wheele seruing to keep the naue from wearing, our gunners cal it a box.

Boccaláro, a Poter or Pot-maker. Also a quaffer, a tospot, a tipler.

Baccále, any kinde of drinking-pot.

Baccále da pisciáre, a chamber-pot.

Boccalétto, a little drinking-pot.

Boccalíno, a little crewse or pot. Also a spout pot or any eawer.

Boccámc, the mouth of any thing.

Boccaríco, a tribute paide so much for euery head or mouth.

Boccaruólo, any little pot or crewse.

Boccasíno, a slight stuffe called Bocasin, or Calimanco. Also Calico. Also Bukeram. Also a certain garment or mantle that women weare ouer their gounes.

Boccáta, a mouthfull, a mouthing. Also a word vsed when on is about to tell a thing and knowes not what it is, or that a scholler would faine read his lesson and cannot, and we by some signe or voice would let him know that he is out, and saies he wots not what, we vse to say Boccáta, as in English, Tush, yea in my other hose, iumpe as Germans lips, and such other phrases.

Boccatúra, as Boccadúra.

Bócce, the hollow pits of the cheekes.

Boccelláto, a kind of fine bisket bread.

Boccheggiáre, to play or checke with the mouth as some ill horses doe. Also to flurt with the mouth. Also to grouell on the ground with the mouth downeward. Also to make mouthes or blurt with ones lips.

Bocchétta, a little mouth.

Bocchello, the mouth or spout of any pot or ewer.

Bocchétto, a posie or nosegay of flowers.

Bocchína, Bocchíno, any little or pretty mouth. Also that stalke or necke of a bullet which in the casting remaines in the necke of the mould, called of our Gunners the bur of the bullet.

Bóccia, a round viale of glasse. Also a kind of Limbecke or receptory. Also a cupping glasse. Also a bud or blossome of a flowre.

Bocciáre, to voice, to name a loud.

Boccicáta, Boccicóne, as Boccáta.

Bóccie di róse, rose-buds.

Bocciéro, a butcher. 

Boccína, yongue beefe or veale.

Boccináre, to whisper, to buzze.

Boccinaménto, a whispering, a buzzing

Baccíno, a yongue runt, steere or heafer. Also a little mouth.

Boccinólo, a silke cod, a muske cod.

Bocciolóso, full of buds or blossoms. Also full of cupping glasses or Limbeckes.

Bocciuólo, the ioynts of a reede or cane. Also the cod of a silke-worme. Also that part of a horne, of a cornet, or of a trumpet which is put to the mouth.

Bóccole, stones giuen to haukes.

Boccóla, an amulet or preseruatiue against poison, charmes or infection worne about ones necke in forme of some iewell or other.

Boccoléccia, a swiuell of a chaine. Also a steele to strike fire with.

Bóccolo, a bud of any blossome or flowre.

Boccolóre, as Bóccolo.

Bocconáre, to morsell or mince into bittes or mammocke. Also to grouell on the ground with the face downeward.

Bocconáta, a mouthfull, a mouthing.

Bocconcelláre, to eat minsingly.

Bocconcello, any little morsell or bit.

Bocconcíno, a little morsell or bit.

Boccón d' Adámo, the bone that some men haue sticking out in their throat.

Boccóne, a morsell, a bit, a mouthfull, a mammock. Also a great mouth. Also a gunners wad or tampion. Also groueling on the ground with the face downeward.

Bocconeggiáre, to eat minsingly.

Boccóre, Buck-wheat, or corne.

Boccúccia, a little simpering mouth.

Boccúto, that hath a mouth.

Bóce, the voice of any creature.

Bociáre, to voice or call a loud.

Bocína, a smale low voice.

Bocináre, as Bucináre.

Bocinaménto, as Bucinaménto.

Bóda, the plague or pestilence.

Bódda, a frog, a padocke. Also a toade.

Bóe, little red pimples about ones bodie.

Boémo, a Bohemian ducket.

Bóffa, Buffa, Buffóne, a toade.

Boffetteggiáre, to buffet on the cheekes.

Boffettíno, a kinde of sugar cake.

Boffétto, a buffer or box on the eare. Also any cupboord. Also a paire of bellowes. Also a kinde of Manchet or Cheate-bread.

Bóggie, as Boópe.

Bóghe, as Boópe.

Bogipíro, a fish liuing among rockes.

Bogisto, a kind of button.

Bóglia, pap or water grewell. Also as Bolgía.

Bogliente, boiling, seething hot.

Bógliere, as Boglíre.

Bogliétto, a walme in seething. 



Boglíre, bóglíto, boglíto, to boile, to seeth.

Bóglio, the boiling or sweating of the pot. Also a walme or boiling, or bubling. It hath also been vsed for Voglio. I will.

Boglióne, warme broth.

Bognóne, a bile or bodge or such sore.

Bóia, a hangman, an executioner. Also a kind of great Serpent.

Boiáccio, a filthy gallowes or hangman.

Boiáro, a neat-heard.

Bóie, a kind of great Serpent.

Boiésco, hangman-like, knauish.

Boiúto, vsed for Bonaiúto, good helpe.

Bolásco, a fish called a Pearch.

Bolbitóne, any yong cattell, that feedes abroade in heard.

Bolcello, a litle worme breeding between the skin and the flesh.

Bolcionáre, to shoot or hit with a bolt or shaft.

Balcióne, a boult, or a shaft. Also a kind of pickax to breake stones with.

Bóle, markes of old sores or plaisters.

Bolermínio, as Boloarméno.

Bolgétta, a little budge.

Bólgia, a budget. Also a gulfe-hole.

Bolgiáro, a budget-maker.

Boldóne, a pudding made of blood.

Boldoniére, a pudding maker.

Bolétta, a Shoomakers tacke or little naile.

Bolétti, a kind of Mushroms.

Bolgicchíno, a little budget. Also a kind of torture called the boot.

Bolíde, a blazing Starre like to a lance, burning all ouer and drawing a long taile.

Bolíno, a cizell to cut stone with.

Bólla, a round viale of glasse. Also a marking or branding iron, a seale, a stamp, a bulle, a print. Also a blister, a wheale, a push, a bladder, a bubble. Also a stud, a bosse or any great round headed naile.

Bolladóre, a brander, or a branding iron.

Bolláre, to marke or brand, to seale, to stamp. Also to blistar, to bubble, or bladder.

Bollário, a booke of bulles or priuiledges.

Bolláro, a branding iron. Also a brander.

Bollatúra, a branding, an impression.

Bollente, boiling, seething, skalding.

Bollétta, a scedule, a docket, a ticket, a bill, a note. Also dry mudde or claish earth. Also a shoomakers take or litle naile.

Bollettíno, as Bollétta.

Bollifóla, as Bollisóla.

Bollicáme, as Bulicáme.

Bollicína, any little pimple or pustle.

Bolliménto, a steame, or boiling heate. Also a swelling or working of the Sea.

Bollíno, a little seale or stamp. Also a little bubble. Also a pounce or pouncer.

Bollire, bóllo, bollíto, to boile, to seethe.

Bollisóla, a pustle, a pimple, a scab.

Bollita, any pap or grewel.

Bollitúra, as Bolliménto.

Bóllo, a branding iron, a seale or stamp. Also a marke. Also a waume or boiling.

Bollolíne, pustles or pimples in the skinne.

Bollóre, a boiling heate, a suddaine waume, a steame, a bubbling or boiling of waters.

Bollóso, blistered, full of blisters or sores.

Bólo, a draught of fishes drawen in a net. Also the forme of a medicine, that may be giuen in grosse at a kniues point.

Bolóa, a precious stone found after great storms.

Boloarméno, a kinde of yellow and reddish earth good against poyson and infection, growing in Armenia, called Bole.

Bologníno, a kinde of smale coine.

Bolpíno, a fish which hauing swallowed a hooke, doth cast vp all his entrailes with it and so saues himselfe.

Bolseggiáre, to cough in the lungues, to blow and puffe as a broken-winded horse.

Bolsína, pursinesse, or cough in the lungues, but properly the broken wind of a horse.

Bolsino, as Bolsína.

Bolsiuo, as Bolso.

Bólso, pursy, short or broken winded, sicke of the lungues. Also puft or swollen.

Bolzelli, the wardes of a locke.

Bólza, a budget.

Bolzacchíni, buskins.

Bolzo, as Bólso.

Bolzonáta, a shoot with a bolt.

Bolzonáre, as Bolcionáre.

Bolzóne, as Bolcióne.

Bolzonelli, the ribs or reemes of a wheele. Also the little ribs in a horses bit.

Bómba, Looke A bómba, a home, a mans owne rest or habitation. Also a kinde of boies play in Italy. Also moistned or steeped in liquor.

Bombáce, as Bombágia.

Bombágia, all maner of cotton woll.

Bombagiáre, bumbasin made of cotton. Also to bombaste or cotten.

Bombagiáro, a carder of cotten woll or bumbaste.

Bombára, furie, haste, or hurlieburlie with a great noise.

Bombárda, any kind of bumbard.

Bombardáre, to bumbard or cannon.

Bombardáro, a gunner or maker of guns.

Bombardésco, of or pertaining to guns.

Bombardéuole, as Bombardésco.

Bombardiera, a spikehole to shoot out at.

Bombardiére, a gunner, a canonier.

Bombardisóna, bumbard, sounding.

Bombáre, to hum or buzze as bees doe. Also to resound as a gun or make a report. Also to steepe or moisten in liquor.

Bomberáca, gum-Arabike.

Bombíce, a silke worme readie to spin.

Bombétto, the drinking or bibbing that is giuen to children.

Bombície, a kind of long slender cane.

Bombicína, as Bombína.

Bombiláre, as Bombáre.

Bombílo, a silke worme of the first grouth. Also a kind of waspe.

Bombína, any kind of bombasine stuffe, tiffanie or cipres.

Bombitáre, as Bombáre.

Bómbo, a humming, a buzzing, a resounding hoarse voice. Also the word that children call their drinke by, as our children say Ninne or Bibbe.

Bombóne, a kind of kernell that comes in the fat of a man.

Bomólcho, a cauilling fellow, one that prefers gaine before friendship.

Bonaccéuole, that can or may be calmed or appeased.

Bonáccia, a calme or faire weather at Sea.

Bonacciáre, to calme or grow faire weather, to quiet, to asswage.

Bonaccióso, calme, quiet, peacefull.

Bonága, whin, petiewhine, Cammocke, restharrow, or Groundfurze.

Bonamáno, a new yeares gift, a reward. drinking money, a good hansell.

Bonariaménte, debonairly, honestly.

Bonarietà, honestie, goodnesse, vprightnesse.

Bonarità, as Bonarietà.

Bonário, honest, vncorrupt, deboraine.

Bonarmínio, as Boloarméno.

Bonáso, a beast as big as a bull with great hornes, but bending backe.

Boncinello, that iron of a lock that goeeth into the hollow of a key.

Bóncio, a kind of fish.

Bonello, a nicke-name for tame asses or heafers.

Bonettáda, a capping, a bonetting.

Bonétto, a bonnet, a cap. Also a fish.

Bonifácia, horsetoong, toongwort, toongblade, or double tongue. 



Bonificaménto, any profit or encrease comming of lands.

Bonificáre, to make good. Bonificáre cámpi, to rent out lands or fields.

Bonigóldo, as Bilíco.

Bónissimo, most, or excellent good.

Bonità, goodnesse, vprightnesse.

Bóno, as Buóno.

Bonóga, as Bonága.

Bón prò, as Buón prò.

Bón prò ui fáccia,  as Buón prò.

Bontà, goodnesse, honestie, bountie.

Bontáde, as Bontà.

Bontà del mio signóre, god a mercie my Lord.

Bontadóso, full of goodnesse or bountie.

Bonzóle, a kind of haggas or pudding.

Boóba, as Boópe.

Boópe, a strange fish hauing his scales backward, called in Latin Boops.

Boóte, a starre following Charleswaine. Also a Serpent that liues by milke of rudder beasts.

Bopígro, a fish liuing in rockes.

Bóra, as Bóa.

Boráce, Boraxe that Goldsmiths vse.

Boracchiáre, to gluttonise, as Crapuláre.

Boráccia, a boracho or bottle made of a goates skin such as they vse in Spaine.

Boraciere, a Boraxe boxe.

Boragóia, hath beene vsed for a bottle.

Boranéze, a kind of tree in India.

Borásca, as Burásca.

Borazzáre, as Burattáre.

Borázzo, as Burátto.

Bórbo, as Bórgo.

Borbócca, a kind of Sea-fish.

Borbogliaménto, as Imbróglio, a tumultuous insurrection, a hurlieburly.

Borbogliáre, to hurlieburlie, to rise tumultuously.

Borbóglio, as Borbogliaménto.

Bórbora, a sucking pigge.

Borbottaménto, a grumbling a muttering.

Borbottáre, to grumble, to mutter.

Borbottoláre, to grumble, to mutter.

Borchiáre, to bosse, to stud.

Bórchie, bosses or studs, the bosses of a bridle. Also the hanging lips of a mule.

Bórda, the name of a saile in a ship.

Bordáglia, as Bródaglia, the base rascacitie, or skum of common people.

Bordáre, to border or brim about. Also to borde a ship.

Bordatúra, a bordering, a brim. Also a cheuron in armorie. Also a bording of a ship.

Bordelláre, to haunt brothell houses.

Bordelleggiáre, as Bordelláre.

Bordellétti, foolish or whorish toyes.

Bordelliére, a whoremonger.

Bordello, a brothell house.

Bordína, a litle saile neere the prowe of a ship.

Bórdo, a border, a brim. Also the bording of a ship. Also a kinde of silke stuffe wouen.

Berdonáli, rafters or quarters of timber. Also such as keep burdons of songs. Also doctors or batchelers wearing tippets

Bordóne, a prop or vnderlaier of timber Also the burdon of a song, or a tenor and keeping of time in musicke. Also the second base string of any instrument. Also a humming noise or sound. Also a shepheards hooke, but chiefly a pilgrims or palmers staffe.

Borea, the Northeast winde, or Boreas blasts. Also a precious stone of a morning skie colour.

Boreále, northren, of the north.

Borella, any round bowle.

Borelláre, to bowle, or trundle.

Botellatóio, a bowling place.

Borelliére, a bowler, a trundler.

Borellóne, a great bowle.

Borfáre, to huffe, to snuffe, to snort.

Borfiáre, as Borfáre.

Borfiaménti, huffings, snuffings, snortings.

Bórfio, a puffer, a huffsnuffe fellow.

Borgáre, to cast or scoure as a hauke.

Borgatúra, casting for a hauke.

Bórge, as Bórchie.

Borgése, as Borghése.

Borghétto, a little borough, a hamlet.

Borghigiáne, as Berghinelle.

Borghinelle, as Berghinelle.

Borghinétta, a burganet, a skull.

Borgnáre, to looke squint-eyde.

Bórgno, bleare-eyde, squint-eyde.

Bórgo, a borough, a suburbe, a towne.

Borgóra, suburbes, boroughs.

Bória, vaine-glory, vaunting ostentation.

Bóriáre, to vaunt, to brag, to glorie.

Boríco, Borícchio, as Borríco.

Boríne, certaine shroudes or ropes in ships.

Boríno, a small pounce vsed by grauers.

Boriosità, boasting, vaunting, proud vaine-glorie.

Borióso, vaine-glorious, full of boasting.

Boriosúzzo, somewhat vaine-glorious.

Bórla, as Bórchia.

Bórnio, as Bórgno.

Bornióla, looke Dáre una bornióla.

Bornitóre, a burnishing toole, a burnisher

Bórno, as Bórgno.

Bóro rósso, red-okre.

Bórra, any stuffing or quilting.

Borrabózza, a fish in Latin Blonnus.

Borráce, Borráso, as Boráce.

Borrágine, the hearbe Borage.

Borrána, the hearbe Borage.

Borráre, to stuffe, to quilt, to bumbaste

Borrattáre, to sift or boult meale. Also to racke, that is betweene an amble an a trot. 

Borrátto, a boulting cloth. Also a stuffe called Buráto. Also a racking pace.

Borreuolménte, stuffingly, gulchingly.

Borríco, a quilted iacket or wastcote.

Borríre, rísco, ríto, to stuffe or quilt. Also to rouze a deere from out his laire

Bórro, the wood called Corke.

Bórsa, a purse or little bag. Also the bladder or cods of a man.

Bórsa pastóris, a shepheardes scrip or purse.

Borsáre, to emburse, or put into a purse.

Borsella, as Borsétta.

Borsétta, a little purse. Also a bladder or blister. Also a glister.

Bórsia, a purse. Also a satchell.

Borsicite, a stone that hath his name of a tree with branching leaues in it.

Borsiére, a purse, a purse-keeper.

Borsináro, a purser, or a purse-maker.

Borsóne, a great purse or pouch.

Borsióne, as Borsóne.

Borsótto, a handsome great purse.

Bórza, a purse, a pouch.

Borzacchináto, that hath buskins on.

Borzacchinétti, litle buskins.

Borzacchíni, buskins, fine bootes.

Borzáto. 

Borzétta, a litle purse.

Bósca, a bird called a Tocard.

Boscáglia, as Boxscággi. Also a great country or circuit of woods, a forest.

Boscággi, all manner of boscage whether it be naturall or in caruing or in painting

Boscaiuólo, a woodman. Also a little groue.

Boscáre, to grow to wood.

Boscaréccio, rurall, sauage, siluane.

Boscatóre, a wood wand, a woodman.

Boscheggiáre, to liue or frequent in woods. Also to grow to woods.

Boscheréccio, as Boscaréccio.

Boschétto, a groue, a thicket, a little wood, a cops of wood. Also a rispe, a lush or lime bush to catch birdes with.

Boschífero, wood bringing or bearing.

Bósco, a wood, a forest, a groue.

Bofeóso, wooddie, full of woods.

Bosécchie, as Busécchie.

Bosfóro, a straight or straightnesse thorough which Seas enter one into another, some take it to import a passage of an oxe or cow.

Bósima, a kind of yeast or gum that weauers vse to stiffen their linnen cloth with.

Bosimáre, to stiffen linen cloth.

Bossétto, a piece of round that a shoemaker vseth to set on his knee and sow his worke vpon it.

Bossíta, Bossitella, a little boxe.

Bósso, the tree or wood called Boxe. Also a fish called the boxe-fish.

Bóssola, a boxe wherein mariners keepe 


their compasse. Also taken for a mariners compasse.

Bossoláre, to put into a boxe.

Bossolétto, a little round boxe.

Bóssolo, an ointment boxe. Also a boxetree.

Bossóro, a cod of raw silke.

Bósta. 

Bostrichíte, a stone of the colour of a womans haire.

Bostrízzo, as Bottaríssa.

Bóta, a grunting fish called a Molebout.

Botáre, to vow, to vouch, to promise.

Botárgo, a salt meate made of fish.

Batáuro, a kind of beast incold countries.

Botéro, butter.

Botináre, to mutinie. Also to bootie.

Botinatóre, a mutiner. Also a booter.

Botíno, a bootie. Also a mutinie.

Botinóso, mutinous, turbulent.

Botíro, butter.

Botiróso, full of butter, fat.

Botíuo, of, or belonging to a vow.

Bóto, a vow, or a wilfull promise.

Bótolo, as Bóttolo.

Botonaría, the blew or Globe dasie.

Botonománte, a deuiner by hearbs.

Botonomantía, diuination by hearbs.

Bótri, Oke of Capadocia or Ierusalem.

Botríno, as Bótri.

Bótrio, a disease or sore in the eies.

Botríte, a kind of brasse ore gathered in the roofe of furnaces. Also a kind of blacke stone.

Bótta, a blowe, a stroke. Also a time. Also a toad. Also the working or surging of the sea. Also a fish called a Gull or Millers thumb.

Bottáccia, a filthy toad. Also as Bóta. Also a filthy But or hogshead. Also a great flagon or bottle.

Bótta difíco, looke Tiráre.

Bótta digrasello, that which our farriers call stifeling.

Botállo, a barrilet or rundlet or firkin.

Bottána, a kind of flanell stuffe.

Bottarello, the calfe of the leg.

Bottaríssa, a kind of Eelepout.

Bottáro, Bottáio, a Cooper or tubmaker.

Bóttascudáia, a tortoise.

Bottáto, booted, that hath boots.

Bótte, a but, a barrell, a pipe or hogshead. Also bootes. Also times.

Botté, stripes or blowes.

Bottéga, any shop or workehouse.

Bottegáro, a shop keeper.

Botteghiére, a shop keeper.

Botteghíno, a little shop or stall.

Bottegíno, a little rundlet or firkin. Also the hole of a priuy or iakes.

Bottéglia, a flagon or bottle.

Bottegliáre, to put into flaggons or bottles.

Bottegliére, a butler, or bottle man.

Bottegliería, a buttry, a bottle house. 

Bottegóne, any great shop, vsed also for a wine tauerne or seller.

Bottegúccia, a poore shop or stall.

Bottéro, a cooper.

Bottésca. 

Botticelle, little rundlets or barrels.

Botticíno, as Bottegíno.

Bottíglia, a bottle or a flagon.

Bottigliáre, to bottle vp.

Bottigliére, a butler, a bottle man.

Bottigliería, a buttry or bottle house.

Bottiglióne, a great flagon or bottle.

Bottinaménto, as Abbottinaménto.

Bottináre, as Abbottináre.

Bottíni, buskins or thin boots.

Bottíno, as Abbottinaménto, a booty.

Bótto, as Bótta, Dibótto, quickly. Also a stroke.

Bottofrédo, as Bettifrédo.

Bóttoli, flockes of raw silke.

Bóttolo, a whelp, a puppy a shepheards cur. Also a kind of Eelepoutor Lamprey.

Bottonáre, to button. Also to quip.

Bottoncelli, as Bottoncíni.

Bottoncíni, little buttons. Also yong buds. Also witty quips or tants.

Bottóne, a button. Also a quip or tant.

Bottoneggiáre, to quip at couertly.

Bottonétto, a little button. Also a bud.

Bottonétto di fuóco, an iron toole that farriers vse, with a little knot at the end like a button.

Bottóni di róse, rose buds.

Bottoniéra, a button or loope hole.

Bottoniére, a button maker.

Bottríci, a kind of fish so called.

Bottúna, a kind of course flanell whereof they make sailes.

Boturáre, to butter.

Botúro, butter.

Boturoso, buttry, full of butter.

Bouáre, as Boáre.

Bouáro, a neate heard, an oxe keeper.

Bouázzo, filthy bull or cow beefe.

Bóne, an oxe, a beefe. Also as Buóue.

Boueggiáre, to play the oxe, to liue a beastly stupide life.

Bóue maríno, the sea calfe.

Bouiféro, oxe bearing, beefe bearing.

Bouile, an oxe stall, or cattell yard.

Bouina, of an oxe. Also oxe dung.

Bouíne, biting flies called brizzes.

Bouinità, the nature or quality of an oxe, stupidity brutishnesse.

Bouíno, of the nature of an oxe. Also an oxe stall or neatheards cottage.

Bouoláre, to goe or make snaile-wise.

Bóuolo, any round snaile, a periwinkle. Also a paire of winding staires. Also the place where a rower sits to row in any boate.

Bózza, a botch, a blane, a bile, a plaguesore. Also a cup, or a round viole glasse. Also the first rough draught of any thing. 

Bozzacchiáre, to blister, to bladder, to swell or puffe with winde or dust.

Bozzácchio, as Bozzacchióni.

Bozzácchioni, all manner of worme-eaten, windie or mishapen fruits vpon trees as galles &c. Also puffes or great blisters. Also dried prunes or peares. Also puffs or mushroms full of dust. Also a womans great filthy dugs or paps.

Bózzare, to rough, hew, cast, cut, worke or write any thing. Also to defile, to polute, to sullie, to foule. Also to blister or swell to a botch or blane.

Bozzatúra, a rough, or bungling piece of worke, a hudled or hastie worke.

Bózze, all manner of puffs, monstrous or mishapen fruites. Also any vntimely or abortiue fruites. Also vnperfect or bungling pieces of worke. Also tromperies, vnlawfull parts as when a woman makes her husband cuckold.

Bozzíma,  a hotchpotch or hudle.

Bózzimáre, to hudle vp in haste, to bungle.

Bózzo, foule, polluted, sullied, defiled. Also a bastard or a mungrell. Also voide or emptie or hollow. Also a push or swelling. Also a thorne or brier.

Bózzoládi ouéro Bozzolái. 

Bózzoláto, as Buccelláto.

Bózzolo, a silke cod. Also any stone wrought like a pointed Diamond. Also a knot or crue of men or good fellowes, so that it be not vnder foure and exceede not the number of sixe, for Bózzolo di génte, is a knot or crue of men. Also a fish called a millers thomb or a cob.

Brabílla, an hearbe or shrub.

Bráca, any kind of breech or slope.

Bracále, a trusse for bursten bellies.

Bracáre, to breech. Also to binde about with iron plates. Also to stocke a piece

Bracáto, breeched.

Bracatúra, a breaching. Also the seate of a sadle.

Brácca, a brache, or a bitch, a beagle.

Braccáre, to bracke or mount ordinance. Also to hunt or quest with braches.

Braccéscalicenza, as we say Staffords law.

Braccésco, arme-strong.

Bracchétti, litle beagles, litle braches.

Bracchiére, a dog or brache-keeper.

Bráccia, all manner of armes. Also a horses forelegs. Also yards or ells. Also the finnes of fishes. Also the beames of skales. Also all manner of spreading branches, namely of vines.

Bráccia bóschi, woodbinde or honisuckle.

Brácciale, a bracer or a pouldron, a vantbrace. Also a gantlet.

Braccialétti, bracelets or wristbands.

Bracciaménti, embracements. 



Bracciáre, to embrace.

Bracciáta, an armefull, an embracing.

Bracciatúra, an embracing, an armefull.

Bracciatello, a kind of roule or bisket bread, we call them round simnels.

Braccicáre, to creepe on the ground on all foure.

Braccicóne, creepingly on all foure.

Bracciello, as Bracciatello.

Bracciétto, a little arme. Also a bracer. Also a trunion or a munion as Carpenters call it.

Bráccio, an arme. Also a yard to measure by. Looke Bráccia.

Braccióláre, to brace or reeme about. Also a yard or ell to measure by.

Braccióli, braces or reemes about any thing.

Braccióne, a big arme. Also that part of the arme that is next to the shoulders.

Bracciuóle, little bracer or handles.

Bracciuóli, short linkes and buttons set to one side of the vpset in the place of the water cheine of a horse.

Bráche, all manner of breeches or slops. Also the breech of any piece.

Bracheráro, a breech or trusse-maker.

Bracheríe, all maner of breeches.

Brachétta, a codpeece. Also the varuell or iesses of a hawke.

Brachiéro, a breech-maker. Also a trusse that bursen or open-bellied men vse to weare.

Brachiétto, as Brachétta.

Brácchio, as Bráccio, Also as Brácco.

Brácco, a beagle, a hound, a spaniall, a blood-hound, a draught-hound. Also a hog-house.

Brácco da réte, a setting dog.

Brácco di manigóldo, a hangmans beagle or blood-hound, that is, such Sargeant Catchpole knaues as will giue one an arrest before he be wary.

Bráchecúculi, Cowslips, Paigle, Oxelips, or Palsiwort.

Brachiále, that part of a mans arme that is betweene the elbow and the hand.

Braciáre, as Bragiáre.

Brácie, as Brágie.

Brága, as Bráca.

Braganíno, a kind of coine in Góa.

Bragáre, as Bracáre.

Brághe, as Bráche.

Brághe di ferro, the iron plate fixed vnder the cariage, wherein as in a breech the axel-tree doeth lie, called exle-tree stirops.

Bragheráro, a breech-maker.

Braghésse, as Bráche.

Braghétta, as Brachétta.

Bragiáre, to burne to sinders.

Brágie, quick-burning coles.

Bragiéra, a warming-pan, a chafing-dish.

Bragióle, as Brasuóle.

Brágo, a bogge, a quagmire, a pudle.

Bragóni, great breeches or slops.

Bráma, an earnest desire or wishing.

Bramà, a souldier among the Indians.

Bramábile, that may be wished for.

Bramangiére, a kind of white-meate.

Bramáre, earnestly to wish or couet.

Brámasángue, a thirster after blood.

Bramíte, a longing or earnest coueting.

Bramóso, earnestly, couetous.

Bramosaménte, earnestly wishing.

Branáre, to hew or slice in peeces.

Bránca, the claw, the paw, the fang, the clinch of any beast. Also a mans fist. Also a kinde of Cockle or such shellfish.

Brancáccio, a griping, a scraping or clinching fellow.

Brancadóre, as Brancáccio.

Brancáglie, all maner of gripings, clinchings, fastnings or conioyning together of timber or ston works as it were with clawes or fangs.

Bránca Ieonína, harts-fodder or wilde-parsenop.

Bránca pólpo, a kind of Crabfish.

Brancáre, to gripe, to clinch, to fang.

Brancáta, a handfull, a griping.

Brancátio, as Brancáccio.

Bránca vrsína, bearesfoote, beareswort, bearesbreech, or brankursine.

Bránce, a kind of gurt or fourmentie corne in France.

Bránche d'óro, ouches of gold. Also golden clawes or fangs.

Bránchi, the clawes of Crabs.

Branciáre, to claw faire and softly.

Brancicáre, to gripe, to grope, to fumble or be handling as it were clawing.

Bránco, a heard of swine, a shole of fishes, a flight of birdes, a droue. Also a rhume or catarne descending into a mans throat.

Brancoláre, to grope or feele in the dark.

Brancolóne, gropingly, fumblingly.

Brancorsína, as Bránca vrsína.

Brancùto, hauing clawes or pawes.

Brandiménto, a brandishing.

Brandíre, dísco, díto, to brandish a sword. Also to smug or trim vp.

Brándo, a sword. Also a gad of steele. Also a french dance called a bransel or braule.

Brandoláre, as Brandíre.

Brandóne, a great torch or taper.

Bránla, a french dance called a brensle.

Branláre, to shake or totter.

Bráno, a piece, a cob, a luncheon.

Bráno a bráno, by piece meale or mammocks.

Brasáre, as Bragiáre.

Brásci, plats, beds, quarters or allies in gardens. Also threshing places.

Brasciáre, as Bragiáre.

Brasciuóle, as Brasuóle.

Bráse, Bráscie, as Brágie.

Brassáre, to brue, to embrue

Bassária, a brue-house.

Brassáro, a beere-bruer.

Brassatúra, a bruing.

Brassíca, gardine-coleworts.

Brassíca canína, dogsbane or dogcole. rassíca marína, Sea coleworts.

Brasuólare, to frie in steakes or collops.

Brasuóle, steakes, rashers or carbinadoes.

Bráthia, the hearbe Sauine.

Brauággine, brauing, vaunting.

Brauáre, to boast, to brag, to vaunt, to braue, to swagger, to flant it, to be all a Goigh.

Brauázzo, a roister, swash-buckler, a swaggerer, a flanter.

Braueggiáre, as Brauáre.

Brauería, as Brauúra.

Brauiére, a kind of water-foule.

Bráuo, a brauer, a boaster, a vaunter, a swaggerer. Also braue, gallant or fine.

Bráuo in piázza, a cowardly slaue one that neuer dares quarrell but in the streetes.

Brauóso, full of brauery or vanting.

Brauúra, brauery, swaggering.

Brazzétto, as Bracciétto.

Brazzuóli, all maner of bracers.

Bréccia, a breach, a rupture. Also grauell or rubbish of broken walles.

Brecciáre, to make a breach. Also to reduce to ruble or rubbish.

Bréccie, peble-stones, rubbles.

Brecciéuole, that may haue breach made into it.

Breccióso, full of breaches. Also full of rubble.

Brechinásino, a kinde of Pepper that hath no substance but the huske.

Bréna, a kinde of graine or Turkiewheate.

Brénca, as Bránca, the guill of a fish.

Brencáre, as Brancáre.

Brénda, bran.

Bréndola, a kind of butterfly.

Bréne, horse-harnish for draught, horse traces for carriage.

Brénna, bran. Also an hearbe.

Brénta, a certaine vessell to carry wine in vpon mens shoulders vsed in Italie.

Brentadóri, Wine-porters or measurers.

Brentári, as Brentadóri.

Brenúzzi. 

Bresagliáre, as Bersagliáre.

Bresagliére, as Bersagliére.

Breságlio, as Berságlio.

Brésca, a hunny combe.

Bresuóle, as Brasuóle.

Brétta, vsed for Berétta, a cap.

Brettónica, the hearbe Betonie.

Brettína. 



Bréue, briefe, shirt, or compendious. Also a briefe, a warrant, a note, a word, a motto, an emblem, a posie, a short saying. Also a briefe in Musicke.

Breuiále, a breuiall, a breuiarie, a masse or seruice booke, a note-booke.

Breuiáre, to abreuiate, to shorten.

Breuiário, as Breuiále.

Breuiatióne, an abreuiation.

Breuiatóre, an abreuiator, a registrer.

Breuicciuólo, any litle Breue.

Breuicíno, a litle manuell, a Pamphlet.

Breuiloquénza, short speaking.

Breuilóquio, a compendious speach.

Breuità, breuitie, shortnesse.

Breuiter, in briefe, briefly.

Brezza, a cold winde bringing mist, fog or frost. Also a chilnesse or shiuering.

Brezzáre, to chill or shiuer.

Breza, as Brezza.

Brezzolína, any litle Brezza.

Briacáre, to be or make drunke.

Briachézza, drunkennesse, carousing.

Briáco, drunken. Also a drunkard.

Briacóne, a filthy beastly drunkard.

Briána, as Brionía.

Briánte, spangling, glittering.

Brianzésco, tipsie, drunken, pot-sicke, giuen to wine, whip the cat.

Briáre, to spangle, to glitter.

Briareo, one hauing a hundred armes.

Brícchi, Serieants, catchpoles, shifting raskals, wandring rogues.

Brícche, crags, cliffs, or brackes in hills.

Bríccia, a piece cut from something, as we say a slice, a shife of bread. Also a crum, a iot, a whit.

Bricciólo, a litle stalke. Also as Boccáta.

Bricco, a cliffe or crag of a mountaine.

Briccócoli, Apricok-plums.

Bríccola, a brickoll or rebounding of a ball from one wall to another in a tennis court. Also a tillar or stock-bow to shoot arrowes or boults. Also a creeping hole.

Briccoláre, to brickoll from wall to wall

Bricconáre, to play the rogue.

Bricconáta, a roguish tricke.

Briccóne, as Brícchi, as Briacóne.

Briccóre, as Brícco.

Bríde di ferro, rings or iron bands that binde the shankes of the wheele, which we call the stirrops of a wheele.

Brieue, as Bréue.

Brifálda, a bolde, shamelesse man-like woman.

Bríga, a brable, a braule, a contention.

Brigánte, a Pirate, a rouer, a robber by Sea and Land, a craftly knaue a cheater.

Brigantello, a diminitiue of Brigánte.

Brigantino, a Pinnasse, a Brigantine.

Brigáre, to braule, to brabble, to striue for. Also to sneake or canuasse for.

Brigáta, a company, a crew, a knot or rout of good fellowes.

Brigatella, a smale-crew, a little flocke.

Bríglia, a bridle, a snaffle, looke Béuere la bríglia.

Bríglia d'óro, a golden bridle. Also the name of a horse in Ariosto.

Brigliaménti, all sortes of bridlings.

Brigliáre, to bridle, to snaffle.

Brigliáro, a bit or bridle-maker.

Bríglie a ferro di cauállo, in times past they called bits so that were with ports, because the port hath somewhat the shape of a horse-shooe.

Brigliózzo, a kind of curbe or bridle or snaffle for coltes.

Brigóni, vsed abusiuely for Bragóni.

Brigóso, contentious, quarellous.

Brillánte, sparkling, spangling, twinkling. Also quauering. Also leaping or chucking for ioy.

Brilláre, to spangle, to twinkle. Also to quauer. Also to leape or chucke for ioy.

Bríllo, a spangle. Also a twinkling or sparkling as a diamond doth in turning.

Brillóso, spangling, fall of spangles.

Brína, a mist, a horefrost, a breame, a dewfrost.

Brináccia, a filthy fogge or mist.

Brináre, to fogge or mist, to dewfreeze. Also to speckle, to spot.

Brináto, bespeckled, spotted, pide, particoloured, full of spots.

Brináta, a dew-frost. Also dew-frozen.

Bríncia, a toole that sadlers vse.

Brindáre, as Brinzáre.

Brindello, a stalke of peare or apple. Also a little scantling of any thing.

Brindeggiáre, as Brinzáre,

Bríndesi, a drinking or health to one. Also I drinke to you.

Brindisi, as Bríndesi.

Brindizáre, as Brinzáre.

Brindizáta, a drinking to one.

Brinóso, misty, foggy, breamy, dewfrozen, full of frost.

Bríns, Brínsi, a health or drinking to one. Also I drinke to you.

Brío, the mosse of white Poplar or Aspe-tree which is very sweet. Also an hearb growing in water called in Latine Pesgálli.

Brinzáre, to tiple, to quaffe or drinke healths one to another.

Brióne, as Brío.

Brionía, briony, wilde nep, white vine.

Brisáro, a hogges hastlet.

Briscióle, as Brasuóle.

Brissio, biting flies called Brizzes.

Británica, Britónica, as Brittánica.

Britenelle, something about a ship.

Brittánica, Spoone-wort, Scorbute-grasse, Scuruy-grasse.

Briuilegiáre, to priuiledge.

Briùilegio, a priuiledge.

Broáre, to skalde or parboile.

Broáta, a parboiling. Also a skalding with hot water.

Bróca, a pipkin or posenet of earth.

Brócca, any kinde of naile, bosse or stud with a great and round head. Also a blocke, a stocke, or haukes pearch. Also a yongue bud or blossom. Also a Caruers great forke. Also a round flagon or bottle. Also a pipkin or posenet of earth.

Brócca d'acqua, a pitcher or pot for water.

Brócca di terra, a flagon or bottle of earth, a stone bottle.

Broccáglio, a bodkin or punching iron.

Broccále, something about a plough.

Broccáme, all maner of cloth of gold.

Broccáre, to bosse, to stud, to naile with great headed nailes. Also to shocke, to but, to encounter or fall vpon furiously. Also to enforke, or pricke.

Broccáta, an encounter, a shocke, a butting. Also an enforking. Also a foreright blow, or thurst ouer the daggar.

Broccatello, thin thinsell of gold.

Broccáto, cloth of gold or siluer.

Brócca vále, as much to say, the spur is good, or the horse is well spurred.

Brócche grándi, great headed studs, called Brodes or Strake nailes.

Brocchétta, a forke to carue or eat withall.

Brocchétte, little studs or bosses.

Brocchiére, a buckler, a target.

Brocchíre, chísco, chíto, to bud as trees or any button flower.

Bróccia, a broach or a spit.

Brocciáre, to broach or spit meat.

Bróccio, gagdtoothed, tutmouthed.

Brocco, a kinde of red and yellowish colour. Also a stump or drie branch of a tree. Also the button of any flower. Also as Broccoli.

Bróccoli, sproutes or topes of Coleworts.

Broccoliéro, a buckler, a target.

Broccóni, as Brócche grándi.

Broccúta, the mute of a hauke.

Broco, a little barrow or tumbrell with two wheeles. Also a fish, in Latine. Pastináca.

Brocóne, a gum that Bidelio beareth.

Bróculi, as Bróccoli.

Bróda, wash, swile or draffe for swine.

Brodáglia, the skum, or dregs or rascality of the basse common people.

Brodaglióne, as Bródolo.

Brodaiuólo, as Bródolo.

Brodáre, as Broáre, to betroth.

Brodaruólo, as Bródolo.



Brodáta, as Bróda.

Brodétto, a litle fine broth.

Bródo, all manner of broth,

Bródolo, a broth-belly, a filthy slouen, one that makes his bellie his God.

Brodúso, as Brodétto.

Broétto, any fine thin broth.

Bróffola, a push, a wheele, a bile, a gall, a blister, a pimple, an itch, a tetter. Also the marke or print of a sore or scab.

Broffoláre, to grow to spots or scars in the skin.

Broffolétta, a litle Bróffola.

Broggiáre, as Brogliáre.

Bróggio, as Bróglio, or Imbróglío.

Brogiáre, to grow full of red pimples.

Brógie, red pimples in mens faces.

Brogiótti, red pimples or pushes in mens faces. Also a kind of excellent figs.

Brogiótto, a logger-head, a plump-pate.

Brogliáre, with some exterior acte of ceremonie to shew the intention of ones heart to him hee speaketh with. Also to giue one another good wordes and faire lookes. Also to canuase for any office and shift vp and downe or trafficke for voices. Also to shift for, to take vp commodities, and as we say to rob Peter to pay Paul. Also to disorder or embroile any matter.

Bróglio, Fáre bróglio, canuasing or suing for offices in Venice, in doing which euery one giueth and taketh faire speeches, large promises, and kind lookes, euen as they doe for Proctors places in Oxford. Also a shift or taking vp of commodities. Also an embroiling or entangling of any matter.

Brógna, any kind of plum or prune.

Brognáta, prune or blacke stuffe for tartes.

Brógno Brógnolo, a Plumbe tree.

Brógnola, as Brógna.

Bróilo, a kitchin garden.

Bróio, as Bróglio.

Brolardelli, a kind of fritters.

Brolláre, as Brúlláre, as Brogliàre.

Bróllo, as Brúllo, or Bróglio.

Brólo, as Brúlo.

Bromboláre, to grow to stalkes.

Brómboli, as Bróccoli.

Brómo, wild Oates.

Brónchi, shrubs, stubs, stumps, or snags.

Bronciáre, to stumble at any thing.

Bróncie, a kind of meate.

Bróncio, a man so transported with anger that he become a starke foole.

Brónco, the fish Cungar.

Broncoláre, to top or lop trees.

Bróncolo, as Bróncone.

Bróncóne, a stub or stump of a tree.

Bróncolúto, as Broncóso.

Broncóso, stumpie, shrubbie, rugged, snaggie, full of brakes briers or bushes. 

Bronfáre, to snort, to huffe, to snuffe.

Bronfiáre, as Bronfáre.

Bronfiatóre, as Bronfatóre.

Bróng, looke Crip.

Brongiáre, as Brogiáre.

Bróngie, as Brógie.

Brongino, as Bronzíno.

Brónia, as Bróntia.

Brontéa, as Bróntia.

Bróntia, or O'mbria, a kind of stone that falles from the middle region in stormes shaped as a Tortois head, which some say is good against thunder and lightning.

Brontolaménti, grumblings, muttrings.

Brontolláre, to grumble, to mutter.

Brontollatóre, a grumbler, a mutterer.

Bronzáre, to brasse, or copper.

Bronzíno, a brazen little mortar, posnet, skellet, or chafer. Also an ewer to giue water with. Also a cock or robinet for a cesterne. Also a lauer or barbars basen of copper. Also that is made of brasse or copper.

Brónzo, brasse, or bell-mettle.

Brostoláre, as Brustoláre.

Brostolíre, as Brustoláre.

Bróto, Brótto, as Brútto.

Brouáre, as Broáre.

Brouétto, a messe of fine broth.

Brózze, as Bróffole. Also the skurfs or scabs of any sore. Also knobs or bunches.

Brucamáglia, a rout or crue of raskals.

Bruccáre, to bruise. Also to pare cleane. Also as Peláre.

Brúcchi, buzze-flies. Also catterpillers. Also wilde silke-wormes.

Brúccia., 

Brucciáte, rosted chesnuts.

Bruccióli, brush-wood to make a suddaine blaze. Also a kinde of wilde pulse.

Brúcco, as Bastángo.

Bruccúda, the muting of a hauke.

Brúchi, as Brúcchi.

Bruciáre, to burne. Also to itch, or smart.

Bruciatíccio, burning too, as milke to the pot, smelling of smoke.

Bruciéuole, that may burne.

Brúcio, holie, not profane.

Brucióre, a burning. Also a smarting.

Brúco, a bramble-bush. Also a caterpiller.

Brúcolo, as Brúculo.

Brúculo, a vermine that eateth vines.

Brudáta, as Bróda.

Brúffola, as Bróffola.

Bruffáre, to sprinkle, but properly with the mouth, as Sbruffáre.

Brúggia, a kind of dressing of fish.

Bruggiáte, a kind of fritters or cakes.

Brúghe, Silke-wormes, Caterpillers.

Brugiáre, to burne, to itch, to smart. 

Brúgna, any kinde of little plumbe.

Brugnáta, as Brognáta.

Brugnóccole, as Bernóccoli.

Brugnóla, any kinde of little plumbe.

Bruíre, ísco, íto, to bray as an Asse.

Bruito, a braying of an Asse.

Brulláre, to tan or sun-burne. Also to parch or scorch, to singe or scalde, as a hog, to pull or scalde a hen.

Brúllo, tunned, sun-burnt, parched, scorched, scalded, singed, burnt, parboiled. Also poore, bare, silly, wretched.

Brúma, breame, frost, mist, fogge, midwinter, frozen-weather.

Brumále, as Brúma.

Brunázzo, brounish, duskie, gloomy.

Brunduláre, to grumble to mutter.

Brundulatóre, a grumbler, a mutterer.

Brunella, the hearbe selfe-heale.

Bruníre, nísco, níto, to burnish.

Brunitósio, a burnishing-toole.

Brunitóre, a burnisher.

Brúno, broune, duskie, mourning.

Brunótta dónna, any broune woman.

Bruodáre, as Broáre.

Bruodaiuóle, as Bródolo.

Bruódo, as Bródo.

Bruódo, lardiéro, a kinde of broth.

Bruólo, a kitching-garden.

Bruósa, as Bruosina.

Brúsca, ling or heath for brushes.

Bruscaménte, sharply, sourely. Also roughly, or snappishly.

Bruseáre, to steale, to purloine, to pilfer or filsh by slie-craft. Also to ensoure, to become sharpe or tart in taste. Also to singe, to scalde, or broile. Also to eat or gnaw with caterpillers or wormes and mothes. Also to shred or lop the boughes of trees. Also to bruse yong trees as Deere or Cunnies doe.

Bruscáta, a slie filching, a crafty stealing. Also a singeing or searing with fire. Also eaten by Caterpillers.

Bruscatello, tart and sweet.

Bruscatúre, shreds of trees. Also brouzing.

Bruschétte, little feskues or stickes.

Bruschétti, timely or hardly ripe shuites.

Bruschétto, somewhat soure.

Brusciáre, to burne. Also to smart.

Brusciéuole, that may burne.

Brusciólo, a push, a pimple, a bile.

Bruscióre, itching, burning, smart.

Brúsco, soure, tarte, eagre, bruske, vnripe. Also soure or grim-looking. Also a push, a pimple, a wheale or bile in the skin. Also a bosse, a bladder, a puff, a knob, a knur, a wen, or nodositie growing on trees. Also kneeholme, butchers broome, petigree, or kneehuluer. Also a Caterpiller

Bruscolíno, a litle Brúsco.



Bruscóne, a cunning slie filcher.

Bruscóso, full of Caterpillers.

Brúsia, stone-pitch.

Brúsola, a wit wall. Also a fish in Latin Alpheste or Cynedo.

Brustoláre, to seare, to burne, to toste.

Brustolíre, lísco, líto, as Brustoláre.

Brusuóle, as Brasuóle.

Brúta, a tree like the Cipres tree whose barke yealdeth a sweete perfume.

Brutággine, brutishnesse.

Brutále, brutish, vnreasonable.

Brutalità, brutishnesse, beastlinesse.

Brútia, stone-pitch.

Brutiáni, a kind of Coleworte.

Brútio, a kind of vermine liuing in fens or moorish grounds.

Brúto, brute, brutish, without reason.

Brútta, a staggering or falling disease in a horse, the foule euill. Also as Brútto.

Bruttáre, to foule, to sullie, to pollute.

Bruttería, as Bruttézza.

Bruttézza, foulenesse, illfauourednesse.

Brútto, foule, filthy, illfauoured.

Bruttúra, as Bruttézza.

Bruzzacúlo, the hip of a rose.

Búa, mud, bog, mire, dirt.

Buáccia, as Buázza.

Buággine, oxishnesse, stupiditie.

Buassággine, gullishnesse, oxishnesse.

Buásso, a gull, a block-head, an oxe.

Buázza, mud, bog, mire, dirt.

Búba, a Scrich howle. Also a houpe.

Bubáre, to skrich as an Owle.

Bubbatióne. 

Búbbule, as Búbole.

Búbo, a scrich owle.

Búbola, as Púpa.

Buboláre, as Bubáre. Also to bubble.

Búbole, bables, toies, trifles.

Bubolóso, bubly, full of bubles.

Bubóne, a scrich owle.

Bubónia, as Astére.

Búbula, a kind of Marioram or Sauorie.

Búca, Búco, any kind of hole, caue, or den vnder ground. Fare buca, to steale, or filch away.

Bucaláme, an open-taile fellow, one that is euer farting or shiting.

Bucámi, all manner of holes.

Bucaráre, as Bucheráre.

Bucardía, a stone like an oxe heart.

Bucáre, to boare or make full of holes.

Bucaróne, a great hole. Also a scarabe-flie, a beetle, a hornet.

Bucáta, a buckling. Also a fullers mill, or worke-house. Also lye to wash a buck.

Bucatáre, to full clothes. Also to buck.

Bucatáro, a fuller of clothes.

Bucáti, cleane washed clothes.

Bucáto, washt in a buck. Also holed.

Búcchia, the barke or rinde of a tree, the parings of fruite. Also an egge-shell.

Búccia, a bud or button of any flowre, the huske, or cod or shell of any pulse. Also a kind of limbeck of glasse. Also a round viall glasse. Also properly the vtmost skin of man or woman namely of the face. Also the outward huske where in any thing groweth.

Bucciácchere, offall, garbash, filthie guts.

Bucciáre, to huske or shale any pulse.

Bucciário, a bustard, or bistard.

Bucciere, a butcher.

Buccína, as Bucína.

Buccináre, as Bucináre.

Buccinaménto, as Bucinaménto.

Buccináta, a kind of vine or grape.

Buccíne, a kinde of sea-snaile, or shellfish fashioned like a cornet. Also cornets.

Buccinelli, pick-lock tooles. Also springes or ginnes to catch birds.

Buccintóro, a stately gallie or gallyfoist that the Duke of Venice goes in triumph in.

Búcciolo, any reede or hollow cane. Also the ioints or knots in a cane. Also a chanell or gutter through a pipe.

Buccisóffiola, a flim flam tale whether true or false, to make one feare or suspect shame or losse, as we say a tale of Robin hood.

Buccólica, a heardmans song. Also gluttonie or mouth cheere.

Buccólici, things pertaining to ploughmen.

Buccolicóne, a countrie clowne, or foolish shepheard, but vsed in mockerie.

Bucelláto, any kind of cake, but namely a kind of simnell or spiced bread.

Bucello, simnell or cracknell bread.

Bucentóro, as Buccintóro.

Bucera, a kind of Fenigreeke.

Bucheráme, Buckram stuffe, anciently it was taken for the finest linnen cloth.

Bucheráre, to bore, to wimble, or pearce full of holes. Also to sneake, to toot, to pry or gape diligently into any matter. Also as Brogliáre.

Bucigátti, lurking holes sluts corners.

Bucína, a smale low voice. Also a sordin for a trumpet. Also a horne-pipe. Also a kinde of hollow, winding, cockle shell or such other shell-fish.

Bucinaménto, a whispring, a humming. Also a clang of a trumpet.

Bucináre, to whisper, to humme, to buzze. Also to clang as a trumpet. Also to pipe.

Bucinelli, as Buccinelli.

Búco, any hole, a touch-hole.

Bucolíno, a little or peeping-hole.

Budello, any kinde of gut.

Budello culáre, the arse-gut.

Budello d'arco, a bow-string made of guts.

Budello drítto, the twill, the longaon or straight gut.

Búdo, a kind of bag-net or fishing-net.

Búe, an oxe. Also a block-head. Also a kind of Sea-bull. Also a Greeke coine of two drammes.

Buello, vsed for Budello, a gut.

Buéssi, simple fooles, stupide guls.

Búfera, a certaine huge beast.

Búffa, the buffie or breathing hole of a caske or head-peece. Also a toade. Also a puffe a push or blurt with the mouth in skorne. Also a brabling contention. Also a skoffe or flout, or iest, or vaine trifle. Also as Búffera.

Buffalággine, foolishnesse, blockishnesse.

Buffaláre, to play the gull or idiot.

Buffaláro, a buffleheard, or buff-keeper.

Buffalíno, of buffle, of buffe, of buffin. Also cheese made of buffles milke.

Buffalo, a buffle, or a buffe. Also a blocke or logarhead.

Buffalóne, a grosse pated ninny or foole.

Buffáre, to puffe, to huffe, to snuffe, to blow, to bluster.

Búffera, a confusion, a gust, a berry, or variety of windes. Also as Búffa.

Bufferáre, to bluster, to storme, to puffe or blow roughly and furiously.

Bufferóso, rough-blowing, stormy, blustering, windy, puffing.

Buffettáre, to buffet one. Also as Busfáre.

Buffétto, as Boffétto. Also a clacke or clicke with ones fingers.

Buffettóne, a great wherret on the eare.

Búffo, a puffe, a blast, or gust of winds. Also a toade.

Buffonáre, to ieast or play the buffon.

Buffóne, a buffone or pleasant iester. Also a great toade.

Buffoneggiáre, the play, the iester.

Buffonería, iesting, pleasant, meariment.

Buffonía, sweetnesse and cleerenesse of voice.

Búfo, a scrich-owle.

Bufoláccio, a Buffes-head, a dolt, a codshead.

Búfolo, as Buffálo.

Bufonchiáre, to grumble or grudge at euery thing. Also to swell as a toade.

Bufonchíno, a grumbler, a grudger.

Buftálme, May-weede, Ox-eies, or stinking Cammomill.

Bugáncie, kibes or chilblaines.

Bugandiéra, a Landris or Buck-washer.

Bugeráre, to bugger.

Bugeróne, a buggerer.

Bugétta, budget.

Búggio, hallow. 



Buggíre, gísco, gíto, to hollow.

Bugia, a lie, a leasing, an vntruth.

Bugiáccia, a huge or monstrous lie.

Bugiárdo, a lyer, a leaser, false.

Bugiardóne, a monstrous lyer.

Bugiáre, to lie. Also to hollow.

Bugiardataménte, falsely, lyingly.

Bugieráre, to bugger.

Bugieróne, a buggerer.

Bugiétta, a little or small lie.

Bugigáttolo, a sneaker or tooter into holes.

Búgio, a hole. Also hollow.

Bugióne, a great lyer, a great lie.

Bugliáre, to shake betweene two hands.

Búglio, Buglióne, a walme, a boyling.

Buglósa, as Bugolósa.

Búgna, a kinde of knobs in building.

Búgno, a bunch, a knob, a bile, a botch.

Búgnola, a froile, a wicker, a cade, a dosser. Also a binne for bread.

Bugnóne, as Búgno.

Bugolósa, lang-de beuf, Buglosse or Rosecampion.

Bugóne, as Bóuolo.

Buiáre, to darken or obscure. Also to cast or throw. Also to spend riotously.

Buiatóre, a wast-good, a spend-thrift.

Búio, darke, obscure. Also darknesse.

Buióso, full of prodigall spending.

Búla, chaffe of Corne.

Bulapátho, a Docke with a long roote.

Búlbari, a kinde of meat vsed in Mantua.

Bulbíno, a kinde of Onion or bulbous plant.

Búlbo, any roote that pils as Onions. Also Dogsbane, Dogs-stones, or Corne-leeke.

Bulbónio, as Astére.

Bulbosità, an Onion-like or bulbous forme.

Bulbóso, bulbous, Onion-like.

Buldriána, a common-strumpet or whore.

Bulésco, gullish, momish, foolish.

Bulettáre, to fasten with little tackes.

Bulétte, studs, or tackes with great heades.

Bulettíno, as Bolletíno, as Bollétta.

Búli, guls, sots, noddies, idiots.

Bulicáme, a naturall warme bath, or the naturall heat and boiling of hot waters. Also a mans bum or taile.

Bulicáne, as Bulicáme.

Bulicáre, to bubble and boile as water doth in warme bathes. Also to rumble, to ride or walme in the stomacke.

Bulímia, exceeding famine or great hunger. Also a riotous disordered rout.

Bulíno, a kind of pouncer that grauers vse.

Buliuácca, a great filthy Cow.

Búlla, as Bólla. Also a bubble.

Bullétta, a litle bill, billet, or note of paper. 

Bullétte, bubbles, trifles, vanities.

Bullicáme, as Bulicáme.

Búllo, a swaggerer, a swash-buckler.

Bullói, bulloes, slowne, or skegs.

Bulsína, Bulsíno, as Bolsína.

Bumásta, a kind of vine or grape.

Búmbo, as Bugóne.

Bumelio, a kind of Ash-tree.

Buncinelli, as Buccinelli.

Buniade, a kind of nauew roote.

Bunióne, a nauew like a radish.

Buocciólo, as Bocciuólo,

Buóiluchi, the names that Elephants had first in Italie.

Buoíne, as Bouíne.

Buolermínio, as Boloarméno.

Buólo. 

Buónamáno, as Bónamáno.

Buónamemória, of good memorie, wellfare all good tokens.

Buonaménte, in good sort.

Buónamercè, godamercie, or by meanes

Buóna pezza, a good while.

Buónária, a pleasant aspect.

Buonaróbba, as we say good stuffe, that is a good wholesome plum-cheeked wench.

Buóna séra, good euening.

Buónauentúra, good hap, good luck.

Buóndato, a free-gift, a bribe willingly giuen. Also a trifle or thing of nothing.

Buón dí, good day, good morrow.

Buón dí & buón ánno, good morrow and a good yeare withall.

Buóne christiáne, a kind of good Peares

Buóni dí sóno, a good many daies are since.

Buonissimássimo, most good, most chiefe

Buoníssimo, good in the highest degree.

Buóno, good. Also goodnesse. Also apt, fit, able, or honest.

Buon mercáto, good cheape.

Buono á, good for, fit for, or vnto.

Buon partíto, a good course, a good resolution. Also good entertainment, a good match.

Buono spátio, a good while or space.

Buon pátto, a good bargaine.

Buón presso, a pullie in a ship called dead manhe.

Buon per tè, good or happie for thee.

Buón prò, much good, god giue you ioy.

Buon prò ui fáccia, much good may it doe you.

Buon púnto, good lucke, a good chance at dice, or a good encounter at Primero.

Buon víso, a merry countenance.

Buon vólto, as Buon viso.

Buóra, as Bórea.

Buoríno, as Boarína.

Buoséga, a wooden pantoflle or patin. Also a loggerhead, a clounish fellow.

Buouále, as Bugóne.

Buóue, fetters, giues, shackles, stockes, clogs, or such punishments for prisoners.

Buóuolo, as Bouolo.

Buplithálmo, oxe-eye, or maineweede, some take it for Sengreene or Houseleeke.

Bupíti, certaine feasts celebrated for the prosperittie of oxen and other cattell.

Bupleuróne, an hearbe that growes of it selfe, called Harescare.

Bupresti, a very venemous flie called a wagleg or longleg. Also a certaine very venemous hearbe.

Burásca, a storme, a tempest, a blasting.

Burascóso, stormie, blustring, tempestuous.

Buratelli, a kind of salt-fish.

Buratíno, a sillie gull in a Comedie.

Burattáre, to boult or sift meale.

Burattadóre, a boulter of meale.

Burattíno, a boulter. Also a millers or bakers man. Also Burato stuffe.

Burátto, a bakers boulter.

Burazzíno, as Burattíno.

Burbánza, a swelling pride, a grudging disdaine, a repining sturdinesse, a grim looking. Also a confused noise or hurliburlie.

Burbáre, to swell with pride, to grudge, to froune, to grow fell, to looke grim.

Burbería, grimnesse, gastlinesse, hideousnesse, vglinesse, swartnesse. Also fiercenesse or crueltie.

Búrbero, fierce, fell, cruell, grudging. Also grim, gastly, grisly in countenance.

Búrbo, as Búrbero.

Burchiella, a great cesterne or close place to receiue and keepe water in. Also a wheelebarrow. Also a kind of flat bote or barge for burthen.

Búrchio, a hulke, a craine, a lighter.

Búrchio ferránte, a hulke with sailes.

Burchiello, as Búrchio.

Búrco, a badger, a brocke, a beauer.

Burdello, as Bordello.

Buréggia. 

Burella, as Borella. Also a wooden rowle. Also a wheelebarrow. Also a clog at ones heeles. Also a by or darke corner.

Burelláre, to rowle, to trundle, to carie in a wheele-barrow. Also to clog.

Burgése, a Burges, a borough man.

Burgensático, of or belonging to a Burgesse.

Bnrgensátichi béni, Citie or towne goods, as we say candle rents.

Burghéra, a burganet, a gorget.

Buriásso, a stickler or iudge of any combate, one that brings into the lists such as are to fight a combate or to run at tilt. Also a prompter, or one that keeps the booke for plaiers and teacheth them or other scholars their kue. 



Buríno, a kind of cutting or iagging of garments. Also a kind of caruing.

Burichétto, a litle iacket.

Búrla, a test, a scoff, a flout, a frump.

Burláre, to iest, to flout, to mocke, to gibe, to skoff, to frump. Also as Buiáre.

Burlénghi, a kind of simnell bread.

Burléuole, iesting, pleasant, merry.

Burleuolménte, iestingly, scoffingly.

Burliére, a merry iester or giber.

Burlóne, a merry companion.

Burlóso, full of merry iests.

Búrna, a wild beast in Affrica so fierce that it fights with two Elephants at once, it ouercommeth the Lion and the Panther.

Búrra, as Bórra. Also some part of a plough.

Burrattíno, as Burattíno.

Burráto, a deepe darke dungeon, a depth, a pit, a downefall. Also a streame running violently in some low valley, and making a hideous noise.

Búrro, butter. Also an engine to mooue or mount great ordinance among Spaniards.

Burróne, a crag, a cliff, a rocke, a grot. Also a currant or downefall of waters from off some steepie broken rocke. Also a goates or sheepes walke.

Burzacchini, buskins.

Busáre, to bore or make hollow.

Busbaccáre, to sneake or toote into corners.

Busbaccóne, a sneaker or tooter in corners.

Búsca, a shifting for by hooke or crooke.

Buscaménto, as Busca.

Buscándoli, hops to brew beere with.

Buscáre, to filch, to proule, to shift for.

Buschétta, childrens play at musse.

Busciarella, a reede, an oaten pipe.

Búscio, as Búso.

Busécchie, garbage, emptie guts, tripes.

Busécchio, any leathren belt or girdle.

Buselióne, a kind of Ash or Persley whose roote is red.

Busigáttolo, as Busbaccóne.

Búsima, as Bósima.

Busimáre, as Bosimáre.

Busnáre d'orecchie, a buzzing or humming in ones eares.

Búso, any hole. Also hollow or voide. Also a touch-hole. Also the bore of any piece.

Busóne, a great hole. Also a certaine winde instrument of Musike.

Busláre, to knocke, to thump, to strike.

Bussáre álla ruóta, to knocke at the ring of a dore.

Bússe, knocks, thumps, blowes.

Bussétto, a piece of wood that shoemakers knocke their worke with.

Bússo, the boxe tree or wood. Also a rumbling or hurlie-burlie. 

Bússola, a mariners compasse.

Bússolo, as Bóssolo. Also as Speronella.

Bústa, a gally pot. Also the beauer of a head piece. Also as Búffa. Also a kind of bag or purse of leather to open and shut that mariners vse at sea to keepe gunpouder in.

Bustello, a kind of dry measure.

Bústo, a trunke, a bulke, or bodie without a head. Also a sleeuelesse trusse. Also a womans buske.

Bastuária, a night-witch such a one as frequents and keepes about graues and tombes.

Butafáro, a kind of gurt pudding.

Buteo, a Putocke, or a Buzard.

Buteóne, as Buteo.

Buthísia, a great sacrifice wherein were killed a hundred beasts.

Butiráre, to butter.

Butíro, butter.

Butiróso, fat, full of butter.

Butta fuóco, a boutefeu, an incendiarie, a fire-flinger, a make-bate. Also a gunners lintstocke.

Bútta in sella, a charge that trumpeters sound as a warning to take horse.

Buttáre, to throw, to fling, to hurle. Also to driue or thrust in.

Buttár'in ócchio, to hit in the teeth.

Buttigóne, as Bottegóne.

Buttíro, a blocke or mistresse at bowles.

Buttúro, butter.

Buzzágo, a buzard or some such praing kite. Also a fruit like galles growing vpon Oken leaues. Also a puff or dried mushrom full of dust.

Buzzeláto, bisket or simnell bread.

Buzzicchiáre, to whisper, to busse, to mutter in hugger-mugger.

Buzzicchióne, a priuie whisperer, a close mutterer in hugger-mugger. 


C.
Ca, as Cása.

Cabacello, a fish like a dace or merow.

Cábala, a reuelation of secret things, or hidden science of heauenly and Deuine Mysteries professed by the Rabbies.

Cábali, a beast in Sumatra more hunted after then the Bezear, for the bones of it are most forcible to stanch bleeding.

Cabália, as Cábala.

Cabalísta, a professor of Cábala.

Cabalistico, Mysterious, Cabalisticall.

Cábbia, as Gábbia, a cage.

Cabaríno, a gabardine, a shepheards frocke, coate, or cassocke.

Cabíglio, a Cod-fish, be it salt or fresh. 

Cabinétto, a cabinet, a closet, a casket.

Cábo, a measure called a kab in the Bible.

Cabucciáre, to cabage or grow to a head.

Cabúccio, a Cabadge.

Cábuli, a tree, whose fruit being eaten cureth all diseases, and is much esteemed in India.

Cacabálde, foolish, trifling, or shitten trickes.

Cacabáldole, as Cacabálde.

Cacábo, the hearbe Soláno.

Cacábre, a kinde of whitish-stone.

Cacafióri, a selfe-conceited, others-scorning spruce fellow.

Cacafrétta, a shitten-hasty fellow.

Cacafuóco, a hot violent fellow.

Cacalegge, a scorner of the Law.

Cacália, a wilde caroway, or wilde cheruill.

Cacálide, as Cacália.

Cacalóio, a kinde of bird.

Cacáma, a kinde of many-coloured stone.

Cacaménto, a shiting or scummering.

Cacámo, a kind of tree that yeeldeth a pretious liquor.

Cacamusone, a fond shitten fellow.

Cacáo, a fruite in India like to an Almond, whereof they make a kinde of wine.

Cacapensiére, a kind of country croud or fiddle. Also a lasie thoughtles fellow.

Cacáre, to shite, to cacke, to scummer.

Cacarella, as Cacaruóla.

Cacarelle, trickles or dung of sheepe.

Cacaríe, shitten trickes, trifles, toies.

Cacarósso, vsed for the bloody flix.

Cacaruóla, a squirt, a laske, a flix.

Cacasángue, the bloody-flix.

Cacasódo, one that is hard, bound, a miserable pinchpenny, a chuffe. Also constant or stiffnecked.

Cacasótto, Cacasisótto, a pisse-kitching a drigledragle, a durty-flurt, a shitten slut.

Cacastécchi, a shite-stickes, a hard chuffe.

Cacastráccie, a shite-ragges, a pinchpenny.

Cacataménte, shittenly, sneakingly.

Cacatóio, a priuy, a iakes, a closestoole.

Cacatréppola, a kinde of Thistle or Bur.

Cacauínci, as Cacauincígli.

Cacavincígli, a miserable hard chuffe.

Cacazibétto, a spruce sweet effeminate fellow.

Caccábo, as Lauéggio.

Cácchera, the cackling of a hen.

Caccheráre, to cackle as a hen. 



Caccherella, a laske, a squirt, a loosenesse.

Caccherelli, hens-cackling. Also egges, as we say cockanegs.

Cacchináre, to laugh vnmeasurably loud.

Cacchinatióne, a foule loud laughter.

Canchíno, a great laugher, a scorner.

Cacchionáto, fludged or feathered on the wings.

Cacchióne, a prating smell-feast.

Cacchióni, the first fludged feathers on birds winges.

Cáccia, all maner of hunting or chasing. Also a chase at tennis, or blot at tables.

Cacciacornácchie, a skare-crow, a bugbeare. Also a kinde of shot or peece.

Cacciadiáuoli, Saint Iohns wort.

Cacciafrústo, a kinde of sling.

Cacciagióne, a hunting game, Venison.

Caccialepre, the Sow-thistle.

Cacciamósche, a fanne to put away flies.

Caccianemíco, a bug-beare, skare-crow a raw-flesh and bloody bone.

Cacciáre, to hunt, to chase, to driue. Also to thrust in or out.

Cacciár caróte, to make one swallow a gudgeon, or beleeue a lie, and that the Moone is made of greene-cheese.

Cacciáta, a chasing, a hunting, a driuing. Also a gull or gudgeon giuen.

Cáccia sapiente, a kinde of custard, or Deuon-shire white-pot or Lancashire foole.

Cacciár grídi, to cry out a loud.

Cacciatelle. 

Cacciatóre, a hunter, a huntsman, a woodman, a chaser, a driuer.

Caccíma, a bitch with whelps.

Cacciuoláre, to thump, to bang.

Cacciuólo, a thump, a knocke, a bange.

Caccóle, Cácole, as Cacarelle.

Cáce, a chase at tennis, a blot at tables.

Cacético, as Bólso, short-winded.

Cachessía, an euill disposition of the body either by long sicknesse or bad diet.

Cachéti, giuen to colliguations or to weare away.

Cachétto, a man crazed in body, one that pineth away, one that nothing prooues with.

Cachináre, to cackle, to pule. Also to laugh immoderately.

Cachinatióne, an immoderate laughing.

Cachíno, an immoderate laughter. Also a whining, a puling, a cackling.

Cachléna, a kinde of Oxe-eie or many-weede.

Cáchrio, a Catkin, a Chat or knob with many skales on ouer another and kernels in them which hang dangling at the branches of Fir-trees.

Cachríno, as Cácri.

Cácia, a naughtinesse or fault in any thing.

Cácio, any kinde of cheese.

Cácio cauallíno, Mares-cheese.

Cácio capríno, Goates-cheese.

Cácio pecoríno, Sheepes-cheese.

Cacióso, Cascióso, Cheesie, full of cheese.

Caciótto, a good handsome bigge cheese.

Cacobasilea, an ill kingdome.

Cacóccia, Cacózza, as Cacasótto.

Cacochímia, that in disposition of the body which by ill disgestion causeth ill humors.

Cacochímico, an ill alchimist.

Cacodémone, an euill spirit or deuill.

Cacodeo, an euill God, or ill spirite.

Cacoéthe, Morimals or cancerous vlcers.

Cacograsizáre, to write euill or railingly against any body.

Caeoníte, a precious stone, that makes him conquerour that hath it about him.

Cácri, the seede of a kinde of Rosemary. Also a kinde of hearbe.

Cácrio, as Cáchrio.

Cácro, the mossinesse ouer some fruits.

Cacúme, the top or height of any thing.

Cadaletto, a couch or little bed. Also a horse-litter, or carying chaire. Also a beere for dead men.

Cadáuero, a corpes, a carkesse, a dead body.

Cadaúno, each one, euery one.

Cadéna, any kinde of chaine.

Cadenacciáre, to boult, or bar a dore.

Cadenáccio, a bolt or bar of a dore.

Cadenáli, something about a ship.

Cadenelle, little chaines. Also chainelace.

Cadente, falling, declining.

Cadenza, a cadence, a falling, a low note.

Cadenúccia, any kinde of little chaine.

Cadére, cádo, cáddi, cadúto, to fall.

Cadér in pensiéro, to fall into ones thought or minde.

Cadéuole, that may fall.

Cadér maláto, to fall sicke.

Cadiletto, as Cadaletto.

Cadiménto, a falling, a declining.

Cadíno, a milke-pan, a washing-boule, a broade-dish, a great tray.

Cadíta, the weede we call Dodder.

Cadislechéro, an interpreter of the law amongst Turkes.

Cádmia, the ore of brasse. Also the Calamine stone out of which brasse is drawne.

Cadmíte, a precious stone compassed about with blue spots.

Cádo, a rundlet or firkin of wine anciently vsed in Greece. Also I fall.

Cadréga, any kinde of chaire.

Cadregále, as Cathedrále.

Cadregáro, a maker of chaires.

Cadreláte, a kinde of Cedar, or fruite thereof.

Caduceatóre, a mace-bearer, a herauld sent to treat of peace.

Caduceo, a Caducey or Mercuries rod, a wand that Heralds carry in their hands.

Caducità, falling or readinesse to fall.

Cadúta, a falling, a fall, a cheate.

Caéndo, an old word vsed for Cercándo, seeking.

Caére, cá, o, caéi, caúto, Caendo, to seeke or shift for, to beg or humbly sue for.

Caffáre, to make of an odde number. Also to worke and boile as wine or new strong drinke.

Caffettáno, a gaberdine or such garment.

Cáffo, the number odde or vneuen. Also the working of new wine. Also a kind of worme.

Caffumáte, red-hearings, blot-hearings. Also dried sprats or pilchards.

Cafíso, a kinde of waight or measure.

Cafórchio, a cliffe, a cragge, a rocke. Also a lime or clay-pit.

Cáfro, a cifre of nothing.

Cággere, cággio, caggéi, caggiuto, to fall.

Caggéuole, that may befale, or fale.

Cággia, let him fall, or it may fall.

Caggiúto, a fall, a falling.

Cagiána, a bird called a Coote.

Cagiéra, a corde or cable made of some part of the Palme-tre in India.

Cagionáre, to cause, to occasion.

Cagionánte, causing, occasioning.

Cagionáto, caused, occasioned. Also accused, tainted, or charged with some faulte.

Cagióne, a cause, an occasion, a meane. Also defect of health or crazednesse.

Cagionéuole, casuall. Also crazed or sickish, defectiue by chance.

Cáglia, may care or take thought for.

Cagliare, to crudle as milke, to grow hard as a core. Also to hold ones peace.

Cagliata, a crudding of milke.

Cáglio, rennet to make cheese. Also a crudding. Also a core in hand or foot.

Caglióso, cruddy. 



Cágna, a bitch. Also a harping or dragging hooke. Also an interiection as we say Gods me. Also sluggishnesse or lazie stretching of ones bones.

Cagnáccia, a filthy currish bitch.

Cágna in fréga, a salt or proud bitch.

Cagnáre, to whelpe, to litter as a bitch.

Cagnázzo, a filthy currish dog.

Cagneggiáre, to play the dog or cur.

Cágne mágre, vsed of Dant for the base and greedy raskality of people.

Cagnésco, doggish, currish, dog like.

Cagnétto, a puppy, a whelpe, a little dog. Also a toole to draw teeth with.

Cagnità, currishnesse, doggednesse.

Cagnóla, Cagnolétta, a little bitch.

Cagnoláre, to whelpe or puppy as a bitch.

Cagnolétti, little dogs, whelps, puppies.

Cagnolíno, as Cagnétto.

Cagnóse, something belonging to a ship.

Cagnóne, a huge dog, a great mastiue.

Cagnottáre, to faune or leere vpon one, to play the sicophant, or soothing parasite.

Cagnótto, a shepheards dog or cur. Also a fauning parasite or soothing sicophant. Also a brauo, a swosh buckler, one that for mony and good cheere will follow any man to defend him and fight for him, but if any danger come, he runs away the first and leaues him in the lurch.

Cagnuóla, a little bitch.

Cagnuoláre, to whelpe or puppy.

Cagnuolíno, any little dog or whelpe.

Cahósse, the vniuersall Chaos.

Cái, looke Tarózzi.

Caiándra, a tortoise, or a shell crab.

Cáia, as Feccia, or as Grómma.

Caícchio, a little cocke bote, skiffe or scallop.

Cái di látte, a kind of thicke creame.

Cáie, a kind of rauenous foule.

Caína, a place in hell where Dant faigneth those to be tormented that kill their allies.

Calabráche, a game at cards called laugh and lie downe.

Calábrico, the Hartrham thorne.

Calabróne, a Beetle flie or Hornet.

Caláce, a stone resembling haile, continuing cold in the fire.

Calafádo, a shipwright, as Calafáte.

Calafáte, a caulker of a ship. Also a swabber in a ship.

Calafatáre, to calke a ship.

Caláia, a narrow lane or passage. Also a ferry or ford ouer a water.

Caláide, a Turkie stone, some take it for a Chrisolite stone.

Calaíno, a kind of coine in India.

Calalíni, as Farfálla, as Pauiglióli.

Calamáchne, a kind of cane to make pipes. 

Calamágio, as Calamáio.

Calamáio, a standish or pen and inkehorne. Also a sea cut or cuttle fish.

Calamandrína, the hearb Bettony.

Calamandrína palústre, water or garlike Germander.

Calamáro, as Calamáio.

Calaménta, bush, nip or hoare calamint.

Calaménto, a diminishing, an abatement, looke Caláre.

Calamístro, a crisping wire.

Calamíta, the adamant or magnet stone.

Calamità, misery, calamity.

Calamíte, or Diopete, a kind of frogs that liue among sags and reeds.

Calamitóso, miserable, full of calamity.

Cálamo, a Cane or reed. Also a writing pen. Also a shaft or arrow. Also a certaine measure vsed of old in Greece.

Calamócro, a kind of beast that liues in the water.

Cálamo odoráto, sweet Calamus.

Calandário, a Calendar, an Almanacke.

Calándra, a wood larke, or a bunting.

Calandrelli, buntings. Also woden pattins.

Calandríno, a Gold finch. Also vsed for a silly gull, or ninny hammer.

Calándrio, as Calandríno.

Calappiáre, to ensnare, or entramell.

Caláppio, a fishing cage, a snare, a gin. Also a twiggen basket, a sliding net.

Calaménto, as Calo.

Caláre, to abate, to diminish, to welke, to stoope, to descend, to fall as the tide, to wane as the moone, to abate in price, to descend a paire of staires, to stoope from aloft, to come downe from on high, to vaile bonet, to stoope to a lure, to sirike sailes, to diminish in estimation.

Calastrelláre, to transame.

Calastrello, a transame as carpenters call it.

Calastrello da sostentáre, the vpright transame in the cariage of a great piece.

Calastrello della códa, the taile transame.

Calastrello della frónte, the fore transame.

Calastrello del letto, the low or flat transame.

Calástro, a kind of Nitre.

Caláta, an abating, a descending, a waning, &c. Also a falling note. Also a trap dore. Also a fit of mirth.

Caláta bellétta, as Cacasótto.

Calátide, a kind of tree.

Calatio, a kind of whetstone.

Calatúra, as Cálo.

Calauríta, the north pole, vrsa maior. 

Calauróne, a hornet, a beetle flie.

Cálca, a presse, a throng, a thrust. Also as Bestrica.

Calcábile, that may be troden or trampled vpon, pressed or crouded.

Calcabrína, the name of a deuill in Dant, that is, a trampler of Gods grace vnder feet.

Calcagnáre, to strike or tread with ones heeles. Also to dodge, to wrangle, to cauill.

Calcadóre, a treader, a trampler. Also a rammer to driue the pouder home into a piece.

Calcagnería, wrangling, dodging, cogging.

Calcágno, the heele of a man.

Calcagnólo, some part about a piece. Also about a ship. I take it to be the breeching.

Calcaneáre, of or belonging to heeles.

Calcántho, a kind of vitrioll.

Calcára, a lime kill.

Calcáre, to tread, to croud, to throng, to ram in, to thrust hard, to tread vnder.

Calcáre la terra, vsed for Camináre.

Calcarello, a lime maker.

Calcatóio, as Calcadóre.

Calcatóre, as Calcadóre.

Calcatríce, a kind of venemous serpent. Also ashe treader or rammer.

Calcatríppa, Star thistle, or Saint Barnabas thistle.

Cálce, all manner of breeches, hosen slops, or stockins. Also a kicke or wincing blow, a yorke with ones heeles. Also a vant plate of a tilting staffe or place to hold it by. Also the heele bone of ones leg. Also vnslaked lime.

Calcecúmia, as Calcímia.

Cálce d'arcobúgio, the stocke or breech of a piece.

Calcedónio, a chalcidony stone.

Calceóso, as Calcatrippa.

Calcése, the step of a mast.

Calcestre, any stone good to make lime.

Calcéto, an hearb growing among vines

Calcétte, neather stockins or shinners.

Calcétti, linnen sockes. Also narrow passages.

Cálce vérgine, vnflaked lime.

Cálchi, rogues, crosse biters, vpright men.

Cálcia, any hose. Also a fish.

Calciaménto, all hosing or shooing.

Calciánte, sutable, squaring, fitting.

Calciapiéde, a shooing horne.

Calciáio, a hosier. Also a shoomaker.

Calciáre, to hose or shooe. Also to sute, to fit or square in proportion.

Calcidónio, a chalcidony stone.

Calcide, a kind of lizard.

Calcidíca, Melilot or Chalcis.

Calcidichéne, or Sépa, a kind of lizard. 



Cálcie, hosen. Also shooes.

Calciétte, as Calcétte.

Calcifrága, saxifrage, some take it also for Sampeere.

Calcímia, calcination of mettalls.

Calcína, lime. Also mortar of lime.

Calcináccio, ruble or rubbish. Also a lime pit. Also a tanners fat or pit. Also the rugged mute of a hanke.

Calcináre, to calcinate, to glaze earthen pots within. Also a burning of minerals to correct the malignitie of them. Also to morter, to lime, to loame.

Calcinatióne, a calcination or burning of minerals. Also a mortering of walles.

Calcináto, as Calcináccio. Also calcinated, mortered, loamed or glazed.

Calcinatóio, a lime-kill.

Calcína víua, vnslaked lime.

Calcinegli, all creatures that haue vegetation and sensibilitie.

Calcinelli, as Calcinétti.

Calcinétti, a kind of litle shell-fish.

Calcinóso, full of lime, limie.

Cálcio, as Calce. Also a kind of play vsed in Spaine and Italie like vnto the play at Ballone.

Calcióni, great brecches or hosen.

Calcipotente, mightie or strong in his heeles, and by consequence in kicking and wincing.

Calcistrúzzo, all manner of ruble or rubbish.

Calcíte, a stone whereof brasse is tried or the flowre of copper as whereof vitrioll is made. Also red vitrioll. Also a kind of fish.

Calcitránte, as Calcitróso.

Calcitráre, to wince, to yerke, to kicke. Also to spur or be stubborne.

Calcitróso, iadish, wincing, yerking, kickish. Also froward and stubborne.

Cálco, as Scálco.

Calcófano, as Calcophíno.

Cálcole, a weauers tredles. Also cones or knobs in hand or feete Menarele cálcole, to wag the tredles, that is, to iumble a wench till the bed cry giga-ioggie.

Calcophíno, a blacke stone which being striken resounds like brasse.

Calcósa, a croud, a throng or presse of people. Also a common trodden highway.

Calculáre, to calculate, to count.

Calculatióne, a calculation.

Calculatóre, an Arithmetician.

Calculéuole, that may be calculated.

Cálculi maríni, litle pible stones by the Sea-shore.

Cálculo, a calculation or computation.

Calculósa, a kinde of very rugged and grauellous shell-fish.

Cálda, a heating or skalding. Also proud or salt as a bitch.

Caldábile, that may be warmed or heated.

Caldácci, soultry or faint heates.

Caldáia, a great Cauldron or ketile.

Caldaicaménte, after the Chaldeans fashion or language.

Caldáio, as Caldáia.

Caldalésse, hote sodden chesnuts.

Caldána, a hote burning feauer, called also the Calantura.

Caldára, as Cadáia.

Caldaráio, a brazier, a ketler. Also potbrasse or pan-mettall.

Caldáro, as Caldáia.

Caldarello, a litle heate or warmth.

Caldaríno, a litle kettle or skillet.

Caldaróne, a great cauldron or kettle.

Caldaróste, hote rosted chesnuts.

Caldarnólo, as Caldaríno.

Caldeggiáre, to giue heate vnto. Also to fauour, to countenance or backe.

Caldei, the Chaldeans, but taken for hote, violent, and furious people.

Caldeísmo, Chaldeisme.

Calderíre, rísco, ríto, as Calteríre.

Calderótto, a litle kettle or pan.

Calderúgio, the Gold or Thistle-finch.

Caldétta, a litle warmth or heate.

Caldéuole, as Caldábile.

Caldézza, heate, warmth, feruencie.

Caldinelli, a kind of meate.

Caldicciuólo, a litle temperate heate.

Caldissimaménte, most hotly or earnestly.

Cáldo, heate or warmth. Also hot, warme feruent. Also earnest or hastfull.

Caldúme, a soultrie and faint heate.

Cále, he careth for, or taketh care.

Calea, as Solátro. Also dogs grease.

Calefággine, a heating, or warmth.

Calefáre, to heate, to warme, to chafe.

Calefattíuo, that hath vertue to heate.

Calefátto, heated, warmed, chafed.

Calefelle, as Caleselle.

Caleffáre, to skoff, to iest or dallie.

Caleffár le náui, to calke ships.

Caleffo, a flout, a skoffe, a frumpe, a mocke.

Calegáio, a cordwainer, a shooemaker.

Calendário, a Calender, an Almanacke.

Calende, the Calends or first day of a moneth.

Caléne, a kind of harpies.

Caléno, a kind of wine.

Calenzuólo, a gold or Thistle finch.

Calére, cáglio, cálsi, calúto, to take care or thought for, to care.

Caleselle, apish, minike or iugling trickes. Also a kind of paste meate. Also a kind of sport or game vsed at Shrouetide in Italie. Also certaine round balles made of baked earth very britle, which in that play they vse to cast one at another, and breake very suddenly.

Calesóni, a kind of comfets or conserues.

Cália, as Boccáta.

Caliáce, a medicine to stay the flix comming from the stomacke.

Calíbro, as Colíbro.

Cálice, a chalice or cup.

Calicetríta, Fleabane or Mulet.

Calícia, an hearbe which cast into water makes it freeze.

Calidíce, a kind of Lizard.

Calidità, heate or warmth.

Cálido, hote or warme in operation.

Calidónia, the hearbe Celandine. Also a stone or earth that Chimikes vse.

Calidónio, a wind that begins to blow when swallowes first appeare.

Califfo, a professor or expounder of Mahomets lawes.

Caligáre, to besut, to besmoulder. Also to darken, to obscure or become suttie.

Caligáro, a cordwainer or shooemaker.

Calígere, as Caligáre.

Caligináre, as Caligáre.

Calígine, the sut of a chimney. Also pitchie darknesse or duskishnesse.

Caliginíre, nísco, níto, as Caligáre.

Caliginóso, suttie, darke, pitchie, duskie.

Calígo, as Calígioe.

Calígola, a cordwainer, a shooemaker.

Caligóso, a tree that euery morning is full of mist, and distils so much water that the people and cattle of a great part of India haue no other water to drinke.

Calimála., 

Calimána, a kind of Apple in Italie.

Caliópe, a good, cleare and pleasing voice.

Calisóni, a kind of comfets so called.

Calistefano, a kind of wilde Oliue tree.

Cálla, as Cálle. Also an hearbe.

Calláia, as Cálle.

Calláide, as Caláide.

Callaíne, a kind of precious stone.

Calláre, as Callíre.

Callaiuóla, a kind of fowling net that is laid flat on the ground.

Callária, the Hadocke or litle Codfish.

Calláta, a long going in one path.

Cálle, a path, a causey, a high way trode, an entry, a lane. Also a brawnie flesh or core in feete or hands. Also a habite or custome that one cannot leaue.

Cálli, a stone like a blew Zaphire.

Callibéphere, a kind of good Oysters.

Calliblephára, a defect in the eie lids.

Calliblepháro, an eye-salue.

Callícia, an hearbe so cold that it makes the water freeze whereinto it is put.

Callímo, a stone found in an Eagles stone.

Calligonóne, as Sanguinária herba.

Callióne, the hearb winter cherry which is very soporiferous. 



Calliónimo, a fish whose eies are in the vpper part of his head, and whose gall healeth skars of woundes.

Callíre, lísco, líto, to grow hard, brawnie or callous. Also to accustome or enure.

Calliráphio, a kind of wild beast whose backe is all speckled ouer.

Callitríca, venus-haire, maidens-haire.

Callitríchi, certaine great Apes with broad spreading beards.

Calliuóla, a narrow path or causie.

Cállo, as Cálle. Also the fastning of an oister shell, or the pith that makes the fish and shell sticke together. Also the pith, the cone, the core or tough part of any thing. Also the ball of a horsses foote.

Cállo di cinghiále, the meate Brawne.

Callosità, cauositie, hardnesse, brawnenesse.

Callóso, callous, brawnie, hard, thickeskinned, full of cores or hard flesh.

Callóstro, the ill milke of a womans breast. Also butter milke or any soure crudded milke. Also the shrub Priuet or Primeprint.

Cálma, a calme or quiet faire weather. Also calme, quiet and still. Also a sprig, a sien, a grast, a twig.

Calmáre, to calme. Also to engraffe.

Calmázza, a kinde of Feasant-pout, some take it for a Bustard.

Calmei, such as speake the rogues language or pedlers French.

Cálmo, calme, quiet. Also milde, gentle and flexible.

Calmóne, gibbrish or pedlers french.

Cálo, an abatement of any thing, looke Caláre.

Cal, òcco.

Calónaca, as Canónica.

Calonacáto, as Canonicáto.

Calónaco, as Canónico.

Cálo cálo, good good, very very good.

Calofónio, a certaine drug or gum.

Calónica, as Canónica.

Calonicáto, as Canonicáto.

Calónico, as Canónico.

Calónia, a chiefe chappell in a Church, a queere of a Church, the chancell of a Church.

Calónio, a fish with his scales contrarie to others, and swims against the course of the water.

Calóre, heate or warmth.

Calophánta, a man that seemeth to bee good and is naught.

Calopódio, a patten or night-slipper.

Calorífico, full of heate or warmth.

Caloríte, a greene stone which set in iron and worne about one is good against Magike and Charmes.

Caloróso, full of heate or warmth.

Calpestáre, to trample vnderfoote. 

Calotíbo, a bird called a Woodpecker. Also a kind of verse or foote of a verse.

Calpestéuole, that may be trampled.

Calpéstio, a trampling noise. Also a path, a trode or high troden way.

Calpicciáre, to trample vnder foote.

Calpíccio, as Calpéstio.

Calpistáre, as Calpestáre.

Calpístio, as Calpéstio.

Calpitáre, as Calpestáre.

Cálta, the Marsegold or braue hasinet, some take it for the Walle-flowre. Also an Autumne-violet. Also an excellent kind of apple in Italie.

Calterigióne, a swelling, a blane, a botch, a bile. Also a galing or surbating.

Calteríre, rísco, ríto, to swell to a sore. Also to gall or surbate. Also to grow Scaltríto.

Calteríto, swollen. Also raw-sore or surbated. Also as Scaltríto.

Cálto, a path or way that a land flood or torrent maketh.

Cáltula, a kind of garment mentioned by Varro.

Caluária, baldnesse. Also the head or skull of a dead bodie.

Calueggiáre, to become balde.

Caluello, a kind of graine in Italie.

Caluézza, baldnesse.

Caluire, vísco, víto, to become balde.

Caluítie, Caluítio, baldnesse.

Calugináto, fludged, feathered, dounie.

Calúgine, the first doune of birde.

Caluginóso, soft-feathered, dounie, fludged.

Calumáre la goména, to veere out the cable.

Calúnnia, a false or craftie accusation, a forged crime, a malicious surmise, cauill or detraction to slander or trouble on.

Calunniáre, falsely or maliciously to accuse and lay to ones charge.

Calunniatóre, a malicious detractor, or deceitfull accuser.

Calunnióso, false, vniust, cauillous, readie to accuse or forge false crimes, full of detraction and deceitfull interpretations.

Caluo, balde on the head.

Calúra, heate, warmth.

Cálza, as Cálcia.

Calzaiuólo, a hosier, or a shooemaker.

Calzaménto, as Calciaménto.

Calzánte, as Calciánte.

Calzapiédi, a shooing-horne.

Calzáre, as Calciáre.

Calzarétti, all manner of hose or shoes

Calzári, hosen or shoes.

Calzaríno, a shooemaker or cordwainer.

Calzaruólo, as Calzaríno.

Calzáto, hosed or shod. Also a horse that is white-footed aboue the pasterns. 

Calzatóio, a shooing-horne.

Cálze, hosen or shooes.

Calzelíne, any linnin hosen.

Cálze tiráte, neately-stretched hosen.

Calzettáro, a Hosier or Shoomaker.

Calzétti, sockes, hosen. Also pumps.

Calzéuole, that may be put on feet.

Calzoláio, a Hosier or Shoomaker.

Calzolaría, the trade of Shoomakers. Also a Shomakers shop or where shooes are sould.

Calzoménio, a kind of wine.

Calzoni, as Calcióni.

Calzoppáre, to hop, or skip, or goe a false gallop.

Calzóppo, a false gallop, skippingly.

Calzoppóne, hoppingly, skippingly.

Camacína, a kind of speare or staffe.

Camáglio, a gorget of male.

Camaiuóla, a kinde of grape in Italy.

Camáito, Camáto, a cudgell, a sticke or wand to beate clothes withall

Camaitáre, to beat the dust out of clothes with a wand.

Camáldole, a place frequented or full of people.

Camamílla, the hearbe Cammomill.

Camangiáre, all maner of foode, prouant, meat or victuals, all houshould-foode, or sustenance.

Camári, certaine Ministers of Idolatry mentioned in 2. Kings 23. 5.

Camarína, a stinking weed prouokeing vomite.

Camarlíngo, a chamberlaine.

Camárra, a martingall for a horse.

Camárzo, a game at tables with dice.

Camatáre, as Camaitáre.

Camáto, as Camáito.

Camazálo, Cud-wort, or Cotten-weed.

Cambellanía, the office of a Chamberlaine.

Cambelláno, a Chamberlaine.

Cambétta, as Crambétta. Also a fish called in Latin Zingána.

Cambiáre, to exchange, to change.

Cambiatóre, a changer, an exchanger.

Cambiatúra, a changing, an exchanging.

Cambieuolménte, mutually, enterchangeably.

Cámbio, a change, an exchange, a stead.

Cámbio di denári, an exchange of money.

Cámbio & ricámbio, change vpon change.

Cámbio sécco, an exchange among Marchants so called, when no money but bare billes passe from one to another.

Cambrái, Cambricke-cloth.

Cambraíta, fine Lawne or Cambricke.

Cambrasía, a kinde of light dart. 



Cáme, a kind of Cockle or shell-fish.

Cameatáno, as Cameátta.

Cameatta, wall-wore, dane-wort or ground elder.

Camébato, Cankre or Canebrier.

Camecísso, the ground Iure. Also Shewebread or Swine-bread, some take it for Hare-hoofe, and other some for Periwinkle or Ale-hoofe.

Cameciparísso, Lauander-cotten or ground Cipresse.

Camedáphne, the wilde or shruhby laurell, laury or ground bay. Also the Perwinkle hearbe.

Camedírio, as Camelea.

Camédrio, Germander, Ground-oke, Pettie-oke, or English treacle.

Camedrópe, as Camédrio.

Camegliciméride, as Cameleóni.

Cameine, the nine Muses.

Camelea, Widdow-waile, or ground Oliue. Also as Camelúca. Also a shrub which beareth the graine Gnidium whereof they make wine in Greece.

Cameleóne, a Camelion. Also a kinde of Thistle growing on sea-rockes called Chameleon.

Cameleóni, a kinde of Cockle or Muscle-fish.

Cameleónte, as Cameleóne.

Cameléuca, Ground-poplar, Colteshoofe, Fole-foote or Asses-foote.

Camélino, a yongue Camell. Also a kind of dainty sauce in Italy.

Camélo, Camello, a Camell.

Camélo párdalo, as Nabíno.

Camélo párdo, a beast engendered betweene a Camell and a Panther.

Camelopódio, Horehound.

Camelótto, Chamblet-stuffe. Also a kind of wild sheepe in India shaped like a Camell.

Camemelóno, the hearbe Camomill.

Camemirsína, Ground-mirtle or Butchersbroome.

Camemirsinéno, Oyle made of that mirtle.

Caméne, the nine Muses, or a Poeticall song.

Caméo, any white, raised, or imaginary stone-worke vpon a blacke ground, namely as some rich gates be.

Camepelóride, as Cameleóni.

Camepéuce, Ground-pine or Pitchtree.

Cameplatáno, the dwarfe plane-tree.

Camepítio, as Camélea. Also a kinde of Ground-frankinsence. Also the wild Pine-tree.

Cámera, any Chamber or Lodging.

Cámera da letto, a bed-chamber.

Cámera di presénza, a Chamber of presence.

Cámera di ritirára, a with-drawing Chamber. 

Cámera priuáta, a Priuy Chamber.

Cameráio, a Chamberlaine. Also a Chambrer. Also a Chamber-fellow.

Camerále, of or pertaining to a Chamber. Also a Groome of a Chamber.

Cámera locánda, a hiring Chamber.

Cameráre, to chamber, to lodge.

Camerário, as Cameràio.

Cámera secréta, a Priuy-chamber.

Cameráta, a chamber full, a camerada, a society in a chamber. Also a tire of Ordinance.

Cameráta per Cameráta, tire by tire.

Camerelle, little Chambers. Also little holes, flawes or hony combes in peeces of Ordinance.

Camerétta, a little chamber.

Cámere viatórie, remoouing or progresse chambers such as Noro vsed in his trauels.

Cameriera, a chamber-maide, a chambrer.

Cameriére, a groome of a chamber.

Camerína, a little chamber. Also a kind of apple

Cameríno, a little closet, or chamber.

Camerlengáto, the office of a Chamberlaine.

Camerlenghería, a Chamberlaineship. Also the Exchecker of a Prince.

Camerléngo, a Chamberlaine. Also vsed for a Princes Auditour.

Camerópe, a kind of Date-tree with very broad leaues. Also an hearbe very medicinable.

Camerótto, a withdrawing chamber.

Camerótto da destro, a chamber for a closse-stoole.

Camerúccia, a poore meane Chamber.

Camescíce, a kinde of hearbe or weede.

Camesica, Ground-figge-tree.

Camestre, the second moode of the second figure of Syllogismes.

Camétrachea, as Cameleóni.

Camezelóne, the hearbe Cinquefoly.

Cámia, a kinde of fish.

Camíce, a surples or Priests vpper robe.

Camícia, as Camisáia.

Camiciára, as Camisciára.

Camiciáta, as Camisciáta.

Camicióne, as Camiscióne.

Camiciótto, as Camisciótto.

Camiciuóla, as Camisciuóla.

Caminábile, that may be gone or walked.

Caminánte, going, marching, wandering. Also a wanderer or way-faring man.

Camináre, to goe, to march, to wander, to trauell, to waie-fare, to walke.

Camináre paési, to trauell countries.

Camináta, a walking, a marching. Also a great chamber or dining hall vpon the ground. Also a chimny, or chimnie-peece.

Caminiáne, a kinde of Oliues.

Camíno, a high-way, a path, a trode, a street. Also a chimny.

Camiscia, a shirt, a smocke. Also a surples. Also a Porters frocke.

Camiscia difábrica, a skirt or enclosure of any building

Camisciára, a maker of shirtes and smockes.

Camisciáre, to shirt, or to smocke.

Camíscia stampáta, vsed for a wrought shirt.

Camisciáta, a Camisado, which is a secret attempt in time of warre with shirtes ouer the souldiers armour.

Camíscio, as Camíscia. Also a wastecoate.

Camiscióne, a Porters frocke or bodycoate.

Camisciótta, as Camiscióne.

Camisciuóla, a little shirte or wastecoate.

Cammarúgie, a kinde of creuises or prauens.

Cammáro, a Lobster or Crab-fish.

Cammáróne, an hearbe whose roote is like a crabfish.

Cammeo, as Cameo.

Cámmera, as Cámera.

Cámmere viatórie., looke Cámere.

Cammúcca, as Camúca.

Cámo, a bridle a snaffle.

Camóccia, a Chamoy or wilde Goate,

Camoccína, Chamoye-skin.

Camomílla, the hearbe Cammomill.

Camórra, an Irish rugge or mantle, a Mariners frocke.

Camórro, a murne, a pose, a cold.

Camoscello, a kinde of Buffin or such stuffe.

Camóscio, a kinde of stuffe worne in Italie.

Campácchio, a kinde of great basket to carry haye or fodder in vpon mens shoulders.

Campále, of or pertaining to fields.

Campágna, a field or a champaine.

Campágna rása, an open field, a razed plaine.

Campagníno, any little field. Also a man dwelling in any champion countrie.

Campagnuóli, a kind of dainty Mushromes.

Campána, a bell. Also a couer of Limbike. Also a bell-flowre, or kinde of rose.

Campána a martello, to ring the belles backeward, or with stones and hammers, as they doe in Italy in dangerous times.

Campála azzurrea, blew-birde-weed.

Campanáio, a bell-ringer, a sexton of a Church. Also a bel-founder. 



Campanaria, a iangling of belles.

Campanáti, a kinde of wilde ducke or wigin.

Campáne, a kinde of long Peares.

Campaneggiaménti, ianglings of belles.

Campaneggiáre, to iangle or ring belles.

Campanella, a beautious flowre fashioned as a bell. Also any little bell. Also a couer for a Limbecke or Still.

Campanelle, Binde-weed. Also a Vine-fretter or the diuels gold-ring.

Campanello, a camponell or roule in the mouth of the bit of a horse in form of a bell.

Campanello con tímpano a vólta, is when the broad end of the campanell is compasse like a Cannon-mouth.

Campanello con tímpano piáno, is when the broad end of the campanel is flat and plaine.

Campaníle, a steeple or belfrey.

Campaníliter, vsed by Giouius forlurkingly or coitringly as vnder the priuiledge of a steeple as idle Churchmen and Iesuites doe.

Campaníno, a little bell.

Campáno, bell-mettle.

Campanúccio, a meane bell. Also a ring of belles in a steeple.

Campáre, to escape. Also as Campeggiáre. Also the weed Sampier.

Campatello, any little field or campe.

Campeggiáre, to encampe, to beleagre or lie in the field with an army of men. Also to dwell among or frequent the fields. Also to sute, or square with, to become well and seemly as any faine cocke vpon or in any field, shield, or banner.

Campestre, of or pertaining to the fields. Also a kind of hawke.

Campestri, a kind of garment mentioned by Horace.

Campicello, a little field.

Campidóglio, the Capitoll in Rome.

Campignáre, to make merry, to be frolike, to reuell, to fall out in drinking.

Campimetra, a measurer or suruaier of fields or lands.

Campimetría, measuring of fields or lands.

Campióne, a champion, a strong man. Also a Knight, a protector, a defender.

Campioneggiáre, to play the champion.

Campire vn'árma, to place any armes vpon his right field.

Cámpo, a field. Also a campe or hoste of men. Also a field in armory. Also an escape. Also by a metaphor, an occasion or faire meanes and skope to doe any thing.

Cámpo angoláre, party per saltier in armory. 

Cámpo della náue, the maine decke or ourelope in a ship.

Camporéccio, that growes in the fields. Also faire and seasonable for the fields.

Campóra, all manner of fields.

Camúca, a kind of wollen and silken stuffe.

Camuffáre, to filch or steale craftily, namely at play. Also to packe the cards craftily. Also to deale roughly with one. Also to reuell, to riot, to swagger. Also to put one out of countenance. Also to smooth hewen stones, to polish.

Camúffo, a man out of countenance, hauing lost his speech for shame, one that is craftily ouer reached and then laught at by others.

Camuffóne, a crafty filcher or subtile theefe in play or gaming, a cunning cheater.

Camúrra, as Camórra.

Camusíno, a little flat nose. Also a little dog with a flat nose.

Camúso, flat, or squat nosed.

Camussáti, a kind of worke in gold rings.

Camuzzóne, a kind of racke or torture to make one confesse.

Cán', Cáne, looke Cáne.

Canáglia, raskaly people only fit for dogs company.

Canagliáccia, as Canáglia.

Canáia, a cellar or a buttery.

Canáio, a butler. Also a clarke of a kitchin.

Canaláno, a gray hound, a harrier.

Canále, a channell, a gutter, a water pipe.

Canalétto, a little channell or gutter.

Canalício, the first gold ore that is digged out of pits or mines.

Canaliense, as Canalício.

Cánapa, all manner of hempe.

Canapáccia, course canuase, or hempe.

Canapáccio, hempen hurds, or canuase.

Canapáro, one that sells hempe.

Cánape, hempe. Also a hempen halter.

Canapétto, a little hempen rope. Also a hempe field.

Canápolo, a bough or a branch. Also a hempen stalke.

Canapóso, hempy, full of hempe.

Canária, hound grasse. Also the little bur.

Canárij, a kind of people so called because they feed on dogs. Also Canarians.

Canaríno, a Canary bird or man.

Canário, a sacrifice of a red dog, vsed of ancient to pacifie the dog star.

Canarúccio della góla, the gullet of the throate.

Canáta, a fence made of canes or reeds. 

Canatéro, a master or keeper of dogs.

Cánaua, a cellar or a buttery.

Canauáccio, as Canapáccio.

Canauáro, a butler or cellar keeper.

Cancámo, a gum like mirrhe brought out of Arabia.

Cáncani dell'úscio, the hinges of a dore.

Cancaríre, rísco, ríto, to cankre, to rankle, to fester.

Cancaríto, cankred, rankled, festred.

Cáncaro, a cankre. Also the Crab star. Also a sea crab. Also an interiection of deniall. Also a curse that the Italians vse to wish to one.

Cancaróso, full of cankre or festring.

Cancegliére, a Chancellor.

Cancellaménto, a cancelling, an abolishing. Also a shutting in with any grates of iron as prisons.

Cancelláre, to cancell, to abolish. Also to shut or enclose with any grates of iron or bundles of wood.

Cancellaría, a Chancery.

Cancellerésca, of or belonging to the Chancery. Also a chancery hand.

Cancelliére, a chancellor.

Cancello, a writing deske. Also a cacement for a window. Also a lettise or grate before a dore. Also a prying bole, or iron grate before prisons or windowes.

Cancello della póppa, the niple of ones brest or dug.

Canceróso, cancrous or cankred.

Cánchero, as Cáncaro.

Cancheríno, cancrous, cancred, festered. Also a cancrous deuouring fellow.

Cancheríre, risco, ríto, as Cancaríre.

Cancheróso, as Cancaróso.

Canchíni, a shrub bearing a certaine gummy and rosinous fruit.

Canchiri, as Canchíni.

Cánciola, as Cáncaro, Cánciola ti násca, as we say a pox come to you.

Cancórso, a gray hound, a fleet dog.

Cancréna, as Gangréna.

Cancrenáre, to grow to a Gangrena.

Cancríno, borne vnder Cancer. Also of a cancerous nature.

Cancro, as Cáncaro.

Cancróso, as Cancaróso.

Candárie, certaine signes or caracters vsed in negromancy.

Candéla, a candle, or light.

Candelábro, a candle sticke.

Candeláia, Candlemasse day.

Candeláio, idem. Also a chandler.

Candelára, Candlemasse day.

Candelaría, a chandery.

Candelétte, little or small candles.

Candeliére, a candlesticke.

Candelóra, Candlemasse day.

Candelósa, Candlemasse day.

Candelótti, droppings of candles.

Candelótti di ghiáccio, ise sickles. 



Candente, shining, bright, or white.

Candenza, brightnesse, shining whitenesse.

Cándere, cándo, candéi, candúto, to shine bright or white.

Cándida, the milke way in heauen.

Candidáre, to whiten, to candy.

Cándidáto, whitened, blanched, candied. Also clothed in white. Also one that stands for an office and is likely to speed.

Candidétta máno, a fine lilly white hand.

Candidézza, whitenesse, purity.

Candidità, idem.

Cándido, white, pure, vnspotted.

Candílo, a kind of waight in Goa.

Candiótto, Candian cheese. Also one borne in Candia.

Canditáre, to candy with hard sugar.

Cándido zuccaro, sugar candy.

Candóre, whitenesse, purity.

Cáne, any kind of dog in generall. Also an instrument to pull out teeth. Also a snaphance. Also a dog fish. Also an iron crowe to stay any thing. Also in the Tartarian tongue an Emperor or absolute Monarke.

Cáne aláno, a gray hound, a harrier.

Cáne bótolo, a cur, a shepheards dog, but properly any little dog.

Cáne da pagliáro, a tie dog.

Cáne da rázza, a breeding dog.

Cáne da réte, a setting dog, a spaniell.

Cáne da vccello, a faulkeners spaniell.

Cáne di gabbatelle, a tumbling dog.

Cáne & lúpo, cocke shute, twylight, as when a dog can not be discerned from a woolfe.

Cáne leuriére, a gray hound, a harrier.

Cáne maggióre, the name of the great Canicula.

Cáne maríno, a sea dog, a hound fish.

Cáne molósso, a mastiue or beare dog.

Cánc sparauiére, as Cansparauiére.

Caneggiáre, to be currish or play the dog.

Cáne minóre, as Canícula.

Cáne Sirio, as Cáne maggióre.

Canella, as Cannella.

Canelláre, to cinamond.

Canelláto, as Cannelláto.

Cáne segúgio, a blood hound, or setting dog.

Cánepa, as Cánapa.

Canestráio, a basket maker.

Canestráre, to put vp in a basket.

Canestríno, a little hand basket.

Canestro, a hand or close-basket of wicker.

Canestróne, a great basket of wicker.

Canestrúccio, a little hand basket.

Canéto, as Cannétto.

Canétto, a litle dog or whelpe.

Cáneua, a cellar or butterie. 

Caneuáccio, sackcloth or canuase.

Caneuáro, as Canouáro.

Caneuella, the ankle of ones leg.

Cáne villaréccio, a filthy cur that is no mans in particular but the whole townes.

Cáneuo, hempe. Also a hempen halter.

Cancuóso, hempie, full of hempe.

Cánfora, Camphire. Also a kind of tree or the wood thereof.

Canfórchio, a narrow lane, a straite alley.

Cánga, a measure in China containing fiue of our ells.

Cangiaménto, a changing, a change.

Cangiánte, changeable.

Cangiáre, to change, to exchange.

Cangiatóre, a changer, an exchanger.

Cangiatúra, as Cangiaménto.

Cánia, an hearbe that stingeth very sore.

Caniáro, a Canarie bird.

Caníbale, a Caniball or feeder on mans raw flesh.

Canibello, a kestrell.

Canicída, a dog-killer.

Canicídio, dog-slaughter.

Canícula, the dog starre. Also a Seadog or houndfish, or dog fish.

Canície, hoarinesse, whitenesse.

Caniculáre, caniculare, doggish.

Caníglia, a litle cane. Also gold or siluer purle. Also bran or course bread.

Caníle, a dogs-kennell.

Caninaménte, doggedly, currishly.

Caníno, a litle dog. Also Houndgrasse. Also a worme breeding in a horse as Corcaiuólo. Also a Sea hedge-hog or vrchin. Also currish, dogged, of a dogs nature.

Cánna, any cane or reede. Also an angling or fishing rod. Also the bore or concauitie of a piece. Also a pipe or gullet to conuey water. Also a flute, a pipe or a recorder. Also a mans throat or vzell pipe. Also a kind of long barrilet. Also the measure called an ell or long yard. Also a fish called in Latin Orcynus.

Cánna d'un pezzo, the barrell, the bore or concauitie of a piece.

Cánna odorósa, sweete Calamus.

Cannáca, a Lamprey fish. Also a carcanet, a border or billement of gold.

Cannácca, as Cannáca.

Cannafóglio, a cane, a reede, or a sedge.

Cannafóssa, a gutter or sluce to draine water. Also a toole to let blood.

Cannagóla, a single yoke about a cowes necke to keepe it out of hedges.

Cannalétto, a litle channell or gutter.

Cannamella, a sugar-cane. Also a kind of musicall pipe or recorder.

Cánnapa, any kinde of hempe. Also a halter. 

Cannára, a bin or great bread-basket.

Cannaríccia, a place where reedes or canes or sedges grow. Also gluttonie.

Cannaróla, a Linnet-bird.

Cannaróne, a glutton, a gourmand.

Cannarúto, one well throated.

Cannáta, an enclosure or fence of canes.

Cánna vána, a hollow cane or reed. Also a witlesse fellow, a shallow pate. Also an old fellow that hath no mettall to his scourging sticke.

Cannella, a litle cane, reede or pipe. Also a flute or recorder. Also a tap or spiggot. Also the arme-bone of a man. Also the spice Cinnamond.

Cannelláta, a kind of Cinnamond meat.

Cannelláto., wrough hollow or champred as a reede.

Cannelle, as Córli, or Corlóni.

Cannelli delle gámbe, as Cánnoli.

Cannellíni, Cinamond long confets.

Cannello postrémo, the chiefe bone in the rump of a horse. Also a weauers shutle.

Cannétta, any litle cane, reede, or pipe, or gullet. Also a tobacco-pipe. Also as Cunétta.

Cannéto, a thicket or plot of canes.

Canneuáccio, canuase or sack-cloth.

Cánneuo, hempe, or a hempen halter.

Canníccij, bundles of canes or reedes.

Cánnoli, the bones of either leg between the knee and the pasterne of a horse.

Cannonáre, to beate or batter with Canon.

Cannonáro, a caster or founder of ordinance.

Cannonáta, a Cannon-shot.

Cannóne, any Cannon, a double Canon, a Cannon royall. Also the barrell, the bore or the concauitie of any piece. Also any conduit pipe or gutter. Also a a Cannon, a rule or a law. Also a cannon of a horses bit. Also a kind of long wafers.

Cannóne bastárdo, a bastard Cannon.

Cannóne dóppio, a double Cannon, a Cannon royall, which must be eight inches in height or vpward.

Cannóne petriére, a Cannon-perier to shoot stone bullets, about eight inches in height.

Cannóne rinforzáto, a double Cannon or Cannon royall.

Cannóne semplíce, a single Cannon.

Cannónesottíle, a single Cannon.

Cannonícchi, a kinde of long shell-fish.

Cannoniéra, the place where a Cannon is placed, vpon a bullwarke. Also a spike or loope-hole to shoot out at.

Cannoniére, a gunner, a Cannonier.

Cannotíglio, purled twist of gold or siluer much vsed in embroyderies.

Cannúccia, a little reede, sedge or cane. Also a little angling rod. 



Cannucciáta, a thicket or place of canes or reedes. Also a fence or hedge of reedes or canes.

Cannuóle delle gámbe, the ancles of ones legges.

Cánoa, a cellar, a buttery, a vault.

Canoa, an Indian boate of one peece.

Canoáro, as Canouáro.

Canodello, a kinde of needle fish.

Cánola, a spiggot for a runnlet.

Canóne, as Cannóne.

Canónica, a Cannons or religious house.

Canonicáre, to make one a Canon.

Canonicáto, a Canonship.

Canonicatióne, a Canonizing.

Canonichéssa, a religious woman or Nunne.

Canonichíssimo, most Canonicall or authenticall.

Canónico, a Canon. Also Canonicall.

Canonizzábile, that may be Canonized.

Canonizzáre, to canonize.

Canonizzatióne, a canonizing.

Cánoa, a distaffe full of hempe or slaxe.

Cánopo, hempe. Also a digger or worker about Mines or minerels. Also a goodly, a great and bright starre about the Antarticke pole.

Canóro, shrill, loud, resounding.

Canorità, shrilnesse, loudnesse.

Cánoua, a cellar, a vault, a buttery. vsed also for a store of munition.

Canóuaro, a yeoman of a cellar.

Canouático, cellerage, buttelrage.

Cánouo, hempe. Also a hemping halter.

Cansáre, to auoide by going a slope, a slope, aside, or by giuing place, to slip or goe out of sight. Also to deuide or cleaue assunder. Also to cancell or blot out.

Cansatióne, an auoiding by going aside.

Canséuole, that may be avoided sideling.

Cánso, auoided by going a side. Also cancelled or blotted out.

Cán sparauiére, a falkeners spaniell.

Cantábile, that may be sung.

Cantacchiáre, to sing foolishly.

Cantabríca, a kinde of wilde gillofre.

Cantabríga, as Cantabríca.

Contafáuole, a mountibanke, or singer of fables. Also a kinde of quaffing glasse. Also lying fables or faigned tales.

Cantafole, as Cantafáuole.

Cantáio, as Parétolo.

Cántara, as Cántharo.

Cantáre, to sing to chante. Also to chirp as a bird, to crow as a Cocke.

Cantarella, the treble string or minikin of an instrument. Also the flies Cantharides. Also a yongue frog. Also a kinde of call or pipe to call birds to the net.

Cuntáride, the Cantharides or Frenchgreene flies.

Cantarelle, Cantarides flies.

Cantaríni, such as sing three mens songs.

Cantaríno, a singer. Also looke Oro Cantaríno.

Cantáro, as Cántharo.

Cántaro, as Cántharo.

Cántaro fórfori, a kintall weight.

Cántarozerói, idem.

Cantatíuo, that may be sung or chaunted.

Cantatóre, a singer, a chanter.

Cantatrìce, a chantres or woman singer.

Cantepoláre, to sing at ones window. Also to keepe a filthy singing.

Cantefóla, the cackeling of a hen.

Canterella, as Cantarella.

Canterelle, as Cantarelle.

Cantería, a chantery or singing place.

Canteríno, as Cantaríno.

Canterio, a vine laide vpon a single range in one direct line.

Cántero, as Cánthero.

Cantharíde, a Beetle-ston.

Cántharo, a fish of a chasnut colour endewed with great chastity as the turtle is, and hauing a most vnsauory taste. Also a beast whereof there is no female. Also a blacke beetle or hornet. Also a kinde of boate. Also a ring or hammer to knocke at a dore. Also a kintall waight being about a hundred waight & in some places, much more. Also a great iug or tankard. Also a close-stoole pan. Also a knob or bunch growing vnder the tongue of some Oxen and cowes.

Cantheríto, a kinde of wine.

Cánthoro, as Cántharo.

Canthóro, a woodden goddet or tankard. Also a kinde of dorfish.

Cántica, a canticle.

Cantiere, a chanter. Also a toole with a vice or skrew in it that ioyners vse.

Cantiléna, a ballad, a flimflam tale.

Cantilenáre, to sing flimflam tales.

Cantína, a cellar, a buttery.

Cantináro, a yeoman of a cellar.

Cantinático, cellerage, butlerage.

Cantinbánco, a mountbanke.

Cantinella, a litle cellar. Also a flaw or honicombe in any cast piece of ordinance. Also a long thin square, or ruler made like a lath. Also a thin lath.

Cantíri, great and long pieces of timber about buildings.

Cánto, a song, a sonnet, a canto. Also the treble string of an instrument. Also a side or a corner.

Cánto figuráto, a set song. 

Contonáli, certaine pieces of timber about building, namely of a ship.

Cantonáre, to canton, to corner, to coyne. Also to conicatch and giue one the slip at a corner.

Cantonáta, any corner, or cornering. Also a slip or knauish part as it were committed in some corner, as we say. Also Iack Droms entertainment.

Cantonáto, nooked, cornered, coyned, cantoned. Also conicatcht.

Cantoncíno, a litle corner or nooke.

Cantóne, a corner, a nooke, an angle, a coyne, a canton.

Cantoniéra, a cozening whore.

Cantoniére, a conicatcher, an affronter.

Cantoniéri, as Cantíri.

Cantóre, a chanter, a singer.

Cantúccio, a litle corner or nooke.

Canúdo, a fish called in Latin Alphestus.

Canuólo, the quill of a spinning wheele. Also a bobin to wind silke vpon.

Canutáre, to grow hoarie white.

Canutíre, tísco, títo, as Canutáre.

Canuto, hoarie-white.

Canutézza, hoarinesse.

Canzellaría, a Chancerie.

Canzelliére, a Chancellor.

Canzóna, as Canzóne.

Canzonáre, to sing songs or canzonets. Also to make or write songs or sonnets.

Canzóne, a song, a canzonet, a dittie.

Canzonétta, a canzonet or dittie.

Canzoniere, a maker or singer of songs. Also a booke of songs or sonnets.

Cáo martíno, some part of a ship.

Cáo, vsed in Lombardie for Cápo.

Cáos, Caósse, the vniuersall Chaos, that is to say a confusion of things.

Caósi, a kind of rauenous Sea-foule.

Caostelli, a kind of fish.

Cápa, a blacke hairie wild beast, bigger than an Asse breading in India.

Capábile, capable.

Capabilità, capablenesse, capacitie.

Capáce, capable, ample, large, able to receiue or containe.

Capacità, capacitie, amplenesse, ablenesse to receiue or containe.

Capále, a gorget. Also a skull.

Capanella, a little cottage or cabin, or bully or cell. Also a houell of bushes.

Capanello, a stake where at malefactors be tide to be burnt.

Capanétto, as Capanella. Also a kind of call or pipe to call or catch birdes.

Capáno, a shepheards frocke or cloke.

Capanótto, as Capáno.

Capánna, a cottage, a bully, a cabin.

Capanúccia, vsed for Catásta.

Capannúccio, a graue or a tombe, or a monument for the dead. Also a great sire wherein dead bodies were wont to be burnt, a funerall fire. Also a little 



steeple or spire.

Capanúccia, as Capanella.

Capárbio, froward, wilfull, obstinate.

Caparbíre, bísco, bíto, to grow obstinate.

Caparbità, frowardnesse, stubbornnesse, teastinesse, obstinacy.

Capáre, to lay hold or seaze vpon.

Capárra, an earnest penny.

Caparráre, to giue or leaue earnest in hand.

Caparróne, an ape, a monkie, a pug. Also a gull, a ninny, a mome, a sot.

Capassone, a iolt head, a loggar bead.

Cápe, it containeth or is capable of.

Capécchio, course hurds of hemp, of toe, or flax. Also a hempen halter.

Capeccína, that part of a yoke that goes about the necke.

Capéccio, as Capécchio.

Capeccióne, as Cauezzána.

Capédine, a kind of iug or pot with eares vsed in sacrifices.

Capégli, Capélli, haires.

Capéi, as Capélli.

Capella, a chappell or little Church, looke Fáre capelláccio.

Capelláccio, a filthy great broad hat.

Capellanía, a chaplaineship.

Capelláno, a chaplaine.

Capelláre, to hat, to hood, to bonnet.

Capellétta, a little chappell, a chappell of ease.

Capellétto, a chaplet, a little hat. Also a hawkes hood. Also the labell of a letter. Also the buske of any fruit that is not altogether close as of a hazell nut. Also a little tuffe vpon a peacocks head. Also a disease about a horses knee.

Capélli, all manner of haires. Also hats.

Capélli bióndi, golden, or bright haires.

Capélli di vénere, Maidens haire, Venus haire or our ladies haire.

Capélli créspi, curled, frizled or crisped haires.

Capélli inannelláti, idem.

Capélli rícci, idem.

Capelliéra, the whole dressing of a womans head. Also a peruke.

Capellína, a little chappell, a chappell of ease. Also a bush or tuffe of haire before. Also a little hat or quoife that women vse to weare in their houses in Italy. Also a kind of lurke with a bush or tuffe on his head. Also the foreskin of a mans priuities.

Capello, a hat, a hood. Also the dignity or badge of a Cardinall. Also a hawkes hood. Also a couer of a still or limbecke. Also a checke, a tant, a rating or rebuke giuen by one in authority. Fáre vn capello ad vno, to giue one a checke or rebuke. Also as Boccáta.

Capello di serro, an iron skall, a murion, a steele cap, a head piece, a helmet. 

Capellúta, as Capellína.

Capellúto, hatted.

Capellúto, haired.
>
Capeluénere, as Capélli di vénere.

Cápere, Cápio, Capér, Capúto, as Capíre.

Caperóne, as Capróne.

Caperúcci, the cape of a spanish cloke.

Capestrággine, knauish condition.

Capestráre, to tie with a halter.

Capestraríe, villenies or gallows trickes.

Capestratúra prima, the first haltring of a colt when he is first taken vp.

Capestratúre, hurts or galls in horses legs.

Capestrello, a knauish lad, a slie wag, a halter sacke, a waghalter.

Capéstro, a rope, a halter, a headstall. Also a wag, a haltersacke. Also a shoomakers strap.

Capéuole, as Capáce.

Capézza, as Cauézza.

Capezzále, a bolster for a bed.

Capézza di móro, cole blacke, morish.

Capézzoli, the niples or teats of sucking dugs. Also stems or stalkes of any fruit.

Capherágo, a kind of venemous serpent.

Capíde, a kind of measure in Persia.

Capidiéci, a chiefe magistrate in Venice.

Capídio, a hurlepoole or great whale.

Capidólio, as Capídio.

Capifóglio, the woodbine bearing the hony suckle.

Capifósso, as Caponégro.

Capifuóchi, andirons, brandirons, rangers or rackes for a chimney.

Capifuóri, as Capifuóchi.

Capigliáre, to dresse, tresse, to plait, to curle, to crispe or tie vp haires.

Capigliáta, the forelocke of a mans or womans haire. Also hairy.

Capigliatura, all the haires of ones head. Also the whole dressing of a womans head.

Capigliúto, very hairy.

Capilláre, the name of a veine in any body. Also as Capélli di vénere.

Capilláto, that is very hairy.

Capillatúra, as Capigliatúra.

Capiluénere, as Capélli di vénere.

Capimástro, a chiefe master, a suruaier or controuler of others.

Capinéro, the bird Fig pecker.

Cápio, the sliding of a knot.

Capíra, a certaine Persian garment.

Capíre, pífco, píto, to containe or be capable of, to conceiue.

Capirománte, a deuiner by looking glasses.

Capiromantía, diuination by looking glasses.

Capiróta, a kind of dainty meat.

Capirotáta, as Capiróta.

Capistótico, the staggers of a horse. 

Capitále, capitall, chiefe, principall. Also a mans wealth, goods or stocke. Also deadly.

Capitalità, chiefnesse, capitality.

Capíta, a containing or capacity.

Capitána, an admirall ship of a fleet.

Capitanánza, as Capitanáto.

Capitanáre, to command as a captaine, to gouerne a fort or place, or companie.

Capitanáto, the place or dignitie of a Captaine, a Captaineship. Also gouerned.

Capitanéssa, a woman leader or Captaine.

Capitanería, a captainry or gouernment by Captaines.

Capitáno, a Captaine, a Chiefetaine.

Capitáre, to grow to a head. Also to come, to fall vpon or light to a place by chance.

Capitár mále, to come to some ill or misfortune, to come to an ill end.

Capitáto, headed. Also hapned to a place by chance. Also a kinde of great headed Onion or leeke.

Cápite, a kind of white stone.

Capitello, the head of any pillar, a little chapter or head. Also frets or knobs in any worke. Also the niple of a womans breast. Also lie to wash and skoure with.

Capitoláre, to capitulate, to couenant.

Capitolarménte, capitularly, from point to point.

Capitolári negótij, affaires of a chapter house.

Capitolatióne, a capitulation, a couenant.

Capitoléssa, a long tale or legend or chapter but taken in ill part.

Capitólio, the Capitoll in Rome.

Capítolo, a chapter. Also a Conuocation-house or meeting place of any society.

Capitómolo, a tumbling downe or tricke.

Capitóne, course sleaue-silke. Also a fish called a cur, a gull, a bulshead or millars thumb.

Capitóni, as Cápifuóchi.

Capitónzo, an Item with a great letter, or beginning of a chapter.

Capitórza, a bird called a wry necke.

Capitóso, testie, obstinate, wilfull, heady, stuborne, hare-brainde, stiffnecked.

Capituláre, as Capitoláre.

Capitulatióne, as Capitolatióne.

Capítulo, as Capítolo.

Capitudinário, chiefe or one of a chiefe faction, a Master or Warden of a companie.

Capitúdine, a chiefe company or faction aboue others, as the companies of 



London.

Capitúto, a logger-head, a iolt-head. Also any thing hauing a bighead.

Capníte, a kind of precious stone.

Cápno, Hens-feet, which some take for Fumiterry.

Capnománte, a deuiner by smokes and fumes.

Capnomantía, diuination by obseruing smokes and fumes.

Cápo, a head, a pate, a nole, a skonce. Also a chiefe ouer others. Also a cloue of garlike. Also an end or beginning. Also a Cape of any land, a but or point of land. Also the naue of a wheele. Also a fish called a Cur, a bulhead, a gull or a millers-thumb.

Cápo a máre, a Cape or Promontorie into the Sea.

Capocáccia, a chiefe or master hunter.

Capócchia, the foreskin or prepuce.

Capocchiería, foolishnesse, doltishnesse.

Capócchio, a shallow skonce, a loggerhead.

Capóccio, as Capócchio.

Cápocerro, the staggers in any beast.

Cápo d'ácqua, a well-spring or head of water.

Cápo d'ángolo, a chiefe corner stone.

Cápo d'ánno, the yeeres end.

Cápo del dragóne, the name of a starre called the Dragons head.

Cápo di contráda, an alderman or headborough-master.

Cápo di córda, a ropes end, a cables end. Also a sliding knet.

Cápo diéci, a chiefe or commander of ten.

Cápo di goména, a cables end.

Cápo di gróssa, a coyle of great cable.

Cápo di látte, the creame of milke.

Cápo di squádra, a ring-leader or chiefe.

Cápo di vento, a stiffe or chiefe gale of winde.

Cápo frónte, the forefront of a horse.

Capofuóchi, as Capifuóchi.

Cápo gátto, a kind of foule euill or falling sicknesse in a horse, some say it is a swelling ouer all the horses head possessing the eyes, the throat, and other parts, so that for the time hee can receiue no foode.

Capogírli, giddinesse in the head, qualmes ouer the stomacke. Also fantasticall, suddaine or humorous fancies.

Capogirlóso, full of suddaine toyes, gadding humors, or giddinesse in the head.

Capo grósso, a grout-head, a logarhead.

Cápoletto, a testerne, a canopie or head of a bed. Also all furnitures belonging either to a bed or a bed chamber. 

Capolíno, a little head or pate.

Capoleuáre, to lift vp the head, to stand without blushing. Also to turne vpside downe.

Capoléno, with the head aloft, without blushing. Also as Cápo vólto.

Cápolo, some part about a plough.

Capománno, a chiefe man, a Bourgamaster.

Capomástro, a chiefe or head master.

Caponára, a coope or pen for capons.

Caponáre, to capon, to gueld.

Caponáto, caponed, guelded. Also a Poultrer.

Caponcello, a caponet, a yong capon.

Capóne, a Capon. Also one that is guelded. Also a kind of shell-fish.

Caponégro, a titmouse or oxe-eye.

Caponéra, as Caponára.

Capopárte, a chiefe or head of a faction

Caporále, a Corporall of a band of men, a Chieftaine, a principall, a head on guide to others.

Caporióne, a Marshall of a campe, a Corporall of the field. Also a Sherife or Iealour.

Capotíglio, a spanish cloke with a litle hood.

Capotórto, a bird called a Wrinecke.

Capótto, as Cappótto.

Capostórno, the staggers in any beast.

Capo vólto, topsieturuie, turned vp side downe.

Cáppa, a Cape-cloke, a Spanish cloke. Also a Priests-coape. Also a kind of vaile that women weare about their necks in Italie. Also a pile, or canton in armorie. Also any kind of long or round shell fish.

Cappacciólo, a kind of dressing of meat so called in Italie.

Cáppa di camíno, the lower hole of a chimney.

Cappadóce, a kind of cabage lectuce.

Cappadócia, blossoms of Iuiube tree.

Cappanella, a rout or crue of people.

Cappanelli, a kind of fetters, giues, or shackles for prisoners.

Cappáre, to cape, to coape, to cloke or hood. Also giue or leaue earnest in hand for any bargaine. Also to chuse or traine vp men. Also to snatch vp any thing.

Cáppari, the shrub bearing caper. Also the capers themselues. Also an Aduerbe importing take heed because the capers growing in Egypt are very venemous and dangerous where they touch, and therefore to be fled.

Capparisonáre, to trap or caparison a horse.

Capparisóne, a caparison.

Capparócchiole, a kind of great cockles or Scalops.

Capparóle, a kinde of little cockles or winkles.

Capparóne, as Capperóne.

Capparúccia, an olde, torne, ragged cloke or fishers frocke, or gabardine.

Capparúccio, as Capúccio. Also a cape of a Spanish cloke.

Cáppa speláta, a thrid-bare cloke.

Cappáti, cloked, caped, or hoodded. Also chosen or gaged men for any action.

Cáppe, capes, coapes, Spanish clokes. Also all manner of cockles, scallops, winkles or muscles.

Cappelétti, souldiers seruing on horsebacke with skuls or steelecaps, skulmen, black-skuls.

Cappella, as Capella.

Cappelláno, as Capelláno.

Cáppe lónghe, great long muskles.

Cappellétto, any kind of chaplet or litle hat.

Capperáta, a kind of fish-sauce.

Cápperi, as Cáppari. Also spades vpon plaing cardes.

Capperóne, a chaperon or french-hood. Also a frock with a hood for the raine or shepheards cloke. Also a simple gull or ninnie hammer.

Capperóni, Caperons or great capers.

Capperúccia, as Capparúccia.

Capperúccio, as Capparúccio.

Cáppe sánte, as Cáppe lónghe.

Cáppe tónde, round cockles or scallops.

Cáppi, the clawes of any crabfish. Also the knots or steps that are vpon the shrouds of ships by which Mariners climbe vp. Also sliding knots.

Cappiáre, to tie or ensnare with Cáppio.

Cáppio, a sliding knot. Also a ginne, a snare or spring to catch birds. Also Legáta a Cáppio, is a ioint in the midle of a port or vpset of a horses bit, where one end of the iron claspeth another like two single hookes.

Cáppio scorridóre, a sliding knot.

Cáppita, an aduerbe as Cáppari. Also capacity or containing.

Cáppo, a chiefe in armory.

Cappócchio, as Capócchio.

Capponára, as Caponára.

Capponáre, as Caponáre.

Cappóne, as Capóne.

Cappótto, a short dutch cloke, a short Spanish cap. Also a hood or cowle.

Cappucciáre, to hood. Also to stumble, to trip or skip.

Cappúccio, a hood, a cowle. Also the cape of a spanish cloke.

Cappucciólo, a kind of dressing of fish.

Cápra, any kinde of Goate. Also a kind of racke or torture. Also a skid or such engine to mount and raise great Ordinance withall.

Cápra fólle, a fond Goatish woman, a skittish lasse. 



Capragina, Goates Rew or Italian fitch.

Capráro, a Goate-herad.

Capránica, foolish, Goatish, skittish.

Capréccio, as Capríccio.

Capreccióso, as Capriccióso.

Capreggiáre, to play the Goate, to be letcherous.

Capreóla, as Caprióla.

Capreoláre, as Caprioláre.

Capreólo, as Capriólo.

Capresta, as Caprétio.

Caprésto, as Capríccio.

Caprétio, goatish, toyish, humorus.

Caprestuólo, a wag-halter, a haltersacke.

Caprétta, a yongue doe-goate or Faune.

Caprétti, certaine starres called the kids presaging raine and shoures.

Caprettíni, yongue kids or cheurets.

Caprétto, a yongue kid or faune.

Cápria, as Cápra. Also a kinde of Vine or grape. Also a kinde of duskie Iasperstone.

Capriáta, a Cheese-cake of Goates milke.

Capricciáre, to grow or be humorus, toyish or fantasticall, to be suddainely affrighted.

Capríccio, a suddaine toy, a fantasticall humor, a selfe-conceit. Also a suddain feare making ones haire to stand an end. Also a shiuering or chilling cold or fit as of an ague.

Capriccióso, humorous, fantasticall, toyish, conceited, wauering in mindes. Also chilling or shiuering. Also subiect to feare.

Capríccio di febbre, a suddain fit of an ague.

Capricciosità, humorousnesse, toyishnesse, fondnesse, wauering of minde.

Capricórno, a beast bodied like a Stag, footed and horned like a Goat. Also one of the twelue signes called Capricornus.

Capricorníno, borne vnder, or of the nature of Capricornus.

Caprificále giórno, a day kept holy to Vulcan when figges be in perfection.

Caprificatióne, a scarifying of trees or drying their superfluous humors, namly in fig-trees. Also a seeking of that which may not be.

Caprísico, a wild Fig-tree, or figge that will neuer be ripe.

Caprifóglio, wood-binde or honysuckle.

Caprígno, goatish, rammish, wilde, skittish. Also letcherous, sault.

Capríle, a place where Goates are kept.

Caprimúlgo, a skrich-owle or night-rauen that in the night sucketh the vdders of Goates. Also a milker of Goates.

Caprína, goatish. Also, Goates-dung. Also a cheuerill or Goates skin.

Caprinella, the hearbe Dogs-tooth.

Capríno, Goatish or rammish. Also Goates-cheese.

Caprióla, a Faune, a Kid, a yongue Hinde, a Koe-doe, a Calfe of a Hinde, Also a Capriole or Caper in dauncing. Also a Capriole, a Sault or Goates leape that cunning riders teach their horses. Also the hearbe Doggestooth.

Caprioláre, to caper, or capricle.

Capriólo, as Caprióla, but Masculine.

Capriólo della víte, the twinding of a Vine about a pole, a with to tie vp vines.

Capriótta, as Capiróta.

Capríte, a kinde of brasse ore burnt like Cinders.

Capriuúlgo, a kind of strange bird.

Cápro, a Buck-goate, a riuer-goate.

Capromárgo, a kind of red marle to fatten and manure ground for corne.

Capróne, a great Bucke-goate. Also a thicke Goates or Chamoy-skin. Also a dull-pate, a logarhead, a shallow foolish skonce. Also a great cuckold.

Captáre, as Cattáre.

Captiuáre, to Captiuate or take prisoner.

Captióncula, a captious cauill, or slight deceite.

Captióne, caption, snappishnesse, curiosity, craft, deceite.

Captiosità, captiousnesse, snappishnesse, curiosity, deceite.

Capióso, captious, snappish, curious, deceitfull.

Captiuità, captiuity.

Cápto, taken, catcht, captiuated.

Capucciare, as Cappucciáre.

Capuccij, any kinde of Cabages.

Capuccíni, Capuchin-friers.

Capúccio, a hood, a cowle, a bonnet.

Cápula del capello, the head of a hatte without brims.

Capúto, a kinde of great headed fish, taken for the great Codfish.

Cára, an hearb in India, which mingled with milke makes a kind of bread.

Carabáccia, as Carabozzáda.

Carabáttola, a box where in a shoemaker keepes all his implements, standing on his right hand where he works.

Carábe, as Caróbe.

Carábo, a kind of Crabfish that is a great enemy, to the fish Polipo.

Carab, ozzáda, a kind of dainty dish or meat in Italy.

Carabróne, a Scarab flie or hornet.

Carabuzzáta, a kind of pottage vsed in Spaine.

Carácca, a Carake ship.

Caráccia, as Charáccia, or Carácia.

Carácia, the male Tithimale. Also a kind of strong, thicke and tuffe cane.

Caracolláre, to turne a horse cunningly when a man is running or fighting a course in the field or in any furious seruice on horsebacke.

Caracóllo, that quicke turne a horse makes when his rider fights on horsebacke.

Caráffa, a violl glasse, as Inghiftára.

Caraffóni, great bottles of glasse.

Carafúllo, a gull, a noday, a dull pate.

Caragnóla, a kind of creeping snaile.

Caragnólo, some gunners in strument.

Caramáio, as Calamáio.

Caramelláre, to chat, to pratle, to bable. Also to worme eat, to worme gnaw.

Caramelláta, worme eaten, gnawne, rugged, ouerworne. Also a prating.

Caramellétti, a kind of dainty sea fish called also Beccafíchi maríni.

Caramellóne, a pratler, a babler, a chatter.

Caramíta, a bed minion, a bardash.

Caramóte, a kind of shrimps or praunes.

Carampána, a homely cottage, a meane place.

Caramusáli, a kind of ship in Ormuz.

Caramusolína, a kind of pinnace or barke.

Carantáno, a kind of coine or mony.

Caránto, a greene finch.

Caránza, the hearb Balsam apple.

Carapignáre, as Carpire.

Caratello, a gally or ship of Creet. Also a little cart, a wheele barrow or tumbrell. Also a gally pot. Also a measure for liquid things.

Caráto, a waight or degree in mettalls called a charact. Also the touch or loye or refining of gold.

Carattáre, to charact, to touch or trie gold, to refine or make perfect.

Caráttero, a caracter or figure written.

Carattéro, a carter, a wane man.

Carátto, a certaine fee or slint which euery man in Venice paieth to Saint Marke that obtaines any sute by law. Also a gally pot or violl glasse, it is called in Rome la Spórtula.

Caráua, a packe, a rout or crew of knaues.

Carauána, a Carauan, which is a companie of men and horses marching together, as they vse to trauell in Egypt with Camels.

Carauanáre, to wander or trauell great iourneyes horse and men in troupes as the Carauans.

Caraueila, a Carauell-ship. Also a kind of glue. Also a kinde of peare in Italie.

Carauelle, a kind of peares so called.

Carbáso, a kind of fine flaxe. Also the name of a saile in a ship. 



Carbatía, a kind of creame.

Carbonáia, a Coale-pit, a Coale-house.

Carbonáre, to besmeare with coales. Also to carbonado.

Carbonára, as Carbonáia.

Carbonáro, a Collier, or coale-maker.

Carbonáta, a rasher or Carbonado.

Carboncelli, pushes or pimples of wilde fire arising in red faces.

Carbonchiáre, looke Carbónchio.

Carbonchiatúra, looke Carbónchio.

Carbónchio, a Carbuncle stone. Also a carbuncle-sore, a blane, a botch, a bile, a push, a plague-sore or fierie swelling in any part of the bodie. Also Mildew Hotplanets, or blasting or corne, or fruits, or trees. Also a burning coale.

Carbonchióso terréno, earth that is crumbling and full of grit.

Carbóne, any kind of coale.

Carbóne acquático, a Cormorant.

Carbóncolo, as Carbónchio.

Carbóne di terra, smithes-pit, or Seacoale.

Carbóni pésti, Coale-dust.

Carbonóso, coalie, durtie, full of coales.

Carcáme, any dead carcesse or carion, It may also be taken for fleshinesse of bodie.

Carcáre, as Caricáre.

Carcásso, a quiuer for arrowes.

Carcassóne, a Sailers frocke, or course stuffe to make frocks for Sea-men.

Carcáta, as Cárica.

Carceráre, to emprison, to lay in prison.

Carceráto, a prisoner. Also emprisoned.

Cárcere, any kind of prison.

Carceriére, a Iailor or prison-keeper.

Carchedóni, a kind of Rubie stone.

Carcidónio, as Calcedónio.

Carcidóni, cancerous or vlcerous putrefactions in the nose.

Cárcij, a stone named of the colour of a Sea-crab.

Carcinóma, a rancled or cancerous vlcer like a cancer or Crab-fish clawes.

Carcinomáto, that hath a cankre.

Carcinotróne, as Sanguinária herba.

Carcióffi, hartichockes.

Carciócchi, hartichockes.

Carcióffoli, hartichockes.

Cárco, as Cárico.

Carcóia. 

Carcomfuráre, to goe and wander about sneakeingly, to filsh and steale.

Cárda, as Cárdo.

Cardalána, a carder of wooll, taken also for a crafty scraping companion.

Cardámo, grainesse of Paradise, Seps or Cadomomes. Also gardine cresses.

Cardamómo, as Cardámo.

Cardáre, to card or teazel wooll. Also to backbite one behinde his backe.

Cardarelle, a kind of Mushroms. 

Cardassáre, to card or teazell wooll.

Cardassóne, cardes to carde wooll.

Cardatóre, a carder of wooll.

Cardatúro, as Cardassóne.

Cardellíno, a Gold-finch, a Thistlefinch.

Cardello, as Cardellíno.

Carderíno, as Cardellíno.

Cardiáca, the hearbe Mother-wort.

Cardiáco, a griefe or wringing of the heart and the stomacke, a faintnesse or colde sweate.

Cardiáco mále, a griefe in the mouth of the stomacke which makes the heart to gnaw.

Cardialgía, a gnawing of the stomackes.

Cardinaláto, a Cardinal-ship, the office or dignity of a Cardinall.

Cardin alático, as Cardinaláto.

Cardinále, a Cardinall or chiefe man.

Cardinaleggiáre, to play the Cardinall or chiefe Supporter.

Cardinále della pórta, the hinges of a dore, deriued of Cárdine.

Cardinalésco, Cardinall-like.

Cardinalésimo, the order or function of Cardinals.

Cárdine, a hinge or hooke of a dore, a tennon. Also the furthest part of any thing.

Cárdine del cielo, heauens axeltree.

Cárdini del móndo, the foure chiefe corners of the world.

Cardísche, a stone hauing the shape of a heart in it.

Cárdo, any kind of thistle or teazell.

Cardoíno, a Gold finch.

Cardoncello, the hearb Groundsell. Also a little thistle or bur.

Cardóne, any kind of great thistle. Also the vtmost huske of a Chesnut. Also a tree in the East Indies called Meth or Magnei, which growes vp straight aboue a quarter of a mile, and no bigger then the body of a man, and hath but few leaues, but so thicke and great that with them they couer and tile their houses, and with the root of it they make wine, hony, vinegre, sugar and many other things.

Cardonétta, the hearb stinking weed.

Cardosánto, cardus benedictus or the blessed thistle.

Carduelo, a linnet bird.

Careggiáre, as Accarezzáre.

Caréggie, as Carézze.

Carello, a hassocke or mat to stop a priuy with. Also a square cushion made of diuers pieces or patches as tailors and beggars vse to sit vpon. Also a truckle bed vnder a standing bed.

Caréna, the keele or bottom of a ship. Also a whole ship. Also the fruit of grape.

Careo, the seed caroway. 

Carestía, dearth, penury, want, scarsity.

Carestiólo, penurious, full of dearth.

Carestioso, as Carestiólo.

Carétta, as Carrétta.

Carétto, a weauers warping loome.

Carezzáre, as Accarezzáre.

Carézze, cherishings, blandishments.

Carezzétte, diminutiue of Carézze.

Carezzéuole, cherishing, blandishing.

Carezzíne, as Carezzétte.

Carezzóso, as Carezzéuole.

Carfágna, vncared for, not set by.

Cári, carowaies. Also plu. of Cáro.

Cariággio, all maner of cariage.

Cariátide, an order of holy Nunnes or votaries in old time.

Cárica, a charge, a burthen, a load, a lading, a fraight, a waight. Also a kind of meat in Italy wherein they put much hogs blood.

Cárica l'ásino, the play at cardes, lodame,

Caricáre, to charge, to loade, to lade, to fraight, to burthen. Also to impute.

Caricáre un pezzo, to charge a small pice, to load a great piece.

Caricáre un pezzo a sécco, to charge or load a piece dry (according to our gunners phrase) which is without pouder or shot, for sparing whereof yong schollers learne to vse the ladle nimbly, and for practise sake charge and vncharge pieces with sand and grauell.

Caricatóre, a loader, a charger, a fraughter. Also a gunners ladle.

Caricatúra, as Cárica.

Caríce, Sheare-grasse, or Sedge.

Caríci, little wilde figs growing in hedges.

Cárico, as Cárica. Also charged or loaden. Also an imputation or charge laid to one. Vsed also for any charge, gouernment, or care committed to one.

Cariddóso, rockie, full of cliffs and dangerous.

Cariéga, a chaire or remoouing seate.

Cariglionáre, to chime the bells.

Cariglióne, a chime or iangle of bells.

Cariéra, a careere of a horse.

Carieráre, to careere a horse.

Caríma, a kind of nut whereof Nut-oyle is made.

Carína, as Caréna.

Carinóne, wall nut oyle.

Carióla, as Carriuóla.

Cariópo, looke Cinamómo.

Carióti, a kind of excellent Dates good to make wine of. Also a kind of watrish figs.

Carístio, a kinde of bird that will flie through the fire and not burne his feathers. Also a kind of greene-speckled marble. Also as Carestía.



Carità, charitie, loue, agreement.

Caríta, a bird that houers in the fire.

Caritatiuaménte, charitably.

Caritatéuole, charitable, full of charitie.

Caritatíuo, charitable, full of charitie.

Carità pelósa, hairie charitie, as much to say neighbourly letcherie.

Caritea, a kind of meate in Italie, minced small with egges, spices, hearbes and raisins.

Caritéme, the male, Tithimale.

Caritéuole, full of charitie, charitable.

Carítia, dearth, dearenesse, scarsitie.

Caritobepharóne, a shrub of the Sea like Coralle and blackish.

Carlína biánca, a kind of litle Thistle wherewith Charles the great cured the plague, and of him it tooke the name. It is also taken for a Fullers teazell.

Carlína néra, the common Thistle with a long stalke wherewith they curde milke.

Carlíno, a fish like a Tench. Also a small coyne, coyned by the Charles of France

Carlóna, plainely, homely fashion, Dunstable-way. Looke Alla carlóna.

Carlótto, a bird called a Curlue.

Carlúccia., 

Cárme, a verse or a rime.

Carmeggiáre, to rime, to versifie.

Carmelle, lockes, tuffes or bundles of wooll.

Carménne, a kind of Apples.

Carmináre, to picke, to carde or teazell wooll, flaxe or hempe. Also to tug, to beate or bang. Also by medicines to make grosse humors fine and thin.

Carminatíuo, that may be dissolued and made thin by medicines, the word is borrowed of carders of wooll.

Carminatóre, a wooll-carder.

Cármine, a verse.

Carmíno, an order of Friers so called.

Carmosíno, Crimson or Stammell colour.

Carnáccia, filthy flesh, or any carion. Vsed also for a bodie of Sinne.

Carnadíno, a Carnation colour.

Carnafáu, the brat-getting place.

Carnafístola, a kind of Indian drug.

Carnagióne, the hew or colour of ones skin and flesh. Also fleshinesse.

Carnággio, carnage, slaughter, murther. Also all manner of flesh meate.

Carnáio, a shambles. Also a Lardrie to keepe flesh in. Also a place to cast bones in.

Carnaláccio, a filthy, sensuall, fleshly man, one that makes his pleasure his God.

Carnále, carnall, fleshly. Also lawfull issue of children, or conioyned in blood. 

Carnáli, some pieces of a weauers loome or of a ship.

Carnalità, carnalitie, fleshlinesse. Also alliance in blood, or affection in or of blood.

Carnáme, all manner of flesh meate. Also carrion or dead carcasses.

Carnário, as Carnáio.

Carnasciále, as Carneuále.

Carnáto, vsed as Carnagióne.

Cárne, all manner of flesh. Also the pith of wood, fruit, fish, or any thing else.

Cárne bouína, Beef-flesh.

Cárne di caprétto, Kid-flesh.

Cárne di castráto, mutton or sheepes flesh.

Cárne di pórco, swines or hogs-flesh.

Cárne in pótto, meate stewed in a pot.

Cárne vaccína, Cow-beefe.

Carnéfice, a hangman, an executioner, a cruell, a bloody or fleshly minded man.

Carneggiáre, to flesh it, to feede vpon flesh. Also to follow the lust of the flesh.

Cárne ne tegami, meate stewed between two dishes, which some call a French pie.

Carnéro, a net-bag to carie meate in. Also a hawking bag.

Carneruólo, any litle Carnéro.

Carnesciále, as Carneuále.

Carnesécchi, a dry, a greedie and hungry fellow, a leane bones.

Cárneuále, Shrouetide, shrouing time, when flesh is bidden farewell.

Carneualeggiáre, to shroue or be merry

Carneualítio, of or belonging to shrouetide or shrouing.

Carneuíua, a plaister of warme guts.

Carníccio, the fleshy side of any fell, hide, or skin, or leather.

Carnicella, yoong tender flesh growing vpon any sore.

Carnicína, as Carnicella.

Carniero, as Carnéro.

Carnífero, flesh-bringing, flesh-bearing.

Carnificiáre, to racke or teare in pieces.

Carnificína, a place where malefactors are executed. Also the office or act of a hangman or murtherer. Also murther and cruelty.

Carnifício, the office of a hangman. Also a cutting or racking in peeces.

Carniuoráre, to deuoure or teare ones flesh.

Carniuóro, a deuourer of flesh.

Carnízzo, as Carnúccio.

Carnolénte, grosse, fleshy, thicke, quarrey, corpolent in flesh.

Carnósa, a fish so called in Rome.

Carnosità, a carnosity or fleshinesse.

Carnóso, fleshy, brawny, pithy. 

Carnósso, flesh and bone together.

Carnúccio, the raw shauings of hides or flesh or felles, or the sinewes and thrids of Parchment to make size or glue.

Cáro, deare, precious, beloued, leefe, costly. Also dearth or penury. Also Caroway-seed.

Caróba, the fruit or tree called the Carobe-tree which beares a kind of sweet cod. Also the pulse Fenie-greeke.

Caróbia, a Crosse or highway that goes and turnes foure waies.

Caróbio, as Caróbia.

Caróbo, as Caróba.

Caróbola, as Caróba.

Carógna, stinking carion

Caróla, a song, a caroll. Also a dance.

Caroládi, something about a ship.

Caroláre, to caroll, to sing, to reuell. Also to dance and be mery. Also to make hollow. Also to moath or worme eat. Also to deuoure or fester with any corosiue or gnawing. Also to grow to a cunt-botch.

Carolíccio, moath-eaten, gnawne, worme-eaten, rotten as old wood.

Carólo, a moath or timber-worme. Also a cunt-botch or winchester-goose. Also dust of rotten wood vsed about yongue children against fleaing.

Carolóso, full of moathes or wormes.

Carománo, a kinde of fine steele so called.

Caróncola, a kind of worme or disease breeding in horses heads.

Caróne, as Caróba.

Carósa, a wench, a girle, a lasse.

Carosáre, to sheare as they doe sheepe.

Caroselle, as Caleselle.

Caróta, a Carot root. Looke Cacciáre.

Caróso, hollow and worme eaten.

Carotíglia, as Cannotíglia.

Carouána, as Carauána.

Carouanáre, as Carauanáre.

Carouelle, a kind of peares in Italy.

Cárpa, a Carpe-fish. Also a moathe in clothes.

Carpáno, a Carpe-fish.

Carpáre, to creepe or craule, as Carpíre.

Carpáso, a venemous kinde of beast.

Carpátho, a venemous hearbe.

Carpea, a dance among the Grecians.

Carpéno, a Carpe-fish.

Carpentiero, a Carpenter.

Carpesía, a venemous hearbe. Also Cubebs as Apothecaries call it.

Carpétta, a table carpet.

Carphósi, a kinde of Fenigreeke.

Carpicciáre, to tug, to snatch or shift for.

Carpíccio, a tugging, a snatching or shifting for.

Carpignáre, as Carpíre.

Carpináre, as Carpíre.



Carpíno, the vtmost or last tree of any ranke. Also the Carpin-tree, the Carmtree the Horne-beame, the hard-beam, or Yuoke-alme. Also as Carpísci.

Carpionáto pésce, Marled-fish.

Carpióne, a Carpe-fish. Also creepingly or crawling. Also as Carpísci.

Carpíre, písco, píto, to snatch, to pilfer to filch, to prowle, to shift for, to climbe or graple for, to get by hooke or crooke.

Carpír sù, to snatch vp.

Carpísci, a snatching, hooking, pilfering fellow. Looke Carpire.

Carpíta, a filching, a prowling, a pilfering, a shifting for, a climing vp for, a snatch and away.

Cárpo, a highway, a trodden path, a street. Also the ioynt by which the hand is tied to the end of the lesser bone in the arme. Also the wrist or the first part of the palme of the hand. Also wise, subtill, wary, crafty.

Carponáre, to creepe on all foure.

Carpóne, groping or creeping in the darke.

Carpheóto, the best Frankincense.

Carpophilóne, the horse-tongue Laurell.

Cárra, all maner of cartes and waines.

Carraguóli, a kinde of Winckles or welkes.

Carráia, a place where carts or waggons stand or are to be hired.

Carraiuólo, a wheele or Cart-wright. Also a carter or a waine-man.

Carraréccia, a slough or rut that a cartwheele makes in foule way.

Carráro, as Carraiuólo.

Carratello, as Caratello.

Carratiere, as Carraiuólo.

Carratóre, as Carraiuólo.

Carreággio, all manner of carts or cariage by carts.

Carréccia, as Carraréccia.

Carreggiáre, to play the car man, to cary or remoue by carts.

Carreggiáta, as Carraréccia.

Carreggiatóre, as Carrettáro.

Carréggio, all manner of carts or cariage by carts. Also a place in an army or campe where the carts and campe cariages are placed.

Carréra, as Cariéra.

Carrétta, a cart, a waggon, a waine.

Carrettáre, to cart or cary by carts.

Carrettáro, a carter, a car or waineman.

Carrettáta, a cart full, a cart loade.

Carrettiére, as Carrettáro.

Carrétto, a childs standing stoole to learne to goe by. Also as Carétto.

Carrettóni, charrioters that keep coaches and coach horses. Also great carts.

Carriággio, as Carreággio.

Carríbo, forme, fashion, guise, manner.

Carriéra, the carrier of a horse.

Carriéro, the name of a star called Charles waine.

Carríno, the forecariage of a plece of ordinance, neuer vsed but in marching. Also a little cart, charriot or waggon. Also luggage, cariage, bag and baggage.

Carrióla, as Carriuóla.

Carrioláro, a bearer of a Carriuóla.

Carriuóla, a trundle bed, a child standing stoole with wheeles. Also a wheele barrow. Also the root of a horses taile. Also a kind of couered chaire vsed in Italy wherein men and women are carried by porters vpon their shoulders.

Cárro, a cart, a charriot, a wain, a waggon. Also a pageant. Also Charles waine, or the seauen stars about the North star. Also a kind of measure.

Carrobalísta, a certaine instrument of war.

Carrocchiéro, a coach man or maker.

Carróccia, a caroch, or a coach.

Carrocciáre, to goe or ride in caroch.

Carróccio, a portable chariot, carrosse or pageant.

Carrocciáro, a coach man or maker.

Cárro di villaníe, a cart loade of villaines. Dire un cárro di villaníe, to loade a man with a cart loade of villanous termes.

Carromátto, a block carriage vsed sometimes to spare field cariages.

Cárro píccolo, the name of a star.

Carrózza, as Carróccia.

Carrozzáre, as Carrocciáre.

Carrozzáro, as Carrocciáro.

Carrúba, as Caróba.

Carrúca, as Carrúcula.

Carrucciáre, to cary vpon sleds.

Carrúccio, sleds with low wheeles to remoue great packs, timber or pieces.

Carrúcula, as Carriuóla. Also a pullie of a well or ship. Also the rump of a herses taile.

Carruculáre, to trundle or rowle, or pullie.

Cárta, any paper, a leafe of a booke. Also a carde, a map. Also a plaing card. Also any writing or letter. Also any Indenture, bill, bond, euidence, record, or contract written.

Cartabóne, a certaine instrument of paste-boord to measure land with.

Cárta caprína, goates-skin-parchment.

Cárta caurétta, kid-skin-parchment,

Cartáccia, course waste paper. Also a play at cardes so called. Also a filthy carde.

Cárta da nauicáre, a sailing carde.

Cárta da stráccio, waste paper.

Cárta di commétta, a writ in law, as we say a Capiat.

Cárta di figúra, a coate-carde.

Cárta di punto, a pricke-carde.

Cárta di villanía, a letter, a booke or volume of iniurious or villanous termes.

Cartadúci, a kinde of men or Satyres of all other creatures most swift in footemanship, running sometimes on all foure and other times but on two feete

Cárta membrána, vellame parchment.

Cárta pecorína, parchment.

Cárta pergaména, parchment.

Cárta reále, royall paper.

Cárta sciúga, sucking paper.

Cárta sciugarína, sucking paper.

Cartáre, to carde, as Carteggiáre.

Cartáro, a seller or maker of paper or cardes.

Cárte, cardes, or leaues of bookes.

Cartécca, as Colátro. Also Dogs grasse.

Carteggiáre, to carde or play at cardes.

Cartégia., Dogs grasse.

Cartella, a kind of sleeked pasteboord to write vpon and may bee blotted out againe. Also leaues of writing tables. Also an instrument full of holes vsed by Iewellers to measure pearles and of gunners to measure bullets.

Cartellánte, a challenger, a carteller.

Cartelláre, to challenge to fight. Also to answere a challenge.

Cartelle, writing tables. Also the side postes of a dore.

Cartello, a cartell or writ of defiance.

Cartellóni, great thicke pasteboordes.

Cartésimo, the arte or play at cardes.

Carteríno Imperiále, a kind of Physike called an Imperiall purge.

Carthegóne, a kinde of graine that the Boxe tree brings foorth.

Cárti, carding cardes.

Cartiéra, a Paper-mill.

Cartiéro, a carder. Also a carter.

Cartíglia, a small scroule of paper, a briefe.

Cartíglio, any piece of plats or paper worne vpon helmet or about ones armes with some armes, badge, marke, signe, writing or inscription.

Cartilágine, a gristle. Also a litle leafe.

Cartilaginóso, gristly, full of gristles.

Cárto, a carde to carde wooll withall.

Cartóccio, a coffin of paper.

Cartoério, a coffin of paper. Also a cartage or charge of powder to put into a musket or cannon. Also a kind of yonike worke so called among Masons.

Cartoliéra, a paper-mill.

Cartoliére, a paper seller or maker.

Cartolína, a litle skin or thin caule ouer any thing, a litle sinew or gristly piece of flesh, a litle filme.

Cartóne, thicke paste-boord.

Cartúccia, any litle carde or piece of pa­



per. Vsed also for a foolish ballade.

Carúca, as Carrúcola.

Carúcia, the male Tithimale.

Caruóla, as Carrúcola.

Caruoláre, as Carrucoláre.

Caruólo, as Taruólo.

Caruolóso, as Tarlóso.

Carútta, vsed for Carótta.

Cárza, the blacke-berrie bush.

Carzeríno, a Gold or Thistle-finch.

Cása, any kinde of house, a mannor or dwelling place. Also a familie, a blood a name, or stocke. Also a point in the plaing tables or house vpon a chesseboord. Also a mans owne home or natiue country.

Cása, not named and yet ment. As Essendo ad un súo parente, being at the house of a kinsman of his.

Cása bollíta, vsed for hell. And also for a common brothell house.

Cása cálda, as Cása bollíta.

Cása di páglia, a thatcht-house.

Cása maladétta, as Cása bollíta.

Casácca, an habitation or dwelling. Also a Cassocke or long coate.

Cassacchino, a mandilion, a iacket, a ierkin.

Casáccia, a filthy ruinous house.

Casále, a farme, a mannor or dayrie house, a messuage, a tenement. Also a hamlet or litle village.

Casaléngo, as Casalíngo.

Casalíngo, homelie bread in a house, belonging to houshold, páne casalíngo houshold bread, Colómbi casalínghi tame or house pigeons.

Casalíno, a litle house. Also a houselin. Also as Casalíngo.

Casamátta, a Casamat, a Canonrie or slaughter-house so called of enginers, which is a place built low vnder the wall or bul warke not arriuing vnto the height of the ditch, and serues to annoy or hinder the enemie when he entreth the ditch to skale the wall.

Casaménto, a building or house-frame. Also a mannor or farme-house.

Casáre, to house, to marrie, to wed.

Casáta, a houshold. Also married.

Casatelle, a kind of paste-meate in Italie.

Casáto, a familie, a name or stocke of a house. Also as Casále.

Cascáglio, a kind of churse cheese.

Cascánte, drooping, ready to fall.

Canscantíccio, weake, drooping, ready to fall.

Cascapéli, the shedding of the haire.

Cascáre, to fall, to escheat.

Cascáta, a fall, an escheating.

Caschétto, a caske or head piece.

Casciára, a cheese or dairy house.

Casciáre, to crush, to squise, to wring out. Also to crud as cheese. 

Casciáro, a cheesemunger or maker.

Casciaruólo, as Casciáro.

Cascína, a country cottage, a thatcht house, a booth, an harbor or shelter.

Cáscio, as Cácio, any kind of cheese.

Casciólo, a little cheese.

Cáscio marzolíno, a kind of cheese.

Cascióne, a ricke of hay, or stacke of corne.

Cascióso, cheesie, full of cheese.

Cascóse, a kind of dried paste-meat.

Cascóssa, a kind of creame or fresh cheese, some take it for a kind of paste-meat.

Caseáro, a cheesemunger or maker.

Caselle, little houses or holes for pigeons.

Casénda, a custome or tole house.

Cáseo, any kind of cheese.

Caseréccio, home bred, homely, belonging to home or houshold.

Caserino, a little house, a poore cottage.

Casése, a fellow that keepes home and neuer goes abroad, a houselin.

Casétta, any little house or cottage.

Cásia, a kind of hearb or flowre.

Casiácca, a cassocke or such garment.

Casíccio, a tame lambe bred by hand.

Casimódo, 

Casíno, a little house, a mans poore home.

Casionáre, as Occasionáre.

Casióne, as Occasióne.

Casípula, a little house, a poore cottage.

Cásma, a kind of blazing in the firmament when it is seene to chinke and open.

Cáso, the case, the fitnesse or purpose of any thing. Also the manner how a matter is. Also fate, destiny, chance or hap. Also accompt or estimation, among Astronomers, Cáso is all that space of time in which a planet goeth continually falling in obscuration.

Cásoche, if so be, put case, admitting that.

Cáso di státo, a matter of state.

Casolána méla, a red or queene apple.

Casoláre, a mannor house, a farme house, a gentlemans place, a messuage, a tenement. Also a ruinous decaied house.

Casolaráccio, an old ruinous decaied house, the ruines of a house or dwelling.

Casonáda, a kind of dressing of meate with grated cheese and spice.

Casoncelli, as Casonáda.

Casóne, a great farme house.

Cáspo, a bramble, a brake, a brier.

Caspóso, shrubby, bushy, thorny.

Cássa, a chest, a coffin, a shrine, a hutch, a bin, a trunke, a marchants cash or counter. Also a bee-hiue. Also a cace for any thing. Also the stocke of any piece of ordinance. Also a chase at tennis, or a blot at tables.

Cassa da mórto, a coffin for a corps.

Cássa dell'orecchióne, the trunion hole

Cássa fátta a schiéna d'ásino, a kind of cariage for mortar pieces, so called of the Italians, because it is like the backe of an Asse, and beareth all the waight vpon the ridge of it's backe.

Cássa nauegára, a shipmans chest, a mariners box.

Cassáre, to crosse, to blot, to cancell or cashere out of a booke, to put out of checke roule, to frustrate, to make voide.

Cassáro, a chest maker. Also the neather decke or ouerlope of a ship. Also the cariage of any piece of ordinance.

Cassatióne, as Cassatúra.

Cassáto, as Cásso.

Cassatura, a cancelling, a cashering.

Cásse, chests. Also the frames of a weauers loome, looke Cássa.

Cassellétta, any little chest or box drawer, namely such as printers keepe their letters in, a casket.

Casséro, as Cassiere.

Cassétta, any little chest. Also a poore mans box, a seamsters cabinet or worke basket. Also a pan for a close stoole.

Cassettáre, to enshrine or put in some chest or casket or box.

Cassettína, as Cassétta.

Cássia, the drug Cassia or Canell.

Cassiafístula, a pudding pipe of Canell.

Cassiere, a marchants cashier, factor, purser or keeper of accoumpts. Also the hole vnder the decke of a ship.

Cassíta, hath been vsed for a larke.

Cassiteróne, bright white lead.

Cassiopéa, the name of a starre.

Cásso, a body from the necke to the thigh. Also the stomacke seat. Also a stomacher or garment that couers the breast. Also voide or depriued, frustrated, crossed, cashiered, cancelled or put out of booke and checke roule.

Cassóne, a great chest or standard.

Cassúta, the weed Dodder.

Cásta, chaste, modest, continent.

Castágna, a Chesse-nut.

Castagnáto, Chesse-nut colour.

Castágne, a piece of Iron like a scallopshell, standing vp in the middest of some bits.

Castagnéto, as Castagnétto.

Castagnétte, little shels vsed of those that dance the canaries to clacke or snap with their fingers. Also fips or flips with the fingers ends.

Castagnétto, a groue of Chesse-nut-trees.

Castagnífero, Chesse nuts-bearing.

Castagnóso, full of, or Chesse-nuts yealding. 



Castagnuóla, the hole whereunto any winding pin, or skrew is put.

Castagnuóle, little wilde Chesnuts. Also a kind of figges. Also as Castagnétto.

Castaldía, a baily-weeke for husbandrie.

Castáldo, a bailiefe for husbandry or ouer seere of a mans lands. Also a hinde or swaine.

Castáneo, a bay or Chestenut-coloure.

Castellanía, a Castle-ship, the priuiledges or precincts of a castle.

Castelláno, a Captaine, a Guardian, a Commander or keeper of a Castle or Cittadell.

Cestellánza, a Castle-ship, the precinct, the iurisdiction or the inhabitants of a Castle.

Castelláre, to encastle, to Castle. Also the precinct of a castle, a castle with boundes. Also a toune that is defended by a Castle.

Castellería, as Castellánza.

Cestellétto, a little castle. Also a play that children vse called cobnut.

Castello, any kinde of castle. Also the vpper part of any engine of warre.

Castello della náue, the poupe or vpper walke of a ship.

Casticáre, to punish, to chastise.

Castigábile, punishable.

Castigaménto, as Castígo.

Castigáre, to punish, to chastise.

Castigatóre, a punisher, a chastiser.

Castighéuole, punishable.

Castigatúra, chastisement, punishment.

Castigliáno, a coine in Spaine worth a ducket. Also a castillian.

Castigo, punishment, chastisement.

Castimonía, a superstitious vow to keepe chastity.

Cásto, chaste, continent, temperate.

Castonáre, to bosse, to embosse. Also to furnish with ouches or brouches.

Castóne, that part of a ring wherein the stone is set, or the seale grauen. Also any kinde of bosse as on corners of bookes. Also a brouch or ouch.

Castorea, Castors or beauers stones.

Castoreo, a beauer. Also a fish that liues both in the water and on land. Also a kind of stinking oyle made of beauers stones.

Castória, as Castoreo.

Castório, an hearbe which makes ones nose to bleed but touching it.

Castórre, a Beauer, a Brocke, a badger, Capello di castórre, a Beauer-hat.

Castracáne, a dog-gelder. Also Indian-fitch or goates-rew.

Castraménto, a libbing or gelding.

Castrametáre, to pitch a campe or tents, to encampe, to lodge an armie. 

Castramentatióne, the pitching of a campe or maine battle.

Castrángola, figwort or kernell wort.

Castrapórci, a hog or sow-gelder.

Castráre, to geld, to lib, to splay.

Castráto, gelded, libbed. Also an ewe, a turpe or weather-mutton. Cárne di castráto. Mutton-flesh. Also a kind of well-busked, cleansed or gelded wheat.

Castratore, a gelder, a libber.

Castrense, of or pertaining to a castle. Looke Corona.

Castré, o, a fish that neuer eateth other fishcs, and can be taken with no baite.

Cástro, that part of a ring wherein the stone is set.

Castronággine, sheepishnesse, grosenesse.

Castróne, a Weather or ewe-mutton. Also a gelded man. Also a noddy or simple gull.

Castroneggiáre, to play the sheepe or gullish simple fellow.

Castronería, as Castronággine.

Cástula, a garment mencioned by Varro.

Casuále, casuale, by fortune.

Casualità, casuality, chance.

Casúcula, as Casúpula.

Casúpula, a poore house, a simple cottage.

Catáce, a kind of wine.

Cataclísmo, a great shoure of raine and waters. Also a generall flood or deluge.

Catacrési, a figure when a word is abused for lacke of a proper word.

Catadúpi, as Catarátte.

Catafálco, a scaffold, a stage, a hearse.

Catafárco, as Catafálco.

Catafasciáre, to huddle or bundle vp.

Catafáscio, a huddle or bundle of any thing.

Catafrátta, as Catapúlta.

Catafrátti, men at armes or demy launciers.

Catagráphi, images or pictures standing biase or sideline.

Cataláno, vsed for a light horseman, for that those of Catalógua in Spaine are such.

Catalogáre, to register, to record.

Catalógna, an Irish rug for a bed.

Catalessi, a disease where of they that be sicke haue the holes of their eies wide and deep, and their body stiffe.

Cataletto, as Cadaletto.

Catálogo, a catalogue, a register.

Catálogo della glória del móndo, the worlds wonder, the catalogue of the worlds glory, but spoken ironically by a bragging fellow such a one as Francis Varney was that would be called the mirror of the totall Orbe.

Catalúffa, a kinde of thicke and shaggy plush to line garments with.

Catamíto, one hired to sinne against nature, an ingle, a ganimade.

Catanáce, an hearbe vsed of witches to prouoke loue and lust.

Catanánce, as Catanáce.

Cataneo, a Prince of great command, but properly one that is inferiour to an Earle and more then a Vicount. Cataneo, si dicéua da Catíno, váso nel quale si teneua L'acqua per la ménsa dell Imperadóre, & quelli che haueuano questo vfficio erano detti Catanei.

Catapáno, the triall of waights.

Catapásma, as Cataplásma.

Catapécchia, a desert place far from all commerce where nature brings no maner of good.

Catapécchie, clifs, crags, holes in dens or downfals from rockes or mountaines. Also cranklings or turnings in and out.

Catapirománte, a deuiner by looking into a glasse.

Catapiromantía, diuination by looking into glasses.

Catapláma, as Cataplásma.

Cataplásma, a grosse maner of plaister, a pultesse or cataplasme, or green salue laid vpon a sore.

Cataplasmáre, to cataplasme or pultesse.

Catapótio, a kind of physike pill.

Catapúlta, a kinde of warlike engine to shoote or sling great darts.

Catapultáre, to beate or batter with a Catapúlta.

Catapútia, the hearbe spurge. Also an instrument that Chirurgions vse to search the bladder and open the passage to vrine being stopped.

Catapúzza, as Catapútia.

Catarátta, a purculleis. Also any window, iron grate, any lettise window, a window in the roofe of a house, a great high window, or the windowes of heauen. Also Cataracts, sluces, ouerfales, fludgates, or hanging rockes whose waterfales make a mighty and violent roaring noise. Also a dimnesse of sight occasioned by humores hardned in the eies called a Cataract or a pin and a web. Vsed also for a trap-dore.

Cátaro, a closc-stoole.

Catarátto, purculesed, cataracted.

Cataróttoli, certaine circles vsed in Sorcerie.

Catárro, a catarre, a rbume.

Catarróso, rhumatike, full of Catarre.

Catártico imperiále, a kind of purge called an Imperiall purge.

Catárzo, a kind of course rugged wooll.

Catásta, a cage wherein prisoners are set in the stockes, standing in the streete. Also a pile or heape or range 



of any thing in order as of faggots and billets, a wood stacke or pile. Also a measure whereby wood is sold in Florence.

Catastáre, to pile vp or range in order.

Catastáto, piled vp or ranged in order.

Catástrophe, the conclusion or shutting vp of a Comedie or any thing else.

Catatráta, a paire of secret staires, or back-way to descend.

Catechési, an instruction by word of mouth or teaching by bookes, a catechizing.

Catechesimistagógica, a catechizing or instruction for initiated sacred things or persons.

Catechísmo, as Catechési.

Catechizzáre, to teach or instruct by mouth, to catechize.

Catecuméno, one newly instructed by mouth.

Cátedra, any kind of chaire. Also a degree or dignitie in Schooles.

Catedrále, Cathedrall.

Catedránte, a professor or reader in a chaire.

Categoremático, that is predicable.

Categoría, a predicament, an accusation.

Categórico, predicable, categoricall.

Categorizzáre, to treate of predicables.

Catella, a litle bitch.

Catelláre, to whelpe, or to kittle.

Catelláta, a litter of whelpes or kitlins.

Catelli, yong whelpes or kitlins.

Catellináre, to whelpe, or to kittle.

Catellináta, a litter of whelpes or kitlins.

Catellíni, yong whelpes or kitlins.

Caténa, any kind of chaine.

Catenacciáre, to boult or barre.

Catenáccio, a boult or barre of a dore.

Catenáre, to enchaine or enlinke.

Catenatióne, an enchaining.

Catenázzi, a kinde of rauenous Seafowle.

Caténe, chaines, looke Fascétti.

Caténe delle sárte, the chaine walles in ships, fastned to the side of the ship, and the ends of the shroudes.

Catenella, any little chaine.

Catenóne, any great chaine.

Cateráta, Caterátta, as Catarátta.

Caterátte di piómbo, farthing tokens of leade.

Caterátti, a kinde of white bird with teeth and eyes as bright as fire.

Caterua, a crew, a rout, a troupe, a companie, a heard, a flocke, a shole, a knot, a cluster, a beauie, a droue of any thing, most commonly taken in ill part.

Catéto, a troupe, a knot, or cluster of an vncertaine number. Also a kind of yonike worke in building. 

Catinello, a litle Catíno.

Cáthedra, as Cátedra.

Cathólico, as Católico.

Catíno, any milke pan, broad flat boule, dish, platter, tray, or lauer. Also a snuffe dish.

Cáto, a litle water-mill.

Catócchia, the neathermost part of the bellie or panch.

Catochíte, a stone so clammie that it stickes to his hands that doth but touch it.

Católico, catholicke, vniuersall.

Católlo, a tormenting instrument called a griper or pincher. Also a lumpe of any thing, as a gad of steele, a sowe of leade, or any vnwrought piece. Also a blocke, a log, a stocke.

Catopiríta, as Catochíte.

Catopleba, a wilde beast, litle of bodie, but heauie and slow, his head so great that his bodie can scarse beare it, whosoeuer looketh vpon his eyes doth presently die.

Catorchite, a kinde of wine made of figges and dates.

Catórcio, a bolte, a barre or stang of a dore.

Catorciáre, to bolte, to barre, to stang.

Catótta, euen now, at this instant.

Catrafósso, a deepe, a hollow or dreadfull pit, den, trench, gulph, dungeon, hole or downefall.

Catramádi, looke Tarózzi.

Catraméssi, a kind of perfuming pan.

Catriósso, the bone called the merry thought.

Cattàbríga, a make-bate, a busie-bodie, a pick-thanke, a seeke-trouble.

Cattaletto, as Cadaletto.

Cattanei, such as hold a Princes bason when he washeth, and therefore reputed noble men, or Princes fauorites.

Cattáni, chiefe officers among gentlemen or honoured with some dignitie.

Cattarále febbre, an ague with a rhume or falling downe of humors from the head.

Cattáre, to get, or make shift for.

Cattarátta, as Catarátta.

Cattásta, as Catásta.

Cattastáre, as Catastáre.

Cattatozzáre, to beg vp and downe for broken scraps of meate.

Cattatózzi, a begger of broken scraps.

Cátti, a fruit of a Thistle good to eate.

Cattiuáccio, a filthy bad fellow.

Cattiuánza, as Cattiuità.

Cattiuáre, to captiuate.

Cattiuelláre, to shift for with craft and cheating.

Cattiuello, a craftie, slie, shrewd or bad fellow. Also wretched, poore and silly.

Cattiuería, knauerie, shrewdnesse, craft, lewdnesse, badnesse, naughtinesse. 

Cattiuézza, as Cattiuería.

Cattiuíre, vísco, víto, to become bad or wicked.

Cattiuità, captiuitie, bondage. Also as Cattiuería.

Cattíuo, captiue, enthraled. Also bad lewd, naughtie, craftie, shrewd.

Cattíuo di nído, bad, naught, or shrewd from his very nest or cradle.

Cátto, caught, taken, gotten. Also a borrowing, a getting, or shifting for.

Cattósi, a kind of Thistle.

Cattúcci, false smooth-running dice.

Cattúra, a taking, a captiuating, a catching. Also a getting.

Catulitióne, the seasoning time for fruites.

Cátulo, any yong whelpe.

Catúno, euery one, each one.

Catúro, a kind of boate in India.

Cáua, a caue, a hollow, a vault, a cellar, a myne, a ditch, a furrow, a trench. Also a den or lurking hole.

Cauà, Cauái, ill manner of horses.

Cáuacoglióni, a guelder, a libber.

Cáuadenti, a tooth-drawer.

Cáua dirubini, a toothlesse mouth, that hath onely the gumes, a rubiccaue.

Cauafiéno, Gunners call it a wad-hooke

Cauágna, a flasket, a fishers basket or haske. Also a bin for bread.

Cauagnáre, to flasket or basket vp. Also to knead dough for bread.

Cauaiuólo, a maker or keeper of cellars.

Cauagliete, a knight or gentleman seruing on horsebacke, but in fortification it is a mount or platforme of earth built or raised high, either within or without the wall to plant great ordinance vpon. Also a silke worme or spinner. Also a kinde of great Seacrab or lobster.

Cauagliere a cauállo, a high mount or platforme of earth raised very high, that the ordinance or artillerie of the same may shoot ouer the walles or bulwarke to scoure and cleare the fields all about.

Cauagliére a elmo, a man at armes, a compleat armed man on horsebacke.

Cauagliére banderése, a Knight banneret.

Cauagliére della spáda guaináta, a knight of the drawen sword, that an excellent whoremonger or notable wencher.

Cauagliére di corrédo, knights made by Princes at some great solemnitie and that waite on Princes persons.

Cauagliére a sprón d'óro, a knight made by the Emperor.

Cauagliére di parággio, idem.

Cauagliére di scúdo, a poore beggerly knight that hath nothing but his sword and cloake. 



Cauagliére di Nápoli, a knight of Naples, but taken for one that hath the poxe.

Cauagliére maríno, a Sea-horse.

Cauagliére soldáto, a knight that maintaines himselfe by the warres.

Caualcáre, to ride, to stradle.

Caualcáre a bardósso, to ride barebackt without a sadle.

Caualcáre a bisdósso, idem.

Caualcáre a ridósso, idem.

Caualcáre un pezzo, to mount a piece of ordinance in his cariage.

Caualcáta, a riding, a rode. Also a troupe of horsemen. Also ridden.

Caualcatóre, a rider, a horseman.

Caualcatória árte, the arte of riding or horsemanship.

Caualcatúra, a riding. Also a hackney.

Caualcionáre, to ride stradling.

Caualcióne, tradling as men ride.

Caualeggiéri, light horsemen. Also light horses.

Caualieréssa, a knights wife. Also a woman professing armes on horsebacke.

Cauálla, a mare.

Caualláccio, a filthy cast iade.

Cauallánti, horse-driuers such as we call cariers.

Cauallerescaménte, knight-like.

Caualláro, a carier or driuer of horses.

Caualláta, a riding, a rode. Also a troupe of horses or horsemen.

Caualleréccio, that is vsed about horses, or may be caried by horses.

Caualleggiáre, as Cauallereggiáre.

Cauallereggiáre, to play the knight or man at armes. Also to ouerview, to ride or command ouer as a Caualier doth in fortification.

Cauallerésco, cheualrous, knight-like.

Caualleréssa, a knights wife, or woman professing horsemanship.

Caualléssa, a filthy iadish mare.

Cauallétta, a skid or engine to raise and lift vp great waights.

Cauallétte, Locusts, Grashoppers.

Cauallétti, hay-cocks or such round heapes.

Cauallétto, any litle nagge or horse. Also any tressell or Sadlers or Armorers woodden horse. Vsed also for a little bedstead.

Caualle rízza, a Princes quierie or stable where horses of seruice are kept and ridden.

Cauallerízzo, a professer of horsemanship, a rider of great horses.

Cauallería, chiualrie, or the honor and dignitie of a knight and man at armes. Also Cauallerie or souldiers seruing on horsebacke.

Caualleriáto, a knighthood.

Cauálli, Cauágli, Cauái, Cauà, all manner of horses. 

Cauálli delle velétte, light horsemen in warre that goe to discouer.

Caualliere, as Cauagliere, &c.

Cauallína, the hearbe Horse-taile. Also horse-dung.

Cauallíne, certaine biting horse-flies.

Cauallinità, coltishnesse horse-like nature.

Cauallíno, a pretty horse, a little nagge. Also greedy or longing for.

Cauállo, a horse in generall. Also a knight at Chesse. Also a horsefish. Also a beating or whipping of a Schooleboy held vpon anothers shoulders. Also a kind of small coyne in Italie.

Cauállo da sóma, a horse for burthen.

Cauállo di chrísto, vsed for an Asse, because Christ rid vpon an Asse.

Cauállo di mezza sella, a horse that is but halfe taught and is not yet come to his perfection.

Cauállo di móstra, a horse for show or muster.

Cauállo di pezzo, a great horse, a horse for seruice.

Cauállo di portánte, an ambling nagge.

Cauállo di pósta, a Post-horse.

Cauállo di rázza, a horse of race to breed on.

Cauállo di rifiúto, a cast horse.

Cauállo di riméno, a led or spare horse. Also a horse sent backe empty.

Cauállo di trótto, a trotting horse.

Cauállo di tétta sellà, a horse fully taught, a perfect ready horse.

Cauállo grósso, a great horse, a horse of seruice.

Cauállo maggióre, the name of a Starre.

Cauállo minóre, the name of a Starre.

Cauallóne, a great filthy iade.

Cauállo prímo, the name of a Starre.

Cauállo secóndo, the name of a Starre.

Cauallóni, great horses. Also the boistrous billowes or rough surging waues of the sea.

Cauallúccio, a poore silly leane horse.

Cauallótto, a handsome well trust nagge.

Cauallúccij, a kinde of small coine in Naples.

Caualócchi, such as are hired or appointed to receiue and gather vp money of debters and are very importunate and earnest vpon them, so tearmed because it is supposed they are as eye-sores vnto them.

Cauaménto, a digging, a hollownesse.

Cauána, a ware-house, a store-house, an arsenall, a shed or place couered ouer where they build and keepe boates and barges in. Also a hole or den vnder ground.

Cauardína, a gaberdin or vpper frocke. 

Cauáre, to digge, to make hollow, to draw out from, to caue, to mine.

Cauár di bócca, to get out of ones mouth to make one confesse.

Cauár il capello, to put off ones hat.

Cauár denári, to get mony by or from.

Cauáre il márcio, to get, to finde or sift out the pith, the core, the heart of any thing.

Cauáre il púnto, to take the dispart of a piece, which is the peg or pin set vpon the mouth of the piece by which the leuell is taken.

Cauár fuóri il limbello, to vtter the worst one knowes against any body.

Cauáre la vóglia, to haue ones longing.

Cauáre mácchie, to get out staines.

Cauáre sángue, to let or draw blood.

Cauatíccie, a kind of snailes euer keeping in holes and sticking together in clusters.

Cauatóre, a digger, a miner, a pitmaker.

Cauatúra, a digging, a mining.

Cáua véna, as Chili.

Cauazzána, a Cauezan or headstraine.

Caucálide, bastard Parsley.

Cáuco, a weather without hornes.

Caucóne, the hearbe Horse-taile.

Caudáce, tailed, hauing a taile or traine

Caudatário, a traine-bearer.

Cáudo, a kind of measure in Ormuz.

Cauécchia, as Cauícchia.

Cauedále, as Capitále.

Cauedáno, as Cauezzále.

Cauedóni, as Capifuóchi. Also a kind of fish with a very great head.

Cauéggi, some part of a mill-wheele.

Cauelle, as Couelle.

Cauello, a niple of a dug. Also a little stemme or stalke.

Cauerna, a cauerne, a caue, a den, a grot. Also a honiecombe in a caste piece.

Cauernáre, to make hollow as a den or flaw of a piece.

Cauernétta, any litle Cauerna.

Cauernosità, hollownesse, fulnesse of holes.

Cauernóso, hollow, full of caues or dens, or honiecombes and flawes.

Cauéstro, as Capéstro.

Cauétta, vsed for Ciuétta, any Owle.

Cauézza, a halter, a headstraine, a horse coller.

Cauézza di móro, a broune bay colour.

Cauezzále, a boulster for a bed. Also a fish called a Pollard or a Chieuen.

Cauezzána, a cauezan, a headstraine.

Cauezzáre, to halter a horse.

Cauezzóne, as Cauezzána.

Cauiále, as Cauiáro.

Cauiáro, a kinde of salt blacke meate made of roes of fishes much vsed in Italie. 



Cauícchia, as Cauíglia.

Cauicchiáre, to peg, to pin or wrench in. Also to stringe silke.

Cauicchiatóre, a stringer of silke.

Cauicchína, a litle Cauíglia.

Cauicchióne, as 
Cauiglióne.

Cauicchiuóli, as Bischeri.

Cauíglia, any ring or peg fastened in a wall to tye horses at. Also any peg or pin for any instrument. Also a Carpenters tennon or linch pin. Also the anklebone of a mans legge also the fetlockes or pasternes of a horse or other beast. Also vsed for a mans yard. Also a dible. Also a wresting or stringing pin. Also a poking iron or setting sticke.

Cauigliáre, as Cauicchiáre.

Cauigliatóre, as Cauicchiatóre.

Cauiglióne, a great Cauiglía.

Cauigliuólo, any litle Cauíglia.

Cauilláre, to cauill, to wrangle.

Cauillatióne, cauilling, contention.

Cauillatóre, a cauiller, a wrangler.

Cauíllio, a cauill, a cauilling.

Cauillióso, as Cauillóso

Cauillóso, cauillous, full of contention.

Cauità, a cauitie or hollownesse.

Cáula, a kind of musicall instrument.

Cauláta, a meat of coaleworts.

Cáuli, Coales or Coale worts.

Cáulia, a kind of iuice vsed in Physicke.

Caulícolo, architecture composed of Yonike, Dorike and Corinthworke.

Caulíno, a kind of wine.

Caulóde, a kind of broad leaued Colewort smooth and plaine.

Caumeníte, a kind of wine.

Caúmo, any fiery meteor or impression moouing or falling from the skies.

Cáuna, a fish that without male conceiueth of her selfe.

Cáuni, a kind of figs.

Cauníta, a kind of extracted salt.

Cáuo, hollow, concaue.

Cauoláta, a meat made of coaleworts.

Cáuoli, Cáoli, coles or coleworts.

Cáuoli fióri, Colyflowres.

Cáura, Cáuria, as Cápra.

Caurálo, as Capráro.

Caurétto, a kid or yong goate. Also a cheurell or kids skin.

Caurióla, as Caprióla, a Roedoe.

Caurioláre, as Caprioláre.

Cauriólo, a Roe bucke, a yong kid or faune. Also a kind of rauenous seafoule.

Cáuro, the west or northwest wind.

Cauróne, a great goat. Also a Cheuron in armory.

Cáusa, a cause, an occasion, a meanes, vsed also for any strife, contention or squaring, a controuersie or matter in sute or question.

Causále, casuall, subiect to chance. 

Causalità, chance, casuality.

Causáre, to cause, to occasion.

Causatíuo, efficient, that is the cause.

Causatióne, a causation, a causing.

Causidíco, a pleader at the bar, a barister, an atturny, a lawyer, an aduocate.

Cáusia, a kind of hat that the kings of Macedon were wont to weare. Also a broad straw hat that haruest folkes vse to keepe them from the sun.

Causticáre, to make or become costiue or caustike and burning.

Cáustico, costiue, bound or stopt in the belly. Also caustike, burning or blistring.

Cautela, a cautell or taking heed, a diligent care, a wary diligence, a caution.

Cauteláto, become cautelous or wary at his owne cost.

Cautelóso, cautelous, heedy, wary.

Cauterio, a searing iron. Also a cautery.

Cauterizzáre, to cautery or seare with a burning or searing iron.

Cautionáre, to caution, to pledge, to baile, to assure. Also to be wary.

Cautióne, a caution, a surety, a baile, an assurance. Also a shift or starting hole. Also heed or warinesse.

Cáuto, warie, heedie, caute, full of caution.

Cazúde, a Magistrate in Venice.

Cázza, as Caccía. Also a ladle or skoope. Also a fire-pan, a Censer or Incense cup. Also a kind of coyne in India.

Cázza da scóglio, a melting ladle.

Cázza foráta, a skimmer.

Cazzafrústo, a sling, a kind of dart.

Cázza rimbeccáta, a ladle with a long beake or bill.

Cazzáli, as Bozzacchióni.

Cazzarénga, a kind of Sparrow.

Cazzaría, a treatise of prickes.

Cazzáride, a certaine rope in a ship about the mizen saile.

Cazzáue, a kind of white roote in India, which they vse in stead of wheat.

Cazzétta, as Cazzuóla.

Cazzíca, an Interiection of admiration, what! gods me! god forbid, tush.

Cazzipoténte, mighty in a Cázzo.

Cázzo, a mans priuie member. Also as Cazzíca.

Cazzoláta, a ladle-full. Also a musicall instrument without strings.

Cázzo maríno, a Pintle-fish.

Cázzo rítto, a stiffe standing pricke.

Cazzuóla, a litle ladle. Also a trowell.

Cazzúto, a man that hath a pricke.

Cé, as Ci, for Ci is euer turned into Cé when it is ioyned vnto any of the seauen Articles, or the Particle Ne. Also vsed for a hundred.

Cé, there is, in that place there is.

Cébano, a kind of cheese made in Ligúria.

Cecáre, to blinde.

Cecatello, somewhat blinde.

Cécca, a mint or coining place.

Ceccárdola, a philip with the fingers.

Ceccardoláre, to philip or phip.

Ceccáre, to coine, to mint or stampe.

Ceccáro, a minter, a monier, a coiner.

Cécco, a nick-name for tame Asses. Also an abreuiation of the name Francesco.

Céce, any kind of chitch, fitch or tare.

Céceri, a bird, or kind of Swan.

Cecespíta., 

Cechità, blindnesse.

Céci, fitches, citches, wilde tares.

Cécia, a wind betweene the North-east and that of the Sunne-rising in the Equinoctiall.

Cecilij serpenti, all manner of blinde wormes or creeping creatures.

Cecità, blindnesse.

Cécio, as Cécia.

Céco, as Ciéco, blinde.

Cecóne, a grosse blinde man.

Cecúbo, a kinde of wine.

Cecutiente, blindish, dimme of sight.

Cedebónis, a game at cards so called.

Cédere, Cedo, Cessi vel Cedei, Cesso vel cedúto, to yeeld, to giue place, to grant vnto, to resigne, to surrender, to afford.

Cédola, as Cédula.

Cedra, a drinke of apples called Cider.

Cedraláte, the Firre-cedar tree.

Cedráto, of the colour of Cedar.

Cedreolóne, oyle of Citrons.

Cédria, pitch of the Firre-cedar.

Cedriále, as Cédride.

Cédride, the fruit of a Cedar-tree.

Cedríno, that is made or smels of Cedar.

Cedriólo, a little Cedar-tree. Also a little Cytron. Also a little Coucumber.

Cédrio, a kinde of pitch that preserueth deade bodies.

Cédro, a Cedar-tree. Also a Cytron.

Cedrolétta, a yongue lim-lifter or twigger.

Cedróne, a Cytron, a Pome-cytron. Also a kind of wilde-hen.

Cedronella, baulmemint or gentle.

Cedrostíno, a kinde of wilde white grape.

Cédula, a shedule, a bill, a note, a docket, a ticket, a billet, or handwriting.

Céfa, a head or chiefe, a surname of Peter as heade of the Apostles.

Cefaglióne, leaues of wilde dates good to eate.

Cefálica, the humerall or shoulder vaine.



Cefalo, a Mullet-fish, some take it for the Pollard-fish, some haue in mockery vsed it for the beake or bil of a bird. Also for a snout. Also for a mans priuy member.

Cefalù, a scornefull nickname, as we say a lim-lifter.

Cefaút, a key in musicke.

Ceffáre, to take by the snout. Also to whirret on the mouth or snout.

Ceffáta, a whirret on the mouth.

Ceffo, the snout or muzell of any beast. Also a sea-meaw or white-cob.

Céfo, a kinde of Ape or Monkey.

Cegolíte, a kind of blackish stone.

Céice, a bird called a kings-fisher.

Ce'l, it to vs, it vs, it from. Also it there, or him there.

Celabro, as Ceruello.

Celadóne, a great morion or skull.

Celága, a sparrow.

Celáio, as Celláro.

Celáre, to hide, to conceale.

Celánte, or Cælánte, the second moode of the first figure of Syllogismes.

Celárent, or Cælárent, as Celánte.

Celáta, a skull, a morion, a celade.

Celataménte, hiddenly, secretly.

Celatóne, a great celade, skull or murrion.

Celatúra, a hiding or concealing. Also Helmetrie. Also a helmet, a caske, a skull.

Celeberrimo, most renoumed or spoken of.

Celebránza, as Celebratióne.

Celebráre, to celebrate, to renoume.

Celebratióne, celebration, renouming.

Celebre, famous, renoumed, glorious.

Celebrità, fame, renoume, glory.

Celebro, as Ceruello.

Celéga, a Sparrow.

Céleno, a kind of smallage or parseley.

Celeraménte, speedily, hastily.

Celeráre, to speed, to hasten.

Celere, swift, speedy, hasty, nimble.

Celereménte, speedily, hastily.

Celeri, an ancient magistrate in Rome.

Celerità, celerity, speed, hast.

Celerrimo, most swift or speedy.

Celeste, celestiall, heauenly. Also skie colour, azure or watchet.

Celeste árco, the Rayne bow.

Celesistiále, celestiall, heauenly.

Celestiále, heauenly, celestiall.

Celestino, as Celestro.

Celestro, azure, watchet, skie colour.

Celéto, a kind of fish.

Celia, a kind of strong drinke made of corne vsed among the Numantines.

Celiáco mórbo, a collicke passion, a paine in the stomacke without flix.

Celiáci, such as through weaknesse of stomacke are troubled with the collicke.

Celiárca, as Chiliárca.

Celíbiri, a kind of speare wherewith new maried wiues had their haires trussed vp.

Celibáto, a single or vnmaried life.

Celibe, single, vnmaried, vnwedded.

Celibeuità, as Celibáto.

Celidónia, Celandine, Swallow wort, Tetter wort, or silken Cisley.

Celídro, a kind of venemous Serpent.

Celispíca, a viewer of the heauens.

Celítia, a kind of huge Sea-tortoise.

Cella, a Cell, a caue, a cabine. Also a Cellar or a butterie. Also a black-berrie.

Celláio, a cellar. Also a Butler.

Cellaiático, cellerage, butlerage.

Cellaráio, an ouerseer of Friers cells.

Celláro, a cell-keeper. Also a Butler.

Celleraría, the office of the ouerseer of Friers or Nunnes cells.

Cellétta, any litle Cella.

Celo, as Cielo, Heauen.

Celóca, a kinde of Brigandine or Pinnasse.

Celóma, the mariners cry when they waigh ankre or hoise sailes.

Celomáre, to cry as mariners when they waigh ankre or hoise sailes.

Celóne, a testerne for a bed, a high roofe. Also a penthouse. Also a kind of Azure vsed to colour glasse for windowes and armes.

Celóni, penthouses or bordes. Also course hangings of rugged clothes.

Celostomía, a speaking hollow in the mouth.

Celsa, a Mulberrie fruit.

Celsità, loftinesse, haughtinesse, height, nobilitie, excellencie, eminencie.

Celsitúdine, as Celsità.

Celso, a Mulberrie tree. Also high, noble, famous, eminent.

Celsomíno, a Gelsemine floure.

Celta, the plant of the Loto tree.

Celti, as Celta.

Cembelliero, a plaier on Cymbals.

Cembalísta, idem.

Cémbalo, a Cymball or Timbrell. Vsed also for a great round vatte as bookes come in.

Cementáre, as Cimentáre.

Ceménto, a ciment, or fastning together.

Cementóso, full of ciment and fastning.

Cemeterio, as Cimiterio.

Cémmalo, a musicall instrument that country wenches vse to dance and sing vnto.

Cemmamella, as Cémmalo.

Cemósa, a kind of hearbe.

Cén, vsed in liew of Cento, a hundred.

Céna, a supper. Also the holy Sacrament of the lords supper. 

Cenábrio, Cinabre or Vermillion.

Cenácolo, a supping place or parlour.

Cenáre, to sup, to eat in the euening.

Cenarella, a light or little supper.

Cenchríde, a kestrell. Also a kinde of small dyamond, some say it is a stone that seemes to haue seede of Millet scattered heere and there in it. Also as Cencri.

Cenchríte, as Cenchride.

Cénchro, as Cenchríde.

Cénci, ragges, cloutes, tatters, shreds of linnen cloathes.

Cenciaría, a frippery of old ragges.

Cenciáro, a fripper or broker of old rags or filthy cloathes.

Cencíglio, a little clout or ragge.

Cencinquánta, a hundred and fifty.

Céncio díce stráccio, a prouerbe, as we say the pan calles the ouen burnt-taile.

Cencióne, a ragged, torne companion.

Cencióso, ragged, torne, full of patches, sluttish, beggerly, tattered.

Cenéri, a certaine speckled snake or serpent with a horride face.

Cendálo, as Sandálo.

Cendalétti, as Sandalétti.

Cenè, Cén', to vs of it, or thereof, vs thereof, from vs thereof. Also there thereof.

Ceneráccio, as Ceneríccio. Also the finest siluer that can be tried with fire.

Ceneráre, to cinder or reduce to ashes, or ash-colour.

Ceneráta, as Ceneríccio.

Cénere, ashes, Cinders

Cénere aspersa, Ethiopian mullein.

Ceneríccio, a heape of ashes, the ashes of a bucke cast away. Also one that lies in the ashes or chimney corner. Also ash-colour.

Ceneríno, as Ceneríccio.

Cenerógna, all maner of ashes.

Cenerógnolo, of a dead ash-colour.

Ceneróso, ashy, full of ashes and cinders. Also of an ash-coloure.

Cenétta, a little supper, a schollers pittance.

Cénghia, a guirt, a cingle.

Cenghiáre, to guirt, to cingle.

Cénici., 

Cennamella, as Cémmalo.

Cénnamo, Cennamómo, cynamond.

Cennáre, as Accennáre.

Cénno, a nod, a becke, an inkling, a sign, a glance at any thing, made with the head, with the eie, or with the hand.

Cenóbio, a conuent, a religious house, a house where people liue in common.

Cenocephalo, a dogs head, as Cinocephalo.

Cenotáfio, a monument or empty tombe erected in memory of the dead. 



Censále, a receiuer of fines, subsidies, fines, taxes or valuations.

Censemína, a kind of vine or grape.

Censeniére, as Censále.

Cénso, a sessing, a taxing, a subsidie, a rating, a tribute, a rent, a fee, a rate, or valuation of a mans substance.

Censóre, a censor, a iudge, a corrector, a doomer, a high constable, a reformer of policies and disorders.

Censório, pertaining to a censor.

Censuále, by denumberment or valuation, that is to be taxed, sessed, rated, fined or valued.

Censuário, one that paieth Cénso.

Censúra, a censure, a iudgement, a reformation or correction.

Censurábile, that may be censured.

Censuráre, to censure, to iudge, to doome.

Centa, any kind of girdle.

Centaníno, any little Centóne.

Centariáre, to distribute in bands or deuide into hundreds.

Centáura, the hearbe Centory.

Centaurea, as Centáura.

Centáuro, a centaure, halfe a man and halfe a bull. Also the name of a star.

Cénte, some part of a ship.

Centellíno, as Ciantellíno.

Centéna, a hundred or fiue score.

Centenáia, hundreds.

Centenáio, a hundred.

Centenário, of a hundred yeeres old.

Centesimáre, to reduce into hundreds. Also to chuse or draw one out of a hundred by lots, as sometimes it hapneth among souldiers.

Centésimo, the hundreth.

Centigráno, a kind of wheate that beareth iust a hundred graines.

Centilóquio, a hundred fold discourse.

Centína, a hundred.

Centináia, hundreds.

Centinella, as Sentinella.

Cento, a hundred, fiue score.

Centobráccia, one with a hundred armes.

Centocápi, an hearb that causeth him to be loued that weareth the same about him, it is a kind of thistle and hath iust a hundred heads.

Centofóglie, the hundred leafe rose.

Centolína di baladóre, some part of a ship.

Céntolo, a kind of rare choise wine.

Centogámbe, as Centopiédi.

Centománi, with a hundred hands.

Centomila, a hundred thousand.

Centonáia, hundreds.

Centóne, the hearbe Chickweede or Mouseare. Also a kind of quilt which in warre was vsed for a defence against slings or bowes. Also a course couerlet or beggers cloke made of shreds listes or patches. Also a quilted iacket. Also as Centóni.

Centóni, rapsodies, mingle-mangles of many kindes of verses gathered from diuers Authors.

Centonócchio, Periwinkle or Lesseron.

Centonódia, knot-grasse.

Centópellióne, the rim of the Panch.

Cento piedi, a fish hauing a hundred feete. Also a worme called a Palmer with a hundred feete, as Moltipiédi.

Centoplicáre, to multiply by hundreds.

Centoplicáto, an hundred-folde.

Centório, Monie wort or two pennygrasse, some take it for Centorie or Clarie.

Centouirále, of an hundred men.

Cento vólte, a hundred times.

Centrále, of or belonging to the centre.

Centrico, as Centro.

Centro, the Centre, middle point or depth of any thing.

Centróne, the hearbe Clarie.

Centúculo, Cottenweede, or Cudwort.

Centúnculo, as Climátide.

Centupéde, as Centopiédi.

Centuplicáre, to multiply by hundreds.

Centúra, a belt or girdle.

Centuráre, to girdle or belt.

Centúria, a centurie.

Centuriáto, the office and estate of a Centurion. Also registred or enroled in the band of a hundred.

Canturíno, a little girdle or waste band.

Centurióne, a Captaine of a hundred men.

Centuripino, a kinde of good Saffron growing in Sicilie.

Centuruóla, a litle girdle, a wasteband. Also a garter. Also a childes hornebooke hanging at his girdle.

Cepea, Brookelime or Sea-purslaine.

Cephálea, a long continuing head-ache.

Cephálica, the head-veine.

Cephalo, as Cefalo.

Cepheo, the name of a starre.

Cepheri, yong drones or spurious bees.

Cepho, a wilde beast whose forefeete are like a mans hands, and the hinder legs like vnto those of a man.

Cepo, as Cepho.

Cepiónide, a stone of diuers colours very strange to see.

Cépite, as Cepocápite.

Cepocápite, a stone that doth reiect all whitenesse.

Cépola, a kind of Cheese-cake.

Ceppa, a chirping sparrow.

Cepparello, a little Ceppo.

Ceppáto, hath beene vsed as Stecoáto.

Ceppo, a stocke, a log, a blocke, a stump, a trunke of a tree. Also a stocke of a plaine or pistole. Also the head of a beetle. Also the stocke or pedegree of any man or family. Also fetters, shackles, stockes, giues or boults, or a foottrap.

Céra, any kinde of wax. Also cheere, or fare. Also countenance, looke or aspect.

Ceraginóso, like vnto or full of wax.

Ceracháte, a kind of Agate-stone.

Ceraiuóla, a woman that selleth wax-candles, or hath care of wax lights in a Monastery. Also Candlemasdaie.

Ceraiuólo, a wax-chandler.

Ceramella, a kind of bag-pipe.

Ceraménto, a waxing together.

Ceráre, to wax or seale with wax.

Ceráro, a Waxe-chandler, or maker.

Cerasciuólo, a pallet wine.

Cerasáro, a cherry man or hortyard.

Ceráse, all maner of Cherries.

Ceráse d'inuerno, a lote or nettletree.

Cerásta, a kind of snake or serpent with hornes like a ram.

Cerasuólo, a kind of pallet-wine.

Cerátia, a blazing-starre some what resembling the fashion of a horne. Also the hearbe our Ladies mantle.

Ceratinóa, a kind of horned Poppy.

Ceráunia, a blackish and blewish stone, which put in Vineger & saltpeter, wil in time grow to haue a bright-glittering star in the centre of it, and taken out will iust in so long time loose it againe, it is said to fall out of the clouds and that who weares it about him can not be drowned, some say it is a kinde of glittering pearle. Also the Carobe-cod or fruit. Also as Misi.

Ceráuro, as Ceráunia.

Cerbia, a hinde of a stagge.

Cerbiátto, a brocke or a staggard.

Cerbio, a Stagge or a Hart.

Cerbióne, a Stagge or a Hart.

Cerbo, a Stagge or a Hart.

Cerbonéa., 

Cerbottána, as Ciarbattána.

Cérca, a search, an enquiry. Also as Círca.

Cérca-bríghe, a seeker of troubles or quarrels, one that will thrust himselfe into all companies.

Cercaménto, a seeking, an inquiry. Also a combate, a fight a fray.

Cercáre, to search, to seeke. Also to fight, to striue or combate. Also to feele or grope for.

Cercár del móndo, to trauell and see the world for experience.

Cercár del páne, to trauell, to labour or shift for ones liuing.

Cercáre il pélo nell' vuóuo, to seeke a haire in an egge, as we say to seeke a knot in a rush. 



Cercáre partíto, to seeke entertainement.

Cercáta, a search, a seeking.

Cercáti, searchings, deuises, seekings.

Cercatóre, a seeker, a searcher.

Cerceglio, a hoope ring, a circlet, a coronet, a wreath, a chaplet or garland about the head. Also a neckelace. Also an eare ring. Also a carkanet or border vpon a womans head. Also a circuit. Also a round or troupe of men. Also a tauerne or alehouse bush.

Cercégne, a kind of rauenous foule.

Cercéuolo, a Teale or a wigin.

Cérchia, hoopes. Also an encircling.

Cerchiáre, to hoope or circle about. Also to encompasse or encircle round.

Cerchiáta, an encircling, a hooping.

Cerchiáro, a hooper, a cooper.

Cerchiátto, any kind of hoope or circle.

Cerchiello, as Cerceglio.

Cerchiétto, as Cerceglio.

Cerchiéuole, that may be circled.

Cérchij, circles in a horses hoofe.

Cérchij d'una ruóta, the fellowes of a wheele.

Cérchio, a circle, a hoope. Also as Cerceglio. Also a round compasse.

Cérchio da tauerna, a tauerne bush.

Cérchio di ferro, an iron hoope, amongst gunners called a washer, which serues to keepe the iron pin at the end of the axeltree from wearing the naue.

Cérchio terréno, a rampart, a skonce.

Cercíno, a paire of compasses.

Cercoláre, circular, round, sphericall.

Cercóne, the turning or sowring of wine, beere or ale by thunder or heate.

Cercopiteco, a marmozet or monkie.

Cercuróne, a kind of great ship among the Grecians.

Cerea, as Celia, a drinke made of corne.

Cereále, smooth or coloured as wax. Also pertaining to the Goddesse of haruest.

Cerdóne, a base mechanicall fellow.

Cerebattána, as Ciarbattána.

Cerebro, as Ceruello.

Cerefóglio, Cheruill or toothpicke grasse.

Cerégia, any kind of cherry.

Ceregiáro, a cherry man or hortyard.

Cerégio, a cherry tree.

Ceremíta, a kind of pretious stone.

Ceremónie, as Cerimónie.

Cereo, a pale yellow or wax colour.

Cerephilóne, Senuy or Cheruill.

Ceretanáre, to play the mountibanke.

Ceretanaríe, mountibanke trickes.

Ceretáno, as Ciaratáno.

Cerfóglio, as Cerefóglio.

Céria, a kind of wen or impostumation. Also a kind of strong drinke in Spaine made of corne.

Cérica, a shauelin, a Shauen-pate.

Cérico, a shauelin, a Clergie-man.

Cérie, wens or vlcers gathered in manner of honie-combes. 

Cerífero, waxe-bearing or bringing.

Cériga, as Cérica.

Cérigo, as Cérico.

Cerígno, a pale yellow or waxe colour.

Cerigóne, a wilde beast in India with a bag vnder his bellie wherein in times of danger he carieth his yong ones.

Ceríllo, a kind of daintie wine in Rome.

Cerimónia, a ceremonie a complement.

Ceromoniále, ceremoniall, cerimonious,

Cerimoniáre, to vse ceremonies.

Cerimoniárij, as Ceremoniásti.

Cerimoniére, a master of ceremonies.

Cerimoniásti, an obseruer of ceremonies.

Cerimonísti, as Ceremoniásti.

Cerimonióso, full of ceremonies.

Cerimoniúzze, foolish ceremonies.

Cerína, a kind of yellow wheate-plum.

Ceríni, a kind of yellow Berill stone.

Ceríno, a wax or pale yellow colour.

Ceríntho, as Eritháce, a kind of Lilly.

Cério, a torche, a taper or size of waxe.

Ceríolo, a fish called a ruffe, or guilthead.

Cerisiána, a grape tasting of cherries.

Ceríte, a stone of a waxe colour.

Cermanella, as Ceramella.

Cermisóne, a bold foole, a sancie gull.

Cerna, a culling or chusing out.

Cerne, a ruffe or guilthead fish, as Cerníta.

Cernere, cerno, cernéi, cernúto, to sift, to search. Also to chuse or cull out.

Cernícchio, a crisping wire, a bodkin that women vse to part their haire. Also a picker or culler of any thing.

Cernie, as Cerne.

Cerníre, nísco, níto, as Cernere.

Cernita, a choise, a culling or picking out. Páne di cernita, ranged bread.

Cernite d'Itália, the choise trained souldiers of Italie.

Cernitóre, a chuser, a culler.

Cernitúra, as Cernita.

Céro, a taper or torch of waxe. Also as Zéro. Also as Cerro.

Ceróstrata, fine inlaid or marquetrie worke of diuers colours.

Ceróto, Cerótto, a seare-cloth. Also of middle nature betweene a plaister and an ointment.

Cerpíre, as Serpíre.

Cerracchióni, great Oke-elme trees.

Cerrétta, basebroome, woodwaxen, grening weede, dyers weede.

Cerro, the holme-Oke tree. Also a Cakrell fish. Also a locke of haire.

Certáme, a conflict, a combate. Also the prize for which men striue in any bodily contention.

Certamente, certainely, assuredly.

Certánza, as Certézza.

Certanità, as Certézza.

Certanaménte, certainely, assuredly.

Certáno, certaine, sure, assured.

Certatóre, a combatant, a fighter.

Certézza, certaintie, assurednesse.

Certificánza, as Certificatióne.

Certificáre, to certifie, to assure.

Certificatióne, a certificate.

Certificatóre, a certifier, an assurer.

Certificáto, certified. Also a certificate.

Certo, certaine, sure, certes, fast, firms. Also a truth or certaintie. Also being ioined with any Substantiue noune, it stands for some, some one, or a certaine bodie.

Certósa, a charter-house.

Certosíno, a Carthusian Frier.

Certugino, as Certosíno.

Certusíno, as Certosíno.

Cerua, a hinde of a stagge.

Ceruáme, all manner of Deare.

Ceruário, of or belonging to stags.

Ceruáto, a speckled dun stag-colour.

Cerueggiáre, to be wilde, to hunt stags.

Ceruelláccio, a mad fantasticall wit.

Ceruelláto, a kinde of dried Sausage called also Rè de'cíbi, king of meates.

Ceruelliéra, a fantasticall wench.

Ceruellíno, a fond humorous man.

Ceruello, the braine of any creature. Also pith, wit, conceit, discretion.

Ceruétto, a yong stag or faune.

Ceruíce, the hinder part of the necke. Also the crest or necke of a horse.

Ceruicúto, thicke or stiffe necked.

Ceruiére, as Lupo ceruiére. Also sharpe or quicke-sighted. O'cchio ceruiére, a quicke eye.

Ceruiétta, a yong or litle Hinde or Doe.

Ceruígia, strong drinke, beare.

Ceruina, looke Spína.

Ceruína pelle, a Stagges skin or leather.

Ceruíno, of or made of a Stagge, of a Stags coloure or nature. Also a yongue staggard.

Ceruíto, a calfe, or brocke, or staggard.

Cerugía, the art of Chirurgery.

Cerúgico, a Chirurgion.

Ceruleo, azure, watchet, skie-coloure.

Ceruo, a Stagge, a Hart.

Ceruógia, B, eere or Ale, strong drinke.

Ceruogiáro, a Beere-brewer.

Ceruósa, as Ceruógia.

Ceruosáro, as Ceruogiáro.

Cerúsico, a Chirurgion.

Cerússa, as Cirósla.

Cesále, any kinde of hedge, or enclosures about fields.

Cesána, a kind of Swan.

Cesaráne, a kinde of chaine or linkeworke that Gold-smithes worke in Italy.

Césare, one that at his birth is ript out of his mothers wombe. Also an Empe­



rour. Also a kind chitch or tare. Also a proper name of a man. Also the first moode of the second figure of Syllogismes.

Cesáreo, Imperiall, Maiesticall.

Césca., Vsed of Bocace as Francésca.

Cesendello, a lampe hanging.

Cesennáto, a kinde of very wholesome wine.

Césila, Cesílla, a swallow.

Cesino, as Cígno, a Swan.

Césio, a kinde of coloure that Painters vse.

Cesítio, a kind of garment mentioned by Nonnius.

Céso, a part of a proposition signifying no full sence.

Cesóie, shires or cizers.

Cesóne, as Césare. Also a kinde of ducke.

Cesóre, a cutten, a tailor.

Cespitáre, to stumble.

Cespitatióne, a stumbling.

Cespitatóre, a stumbler.

Cespite, as Cespúglio.

Cespo, as Cespúglio, a stumbling-blocke.

Cespugliáre, to make or grow bushy.

Cespúglio, a bush, a bramble, a busket.

Cespuglióso, bushy, full of brambles.

Cessábile, that may cease.

Cessagióne, a cessation, a ceasing.

Cessáre, to cease, to relinquish.

Cesséuole, that may cease.

Cessi Iddío, God cease or forbid.

Céssio ócchio, a whale eie.

Cessióne, a cession, a resignation.

Cessíte, a kind of whitish stone.

Cesso, yeelded, resigned. Also a priuy or close stoole. Also a scroule of paper.

Césta, a basket, a flasket, a pannier.

Cestáre, to put into a basket.

Cestáro, Cestáio, a basket-maker.

Cestaruólo, a Porter or basket-bearer.

Cestella, a Seamsters worke-basket.

Cestellína, as Cestella.

Césti, foiles, wasters or cudgels vsed in fence-schooles.

Cesterella, any kind of litle basket.

Cesticíllo, a wispe, a wad, a wase, or wreath of straw or cloutes that women vse on their heads to carry things vpon.

Cestíno, a measure of dry things.

Césto, a mariage girdle full of studs much spoken off by Poets, which the husband gaue his wife, and girded her with the first day, and at night tooke it from her againe. Also a kinde of heauie flaile. Also a basket or pannier. Also a shrub or bush. Also was anciently vsed among the Grecians and wrestlers for a kind of iron club or sledge, vnto which were tied with leather straps or dried sinewes certaine balles or bullets of leade, which in their Olimpicke games and exercises they were wont to hurle, pitch, throw or cast.

Cestonáto, fortified with gabbions.

Cestóne, a gabbion, a great basket.

Cestopilótto, a close-basket.

Cestótta, a great basket or gabbion.

Cestra, a battle-axe or pole-axe.

Cestreo, a kinde of fish that hath this propertie, to feed vpon no other fish but of her owne kind, and can be taken with no baite but hir owne, fishers hang out one of the male kinde, wherof the females are so greedie, that they will come in whole skoales about him, he hides himselfe in the mud, and hauing hidden his head, he thinks that all his bodie is vnseene, the Latins call this fish Mugil or else Mugilis. Looke Mugíle.

Cestróne, the hearbe Betonie.

Cestullúccia, a poore, old, silly basket.

Cestúto, bushie, leauie, shrubbie.

Cesúra, a cut, a gash, an incision. Also caruing in stone or timber. Also a piece of a verse or sentence.

Céta, as Céto. Also a hatchet.

Cetaceipésci, whale-fishes.

Cetára, a citterne, a gitterne.

Cetarédo, a gitterne or citterne-plaier

Cetarei pésci, pond or poole-fishes.

Cetarella, a litle citterne or gitterne.

Cetárij, places neare the Sea, where fishers were wont to salt greene-fishes.

Cétera, an & cetera, a conclusion vsed in writings, and so forth.

Ceteráre, to play vpon a citerne.

Ceteratóio, as Cetarédo.

Ceteratóre, as Cetarédo.

Ceterísta, a gitterne-plaier.

Cetiáco, one that hath a weake stomacke.

Céto, a Whale or such other great fish of the sea. Also a congregation. Also the name of a starre.

Cétola, a fish in Latine, Faber marinus. Also a kinde of coine in Venice.

Cetrángolo, a kinde of Citron.

Cetráti, armed with a kinde of little shield or buckler after the old fashion.

Cetríne, a kinde of gnats.

Cetríno, a Citron or Pome-citron coloure.

Cétro, a Scepter, a mace of dignity.

Cetróne, a Pome-citron, a Citron.

Cetronella, the hearbe Baulmemint.

Cetruólo, a little Pomecitron.

Cétta, a hatchet. Also an axe.

Cettína, a little hatchet.

Cetto, now, euen now, at this instant.

Cettolíno, a little hatchet.

Céualo, as Céfalo, a fish.

Ceuello, as Céfalo, a fish. 

Céuera, a mullet fish.

Céuole, ciues, scallions, or cibols.

Chálci, a Turbot fish, some take it for a shad. Also a small coine among the Romans.

Chalázia, a stone named of haile, because it resembleth haile.

Chalcíde, a kind of serpent or lizard. Also a fish that hisseth like a serpent.

Chálco, a waight of halfe a Caract.

Chalcomarágdo, a kind of greene stone like an Emarauld.

Chálta, as Cálta,

Chám, a mighty one or a great Prince in the Persian tongue.

Chambróne, the Priuet or Primeprint.

Chamerópe, as Camerópe.

Chá, o, Cáo, a Hynde-woolfe.

Cháos, Chaósse, a Chaos, a confused lump, a formelesse masse, a mishmash.

Chára, a roote whereof Cesars souldiers made bread in Pharsalia.

Charáccia, woad or Pastell for Dyers.

Charáte, a stone like Christall good against the dropsie, and makes him eloquent that weares it about him.

Charità, as Carità.

Charíte, grace, comelinesse, elegancy.

Chárta, as Cárta.

Chárta, as Cárta.

Chè? what? what thing?

Chè? why? wherefore?

Chè? that, which, the which, who.

Chè?, because, for.

Chè?, then, when, at what time.

Chè?, to the end, that so, that.

Chè?, sithence, since that.

Chè?, but except, sauing, onely.

Chè?, but, as, A péna era partíto ch'io víddi il luógo, scarce was he gone, but I saw the place.

Chè?, wherefore, whereof, for so much.

Chè?, being in any comparison, namely Non following the same signifieth then, as Tù séi più dótto chè non sóno io, thou art more learned then I am.

Chè?, so, so that, in such sort as.

Chè?, as, as that, as what.

Chè?, least that, least, that.

Chè?, as Chéchè, what soeuer.

Chè?, vntill, vntill that.

Chè?, a nothing, a whit, a iot.

Chè?, a thing, as Vn bel chè, a goodly or faire thing.

Chè?, what betweene, ví fúrono chè guáste chè sfraccelláte cénto náui.

Chè?, sometimes not written nor spoken and yet vnderstood and meant, as Témo tu non m'ingánni, I feare thou wilt deceiue me.

Chè?, what, Non sò chè tu ti díca, I wot not what thou saiest.



Chè?, why, wherefore? Chè non impári a temér Dío? why or wherefore doest thou not learne to feare God?

Ché, as quándo, when, at what time, after that, when as, and than it followeth commonly a participle.

Ché, many times leaft out as a grace in writing and speech after these verbes Dubitáre, Suspicáre and Temére. Dubitáuano fórte non Sér Ciapellétto gl'ingannásse. Cominciò a Suspicáre non costúi fósse desso. 
As for the words that are ioyned vnto Chè, which are very many I refer the reader to my rules at the word Chè.

Chébuli, a kind of mirabolane plum.

Checcaláre, to cackle as a hen.

Checcalísta, a pratling woman.

Checchè, as Chè chè.

Cheché, what thing soeuer.

Chè chè si sía, whatsoeuer it be.

Ch'è che non è, soone after, but presently.

Chè chì, that who, that whosoeuer.

Chè c'è? che ci è, what is there?

Chéd, instead of Chè, before vowels, Inánziched io mi dispéri, &c.

Ché dómin, what a Gods-name.

Chè è del fátto túo? what becomes of the?

Chéggiere, chéggio, as Chiédere.

Ché'l, that he, that it.

Chelastríco, the best kinde of Nitre.

Chéle, the fore part of the signe Scorpio.

Chelidónia, the hearbe Celandine the great, some take it for Figwort, pilewort or tetterwort. Also a stone of a swallow colour found in a Swallow. Also a kind of serpent. Also a Westerne wind.

Chelídro, as Chelíndro.

Chelíndro, an adder or water-snake.

Chelle, to the end that she or it.

Chello, that he or it.

Chelónia, as Cheloníte.

Chelóne, a kind of Emerauld.

Cheloníte, a stone found in a Tortoise and like a Tortoise shell, good against stormes.

Chelonítide, as Cheloníte.

Chelonophágo, a feeder vpon Tortoises.

Chemacísso, ground Iuie.

Chè mái, that euer. Also then euer. Also that neuer. Also then neuer.

Cheméle, a stone like Iuorie, as hard as marble, the bodies buried in them are neuer consumed, it is said that the bodie of Darius King of Persia was buried in a tombe of such stones.

Chememirsíno, a kind of wild mirtle.

Chemerisón, a kind of salt that Alchimists vse. 

Chemíte, as Cheméle.

Chéna, a kind of powder of the colour of spice which tempered with warme water, the maidens in Turkie when they are to bee maried wash their bodies therewith, and an houre after being washed againe their bodies glister all ouer like Gold.

Chéne, a measure of liquid things in Greece.

Chenalopéce, as Chenalopéco.

Chenalopéco, a bird called a Brant or Bargander, some take it for the Scotish Solan-goose.

Chéne, a stone found in the eye of an old Hart, good against poison.

Chenéro, a kind of Snake or serpent.

Chénica, a Greeke dry measure.

Che nó? che non?, not so, I should not, what will you lay? a wager.

Chenón, then, least, least that, that not, and if in any comparison there bee vsed a second verbe it signifies then, as for example. Il sáuio sà più che non sà il mátto, The wise man knowes more then knoweth the foole. Gliantíchi erano più sáuij che non siámo nói, Our elders were more wise then we are.

Chenomicóne, an hearbe called Goosefoote, it shines in the night and Geese be affraid of it.

Chenopéde, as Chenomicóne.

Chenoréte, a kind of litle wild Goose.

Chénte, as quánto, how much? how long? how farre? as much, as long, as farre. Also a kinde of fine linnen cloth.

Chénte si sía, how much soeuer it be.

Che più?, what more?

Cheppiúzzo, a suttle, slye, cheating knaue.

Chérco, a Clerke, a Clergie-man, one that is elected.

Chentúnque, as Quantúnque.

Che prò ?  what good? what profit?

Chercúto, shauen-pated. Also elected.

Chérere, as Chiédere.

Chérgna, a ruffe or guilthead fish.

Chérica, as Chiérica.

Chericále, of or belonging to the Clergie.

Chericáto, as Chiericáto.

Cherichería, the Clergie.

Cherícia, the Clergie.

Chericíle, as Chericále.

Chérico, as Chiérico.

Cheriníte, as Cheméle.

Cherminále, as Criminále.

Chermisí, the colour crimson, or purple red.

Cherminóso, as Criminóso.

Chermosíno, a Crimson colour.

Cherníte, as Cheméle.

Chéro, I require, I demaund. 

Cherséa, as Chersídro.

Chersína, as Chersídro.

Chersídro, a Serpent or Tortoise that liues as well on land as in the water.

Cherúbico, enflamed with charitie.

Cherubíno, multitude of knowledge or infusion of wisedome. Also cherubine.

Che sì che sì, be still, or whosht, for if not, you shall repent it. Also what will you lay?

Chésta, an enquest or enquirie. Also vsed for Quésta.

Chestreo, as Cestreo.

Che tallhóra non, least that.

Chetáre, to whosht, to quiet, to still.

Chéte, a kind of stinging waspe.

Chetéuole, that may be quieted.

Chetézza, stilnesse, silence, whoshtnesse.

Chetechegli., Looke Fare a chetichegli.

Chéto, whosht, quiet, still, calme.

Cheúnche, whosoeuer, or whatsoeuer.

Cheúnque, as Cheúnche.

Chì?, who? which?

Chì, who, who that, he the which.

Chì, whose. Also to whom, or whom.
some, some one, chi morì di fáme, chi di séte, & chi s'affogó nel'acqua

Chì, hath beene once vsed of a good Author for Quì, heere, in this place.

Chichè, whosoeuer, what man soeuer.

Chi chì, whosoeuer, what man soeuer.

Chía, a kinde of gum or Mastike, or as some thinke a kinde of white earth which giueth an amiable colour to the whole bodie being applied vnto it. Also a precious powder, which they of Iapone vse to mixe with their water when they drinke.

Chiácchiara, a chat or pritle prattle.

Chiacchiaráre, to prattle, to babble, to tattle.

Chiacchiaráta, as Fagioláta.

Chiácchera, as Chiacchería.

Chiacchería, a tittle tattle, a babling.

Chiaccheróne, a babler, a pratier.

Chiácco, a drawing or lettise window, a tooting, prying or lurking hole. Also a smacking with the tongue. Also a snare, a springe, or gin.

Chiácchibichiácchi, pratling companions, babling lads. Also helter-skelter or higledepigle.

Chiaéni, certaine Iudges so called in China that ride in circuit to correct abuses.

Chiága, a kind of rauenous Sea-fowle.

Chiaffiáto, as Affiáto.

Chiaggía, as Cloáca.

Chiamáre, to call, to claime, to inuoke. Also to name, to hight, to yelip.

Chiamáta, a call or calling for.

Chiamatíuo, to be called.

Chiamóre, a call, a clamor, a calling.

Chiána, as Chía. Also a standing poole 



or watring place. Also a Carpenters plaine.

Chianáre, to stand or grow to a poole. Also to plaine or make smooth.

Chiánca, a slaughter-house, a butcherie. A shambles. Also a torturing place. Also a pauement or planked floore. Also a springe or gin to catch birdes.

Chiancára, as Chiaranzána.

Chiancasáno, a horse-shooe for horses that haue tender hoofes or false quarters, being shorter on the one side then on the other.

Chianelle, as Pianelle.

Chianellétte, litle or thin pantofles.

Chianétta, a caske, a helmet, a headpiece.

Chiantáre, as Schiantáre. Also to tug.

Chiánte, a kind of excellent wine.

Chiápia, a brick-bat, a tilesharde.

Chiáppa, a buttocke, a hanch, a hamor hip. Also an earthen dripping pan. Also a broken crag, or splinter of stone deuided by nature. Also a step of a ladder. Also a flat boate or broad lighter. Also a broad planke or piece of timber. Also that part of a knife that goes into the handle or haft. Also the breech of a Cannon or Musket. Also a patch of leade clapt to a ship that is shot or hath a leake. Also a clap.

Chiappáre, as Acchiappáre. Also looke Chiáppa.

Chiáppe di bue, a kind of horse-shooe.

Chiappeggiáre, to clap on the buttocks, to pinch by the hanch.

Chiappe ggiáta, a clap on the buttocke, a pinch by the hanch.

Chiapperóne, a clout of iron to couer the end of the axel-tree, some call it a cap, because it couers and caps any thing.

Chiappetíne, litle buttockes or lips.

Chiáppole, foolish Harlots, broad hipt rigs. Also hudle or bedroules.

Chiappóne, a port in the mouth of a bit.

Chiappóso, well buttockt. Also full of broken stones. Looke Chiáppa.

Chiára, a kind of very strange lightning, whereby full Tunnes are drawen dry, mettall moulten in bags, shins broken and the stockings left whole, letters burnt and the seales of waxe vntoucht, and many such strange things. Also as Chiáro.

Chiára d'vuóuo, the white of an egge. Also according to Alchimists quickesiluer.

Chiaramella, a kind of bag-pipe.

Chiarantána, a kinde of Caroll or song full of leapings like a Scotish gigge, some take it for the Almaine-leape.

Chiranzána, as Chiarantána.

Chiarantanáre, to dance Chiarantána.

Chiaráre, as Chiaríre.

Chiarea, the hearbe Clarie. Also the wine Ipocrasse made of spices Also a kinde of sauce in Italie made of graines. Also a kind of sweet washing water.

Chiarello, somewhat cleare. Also Claret-wine.

Chiarétto, as Chiarello. Also a sounding instrument called a Clairon.

Chiarézza, clearenesse, brightnesse, thinnesse. Also apparance. Also renowme or splendor.

Chiarificare, as Chiaríre.

Chiarentána, as Chiarantána.

Chiarentanáre, to dance Chiarantána.

Chiarenzána, as Chiarantána.

Chiariménto, a clearing or manifestation.

Chiaríno, a clairon of a trumpet. Also a nicke name for tame heafers or houslins.

Chiarificáre, to make cleare or manifest, to clarifie.

Chiarificatione, a clarification, a making cleere or manifest.

Chiaríre, rísco, ríto, to cleare, to clarifie. Also to resolue or put out of doubt.

Chiarità, as Chiarézza.

Chiáro, cleere, bright, or through shining. Also apparant, manifest or out of doubt. Also thin. Also famous or renowmed.

Chiaróre, as Chiarézza.

Chiáro scúro, a darke puke colour.

Chiassaiuólo, a little darke entry, or Chiásso.

Chiassáre, to spot, to blur, to dash with dirt. Also to haunt whore-houses.

Chiassétto, a little lane, a by-ally, a little whore-house.

Chiásso, a narrow lane, an ally that hath but one entrance and comming out, an out-nooke in a towne. where poore folkes dwell. Also a brothell or bawdie house. Also a scolding noise, a hurly burly in a brothell. Also a kind of weight in Ormuz.

Chiassolíno, as Chiassétto.

Chiattáre, to squat or grouell on the ground. Also to whosht or still. Also to lurke.

Chiátto, squatting, groueling, whosht, lurking. Also a foule toade.

Chiauáio, he that shuts and lockes or hath the charge of keyes. Also a lockesmith.

Chiauaiuólo, as Chiauáio.

Chiauálli, transoms. Also wooden barres or boults to open and shut doores.

Chiauárda, any thing to be locked vp.

Chiauárdi, a disease in a horse.

Chiauánte, as Chiauéscha.

Chiauáre, to locke with a key. Also to transome, but now a daies abusiuely vsed for Fóttere.

Chiauarina, as Chiauerína.

Chiauaríno, as Chiauáro.

Chiauáro, a locke-smith, a key-keeper, a porter. Also a woodden barre or transom.

Chiauaruóla, a transom or woodden barre. Also a chiefe ward or spring in a locke. vsed also for mortises in buildings.

Chiauatóre, as Chiauáro, Also as Fottitóre.

Chiauatúra, a locke with a key. Also a locking. Also as Fottitúra.

Chiauattiére, as Chiauaro.

Chiáue, any kinde of key. Also a cleefe in musike. Also the roote of a horses taile. Looke Chiáui.

Chiauéca, a beldame, a dame, a mother.

Chiauelláre, to fumble or grope about a key-hole or womans priuities. Also as Chiodáre. Also to clinch, to pin, to pegge.

Chiauellatúra, as Chiodotúra. Also a clinching, a pegging, a fore-locking.

Chiauello, a peg, a pin or stake to fasten the cords of a tent to the ground. Also a great naile, a bolt, a chiuing pin or a forelocke about a wheele.

Chiaueríno, a locke-smith.

Chiauerína, a little speare or launce.

Chiauésca, of, like, or pertaining to a key or locke.

Chiauétta, a little key. Also as Gunners call it a fore-locke which keepes the piece from falling out, our Carters call them transoms, or rowlers.

Chiauéuole, as Chiauésca.

Chiáui, all maner of keyes, but among Gunners and carters transoms, a transom is a crosse planke bolted with iron bolts to strengthen the sides of the cariages in euery of which they have foure: the foretransom, the vpright transom, the flat transome, and the taile transom, Italian Gunners call them quatro chiauo, sometimes they are taken for woodden rowlers to mooue Ordinance.

Chaíuica, as Cloáca.

Chiauícchia, as Cauícchia,

Chiauicchióne, as Chiauigióne.

Chiauichétta, a gutter to conueigh water.

Chiauícola, the craw-bone, the chanellbone, or neck-bone.

Chiáui d'albéo, some part of a ship.

Chiauigióne, any great bolt, peg or pin, a crow of iron, a cheeuing bolt.

Chiauígero, a keeper or bearer of keyes.

Chiauistello., a doore-boult.

Chiauisterio, a brothell or vaulting-house.

Chiáuo, a knur, a knob, a puffe, a mea­



zell, or blister growing on trees.

Chiaússo, as Ciaússo.

Chiazzáre, as Schiacciáre. Also to spot or speckle with diuers colours. Also to dash with dirt.

Chiazzáta, as Schiacciáta.

Chiazzáto, squashed flat. Also spotted. Also bemired with dirt.

Chiázze, spots or dashings of dirt and mire.

Chiázzo, as Chiásso.

Chicchi, as Chi chi, whosoeuer.

Chicchi sisía, whosoeuer it be.

Chícchere, a flurt with ones fingers or blurt with ones mouth in scorne or derision.

Chicchirilláre, as Anfanáre.

Chi chesía, whosoeuer it be.

Chichì, whosoeuer.

Chichi si sía, whosoeuer it be.

Chidei, a kind of wilde round Date.

Chídre, a kinde of Palme to make wine off.

Chiedente, requesting, suing for. Also a suter, a petitioner. Also a chalenger, an appellant, a demander, a requirer, a crauer.

Chieditóre, as Chiedente.

Chiédere, Chiédo, orChiéggio, Chiedéi, orChiési, Chiedúto, orChiesto, to require, to request, to craue, to sue for in begging manner.

Chiédere a bócca, to request by word of mouth.

Chiedíbile, that may be required.

Chiéga, the lining of a garment.

Chiégge, splints, shiuers, spals, riuings. Also the ridges of an hill.

Chieggere, chiéggio, chiési, chiesto, as Chiédere.

Chieggiáre, to splinter, to shiuer.

Chiéndine, nits that breed lice.

Chiendinóso, nitty, full of nits

Chiépa, as Chiéppa.

Chiepíno, as Chieppíno.

Chiéppa, a fish in Latine, Lupéa, that for desire of a veine in a tunnis iaw killeth the same.

Chieppináre, to dissemble as an Hypocrite.

Chieppíno, a dissembling puritan.

Chiérere, chiéro, chiési, chiesto, as Chiédere.

Chieresía, the whole body of the Clergy.

Chiérica, a shauen pate, pole or nole.

Chiericánte, Clarke-like. Also perching, crowing or prating ouer one.

Chiérica rása, a shauen pate, a shaueling.

Chiericáto, the whole Cleargy, the elected. Also a benefice or Clarkes liuing Also shauen or notted.

Chierichétti, yongue nouices, little Clarkes.

Chiérico, a Clergie-man, a Clarke, an elect, a Priest, a religious man. 

Chierigíni, a kinde of fish.

Chiéro, I require, I craue.

Chiérsi, a kinde of Ducke, Wigin, or Mallard.

Chiésa, a Church, a Temple.

Chiesétta, a little Church.

Chiesicciuóla, a little little Church.

Chiesta, a request, a crauing, an enquest. Also a vaunt or vie in gaming.

Chiestáre, to quest. Also to vant it or vie it at gaming.

Chiesto, required, craued, requested.

Chietaríe, hypocriticall trickes.

Chietináre, to dissemble as an hypocrite.

Chiéti, dissembling hypocrites.

Chietíno, an hypocriticall puritane.

Chieuégli, a gull, a ninny, a sot.

Chíffi, a certaine composition among the Egyptians, strong to smell vnto in suffumications, which they burne as incense to the Sunne when it is setting: the vertue of it is, (as they affirme) to put away all melancholy contracted by the incenser that day, thereby to be cleared of all cares, and to procure pleasing dreames that night.

Chígli, as Sbrigli, skales or nine-pinnes.

Chíli, the mother of all other veines in our bodies called Caua vena.

Chiliárca, a Captaine of a thousand foote.

Chiliodináma, the hearbe Polemónia, so called by the number of vertues it hath.

Chílo, a white iuice comming of the meat disgested in the stomacke, which engendreth the blood.

Chilóne, one that is blaber-lipt.

Chilósi, a rauenous water foule.

Chilosétti, as Chilósi.

Chilóso, full of Chilo.

Chimánta, a kind of wouen stuffe.

Chimédio vespertíno, as Dracónite.

Chiméra, a chimere, a monster, a foolish imagination, or Castle in the ayre.

Chimérico, full of Chimers.

Chimeríno, a circle, whereto when the Sunne commeth the daies bee at the shortest, winterly.

Chimerísta, a chimerist or fond humour.

Chimerizzáre, to rare or build castles in the aire.

Chímia, the arte of Alchimy.

Chímico, a Chimike, an Alchimist. Also Chimicall.

Chimísta, an Alchimist, a Chimike.

Chímo, the second digestion in the liuer.

Chimósi, a moisture in the skinne enclosing the eies.

Chímus, a fish that foreseeth stormes and then hideth himselfe vnder a stone.

Chína, a descent or downe bending. Also a fullers teazell or Venus bason.

Chinánce, the squinancy.

Chináre, to stoope, to bow, to loute low, to make a reuerence, to encline, to bend.

Chinatúra, a declining, a downebending.

Chinea, a hackney or ambling nagge.

Chinéuole, that may stoope or bend, enclinable.

Chíno, stooping, louting, downe-hanging. Also a reuerence or curtzie. Also stooped.

Chinocéto, a precious stone good to expell euill spirits.

Chintána, a sport called the Quintane.

Chío, a skrich-owle.

Chiócca, a locke or handfull of wooll, a bush or locke of haire. Also a chicking hen. Also a squatting or cowring downe.

Chiócca a chiócca, by lockes, by peecemeale.

Chioccáre, as Chiocciáre.

Chióccia, a broode or cluck-hen. Also hoarse in the throate.

Chiocciáre, to clocke as a broode-hen. Also to reduce into lockes or bushes as wooll or haire. Also to speake hoarse. Also to whiske or yarke as a whip doth. Also to cowre or squat downe.

Chiócciola, a paire of round winding staires. Also a hoddydod, a shel-snaile, a perwinkle. Also a scalop, a welke, a cockle or any round shel-fish. Also those blacke horned snailes that creepe without shelles.

Chióccio, hoarse or snorting.

Chiócco, a snap, a clicke, a clacke, a yarke of a whip, a snap or such noise.

Chiodáme, as Chiodería.

Chiodáre, to naile, to clow. Also to prick a horse with a naile.

Chiodáro, a nailer.

Chiodaruólo, a Tenter-man, a nailer.

Chiodatúra, a clowing or pricking of a horse with a naile.

Chiodería, all maner of nailes or nailings, or pegs or pins or bolts of Iron.

Chiodétto, any little naile or peg.

Chiódi, all maner of nailes. Also agnels on cornes in feete that haue rootes.

Chiódo, a naile, a spicke. Also as Chiáuo.

Chióma, the whole haire of a womans head. Also a peruke. Also the maine of a horse.

Chiomáre, to haire. Also to maine.

Chiomáta stella, a blazing starre. 



Chiomáto, that hath long haires on his head. Also long mained as a horse.

Chiomazzuóli., Looke Fáre chiomaz-zuóli.

Chionétta., 

Chióppa, a dripping-pan. Also as Chiáppa.

Chioppáre, to clacke or snap, or phip, or click, or lirp with ones fingers as they that dance the Canaries, or as some Barbers.

Chióppo, a clacke, a clicke, a phip or snap, or lirping with ones fingers ends.

Chiósa, a glosse, an interpretation, an exposition. Also a kinde of game or play in Italy.

Chiosáre, to glosse to interpret. Looke Chiósa.

Chiosatóre, a glosser, an expounder.

Chióso, thawed, molten.

Chióstra, a Cloister, an enclosure.

Chiostráre, to Cloister, to immure.

Chióstro, a Cloister, an enclosure.

Chiótta, close, squat, secret, husht as a hen ower her chickins.

Chiottáre, to lie squat, close, or husht.

Chióua, a kinde of great weight in Italy.

Chiouára, tenters to drie and stretch cloathes vpon.

Chiouárde, the spokes of a cart-wheele.

Chiouárdo, a swelling or vlcering at the coronet of a horses hoofe, proceeding of some hurt in the foote by a naile or other accident.

Chiouáre, as Chiodáre. Also to tenter.

Chiouáro, a Tenter-man.

Chiouaruólo, as Chiouáro.

Chiouattúra, as Chiodatúra.

Chiouiále, a sleeuelesse garment.

Chiouétta, as Chionétta.

Chióua, as Chiódo. Also a kinde of disease or swelling in a hawkes feet, or in mens eies.

Chióuola, the knee-pan of any creature.

Chiózza, a water-gate or sluce.

Chipássa, the name of a galliard.

Chipiù chi méno, some more, some lesse.

Chiráde, ruptures or chaps in hands or fecte.

Chirágra, the gout in fingers, or hands.

Chiragróse, gouty in fingers or hands.

Chiribizzáre, as Ghiribizzáre.

Chiribízzo, as Ghiribízzo.

Chiribizzóso, as Ghiribizzóso.

Chiricóccola, a wagtaile.

Chirintána, as Chiarantána.

Chirográfo, an obligation of ones hand.

Chirománte, a Palmester.

Chiromantía, Palmestry.

Chironía, the hearbe Centory. Also a kinde of blacke wild vine or briony.

Chironíe., looke Vlcere chironíe.

Chironióne, the hearbe Centory.

Chirotéca, the flowre Our ladies gloue. Vsed also for gloues.

Chirúca, a little beast with eares, skin, taile and shape like a Mouse, with a bagge vnder his belly wherein he carieth his yongue ones, it doth much hurt to hens and other poultry, there be two sorts one bigger then another, and somewhat like a Fox with a great taile.

Chirugía, the arte of Chirurgery.

Chirúgico, a Chirurgion.

Chi si sia, whosoeuer it be.

Chisto., Vsed for questo, this.

Chitárra, a Gitterne, or Citterne.

Chitarísta, a Gittern or Cittern-plaier.

Chistétto, a deepe measure of drie things.

Chiù, hath been vsed for Più, more.

Chiúca, as Chirúca.

Chiudára, a Turners or Sadlers toole.

Chiudenda, a locke, a pad-locke, a horse locke. Also the leafe or side of a gate or doore. Also any locking or shutting. Also a Parke, an enclosure, or ground impailed.

Chiúdere, to shut, to locke, to enclose, to Cloister vp, to pen, or coope vp.

Chiudíbile, that may be shut or closed.

Chiuditúra, as Chiudenda.

Chiúnque, whosoeuer.

Chiúnque si sía, whosoeuer it be.

Chiúsa, a little shop or vnderstall. Also a sluce or water-gate. Also any enclosure, a close or shutting vp of any thing. Also shut close or locket.

Chiusarello, a bird so called.

Chiusaménte, closely, secretly.

Chiuserána, a kinde of tramell or fishing net.

Chiuso, close, shut vp, pend or cooped vp.

Chiusúra, as Chiudenda.

Chízza, old, withered, wrimpled. Also a trull, a strumpet, a minx, a gigsie.

Chizzuóla, a white-pot, or pot-pudding.

Chlamíde, a military garment worne by the Macedonian souldiers.

Chlorióne, a lariot or wit-wall-bird.

Chloríte, a grasse greene-stone.

Chóe, a Greeke measure of liquid things.

Chóndro, the bastard Dictamum.

Chorísta, a Quirister in a Church.

Chóro, as Córo.

Choromándri, a kind of Sauage people all hairie ouer, hauing no distinct voice or speech, but an horrible gnashing noise.

Chrich, a creaking noise. Also as Chióppo.

Chrísi, the conflict betweene nature and sicknesse. 

Chrisálide, a kinde of worme or grub enwrapped in a key or huske.

Chrisantémo, as Heliochríso.

Chrisermo, a kind of hearbe.

Chrisippea, a kind of hearbe.

Chrisiténo, a kind of hard whetstone.

Chrisitíno, litharge or fome of gold.

Chrisíti, as Chrisocómo.

Chríso, as Chrisocómo.

Chrisoberíllo, a pale coloured Emerauld.

Chisocárpo, golden-berie Iuie.

Crisocárpino, golden-berie Iuie.

Chrisocólla, Borace that Gold-smithes vse to solder mettals with. Also a colour that Painters vse called verd de terre.

Chrisocolláre, to solder with Borace, or to dye with verd de terre.

Chrisocómo, an hearbe glittering in the head like Gold,

Chrisolámpo, a stone pale coloured by day, and glowing as fire in the night.

Chrisoletro, yellow Amber. Also a kind of Iacinth stone.

Chrisólito, a Chrisolite stone.

Chrisolocáno, a kind of hearbe.

Chrisomele, a kind of Quince.

Chrisóne, a fish all yellow ouer.

Chrisopázo, a Sea-water colled kind of Emerauld.

Chrisopétro, a Chrisolite stone.

Chrisophíde, a stone glittering as Gold.

Chrisoprásio, as Chrisopázo.

Chrisothále, Sengreene, or Houseleeke.

Christallína., looke Túnica.

Christallóide, as Cristallóide.

Christeo, a glister.

Christianáccio, a filthy Christian.

Christianaménte, Christian-like.

Christianésimo, Christendome

Christianello, a simple Christian.

Christianità, Christianitie.

Christiáno, a Christian.

Chrísto, Our Sauiour CHRIST.

Chrómo, Crómo, a kind of Sea-Lobstar whereof there is no male kind.

Chrónica, a Chronicle, a Historie.

Chronichísta, a Chronicler.

Chrónico, a Chronicler.

Chrónico mále, a long sicknesse, a lingring disease, a wasting away by sicknesse.

Chrónio, as Crónio.

Chronographía, a description of times.

Chronográpho, a describer of times.

Cì, an Aduerbe of place, there in that place, or here, or in this place.

Cía, a Pronoune of the Datiue case, vs, or to vs, lui cì diéde, he gaue vs.

Cì, a Pronoune of the Accusatiue case, vs, lui cì vídde, he saw vs.

Cì, a Pronoune of the Ablatiue case with Verbes of priuation, from vs, lui cì tólse.

Cì, a bird called a Yellow-hammer, a



Golden-hammer or a Youlring. Also a kind of drinke vsed in China, made of hearbes, spices and other comfortable things very costly; they drinke it warme, and with it welcome their dearest guests and friends.

Ciabátta, an old ouerworne shoe.

Ciabáttare, to coble shoes. Also to trifle.

Ciabattaríe, triflings, paltrings not worth an old shoe.

Ciabattiére, as Ciabattíno.

Ciabattáro, as Ciabattíno.

Ciabattinésco, cobler-like, idle, trifling.

Ciabattíno, a cobler, a souter, a clouter.

Ciabratána, as Ciarbattána.

Ciaccáre, to play the hog or churle, to play the gourmand or slouen.

Ciaccheráte, to squash or squease.

Ciaccherelle, a kinde of Almonds or Nuts so thin husked that one may squash them with his hands.

Ciácco, a hog, a boare, a swine. Also a hog-stie. Also a hoggish, a slouenly, a churlish, a beastly, a gluttonous, a gourmandizing or filthy fellow.

Ciaffáre, to arrest suddenly, to catch by the shoulders, to snatch vp violently.

Ciáffo, a Catchpole, a base Sergeant. Also the bung-hole of any But or pipe of wine.

Ciágola, a cornish chough or daw.

Cialdáro, a wafrer or wafer-maker.

Ciálde, flakes of snow. Also wafers.

Cialdonáro, a Wafrer.

Cialdóni, long wafers rowled vp.

Cialdoncíni, litle or thin wafers.

Ciallóne, a kind of Canopie or bed sparuis.

Cialtráre, to pratle, to brabble, to prate.

Cialtróne, a pratler, a prater, a babler.

Ciamárra, a habite worne ouer a gowne as Graduates weare in Vniuersities.

Ciambaglióne, a caudle for a sicke man.

Ciambella, a cracknell or simnell cake.

Ciambellanía, the office of a Chamberlaine.

Ciambelláno, a Chamberlaine.

Ciambelláro, a simnell or bun-maker.

Ciambelle, simnels, buns, or cakes.

Ciambellétte, wafers or thin cakes.

Ciambellottáro, a Chamblet-maker.

Ciambellíni, as Ciambellétte.

Ciambellótto, as Ciamellótto.

Ciamberláno, a Chamberlaine.

Ciamberta, a fish in Latin Zygena.

Ciambétta, when the horse holds vp his sore-foote on the same side that he is to make his turne, is said fare ciambétta.

Ciambudelli, a kinde of haggas pudding.

Ciamea, a blacke stone like a beane.

Ciamellótto, the weaued stuffe Chamblet. 

Ciámo, an Egyptian beame.

Ciamórro, the mourning of the chine in a horse, issuing at the nostrils.

Ciampolíne, a kind of peare in Italie.

Ciancellaménto, a wauering, a staggering, the cancelliering of a hawke.

Ciancelláre, to wauer, to stagger. Also to cancellier as a hawke in the aire.

Cianciaféra, a dunghill queane, a dragle taile, a durtie slut. Also filthy dung.

Cianciáre, to chat, to prattle, to prattle idly. Also to play the mountibanke.

Cianciatóre, a pratler, a prater.

Cianciatríce, a pratling woman.

Ciancicáre, to chew or mince small.

Ciáncie, chatting, pratlings, bablings, idle words, merry talke.

Ciancióne, a babler, a prater, a chatter.

Ciancióso, full of pratling or chat.

Cianciúme, as Ciáncie.

Cianeo, a bright blew or Azure colour.

Cianfárda, a cod piece-louing woman.

Cianfrógna, gibbrish, pedlers french.

Cianfrognáre, to talke gibbrish.

Cianfrognóne, a gibbrish-speaker.

Cianfróne, as Zanfróne.

Cianfruságlia, raskally base people.

Cianfrusagliume, idem.

Ciángola, a wodden tray, a washing bowle. Also a pan for a close-stoole.

Ciangoláre, as Cinguettáre.

Ciangottáre, to mumble, to falter or to raue in speech as some dreamers doe.

Ciangottóne, a mumbler or pratler without head or taile, an idle talker.

Ciáno, the Lillie-flowre or blew-blaw.

Ciantellináre, to scantlin. Also to sip or drinke small draughts.

Ciantellíno, a litle scantlin. Also a litle sip or small draught of drinke.

Ciántolo, as Ciantellíno.

Ciánza, the game at dice called Hazard or Chance.

Cianzáre, to play at Hazard or Chance. Also to cast hazards at dice.

Ciaperonáre, to put into a French-hood.

Ciaperóne, a French-hood, or lettuce cap.

Ciáppola, a Gold-smithes toole.

Ciapétte, some thing that the women of Greece wore about their gownes.

Ciarabattána, as Ciarbattána.

Ciaramella, a bag-pipe. Also any pratling or babling in merry sort.

Ciaramelláre, to play vpon a bag-pipe. Also to prattle merrily.

Ciaramellóne, a pratler, a babler.

Ciaramíglia, as Ciaramella.

Ciaratanáre, to play the Ciaratáno.

Ciaratáno, a mountibanke, and idle pratler, a foolish babler.

Ciarbattána, a trunke to shoote pellets. Also a kind of Chamber or Bumbard.

Ciátla, a tittle-tattle, a pratling.

Ciarláre, to prattle, to tittle-tattle. 

Ciarlatanáre, to play the Ciaratáno.

Ciarlatáno, as Ciaratáno.

Ciarlatóre, a pratler, a tatler.

Ciarlería, as Ciárla.

Ciarliére, a pratling fellow.

Ciarlóne, as Ciancióne.

Ciárma, a Charme.

Ciarmáre, to charme.

Ciarmatóre, a Charmer.

Ciárpa, any kind of scarfe or bandelet. Also any filth, trash, rable, or idle stuffe. Also a slut, a trull, a gigsie, or gadding minxe.

Ciarpánce, riff-raff, luggage, trash.

Ciarperáccia, a sluttish flurt, a drigledragle slut.

Ciartusíno, a Carthusian Frier.

Ciaschedúno, each one, euery one.

Ciascheúno, each one, euery one.

Ciascúno, each one, euery one.

Ciastúno, each one, euery one.

Ciátho, Ciáto, a waight of ten drams. Also a certaine measure or drinking glasse.

Ciauarello, a Cheurell, a Kid.

Ciauariaménto, a rauing, a wauering.

Ciauariáre, to raue, to wauer, to varie.

Ciauátta, as Ciabátta.

Ciauattáre, as Ciabattáre.

Ciauattíno, as Ciabattíno.

Ciauettíno, as Ciabattíno.

Ciáula, a cornish chough, a dew.

Ciaulella, a litle breake-fast.

Ciaulelláre, to breake-fast slightly.

Ciaus, Ciaússo, an officer of the great Turke, as we say here a Gentleman of the Kings chamber of presence.

Cibáglie, all manner of foode or victuals.

Cibáli, the name of an hearbe.

Cibáme, as Cibáglie.

Cibaménto, any food or nourishment.

Cibáre, to feed, to finde with food.

Cibário, a lardry or place where meate is kept. Also a kind of cheat-bread.

Cibátta, as Ciabátta.

Cibattíno, as Ciabattíno.

Cibattóne, as Busbacóne.

Cibécca, an Owle, an Howlet.

Cibéga, a kind of boyes play in Italie.

Cibíbi, dried raisins of the Sunne.

Cíbio, a square rand of fish, cut out, poudred, and then eaten, namely of Tunnie. Also a kind of fish. Also the ashes of the bones of that fish vsed in Physicke.

Cíbo, food, meate, sustenance.

Cibório, the Tabernacle where the ostia is kept in a Church.

Cibóso, full of meate or foode.

Cíca, as Boccáta.

Cicáda, a Grashopper. Also a Cricket.

Cicadestra, a kind of noisome waspe.

Cicála, as Cicáda.

Cicaláccia, a common scould, a pratler. 



Cicalaménto, a pratling, a tatling.

Cicaláre, to prate, to chat, to prattle.

Cicalaríe, pratlings, bablings, chats.

Cicaláta, a prating or pratling noise.

Cicalatóre, a man pratler, or prater.

Cicalatríce, a woman prater or chatter.

Cicaléccio, as Cicalíno.

Cicalétte, litle or yong Grasse-hoppers.

Cicalétte d'óro, certaine little Grassehoppers of gold worne by the Athenians in their haire.

Cicaliéra, a woman pratler or scold.

Cicalíno, a pratling, a tittle-tattle.

Cicalóne, a man pratler or prater.

Cicárdola, a phip or flurt with fingers.

Cicardoláre, to phip, to flurt, to lirpe.

Cicatríce, a skar or marke of a hurt.

Cicatríce negl'ócchij, whitish spots in the eyes called Pearles.

Cicatrizzáre, to cicatrise, to heale or skin vp a hurt or sore.

Ciccantóna, a cast ouerridden whore.

Ciccantonáre, as Atelláre.

Ciccantóni, as Atelláni.

Cíccia, a word that litle children in Toscana call meate or flesh with.

Ciccióni, biles, pushes, fellones or such hard tumores in fingers or toes.

Ciccúna, a flood or wild goose.

Cíce, a kinde of round Date. Also as Céci.

Cicerbíta, Sowthistle. Also Hareslettuce.

Cicérchia, the pulse Chicklings.

Cicérculo, a course Bolearmin or Sinopis.

Cíceri, as Céci.

Cicerlándia, a boies play vsed in Italie.

Cichrámo, a like-Owle or Howlet.

Cíci, the plant Palma Christi.

Cicigáre, as Aizzáre, as Cicaláre.

Cicígna, a kind of Snake or Serpent.

Cicílla., 

Cicilláre., 

Cicíndile, Gloe-birds, or Gloe-wormes. Also the nose or socket of a candlesticke or lampe.

Cicíno, the hearbe Palma Christi.

Ciclamíno, Sowbread, Swinebread.

Cíclico, any beast hauing the viues.

Cíclo, around place or circle. Also a disease in beasts called the viues, which is a rising of kernels vnder their eares.

Ciclomíno, as Ciclamíno.

Ciclopedía, an vniuersall knowledge of all sciences.

Cicógna, as Cigógna, a Storke. Also the beake of any instrument or toole. Also an engine to draw vp water called a Mock Also a kind of instrument to make furrowes or ditches with. Also a toole that Chirurgions vse.

Cicogníno, a yong or litle storke. Also any litle Cicógna.

Cicolína, a litle push, pimple or whelke. 

Cicómero, a Cucumber or water melon.

Cicórea, the hearbe Cicorie.

Cicorella, idem.

Cicória, idem.

Cicoriára, a woman that sels hearbes.

Cicoriáta, a sauce or meate of Cicorie.

Cicórlia, a chirping of birdes.

Cicorliáre, to chirp or chat as birdes.

Cicóttola, the nape of the head.

Cicróne, as Cicómero.

Cicúta, Henbane, kex or hearbe-Bennet.

Cicutária, mockcheruill, asseparselie or kexes.

Cicutrémma, a country musicall instrument.

Cídari, a wreath or cap that the Kings and Priests of Persia were wont to weare. Also a Turkish tuffe or turbant.

Cidoneo, a kind of Quince.

Cídra, a drinke made of apples, Cydar.

Cidrióli, litle Cidrons or Citrons.

Ciecaménte, blindly, without sight.

Ciecáre, to blinde, to enueagle.

Ciechità, blindnesse.

Cieco, blinde. Also eye-blind, ignorant, inuisible, depriued. Also the fourth gut which because it hath diuers enfouldings and turnings seemeth to haue no end.

Cieco., looke Fogóne cieco.

Ciéfalo, as Céfalo.

Cieffáre, as Ceffáre.

Cieffo, as Ceffo.

Ciélabro, as Ceruello.

Cieláre, to enskie or enheauen. Also to couer or testerne ouer, to canopie.

Cielo, the heauen, the skie, the firmament or welkin. Also a canopie or testerne of a bed, the vpper face or roofe of any thing else.

Ciémbalo, aire or breath, beuúto il primo cielo.

Ciémbalo, olímpio, that part of heauen that is aboue the cloudes and windes.

Ciémbalo, as Cémbalo.

Ciembalísta, a player on Cymbals.

Ciéntri, as Céntri.

Ciéra, as Céra.

Cierchióne, one that busieth himselfe in coniuring, a circler, a coniurer.

Cieregiáro, a cherie plat, or man.

Ciério, as Cério.

Cierisáro, as Cieregiáro.

Ciertosíno, a Carthusian Frier.

Ciesáre, to set with a quicke hedge.

Ciése, quicke-set-hedges, or bushes.

Ciesso, as Cesso.

Ciéfalo, Ciéualo, or Céfalo. 

Cifaráre, to cipher.

Cífara, a cipher.

Cifarísta, a Cifrer.

Cifello, a piper, a whistler.

Cífera, a cipher or ciphring.

Ciferáre, to cipher. 

Ciferísta, a Ciphrer.

Ciferatóre, a Ciphrer.

Cífi, a perfume dedicated to the Gods.

Cifoláre, to whisse or whistle.

Cífolo, a whisse or whistle.

Cifra, a cipher, or ciphering.

Cifránte, a Ciphrer.

Cifráre, to cipher.

Cifratóre, a Ciphrer.

Cigáre, as Cigoláre.

Cighignuóla, a litle pullie in a ship.

Cíglia, the eye-browes or eye-lids.

Cíglia di grátia, a tree of whose wood chaines and beades are made of vertue to procure loue.

Cigliáre, to seele as pigeons eyes.

Cíglio, an eye-lid, or eye-brow.

Ciglióne, the lip or brow of any thing, or front of a hill.

Ciglióso, that hath bushie eye-browes.

Cigliúto, as Ciglióso.

Cígna, a cingle or girt for a horse.

Cignále, a wild Boare.

Cignáre, to cingle or guirt. Also to twinge or plucke. Also to imitate the Swan.

Cígnere, cíngo, cínsi, cínto, to gird or compasse about.

Cignétto, a cignet or yong Swan.

Cígno, a Swan. Also a twinging with band and feete. Also the name of a starre.

Cígola, a creeking or shrill woman.

Cigolaménto, the creeking of a wheele.

Cigoláre, to creeke or squeake as a dore or cart-wheele, to whisse or whistle. Also to riue, or splint or shiuer.

Cigógna, as Cicógna.

Cilécca, a flap with a Foxe-taile, a iest.

Cileccáre, to iest merily, to play the foole, to flap with a Foxe-taile.

Cilécchi, newfangles, toyes, iests.

Cilestro, a kind of blew Lillie. Also a watchet colour.

Celícia, Fœnigreeke.

Cilício, rugged haire-cloth, but properly made of goates haire.

Cilíndrico, of the figure of Cilíndro.

Cilíndro, a Cilinder. Also a kind of dyall or square figure. Also a long Pearle fashioned like an egge. Also a long plaister made like a couer. Also a scouring sticke. Also the bore or concauitie of a piece of ordinance. Also a rowler of wood or stone as gardiners vse to rowle and smooth allies.

Cílli, such as want any limmes, maimed.

Cillóne, a kind of colour.

Cilóma, as Fagioláta.

Cilomáre., looke Fagioláta.

Címa, the top or vpper part of any thing by metaphore, dignitie or greatnesse.

Cimára, as Ciamárra.

Cimáre, to top or lop trees, Also to sheare clothes. 



Cimarósto, the best part or daintiest morsell of any roste-meate.

Cimása, as Cimátio.

Cimátio, the vpper ledge of any wanescot worke. Also any thing or roome that is foure square on the top.

Cimatóre, a topper, a cloth-shearer.

Cimatúre, toppings, shearings of clothes.

Címba, a fishers boate, a cockboate, a ferrie-boate. Also the name of a bone in ones legs. Also an hearbe growing on stone walles somewhat like Iuie.

Cimbále, as Címba.

Cimbalísta, a plaier on cimbals or Timbrels.

Címbalo, a Cimball, a Timbrell.

Cimbanello, a litle Cimball or Timbrell.

Cimbelláre, to play on Cimbals.

Cimbello, a whisse, or whistle. Also a baite or lure for fishes or birdes.

Cimbório, a square hollow partition in the naue of a Church. Also as Cibório.

Cimbóttolo, a tumbling cast or tricke.

Cimédia, a kind of precious stone.

Cimentáre, to ciment or fasten together. Also to come to an experience.

Ciménto, ciment or fastning stuffe.

Ciméra, as Cimiére. Also the top or crest of any thing.

Cimieráto, crested or euerested.

Cimiére, a crest or timber of armes or of an helmet.

Címici, punies or walle-lice

Cimíndi, a kind of Hawke that praieth onely in the night.

Cimínide, as Cimíndi.

Cimíno, the hearbe or seede Comin. Also a kind of corne or wheate in Greece.

Cimitára, a Cimitar or Turkish sword.

Cimitárra, idem.

Cimiterio, a Church-yard, a burying place.

Cimmorrea, a disease called the Pose or Murre in the head proceeding of cold, and in horses the Glanders.

Címole, any tender tops of hearbes.

Cimoláre, as Cimáre.

Cimólia, tuckers earth, Fullers clay.

Címolo, a litle top. Also a tender stalke.

Cimóne, rude, dull, blockish, clounish.

Cimóro, as Cimmorea.

Cimóssa, the seluage or list of any cloth.

Cimossáto, that hath a seluage.

Cína, a tree in Arabia with whose leaues they make their garments.

Cinábari, as Cinábro.

Cinabaríno, as  Cinnabaríno.

Cinábro, Cinabre or Vermillion. Also  Sanguis draconis. Also a soft red stone found in minerals.

Cinadella, a fish like a Pearch.

Cinalópia, a bird, which to saue hir yongue ones from the foulers will shew hir selfe and be taken.

Cinomólgi, a kinde of people that haue heads like dogges.

Cinámo, as  Cinamómo.

Cinamomíno, oyle of Cinamond.

Cinamómo, the spice Cinamond.

Cinamómo cariópo, a kind of sweete drugge. Also an oyle pressed from a certaine nut.

Cinamúlgo, as Cinnamológo. Also as  Cinamólgi.

Cinándra, a Fox, a Cub.

Cínara, an hearbe like a great Thistle or Artichocke.

Cínchio, a guirt, a girdle, a cingle. Also around iron that keepeth in any thing.

Cincígli, little haires, filaments, or thrids that sticke to some rootes.

Cincigliáre, to quaffe merily, to tiple square. Also to prate or scolde as one in drinke.

Cinciglióne, a quaffer, a tipler, a talker or prater if he were in drinke.

Cinciglióso, capillous, hairy, full of filaments or thrids as some rootes are.

Cincinnáre, to curle or thrum any haire.

Cincinnáto, that hath bushes of haire curled or crisped.

Cincínno, a tuffe or locke of curled haire.

Cincinnóso, bushy, curled, crisped, that hath long curled lockes.

Cincinále, flat Veruin, Maidens-haire, Venus or our Ladies-haire.

Cincischiáre, to hacke, to mangle, or slice in small peeces. Also to mince or bride it at the table or in speech as some affected women vse.

Cíne, a kind of drug in China.

Cinédia, a stone found in the head of the Cinedo fish.

Cinédo, a kind of fish that is yellow all ouer. Also as  Cinédulo.

Cineduláre, to play the Sodamite.

Cinédulo, a bardosh, a sodomite.

Cineraceo, palish of ash colour.

Cineríccio, ash colour, friers gray.

Cinerígno, ash colour friers gray.

Cineríno, ash colour friers gray.

Cinerúgia, something about Silkewormes.

Cinforniáta, as Fagioláta.

Cingallégra, a kind of singing bird.

Cíngani, roagueing Egyptians.

Cíngari, idem.

Cíngere, cíngo, cínsi, cínto, to guirt or compasse about. Also to single.

Cínghia, a cingle, a guirt.

Cinghiále, a wilde boare.

Cinghiáre, to guirt, to cingle. Also a wilde boare.

Cínghio, a guirting about, a round bordering, a precinct, a round trench.

Cingoláre, to gird, to engirdle.

Cíngolo, a guirt, a cingle. Also a girdle or a belt, an engirdling. Also a garter. Also a paire of hangers. Also a Wag-taile.

Cingottáre, as Cincigliáre.

Cinguétta lingua, a pratling tongue.

Cinguettáre, as Cincigliáre.

Cinicaménte, currishly, doggedly.

Cínice, Cinders, embers.

Cínico, chinicke, dogged, currish.

Cínir, as Zenith.

Cinízza, a cindring sparkle.

Cinnabaríno, oyle of Vermilion.

Cinnamológo, a bird that buildeth her nest of Cynamond twigges.

Cinnúto, tusked, as Sannúto.

Cinocefália, an hearbe called Osirite.

Cinocefalo, a kinde of Monkie or Ape with a face like a dog, which much obserueth the Moone, & reioyceth when it riseth, it pisseth iust euery houre.

Cinódie, a fish out of which is taken a stone called Cinodio, which hath the propriety to be cleare an bright before calme and faire weather at sea, but any storme being at hand it will looke very duskie and cloudy.

Cinoglóssa, Houndes-tongue or Horsepisse, some take it for a kinde of Buglosse.

Cinóide, Flea-mort.

Cinómia, a horse-fly, a dog-flie.

Cinomiáno, Flea-wort.

Cinópo, a kind of shell-fish, or hearbe.

Cinomorióne, a weede that choketh Ervile or other pulse.

Cinoróda, sweetbryer or Eglantine.

Cinorodóne, idem. Also a red lily.

Cinorósa, as Cinoróda.

Cinosbáto, Cane-bryer, or Cankrebryer.

Cinosbatóni, as Cáppari.

Cinosdessia, a kinde of Crab or Lobstar.

Cinosorchíde, the hearbe Dog-stones.

Cinospastóne, as Cinosbáto.

Cinosúra, a figure of stars in heauen, as òrsa minóre.

Cinozolóne, the hearbe Dog-stones.

Cinquannággine, a tricke of youth or fiue yeeres. Also the space of fiue yeeres.

Cinquánta, the number of fifty.

Cinquantésimo, the fiftieth in order.

Cinquanténa, a fifty, halfe a hundred, a company of fifty.

Cinquantiplicáre, to multiply by fifty.

Cínque, the number of fiue, a cinque.

Cinquecento, fiue hundreth.

Cinquecentésimo, the fiue hundreth.

Cinquedíta, a weapon but fiue fingers long vsed in Venice.

Cinquefóglio, Cinquefoile, Fiueleaued-grasse, Fiue-finger-grasse.

Cinque in ásso & ásso, the second kinde of the best gun-powdar.

Cinqueláteri fórma, a fiue-sided forme. 



Cinquétto, a kinde of play at dice.

Cinquésimo, the fish in order.

Cinquíne, numbers of fiues or cinques.

Cinquíni, two cinques vpon the dice.

Cínta, a girdie, a belt, a waste-band. Also the compasse of any thing.

Cínta di ferro, an iron girdle. Also that round ring about bullets that are cast in a mould that shoots not close, called of Gunners the crest of the bullet. Also the iron barres that binde a wheele, called the shod, the strakes or stirrops of a wheele.

Cintimuláro, a Millar.

Cínto, as Cinta, Also guirt or compassed.

Cíntola, as Cínta. Also a garter.

Cintoláre, to girdle or garter.

Cintolíni, garters or little girdles.

Cintúra, a girdle, a belt, a wasteband.

Cinturáio, a girdler.

Cinturino, a little girdle, or garter.

Cin, zóni, certaine little birds in Mexico, that haue no feete, and liue only by the dew, of whose feathers they make all their curious quilts and Couerlets.

Ciò, that, that same, that which, it, it is applied both to persons and things.

Ciócca, a tuffe, a locke, a tassell, a bunch, a cluster, a bush of haire, or locke of wooll.

Cioccáre, to tuffe, to tassell, to bush. Also to reduce or cut out into logges or stumps.

Ciócche, tuffes, lockes. Also as Cióchè.

Ciócco, a burning logge, a blocke, or stumpe. Also hoarse in speaking.

Cioccóso, full of tuffes, lockes or tassels, shaggie, tuffty.

Cióche, that which, whatsoeuer.

Ciocúta, a beast bred betweene a bitch and a woolfe.

Cioè, that is, to wit, that is to say.

Cióffo, a halter, a head-stall, a horsecollar.

Ciompáre, as Ciompeggiáre.

Ciompeggiáre, to be iolly or blithe, to play merry youthfull trickes.

Ciomperíe, iollities, merry tricks youthfull prankes.

Cióna, looke V'uole.

Cioncáre, to maime or cut off any limme. Also to quaffe, to tipple, or drinke lustilie.

Cióncia, a womans quaint.

Cióncio, a bum or sitting place.

Ciónco, maimed, wanting a limme, curtailed. Also drunke or well tippled.

Cióncola, a filthy trull, a iadish harlot.

Cioncoláre, as Cioncáre.

Ciondoláre, to hang downe dangling as ice sickles.

Cióndoli, danglings, ice sikles.

Ciondolóni, dingledangle, as ice sickles.

Cióne, a bird called a fieldfare or thrush. Also a nine pin or peg or keele.

Cióppa, a dripping pan. Also a shepheards cap, or frocke with a hood.

Ciórro, a halter or head stall.

Ciortóne, a fish whose backe is of a faire shining sky-colour.

Ciótto, as Ciónco, but properly any round or hard pible-stone. Also a potshard.

Cióttola, a flat woodden drinking dish, a beggers dish.

Ciottoláre, as Cioncáre.

Ciottolo, as Ciótto.

Ciottóso, bunch or crooked backt. Also lame. Also puckred or wrimpled as clothes will be.

Ciparísso, a Cipresse-tree.

Cipellína, as Capellúta.

Ciparissióne, a kind of Tithimale.

Cipérida, Ciperóne, as Cipiróne.

Cípero, the hearb Galin or Galangle.

Cipigliáre, to looke asquint.

Cipíglio, a squint looke, squint-eied.

Cipiróne, as Cíprio. Also a kind of rush.

Cipólla, any kind of onion, or cyboll.

Cipolláro, a plat, or a seller of Onions.

Cipolláta, a kind of meat, sallade or tanzie made of onions. Also a tittle-tattle, a flim-flam tale.

Cipólle malígi, ciues or youngue cibols.

Cipollétte, Ciues or little Onions.

Cipollóso, bulbous or Onion-like.

Cipóne, a beast like a Panther. Also a kind of chirping birde.

Cipórro, as Granchipórro.

Cíppero, a thrush or fieldfare.

Cipressáro, a groue of Cipres-trees.

Cipresso, the Cipresse-tree or wood.

Ciprigníre, as Inciprigníre.

Ciprígno, is properly that ioining of the eye lids that causeth lowring or frowning proceeding of anger or dislike. Also subiect to festring or cankring.

Cipríno, a fish called a shad, some take it for a Sea breame said to haue a very fleshy tongue in his mouth. Also oyle or ointment made of the Cipres tree.

Cíprio, a kind of lawrell or Bay. Also petty gladen, flags, swordwort, or sword grasse. Also a foote of a verse of fiue sillables.

Cípro, a tree in Egipt with leaues like the Iuiube tree, bearing a white sweet flowre, and a graine like coriander seeds. Also an oyle made of the said flowres.

Cipsáli, a kind of Martinet without feet. 

Círca, about. Also touching, concerning.

Círca in círca, round about.

Circabitáre, to dwell about.

Circandáre, to goe or wander about.

Circánia, a certaine bird that in his flight fetcheth a great compasse.

Circauicináre, to neighbour about.

Circanicíno, round neighboring.

Circea, the hearb Mandrage.

Circello, a compasse instrument. Also a little ring or round plate.

Círchi, circles, windings, turnings.

Circhiello, a circlet. Also a feather in a horse.

Círcie, the sun beames.

Circináre, to measure by compasse. Also to desheuell or tug by the haire.

Circinatióne, a compassing course.

Circíno, as Circello.

Círcio, a violent wind blowing chiefly about Narbona in France, a whirle wind.

Circióli, a kind of cucumbers.

Círco, a show place in Rome.

Circoandáre, as Circandáre.

Circoandáta, a going round.

Circoíre, ísco, íto, to goe round about.

Circóide, a stone like a wreath or circlet.

Circoitióne, a going round or about.

Circoíto, gone about. Also circuit.

Circoitóre, a goer about.

Circoláre, to encircle or enuiron. Also to goe from one matter to another in talking. Also round, circular or sphericall.

Circolarménte, roundly or circularly.

Circolatióne, a circulation, an encircling. Also a deuise of subliming by extracting through a stillatory.

Circolatóre, a goer from place to place.

Circolatório, a winding limbecke.

Círcolo, a circle, a compasse, a hoope, a round.

Circolo latteo, the milke waine, or circle.

Circolo poláre, that circle which is described by the Pole of the Zodiacke, being caried about the Pole of the world.

Circomfuráre, to goe filching, pilfring and stealing about.

Circomportáre, to cary about.

Circompósto, set or placed about.

Circonárdere, to burne about.

Circonassúmere, to assume about.

Circonbáttere, to beat about.

Circonbrusciáre, to burne about.

Circoncauáre, to dig round or about.

Circoncernente, concerning about.

Circoncídere, to circumcise or cut about.

Circoncíngere, to gird about.

Circoncínto, girt or compassed about.

Circoncisióne, a circumcision.

Circoncíso, circumcised, vsed for a sinner.

Circoncopríre, to couer round or about. 



Circoncórrere, to run about.

Circoncursáre, to goe about idly.

Circondáre, to circompasse.

Circondéuole, that may be compassed.

Circondótto, led about.

Circondúrre, to guide or lead about.

Circonduttióne, a leading about.

Circóne, as Cercóne. Also a kind of hawke euer limping on one leg.

Circonferentia, a circumference, the compasse that enuironeth any thing.

Circonferentiále, circumferenciall.

Circonferíre, to wound about.

Circonflessióne, a bending about, a round bending.

Circonflesso, bent about, round bending or about.

Circonfortificáre, to fortifie about.

Circonfluíre, to flow about.

Circonforáno, a goer or gadder about the streets or market places.

Circonfuggíre, to run or flie about.

Circonfúlgere, to shine or glitter about.

Circonfúso, wet round, round beset.

Circongeláre, to freeze about.

Círcongettáre, to cast about.

Circongiráre, to turne about.

Circongiréuole, to may turne about.

Circongreggiáre, to flocke about.

Circongressióne, a going about.

Circonlocutióne, a circumlocution.

Circonlúcere, to shine about.

Circonmangiáre, to eat or gnaw about.

Circonmuráre, to wall about.

Circonnarráre, to declare or speake about.

Circonpiagáre, to hurt or wound about.

Circonpiantáre, to plant about.

Circonquistáre, to conquer about.

Circonrádere, to shaue about.

Circonscríuere, to circumscribe.

Circonscrittíbile, that may be circumscribed.

Circonscrittióne, a circumscription.

Circonscrittiuam énte, circumscriptly.

Circonsemiuáre, to sow about.

Circonsistente, an assistant about.

Circonsístere, to assist about.

Circonstántia, a circumstance.

Circonstánti, by or about standers.

Circonstáre, to stand by or about.

Circonsultáre, to consult about.

Circontagliáre, to cut about.

Circonuagáre, to gad or wander about.

Circontrinceáre, to entrench about.

Circontroncáre, to cut of round about.

Circonualláre, to vally about. Also to enclose or compasse about.

Circonuedére, to see or looke about.

Circo nueníre, to circumuent.

Circonuentióne, a circumuenting.

Circonuestíre, to cloath about.

Circonuibráre, to brandish about.

Circonuicináre, to neighbor about.

Circonuicinánza, a round neighboring. 

Circonuicíno, a neere neighbor.

Circonuigiláre, to watch about.

Circonuínto, vanquished about.

Circonuoláre, to flie or houer about.

Circonuólgere, to turne about.

Circonuolgíbile, that may be wound about.

Circonuólto, turned or wound about.

Circonuóluere, to wind or turne about.

Circonuolutióne, a winding about.

Circopitéco, a kind of marmuzet or monkie.

Circospárso, scatred here and there.

Circospettaménte, circumspectly, warily

Círcospettióne, circumspection.

Circospetto, wary, circumspect.

Circostánte, standing round about.

Circostánti, by or round standers.

Circostánza, a circumstance.

Circostáre, to stand by or about.

Circuíbile, that may be circled.

Circuíre, as Circoíre.

Circuitióne, a round going or about.

Circuíto, as Circoíto.

Circularménte, as Circolarm énte.

Circulatióne, as Circolatióne.

Circuláre, as Circoláre.

Circustánte, as Circostánte.

Circustánza, as Circostánza.

Cirégia, any kind of cherry.

Ciregiáro, a plat, or a seller of cherries.

Cirégio, a cherry tree.

Cirella, any kind of pully.

Cirenea, a kind of vine or grape.

Ciresse, a kind of tree or fruit.

Ciriáto, the name of a deuill in Dant, that is, a hog or swine wallowing in all polution.

Ciribrustolóne, as Verbésco.

Ciriégio, a cherry tree or wood.

Círni, a kind of people in some part of India that liue 140. yeeres.

Cirimónie, cerimonies.

Cirimonióso, ceremonious.

Cirnícchio, a sieue, to sift corne.

Círo, as Ciácco, a swine, a hog.

Ciróico, a Chirurgion.

Cirománte, a professor of palmestry.

Ciromantía, the art of palmestry.

Cironópo, as Coronópo.

Ciróssa, ceruse or white leade.

Cirráto, that hath his haires curled or growing in locks.

Círro, a tuffe or locke of haire curled. Also a crest of feathers that some birds haue on their heads. Also the hairie or capillous substance on hearbes or on oysters shells.

Círsio, the hearbe Lang de boeuf.

Cirsióne, as Círsio.

Círso, a kind of Chariot. Also a certaine disease in the cods.

Cirsocéle, a displacing or swelling of those vessels which nourish a mans stones. 

Cirugía, the arte of Chirurgerie.

Cirugico, a Chirurgion.

Cirurgía, the arte of Chirurgerie.

Cirúrgico, a Chirurgion.

Cirússa, ceruse or white leade.

Cisalpíno, of or on this side the Alpes.

Císca, a bucket or paile.

Ciscílla, a kind of Marten or Swallow.

Ciscilláre, to chirp as Ciscílla.

Ciscránna, a low foote stoole.

Ciselláre, to pounce with a cizell.

Cisello, a cizell. Also a pounce.

Ciserchia, as Céci.

Císila, as Ciscílla.

Cifiláre, as Ciscilláre.

Ci fibilíte, a kind of sweet wine or cuit.

Cisóne, the name of a bird.

Císpa, a bleare, a blemmish, or waterish matter in sore eyes called of some gowle Also as Císpo. Also a game at cardes.

Cispáre, to grow to haue waterish eyes, or looke bleare-eyde. Also to wither, to fade.

Císpo, withred, shrunke vp with heate.

Cispóso, bleare-eyde. Also waterish eyes.

Císsa, the longing or lust of a woman with child, but properly a corrupt appetite or desire to eate earth, coles, candles or such other trash.

Cissanthémo, swine-bread or sowbread.

Cissáre, to long or lust after strange meates as a woman with childe.

Cissíta, a stone that seemes to haue something stirring in it as if it were with child, and to be clasped about with Iuie leaues.

Cissóido, of or like an Iuie-leafe.

Cissóne, Císsos, the right kind of Iuie.

Císta, a basket, a flasket.

Cistarella, a litle basket.

Cistaruólo, as Cestaruólo.

Cistella, a litle basket.

Cistelláro, a basket-maker or bearer.

Cisterna, a cesterne to keepe water in.

Cistóne, a great basket. Also a shrub bigger then Thime, and leaued like Basil growing among rockes.

Cíta, a wench, a girle, a lasse. Also a signe or word to command silence.

Citáde, a Citie or walled towne.

Citadella, a Citadell or spacious fort built not onely to defend a citie, but also to keepe the same in awe and subiection.

Citagióne, a citation, a citing.

Cítara, a gitterne, a citterne.

Citarédo, a fidler or gitterne plaier. Also a kind of fish so called, because that from his taile to his head he hath certaine strings or lines going along like strings of an instrument.

Citáre, to cite, to summon, to conuent.

Citarísta, as Citaré

Citáro, a fish whose teeth are like a 



sawe called a Sharke, it is like a Turbot.

Citatióne, a citation, a summoning.

Citatóre, a citer, a sumner.

Citatória, a citation, a processe.

Citella, a yong girle, a litle wench.

Citello, as Cittíno.

Citerióre, nigher, or neare to vs.

Citeriorità, nearenesse vnto vs.

Cithára, a gitterne, a citterne.

Citharísta, a gitterne-plaier.

Cíthera, a citterne, a gitterne.

Citherísta, a citterne-plaier.

Cithíso, a bushie shrub called Tretrifolie much commended for feeding and nourishing of sheepe; whereof the ancient Picts were wont to make a kind of strong drinke, and to dye their faces to make them seeme fearefull to their enemies.

Cíti, as Frinfrì.

Citidanésco, citizen-like.

Citíre, tísco, títo, to hush, to still. Also to whisper or mooue the lips or tongue.

Cíto, a yong boy or litle lad.

Citolézze, boyes-trickes, yong prankes.

Citóso, as Cithíso.

Citráce, the hearbe Citrach or balme.

Citrángolo, as Cedriólo.

Cítri, toyes, humors, trifles, fancies.

Citrinella, a yellow or gold-finch.

Citríno, a Citron. Also a Citron colour. Also a kind of mirabolane plum.

Citriuólo, a litle Citron.

Citronáta, a meate or sauce of citrons.

Citróne, a Pome-citron.

Città, Cittáde, a Citie or walled towne.

Cittadella, as Citadella.

Cittadinánza, the franchise or libertie of a citizen. Also the whole bodie or communaltie of a Citie, the corporation of a Citie.

Cittadináre, to dwell in, or endenizon, or make free of a Citie.

Cittadinésco, citizen-like, or citie-like.

Cittadinéscolo, after your citizen-fashion.

Cittadíno, a Citizen, a Denison.

Cittadinótta, a good handsome towneswoman.

Città di Díte, Limbo, or Hell.

Citta di passággio, a thorough-fare to towne.

Cittáre, to whosht or put to silence.

Citteggiáre, to liue a citie-life.

Cíttico, a kind of good fine salt.

Cittíno, a yong lad, a litle boy.

Cítto, as Cíta.

Cíttolo, as Cítaro.

Cittóna, a big huge wench.

Citusella, the hearbe Sorell.

Ciuadéra, the name of a saile in a ship.

Ciuáie, all manner of market hearbes that are good to be eaten. Also as Ciuáza.

Ciuánza, sparings, gettings, gaines, prosits, good shifis, shiftings for profit. Also any food or nourishment.

Ciuanzaménti, as Ciuánza.

Ciuanzáre, to get, to profit, to forecast, to shift-for. Also to eate or feed.

Ciue, a Citizen, a citie-dweller.

Ciuétta, an Owle, an Howlet.

Ciuettáre, to play the Owle. Also to sneake vp and downe & lurke secretly.

Ciuettaríe, idle, prying or bawdy tricks.

Ciuetteggiáre, as Ciuettáre.

Ciuettíni, yong Owlets. Also wanton or effeminate lads, night-sneakers.

Ciúffa, a brabble, a brawle, a bickering.

Ciúffa il mósto, a snatcher of good wine.

Ciuffáre, to lug by the face, to take by the snout. Also to brawle, to striue.

Ciuffétto, a locke of baire on the forepart of the head. Also a litle Ciúffo.

Ciúffo, the snout or muzle of a beast. Also a tuft or forelocke of haire. Also a staffe big at one end wherewith porters when they rest hold vp their burdens.

Ciuffoláre, to whisse, or whistle.

Ciúffole, foolish toyes, apish trickes.

Ciuffoleríe, as Ciúffole.

Ciúffolo, a whisse, a whistle.

Cíuico, of a City, or Ciuill.

Ciuiéra., 

Ciuíle, Ciuill, modest. Also the Ciuill law. Also lay or temporall.

Ciuíle ragíone, the Ciuill law.

Ciuilíre, lísco, líto, to become ciuill.

Ciuilità, ciuility, courtesie.

Ciuillári, a common iakes or filthy place in Florence.

Ciuiltà, as Ciuilità, modesty.

Ciuíre, vísco, víto, to come by or shift for. Also to barter, to trucke, or change for.

Ciuógne, a deuice to draw water out of a deepe well as with two buckets.

Ciurláre, to twirle or turne round in dancing.

Ciúrlo, a twirle or round tricke in dancing.

Ciúrma, the ghing or rascality, the base rout or slaues of a gally or ship.

Ciurm áglia, as Ciúrma.

Ciurmáre, to play the ghing, or the base fellow, to charme or allure with craft and doceit, to prate, to cogge, to foist with faire words and intent to deceiue. Ciurmársi, hath metaphoricaly bin vsed among good fellowes to tiple square or quaffe freely.

Ciurmaríe, ghing trickes, cheatings. Also cosening or cheating houses.

Ciurmatóre, a deceiuer, a cony-catcher, a cogger, a foister, a skondrell.

Ciutáccia, a trull, a harlot, a baggage.

Cizicéna, a kinde of sweet smelling hearbe. Also a Greeke coine of gold. 

Cizza, a dugge, a teate, a womans brest.

Cizzare, to sucke a dug.

Cizzárea, a kinde of chich or peason.

Cizzúte, hauing great dugges or teates.

Cláde, great misery, losse, ruine or destruction of men, or great slaughter in warre.

Cladóso, full of misery and destruction.

Clamatória, an vnluckie screech-owle.

Clamatióne, an exclamation.

Clamíde, a kind of garment described by Valerius Flaccus.

Clamóre, a clamore, an outcry.

Clamoreggiáre, to clamoure or crieout.

Clamoróso, clamorous, loud calling.

Clamóso, as Clamoróso.

Clandestináre, to hide or conceale by stealth or in hugger mugger.

Clandestinatióne, concealing, by stealth.

Clandestíno, secret, hidden, by stealth.

Clángo, a kind of kite or buzard.

Clangoráre, to clang as a trumpet, to gagle as a goose, to cry as an Eagle.

Clangóre, a clang of a trumpet, the gagling of a goose, the cry of an Eagle.

Clangoróso, full of gagling or clang.

Clangúgine, as Lanúgine.

Clarea, the hearb Clary.

Clarétto, a claret colour or wine.

Clarificáre, to make cleere or manifest.

Clarificatióne, a making cleere or manifest.

Clarità, cleernesse, brightnesse.

Claríno, a kind of trumpet called a Clairon.

Clásse, a nauy or fleet of ships. Also a degree or forme in a schoole. Also a like company.

Clássico, classicall, or belonging to degrees in schooles. Also belonging to a nauy at sea.

Cláua, a boistrous club.

Cláudo, lame, halting, creeping.

Clauicembalo, an instrument like vigoles.

Clauícola, a little club, a little key. Also ground Iuy. Also the necke or craw bone.

Clauicórdo, as Clauicembalo.

Clauígero, a keeper or bearer of keies.

Claustrále, of or pertaining to a cloister.

Claustráre, to encloister.

Cláustro, a cloister. Also a beehiue.

Cláusula, a clause, a conclusion, a sentence which doth conclude.

Clausúra, an enclosure, a parke. Also a sluce or fludgate. Also as Cláusula.

Clemátide, as Climátide.

Cléma, as Cliniátide.



Cleménte, clement, benigne, meeke.

Clementeménte, mercifully, pitifully.

Clementíno, gentle, kind, meeke.

Cleméntia, clemency, pitty, meeknesse.

Cleoniccióne, as Climátide.

Clepsiámbo, a kind of musicke instrument.

Clepsídra, a water diall, a vessell measuring houres by the runnning of water or sand out of it. Also a water pot full of holes to water gardins. Also an astronomicall instrument to measure the stars.

Clericále, clarke-like, of or pertaining to a clarke.

Clérico, a clarke, an elect, a clergie man.

Clero, the clergie or spirituality. Also the abortiue fruit of Bees like wax but imperfect.

Clerománte, a deuiner by lots.

Cleromantía, diuination by lots.

Clefiástico, ecclesiasticall.

Clíbano, an armour for a horse that armeth the necke and crupper.

Cliente, a Client, a suter vnto.

Clientela, a countenancing, or bearing out.

Clientulo, a Client or a suter.

Clíma, a clime, a climate. Also the deuiding of heauen an earth. Also a measure of threescore foot euery way.

Climaterico, the dangerous or perilous yeeres of ones life, commonly the yeere. 63.

Climatero, as Climaterico.

Climático, as Climaterico.

Climátide, with winde, roapebinde, or creeping-weede vpon trees. Also a running thime, or the Saracins hearb, some haue taken it for Sanguinária.

Climéno, , Tout-sain or Parke-leaues, some take it for Water-betony.

Clímice, chamber physicke, or visiting of the sicke by Physitions in their chambers.

Clímo, a kind of Greeke measure.

Clíndri, some part of a plough.

Clínica medicína, Physicke that healeth by diet.

Clínico, a Physition that healeth by diet.

Clinopália, ouermuch letchery.

Clinopálio, an ouermuch occupier.

Clinopódio, Horse-time or Pulialmountaine.

Clío, denomination.

Clipeáto, armed with a Clipeo.

Clipeo, a grauen target that foote-men were went to weare.

Clísi, declination or bending.

Clísse, a kind of weapon.

Clítia, a floure into the which Clitia was transformed. 

Cliuína, as Clamatória.

Cliuità, a downebending.

Clíuo, downe bending, a going downe or pitch of a hill, a little hill. Also steepe, difficult, craggy, cliffie, hard.

Cliuóso, steepy, full of cliffes, or crags.

Cloáca, a common shoare, or sinke wherby all filth doth passe.

Clocitánte, gagling or pratling idly.

Clocitáre, to gagle as a goose or ducke.

Clodóne, certain furious or mad women, as the Menades.

Clóra, a smale nut or filbird.

Clorióne, a lariot, or wit-wall.

Cluente, purging, cleansing. Also fighting to be well reputed.

Clúere, clúo, cluéi, cluúto to purge or cleanse. Also to fight to be well reputed.

Cluína, as Clamatória.

Clupea, a fish that to sucke of a veine of the tunny pursues it to death, some take it for a Blaie or a Bleake.

Clúsia, or Clúsio, a gate belonging to the temple of Ianus so called because it was semper Occlusa.

Clútico, that lyeth bedred of the dead palsie or any chronike disease.

Cneóri, as Cameléuca.

Cneoróne, as Cameléuca.

Cnestóne, as Cameléuca.

Cnicóso, a kind of Thistle.

Cnicóne, a bastard saffron whereof good oyle is made. Also as Attratíle.

Cnidiáno, the Needle fish.

Co, Co', Coi, Congli, with, with the.

Cò, as Cápo, a head, a chiefe.

Cóa, a Greeke measure of liquid things.

Coáca, as Cloáca.

Coabitánza, a dwelling together.

Coabitábile, that may be dwelt together.

Coabitánte, one that dwels with others.

Coabitatióne, as Coabitánza.

Coabitáre, to dwell together.

Coaceruáre, to heape together.

Coaceruatióne, a heaping together.

Coadministráre, to minister together.

Coadministratióne, a coadministration.

Coadministratóre, a coadministrator.

Coadiutáre, to helpe with or together.

Coadiúto, fellow helpe.

Coadiutóre, a fellow helper.

Coadiuuáre, as Coadiutáre.

Coadunánza, an assembly.

Coadunáre, to assemble together.

Coaguláre, to congeale, to curd.

Coagulatióne, a congealing, a curding.

Coágulo, rinnet for cheese, a curding. Also the gale of any body. Also a kind of salt in Alchimy.

Coaiutánte, a fellow helper.

Coaiutáre, to helpe with or together.

Coaiúto, a fellow helpe or ayde.

Coaiutóre, a fellow helper, a coadiutor.

Coaiutório, with or fellow helpe.

Coaliótto, a kind of water snake.

Coamánte, a fellow louer.

Coamáre, to loue with or together.

Coartáre, to stifle, to smother, to ouerwhelme.

Coartatióne, a stifling, an ouerwhelming.

Coassáre, as Coazzáre.

Coattaménto, a ioyning or fitting close together.

Coattáre, a ioyner, to ioyne or fit close together.

Coattatióne, as Coattaménto.

Coattatóre, a sitter of things close together.

Coazzáre, to croke as a frog. Also to prattle or talke idly.

Coazzaménti, crokings of frogges. Also vaine pratlings or idle chattings.

Cabacello, a gull, codshead, a noddy.

Cobeuitóre, a fellow or with-drinker.

Cóbbola, a country gigge or rounddelaie.

Cóbboláre, to sing country songs or gigges.

Cóbio, a Sea-gougeon.

Cobrióne, a kind of Tithi-male.

Cóca, an Indian nut. Also an hearbe in India, whose leafe caried in ones mouth quencheth hunger and thirst.

Cocágna, as Cucágna, lubbarland.

Cocáhe, as Cóca.

Cocállo, a kind of water-foule which perceauing a storme leaues the water and comes on land.

Cocardinále, a fellow Cardinall.

Cócatrice, a Cocatrice.

Cócca, Cúcca, the nut of a Crosse-bow the nocke of an arrow, the nib of a pen. Also a dent in any thing. Also a Cockbote.

Cócca del cápo, the crowne of the head.

Coccále, a gull, a noddy, a shallowpate.

Coccáre, to shoot off, to snap. Also to fasten vpon one any iest.

Coccáro, a quiuer for arrowes.

Coccea, a kind of cockle-fish.

Cócche, Berries as of Baies or Iuniper.

Cocchiára, a ladle, a long spoone.

Cocchétta, some part of a cogwheele.

Cocchiáro, a spoone. Also a ladle.

Cocchiaróne, a great eater of spoone meates.

Cocchiére, a Coach-man.

Cocchíglie, all manner of fish-shels.

Cocchína, a skallop or cock-boat.

Cocchináre, as Cocchineggiáre.



Cocchineggiáre, to play the knaue.

Cocchíno, a varlet, a knaue, a lout.

Cócchio, a coach, a caroach.

Cocchiume, a bung, or a bung-hole.

Cocchlíde, a kinde of precious stone.

Cóccia, the shell of a Tortoise or Snaile. Also the buske or shell of any thing, namely of small nuts or Almonds.

Coccíce, as Cóccij.

Cóccij, a fish that crieth as a Cuckow. Also a Cuckow. Also pots or potsheardes.

Coccineo, dyed in graine or scarlet.

Coccíno, a scarlet robe or vesture.

Coccioláre, to blister with scalding.

Cócciole, blisters arising by heate.

Cócco, graine to dye scarlet with. Also scarlet or scarlet-dye. Also the cockle floure among corne. Also cockring or dandling sport. Also a cocks egge.

Coccoláre, to grow vnto, or beare berries. Also as Cuculáre.

Cóccola, Cócola, as Cúccola.

Coccográno, grayne to dye Scarlet.

Cóccole, berries as of bay or Iuniper, Okeapples or such gales growing on leaues. Also bables, trifles, toyes or iests.

Coccoline, an easie or litle cough.

Coccolóne, couring or squatting downe.

Cocconáre, to tampion or bung in.

Coccóne, a bung. Also a tampion.

Coccouéggia, as Cuccouéggia.

Coccouì, a kind of Serpent in India.

Cocente, boiling, scalding, burning. Also grieuous, irkesome, or smarting.

Cócere, cuóco, cocéi, or cócqui, cótto, to boile, to bake, to roste. Also to itch, to burne, to smart. Also to grieue, to molest or afflict.

Cocíge, the name of a bone, in ones leg.

Cocína, a kitchin, a skullerie.

Cocináglie, all manner of kitchin-stuffe.

Cocináre, to dresse meate, to play the Cooke.

Cocinatóre, a Cooke, a dresser of meate.

Cociníglia, Cutchenele to dye Crimson.

Cocióre, burning, itching, smarting.

Cocitúra, a seething, a concoction, a baking, a boiling, a rosting or dressing of any meate. Also a smarting or burning.

Cocleátia, the hearbe Spoonewort.

Coclee, a round warlike engine of war.

Coclério, a small measure in Greece.

Cocliti, such as are borne blinde with one eye.

Cocodríllo, a Crocodile.

Cocográno, graine to dye Scarlet.

Cocolíste, some disease naturall to yong children, the red gummes.

Cócole, as Cócche.

Cocólla, a Munkes hood or cowle. Also a silke-worme cod.

Cocolláto, hooded, cowled.

Cocolobína, a kind of vine or grape. 

Cocóma, a brazen vessell by a cupboord, wherein Butlers keep their pots or bottles.

Cocómero, a Cucumber. Also a Citron.

Coconáre, as Cocconáre.

Cocóne, as Coccóne.

Cocóre., 

Cócos, a rich and precious tree in India, of the nature of the Palme.

Cocouéggia, any Owle or Howlet.

Cocoueggiáre, as Ciuettáre.

Cocózza, a wild Gourd or Pompion.

Cocúme, the top or height of any thing.

Cocúmero, a Cucumber. Also a Citron.

Cocúmi, a shell fish called the Sea-cucumber.

Cocúzza, as Cocózza.

Cocúzzola del cápo, the crowne of the head.

Cocúzzolo, the very top of any thing.

Coda, a taile a traine, a traile. Also vsed for a mans priuie member. Also a squib.

Codacciáre, as Codiáre.

Codacinciuóla, a Wagtaile.

Codacciuóla, a Wagtaile.

Codacciúto, well tailed, hauing a taile.

Códa da mósca, a foxe-taile to beate away flyes.

Códa del dragóne, a signe in heauen.

Códa delletto, the taile of a cariage wherein a piece lieth.

Códa di cauállo, Shauegrasse, or Horsetaile.

Códa dileóne, as Orobánche.

Códa di pésce, an hearbe.

Códa di póluere, a traine of powder.

Codále, a docke for a horse taile, as Codíle.

Codardággine, as Codardía.

Codardeggiáre, to play the coward.

Codardésco, dastardly, cowardly.

Codardía, cowardise, dastardlinesse.

Codárdo, a coward, a dastard.

Codáre, to put on a taile, to taile.

Codatrémola, a Wagtaile.

Cadazínzola, idem.

Codázzo, a traine of followers.

Códe d'armellíno, ermined in armorie.

Codéga, the rump of any taile. Also as Cotténna.

Codenzinzuóla, a Wagtaile.

Coderínzo, the taile where the sting is.

Coderízzo, as Coderínzo.

Codétte, litle tailes. Also litle shooting chambers, or mortares, or pot-gunnes.

Codétti, running squibs of fire.

Codíca, as Cúte.

Codiamíno, a kind of flowre that bloweth thrise a yeare.

Codiáre, to follow one at the taile, to waite behind one. Also to traile or traine along. Also to fawne vpon or sooth vp in any thing. Also to pry, to watch, or dog one and his doings. 

Codiatóre, a mans follower or attendant, Also a dogger or prier in ones doings.

Códice, a booke or volume of the ciuill law. Also a stumpe of a tree. Also a place of punishment.

Codicíllo, a codicile, a booke, a libell, or litle volume of the law.

Codígo, as Códice.

Codíle, the rumpe of any taile.

Codíllo, the nape or pole of the head.

Codilóngo, a long tailed bird.

Codíno, any litle taile.

Codiróne, the rumpe of a taile.

Codirósso, as Codilóngo.

Codognáta, marmalade of quinces.

Codógno, a quince tree or fruit.

Códolo, a small round peble-stone.

Codotária, a traine bearer to a Prince.

Codrílla, the hearbe Gumsucchory.

Codrióne, the rumpe of a taile.

Codúzza, the rumpe or skue of a bird.

Coepíscopo, a fellow-bishop.

Coequále, coequall.

Coequalità, coequality.

Coetáneo, of one age, equall in yeeres.

Coeternále, coeternall.

Coeternità, coeternity.

Coétte, as Codétte.

Cofáccia, any kind of cake.

Coeterno, coeternall.

Cófano, any coffen or cofer.

Cofanétto, any little coffen or cofer.

Cóffa, a basket or gabbion to carry earth in fortifications.

Coforóna, a Tortoise or shell-crab.

Cofráte, a fellow brother or frier.

Cofratería, a fellow-brother-hood.

Cogéro, the fish conger.

Cogídria, a wild tree like to Arachnen.

Cogitábile, that may be imagined.

Cogitabóndo, musing, meditating.

Cogitánza, as Cogitatióne.

Cogitáre, to muse, to minde, to meditate.

Cogitatióne, cogitation, meditation.

Cogitatíuo, cogitatiue, imaginable.

Cogiuanella, a wag-taile.

Cógli, as Congli, with the.

Cóglia, a mans whole priuities

Cogliandro, Coriander seedes.

Coglicúmero, an idle lazie fellow.

Cógliere, cólgo, cólsi, cólto, to collect, to gather. Also to hit leuell. Also as Accógliere.

Cógliere di míra, to hit leuell.

Cógliere in cámbio, to mistake one for another.

Cógliere in berzáglio, to hit point blanke.

Coglionáre, to play with ones stones. Also to cogge or deceiue one.

Coglionaríe, knaueries deceiuing trickes.

Coglioncíni, cockes or sparrow stones.

Coglióne, a cuglion, a gull, a meacoke. 



Coglioneggiáre, as Coglionáre.

Coglióni, the stones or testicles of men, or any creature else.

Coglitóre, a collector, a gatherer.

Cogliúto, a man well tooled.

Cognáre, to coine or cleaue wood.

Cognáta, a sister in law properly a mans brothers wife.

Cognatióne, kindred, alliance, affinity. Also agreement.

Cognáto, a brother in law, properly a mans sisters husband.

Cognatóre, a coiner, a wood cleauer.

Cognitióne, an acknowledgement, a recognison.

Cognitíssimo, most knowen.

Cógnito, acknowledged, knowen.

Cognitóre, a recognizer, an acknowledger.

Cógno, as Cúgno. Also a certaine wine vessell or measure in Florence.

Cognóme, a surname, a nickename.

Cognoménto, a nicke or surname.

Cognomináre, to surname, to nickname.

Cognominatióne, a surnaming.

Cognoscenza, as Conoscenza.

Cognóscere, as Conóscere.

Cognoscitíuo, knowing, to be knowen.

Cógola, a broade pan, kettle or Caldron.

Cohabitánza, a dwelling together.

Cohabitáre, to dwell together.

Coherede, a coheire, a ioint-heire.

Coheredità, a ioint inheritance.

Cohereditáre, to inherite together.

Coherenza, coherence, affinity.

Cohórte, a band or troupe of men wherof a Roman legion contained ten.

Coi, with, with the.

Coiáme, all maner of leather or felles.

Coiáio, a Fell-monger, a Leather-seller, a Tanner, a Currier, a cordwiner.

Coiáro, as Coiáio.

Cóio, hides, fell, leather, skinnes.

Coincidente, incident with or vnto.

Coincidenza, an incidency with, a with chancing.

Coinfiammáto, coinflamed.

Coionaríe, as Coglionaríe.

Coiráro, as Coiáio.

Coíre, to goe with. Also to commit carnall copulation.

Cóiro, as Cóio.

Cóito, carnall copulation.

Cóito della lúna, as Nouilúnio.

Coinquinatióne, a staining, a poluting, a defiling. Also a defamation.

Coinquináre, to staine, to defile, to polute. Also to defame.

Cól, con il, Collo, with, with the.

Cóla, any kind of glue or size.

Cóla di carnúccio, size of hide-shauings.

Colà, there, yonder, in that place.

Colabácco, a fish of whose skin water-glue is made.

Coladúra, as Colatúra, as Colagióne.

Cólafo, a buffet or whirret with ones hand.

Colafóne, a great whirret on the cheeke.

Colagióne, any kinde of trilling, dropping or straining. Also the running of the reines.

Colággiù, there below, or downe there.

Colàoltre, there beyond.

Colássù, there aboue or vp there.

Colífio, a kind of bread in Puglia.

Collaníni, litle chaines or neck-laces.

Colánza, as Colagióne. Also a bird.

Coláre, any kind of collar, band or carcanet. Also a cape for a cloake. Also a gorget, a neckercher. Also a leash or collar or slip for dogs, any thing about ones necke. Also a brim or border about. Also a kind of Sparrow.

Coláre, to glue together. Also to drop or trill. Also to straine through a colander. Also to leake as a ship or barrell. Also to embrace, to coll, to hug, to honor.

Colarétto, as Colaríno.

Colaríno, a gorget piece, a litle collar.

Colaterále, colaterall, of the side. Also the middle crosse boord of the head of any barrell, pipe or But.

Colateralità, a colateralitie.

Colationáre, to colation, to coppie, or draw from the originall.

Colatióne, a colation, a coppying. Also a conferring or comparing or ioyning together. Also a breakefast, a drinking, or nunchions. Also a taske, a size, or a collection.

Colatóio, a colander or a strainer. Also a gutter or running sinke, a leake in a ship.

Colatúra, a gluing together. Also any straining, dropping, trilling or running. Also a leake in a ship.

Colaudáre, to praise with or together.

Coláude, fellow or with praise.

Col buon' ánno sía, with a good yeare be it.

Colcáre, to couch or lye downe.

Colcápo in giù, with the head downeward.

Colcáta, a downe-lying, a couching.

Colcétra, a feather or flock-bed.

Colchicóne, a venemous hearbe.

Colcítra, as Colcétra, a litle couch.

Colegaménto, as Collegánza.

Colegánza, as Collegaménto.

Colegáre, as Collegáre.

Colei, she, that woman.

Colendo, honorable, to be respected.

Cólera, choler, indignation. Also the flowing of the gall.

Colére, cólo, coléi, colúto, to coll, to hug, to embrace. Also to honor, to respect. 

Colérico, cholerike, wrathfull, angry.

Cólfo, a burning drug vsed for sulpher. Also a Gulph.

Colfónia, as Cólfo.

Colgúscio in cápo, scarce out of the shell, yet yong, with a beguin on his head.

Cóli, coales, coleworts.

Colì, there, yonder, in that place.

Cólia, a needle fish like a Snake.

Coliámbi, Iambike verses.

Colibáde, a kind of daintie Oliues.

Colíbro, as Calíbro, an instrument that Gunners vse to measure the height of any piece or bullet. Also the height or bore of any piece, from whence our word Caliuer is deriued, being at first a piece different from others.

Cólica, the colicke-passion, the winde-colicke.

Colícia, a kind of shell or muskle fish.

Colicello, a hillocke, a litle hill.

Cólici dolóri, the paines of the colicke.

Colimbáde, as Colibáde.

Colimóne, a kind of great Thistle.

Colírio, as Collírio.

Coliseo, a spire steeple. Also a bum.

Cólla, a corde wherewith they giue the strapado. Also a strapado or torture to make one confesse. Also glue. Also with her, with the, or with it.

Collagrimáre, to weepe together.

Collána, a neck-chaine.

Collanella, a litle neck-chaine.

Collaphizzáre, to buffet, to boxe, or whirret on the eares or cheekes.

Colláre, as Coláre, sost.

Callápso., 

Colláre líscio, a falling band, a rabato.

Colláre, to coll or embrace about the necke. Also to put a collar about one. Also to torture, to racke, or giue the strapado. Also to behead, or pull, or cut off by the necke. Also to straine any liquid thing by drops, as Coláre. Also to glue together. Also to hoise the sailes of a ship, to draw or hoise a thing aloft.

Collaríno, a litle gorget or neck-band.

Colláta, an embracing about the necke.

Collatáeo, a foster-brother, one that hath suckt the same milke.

Collaterále, as Colaterále

Collatítia, the fourth kind of Mirrhe.

Collationcella, a litle breake-fast or baiting, or drinking, or nunchions.

Collatióne, a hard or skirrous tumor occasioned by the gathering of humors.

Collatóre, hee that conferreth or laieth his portion with others. Also a headsman.

Collaudáre, to praise with or together.

Cólle, a hill, a hillocke. Also with the.

Colléga, a combination, a fellow-league. Also a fellow in any office, a partner.

Collageménto, as Collegánza.



Collegánza, a combination, a league, an affinitie, a binding together.

Collegáre, to combine, to colleague, to confederate, to binde together.

Collegáti, combined, confederates, colleagues.

Collegatióne, as Collegánza.

Collegatúra, as Collegánza.

Collegiále, of one Colledge, societie or corporation. Also a Colledge man.

Collegio, a Colledge, a brotherhood, a corporation.

Colleppoláre, to bee merry and blith without taking care for any thing, to shuckle and laugh vnmeasurably through mirth and gladnesse.

Colleppolóne, one that giues himselfe to all mirth without any care.

Cóllera, anger, choller, ire, wrath.

Collérico, chollericke, full of anger.

Colleróso, chollericke, full of anger.

Collerína, the dewlap of a bull.

Colletta, a collect, or collection, or gathering together.

Collettaría, an office in Spaine where a collection of all accompts are kept.

Collettióne, a collection, a gathering. Vsed also for a breake-fast in the morning.

Collettítij, gathered together in haste, and of all sorts, tag and rag.

Collettíuo, collectiue, gatherable.

Colletto, collected, gathered.

Collétto, a leather ierkin. Also a hillocke.

Collettóre, a collector, a gatherer.

Collettoría, a collectorship.

Cólli, with the, with them.

Cólli, hils, hillockes. Also fardels, bundels or packes caried vpon ones necke. Also neckes.

Collibétti, quodlibets, any bodie, it is no matter who, who so list.

Cóllica, the disease called the Collicke.

Cóllico dolóre, the Collicke passion.

Colligánza, as Collegánza.

Colligáre, as Collegáre.

Colligatióne, as Collegánza.

Collígere, as Cógliere.

Collímáre, to leuell at or hit a marke. Also to winke with one eye and looke at the marke with the other.

Collimatióne, a hitting or ayming at a marke.

Collína, a litle hill or hillocke.

Collinétta, a litle hillocke.

Colliquatióne, a falling away of the radicall humor or solide substance of the bodie.

Collírio, a medicine for eyes. Also for horses or oxen to slake their bellies. Also a kind of earthin Samia.

Collíso, abridged, or cut off in pronouncing with an Apostrophe. Also brused, squeased or dashed together. 

Collisióne, an Apostrophe, or abridging of any letter or sillable from the end or beginning of a word. Also a brusing, a squeasing or dashing together.

Cóllo, a necke, a cragge. Also with the.

Collocáre, to place or stow together.

Collocatióne, a placing together.

Cóllo del pezzo, the necke of a piece.

Cóllo d'óca, a kinde of bit for a herse made like the necke of a goose.

Collónna, as Colónna.

Collonnáre, as Colonnáre.

Collóquio, as Colóquio.

Cóllora, anger, choller, indignation.

Collóttola, the nape of the head.

Cóllo tórto, as Capotórto.

Collúbra, a snake or serpent so called.

Collumellári denti, the eye or iaw teeth.

Collurióne, the bird field-faire or Iumper.

Collufióne, collusion, fraude, guile.

Collutióne, a gargarisme, or liquor to wash the teeth, gummes and mouth.

Colluviáre, to line and wallow in all filthy iniquity.

Collúuie, all maner of filth, or stinking dirt of sinkes. Also a pudle of iniquity.

Colluvióne, a sinke of sinne, a filthy liuer, a wallower in all vice.

Colmáre, to heape or fill vp top-full. Also to raise to any height.

Colmestra, a kinde of hawke.

Colmézza, top-fulnesse, height.

Cólmo, heaped or filled top-full. Also the top or height of any thing. Vsed also for honorable dignity, chiefe rule or height of fortune.

Colóbio, a garment that ancient Romans were wont to weare.

Colocáre, as Collocáre.

Colocásia, the hearbe Calues foote or Cuckco-pintle. Also the Egyptian beane.

Colocatióne, as Collocatióne.

Colocínthia, as Coloquintida.

Colofóni, a kind of foote in a verse.

Colómba, any doue, pigeon or culuer. Also a fish called a lump.

Colombára, a Doue or Pigeon house.

Colombína, Pigeons dung. Also a kind of vine or grape.

Colombella, a Turtle-doue, a housedoue. Also a Ring-doue, a stockdoue, a Quoist.

Colombíno, a Doue or Columbine coloure. Also a kinde of blew marble. Also of or pertaining to a doue or Pigeon.

Colómbo, as Colómba.

Colómbo seluático, a Ringdoue, a Stockdoue, a quoist.

Colómbo terraiuólo, idem.

Colómbo terrigiáno, idem.

Colomellári denti, the cheeke or eye-teeth. 

Colombrináto, made or fashioned like a Culuerin.

Colomella, looke V'uola.

Colomíno, a kinde of figge early ripe.

Colónna, any columne, or piller. Also a kind of pipe or flute. Also by metaphore, any stay, prop, vpholding or thing to rest vpon.

Colonnáre, to vnderset or adorne with columnes or pillers. Also piller-like.

Colonnáto, a row or ranke of pillers.

Colóne, a Colone or point in writing the member of a sentence. Also a planter of a Colony. Also the fift gut or great gut rising from the left side to the right, in which is the disease or paine called the collike.

Colonella, a little columne or piller.

Colonelláta, the office of a Coronell, a Coronell-ship.

Colonello, a Coronell of a Regiment.

Colónia, a Colony or plantation of people as the Romans were wont to send into any place to dwell.

Coloquíntida, a kinde of Wild-gourde purging fleame.

Colóquio, a conference or communication.

Cólora, as Cólera, anger, indignation.

Coloráre, to colour, to die, to paint, to staine. Also to excuse or cloake.

Colorataménte, colourably, vnder coloure.

Coloratióne, a colouring, a dying.

Colóre, a colour, a hue, by metaphor, a vaile, a cloake, a pretence or excuse.

Coloréuole, colourable. Also excusable.

Colórica, a sheepe reared abroad at randan.

Colórico, any colour or hue.

Coloríre, rísco, ríto, as Coloráre.

Coloritóre, a dyer, a painter, a limner.

Colóro, those, those men, they.

Coloróso, full of colour, high coloured.

Colósso, a great high and huge stature bigger than a man, a Colossus.

Colóstra, the first milke that commeth in the teates after a birth in women or beasts, called beestings.

Colostráre, to come to haue milke, to curd.

Colostratióne, a disease that commeth to yongue children or cattell newly fallen by ouer sucking of ranke and crudded milke. Also a crudding of any milke.

Coloténo, as Stellióne.

Colóto, as Stellióne.

Cólpa, a fault, a guilt, a blame, a want. Vsed also for a misdeede, a trespasse or offence. 



Colpagióne, as Cólpa.

Colpáre, to trespasse, to commit a fault. Also to accuse, to blame, or make faulty.

Colpeggiáre, as Colpíre.

Colperello, any little Cólpo.

Colpésce, as Colabácco.

Colpéuole, culpable, faulty, guilty.

Colpeuolézza, guiltinesse, faultinesse.

Col piè scoperto, barefooted. Also manifestly, faire play ouer the boord.

Colpíre, písco, pito, to strike, to hit, or giue any stroke.

Colpíscere, ísco, íto, as Colpíre.

Cólpo, a blow, a stroke, a hit, a veny at fence. Also one time, one cast. Also a tricke, a cast, a throw, a pranke. Also a cast at dice, or a draught at chesse. Also a draught of drinke.

Cólta, a haruest of any fruite, a gathering in. Also any rent, tithes or paiment gathered by collection. Also a blow, a stroke, a veny, a hitting.

Coltáre, to culter, to grub, to harrow.

Coltegli, as Coltelli.

Coltella, all manner of kniues.

Coltelláccio, a cutleax, a hanger. Also a chopping knife, a great knife.

Coltelláre, to fight or fence with kniues, or swords or any cutting weapon.

Coltelláta, a blow with a knife or any cutting weapon.

Coltelleggiáre, as Coltelláre.

Coltelli, all manner of kniues. Also Culters for ploughes. Also the second feathers of any hawke. Also the pellicles of any fruit.

Coltellináio, a Pen-knife-maker.

Coltellíno, a little knife, a pen-knife.

Coltello, a knife, a culter, a whittle. Also vsed for any cutting weapon.

Coltellóne, as Coltelláccio.

Cólti luóghi, tilled or manured grounds.

Coltiuábile, eareable, manurable.

Coltiuáre, as Cultiuáre.

Coltiuatóre, a Husband or Ploughman.

Cólto, of Cógliere, gathered in as haruest, collected. Also hit, stricken, taken napping. Also honored, embraced, respected. Also labored, manured, tilled or husbanded.

Cólto, as Cúlto, deuine worship or honor. Also any gardine or ground tilled about a mans house. Also trimme, choise, neat, fine.

Cólto súl fátto, taken napping or doing the deed.

Cólto súl fíco, idem.

Cóltra di cámpo, as much land as a yoke of oxen can plough in one day.

Cóltre, a counter point or quilt for a bed, vsed also for an vpper garment.

Coltríce, a counter point or quilt for a bed. Also a quilted materasse.

Cóltri da póppa, some part of a ship.

Coltrína, any Curtaine.

Coltrinággio, all that belongs to the curtaines or vallences of a bed.

Coltrináre, to vaile, to curtaine.

Cóltro, a culter or plough share.

Coltúra, tillage, manuring, husbandry.

Colubrína, a Culuerin.

Colubrináre, to shoote or hit with a culuerin.

Colubrináto, as Colombrináto.

Colúbro, a kind of venemous serpent.

Colúi, he, that man, that same man.

Columella., looke V'uola.

Columità, safety, soundnesse, healthinesse, lacke of nothing.

Coluóre, a hazell nut or filbird tree.

Colúri, great circles imagined in heauen meeting in the poles of the world, of which there are two principall.

Coluurína, a culuerin.

Colúro délli solstítij, termine astronómico.

Cóma, a point in an oration or writing called a Comma. Also a man or womans haire of the head. Also the maine of a horse.

Comagéno, a kind of sweet ointment made of the fat or leafe of a goose.

Comalánge, a fruit like a Muske melon.

Comandaménto, a commandement, a beheast.

Comandáre, to will and command, to bid, to enioine. Also to recommend or bequeath vnto.

Comandella, as Commandella.

Comándo, any commandement, a command.

Comangiatóre, a fellow eater.

Cománte, bushie or full of haire, shaggy.

Comárca, a shire or diuision of a country.

Comàre, to combe, or dresse ones haire of the head. Also a woman gossip.

Comáro, arbut or comarus vsed in perfumes.

Comaróne, the fruit of an Arbut tree.

Comáta stella, a blazing star.

Comáto, hauing or wearing long haires.

Combaciáre, to kisse, to coll, or hug together.

Combállo, a kind of fishing bote made all of one piece.

Combattente, a combattant or fighting man.

Combáttere, bátto, battéi, battúto, to combat or fight together. Also to striue and contend.

Combattiménto, a combat, a fighting. Also a strife or contention.

Combattitóre, a fighter, a combater.

Cómbere, bo, bei, búto, to bow or bend vnder. 

Combéuere, to drinke with. Also to steepe in.

Combiatáre, as Comiatáre.

Combiáto, as Comiáto.

Combibere, as Combéuere.

Combilia, an argument or composition framed to ones selfe in his mind, with purpose to discourse vpon it.

Combináre, to combine or ioine together. Also to spell in reading.

Combinatióne, a combination or ioining together. Also a spelling of letters.

Combréto, roape weed or withy bind.

Combrícca, a confused crue or rout of odde strange fellowes met together.

Combrícche, foolish, base, riotous assemblies, base hants.

Combríttola, as Combrícca.

Cómbro, a kind of beast engendred between a sheep and a Musmone.

Combúrere, as Combuftiáre.

Combustiáre, to burne, to set in a combustion, to parch.

Combustéuole, as Combustibile.

Combustíbile, that may be burned or set a fire, combustible.

Combustióne, a combustion or burning.

Combustióne délla lúna, as Nouilúnio.

Combustióso, as Combustíbile.

Combustíre, tísco, títo, as Combustiáre.

Combústo, burnt, parched, combusted.

Combúto, bending, stooped vnder, faint with bearing.

Cóme?, how, in what maner? or why.

Cóme, vsed as a noune substantiue, the meanes, manner, way or fashion how any thing is or may be.

Cóme, as, euen as, so as, in such sort, as if, like as. Also since that. Also as much as. Also whilst or so long as. Also so soone as when, or when as, or at what time, or then. Also as Chióme.

Cóme chè, how that, albeit, although, as well that, howsoeuer that. Also when as, when that.

Cóme che sia, howsoeuer it be.

Cóme domine?, how a Gods name?

Cóme Iddio vél dica, God himselfe tell you, for I can not.

Cóme príma, so soone as, when first.

Cóme sarebbe a díre, as a man would say.

Cómesè, as if, as if that.

Cóme si sía, howsoeuer it be.

Cóme si vóglia, howsoeuer one list.

Comedia, a Comedy, an enterlude.

Comediánte, a Comedian, a stage plaier.

Comediáre, to play Comedies.

Comedicáre, to heale, or cure together.

Comedico, a fellow phisition. Also a 



writer or speaker of comedies.

Comediétta, a pretty short comedy.

Comedista, a comedian, or writer of comedies.

Cóme mai, as euer. Also as neuer.

Coména, a cable of a ship.

Comenda, a Comendum, that is a custody of any Church liuing put to ones trust.

Comendábile, commendable, praise worthy.

Comendáre, to commend, to praise.

Comendatióne, commendation, praise.

Comendatízia lettera, a letter of commendations.

Comendatóre, a Commender. Also one that hath Comendas put to his charge.

Comendatória léttera, a letter of commendations.

Comendéuole, commendable, praise worthy.

Coméno, the hearb or seed Cumin.

Comensále, a fellow border or tabler.

Comensáre, to bord or feed together.

Comensúra, a measuring together.

Comensuráre, to measure with, to interpret any writing.

Comentáre, to comment to expound.

Comentatióne, a comenting, an expounding.

Comentatóre, a commenter or expounder.

Comentéuole, that may be commented.

Comento, a comment or large exposition.

Comequánto, as because.

Comerciáre, to comerce or traffike with, to trade together.

Comercio, comerce, trade, traffike.

Comercióso, full of comerce or traffike or trade.

Cometa, a Comet, a blazing star.

Comiatáre, to licence, to giue leaue to depart, to dismisse, is discharge away.

Comiáto, leaue or licence to depart.

Cómico, comicall, or a comedy writer.

Comígnolo, the rising or height or ridge of a roofe of any house or building.

Comígnolo di tétti, a pipe or gutter to conueigh water from the top of an house.

Comilitáre, to fight or professe armes with or in company of others.

Comilitóni, fellow-mates in armes, companions in seruice of war.

Comináre, to menace or threaten together.

Cominatióne, a commination, a threatning.

Cominatóre, a menacer, a threatner.

Cominatória, menacing or minatory.

Cominciaménto, a beginning, a Commencement.

Cominciánte, a beginner, a Commencer.

Cominciáre, to begin, to Commence. 

Cominciatore, a beginner, a Commencer.

Comínie, a kinde of dainty little Oliues.

Coministráre, to minister with or together.

Coministratióne, a fellow administration.

Comíno, the hearbe or seed Cumin.

Cominístro, a fellow minister.

Comistióne, a commixture, a mash.

Comísto, mixt or mingled with.

Comistúra, a commixture.

Comità, mildenesse, courtesie, gentlenesse.

Cómite, an Earle. Also a fellow-mate, or companion. Also a Shriefe of a shire.

Comitiále, belonging to Comitij or a Counsell-house. Also a day of hearing. Also the foule-euill or falling sicknesse.

Comítij, an assembly of people for electing of officers or making of lawes. Also a Counsell-house, a Guilde-hall, a Towne-house, a Parlament-house where Comitij be kept.

Comítio, a place in Rome where all the Roman senate and people met in great counsell.

Comitíua, a traine or following of men.

Cómito, a Masters mate of a ship.

Comiffúre, as Commessúre, chinkes.

Commánda, a commandement a heast.

Commandaménto, as Commánda.

Commandáre, to command, to bid.

Commandella, a kinde of boies play in Italy.

Commándo, a heast or commandement.

Commáre, a woman gossip.

Commemoráre, to remember, to mention.

Commemoratióne, remembrance.

Commemoratóre, a remembrancer.

Commemoréuole, to be remembred.

Commendábile, commendable, praiseworthy.

Commendáre, to commend, to praise.

Commendatióne, commendation, praise.

Commendéuole, commendable.

Commensále, a fellow border or tabler.

Commensuráre, to measure with.

Commentáre, to comment or expound largely.

Commentatóre, a commenter, an expounder.

Commento, a comment, a large exposition.

Commentíto, vaine, slight, of no account.

Commercio, as Comercio.

Commercióso, as Comercióso.

Comméssa, a het, a lay, a wager.

Commessario, a Commissarie.

Commessióne, a Commission.

Commessiuaménte, by way of Commission.

Comméscere, as Commischiáre.

Commessatióne, a banquet or rare supper.

Commésso, committed. Also wrought or put together. Also a Committy, an vmpier, an Arbitrator. Also a kinde of seamesters worke or low plaine stitch.

Commessúra, as Commissúra.

Commestíbile, that may be commixt.

Commesuráre, to measure with.

Commétta, a writ in law, as we say a Capiat, or Habeat-corpus.

Comméttere, métto, misi, mésso, to commit some fault or errour. Also to impose, to enioyne, to command or lay a charge vpon. Also to ioyne, to lay, to worke, to knit or set close together, to incert or enclose. Also to bet or lay a wager. Also to trust, to affie, or put confidence in.

Commettitóre, a committer of any fault.

Commiatáre, as Comiatáre.

Commiáto, as Comiáto.

Comminatióne, a threatning.

Comminella, a little roape or cable.

Comminuíre, to diminish together.

Commischiánza, a commixture, a blending.

Commischiáre, to commix or blend together.

Commiseráre, to pitty, to commiserate, or to haue compassion off.

Commiseratióne, pitty, compassion, ruth.

Commiserábile, compassionable.

Commiseréuole, ruthfull, pittiefull.

Commiseróso, full of pitty and ruth.

Commisuráre, to measure together.

Commissário, a commissary or man appointed by or with commission.

Commissúra, a chinke, a crauise, a flaw, a cleaft in wall or ioints.

Commissíua léttera, a letter importing any commission or iniunction.

Commistióne, a commixture, a mash.

Commísto, commixt or blended with.

Commistúra, a commixture, a blending.

Commisturáre, to blend with or together.

Cómmo délla tragedia, the complaint of a Chorus in a tragedy.

Commodáre, as Accomodáre.

Commodità, commodity, ease, opportunity, fitnesse, meanes, occasion, profite.

Commodézza, as Commodità.

Cómmodo, commodious, fit proper 



at ease. Also as Commodità.

Commonicáre, as Comunicáre.

Commoriénte, dying with or together.

Commósso, mooued, stirred, out of order, of frame, out of ioint.

Commotióne, a commotion, an insurrection.

Commóto, as Commotióne.

Commóuere, móuo, móssi, mósso, to mooue or stir together. Also to trouble ones minde.

Commoueuóle, that may be mooued or stirred with or together.

Commouiménto, as Commotióne.

Commouitióne, as Commotióne.

Commouitóre, a moouer or stirrer vp.

Communále, as Comunále.

Communánza, as Comunánza.

Commúne, as Comúne.

Communicábile, as Comunicábile.

Communicánte, as Comunicánte.

Communicánza, communication.

Communicatíuo, communicatiue.

Communicáre, as Comunicare.

Communichíno, Masse-holy-bread.

Communióne, as Comunióne.

Communità, as Comunità.

Communiéri, commoners, vulgar people.

Commuóuere, as Commóuere.

Commutábile, as Comutábile.

Commutánza, a commutation.

Commutáre, as Comutáre.

Commutatióne, as Comutatióne.

Commutatíuo, as Comutatíuo.

Commutéuole, that may be changed.

Cómo., Vsed for Cóme.

Comodáre, as Accomodáre.

Comodézza, as Commodità.

Comodità, as Commodità.

Comodeuole, that may be accommodated.

Cómodo, as Cómmodo.

Comolánga, a fruit like a Muske-melon.

Comosíno, the first coate or crust of the wax that Bees make in the spring.

Compáge, a conioyning or knitting together. Also as Congérie.

Compaginábile, that may be conioyned or knit together.

Compagináre, to ioyne or knit together any thing that is loose.

Compaginatióne, a conioyning or knitting any loose thing together.

Compágna, a shee mate or fellow.

Compagnáccio, a filthy companion.

Compagnáre, to accompany, to associate.

Compagnétta, a pretty shee companion.

Compagnéuole, sociable.

Compagnía, company, society, fellowship. Also partnership in any contract. 

Compágno, a companion, a fellow, a mate.

Compagnóne, a good fellow, a merie-lad.

Compágo, a kind of Ordinance or Bumbard anciently vsed, but now out of vse.

Companággio, as Companático.

Companático, all cates, meat or foode besides bread and drinke.

Comparábile, comparable, matchable.

Comparáre, to compare, to match.

Comparático, a gossopping, or gossops meeting, a gossops duty or charge, properly that spirituall alliance contarcted by being gossops one to another.

Comparatióne, a comparison.

Comparatiuaménte, comparatiuely.

Comparatíuo, comparatiue.

Compáre, a hee or man gossop.

Campáre del'anello, he that giues the bride at Church.

Comparére, as Comparíre.

Comparéuole, that may appeere.

Comparigióne, an appearance, or a mans presenting of himselfe.

Comparíre, rísco, ríto, to appeare, or for a man to present himselfe to be seene.

Compariscente, as Appariscente.

Comparitióne, as Comparigióne.

Compársa, as Comparigióne.

Compartecipáre, to partake with others.

Compartecipe, a fellow partner.

Compartiménto, a partition, a compartement, a sharing with.

Compartíre, to impart, to deuide, to share together.

Compartíta, a diuidence with others.

Campassábile, that may be compassed.

Compassáre, to compasse about.

Compasséuole, compassable.

Compássi, not onely compasses, but also any compartements in needle-workes.

Compassíbile, passible with others.

Compassibilità, a fellow passibilitie.

Compassionáre, to pittie, to compassionate.

Compassióne, compassion, ruth, pittie.

Compassionéuole, compassionable.

Campassíuo, compassionate.

Compásso, a compasse, a round.

Compásso stórto, a crooked or bowing compasse called of Gunners a Caliber, which serues to finde the diameter of any piece or bullet.

Compatíbile, compatible, abiding one another.

Compatibilità, an abiding on another.

Compatientíssimo, most patient with others. 

Compatíre, tísco, títo, to abide or suffer with or one another.

Compatriótti, men of one and the same country.

Compattáre, to compact, to couenant.

Compátto, a compact, a couenant.

Compédi, feete-shackles or fetters.

Compellere, pello, púlsi, púlso, to compell, to force, to constraine.

Compendiále, compendious, succinct.

Compendiáre, to abreuiate, to epitomize.

Compendiariaménte, compendiously.

Compendiário, as Compéndio.

Compendio, an abbreuiate, an epitomie, a short way, a breuitie.

Compendióso, briefe, compendious.

Compensa, a recompence, a reward.

Compensáme, a recompence or guerdon.

Compensáre, to recompence, to reward.

Compensatióne, as Compensáme.

Compenséuole, that may be rewarded.

Compenso, a remedie to auoide any thing.

Cómpera, a buing, a purchase.

Comperábile, that may be bought.

Comperáre, to buy, to purchase.

Comperatióne, a purchase, a buying. Also a comparison.

Compestáre, to stamp or punne together.

Compestóio, a toole that Weauers vse.

Competente, competent, conuenient. Also a contender with another for one same thing.

Competenteménte, competently, conueniently.

Competentia, competencie, conueniencie. Also a contending with another for one same thing.

Compétere, péto, petéi, petúto, to contend or striue with another for maistrie.

Competíre, tísco, títo, as Conueníre.

Competitóre, a competitor, a riuall.

Compiacenza, as Compiaciménto.

Compiacente, pleasing with or together.

Compiacére, to please or be pleased with

Compiacérsi, for a man to please himselfe.

Compiacéuole, pleasing, pleasant.

Compiaceuolézza, as Compiaciménto.

Compiaciménto, a delighting with, a pleasure or contentment with.

Compiágnere, piángo, piánsi, piánto, to bemone or bewaile with others. Also to complaine.

Compiángere, as Compiágnere.

Compiangiménto, as Compiánto.

Compiantáre, to plant with or together.

Compiánto, bewailed with others.

Compiánto, a wailing with or vnto 



others, a complaint.

Compiere, as Compíre.

Compiéta, completorie, a piece of seruice in the Romane Church. Also comlinesse. Also the latter part or end of the day, the euening tide.

Compigliáre, to take with or together.

Compiláre, to compile or gather together.

Compilatióne, a compilation or heaping together.

Compilatóre, a compiler, a gatherer.

Compiménto, a complement, a fine, a finishing.

Compíre, písco, píto, to complete, to accomplish, to make an end. Also to vse complements, or ceremonies, or kind offices to perfect what wanteth.

Compiráli, a feast in Rome three daies before Saturnalia.

Compitáli, certaine games vsed anciently in honor of lares or houshold gods.

Compitaménte, completely, at full.

Compitáre, to spell in reading. Also to name or call and hight by name.

Compitissimaménte, most completely.

Compitúra, a finishing, a completeing.

Compiutaménte, fully, completely.

Complessáre, to embrace, to coll, to clip, to winde about, to compasse, to comprise.

Complessi, embracements, collings, clippings.

Complesso, embraced, colled, clipped. Also framed or composed.

Complesse paróle, comprised wordes, wordes well described.

Complessionáre, to complexionate.

Complessionáto, complexioned.

Complessionale, complexionall.

Complessióne, a habitude or complexion of the bodie. Vsed also for the nature and qualitie of vegetables. Also a containing at full. Also an agreement in wordes.

Complessótta, a good handsome well complexioned wench.

Compléto, complete, accomplished.

Complettáre, to frame or compose.

Cómplice, a confederate, a coherent.

Compliménti, complements, ceremonies, kind offices, accomplishments, or making perfect of that which is wanting.

Complim entóso, full of complements.

Complíre, plísco, plíto, as Compíre.

Complicáre, to folde vp, or enwrap together. Also to contract, to twine together. Also to confederate or become partakers together.

Complicataménte, contractedly, infolding or enwrapped manner, confederately.

Complicáto, confederated, made partaker.

Complicità, a folding, an enwrapping or contracting together.

Comploráre, to bewaile with others.

Complosióne, as Bischíccio.

Compluuiáta, a raine-gutter, or hollow course of gutter-tiles, that in houses receiue all the rayne-water and cast it off, a water-spoute.

Compluuiáta víte, a running vine framed vpon trailes & frames along harbors in gardens as they vse in Italie.

Compónere, póngo, pósi, pósto, to compose, to compound, to frame, to set in order or mingle together. Also to settle and dispose. Also to agree or compound. Also to deuise or frame in minde as any Poeme or Oration.

Componéuole, that may be composed.

Componicchiáre, to compose slightly.

Componiménto, a composition.

Componicchiaménti, slight compositions.

Compónito, any thing composed.

Componitóre, a Composer.

Compórre, as Compónere.

Comportaménto, comportment, bearing with cariage or behauiour of a man.

Comportáre, to comport. Also to beare with and suffer a man to behaue himselfe.

Comportéuole, tolerable, that may bee borne with.

Comporteuolménte, tolerablie.

Comporteuolézza, toleration, bearing with.

Compositióne, a composition, a compounding, a framing or setling in order. Also an ordering, an agreement.

Compósito, as Compósto.

Compositóre, a composer, a framer.

Compositùra, as Compositióne.

Compossíbile, possible-with.

Compossibilità, a possibilitie with.

Compósta, any compost or wet sucket.

Compostaménte, composedly, framed orderly. Also by way of agreement.

Compósto, composed, framed. Also a composition, a framing together.

Compostúra, a composing, or setling.

Cómpra, a purchase, a buying.

Comprábile, that may be bought.

Compraménto, as Cómpra.

Compráre, to buy, to purchase.

Compratóre, a buier, a purchaser.

Comprauendi, retailers, huckesters.

Compréda, a buying, a purchase.

Compredómine, thrift or gaine by buying.

Comprehendére, as Comprendére.

Comprehensíbile, as Comprensíbile.

Comprehensióne, as Comprensióne.

Comprendére, préndo prési, préso, to comprehend, to know, to consider, to conceiue, to iudge or vnderstand in minde. Also to take together, to take in.

Comprendénte, comprehending. 

Comprendiménto, as Comprensióne.

Comprensíbile, comprehensible.

Comprensibilità, comprehensibilitie.

Comprensióne, a comprehension.

Comprensóre, a comprehender, a container. Also a containing or comprehending.

Compréso, comprehended, contained, conceiued, vnderstood. Also taken together. Also a circuit, a pourprise, a containing, or so much land or ground contained in such a precinct. Also close compact together.

Compressáre, to compresse together.

Compressióne, a compressing, a crushing. Vsed also for Complessióne.

Compresso, compressed, hardned, crushed or pressed together, close compact.

Compressúra, as Compressióne.

Comprímere, mo, méi, múto, as Compressáre.

Cómpro, bought, purchased.

Comprobábile, that may be approoued.

Comprobánza, as Comprobatióne.

Comprobáre, to approoue or allow with.

Comprobatióne, a comprobation or allowing with others.

Compromessário, an arbitrator to compromise a thing for others.

Compromésso, compromised. Also a compromise, or arbitrement.

Comprométtere, métto, mísi, mésso, to compromise, to arbitrate for others.

Comproperio, a fellow-quicknesse or ioint-speed.

Cómptos, a place where the Grecians were wont to keepe their markets and faires.

Compuerta, a percullis of a gate.

Compulsióne, compulsion, constraint.

Compulsíuo, compulsiue.

Compúlso, compelled, constrained.

Compúngere, púngo, púnsi, púnto, to pricke with or together, to prouoke.

Compungiménto, as Compuntióne.

Compuntióne, compunction, sorrow with repentance.

Compuntáre, as Compúngere.

Compúnto, toucht with compunction.

Compurgáre, to purge together.

Compurgatióne, a purging with.

Computábile, computable.

Computáre, to compute, to reckon, to number together.

Computatióne, a computation, a numbring together.

Computéuole, computable, that may be reckoned or numbred.

Computísta, a computator, a reckoner, a numbrer, a caster of accompts.

Compúto, as Computatióne.

Comulgáre, to communicate.

Comulgatióne, a communicating.

Comúna, the communaltie, a generall assembly. 



Comunále, common, vulgare, ordinarie.

Comunalità, as Comunità.

Comunánza, as Comunità.

Comuncheménte, howsoeuer.

Comúne, common, vulgar, publicke, that is not particular to any man. Also the communalty or publicke people of any state.

Comunella, an imparting or communing. Also a common wench.

Comuneménte, commonly, vulgarly, ordinarily, publikely.

Comunicábile, that may be communicated or imparted to others.

Comunicánti, communicants, receiuers of the holy communion.

Comunicánza, as Comunicatióne.

Comunicáre, to communicate, to impart to make common or publicke.

Comunicársi, to receiue the holy communion, or blessed supper.

Comunicatióne, a communication, a publishing or imparting to others.

Comunióne, a communion. Also the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Comunità, a community. Also a free state, towne or common wealth, or the whole body thereof, the whole commons or communalty.

Comúnque, howsoeuer.

Comúnque che, howsoeuer that.

Comunqueménte, in what manner soeuer.

Comutábile, that may be altred with.

Comutánza, as Comutatióne.

Comutáre, to alter or change with.

Comutatióne, a change or alteration.

Comutatíuo, subiect to change.

Cón, with, withall, together, in company.

Con buón ricórdo sía, well be it remembred, well fare all good tokens, in good time be it spoken.

Con licentia, with or by your leaue.

Con autorità, with or by authority.

Con che, withall, wherewith, with which, with what.

Con máppa móndo, with iolity, with the world at will.

Con reuerentia, sauing your reuerence, with reuerence.

Con tánto di náso, to remaine as one ashamed, to haue the canuase in any sute, to be as if one were ashamed to looke vpon himselfe, as if his nose were to long.

Cóna, a painted table or boord, a Cone.

Conáglio, rinnet to make cheese.

Conále, of, or belonging to a painted boord.

Conaménto, that helpeth in any thing.

Conáto, a thing whereabout labor hath been taken. Also one that endeuoreth himselfe to do any thing.

Cónca, a tray, a broade pan, a lauer, a bowle, a bason. Also a graue, a tombe. Also any fish shell or mother of pearle. Also a greeke measure.

Concapitáno, a fellow captaine.

Concatenaménto, as Concatenatióne.

Concatenábile, that may be chained or linked together.

Concatenáre, to chaine or linke together.

Concatenatióne, a chaining or linking together.

Concattiuità, fellow captiuity.

Concattíuo, fellow captiue, or naught.

Concauáre, to make hollow or concaue.

Concauità, concauity, hollownesse.

Concáuo, hollow, concaue, caued.

Concáusa, a cause ioined with another cause.

Concautela, with warinesse.

Concedente, granting with, or vnto.

Concedenza, a grant, a yeelding with.

Concedere, cédo, cessi, cesso, or cedúto, to grant, to yeeld vnto, to giue place, to resigne, to surrender.

Concedéuole, that may be granted.

Concento, a consort or concordance, a harmony, a tunable accord.

Concentráre, to incorporate or concentre hard together.

Concentríce, a circle within an orbe, hauing the same superficies.

Concéntrico, that is about one same circle.

Concepere, cépo, cepéi, cepúto, to conceiue with child.

Concepíto, conceiued with child.

Concepúto, conceiued with child.

Concernere, cerno, cernéi, cernúto, to concerne.

Concernénte, concerning.

Concerchiáre, to hoope or circle with.

Concertaménto, as Concerto.

Concertáre, to proportion or accord together, to agree or tune together, to sing or play in consort.

Concerto, an agreement, an accord, a consort, or concordance.

Concessióne, a grant or yeelding vnto, a resignation.

Concesso, looke Concédere.

Concettióne, a conception, a conceiuing.

Concetto, conceiued with child. Also a conceit or apprehension of the mind.

Concettóso, full of conceit, conceited.

Conchétta, a little Conca.

Conchíglia, any kind of fish shell. Also a kind of purple fish.

Conchigliáto, a fine purple dyed with Conchiglia.

Conchíglie, all manner of fish shells.

Conchíle pésce, all manner of shell fish.

Conchiúdere, údo, úsi, úso, to conclude.

Conchiudíbile, that may be concluded.

Conchiusióne, a conclusion.

Conchiúso, concluded.

Cóncia, a dressing, a reforming, a repairing, a washing or perfuming of leather.

Cóncia corámi, a leather dresser, a tanner.

Cóncia cuóio, as Cóncia corámi.

Cóncia fenestre, a mender of windowes.

Conciafólli, a mender of bellowes.

Concialauézzi, a tinker.

Concialetti, a mender of beds.

Conciaménti, mendings, dressings.

Conciapadelle, a kettle mender, a tinker.

Conciapiátti, a mender of dishes.

Conciastágni, a pewter mender.

Conciatétti, a tiler, a thatcher.

Concia vétri, a mender of glasses.

Conciastrácci, a mender of old rags.

Conciatútto, a mend all, a find fault.

Conciáre, to dresse, to mend, to reforme, to repaire, to dight, to attire. Also to treat or handle. Also to pacifie or reconcile and attone.

Conciatóre, a mender, a dresser, a dighter, a repairer. Also a treater or handler.

Conciatúra, any kind of dressing, mending, dighting or repairing.

Conciatúra di testa, a head dressing.

Concídere, cído, císi, císo, to cut with, to hacke small, to chop, to iag, to pounce. Also to fall downe and die and faint. Also to beat, or to kill with.

Concidentia, a cutting with, a hacking, a iagging, a chopping. Also a killing with, a falling or dying with. Also a disease in the eies.

Conciére da testa, any head attire.

Conciéro, any kind of dressing, mending, decking, dighting, ornament, or attire namely of a womans head. Also a hearse or stately funerall.

Conciéuole, that may be mended or dressed.

Conciliábolo, a Councell house or place.

Conciliáre, to reconcile, to attone.

Conciliatióne, a reconciliation.

Concílio, a Councell generall. Also the flowre of Iasione.

Concimáre, to mucke, to dung, to marle or fatten land.

Concíme, mucke, marle, dung, or any compost to fatten grounds.

Conciníglia, as Cociníglia.

Concinnáre, to make fit, apt or proper, to dresse, to make fine or feat, to patch, to mend, to make handsome, to prouide or prepare. Also to forge with fained words.

Concinnatióne, a making fit or apt, handsomnesse

Concinnità, featnesse, gallantnesse, pro­



pernesse, aptnesse, iolinesse, fitnesse, handsomnesse.

Concínno, trimme, gay, fine, handsome.

Concíno, a find fault, a reformer.

Cóncio, drest, mended, reformed, repaired, dight, handsomely attired. Also treated, vsed or handled. Also pacified or attoned. Also vsed as a noune, for any kinde of setling, dressing or dighting.

Cónciò, with that.

Conciofósse, forsomuch as it was.

Conciofósse che, for somuch as that it was.

Conciofósse cósa che, idem.

Concionáre, to make an Oration or Sermon to an assembly of people.

Concióne, an assembly of people, or a Sermon and Oration made to them.

Conciosía, for so much, because, for why.

Conciosía che, forsomuch as that.

Conciosía cósa che, idem.

Concipere, as Concépere.

Concipiente, conceiuing.

Concisióne, a cutting short and close.

Concíso, concise, close or short cut.

Concistoriále, consistoriall, of, or pertaining to a Concistory.

Concistório, a Consistory an assembly of Cardinals before the Pope. Also the whole body of the Cardinals.

Concistóro, as Concistório.

Concitáre, to conceit, to prouoke.

Concitatióne, an enciting, a conciting.

Concitatóre, a prouoker, or stirrer vp.

Concittadíno, a fellow Citizen.

Concittadinánza, a fellow dwelling in a City, or corporation of a City.

Concíue, a fellow Citizen.

Concláue, a place where the Popes are chosen, a Closet, a Priuate roome or an inner chamber. Also a Consistory or a Congregation of Prelates.

Conclauista, a fellow chooser of a Pope, or one that is admitted in the Conclaue.

Concludente, concluding.

Conclúdere, as Conchiudere.

Conclusióne, a conclusion, a shutting vp.

Conclusíuo, conclusiue, concluding.

Concubíno, a concubine, a lemman.

Concócere, to concoct or boyle together.

Concociménto, a concocting.

Concólla, a ridge or greene soard betweene ploughed lands.

Cóncola, as Cónca.

Concoloráre, to colour with or together.

Concolóri, coloures answering one another. 

Concomitànte, as Concómite.

Concomitánza, fellow attendance in court, or fellow courtier-ship.

Concomitáre, to serue or attend in court with others or together.

Concómite, a fellow courtier or attendant about a Prince, a companion.

Concóne, a great Cónca.

Concordaménte, friendly, louingly.

Concordánza, a concordance.

Concordáre, to accord together.

Concórde, agreed, of one consent.

Concordeménte, with one accord.

Concordéuole, that may be accorded.

Concórdia, concord, vnity in hearts, agreement. Also wilde poppy.

Concordiáre, as Concordáre.

Concordióso, full of concord.

Concorporáre, to concorporate, or mix into one body.

Concorrente, a concurrent, a riuall.

Concorrenza, a concurrence or running together. Also an agreement in one.

Concórrere, córro, córsi, córso, to concur, to run or flocke together.

Concórso, concurred, run or flocked together.

Concórso, sost, a Concurse or running together of men or beasts. Also an ouerflowing of humores in man or beast.

Concortegiáno, a fellow courtier.

Concottióne, a Concoction.

Concótto, concocted or boiled together, or altered to that substance by naturall heat.

Concreáto, created together.

Concretáre, to harden or grow thicke, to clotter or congeale together.

Concretatióne, a clottring together.

Concréto, clotted, hardned, growen thicke.

Concubína, a concubine, a lemman.

Cohcubináre, to loue or match with a whore, to lye with a concubine.

Concubinário, one that lyeth with a concubine.

Concubíno, a bed-minion, a caramite.

Concúbito, the time of creatures coupling and engendring together.

Concubuíre, as Concubináre.

Concúbito, bed-minionship.

Conculcábile, that may be pressed or trodden vpon.

Conculcáre, to suppresse or tread downe, to conculcate.

Conculcatióne, a pressing together.

Concuócere, to concoct or bake together.

Concupíre, písco, pito, as Concupíscere.

Concupiscénza, lust, filthy desire, concupiscence, carnall appetite.

Concupíscere, písco, piscéi, pisciúto, to lust or desire with concupiscence.

Concupiscíbile, lustfull, desirous.

Concupiscíre, as Concupíscere.

Concussáre, to shake or rumble together.

Concussíbile, that may be shaken.

Concussióne, a violent shaking.

Concússo, shaken or rumbled together.

Condánna, as Condannagióne.

Condannábile, condemnable.

Condannagióne, a condemning, a condemnation, a doome, an amercement.

Condannáre, to condemne, to amerce, to doome.

Condannáta, a game at cardes so called.

Condannatióne, as Condannagióne.

Condánno, a fine, an amercement.

Condecente, decent, comely, seemely.

Condecenteménte, very decently.

Condecentia, decencie, comelinesse.

Condégno, condigne, worthy with others.

Condennagióne, as Condannagióne.

Condennáre, as Condannáre.

Condennáta, as Condannáta.

Condennatióne, as Condannagióne.

Condennatório, condemning in charges.

Condensaménto, a thicking together.

Condensáre, to condense or thicken.

Condenséuole, that may be thickned.

Condensatióne, as Condensità.

Condensità, a densitie, a thicknesse.

Condenso, condense, thicke, spisse.

Condescendente, yealding with or vnto.

Condescendere, scendo, scési, scéso, to condescend, to yeeld or decline vnto.

Condestábile, a Constable.

Condilomáti, swellings in the fundament proceeding of inflamation.

Condétto., 

Condimentário, of or belonging to sauce, or seasoning of meates.

Condiménto, a seasoning, a confecting or tempring of meates.

Condíre, dísco, condíto, to season, to sauce, to confite or temper meates.

Condiscépolo, a fellow Disciple.

Condisputánte, a fellow disputant.

Conditionábile, conditionable.

Conditionále, conditionall.

Conditionáre, to conditionate, to enable with condition. Also to couenant. Also to entaile lands or goods.

Conditionataménte, conditionally.

Conditionátib éni, entailed goods.

Condíto, seasoned, sauced, comfited, or tempered as meate. Also preserued or pickled in liquor. Also the dripping or grauie of roste meate.

Conditióne, a condition, a couenant. Also a qualitie, an estate.

Conditóre, a seasoner of meates.

Condogliénte ánimo, a condoling minde. 



Condoglienza, a condoling with others.

Condogliéuole, that may be condoled.

Condolente, condoling, lamentable.

Condolére, dólgo, dólsi, doluto, to condole, to bemone or be waile together.

Condolúto, condoled, or be wailed with.

Condonáre, to pardon, to forgiue with.

Condonatióne, a pardon, a remittance.

Condótta, a conduct, a leading, a guide.

Condottiére, as Conducitóre, a Conductor, a Leader, a Guider, a Captaine.

Condótto, conducted, led, guided.

Condótto, sost, a conduite, a priuy, a sinke, a ditch.

Condríllo, wilde endiue, gum-cicory, or rust Cicory.

Cóndro, a bone or gristle ouer the mouth of the stomacke for defence of it.

Conducíbile, that may be conducted.

Condúcere, as Condúrre.

Conduciménto, a conducting, a leading.

Conducitóre, as Condottiére.

Conduplicáre, to double with or together.

Conduplicatióne, a doubling together.

Condúrdo, a Sommer hearbe with a red flower that continues but one weeke.

Condúrre, dúco, dússi, dútto , or dótto, to conduct, to leade, to guide to a place.

Conduttítio, that leads or may be led.

Conduttítij soldáti, souldiers that for pay wilbe led euery where.

Condútto, as Condótto.

Conduttúra, a conducting, a leading.

Conegliera, as Conigliera.

Conesso lóro, with themselues.

Con esso lui, with himselfe.

Con esso lei, with her selfe.

Con esso méco, with my selfe.

Con esso noi, with vs our selues.

Con esso teco, with thy selfe.

Con esso séco, with himselfe.

Con esso uoi, with you your selues.

Conestábile, a Constable.

Conétto, a disease in a horse.

Confabuláre, to talke or fable together.

Confabulatióne, a confabulation.

Confácere, as Confáre.

Confacéuole, conuenient behoofefull.

Confaceuolézza, conueniency, or agreing in nature, a suting together.

Consacimento, as Confaceuolézza.

Confalóne, a chiefe engine or standerd.

Confaloniére, a chiefe standerd bearer 

Confáre, fáccio, féci, fátto, to make or doe together. Also to become, to sute, to agree or proportion together, to fit, to square or become well.

Confarráre, to marrie with the solemnitie and saerifice of Confarratióne.

Confarratióne, a kinde of sacrifice betweene the husband and the wife in token of a firme coniunction, a solemnitie vsed in mariages with a cake or wheate. It was also anciently a kind of bond or societie among countrymen when corne and corne-fields were common.

Confarráto, lawfully ioyned in wedlocke

Confederánza, as Confederatióne.

Confederáre, to confederate.

Confederatióne, a confederacie.

Confederáto, a confederate.

Conferente, conferring.

Conferentia, a conference. Also a circomference. Also a conferring or comparing. Also an aduouson of a liuing.

Conferíre, rísco, ríto, to conferre, to impart, to bestow, to contribute vpon.

Confermagióne, as Confermatióne.

Confermaménto, as Confermatióne.

Confermáre, to confirme, to establish.

Confermatióne, a confirmation.

Conferrumináre, to glue or conglutinate, or soulder together, to ciment.

Confertíni, as Confortíni.

Conferua, an hearbe of a glutinous substance called Spunge of the riuer.

Confessagióne, as Confessióne.

Confessáre, to confesse, to acknowledge.

Confesséuole, that may be confessed.

Confessionále, a booke of confession, of or belonging to confession.

Coufessionárij, Confessors, shriuing-fathers.

Confessióne, a confession, a shriuing.

Confessionísta, one that hath power to confesse and shriue others.

Confesso, one that is confessed and hath absolution of his ghostly father.

Confessóre, a Confessor, a Shriuer.

Confettáre, to comfite, to candie, or to preserue with sugars.

Confettáro, a comfit-maker.

Confetti, all manner of comfits

Confettiéra, a sugar or comfit-boxe.

Confettináro, a comfit-maker.

Confettionále, confectionall.

Confettionário, a confectionarie.

Confettióni, all manner of confections.

Confíca, the hearbe Lowe-pine.

Conficcáre, to affixe, to fixe together, to thrust or driue in fast.

Confidánza, confidence, affiance.

Confidáre, to trust or put in feoffie.

Confidente, confident, trusty.

Confidenteménte, confidently. 

Confidenza, confidence, trust, affiance.

Confíggere, fíggo, físsi, físso, as Conficcáre.

Configuráre, to figure with or together.

Configuratióne, a figuring together.

Confinánte, confining, bounding.

Confinánza, a bounding, a confining.

Confináre, to confine, to bound. Also to banish, or limite and confine to a place.

Confinatióne, a confination, a bounding.

Confíni, confines, bounds, limites.

Confíno, neare bordering or bounding.

Confínta, faignedly, vnder colour.

Confirmáre, as Consermáre.

Confirmatióne, as Confermatióne.

Confiscáre, to confiscate, to forfeit.

Confiscatióne, a confiscation.

Coufitente, confessing, bewraying.

Confítere, to make confession, to confesse.

Confittáre, as Confettáre.

Confittáro, as Confettáro.

Confítto, fixed, obstinate, headestrong.

Confiutáre, to confute.

Confiutatióne, a confutation.

Conflagrántia, a burning, a scorching. Also a feruent desire.

Conflagráre, to burne furiously. Also to desire feruently.

Conflánte, blowing or breathing together.

Conflatíle, that is made with melting or casting of mettales.

Confláto, blowen together.

Conflíggere, flíggo, flíssi, flitto, to conflict, to battle, to put to flight, to discomfite.

Conflítta, a conflict, a discomfiture.

Conslítto, a conflict, a fight, a discomfiture.

Confluente, flowing together.

Confluenza, a confluence, a flowing or meeting of diuers riuers in one.

Confluíre, ísco, íto, to flow with, to rush in or meete together.

Confóndere, fóndo, fúsi, or fondéi, fúso, or fondúto, to confound, to dissturb, to disorder. Also to put to shame or confusion.

Conformábile, conformable.

Conformáre, to conforme.

Confórme, conforme or like.

Conforméuole, conformable.

Conformézza, as Conformità.

Conformità, conformity, affinity.

Confortábile, comfortable.

Confortáre, to comfort. Also to exhort.

Confortatíuo, comfortable. 



Confortatóre, a comforter.

Confortería, a tribe in alliance, or neighbour-hood in bloud and agreement.

Confortíni, a kind of little biskets.

Confortéuole, comfortable.

Confórto, comfort, helpe, consolation.

Confrángere, frángo, fránsi, fránto, to confract or breake together.

Confránto, confracted, broken together.

Confráte, a fellow-brother or Frier.

Confratellánza, a fellow-brotherhoode.

Confratería, a brother-hoode, a frierie.

Confraternità, as Confratería.

Confrattióne, a breaking together.

Confrontáre, to confront, to compare together, to butte or shocke together.

Confrónto, a confronting.

Confrustágno, some toole about digging of Mines.

Confuggíre, fúggo, suggíj, fuggíto, to flee or run away with others.

Confusaménte, confusedly, disorderlie.

Confusíbile, full of confusion and trouble.

Confusióne, a confusion, a disorder.

Confusíssimo, most confused.

Confúso, confused, disturbed, adanted.

Confutáre, to confute, to confound.

Confutatióne, a confutation.

Confutéuole, that may be confuted.

Confutatório, that confuteth.

Con galantería, as Con gárbo.

Con gárbo, handsomely, with a grace.

Congarofonáto, drest with cloues or spices.

Congedáre, to licence, to dismisse.

Congedo, leaue, licence, dismission or permission to depart.

Congegnáre, to worke or frame together.

Congegnéuole, that may be framed together with pieces, as a Carpenters frame.

Congeláre, to congeale.

Congclatióne, a congealing.

Congelatóri di Mercúrio, Alchimists.

Congemináre, to twine together.

Congeminatióne, a twining together.

Congéneo, of the same kinde.

Congeneráre, to engender and beget together.

Congeneráto, begotten or engendred together, bredwith, inbred.

Congeníre, nísco, níto, as Congeneráre.

Congénito, begotten or engendred with, inbred, bredwith, innated.

Congenitúra, an engendring together.

Congérie, a huddle, a heape, a pile or masse of diuers things together.

Congestióne, a setting together.

Congesto, set, or placed together.

Congettúra, a coniecture, a surmise.

Congetturábile, coniecturable.

Congetturáre, to coniecture, to surmise.

Congetturéuole, coniecturable.

Cóngio, a measure of about three gallons of ours. Also as Congédo.

Congiógnere, as Congióngere.

Congióngere, gióngo, giónsi, giónto, to conioyne, to combine. Also to ioyne in wedlocke.

Congiongiménto, a conioining.

Congiongéuole, that may bee conioyned.

Congiontióne, a coniunction.

Congiontáre, to ioyne with. Also to connicatch with or together.

Congiónto, conioined, combined. Also a kinsman, or an allie.

Congiontúra, a conioining. Also a iointing of any limme together.

Congiugále, that is or may be ioyned.

Congiugáre, to conioine or couple together. Also to coniugate verbes.

Coniugatióne, a Coniugation.

Congiúngere, as Congióngere, &c.

Congiúra, a conspiracie, a coniuration, a swearing with or together.

Congiuraménto, as Congiúra.

Congiuráre, to conspire, to coniure.

Congiuráti, conspirators, coniurators.

Congiuratióne, as Congiúra.

Congiuratóre, a conspirer, a coniurer.

Congiustáre, to leuell or rectifie together.

Conglobáre, to englobe or make vp round together.

Cóngola, as Conca. Also a kind of fish.

Con grátia, with grace, gratiously.

Congratiáre, to grace with.

Congratulánza, a congratulation.

Congratuláre, to congratulate or reioyce together.

Congratulatióne, congratulation.

Congratulatória, of congratulation.

Congréga, an assembly, a congregation.

Congregánza, as Congréga.

Congregáre, to assemble together.

Congregatióne, as Congréga.

Congressióne, as Congresso.

Congresso, a congresse or resorting together. Vsed also for Nouilúnio.

Cóngrio, a Cungar fish.

Cóngro, a Cungar fish.

Congruente, congruent, meete.

Congruentia, congruence, congruitie.

Congruíre, ísco, íto, to make congruent.

Congruità, congruitie, fitnesse, decorum.

Cóngruo, congruous, meete, well-fitting.

Con méco, with me. 

Con méco insiéme, with me together.

Con méco stésso, with my selfe.

Coniáre, to coine, to stampe, to mint monie, to brand or marke. Also to forge or deuise.

Coniatóre, a coiner, a stamper, a minter, a forger, a deuiser.

Cónico, after the figure of a Cone, looke Cóno.

Coniella, the hearbe winter sauorie.

Coniettúra, as Congettúra.

Conietturáre, as Congetturáre.

Coníglia, a Doe-cunnie or rabet.

Coniglieggiáre, to cunnie, to play the cunnie, to bee fearefull and lurke in holes.

Conigliéra, a connie-grea, a warren.

Coníglio, a Buck-cunnie or rabbet.

Cónij, billets or piles in armorie.

Con il, with the, together with the.

Cónio, a coine, a stampe, a mint. Also a pile in armorie. Also a wedge.

Coniugiáre, to marry, to wedde, to couple.

Coniúgio, a mariage, a copulation.

Conizóide, as Conízza.

Conizza, Fleabane or Mulet, the smoke of it killeth fleaes and chaseth Serpents.

Conládro, a fellow thiefe.

Conlauoránte, a fellow labourer.

Conlegáre, to binde or tie together.

Conlettióne, a choise made together.

Conmercánte, a fellow marchant.

Connatúra, a fellowship in nature.

Connaturále, conaturall, inbred, inborne, innated, ioyned in nature.

Connaturalità, a conaturality.

Connauigánte, a fellow sailer.

Cónne., Vsed for the coniunction Con.

Connessáre, to ioyne with, to connex.

Connessióne, a connexing or ioyning with. Also a neerenesse in bloud or alliance.

Connessità, as Connessióne.

Connesso, connexed or ioyned vnto.

Connestábile, a Constable.

Connísa, as Conízza.

Cónno, a womans quaint.

Connócchia, a rocke or distaffe. Also a kinde of bushy squib.

Connocchiáre, to winde vpon a distaffe. Also to spin.

Connocchiáta, a rocke or distaffe full.

Connubiále, of or pertaining to wedlocke.

Connubiáre, to wed, to spouse, to marrie.

Connúbio, a wedding, an espousall.

Connumeráre, to number together, as Computáre.

Connumeratióne, a numbring together, as Computatióne.

Connúta, a woman nocked well. 



Connutrítio, a foster-brother.

Cóno, a Cone, a geometricall body, broad beneath and sharp aboue with a circulare bottom.

Conócchia, as Connócchia.

Conocchiáre, as Connocchiáre.

Conocchiáta, as Connocchiáta.

Conoidále, framed like a Cone.

Conoscente, acknowledging, gratefull. Also an acquaintance.

Conoscenza, knowledge, acquaintance.

Conóscere nósco, nóbbi, nosciúto, to know, to ken or discerne by the eye. Also to acknowledge with thanks. Also to perceiue.

Conoscíbile, that may be knowen.

Conosciménto, an acknowledgement.

Conoscitóre, an acknowledger.

Conoscitríce, a woman knowen.

Conosciutíssimo, most knowen.

Conosciúto, knowen. Also expert and full of knowledge.

Con páce vóstra, with your leaue.

Con pátto, vpon bargane and condition.

Con prigióne, a fellow prisoner.

Conprigioniére, idem.

Conprigionía, a fellow imprisonment.

Conquassáre, to tosse, to tumble, or hull vp and downe as a ship at sea. Also to ruine, to spoile, or shake vp and downe.

Conquassatióne, as Conquásso.

Conquásso, a tossing, a tumbling, a shaking, a bulling as of a ship at sea. Also a ruine, a spoile, a dissolution, a commotion.

Conquerela, a fellow bewayling.

Conquereláre, to complaine with.

Conquerere, to lament, to bewaile.

Conquésta, a conquest, a victory.

Conquestáre, to conquer, to subdue.

Conquídere, quido, quísi, quíso, to conquer, to subdue, to oppresse, to destroy.

Conquisitóre, a commissioner to enquire for any thing, a mustermaster.

Conquísta, a conquest, a victory.

Conquistaménto, a conquering.

Conquistáre, to conquer, to subdue.

Conquistatóre, a conqueror, a victor.

Conquistéuole, that may be conquered.

Conquíso, conquered, subdued, opened.

Conquísto, a conquest, a subduing.

Conquistóre, a conqueror, a victor.

Conresuscitáto, risen with or together.

Conrespondente, as Correspondente.

Conrespóndere, as Correspóndere.

Conreuerenza, with reuerence.

Consacráre, to consecrate.

Consacratióne, a consecration. 

Consagráre, to consecrate.

Consagratióne, a consecration.

Con sána ménte, with a sound minde.

Consanguíneo, a kinne or neare in blood

Consanguinità, kindred, neerenesse in blood.

Consapére, sò, séppi, sapúto, to know with, to be of counsell, to be guilty of.

Consapéuole, of counsell, witting.

Consapeuolezza, wittingnesse.

Con sapúta, with knowledge.

Conscésa, a downe-steepie place or crag in a mountaine.

Conscientia, a conscience. Vsed anciently for knowledge or witting.

Conscientióso, full of conscience, conscionable.

Conscinománte, a deuiner by sieues.

Conscinomantía, diuination by sieues.

Cónscio, of counsell, witting, accessarie.

Conscrítti pádri, registred or enrouled among the Fathers or Senatours.

Conscríuere, to register or enroule with.

Con séco, with him.

Con séco medésimo, with himselfe.

Con séco sólo, with himselfe alone.

Consecráre, to consecrate.

Consecratióne, a consecration.

Consedáre, to qualifie or asswage with.

Consecutióne, a consequence.

Consecutiuaménte, consequently.

Consecutíuo, consequent withall.

Consegnáre, to assigne. Also to resigne.

Consegnatióne, a resignation.

Conseguente, consequent, following.

Conseguenteménte, consequently.

Conseguenza, a consequence.

Conseguiménto, an atchieuance. Also an attaining vnto.

Conseguíre, guísco, guíto, to follow with. Also to atchieue or to attaine.

Conseguitáre, as Conseguíre.

Conseguitóre, an atchieuer, an obtainer.

Consegurtà, safetie, with securitie.

Consemináre, to sowe and scatter with.

Con sénno, with wit or iudgement.

Consénso, a consent, an assent vnto.

Consentáneo, consenting with.

Consentiente, consenting vnto.

Consentiménto, a consent, an assent.

Consentíre, sénto, sentíto, to consent.

Consentóre, a consenter.

Consertáre, as Concertáre.

Consertataménte, proportionably.

Conserto, ioined, enterlaced, entermedled, set with, conserted. Also as Concerto.

Conserua, a storehouse, a lardery, a buttery, a pantry, a spicery, a comfit house, a wardrobe, or place where any thing is kept in store. Also any kind of conserue or preserue. Also a conuoy or consort of souldiers or ships.

Conseruábile, that may be preserued.

Conseruagióne, as Conseruatióne.

Conseruáre, to conserue, to preserue.

Conseruatióne, preseruation, keeping.

Conseruatíuo, conseruing.

Conseruatóio, a lardry, a cupboord.

Conseruéuole, as Conseruábile.

Conseruíre, to serue in fellowship.

Conseruitóre, a fellow seruant.

Conseruo, a fellow seruant.

Consesso, an assembly of one sex together.

Considerábile, to be considered, considerable.

Considerándo, considerable.

Consideráre, to consider, to bethinke.

Consideratióne, consideration.

Consideróso, full of consideration.

Consigliáre, to counsell, to aduise, to direct.

Consigliatóre, a counseller, an aduiser.

Consigliatúra, the body of a Counsell. Also a Counsell chamber.

Consigliére, a counseller, a directer.

Consigliére secréto, a priuy counseller.

Consiglio, counsell, aduice, direction. Also a place or chamber of counsell.

Consignóre, a fellow lord.

Consignoreggiáre, to command with others, or gouerne in fellowship.

Consignáre, as Consegnáre.

Consignatióne, as Consegnatióne.

Consilígine, an hearb, thrust an iron through the root of it, then thrust the said iron through the eare of any poisoned or infected beast, all the poison and venome will voide at that place, and the beast liue.

Consiligóne, as Consilígine. Also Beare foot or setter wort.

Consimigliánza, a like resemblance.

Consimigliáre, to be semblable with.

Consímile, semblable or like to others.

Consimilitúdine, as Consimigliánza.

Consistente, consisting.

Consistenza, a consistence.

Consístere, sto, stei, stúto, to consist, or stand vp, to rely vpon.

Consistório, as Concistório.

Cónso, the God of counsell, from whom was Consull denominated.

Consobríno, a cosin german. Also a sisters sonne.

Consolábile, that may be comforted, comfortable.

Consoláre, to comfort, or giue consolation. Also to perswade vnto.

Consoláre, of or pertaining to a Consull. Also one that hath been a Consull.

Consolatióne, consolation, comfort.

Consolatíssimo, most comforted.

Consoláto, comforted, perswaded.

Consoláto, a Consulship, the office of a Consull.

Consolatória lettera, a letter of consolation.

Consolatóre, a comforter.

Consoldáto, a fellow soldier. 



Cónsole, as Cónsolo.

Consólida, the hearb Larkes foot.

Consólida maggióre, the hearb Comfrie, knitbacke, or Backwort.

Consólida média, Bugle hearb.

Consólidaminóre, wild dasie.

Consolidáre, to consolidate, to harden, to confirme, to establish, and make whole and solide what was broken.

Consolidatióne, a consolidation.

Consolidatíuo, that will consolidate.

Consólido, hard, solide, confirmed.

Cónsolo, a Consull, an office so called.

Consommáre, to sum vp together.

Consonánte, a consonant letter. Also that is consonant and agreeing.

Consonánza, a consonant in sounds.

Consonáre, to agree in voices or tune.

Consonéuole, consonant, agreeing.

Consoneuolézza, consonancy.

Consóno, consonant, a concordance.

Consontióne, a consumption.

Consónto, consumed, wasted, spent.

Consopiménto, a lulling asleep, or whoshting with.

Consopíre, písco, píto, to appease, to whosht or lull asleep with.

Consopíto, whosht, lulled asleep.

Con sopportatióne vóstra, with good leaue and toleration.

Consororità, a fellow sisterhood.

Consortáre, to consort together.

Consórte, a Consort, a fellow mate, a wife or a husband.

Consortería, partnership, consorting together, society.

Consórtio, familiarity. Also one of the same family or consort.

Consortíre, tísco, títo, as Consortáre.

Consórto, a kinsman, a mate, a consort, an allie, a fellow in fortune.

Consostantiále, consubstantiall.

Consostantialità, consubstantiality.

Consostantiatióne, consubstantiation.

Conspergere, ergo, ersi, erso, as Cospárgere.

Conspersióne, a sprinkling together.

Consperso, sprinkled, bedewed.

Conspetto, the presence or view of a man.

Conspícere, to be conspicuous or manifest.

Conspicuit à, conspicuity, plainnesse.

Conspícuo, conspicuous, manifest, plaine.

Conspíra, a conspiracie.

Conspiráre, to conspire.

Conspiratióne, a conspiracie.

Conspiratíssimo, by a most ioint consent.

Constánte, constant, stedfast.

Constánza, constancie, stedfastnesse.

Constabilíre, lísco, líto, to coestablish.

Consta bilità, a coestablishment.

Constáre, to consist, to persist, to stand together, to perseuere, to continue.

Constellatióne, as Costellatióne.

Consternáre, as Costernáre.

Consternatióne, as Costernatióne.

Constipáre, to harden, or compact together, as Stipáre.

Constipáto, hardned or fastened together.

Constipatióne, a compacting together.

Constipuláre, as Stipuláre.

Constipulatióne, as Stipulatióne.

Constituíre, ísco, íto, to constitute, to institute, to ordaine, to appoint, to establish.

Constitutióne, a constitution.

Constitúto, a constitute, an institute.

Constitutóre, a constituter.

Constórcere, as Contórcere.

Constrettúra, a constraint.

Constrígnere, as Costríngere.

Constrúrre, úggo, ússi, útto, to conster, to construct, to frame, to build.

Construttióne, a Construction.

Constrútto, a Construction.

Constrútto, construed, built, framed.

Construttóre, a constructer, a framer.

Constudente, a fellow student.

Constudiáre, to studdy together.

Consueto, woonted, accustomed, enured.

Consuetudinário, customary.

Consnetúdine, custome, wont, vre, vse.

Consúlta, a Consultation.

Consultáre, to consult, to deliberate.

Consultatióne, a consultation.

Consultatíuo, consultatiue.

Consultéuole, consultable.

Consultóre, a consulter.

Consumábile, that may be consumed.

Consumaménto, a consuming.

Consumáre, to consume, to consumate, to waste, to spend. Also to finish.

Consumatióne, a consumation, an end.

Consumáto, consumed, ended, spent, wasted. Also absolute, perfect, finished.

Consuméuole, that may be consumed.

Consúmo, as Consumaménto.

Consuntióne, a consumption.

Consúnto, consumed, spent. Also dead.

Consuonáre, to sound together.

Consuóno, a consonancy together.

Consustantiále, consubstantiall.

Consustantiatióne, consubstantiation.

Cónta, recounted, declared, numbred. Also manifest or knowen. Also as Cúnta. Also a dwelling place.

Contabíle, countable, numerable.

Conta dina, a Country lasse or wench. 

Contadinánza, countriship.

Contadinella, a yongue or pretty country wench. Also country songes or gigges.

Contadíno, a country man, a swaine, a hinde, a clowne, a peasant, a borrell.

Contadinózza, a handsome country wench.

Contádo, a County, an Earledome, a shire, a precinct. Also the Country.

Contadoría, as Contería.

Contágio, as Contagióne.

Contagionáre, to infect with contagion.

Contagióne, a contagion, an infection.

Contagióso, contagious, infectious.

Con tál pátto, vpon such condition.

Contaminábile, that may be polluted or defiled.

Contamináre, to contaminate, to pollute.

Contaminatióne, contamination, pollution.

Contaminatíssimo, most corrupt.

Contamin éuole, that may bedefiled.

Contána, a disease in a horses forelegges.

Contánti, ready or tould mony.

Contáre, to count, to number, to tell, to reckon, to report. Also as Cuntáre.

Contatióne, as Cuntatióne.

Contatóre, a numberer, a reckoner, a teller, an auditor, a keeper of accounts.

Contastáre, as Contrastáre.

Contásto, as Contrásto.

Contátto, a touching with or feeling together.

Cónte, a Count, an Earle. Also noted, reported, knowen, or famous.

Contea, a County, an Earledome, a Shire.

Con téco, with the.

Contégno, coynesse, nicenesse, peeuishnesse, pride, arrogancy. Also grauity or sobriety. Also euery thing contained.

Contegnóso, coye, nice, peeuish, proud, arrogant, scrupulous. Also graue or sober.

Contemperaménto, as Contempránza.

Contemperánte, tempering together.

Contemperánza, as Contempránza.

Contemperáre, to temper with, or moderate together, to accorde or tune with.

Contempiáre, as Contempláre.

Contempiatióne, as Contemplatióne.

Contempláre, to contemplate. 



Contemplatióne, contemplation.

Contemplatíuo, contemplatiue.

Contemplábile, contemplable, that may be contemplated.

Contempráre, as Contemperáre.

Contempraménto, as Contempránza.

Contempránza, a tempering together.

Contemptíbile, contemptible.

Contemptibilità, contemptiblenesse.

Contenáro, a great weight or measure.

Contendere, tendo, tesi, téso, to contend, to striue, to debate, to wrangle. Also to refuse, to deny, to gainesay.

Contenente, a continent. Also containing.

Contenenza, continency, containing.

Contenére, tengo, tenni, tenúto, to containe or hold.

Contentábile, that may be contented.

Contentaménto, contentment.

Contentáre, to content, to please.

Contentatíuo, full of contentment.

Contentatúra, a contenting.

Contentéuole, that may be contented.

Contentézza, content, contentment.

Contentiéuole, contentionable.

Contentionáre, to contend, to debate, to striue.

Contentióne, a contention, a debate, a strife.

Contentiosaménte, contentiously.

Contentióso, contentious, wrangling.

Contento, contentment, content.

Conténto, contented, pleased. Also contained.

Contenúto, contained, held together.

Contería, a counting or telling-house, a place where accompts are kept.

Conterminále, bounding with or together.

Contermináre, to bound with, to confine vpon. Also to agree vpon equall termes.

Contermine, a bordering, a ioining, or limiting with or neere. Also a concordance, an vnitie or being with or together.

Conterráneo, of the same country or towne.

Contésa, a contention, a strife, a debate.

Contéso, contented. Also gaine-said. Also for bidden or hidden from.

Contéssa, a Countesse, an Earles wife.

Contessere, tesso, tesséi, tessúto, to weaue with, or worke and frame together.

Contessiménto, a weauing or working together.

Contestábile, a Constable.

Contessúto, as Contesto.

Contestatióne, contestation.

Contestáre, to contest, to debate. 

Contesto, inwrought, wouen, or enterlaid together or with.

Contestúra, a contexture.

Contézza, familiaritie, acquaintance. Also information, accompt, aduertisement.

Cóntie, a kind of good little Oliues.

Conticello, a small accompt or reckoning.

Contígia, the lying-in of a woman in childbed, when she is finely drest and trimmed vp in her bed curiously expecting her friends to come to visite and gossip with her.

Contigiáre, to decke, to trimme, to dight and adorne finely as women are, lying in childbed.

Contígie, all manner of dightings or trimmings as belong to women rather for ornament then vse, all fine knacks that belong to fine women in childbed. Also all manner of blandishments or adulations in faire speeches. Also leather hosen such as our forefathers were wont to weare.

Contiguità, contiguitie, or neighbourbood that ioyneth neare together.

Contíguo, contiguous, adioining neere, or touching one another.

Continente, continent, chaste. Also the continent or maine firme land.

Continénza, continencie, chastitie.

Contingente, contingent, that may bee or not be, hapning, that chanceth.

Contingenza, casuall, comming to passe, contingencie.

Contíngere, tíngo, tingéi, tingiúto, to happen, to chance. Also to dye with or together.

Continoáre, as Continuáre.

Contínua, vsed for a continuall ague.

Continuánza, continuance.

Continuále, continuall.

Continuáre, to continue.

Continuaménte, continually.

Continuatióne, continuance.

Continuáto, continued, fast-knit together.

Continuéuole, that may continue.

Continuità, continuance, continuitie.

Contínuo, continuall, euer during.

Contióne, as Concióne.

Contísta, a caster of accompts.

Cónto, counted, numbred, tould, reported, related, proclaimed. Also ready prepared.

Cónto, an accompt, a reckoning, an estimation. Also a tale, a discourse, a count, a relation, a report. Also a million of crownes.

Contórcere, tórco, torcéi, tórto, to writhe, to wrest, to wrinch, to wrigle, to spraine, or winde vp with or together.

Contorciménto, as Contórta.

Contornáre, to turne together, or compasse about.

Contórno, a circuit or place neere about. Also the purlies about a wood.

Contórta, a wrinching or spraining of ones limmes.

Contórto., looke Contorcére.

Cóntra, against, opposite, counter, contrarie.

Contraassále, as Anima diferro.

Contrabandáre, to doe against lawes or proclamations. Also to forfeit.

Contrabandiére, a forfaiter, a trespasser against lawes proclaimed, one that medleth to buy and sell forbidden wares or goods, an vnlawfull dealer.

Contrabandito, counterbanished, but properly one that doth against lawes.

Contrabándo, any vnlawfull dealing against law or proclamations, a forfeiting against statutes, forbidden martes.

Contrabásso, a counterbase, be it voice, string or instrument.

Contrabátta, a Counterbuffe or beating.

Contrabáttere, to counterbuffe or beat.

Contrabattería, a counter-batterie.

Contrabattúta, a counter-beating.

Contracambiáre, to counterchange.

Contracámbio, a counterchange.

Contracáua, a countermine, or caue.

Contracauáre, to countermine.

Contracífera, a counter cipher.

Contraciferáre, to countercipher.

Contracolpíre, to counter-strike.

Contracólpo, a counter-blow or buffe.

Contráda, a country, a precinct, a wapentake. Also a parish. Also a highway or streete.

Contradétta, as Contradittióne.

Contradétto, gaine-said, contradicted.

Contradiáre, to contrarie, to oppose.

Contradicente, contradicting, gaine-saying.

Contradicenza, as Contradittióne.

Contradietà, contrarietie.

Contrádio, contrary.

Contradióso, full of contrarietie.

Contradicéuole, that may bee gainesaid.

Contradíre, díco, díssi, détto, to contradict.

Contradistínguere, to distinguish against, to counterdistinguish.

Contradistintióne, a counterdistinction.

Contradistínto, different from others, distinguished moreouer and besides.

Contradittióne, a contradiction.

Contradittóre, a gaine-sayer.

Contradittório, contradictorie.

Contradiuieto, a countermand.

Contrafacéuole, that may bee done against. 



Contrafaciente, a trespasser or doer against.

Contrafaciménto, a doing against.

Contrafáre, fáccio, féci, fátto, to counterfeit, to imitate. Also to doe against, or trespasse.

Contrafátto, counterfeited, imitated. Also done against or transgressed.

Contrafátto, a counterfeit, a false or not true thing.

Contrafattóre, a counterfeiter, an imitator. Also a doer against, an offender.

Contrafódera, a counterlyning. Also a false scabard of a sword.

Contrafoderáre, to counterlyne.

Contraforáre, to counterbore.

Contrafórte, a counter fort or counterskonce.

Contrafortificáre, to fortifie against.

Contrafrontáre, to counterfront.

Contrafrónte, the spurne or inner part of a bulwarke.

Contrafustágno, a word of Architecture.

Contragabbionáre, to countergabbion.

Contragabbióne, a countergabbion.

Contrággere, trággo, trássi, trátto, to contract, to couenant, to bargaine.

Contrahére, as Contrággere.

Contrahíbile, that may be contracted.

Contralésina, a counter sparing, a lauish, spender, or expence.

Contralesinággine, prodigall spending.

Contralesinánte, a lauish spender.

Contralesináre, to spend lauishly.

Contralettera, a countermand or letter written against another.

Contrálto, a countertreble in Musicke.

Contralzáre, to raise against.

Contralzáta, a counter raising.

Contramaéstro, a masters mate in a ship.

Contramaggióre, some part of a ship.

Contramáglie, crownes or money in gibrish or rogues language.

Contramandáre, to countermand, to send against.

Contramandáto, as Contramándo.

Contramándo, a countermand.

Contramánico, a counterhaft or handle.

Contramáno, against the hand.

Contramezzána, a saile in a ship. Also a counter tenor stringe of an instrument.

Contramína, a counter mine or caue.

Contramináre, to countermine.

Contramonitionére, a controuler of the munition of a campe.

Contramuráre, to countermure.

Contramúro, a countermure.

Contraoperáre, to counter worke.

Contraoperatióne, a counter worke.

Contraouáre, to make ouale at one end. 

Contrapassáre, to transgresse, to doe or forfeit against any edict, to counterpace.

Contrapásso, a counterpace, a forfeiture against law, a law, as we say, limme for limme: as if one kill another with a stone or fall, he must be killed so himselfe, a talion law.

Contrapélo, against haire or biasse.

Contrapesáre, to counterpoise.

Contrapéso, a counterpoise.

Contrapiacére, to counterplease.

Contrapóliza, a counter bill or schedule.

Contraponente, an opponent.

Contrapónere, as Contrapórre.

Contrapórre, to oppose or lay against.

Contrapositióne, an opposition.

Contrapósta, an opposition.

Contrapósto, opposed or laid against. Also an opposition.

Contrapugnáre, to fight against.

Contrapuntáre, to counter point. Also to descant in singing.

Contrapúnto, a counterpoint. Also a back-stitch in sowing. Also a descant in Musicke or singing.

Contrapúnto, counterpointed. Also a lesson of descant.

Contrariáre, to contrarie, to impugne.

Contrarietà, contrarietie, opposition.

Contrariéuole, that may be contraried.

Contrariíssimo, most opposite or contrarie.

Contrário, contrarie, opposite, against.

Contrarióso, full of contrarietie.

Contrarispóndere, to answere against.

Contrarispósta, a counter answere.

Contrárre, trággo, trássi, trátto, to contract, to pull together, to treat together.

Contraróndo, a certaine number of officers or commanders going to visite the Corps de guard watches, sentinels or the round to see whether they performe their dutie.

Contrascaccáto, counterponie or countercheckie in armorie.

Contrascarpáre, to counterskarfe.

Contrascárpa, a countermure, a counterskarfe, a banke of a ditch opposite to the wall.

Contrascrítto, a counter writing.

Contrascrítto, counter written.

Contrascríuere, to write against.

Contrasedére, to sit ouer against.

Contrasegnále, as Contraségno.

Contrasegnáre, to countermarke.

Contraségno, a counter token, or signe.

Contrasouráno, a counter treble.

Contrassále, as Anima di ferro.

Contrastaménto, as Contrásto.

Contrastáre, to resist, to withstand, to striue, to wrangle, to contend, to stand against.

Contrásto, a with standing, a contention, a strife, a contecke, a standing against.

Contrastómaco, against stomacke. Also a stomacher.

Contrastóso, full of strife, wrangling.

Contratenére, to hold against.

Contratenóre, a counter tenor.

Contratóndo, as Contraróndo.

Contratóssico, a counterpoison.

Contrattábile, that may be contracted.

Contrattáre, to contract, to treat together.

Contrattatióne, a contracting, a treating together.

Contrattatória, contractorie.

Contrattióne, a contracting, a contraction or shrinking together.

Contrátto, a contracting, a shrinking. Also contracted, or couenanted. Also a Contract.

Contraueléno, a counterpoison.

Contraueniménto, a transgressing or breach of law, a comming against.

Contraueníre, vengo, vénni, venúto, to come against, to transgresse.

Contrauersia, a controuersie.

Contravóglia, against will.

Contraurtáre, to countershocke.

Contraúrto, a countreshocke.

Contribuente, contributing.

Contribuíre, ísco, íto, to contribute.

Contríbuli, men of one tribe, or borne in the selfe same parish.

Contributióne, a contribution.

Contributóre, a contributer.

Contríne, vsed for Cortíne, Curtaines.

Contristaménto, a sorrowing with others.

Contristáre, to be or make sorrowfull.

Contristatióne, as Contristaménto.

Contríre, ísco, íto, to be or become contrite, penitent or sorrowfull at the heart.

Contritáre, to bring to contrition. Look also Tritáre.

Contritióne, contrition, remorse.

Contríto, contrite, penitent, sorrowfull.

Cóntro, as Cóntra in all compositions. Also a Counter. Also a tenor in Musicke.

Cóntroa grádo, against ones will.

Controuersábile, controuersable.

Controuersáre, to controuerse.

Controuerséuole, controuersable.

Controuersia, a controuersie.

Controuersóso, full of controuersie.

Contubernio, a tent, a pauilion. Also a fellowship in a house, or camerada of souldiers.

Contumáce, disobedient, stubborne, wilfull, headstrong, stiffe-necked against superioritie or law.

Contumácia, contempt, stubbornenesse, disobedience, stiffeneckednesse, frowardnesse against law.

Contumelia, reproch, spite, contempt. 



Contumelióso, reprochfull, spitefull.

Conturbaménto, perturbation, disquietnesse, trouble, disturbance.

Conturbáre, to disturbe, to disquiet, to trouble, to confound, to afflict.

Conturbatióne, as Conturbaménto.

Conturbáto, disturbed, troubled with, sad, afflicted in minde.

Conturbéuole, that may be disturbed.

Contúrno, as Cothúrno.

Contusióne, a contusion or brusing of a mans bodie.

Contutáre, as Tutáre.

Contútto, with all, for all that, notwithstanding all that.

Contútto che, with all that, notwithstanding all that, for all that.

Contúttociò, as Contútto che.

Contútto quésto, for all this.

Conualescente, in health or good state of bodie.

Conualescenza, health of bodie.

Conualére, to be in good state of bodie.

Conuálle, a fellow-vallie.

Conuariábile, variable with others.

Conuariáre, to varie with others.

Conubiáre, as Connubiáre.

Conúbio, as Connúbio.

Conuenente, as Conuenéuole. Also as Conuégna.

Conuenenza, as Conuégna.

Conuenéuole, conuenient, seemely, beseeming, expedient, meete, necessarie.

Conueneuolezza, as Conueniénza.

Conueneuolménte, conueniently, decently.

Conueneuolità, as Conuenienza.

Conuegna, a conueening, a meeting. Also a couenant, a bargaine, an agreement, a condition, a promise.

Conueniente, as Conuenéuole.

Conuenienteménte, conueniently.

Conuenienza, conuenience, seemelinesse, expediency, decencie.

Conuenientíssimo, most conuenient.

Conueníre, vengo, vénni, venúto, to conueene, to meete with or come together. Also to behooue, to be conuenient. Also to agree or couenant together. Also to sute or square well together. Also to cite, to summon together. Also to appeare with or together.

Conuentáre, to conuent or enter into a religious house. Also to couenant. Also to take the degree of Doctor, or be numbred in the ranke of Doctors.

Conuenticuláre, to conuenticle, to complot, to conspire.

Conuentículo, a conuenticle, a complot, a conspiracie.

Conuentióne, as Conuégna.

Conuento, a Conuent or religious house, a meeting place. Also comming or meeting with or together, an assembly, a conueening. Also a couenant or agreement with.

Conuentuále, conuentuall, of a Conuent or religious house.

Conuenúto., looke Conueníre.

Conuersábile, sociable, conuersable.

Conuersáre, to conuerse or frequent.

Conuersatióne, conuersation.

Conuersatíuo, conuersable, sociable.

Conuerséuole, conuersable, sociable.

Conuersióne, a conuersion, a change, a transformation.

Conuerso, as Conuertíto.

Conuertenza, a conuerting, or turning.

Conuertíbile, verting to and fro.

Conuertíre, tísco, títo, to conuert, to turne, to transforme, or change into.

Conuertíto, conuerted, turned, transformed. Also a Conuertite, or changeling.

Conuertitóre, a conuerter.

Conuessáre, to conuexe or bend the hollow of any thing downeward.

Conuessità, a conuexitie, or bending of a hollow thing downeward.

Conuessitúdine, as Conuessità.

Conuésso, conuexe, bending downeward as the heauen doth.

Conuiandánte, a fellow-traueller.

Conuiáre, to conuoy, to lead, to conduct.

Conuiáto, conuoyed. Also a conuoy.

Conuiciatóre, a detracter, a railer against any mans good name or fame.

Conuicínáre, to neighbour with.

Conuicíno, neere or neighbouring with.

Conuiéne, it behooueth, it is necessary. Also it becommeth or is meete.

Conuíncere, vínco, vínsi, vínto, or vítto, to conuince, to conuict.

Conuinciménto, a conuincing.

Conuintióne, a conuicting.

Conuínto, conuinced, conuicted.

Conuitánti, as Conuitáti.

Conuitáre, to enuite to some feast.

Conuitáti, enuited or feasted guests.

Conuitatóre, an enuiter of guests.

Conuíto, a feast or guest meale.

Conuítto, food, sustenance or maintenance of life together.

Conuítto, conuicted, vanquished.

Conuittióne, a conuiction, a vanquishing.

Conuittiménto, as Conuittióne.

Conuittúra, as Conuittióne.

Conuitiáre, to vitiate or defile with.

Conuítio, a vice ioyned to another vice.

Conuiuánte, a fellow-guest.

Conuiuáre, as Conuitáre.

Conuiuente, a Conuiuent or liuing together.

Conuiuenza, a Conuiuence, a Coniunction or liuing together.

Conuíuere, víuo, víssi, vissúto, to liue and eat and drinke together.

Conuíuio, a feast, a banquet, a guestmeale. 

Conuocáre, to conuoke or call together.

Conuocatióne, a Conuocation.

Conuoitóso, couetous, greedily-desirous.

Conuólgere, as Conuóluere.

Conuolgiménto, a conuoluing, turning or winding about.

Conuóluere, vóluo, vólsi, vólto, to turne about, to twine together. Also to conuolue, to ouerturne, to diuert with, to enwrap together.

Conuólto, enwrapped with or together.

Conuóluoli, twinings or windings about, enwrappings together. Also wringings in ones body.

Conuóluolo, a Vine-fretter or the deuils goldring. Also Rope-weed or Withwinde.

Conuóti, votaries, men that haue made one vow together.

Conuulsionáre, to come to a conuulsion.

Conuulsióne, a conuulsion, a painefull crampe, a shrinking of sinnewes.

Conzáre, as Conciáre, &c.

Conziero, as Conciéro.

Cóo, a kind of wine so called.

Cooperánte, working with or together, cooperating, fellow-working.

Cooperáre, to worke with or together.

Cooperatióne, a working together, a fellow working.

Cooperatóre, a fellow worker.

Coordináre, to co-ordinate.

Coordinatióne, a co-ordination.

Coorte, as Cohórte.

Copáno, a kind of little boate or shallop.

Copeello., Looke Molíno and Tramóggio.

Copella, as Coppella.

Copelláre, as Coppelláre.

Copelli, little round graines.

Copercéro, a kind of vpper frocke.

Coperchia, as Coperchio.

Coperchiáre, to couer, to shroud.

Coperchiatúra, a couering.

Coperchio, a couerlet, a couer, a billing, a lid. Also a shouding, a sheltring. Also vsed for the Mercy seat of God. Exodus. 26. 34.

Coperco, as Coperchio. Also a coine.

Copertícola, the hearbe Water-lilly.

Coperta., Looke Stráda coperta, a couer, a couert, a shelter, a houell, a shrouding. Also a thicket of wood. Also the vpper decke or ouer-lope of a ship.

Copertaménte, couertly, secretly.

Coperta di letto, a teaster or couerlet for a bed.

Coperto, couered, shrouded, hilled.

Copertína, a thin couerlet. Also a footcloth.

Copertóio, a couer, a couering.

Copertúra, a couerlet, a hilling.

Copése, as Colabácco, a fish. 



Copetelle, the hearbe Water-lilly.

Copétta, bread made with hony and spice.

Copettáio, one that maketh such bread.

Cóphano, a coffin, a chest. Also a bin, or a maund.

Cópia, a coppy, a transcript, an original, a patterne. Also store, plenty, abundance or quantity.

Cópia, a couple, a paire, a brace, a cast.

Copialettere, a secretary, a booke keeper.

Copiáre, to match, to ensample.

Copiáre, to coppy, to write out.

Copiatóre, one that coppieth any writing, a notary, a scriuener.

Copíba, a tree in India, the barke wherof being cut yeelds and gusheth out a precious balsamum.

Copídi, long crooked swords like faulchons vsed by the Grecians.

Copiére, as Coppiére.

Copíle, a Bee-hiue. Also the hole at which the Bees goe into the Hiue.

Copiosissimaménte, most abundantlie.

Copióso, copious, plentious, aboundant. Also full off, large or great.

Copista, a coppy-writer, a registrer, a remembrancer.

Copistáccio, a scribler, a foolish writer, a note gatherer.

Copistáre, to scrible, from booke to booke.

Copistúzzo, as Copistáccio.

Copofello, a pully in a ship.

Cópola, a couple for dogges.

Copoláre, to couple together.

Coppa, any cup, bowle, mazer or goblet, a cupping glasse, the test of any mettall. Also the nape of the head. Also some part of a sadle.

Cóppa di Gióue, a high-growing weed, which euery morning as the funne riseth, it bendeth his tops to him, and so soone as the sunne is risen it standeth vp againe, and a gaine bendeth at his sitting, and being set, it riseth againe looking Westward, and in the morning Eastward.

Coppáre, to cup. Also to kill, to quell or knocke out ones braines.

Copparella, a little cup or goblet.

Cóppe, cups, bowles, goblets, spoones.

Coppella, the test or loye of siluer or gold. Also a kind of wheele-barrow. Also a dosser or pannier.

Coppelláre, to refine or bring gold or siluer to his right and due test or loye.

Coppétte, a little cup. Also a cupping glasse. Also a kind of simnell bread.

Coppettáre, to vse cupping glasses.

Cóppi, tiles or slates ouer houses. Also tileshards.

Cóppia, a couple, a brace, a paire, a consort, a company, a crue.

Coppiáre, to couple, to paire, to brace.

Coppiére, a Cup-bearer, a fil-cup.

Coppiétte, a kind of dressing of meat, as Polpétte.

Coppináre, to play bopeepe.

Coppíno, boe-peepe, a bug-beare.

Cóppo, a roofe-tile. Also the hollow of ones eies.

Cóppola, a shepheards cap.

Cópra, cioe cálo di nóci d' India.

Copriletto, a bed-couerlet.

Copriménto, any kinde of couering.

Copríre, cuópro, copríj,or copersi, coperto, to couer. Also to hill, to cloake, to shroud, to shelter, or protect.

Copritesta, a couersheafe, any couer for the head, be it hat, cap or quoife.

Copritúra, as Copriménto.

Cópso, a fish, called in Latine Cops.

Cópula, a couple. Also a copulation.

Copuláre, to couple or ioyne together.

Copulatióne, copulation, or coupling.

Copulatíuo, that coupleth, or may couple.

Cóquo, a Cooke.

Cór, Córe, Cuóre, the heart or core of any thing. Vsed also for Córre or Cogliere. Vsed also anciently for Con, with, together, or in company.

Coráccia, a cuirace, a vantplate, a breast-plate, some take it for the armour of the body and backe. Also a brigandine.

Coraccína, a little Coráccia.

Coracéni cauálli, horse-men armed with cuiraces.

Coracíno, a little heart, a bright Rauencolour. Also the blacke fish with a head shining like gold, whereof there is no male.

Coraciesa, Calícia. 

Coráda, the midrife, geither, plucke or hasselet of any beast, the vmble of a Deare, the giblets of a goose.

Coradella, as Coráda.

Coraggiáre, to encourage, to harten.

Corággio, courage, stoutnesse, hardinesse.

Coraggióso, couragious, hardie, stout.

Corále, cordiall, hearty.

Corálide, a Vermillion-stone.

Corálio, a stone to make Mill-stons.

Coralítico, a kind of rich marble.

Corállide, as Corálide.

Corallína, Corall or mountaine Coralline. Also the male pimpernell.

Corallíno, a coraline-stone or colour.

Corállo, Corall, which groweth in the sea like a shrub, and taken out waxeth hard.

Corállo acháte, a red Agate-stone.

Corallóso, full of Corall, Corally.

Coralménte, cordially, hartily.

Coráme, all manner of drest leather. 

Corámi crúdi, all sorts of raw hides.

Coratella, as Coráta.

Coratiere, a broker of barganes.

Corázza, as Coráccia.

Corba, anykind of basket. Also a certain measure of liquid things. Also the cage of a ship.

Corbacchiáre, to croke as a Rauen, to act or play the vnluckie-rauen.

Corbácchio, a filthy great Rauen. Also a worme breeding in horses.

Corbacchióne, a filthy Rauen. Also a rauenous filthy fellow.

Corbáme, all manner of great baskets.

Corbámi, cast hulkes, old ships.

Corbána cássa, a Chest wherein the Priests oblations were cast in the holy Temple.

Corbástro, a Water-rauen.

Corbella, a little pannier or basket.

Corbelláre, to put into panniers or baskets.

Corbétta, a little panyer. Also a young rauen. Also a coruet of a horse.

Corbettáre, to coruet.

Corbétto, a fish in Latine Glaucus.

Corbézzolo, Corbezzuólo, an Arbut or Strawberry tree or fruit therof. Also a kind of Wilding or Crab-tree or the fruit thereof.

Córbi, Rauens. Also a kind of fish.

Corbíne, a kind of wild blacke cherries.

Corbíta, a great ship for burthen.

Córbo, a Crow or a rauen. Also a fish.

Córboli in squára, some part of a ship.

Corbona, hell or a place where no redemption is. Also a little ease in a prison. Also a great basket.

Corcaiuólo, a worme breeding in horses, whereof cunning Farriers say, there be eight kinds.

Corcálle, Colánza, a kind of bird.

Corcáre, to lie downe or along, to squat downe. Also to doubt. Also to bray as a stag or bucke.

Corcára, as Córcoro.

Corcáta, a lying downe along. Also the laire of a stag or bucke.

Córcoro, the hearb Pimpernell.

Córda, a cord, a rope, a cable, a halter, a line, a string. Also gunners match. Also a strappado. Also a kind of measure vsed in Italy.

Cordággij, all manner of cordage, cables, shrouds, tacklings or ropes for ships.

Córda di stóppa, gunners match.

Cordáglia, as Cordággij.

Cordáme, as Cordággij.

Córda gróssa, draughtrope.

Cordápso, the wringing or torment of the small guts in ones body.

Cordáre, to cord, to string.

Cordáro, a roper, a rope maker.

Cordaruólo, as Cordáro.



Córda sottíle, hand roape, small cord.

Córde, all kinds of strings for instruments.

Cordegliére, a frier, a franciscan frier.

Cordella, as Cordicella.

Cordelláme, as Cordággij.

Cordellíne, little strings, twists or laces.

Cordería, as Cordággij.

Córdi, latter lambs.

Cordiále, cordiall, harty.

Cordialità, hartinesse, cordiality.

Cordicella, any little cord or string, a line, a tape, a lace, a fillet, an inkle, a ribond, a binding, a twine, a twist. Also merline, whipcord, twist cord. Also a little thong or latchet of leather. Also a shirt string.

Cordigliére, as Cordegliére.

Cordíglio, a Spanish friers habit.

Cordílla, the yong frie of the Tunny fish.

Cordíni, all manner of cordicelle.

Córdo, as Accórdo. Also latter haye or woodcocke haye. Also a latter lambe.

Cordoána, as Cordouáno.

Cordóglio, hearts greefe, teene, sorrow.

Cordoglióso, full of hearts griefe.

Cordogliére, as Cordegliére.

Cordoncella, as Cordicella. Also an hearb.

Cordoncíni, as Cordellíne.

Cordóne, a great cord or string. Also a hatband. Also a broade ribond. Also the name of a certaine gut in a horse. Also the Cordon, that is the water table placed euen with the face of the rampart, from which vpward is the parapet.

Cordouaniére, a cordwainer, a shoemaker, a dresser or maker of spanish leather.

Cordouáno, Cordouane or spanish leather. Also as Corríbo.

Cordúse, or Cordúce, quasi Cúria Ducis, a Dukes pallate.

Córe, a heart, a core. Also a Greeke coine of foure dragmes.

Corecíno, a little heart or core.

Corédula, a bird like a hearon.

Coreggiáti, such flailes as they thresh corne with.

Corelatióne, a correlation, a relation to another.

Corelatíuo, hauing relation to another.

Corellário, a corollary, an illation or agreeable addition.

Coreo, a foot in meeter of two sillables, the one long the other short.

Córgna, the fruit of the tree Córgno.

Corgniále, as Córnio.

Córgno, as Córnio.

Corgnóla, a cornix stone.

Corgnolíno, a corniolin stone.

Córi, a kind of Hiperico, which boiled in wine and giuen to any body in a swoune he will presently sweat and come to himselfe againe.

Cória, a kind of fish.

Coriacésia, an hearb that makes the water freeze whereinto it is put.

Coriaginea, a sicknesse in cattell called hidebound, that is when the skin cleaueth so fast to their sides that they can not stir.

Coriaginóso, sicke of the hide bound.

Coriámbi, a foot in meeter hauing the first and last sillable long, and the two in the middle short.

Coriándoli, Coriander seeds or comfets.

Coriándro, the shrub bearing Corianders.

Coriáno, a kind of ring that women were wont to weare on their middle finger.

Coriário, the Curriers shrub.

Coribánthe, one that sleeps with his eies open.

Coribanthía, a sleeping with ones eies open.

Coricánte, couchant in armory.

Coricáre, as Corcáre.

Córico, all the part of a tragedy belonging to a Chorus. Also a light dart or other thing fit to be shot off like an arrow.

Coridestra, a kind of shell fish.

Corifórme, the ne -'like folds which being caried through the vpper hollownesse or ventricles of the braine serue for the generation of the animall spirits, looke Vuea.

Córila, a hazell nut or filbird.

Córilo, a hazell nut or filbird tree.

Corímbi, a kind of loope rings. Also the bunches or clusters growing with Iuie. Also the stems or stalkes of hempe, fennell, or holyhockes.

Corimbiténo, a kind of Tithimale.

Corínca, the snarling of a dog.

Corincáre, to snarle as a dog.

Corinóne, a kind of red lillie.

Coríntha, an hearb the iuice whereof is present poison.

Corintáde, as Coríntha.

Corínthi, corans or small raisins.

Corínti, as Corímbi.

Coríntho, a kind of Architecture.

Cório, any vpper cote, rind, pill or couer of any thing. Also a foote in verses of two sillables, one long and the other short.

Corioléna, a kind of dainty peare.

Corióne, a thin skin or membrant vnder Dura mater. Also as Coríntha, looke Vnea.

Coripheo, as much to say as chiefe.

Coríthia, a kind of shell fish.

Coríto, a kind of speare or horse mans staffe. Also a bow-case. Also Saint Iohns wort.

Coriza, a Cathar, or rhume in the nose.

Corláre, to wind or reele silke vpon bobins. Also as Crolláre.

Corlétto, any little Corlo.

Córli, roulers of timber to roule great ordinance vpon.

Córlo, a reele, a winder or rise to wind silke with. Also a bottom or clue of silke or thrid. Also a top or gigge that children play with in Lent.

Corlóni, as Córli.

Córna, all maner of hornes. Also a kind of boies play in Italy.

Cornácchia, a chough, a daw, a rooke.

Cornacchiáre, to chat or chough as a daw.

Cornacchióne, a great iacke daw. Also a detracting pratler.

Cornamusa, a bag pipe or a hornet, looke Fáre cornamúsa.

Cornamusáre, to play vpon a bag pipe or horne pipe. Also to call aloud to one that will not heare, to waste ones wind in vaine.

Cornáre, to horne or set hornes vpon ones head, to cuckold. Also to wind a horne. Also to shocke, front or But as rams do. Also to call aloud or importune one that will not heare.

Cornáro, a horner.

Cornea, the hornie tunicle of the eye, wherein the apple of the eye is placed.

Corneggiáre, to horne, to wind a horne, to make or become horned, to make cuckold.

Corneggiáto, horned, or bending as a horne.

Cornelíne, a kind of daintie Peare.

Cornelíno, a Corniolin stone.

Corneo, of the nature of horne, like a horne, as hard as horne.

Cornétta, a kind of miniuer hood that Scholars and Masters of Artes weare in Vniuersities for honor. Also the ensigne which is carried by the Lanciers.

Cornétta di cauálli, a Cornet or troupe of horses, or their ensigne.

Cornettáro, a Cornet-maker or winder.

Cornétto, a Cornet, a litle horne, a bugle, an inkehorne. Also a cupping glasse. Also a kinde of fish about Genoa.

Corniále, as Córnio.

Corniccino, a little horne.

Corniccióne, as Corníce.

Corníce, a Chough, a Dawe, a Rooke. Also a red Cornixstone. Also a Corner in any frame or building, an outiutting peece or part of house or wall. Also the ledge whereon they hang tapistries in any roome.

Corníce délla bócca, the ring of the mouth of any piece of Ordinance.

Corníce del metállo, the ring about any 



peece of Ordinance.

Corníce delli orecchióni, a ring or cornish round about a piece both at mouth and breech, or about the middle where the trunions or eares of the pieces are.

Cornicchióne, a great Corníce.

Cornicello, a litle horne or bugle.

Cornicína, as Cornióla.

Cornicíne del fagiáno, the red gilles of a fesant.

Cornicióne, a great Corníce.

Cornífero, hornes-bearing.

Cornígero, hornes-bearing.

Cornílla, a kind of chough or daw.

Córnio, the Cornell, the long or wilde Cherrie tree, the Hounds-tree, the Dogberrie-tree, the Prick-timber-tree or Gater trull tree. Also a Cornix stone. Also a flaske for powder. Also a shepheards cur or mungrell dog.

Cornióla, as Córnio.

Cornióle, a kind of wilde Cherries.

Corniolétto, a kind of litle horne-fish.

Corniólo, as Córnio.

Cornipotente, mighty in hornes.

Cornizáro, a kind of Sea-rauen.

Córno, any kinde of horne. Also the hornes or hard bones growing vnder the sadle in the sides of a horse. Also a kinde of brasen instrument like a horne, called a Hornepipe. Also as Córnio.

Cornóbio, a kind of litle fish.

Córno di hammóne, one of the most pretious stones or gems in Ethiopia, in forme of a Rams horne, called Hamons horne.

Córnola, a Carobe, or Carobe beane-cod.

Córnolo, a Carobe tree.

Cornúda, a horned venemous Serpent.

Cornuóla, as Corgnóla.

Cornuolúzza, a litle Cornix stone.

Cornupéto, a beast that striketh with his hornes.

Cornúte., Looke Pálle cornúte.

Cornutáre, to horne or make cuckold.

Cornúto, horned. Also the Horne-fish. Also a Cuckold. Also a kind of loafe, rolle, or bunne or simnell bread cornered.

Córo, a Quier of a Church, a companie of people gathered close together. Also a Chorus in a Tragedie. Also the South-winde. Also a measure of dry things vsed of old in Ierusalem. Also a kind of musicall instrument.

Corocciáre, as Corrocciáre.

Corognále, as Córnio.

Coróccio, as Corróccio.

Corocotto., 

Corografía, the description of a country.

Corográfo, a describer of a country.

Corolário, as Corollário.

Corólla, a pettie garland, a winter chaplet of false flowers.

Corollário, correspondent, agreement with the matter spoken before. Also an aduantage, and addition, or ouerplus giuen aboue tale or measure.

Coróna, a Crowne, a Diadem, a Circlet, a wreath, a garland or chaplet wherewith Princes be crowned. Also a chaplet or garland of flowres. Also a companie, a crew, a circle or round of persons standing round about one. Also a piece of coine called a Crowne. Also a set or perfect paire of beades. Also a round circle or compasse about the Moone. Also a signe in heauen vpon the shoulder of Artophilax. Also the round circle betweene the white and the apple or sight of the eye. Also the brow of a wall, or ledge and cornish about any roome that is tapistred. Also a pillar to cast off the raine. Also the beginning, ioyning or crowne of the hoofe of a horse. Also a thicke and pointing processe of bones much like to the snag of a Harts-horne. Also the brim, edge or tip of a pot. Also the circlet about any thing or vessell.

Coronaaustrále, the name of a Starre or signe in heauen.

Coróna castrense, a Crowne giuen to him that first inuaded the enemies campe.

Coróna cíuica, a Garland of Oke giuen to him that saued a Citizen by him that was saued.

Coróna della terra, ground Iuie.

Coróna donática, a Crowne giuen for valour and prowes.

Coróna meridionále, as Coróna austrále.

Coróna merláta, as Coróna murále.

Coróna mirtea, as Coróna ouále.

Coróna murále, a Crowne giuen to him that first scaled the walles.

Coróna nauále, a Crowne giuen to him that first boarded a ship.

Coróna ossidionále, a Crowne giuen to a Captaine that first raised a force or siege.

Coróna ouále, a Crowne giuen to a Prince or Captaine that obtained a victorie without slaughter of men.

Coróna prouinciále, as Coróna donática.

Coróna regále, as Cóppa di Gióue.

Coróna régia, the hearbe Melilot.

Coróna rosaria, a coine so called.

Coróna rostráta, as Coróna nauále.

Coróna settentrionále, the name of a starre in heauen, as Ariádna.

Coróna triomphále, a Crowne sent to an Emperor or Captaine generall in honor of triumph.

Coróna valláre, as Coróna castrénse.

Coronále, that seame or suture which is in the forepart of the skull, compassing the forehead like a halfe circle.

Coronále véna, a veine which being a branch of Chilis enuironeth the heart like vnto a Crowne.
`
Coronaménto, a crowning, a coronation.

Coronáre, to crowne, to engarland.

Coronário, the mettall brasse, or latten.

Coroncína, as Coronella.

Coronella, a litle Coronet, as Corníce.

Coronatióne, a Coronation.

Coronella del piéde, the vpper part of the foote.

Coronétta, a coronet, a chaplet, a circlet.

Coroniére, a Crowner, a maker of beades.

Coroneola, a kind of Autumne rose.

Coronópo, Buck-horne plantaine.

Coróphia, a kind of cockle fish.

Corossolo, a robin red brest or red taile.

Corpacciáta, a glutting, a panch full.

Corpáccio, any filthy great bodie.

Corpacciúto, corpulent, big-bodied.

Corparello, as Corpicello.

Corpicello, a litle bodie, a bodilet.

Corpicíno, as Corpicello.

Corpiciuólo, as Corpicello.

Córpo, a bodie, a corps, a volume.

Córpo a córpo, bodie to bodie.

Córpo di guárdia, a Corpe de gard, a court of garde, the bodie of a watch or maine watch consisting of a certaine number of souldiers.

Corpolente, corpulent, big of bodie.

Corpolenza, corpulencie, bignesse of bodie.

Corpóra, all manner of bodies.

Corporále, corporall, pertaining to a bodie, or that hath a bodie. Also a boxe or vaile wherein Priests keepe their Hostias or Sacraments.

Corporále battáglia, a corporall fight.

Corporalità, as Corporeità.

Corporatúra, as Corpolenza.

Corporeità, bodilinesse, realitie, essence.

Corporeo, corporeall, hauing a bodie.

Corpóso, full of bodie or essence.

Corpúsculo, any litle litle bodie.

Corránta, a dance so called.

Córre, as Cógliere, &c.

Corredáre, to dight, to adorne, to decke, to furnish, to set forth, to store a Bride with gifts. Also to equipage, to rig, to tackle or set forth a ship.

Corrédi, dightings, ornaments, deckings, furnitures, equipage. Also the riggings or tacklings of a ship.

Corrédo, is properly such things or gifts as a Bride hath giuen her by her friends at her mariage.

Correggere, reggo, ressi, retto, to correct, to punish, to chastise, to controule.

Corréggia, a cingle, a girt, a strap, a stir­



rop leather, a scourge, the latchet of a shoe. Also a guirding loud fart.

Correggiáli, as Correggiáti.

Correggiáre, to gird, to girt, to strap, to latchet, to scourge. Also to fart aloude.

Correggiáro, a girder, a farter. Also a maker of straps or scourges.

Correggiáta, a girding, a farting.

Correggiáta, the straps of a flaile or of a stirrop. Also a flaile to thrash corne.

Correggíbile, that may be corrected.

Correggiménto, a correcting.

Correggíni, little straps of leather.

Correggiólo, a small kinde of wine.

Correggitóre, a corrector, a controuler.

Correggiuóla, Swine-grasse, Knotgrasse, or Bloodwort. Also a little Corréggia. Also a squirt, or laske. Also a kinde of boyes-play vsed in Italie.

Correlatióne, Correlatíuo, as Corelatióne.

Corrente, running, currant.

Corrente, a current, a streame, a tide, or channell of a riuer.

Correnti, running roulers of timber. Also running sommers or rafters.

Correnti véne, the running veines in the necke.

Correnza, any kinde of running or currant.

Correliáne, a kinde of Ches-nut graffed vpon another Ches-nut.

Córre in mezzo, to take napping with rem in re.

Córrere, córro, córsi, córso, to run.

Córrere adósso, to run vpon.

Córrere al'anello, to run at the ring.

Córrere fortúna, to run a hazard, to be in danger, to suffer ship-wracke.

Córrere alla bága, to run at the ring.

Córrere il pálio, to run a race.

Córrere il móndo, to runne or wander vp and downe the world.

Córrere la bága, to run at the ring.

Córrere la láncia, to run a lance.

Córrere l'anello, to run at the ring.

Córrere la pósta, to run poste.

Córrere l'istessa sortúna, to run on some fortune.

Córrere mele elátte, to run or flow with milke and hony.

Córrere perícolo, to run in danger.

Correría, an excursion an outrode.

Correspondente, correspondent, that answereth to, that agreeth with, answerable, surety for.

Correspondenza, correspondency.

Correspóndere, póndo, pósi, pósto, to be correspondent, to be answerable.

Corresponditóre, one that answereth for or vnto, a correspondent.

Corresuscitáto, risen with againe. 

Corréte, a kind of vnluckie Rauen.

Correttíbile, that may be corrected.

Correttióne, correction, punishment.

Correttíuo, correctiue, correctible.

Corretto, corrected, punished, chastised.

Correttóre, a correcter, a punisher.

Corrézza, as Corréggia, &c.

Correzzuóla, as Correggiuóla.

Corr'huómo, as Corrihuómo.

Corribo, as Corríuo.

Corricále, a tree the male wherof is euer barren and the female fruitfull.

Corridóre, a runner, a swift-horse. Also a long gallery, walke or terrase. Also the vpper decke or ouer-lop of a ship. Also a running scout or spie.

Corriéra, as Carriéra.

Corriere, a Currier, a runner, a post, a messenger, a pursiuant.

Corrihuómo, hue and cry for help.

Corriggíbile, that may be corrected.

Corrispondente, as Correspondente.

Corrispondenza, as Correspondenza.

Corrispóndere, as Correspóndere.

Corritóre, as Corridóre. Also a scoute.

Corriuále, a corriuall, a competitor.

Corriualità, a fellow competency.

Corriuáre, to arriue or come to a place with and together. Also to be or play the corriuall in loue. Also to banke, to land, or come to shore with or together.

Corriuatióne, a drawing of many springs or rilles to one head or channell.

Corríuo, hasty, running headlong, fond-hardy. Also a credulous gull, one more rash then wise. Also one that will be perswaded to doe or say any thing hastily.

Corrízza, a rhume or running at the nose.

Corroboráre, to corroborate, to strengthen.

Corroboratióne, corroboration.

Corroboréuole, that may corroborated.

Corrocciáre, to anger, to mooue to wrath, to vex.

Corrocciéuole, that may be angry.

Corróccio, anger, wrath, ire, vexation, chafing, fretting. Also mourning.

Corroccióso, wrathful, subiect to anger, irefull, angry, fretfull.

Corródere, ródo, rósi, róso, to gnaw, to fret, to corrode.

Corrodiménto, a gnawing, a corroding.

Corrómpere, rómpo, rúppi, rótto, or rompúto, to corrupt, to vitiate, to depraue, to spoile. Also to subborne or corrupt with bribes.

Corrompéuole, that may be corrupted. Looke Corrómpere.

Corrompiménto, a corrupting. Looke Corrómpere.

Corrompitóre, a corrupter. Looke Corrómpere.

Corosiuo, corosiue. Also a corosiue.

Corrosióne, a corroding, a corosiue.

Corrosíuo, a corrosiue or corroding.

Corróso, gnawne, corroded, fretted. Also as Carolíccio.

Corrottíbile, corruptible.

Corrottióne, corruption, putrefaction.

Corrottibilità, corruptibility.

Corrottela, a corrupting.

Corrottele auree, golden bribes.

Corrotto, corrupted, putrified. Also bribed. Also mourning or sorowing for the dead.

Corrottóre, a corrupter.

Corruca, the bird that hatcheth the Cuckoes egs. Also a tittling bird.

Corrucciáre, as Corrocciáre, &c.

Corrúccio, as Corróccio.

Corruccióso, as Corroccióso.

Corrúda, a kind of wild Sparage.

Corrúgij, riuerets, rills, or wairy furrowes in digging of mines.

Corruscáre, to lighten, to sparkle, to flash.

Corruscatióne, as Corrúsco.

Corrúsco, a lightning, a sparkling, a flashing or fire in the aire.

Corruttela, corrupting.

Corruttíbile, corruptible.

Corruttibilità, corruptibility, corruptiblenesse.

Corruttióne, as Corrottióne.

Corruttióni nottúrne, night pollutions.

Corruttíuo, corruptiue, corruptible.

Corrútto, as Corrótto.

Corruttóre, as Corrompitóre.

Córsa, a running. Also a race or course on horsebacke, a carreere of a horse.

Corsáldo, a Courser of Naples.

Corsaláre, to commit piracy, to rob by sea, to play the pirate.

Corsále, a pirate or rouer by sea.

Corsalétto, a Corselet or armour compleat for afoot soldier.

Corsáre, as Corsaláre.

Corsea, as Córsa. Also a broade long walke.

Corseggiatóre, as Corsále.

Corseggiáre, as Corsaláre. Also to roue, to run, to range or gad vp and downe.

Corséca, a partezan or a iauelin such as they vse in Córsica.

Corsétto, as Corsaletto.

Córsia, the ourelope or vpper decke of a ship, the hatches in a ship. Also the middle place in a gally or ship where the best piece of ordinance is placed. Also a ship crane that goes on pullies. Also the breaking of the billowes in a 



rough and stormy sea. Also a running.

Corsiére, a steed or courser of Naples.

Córso, a place where races are run. Also a Course, a running or race of man or horse, a Carreere. Also wine of Córsica. Also the participle of Córrere, run.

Corsóide, a stone like a peruke of gray haire.

Corsóre, as Cursóre. Also a little barrell or firkin for dry things.

Córta, short, briefe, curtald.

Cortadóre, a shortner. Also a heads man.

Cortálda, a short bumbard, a pot gun.

Cortáldo, a curtall, a horse sans taile.

Cortáldo petriéro, a short perrier.

Cortáre, to shorten, to curtall.

Córte, a Court or pallace of a Prince, a Court or yard in or about any house. Also a Court of Iustice, a Guild hall or towne house. Also a Court of Iusticers, magistrates, or of Aldermen. Also the whole body of Magistrates or officers together. Also a Princes whole family or traine. Also an open house hold or great feasting.

Córte sauella, a famous prison in Rome.

Corteáre, vsed antiently for Corteggiáre.

Cortéccia, the rind or barke of a tree. Also the huske of any fruit. Also a hide, a skin or fell. Also any ruggednesse.

Corteccióso, rugged as the barke of a tree, rindy or full of barke.

Cortéggio, a traine of followers that attend one as it were to court him or fawne on him.

Corteggiáre, to court one with attendance and obsequiousnesse.

Cortegiána, a curtezane, a strumpet, quasi Cortése áno, a curteous tale.

Cortegianaménti, courtiers or curtezans trickes.

Cortegianáre, to play the curtezan. Also to follow curtezans.

Cortegianello, a little or yong Courtier.

Cortegianería, Courtiership.

Cortegianésco, courtier or curtezan like.

Cortegianésimo, courtier ship. Also the profession of a curtezan.

Cortegianía, Courtier ship.

Cortegiáno, a Courtier. Also an Eunuch.

Cottelláccio, a curtelax, a faulcon.

Cortelláre, to fence, to swash with swords, to swagger.

Cortellára, a cace for, or of kniues.

Cortelláro, a Cutler, a knife maker.

Cortelláta, a blow with knife or sword.

Cortellatóre, a fencer, a hackester.

Cortellíno, a little knife, a pen knife.

Cortello, any knife or whitle, a sword. 

Corteo, as Cortéggio.

Cortése, curteous, affable, gentle, kind.

Corteseggiare, to shew curtesie, louingnesse or kindnesse, to fawne vpon one.

Cortesia, curtesie, louingnesse, genilenesse, affability, kindnesse, mildnesse.

Cortézza, shortnesse. Also as Cortéccia.

Cortíccía, as Cortéccia.

Cortíce, the smooth barke of a tree, good to carue or graue in.

Corticella, a little court, yard, or backe side of a house.

Cortíglio, as Cortíle.

Cortíle, a court or yard of a house.

Cortína, any kind of curtine. Also a curtine of a long wall running leuell from one bulwarke to another. Also a vaile of a temple. Also any fine linnen, lawne, cambricke, sipres, tiffany or cobweb lawne.

Cortinággio, the curtaines or valance, or sparuis, or vailing of a bed or window.

Cortináre, to curtaine, to vaile. Also to flanke any wall about.

Cortinóne, Dent de chien, or Quich grasse. Also oyle made of it.

Córto, short, briefe, succinct, either in body, quantity or time.

Corualsalomóne, a kind of fish.

Coruáre, as Curuáre.

Córue, as Garuelli, as Córba.

Coruetta, a coruet, a sault, a prancing or continuall dancing of a horse.

Coruettáre, to coruet or prance or sault as horses of seruice.

Coruettáta, a coruetting of a horse.

Córuia, a stone of many vertues, found in a rauens nest, and fetcht thither by the rauen, with purpose that if in her absence a man haue sodden her egs and laid them in the nest againe, she may make them raw againe.

Coruína, as Córuia.

Coruíno, of a rauens nature or colour.

Coruità, crookednesse.

Córuo, any kind of rauen or Crow. Also a fish called a Cabot or sea rauen.

Córuo, as Cúruo.

Corúzzo, a bird called a Raile.

Cósa, the generall and common name for any thing.

Cosácchij, vsed for masnadieri.

Cósa da spáccio, any thing that is to be sold.

Cosalína, as Cosétta.

Cosaría, all manner of things.

Cósche, a venemous weed or shrub.

Coschinománte, a deuiner by siues.

Coschinomantía, diuination by siues.

Cóscia, a thigh, a hip, a hanch, vsed also for the brawne of ones arme.

Cosciále, a cuishard piece of armour. Also a breech or a pocket therein. 

Cóscie, thighes, hips or hanches.

Coscieggiare, to clap, to dally, to grope, to play with or on ones thighes, hips, or buttockes.

Coscientia, as Conscientia.

Coscientióso, as Conscientióso.

Cosciétte, little prety thighes or hips.

Cosciettíne, as Cosciétte.

Cosciétto, a leg or gigot of mutton, a pestle of porke, a ham or gammon of Bacon.

Coscinello, as Coscinétto.

Coscinétto, a cushinet, a seamsters coushinet. Also a post-pillion. Also any little pillow, boulster, stuffing or bumbasting. Also a head-wad.

Coscíno, any kind of cushion.

Cóscura, as Cúscura.

Coscióni, cuishards. Also slops or breeches.

Coscrítti, as Conscrítti.

Coscríuere, as Conscríuere.

Cóse, all manner of things.

Cosétta, any little thing or trifle.

Così, so, thus, as, as well, as much.

Cosíbene, as well, thus well.

Cosichè, so that, so as that.

Cosicóme, euen as, so as, like as.

Così così, so so, indifferently.

Cosifattaménte, thus, in such sort.

Cosifátto, such, so made, thus, so like.

Cosi m'aiúti Dio, so helpe me God.

Così similménte, so likewise.

Cósmico, worldly of the world.

Cósmico náscer delle stélle, the arising of any starre in the day time.

Cósmico, occáso, the falling of any star in the day time.

Cosmographía, the discribing of the world.

Cosmográfo, a discriber of the world.

Cosmología, a discription of all things created, or discoursing of the world.

Cosmólogo, a discourser of the world, or describer of all things created.

Cosmométra, a measurer of the world.

Cosmometría, measuring of the world.

Cóso, as Cósa. Vsed in iest as we say, a trime thing to mocke an Ape.

Cospárgere, spárgo, spársi, spárso, or spárto, to sprinkle with or together, to scatter, to disperse, to strew or mingle with.

Cospáre, to tip, to head or socket at the end with horne or mettell.

Cospárso, sprinkled, or scattered with or together.

Cospárto, as Cospárso.

Cospedo, a head, a tip or socket at the end of any staffe or other thing.

Cospergere, as Cospárgere.

Cospersióne, a sprinkling with.

Cosperso, as Cospárso.

Cospetto, the presence or view of any man. 



Cóspi, startops, galashes, pattins or shoes with wooden soles, sockets or tips, or ends put to any thing.

Cospiráre, as Conspiráre.

Cospiratióne, as Conspiratióne.

Cossétto, as Cosciétto.

Cóssi, certaine litlegrubs, hoglice or such litle wormes that breed in timber. Also wrincles in ones face. Also I boiled or smarted of Cócere.

Cóssico, belonging to the arte of figurate numbers.

Cossídia, a kind of hearbe.

Cossíno, any kind of cushion.

Cossinello, any litle cushinet.

Cossinétto, as Coscinétto.

Cósso, a kind of fishers basket.

Cóssolo, the huske, cod, or shale of any pulse.

Costà, there, thither, in yonder place.

Cósta, the rib or coaste of any bodie. Also a side or coast of a Country. Also an habitation or dwelling place. Also a litle or craggie hillocke. Also the backe of a knife or weapon. Also the rib, stalke or stem of a leafe.

Costabilíre, to establish with or together.

Cósta canína, the hearbe Dogs-rib.

Costaggiù, there below or beneath.

Costána, a disease vpon a horses backe.

Costánte, constant, firme, stedfast.

Costántia, as Costánza.

Costantiáre, to lodge with or together.

Costánza, constancie, stedfastnesse.

Costáre, to cost in price. Also as Constáre.

Costáto, ribbed. Also the side, the breast, or whole ribs of any creature.

Costassù, there aboue.

Costeggiáre, to coast, or goe along a coast.

Costei, this woman.

Costellatióne, a constellation, a working, a disposition, or influence of the Starres or Planets.

Costelláto, bespangled with stars.

Costernáre, to astonish, to abash, to affright or ouerthrow in minde.

Costernatióne, amazement, anguish, trouble or astonishment of minde.

Costéuole, as Costóso.

Costì, there, yonder, in that place.

Costiále, a cuishard or thigh armour.

Costiéra, a side or coast of any thing. Also any hill or cliffe coasting along the Sea.

Costiére, ribs or stalkes of any thing. Also a slope, sideline, wide, askew.

Costínci, thence, from thence.

Costionáre, as Questionáre.

Costióne, as Questióne.

Costionéuole, as Questienéuole.

Costionóso, as Questionéuole.

Costituente, constituting. 

Costituíre, as Constituíre.

Costitutióne, a constitution.

Cósto, cost or charge. Also the hearbe Costemary. Also a tree whose roote biteth and burneth and is of an excellent good smell.

Cóstola, as Cósta.

Costoláme, the hole ribes of a body.

Costoláre, to rib, to strengthen with ribes.

Costoláto, as Costáto.

Costolóso, full of ribes, ribbed.

Costoliere, a kind of broade dagger or hanger.

Costolúto, that hath ribs, that is tough and strong.

Costóro, these men.

Costóso, costly, full of cost.

Costrétto, constrained, compelled, forced.

Costríngere, stríngo, strínsi, strétto, to constraine, to force, to compell.

Costrúggere, as Construrre.

Costruíre, ísco, íto, as Costrúggere.

Costruttióne, as Construttióne.

Costrútto, as Constrútto.

Costúi, this man, this same man.

Costumánza, as Costumatézza.

Costumáre, to accustome, to enure, to be wont. Also to teach nurture or maners.

Costumataménte, customably, wontedly. Also mannerly or ciuily.

Costumatézza, mannerlinesse, ciuility

Costumáto, accustomed, wonted, enured. Also mannerly, ciuill, or well brought vp.

Costúme, custome, vse, vre, wont, fashion, guise, habit, manner. Vsed also for ciuility or mannerly education.

Costuméuole, customary.

Costúmi, manners, education, good nurture.

Costúra, a seame in any garment.

Costúre, seames. Also seemelinesse.

Cosúccie, odde things, trash or trifles.

Cotáio, a piece of an old shooe that mowers hang at their girdle to put in a whetstone.

Cotále, such, or a thing so made, a what you call it. Also a mans priuities.

Cotalína, a little prety thing or quaint.

Cotánti, so many, thus many.

Cotánto, so much, thus much.

Cotáre, to quote. Also to thinke, to imagine. Also to wish or desire.

Cotatióne, a quotation. Also a thought.

Cotatóio, as Cotáio.

Cóte, a whetstone, a touchstone.

Coteáre, to make keene vpon a whetstone.

Cóteca, as Coténna.

Cotégia, as Cóte.

Cotegiáre, as Coteáre.

Cotenella, a thin skin, hide or filme.

Coténna, the skin or hide of any creature namely of the head. Also the sord of bakon.

Cotésta, this, this same woman or thing.

Cotéste, these things or women.

Cotestei, this woman.

Cotésti, these men or things.

Cotésto, this man or thing.

Cotestóro, these same men.

Cotestúi, this, or this same man.

Cothurnáto, that weareth Cotúrni.

Cothúrno, as Cotúrno.

Cotíca, as Coténna.

Coticágna, as Coténna.

Cotícola, a little, thin or tender skin or filme. Also a little touchstone.

Coticóne, a thicke skinned fellow, a hard chuffe, a miser, a pinch penny.

Cotícula, as Cotícola.

Cotidiáno, cotidian, daily.

Cotiente, the quotient or how manieth time in Arithmeticke.

Cotígie, such leather hosen and trusses as our forefathers were wont to weare.

Cótila, a greeke measure of foure Osibási.

Cotile dóne, venus nauill.

Cotíno, a shrub that hath a purple wood vsed in marquetry or inlaid workes.

Cóto, as Cotatióne.

Cotonáre, to nap, to cotton, to thrum.

Cotóne, cottone, thrum, nap, bumbace.

Cotonea, the plant Bugle.

Cotognáre, to preserue as marmalade.

Cotognáta, Marmalade of quinces.

Cotognáto, preserued as Quinces, quinced.

Cotógni, quinces.

Cotógno, a Quince-tree.

Cotorníce, a Partridge.

Cotrémola, a Wagtaile.

Cotrétola, a Wagtaile.

Cotrétula, a Wagtaile.

Cotroníse, a Quaile.

Cótta, any kind of coate or vpper garment. Also a bakeing, a rosting or seething. Also sodden, baked, rosted, or cocted.

Cótta d'arme, a Hearaulds coate.

Cottáme, any thing baked, sod or rosted.

Cottáne, Lenton-figges.

Cottígli, all manner of boyled meates.

Cottignuólo, as Coticóne.

Cóttimo, as Cotiénte.

Cottíno, that may be boiled, rosted or baked. Also a kind of Ches-nuts.

Cótto, boiled, sodden, baked, rosted. Also Cuitewine. Also drunken or tipsie.

Cottóia, a quotation of any thing.

Cottonáta piétra, polished stone. 



Cottonáio, a Cotton seller.

Cottóne, as Cotóne.

Cottonei, a kinde of figges.

Cottúra, a boyling or dressing of meat, a concoction, any kinde of broth. Also the nealing or baking of glasses when they are made. Also a scalding, a burning, or a smarting.

Coturnáto, that weareth Cotúrno.

Coturníce, a Partridge.

Cotúrno, a kind of buskin worne by Tragedians. Also a lofty tragicke stile. Also a kind of wanton or effeminate garment.

Cóua, as Couáta.

Couacciáre, to sneake, to sit, or squat, or coure, or lurke as it were vpon a nest.

Couáccio, a roosting, or hatching nest, a cockes owne dunghill.

Couácciolo, a Lyons stinking den, a Beares den.

Couadóri, sitters, hatchers, couiers, lurkers. Also a kind of bird euer sitting.

Couále, a lurking, a roosting, a sneaking, a squatting or hatching hole.

Couálle, a dale or vally betweene hilles.

Couamele, a base swaine, a dastardly meacocke, one that milkes a cow in the stall, a dunghill cocke.

Couáre, to hatch, to couie, to brood, to sit, to squat, or coure as a hen ouer her chickens.

Couarella, as Capellúta.

Couáta, a couie of Partridges, a beuie of Fesants, a brood of Chickins, an ayrie of Hawkes, a nest-full, a lairie, an eyase, or any birdes hatching and sitting.

Couatíccio, an adle or rotten egge.

Couatrémola, a Wagtaile.

Cóudo, a measure vsed in Ormuz about the length of a Cubite.

Couelle, trifles, matters of nothing. Also something or any thing.

Couéde, as Cóudo.

Couerchia, as Coperta.

Couerchiáre, as Copríre.

Couerchiáte siche, fraile figs.

Couerta, a couerlet, a roofe, a lid, a couer. Also a cloke, a colour, a pretence

Couertáre, to couer, to hill, to roofe.

Couertína, as Copertína.

Couertóio, the testerne of any thing.

Couertúra, a couerture, a couering.

Couétta, waddes of hempe as Gunners vse.

Couidígia, couetousnesse, greedinesse.

Couidigiáre, to couet greedily.

Couidígióso, couetous, greedy.

Couíglio, as Couíle.

Couíle, a kennell, a stie, a layer, a rooste.

Couína, a kinde of white broth or pottage.

Cóuo, a couie plate, a hares forme, a foxes den. Also a hatching, or hens sitting. Also a ricke, a stacke, a mow of corne.

Cóuolo, a fowling net, a springe, a gin, a pipe to call birdes. Also a wooden tray.

Couóne, as Cóua. Also a sheafe of corne. Also a squatting or cowring fellow.

Couóni, bottles of haye, waddes of straw.

Couríre, as Copríre.

Cozzáre, to but, to shocke, to front, to gore, or shoulder front to front as Rams doe.

Cózzo, a butting, a shocke, an encounter, a shouldring. Also a wrapping blanket.

Cózzolo, a knuckle bone. Also an iron instrument in a ship.

Cozzóna di poledre, a breaker of coltes or yong mares. Also a bawde.

Cozzonáre, to play the horse-breaker, or courser. Also to breake and tame horses. Also to play the craftie knaue.

Cozzonáto, broken or tamed as a horse. Also knauish, past all danger.

Cozzóne, a horse-breaker, a tamer of coltes, a horse-courser. Also a craftie knaue.

Crácca, a bastard kind of vetches.

Cracchiáre, as Gracchiáre.

Crái, to morrow.

Caáizo, a Dutch coine worth three pence.

Crámbe, stalkes or stems, or shankes of Coleworts vsed in Salads.

Crambétta, as Coruétta.

Crambettáre, as Coruettáre.

Cráneo, as Cránio.

Crangíni, litle shrimpes or praunes.

Cranio, the braine pan or bone, or skull.

Cranocolátte, a kind of Spider.

Crapíce, a kind of Thistle or Bur.

Crápola, as Crapúla.

Crapoláre, as Crapuláre.

Crapolóne, as Crapulóne.

Cráppa, as Cránio.

Crápula, surfet, excesse, gulleting or gourmandising in meate and drinke. Also a mixture of wine, rasins, terpentine, and diuers spices.

Crapuláre, to surfet or commit excesse in meate and drinke.

Crapulatóre, as Crapulóne.

Crapulatória vita, a surfetting or Epicures life.

Crapulóne, a surfetter, a glutton, a gourmand, an Epicure.

Crapuliére, as Crapulóne.

Crassáme, a spissenesse, a fatnesse, any thicke or dreggie matter.

Crassézza, thicknesse, grosenesse, spissenesse, clubbishnesse, fatnesse.

Crassirénio, a kind of Maple-tree.

Crassitudíne, as Crassézza.

Crásso, thicke, spisse, grosse, clubbish. 

Crásta, a lillie-pot, a flowre-pot.

Crastináre, to put off from day to day.

Crastinatióne, delay from day to day.

Crástino, the time to come of to morrow.

Crastomíne, a kind of delicate Peares.

Cráte, a hurdle, a grate, a harrow.

Crategóno, Arsesmart, Culerage, or Persicorie.

Crategonóne, an extraordinarie wanton or raging lust to Venerie.

Cratera, a great cup or boll. Also a broad platter or charger. Also a lauer or cesterne. Also a certaine signe in heauen rising about March.

Cratíccia, a hurdle. Also agrate.

Crateríte, a kind of precious stone.

Craticciáre, to make grate wise. Also to hurdle about.

Cratíccij, hurdles for sheepe-pens.

Craticciáta, a sheepe-pen or folde.

Cratícula, as Cratíccia.

Cratítia, as Cratíccia.

Cratóne., 

Crázzo, a brasse coine of three farthings.

Créa, vsed as Créta.

Creádo, as Creáto.

Creánza, nurture, education, manners.

Creáre, to create, to engender, to beget. Also to nurture, to fosture, to educate, to bring vp.

Creatióne, a creation, a creating.

Creáto, created, begetten. Also ciuill, mannerly, well brought vp or nurtured. Also a foster-childe, or seruant of ones bringing vp.

Creatóre, a Creator.

Creatúra, a Creature.

Crebbi, Crebbe, Crebbero, of Créscere.

Crebe, as Crebre.

Crebre, a kinde of garment wrought thicke with flower-worke. Also vsed of yore for a mans shoulders. Also darke, pitchy and obscure. Also heauy or grieuous. Also often, many times, frequently, or full of

Credégno, muddy, boggie, or moorish ground.

Credente, credulous, beleeuing, trusting.

Credentiúle, of credite or trust.

Credentiéra, a cup-boord for plate.

Credentiére, a cup-boord-keeper, a Butler. Also a Steward. Also a creditor or one that trusteth. Also a Princes Sewer, Taster, or Cup-bearer. Also a secret or trusty friend.
Credenza, credence, credite, trust, beliefe, confidence. Also a safe conduite. Also a token, a pledge or paune of trust and credence. Also a Buttery or Pantry. Also a cup-boord of plate 



Also the taste, the assay or sewing of a Princes meate and drinke. Also a fault that some horses haue, who turne not so readily on the one side as on the other, a horses refusing to turne of one hand.

Crédere, crédo, credéi, credúto, to beleeue, to credite, to trust.

Crédere al férmo, to beleeue certainly.

Crederello, an easie beleeuing man.

Credíbile, credible, that may be beleeued.

Credibilità, beliefe, crediblenesse.

Crediti, debts, credites.

Credito, credite, trust, beliefe, affiance, loyalty, truth, faith. Also reputation.

Creditóre, a creditor, one that beleeueth or trusteth.

Credo, a Creed, a beleefe, I beleeue.

Credulità, credulity, easie beleefe.

Crédulo, credulous, that beleeueth.

Créggio, as Crédo, I beleeue.

Créma, the Creame or best of any thing.

Cremástice, two long and slender muskles, by which the stones of a man are drawne vpward, least by loose hanging downe the seminary vessels should be ouerladen.

Creménto, any encrease or encreasing. Also the seed of man or other male creature.

Cremesì, as Cremesíno.

Cremesíno, crimson or stamell in graine.

Cremóre, the creame or simpring of milke when it seeths. Also yest, barme, quickning, Gods good, or good speed.

Créna, a notch in a score, a nocke in a bow or arrow, the nib, slit, or clift of a pen, the eie of a needle. Also notches, iags, or indentures about the edges of leaues.

Créna d'un cauállo, the maine of a horse.

Crenédi, a kind of beast in India.

Crepa, as Cránio. Also of Crepáre.

Crepáccij, the scratchets, cratches, or rats-tailes in a horse, some horsemen say they are little chaps or rifts about the coronet of the horses hoofe.

Crepacuóre, hearts bursting, hearts sorrow, or other passion of the heart, looke A crepacuóre.

Crepafégato, as Crepacuóre.

Crepággine, a bursting, a rupture, a falling downe of the bowels. Also hearts bursting.

Crepanella, the hearb Lead wort.

Crepáre, to burst, to chap, to cracke, or riue in sunder.

Crepatíccio, ready to burst or cracke. Also subiect to bursting or rupture.

Crepáto, bursten, that hath a rupture or hernia.

Crepatúra, a bursting, a rupture. 

Crepíce, a kind of Thistle or bur.

Crepitácolo, a shrill timbrell. Also a childs rattle.

Crepitánte, crackling, ratling, cracking.

Crepitáre, to crackle, to cracke, to rattle.

Crepito, a cracke, a ratling, a crackling, a rap or any violent sound.

Crepito di denti, chatring of teeth.

Crepúscio, the twilight either in the euening or morning.

Crepúscie, things borne or made about twilight.

Crepúsculo, as Crepúscio.

Crepúsculo matutíno, morning twilight.

Crepúsculo vespertíno, euening twilight.

Crepúso, a vanter in speech, one that speaketh with maiesty.

Crésce in máno, the name of a Saint wantonly vsed by Bocace, as much to say, as saint growing or standing in a womans hand.

Crescenta, a kind of tart or white pot. Also meat to cram pullets.

Crescente, cressant, growing, encreasing. Also the halfe moone or croisant.

Crescentíne, a kind of cheese cake. Also a kind of creame.

Crescenza, a grouth, a growing, an encrease. Also the flowing of the sea.

Crescenza di cárne, a carnosity or growing of knobs of flesh about some men.

Créscere, crésco, crescéi, or crébbi, cresciúto, to grow, to encrease, to wax.

Crescéuole, that may grow.

Cresciménto, a growing, an encreasing.

Crescinméno, as Cresce in máno.

Crescióne, the weede Water-cresses.

Crése, he belieued, vsed so of Dante.

Crésima, a Chrisome vsed at the christning of children. Also an vnction.

Cresicolóri., 

Cresimáre, to chrisome, to annoint.

Créspa, curled, crisped, frizeled, wrinkled. Also as Crespatúra.

Crespáre, to curle, to frizle, to crispe, to wrinkle, to pucker, to wither.

Crespatúra, a curling, a frizling, a crisping, a wrinkling, a withering, as we say a Crowes-foote in a womans face. Also a puckring in any cloth or clothes.

Crespégli, a kind of daintie birdes.

Crespello, a kind of bird. Also a crisping iron.

Crespézza, as Crespatúra.

Crespináre, to dresse with gooseberries.

Crespíne, gooseberries. Also barberries.

Créspo, crisped, curled, frizled.

Crespóso, full of crispes or curlings.

Crésta, any kind of crest, a coxecombe. Also a bunch of feathers in a helmet. Also money in gibrish or rogues language. Also a disease in a mans or womans fundament called the piles or hemorrhoides.

Crésta di gállo, a coxe-combe. Also the hearbe Coxecombe or Yellow-rattle.

Crésta gálli, as Crésta di gállo.

Créste, the piles or hemorrhoides.

Crestiéro, that hath the hemorrhoides.

Crestóne, a kind of good Cychorie.

Crestóso, crestie. Also rugged, crustie, scuruie, full of sores, of scabs, or of the piles.

Crestúto, as Crestóso.

Créta, chalke, lome, clay. Also Sampere.

Créta cimólia, fullers-clay, tuckers-earth.

Cretále, a plot of chalke, lome, or clay.

Créta marína, Sampire, Crestmarine.

Crethémo, as Créta marína.

Créthmo ágrio, Sampire Sauage.

Crética, Melilot of Candie.

Creticolátio, a verse of sixe sillables.

Cretóso, claish, chalke.

Crétula, dawbing or plaister worke.

Criáre, as Creáre.

Criánza, as Creáza.

Criáto, as Creáto.

Criatóre, as Creatóre.

Criatúra, as Creatúra.

Cribáre, to sift, to search, to winnow.

Críbo, a sieue, a search, a winnow.

Cribráre, as Cribáre.

Cribraría, a kind of Fourmentie gourts.

Críbro, as Críbo.

Crícca, a cricke or creaking of a dore or cart-wheele. Also a game at cardes so called. Also the name of a Printers toole. Also a rout, a knot, a crew, or packe of good fellowes.

Criccáre, as Cricchiáre.

Cricchiáre, to cricke, to creake or squeake as a cart-wheele or a dore.

Crícco, a creaking, a cricke. Also as Capríccio.

Criccóso, creaking. Also as Capriccióso.

Criccóne, a game at cardes so called.

Crich, that creaking or squeaking noise that a dore or cart-wheele maketh.

Crída, a cry, a bruit, a proclamation.

Cridáre, to cry, to proclaime, to bruit.

Cridatóre, a cryer, a proclaimer.

Crído, as Crída.

Crimaterico, as Climaterico.

Crimáto, as Climáto.

Criminále, criminall, faultie or capitall, wherein is offence against law.

Criminalménte, criminally, faultily.

Crímine, a crime, a fault.

Criminóso, faultie, full of crime.

Crímno, meate made of barlie and wheate-meale.

Crinále, a haire-lace or fillet. Also a 



crisping wire, or haire-bodkin.

Crináto, curled, crisped, haired.

Críne, all manner of haire of man or woman, any stringes or capillature in rootes.

Crinifórmia, any kind of wanton and hairie-touching dalliance.

Criníta stélla, a blazing starre.

Crinóne, a kind of red Lillie.

Crinúto, hairie, capillous, shaggie.

Crip, Frap, Ler, Brong, Gualif, Guendir, words vttered in excesse of ioy, and which haue no signification, as we say in English, Falantidodire, flim, flam, tan.

Crippióne, a racke or manger.

Crípta, a low vault or hollow sinke vnder ground, a lurking den.

Críptico, secret or hidden as vnder ground.

Crisaría, the crowne scab in horses.

Crísi, the conflict betweene nature and sicknesse. Also the vnction or anointing.

Crísima, Crisimáre, as Crésima.

Crisíte, golde fome comming of tried leade. Also a kind of precious stone.

Crisméra, a Chrisome vsed at christnings.

Crisoberíllo, a stone shining like Gold.

Críso, as Chríso in all compositions. Also a kind of weapon among the Indians.

Crisocóllo, Borace that Goldsmithes vse to soulder with. Also a minerall like sand found in the veines of brasse, siluer or gold.

Crisocómo, a kinde of stone to try the goodnesse of gold.

Crisogóne, a kind of hearbe.

Crisolámpo, a precious stone darke and pale by day, cleare and fierie by night.

Crisolétro, a precious stone that drawes Amber vnto it, which comming in sight of fire it will flie into it.

Corisólito, a Crisolite stone.

Crisopásso, a kind of precious stone.

Crispíno, crisped, curled, frizled. Also a kind of glistring stone.

Cristalleggiáre, to shine as Cristall.

Cristallína., Looke Vuea.

Cristallíno, Christalline, transparant. Also cleare-sounding.

Christallióne, Flea-wort.

Christállo, Christall.

Cristallóide, the light, the cleare or transparency or sight of any bodies eyes.

Christallóso, Cristalline, transparent.

Cristégio, a glister, or a suppository.

Cristella, a bird called a Houpe.

Cristeo, a glister, a suppository.

Cristianésimo, Christianisme.

Cristianità, Christianity.

Cristiáno, a Christian. 

Crísto, our sauiour Iesus Christ.

Crisuólo, a little cruse or melting pot.

Crítica, the arte of cutting of stones.

Criticále, Criticall, that iudgeth by obseruations written.

Crítici giórni, such daies as in short diseases and of quicke motion giue light to Phisitions of life or death, of hope or feare.

Crítico, Criticke, iudging mens acts and workes written.

Criticóne, a rash Criticke or finde-fault.

Criuelláre, to sift, to search, to winnow.

Criuelláro, a sifter, a siue-maker.

Criuello, a sieue, a search, a winnow.

Criuésa, a kind of Salmon-troute.

Críuo, as Criuello.

Críuola, a Coupe or pen for poultry.

Crocállo, a stone like to a Cherry.

Crócalo, a Seamew, a Seagull.

Crocáre, to croke as a rauen doth.

Croccáre, as Crocchiáre.

Croccátto, a kinde of golden coine.

Crocchiáre, to halt or goe on crutchets. Also to snort or speake in the nose. Also to keepe a great shouting or claping of hands. Also to crackle, to creeke or snap. Also to strike as the clocke. Also to vant or brag or boast. Also to stagger, or shake. Also to croke as a Rauen.

Crocchiáta, as Crócchio.

Crocchiétte, crutchets for lame men.

Crócchio, a crooking. Also a crutcheting. Also a shouting or clapping of hands. Also a cracke, a snap, a creaking, a clicking. Also a snaphance of a piece. Also some part of a mans nose.

Crocciáre, as Corucciáre. Also to clocke as a brood hen. Also to crosse. Also to torment, or put to torture.

Croccicchiáre, to cruch or goe on crutchets.

Croccicchiéro, a crutchet frier, one going on crutchets. Also a crouching fellow.

Croccícchio, a cruche, a crutchet.

Cróccie, cruches, crutchets.

Crocciétte, little crosses, or crosselets, or crutchets. Also Bishops crosiers. Also round heapes or haycockes.

Crócciola, a crutchet. Also a hawkes little remouing stocke or pearch. Also the crosse of a hilt, or handle and hold of a sith. Also a winders reele or rise.

Croccioláre, to crosse with crosselets, to set vpon a pearch. Also to knead dough or paste. Also to croke as a Rauen.

Crócciole, cruches, or crutches.

Crócco, as Crócchio.

Cróce, any kind of Crosse. Also torment or torture.

Crócea dentáta, a crosse engrailed, endented, or embatteled.

Croceáre, to crosse, to marke with a crosse.

Croceátto, a kind of golden coine.

Crocefíggere, to crucifie, to martir.

Crocefisso, crucified, a crucifix.

Croceo, a saffron colour.

Croceóla, a little crosse or crosselet. Also a weed growing among corne.

Crocería, people or soldiers belonging to a Crociáta against Infidels.

Crocétta, a crosselet. Also as Destra an instrument so called, a crosse staffe. Also a kind of stone sling. Also a hawkes pearch, or little stocke for a hawke.

Cróce in ángoli, a saltier in armory.

Crocétte, all manner crosselets or crouches. Also crotchets.

Crocheggiáre, to strut, to rouze, to strout and put out the necke as a turkiecocke doth being angry.

Cróci, a stone of a saffron colour.

Crociáre, to crosse. Also to cruciate.

Crociársi, to enter into a generall league of christians against infidels.

Crociáta, a Crosse way. Also the hearb Crossewort or golden mugwet. Also a crossing or kind of torture. Also a generall league of christians against Infidels called a Crusado.

Crocícchio, a carrefoure, or crosse way.

Crociáti, as Cruciáti.

Crocidáre, to croke as a Rauen.

Crocíde, an hearb.

Crociétta, as Crocétta.

Crocífero, crosse bearing. Also a knight of any order of the crosse.

Crocifíggere, fíggo, físsi, físso, or fítto, to crucifie, to martir, to torture.

Crocifiggiménto, a crucifying.

Crocifissióne, a crucifying a torturing.

Crocifísso, a Crucifix. Also crucified.

Crocifissóre, a crucifier, a torturer.

Crocígeri, crutchet friers.

Crocíno, oile or ointment of saffron.

Crocióla, as Crocétta.

Crocióli, cruses or little melting pots.

Crocióne, any great Crosse.

Crocitánte, croking as a rauen.

Crocitáre, to croke as a rauen. Also to cackle as a hen.

Crocíto, the croking of a rauen.

Cróco, saffron, or saffron flowres.

Crocodilea, an hearb, looke Cocodríllo.

Crocodíllo, a Crocodill, which only stirs his vpper iaw or chaps. Also an hearb that touching ones nose with it it will presently gush out on blood.

Crocomagmáte, cakes or dregs of saffron.

Crocóta, as Crocúta.

Crocotóne, a saffron coloured garment.

Crocótula, as Crocotóne.

Crocúta, a beast engendred between a lionesse and an Hienna hauing his row of teeth of one piece alone. Also 



a kind of mastiue dog engendred between a dog and a woolfe, which imitates the voice of man.

Crogióli, as Crocióli.

Crogliáre, to cry as an angry turkiecocke, or chafe as beasts when they are angry.

Cróglio, the anger, chafing or fretting of a turkiecocke or other beast.

Crognalíne, a kind of cherries.

Croiáre, to speake or rattle in the threat Also to stiffen, to harden or grow to crust.

Cróio, a harsh speaking or ratling in the throat. Also hard, stiffe, crusty, rugged, gulchy, foule, fat or greasie.

Crolláre, to shake, to tosse, to tremble, to wag, to tot, to totter, to stagger.

Crólla pennácchij, a swaggring braggard one that loues to see his feathers wag.

Crolláre il péro, to shake a Peare-tree, but taken to tickle a woman roundly.

Crolláta, as Cróllo.

Crollatúra, as Cróllo.

Cróllo, a shaking, a tossing, a wagging, a tottering, a staggering, by metaphor, a fall or diminution of state and fortune.

Crollósso, a great shaking or tottering.

Cróma, pleasant and delight some musike with descant, faining or quauering. Also a burning iron.

Cromáte, Pictures but of one colour.

Cromática música, musike deuided by halfe notes.

Cromático, one whose colour is tanned in the sunne, or one who neuer blusheth.

Crombório, a kind of sea fish.

Cróme, crotchets in musike, that is the fourth part of a note.

Crómi, as Crombório,

Crómmo, a wayling in a Tragedy.

Crónaca, as Crónica.

Crónica, a Chronicle, that is a note of acts done with the time expressed.

Cróniche, a kind of lingring feauer in a horse.

Crónico náscer delle stélle, the arising of any starre in the day time.

Cronichísta, a Cronicler.

Crónio, Chrónio, a fish that buildes his nest in the very water.

Cronísta, a Chronicler.

Cronografía, a discription of times.

Cronográfo, a discriber of times.

Cronománte, a deuiner by the times.

Cronomantía, a diuination by obseruing of times.

Crópa, the rumpe of any bird.

Cropiéra, a horses crooper or docke.

Cróppa, a horses crupper.

Crosário, any crossing as of a way. 

Crosáta, as Crociáta.

Cróscere, scí,o, scéi, sciúto, as Crosciáre.

Cróscia d' ácque, a suddaine showre, a storme, a tempest, a blustring, a berry or flaw of many windes or stormes together bringing violent showres of water, a crushing.

Crosciáre, as Crolláre. Also to thump, to bange. Also to squease to crush, or squash, but properly the squashing, the clattering or stormy falling of haile and raine vpon the tiles of houses.

Cróscio, as Cróscia. Also a thump.

Crosétta, a Crosselet, a little Crosse.

Crósolo, a cruse or melting pot.

Crosseróne, a Robin-red-brest.

Crósta, a crust. Also an outside. Also a pargeting. Also a hard scab or scurfe.

Crostacei, as Crostarei.

Crósta francése, a French crust, that is to say, the French-pox.

Crostáme, crusts, chippings of bread. Also pargetings.

Crostamína, a kinde of hard rough Peare.

Crostáre, to crust, to wax hard, to parget ouer to scurffe.

Crosterei pésci, rugged, hard or stony fishes.

Crostário, as Crustário.

Crostáta, a kinde of pie, or tarte with a crust. Also the paste, crust, or coffine of a pie.

Crostatelli, a kind of hard biskets. Also little tostes put about dishes.

Cróste, trustes, chippings, parings.

Crostelli, as Crostatelli.

Crostosità, crustinesse, hardnesse without.

Crostóso, crusty, full of crust.

Crostúta, the peeling of ones skin. Also crusty or rugged on the outside.

Crotáli, pendents of pearles hanging and knobbing one against another.

Crotálo, a musicall instrument made like a great ring of brasse, hollow, which beaten with an iron rod maketh sweet harmony. Also a Cimbal or gingling rattle or clapper. Also a childes rattle.

Crotésca, antique, fretted or carued worke.

Crotóne, the plant Palmachristi.

Cróto, a bird like a Swan with a bagge vnder his chin, which brayeth as an Asse.

Crótto, a common by word for an egregious foole or gull, for Crótto was such a notable foole, that to make his face euen, he did cut off his nose and sow vp his mouth.

Cruciáre, to cruciate, to vex, to torture, to torment, to mooue to wrath.

Cruciáti, torments, tortures, rackings. Also vexations, crossings, frettings.

Cruccicchiéro, as Croccicchiéro.

Crucciéuole, that may be cruciated.

Crucicchí,o, as Crocicchio.

Cruccio, as Corróccio.

Cruccióso, as Corroccióso.

Cruciáta, as Crociáta. Also an hearbe growing on mountaines.

Crucífero, as Crocífero.

Crucifíggere, as Crocifíggere.

Crucifissióne, crucifying.

Crucifísso, as Crocifísso.

Crucifissóre, a crucifier, a tormenter.

Crudaría, a veine of siluer lying but ebbe and shallow in the ground. Also all maner of raw things.

Crudeláccia, a cruell hard harted wench.

Crudeláccio, a cruell currish fellow.

Crudele, cruell, fell, moody, fierce.

Crudelína, a curst wench, a cruell lasse.

Crudelíre, lísco, líto, to waxe cruell.

Crudelità, Crudeltà, cruelty.

Crudézza, crudity, rawenesse.

Crudità, crudity, rawenesse.

Crúdo, crude, raw. Also cruell, surly.

Cruente, cruell, bloudy minded, bloudthirsty, moody, fell.

Cruentóso, as Cruente.

Cruenza, cruelty bloud-thirstinesse.

Cruità, the rawnesse of a wound and bloud comming out.

Crúna, the eye of a needle.

Cruóre, blacke, clotted or gore blood.

Crupeláio, a souldier armed with one whole piece of iron. Also a certaine weake armour of one piece like a iacket vsed in old times.

Crúsca, the bran of flowre or meale. Also by a meataphore vsed for a gull or such a simple fellow as hath no stuffe in him. Also the name of the famous Academy in Florence, which is composed of the rarest wits of Italy.

Cruscáta, any thing made of bran. Also as Fagioláta.

Cruscánte, one of the famous Academies of La Crúsca in Florence.

Cruscóso, full of bran, course.

Crustacei, as Crostarei.

Crustuário, a professor of embossed workes.

Crústula, a little crust, or hard fritter.

Cúba, a coope or pen for poultry. Also a couch or bed. Also a horselitter. Also as Cúbo. Also the name of a beautious garden that was Frederikes King of Cicilie mentioned by Boccace.

Cubáita, a kind of sweet cake.

Cubáre, to lie downe, to lie in child bed.

Cubbie., Looke Bardoelle.

Cubebe, the fruit of an hearbe, Cubebs.



Cúbia, a leash or slip for dogs. Also couples for Spaniels.

Cubiáre, to couple vp hounds, to leash.

Cúbico, cubicall or foure-square.

Cúbica radíce, the number that produceth any other square number.

Cubiculáre, to lye in a chamber, to chamber.

Cubiculário, a groome of a chamber, a chamber or bed-fellow. Also a Chamberlaine.

Cubículó, a chamber, or bed-chamber.

Cubíle, a bed or couch. Also a kennell, a den, a stye or breeding place for beasts.

Cubitále, a foresleeue for the arme no further then the elbow. Also an elbow cushion.

Cúbito, a cubite, an elbow. Also a measure of 24 inches or a foote and a halfe, that is from the elbow to the end of the middle finger. Also an out nooke of land butting into the Sea.

Cúbo, a Cube or foure square like a Dye.

Cúbo número, any foure square number.

Cucágna, as Cocágna.

Cúcca, a childes-babie, a foolish trifle.

Cuccáia, a Cuckoes nest, hole or roost.

Cúcchi, money in rogues language.

Cucchiaiáta, a spoone or ladle full.

Cucchiára, any kind of ladle. Also a Brick-laiers trowell.

Cucchiára foráta, a skimmer.

Cucchiaráta, a ladle or spoone full.

Cucchiáro, a spoone.

Cucchiaruóli, a kind of country meate.

Cucchináre, to play the Cucchíno.

Cucchíno, an Incense dish. Also a knaue.

Cúcchio, a kind of small coine.

Cúccia, a Couch, a trundle-bed. Also a yoong whelpe or puppie. Also a pug, an Ape, or a Munkie. Also a kind of Ioyners fretted worke.

Cucciáre, to whelpe. Also to couch.

Cucciáro, any kind of spoone.

Cucciétto, a yong whelpe or playing dog.

Cuccinólo, as Cuccétto.

Cúccio, as Cucciétto.

Cucciólo, a kind of round Snaile.

Cucciúme, as Cocchiúme.

Cúcco, a Cuckoe-bird. Also a Gournard or Rochet fish. Also a minion or a fauorite. Also a loitring or gazing gull. Also a Cooke.

Cuccouáia, a Cuckoes roost or nest. Also a Cuckoes song or flimflam tale.

Cuccouéggia, an Owle tied to a stocke to catch other birdes with. Also twilight or cockshute.

Cuccoueggiáre, to sing as a Cuckoe, to play the Cuckoe, or sneake vp and downe gazing also to catch other birds with an Owle.

Cuccúma, pouting, louting, mumping.

Cuccúzza, a gorde or pompilion, or the paring of them. Also a bottle or saltboxe made of a gorde.

Cucíbile, that may be sewed.

Cucína, a kitchin, a skullerie. Vsed also for dressing or rosting of meate.

Cucináre, to dresse meate as a Cooke.

Cucinaría, the arte of Cookerie.

Cucináto, meate dressed and serued vp.

Cucinatóre, a Cooke.

Cuciniéra, a kitchin-maide or Cooke.

Cuciniére, a man-Cooke.

Cucinétto, a cushinet.

Cucíno, any kind of cushion.

Cúcio, a tree of whose leaues mats are made.

Cucíre, cúcio, cucíto, to sewe with a needle.

Cucitóre, a Sewer, a Tailour.

Cucitríce, a she seamster or sewer.

Cucitúra, a seame or a sewing.

Cucitúsa, part of a mans priuities.

Cucúglio, a Cuckoe. Also a hood or coule.

Cucubalóne, an hearbe.

Cúcula, a Friers cowle or Monkes hood.

Cuculáre, to hood, to play the Cuckoe.

Cuculáta, a hooding. Also a Cuckoing.

Cuculáto, hooded, cowled.

Cucúlio, as Cucúglio.

Cucúlla, as Cúcula, &c.

Cuculláre, as Cuculáre.

Cucúlli, silke wormes. Also Rochet-fishes.

Cúculo, a Cuckoe. Also a Gournard fish.

Cucúmero, a Cucumber.

Cucurbitále, ouale, gourd-fashion.

Cucurbitoláre, Ground pine or field cipres.

Cucurbitáne, a kind of long Peares.

Cucurbitula, a cupping glasse.

Cucúrbita saluática, as Coloquíntida.

Cucuriáre, to chur as a Turkie-cocke.

Cucuríre, rísco, ríto, to crow as a cocke.

Cucuríto, the crowing of a cocke.

Cucúrma, a three cornered rush or cane so great as they make walking stickes of them.

Cucutrémma, a kind of croud or fidle.

Cucuuiáre, to chirp as a Nightbat.

Cucúzza, as Cuccúzza.

Cucúzzolo, the vppermost top or spire of any thing, but namely of an hill.

Cueri, a litle fish like a Sprat, a Sardine.

Cueinári, as Cueri.

Cúffia, a coife, a biggin, a nightcap.

Cuffiáre, to coife, or put on a night-cap.

Cuffióne, a great coife or biggin.

Cuffiótto, as Cuffióne.

Cufúrma, a shell-crab, a Tortoise.

Cugíno, a cousin or brother in law.

Cugíno germáno, a cousin germane.

Cúglia, a pinnacle or spire of a steeple. 

Cugnáre, to wedge or coine in. Also to fasten with a forelocke.

Cúgno, a wedge, a coyne. Also a forelocke.

Cugnoláre, as Cugnáre.

Cúgnolo, as Cúgno.

Cúgole, little round balles of wood or bone to play at balliards.

Cúi, of the Genitiue case, whose.

Cúi, of the Datiue case, to whom.

Cúi, of the Ablatiue case, from whom.

Cuiússo, as Cuius in Latin, but taken for any Latin word ignorantly spoken.

Culabrése, as of Calábria, we say Calabrése, so of Cúlo, Culabrése.

Culacciáre, to beate or clap on the arse, to wrigle ones taile.

Culacciáte, claps on the arse.

Culáre, the arse-gut. Also of or belonging to the arse.

Culáte, buttocks, hips, bums.

Culatório, arserie, as Culattário.

Culátta, a hip, a buttocke. Also the seate of a sadle. Also the breech of any piece.

Culattáre, as Culacciáre.

Culattário, a scoffing word, as one would say the arserie of man-kind.

Culcítra, as Coltríce.

Culd'ásino, a fish in Latin, Vrtica.

Cúldi, a Greeke measure or pot.

Culeggiáre, to wrigle with ones bum.

Culeo, a kind of pot or measure.

Culipotente, strong in his bum.

Culétto, a litle pretty arse.

Culína, as Cúlla, a cradle.

Culináre, to rocke as in a cradle.

Culiseo, vsed for Cúlo.

Cúlla, any kind of cradle.

Culláre, to rocke the cradle.

Cullúra, a wad or wase of rags or straw, as milke women vse to carie on their heads vnder their pales.

Cúlmine, as Cólmo.

Culmináre, as Colmáre.

Cúlo, the arse, bum, fundament or taile.

Culobiánco, a gnat-snapper.

Cúlo pesánte, a beauie tailed fellow.

Cúlpa, as Cólpa.

Culpéuole, as Colpéuole.

Cultiuábile, earable, that may be tilled manured, or husbanded.

Cultiuáre, to till, to manure, to plough, or eare the ground. Also to polish, to correct or ouersee any thing. Also vsed of Bocace to wrigle a womans hand.

Cultiuatióne, as Cultúra.

Cultiuatóre, a plough or husband-man.

Cúlto, tilled, manured, husbanded. Also polished, corrected, ouerseene.

Cúlto, the worship or seruice of God. Also neatenesse or elegancie.

Cultóre, as Cultiuatóre.

Cultrémola, a Wagtaile. 



Cultríce, as Coltríce.

Cultúra, tillage, husbandry, manuring.

Cumatíle, a colour vsed of Painters.

Cumolánza, a heaping or hording vp.

Cumoláre, to horde or heape vp.

Cumolataménte, by heapes, plenty.

Cumolatióne, as Cumolánza.

Cúmolo, a heape, a masse. Also increase.

Cumulánza, as Cumolánza.

Cumuláre, as Cumoláre.

Cumulatamente, by heapes.

Cumulatióne, as Cumolánza.

Cúmulo, as Cúmolo.

Cúna, any kind of cradle.

Cunáre, to rocke the cradle.

Cuneáto, sharpe-cornered, wedge-like.

Cunegiáto, a kinde of coine in Portugall.

Cunéi, mortises or lifters so called among Carpenters. Also wedges.

Cúneo, a wedge, a coine or corner.

Cunétta, a little dyke or ditch in trenchings and fortifications cut out in the midst or bottome of a greater ditch and made somewhat deeper. Also a litle cradle.

Cuniáre, as Coniáre.

Cuniatóre, as Coniatóre.

Cunícolo, an vndermining engine of warre, but properly a cunny or rabet.

Cúnila, gardin or winter sauory.

Cúnila búbula, wild origan.

Cunilágine, Fleabane, or Mulet.

Cunizóide, Fleabane or Mulet.

Cúnno, a womans nocke or priuy parts.

Cunnúta, a woman well nocked.

Cúnta, as Cuntatióne.

Cuntáre, to delay, to linger, or prolong time as it were doubting and wauering.

Cuntatióne, a delaying, a lingring, a slacknesse, or doubtfull prolonging of time. Also a demur in law. Also a doubtfull wauering in mind, a staggering.

Cuntatóre, a deferrer or doubtfull prolonger of time.

Cuóca, a woman cooke.

Cuocaría, cookery, a Cookes shop.

Cuócere, as Cócere.

Cuocióre, as Coeióre.

Cuocheggiáre, to play the cooke.

Cuóco, a man cooke.

Cuóco secréto, a cooke for a priuy diet.

Cuócola, a pipkin, a possenet, a fleshpot.

Cuocóme, a brazen vessell for other pots to stand in at a cubord.

Cuocouáia, as Cuccáia.

Cuófano, as Cófano.

Cuógola, a pible or flint stone.

Cuogoláre, to paue with pible stones.

Cuogóma, a brasen bucket.

Cuoiáio, a currier, a tanner, a fellmunger. 

Cuóio, as Cório.

Cuór, as Cuóre.

Cuoráme, any kind of leather drest.

Cuóre, the heart of any liuing creature. Also the core of any thing, vsed also for courage, hardinesse, affection or will.

Cuór del verno, the mid, the deepe or heart of winter.

Cuoricíno, a prety little sweet heart.

Cupella, a kind of scoope or bucket.

Cupéta, a sweet cake or marchpane.

Cupidígia, as Cupidità, couetousnesse.

Cupídine, lust, longing, desire, vsed also for the God of loue, Cupide.

Cupidinésco, lustfull, desirous.

Cupidità, couetousnesse, greedinesse.

Cupído, the God of lust or loue.

Cupido, greedy, desirous, couetous.

Cupidóso, couetous, desirous, greedy.

Cupíllo, a Bee hiue, or hole where bees goe in.

Cupíre, ísco, íto, to couet, to desire, to lust.

Cúpo, deepe, full, high, and darke. Also a hiue.

Cúpola, a high arch or round vault of any high Church or steeple, some haue abusiuely vsed the same for a spire or pinacle of a steeple.

Cúppio, as Cupíllo.

Cúppola, as Cúpola. Also a round vaulted chappell behind the chancell or quire of a Church.

Cúppula, as Cúpola.

Cupresso, as Cupresto.

Cupresto, the Cipres tree dedicated to Pluto.

Cúra, care, thought or charge, regard, diligence, labor or study in any thing. Also any phisicall or chirurgicall cure. Also a cure of soules. Also a Curateship.

Curábile, curable, that may be cured.

Cúra dénti, a tooth picker.

Cúra destri, a iakes or dung farmer.

Cúra or écchie, an eare picker.

Curanétta, a fariers toole to pare horses hoofes with, a paring iron or knife.

Curánte, caring, regarding, curing.

Curáre, to cure, to care, to take thought or charge of, to dresse, to heale, or cure any sicknesse, or hurt. Also to clense, to picke to farme or make cleane.

Curáta, a curing. Also as Coradella.

Curatiere, a broker or spokes man.

Curatióne, a curing, a healing, a charge.

Curatíua medicína, curing phisicke.

Curáto, a curate of a Church.

Curatóre, a curate, one that hath a cure. Also a curer. Also a broker or spokes man. Also a surueier, or diligent ouerseer. Also a defender or gardian of orphlins.

Curatríce, a she chirurgion, a woman that keepes sicke folkes. Also a mid-wife.

Cúrba, the Curbe or swelling in a horse.

Cúrcuma, the root of Celandine.

Curcúlio, a little worme or grub called a mite or weeuell. Also the wind pipe or weazand of a mans throate.

Curcúma, as Cucúrma.

Cúria, any Court or Pallace. Also the place where the senate or counsell assembled. Also the senate or Counsell it selfe.

Curiále, of or belonging to a Court.

Curiáli, certaine officers in the Popes Court.

Curialità, Courtlinesse.

Curiándoli, Corianders.

Curiosità, curiosity, nicenesse, diligence or inordinate desire to know precisely.

Curióso, curious, nice, chary, inquisitiue, scrupulous, desirous to know.

Cúrli, as Córli.

Curlóni, as Corlóni.

Cùrro, vsed of Dant for a Cart or Chariot. Also a suddain toy, humor, passion or giddy conceit as soone gone as apprehended. Also any rowling or wheeling thing. Also a roule or round piece of wood that earpenters or gunners vse to lay vnder great pieces of timber with holes in it neere the end, to turne and roule with more case.

Currúcca, the bird that hatcheth the Cuckoes egges thinking them her owne.

Currúcula, as Currúcca.

Cúrso, as Córso.

Cursóre, an office sometimes in Rome called a Cursor, a Sumner, an Apparitor. Also a runner, a courser.

Cursoráto, as Cursoría.

Cursoría, the office of a Cursóre.

Curtáldo, as Cortáldo.

Cúrte, knobs or wens growing vpon a horse.

Cúrti, pens or folds for sheepe.

Cúrto, as Córto.

Cúrtola, a toole that braziers vse.

Curuábile, that may be crooked.

Curuáre, to bow, to bend, to make crooked, to stoope, to crooch down ward.

Curuatúra, a bending, a crookednesse.

Curúcca, as Currúcca.

Curúccola, as Currúcca.

Curuéuole, that may be bent.

Curuilíneo, with crooked lines.

Curuitúra, crookednesse, a bent.

Cúrule sedia, a seat in fashion of a chariot of state made of iuory for chiefe officers and senators in Rome.

Cúruo, crooked, bowed, bent, crouched.

Cúrulo, a little cart or wheele barow. Also a trundle-bed.

Curuopiéde, splay footed, hauing crooked feet. 



Cúsa, an accusation.

Cusáre, to accuse.

Cuscinétto, as Coscinétto.

Cuscíno, any cushion.

Cuscíre, as Cucíre.

Cuscitríce, a woman sewer or seamster.

Cuscitúra, a seame, a sewing.

Cusdiére, any kind of spoone.

Cuscúta, Dodder or withewind.

Cuscúglio, all manner of trash, sweepings, or refusals that are cast away.

Cuscusù, a graine in Spaine, Cuske.

Cusire, as Cucíre.

Cusì, as Così.

Cusióffola, as Baccisáffiola.

Cussini, cushions.

Cússo, an Owle with standing feathers on his head called a horne-cout.

Custódia, custody, charge, keeping, garedainship. Also a case or box to keep any thing in.

Custodibile, that may be kept.

Custóde, a guardian, a keeper, a rector.

Custodíre, dísco, dito, to keepe or haue in charge.

Custoditóre, as Custóde.

Cutaneane rottúre, wheles, pushes, pimples or scabs that breake in the skin.

Cutataménte, rasedly, smoothly.

Cúte, the outward skin of man or woman while they be liuing. Also the thin rind, pill, skin, or barke of any thing. Also a whet-stone.

Cuterízzole, a kinde of emmet or pissemire.

Cuticágna, the crowne, the sconce or vpper haire of ones head.

Cutícola, any filme, or skinlet, or thin rinde or pill.

Cútila, Gardine-sauory.

Cutrétta, a Wag-taile.

Cutréttola, a Wag-taile.

Cútta, a Chough, a Iacke-daw. Also a Piot, a Iaye or Pie. 


D.
D, the letter D. which often stands for fiue hundred.

D', with an Apostrophe before vowels serueth for Da, or Di, as D'altra parte.

Da, before any number, about, Sono da uenti, they are about twenty.

Da, is sometimes a preposition before any Infinitiue Moode, namely if it answer, or haue relation to any thing mencioned before, it implieth a necessity, a conueniency, a reason, a meanes or cause of any action, to, for to, as, A che é buóno quésto? whereto is this good? Da uedére, Da mangi áre, Da fáre, for to see, for to eat, for to doe, &c.

Da, sometimes a Preposition of the Genitiue case as Dì of, as pálla da vento, a ball of wind, &c.

Da, a Preposition or signe of the Ablatiue case, from, from of, as Da Dío solo procéde ógni bene, from God alone proceedeth all goodnesse.

Da, being ioyned or hauing relation to the Verbe Andáre or fuggíre and naming or implying the party to whom one goeth or runneth is a signe of the Datiue case vnto, to wards, to, as Doue andáte o fuggíte cosi in frétta? whether goe you or run you in such haste? Io vádo o fúggo dal Signór Andrea ouer dal signór Thomáso, I goe or run vnto Mister Andrew, or eise to Mister Thomas.

Da, with the correspondency of A. signifieth, betweene, as in this example, accióche accórdo hauésse da lui alla chiésa, or fu aspra battáglia dagliusciti Guelfi a'Tedeschi.

Da, being ioyned to any Noune of profession becomes as a signe of aptitude, conueniency, decency or proportion and is expressed as an Aduerb of similitude, as Da soldáto, Da huómo da bene, like a soldier, as an honest man, in manner of a souldier, honest manlike.

Da, signifieth sometimes, of, as Da méno, of lesse worth, Da più, of more worth.

Da, of the verbe Dáre, he or shee giueth, or else giue thou.

Da, signifieth sometimes, fit for, as Dónna da maríto, a woman fit for a husband.

Da, in or on, Da parte sua, in his behalfe, on his behalfe.

Dabbásso, below. Also from below.

Da baiánte a ferránte, from bad to worse, from a cheater to a theefe.

Dá bambíno, like a child, babishly.

Da bánda, on or from the side.

Da bánda a bánda, from side to side.

Da básso, below. Also from below.

Da bastóne, for a cudgell, to be beaten.

Da besse, in iest, in mockery.

Dabenággine, honesty, vertue, sinceritie.

Dabéne, good, honest, debonaire, of worth.

Dabeníssimo, very honest, most honest.

Dábile, that may be or is to be giuen.

Dabudà, a famous foole so called, a Will-sommer, or a Patch. Also a musicall instrument among Shepheards.

Da bómba, as A bómba.

Dábule, a kind of sweet Dates. 

Da búrla, testingly, to be iested, at.

Da buon sénno, in good earnest.

Da buón tempo, sportingly, mearily.

Da cáccia, for hunting, from hunting.

Da cánto, a side, a part, at one-side.

Da cápo, againe, from the beginning.

Da cápo a piede, from head to foote.

Da cárico, of or for burthen.

Da chè, since that, sithence.

Da chè, from which thing.

Da chè perchè, since that, what betweene.

Dáccelo, giue it to vs.

Dacciò, as Daciò.

Daccórdo, agreed, accorded, tuned.

Daccósto, from ones side.

Daciò, of, from, or for that.

Da coltello che non táglia, & da amico che non váglia, non te ne cáglia. 

Da corótto, in mourning maner.

Da corúccio, in mourning maner.

Da cúi, from or of whom.

Da cuóre, hartily, euen from the heart.

Da da, daddy, dad, babby, father.

Dadário, a Dice-maker, a Dicer.

Dadeggiáre, to dice, to play at dice.

Dádi, dice. Also squares about a wheele.

Dádi di ferro, haile, or dice shot.

Dadietro, behinde, from behinde, after.

Dádo, a dye. Also as Rosétta.

Dádo farinário, a blanke dye, a dye that hath spots but on one square and no more.

Dadósso, from vpon ones backe.

Da douére essere, likely, to be.

Da douéro, in sooth, in earnest, in truth.

Da dozzéna, common, vulgar, to be had or sould by dozens.

Da dúo in sù, from two vpward.

Dadúchi, certaine priests of Ceres.

Da duólo, in mourning clothes.

Da esperto, skilfully, expertly.

Da eterno, from eternitie.

Da fanciúllo, from a child, childishly.

Dafarína, fullams or false dice.

Da férmo a férmo, from fast to firme.

Da festa, of or fit for play, Giórno da festa, a holy or plaing-day.

Daffáre, of businesse, for employment.

Dafíno, euen from the time.

Dáfnia, a stone good for the falling sicknesse.

Da fórche, fit for the gallowes.

Da frónte, before ones face.

Da giuóco, for sport, sportingly.

Da gábbia, fit for or that hath a cage.

Da gióuane, like a yoong man.

Da hóra inánzi, hence forward.

Da huomo da béne, honest man-like.

Dága, a wood-knife, a hanger.

Dagágna, a drag-net to catch fish.

Daghétta, a litle dagger. 



Da giuóco, in iest, in play, in sport.

Dágli, from the. Also strike him.

Dái, Da', from or of the, thou giuest.

Da imo al sómmo, from the bottome to the top or highest.

Da índi, thence, from thence.

Da índi addiétro, from thence backeward.

Daindi inánzi, from thence forward.

Daindi in auántì, from thence forward.

Da indi in diétro, from thence backeward.

Daindi in giù, thence downeward.

Daindi in là, from thence forward.

Daindi in pói, from thence forward.

Dain pói, sauing, except.

Daindi in quà, since that time,

Daindi in sù, from thence vpward.

Dáina, a Doe. Also a Doe-faune.

Dáino, a Faune, a Pricket, a sore, a sorell, a Bucke, a Fallow-deare.

Dain pói, except, but, sauing.

Dál, from or of the. Also to the.

Dala lóngi, a farre off.

Dál'áltra párte, on the other part.

Daláto, neare vnto, close by the side.

Dalauóro, fit for worke, Giórno da lauóro, a working day.

Dalbásso all'álto, from the lowest to the highest.

Daldì, from or since the day.

Daldì déntro, from the inward.

Daldì d'hóggi, from this day.

Daldi fuóra, from the outward.

Daldi sópra, from the aboue.

Dalfíno, a Dolphin. Also a signe in heauen. Also a Bishop at Chesse. Also some part of a ship or gallie.

Dal chè, from what or which.

Dalcóllo in giù, from the necke downeward.

Dall'hóra, from that houre or time.

Dall'hóra inánzi, from that time foreward.

Dall'in fuóri, except, sauing, but the thing excepted must come betweene Dal, and in fuóri, as Dal peccáto in fuóri, sinne excepted, &c.

Dálla, from or of the. Also to the.

Dálla címa alfóndo, from the top to the bottome.

Dálla cintúra in sù o giù, from the girdle vpward or downeward.

Dalla cúlla, from the cradle.

Dálla buóna, in good sooth or meaning.

Dall'altra párte, on the other part.

Dálla lúnge, a farre off, from farre.

Dalla párte di, in or on the part of.

Dalláto, as Daláto.

Dalla príma, from the first.

Dálle, from or of the. Also beate her.

Dálle dálle, spoken aduerbially, and implying an earnestnesse or frequence of some act, as thus, la quale da cin guettáre mai non resta, mai non fína, dalle, dalle, dalle, dalla matína in fíno alla sera.

Dálle fascie, from the swadling clouts.

Dálli, as Dágli.

Dálli dálli, to him, hit him, vpon him,

Dall'in giúso, from downeward.

Dall'in súso, from vpward.

Dállo, from or of the. Also giue it.

Dállomi, giue it me.

Dallóro, of or from them.

Dallúi, of, by, or from him.

Dall'úna máno, on or from one hand.

Dall'ún cánto, on or from one side.

Dall'un cápo all'áltro, from one end to another.

Dall'un láto all'áltro, from one side to another.

D'áltra maniera, after another manner.

Dalmáta, as Dalmática.

Dalmática, a Priests surples or such religious garment. Also a shepheards long frocke.

Dalmigliór sénno, with the best wit. Also in most earnest manner.

Dalmío láto, on or from my side.

Dalóngi, a farre off, from farre.

Dalontáno, farre off. Also from farre.

D'áltra párte, on the other side.

Dalóro stéssi, of or from themselues.

D'álto, of or from on high.

Daltrónde, from else where.

D'álto affáre, of high import or employment.

D'alto cuóre, of high courage.

Daltrúi, others, other mens, os others.

D'altróue, from else where.

Dalúngi, as Dalóngi.

Dalphíno, as Dalfíno.

Daluogo a luógo, from place to place.

Dáma, a Dame, a Lady, a Mistris. Also a queene at Chesse, or man at tables. Also a Doe of a fallow deare.

Damán destra, on the right hand.

Damáno in máno, from hand to hand, successiuely.

Damán sinístra, on the left hand.

Da maríto, mariageable.

Damascáre, to damaske.

Danaschíno, Damaske worke of Damasco.

Damásco, the stuffe called Damaske.

Damasonióne, an hearbe like Plantaine.

Damattína, of or from the morning. Also to morrow morning.

Dáme, Ladies. Also wilde Hares. Also men to play at tables or chesses.

Damè, by or of my selfe. Also from me.

Damèa mè, by my selfe alone.

Daméno, of lesse worth or estimation.

Damèstésso, by or of my selfe.

Damezza nótte, of or about midnight.

Damigella, a Damsell, awaiting woman. 

Damigello, a batchelour, a waiting-man.

Damiére, a paire of Tables.

Damíno, a coine in Ormuz.

Damíra a míra, from ayme to ayme.

Dámma, a Doe or wild Goate, a Hinde-deare.

Dámmi, giue me.

Da mó inánzi, from this time forward.

Damólto, of much, of much worth.

Damólto méno, of much lesse worth.

Damólto più, of much more worth.

Damotéggio, in iest, in mockerie.

Damóstra, for shew, for muster.

Danáio, Danáro, a pennie, monie.

Danaiáccio, filthy pelfe or monie.

Danaióso, Danaróso, full of monie.

Danári, pence. Also money or coine.

Dándola, as Dóndola.

Dandoláre, as Dondoláre.

Danessúno, of none at all.

Danéta, wilde wormewood.

D'angóscia, of anguish. Looke Péra.

Daniénte, of nought, for nothing.

Dánio, as Dáino.

Dannábile, damnable.

Dannaggiáre, as Danneggiáre.

Dannággio, as Dánno, domage.

Dannaggióso, domageable, full of danger.

Dannáro, to damne, to condemne, to blame. Also to doome, to adiudge, or fine. Also to blot out or cancell.

Dannáre laragióne, to cancell a debt.

Dannáre partíte, to crosse or cancell reckonings.

Dannáti, condemned or damned persons.

Dannatióne, condemnation, damnation.

Dánne, giue vs. Also giue of it.

Dannedáto, damnified, a legal word.

Danneggiaménto, any damnifying or losse.

Danneggiáre, to damnifie, to endomage.

Danneggiéuole, hurtfull, dangerous.

Dannéuole, damnable, full of danger.

Dannífero, danger or harme-bringing.

Dannificáre, to damnifie.

Dánno, danger, skaith, dammage, perill, detriment. Also offensiue losse.

Dannóso, full of danger, skaith or perill.

Da non díre, not to be spoken, vnlawfull.

Da non fáre, not to be done.

Da non núlla, good for something.

Dánte, a great wilde beast in Affrica with a very hard skin. Also vsed for the best perfumed Turkie or Spanish leather for gloues or ierkins. Also that giueth, a giuing man.

Da núlla, of no worth, for nought.

Dánza, a daunce, a ball.

Danzáre, to daunce.

Danzaríno, a dauncer. 



Danzatóre, a dauncer.

Daógni bánda, on or from euery side.

Dao, as Dáto. Also a dye.

Da ógni bóra, at or from all houres.

Da ógni láto, at or from euery side.

Da ógni máno, at or from all hands.

Da ógni tempo, at or from all times.

Dá ónde, whence, from whence.

Da ópera, fit for worke or labour.

Da órza, from larbord.

Da órza a póggia, from larbord to starbord, that is from the left to the right hand.

Da párte a párte, a part, a side, remote, a farre off. Also in the behalfe or name.

Da partíto, common, veniall, that may be had for money.

Dápe, meate or food for Gods or Princes.

Da per lui, by himselfe apart.

Da per lóro, by themselues apart.

Da per mè, by my selfe apart.

Da per nói, by our selues apart.

Da per sè, by himselfe apart.

Da per vói, by your selues apart.

Da per tútto, each where, in euery place.

Daphínio, a kind of precious stone.

Daphnitico, horse-tongue laurell.

Daphnóide, the hearbe Perwinkle. Also laurell gum.

Dapie, againe, from the foote or roote or foundation.

Dapiéde a cápo, from the foote to the head.

Da più, of more worth or qualitie.

Dapocággine, simplicitie, retchlesnesse, insufficiencie, foolishnesse.

Dapochétto, of litle litle worth.

Da póco, of litle, of small worth.

Da póco fà in quà, not long since.

Da póco in quà, not long since.

Da pò, as Dapói, since, after, then.

Da póco tempo in quà, a little while since.

Da pocóne, a great foolish Idiot.

Da póggia, from star-bord.

Da poggia ad órza, from starbord to larbord, that is from the right to the left hand.

Da pói, since, after, then, after that.

Da poi chè, since or sithence that.

Da poi dománe, after to morrow.

Da poi in quà, since vntill this time.

Dappiè, as Dapiè.

Dapresso, neere vnto, close by. Also from neare, from by.

Da príma, at first, from first.

Da princípio, from the beginning.

Da quà inánzi, hence forward.

Da quánto in quà?, how long since?

Da quél dì, from that day.

Da quél dì inánzi, from that day forward. 

Da quéllo, of that worth or qualitie.

Da quélla vólta inánzi, from that time forward.

Da qui inánzi, hence forward.

Da quéll'hóra, from that houre.

Da quéllo in pói, onely that excepted.

Da quínci inánzi, hence forward.

Da qui inpói, hence forward.

Da qui indiétro, heretofore.

Da quínci in diétro, heretofore.

Da quínci in pói, heereafter.

Da quíndi inánzi, henceforward.

Da quíndi indiétro, heretofore.

Da quíndi in pói, henceforward.

Dár'a l'árma, to strike vp or sound an alarum.

Dár bándo, to proclaime or banish.

Dardána, the great Clot-burre.

Dardáni, Cate-billes, or Wood-peckers, some take them for Sea-swallowes.

Dardaníni, as Dardáni.

Dardeggiáre, to darte, to cast a darte.

Dárdo, a darte. Also a Serpent that will fling himselfe from any high place and not hurt himselfe. Also as Bardáni.

Dáre, dò, diédi, or détti, Dáto, to giue. Also to hit or strike. Also to deale the cardes.

Dáre a cámbio, to put out money to exchange.

Dáre a credito, to giue vpon trust.

Dáre ádito, to giue entrance or accesse.

Dáre ad intendere, to teach or giue to vnderstand.

Dáre adósso, to strike or fall vpon.

Dáre a druedére, as Dáre a vedére.

Dáre a gámbe, to betake him to his legges, to shew a faire paire of heeles.

Dáre all'árma, to strike vp an alarum.

Dáre a pigióne, to let, to rent, or farme.

Dáre a vedére, to giue one to see or beleeue, to perswade.

Dáre a ruba, to giue to the spoile.

Dáre assúnto, to giue the charge off.

Dáre baggiáne, as Gonfiáre alcúno.

Dáre cacabáldole, as Dáre l'allódola.

Dáre cápo, to giue head. Also to come to a place or end of a matter.

Dáre cápo máno, to goe beyond limites or reason in any matter.

Dáre caréna, to giue the keele, to carene as Mariners say.

Dáre caróte, to giue a gudgeon.

Dáre cartáccia, a game at cardes.

Dáre cróllo, to shake, to stagger.

Dáre de' cálci, to kicke or wince.

Dáre de cálci a rouáio, to be hanged, to kicke the winde.

Dáre délle bótte, to giue blowes.

Dáre delle bastonáte, to bastonado. 

Dáre delle calcágna, as Dáre de'calci.

Dáre delle máni, to lay hold vpon.

Dáre delle múccie, to giue one a flap with a fox-taile.

Dáre déntro, to fall to, to strike or hit in.

Dáre del tù, to thou a man.

Dáre di bécco, to seaze vpon with the bill.

Dáre di brócca, to hit the white or peg or middle of any But, arme or marke that a man shooteth at. Also we say to hit a naile on the head.

Dáre di cálcio, as Dáre de cálci.

Dáre di cóllo ad ogni cósa, to catch at euery thing.

Dáre di cózzo, to shocke, to front, to But.

Dáre di máno, to lay hold on. Also to strike with the hand.

Dáre di míra, to take or hit leuill.

Dáre di pénna, to crosse or blot out.

Dáre di petto, to chocke breast to breast.

Dáre di piátto, to strike flatlin.

Dáre di píglo, to catch or take hold off.

Dáre di púnta, to phoine or thrust at.

Dáre di táglio, to strike with the edge.

Dáre fastídio, to trouble, to molest.

Dáre féde, to giue trust or credit.

Dáre finócchio, to flatter or giue Fennell.

Dáre fóndo, to sinke. Also to cast ancre.

Dáre suóco álla bombárda, to giue fire to a piece, to begin a matter.

Dáre gángheri, with dixterity to escape, it is a hunters phraise, & is properly vsed when the hare to auoide the houndes that be neere her makes so many turnes that she escapeth them, and leaues them at a fault.

Dáre il buón'ánno, to giue a new yeeres gift. Also to bid or wish one a good yeere.

Dáre il buón cápò d'ánno, idem.

Dáre il buón giórno, to bid good morrow.

Dáre il buón viággio, to giue a farewell.

Dáre il cáne, to dogge one, or watch one.

Dáre il cuóre, to giue ones heart.

Dáre il dósso, to turne ones backe.

Dáre il gábbo, to mocke or iest at.

Dáre il guásto, to giue the spoile, to ransake.

Dáre il mótto, to giue the word.

Dáre il pásso, to giue free passage.

Dáre il vénto alla pálla, to giue the bullet play, as Gunners say.

Dáre imprestánza, to lend.

Dáre in brócca, as Dáre di brocca.





Dáre in cárta, to deliuer in writing or paper. Also to hit the white or clout of a But or marke.

Dáre in lúce, to publish or put out.

Dáre in terra, to fall or run on ground.

Dáre la báia, to giue a mocke or flout.

Dáre la berta, idem.

Dare la ben'andáta, to bid farewell.

Dáre la ben venúta, to bid welcome.

Dáre la buóna nótte, to bid good night.

Dáre la buóna máno, to giue a newyeeres gift, or drinking mony.

Dáre la córda, to giue the strappado.

Dáre la fáua, to giue one his voice.

Dáre l'allódola, to giue Court-holy water, to cog and foist and flatter. Also to smooth or sooth vp a man in his speech or actions.

Dáre la mála pásqua, to giue one an ill easter, to giue one sorrow.

Dáre la máncia, to giue drinking monie.

Dáre l'anello, to wed with a ring.

Dáre la mádre d'Orlándo, to giue a mocke because her name was Berta.

Dáre la pálma, to giue the victory.

Dare la paríglia, to giue one the like.

Dáre la pínta, to giue thrust.

Dáre la pósta, to giue any appointment, to appoint a place of meeting.

Dáre la quádra, as Dáre Pallódola.

Dáre la sóia, as Dáre la báia.

Dáre la squádra, as Dáre l'allódola.

Dáre la strétta, to giue a ierke or pinch.

Dáre la trátta, to giue leaue for an exportation.

Dáre la tráue, as dárel'allódola.

Dáre la vóce, to giue voice or consent.

Dare le cárte, to deale the cardes.

Dáre le calcágna, to turne the heeles.

Dáre le ceruella a ripeduláre, to let ones wits goe a wooll gathering.

Dáre le mósse, to set foorth, to giue the start to a running horse.

Dáre le pésche, to giue ones taile, or consent to vnnaturall sinne.

Dáre le spélle, to turne ones shoulders to run away.

Dáre língua, to giue word.

Dáre le véle, to set sailes.

Dáre lo stórmo, to giue the spoile.

Dáre luógo al compágno, a Cristmas-game called, rise vp good fellow, or itch buttocke.

Dáre máno, to set to ones helping hand.

Dáre martello, to make one iealous, suspicious or passionate.

Dáre mátto, to giue check-mate.

Dáre módo, to giue meanes.

Dáre móine, as Dáre l'allódola.

Dáre nella rágna, to fall into a net or trap.

Dáre nelle máni, to fall into ones hands.

Dáre nelle scartáte, to fall into euill company, or into mischiefes, as a man would say among such as are discarded from others. Also to speake what hath beene spoken off before, for want of matter.

Dáre ménda, to impute or finde fault.

Dáre nóia, to trouble, to annoy.

Dáre óglio, to flatter or sooth vp.

Dáre nóme, to publish or giue out.

Dáre ócchio, to heed well, or looke vnto.

Dáre ómbra, to giue suspicion.

Dáre ópera, to endeuour, to labour.

Dáre órdine, to giue order, to dispose.

Dáre panzáne, as Gonfiáre alcúno.

Dáre paróla, to consent or yeeld vnto.

Dáre pásto, to feede with faire words.

Dáre párte, to empart, or participate.

Dáre pastócchie, as Cacciár caróre.

Dáre pensiére, to put in suspicion.

Dáre roselíne, as Dáre l'allódola.

Dáre recápito, to giue entertainment. Also to deliuer safely.

Dáre sesto, to settle or giue order.

Dáre sténto, to giue sorrow and griefe.

Dáre una bórniola, to giue false iudgement of any matter referred vnto one, a phraise vsed of gamsters and plaiers in gaming houses and Tennis-courts.

Dáre un cauállo, to brich or ierke a schoole boie vpon anothers backe

Dáre vísta, to seeme or make show.

Dáre víta, to giue life.

Dáre una fínta, to giue an offer, to profer and not doe, to faine to doe a thing.

Dáre úna occhiáta, to giue a looke, to cast an eye, to looke about.

Dáre un pax tecum, to giue one a whirret or blow and then begone.

Dáre una scantonáta, to scape from one at a corner and there leaue him.

Dáre un stácci queto, to giue one such a blow as will make him be quiet.

Dáre vóce, to giue out, to bruite out.

Dáre vólta, to turne away. Also to turn backe.

Dársi, for a man to giue himselfe.

Dársi vánto, to brag or boast off.

Dársi bel tempo, to liue a merry life.

Dá rispetto, to spare against need.

Dariuólto, to turne downe as a falling band or womans rabato.

Darmácco, a kind of coine.

Dascherzo, in iest, in sport.

Dasè, by or of himselfe.

Dasè a sè, by himselfe alone.

Dasè medésimo, by himselfe.

Dasénno, in good sooth or earnest.

Daséra & da matína, euening and morning.

Dasezzo, at last, lastly, in the end.

Dasía, pursinesse or thicknesse of breath.

Dasiéme, a sunder, a part, from together.

Dásio, a verse consisting of fiue sillables. 

Dasipóde, a kinde of Hare or Cunny which being with yongue conceiueth againe vpon it.

Dasólo a sólo, all alone by himselfe.

Dasómmo ad imo, from the top to the bottome.

Dasperlóro, by or of themselues.

Daspersè, by or of himselfe.

D'assái, of much or sufficiency.

Dassè, by or of himselfe.

Dássi, is giuen, or he giues himselfe.

Dássigli, is giuen to him.

Da strapázzo, for wast and spoile.

Dáta, the date, or dating of any writing.

Da tánto, of as much, or so much worth.

Dáta ópera, of set purpose, with industry.

Datáre, to date a letter or writing.

Datário, he to whom one giueth. Also what is freely giuen. Also a dignity sometimes in Rome.

Datarócco, gullish, wayward, peeuish.

Dátero, as Dáttero.

Dathiáto, the worst Frankincense.

Datiábile, toleable, customable.

Datiáre, to tole, to tax, to sesse, to custome.

Datiaría, a Custome or Tole-house.

Datiáro, a receiuer of pole or custome.

Dátila úua, the Date-grape.

Dátilo, as Dáttilo, as Dáttero.

Dátio, custome, tole, tallage, imposition.

Datióne, a giuing, a donation.

Datíuo, to be giuen, the Datiue case.

Dáto, giuen. Also stroken. Also addicted or giuen vnto. Also dealt the cardes.

Dáto chè, since that, put case that.

Dáto ópera, hauing endeuoured or laboured for.

Datóre, a giuer.

Datórno, about, from about.

Datórno vía, round about.

Da trauerso, a crosse, a thwart, sideline.

Dáttero, a Date, a Date-tree. Also a kind of hard shell-fish that shines in the night.

Dáttili, a foote of three sillables, the first long, and the two other short.

Dáttilo, as Dáttero. Also a measure about an inche. Also Fiuefinger-grasse, Stone-crop, Wall-pepper, or Wilde-purcelane.

Dáttilo dógma, a handfull, foure inches.

Dattoliére, an hortyard of Date-trees. Also a Date-tree.

Dáttolo, as Dáttilo, or Dáttero.

Dattórno, about, round about.

Dauantággio, moreouer, besides, more.

Dauánti, before, a forehand.

Dauantíno, a womans apron. Also a 



halfe kirtle.

Dauánzo, ouer plus, to leaue and spare, to much, more then neede, ouer and aboue.

Dáuco, the yellow Douke or Carrot-root. Also a kind of hemlocke.

Daucóne, as Dáuco.

Dauentúra, by hap or chance.

Dauéro, in truth, in earnest, in sooth.

Da uicíno, neere, neere hand, by.

Dauídica poesía, poetry of Psalmes, Psalme-like poetry.

Daúno ad áltro, from one to another.

Daziáre, as Datiáre.

Dauno infuóri, one excepted.

Davói, by or of your selfe.

Daziáro, as Datiáro.

Dázio, as Dátio.

Dè, the letter D. Also fiue hundred.

Dè, a Preposition of the Genitiue case, of.

Dea, a Goddesse.

Dealbáre, to whiten, to blanch, to dawne.

Dealbatióne, a whiting, a blanching.

Deacríte, as Dracónite.

Debbe, as Debba, he oweth, he ought, he shall, he must. Also he is like, or belike.

Debbo, as Deggio, I owe, I ought, I shall, I should, I must.

Debe, as Debbe.

Debelláre, to vanquish by warre. It also hath been vsed for Debilitáre, to weaken.

Debellatióne, a subduing by warre.

Debére, as Douére.

Debile, weake, feeble, faint.

Debilità, weaknesse, feeblenesse, debilitie.

Debitaménte, duely, in good sort.

Debilitáre, to enfeeble, to weaken.

Debilitatióne, as Debilità.

Debitáre, to endebt.

Debiti, debts, duties, bonds, obligations, owings.

Debito, a debt, a dutie. Also due or fit. Also owing. Vsed also for a Debtor.

Debitóre, a Debtor, one that oweth.

Debole, weake, feeble, faint.

Debolétto, somewhat weake and feeble.

Debolézza, weaknesse, feeblenesse, debilitie.

Debolíre, as Indebolíre.

Debonário, vpright, giuen to honestie.

Debonarità, vprightnesse, honestie.

Déca, a decade, or the number of ten.

Decacórdo, an instrument of ten strings.

Décade, Decades, consisting of ten.

Decadenza, a cadence, a declining, a decaying, an empairing. Also an escheating.

Decadére, cádo, cáddi, cadúto, to decline, to decay, to fall downe. Also to escheat or deuolue vnto.

Decagonáre, to make ten-angled.

Decágono, hauing ten angles or corners.

Decálogo, containing the ten commandements of God giuen to Moses.

Decameróne, of ten parts or ten daies worke, a Decameron.

Decanáto, a Deaconrie. Also a Deanerie.

Decáno, a Deacon. Also a Deane.

Decantáre, to sing, to publish or make famous.

Decantatióne, a publishing, a proclaiming, a singing or making famous.

Decapitáre, to behead.

Decapitatióne, a beheading.

Decembre, the moneth of December.

Decemuiráto, an office of ten men.

Decennále, of ten yeares.

Decennário, of ten yeares.

Decenne, of ten yeares.

Decéno, the tenth.

Decenóue, nineteene.

Decente, decent, comely, well-seeming.

Decenteménte, decently, comely.

Decenza, decencie, seemelinesse, comelinesse.

Decettióne, illusion, deceit, guile.

Decéuole, decent, seemely, comely, conuenient.

Deche, as Décade, as those of Liuie.

Dechiaráre, to declare, to manifest.

Dechiaratióne, a declaration.

Dechináre, to decline, to descend.

Dechinatióne, a declination.

Dechíno, as Clúno.

Decídere, cído, císi, císo, to decide, to define.

Deciferáre, to decipher.

Deciferatóre, a Deciphrer.

Decima, a tithe, or tenth part.

Decíma, halfe a score, a tenth in number.

Decimáre, to tithe or tenth.

Decimário, a Tither.

Deciméro, a Tither.

Decimiére, a Tither. Also a kind of good Peare.

Decimo, the tenth, a tenth deale measure.

Deciplicáre, to tenfold.

Decisíbile, that may be decided.

Decisióne, a deciding, a defining.

Decíso, decided, defined, determined.

Decisóre, a decider, a determiner.

Declamáre, to declaime.

Declamatióne, a declamation.

Declamatória, of declaiming.

Declmábile, that may be declined.

Declináre, to decline, to descend.

Declinatióne, a declination, a declension.

Declinéuole, declinable.

Declíuo, downe bending, low, inferior. 

Deco, honor, worship, glory. Also comelinesse, commendation, honesty.

Decollaménto, a beheading or cutting off by the necke.

Decolláre, to behead or cut off by the necke.

Decollatióne, as Decollaménto.

Decollatóre, a beheader, a heads man.

Decondiménto, as Condiménto.

Decoráre, to set forth in comly manner, to make beautifull to the eie.

Decoratióne, as Decóro.

Decóro, comelinesse, grace, decorum, beauty, grace in comely doing or speaking.

Decorsióne, a running as of time or yeeres.

Decórso, past, run ouer.

Decottióne, a decoction, or liquer wherein things haue been sodden.

Decótto, decocted, boiled in.

Decrepità, old age, decrepity.

Decrepito, very old, at the pits brinke.

Decrepitúdine, as Decrepità.

Decréscere, to decrease, to wane.

Decresciménto, a decreasing, a waning.

Decretále, according to decrees, the Popes decretales or law bookes.

Decretáre, to decree, to enact, to iudge.

Decreto, a decree, an order, an enacting.

Decretório, iudiciall, established.

Decretórij giórni, perilous, fatall, dismall or vnauoidable daies.

Decumáno, a brode path or way between field and field.

Decupláre, to double tenfold.

Decúplo, ten fold.

Decurióne, a decurion, a captaine of ten.

Decussáre, to cut equally in the midst crosse-wise as the letter x.

Decussióne, a cutting equally in the midst crosse-wise.

Dedále, a thimble, a fingerstale.

Dedicáre, to dedicate, to consecrate vnto.

Dedicatióne, a dedication.

Dedicatóre, a Dedicator.

Dedicatória, a dedicatorie Epistle.

Deditióne, a dedition, a dedication.

Dedito, giuen, addicted, dedicated.

Dedúrre, to deduce, to deduct.

Deduttióne, a deduction, a deducting.

Dee, Goddesses.

Dee, he oweth, as Debbe.

Deesi, one ought, it ought.

Defessaménte, wearily, tiredly.

Defesso, wearie, tired, faint.

Deflussióne, as Deflússo.

Deffalcaménto, as Deffalcatúra.

Deffalcáre, to defalke, to abate.

Defalcatúra, an abatement, a deducting.

Defecáto, cleansed from leese or dregs.

Deffendere, as Diffendere.



Deffendénole, that may be defended. 

Deffensíbile, defensible.

Deffensiríuo, that resisteth.

Deffensóre, as Diffensóre.

Deffesa, as Diffesa.

Deffetto, as Diffetto.

Deffettóso, as Diffettóso.

Defficiente, wanting meanes. Also fainting in courage and power.

Defficienza, want of meanes, want of courage or power.

Deffícere, fício, sicéi, siciúto, to faile in abilitie, to want meanes.

Deffiníre, nísco, níto, to define.

Deffinitióne, a definition.

Deffinitiuaménte, definitely.

Deffinitíuo, definitiue.

Deffiníto, defined, determined.

Defieuolíre, lísco, líto, to enfeeble.

Dessagráre, to consume with fire.

Deflagratióne, a consuming with fire.

Defloratióne, a bloudy flixe that Coults haue.

Defluíre, ísco, íto, to flow forth or from.

Deflússo, a defluxion, a flowing downeward, a scouring, a laske or loosenesse in the bellie.

Defónto, deceased, past out of this life.

Defontóro, a Tombe, a Sepulchre.

Deformáre, to deforme, to misshape.

Deformatióne, a misshaping.

Deformità, deformitie.

Defrodáre, to beguile, to defraud.

Defrodatióne, a defrauding.

Defrútto, Cuit or sodden wine.

Defúnto, as Defónto.

Defuntóro, as Defontóro.

Degeneráre, to degenerate from kind.

Degeneratióne, degeneration.

Degenero, a degenerate from kind.

Degettáre, to deiect, to cast-downe.

Degettióne, a deiection.

Degetto, deiected, cast downe.

Deggio, I owe, I must, I shall, I ought.

Dégli, of the. Also he gaue him.

Deglinánzi, in former times.

Degnáre, to daine, to vouchsafe.

Degnatióne, a vouchsafing, a daining.

Degnità, dignitie, worthinesse.

Degnitóso, worthy, full of dignitie.

Dégno, worthy, of worth.

Degomentáre, to waste, to consume, to destroy, to spoile, to deuour riotously.

Degoménto, a riotous wasting, a consuming, a destruction, a hauocke, a deuouring.

Degradáre, to degrade, to descend steps.

Degradatióne, a degrading.

Degredere, gredo, gressi, gresso, to digresse from the purpose.

Degressióne, a digression.

Degresso, digressed from the purpose.

Degrignáre, to grin, to snarle.

Degustáre, to distaste.

Deh, a note, a signe or interiection of compassion, of sorrow, of repentance, of an earnest desire, of entreating or of exhortation, as oh, oh that, alas, &c.

Dehíscere, ísco, iscéi, isciúto, to gape and open wide.

Dei, Gods. Also of the.

Dei, of Douere, thou owest, or must.

Deificáre, to deifie, or make a God.

Deificatióne, a deifying.

Deiforme, bearing the frame or forme of God. Also framed by God, after Gods image.

Deiformità, Gods forming, Deiformitie.

Dél, of the, of it's.

Dél, some, or part of, namely before diuisible things, as Del pane, some bread.

Déla, a marke like a D. among Correctors in Printing-houses, whereby they meane the taking away of some thing that is superfluous.

Delantera, the fore part of the horse.

Delapidáre, to delapidate, to ruine or pull downe stone walles.

Delapidatióne, a delapidation.

Delatóre, a spie, an eawes-droppor, a tell-tale.

Del certo, certainly, of a certaine.

Del chè, whereof, of which.

Del cóme, of the manner how.

Del contínuo, continually, still.

Del córpo, looke Andáre.

Delebile, that may be defaced, put or crossed out, or taken away.

Delebilità, a defacing or crossing out.

Delegáre, to delegate, to assigne or appoint to some charge or office.

Delegáti, delegates, men appointed.

Delegatióne, an assignation or appointment to any charge or office.

Deleggiáre, as Dileggiare.

Deleniméno, as appeasing, a mittigating.

Deleniménto, a poison or medicine to make one loue.

Deletto., Vsed for Eletto, chosen.

Deleuáre, to leauy.

Delfíno, Delphino, as Dolfíno.

Delì, that way, there away.

Delibáre, to taste or assay with the tongue.

Deliberagióne, a deliuerance.

Deliberánza, deliberation, deliuerance.

Deliberáre, to deliberate, to determine.

Deliberatióne, a deliberation.

Deliberatíuo, deliberatiue.

Delibránza, deliuerance, deliuery.

Delicatella, a fine dainty minx.

Delicatézza, delicacy, daintinesse.

Delicáto, delicate, dainty, nice.

Delicatúra, as Delicatézza.

Delineáre, to delineate, to draw, to paint 

Delineatióne, a delineation, a drawing.

Delíngo, e un pánno di cottóne grósso, dóppio di várij colóri, lúngo & lárgo quánto un tapéto di cása con un ferro per testa per potérlo attaccáre da ogni bánda si che nel mezzo fáccia cóme una bórsa.

Delinquente, a man guilty of a fault.

Delinquenza, offence or guiltinesse.

Delínquere, línquo, linquéi, linqunto, or lítto, to offend, to trespas, to do what one ought not.

Delíquio, lacke, want, defect.

Deliráre, to dote, to raue, to goe out of the right way, among ploughmen it is to leaue bare balkes vncouered in harrowing, whence came the metaphore to raue and speake idly.

Deliratióne, as Delírio. Also an imperfect harrowing.

Delírio, a doting, a rauing, or distracting of the wit.

Deliro, a Dottrell, a swaruer from reason, distracted of his wits. Also peeuish, fond, or foolish. Also doted, raued, or become a fabling foole.

Delítia, deliciousnesse, daintinesse, pleasure.

Delitiáre, to liue in diliciousnesse.

Deliticáre, to tickle, as Diliticáre.

Delitico, any kind of tickling.

Deliticóso, full of tickling, ticklish.

Delitioso, delicious, full of dainties.

Delítto, an offence, a fault, a trespasse.

Délla, Délle, of the.

Délle vólte, sometimes.

Déllo, Délli, of the.

Delméno, of the least.

Delpári, hand to hand, without ods.

Delpiù, of the most or plurall.

Del quándo, of the time when.

Delta, a Greeke letter. Also a Triangle.

Deltánto, of the so much, or quantity.

Deltatóno, three cornered. Also a concord of three voices or tunes.

Deltotóne, the name of a signe in heauen.

Deltútto, wholy, altogether.

Delúbro, a Temple, a Church. Also an idoll or image of wood.

Delúdere, lúdo, lúsi, lúso, to delude.

Delusióne, delusion, deceit.

Delúso, deluded, mocked, deceiued.

Demag ogía, turbulency, factiousnesse.

Demag ógo, a factious turbulent man.

Demaniále, of or pertaining to demaines. Also a man hauing demaines of lands.

Demánio, the demaines of any land.

Demensióne, a demension, a substance.

Demente, doting, swarued from reason.

Dementia, madnesse, fury, lacke of wit.

Demergere, mergo, mersi, merso, to 



ouerwhelme.

Demergiménto, an ouerwhelming.

Demeritánza, as Demerito.

Demeritáre, to demerit, to deserue.

Demerito, a demerit, a desert.

Demeritório, deseruing, meritorious.

Demersióne, an ouer whelming.

Demerso, ouer whelmed.

Demerto, as Demerito.

Demessióne, demissenesse, deiection.

Demésso, demissed, deiected.

Démio, a kind of cornalline stone.

Demissióne, demissenesse, basenesse.

Demísso, demisse, submisse, faint, base.

Democratía, a free state or common wealth, hauing no Prince or superior but themselues (as Venice is) except those officers that themselues appoint.

Democriteggiáre, to laugh at the vanity of the world as Democritus did.

Demóne, as Demónio.

Demoniáco, possessed with an euill spirit.

Demónia, diuels, euill spirits.

Demoniáre, to possesse with a diuell.

Demoniáto, as Demoniáco.

Demónio, a demon, a diuell, an euill spirit. Also knowledge. Also a precious stone of seuerall colours like the rainebow. Also a signe in heauen.

Demostránza, a demonstration.

Demostráre, to shew by demonstration.

Demostratióne, a demonstration.

Demostratíuo, demonstratiue.

Demultáre, to stroke gently with the hand, to mitigate or entreat gently.

Demúlto, stroked gently, allured.

Demugíre, gísco, gíto, to bellow much.

Denaióso, monied, full of mony.

Denári, pence, mony, coine.

Denári contánti, ready mony.

Denário, the tenth part of a Dramme of fine gold.

Denáro, Denáio, a peny, mony.

Denaróso, monied, full of mony.

Dendracháte, a kind of Agate stone.

Dendrítide, a stone which put to the root of a tree the axe that attempts to cut it turnes and waxeth blunt.

Dendróide, a kind of Tithimale or spurge.

Denegáre, to deny, to renounce to refuse.

Denegatióne, a denying, a refusing.

Denigránza, a darkning, an obscuring.

Denigráre, to darken, to obscure, to blacke.

Denigratióne, a denigration, a clouding.

Denihilábile, that may be disanulled.

Denihiláre, to disanull.

Denihilatióne, a disanulling.

Denno, as Debbono, they owe or must.s Looke Douére. Also they gaue.

Denominánza, a denomination. 

Denomináre, to denominate.

Denominatióne, a denomination.

Denominatiuaménte, by denomination.

Denominatíuo, that may be named by.

Denóntia, a denuntiation.

Denontiáre, to denounce.

Denontiatióne, a denuntiation.

Denontiatóre, a denouncer.

Denotáre, to denote, to shew, to meane.

Denotatióne, a denotation, a meaning.

Densáre, to thicken, to condense.

Denséuole, that may be thickned.

Densità, thicknesse, density, spissenesse.

Denso, dense, thicke, foggy, compact.

Dentále, a piece of iron not reaching all ouer the ploughhead, and turning vp as a snout pointed, some take it for the share of the plough, or the wood wherein the culter is closed. Also a corall for children breeding teeth. Also a rakes tooth. Also the name of a fish that hurteth much with his teeth. Also the hearb dogs tooth.

Dentáre, to tooth. Also to endent.

Dentária, toothed violet, or corall wort.

Dentaruóla, a childs paine or shedding of the teeth.

Dentáte árme, endented armes.

Dentáto, toothed, snagle, gogtoothed. Also spitefully, railing.

Dentatúra, any mans toothing.

Dente, any tooth or dent.

Dente bucáto, a hollow tooth.

Dente caballíno, an hearbe.

Denteggiáre, to tooth, to endent.

Dentelláre, to endent, or engraile.

Dentelli, the dents or teeth of a sawe or rake, endentings in armorie. Also litle spike-nailes.

Dente mascoláre, a iaw-tooth.

Dentero, weake or forcelesse in taste.

Denti, all manner of dents or teeth.

Denticáre, to pinch, to nible, or brouse with ones teeth.

Dentice, a fish with great teeth.

Denti dauánti, the fore-teeth.

Denti mascellári, the iaw or eye-teeth.

Dentifrício, a meane to preserue teeth.

Denti sécchi., Looke Rimanere.

Dentóso, toothie, full of teeth.

Dentráre, to enter within.

Dentro, within, inward.

Dentrouía, inaway, inward.

Dentúto, as Dentúto.

Denudáre, to strip, to make naked.

Denudatióne, a stripping naked.

Deo, as Dío, G O D.

Depaisáre, to vncountry.

Depaláre, to vnpole, to vnstake.

Depanáre, to reele or winde yarne.

Depanatóio, a rice or reele to wind silke vpon.

Depannáre, to open, to cleare. 

Dependere, pendo, pendéi, pendúto, or péso, to depend, to hang by, to relie vpon.

Dependente, depending, hanging by. Also a dependant.

Dependenza, dependencie.

Depennáre, as Dipennáre.

Deplorábile, that may be deplored.

Deploránza, as Deploratióne.

Deploráre, to deplore, to bewaile.

Deploratióne, deploration, bemoning.

Depò, vsed for Dopò or Dapói.

Deponente, deponent, lying downe.

Depónere, póngo, pósi, pósto, to depose, to depone, to lay downe.

Depositáre, to leaue in trust or feoffie, to enshrine, to pledge, to pawne.

Depositório, a secret trustie friend, a feoffie, one that takes in trust

Depositióne, a deposition, a deposing.

Depósito, in trust or feoffie, a pledge. Also a shrine, a tombe, a sepulchre. Also a store-house.

Depositúra, a feoffie or trust. Also a deposing or laying downe.

Deprauáre, to depraue, to backbite. Also to spoile or corrupt.

Deprauatióne, deprauation.

Deprauatóre, a deprauer.

Depredaménto, as Depredatióne.

Depredáre, to praie, to ransacke.

Depredatióne, a depredation.

Depredatríce, a filching whore, a robbresse.

Depressaménto, a depressing.

Deppressáre, to depresse, to suppresse.

Depresséuole, depressable.

Depressióne, a depression, a suppressing.

Depresso, depressed, suppressed, brought low.

Depriménto, as Depressióne.

Deprímere, prímo, priméi, or pressi, presso, to depresse, to bring low, to suppresse.

Depuráre, to purge, to cleanse from all filth, to purifie.

Depuratióne, a purging, a cleansing from all filth, a puryfying.

Deputáre, to depute, to substitute.

Deputáti, Deputies, Substitutes.

Deputatióne, a deputation.

Deputatóre, a Substituter.

Deramáre, to vnbranch.

Deráta, as Derráta.

Derbio, a kind of litle fish.

Deredáre, to disinherite.

Deredatióne, a disinheriting.

Derelítto, left, cast off, forsaken.

Deretanaménto, lastly. Also lag or lately.

Deretáno, lag, last, hindmost.

Derídere, rído, rísi, ríso, to deride.

Deriétro, behind, hindermost.

Derisíbile, that may be derided.

Derisióne, derision, flouting. 



Deríso, derided, flouted, mocked.

Derisóre, a derider, a mocker.

Derisoriaménte, by way of derision.

Derítto, as Dirítto.

Derisório, subiect to derision.

Deriuánza, a deriuing from.

Deriuáre, to deriue, or come from.

Deriuatióne, a deriuation.

Deriuatíuo, deriuatiue.

Deriuiéno, an euasion, a startinghole, a shift to scape or goe from ones word.

Derogánza, as Derogatióne.

Derogáre, to derogate, to empaire. Also to preiudice.

Derogatióne, derogation, preiudice.

Derráta, a cheapning, a bargaine. Also any buying or selling. Also a cheapnesse or good penny worth, a good hansell. Also a certaine coine.

Derráte, all maner of ware or stuffe that is to be bought or sould at the second hand.

Descedáre, to awake from sleepe.

Descendere, scendo, scési, scéso, to descend, to come downe, to a light.

Descendente, as Discendente.

Descendenza, as Descésa. Also a desscent in blood.

Descensióne, as Descésa.

Descenso, as Descésa.

Descésa, a descending or comming down. Also a running rhume, a pose or murre.

Descéso, descended, come downe.

Deschétto, a little deske or table.

Descináre, to dine. Also a dinner.

Désco, a deske, a table, a counting-boord. Also a forme, a bench, a seat or stoole.

Descríuere, to describe, to declare.

Descrittióne, a description.

Descrítto, described, declared.

Descrittóri, a describer.

Desertáre, to make desart or desolate.

Desertatióne, a desolation, a forsaking.

Desertíssimo, most forlorne or desolate.

Desertitúdine, a desolating.

Deserto, a desart, a wildernesse, a heath.

Desertóre, a waster, a dissoluter.

Deseruiménto, a deseruing.

Deseruíre, as Diseruíre.

Desiáre, to desire, to wish, to long for.

Desiderábile, that may be desired.

Desideráre, to desire, to wish, to long for.

Desideráta, a kind of paste of Genoa.

Desideratíssimo, most desired.

Desideratíuo, to be desired.

Desideréuole, to be desired.

Desiderio, desire, wish, longing for.

Desídia, sloth, idlenesse. 

Desiderosíssimo, most desirous.

Desideróso, desirous, longing for.

Designáre, as Disegnáre.

Designo, as Diségno.

Desináre, to dine. Also a dinner.

Desinea, a dining, or dinner space.

Desinenza, a desinence or termination.

Desío, desire, lust or longing for.

Desióso, desirous, longing for.

Desíre, desire, lust, or longing for.

Desistenza, a ceasing or desisting.

Desistere, sisto, sistéi, sistúto, to cease, to desist, to leaue off.

Desocupatióne, leasure or vacant time from businesse.

Desoláre, to desolate, to waste.

Desolatióne, desolation, wasting.

Despittáre, to spight, to despight.

Despicente, despising, contemning.

Despicenza, a despising, a contemning.

Despítto, spite, despight, despised.

Despittóso, spitefull, despightfull.

Desponsáre, to vnwed, to vnbride.

Despóta, a lord, a lordlike gouernment.

Despótico, lordlike, commanding wise.

Déssa, she, the very same.

Désse, they, them very same.

Dessedáre, to awake from sleepe.

Dessepelíre, as Dissepelíre.

Desserráre, as Disserráre.

Desseruíre, as Disseruíre.

Déssi, them same, they.

Dessíssimo, the most and very same.

Désso, he, it, the very same.

Dessolatúra, as Dissolatúra.

Déssono, they might, wold or should giue.

Destaiuólo, as Destatóio.

Destáre, to awaken, to rouze. Also to prouoke or allure vnto.

Destatóio, an awaker, an alarum.

Déste, you gaue or did giue.

Desterità, as Destrézza.

Destináre, to destinate, to appoint.

Destinatióne, destination.

Destíno, destiny, fate, lot, chance.

Destituíre, ísco, íto, to make destitute.

Destitutióne, destitution.

Destitúto, destitute, voide, wanting.

Desto, a wakened, vigilant, rouzed.

Destolo falcóne, a kind of faulkon.

Destra, the right hand. Also an instrument called by founders a chaplet, which is placed neere the mouth and breech of the mould of the piece when it is cast to sustaine the Niuell or Newell, whereby the concauity of the piece may be iust and euen. Also handsome, well fitting, sutable. Also happy, luckie or fortunate.

Destraménte, nimbly, with dexterity.

Destreggiáre, to play ambodexter, to go handsomely to worke. Also to applaude or sooth vp, still to follow ones right hand. Also to vse dexterity or discretion in pursuit of any businesse. 

Destrétto, as Distrétto.

Destrézza, nimblenesse, dexterity.

Destriéra, any fine mare of seruice.

Destriére, a palfrie, a nimble steede or ready swift horse. Also a mans priuities.

Destringáto, vntrussed, vnpointed.

Destríno, a right handed man.

Destro, nimble, agile, quicke. Also right handed. Also conuenient or necessary. Also fauorable, seconding or prosperous. Also a priuy or close stoole.

Destrocherío, a bracelet or hoope of gold set with precious stones.

Destrórso, toward or on the right hand.

Destruente, destroying, consuming.

Destrúere, as Distrúggere.

Destrúggere, to destroy.

Destruggitóre, a destroier.

Destrúrre, to destroy.

Destruttríce, a woman destroier.

Destruttióne, waste, destruction.

Destrútto, destroied, wasted.

Destruttóre, a destroier

Desuáno, a garnet, a cocke loft.

Desueto, disused, disaccustomed.

Desuetúdine, disuse, discustome.

Desuiáre, as Disuiáre.

Desuitiáre, to limne, to paint, or draw draughts in bookes.

Desuitiatóre, a limner, a painter. Also a drawer of draughts in bookes.

Desultóri, certaine Numidian horsemen that Hanniball made great vse of.

Detále, a thimble or a finger-stall.

Detarello, a little thimble or fingerstall.

Deterioráre, to make or become worse, more wicked or vnhappy.

Deterioratióne, a becomming or making worse.

Deterióre, made or become more wicked.

Determinábile, determinable.

Determináre, to determine.

Determinatióne, a determination.

Determinéuole, determinable.

Deterriménto, a deterring, a dismaying.

Deterríto, deterred, dismaied.

Detestábile, detestable, abhominable.

Detestáre, to detest, to abhor.

Detestatióne, detestation.

Detesto, detested, abhorred.

Déto, a finger. Looke Díto.

Detragghiáre, as Detrárre.

Detrárre, trággo, trássi, trátto, to detract, to backbite, to slander, to draw from.

Detrattióne, detraction, backbiting.

Detrátto, detracted, backbitten, drawne from.

Detrattóre, a detracter, a backbiter.

Detrattória língua, a detracting tongue. 



Detrattaménto, as Detrattatióne.

Detriménto, detriment, hindrance.

Detrúdere, trúdo, trúsi, trúso, to detrude or cast downe.

Detrusióne, a casting downe.

Detrúso, detruded, cast downe.

Dettáme, an instruction giuen from another.

Dettáre, to endite, to compose in minde.

Dettarello, a pretty saying or sentence.

Dettatióne, an enditing, a composition.

Dettáto, endited. Also a saying.

Dettatóre, an enditer, a composer.

Dettatúra, an inditing or stiling.

Détti, sayings, prouerbes. Also I gaue.

Détti feltríni, counters to cast accounts.

Détto, said, spoken, named. Looke Díre.

Détto, a saying, a diction, a motto, a prouerb.

Deturpáre, to defile, to pollute.

Deturpatióne, pollution, defiling.

Deturpéuole, that may be defiled.

Deuastáre, to waste, to destroy, to spoile.

Deuastatióne, a wasting, a desolation.

Deuastatóre, a waster, a spoiler.

Deuedáre, to forbid, to prohibite.

Deuér hauére, to haue owing.

Deuér dáre, to owe.

Deuiáre, as Disuiáre.

Deuiatióne, as Suiaménto.

Deuío, a digressing or swaruing out.

Deuío camíno, a by or vncouth way.

Deuóluere, as Diuóluere.

Deuolutióne, as Diuolutióne.

Deuolúto, as Diuolúto.

Deuoráre, to deuoure, as Diuoráre.

Deuotáre, to deuote or vow vnto.

Deuotióne, deuotion, religion.

Deuóto, deuout, deuoted, religious.

Deuére, Debbo, Deggio, Deo, or Deuo, Deuéi, or Deuétti, Deuúto, to owe, to be endebted, to be due. Also to beseeme or be conuenient. Also to belong or appartaine. Also to be likely.

Deutoronómio, a reiteration of the law or a second law.

Deuúto, owed, endebted, due. Also seemely or conuenient. Also right and orderly.

D'hóggi inánzi, from this day forward.

D'hóggi in dománi, from this day vntill to morrow.

D'hóggi in ótto, from this day seauen-night.

D'hóggi in quíndeci, from this day fortnight.

D'hóra in ánzi, from henceforward.

D'hóra in hóra, from houre to houre.

D'huópo, necessary, needfull.

D'huópo essere, to be needfull. 

Dì, a Preposition or signe of the Genitiue case, of, of the.

Día, in signification of with, as fù feríto dìláncia, he was hurt with a launce.

Dì, a signe of comparison, then, Maggiór dìme, greater then I.

Dì, in signification of some or many, as Féce armáre due galére e messeui su di valent' huómini.

Dì, a signe of the Infinitiue Moode, to, for, for to.

Dì, a signe of the Ablatiue case, as, Intorniáto di sei montagnétte.

Dì, from, Dì dì in dì. from day to day, a signe of the Ablatiue case.

Dì, as Cóntra, against, as, Chem'aiúti di non sò che, or che vendétta é di luì ch'a ció ne ména.

Dì, in Di sórte che, in such manner as.

Dì, an ornament, sótto di lúi, sótto di mè.

Dì, a noune substantiue, a day, a morrow, Buon dì, good day, good morrow.

Dì, the Imperatiue of Díre, say thou.

Día, a Goddesse. Also diuine. Also let him or her giue. Also two, being ioyned to any word.

Diabólico, diuelish, diabolicall.

Diacartáno, an ellectuary made vp with bastard Saffron called a diacarthanum.

Diacciáre, to freese or become Ice.

Diacatolicon, a purging electuary to draw all humours.

Diáccio, ice or frost. Also a kind of hollow or transparent work among Goldsmithes.

Diacciuóli, dangling ice-sickles.

Diácene, godsforbode, godforbide.

Diacéte, a thorne in Latine Díacheton.

Diachilóni, a kind of plaister.

Diachitóne, a kind of Cuitwine.

Diacidónio, a compound wherein quinces are predominant.

Diacodióne, an oppiate, that is a medicine wherein Poppy is predominant.

Diacódo, a white-stone vsed of coniurers.

Diaconáto, as Diaconía.

Diaconía, a Deaconry, the office of a Deacon.

Diácono, a Deacon, a Minister, a seruant.

Diacorióne, a medicine made of Onions.

Diadário, a principal Magistrate among the Mamaluckes as a Great Constable amongst vs.

Diadema, a diademe, a wreath, a crowne.

Diademáre, to crowne with a diademe.

Diadóco, a stone so pure and vnspotted that it can abide no vncleannesse neere it.

Diafanità, transparency, translucencie.

Diáfano, transparent, translucent, through-shining.

Diafonía, discord, iarring.

Diaforesi, digestion or euaporation. Also the figure dubitation.

Diafrágma, a round muskle lying ouerthwart the lower part of the breast separating the heart and lights from the stomacke.

Diaglaucióne, an eye-medicine.

Diagonále, a line in Geometry from one corner to another. Also a particular parallelagram within a greater hauing one angle and his diagone common with the greater.

Diágono, hauing two corners or angles.

Diagrásica, the skill or arte to draw or paint in box-tables.

Diagrámma, a sentence or decree. Also a title of a booke. Also among Musicians a proportion of measures distinguished by certaine notes. Also a kind of figure of Geometry drawne in a place.

Diagrédio, a gum of Scamony, vehement to purge choller.

Dialessi, a disputation.

Dialettica, the arte of Logike teaching to reason to and fro.

Dialettico, a Logician, on that teacheth to reason to and fro.

Dialetto, a dialect or manner of speech in any language differing from others of the same Countries.

Dialgacitríno, a kind of ointment.

Dialgáro, a drug so called.

Dialhóra, from that time or houre.

Dialibáno, a medicine or sirrup to dead griefe or oppiate one to sleepe.

Dialitóne, a figure when numbers be put without any coniunction.

Dialogáre, to dialogue or dispute betweene two or more persons.

Dialoghétto, a little or short Dialogue.

Dialogísino, a figure, when as one discussing with himselfe as it were talking with another doth mooue questions and answereth them himselfe.

Diálogo, a diologue betweene two or more.

Dialtea, a drugge vsed in Physike.

Diálto affáre, of high account, good worth, or great dealings.

Diamantáro, a Diamond-cutter.

Diamánte, a Diamond, and by translation, hardnesse, firmenesse or obstinacy. Also among curious Cookes a kind of dainty spanish blanc manger or white-meat.

Di amánte, of a louer, a louers. 



Diamantína, an hearbe the leafe wherof is as hard as a Diamond to be cut.

Diamantíno, Diamantine, Adamantine.

Diámbo, a verse consisting of Iambikes.

Diametrále, Diameter-like.

Diametralménte, Diameter-like.

Diámetro, a Diameter or line deuiding any thing into two equall parts.

Diaméttere, to tosse, to shake or beate downe.

Diamóne, a money-coloured stone.

Diamoróne, a sirrop made of Blacke or Muleberries.

Diamúsco, a kind of persume.

Diána, the Goddesse Diana. Also ancient. Also a march sounded by Trumpeters in a morning to their Generall or Captaine.

Dianía, discourse, reason.

Dianíte, the third kind of wild Mirrhe.

Dianistáre, to discourse, to reason.

Diánzi, before, forward, aforehand.

Dianoea, the minde, the vnderstanding.

Diánzihiéri, before yesterday.

Diapantóno, a rule or note in Musicke.

Diapáson, a diapason or concord in Musicke of all parts.

Diapasmáti, all manner of dry perfumes, powders or pomanders, bags or quilts of dry powder to represse sweates.

Diapénsia, the hearbe Sanikle.

Diapente, a composition of fiue, of the number of fiue.

Diaphoretico, that dissolueth and sendeth forth humors.

Diapiéde, a diapedon or confection made of Penids.

Diaprásso, a kind of sirrup or medicine.

Diaquilóne, a drug so called.

Diarési, a figure, whereby one sillable is deuided, in two parts.

Diarodóne, a medicine or sirrup to mitigate paine and griefe.

Diasatirióne, a medicine to stir men to the lust of the flesh.

Diáscane, as Diácene.

Diáscolo, as Diácene.

Diaséne, a medicine to stir men to the lust of women, or as some say an electuarie made of Sena to purge melancholie.

Diáspe, a kind of cruell Serpent.

Diáspro, a Iasper stone.

Diastási, a distance, or space.

Diastéma, a distance or space in Musicke.

Diástole, a distinction in a sentence. Also a figure whereby a sillable that is short by nature is made long, Phisitions take it for the rising of the heart, the arteries and braine, which is sensibly felt by the pulses. 

Diaterica, phisicke curing by diet.

Diatessaróne, consisting of foure in number.

Diatónico, a concord in Musicke or plaine song betweene two.

Diatóno, D sol re, or G sol re ut. Also a plaine song betweene two.

Diatragánte, certaine sugar pellets.

Diáulo, a Greeke measure of two stadios, 250. paces, a quarter of an Italian mile.

Diauoláccia, a deuilish scolding woman.

Diauolaménti, as Diauolaríe.

Diauolaríe, deuilish parts or deuices.

Diauoléssa, a she-deuill, a curst dame.

Diauolíno, a litle deuill, or deailish.

Diáuolo, a calumniator, a deuill, a feend, an euill spirit. Also a needle-fish, a horne-fish, or horne-back-fish.

Diauolóso, deuilish, calumnious.

Diauánzo, ouerplus, to spare.

Dibalzáre, to bound as a ball.

Dibálzo, taken at a bound as a ball.

Dibápha, a kinde of fine double-dyed purple in Tiros very deare.

Dibarbáre, to vnbeard, to vnroote.

Dibassáre, to debase, to make low.

Dibatticáre, to thrum a wench lustily till the bed cry giggaioggie.

Dibattiménto, a debating, a shaking, a beating, a stirring or tossing too & fro.

Dibáttere, bátto, battéi, battúto, to debate, to shake or beate too and fro.

Dibáttersi, to bathe as a Hawke doth.

Dibattéuole, that may be debated.

Dibattíto, debated. Also a debating.

Dibátto, a debate, a debating.

Dibattúto., looke Dibáttere.

Di bel nuóuo, faire and againe.

Di bene in meglio, from good to better.

Di bisógno, needfull.

Di bisógno essere, to be needfull.

Di bisógno hauére, to haue need.

Dibonarietà, as Debonarità.

Dibonário, as Debonário.

Dibótto, quickly, soone, out of hand.

Dibréue, shortly.

Dibrigáta, together, with, in companie.

Dibrusciáre, to consume with fire.

Dibucáre, to vnhole, to vnden.

Dibuccáto, newly washt or buck't.

Dibucciáre, to vnlurke, to dislodge, to vnden, to vnhole. Also to lop or fell trees. Also to vnhuske, to vnskin, to pill, to shale, to flea.

Dibucciáto, budded forth as a flowre.

Dibuóna creánza, of good education.

Dibuónaféde, in well meaning faith.

Dibuóna testa, a man of sound iudgement, wise and discreet.

Dibuóna vóglia, with a good will, merily disposed, blith.

Dibuón cuóre, heartily, with a good heart. 

Dibuón grádo, with a goodwill.

Dibuón'hóra, betimes, early.

Dibútto, at a cast, out of hand, quickly.

Dicáce, a babler or talking fellow. Also a railer, a scoffer, a reprocher.

Dicacità, prating, railing, scoffing.

Dicadenza, as Decadenza.

Dicadére, as Decadére.

Dicadiménto, as Decadenza.

Dicadúta, as Decadenza, a downefall, a relaps.

Dicantáre, as Decantáre.

Dicapitáre, to behead.

Dicáre, to vow, to dedicate, to addict.

Dicatióne, a vowing, a dedication vnto.

Dicattíua vóglia, with an ill will, sad, ill disposed, malecontent.

Dícci, tell vs, say to vs.

Dícco, a ditch, a dike, a water trench.

Díce, he saith.

Dicembre, the moneth December.

Dícere, as Díre.

Dicernere, as Discernere.

Dicería, a speech, a discourse, a tale.

Dicerto, certainely, certes, surely.

Dicertézza, as Dicerto.

Diceruelláre, to vnbraine, to besot.

Dicesette, seauenteene.

Dícesi, it is said or reported.

Dicéuole, to be spoken, seemely, decent.

Dichè, dykes. Also high bankes or causies.

Dichè?, of what? wherewith? whereof.

Dìchè, whereof, of which, of what, whence.

Dichì?, whose? of whom?

Dichiarábile, that may be declared.

Dichiaráre, to declare, to manifest.

Dichiaratióne, a declaration.

Dichiaratiuo, that may be declared.

Dichináre, to decline or come downe.

Dichinatióne, a declining.

Dichíno, a declining.

Dicianóue, nineteene.

Dicianouésimo, the nineteenth.

Diciasette, seauenteene.

Diciasettéssimo, the seauenteenth.

Dicídere, as Decídere.

Dicílla, vsed for Iustice.

Dicina, halfe a score, one ten.

Diciótto, eighteene.

Diciottésimo, the eighteenth.

Dicisette, seauenteene.

Dicisettéssimo, the seauenteenth.

Dicisíbile, that may be decided.

Dicisióne, as Decisióne.

Dicíso, as Decíso.

Dicitíccia, a foolish speech or saying.

Dicitóre, a saier, a speaker.

Diclináre, to decline or come downe.

Diclinatióne, a declination,

Díco, I say, I speake.

Dicoláre, to vnglue.

Dicolláre, to vnnecke, to behead. Also 



to shake or totter.

Dì cóllo dúro, stiffe-necked.

Dì cólpo, with a hit or a blow.

Dì cólta, taken at a vollie as a hall.

Dì concórdia, with loue and concord.

Dì continuo, continually, alwaies.

Di cóntra, opposite, ouer against.

Dicoreo, a verse consisting of two Trochei or sixe sillables.

Dì córto, shortly, briefely, not long hence.

Dì cósta, sideling, costing along the coast or shore. Also with the backe of any weapon.

Dì costà, there away, that way.

Dì costà sù, from thence aboue.

Dì costì, from thence, or there away.

Di costiéro, sideling, awry, wide off.

Dì costínci, from thence.

Dì cósto, of cost, costly.

Dì cotómo, deuided in two parts or middle.

Dícouelo, I tell it yow.

Dì cózzo, shockingly, buttingly.

Dicréscere, to diminish, to decrease.

Dicretáre, as Decretáre.

Dicreto, as Decreto.

Dicrináre, as Declináre.

Dicríno, a declination.

Dicrolláre, as Crolláre.

Dì crúdo verno, in the heart of winter.

Dì déntro, within, inward.

Dì déntro vía, inwardly, withinward.

Dì d'hóggi, this day.

Dì dì, by day, in the day.

Dì die in díe, day by day.

Dì dietro, after, behind.

Dì di festa, a holy-day.

Dì di resuresso, Ascension day, Easter day. Also the day of Iudgement.

Dì grásso, a flesh day.

Dì dònde, from whence.

Dì dósso, from of ones backe.

Dì dilauóro, a workie day.

Dì dúo in dúo,, from two to two.

Dì mágro, a fish or fasting-day.

Didì in dì, from day to day.

Di dóue, from whence, whence.

Didrágma, a coine of two dragms.

Didúrre, as Dedúrre.

Diduttione, a deduction, a deducting.

Díe, a day.

Diè, Diéde, be or she gaue.

Dieci, ten, the number of ten.

Dieci cotánti, ten times as many.

Diecimáre, as Decimáre.

Dieci-rémi, a gallie or barge of ten oares of a side.

Dierési, as Diarési.

Díe giudítio, the day of Iudgement.

Dielcucóne, a kind of Saffron flowre.

Dielti, gaue it thee.

Diello, gaue him, it, or the same.

Dieluóglia, God grant it. 

Dielle, Dielli, gaue her or him.

Diési, as Diepsi.

Diepsi, the halfe of halfe a tune.

Dieróte, a kind of sinall ship.

Di età, of age, of discretion.

Diéta, a diet or abstinence from meate, a prescription when to eate. Also a Parliament or generall assembly of Estates.

Dietáre, to dyet, to order or stint ones dyet.

Dietéri, the space of two yeares.

Diétro, behind. Also after.

Dietro cámmera, a back-chamber.

Dietrogli, behind him.

Dietro guárdia, a reare ward.

Dietro pásto, fruit after meate.

Dietro pórta, a back-dore or gate.

Dietro púnto, a back-stitch.

Dietro stánza, a back-lodging.

Dietro vía, behind, afterward, backeward.

Diéuui, gaue yow, or gaue there.

Difalcáre, to abate, to deduct.

Difálco, an abatement. Also a default.

Difaleaménto, an abatement, a deduction.

Difálta, a default, a misse, a trespasse.

Difaltáre, to misse, to faile, to want.

Difaltóso, faulty, defectiue.

Difamáre, as Diffamáre, &c.

Difamatióne, as Diffamatióne.

Difátto, outright, out of hand, in the nicke.

Difattióne, of faction, of action.

Diféde, of trust, of faith, honest.

Difendere, as Diffendere.

Difendéuole, as Deffensíbile.

Difensióne, as Diffésa.

Difensibile, as Diffensíbile.

Difenséuole, as Diffensíbile.

Difenditóre, as Diffensóre.

Difensóre, as Diffenditóre.

Difésa, as Diffésa.

Difettáre, to defect, to disable, to taxe.

Difettíuo, as Difettóso.

Difetto, a defect, a fault, a want, an imperfection, a vice, &c.

Difettóso, faulty, defectiue, crazed, imperfect.

Difettuóso, as Difettóso.

Diffalcáre, to defalke, to deduce, to abate.

Diffalcatúra, a deduction, a defalking.

Diffálta, as Difálta.

Diffaltáre, as Difaltáre.

Diffamáre, to defame or slander.

Diffamatióne, defamation.

Diffamatório, defaming, slanderous.

Diffamatóre, a defamer, a slanderer.

Diffendere, fendo, fendéi, or fési, fendúto, or féso, to defend, to shield, to warde.

Diffendéuole, that may be defended.

Diffenditóre, a defender, a warder. 

Diffensatóre, as Diffenditóre.

Diffensáre, as Diffendere.

Diffensíbile, that may be defended.

Diffenséuole, that may be defended.

Diffensióne, as Diffésa.

Diffenditríce, a defendresse.

Diffensitríce, a defendresse.

Diffensóre, as Diffenditóre.

Diffésa, a defence, a shielding, a warding.

Differente, different, diuers.

Differenteménte, diuersly, differently.

Differentia, difference, diuersity.

Differentiábile, that may be differenced.

Differentiáre, to differ, to vary, to square.

Differentiáto, with a difference, varied.

Differentíssimo, most different.

Differíre, rísco, ríto, to differ, to put off.

Differríre, rísco, ríto, to differ.

Diffettíuo, defectiue, wanting.

Diffettóso, defectiue, wanting.

Diffetto, defect, want.

Diffettuosità, defectiuenesse.

Diffibbiáre, to vnbuckle, to vnty.

Diffícile, difficile, vneasie, hard.

Difficílimo, most vneasie or hard.

Difficilíssimo, idem.

Difficiáre, to build, to frame, to edifie.

Diffício, a building, an edifice.

Difficultáre, to make difficult.

Difficultà, difficulty, vneasinesse.

Difficultóso, full of difficulty.

Diffidánza, diffidence, distrust.

Diffidáre, to distrust, to defie.

Diffidente, diffident, distrustfull.

Diffiguráre, to disfigure, to misshap.

Diffíggere, fíggo, físsi, fítto, to vnfix, to vnfasten, to loose from, to lanch out.

Diffiníbile, definable.

Diffiníre, nísco, níto, to define.

Diffinitióne, a definition, a defining.

Diffinitiuaménte, definitely.

Diffinitíuo, definitiue.

Diffiníto, a thing defined.

Diffitto, looke Diffiggere.

Diffluenza, a flowing forth.

Diffondáre, to vnbutton.

Diffondiménto, a defusion.

Diffóndere, fóndo, fúsi, fúso, to defuse, to shed, to scatter, to melt away.

Difformáre, to disfigure, to misshape.

Diffórme, deformed, disfigured, misshapen. Also formelesse, or shapelesse.

Difformità, deformity, misshaping.

Diffrángere, as Frángere.

Diffrangiménto, as Frangiménto.

Diffránto, as Fránto.

Diffrattúra, a fracture, a rupture.

Diffrenáre, to vnbridle.

Diffusaménte, defusedly. 



Diffusióne, a defusion, a confusion.

Diffusissimaménte, most fully or largely

Diffusiuo, diffusiue, spreadingly.

Diffúso, defused, confused, scattred.

Difiata in fiáta, from time to time.

Dificio, an edifice, a building.

Dificiáre, to edifie, to build.

Difiláto, out of ranke or file. Also vnthrided. Also raueled. Also forthright, straight on, by line and measure.

Difinitióne, a definition.

Difiníre, as Diffiníre.

Difio, a kinde of verse or foot of a verse.

Difítto, outright, downeright.

Diforme, as Diffórme.

Diformità, as Difformità.

Diformentáta, of wheat or formenty. Also cheat or wheaten bread.

Diformento, of wheat, wheaten.

Disórza, perforce, by maine strength.

Difrésco, lately, freshly.

Difríges, a kind of ore or minerall earth that finers and founders vse.

Diftera, see the Latin word Diphthera.

Diftóngo, as Diphtóngo.

Difuóra, outward, abroad, without. Also from abroad, or from forth.

Difuóri, as Difuóra.

Difuóra via, on the outside, outward.

Difúrto, by stealth, pilfringly.

Digallantería, gallantly.

Digallóppo, a gallopping pace.

Dígama, a woman with two husbands.

Digámma, the greeke letter F.

Dígamo, a man with two wiues.

Digeláre, to thaw, to vnfreeze.

Digeneráre, to degenerate.

Digeneratióne, degeneration.

Digenero, a degenerate.

Digérie, an order or disposition.

Digeríbile, that may be disgested.

Digeríre, rísco, ríto, to disgest, to brooke.

Digestéuole, as Digeríbile.

Digestíbile, as Digeríbile.

Digestióne, disgestion, brooking.

Digestíre, tísco, títo, to disgest, to brooke.

Digestíua, digestion, or digestiue.

Digestíuo, that helpeth concoction of meates or humours, or comforts the place.

Digesto, disgested, brooked. Also considered, viewed, ordered, disposed.

Digetto, as Digítto.

Dighiománte, a deuiner by setting and obseruing of prickes and points.

Dighiomantía, diuination by prickes.

Digià, already.

Digiórno, by day, by dailight.

Digiórno in giórno, day by day, from day to day.

Digitále, a thimble, a finger-stall. Also the hearbe Fox-gloues.

Digitella, Sengreene, or Houseleeke.

Dígito, a finger. Also a toe.

Digítto, cast in a mould, cast-worke. 

Digiù, below, beneath, from below.

Digiúna, an eue or fast.

Digiunábile, to be fasted.

Digiunáre, to fast or abstaine.

Digiuno, fasting. Also a fast or abstinance. Also a gut called the hungry gut, because it is euer empty. Also vsed for continuall necessity.

Digiúso, as Digiù.

Dignáre, to daigne, to vouchsafe.

Dignità, dignity, worthinesse.

Dignitáre, to dignifie or make worthy.

Dignitóso, worthy, full of dignity.

Dígno, worthy, deseruing.

Digrandináre, as Grandináre.

Digrán pezza, by a great way or deale, by much.

Digrán sénno, of great wit or wisdome.

Digrán lúnga, as Di grán pezza.

Digradáre, to degrade, or come downe steps.

Digradatióne, , a degradation.

Digradíre, dísco, díto, not to except in good worth or thankefully.

Digradíto, refused to accept kindly.

Digrádo, acceptable, gratis, freely, sans-hire, voluntarily, for naught.

Di grádo in grádo, by degrees.

Di grán tempo, of long time.

Digrátia, in courtesie, of kindnesse.

Digráto, as Digrádo.

Digredere, gredo, gressi, gresso, to digresse, to swarue, to goe from the purpose.

Digrediente, that departeth from.

Digredíre, dísco, díto, to digresse.

Digreggiáre, to scatter, to vnstocke.

Digressióne, a digression, a swaruing.

Digressíuo, digressiue, swaruing.

Digresso, Looke Digredere.

Digrignáre, to grin, to snar, to yarre.

Digrigníre, ísco, íto, idem.

Digróssa pásta, of a grosse conceit.

Digrossáre, to disgrosse, to vnbigge. Also to begin to teach or instruct.

Digrósso, by great, by much, in grosse.

Digualóppo, a galloping pace.

Diguazzaménto, a padling, a plashing.

Diguazzáre, to padle, to plash, to rence or wash in water. Also to lauish as it were water. Also to brandish in the aire.

Diguázzo, a padling, a plashing. Also a brandishing in the aire.

Diguisa tále, in such sort, so that.

Digusciáre, to vnhuske, to vnshale.

Dihóggi al terzo,, three daies hence.

Dihóggi mái, at last, in these times.

Dihóggi giórno, of this day.

Dihóggi in dománi, from this day vnto to morrow.

Dihora in hóra, from houre, to houre.

Dihuópo, necessary, behoofefull. 

Dihuópo fù, it was necessary.

Díj, Dei, Gods.

Dilà, that way, beyond, on the other side.

Dilà a colà, from thence thither.

Dilaccáre, to open wide, to spread abroad, to vnbar. Also to rend or teare in peeces. Also to vanish out of sight. Also to gird out a fart or squirt Also to vngum.

Dilacciáre, as Slacciáre.

Dilaceráre, to rend or teare in peeces.

Dilaceratióne, a rending or tearing in peeces.

Dilà dalmáre, beyond the sea.

Dilagáre, to ouerflow with water.

Dilà giù, downe there or thence.

Dilaiáre, to delay.

Diláio, delay.

Dilaióso, full of delaies.

Dilaniáre, to teare or tug in peeces.

Dilaniatóre, a tearer in peeces.

Dilapidáre, as Delapidáre.

Dilapidatióne, a delapidation.

Dilasù, from thence aboue.

Dilatábile, that may be dilated.

Dilataménto, a dilating and inlargeing.

Dilatáre, to dilate, to spread, to enlarge.

Dilatatióne, a dilating, a spreading.

Dilatensi, certaine shell fishes that feede in diuerse soiles.

Dilatióne, a delaying.

Dilattáre, to weane, to vnmilch.

Dilauáre, to wash away or ouer. Also to make thin or waterish.

Dilauatióne, a washing away.

Dila vía, thereaway, that way.

Dileggiáre, to scoffe, to flout, to deride.

Dileggiatóre, a scoffer, a derider, a flouter.

Dileggióso, flouting, full of derision.

Diléggine, as Dilegióne.

Dileggiéri, lightly, easily, facilly.

Dilegióne, scoffing, derision flouteing.

Dileguáre, to melt, to thaw, to vanish.

Dileguáto, tried sewet or seame to frie withall or make pan-cakes.

Diléguo, a vanishing away.

Dileticáre, to tickle, by metaphore to please, and delight or to soothe vp.

Diletico, a tickling.

Dileticóso, ticklish.

Dilettábile, delectable, amiable.

Dilettaménto, as Dilettánza.

Dilettánza, pleasance, delectation.

Dilettáre, to delight, to like, to please.

Dilettatióne, delectation, pleasance.

Dilettatíuo, delightfull, or delighting.

Dilettéuole, delectable, delightfull.

Dilettióne, delectation, pleasance. 



Diletto, delight, content, liking, pleasure.

Dilettóso, delectable, delightfull.

Dilì, thereaway, that way.

Dilicì, thereaway, thereabout.

Diliberánza, a deliuerance.

Diliberáre, as Deliberáre.

Diliberatióne, as Deliberatióne.

Dilíbero, free, franke, deliuered.

Dilicatézza, delicacy, daintinesse.

Dilicáto, delicate, nice, dainty.

Dilicatúra, delicacy, daintinesse.

Diliene, easily, lightly.

Diligentáre, to hasten with diligence.

Diligente, diligent, carefull.

Diligenza, diligence, carefulnesse.

Diligióne, mocking, scoffing.

Dilinquente, as Delinquente.

Diliscáre, to vnhuske, to vnbone fish.

Diliticáre, as Dileticáre.

Diliueránza, diliuerance.

Diliueráre, to deliuer, to free.

Diliuráre, to deliuer.

Dílle, tell her, say vnto her.

Dílli, tell him, say vnto him.

Díllo, tell it, say the same.

Diloggiáre, to disloge, to vnlodge.

Dilolláre, to weed corne from tares or cockle. Also to powre from one vessell into another.

Dilombáre, to disloine, to vnhanch.

Dilongaménto, an enlonging, a lengthning, a going or sending far off. Also a prolonging.

Dilongáre, to enlonge, to lengthen, to goe or send farre-off. Also to prolongue.

Dilonga máno, of a long time.

Dilóngo, on along, forthright.

Dilongatióne, as Dilongaménto.

Dilontanáre, to enlong, to remooue farre off.

Dilontáno, a far off, distant, far.

Dilóro, theirs, belonging to them.

Dilóro vóglia, of their owne will.

Dilúcida, plaine, to be vnderstood.

Dilucidáre, to declare or make plaine.

Dllucidatióne, a declaring plainely.

Dilúcido, bright, cleere, shining.

Diluculáre, to dawne, or begin to wax day.

Dilúdio, the space betweene plaies.

Dilúi, his, belonging to him.

Dilúngi, far off, far, distant.

Dilúngo, on along, straight on.

Dilúngo tempo, of long time.

Diluuiáre, to ouerflow with waters. Also to deuoure, to swallow or waste riotously.

Diluuiatóre, as Diluuióne.

Dilúuio, a deluge, an inundation.

Diluuióne, a wasteful deuourer, a spendthrift in belly cheere, a glutton, a gullygut, a gormand, a deuourer. 

Dimacchiáre, to vnspot. Also to vnbreake.

Dimaceráre, to macerate, to mortifie.

Dimagráre, to make or become leane.

Dimála vóglia, as Di cattíua uóglia.

Dimále in peggio, from bad to worse.

Dimalgrádo, with an ill will.

Dimaliáre, to vnwitch, to vncharme.

Dimál pélo, of bad haire or condition.

Dimánda, a demand, a question.

Dimandità, as Dimánda.

Dimandáre, to demand, to aske.

Dimándo, as Dimánda.

Dimáne, Dimáni, to morrow.

Dimaniále, as Demaniále.

Dimanicáre, to vnsleeue, to vnhaft.

Di maniera, in such sort or manner.

Di maniera chè, in such sort that.

Dimán'in máno, from hand to hand. Also by course or succession.

Dimán l'áltro, to morrow next.

Dimantáre, as Dimantelláre.

Dimantelláre, to dismantle, to vncloke.

Dimarchesársi, to bee deliuered of the monethly flowers that women haue.

Dimaritáre, to vnmarie, to vnwed.

Dimásta, a Potentate, a Gouernour.

Dimastía, gouernment, rule or power.

Dimatína, to morrow morning.

Dimattonáre, to vnpaue, to vnbricke.

Dimè, of me, from me. Also mine.

Dimembránza, a dismembring.

Dimembráre, to dismember, to disioint.

Dimenaménto, a wrigling or stirring, a shaking, an agitating.

Dimenare, to mooue, to wrigle, to bestir, to shake, to agitate.

Dimenáta, a wrigling, a bestirring, an agitation, a shaking.

Diméno, of or with lesse.

Dimensionále, consisting of demensions.

Dimensionalità, a demension, a measure.

Dimensionáre, to demension, to measure.

Dimensióne, a measuring, a demension.

Dimensíuo, demensiue, measurable.

Dimensóre, a measurer.

Dimenticággine, forgetfulnesse.

Dimenticánza, forgetfulnesse.

Dimenticáre, to forget.

Dimentichéuole, forgetfull.

Diméntico, forgetfull. Also forgotten.

Dimentíre, tísco, títo, to belie. Also to vnsay or retract what one hath said.

Dimentíta, a belying.

Diméntre, whilst, during the time.

Dimeríggio, of or noone tide, of the South.

Dimessaménte, demissely, priuately.

Dimessióne, as Dimissióne.

Dimésso, demitted, put off, pardoned, remitted, forgiuen. Also lowly, humble, submisse, demisse.

Dimesticamento, as Domestichézza.

Dimesticánza, as Domestichézza.

Dimesticáre, as Domesticáre.

Dimestichéuole, as Domestichéuole.

Dimestichézza, as Domestichézza.

Dimestico, as Domestico.

Dimestiére essere, to be needfull.

Dimetiente, a line that deuides a circle through the middle.

Dimétto, a kind of verse or meeter.

Diméttere, métto, mísi, mésso, to remit, to forgiue, to put off, to pardon.

Dimezzanótte, of or about midnight.

Dimezzáre, to deuide in halfes, to cut in sunder. Also to quarter armes.

Dimezza státe, of or about Midsommer.

Dimezzo, betweene, in the midst.

Dimezzo tempo, of a middle age.

Dimezzo méttersi, for a man to interpose himselfe.

Dimicoláre, to breake into crumbles.

Dimicáre, to fight it out as enemies.

Dimidiáre, to deuide into moities.

Dimídio, a moitie, a middle, a halfe.

Dimíno., 

Diminuíre, ísco, íto, to diminish.

Diminuiménto, a diminishing.

Diminutióne, a diminishing.

Diminuíto, diminished, made lesse.

Diminutaménte, diminitiuely.

Diminutíuo, a diminutiue.

Diminúto, diminished, made lesse.

Dimíra, leuell, point-blanke.

Dimisciáre, to awake from sleepe.

Dimíto, a kind of course linzie-wolzie.

Dimissíbile, remissible, to be forgiuen.

Dimissióne, remission, forgiuenesse. Also lowlinesse, submission.

Dimíttere, as Diméttere.

Dímmel, Dímmelo, tell me it.

Dímmene, tell me of it.

Dímmi, tell me, say vnto me.

Dimitriáre, to vnmitre.

Dimoccáre, to snuffe a candle.

Dimoccoláre, to snuffe a candle.

Dimodo chè, so that.

Dimolláre, to vnsteepe, to vnwet.

Dimólto, by much, long since.

Dimólto più, by or of much more.

Dimomento, of moment, of consequence.

Dimóne, as Demóne.

Dimóra, a demur, a stay, a delay, a lingring, a pause. Also an abiding, or remaining, an habitation, or dwelling.

Dimoránza, Dimóro, as Dimóra.

Dimoráre, to stay, to pause, to demurre, to linger. Also to abide, to dwell, to remaine.

Dimostraménto, a demonstrating. 



Dimostránza, a demonstration.

Dimostráre, to shew by demonstration.

Dimostratióne, a demonstration.

Dimostratíuo, demonstratiue.

Dimostratóre, a manifester, a discouerer.

Dimostréuole, demonstrable.

D'improuíso, extempore, on a suddaine.

Dinucchiáre, to vnheape.

D'in, from, as D'in piázza, from the market place.

Dinánti, Dinánzi, before, forward.

Dinári, pence, money.

Dinascóso, secretly, hiddenly.

Dinascósto, as Dinascóso.

Dinaspáre, to vnreele or vnwind yarne.

D'incóntro, from ouer against.

D'indi, thence, from thence.

Díndi, money, chinke, pelfe.

D'indi inánzi, thence forward.

D'índi in giù, thence downeward.

D'indì in sù, thence vpward.

Dinegáre, to denie, to refuse.

Di necessità, of necessitie.

Dineghéuole, that may be denied.

Dinétto, neately, cleanely, handsomely.

D'ínfra, from among or betweene.

D'infuori, sauing, excepted.

D'in giù, from beneath or below.

Diniente, of nought or nothing.

Dinnásta, as Dimásta.

Dinnastía, as Dimastía.

Dinatúra, of or by nature.

Dínne, tell vs. Also speake of it.

Díno, an open place for aire.

Dinò, nay, no, not.

Dinoccáre, as Dinoccioláre.

Dinoccioláre, to vnhuske, to vnshale, to vncod. Also to vntie or vnknot. Also to vnknuckle. Also to snap or spraine out of ioint. Also to clicke with ones knuckles.

Dinoccoláre, as Dinoccioláre.

Dinobilitáre, to put from nobilitie.

Dinodáre, to vnknot, to vntie.

Dinói, ours, of vs.

Dinominánza, as Denominatióne.

Dinomináre, as Denomináre.

Dinon sò ónde, I wot not whence.

Dinóntia, a denuntiation.

Dinontiáre, to denounce, to declare.

Dinontiatióne, a denuntiation.

Dinominatióne, a denomination.

Dinotáre, to denote, to declare.

Dinotatióne, a denotation.

Dinótte, by night, in the darke.

Dinóttetempo, in time of night.

Dinouello, newly, of late, very latelie.

D'in sù, from vpon or aboue.

D'intáglio, grauen or cut worke.

Dintòrno, about. Also round about.

Dinubiláre, to vncloud, to cleare vp.

Dinudáre, to strip or lay open.

D'inuerno, in or of winter. 

Di nuóuo, againe, anew, afresh.

Dío, God, Almightie God.

Dióbolo, a Greeke coine worth two pence farthing of our money.

Diocesáno, a commander of a diocesse. Also a dweller in a diocesse or Church iurisdiction.

Diocése, a diocesse or iurisdiction, but properly Episcopall and Ecclesiasticall.

Dío concedente, God granting or willing.

Diodeo, a toole that Chirurgions vse.

Diodóron, a bricke of a foote and halfe long, and a foote broad.

Dío ce la mándi buóna, God send vs good speed.

Dio il sà, God knowes it.

Di ogni intórno, of round about.

Dío grátia, by the grace of God.

Dióla, a daintie kind of grape.

Dío lo fáccia, God grant it, God make it.

Di óltre, of or from beyond.

Diomédi, as Caterátri.

Dío me ne gnárdi, God shield me from it.

Dionicíssi, litle swellings in the temples of the head.

Dionicísio, a stone good against drunkennesse being caried about one, it is full of red spots. Also Bacchus the god of wine.

Dionisanímphade, an hearbe.

Dío non vóglia, God forbid.

Diopeia, the name of a certaine Goddesse, nimph, or starre.

Dío permettente, God permitting.

Diopéte, a kind of little frogs, as Calamíte.

Diopinióne, of opinion.

Dióptica, that part of Astrologie that by instruments seeketh the distance of Sunne, Moone, and Starres.

Dióptra, as Dióttra.

Dío sà cóme, God knowes how.

Diosántho, Iupiters flowre, which some take to be the Colombine.

Dioscúri, two lights appearing like fire vpon the masts of ships, Castor and Pollux, betokening a luckie voyage vnto Sailers, the Italians call it Sant' Hermo.

Diospíro, the hearb Stone-crop, or Graimile.

Dióttra, a certaine quadrate or geometricall instrument.

Dióttrica árte, an arte that by an instrument teacheth the distances and aspects of the Starres.

Dío vóglia, God grant, be it Gods will.

Dío vél díca, God tell it yow.

Dío vél meriti, God reward yow for it.

Dío vóglia che, God grant that.

Dío volésse, would to god.

Dío volésse chè, would to god that. 

Di pálo in frása, from pole to bish, impertinently from one matter to another.

Dipanáre, to winde or reale silke.

Dipannáre, to vnuaile, to open.

Diparangóne, able to stand to the touch.

Diparecchiáre, to make vnready.

Diparére, of minde or opinion.

Dipári, euen, euenhand, hand to hand, alike, equally, quit.

Dipári concórdia, of equall concord.

Dipári combáttere, to fight hand to hand.

Dipáro, as Dipári.

Dipári consentiménto, with equall consent.

Dipárte in párte, from part to part.

Dipartenza, as Dipartíta.

Dipartíbile, that may be deuided.

Dipartiménto, a departure.

Dipartíre, párto, partíj, partíto, to depart. Also to separate or deuide.

Dipartíto, departed. Also separated.

Dipartíta, a departure, a separation.

Dipárto, of or in childbed.

Dipassággio, in passing by, by passage.

Dipásso, a pace. Also in passing by.

Dipátto, of or vpon bargaine.

Dipegnáre, to vnpawne, to redeeme.

Dipeláre, to pill, or pull bare. Also to make bald.

Dipelatório, a medicine to fetch off haire or hinder it from growing.

Dipenáre, to rid from paine.

Dipendente, depending, a dependent.

Dipendenza, a dependency or hanging by.

Dipendere, as Dependere.

Dipénna, written, in writing.

Dipennáre, to blot or crosse writings.

Diper dí, day by day. Also as we say from hand to mouth.

Dipersè, by himselfe, alone, seuerall.

Dipéso, waighty, by maine waight.

Dipezzáre, to vnpiece, to vnpatch.

Diphríde, a precious stone of two sorts white and blacke male and female.

Diphríge, a kind of cindry drosse found in brasse furnaces.

Diphtóngo, a dipthong, that is two vowells contracted in one body or forme.

Dipiána concórdia, with full concord.

Dipiáto, lurkingly, in hugermuger.

Dipiátto, flatling.

Dipiéde, looke Senatóri dipiéde.

Dipígnere, as Dipíngere.

Dipingéuole, that may be painted.

Dipíngere, píngo, pínsi, pínto, to paint or staine with any colour.

Dipintóre, a painter, a drawer.

Dipintúra, a picture, a painting.

Dipiù, more ouer and besides.

Dipiúma, of or made of feathers.

Dipiumáre, to vnfeather. 



Dipiù ragióni, of many kinds.

Diplóma, a charter, a letter patent, a broad seale or autenticall writ of a Prince.

Diploráre, as Deploráre.

Diploratióne, as Deploratióne.

Dipóco, within a lettle. Also of little.

Dipóco tempo, of small age.

Dipnea, difficulty of respiration.

Dipóca leuatúra, scarce worth the taking vp, of little or no worth.

Dipocciárc, to sucke dry, to exhaust.

Dipói, afterward, then, behind.

Dipóndio, a masse of brasse or coine waying two pound.

Dipónere, as Depónere.

Diponitóre, a deposer, a gager.

Dipopoláre, to vnpeople, to dispeople.

Dipónto, with a thrust or point.

Diportaménti, behauiours. Also disports.

Diportánte, an ambling or easie pace.

Diportáre, to behaue, to demeane, or cary ones selfe. Also to disport.

Dipórto, solace, sport, pastime.

Dipositáre, as Depositáre.

Dipositário, as Depositário.

Dipositióne, as Depositióne.

Dipositóre, as Diponitóre.

Dipósito, as Depósito.

Di pósta, taken at a volly as a ball.

Dipredáre, to depray, to rob, to ransacke.

Dipredatióne, a depredation, a ransacking.

Di pregio, of worth or estimation.

Di presente, euen now, presently.

Di presso, depressed. Also neere vnto.

Di príma, at first, erst, of erst.

Di príma giónta, at the first arriuall.

Di prímo láncio, at the first onset.

Di prímo trátto, at the first cast.

Di prímo vólo, at first flight.

Dípsa, or Sépa, a venemous serpent.

Dipsacóne, a kind of thorne or teazell.

Diptóto, a noune hauing two cases.

Diputáre, to depute, to substitute.

Diputáti, deputies, substitutes.

Diputatióne, a deputation.

Di quà, this way, on this side, from hence.

Di quà déntro, of this place within.

Di quà éntro, idem.

Di quà & di là, this and that way.

Di quà giù, from hence below.

Di quándo in quándo, from time to time.

Di quánto, of how much.

Di quarésima, of lent.

Di quélle, as it were of those things.

Di quéi dì, of those daies.

Di quercia, of oke made of oke.

Di quél módo, of that fashion.

Di queto, in quiet or peacefull manner.

Di quì, as Diquà, here away. 

Di qui a póco, hence to a little.

Di quínci, hence, hence away.

Di quindi, thence, thence away.

Di quí presso, neare, not far hence.

Di quíui, from thence or hence.

Díra, dire, cruell, fell, remorcelesse.

Diradáre, to rarifie, to make thin.

Dirádere, as Rádere, to shaue.

Diradicáre, to vnroot.

Dirádo, seldome, seldome times, rarely.

Dirággio, as Dirò, I will say.

Diramáre, to branch or spread forth in branches. Also to vnbranch.

Diragióne, of right, of duty, by law.

Diráro, seldome, seldome times.

Dír béne, to say well or commend.

Dír disì, to say yea.

Dír dinò, to say no or not.

Díre, díco, díssi, détto, to say, to speake, to vtter, to report, to tell. Also to name, to call, to hight, or yelip, vsed also to discouer, or manifest by speech.

Díre a dío, to bid farewell.

Díre a più ócchij, to speake openly.

Díre a più orécchij, to speake openly.

Díre il páter nóstro della bertúccia, to chafe, to fret, to curse, to ban, or grumble in vaine and to no purpose, to grin and snare as an angry ape.

Díre ciò che Pasquíno dice de' Cardináli, to raile or speake all euill without regard of times or persons, and be it true or false.

Díre villanía, to chide, to reuile.

Diredáre, to disinherit. Also to vnnet.

Direditáre, to disinherit.

Direnáto, broken backt, backe disiointed.

Direpento, suddainly, rashly, vnlooked for.

Dire prò, to wish good or profit vnto.

Diretáno, last, lag, hindmost.

Diretanaménte, lastly, lagly, behind all.

Diretáre, to disinherit, to vntangle.

Dirétri, those that are come after. Also foregon ancestors, forepast.

Dirétro, behind, after, backward.

Direttaménte, directly.

Direttíuo, hauing or giuing direction, directiue, direction.

Diretta, a direction, an adresse.

Diretto, directed, adrest. Also direct.

Direttióne, a direction, a going forward.

Direttóre, a director, a guide. Also a carpenters ruler or square.

Direttíbile, that may be directed.

Direttíuo, directiue, directing.

Direttório, a directory.

Diricciáre, to vncurle, to vncrisp. Also to vnhuske chesnuts.

Díria, a kind of ague or feuer.

Diribitório, the muster place or treasurers hall among the Romans.

Dirieto, lag, last, behind, hindmost.

Dirietro, behind, after, hindmost.

Dirigíbile, that may be directed. 

Diriláncio, forthright, without stop or stay, sudainly.

Diriliéuo, raised worke. Also of worth.

Dirimándo, to spare and to be sent backe.

Dirimbálzo, at a rebound or suddaine.

Dirímere, to deuide, to scatter, to disperse.

Dirimpetto, foreaneanst, oueragainst, opposite, brest to breast.

Dirincóntro, as Dirimpetto.

Dirínga, on a roe or in file and ranke.

Dirinomea, of renoume.

Dirintóppo, as Dirimpetto.

Dir'in víso, to say to ones face.

Diritézza, directnesse, straightnesse. Also vprightnesse of liuing.

Dirítto, directed, adrest. Also right, iust, straight, stiffe, standing vp, direct. Also righteous, right, vpright, honest, direct. Also reason, right, law, iustice.

Dirittúra, directnesse, straightnesse. Also vprightnesse, honesty, righteousnesse, integrity. Also reason, right, law, iustice. Also Adirittúra, forthright, streight.

Diriuáre, as Deriuáre, &c.

Diríuo, as Deriuatióne, an ofspring.

Dirizzáre, as Drizzáre, &c.

Dirocáre, as Derogáre.

Dirizzatóio, as Drizzatóio.

Diroccáre, to destroy or raze from the very foundation. Also to tumble downe from a rocke. Also to flow out off or downe a rocke as water doeth.

Dirocciáre, as Diroccáre.

Díro, dire, cruell, fell, remorcelesse.

Dirò, I will say or shall speake.

Dirobáre, to disrobe. Also to steale.

Dirómpere, rómpo, rúppi, rótto, to breake downe, to burst foorth. Also to bruise or crush in peeces.

Dirompiménto, a violent breaking downe, a crushing in pieces, a bursting.

Dironcáre, to prune a vine or tree.

Dirópico, that hath the dropsie.

Diropisía, the dropsie.

Dirósa, of a rose. Acqua di rósa, Rosewater.

Diróso, direfull, dreary, remorcelesse.

Dirótta, a downe right blow. Also broken or burst foorth, or crushed in peeces.

Dirottaménte, outright, foorthright, without stop or stay.

Dirottáre, as Dirizzáre.

Dirótto, looke Diróinpere.

Dirouáre, to plucke with fury, as Dirupáre.

Diróuero, of Oke, made of Oke.

Dirozzáre, to vncolte, to disrough.

Dírtelo, to tell it thee.

Dírti, to tell thee.

Dirugináre, to vnrust, to scoure cleere. 



Diruginíre, nísco, níto, to vnrust.

Dirupaménto, a tumbling downe from a rocke. Also a broken or steepy rocke. Also a splinting or shiuering.

Dirupáre, as Diroccáre.

Dirúpo, a ruinous stony or rockie place, a rocke, a crag, a cliffe, or broken mountaine.

Dìrupináre, as Diroccáre.

Dirupóso, full of ruinous cragges or cliffes.

Disabellíre, lísco, líto, to vnbeautyfie.

Disabondánza, scarcity, vnplenty.

Disabondáre, to disabound.

Disabilitáre, to disable.

Disabilità, disability.

Disaccentáto, with accent or due sound.

Disacetbáre, to vnsoure, to asswage.

Disacomodáre, to incommode, to trouble.

Disaconciáre, to vndresse, to marre.

Disacóncio, vndrest, marred, troubled.

Disacostumáto, vnaccustomed, vnmannerly.

Disacráre, to vnhallow, to degrade.

Disadattáre, to vnfit, to disorder.

Disadátto, vnfit, vnordred, vnapt.

Disadolcíre, císco, cíto, to vnsweeten.

Disageuoláre, to make vneasie.

Disagéuole, vneasie, hard, difficult.

Disageuolézza, vneasinesse, difficulty.

Disaghiadáre, to thaw, to vnfreese.

Disagiáre, to disease, to trouble, to molest.

Disagiáto, diseased, crased in body.

Diságio, disease, molestation, want.

Disagióso, full of diseases or penury.

Disagiúzzo, a little paine or inconuenience.

Disagrauáre, to disburden, to lighten.

Disagráuio, a disburdening.

Disagríre, ísco, íto, to vnsoure.

Disaguagliánza, inequality.

Disaguagliáre, to vnequall, to disparage.

Disaiutáre, to vnhelpe, to hinder.

Disaiúto, vnhelpe, let, hindrance.

Disalbergáre, to dislodge, to vnharborough.

Disalboráre, as Disarboráre.

Disaloggiáre, to vnlodge, to dislodge.

Disálto, suddenly, leapingly.

Disamaláre, to vnsicken.

Disamáre, to hate, to vnloue.

Disámine, an examination.

Disamináre, to examine or discourse vpon.

Disaminatóre, an examiner.

Disamoráre, to disinamore.

Disamoratáccio, a louelesse man.

Disamoráto, out of loue disinamored.

Disamóre, the contrary of loue, vnloue, hate, grudge, vnkindnesse. 

Disamoréuole, vnlouing, vnkind.

Disamoreuolézza, vnlouingnesse.

Disanimáre, to depriue of soule and life. Also to discourage, or disswade from.

Disanottáre, to vnnight, to wax day.

Disapére, of knowledge, wittingly.

Disapíto, vnsauory, wallowish.

Disapostoláto, disapostled.

Disapricáre, to set bleake againe.

Disapríre, to vnopen, to shut.

Disaperto, vnopen, shut.

Disappanáre, to vnwinde, to vnreele silke.

Disapropriáre, to disappropriate.

Disarcáre, to vnbend, to vnarch.

Disarenáre, to vnsand, to vngrauell.

Disarmáre, to disarme, to vnweapon.

Disarboráre, to vntree, to cut downe trees. Also to vnmast a ship. Also to vnstaue or pull any ensigne from of its staffe. Also to reduce any tree into timber or fewell, the contrary, also of Inalboráre.

Disarborátilégni, shipes vnmasted.

Disaroccáre, as Disroccáre.

Disascóndere, to vnbide, to reueale.

Disascósto, vnhidden, reuealed.

Disaspríre, to vnsharpen, to vnsoure.

Disástro, disaster, ill lucke, mischance.

Disastróso, vnluckie, disastrous.

Disauantaggiáre, to disaduantage.

Disauantággio, disaduantage.

Disauantaggióso, disaduantagious.

Disauanzáre, to disaduance.

Disauán, zo, the contrary of Auánzo.

Disaùedére, to be vnwary, to mis-see.

Disauedutaménte, vnwarily.

Disauedutézza, vnwarinesse.

Disauedúto, vnwary, vnaduised.

Disaueniménto, a mischiefe or mishap.

Disaueníre, to miscome, to mishapen.

Disauentúra, a mishape, a misfortune.

Disauenturataménte, vnhappily.

Disauenturáto, vnhappy, vnluckie.

Dsauenturóso, vnfortunate, vnluckie.

Disauertenza, ouersight, vnaduisednesse.

Disauertíre, not to beware or heede.

Disauezzáre, to disaccustome, to vnuse.

Disauézzo, disaccustomed, vnused.

Disautorizzáre, to put from authority.

Disbalordíre, to vngiddy, or vndizzie.

Disbarcáre, to disimbarke, to vnship.

Disbárco, a landing out of a ship.

Disbardáre, to vntrap as a horse.

Disbarráre, to vnbar, to open wide.

Disbattezzáre, to vnchristen.

Disbellettáre, to vnpaint, or vnbeautie.

Disberettáre, to vncap, to vnhat.

Disbestiáre, to vnbeast, to vnrude.

Disborgáre, to vnborough.

Disbiadáre, to vnprouender, to vncorne. 

Disbiauáto, as Sbiauáto.

Disbolláre, to vnbrand, to vnplaister.

Disboscáre, to vnwood, to vntimber.

Disbracáre, to vnbreech, to vnstocke.

Disbottonáre, to vnbutton, to disbutton.

Disbramáre, to vnwish, to haue a longing.

Disbranáre, as Sbranáre.

Disbrattáre, as Sbrattáre.

Disbrauáre, to spoile of brauerie.

Disbriacáre, to become sober againe.

Disbrigáre, as Sbrigáre.

Disbrigliáre, to vnbridle, to vnsnaffle.

Disbrináre, to thaw a hore frost.

Disbrísso, crookedly, obliquely.

Disbrogliáre, to disimbroile.

Disbuffáre, as Sbuffáre.

Discacciáre, as Scacciáre.

Discacciaménto, a chasing away.

Discadére, as Decadére, to faile, to faint, to decline, to droope, to empaire, to fall from.

Discággere, as Discadére.

Discagliáre, as Scagliáre.

Discadúta, a relaps, an empairing.

Dicadenacciáre, to vnbolt or vnbar a dore.

Discalciáre, as Scalciáre.

Discaligináre, to vnsut, to vnmist.

Discálcio, vnshod, barefooted.

Discammeráre, to vnchamber.

Discallíre, to suple, to vnharden, to vncore.

Discancelláre, to vncancell.

Díscane, as Diácene, or Diáscane.

Discantináre, to vncellar.

Discanutíre, tísco, títo, to vnhore.

Discapelláre, to vnhat, to vnhood.

Discaparucciáre, to vnhood, to vncowle.

Discapestráre, to vnhalter.

Discapigliáre, as Scapigliáre.

Discapitáre, as Scapitáre.

Discappiáre, to vnknot, to vnsnare.

Discapricciáre, as Scapricciáre.

Discapucciáre, to vnhood, to vncowle.

Discarceráre, to vnprison, to free.

Discaricáre, to discharge, to vnlode.

Discarità, vncharitablenesse.

Discaritéuole, vncharitable.

Dìscarlátto, of purple or scarlet.

Discarnáre, to vnflesh, to make leane.

Discáro, not deare, hated, ill beloued.

Discarpáto, vnshod, without shooes.

Discasciáre, as Discassáre.

Discassáre, to vnchest, to vnplace, to vnbreech, to dismount artillerie, to loosen teeth.

Discastelláre, to vncastle.

Discatenáre, to vnchaine.

Discaualcáre, to vnhorse, to dismount.

Discauezzáre, to vnhalter.

Discédere, to decease, to depart.

Discelestiáre, to put out of heauen. 



Discemáre, to wane, to diminish.

Discendente, descending, a descendant.

Discendenza, a descending, a descent.

Discendere, to descend, or come downe.

Discendiménto, a descending.

Discensióne, a descending.

Discente, a learner, a disciple.

Disceo, a blazing starre resembling a dish or coite of an Amber colour.

Discepáre, to scatter, to disperse.

Discepolo, a learner, a disciple.

Discernente, discerning, perceiuing.

Discernere, scerno, scernéi, scernúto, to discerne, to perceiue, to ken a far off.

Discernéuole, that may be discerned.

Disceruelláre, to vnbraine.

Disceruicáre, to vnnecke.

Discésa, a descent, a declining. Also a rhume or catharre.

Discéso, descended, alighted, come downe.

Discettáre, to dissect, to deuide, to disperse. Also to varie, to iarre, to disagree.

Dischiattáre, to vnrace, to degrade or conuict in name and blood.

Dischiauáre, to vnlocke, to vnshut.

Dischieráre, to vntroope or disaray.

Dischiodáre, to vn-naile.

Dischiomáre, to vnhaire, to disheuell.

Dischiostráre, to vncloister.

Dischiúdere, chiúdo, chiúsi, chiúso, to vnshut, to disclose, to set open.

Dischiumáre, to vnskum or vnfoame.

Dischiúso, vnshut, disclosed, set open or at libertie.

Disciecáre, to vnblinde.

Disciferáre, to decipher.

Discigliáre, to vnhood a Hawke, to vnseere a birdes eye.

Discináre, to dine. Also a dinner.

Discingere, cíngo, cínsi, cínto, to vngirt.

Discinghiáre, to vncingle, to vngirt.

Discínto, vngirt, vngirdled.

Disciógliere, as Sciógliere.

Disciogliménto, a loosing, or freeing.

Discioláre, to vncase a slouen, to put off hose and doublet without vndoing points.

Disciólto, as Sciólto, loose, free.

Discioperáto, not idle, busied.

Discipáre, to dissipate, to waste.

Discipíto, vnsauorie, wallowish, tastelesse. Also simply minded, shallow-witted.

Disciplina, discipline, instruction.

Disciplinábile, that may be disciplined, docile.

Disciplinánti, a religious order of some that will scourge themselues.

Disciplináre, to discipline, to instruct.

Disciplinário, disciplinarie, of or pertaining to discipline or correction.

Disciplinéuole, docile, disciplinable. 

Disciplinità, disciplining, instruction.

Disciplíno, one subiect to discipline.

Discípulo, a disciple, a scholler, a learner.

Discittadináre, to vncittizen, to vncitie.

Disciuilíre, lísce, líto, to become vnciuill.

Discluso, excluded, exempted.

Dísco, a great ring of iron, leade or stone which for exercise men vsed to cast vp in the aire as we vse to throw the sledge or pitch the barre. Also a casting quoit.

Discoccáre, as Scoccáre.

Discóglio, a rocke or shelfe in the Sea.

Discobolóne, a quoit-caster, a stonehurler.

Discodáta gátta, a cat without a taile.

Discodáto, vntailed, curtailed.

Discoláre, to vnglue.

Discolíno, a kind of colour in a horse.

Díscolo, disobedient, stiffe-necked, shrewd.

Discoloráre, to discolour.

Discoloríre, rísco, ríto, idem.

Discólpa, clearenesse from guilt or blame.

Discolpáre, as Scolpáre.

Discolpéuole, vnguilty, blamelesse.

Discoltráre, to vnquilt, to vnhill.

Discómbere, contrarie of Soccombere.

Discomésso, displaced, disiointed.

Discométtere, to disioint, to displace.

Discomodáre, as Incomodáre.

Discómodo, vncomodious. Also trouble.

Discompagnáre, as Scompagnáre.

Discompiacenza, dislike, displeasure.

Discompiacére, to displease, to dislike.

Discompórre, to vnframe, to discompose.

Discompósto, vnframed, discomposed.

Discomunále, not commune, vnusuall.

Discomunáre, to appropriate what is common.

Disconchiúdere, to disconclude.

Disconchiúso, disconcluded.

Disconcertáre, to disagree, to vntune.

Disconcerto, a disagreement in tunes.

Disconciáre, as Sconciáre.

Disconciaménte, as Sconciaménte.

Disconciatúra, as Sconciatúra.

Disconfermáre, to vnconfirme, to disestablish.

Discóncio, as Scóncio.

Disconficcáre, as Sconficcáre.

Disconfidánza, distrust, suspect.

Disconfidáre, to distrust, to suspect.

Disconfidente, distrustfull.

Disconfórme, vncomformable.

Disconfortáre, to discomfort.

Disconfortéuole, discomfortable.

Disconfórto, discomfort.

Discongegnare, to vnframe, to disorder.

Discongregáre, to scatter from a flocke.

Disconocchiáre, to empty or spin from a distaffe. 

Disconoscente, vnacknowledging.

Disconoscenza, vnacknowledgement.

Disconóscere, to disacknowledge.

Disconosciúto, vnknowen, vnacknowledged.

Disconsecráre, to vnconsecrate, to prophane.

Disconsertáre, to disagree in tunes.

Disconsigliáre, to disswade.

Disconsiglio, disswasion.

Disconsoláre, to discomfort.

Disconsolatióne, discomfort.

Disconsueto, vnused, not vsuall, disaccustomed.

Disconsuetúdine, vnwont, disuse.

Discontáre, to vnreckon, to abate.

Discontentáre, to discontent.

Discontentézza, discontentment.

Discontento, discontent.

Discontinuánza, discontinuance.

Discontinuáre, to discontinue.

Discontinuáto, disioined, vnknit.

Discontínuo, discontinuall.

Discontinuità, a disiuncture.

Disconuenéuole, disconuenient, vndecent.

Disconueneuolézza, disconueniency.

Disconueniente, disconuenient, vndecent.

Disconuenienza, disconueniency.

Disconueníre, vengo, vénni, venúto, to be inconuenient, indecent, vnseemly vnmeet or vnlawfull. Also to disagree.

Disconuersáre, to vnfrequent, or not conuerse together.

Discoppiáre, to vncouple, to vnyoke.

Discoperchiáre, as Discopríre.

Discoperta, a discouery.

Discoperto, discouered, open, manifest.

Discopriménto, a discouering.

Discoprire, cuópro copríj, coperte, to discouer, to vncouer.

Discórcio, a worke in painting so called

Discoraggiáre, to discourage.

Discordánte, disagreeing, discordant.

Discordánza, a disagreement, a discorde.

Discordáre, to disagree, to disaccord. Also to vnstring or vntune. Also to forget.

Discórde, discordant, disagreeing.

Discordéuole, disagreeable.

Discórdia, discord, iarring, contention.

Discordiále, that breedeth discord.

Discordióso, contentious, full of discord.

Discórdo, a discord, a disagreement.

Discorpionáto, rid from poison.

Discorrentia, a running of humours.

Discorrente, running, or discoursing.

Discórrere, to discourse, or run too and fro. 



Discorretto, vncorrected, disordered.

Discorréuole, that may be discoursed, discoursable.

Discorribánda, a glance or touch at any thing in discourse, a word and away.

Discorridóre, as Corridóre.

Discorriménto, a discoursing, a running or gadding too and fro.

Discorrucciáre, to pacifie from anger.

Discorsiuaménte, by way of discourse.

Discorséuole, discoursable.

Discorsíuo, discoursesiue.

Discórso, discourse, reason, consideration.

Discórso, discoursed, reasoned, run too and fro.

Discortegianáto, discourtired.

Discortecciáre, to vnrinde, to vnbarke.

Discortése, discurteous, vnciuill.

Discortesía, discurtesie, inciuility.

Discorzáre, to vnrind, to pare, to pill.

Discoscendere, as Scoscendere.

Discoscéso, as Scoscéso.

Discostaménto, an eslonging from.

Discostáre, to separate, to disioine, to eslong or goe far off, to distance.

Discósto, distant, far off or from.

Discotennáre, to vnskin, to flea.

Discouerta, a discouery.

Discouerto, discouered, reuealed.

Discouriménto, a discouering.

Discouríre, to discouer, to vnhill.

Discozzáre, as Scozzáre.

Discozzonáre, as Scozzonáre.

Discredente, miscreant, vnbelieuing.

Discredenza, vnbeliefe, miscreance.

Discrédere, to misbelieue, to distrust.

Discrepánte, different, disagreeing.

Discrepántia, difference, squaring.

Discrepáre, to differ, to disagree.

Discrescente lúna, a waining moone.

Discrescenza, a decreasing, a waining.

Discrescere, to decrease, to vngrow, to wane.

Discrespáre, to vnfrizle, to vncurle.

Discretézza, discreetnesse, iudgement.

Discretióne, discretion, consideration.

Discreto, discreet, considerate, wary.

Discríme, diuersity. Also controuersie.

Discriminatióne, a deuiding, a seuering.

Discrimináre, to deuide, to sunder.

Discriminatúra, a partition, a separation.

Discrittíbile, that may be described.

Discrittióne, a description.

Discríuere, to describe.

Discrostáre, as Scrostáre.

Discrudelíre, lísco, líto, to become from cruell gentle or mild, to tame.

Discuculláre, to vnhood, to vncowle.

Discubáre, to ly downe to sleepe.

Discuffiáre, to vnquoife.

Discugnáre, to vnwedge. 

Disculmináre, to vntop, to vnroofe.

Discumuláre, to vnheape.

Discuoiáre, as Scuoiáre.

Discursióne, a discursing or running.

Discúsa, an excuse.

Discusáre, to excuse.

Discuséuole, excusable.

Discuscíre, as Scuscíre.

Discuscíto, as Scuscíto.

Discussibile, that may be discussed.

Discussióne, a discussing, a dissoluing.

Discussiuo, discussiue or that hath strength to dissolue or breake.

Discússo, discussed, dissolued, searched.

Discútere, cúto, cússi, cússo, to discusse, to search out, to vse diligence for to know.

Discutéuole, that may be discussed.

Discutíbile, that may be discussed.

Disdebitáre, to come out or free from debt.

Disdebolíre, lísco, líto, to vnweaken.

Disdegnáre, as Sdegnáre, to disdaine.

Disdégno, as Sdégno, disdaine.

Disdegnóso, disdainfull.

Disdentáto, vntoothed, toothlesse.

Disdétta, a foreboding, an ill lucke, a misfortune. Also a gainsaying, a contradiction.

Disdétto, vnsaid, recanted, reuoked a saying. Also gainsaid or withstood. Also vndecent or misbeseemed. Also a contention or controuersie.

Disdicéuole, vndecent, not to be spoken.

Disdíre, díco, díssi, détto, to vnsay, to recant. Also not to become or beseeme.

Disdogliáre, as Sdogliáre.

Disdoloráre, as Sdogliáre.

Disdonnáre, to vnwoman.

Disdóssa, alla disdóssa, a picke, a packe.

Disdossáre, to take from ones backe.

Disdótto, vnlearned. Also the number 18.

Disdottoráto, vndoctored, degraded.

Disdottrináto, vndoctrined, vnlearned.

Disè, as Súo, his, of himselfe.

Diseclissare, to diseclips, to discloud.

Disegnánte, a designer, a contriuer, a drawer, a painter, an embroitherer. Also a map or modell-maker.

Disegnáre, to designe, to contriue, to plot, to purpose, to intend, to draw, to paint, to embroither, to modle, to pourtray.

Disegnatóre, as Disegnánte.

Diségni, the plurall of Diségno.

Diségno, a purpose, a designe, a draught, a modell, a plot, a picture, a pourtrait.

Disegreto, secretly, priuily

Disequalità, inequalitie, disproportion.

Diselláre, to vnsadle.

Disembriciáre, to pull off the vpper tiles.

Disenfiaménto, an vnswelling.

Disenfiáre, to vnswell. 

Disensággine, a sencelesnesse.

Disensáto, sencelesse, vnsensed, out of reason.

Disensáre, to depriue of sense or reason.

Disentería, as Dissentería.

Disenterico, as Dissenterico.

Diseparáre, to seperate, to sunder.

Disepelíre, to vnburie, to disintombe.

Disepólto, vnburied, disintombed.

Diséra, in the euening, by night.

Diseredáre, to disinherite.

Disereditáre, to disinherite.

Diserráre, to vnlocke, to vnshut, to open.

Disertaménto, a wasting, a making desert.

Disertánza, idem, a desolation.

Disertáre, to make desert, to waste, to spoile, to desolate, to reduce to a wildernesse. Also for a woman to miscarie in childbed. Also to kill, to murther or slay.

Disertéuole, that may be made desart.

Diserto, a desert, a waste, a heath, a wildernesse.

Diserto, wasted, desolate, made a wildernesse, ruined, made desert, spoiled.

Diserto, eloquent, well spoken, of good vtterance.

Diseruíre, seruo, seruíto, to vnserue, to disobey, to be vnthankefull. Also to deserue.

Diseruígio, as Diseruítio.

Diseruítio, a bad seruice, a shrewd turne, an ill office, the part of any bad seruant. Also fit for seruice.

Diseruíto, vnserued, disobaied, bin vnthankefull. Also deserued.

Disestimáre, to disesteeme, to disualue.

Disestimatióne, disestimation.

Disestímo, disestimation.

Disetáre, to vnthirst.

Disfacendáto, idle, vnbusied.

Disfaciménto, a defeasance, an vndooing.

Disfagottáre, to vnfaggot, to vnbundle.

Disfaldáre, to vnfould, to vnplate.

Disfálta, a default, a defect, a misse.

Disfaltáre, to default, to defect, to erre.

Disfamáre, to vnhunger. Also to defame.

Disfamatióne, defamation.

Disfaméuole, whose hunger may be quenched.

Disfanciullíre, lísco, líto, to vnchilde.

Disfangáre, to cleanse from dirt or mire.

Disfantáre, to become from a footeman a horseman. Also to depriue of infantery. Also to vanish out of sight.

Disfáre, to vndoe, to vnmake, to mar.

Disfaretráre, to vnquiuer. 



`Disfarináre, to vnmeale, to vnflowre.

Disfasciáre, to vnswathe, to vnbinde.

Disfátta, an vndoing, an vnmaking.

Disfattióne, as Disfátta.

Disfátto, vndone, vnmade, spoiled.

Disfauilláre, to vnsparkle.

Disfauóre, a disfauour, a disgrace.

Disfauoréuole, vnfauourable.

Disfauoríre, rísco, ríto, to disfauour.

Disfebbráre, to be rid of an ague.

Disfecondáre, to make vnfruitfull.

Disfeltráre, to vnfelt.

Disferráre, to vniron, to vnshooe a horse.

Disferuoráre, to make vnearnest, to coole.

Disfiacchíre, to vnweary, to vndroop.

Disfibbiáre, to vnbuckle.

Disficcáre, as Staccáre.

Disfída, a challenge, a defying.

Disfidánza, a defying, a distrusting.

Disfidáre, to defie, to challenge.

Disfienolíre, to vnweaken.

Disfigliáre, to be brought a bed as a woman, to filly as a mare, to eaw as a sheepe.

Disfigliuoláre, to vnchilde.

Disfiguráre, to disfigure, to vnshape.

Disfiláre, as Sfiláre.

Disfiníre, nísco, níto, to define, to expound.

Disfinitóre, a definer, an expounder.

Disfistolíre, lísco, líto, to vnfistulate.

Disfocáre, as Sfogáre.

Disfoderáre, to vnsheath.

Disfogáre, as Sfogáre.

Disfogliáre, to vnleafe.

Disfoiáto, as Sfoiáto.

Disfoltáre, to vnthicken, to vnfogge.

Disforáto, vnbored, without holes.

Disforcáre, to vnforke, to vnhange or free from the gallowes.

Disforgiáre, as Sfoggiáre.

Disformaggiáto, to vncheese.

Disformáre, to disforme, to disfigure.

Disfórme, deformed, misshaped.

Disformità, deformity, disfiguring.

Disfornáre, to vnfurnace, to vnouen.

Disforníre, nísco, níto, to disfurnish.

Disfrancáre, to vnfranchise.

Disfranciosáto, rid of the Frenchpox.

Disfrangiáre, to vnfringe, to disadorne.

Disfratáre, to vnfrier, as Sfratáre.

Disfregiáre, as Sfregiáre.

Disfrenáre, to vnbridle.

Disfrondáre, as Sfrondáre.

Disfumáre, to vnsmoake, to vnfume.

Dissuriáre, to disfury, to tame.

Disgangheráte, as Sgangheráre.

Disgannáre, as Disingannáre.

Disgarbugliáre, to free from entanglings.

Disgegnáre, to vnframe, to disioine.

Disgeláre, to vnfreeze, to thaw. 

Disgelo, a thaw, an vnfreezing.

Disgelosíre, sísco, síto, to free from ielousie.

Disghembo, a thwart, sideline, awry.

Disghembro, as Disgembo.

Disghiacciáre, to vnfrost, to thaw.

Disghiadáre, to vnfreeze, to thaw.

Disghirlandáre, to vngarland.

Disgigantíto, disgianted.

Disgiogáre, to vnyoke.

Disgióngere, to disioyne, to disunite.

Disgiontióne, a disioining, a disiunction.

Disgiontíuo, that may be disioined, disiunctiue.

Disgiónto, disioined, disunited, seuered.

Disgiontúra, a disiointing.

Disgiornáre, to vnday, to waxe night.

Disgiouáre, to disauaile, to hurt.

Disgiúgnere, to disioine, to disunite.

Disgiustáre, to make vneuen, or vniust.

Disglobáre, to vnglobe, to make vnround.

Disgoluppáre, as Sgomináre.

Disgombráre, as Sgombráre.

Disgómbro, sost. a discombring.

Disgomentáre, as Sgomentáre.

Disgoménto, sost, as Sgoménto.

Disgommáre, as Sgommáre.

Disgonfiáre, to vnswell.

Disgorgáre, as Sgorgáre.

Disgouernáre, to misgouerne, to misrule.

Disgradáre, to degrade.

Disgradíre, dísco, díto, not to take in worth.

Disgrandíre, dísco, díto, to disgreaten.

Disgrassáre, to vnfatten, to make leane.

Disgrátia, a disgrace. Also a misfortune.

Disgratiáre, to disgrace, to scorne.

Disgratiataménte, disgracefully.

Disgratiáto, disgraced, gracelesse, vnhappie.

Disgratióso, gracelesse, full of disgrace.

Disgráto, vnacceptable, irkesome.

Disgrauáre, to disagrauate, to disburden

Disgrauidánza, as Sgrauidánza.

Disgrauidáre, as Sgrauidáre.

Disgráuio, a disaggrauating, a discharge.

Disgregáre, to scatter, to deuide.

Disgregatióne, a scattering, a disgregation.

Disgreggiáre, to scatter, to vnflocke.

Disgreuáre, to lighten, to disburden.

Disgrinzáto, smooth, vnwrimpled.

Disgroppáre, to vnknot, to vnknit.

Desgrossaménto, a refining, a disgrosing.

Disgrossáre, as Sgrossáre.

Disguantáre, to vngloue.

Disgusciáre, to vnhuske, to vnshale.

Disgustáre, to distaste.

Disgustéuole, distastefull.

Disgústo, distaste. Also vnkindnesse.

Disgustóso, full of distaste, distastefull.

Dishabitábile, vnhabitable.

Dishabilità, vnablenesse, disabilitie. 

Dishabilitáre, to vnable, to disable.

Dishabitáto, disinhabited, vncouth.

Disherbáre, to weed out, to vngrasse.

Disherbeggiáre, as Disherbáre.

Disheredáre, to disinherite.

Dishereditáre, to disinherite.

Disheritáre, to disinherite.

Dishonestà, dishonestie, vnhonestie.

Dishonesta, dishonest, vnhonest.

Dishonestáre, to dishonest, to shame.

Dishonoránza, dishonoring.

Dishonoráre, to dishonor, to shame.

Dishonóre, dishonor, shame.

Dishonoréuole, dishonorable.

Dishorréuole, dishonorable.

Dishorridíre, dísco, díto, to vnhorrid.

Dishorríre, rísco, rito, to vnhorrid.

Dishumanáre, to become inhumane.

Dishumáno, inhumane, cruell.

Dishumidíre, dísco, díto, to vnmoisten.

Dishúmile, vnhumble, high minded.

Disi, yea, Dico disì, I say yea.

Dishumiliáre, to dishumble, to encruell.

Disiánza, a desiring, a wishing.

Disiánte, desirous, wishing, desiring.

Disiáre, to desire, to wish, to long for.

Disideráre, as Disiáre, to desire.

Disiderio, a desire, a longing for.

Disideróso, desirous, wishing.

Disiecoráre, to vnpanch, to vnbowell.

Disiecóre, the humbles, plucke, midrife, panch, bowels, entrailes, garbish, giblet, or gether or haslet of any beast.

Disiéme, from asunder.

Disifátta maniéra, in such manner or sort.

Disifátta sórte, in such sort or guise.

Disigilláre, to vnseale, to pull off the seale.

Disimbarazzáre, to rid, to disimbroile.

Disimbarcaménto, a disimbarking.

Disimbarcáre, to disimbarke, to vnship.

Disimbarcatióne, a disimbarking.

Disimboscáre, as Sboscáre, to disforest.

Disimbrattáre, as Sbrattáre.

Disimbriacáre, to become sober againe.

Disimpacciáto, vnbusied, at leasure.

Disimpáccio, a vacation from businesse.

Disimparáre, to vnlearne, to forget.

Disimpegnáre, to vnpaune, to vngage.

Disimpendere, to vnhang.

Disimpéso, vnhanged.

Disimpiastráre, to disimplaster.

Disimpiàstricciáre, idem.

Disimpiccáre, to vnhang.

Disinamoráre, to disinamour.

Disináre, to dine. Also a dinner.

Disincantáre, to disinchant.

Disincarceráre, to disinprison.

Disincatenáre, to vnchaine.

Disincanalcáre, to vnhorse, to dismount.

Disinebbiáre, to vnmist, to vnfog.

Disinebriáre, to become sober againe.

Disingannáre, to vndeceaue, to cleare from any doubt or error. 



Disinoráre, to dishonor, to shame.

Disinóre, dishonor, shame.

Disintendere, to misunderstand.

Disinsegnáre, to vnteach.

Disinteressáto, disinteressed.

Disintimáre, to reuoke an intimation.

Disintonáre, to vntune, to disagree.

Disintricáre, to disintangle.

Disintronáre, contrary of Intronáre.

Disinuescáre, to vnsnare, to vnbait.

Disinueschiáre, to vnsnare, to vnbait.

Disinuitáre, to disinuite, to vnuie.

Disinuólgere, to vntangle, to vnwrap.

Disinuólto, disintangled, disinuolued.

Disío,, a desire, a wish, a longing for.

Disiosaménte, desirously, earnestly.

Disióso, desirous, longing for.

Disirábile, desirable, to be desired.

Disiránza, a desiring, a longing for.

Disiráre, to desire, to wish, to long for.

Disiróso, desirous, longing for.

Dislacciáre, as Slacciáre.

Dislagáre, to ebbe or fall as waters doe.

Dislanguidíre, ísco, íto, to dislanguish.

Dislattáre, to weane from sucking.

Dislauáre, to vnwash.

Disleále, disloiall, false hearted.

Disleánza, disloialty, falshood.

Dislegáre, to vnbind, to vnty.

Dislealtà, disloialty, falshood.

Dislegaménti, vnloosings, vnbindings.

Disleggiáre, to flout, to deride, to scoffe.

Dislendináre, to vn-nit, to vn-louse.

Dislettáre, to vnbed, to vncouch.

Disletteráto, vnlettered, vnlearned.

Dislinguáre, to vntongue.

Dislocáre, to displace, as Slogáre.

Dislocatióne, a dislocation, a displacing.

Dislodáre, to dispraise, to discommend.

Dislogáre, to displace, as Slogáre.

Dislogatióne, a dislocation, a displacing.

Disloggiáre, to dislodge, to displace.

Dislombáre, to vnloine, to back-breake.

Dislongáre, as Discostáre, to shorten.

Dislustráre, to darken, to obscure.

Dismacchiáre, as Smacchiáre.

Dismagagnáre, to vncorrupt.

Dismagáre, to change ones looke or alter countenance. Also to depart far off.

Dismagliáre, as Smagliáre.

Dismagríre, grísco, gríto, to vnleane.

Dismaláre, to vnsicken, to recouer health.

Dismandársi, in Grison it is taken when a horse doth flie and depart out of the ring or compasse where he is ridden.

Dismandráre, to vnheard, to scatter.

Dismanicáre, to vnsleeue, to vnhaft.

Dismaritáre, to vnhusband, to vnmarrie.

Dismattíre, tísco, títo, to become wise from mad.

Dismembránza, a dismembring.

Dismembráre, to dismember. 

Dismentáre, to put out of minde.

Dismenticánza, forgetfulnesse.

Dismenticáre, to forget, to put out of minde.

Dismentichénole, forgetfull.

Dismentíre, to vnlye. Also to belye.

Dismersióne, a way going euery where.

Dismessaménte, poorely, in demisse manner.

Dismésso, left off, dismissed. Also displaced.

Disméttere, métto, mísi, mésso, to dismisse, to leaue off, to renounce. Also to displace.

Dismiáre, to awaken from sleepe.

Dismidolláre, to vnmarrew, to weaken.

Dismisciáre, to awaken from sleepe.

Dismissióne, a dismission, a dismissing.

Dismisúra, vnmeasurablenesse, excesse.

Dismisuráre, to goe beyond measure.

Dismisuráto, vnmeasurable.

Dismogliáre, to vnwiue, to vnwed.

Dismonacáre, to vnfrier, to vnmunke. Also to disnunne.

Dismontáre, to dismount, to alight.

Dismontáta, a dismounting, an alighting. Also a fall, a loape, an ouer loape.

Dismorbáre, as Smorbáre, to disinfect.

Dismucchiáre, to vnheape.

Disnamoráre, to disinamore.

Disnaníto, vndwarfed.

Disnea, a dinner, or dining time.

Disnebbiáre, to vnmist, to vnfog.

Disneruáre, to vnsinnow.

Disnodáre, to vnknot, to vnknit.

Disnodatióne, as Snodatúra.

Disnóre, dishonor, shame.

Disnottáre, to vnnight, to waxe day.

Disnubiláre, to vncloud, to cleare vp.

Disobligáre, to disoblige, to free from bonds.

Disóbligo, no bond nor dutie.

Disobrigáre, as Disobligáre.

Disóbrigo, as Disóbligo.

Disocupáto, vnoccupied, not busied.

Disoláre, to destroy, to desolate, to spoile or lay waste. Also as Dissoláre.

Disolatióne, a waste, a desolation, a destruction.

Disonánte, dissonant, disagreeing.

Disonánza, a dissonance or discord in Musike.

Disonáre, to disaccord, to dissent, to iarre.

Disonghiáre, to vnnaile, to vnhoofe.

Disonnáre, to awaken or rid from sleepe.

Disonniáre, as Disonnáre.

Disoperchio, ouermuch, superfluous.

Disoperáto, vnbusied, idle, not set a worke.

Disopiláre, to open or vnstop, to disobstruct.

Disopilatióne, an vnstopping of the body. 

Disópra, aboue, ouer, aloft.

Disopra, moreouer, besides. Also from aboue.

Disopracálcie, as Sopracálcie.

Disoprapiù, more ouer and besides.

Disopravía, idem, and as Disópra.

Disorbáre, to vnblinde, to open ones eies.

Disorbitánte, absurd, irregular, orderlesse.

Disorbitánza, absurdnesse, irregularitie.

Disórbo, as if it were halfe blind.

Disordinaménto, a disordering.

Disordinánza, disorder, confusion.

Disordináre, to disorder, to confound.

Disordinataménte, disorderly.

Disordinatióne, a disorder, a confusion.

Disórdine, disorder, confusion, excesse.

Disornáre, to disadorne, to vndight.

Disórte, in such sort, so that.

Disórte che, in such sort that, so that.

Disossáre, to vnbone.

Disostináre, to disobstinate.

Disotterra, from vnder ground.

Disotterráre, to vnbury from vnder ground.

Disótto, vnder, vnderneath, from below.

Disouerchio, superfluous, ouer much.

Dispacciáre, to dispatch, to rid.

Dispáccio, a dispatch or packet in haste.

Dispáccio, to be dispatched, vendible.

Dispagliáre, to vnstraw, to vnchaffe.

Dispaiáre, to vnpaire, to vncouple.

Dispantanáre, to vnmudde, to vnmire.

Disparáre, as Sparáre.

Dispareggiáre, to disparage.

Dispareggio, disparagement.

Disparére, to disappeere, not to seeme.

Disparére, a disopinion, an vnseeming.

Dispárgere, as Dispergere.

Dispári, vneuen, not match, odde in number.

Disparíre, rísco, ríto, to vanish out of sight.

Disparità, oddes, disparity, inequalitie.

Dispáro, vneuen, vnequall, odde in number.

Dispárte, a dispart, a parte, seuerall.

Dispartiménto, a disparting.

Dispartíre, as Spartíre.

Disparuccáre, to pull off ones perwig.

Disparuto, as Sparúto.

Disparutézza, as Sparutézza.

Dispathía, as Antipathía.

Dispathizzáre, to disagree in nature.

Dispatriáre, to leaue ones natiue countrie.

Dispauríre, as Spauríre.



Dispeciáre, to vnpitch.

Dispedíre, as Spedíre.

Dispeditióne, an expedition.

Dispegnáre, to vnpawne, to vngage.

Dispegnere, as Spegnere.

Dispegoláre, to vnpitch, to vntarre.

Dispeláre, as Speláre.

Dispendere, to dispend, to dispence with. Also to vnhang.

Dispendiménto, as Dispendio.

Dispendio, expences, charges, defraying.

Dispendióso, chargeable, full of expences.

Dispennacchiáre, to vnfeather.

Dispensa, an expence, a defraying, a charge. Also a buttery, a pantery, a lardery, a store-house. Also a distributing. Also dispensation or dispensing with.

Dispensagióne, a Dispensation or dispensing with, an Ecclesiasticall permission.

Dispensáre, to dispence with, to dispose, to order, to distribute. Also to spend, to defray, to discharge, to finde one meat and drinke.

Dispensaménto, a dispensing, a distributing, a disposing, a spending, &c.

Dispensatióne, as Dispensagióne.

Dispensatóre, a dispencer. Also a dispender.

Dispenséuole, that may be dispenced.

Dispensieráto, carelesse, thoughtlesse.

Dispensiere, a spender, a cater, a purser, a disburser, a distributer, a steward, a treasurer or butler of a household.

Dispepsia, ill concoction or crudity in the stomacke.

Disperággine, desperation.

Disperánza, a despairing.

Disperábile, desperable.

Disperáre, to despaire.

Disperáte, a kinde of wailefull songs.

Disperatézza, desperatenesse.

Disperatióne, desperation.

Disperáto, desperate, hopelesse, mad.

Disperdere, perdo, persi, perso, to disperse. Also to miscary as a woman in childebed.

Disperdiménto, a dispersing, a scattering. Also a miscarying of a woman in childebed.

Disperditúra, as Disperdimento.

Disperéuole, desperable.

Dispergere, spergo, spersi, sperso, to disperse, to scatter. Also to despise, to contemne or to set at naught.

Dispergiménto, a dispersing, a scattering. Also a despising, a contemning.

Dispergiúto, dispersed, scattered. Also contemned or despised, set at naught. 

Disperláre, to dispearle, to vnpearle.

Disperlóro, by themselues.

Disperóso, full of dispaire.

Dispersa, miscaried in childebed.

Dispersaménte, dispersedly.

Dispersè, alone by himselfe.

Dispersióne, a dispersion, a scattering. Also an abortion or miscarying in childebed.

Disperuccáre, to vnperiwig, to vnhaire.

Dispésa, expence, charge, defraying.

Dispeso, vnhanged. Also dispended.

Dispessire, to vnthicken.

Dispestiáre, to vnbolt, or vnbarre a doore.

Dispetiál grátia, of speciall fauour.

Dispettáre, to despight, to shew spight.

Dispettéuole, despightfull.

Dispetto, despight. Also despised.

Dispettóso, despightfull.

Dispiacente, displeasing.

Dispiacénza, displeasance.

Dispiacére, to displease, to dislike.

Dispiacére, a displeasure, a grieuance.

Dispiacéuole, displeasing.

Dispiaceuolézza, vnpleasantnesse.

Dispiaciménto, a displeasing.

Dispianáre, to vnplaine.

Dispiatáto, pittilesse, ruthelesse.

Dispiccáre, to vnhang.

Dispicente, circumspect, aduised.

Dispicenza, circumspection, aduisednesse.

Dispidocchiáre, to vnlouse.

Dispiegáre, to vnfold, to display.

Dispietáto, pittilesse, ruthlesse, remorcelesse.

Dispíngere, to vnthrust.

Dispiráto, expired.

Dispirón, a kind of hearb.

Dispítto, despight, spite.

Dispittóso, despightfull, spitefull.

Displicáre, to explicate.

Displicatióne, an explication.

Displicenza, vnpleasantnesse.

Díspo, a kind of venemous serpent.

Dispodestáre, to rid of power or office.

Dispogliáre, to strip, to dispoile.

Dispoltroníto, vncowarded.

Dispolueráre, to vndust.

Dispolutióne, a dispoiling, a stripping.

Disponea, a stopping of the lungs hindring respiration.

Dispondeo, a double Spondeo off oure long sillables.

Dispóndico, one that hardly fetcheth and deliuereth his breath.

Disponénte, disposing.

Dispónere, póngo, pósi, pósto, to dispose, to distribute, to order, to appoint, to settle. Also to depose from. Also to expound.

Disponéuole, that may be disposed.

Disponiménto, a disposing. 

Disponitóre, a disposer, an ordrer.

Disponsáre, to vnwed, to vnbride.

Dispontáre, to disappoint. Also to vnbridge.

Dispórre, as Dispónere.

Dispositióne, a disposition. Also a mind or inclination vnto. Also a deposing.

Disposáre, to vnwed, to vnbride.

Dispositáre, to dispose of.

Dispossáre, to depriue of power

Dispossedére, to dispossesse, to put out.

Dispossente, impotent, vnable, weake.

Dispostézza, as Dispositióne. Also nimblenesse of body.

Dispostíssimo, most apt or disposed.

Dispósto, disposed, ordred, setled. Also affected or enclined vnto. Also deposed from. Also lusty, gallant, strong, sound in health.

Disprea, as Disponea.

Dispregiáre, to despise, to contemne.

Dispregiatíssimo, most contemptible.

Dispregiatóre, a dispiser, a contemner.

Dispregiéuole, dispiseable, contemptible.

Dispregio, contempt, scorne, despisall.

Dispregióso, full of contempt or scorne.

Dispretáto, vnpriested.

Disprezzábile, as Dispregiéuole.

Disprezzáre, as Dispregiáre.

Disprezzatóre, as Dispregiatóre.

Disprezzéuole, as Dispregiéuole.

Disprezzo, as Dispregio.

Disprig onáre, to vnprison.

Disprosittáre, to disprofit.

Disprofittéuole, vnprofitable.

Disprofítto, disprofite.

Disproportionále, disproportionable.

Disproportionalità, disproportion.

Disproportionáre, to disproportion.

Disproportióne, a disproportion.

Disproportionéuole, disproportionable.

Dispropósito, a dispurpose.

Dispropriáre, to disappropriate.

Disprouáre, to disprooue.

Disprouedére, to vnprouide.

Disprouedúto, vnprouided.

Disprouísto, vnprouided.

Dispueríre, rísco, rito, to vnchilde.

Dispulcelláre, to disuirgine.

Dispúta, a disputation, a debating.

Disputábile, disputable.

Disputáre, to dispute, to debate.

Disputánte, a disputer, a debater.

Disputatióne, a disputation.

Disputatóre, a disputer, a debater.

Disputéuole, disputable.

Disquagliáto, vncrudded.

Disquartáre, to vnquarter.

Disquárto, apart, out of the way.

Dísquatrárè, to vnsquare, to disorder.

Disquietaménto, a disquieting. 



Disquietáre, to disquiet, to trouble.

Disquiete, disquietnesse, trouble.

Disquieto, vnquiet, turbulent.

Disquietúdine, disquietnesse, trouble.

Disradicáre, to vnroote, to grub out.

Disredáre, to disinherite.

Disregoláre, to disorder, to confound.

Disreputáre, to disrepute, to disesteeme.

Disreputatióne, disreputation.

Disreputéuole, to be disreputed.

Disroccáre, to vnrocke.

Disroncáre, to grub or roote out.

Disrozzáre, to vnrude, to vniade.

Disrubináre, to vnrubie.

Disruginíre, nísco, níto, to vnrust.

Dissaccáre, to emptie out of a sacke, to vnbag.

Disáco, a card-teazell, or venus bazon.

Dissacráre, to vnconsecrate, to vnhallow.

Dissaláre, to vnsalt.

Dissáda, a kind of venemous Serpent all speckled with white spots.

Dissaguagliánza, disequalitie, odds.

Dissaláre, to vnsalt, to make fresh.

Dissantería, as Dissentería.

Dísse, he said or spake.

Dissecábile, that may be dried vp.

Dissecáre, to exsiccate or dry vp.

Dissecatióne, an exsiccation or drying vp.

Disseccatíuo, that is dry in operation.

Dissedáre, to remooue from out his due seate or place.

Dissediáre, to free from a siege.

Dissegnáre, &c. , as Disegnáre.

Disselláre, to vnsadle.

Dissemináre, to scatter or sow heere and there.

Disseminatióne, a scattering or sowing heere and there.

Dissenso, a dissent or varying in opinion.

Dissentería, a dangerous flixe with excoriation and wringing of the bowels, and some blood comming with it.

Dissenterico, subiect to the bloody flix.

Dissentiente, dissenting, differing.

Dissentiménto, a dissenting, a disagreeing.

Dissentióne, dissention, contention, strife.

Dissentióso, dissentious, contentious.

Dissentíre, tísco, títo, to dissent, to disagree.

Díssero, they said, they spake.

Disseparábile, separable.

Disseparáre, to separate, to part asunder.

Disseparatióne, a separation.

Dissepelíre, lísco, líto, to vnburie.

Dissepólto, vnburied.

Disserpentíto, vnuenomed, vnserpented.

Disserráre, to vnlocke, to vnshut.

Disseruente, vnseruiceable, vnseruing.

Disseruíre, as Diseruíre.

Disseruítio, as Diseruítio.

Disseruíto, as Diseruíto.

Disseruitù, vnseruice, dis-seruice.

Dissetáre, to vnthirst. Also to vnsilke.

Dissetatióne, an vnthirsting, a quenching of thirst.

Dissettáre, to desect or cut as an Anatomie. Also to displace, to disorder.

Dissettatóre, a desector of an Anatomie.

Dissettatúra, as Dissettióne.

Dissettibile, that may be desected.

Dissettióne, a desecting, a displacing.

Díssi, I said, I spake.

Dissidiáre, to striue, to iarre.

Dissidentia, variance, debate, iarring.

Dissídio, debate, strife. Also separation.

Dissigiláre, to vnseale.

Dissimigliánte, vnresembling.

Dissimigliánza, vnresemblance.

Dissimigliáre, not to resemble.

Dissimiláre, as Dissímile.

Dissímile, vnlike, vnresembling.

Dissimíllimo, most vnlike.

Dissimilissímo, most-most vnlike.

Dissimilitúdine, vnresemblance.

Dissimilménte, vnlike, in different manner.

Dissimuláre, to dissemble, to disguise.

Dissimulatióne, dissimulation.

Dissimulatóre, a dissembler, a cloker.

Dissipánte, scattering, wasting.

Dissipáre, to dissipate, to waste, to consume.

Dissipatióne, dissipation, wasting.

Dissipaóre, a waster, a consumer.

Dissipitò, vnsauory, wallowish in taste, without salt, by metaphor ignorant and gullish.

Dissítio, foolish, gullish, shallow-pated.

Dissítte, the Dixit, meaning him that said Dixit dominus domino meo.

Dissiuáre, to straine out of ioint.

Dissiuatióne, a straining out of ioynt.

dissiuáto, strained out of ioynt.

Dissociábile, vnsociable, wilde.

Dissoláre, to vnsole to loose, to seuer, to sunder as the shooe from the sole. Also as Disoláre.

Dissolatúra, a paine in the bottome of a horses foote proceeding of the pricking of a naile being not well healed or such like accident, which causeth a confluence of euill humoures bereauing the horse of his limme.

Dissoláta, the place in the horses foote pained with Dissolatúra. Also vnsoled.

Dissoldáto, vnsoldiered.

Dissolúbile, easie to loose or dissolue.

Dissolubilità, a dissolubility.

Dissóluere, sóluo, soluéi, solúto, to dissolue, to loose, to vnbinde, to vndoe. Also to desolue, to thaw or melt.

Dissolutézza, dissolutenes, riotousnesse. 

Dissolutióne, dissolution, or licenciousnesse of life. Also a dissoluing.

Dissoluto, dissolute, riotous, licentious.

Dissomigliánte, vnresembling.

Dissomigliánza, vnresemblance.

Dissomigliáre, to differ in likenesse.

Dissonánte, dissonant, disagreeing.

Dissonánza, a dissonance, a disagreeing.

Dissonáre, to disaccord, to dissent.

Dissonnáre, to awake from sleepe.

Dissóno, dissonant, confuse.

Dissoráre, to diuide, to share, to part.

Dissottáni, men of lowest ranke.

Dissotterráre, to fetch from vnderground.

Dissugeláre, to vnseale.

Dissuperbíto, vnprouded, made milde.

Distaccáre, as Staccáre.

Distánte, distant, farre off.

Distántia, distance of place.

Distailáre, to vnstable.

Distáre, to be distant or far off.

Distáte, in Sommer, of Sommer.

Distemperaménto, a distemperature.

Distemperánza, distemperance.

Distemperáre, to distemper.

Distemperatézza, distemperature.

Distempráre, to distemper.

Distendáre, as Stendáre.

Distendere, tendo, tési, téso, to extend.

Distenebráre, to vndarken.

Distenére, tengo, ténni, tenúto, to detaine.

Distentíuo, extensiue, far-spreading.

Disternere, to torment, to torture.

Disterráre, to digge from vnder ground.

Distésa, an extension, or large spreading.

Distesaménte, at large, extendedly.

Distéso, extended, displaied, spread abroad.

Distessere, to vnweaue, to rauell out.

Distettáre, to weane from the dug.

Distettáre, to vnroofe a house.

Dístico, a double meeter, two verses containing one matter. Also the hearbe Smilax.

Disticóne, the hearbe Smilax.

Distilláre, to distill, to trill to drop.

Distillaménto, as Distillatióne.

Distillatióne, a distillation, a trilling.

Distillatóio, a still, or a distilling house.

Distilléuole, that may be distilled.

Distimoríre, rísco, ríto, to rid from feare.

Distináre, to destinate, to allot.

Distinatióne, destination, lot, fate.

Distíngnere, stínguo, stínsi, stínto, to distinguish, to separate, to diuide.

Distinguíbile, that may be distinguished. 



Distíno, destiny, lot, fate, chance.

Distintaménte, distinctly, seuerally.

Distintióne, a distinction, a separation.

Distintissimaménte, most distinctly.

Distintíuo, distinctiue.

Distínto, distinguished, distinct.

Distiráre, to stretch out, to wrest in length.

Distirpáre, to extirp or grub vp by the rootes.

Distirizzáre, to vnstiffen, to vnbenum.

Distiualáre, to vnboote.

Distoccáta, with a foine or a thrust.

Distógliere, tólgo, tólsi, tólto, to remooue or withdraw from any purpose or action.

Distólto, remooued, withdrawen or diuerted from any purpose or action.

Distonáre, to vntune, to bring out of frame.

Distoppáre, to vnstop.

Distórcere, tórco, tórsi, tórto, to vntwist, to vnwrest, to extort, to vnwrith.

Distorciménto, an vntwisting, an vnwresting, an extorting, an vnwrithing.

Distordíre, as Stordíre.

Distordiménto, as Stordiménto,

Distordíto, as Stordíto.

Distornáre, to turne away from.

Distórno, a backe or from-returning.

Distórre, as Distógliere.

Distorsióne, an extorting, an extorsion.

Distortaménte, crookedly, wrongfully.

Distortióne, a turning awry vnnaturally.

Distórto, crooked, crankling in and out. Also extorted.

Distracciáre, as Stracciáre.

Distráccio, as Straccio.

Distraccióso, as Straccióso.

Distrárre, trággo, trássi, trátto, to distract, to withdraw, to mislead.

Distratiáre, as Stratiáre.

Distrátio, as Strátio.

Distrattióne, a distracting, a distraction.

Distrátto, distracted, withdrawen, misled.

Distregáre, to vnbewitch.

Distrétta, a distresse, a distraine, a narrow pinch, a durance, an emprisonment.

Distrétto, distressed, distrained, pinched, in durance, straite bound, emprisoned.

Distrétto, a precinct, a verge, a circuit, a bound, a limite, a narrow place, a prison, a wapen-take, a hundred of a shire.

Distrettuále, a confiner, a borderer, one that liues and holds lands within the precinct and command of another.

Distrettuáto, as Distrettuále.

Distribuíre, ísco, íto, to deale, to distribute.

Distributióne, a distribution, a dealing.

Distributíuo, that may be distributed.

Distributóre, a distributer, a dealer. Also the master or chiefe gut in any body.

Districáre, to vntangle, to disintricate.

Districaménto, a disintangling.

Distrigáre, &c. , as Districáre.

Distrígnere, as Distríngere.

Distringáto, vnpointed, vntrussed.

Distríngere, stríngo, strínsi, strétto, to distraine, to distresse, to pinch, to straiten.

Distruggéuole, destroyable.

Distrúggere, strúggo, strússi, strútto, to destroy, to waste. Also to thaw or melt.

Distruggíbile, destroyable.

Distruggiménto, a destroying.

Distruttióne, a destruction, a destroying.

Distruggitíuo, that may be destroyed.

Distruggitóre, a destroyer, a waster.

Distrútto, destroyed, wasted, consumed. Also thawed or melted. Also clarified sewet.

Distruttóre, a destroyer, a waster.

Distruttríce, a woman-destroyer.

Distuonáre, to vntune.

Disturáre, to vnstop, to open.

Disturbaménto, a disturbing.

Disturbáre, to disturbe, to molest.

Disturbatióne, a disturbing.

Disturbatóre, a disturber, a molester.

Disturbéuole, that may be disturbed.

Distúrbo, disturbance, molestation.

Disù, Disúso, aboue, aloft. Also from aboue.

Dì sù, Dì súso, say on, speake vp.

Disúa bócca, of or with his owne mouth.

Disuádere, suádo, suási, suáso, to disswade.

Disúa natúra, of his owne nature.

Disuantaggiáre, to disaduantage.

Disuantággio, disaduantage.

Disuantaggióso, disaduantageous.

Disnalutáre, to disualue, to disesteeme.

Disualéuole, vnauailable.

Di súa pósta, at his owne will or choise.

Disuatiáre, to varie and varie againe.

Disuário, a diuersitie or variation.

Disuasióne, a disswasion.

Disuariataménte, variously, diuersly.

Disuasíuo, disswasiue.

Disuasóre, a disswader.

Disuasório, dissuading, discouraging.

Disúa uóglia, of his owne will.

Disubidiente, disobedient.

Disubidienza, disobedience.

Disubidire, dísco, díto, to disobey.

Disúbito, suddainely, on a suddaine.

Disú détto, aboue said, or spoken. 

Disuefáre, to disaccustome.

Disuefattióne, vnuse, discustome.

Disuefátto, disaccustomed, vnused.

Disuegghiáre, to awaken from sleepe.

Disuegliáre, as Disuegghiáre.

Disuegliere, as Suellere.

Disuelaménto, an vnuailing.

Disucláre, as Sucláre.

Disuellere, as Suellere.

Disuelto, as Suelto.

Disueniménto, as Sueniménto.

Disueníre, as Suenire.

Disuentráre, as Suentráre.

Disuergináre, to vnmaiden, to disuirgin

Disuermigliáre, to disuermillion.

Disuernicáre, to vnuarnish.

Disuescouáre, to vnbishop.

Disuestíre, to vnapparell, to vncloth.

Disueto, vnwont, vnaccustomed.

Disuetudinário, that is vnaccustomed.

Disuetudine, disuse, discustome.

Disuezzáre, to disaccustome, to disuse.

Disuézzo, disaccustomed, vnwont.

Disuguagliánza, inequalitie.

Disuguále, vnequall, vneuen.

Disugualità, inequalitie.

Disuiaménto, a diuerting, alluring or drawing out of the right way.

Disuiáre, to diuert, to mislead, to allure or draw out of the right way.

Disuigoríre, rísco, ríto, to disuigor.

Disuillaníto, disclouned, disruded.

Disuilluppaménto, a disintangling.

Disuilluppáre, to disinwrap.

Disuimáre, to vntie, to vntangle.

Disuinchiáre, to vntwinde, to vnwrith.

Disuincoláre, as Disuinchiáre.

Disuiperáto, vnuipered, vnuenomed.

Disuitticchiáre, to vnwrap, to vntwine.

Disuitiáre, to cleanse from any vice, fault or pollution.

Disúl', from vpon thee.

Disunáre, to disunite, to sunder.

Disunghiáre, to vnuaile, to vnhoofe.

Disuniménto, a disuniting.

Disunióne, disunion, discord.

Disuníre, nísco, níto, to disunite.

Disunitíuo, that doth disunite.

Di súo,, his, belonging to him.

Di súo cápo, of his owne head or will.

Disuogliáre, to vnwill, to vnlist.

Disuolére, to vnwill, to vnlist.

Disuólgere, as Suólgere.

Disuolgiménto, a deuoluing.

Di suóno, by sound or sounding.

Disúria, inflammation of the blader or hardnesse to pisse.

Disusánza, disuse, vnwontednesse.

Disusáto, disused, vnwont, disaccustomed.

Disuséuole, not to be vsed, vnusuall.

Disúso, a disuse, vnwontednesse.

Disútile, vnprofitable, disprofit.

Díta, fingers, thumbs. Also inches.

Ditáglio, edgling, with the edge of a weapon. 



Ditále, a thimble, a finger stall.

Ditále, the hearb Fox gloues.

Ditánto, of so much.

Díte, hell or limbo. Also you say.

Ditè, of thee. Also thine.

Ditella, the arme holes or arme pits.

Ditempo in tempo, from time to time.

Ditermináre, to determine, to resolue.

Diterminatióne, a determination.

Diterminéuole, determinable.

Ditesta, huómo ditesta, as Testárdo.

Ditestáre, to detest, to abhor.

Ditestándo, as Ditestéuole.

Ditestatióne, detestation.

Ditestéuole, detestable, abhominable.

Ditióne, as Dittióne.

Ditirámbo, a song in honor of Bacchus.

Ditirámbico poeta, a poet singing in praise of Bacchus.

Díto, a finger, a thumb. Also an inch.

Díto alato al grósso, the finger next the thumbe.

Díto aláto al pícciolo, as Díto annulláre.

Díto annulláre, the finger next the little one

Díto auricoláre, the little finger.

Díto di mezzo, the midle finger.

Díto grósso, a thumb or great toe.

Díto mígnolo, the little finger.

Díto minuello, the little finger.

Díto pícciolo, the little finger.

Ditóno, hauing or making two sounds or two parts in musicke.

Ditórto, by wrong. Also crooked.

Ditrárre, as Distrárre.

Ditrattióne, detraction, backbiting.

Ditrattóre, a detracter, a backbiter.

Ditrauerso, a thwart, a scance, sideling.

Ditrè cótte, perfect, three times tried.

Ditrocheo, a double Trocheo verse.

Ditróppo, ouer much.

Ditrótto, a trotting pace.

Dittámo, dittany, dittander, gardin-ginger or pepper-wort.

Dittándro, as Dittámo.

Dittáre, as Dettáre, to endite.

Dittatóre, an enditer. Also a Dictator or chiefe Imperiall commander.

Dittatúra, a Dictatorship which was the chiefest honor among the Romans.

Dittella, the arme holes or arme pits.

Dittionário, a Dictionary of words.

Dittióne, a diction, a saying, a mot, a word.

Dittiorettóne, a kind of networke or checkie in mazonry or building.

Dítto, as Détto.

Dittóngo, as Diphtóngo.

Diturpáre, to pollute or defile.

Ditútta bótta, with a full blow.

Ditútto púnto, at all points.

Ditútto cuóre, with all ones heart.

Díua, a Goddesse. Also diuine, or heauenly.

Diualláre, to fall or descend downe. Also to flote downe the streame or water.

Diuallíre, lísco, líto, as Diualláre.

Diuampáre, to flash or burne in flame.

Diuantággio, as Dauantággio.

Diuariáre, to vary. Also to contend.

Diuário, a variance, a controuersie.

Diuedére, védo, víddi, vedúto, or vísto, to perceiue, to see. Also to diuide. Also to wind silke or yarne, looke Dáre a diuedére.

Diuedúta, by sight, by the eie.

Diuellere, as Suellere.

Diueltrícitenáglie, plucking tongs.

Diueniménto, a becomming.

Diueníre, as Diuentáre. Also to deriue or come from.

Diuentáre, to become, to betide, to befall.

Diver, as Diverso, to wards.

Diuerbio, the first part of a comedy, or a part wherein many persons are busied and doe speake. Also an old saying.

Diverno, of or in winter.

Divéro, truly, of truth, verily.

Diuersaménte, diuersly.

Diuersáre, to differ, to be diuers.

Diuersificáre, to diuersifie, to vary.

Diuersificaménte, differently.

Diuersióne, a diuerting, a turning away.

Diuersità, diuersity, contrariety.

Diuersivóco, signifying diuers things.

Diuerso, towards. Also diuers, different.

Diuersório, an Inne, an hostery.

Diuertere, as Diuertíre.

Diuertíglio, as Diuertícolo.

Diuertícolo, a side way, a narrow bylane, a turning lane, a winding or cranckling riuer. Also a crafty slip.

Diuertiménto, as Diuertíta.

Diuertíre, verto, vertíj, títo, to diuert, to remoue, or turne away.

Diuertíta, a diuerting, a remouing.

Diuertíua, diuertiue or turning away. Guerra diuertíua, diuertiue war.

Diuessáre, to vex, to grieue.

Diuessità, griefe, vexation.

Diuesso, vexed, grieued.

Díui, Saints, sacred, holy, godly.

D'iui, thence, from thence.

Divicíno, neare, neighboring.

Diuidáre, to wind silke or reele yarne.

Diuidatríce, a silke-windresse.

Diuidente parláre, a distinct speech.

Diuidenza, a diuidence, a distinction.

Diuídere, vído, vísi, víso, to diuide.

Diuídia, wearinesse, tediousnesse. Also variance or discord.

Diuiduále, diuiduall, separable.

Diuíduo, seperable, adiuisible thing.

Diuietáre, to forbid, to withdraw from.

Diuieto, a forbidding. Also an ill smell.

Diuimáre, to vnbind a thing bound with twigs. 

Diuináre, to deuine, to guesse, to foretell, to presage, to soothsay.

Diuinatióne, diuination, guessing, soothsaying.

Diuinatóre, a deuiner, a foreteller, a soothsaier.

Diuinatória árte, the arte of diuination or soothsaying.

Diuinatríce, a woman deuiner.

Diuincolaménto, a strugling, a striuing. Also Nícchio.

Diuincoláre, to strugle, to striue. Also as Nicchiáre.

Diuinità, Diuinity, Dyety, Godhead.

Diuinéuole, that may be diuined.

Diuíno, diuine, heauenly. Also a professer of diuinity. Also of wine.

Diuísa, a deuise, an inuention, an emprese. Also a liuery, a fashion. Also a note. Also deuided, or seuerall.

Diuisaménte, seuerally, deuisedly.

Diuisaménto, a deuice or deuising. Also a partition or deuiding. Also a discourse or discoursing. Also a blazoning of armes.

Diuisáre, to deuise, to inuent. Also to deuide or part a sunder. Also to discource, to talke or confer together. Also to blazon armes. Also to surmise, to thinke, to seeme vnto.

Diuisáto, partycolured, party perpale.

Diuisíbile, that may be diuided.

Diuisióne, diuision, seperation.

Diuisíssimo, most seuerally diuided.

Dinisíuo, that is to be diuided.

Diuíso, a deuice, an inuention. Also a speech, a discourse. Also a seeming vnto.

Diuíso, diuided, seperated. Also seemed vnto, or supposed.

Di viso essere, to seeme vnto or be of opinion.

Diuisóre, a diuider. Also a deuiser.

Di vísta, of sight, by sight, visible.

Diuisúra, a diuision, a partition, a gap, a fissure, a cleaft.

Diuítia, plenty, store, riches.

Duitióso, plentious, aboundance, rich.

Diúno in úno, one by one, from one to one.

Diunsúbito, on a suddaine, suddainly.

Dìuo, diuine, heauenly, sacred, sainted.

Díuo, a Saint, a God, a Diety.

Diuolgáre, to diuulge, to publish.

Diuolgatióne, a diuulging, a publication.

Diuolgatóre, a publisher, a diuulger.

Diuólo, flying, by flight, at a volly as a Bull.

Divolontà, willingly, of freewill.

Diuólta, by a turne.

Divólta in vólta, from time, to time, from turne to turne.

Divóluere, vóluo, vólsi, volùto, to 



deuolue, to come or happen from one to another. Also to reuolue or turne backe.

Diuolutióne, a deuoluing, a deuolution.

Divolúto, deuolued, or escheated vnto.

Diuoracità, deuouringnesse, greedinesse.

Diuoránte, diuouring, vorant in armorie.

Diuoráre, to diuoure, to swallow vp.

Diuoratríce, a deuouresse.

Diuoratóre, a deuourer, a swallower.

Diuortiáre, to diuorce or part a sunder.

Diuórtio, a diuorce, a diuorcement.

Diuotáre, to deuote, or vow vnto.

Diuotióne, deuotion, vowing, religion, a religious affect of minde towards God, by metaphor an earnest loue and reuerence towards our elders and friends.

Diuóto, deuout, vowed, earnest, religious, religiously affected.

Diureticále, that prouoketh vrine.

Diurnále, diurnall, daily, continuall, of or belonging to daies.

Diurnáre, to continue day by day.

Diurnità, daylinesse, continuance, lastingnesse.

Diúrno, daily, continuing, lasting.

Diuturnáre, to continue, to perpetuate.

Diuturnále, perpetuall, continuall, daily.

Diuturnità, as Diurnità.

Diutúrno, as Diúrno.

Diuulgáre, to diuulge, to publish.

Diuulgatióne, a diuulging, a publishing.

Diuulgatóre, a diuulger, a publisher.

Diunlsióne, a deuulsion, an vnioyning.

Dizecca, new from the mint.

Dixenóre, vsed for Disonóre.

Dò, I giue. Also where or whether.

Doággio, a kind of course sheepe russet cloth, or shepheards garment of home-spunne cloth.

Doána, as Dogána.

Doamére, as Doganiére.

Dóbba, a kind of dressing of meate.

Dobbáre, as Addobbáre.

Dobbiámo, we owe, ought, must or shall.

Dobbiendo, owing, of Douére.

Dobbláre, as Doppiáre, to double.

Dóbble, double double duckets.

Dóbbre, as Dóbble.

Doblétta, a kind of stuffe worne in dublets.

Doblétto, a dublet, or iacket.

Dóbra, as Dóbbla.

Dobrétta, as Doblétta.

Dobrétto, as Doblétto.

Dóccia, a water-pipe vnder the ground. Also a damme of a mill. Also a waterspout.

Docciatúra, a spouting of waters. 

Docciáre, to spout as water out of a cocke.

Dóccio, a barbers water-pot or spout.

Doccióne, a great spout or water-pipe.

Docére, to teach, to instruct.

Dochímo, a foote of fiue sillables, a short, two long, a short and a long,

Dóci, blazing starres like vnto beames or pieces of timber burning.

Dócile, docile, tractable, that will learne.

Docilità, docilitie, facilitie in learning.

Docilitáre, to make docile or apt to learne.

Docleáto, a kind of cheese in Dalmatia.

Documentáre, to teach, to instruct.

Documénto, a document, an instruction.

Dedecaédro, a figure of starres in heauen.

Dodecathea, an hearbe called Maiorum gentium, representing the Maiesty of the twelue principall Gods and Goddesses.

Dodecatemório, one of the twelue parts of the Zodiake, the twelfth part of any thing.

Dódeci, Dódici, the number of twelue.

Dodicina, a dozen. Also a grosse or 12. dozon.

Dodéga, griefe, torment or vexation of minde.

Dodicésimo, the twelfth in order.

Dodrantále, of nine inches.

Dodránte, a measure of nine inches.

Dóe., Vsed for Dúe, two in number.

Dóga, a long graue robe or goune. Also a Deale-boord, Barrell-boordes, or Pipe-staues. Also a bend in armory. Also a certaine woodden vessell made of Deale or Barrell-boordes. Also a skarre of a long sore or hurt. Also any garde or border about a garment.

Dogále, pertayning to a Duke, as Ducále.

Dogana, a Custome-house, a Magazin or Stone-house of any towne or City where all Marchandize are brought and vnladen. Also the custome paide for them.

Doganiére, a Custome-house-keeper. Also a Customer, or receiuer of customes and toles.

Dogáre, to goune, to enrobe. Also to ioyne as barrell-bords. Also to marke with some skarre. Also to bend in armory.

Dogaréssa, a Dutches of Venice or Genoua.

Dogáto, the Dukedome, raigne or place of a Duke of Venice or Genoua.

Dogatóre, a Cooper or barrell-boord maker.

Dóge, a Duke of Venice or Genoua. 

Dóghe, barrell-boordes, or bends in armory.

Dóghe, vsed for a ban-dog or mastiue.

Doghétte, bendlets in armory.

Dógio, as Dóge.

Dóglia, as Dolóre.

Dógliáre, as Dolére.

Doglienza, as Dolóre.

Dóglio, a barrell, a tub, a bruing-fat. Also a iarre or earthen oyle-pot.

Doglióso, dolorous, sorrowfull, grieuous.

Dogliúzza, any small griefe or dolour.

Dógma, a decree or determination, a position in learning or opinion. Also a measure of a handfull or foure inches.

Dogmatista, a dogmatist, a decreer.

Dogmatizzáre, to dogmatize.

D'ognihóra, at all houres or times.

D'ogniintórno, in euery place about.

D'ogni párte, on all parts or sides.

Dógole, le mániche vóllero essere dógole e pói fúrono brachéste.

Dóh, as Deh.

Dohána, as Dogána.

Dohaniére, as Doganiére.

Dóla, a carpenters plane.

Dolabella, a little plainer. Also a little hatchet.

Dolábro, a kind of mattocke or pickaxe to breake clods of earth.

Doláre, to plane timber, to polish or smooth.

Dolánza, as Dólo.

Dolatióne, any kind of smoothing or plaining.

Dolatóio, a carpenters or ioiners bench to worke or plane vpon.

Dolatóre, a planer of bords or timber.

Dólce, sweet, soot, delicious, toothsome, pleasant in taste or hearing. Also pliable, gentle, tractable, milde, easie, yeelding, flexible.

Dolcemelle, a musicall instrument called a Dulcimell or Dulcimer. Also hony sweet. Also vsed for a mans pillicocke.

Dolcétto, somewhat sweet or pleasant.

Dolcézza, sweetnesse, deliciousnesse.

Dolciáre, to sweeten. Also to appease.

Dolciáta, a kind of sweet sauce.

Dolcíbile, that may be sweetned.

Dolcibuóno, as Dolcemelle.

Dolcígno, sweetish, somewhat sweet.

Dolcíme, a kinde of disease in a horse.

Dolcíno, a womans loue or sweet hart.

Dolcióso, full of sweetnesse.

Dolcióre, sweetnesse, pleasantnesse.

Dolcíre, císco, cíto, as Dolciáre.

Dolcitúdinc, sweetnesse, toothsomnesse.

Dolciúra, as Dolcitúdine.

Dolente, sorrowfull, wailing. Also paining, aking or smarting. Also silly, wretched, wailefull. Vsed also for naught, bad, lewde or wicked.

Dolendo, a case to be lamented. 



Dolenza, as Dolóre.

Dolére, dólgo, dólsi, dolúto, to ake, to smart, to paine, to grieue. Also to waile and be sorrowfull.

Dolfinio, the hearbe or flower Larkesheele, Larkes-spurre, Larkes-claw, or Monkes-hood.

Dólgo, I ake, I grieue, I paine, I smart.

Dolíco, a measure of twelue stadij or furlongs, or 1500. paces, or a mile and a halfe.

Dolicói, feasols or kidnie-beanes.

Dólio, as Dóglio.

Dólo, deceit, fraude, guile, treatchery.

Doloráre, to grieue, to addolorate.

Dolóre, griefe, paine, ache, smart, dolour, anguish, sorrow, teene, vexation.

Dolorífero, paine or dolour-bringing.

Doloróso, dolorous, grieuous, smartfull, sorrowfull, painefull.

Dolosaménte, guilefully, fraudulently.

Dolóso, guilefull, fraudulent, deceitfull.

Dólto, as Dolúto.

D'óltra, from beyond.

Dolúbri, vsed for temples.

Dolúto, Looke Dolére, pained.

Dolzalína, the hearbe Galingale.

Dolzaína, as Dolcemelle.

Dolzóre, Dolcézza, sweetnesse.

Dóma, tamed, quelled, submitted.

Domábile, that may be tamed.

Dománda, a demand, a question, a request.

Domandagióne, a demanding, a questioning.

Domandánte, demanding. Also a demander. Also a challenger. Also a plaintife.

Domandáre, to demand, to aske, to request. Also to name, to call or hight.

Domandatóre, a demander, a requester.

Domándo, as Dománda.

Domán, Dománe, to morrow.

Domán da mattína, to morrow morning.

Domán da nótte, to morrow at night.

Dománi, to morrow.

Dománi in ótto, to morrow seuennight.

Dománi in quíndeci, to morrow fortnight.

Domán l'áltro, to morrow next.

Domáre, to tame, to quell, to daunte.

Domaschíno, damaske worke.

Domásco, the stuffe called Damaske.

Domattína, to morrow morning.

Domatóre, a tamer, a daunter, a queller.

Domatriáre, as Dogmatizzáre.

Domatúra, a taming, a danting, a quelling.

Domenedío, our Lord God. 

Doménica, Sunday, the Lords day.

Doménica d'ulíuo, Palme-sunday.

Domenicále, dominicall, chiefe.

Domenticánza, forgetfulnesse.

Domenticare, to forget.

Domentichéuole, forgetfull.

Doméntico, forgotten, out of minde.

Domentre, whilest, meane while.

Domentrechè, whilest that.

Domesticábile, that may be tamed or daunted, familiar, homely, to be reclaimed.

Domesticánza, familiarity, tamenes, acquaintance, conuersation.

Domesticáre, to tame, to reclaime, to make familiar, milde or gentle.

Domestichéuole, as Domesticábile.

Domestichézza, as Domesticánza.

Domestico, tame, familiar, domestike, household, gentle, homely, milde, conuersant, acquainted, tractable.

Dometa, an old word for a shitten fellow or goodman-turd, for Méta is an heap of turdes.

Doméuole, that may be tamed or danted.

Domiciliáre, to enhabite in a house.

Domicílio, an habitation, a dwelling place.

Domíla, the number of two thousand.

Dominánza, domination, Lordship.

Domináre, to rule, to dominate, to sway.

Dominatióne, domination, rule, sway.

Dominatóre, a ruler, a gouernour, a Lord.

Dómine, Sir, Lord. Also an interiection of admiration, as we say, good Lord, or Gods.

Dómine dominántio, a Lord that doth all, a dominus factotum.

Dominfállo?, good lord, is not this strange? why what a good yeere?

Dómini, anno dómini, the yeere of our Lord God.

Domínica, the Lords day, sunday.

Dominicále, dominicall, chiefe.

Dominicánti fráti, Friers of Saint Dominikes order.

Dominicário, a keeper of Sundaies.

Domínio, dominion, rule, Lordship.

Dóminsè?, what a gods name if? what if?

Domisella, a kind of water-snake.

Domità, tamednesse, submission.

Domitáre, as Domáre, to tame.

Domitatóre, a tamer, a queller.

Dómito, tamed, daunted, quelled.

Dómmi, I giue my selfe.

Dómo, tamed, daunted, humbled, quelled.

Dómo, as Duómo, a chiefe Church.

Dómo petri, vsed in mockery for a stone-house or prison.

Dón, a Don, a Sir, a Lord, a word abbridged of Dónno, it was a title wont to be giuen to country priests or Munkes, but now vnto great Princes.

Donáce, a kinde of water-cane or fenreed. Also a kind of litle shell-fish.

Donadello, a croud or kit or little fidle. Also a darling, a dilling, a wanton.

Donagióne, as Donatióne.

Donáiri, Lasciámo dà párte quésti donáiri, chè cì è di nuóvo.

Donaménti, gifts, giuings, presents.

Donáre, to giue freely, to present.

Donática, looke Coróna donática.

Donatióne, a gift, a donation, a present.

Donatiuaménte, by way of gift.

Donatíuo, a gift, a deed of gift.

Donatóre, a giuer.

Donatório, he to whom a gift is giuen,

Dónde, whence, from whence. Also whereupon, or whereby.

Dónde chè, whereby, whereupon.

Dóndola, a childes baby. Also a conceit or fancy. Also a dandling. Also a kinde of play with a tossing-ball.

Dondoláre, to dandle or play the baby.

Dondeleggiáre, as Dondoláre.

Dóndolo, a shallow-pate, a silly gull.

Donmeta, as Dometa.

Dónna, a woman in generall, and in particular a Lady, a mistris, a wife, a dame. Also a queene at chesse.

Dónna beatríce, Dame Bettrice, but vsed in mockery for an idle houswife.

Donnáccia, a filthy foule woman.

Dónna chè fà le fúsa stórte, a woman that spins crooked spindles, that is, one that maketh her husband cuckold.

Dónna chè mánda il maríto in Cornouáglia sénza bárca, a woman that sendeth her husband into the land of Cornewale without a boat, that is cuckoldeth him.

Dónna chè si láscia scuóter il pelliccióne, a woman that wil haue her furred garment well shaken, that is, suffers her petticote to be lifted vp before.

Dónna cotále, good wife such a one, or as we say what you call her.

Dónna da béne, a good or honest woman.

Dónna da cámpi, a field or hedge whore.

Dónna da mólti, a woman of many.

Dónna da mólto, a woman of much worth.

Dónna da partíto, a woman that may be had for money, a mercenary woman.

Dónna da póco, a woman of small worth.

Dónna nouella, a new married wife. 



Dónna Zúcca al vento, a light-headed, idle-brained, or fond-conceited woman.

Donnáio, a wencher, one giuen to women.

Donnaiuólo, a follower of women.

Donnáre, to goe a wenching, to wench it.

Donnaría, womanishnesse, womanhood.

Dónne, women Also Nunnes or sisters. Also Ladies, mistrisses. Also mens beloued mistrisses or sweet-harts. Vsed also for Dómine.

Dónne, I giue thereof, Io ne dò.

Donneáre, to squire, to vsher, to man, to marshall or direct women. Also to court, to waite, to attend or follow women. Also to play the wanton woman. Also to rule, to sway as a Don.

Donneggiáre, as Donneáre.

Donnésco, womanish, effeminate.

Donnéto, a society, a crew, or beuy of women.

Donnescaménte, in womanly manner.

Donnétta, a little woman.

Donnicella, a little pretty woman.

Donnicciuóla, a little silly woman.

Donnicída, a woman murtherer.

Donnicídio, a womans murther.

Donnífero, woman-bearing or bringing.

Donnína, a little pretty fine woman.

Donníssima, most or wholy women.

Dónno, a Don, a Sir, a Lord, a commander, as it were Dominus.

Dónnola, a Weazell.

Donnolíno, a yongue or little Weazell.

Dóno, a gift, a present, a deede of gift.

Dónola, a Weazell.

Donzella, a damzell, a maiden, a virgine, a waiting woman. Also a fish called in Latine Alphestus.

Donzelláre, as Donneáre.

Donzellésco, maiden or batcheler like.

Donzellíssima, a most pure virgin.

Donzello, a damosell, a batcheler. Also a page, a squire, a custrell, a waiter, a seruing man. Also a clarke, an apprentise or serieant at the law.

Dópo, after, since. Also behind.

Dópo alquánto, after a while.

Dópo al sónno, after sleepe.

Dópochè, after that, since that.

Dópo céna, after supper.

Dópo descináre, after dinner or noone.

Dopói, after, since. Also behind.

Dopói chè, after that, since that.

Dópo lóng' andáre, after long time.

Dópo nóna, after or since noone.

Dópo non mólto, not long or much after.

Dópo l'untúme, after meat or feeding. 

Dópo pásto, after meat or feeding. Also after dishes as fruit or banketing dishes.

Dópo pránzo, after dinner or noone.

Dópo un non núlla, after a trice.

Dóppia, a double, a doubling, a foulding. Also the coppy or transcript of any writing. Also the lyning of any garment. Also a foile set vnder stones. Also counterfeit precious stones. Also a double double ducket of gold.

Doppiaménto, a doubling or foulding.

Doppiáre, to double, to couple, to yoake. Also to coppy any writing. Also to line any garment.

Doppiatúra, a doubling. Also a lining.

Doppiézza, doublenesse, a doubling.

Doppiére, as Doppióne.

Dóppio, as Dóppia. Also false, twofold, and ambiguous. Also a tolling for the dead.

Doppióne, a great torch of waxe, which we call a standard or a quarrier. Also a double silke cod. Also a doubling false companion.

Dóppio più, double againe, as much more.

Dóppo, as Dópo.

Dóra, Doróne, a span from the thumb to the litle fingers end. Also a free gift, because a gift is giuen with the hand out.

Doráre, to gild or couer with gold.

Doraríe, any gildings or gold-workes.

Doratóre, a gilder.

Dorcáde, a wild goate, or Roe-bucke.

Dorcheo, the name of a Dog, as one would say, kill-bucks hunt-doe. Also quick-sighted or spie all.

Dorè, a kind of golden colour now much vsed in Spaine.

Dórfo, the tide or course of the water.

Dóri, the hearbe Orchanet or Alkanet.

Doriáltide, a stone found in a Cockes head, others say in another beasts head.

Dórica, one of the foure Greeke toungues that were commonly spoken in Greece. Also a kind of graue solemne musicke. Also a kinde of Architecture called Dorike-worke.

Doricnióne, as Dorienio.

Dórico, a solemne or graue Musitian.

Dorienio, Dogs-grasse or deadly-dwale.

Dorienióne, as Dorienio.

Dórito, one that plaies graue musicke.

Doripetróne, the hearbe Lions-paw.

Dormacchiáre, to slumber, to slug.

Dormacchióne, a slumbrer, a sluggard

Dermedário, as Dromedário.

Dormente, sleeping, dormant, couchant.

Dormentóro, as Dormitório.

Dormctório, as Dormitório.

Dórmia, a potion to prouoke sleepe.

Dormiente, as Dormente.

Dormicchióne, a slumbrer, a sluggard.

Dormigliáre, to slumber, to slug.

Dormiglióne, a slumbrer, a sluggard.

Dormióso, drouzie, slumbring, sleepie.

Dormíre, dórmo, dormíto, to sleepe. Also to lye carnally with. Also to dye.

Dormíre della brúna, the first sleeping of silke wormes.

Dormíre della biánca, the second sleeping of silke wormes.

Dormíre dellagrássa, the third and last sleeping of silke wormes.

Dormíre sónno, to sleepe a good and full sleepe.

Dormitáre, to slumber, to sleepe.

Dormitatióne, a slumbring, a sleeping.

Dormitóre, a sleeper, a slumbrer.

Dormitório, a dortor or sleeping chamber.

Dormitúra, a sleeping, a slumbring.

D'óro, of gold, golden.

Doróne, as Dóra.

Dorónico, the weede pisse in bed or Craie fish, very wholesome for the stomacke.

Dorrà, he shall grieue or smart.

Dorrái, thou shalt grieue or smart.

Dorránno, they shall grieue or smart.

Dorrebbe, hee or it should or would grieue.

Dorrei, I should or would grieue.

Dorrémo, we shall grieue or smart.

Dorréte, you shall grieue or smart.

Dorrò, I shall grieue or smart.

Dórso, a mans backe. Also the backe or ridge of any thing.

Dorupáre, as Dirupáre.

Dóso, the quantitie of a medicine that without danger may be giuen or taken, a Dose.

Doscéna, Dósa, as Dóso.

Dósso, the backe of a man or any other creature. Also the backe or ridge of any thing, the backe of a knife. Also a kind of home-spunne course sheepes-russet cloth. Also a kind of beast in cold countries bearing a rich furre.

D'ósso, of bone, made of bones.

Dotále, of or belonging to a dowrie or womans ioynture.

Dotáre, to endow, to giue in dowrie.

Dotáto, endowed, endued, giuen in dowrie.

Dotatióne, a dotation, an endowing.

Dóte, Dóta, an endowment, a dowrie, a iointure giuen at a mariage. Also a gift.

Dóti, endowments, gifts.

Dótta, doubt, feare, mistrust, suspicion. Also euen now, or at this time.

Dótta, learned.

Dottánza, doubting, suspicion, feare.

Dottáre, to doubt, to feare, to mistrust.

Dótti, I giue thee. Also learned.

Dótto, learned, wise, clarke-like.

D'ótto, of eight, consisting of eight. 



Dottorággine, doctorship.

Dottoráre, to take the degree of Doctors.

Dottorático, a doctorship.

Dottoráto, doctored. Also a doctorship.

Dottoratúra, a doctorship.

Dottóre, a Doctor, a learned man.

Dottoreggiáre, to act or play the Doctor.

Dottorello, a silly clarke, an informer, a pettiefogger, a promooter, a Sir Iohn lacke Latine.

Dottorésmo, a doctorship.

Dottór sottíle, a slie, subtle, craftie knaue.

Dottorúzzo, a sillie or dunzicall Doctor.

Dottóso, doubtfull, mistrustfull.

Dottrína, doctrine, learning, schollership.

Dottrinábile, disciplinable, to be taught.

Dottrinále, a booke containing doctrine.

Dottrináre, to endoctrine, to instruct.

Dóua, as Dóga.

Douána, as Dogána.

Douaniére, as Doganiére.

Dóue, where, whether, whereas. Also when or if. Also in liew or stead.

Dóue chè, where as that, whether that. Also besides that. Also wheresoeuer.

Dóue che sía, where-euer it be.

Dóue si sía, wheresoeuer it be.

Dóue si vóglia, wheresoeuer it will.

Douére, as Deuére.

Douéro, earnest, good sooth.

Doueróso, full of dutie and sinceritie.

Douináre, to guesse, to deuine.

Douinatóio, a reele or rise to wind silke.

Douinatóre, a guesser, a deuiner.

Douítia, store, plenty, riches.

Douitiáre, to make plenteous or rich.

Douitióso, rich, plenteous, abundant.

Dóuni, I giue you.

Douúnque, in whatsoeuer place.

Douutaménte, duely, rightly.

Douuto, owed, indebted.

Douúto, due, right, equitie, a dutie.

Dozzéna, a dozen or twelue. Also a fellowship or bording together in some house, as one would say in commons or at liuerie.

Dozzenále, common, vulgar, not rare, that may be bought by dozens. Also one that bordes with others, and liues as it were at liuerie.

Dozzenalménte, good cheape, by dozens.

Dozzenánte, a commoner or border with others, one that stands at liuerie.

Dozzenáre, to make vp in dozens or twelues. Also to bord or be in commons with others, to stand at liuerie.

Dozzína, as Dozzéna.

Dozzinále, as Dozzenále.

Dozzinánte, as Dozzenánte.

Dozzináre, as Dozzenáre.

Dozzíno, a kind of small coine.

Drába, an hearbe with a tuft like Elder.

Dracónio, as Draconíte.

Draconíte, a stone taken out of a Dragons head, good against poison.

Dracopópo, a kind of venemous serpent.

Dragánte, a kind of gum that burneth.

Dragantea, as Dragontea.

Draghigázzo, the name of a Deuil vsed by Dante, as much to say, Infection of sinne, or a venemous Dragon.

Drágo, as Dragóne.

Dragománo, an interpreter or trucheman.

Dragóna, barren, fruitlesse, sterill.

Dragoncella, as Dragontea.

Dragoncelli, litle Dragons. Also agnels or kernels growing in the throat.

Dragónculo, a fish called the Sea-dragon Also as Dragontea.

Dragóne, a great Dragon or Sea-dragon. Also a certaine starre in heauen.

Dragóni, olde, crooked or decaying branches of a vine.

Dragontea, Taragon, Dragon wort, or Dragon serpentine.

Dragóntio, as Dragontea. Also a kind of excellent corne or graine in Greece.

Drámma, a Dram-waight. Also a Greeke coine worth seuen pence sterling. Also a florin of Florence worth ten of their pounds.

Drammático poema, a poeme where the auctor speakes not himselfe, but makes others to speake. Also a poeme that shutteth vp many trouble some accidents with a fortunate conclusion.

Drappaménti, all manner of clothes.

Drappelláre, to waue, to shake or play with flags, banners or streamers. Also to flocke together in companies or bands as soldiers vnto their ensignes or colours.

Drappello, a little cloth, a little sheet. Also an ensigne or captaines banner. Also a band or company of men, a beuy of women, a crew of good fellowes.

Drappellóni, great streamers or flags.

Drappería, Drapery, or street where cloth is made or sould.

Drappétto, a little or narow cloth.

Dráppi, all manner of clothes. Also vestments, apparell or attires.

Drappiere, a draper, a clothier.

Dráppo, any kind of cloth.

Dráppo a dóro, cloth of gold or tissue.

Dráppo álto, brode cloth.

Dráppo básso, narow cloth as kersie.

Dráppo di lána, woollen cloth.

Dráppo di líno, linnen cloth.

Drappo di séta, all maner of wouen silkes.

Dráppo d'óro, cloth of gold or tissue.

Drénto, in, or within.

Drepaníno, a sea swallow.

Drésso, a thrush or field fare.

Driáca, a kind of bird that hath no feet. 

Dríadi, wood nimphes or Driades.

Driéto, behind, after.

Drieto púnto, as Dietro púnto.

Driíno, a venemous worme or serpent.

Drilóne, a kind of wild Flowre de luce.

Drincáre, to drinke, to quaffe, to tiple.

Drincáta, a drinking, a quaffing, a tipling.

Drincatóre, a quaffer, a drinker.

Driníre, nísco, níto, to cry as a weazell.

Drío,, as Dietro, behind, or after.

Driophóno, Oke-ferne.

Drioptero, Oke-ferne.

Driosciphéro, Misseltoe growing vpon Okes.

Driottéri, as Driosciphéro.

Drípide, as Drúppe.

Drítta, the right hand. Also the vpright beame of any frame, tent, crane or staires.

Drítta, as Drítto.

Drittaménte, directly, forthright, duely.

Drítti, rights. Also right handed blowes.

Drítto, right, vpright, streight, iust, due. Also a right handed blow or man standing.

Drittoráre, to right, or make straight.

Drittúra, iustnesse, vprightnesse, straightnesse.

Drizzacríni, a bodkin to dresse haires.

Drizzáre, to direct, to erect, to straighten, to raise, to reare, to set or stand vpright.

Drizzáta, a rearing, a raising, a directing.

Drizzatóre, a rearer, a directer. Also as Calamístro. Also a glouers sticke to stretch out gloues with. Also a shoemakers piece of wood to stretch a boot or shoe with or knocke his worke vpon.

Dromedário, a very swift running beast some what like a camell, called a Dromedary.

Dromóne, a fish called the Currier or lacquey of the sea. Also a place to run horses in.

Dropáci, medicines to take away haire or to make one bald.

Drúdo, a wanton louer, a secret letcher, he that lieth with anothers woman.

Drúidi, certaine prophets or learned priests of great renoume in France in the times of ignorance.

Drúpe, or Drúppe, knurs, knobs, snags, or bunches in trees.

Drúppe olíue, hard, greene or vnripe oliues.

Dù, where. Also whence. Also a kind of serpent.

Dúa, the number two of the feminine.

Duággio, as Doággio.

Duále, of or consisting of two.

Duána, as Dogána.

Duanéro, as Doganiére.

Duáre, to couple, to paire, to two fold. 



Duássi, two aces at dice.

Dubbiánza, doubtfulnesse, doubt.

Dubbiáre, to doubt, to suspect.

Dubbietà, doubt, doubtfulnesse.

Dubbiéuole, doubtfull, vncertaine.

Dubbiézza, doubtfulnesse, doubt.

Dúbbio, doubt, vncertainty. Also as Dubù.

Dubbiosaménte, doubtfully, vncertainlie.

Dubbiosità, doubtfulnesse, vncertainty.

Dubbióso, doubtfull, vncertaine.

Dubitánte, doubting, vncertaine.

Dubitánza, doubtfulnesse, vncertainty.

Dubitáre, to doubt, to be vncertaine.

Dubitatióne, doubtfulnesse, vncertainty.

Dubitatiuaménte, doubtfully.

Dubitatíuo, doubtfull, to be doubtfull.

Dubitéuole, doubtfull, vncertaine.

Dubitóso, doubtfull, vncertaine.

Dubù, a monstrous beast in Affrica, like a woolfe, with feet like a man.

Dúca, a Duke, a Chieftaine, a leader.

Ducatello, a little or light ducket.

Ducáto, a Dukedome, a dutchy. Also a Ducket.

Ducáti, duckets, crownes. Also Dukedomes.

Dúce, a chiefe leader, a generall, a captaine.

Ducea, a Dutchy, a Dukedome.

Ducento, two hundred.

Dúcere, dúco, dússi, dútto, to lead, to conduct.

Duchea, a Dukedome, a Dutchy.

Ducheggiáre, to act or play the Duke.

Duchéssa, a Dutchesse or Dukes wife.

Ducheuále, Duke like, Duke worthy.

Dúco, a night owle.

Dúe, Dúi, Dúo, Dúa,, the number two, Vsed also for Dóue, where.

Dúe cotánti, twice so many.

Duellánte, as Duellísta.

Duelláre, to fight single one to one.

Duellísta, a fighter or combatant singly one to one. Also a man skilfull in combats or in the lawes of them.

Duello, a single combate or fight betweene two.

Duerno, of the number of two.

Dúe tánti, twice so much or many.

Dúe uespri, towards night, in the euening.

Dugencinquánta, two hundreth & fifty.

Dugencinquantesimo, the two hundreth and fiftie.

Dugentesimo, the two hundreth.

Dúghi, night Owles. Also crownes or pelfe in the roguish language.

Dúi, the number of two. Also tuos.

Duílij, two principall officers of the common people in Rome.

Duíni, two deuces at dice.

Duiuía, a way double or going two waies. 

Dúlia, the seruice of a bondman or slaue or adoration and seruice due to inferiour superiours.

Dulimáno, a head attire among the Mores like a round turbant.

Dúmi, brambles, briers, brakes, bushes, firzes, shrubs, thornes.

Dumíla, two thousand.

Dumóso, thornie, shrubbie, full of brambles, briers, brakes or bushes.

Dúne, downes or bleake plaines.

D'ún' in áltro, from one to another.

D'ún' in úno, from one to one.

Dunmentre, whilst, whilst that.

Dúnque, then, an Aduerbe of concluding.

Dú, o, the number two.

Duo cotánti, twice so many.

Duódeci, the number twelue.

Duodecimo, the twelfth in order.

Duodenário, of or belonging to twelue yeares.

Duodéno, the gut fastened next to the nether mouth of the ventricle, called the maw or stomacke gut.

Duodicésimo, the twelfth in order.

Duóle, it grieueth, paineth or smarteth.

Duólo, griefe, sorrow, paine, affliction.

Duómo, a house. Also a chiefe Church, or Cathedrall Church in a citie.

Duplicánza, a doubling, or two-folding.

Duplicáre, to double or twofold.

Duplicáte con quadrétti, companie in armorie.

Dúplice, double, twofold.

Duplicità, doublenesse, dissembling.

Dúplo, double, twofold, duple.

Dúra, as Cornea, as comming from Dura mater. Also the hard ground. Also long stay or lingring. Also sufferance or durance.

Durábile, durable, lasting.

Dúrabilità, lastingnesse, durabilitie.

Duracíno, lasting, during, of continuance. Also such fruits as last long, as our apples deusans and our peares wardens.

Durafórte, strong-endure, lasting-strong, the name of a horse. Also the stuffe Perpetuana.

Dúra máter, the skull or braine pan.

Duraménte, hardly, with difficultie.

Duránte, during, lasting, continuing.

Durânte uíta, during life.

Duránza, lastingnesse, durance, sufferance.

Duráre, to last, to endure, to continue. Also to harden, to obdurate. Also to suffer, or to abide.

Durár fatíca, to endure labour or paines.

Duráta, a during, a lasting, a lastingnesse, a durance.

Duratióne, a during. Also a hardning.

Duratíuo, lasting, like to endure.

Durelle, a kind of hard choke-peares. 

Duréngo, an oxe-pizell or salt eeles skin vsed in gallies to beate slaues with.

Duréuole, lasting, during, durable.

Dureuolézza, lastingnesse, durance.

Durézza, hardnesse, ruggednesse.

Durióne, a fruit in Malaca, of that excellency that it exceedeth all other fruites whatsoeuer in sweetnesse of taste, fashioned like a Cucumber, but somewhat harder, from out whose rynde commeth a kinde of silkie downe like wooll, whose meat is inclosed in litle cels as that of Pomegranats, some are of opinion that this was the Apple that Eue tempted Adam to disobedience with, it is so delectable in taste, the leaues of it are so great that one will couer a man.

Dúro, hard, tough, stony. Also surly, cruell, marble-minded, inexorable.

Dúro di bócca, a horse with a hard mouth, or hard in the curbe-place.

Dusaritíno, the sixt kinde of wilde Mirrhe.

Dusolíno, a kind of colour of a horse.

Duttíle, battable, pliable, flexible, gentle, that may be wrought by hand, or that will abide the hammer.

Duttóre, a leader, a conducter.

Duuía, a way going two waies.

Duumuirále, pertaining to Duumuíri.

Duumuiráto, the office of two in equall authority.

Duumvíri, two chiefe officers in Rome ouer prisons as the Sherifes of London bee. 


E.
E, as the coniunction Et, and, moreouer, besides. Also both or aswell, and euer vsed before words that begin with a consonant.

E', as Egli, hee, or it. Also they. Also and.

E', he is, she is, it is.

E'bisógno, it is needfull.

E'd'huópo, it is need or necessary.

E'fórza, of force, perforce, of necessity.

E'mestieri, it is needfull or conuenient.

E'necess ário, it is necessary.

Eále, a beast in India as big as a Riuer-horse with great hornes but loose in his head and tailed like an Elephant.

E'bano, the blacke wood Ebany or Ebene.

E'bbe, he or she or it had.

Ebbrézza, drunkennesse, tipsinesse.

E'bbro, drunken, tipsie.

Ebdomadário, of seuen times seauen. 



E'beno, as E'bano.

E'bio, a kind of shrub or tree.

Ebraísmo, an Hebrewisme.

E'briacáre, to be or make drunken

E'briachézza, drunkennesse, tipsinesse.

E'briacáccio, a filthy drunkard.

E'briáco, drunken, tipsie.

E'briáre, to be or make drunke.

E'brietà, drunkennesse, tipsinesse.

E''brio, drunken, tipsie.

E''bro, drunken, tipsie.

E'brotóno, the hearbe Soothernwood.

E'bulo, Dwarf elder, Wall or Danewort.

Ebúrneo, of Iuorie, or like Iuorie.

Ecatómbo, a sacrifice vsed by the Grecians of a hundred oxen or of the worth of them.

Eccecatióne, blindnesse. Also ignorance.

Eccedente, exceeding, excelling.

Eccedenza, an exceeding or surpassing.

Eccedere, cedo, cessi, cesso, to exceed, to excell, to surpasse, to outgoe.

Eccedéuole, that may be exceeded.

Eccellente, excellent, notable.

Eccellenza, excellencie, excellence.

Eccellere, cello, celsi, celso, to excell, to surmount, to surpasse, to raise high.

E'ccelsità, as Eccelsitúdine.

E'ccelsitúdine, excelsitude, highnesse.

E'ccelso, excellent, high, aduanced aloft.

E''ccene?, is there any, some or of it.

E''ccene, there is some, there is of it.

Eccentrici, circles enclosing one another, yet not hauing one common centre.

Eccentricità, the effect of any circles that enclose one another.

Eccessíuo, excessiue, immoderate.

Eccesso, excesse, superfluitie, immoderatenesse. Also a surfet, a fault, an excesse.

Eccettábile, that may be excepted.

Eccettáre, to except, to saue out.

Eccettióne, an exception, an exempting.

Eccetto, except, sauing, excepted.

Eccetto chè, except or sauing that.

Eccettuáre, to except, to reserue.

Eccettuatióne, an exception.

Eccheità, a certaine proprietie or hidden vertue that makes a difference betweene Angels. It is also singularitie or indiuidualitie.

E'cchio, as E'ccio.

E''cci, for Ciè, there is, also, is to vs.

Eccidiáre, to burne, to ruine, to consume, to spoile, to destroy, to slaughter.

Eccídio, burning, spoile, destruction, ruine, slaughter, hauocke.

Eccidióso, full of destruction with fire and sword.

E'ccio, vipers-hearbe or vipers buglosse, some take it for a kind of tree.

Eccitáre, to encite, to prouoke, to eg-on.

Eccitatióne, enciting, prouocation. 

Eccitatíuo, that prouoketh or enciteth.

Eccitatóre, an enciter, a prouoker.

E''cco, behold, loe heere, at hand, a note of demonstration, of wonder, or of feare.

E''ccoci, behold vs, heere we are.

E'cco chè, loe or behold that.

E''ccomi, behold me, here I am.

E''ccone, behold some, heere is of it.

E'ccotene, loe heere is some for thee.

Eccrésia, a Church, a Temple.

Eccresiástico, Ecclesiasticall.

Echè, and what? and that.

Echeità introdótta da' Scotisti, as Eccheità.

Echenea, as Echíno.

Echíno, a fish that is said to haue the power to stay a ship, called a Suck-stone, a Sealamprey or a Stay-ship, some take it for the Sea-urchin.

Echinometro, a great Sea-urchin.

Echinophóre, a kind of wilke or winkle.

E'chio, vipers-grasse.

Echióne, a medicine for sore eyes made of vipers-grasse.

Echíte, a stone named a Viper. Also a kind of strange bird.

Echiténa, a kind of Clemátide.

E'cho, an echoe, that is an answering or resounding of the voice backe againe.

Echoánte, echoyng or backe resounding.

Echoáre, to echo or resound backe.

Eclesiástico, a man of the Church, a Clergieman, Ecclesiasticall.

Eclígmata, a kind of electuarie.

Eclíptico, as Eclíttico.

Eclissáre, to eclips, to obscure, to ouercast. Also to wane or fall.

Eclíssi, an eclips, an obscuring. Also a waning or falling.

Eclissi bile, that may be eclipsed.

Eclíttica linea, the eclipticke line, that is the circumference of the circle wherein the Sunne finisheth his yearely motion, or a line in the midle of the Zodiake wherein the Sunne keepeth euer his course, by it and therein is measured the length of heauen.

Eclíttico, eclipticke, or pertaining to the eclips.

E'cloga, as E'gloga.

Eclogário, a short breuiarie gathered out of a long worke.

Ecmeli, as Emmeli.

Ecueide, a kind of fish, as Echíno.

Ecnéphia, a kind of prodigious storme comming in Sommer with furious flashings, the firmament seeming to open and burne, as hapned when the Earle of Essex parted from London to goe for Ireland.

E'co, as E'cho.

Ecoánte, as Echoánte.

Ecoáre, as Echoáre.

Ecoláda, a kinde of wine that causeth abhortiuenesse in women.

Economía, the gouernment of a priuate house or familie, Economie.

Económico, Economicall, pertaining to the gouernment of a priuate house.

Ecónomo, a house-keeper, a master or steward of a house.

Econuerso, contrariwise, contrarie to what it was.

Eculeo, a sharpe stake wherein the offender being put, is so tormented and racked, that his bowels are almost crushed out.

Ecunemico, vniuersall, generall, pertaining to the whole world.

E'd, as Et, as E, and moreouer, besides. Also both, vsed before Vowels.

Edáce, eating or greedily deuouring. Also an eater or greedy deuourer.

Edacità, insatiable eating or deuouring vp.

E' dánno, it is a losse, it is pitty.

Edderente, as Adherente.

Edderenza, as Adherenza.

E'dera, the hearbe Iuie.

Edéti, a chiefe Magistrate or President of the Councell among the Grecians.

Edícola, a litle house, a cottage, a shroud, a shelter. Also a litle chappell.

Edificáre, to edifie, to build, to frame.

Edificatióne, edification, edifying.

Edificatóre, an edifier, a builder, a framer.

Edificatória árte, the arte of building.

Edifichéuole, that may be built.

Edifício, an edifice, a building, a frame.

Edíle, an officer in Rome whose charge was to ouersee the buildings of Temples, a Church-warden or Suruaier. Also an ouerseer of high waies.

Edilità, the office of an Edíle.

Edilítio, what be longs to that office.

E'di mestieri, it is needfull or expedient.

Editióne, an edition, a creating, a publishing or setting forth.

Edittáre, to edict, to enact, to decree.

Edítto, an edict, a decree, a statute.

E'dra, the hearbe Iuie.

E'drítto, it is right, it is iust.

Educáre, to instruct, to nurture, to teach, to bring vp, to foster.

Educatióne, education, nurture, bringing vp, manners, instruction.

Educáto, instructed, nurtured.

Educatóre, an instructer, a nurterer, a fosterer, a teacher.

Edúlio, food, cates, sustenance or victuals besides bread and drinke.

E'e, vsed of Dante for E', is.

E'fa, a measure of liquid things.

E'fáma, the report is.

E''ffe, the letter F. Also vsed for the middle of any thing.

E'ffábile, that may be spoken or expressed. 



E'fátta, it is downe, t' is downe.

Efèmera, flies that liue but one day called Day-flies. Also a feauer or ague during but one day. Also a fish that is borne in the morning and dieth at night.

Effemero, as Ephémero.

Effemináre, to effeminate, or be womanish.

Effeminatézza, effeminatenesse, nicenesse.

Effeminatióne, effeminacy.

Effemináto, effeminate, womanish. Also the name of a starre in heauen.

Efferità, wilde nature, moodinesse, fiercenesse, fellnesse, cruelty, madnesse.

Efferáto, fierce, moody, fell, cruell.

E'ffero, cruell, moody, raging in a fury.

Efferuere, feruo, feruéi, feruúto, to chafe, to rage, to be furious or moody.

Efferuescenza, a suddaine rage, anger, moodinesse or fury.

Effestide, or Effestite, a stone found in Corinth that as a looking-glasse will reflect any image, being put in colde water it will presently heate it, being set before the Sunne it will presently set any matter a fire that is able to receiue it.

Effettíbile, that may be effected.

Effettiuaménte, effectiuely, effectually.

Effettíuo, effectiue, effectuall.

Effetto, effect or working.

Effettuále, effectuall, effectiue.

Effettuáre, to effect, to bring to passe.

Effettuóso, effectuall, effectiue.

Efficáce, forcible, effectuall.

Efficácia, efficacy, force.

Efficacissimaménte, most effectually.

Efficcacità, efficacy, force.

Efficiente, efficient, bringing to passe.

Efficienteménte, efficiently, forcibly.

Efficienza, efficience, or power to doe.

Effigiatióne, an expressing of any thing with life.

Effigiáre, to figure, to shape, to draw, to paint, or to carue ones face.

Effígie, a figure, a shape of ones face.

Effimera, as Effemera.

Effiocáre, to be, to grow or make hoarse.

Effluente, out-flowing or gushing.

Effluenza, an out-flowing or gushing.

Effluire, ísco, íto, to gush or flow out.

Efflusióne, as Effluenza.

Effrenáto, vnbridled, as Sfrenáto.

Effúndere, fúndo, fúsi, fúso, to scatter, to poure out, to waste riotously, to shed blood, to melt or cast as mettals.

Effusióne, effusion or shedding of blood, scattering or wastefull spending.

Effúso, effused, shed, scattered, moulten.

E'fórza, of force, perforce, of necessity. 

Eftimémeri, a kind of breaking or fall of a verse.

E'fula, a kind of gardine hearbe.

Efód, a priestly garment vsed anciently among the Hebrewes ceremonies.

Efóro, was among the Lacedemonians as a Tribune among the Romans.

Egente, needy, lacking, poore.

Egesta, necessity of all things, need, pennury, beggery.

Egesto, poore, needy, beggerly.

E'gia, a kind of vine or grape.

Egiaculáre, to cast foorth.

Egiaculatióne, a casting foorth.

Egída, the female Larch-tree. Also as the latine Diphthera.

Egíde, a shield with a Medusas or Gorgons head in it mentioned in Poets.

Egilópa, a kind of bulbous plant or Onion that growes not till a yeare after it is sowen. Also a kind of wild oates. Also the hearbe Beane-trifoly. Also a disease in the eie.

Egiópsio, a kinde of very high Oke-tree.

Egip áni, a kind of people like Satyres.

Egipáno, a kind of Satyre or monster.

Egípto, darkenesse or tribulation.

Egiptíla, a kind of blackish stone.

Egítho, a little bird, but a heauy enemy to the Asse.

Egítto, darkenesse or tribulation.

Egittiáchi giórni, vnluckie, fatall, blacke or dismall daies.

Eglecópula, doue or pigeon marle.

E'gli, speaking of persons, he.

E'gli, speaking of things, it.

E'gli, both in the beginning and in the midst of a speech or sentence serueth sometimes as an Aduerbe, and that rather for a grace then necessitie, as Egli era in quésto castello una dónna uédona, or else Darátti égli il cuóre di toccárla.

Egli è, he, or it is.

E'gli douéua essere, belike he or it was.

E'gli stésso, himselfe, he himselfe.

E'gli uién détto, it is said, men say.

E'glino, they, them.

Egkiklopedía, a world or compasse of all learning, or as some construe it, things that are neither altogether vnknowen or that become doubtfull.

E'gloga, an Egloge, a title, a choise discourse, a communication. Also an election or choise. Also an abridgement or gathering out of Authors that one hath read.

Eglogáre, to write Eglogs.

Eglogário, as Eclogário.

Egocephálo, a bird called a Dogs-head.

Egocéra, a kind of Fenigreeke.

Egoletóne, an hearbe hurtfull to all cattle.

Ególio, a kinde of Kite or filthy Putocke. 

Egonichóne, the hearbe Greimile.

Egophtálmo, a precious stone named a Goates-eye.

Egraménte, sickely, crazedly.

E'grán tempo, it is a long time.

Egredere, gredo, gressi, gresso, to goe forth.

Egrediente, going out or forth.

Egregio, egregious, excellent, surpassing.

Egressióne, a going out or forth.

Egresso, an egresse or going forth.

Egresso, gone forth.

Egritúdine, sicknesse, maladie.

E'gro, sicke, crazed, ill at ease.

Egrotáre, to fall sicke, to sicken.

Egróto, sicke, ill at ease, crazed.

Eguagliánza, equaling, equalitie.

Eguagliáre, to equall, to match.

Eguagnela, a common oath among the common people, as one would say, by the Gospell.

Egualáre, to equall, to match.

Eguále, equall, euen, matched.

Egualità, equalitie, euennesse.

Egurgitáre, to gorge or cast forth.

Egurgitatióne, gorging forth.

Egúia, a kinde of course rough brimstone.

E'h, an interiection of sorrow, of entreating or reproouing, oh, alas, aye me, I pray you.

E'hi, as E'h. Also fie or fie vpon.

E'himè, aye me, alas, weladay.

Ei, as Egli.

E'huópo, it is needfull.

Eidilie, small poemes, as Eglogs.

Eiettáre, to eiect or cast out.

Eiettícia, a sowes wombe cast or slipt together with her pigges.

Eiettióne, an eiection, a casting out.

Eietto, eiected, cast out.

El, the letter L. Also as Ei. Also for Etil, and the.

Elápe, a kind of Serpent.

Elaphobósco, Oliue-phyllon or Maidens mercury, some take it for wilde Angelica or Gratia dei.

Eláphi, a kind of Cake or Wafer.

Elánde, as Alce.

Elargíre, gísco, gíto, to inlarge.

Elargitóre, an inlarger.

Elargitióne, an inlargement.

Elásso, past, ouerworne, ouertired.

Eláta, a kind of Date of Date-tree.

Eláte, a tree the wood and liquor thereof is vsed in perfumes.

Elaterio, a medicineable iuice drawne from the wilde Cucumber.

Elátia, a kinde of Leade-ore in goldmines.

Elatíno, Bucke-wheat or Binde-corne.

Elatióne, pride, scorne, or disdaine in ones countenance.

Elatíte, a kind of bloud-stone.

Eláto, scornefull in lookes, swolne 



with pride, disdainefull.

E'lbúccio, a kinde of tree or wood.

E'lcatáino. 

E''lce, a Holme-tree.

E''lcia, as E'''lce.

E'lciário, as Alzaniére.

Eleboritóne, wine of Eleboro.

Eleboro, an hearbe that purgeth melancholy or madnesse.

Eleboro biánco, Ling-wort or Neesewort.

Eleboro néro, Beare-foote, Tetter-wort, or tetter-grasse.

Elebróth, as Elembróth.

Elefánte, an Elephant. Also a fish.

Elefantáto, become strong or great as an Elephant.

Elefantéssa, a she Elephant.

Elefantía, Saint Magnus euill, or the Leapry which proceedeth of choler melancholy and fleame. Also a disease in horses called the farcine.

Elefantína, a kinde of hearbe.

Elegánte, elegant, cleane, neate, trim, fine, comely, gracious. Also eloquent.

Elegántia, elegancy, neatnesse, finenesse, comelinesse, handsomnesse, eloquence.

Eleggere, leggo, lessi, letto, to elect, to chuse, to cull.

Elegía, an elegie or mournefull verse. Also a kind of low crooked and winding fen-reede.

Elegiáco, an elegiacall or mournefull verse.

Elegiáre, to singe or make elegies in wailefull verse.

Elegíbile, that may be chosen.

Elegídio, a kind of wailefull verse.

Elego, a writer of elegies.

Elembróth, a kind of salt vsed of Alchimists.

Elelispáco, as Elelispháco.

Elelispháco, the hearbe Sauge, Sage or Mugwort.

Elementále, elementall, of or belonging to the Elements.

Elementáre, as Elementále.

Elementáto, composed of Elements.

Elementário, consisting of beginnings or grounds of any thing.

Elementi, the ground of any artes or beginnings of all things. Also Elements. Also the skies or firmament.

Elemento, the beginning of things created, an Element as water, earth, aire and fire.

Elémi, as Eleoméle.

Elemósina, as Elimósina, almes.

Elemosináre, to giue almes.

Elemosinário, an Almoner, a giuer of almes or of Gods water.

Elemosiniére, as Elemosinário.

Elénco, an argument subtilly reproouing. Also a table or index in a booke to shew places by letters. Also a pearle like a peare.

Eléno, Dogs-grasse or Deadly-dwale which is vsed to poison arrow-heads.

Eleoméle, an oyle or gum distilling from some Oliue-trees in Syria, vsed in Physike. Vsed also for cyle of Lillies.

Elepódi, as Ellepódi.

Elephantína, or Ophiúsa, an hearbe.

Elephántio, a colour vsed of Painters.

Elepónto, a kind of sea-lampry.

E'lera, the hearbe Iuie.

Elescof, called the Bishops electuary to purge choller, fleagme and winde.

Eletta, a choise, an electing, a culling.

Elettionáre, to appoint by election.

Elettionário, electiony, that may be chosen.

Elettióne, election, choise.

Elettíssimo, most most elected or chosen.

Elettíuo, electiue, to be chosen.

Elettiuaménte, by election, voluntarily.

Eletto, chosen, elected, culled out.

Eletto, an elect or chosen man.

Eleitoría, an electorship.

Elettóre, an Elector, a chuser.

Elettríde, a tree which some say drops Amber.

Elettro, Amber wherof beades are made. Also a mixture of gold and siluer, the fifth part being siluer.

Elettuário, an electuary, that is, a confection of choise drugges to be taken inward.

Eleuáre, to eleuate, to raise, to aduance, to reare, to lift vp, to heaue.

Elcuatióne, an eleuation, a raising, an aduancing a rearing, a heauing, a lifting vp, a preferment.

E'li, an Hebrew word, that is, My God or else My godhead.

Eliáco, belonging to the Sunne.

Elíce, or Helice, a starre, called Calisto or the great beare. Also a barren scarlet oke or Holme-tree. Also he sucketh or draweth forth, or he extracteth and culleth out.

Elicéto, a groue of Holme-trees.

Elícere, líco, licéi, líto, to extract, to sucke, to draw or to draine out. Also to allure or draw from.

Elício, a surname of Iupiter, that is to say allured.

Eligmáto, a lohoch to be lickt vp for the lungues, breast and stomacke.

Eligíbile, that may be elected or chosen.

Elimáre, to file, to smoothe, to polish.

Elimatióne, a filing, a polishing.

Elimósina, a word composed of E'li, that is to say God, and Mois, that is to say water, that is to say Almes or water of God to wash sinnes away.

Elimosináre, to giue almes. 

Elimosiniére, an Almoner, a giuer of almes or Gods water.

E'lio, a kind of musike or concord.

Eliocrísio, the hearbe Aurelia or goldflowre.

Eliópia, a kind of greene stone.

Eliópole, an engine of war anciently vsed to batter wals.

Elísio, a place of pleasure where Poets faine the soules of good men to dwell.

Elispháco, as Elelispháco. Also a kind of wilde lentils.

Elissáre, to boyle or seeth meat.

Elíssero, elixer or the quintessence of any extraction.

Elísso, sodden or boyled.

Elito, looke Elícere.

Elitrópia, as Helitrópia.

Elitrópio, as EssempiáreHelitrópio.

E'lla, shee, that woman.

E'lla gli mónta, he begins to be angry or to take pepper in the nose.

Ella glicála, he begins to be appeased, his anger goes away.

E'lle, they, those women.

E''lle, the letter L. Also fifty.

Elleborína, as Epipáttide.

E'lleno, they, those women.

Ellépolo, as Eliópole.

E'llera, the hearbe Iuie.

E'lli, as E'gli, he.

E'llo, he, that man. Also being added to any positiue Noune it makes it little, prety and fine, as Asinello, Pastorello, and such.

E'lmettáto, hauing an helmet or caske on.

E'lmétto, a little helmet or caske.

E''lmo, a helmet, a caske, a head piece.

Elógio, a testimony or testification.

Elói, as E'li.

Elongáre, to elonge, to distance.

Elongatióne, elonging, distance.

E'lóngo tempo, it is a long time.

Eloquente, eloquent well spoken.

Eloquenza, eloquence, grace in speech.

Elóquio, eloquent speech, eloquence.

Elópe, the fish Sturgeon, but rather another fish not knowne in our seaes.

Elopecuro, an hearbe.

E''lsa, E''lza, a hilt of sword or dagger.

E'lsáre, to hilt a sword or dagger.

E'lto, as E'rto, steepy.

Eltezza, as Ertézza, steepinesse.

Elucidáre. Lat.

Elucidatióne. Lat.

Elúro, a fish whose eyes increase and wane as the Moone doth.

Elnuiáre, to ouerflow, to deluge.

Eluuióne, an ouerflow of waters aboue their bankes, a spring-tide.

E'lzáre, to hilt sword or dagger.

E''lzo, a hilt of sword or dagger.

Emachíte, a red blood stone.

Emancipáre, to enfranchise, to make 



free, to free out of ward, to endenize.

Emancipatióne, an enfranchising or making of a bondman free.

Emaníte, a blood-stone, hauing the vertue to stanch blood.

Emaríte, as Emaníte.

Embádi, a kinde of shoes that onely Princes were wont to weare.

Embauagliáre, as Embauigliáre.

Embauigliáre, to steale, to filch, to purloine or hooke out of a window.

Embauiglióne, a she-thiefe, a cunning filcher, a craftie hooker, a pilfrer.

Emblemma, an Emblem.

Emblíci, a kind of Mirabolan plums.

Embolíno, a shrub in Asia good against poison.

Embólio, the argument or first entry into a Comedie.

Embolismále ánno, a yeare that hath a day added vnto it.

Embolísmo, the adding of a day in the yeare.

Embriacáre, to be or make drunke.

Embriachézza, drunkennesse, tipsinesse.

Embriáco, drunken, tipsie.

Embriciáre, to couer with roofe-tiles.

Embríce, gutter-tiles. Also a house tiling.

Embrióne, the wombe of a woman with childe. Also the childe in it before it haue perfect shape.

Embriorétto, a crooke or hooke vsed in extremities to draw dead childred out of womens wombes.

Embrocatióne, a fomenting of the head with liquor falling vpon it in manner of raine.

Emenda, amendment, redresse, amends.

Emendáre, to amend, to redresse, to reforme.

Emendatióne, amendment, redresse.

Emendatóre, an amender, a reformer.

Emendéuole, that may be amended.

Emergere, mergo, mersi, merso, to swim or come forth of the water. Also to powre forth.

Emergiménto, as Emersióne.

Emersióne, an emersion or comming out of the water.

Emerso, swom or come forth of the water. Also powred forth.

E'mestiéri, it is requisite, it behooueth.

Emetrén, a stone much esteemed of the Assirians, and vsed of Nigromants.

Eméttere, to emit or send forth.

E'mfasi, emphasis or expresse signification of that which is intended.

Emfático, emphaticall, significant.

Emíde, a Tortoise keeping in fresh water.

Emigránda, as Emigránia.

Emigráre, to goe or wander forth.

Emigránia, an ache or paine in halfe the head. 

Emigratióne, a going or wandring forth.

Eminente, eminent, aloft, in full view, apparent, in sight and on high.

Eminea, a kind of lasting grape.

Eminenza, eminencie, supremacie.

Emispherico, halfe spheared or round.

Emisphero, as Hemisphero.

Emissário, to be sent out. Also a spie or one that is sent out priuily as a skout. Also a poste or messenger euer at hand. Also a promooter, a busie fellow, or pick-thanke.

Emissióne, an emission, an outsending.

Emissíuo, to be sent out.

Emissório, any sending forth.

E'mmi, for Mi è, is to me, to me is.

Emméli, Ecméli, a word of arte about musicke, some take it for low silent musicke.

E'mmisi scordáto, it is out of my minde. I haue forgotten.

Emoláre, as Emuláre.

Emolatióne, as Emulatióne.

Emólia, a proportion or vnion in Musicke.

E'molo, as E'mulo.

Emoluménto, benefit, commoditie or profit gotten by labour and paines.

Emondarióne, a washing away.

Emoróide, a disease called the Hemorhoides. Also a kind of venemous Serpent.

Emoróise, a venemous Serpent.

Empásma, a composition of diuers sweete powders to take away filth and sweating, and cause itching.

Empegnáre, as Impegnáre.

Empégno, as Impégno, a pawne.

Empetra, Saxifrage, some take it for Sampeere.

Emphiséma, a swelling of the guts.

Emphísma, a swelling of the eye-lids.

Emphisóide, a violent ague causing inflammation in the mouth.

Emphitenti béni, goods or lands made better then they were receiued.

Emphrássi, obstruction or stopping of the pores.

E'mpia, wicked, impious, vngodly.

Empiála febbre, a flegmaticke ague far from the heart hot and cold at once.

Empiaménte, wickedly, impiously.

Empiastrare, to plaister, to dawbe. Also to engraffe by inoculation with a scutcheon.

Empiastratióne, in Phisicke it is the applying of any plaister or salue, and in an Orchyard it is the graffing by inoculation with a scutcheon.

Empiastracciáre, to bedawbe, to plaister.

Empiastracciaménto, a bedawbing.

Empiastricciáre, to dawbe, to plaister.

Empiástro, a plaistring, a dawbing. 

Empiegáre, as Impiegáre.

Empiére, Empiéi, empiésti, empiè, empiúto, as Empíre.

Empietà, impietie, vngodlinesse, wickednesse.

Empiézza, as Empietà.

E'mpio, wicked, vngodly, impious.

Empimáchi, such as haue impostumations in their breasts and vnseene.

Empiménto, a filling. Also an accomplishment or fulfilling.

Empíre, písco píto, to fill, to replenish.

Empireo cielo, the fierie heauen, or christalline skie.

Empírico, an Empirike, that is a practicioner in Phisicke vpon other mens receits, hauing no great skill himselfe.

Empíto, filled, full, replenished

E'mpito, furie, violence, rashnesse, force, a suddaine rage or passion, outrage.

Empitóio, a filler or a tunnell.

Empitóso, furious, violent, rash, forcible, suddaine, outragious, passionate.

Empitúra, a filling or stuffing full.

Emplástico, clammie like a plaister.

Emplettóne, a building or wall euen and orderly in front but filled vp within with rubbish and dirt.

Emporetica cárta, shop paper or marchant paper.

Empório, a Mart. Also a Staple-place for merchants, or such a place as Rialto is in Venice, or the Royal exchange in London.

Empugnáre, as Impugnáre.

Empúsa, a supposed spirit that haunteth such as be vnluckie, changing it selfe into diuers formes.

Emuláre, to enuie, to grudge at, or seeking to excell another man in any thing.

Emulatióne, emulation, or laudable enuie or grudging.

Emulatóre, as E'mulo.

Emulgentiuéne, two large veines which springing out of caua vena vnder the ventricle are caried into the raines.

Emúlgere, múlgo, múlsi, múlto, to dilate, publish, or make knowen.

E'mulo, a competitor, a coriuall, an enuiour, a concurrent, a grudger.

Emúngere, to snuffe ones nose.

Emuntióne, a snuffing or clearing of the nose.

Emuntórij, kernelly places of the bodie by which principall parts voide the superfluities, to wit, vnder the armes for the heart, vnder the eares for the braine, and the share for the liuer.

Emuntório, a snuffer. Also the snuffing place of the nose.

E'n, E'no, E'nno, as Sóno, they are, or be.

E'na, being added to any number it makes the same a Substantiue, as Decéna, halfe a score, Venténa, a skore 



Centéna, one hundred, &c.

Enái, a fine white stone which being shaken will seeme to haue something moouing in it as it were a rotten or adle egge.

Enánte, the grapes of the wilde vine called Lambrusca. Also a kind of faire flowre.

Enantíno, oyle or ointment of the flowers of wilde vine. Also a kind of counterfait wine.

Enargía, euident representing of a thing, euidence, perspicuitie.

Enarmónico, an harmonie or concord in Musicke of nine voices or nine strings.

Encárdia, a stone hauing the shape of a heart in it.

En ce, as A'nco cie, Also there is.

Enceledáto, strong giant-like, as Enceladus was.

Encegnáre, to change or shift anew.

Enchiridióne, a little portable booke, a manuell, as may bee caried in ones hand.

Encolesáre, to estrange, to alienate, to sequester.

Encolpíe, windes rising out of the Sea.

Encomenda, a liuing giuen or bequeathed in commendum or recommendation.

Encomiásto, one that praiseth another or singeth that song.

Encómio, a song of praise or commendation.

Encrasícoli, fishes called the greater spurlings.

Encúsa, the hearbe Alkanet or Orchanet.

Endecasílabo, a verse consisting of eleuen sillables.

E'ndego, blew Inde to dye blew with.

Endelechía, euer lastingnesse.

Endeumáre, as Indouináre.

E'ndica, an award, a fine or punishment of iustice and law.

Endicaiuóli, retailers, huckesters.

Endicáre, to award, to fine or punish by iustice and law.

E'ndico, blew Inde to dye withall.

Endíuia, the hearbe Endine.

Ene áte, a kind of Greeke wine.

E'necesso, it behooueth or is necessarie.

Energía, efficacie, effectuall operation.

Energuméno, lunatike, or possessed with some euill spirit.

Eneruáre, to enfeeble, to vnsinnew.

Eneruatióne, an vnsinnewing.

E'nfasi, as E'mfasi.

Enfático, as Emfático.

Enfiagióne, a swelling or puffing vp.

Enfiaménto, a swelling or puffing vp.

Enfiáre, to swell or puffe vp.

Enfiatúra, a swelling or puffing vp.

E'nfio, swollen or puffed vp.

Enghistára, a glasse as an eawer to hold wine in or powre wine out off.

Engistára, as Enghistára.

Engonási, a starre called Hercules.

Enguináglia, the groine of a mans bodie.

Enguináia, as Enguináglia.

Engúdre, a kind of litle fish.

Enhemóne, a precious salue made of a liquor comming of the Oliue tree.

Enhidríde, a kinde of whitish Serpent that liues in the water, and is euer of the male kind.

Enhídro, a stone which shaken as an adle egge, seemeth to haue water in it.

Enígma, as Enímma.

Enigmáre, as Enimmáre.

Enimma, a riddle or doubtfull speech.

Enimináre, to tell or speake riddles.

Enimmático, enigmaticall, riddle-like.

Enimmatóre, a speaker of riddles.

Ennagonále, nine angled or cornered.

E'nne, for Ne è, is thereof, or is to vs.

Enneaphigóne, as Enólia.

Enneruáre, as Eneruare.

Ennía, a notion.

E'nno, as Sóno, they are, they be.

Ennumerábile, numerable.

Ennumeráre, to number, to tell.

Ennumeratióne, a numbring.

Enóa, Horse-heale, Scab-wort or Elicampane.

E'nola, as Enóa.

E'nóme, the voice or brute is.

Enontiáre, as Annuntiáre.

Enontiatióne, as Annuntiatióne.

Enontiatóre, as Annuntiatóre.

Enórchi, a stone which being diuided sheweth the shape of a mans genitories.

Enórme, enormous, hainous, sinfull.

Enormézza, as Enormità.

Enormíssimo, most hainous.

Enormità, enormity, wickednesse, iniquity.

Enothéride, as Enothéra.

Enothera, an hearbe which bound about any beasts necke makes him loose his wonted force and fiercenesse.

Ensiforme cartilágine, the breast or heart-blade or mouth of the stomacke.

E'nsito, any yongue graffe or sprigge.

Entelechía, as Enthelechía.

E'nte, a real-being.

Entennere, vsed for Intendere.

Entemídi, an hearbe that flowreth first on the top.

Enterióra, as Interióra.

Enterióre, as Interióre.

Enterocela, a rupture or bursting when the gut falleth into the cod.

Enterocelico, one that is burst and whose guts fall into his cods.

Enthelechía, perfection, or that which mooueth it selfe. 

Entímella, portáva vn capúccio, fatto con vu entimella. 

Enthiméma, an imperfect sillogisme wanting maior or minor, an argument of two Propositions, antecedent and consequent.

Enthusiásmo, a Poeticall or propheticall fury, a rauishment of sences from aboue.

Entiméma, as Enthiméma.

E'ntità, as E'nte, a being, or effect of a being or reality.

E'ntitatíuo, that hath Entità.

Entomóne, an hearbe.

Entrámbi, both together.

Entránte, entring. Also an entrer.

Entraménto, an entring or an entrance.

Entránza, as Entráta.

Entráre, to enter or goe in.

Entrár' in cóllera, to fall into anger.

Entrár' in máre, to put forth to Sea.

Entrár' in letto, to goe to bed.

Entrár nel pecoréccio, for a man to intangle himselfe either in words or deeds, so that he cannot find out the way againe, to sticke in the briers.

Entráta, an entrance, an entry, an accesse. Also reuenues, incomes, rents.

Entratáccia, a filthy great comming in.

Entratúccia, a poore comming in.

Entráte, reuenues, incoms, commings in, rents.

Entratúra, an entring or entrance.

E'ntro, in, within.

Entromezzáre, to intermixe.

Entromezzáto, intermixed. Also a pide horse or of diuers colours.

Entroui, there in, in there.

Entusiásmo, as Enthusiásmo.

Enudáre, to strip naked. Also to expound or lay forth naked.

Enumeráre, to number, to compt.

Eói cámpi, the Easterne fields or shores, taken for the Sunne rising.

Eói lídi, as Eói cámpi.

Eólica, one of the foure Greeke tongues that were commonly spoken.

Eólio cánto, a kind of song or musicke.

Eóne, a kind of tree, the wood whereof is so hard that neither fire nor water can consume it, Poets say that Argos his ship was made of it, it resembleth the Robur or Oke.

E'pa, the bellie-panch or wombe of any creature.

Epácto, the Epact in the Almanake, an addition vnto.

Epagogía, a figure when like things or arguments are compared together.

Epanadilósi, a figure when a sentence beginneth and endeth with one word.

Epanádo, a figure when two things together are afterwards seuerally mentioned and spoken off. 



Epanáfora, a figure when diuers clauses begin with one word.

Epanalessi, a repetition after a long Parenthesis.

Eparchía, a seuerall Prouince.

Epárco, a President of a Prouince.

Epática, the hearbe Liuerwort.

Epático, of or pertaining to the liuer. Also a kind of aloes.

Epático mórbo, a disease of the liuer.

Epátto, as Epácto.

Epausési, an increase or augmentation.

E'peccáto, it is a sinne, it is pitty.

Epenthesi, the putting in of a letter or sillable in the midest of a word.

Ephébia, striplings age, or the age of fourteene yeeres or there abouts.

Ephebo, a stripling of the age of foureteene yeeres or there abouts.

Ephedra, the hearbe Horse-taile or Horsemaine.

Ephémera febbre, an ague of one day.

Ephelie, a roughnesse or scorching in the face or skinne.

Ephemere, winde-flies or day-flies, that liue but one day.

Ephemeri, day bookes or registers of single or seuerall daies.

Ephemeridi, as Ephemeri.

Ephemero, any beast, fish, or flie that liues but one day. Also the hearbe Liricomfancy or May-lillies the flowre whereof drunken in wine maketh one very drunke. Also as some say a kind of very strong purge.

Ephestij, the Gods called lares or Penates, houshold gods.

Ephestio, a familiar of the same house or family.

Ephestíte, a stone that as a looking glasse reflecteth any image.

Ephiálta, a disease called the nightmare.

Ephódo, as Efódo,

Ephóro, as Efóro.

Epiále febbre, a feauer rising of colde fleagme, that is soure and like glasse, wherein at one time heat and cold is felt in euery part of the body.

Epibáde, a kind of barge or ferry-bote.

Epicáte, as Epipáttide.

Epicátto, a shrube in Asia good against poison.

Epicáuma, a foule sore in the eies.

Epicedio, a funerall song, sung before the corpes be buried.

Epicheréma, an argument made in reasoning.

Epicéno, of both kindes, male and female.

Epicíclo, a lesser circle whose centre is in the circumference of a greater, whereby the irregulare motion of some planet is salued.

Epicitharísma, the last part of the interlude, wherein after the auditors had beene wearied musicians stept foorth and plaid.

Epicóma, the difference of sores which vseth the eyes.

Epíco, which maketh or is made in heroicall, exameter or stately verses.

Epicureo, epicureall, voluptuous, giuen to all pleasures and sensuality.

Epicureggiáre, to liue an Epicurean, or voluptuous life.

Epicúro, an epicure, a gourmand, a voluptuous or sensuall liuer.

Epidemia, an vniuersall sickenesse or pestilence.

Epiderme, the outward thin skin of the body, which being of it selfe insensible doeth as it were spring out of the true and naturall skin.

Epidídime, one of the foure thin skins that couer the testicles, thicker then the rest and out most of all.

Epidíttico, demonstratiue, that pertaineth to praising and dispraising.

Edifanía, the Epiphany or Twelftid. Also an apparition or manifestation.

Epifóra, a Rhumatike watring or dropping of sore eies.

Epigamía, affinity by marriage.

Epigástrio, all the outward part of the belly that couereth the entrailes from the bulke downe to the priuy member, called also Abdomen.

Epigliótta, a cricke or wrinch in necke or backe.

Epiglósi, as Epiglótti.

Epiglótti, the couer or weasell of the throat, the flap or little tongue that closeth the amplitude of the larinx and way of the rough artery, least any meate or drinke should slip into the inner capacity thereof, and so fall into the lungs.

Epigonea, a kinde of musicall instrument or musike plaid at marriages.

Epigónio, one gotten in a second marriage.

Epigrámma, an epigram or superscription.

Epigrammizzáre, to write epigrams.

Epigrífo, one that hath a crooked nose.

Epiícia, indifferent interpretation or tempering of the rigor of the law according to reason and equity.

Epiizzáre, to mitigate the rigor of the law according to reason and equity.

Epilessico, as Epilettico.

Epilessia, the foule euill or falling sicknesse which taketh hold both of sence and minde together.

Epilettico, subiect or that hath the falling sicknesse or foule euill.

Epilogáre, to epilogue or conclude.

Epilogatióne, a concluding or shutting vp. 

Epílogo, an epilogue, a concluding, a finall end, or knitting vp of a matter.

Epimáchi, a kind of impostumation in a mans brest.

Epimedio, a Medler-tree the fruite whereof hath three stones.

Epimela, a white precious stone hauing a blackish colour ouer it.

Epimenídio, a kind of Squilla or Sea-onion.

Epimenio, a meane small gift. Also a souldiers monthes pay.

Epimíttlde, the spot, marke or skar of any sore or tetter. Also any pimple, wheale or push rising vpon the skin by night. Also a disease in the eies which in Florence is called La Porcellána.

Epimíthio, the morall sence of a fable.

Epinície, verses or songes of triumph after some victory.

Epinítide, as Epinittéridi.

Epinittéridi, bloody fales or night blanes that fall into the eyes a nights, running vlcers in the lacrimall place of the eyes, a suddaine mist or dimnesse comming ouer the sight.

Epipáttide, wild whit Elebore or neesewort.

Epipetróne, an hearbe neuer bringing flowre.

Epiphanía, as Epifanía.

Epiphísi, the Anatomists call it an addition or coagmentation of some bone obtaining a peculiar circumscription, yet not being a true portion of that bone whereto it is committed and annexed, an appendance or annexing.

Epiphonéma, a pleasant ending or shutting vp of a matter: a witty sentence in the end or closing of a thing declared or discussed.

Epíphora, a watring or dropping of the eies by meanes of some defluction or rhume issuing from out them.

Epiploceo, a rupture or bursting when the entrailes or thin skin or sewet compassing the entrailes falleth into the cods.

Epipomfálo, a disease when the caule or sowet wherein the guts are lapped issueth out of the nauill.

Episcopáto, a Bishopricke.

Episcópio, a Bishops sea or Mansion.

Epiícopo, a Bishop, an Espie, an ouerseer, or fellow helper in Church matters.

Episéusi, as Episúsi.

Episíno, a watrish disease in the eyes.

Episódica fauella, a speech full of pleasant passages.

Episódio, a part of a fable, an incidentall narration. Also a pleasing or delightfull digression, as in Homers Iliade the description of the number of the ships. Also a Panegyrike verse sung in 



praise of any Emperour or Prince at his first entry into a towne or principality.

Epistálma, a Kings or Princes commission hauing the charge subscribed.

Epistáto, an ouerseer, a stuard, a bailife.

Epistatório, a place or court where matters are heard and debated.

Epistebe, a kind of hearbe or weed.

Epístili, chapters of pillars with their friezes and architraues.

Epistola, an epistle or letter sent from one friende to another.

Epistoláre, to write or send epistles.

Epistómio, a stop in a paire of organes whereby the sound is made high or low.

Epistríte, a kind of precious stone.

Epistropheo, the formost ioynt in the necke, wherein it is turned about.

Episúsi, a figure doubling a word in one sence and hauing no other word betweene.

Epitalámio, a song sung at mariages.

Epitáphio, Epitáfio, an epitaphe or inscription set vpon a graue or tombe. Also a funerall song vsed or sung at a tombe or buriall.

Epitási, the most busie part of a Comedie.

Epithema, a kind of moist medicine laid on linnen to bathe any place of the body to coole the blood or liuer.

Epithesi, a counterfeit description to deceiue a man.

Epitetto, as Epitheto.

Epitheto, an epithete or addition to any Noune for some quality.

Epithímbro, as Epitímbro.

Epithímia, lust or concupiscence of the flesh.

Epitímbro, Dodder growing vpon the hearbe Tythimale, it beareth a flowre like Time, and is vsed to purge melancholy.

Epitímia, as Epithéma.

Epitímalo, as Epitímbro.

Epithimo, as Epitímbro.

Epítome, an epitomy, an abreuiary, an abridgement.

Epitomizzáre, to epitomize, to abridge.

Epitrágij, wormes that deuoure vines.

Epitríto, a foote of a verse consisting of foure silables, wherof one doth alwaies differ from the other three. Also a proportion containing some number and one third part more thereof.

Epitrocásmo, a figure whereby we doe speedily run ouer many different things, and so a maze and trouble our aduersaries.

Epitrópe, a figure when as we seeme to permit one to doe what he will and yet thinke nothing lesse, it is also vsed for a procuration or wardeship.

E' più ánni, it is many yeeres.

E' póca, a with holding of ones assent.

E' póco, it is little, it is a little while.

Epóde, or Láto, a kind of flat fish.

Epódo, verses whereof the first is euer longer then the second.

Epopeia, a verse or songe containing things both of God and man.

Eptálogo, a dialogue or speech betweene fiue persons.

Epúle, flesh growing superfluously about the gumes of the teeth.

Epuleia, an hearbe.

Epúlie, meat, foode, victualls, or whatsoeuer else is mans meat.

Epulóne, an Epicure, a glutton, a gourmand, a smell-feast, a tall-trencherman.

Epulonizzáre, to glut and feast or spend in gourmandizing.

Equabilità, euennesse, equability. Also meeknesse, mildnesse, or gentlenesse.

Equaláre, to equall, to euen, to match.

Equále, equall, euen, match.

Equalità, equality, euennesse.

Equanimità, mildnesse, patience of mind.

Equánimo, mild, meeke, patient of mind.

Equánte, as Equatóre.

Equáre, to equall or make euen.

Equatióne, an equality, an euennesse.

Equatóre, a circle in heauen to which when the Sun commeth the day and night are euen of one length.

Equatúra, an equalling, a making euen.

Equestre, a knight or horseman, or belonging to them or of their profession.

Equiángolo, an euen or equall angle.

Equiceruo, a beast engendred between a horse and a hind, or a stag and a mare.

Equícolo, a little horse or nag.

Equidistánte, equally distant.

Equidistánza, equall distance.

Equidistáre, to be or make equally distant.

Equidità, equity, iustnesse.

Equífero, horse bearing or bringing.

Equilátero, hauing euen or equall sides.

Equíle, a stable for horses.

Equilibráre, to waigh equally.

Equilíbrio, equality in waight.

Equinottiále, the equinoctiall when daies and nights are equally euen.

Equinóttio, as Equinottiále.

Equipággio, equipage, dighting or setting forth of man, horse, or ships.

Equiparábile, equally, comparable.

Equiparáre, to compare equally.

Equiparatióne, an equall comparison.

Equiperáre, as Equiparáre.

Equiperántia, equall comparison.

Equipolláre, to be equally mighty or sufficient.

Equipollente, equally mighty or sufficient.

Equiseli, the weed Horse-taile or horsemaine.

Equiseto, as Ephédra.

Equisóno, an equall or tunable sounding.

Equíssimo, most equall, euen or iust.

Equisitíssimo, most choise or exquisite.

Equità, equity, iustnesse, vprightnesse.

Equiualente, equiualent, worth as much.

Equiualenza, a like valuation.

Equiualere, to value or be worth alike.

Equiuocále, equiuocall, of diuers significations, double meaning.

Equiuocaménte, equiuocally, doubtfully in meaning.

Equiuocáre, to equiuocate, to reduce words to diuers significations.

Equiuocatióne, equiuocation, a doubtfull meaning or signification.

Equíuoco, as Equiuocále.

Equiuolente, equally willing.

Equiuolenza, equall will or consent.

E'ra, I, he, she, or it was. Also was or had with stato ioined vnto it. Also a weed called Raye or Darnell.

Eradicáre, to root or grub vp or out.

Eradicatióne, a rooting out.

Eranthemóne, the hearbe Camomile.

Erário, as Errário.

Eráto, one of the nine muses, as much to say, Inuenters of sillables.

E'rba, as Herba in all parts.

E'rbolána, as Herbáio, an hearbe man.

Eréda, an heire or inheritor.

Ereditággio, heritage, inheritance.

Eremíta, an hermit or solitary man.

Eremitággio, an hermitage or solitarinesse.

Eremítico, solitary, hermit-like.

Eremitório, as Eremitággio.

Erémo, an hermitage, a solitarinesse.

Eréolo, a waight of two graines. Also a coine among the Athenians worth about a penny sterling.

Ereggere, to erect or raise, or reare vp.

Erétria, a kind of chalkie earth or Ceruse. Also an ash colour white that painters vse.

Erettáre, as E'rgere, to erect.

Erettióne, erections, or raising, a rearing.

Eretto, erected, raised vp, reared.

E'rgére, ergo, ersi, erto, to erect, to reare, to aduance, to raise, to set or stand vp.

E'rgáta, as A'rgano, a crane, a capstand, a wind beame, a draw beame.

Eríce, ling or heath brush.

Ericeo méle, heath or ling hony.

Ericetto, a heath or heathy desert.

Eríco, an engine of iron worke full of sharpe spikes or nailes. 



Erictónico, the name of a signe or star in heauen.

Erídano, the name of a signe in heauen.

Erifilla, litigious or strife bringing. Also greedinesse, auarice or couetise.

Erigeróne, the hearbe Groundswell.

Erigíbile, that may be erected.

Erígere, as E'rgere.

Erigoneio, a star called in latin Cani.

Eríge, Erígne, as Eríngio.

Erineóne, an hearbe or kind of pulse.

Eríngio, sea holy, sea holme, or sea huluer, or Eringo roots.

Erínni, the furies of hell.

Eríno, the fruit of the wild fig tree which neuer commeth to ripenesse. Also a medicine vsed to stop bleeding, to prouoke sneesing, to cause child birth, and to purge the braine.

Eriophoróne, a kind of shrub that beareth wooll.

Erípere, rípo, ripéi, ripúto, to take away, to plucke out, or snatch from by force and violence.

Erípíle, a kind of faulkon.

Eríphia, an hearbe in whose stem is euer a flie humming.

Erisimo, wild mustard seed.

Erisíno, a kind of graine or corne in Greece.

Erisipíla, an inflamed vlcer, an inflamation or swelling full of heat and rednesse. Some call it Saint Anthonies fire.

Erisiscettro, a kind of thorne or briar, as Aspálato.

Erisíne, arches or bowing pillars, buttreses, shore posts, or props to hold vp.

Erisomóne, an hearbe, or kind of pulse.

Erisithále, as Erithále.

Eristále, a stone which as one houlds it seemeth to wax red.

Eritáco, a bird so solitary that there are neuer two seene together. Some haue taken it for the Robin red brest.

Eritháce, the spring dew, or sea dew, whereof bees feede whilst they worke their hony proceeding of trees in manner of gum.

Erithále, Sengreene, Houseleeke.

Erithíno, as Eritíno.

Erithríno, as Eritíno.

Erithrea, a kind of red wooll that sheepe beare in Asia.

Erithraicóne, as Satirióne.

Erithrocócco, the red Ragwort.

Erithrodáno, Madder that Dyers vse.

Erithróne, as Doricnióne, a poison.

Erithrotaóne, the hearbe Woodroofe or Madder. Also as Eritáco.

Eritíno, a Sea-fish called a Rochet wherof there is no male.

Eritráno, the red Iuie.

Eritríde, one of the foure thin skins that couer the testicles next to the innermost.

E'nnellíni, Apricots. Also Ermelins.

E'rmo, a solitude or hermitage.

E''rmo, vncouth, solitarie, vnhanted.

E''rnia uentósa, a disease in a Hawkes gorge.

E'rnióni, the kidneis of any creature.

Erómpere, to breake or burst forth.

Erompiménto, a breaking or bursting out.

Erotílo, a kind of precious stone.

Erpéte, a kind of Saint Anthonies fire, which some call the shingles, the wildfire or running worme.

E'rpicáre, to harrow or grub the ground. Also to weede out with hookes. Also to catch in any snare or net, to ensnare, to entramell.

E'rpicatóio, any dragging net.

E'rpíce, a harrow to breake clods of earth. Also a grubbing iron. Also a weeding hooke. Also a kind of weede or thistle. Also vsed for a mans priuy member.

E'rrabóndo, wandring, vagabond, gadding, roaming, straying, roaming, erring.

E'rránte, as E'rrabóndo, erring.

E'rránza, as E'rróre, an erring.

E'rráre, to erre, to misse, to faile, to trespasse. Also to wander, to roaue, to gad, or stray heere and there.

E'rrário, a Princes treasurie or Exchequer, a common treasurie of a Dominion or Cittie. Also an Auditor or Clerke of the Exchequer, or a keeper of bookes of accompts.

E'rrático, as E'rrabóndo.

E'rráta, vsed anciently for Ráta.

E'rreggere, to erect, or raise, or reare vp.

E'rrettióne, erection or raising vp.

E'rretto, erected or raised vp, reared.

E'rri, vsed for Giórni, daies.

E'rríne, short tents to be put into the nose to cure sores, or to draw humors, or to cause sneesing.

E''rro, vsed for Ferro. Also E'rróre.

E'rróneo, erring, ignorant, wilde-wandring, shallow-witted, gadding mad.

E'rroneaménte, erroneously.

E'rronía, as Ironía.

E'rrónico, as Irónico.

E'rrómpere, as Irrómpere.

E'rrompiménto, a violent forth-breaking.

E'rróre, an error, a fault, a missing.

E'rrorúccio, a small error.

E'rruttáre, to cast forth with violence. Also to belch forth.

E'rruttióne, an eruption, a violent outbursting or breaking forth, a belching.

E''rse, as Erpíce. Also be corrected.

E'rta, the vpright beame of any frame, tent, crane, staires or other engine. Also steepie, vpright, high, craggie. Also a steepie, a craggie place, an vpright ascent, a high watch-towre. Also subtile, wilie, watchfull, craftie, quick-sighted, looke Stáre al' erta.

Ertáre, to make steepie.

Ertézza, steepinesse, cragginesse, height of hils, hilly ruggednesse.

E'rto, as E'rta. Also erected, reared, raised, set, or stood vp.

Ertúra, as Ertézza.

Erubescenza, bashfulnesse or blushing shame, but most commonly referred to some act of being ashamed.

Erubescere, to blush and be ashamed.

Erúche, the wormes called cankers or palmers. Also the hearbe Rocket. Also stalkes or stems of Coleworts.

Erudíre, dísco, díto, to teach, to instruct, to informe, to nurture, to bring vp.

Eruditióne, erudition, teaching, instruction, nurture, bringing vp, education. Yet I finde this word vsed by Machiauell in another sense towards the end of the last Chapter of the second booke of his Decades vpon Liuie, conster it as thou please, hee vseth it thus, restáua il cámpo per tútto débole a potére resístere ad una eruditióne che quélli di déntro hauéssino fátta, some thinke it should bee eruttióne.

Erudíto, taught, instructed, nurtured, educated.

Erudiménti, first instructions.

E'rula campána, an hearbe.

Erúsca, bran. Also bread or any thing made of bran.

Eruttáre, to belch out.

Erútto, belched. Also a belching.

E''s, or E''sse, the letter, S.

Esacólito, a stone that hath a circle in it wherein threescore seuerall colours may distinctly be perceiued, and as they say hath as many vertues as colours.

Esacontalíto, as Esacólito.

Esacórdo, an instrument of sixe strings.

Esagonále, sixe-cornered, sixe-angled.

Esaláre, to exhale, to vent out, to euaporate.

Esalatióne, exhalation, euaporation.

Esalatóio, a venting or breathing hole.

Esalóne, a little bird but a great enemie to the Rauen.

Esaltáre, to exalt, to aduance, to raise.

Esaltatióne, exaltation, aduancement.

Esaltatóre, an aduancer, an exalter.

Esamináre, as Essamináre.

Esaminatióne, as Essaminatióne.

Esancimáta, a kinde of disease in the head.

Es angue, bloodlesse, liuelesse, wan, dead.

Esanimáre, to depriue of soule or life.

Esanimatióne, a depriuation of soule or life.

Esarcáto, a dignitie of a Magistrate here­



tofore vsed in Rauenna.

Esárco, a supreame Magistrate or Iudge instituted by another.

Esasperáre, to exasperate, to aggrauate.

Esasperatióne, exasperation.

Esattaménte, exactly.

Esattióne, exactnesse, perfectnesse.

Esátto, exact, perfect, exquisite.

Esattóre, an exacter or receiuer of monie, of taxes, of fines, or subsidies.

Esaustíbile, that may be drawen dry.

Esaudíbile, as Essaudénole.

Esaudíre, as Essaudíre.

Esauditióne, as Essauditióne.

Esauditóre, as Essauditóre.

Esaustíre, to exhaust or draw dry.

Esáusto, exhaust, soked or drawen dry.

Esborsaménto, a disbursing.

Esborsáre, to disburse or lay out.

Esborsatióne, a disbursing.

Esbrefóne, a fish called in Latin Phoxinus, some take it for the Menow-fish.

E'sca, a baite, a food. Also fewell or touchwood. Also tinder to light fire with. Also prime-powder. Also of Vscíre, let him goe out.

Escalfáre, to heate, or chafe.

Escalfatório, heating or chafing.

Escandescenza, a boiling of the blood, a suddaine heate of anger, soone raised, soone laid. Also rage, anger, or pepper in the nose.

E'scane che uóglia, come of it what will.

Escára, a baiting place. Also a Lardry or place to keepe meate in. Also a mouse-trap.

E'scara, a core or lumpe of mortified flesh fetcht out of any sore or fistula.

Escáre, to baite, to angle for fish, to allure.

Escaría, a kind of vine or grape.

Escáro, a fish which chaweth his meate.

E'scato, as Escára.

Escauáre, to dig or grub vp, to hollow.

Eschinoméne, an hearbe which if one approach his hand vnto it, will as it were for shame, draw in her leaues and close them vp.

E''schio, as E''sculo.

Escídere, cído, cisi, císo, to fall out or away, to slip out of memorie, to scape from.

Escína, a bird that once a yeare changeth both voice and colour.

Escíre, as Vscíre.

Escíta, as Vscíta.

Esclúdere, clúdo, clúsi, clúso, to exclude, to shut out, to exempt, to except.

Esclusióne, an exclusion or shutting out.

Esclusíuo, that may be excluded.

Esclúso, excluded, shut out, exempted.

Escogitábile, that may be thought.

Escogitáre, to thinke or imagine.

Escogitatióne, excogitation, surmising. 

Escomúnica, an excommunication.

Escomunicáre, to excommunicate.

Escomunicatióne, excommunication.

Escoriáre, to gall or fret off the skin till it be raw, to excoriate.

Escoriatióne, excoriation, the skin being galled off and made raw.

Escrementále, excrementall.

Escrementáre, to voide excrements.

Escremento, an excrement.

Escrescenza, an excrescence, an outswelling, an vnnaturall ouergrowing outward.

Escréscere, to swell or grow out.

Escrilogía, Lat.

Escubiáre, to watch or keepe sentinell.

Escúbie, a watch or sentinell in warre.

Escuccióne, a scutcheon in armorie.

Escúbre, as Escúbie.

E'sculo, a tree like an Oke consecrated to Iupiter, it beareth leaues and mast bigger than any Oke or Robur.

Escuriále, a place from out the Court, or one liuing out of the Court.

Escuriáre, to hunger, to gnaw for hunger.

Escúsa, an excuse.

Escusáre, to excuse.

Escusatióne, an excusing.

Escuséuole, excusable.

E'sdia, a confection against poison or diseases of the braine.

E'sdra, as E'sdia.

Esecrábile, as Essecrábile.

Esecráre, as Essecráre.

Esecratióne, as Essecratióne.

Esenon che, and but that, were it not.

Esempio, as Essempio.

Esempláre, as Essempláre.

Esentáre, to exempt, to free, to quit.

Esente, exempted, freed, quit.

Esercítio, as Essercítio.

Esercitatório, belonging to an armie.

Esercere, as Essercitáre.

Esercito, an armie or hoste of men.

Eseredáre, to disinherite.

Eseredatióne, a disinheriting.

Eserstíte, a kind of whitish stone.

Esgorgitáre, to cast or gorge forth.

Esgorgitatióne, a casting or gorging.

Esgridáre, to cry out, to exclaime.

Eshiláre, as Essilaráre.

Eshileráre, as Essilaráre.

Esício, death, vtter ruine or destruction.

Esiliáre, to exile or banish.

Esími, parts or fractions taken away in Arithmetike.

Esímio, as Essímio.

Esípo, sewet or grease of vnwashed wool.

E si sía, and be it, and be he.

Esistente, existent, being really.

Esistenza, existence, reall being.

Esistimare, as Stimáre, or Estimáre.

Esistimatióne, estimation.

Esitáre, to eate of ten, to vse to eate. 

Esitatióne, often eating or cramming.

Esitiále, deadly, dismall, ruinous.

Esítio, vtter ruine, spoile or destruction.

E'so, a fish called the Laxe-breeding.

Esocéto, a Sea-fish, round like a Gougegeon, of a yellow colour, that liueth in the water, and sleepeth on the shore.

E'sódo, an issue or going forth.

Esofágo, the mouth of the stomacke.

Esoláre, as Esaláre.

E'sole, as E'sule.

Esóne, as E'so.

Esopóne, a kind of wilde Lectuce.

Esorbitánte, absurd, orderlesse, irregular.

Esorbitánza, absurdnesse, irregularitie.

Esorbitatióne, as Esorbitánza.

Esoreísta, a coniurer, an exorcist.

Esorcísma, a coniuration or exorcisme.

Esorcismáre, to coniure or exorcisme.

Esórdio, an exordium, an entrance into or beginning of a discourse.

Esornáre, to garnish, to adorne.

Esornatióne, a garnishing or adorning.

Esortáre, to exhort, to perswade vnto.

Esortatióne, exhortation, perswasion.

Esortatóre, an exhorter, a perswader.

Esóstra, a vice, or gin of wood wherewith things done within with turning of a wheele are shewed to those that are without.

Esparagnáre, to spare.

Esparágno, sparing.

Espárgere, as Spárgere.

Espargiménto, as Spargiménto.

Espediente, expedient, necessary. Also an expediency or conueniency.

Espedíre, as Spedíre, to dispatch.

Espeditióne, as Speditióne.

Espedíto, as Spedíto, dispatched.

Espendia, a kind of vine in Egypt.

Esperienza, experience.

Espendere, to spend, to dispend.

Espense, expences, charges.

Esperimentáre, to experience, to try.

Esperiménto, an experiment, a triall.

Esperínza, vsed for experience.

Esperto, expert, perfect, tried.

Esphalitióne, a kinde of Clauer or Trifolie.

Espiábile, expiable, that may be satisfied or attoned.

Espianáre, as Spianáre.

Espianatióne, an explaining, or vtterance.

Espiare, to expiate, to cancell, to purge to satisfie, to blot out, to make amends.

Espiatióne, expiation, satisfaction.

Espiatórij, sacrifices to make satisfaction and attonement.

Espettáre, to expect, to looke for.

Espettatióne, expectation.

Espettatíua, expectance, expectation.

Espiéuole, as Espiábile. Also that may be espied. 



Espiláre, to rob or proule from by deceit or extortion, to pillage.

Espilatióne, pillage, prouling, extortion.

Espilatóre, a pillager, a robber, a prouler.

Espilatríce, a robbresse.

Espinétta, Virginals or Claricords.

Espiráre, to expire or breath forth.

Espiratióne, expiration.

Esplanáre, as Spianáre.

Esplicáre, to expresse in words.

Esplicità, an vnfolding, an exposition.

Esplícito, vnfolded, expounded.

Esplificáre, to explicate, to vnfold.

Esplicitaménte, by outward expression.

Esploráre, to explore, to espie, to grope or search for priuily. Also to be waile with exclamation, and waimenting.

Esploratióne, a scouting, a spying, a priuie searching.

Esploratóre, a spie, a scout, a searcher.

Esplorábile, that may be spied or searched out.

Espónere, as Espórre.

Esponíbile, that may be expounded.

Espórre, as Spónere, to expose.

Esportáre, to export or carry forth.

Esportatióne, exportation, carying forth.

Espositióne, an exposition.

Espositóre, an expounder.

Espósto, exposed, expounded, as Spósto.

Espostuláre, to expostulate.

Espostulatióne, expostulation.

Espressaménte, expresly, manifestly, distinctly. Also purposely.

Espresséuole, that may be expressed.

Espressíbile, that may be expressed.

Espressióne, an expression, an expounding.

Espressissimo, most most expresse.

Espressiuaménte, expressiuely.

Espressiuo, expressiue, expressing.

Espresso, expressed, expounded, wrung or crushed forth. Also pronounced.

Espresso, expresse, of purpose, for the nonce.

Esprimentáre, to try, to experiment.

Espriménto, an experiment, a triall.

Esprímere, prímo, priméi, presso, to expresse or pronounce in words. Also to expound. Also to crush or wring forth.

Espriméuole, that may be expressed.

Esprobáre, as Rimproueráre.

Esprobráre, as Rimproueráre.

Espugnáre, to vanquish, to expugne.

Espugnatióne, a conquest, a victory.

Espugnatóre, a vanquisher, a victor.

Espugnatória máchina, a battring engine.

Espugnéuole, vanquishable.

Espulsióne, an expulsing or driuing out.

Espulsatíuo, that doth expell.

Expulsiuo, that may be expelled. Also that doth expell, expulsiue. 

Espúlso, expelled or driuen forth.

Espullsóre, an expeller or forth driuer.

Espurgáre, as Spurgáre.

Espurgatióne, a purging forth.

Espurgatíuo, that purgeth forth.

Esquisitézza, exquisitenesse, perfection.

Esquisitaménte, exquisitly, choisely.

Esquisito, exquisite, perfect, choise.

E'ssa, she, the same woman or thing.

Essacerbáre, to ensharpen, to exasperate.

Essacóne, a kind of Centaury.

Essaédro, a kind of geometricall figure.

Essáde, a kind of chariot or coach vsed of old.

Essageráre, to exaggerate, to irritate, to prouoke. Also to amplifie, or extoll.

Essageratióne, exageration, prouocation, irritation. Also an amplifying or extolling.

Essagitáre, to moue or stir vp and downe, to tosse too & fro. Also to vex or mooue to anger.

Essagitatióne, a stirring, a moouing or tossing too and fro, a turmoiling.

Essagonále, six angled or six cornered.

Essagonáre, to make six angled.

Essalbarnáto, a kind of Kobur or Oke tree.

Essaltaménto, exaltation, aduancement.

Essaltáre, to exalt, to aduance, to magnifie.

Essaltatióne, exaltation, aduancement.

Essalumináte, pearles as Orient and cleere as Alume.

Essáme, enquiry, triall, examining.

Essameróne, a six daies worke.

Essámetro, an exameter verse.

Essámina, an examination, or enquiry.

Essaminatióne, an examination.

Essanimáre, to examine, to enquire.

Essamináto, a party examined.

Essaminatóre, an examiner, an enquirer.

Essámine, as Essáme.

Essanimáre, as Esanimáre.

Essanimatióne, as Esanimatióne.

Essarcáto, as Esarcáto.

Essárco, as Esárco.

Essáre, to exact, or extort from.

Essasperáre, to exasperate, to irritate.

Essasperatióne, exasperation, egging on.

Essattaménte, exactly, perfectly.

Essattióne, exaction, extortion. Also exactnesse.

Essattatióne, an exacting, or exactnesse.

Essátto, exact, perfect. Also exacted.

Essattóre, an exactor. Also a taske master, an extorter, an oppressor. Also a receiuer of rents or subsidies.

Essaudéuole, gentle or mild of hearing. Also that may be heard.

Essaudíbile, as Essaudéuole.

Essaudíre, dísco, díto, to heare, to listen.

Essauditióne, a hearing or listning vnto.

Essauditóre, a hearer, a listner.

Essaustáre, as Esaustáre.

Essauftíbile, as Esaustíbile.

Essáusto, as Esáusto.

Essautoráto, cassiered or put out of pay.

E'sse, the letter S. Also as E'ssere.

E'sse, they, or those women or things.

Essebémo, a white precious stone.

Essecrábile, execrable, blasphemous.

Essecránza, as Essecratióne.

Essecráre, to execrate, to curse.

Essecratióne, execration, curse.

Essecratório, execrable, blasphemous.

Essecutáre, to execute, to performe.

Essecutióne, execution, performance.

Essecutíuo mandáto, a warrant of execution.

Essecutóre, an executer, a performer.

Essédo, an hearb.

Essegetíuo poema, a poeme where the auctor speakes himselfe and none els.

Esseguente, executing, performing.

Esseguíre, guisco, guito, to execute, to accomplish, to obtaine, to atchiue.

Esseguitióne, as Essecutióne. Also accomplishing or atchiuing.

Esseguíto, executed, accomplished, atchiued, obtained, performed.

Esseguitóre, an executer, a performer.

Esséi, as Esséni.

Essempiáre, to exemplifie, to patterne, to example, to ideate, to match.

Essempio, an example, a patterne, an Idea, a coppy.

Essempláre, exemplar, notable, imitable. Also as Essempiáre.

Essemplaríssimo, most exemplary.

Essemplarità, exemplification, an example.

Essemplificáre, to exemplifie.

Essemplificatióne, an exemplification.

Essemplificatóre, an exemplifier.

Essendo chè, being that, seeing that.

Esséni, certaine Philosophers among the Hebrewes, that refer euery thing to prouidence, that deeme the soule to be immortall, that for the defence of iustice would haue all men fight vntill death, that sacrifice not with the common people, that highly esteeme purity of life and sanctity of conuersation, whose manners and customes are full of vertue, who giue themselues to husbandry, who liue in common, and neuer mary, and keepe no seruants, saying that a wife is the cause of discord, and seruants to be wicked, and therefore in all occasions helpe one another with cheerefull willingnesse, their clothes be handsome and neat, but nothing sumptuous.

Essentáre, to exempt, to free, to seclude.

Essente, exempted, free, quit. Also being.

Essentia, essence, being-reality.

Essentiále, essentiall, really, being.

Essentialità, reall-being essentiality.

Essentialménte, essentially, really. 



Essentióne, exemption, exempting.

Essenza, essence, reality, being.

Essequiále, funerall, mourning.

Essequie, funeralls, obsequies.

Essequire, as Esseguire.

Essequíscere, as Esseguíre.

Essequitóre, as Essecutóre.

Essercenti, serieants or such officers.

E'sserci, to be there or in.

Essercitáre, to exercise, to practise.

Essercitatióne, exercising, practising.

Essercítio, an exercise, trade, or occupation.

Essercito, an army or hoste of men.

Essercitéuole, that may be exercised.

E'ssere, sono, fui, fóra, státo or súto, to be.

E'ssere, an essence, a being, a reality.

E'ssere, the condition, quality or state of a man.

E'ssere a'ferri, to be grapling.

E'sser' a grádo, to be acceptable.

E'ssere a hóste, to be in an army.

E'ssere al móndo, to liue and weare out.

E'ssere a mál partíto, to be in ill taking.

E'ssere a párte, to be partaker.

E'ssere a pósta, to be for the nonce.

E'ssere a póllo pésto, to be ready to dy.

E'ssere auíso, to surmise or seeme vnto.

E'ssere a l'óglio sánto, to be ready to dy.

E'ssere a questióne, to be in contention.

E'ssere a rischio, to be in hazard.

E'ssere béne a cása, to be a good husband, to haue his mind at home.

E'sser dánno chè, to be pitty that.

E'sser di bisógno, to be needfull.

E'ssere di póca leuáta, to be of small worth.

E'sser di huópo, to be needfull.

E'sser di mestiéri, to be necessary.

E'sser fórza, to be most necessary.

E'sscre in concláue, to be in secret counsell.

E'sser huópo, to be necessary.

E'sser' in facenda, to be in businesse.

E'sscre in fréga, to be or goe a catterwalling as a cat, or be proud as a sault bitch, to be furiously letcherous.

E'ssere in piéga, to be yeelding, bending, in rout, or declining.

E''ssere in pagliuóla, to lye in childbed.

E''ssere in tenúta, to be or stand bound to performe.

E''ssere in uíta, to be liuing.

E''ssere luógo, to be conuenient or necessarie.

E''ssere mercè, Sarebbe mercè, as we say it were a good deed.

E''ssere per, to bee about, or bee ready for.

E'sser mórto, to be dead or killed.

E''sser per andáre, to be ready and for to goe.

E''ssere questióne, to be question. 

E''ssere seruíto, to be pleased or serued.

E''ssere súto, to haue beene.

E''ssere státo, to haue beene.

E''ssi, they or those men or things.

E'ssere uíso, to seeme vnto.

E''sser uísso, to haue liued.

E'ssi, for Si è, it is. Also is to himselfe.

Essibiláre, to whistle or hisse out of the place.

Essibíre, bísco, bíto, to exhibite, to offer, to set abroad for all men to behold, to present.

Essibitióne, exhibition, deliuerance or presenting vnto, setting abroad to view.

Essibitóre, an exhibitor, a presenter or setter abroad of things.

Essicáre, to exsiccate, to draw all moistnesse from, to dry.

Essicatióne, exsiccation, a drawing out of all moistnesse.

Essicatíuo, that hath vertue to dry.

Essigente, an exigent. Also drawing from, an extorting or wringing from.

Essígere, sígo, sígei, figiúto, to draw or wring from, to extract, to extort.

Essigliáre, to exile, or to banish.

Essíglio, exile, banishment.

Essíguo, little, slender, scant, small, slight.

Essígono, sixe cornered or angled.

Essiguità, litlenesse, slendernesse, smalnesse, thinnesse.

E'sile, slender, small, litle, thin, leane, fine. Also as E''sule.

Esiliáre, to exile, to banish.

Esílio, exile, banishment.

Esilità, as Essiguità.

Essilaráre, to comfort, to frolike, to reioyce, to make merry, to leape for ioy.

Essilaratióne, as Essilarità.

Essilarità, a comforting, a making merry, a reioycing, a cheerefulnesse, a leaping or skipping for ioy and gladnesse.

Essímere, símo, siméi, simúto, to take away, to exempt, to acquit, to discharge.

Essími, as Esími.

Essimiaménte, excellently, passing well, beyond compare, exceedingly.

Essímio, high, singular, notable, excellent, of choise, passing good.

Essimità, singularitie, excellence, choise, not able goodnesse, perfection.

Essi nanimità, an euacuation, an emptying, a stripping, a spoyling, a robbing.

Essinaníre, nísco, níto, to empty, to voide, to strip out of all.

Essípio, the hearbe Glader.

Essíssimo, very very same.

Essistimáre, to esteeme, to value. Also to deeme, to thinke, to suppose.

Essistimatióne, an estimating, an esteeme. Also a deeming, a thinking. 

Essistímo, as Essistimatióne.

Essitiále, dismall, ruinous, dangerous.

Essítio, vtter ruine and destruction.

Essitióso, as Essitiále.

E'sso, he, that, the same. Vsed often with Con, as together with.

Essocéto, a fish that hath a voice and sleepeth on dry land.

Essorábile, exorable, placable, that may be appeased.

Esso lei, shee, or with shee her selfe.

Esso lóro, them or with themselues.

Esso lúi, him or with himselfe.

Essorabilità, exorablenesse, flexiblenesse.

Essorbitánte, absurd, irregular, orderlesse.

Essorbitánza, absurdnesse, irregularitie.

Essorbitáre, to be absurd or irregulare.

Essorcismáre, to exorcisme, to coniure.

Essorcísmi, exorcismes, spels, incantations.

Essorcísta, a coniurer, an enchanter.

Essorcizzáre, as Essorcismáre.

Essórdio, as Esórdio.

Essordíre, dísco, díto, to begin or make entrance into a discourse.

Essornáre, to adorne, to decke, or set foorth.

Essornatióne, an adoring or garnishing

Essortánza, an exhortation.

Essortáre, to exhort, to perswade.

Essortatióne, exhortation, perswasion.

Essortatíuo, exhortable, perswasiue.

Essortatóre, an exhorter, a perswader.

Essortatória lettera, a letter of exhortation or perswasion.

Essóso, cruell, hatefull, vexfull, intolerable, extorting from, detestable.

Essótico, forrenne, externe, brought or come from other parts.

Essuberánte, swelling, abounding.

Essuberánza, a swelling, an abounding.

Essuberáre, to abound, to be plentifull, to be or make aboundant.

Essuberatióne, aboundance, plenty.

Essulceráre, to exulcerate or eat into the flesh.

Essulceratióne, an exulceration, a sorenesse in any part when the skin is off, and the peccant humour frets still deeper.

Essulceratíuo, apt to eate into the flesh and make an vlcer.

Essuperánte, exceeding, or being aboue others.

Essuperánza, excellency, preheminence.

Essuperáre, to exceed, to surmount, to passe, to goe beyond.

Essuperéuole, that may be surmounted, or excelled.

Està, Estáde, the summer season.

E'sta, as Quésta, this woman or thing. 



E''stasi, an extasie, an amazement, a trance, a quandare. Also a figure when a short sillable is made long.

E'stasíre, sísco, síto, to be or fall into an extasie, trance or amazement.

Estáte, the summer season.

Estático, in an extasie, in a trance.

E'ste, the inwards or entrailes, as bowels, heart, liuer, lights, &c.

Esten dere, as Stendere, to extend.

Estendúto, as Stenduto, extended.

Estensaménte, extensiuely.

Estensióne, extension, or extending.

Estensiuaménte, extensiuely.

Estensíuo, extensiue or stretching.

Estenso, extended, outward.

Estenuáre, to extenuate, as Stennáre.

Estenuatióne, extenuation.

Estenuatíuo, that doth extenuate.

Esterefáre, to affright, to terrifie.

Esterefattióne, affrighting, terror.

Esterefátto, affrighted, terrifide, quelled.

Esterióre, exterior, outward.

Esteriorità, outwardnesse, exteriority.

Estermináre, to destroy, to deface, to wast or ruine from the very foundation.

Esterminatióne, as Estermínio.

Estermínio, destruction, wasting or ruine from the very foundations.

Esternále, externall, outward.

Esternaménte, externally, outwardly.

Esternáre, to alienate, to estrange.

Esterno, externall, outward, forrenne.

Esterno, of yesterday.

E'stero, an aliene, a forrenner, a stranger.

E''stesi, as E''stasi.

Estíma, esteeme, value, prising.

Estimábile, esteemable, valuable.

Estimagióne, as Estíma.

Estimare, to esteeme, to value, to prize.

Estimatióne, as Estima, estimation.

Estimatíssimo, most most esteemed.

Estimatíuo, to be esteemed or valued.

Estimatóre, an esteemer, a preiser of goods.

Estiméuole, esteemable, valuable.

Estímo, esteeme, valuation, worth.

Estínguere, stínguo, stínsi, stínto, to quench, to extinguish, to put out.

Estinguitóre, a quencher, an extinguisher.

Estínno, a kind of copper coine in Persia.

Estintióne, a quenching, an extinguishing.

Estínto, extinct, quenched, extinguished.

Estiomenáte, vlcers which corroding, rot and putrifie a mans members.

Estirpare, to extirpe, to grub or roote out. 

Estirpatióne, extirpation or rooting out.

Estirpatíuo, that may be rooted out.

Estirpaménto, a rooting out.

Estirpatóre, an extirper or rooter out.

Estirpéuole, that may be rooted out.

Estiuále, summerly, belonging to summer.

Estiuáre, to summer in some coole place.

Estiuatóre, a gunners rammer to charge pieces.

Estíuo, Estío,, pertaining to summer.

E'sto, as Quésto, this man or thing.

Estóllere, tóllo, tólsi, tólto, to extoll, to eleuate, to aduance, or set vp aloft.

Estolliménto, an extolling.

Estórcere, to extort, as Estórquere.

Estorciménto, an extorting.

Estórquere, tórquo, tórsi, tórto, to take or wrest from by force or violence, to extort. Also to put out of ioint.

Estorsióne, extorsion, or wresting from by violence.

Estórto, extorted or wrested from by violence. Also wrinched out of ioint.

E''stra, as E''xtra, without, from out.

E'stracórrere, to runne out.

E'stracorsióne, an outrunning.

E'stracórso, runne out, outrunne.

E'strággere, as E'strárre.

Estraniáre, to estrange, to aliene.

Estránio, strange, a stranger, an aliene.

Estraníre, nísco, níto, to make or become strange. Also to fall into a swowne.

Estranóme, without, or out of name.

Estrátre, trággo, trássi, trátto, to extract, to draw out, to wrest from.

Estrattióne, an extraction.

Estrattíuo, extractiue, wresting out.

Estrátto, extracted, or drawen out.

Estrátto, an abstract, an extract.

Estrauagánte, extrauagant.

Estrauagánza, extrauagancy.

Estrauagáre, to extrauagate.

Estremáre, as Stremáre.

Estremità, extremity, vtmost.

Estrémo, extreame, as Strémo.

Estrétto, as Strétto.

E'stri, a kind of gnats or horseflies.

Estricábile, extricable, disintricable.

Estricáre, to disintangle.

Estrinsicaménte, exteriourly.

Estrinsichézza, exteriournesse.

Estrínsico, external, extrinsecall.

E'stro, a hornet or horsefly. Also a sting.

Estrúdere, to extrude.

Estrusióne, extrusion.

Estuále, scorching, burning, parching. Also panting through heat.

Estuánte, as Estuále.

Estuáre, to be or become a low creeke or meane ground that the sea may flow and ebbe in.

Estuário, a low creeke or meane ground where the sea commeth, floweth and ebbeth.

Estuatióne, an ebbing or flowing of the sea or breaking into any low grounds.

Esuberánte, plenty, aboundance.

Esuberánza, plentious, aboundant.

Esuláre, to exile, to banish.

Esulatióne, exile, banishment.

E'sule, an exile, a banished man.

Esultáre, as Essilaráre.

Esultatióne, as Essilarità.

Esuriáre, to thirst or hunger for with greedinesse.

Esúrie, thirst, hunger or greedinesse.

Esuriendo, vsed of Dante for hungring, thirsting, or longing for with greedinesse.

E't, a coniunction, vsed before words beginning with vowels, and, moreouer, besides. Also both.

Età, Etáde, Etáte, age. Also posterity.

E't di più, and moreouer.

E't ecco, and behould, and loe.

E'tere, as E'thera.

Eternále, eternall, aye-during, euer lasting.

Eternalménte, eternally, perpetually.

Eternáre, to eternize, to perpetuate.

Eternità, eternity, euerlastingnesse.

Eternizzáre, as Eternáre.

Eterno, eternall, euerlasting, euerduring.

Eterogéneo, of an other kinde.

Etesij, windes blowing very stiffely for fortie dates together from the East iust about the Dogdaies, called of mariners the Auant curriers.

Etésica uíte, a kind of vine or grape.

Ethéolo, a kind of Greeke wine.

E'thera, as E'tra.

Ethereále, as Ethereo.

Ethereo, ethereall, fierie, bright.

Etheróclito, a noune declined otherwise then others be. Also a fantasticall or humorous man, that is not as others.

Ethesij, as Etesij.

E'thica, morall Philosophie. Also of or pertaining to morall Philosophie ciuill manners and behauiour. Also a lingring sicknesse called the consumption or dry dropsie. Also a lingring feuer.

E'thice, a kind of precious stone.

E'thico, morall, belonging to manners and behauiour, or that representeth and setteth them forth. Also sicke of a consumption, dropsie or ethike feuer.

E''thimo, as Etimología.

Ethimología, as Etimología.

Ethimologísta, as Etimólogo.

Ethimólogo, as Etimólogo.

Ethiología, a shewing of the cause or reason.

Ethiópa, an Ethiopian, a Black-more.

Ethiópida, or Moróide, an hearbe wherwith touching locks it opens them,­



and being cast into a riuer it dries it vp, & swimmeth against the streame, if horses tread vpon it, it will make them cast their shooes.

Ethología, the feate of counterfeiting mens manners and behauiour.

Ethólogo, one that with voice or gesture counterfeiteth other mens manners.

E''thmo, the midle bridge or gristle of the nose.

E'thmóide, the nostrils or issues of it.

E'thnarchía, principalitie ouer people.

E'thnárco, a ruler or Prince of people.

E'thnico, an Ethnike, a Pagan, an Infidell.

Etiám, also, moreouer, to.

Etiamchè, albeit, or although that.

Etianchè, albeit or although that.

Etiandío, also, moreouer, estsoone, and also, besides, furthermore, yea also.

Etiandíochè, howbeit, although that.

E'tica, as E'thica.

E'tico, as E'thico.

Etimología, true exposition, saying, reason or deriuation of words.

Etimologísta, as Etimólogo.

Etimólogo, one that searcheth out the true signification and reason of words.

Etíndro, a kind of whitish stone.

Etiológica, that discouereth and discourseth the causes.

Etiópida, as Ethiópida.

Etíte, a stone found in an Eagles nest of great vertue to hasten a womans deliuerie of her child without paine or labour.

E'to, a plant very good to eate.

Etología, as Ethología.

Etólogo, as Ethólogo.

Etopeia, as Ethología.

Etópo, as Ethólogo.

E'tra, whatsoeuer is aboue the element of fire. Also the element of fire. Also light or brightnesse. Also the firmament, the skie, the welkin.

E't si, and if, what then, albeit.

Etrophaséna, a disease that mislikes all benefit of nutriment.

E't similia, and such like.

E'ttagonále, seauen cornered or angled.

E'ttálche, a kinde of tree. Also and, so that.

E'ttasi, a figure when a short sillable is made long.

E'tti, for Tiè, is to thee, to thee is.

Ettíe, a kind of cherrie.

E'tto, a word much vsed in composition of other nounes to expresse littlenesse and prettinesse withall, as Librétto, Hométto, Cosétta, Casétta, &c.

Ettrapéli, a kind of people mencioned by Plinie that liue but three yeares.

Euacuánza, euacuation, emptying forth.

Euacuáre, to euacuate, to empty forth.

Euacuatióne, euacuation, emptying. 

Euadére, uádo, uási, uáso, to euade, to shun, to eschew, to escape.

Euadíbile, that may be euaded.

Euagináre, to vnsheath.

Euangelico, Euangelicall, of the Gospell.

Euangelio, the holy Gospell.

Euangelísta, an Euangelist, a Gospeller.

Euangelizzáre, to preach, to gospell.

Euánti, as Ménade of Baccus.

Euaporáre, to euaporate, to streame out.

Euaporatióne, euaporation, out-breathing.

Euasióne, an euasion, an eschewing.

Euáso, euaded, shunned, eschewed.

Eucástica, the arte or skill to ennamell or paint with fier.

Eucharístia, the Sacrament of the Lords supper. Also good grace or thankesgiuing.

Euellere, as Suellere.

Eueniménto, an euent, or comming to passe.

Eueníre, vengo, vénni, venúto, to happen, to chance, to come to end or passe.

Euentáre, to vent or breath foorth.

Euentatióne, a venting forth.

Euentiláre, to waue in the wind. Also to winnow or trie in the wind.

Euentilatióne, a wauing in the winde.

Euento, an euent, a successe, an issue.

Euersióne, an ouerwhelming, an ouerthrowing, an euersion, a ruine.

Euertere, verto, versi, verso, to euert, to ouerwhelme, to ouerthrow.

Euertíbile, that may be ouerthrowen or ouerwhelmed.

Eufonía, a good sound, a pleasing noise, a smooth vtterance of words.

Eufórbio, Gummy thistle or Euphorbium.

Eufrágia, the hearbe Eie-bright.

Eugalátto, or Gláuce, an hearbe that giues milke.

Eugáneo, a kind of excellent cheese.

Eugenia, noblenesse of blood or birth. Also a kind of vine or grape.

Eugenio, noble in blood and birth.

Euidente, euident, manifest, apparent.

Euidentissimaménte, most euidently.

Euidenza, euidence, apparence. Also an euidence or testimony.

Euíncere, vínco, vínsi, vínto, or vítto, to euict or conuince by law.

Euità, age, eternity, euerlastingnesse.

Euitábile, euitable, auoidable.

Euitándo, to be shunned or auoided.

Euitáre, to auoide, to shun, to eschew.

Euitatióne, auoidance or shunning.

Euiternáre, to eternize, to euerlast.

Euiterno, euerduring, eternall, endlesse, immortall.

Euittióne, a conuincing, an euiction. 

Eulogía, a thing well spoken, a praise, an honest and profitable reason.

Eumece, a kind of Balme tree.

Eumenide, the furies of hell.

Eumétte, a kind of greene precious stone, which being put vpon ones head causeth him to dreame of strange things.

Eunucáre, to geld, to splay, to lib.

Eunocchióne, a kind of Cabidge-lectuce.

Eunúco, an Eunuch, a gelded man.

E'uo, time-euerlasting, aye-during age.

Euocatione, a calling forth or vpon.

Euóna, eternitie, immortalitie.

Euónimo, a tree like a Pomegranate tree.

Eupatalóne, horsetongue-laurell.

Eupatória, Agrimonie or Liuerwort, some take it for Maudelin or Balsamint.

Eupetáso, a stone of foure colours, blew, greene, fierie and vermilion.

Euphrosíno, Buglosse or Borage.

Euphonía, as Eufonía.

Eupílide, a swelling of the flesh in the gumes by the cheeke teeth.

Eupótria, an hearbe good against agues.

Euránia, one of the nine muses, as much to say heauenly.

Eureo, a stone like an Oliue stone, but chamfred.

Euripicéni, a kind of Rush.

Eurípo, a channell or waterconduit. Also a Firth or place where the eddie of tides meete together.

Euríthmia, a beautie where euery part answereth his iust or due proportion.

Eúro, the East winde.

E'uro áuszro, the Northeast winde.

Euro nóto, a winde betweene the South and the Southeast.

Eurótio, a kind of precious stone.

Eusebe, a white stone ouercast with a blacke colour.

Eusebia, pietie, religion, godlinesse.

Euterpe, one of the niue muses, as much to say Delectation.

Eutheristóne, a kind of Balme tree.

Eutímia, securitie, quietnesse, hearts-ease.

Eutrapélia, good-garbe, gentlenesse, tractablenesse, milde behauiour.

Eutrapéleo, gentle, tractable, apt to counterfait any good behauiour.

E'uuene?, is there some or any of it.

E'uuene, there is some or of it.

Euuersáre, as Euertere.

Euuersíbile, as Euertíbile.

Euuersióne, as Euersióne.

Euuertere, as Euertere.

E'uui, for Viè, there is. Also to you is.

Eu, zomóne, a kind of garden rocket.

E'xtauríto, fi truóuano in molte scrittúre di extauriti.  




F.

Fa', he or she doth or maketh or causeth. Also doe, make or cause thou. Also a note in musike.

Fabácij, sacrifices or offrings of beane-cakes. Also Beane-bearing places.

Fabaríe, as Fabácij.

Fabraría, the arte of smithes or framers. Also a smithes worke-house or forge.

Fábrica, a fabrike, a frame, a building.

Fabricáre, to build, to frame, to forge.

Fabricatióne, a framing or building.

Fabricatóre, a builder, a framer.

Fabricatúra, a building, a framing.

Fabricense, a suruaigher of workes, or ouerseer of buildings or forgings.

Fabrichéuole, that may be built.

Fabríle, of or belonging to a smith or forging. Also forgeable.

Fábro, Fábbro, a forger, a smith. Also a manuall framer or worke-man, a Carpenter. Also a fish called a Doree or Gold-fish.

Fabuláre, to fable, to talke.

Fabulatióne, a fabling, a talking.

Fabulória, the hearbe Henbane.

Fabulosità, inuention of fables.

Fabulóso, fabulous.

Faccétte, some part of a horses bit.

Facchinánte, basely playing the Porter.

Facchináre, to play the base porter.

Facchinaríe, porter-like base trickes.

Facchinésco, base porter-like, raskally.

Facchíno, a Porter or burthen-bearer.

Fácci, for Ci fà, doeth to vs, makes vs. Also doeth or makes there.

Fáccia, a face, a visage. Also a sight, a countenance, a figure, a forme, a fashion, a proportion, or likenesse and show of any thing. Also let him, or may he doe, cause or make. Also as Facciáta.

Fáccia a fáccia, face to face.

Fáccia Dío,, God grant, God worke his will, May God doe.

Facciáta, a fore front of any thing namely of building, a side of a house or chamber, a page of a booking. Also a facing or fronting.

Facciuólo, a hand-kercher, a mucketer.

Facciolétto, a handkercher, a mucketer.

Faccióne, as Fattióne, a faction.

Faccióso, as Fattióso, factious.

Fáccola, as Fiáccola, or Fáce.

Faccoltà, as Facultà.

Faccoltóso, wealthy, rich, hauing meanes.

Fáce, a torch, any great light, a firebrand.

Facella, a little brand or burning light.

Facellína, as Facella.

Facendáre, to employ in any affaires.

Facendáro, as Facendiére.

Facende, affaires, businesse, negotiations.

Facendiere, a negotiator, a dealer in any affaires or businesse, an agent, a factor.

Facendóso, full of businesse or affaires.

Facendúccie, idle or small businesse.

Facetie, pleasant and witty conceits.

Facetióso, as Faceto.

Faceto, pleasant, conceited, witty.

Facétte, a word vsed by Grisóni, fol. 62.

Facéuole, that may be done, or made.

Fácile, easie, facile, ethe. Also pliable, gentle, tractable, mild, prone.

Facíllimo, most easie or facile.

Facilissimaménte, most easily.

Facilitá, easinesse, facility.

Facilitáre, to make facile or easie.

Facínio, a mischiefe, a wicked act.

Facíno, bread made of the pulse Ciue.

Facinoróso, wicked, lewd, full of mischiefe.

Facitóre, a doer, a maker.

Facitríce delle fúsa stórte, a woman that makes or spins crooked spindles, that is maketh her husband cuckold.

Facitura, a doing, a making, the fashion, labour or workmanship of a thing.

Facoltà, as Facultà.

Facoltóso, wealthy, hauing meanes.

Facóndia, eloquence, grace in speaking.

Facondióso, as Facóndo.

Facóndo, eloquent, gracefull in speech.

Facultà, faculty, power, ability. Also wealth, riches, goods.

Facultóso, full of faculty or ability. Also wealthy or rich.

Fà di bisógno, it is needfull.

Fà di mestieri, it behooueth.

Fà d'huópo, it is necessary.

Faganello, a linnet. Also a fish.

Fagáro, a Beech tree.

Fagiána, a phesant hen.

Fagianella, a pheasant poute.

Fagiáno, a phesant cocke.

Fagianótto, a poute or heath cocke.

Fagioláta, as Faggioláta.

Fagióli, Fagiuóli, feazols, welch beanes, kidney beanes, French peason.

Fagiólipinti, Romane or French beanes.

Fagiólo, a colts tooth whereby a horses age is knowne.

Fággio, a beech tree.

Faggióla, the mast of a beech tree.

Faggiolata, a tittle tattle or flim flam tale without rime or reason, head or foot, as women tell when they shale peason. Also court holy water.

Fagnóne, an idle loitring fellow.

Fágo, a beech tree.

Fagottáre, to bind or trusse or bundle vp as in faggots or bundles.

Fagótto, a faggot, a bauin. Also a fardell, a bundle, a trusse, a packe. Also a kind of round musicall instrument. 

Fagúccia, the name of a goldsmiths toole.

Faína, as Foína. Also an idle, coy, squeamish or puling woman.

Faináccia, a kind of filthy foule liuing in pudles, or foule waters.

Faináre, to play the squeamish or idle houswife, idly to gaze about.

Faláce, as Falláce.

Falágo, a bright bay horse.

Falangágio, an hearbe that cureth the biting of the spider Phalangie.

Falánge, a great squadron consisting of eight thousand footemen, whereof Alexander the great made great vse.

Falangiále, of the order of a Falánge.

Falángio, a kind of venemous spider.

Falangóse, a disease in a mans eie lids.

Fà, l'anno, it is now a yeere since.

Faláride, the weed Grasse corne.

Falásco, Reeke or Seagrasse.

Fálbo, a bay colour of a horse Also a fish.

Fálca, as Fálce, as Falcaménto.

Falcaménto, an abatement, a defalking.

Falcáre, to arme with crampers. Also to bend or make crooked as a sithe. Also to abate or defalke of a reckoning.

Falcáti, armed with crampers as the Romanes were wont to arme their cartes.

Fálce, a sithe, a sickle, a crampern. Also a fish called in Latin Tænia.

Fálce fenáia, a sithe to mow hay.

Falchétto, a tassell gentle of a Faulkon.

Fálchi, the pauses or staies when a horse doth rest vpon his hinder parts.

Falciáre, to mow hay or corne.

Falciatóre, a mower, a reaper.

Falcídia, a word taken from Falcidius the Romane, who made a law that the Senate should haue the fourth part of the lands that were gotten, the Italians vse it for the abatement of the fourth part of any thing, but spoken in mockerie.

Falcídio, a false, crooked, deceiuing companion.

Falcífero, a sieth-bearer, a mower.

Falcinello, a sickle. Also as Auosétta.

Falcióne, a welch hooke, a crooked bill.

Fálcola, as Fiáccola.

Falcoláre, as Fiaccoláre.

Falconáre, as Falconeggiáre.

Falconáro, a Faulkner, a Hawker.

Falconcello, any litle or yong Hawke.

Falcóne, a Faulcon. Also one that hath crooked toes. Also a piece of ordinance so called. Also according to the Alchimists phrase, Gold.

Falconeggiáre, to hawke, to faulcon.

Falcóne randióne, a kinde of Faulcon that is king of all birdes, for that no bird dares flie neere it, no not the Eagle.

Falcóne trauescio, a kind of Faulcon.

Falcóne zafiro, a kind of Faulcon with yellow leggs and feete. 



Falconello, a kind of lanaret hawke.

Falconería, the arte of hawlking or of faulconrie.

Falconétto, a piece called a Faulconet.

Falcónico, of the nature of a Faulcon.

Falconiera, a hawking pouch or bag.

Falconiere, a faulkner, a hawker. Also some part about a ship.

Fálda, a flake of snow, the skirt of a coat. Also the bending, the side or foote of a hill. Also the armor piece called the taces or cuishards. Also a folde, an enfoulding, a plaining, a wrinkle or puckering in any garment. Also bandles, rowles or swathes. Also a handfull or locke of wooll or flaxe.

Faldáre, to flake as snow. Also to fold, to plaite, to wrinkle, to pucker. Also to bandle, to roule, or swatch vp as they doe yong children.

Faldarello, a litle pretty playing dog, such as gentlewomen loue to haue in their laps.

Faldea, an open or loose garment that the noble women of Venice were wont to weare.

Fálde, the plurall of Fálda.

Faldeláre, as Faldáre.

Faldeláto, flaked or be speckled with litle or small spots as some horses be.

Faldeggiáre, as Faldáre.

Faldella, vsed for a sauegard that women vse in riding.

Faldígie, as Faldíglie.

Faldigliáre, as Faldáre.

Faldíglie, plaitings or enfoldings in a garment. Also a kind of thicke gathered frocke or garment. Also as Fálde.

Faldistóro, a great deske to set cushions or bookes vpon before, vpon which Princes and others kneele when they are at praiers.

Faldóni, as Fálde, great Fálde.

Falécio, a kind of verse or poeme.

Fà legnáme, a woodman, a cutter downe of trees or wood. Also a carpenter, or hewer of timber, a woodmunger.

Faleráto, adorned, trimly decked.

Falerno, a kind of wine. Also a kind of peare very full of liquor.

Fallábile, failable, that may faile.

Fállace, fallacious, false, fraudulent.

Fallácia, fallacie, falshood, illusion, fraude.

Fallacióso, as Falláce, deceitfull.

Falláce loquenza, deceitfull speach.

Fallánte, failing, missing, erring.

Fallánza, a failing, a missing.

Falláre, to faile, to misse, to erre.

Fallente, failing, missing, erring.

Fallenza, a failing, a missing, an erring.

Fallétto, a little ring in the mouth of a bit, set at one end of the roote.

Fálli, saults. Also as Annellétti.

Fallíbile, failable, that may faile. 

Fall'in bello, a gallant, spruce or finicall fellow, that loues to make a faire shew of himselfe and hath no other vertue, a milkesop, a fresh water souldier.

Falliménto, a failing. Also a merchants breaking or banquerouting, a default.

Fallíre, ísco, íto, to faile, to misse, to erre. Also to breake or cracke ones credit and become banquerout.

Fallíto, failed, missed, erred. Also broken or banquerouted. Also a banquerout.

Fállo, a fault, an error, a misse. Also a sinne, a transgression, an ouersight, a trespasse. Also fraude, guile or couen. Also a fault at tennise. Also doe it, or make him.

Fallóre, as Fállo.

Falò, a blazing light, a lantern at sea. Also a bone fire, or feu de ioy.

Falótico, dull pated, heauy witted.

Falsárdo, as Falsário.

Falsáre, to falsifie, to counterfeit, to forge.

Falsário, a falsifier, a forger, a counterfeiter. Also a false coiner or writer.

Falsatóre, as Falsário.

Falseggiáre, to falsifie, to counterfeit. Also to faine a voice.

Falsembiánza, false resemblance.

Falsétto, a false treble or counter tenor in musicke.

Falsía, as Falsità.

Falsidíco, a lier, a leaser, a false speaker.

Falsificábile, falsifiable.

Falsificáre, to falsifie.

Falsificatóre, as Falsário.

Falsifico, as Falsário.

Falsilóquio, a lier, a false speaker.

Falsiloquenza, false speech.

Falsímile, false in likenesse.

Falsimigliánza, false resemblance.

Falsiolátti, a kind of dainty foule.

Falsità, falshood, falsenesse, deceit.

Fálso, false, counterfeit, forged, vntrue.

Falsóne, a faulcon, or any hawke.

Falsonétti, little yong hawkes.

Fálso quárto, a cleft in the hoofe of a horse by the talent naile called of cunning horsemen or farriers a false quarter.

Fálta, Faltánza, a fault, a defect, a want, a lacke.

Fáluo, a bay colour in a horse.

Faltáre, to be faulty or defectiue, to lacke, to want, to aile.

Faltóso, faulty, defectiue, lacking.

Fáma, fame, renoume, bruite, report. Also reputation, credite, or opinion.

Fámaut, a note in musike but, taken in iest for hunger and thirst together.

Fáme, hunger, famine, list to eat. Also vsed for dearth, necessity or want.

Fáme canína, a disease so called.

Famecída, hunger killing.

Fáme contadína, greedy clownish hunger. 

Faméglia, as Famíglia.

Famélico, hungry, greedy, rauenous.

Famelicóso, full of hunger.

Famfalúche, as Fanfalúche.

Famicída, a slanderer.

Famífero, hunger-bringing.

Famigerábile, famous.

Famigeráre, to diuulge fame or blazon reports, to make famous.

Famigeráto, famoused, bearing fame.

Famígero, a bringer or blazoner of fame and reportes.

Famíglia, a family, a household. Vsed also for the whole body of the watch in a Citie, as one would say the Shriefe and his troupe of serieants.

Famigliáccio, a filthy groome, hinde, swaine, skullion or seruile drudge.

Famigliáre, familiar, tame, gentle, acquainted, conuersant. Also a houshold-guest.

Famigliáre, to set vp a family, to liue in a family. Also to make tame or familiare.

Famigliári, vsed for such officers or Serieants as waite vpon a chife iudge or magistrate.

Famigliaríssimo, most familiar.

Famigliarità, acquaintance, familiaritie.

Famíglio, a groome, a manseruant, a househould seruant, a hinde, a swaine.

Famíglio di stálla, a groome of a stable.

Famigliuóla, a little family or household.

Familiáre, as Familiáre.

Familiarità, familiarity, acquaintance.

Fámmelo, doe it vnto me.

Fámmi, make me, doe me.

Famosità, famousnesse, renoumednesse.

Famóso, famous, renoumed, glorious.

Famulente, hungry, full of hunger.

Famulenza, greedy, hunger.

Fanále, a lanterne of a ship or gally. Also a sea marke or towre where lanterns are kept burning a nightes for mariners direction.

Fanaticáre, to be lunatike or frantike.

Fanático, Vsed for a Pagane Priest.

Fanático, enspired, rauished, mad.

Fanciúlla, a wench, a lasse, a girle.

Fanciullággine, as Fanciullézza.

Fanicullaríe, childish toyes or trifles.

Fanciulleggiáre, to play the child.

Fanciullescaménte, childishly.

Fanciullésco, childish, brattish, puerile.

Fanciullézza, child-hood, puerility.

Fanciullíno, any little child.

Fanciúllo, a boy, a child, a brat, a lad.

Fándo., Vsed for Facendo, doing, making. 



Fandonáre, to speake idlely or impertinently.

Fandóne, an idle speaker.

Fandónie, idle impertinent speeches.

Fanéga, a certaine corne measure.

Fanello, a Linnet-bird, some say a Lapwing.

Fanfalucáre, to prate idlely, to fable.

Fanfalúche, flimflam tales, old wiues fables, idle discourses, vaine pratlings.

Fanfalúco, an idle or foolish pratler.

Fanfalúcole, as Fanfalúche.

Fánfaro, a flurt, a toy of nothing, a flap with a fox-taile.

Fangáre, to mud, to bemire, to durt.

Fangarólla, a bird alwaies dabling in the durt, mud or mire.

Fángo, mud, mire, durt.

Fangognáre, to wallow in mud or mire, to enmud, to bemire.

Fangosità, muddinesse, mirinesse.

Fangóso, durty, muddy, myrie, boggie.

Fángro, a fish called in Latine Pagrus.

Fánne, doe vs, make vs, or make of it.

Faniána, a kind of paper ten inches broad.

Fannò, a kind of golden coine in India.

Fanò, a lanterne in a ship or gally.

Fantaccíno, a souldier seruing on foote.

Fantagúzzo, a fresh-water souldier.

Fantaría, infantery or foot-men.

Fantasía, a fantasie, a humour, a conceit.

Fantásima, as Fantásma.

Fantásma, a ghost, a hag, a sprit, a hobgoblin, a robin-good-fellow. Also the night-mare or riding hag.

Fantasticáre, to rate or be fantasticall.

Fantasticheríe, fantasticall toyes.

Fantástico, fantasticall, humorous.

Fánte, a man or woman seruant or attendant. Also a footman or soldier seruing on foot. Also the knaue or varlet at cardes. Also a paune at chesse. Also as Parlánte.

Fantella, a girle, a lasse, a wench.

Fantésca, a kitchin maide or drudge seruant.

Fantescáccia, a kitchin drudge.

Fánti, soldiers seruing on foot.

Fanticella, as Fantella.

Fánti di giustitia, serieants or officers attending on a Marshall or Shrieue.

Fánti di volontà, voluntary soldiers.

Fantilità, childhood, puerility.

Fantína, Fantinella, as Fanticella.

Fantinería, slie knauery, wily craft, subile cheating.

Fantíno, a boy, a lad. Also an apprentice.

Fantolináre, as Fanciulleggiáre.

Fantocchieríe, foolish or childish trickes.

Fantócchio, a foolish seruing man. Also a bugbeare to fray children.

Fantóccia, an elderly vnmaried maide. 

Fantolíno, a yong lad, a boy, a child.

Fapésmo, a kind of argument.

Farácola, a kind of measure in India.

Farássa, a great round fish that is an enemy to the whale.

Fárca, a kind of very fierce and cruell serpent.

Farcína, the farcin, farcies, fashions or creeping vlcer in a horse.

Farciglióne, a rauenous cormorant.

Facinóso, a horse that hath the farcins.

Fáre, fáccio or fò, féci, fátto, to doe, to make, to cause, to compose, it may be said to be a relatiue to many other verbes. Also to act or faine any part or personage.

Fáre accoglienza, to giue or shew good and friendly entertainment.

Fáre a chetichégli, to goe closely and secretly about ones businesse, to play the slie or subtle companion, to play least in sight, to sneake about priuily.

Fáre a cózzi, to shocke or But as Rams.

Fáre ácqua, to water or take in fresh water as a ship. Also to pisse.

Fáre acquísto, to make purchase.

Fáre a crédere, to make to belieue.

Fáre a gára, to striue or contend for the mastery or victory.

Fáre aguáti, to lay ambushes.

Fáre a gúcchia, to knit with a needle.

Fáre a guísadélla códa del pórco che tútto il giórno se la diména, epói la séra non hà fátto núlla, to doe as the hog doth that all day wags his taile and at night hath done nothing, much adoe and neuer the neerer, doe and vndoe the day is long enough.

Fáre a'púgni, to play at fists or hufty cuffes.

Fáre ala, to make alte, as soldiers doe. Also a certaine march vpon drum and trumpet in time of war.

Fáre alla gráppa più, to play at musse, to shuffle and scramble for.

Fáre alle bráccia, to wrestle, to strugle.

Fáre alle coltelláte, to fight with handy and cutting weapons.

Fáre alle púgna, to play at buffets or hufty cuffes.

Fáre álto, at sea to goe romeward, at land to make a stand or a rendezuous.

Fáre a metà, to goe halfes, to be halfes, to share equally.

Fáre a menda, to make amends.

Fáre ánimo, to encourage, to take heart.

Fáre appresto, to make preparation.

Fáre a rigátta, to striue or play at musse as children doe.

Fáre arósto, to roste meate.

Fáre asapére, to let one know, to giue one to vnderstand.

Fáre a uácca in giuóco, to play together helter skelter.

Fáre auánzo, to gaine or get aforehand, to leaue and to spare.

Fáre báco báco, to play boe-peepe, to play least in sight.

Fáre bándo, to make proclamation, to proclaime.

Fáre báu báu, as Fáre báco.

Fáre beffe, to mocke, to scoffe, to flout at.

Fáre bellíno bellíno, to faune, to flatter or sooth vp one.

Fáre bel tempo, to be faire weather.

Fáre bisógno, to haue need.

Fáre buón partíto, to make a good offer or match, to giue good entertainement.

Fáre buón prò,, to much good doe one.

Fáre bríndesi, to drinke healths.

Fàre brínsi, to drinke healths.

Fáre bróglio, to canuase for voices or for any office and place, to shift for, to rob Peter and pay Paul. Also to take vp commodities and sell them.

Fáre búca, to steale away by craft, to picke ones purse or pocket.

Fáre capitále, to make or gather a stocke to liue vpon. Also to make accompt as of his owne goods and stocke.

Fáre callo, to make an habite. Also to grow hard as a corne.

Fáre cattíuo tempo, to be ill weather.

Fáre capelláccio, to put the same tricke vpon him that would put thee like vpon thee, or as we say in English, to beate one with his owne weapon, to giue one as good as he brings.

Fáre cápo, to make head, to resist. Also to come to a head.

Fáre cáso, to make accompt or case of.

Fáre ceffo, to make a moe, a scoffe, or to poute at any thing.

Fáre cerca, to make search or enquire, to seeke after.

Fáre cipíglio, to make a grim, a frouning or scouling looke.

Fáre chiemazzuóli, a horse to defend the bit with this nether lip, some say it is when a horse doth couer or defend his gumes with his lip.

Fáre colatióne, to breake ones fast.

Fáre cólta, to make a collection. Also to gather in breakefast.

Fare cómpera, to make a purchase.

Fáre congiúra, to conspire together.

Fáre conserua, to lay vp in store. Also to make or be a conuoy vnto.

Fáre cônto, to make accompt.

Fáre contrapónti, to descant in singing, to make counterpoints.

Fáre cópia, to giue store of, to giue ones bodie ouer.

Fáre cordóglio, to make lamentation, or to show hearts-griefe.

Fáre cornamúsa, as Gonfiárc alcúno.

Fáre córte, to court one.

Fáre cortéggio, to court, to waite or at­



tend a man as one of his retinue.

Fáre da cena, to dresse supper.

Fáre déllalúna, as Nouilúnio.

Fáre del resto, to doe or play ones wonted trickes.

Fáre délle súe,  idem.

Fáre dél gránde, to grow to greatnesse or pride, to take pride vpon.

Fáre di capello, to put of ones hat for reuerence sake.

Fáre di berétta, to put of ones cap.

Fáre di bisógno, to be necessarie, to need, to haue need or necessitie of.

Fáre d'ócchio, to giue an inkling, to make a signe or winke vpon with ones eyes.

Fáre di mánco, Non pósso fáre di mánco, I can not chuse, I can doe no lesse.

Fáre di méno, idem.

Fár fáre, to cause or force to doe.

Fáre diuieto, to make prohibition.

Farfarello, the name of a deuill in Dante, a bragger, a vaunting pratler.

Fáre féde, to testifie.

Fáre festa, to keepe or make holiday. Also to cherish or shew loue vnto, to feast.

Fáre férie, as Fáre festa.

Fáre figlinóli, to beget or beare children.

Fáre fórbici, or fórfici is when a horse doth writh his chaps like a paire of sheares.

Fáre fréddo, to be or make cold.

Fáre frétta, to make haste.

Fáre frít frít, to play cricket a wicket.

Fáre frónte, to make head, to front, to resist face to face.

Fáre gála, to be merry. Also to make a faire shew and good cheere withall.

Fáre gazouíglia, as Fáre gozouíglia.

Fáre gente, to leauie men.

Fáre gétto d'artegliería, to cast ordinance.

Fáre ghiaiáte., looke Ghiaiáte.

Fáre giornáta, to fight or come to a set battle.

Fáre giuóco, to bett or lay a wager, to play at.

Fáre gozouíglia, to make merry with good cheere and carelesly.

Fáre hostería, to keepe an Inne.

Fárei fátti suói, a man to doe or follow his owne businesse.

Fáre il ballórdo, to play the ninnie.

Fáre il buón prò,, to doe one much good when he eateth, or to haue ioy of.

Fáre il cálle, to make a custome or habit, to settle fast.

Fáre il giórno, to passe or spend the day.

Fáre il rómbo, a piece to make a report being shot off.

Fáre il rósso, to play the wanton or darling.

Fáre il páne, to die or kicke vp ones heeles and neuer to haue more need of bread. 

Fáre il sóle, the Sunne to shine.

Fáre il solécchio, to shade or shadow.

Fáre il sánto, to play the Hipocrite.

Fáre il séme, to come to a full growth or perfection.

Fáre il uerno, to spend or passe the winter.

Fáre ibisógni, to doe ones needes.

Fáre instánza, to vrge or be instant with one.

Fáre la búsca, to play at musse, to scamble or strugle or shift for.

Fáre la credenza, to be sewer or caruer or cupbearer to a Prince, to take essay of a Princes cup or dish.

Fáre la honesta da cámpi, to mince, to bride it, or to counterfait honestie abroad.

Fáre l'amóre, to make loue vnto.

Fáre la nótte, to passe and spend the night.

Fáre la minúta, to make or draw a draught of any writing or worke.

Fáre la quarantána, to keepe lent or fast fortie daies, but properly in times of plague and infection to keepe fortie daies from companie as they vse in Italie.

Fáre la lúna, the Moone to shine.

Fáre la quarésima, to keepe Lent.

Fáre la ruóta del pauóne, to play the proud peacocke, to make shew of all one hath.

Fáre la spósa, to bride it, to mince.

Fáre la státe, to keepe and spend the Summer.

Fáre lárgo, to make or giue roome.

Fáre le bózze, to graft hornes in ones head, to make one cuckold.

Fáre le cárte, to shuffle and deale the cardes.

Fáre le battúte, to beate or keepe time in Musicke.

Fáre le fíca, to bid a fig or a flurt for one.

Fáre le fórche, to know a thing and to dissemble the knowledge thereof. Also to blame one when one should praise him, it is taken in both these sences.

Fáre le fúsa stórte, to spin crooked spindles, that is for a woman to set hornes on her husbands head.

Fáre le lústre, as Fáre le fórche.

Fáre le nóne, to preuent one for borrowing, as if I feare that one comes to borrow money of me, as soone as I see him, I begin to complaine that I am poore and haue no monie, and know not where to get any, of such a one they say, lui fálenóne, that there is nothing to be hoped for of such a dissembler.

Fáre le posáte, to make a horse aduance when at a stop he riseth twice or thrice with his forefeete. 

Fáre le spése, to defray or beare ones charges.

Fáre le stimáte, to make esteeme off.

Fáre leuáta, to make a leauey of souldiers, to raise a tumult or insurrection.

Fáre mál prò, to doe one no good.

Fáre máschera, to maske.

Fáre luógo, to make roome. Also to giue place. Also to be expedient or necessarie.

Fáre mercáto, to bargaine, to trade.

Fáre merenda, to eate ones nunchions betweene dinner and supper.

Fáre mercè, to doe a thing worthy of reward and praise.

Fáre mína, to make a shew or seeming.

Fáre montár'in cóllera, to make one angry or grow into choller.

Fáre mótto, to giue word of, to impart or communicate or giue notice vnto.

Fáre ógni sfórzo, to doe the vttermost of ones power or endeuour.

Fáre ópera, to doe ones endeuour.

Fáre partíto, to make a match or a composition. Also to morgage.

Fáre paragóne, to compare.

Fáre pásto, to eate a meales meate.

Fáre pátto, to couenant, to bargaine.

Fáre peduccio, to sooth one vp with good words, to allow and make good whatsoeuer one saies, to curriefauor one.

Fardelláre, to fardle, to bundle, to packe or trusse vp.

Fardello, a packe, a bundle, a fardle, a trusse.

Fáre pensiere, to suppose, to thinke.

Fáre pónta, to make a point. Also to heaue or thrust with might and maine and with ones shoulders. Also to shoulder. Also to countenance and hold vp.

Fáre prezza, to prize or accompt of.

Fáre preftito, to lend or giue to loue.

Fáre prò, to doe good or profit.

Fáre questióne, to fight and quarrell.

Fáre rabúffo, to checke or taunt one.

Fáre ressa, to make resistance.

Fáre ragióne, to doe right, to administer iustice. Also to pledge one.

Fáre rimenére, to cozen or fetch ouer.

Fáre ribúffi, to chide at, to rate, to checke, to giue one a checke, to rebuffe.

Fáre richiámo, to appeale vnto.

Fáre róbba, to get wealth.

Fáre sálua, to shoot of all ones ordinance, to giue a voley of shot.

Fáre scomméssa, to bett, to lay a wager.

Fáre scála, to land or set foote on shore.

Fáre sapére, to make one know or vnder stand.

Fáre sapúto, to make knowen.

Fáre sfóggij, to inuent or follow new fashions, to lauish out in new clothes.

Fáte sángue, to let, shed, or spill blood. 



Fáre scommésse, to bett or lay wagers.

Fáre scónto, to make any abatement in reckonings.

Fáre scúdo, to make a shield or defence.

Fáre stáre, to make one stand, that is to cunnicatch or fetch one ouer.

Fáre sembiánte, to make shew or semblance off.

Fáre sfórzo, to doe ones vtmost endeuour.

Fáre stócchi, as Fáre bróglio.

Fáre spálla, to backe or vphold one.

Fáre súe bisógne, a man to doe or follow his owne businesse.

Fáre súo ágio, a man to doe his easement.

Fáre cantáre, to be liuely, to make merrie, to throw the house out of the windowes.

Fáre táuola, to bring a game at chesse to a stale, that is, neither loose nor win.

Fáre tcmpóne, to passe the time merily, to sport and make good cheere.

Fáre testa, to make head, to resist.

Fatetra, a quiuer for arrowes.

Faretráre, to quiuer, to enquiuer.

Fáre tríbolo, looke Tríbolo.

Fáre vézzi, to wantonize withall, to blandish or make much of.

Fáre vedúta, to seeme or make a shew of, to dissemble with ones lookes.

Fáre vélo, to make opposition.

Fáre viággio, to wayfare, to trauell.

Fáre vísta, as Fáre vedúta.

Fáre una drincáta, to drinke a health to one, to make a merry drinking.

Fáre úna finta, to faine, or make an offer, to faine to doe.

Fáre un tíro, to play a tricke.

Fáre vía, to make or giue way.

Fáre vuóua, to lay egges.

Fárfa, the dandrafe of ones head.

Farfálla, a flie that houering about a candle burnes it selfe, of some called a bishop.

Farfalónico, full of humming or buzzing. Also snotty, slauering and lubardly.

Farfallóne, a great flie or humming bee. Also a filthy great snot of ones nose, or gobbon of fleame. Also a slouenly, snotty or slauering fellow. Also a shamelesse lying fellow, one that will lie for the whet-stone.

Farfanícchio, a sneakeing dastard, a freshwater-souldier, a milke-sop.

Farfanáccio, as Fárfara.

Farfánte, as Furfánte.

Fárfara, as Fárfa. Also the hearbe Folefoote, Colts-foote, Horse-foote, or Ground-pepper.

Farfarella, as Fárfara.

Fárfaro, the white Popler-tree.

Farfaróso, full of dandrafe in his head. 

Fárfero, as Fárfara.

Farfógna, as Fógna.

Farfóso, as Farfaróso.

Farfúgio, as Fárfara.

Farfúso, as Farfaróso.

Farína, all manner of meale or flower.

Earináccia, any course meale. Also a play much vsed in Italy.

Farináccio, male of meale.

Farináio, Farináro, a meale-man. Also a hutch or bin to keepe meale in. Also Dádo farinário, a blanke Dye. Looke Dádo.

Farinaiuólo, a Miller or Meale-man.

Farináre, to be-meale or be-flowre.

Farináta, a pultesse, a cataplasme. Also any thing of flowre. Also flowred or mealed.

Farinella, as the Latin Crimnum.

Farinelli, a kind of danty mushromes.

Farinóso, mealy, flowry, that hath meale in it.

Fário, a kind of Trout.

Farisaísmo, the life, profession or calling of the Farisei.

Farisei, certaine Phtlosophers among the Hebrewes, that liued soberly without any pompe; that followed the instinct of reason; that resisted not those whom they should obey; that honoured old men; that beleeued all things to be gouerned by fate; that depriue not man of free-will, that beleeue a day of iudgement; and that then all men shall be iudged according to their merites; that held the immortality of the soule; which in hell shall haue an habitation according as they haue liued, either vertuously or viciously.

Farlácchio, a grosse gull, a shallow-pate.

Fárla in trè páci, to haue but three castes for it, not to stay long vpon the matter, to make a concluding peace betweene man and woman putting two into one.

Fárloci, for Celo fàre, to do it vnto vs. Also to make him there.

Farmáco, that part of Physicke that cureth with medicines.

Fár natále, to keepe Christmasse.

Farneticánza, a rauing, a doting.

Farneticáre, to raue, to dote, to be franticke.

Farnético, franticke, rauing, doting.

Farníce, a kinde of tree with a hard fruite.

Fáro, as Fréto, a narrow sea.

Farò, I will or shall doe or make.

Farólo, a beacon. Also a Lantern in a ship.

Faróna, a stubble-goose.

Farrágine, Dredge, Bollimong, or Frage for cattle, it is a kinde of rye.

Farraína, a mash made of diuers sortes of graines together for a sicke horse. 

Farrána, as Farrágine.

Farráno, as Fárfa.

Farráro., Vsed abusiuely for Ferráro.

Fárro, Spelt-corne or Beere-barly. Also a kind of wheat or furmenty to make pottage of.

Fárro adoreo, a kind of red wheat.

Fársa, a merry tale, a pleasant discourse. Also an enterlude or stage-play.

Farsáre, to farce or to stuffe meat.

Farsáta, a farcing or stuffing of meat. Also a kind of pocket or secret budget that wandering rogues vse to weare.

Farsettáre, to trusse vp with a trusse those that are bursten.

Farsettáio, a maker of trusses.

Farsétto, a trusse that they weare that haue ruptures and are bursten. Also a trusse or sleeuelesse thin doublet without skirtes vsed in Italy in sommer.

Fársi, a man to make himselfe.

Fársi inánzi, to aduance or come forward.

Fartágna, a larke with a tuff or bush on his head.

Fárza, as Fársa.

Fás, lawfull before God, standing with reason.

Fasanello, a Phesant pout.

Fasáno, a Phesant coke.

Fásce, swathes, withs, rowles, gardes, fillets, laces, bindings or borders about any garments or any other frame. Also fardles or bundles. Also fesses in armory. Also the bundles of rods born as ensignes before the Consuls or Dictators in Rome.

Fascello, a Bee-hiue. Also as Fascétto.

Fascétti di caténe, chaine-shots.

Fascétto, a bundle or sheafe of any thing.

Fáscia, the singulare of Fáscie. Also a scarfe.

Fasciáno, a Phesant cocke.

Fasciáre, to swathe or bundle as yongue children. Also to roule or tie vp, to binde about, to sheafe vp as corn. Also to garde, to lace, to fillet or border a garment about. Also to sesse in armory.

Fasciatóio, a bandle, a swathe, a rowler.

Fascícolo, a little bundle, trusse or packe.

Fáscie, as Fásce.

Fascína, a faggot or a bauin. Also as Cascína. Also as Bécca.

Fascináre, to bewitch or charme with wordes or lookes.

Fascináta, a fence of faggots or bauins.

Fascinatióne, a bewitching or charming with words or lookes, an eye-biting proceeding of the wrie-lookes of enuious persons and of woolues.

Fascinatóre, a bewitcher or 



charmer with lookes.

Fascinelle, little bauins, little fesses.

Fascinellétti, the diminitiue of Fásce.

Fascíno, as Fascinatióne.

Fáscio, a bundle, a fardle, a trusse, a sheafe. Also any heauy waight or burden.

Fasciuóla, a little Fáscia.

Fasciuóle ondóse, barry-wauy in armorie.

Fascitelli, sheafes or handfuls of corne.

Fás o néfas, lawfull or vnlawfull, with reason or against reason.

Fássene, for Se ne fa, is doone of it, or there is made of it.

Fássi, for Si fa, is made, is done. Also he makes himselfe.

Fastelláre, to bundle, to fardle, to trusse or binde vp in sheaues.

Fastello, a bundle, a fardle, a sheafe or trusse of any thing.

Fastellétto, any little Fastello.

Fastidiáre, to acloy, to trouble, to molest or be tedious vnto in minde.

Fastídio, trouble, molestation, wearinesse, lothsomnesse or tediousnesse of minde.

Fastidiosità, as Fastídio.

Fastidióso, tedious, wearysome, troublesome, yrkesome or lothsome to the minde.

Fastidíre, dísco, díto, as Fastidiáre.

Fastigiáre, to reare, to raise or worke vp to the top or height.

Fastígio, the top or height of any thing namely of a tree, or the depth of it.

Fásti giórni, Court, Law or Leete daies where sutes are heard in common places.

Fásto, pride, surquedry, haughtinesse, loftinesse or proud disdaine.

Fastosità, as Fásto.

Fastóso, proud, haughty minded, disdainefull, lofty spirited.

Fasuóli, as Fagiuóli.

Fáta, a Fairy, an Elfe, a Hag, a witch.

Fatále, fatall, destined.

Fatalità, fatality, destiny.

Fatáppio, a kinde of night flying birde. Also a gull, a dolt, a noddy, a sot.

Fatáre, to fatuate as Fairies doe, to bewitch, to enchant.

Fatatúra, a bewitching by Fairies.

Fáteui in colà, away, remooue further.

Fatesta, namely, chiefely, especially.

Fatézze, feature, shape, handsomnesse in composition, beawty, forme, good making, propernesse.

Fatíca, labour, trauell, paine, toile, swinke, industry, endeuour.

Faticánte, a labouring man.

Faticáre, to labour, to trauell, to take paines, to toile, to swinke.

Fatichéuole, full of labour and paines. 

Faticóso, laboursome, toilesome, painefull, industerous, laborious.

Faticosità, laboriousnesse, toilesomenesse, swinke, painefulnesse, trauell.

Faticído, as Fatidíco.

Fatidíco, a Soothsaier, a Deuiner, a Prophet, a Secretary of the gods.

Fatióne, the making, the fashion or workmanship of any thing.

Fáto, fate, lot, destiny, chance, lucke, deuine will and disposition.

Fatóio, a paper mill, or a paper presse.

Fátta, the fashion or making of any thing. Also made or done. Also Si fatta, so made, so, such, or like. Also as Frátta.

Fátta e, it is done, t'is done.

Fattaménte, si, being ioined thereunto, in such sort, guise, fashion or manner.

Fátti, deeds, doings, acts, facts, feats, actions, geasts.

Fátti, done, made, acted, performed.

Fattibello, a smug, spruce fellow, but properly womens artificiall complexion.

Fattíbile, that may be done, made or wrought, that is to be done or made.

Fátti con Dío,, farewell, God speed thee well.

Fátti in costà, away, get thee further, be gone.

Fattionáre, to fashion.

Fattióne, fashion, workmanship. Also any action, doing or seruice. Also a faction or sect.

Fattióso, factious, sectious, turbulent.

Fattítio, as Fattíbile. Also artificiall or counterfet in making.

Fattíssimo, most or throughly done.

Fattíuo, as Fattíbile.

Fátto, done, made, caused, looke Fáre.

Fátto a denti, the singular of Fátti. Also a mans case, state, businesse or action.

Fátto, accompanied with the word Gránde signifieth some great matter or thing of worth.

Fátto or fátta, following Sì, or Così, serueth for such, so made, or of such quality.

Fátto a denti, engrailed in armory.

Fátto a gúcchia, knit with knitting needles.

Fátto d'árme, a feat of armes, a conflict, a battaile, a warlike piece of seruice.

Fattoráccio, a filthy broker or factor.

Fattocchiáre, to bewitch, to enchant.

Fattocchiéra, a witch, an enchantresse.

Fattocchieríe, charmes, bewitchings.

Fattocchiéro, a witch, an enchanter.

Fattoráre, to play the factor for another.

Fattór di vílla, a bailif or ouerseer or steward of a country, lands or husbandry.

Fattóre, a factor, an agent, a dealer.

Fattoria, a place of trafficke, a factorship. Also a custome or marchants house.

Fattoríno, a factor, a petty fogger.

Fáttosene, hauing made to himselfe of it. 

Fattucchiáre, to charme, to bewitch.

Fattucchiéra, a witch, an enchantresse.

Fattucchieríe, spells, charmes.

Fattúra, a making, a handy worke, a fashion or workmanship of any thing. Also a charming or bewitching.

Fatturáre, to charme, to bewitch.

Fattúre, charmes, spells, bewitchings.

Fattúro, to be made, that will make.

Fatturéra, a witch, an enchantresse.

Fatuáre, to besot, to play the foole.

Fatuità, foolishnesse, blockishnesse.

Fátuo, foolish, blockish, fond, idiot.

Fáua, a beane. Also vsed for the prepuse or top of a mans yard. Also the voice of a man giuen in scrutiny.

Fauagello, some take it for a kind of beane. Vnguénto di fauagello.

Fáua greca, the colocasia or Egiptian beane or Greeke beane.

Fauále, made of, or like to beanes.

Fáua lupína, the hearb Henbane.

Fáua menáta, a kind of beane pottage.

Fáua porcína, the hearb Henbane.

Fauáro, a field or a seller of beanes.

Fauáta, a meade of beanes. Also as Faggioláta.

Fáuce, the throate, gorge or gullet pipe.

Fáue, all manner of beanes. Also certaine running vlcers from which comes a matter like hony. Also kernells or agnells that come between the flesh and the skin.

Fauella, a speech, a language, a tongue.

Fauellaménto, a speaking, or speech.

Fauelláre, to speake, to discourse.

Fauellatóre, a speaker, a discourser.

Fauelléni, a poison maker.

Fauente Dio, God fauoring.

Fauerótti, kipper nuts, or earth chesnuts.

Fauétta, a little beane.

Fauílla, a sparkle, a twinkling.

Fauillánte, sparkling, twinkling.

Fauilláre, to sparkle, to twinkle.

Fauillóso, full of sparkles, sparkling.

Fauillúccia, a little sparkle.

Fauíne, looke V'lcere fauíne.

Fáule, chaffe or stubble of corne.

Fáuni, faunes, siluane gods.

Fáunico, wild, rude, siluane.

Fáuo, a bee-hiue. Also a hony combe. Also as Vlcere fauíne.

Fauognáno, the west wind.

Fáuola, a fable, a tale, a leasing, a lie.

Fauoláio, a fabler, a teller of fables.

Fauoláre, to fable, to tell tales.

Fauolatóre, a fabler, a teller of fables.

Fauoleggiáre, to fable, to tell fables.

Fauolétta, a little fable, a short tale.

Fauolóne, a teller of merry fables.

Fauolo sità, fabulosity, prophanenesse.

Fauolóso, fabulous, false, prophane.

Fauoniáne, a peare called the proud peare.

Fauoniáno, the west wind. 



Fauónio, the west wind.

Fauorábile, sauorable.

Fauoráre, to fauor or grace one.

Fauoratóre, a fauorer.

Fauóre, a fauor, a boone, a good turne. Also helpe or protection.

Fauoreggiánte, fauorable, fauoring.

Fauoreggiáre, to fauour, to befriend.

Fauoréuole, fauorable, friendly.

Fauoríre, rísco, ríto, to fauor.

Fauoríto, fauored, befriended.

Fauoríto, a fauorite, a minion.

Fauorúccio, a poore fauour or grace.

Fauoscello, Celandine, figwort, pilewort.

Fauótti, a kind of ducke or mallard.

Fauraría, a smiths or iron worke house or forge. Also as Ferrería.

Fáuro, as Fábro.

Faustità, good fortune, prosperous lucke.

Fáusto, propiciousnesse, lucke, fortune.

Faustóso, happy, luckie, propicious.

Fautóre, a fauorer, a protecter, a furtherer.

Fautríce, a woman fauorer.

Fáuuli, beane stalkes or strawes.

Fazzatóia, a bin, a hutch or maund for bread.

Fázzo, a fashion, a guise, a manner.

Fazzolettáccio, any filthy Fazzolétto.

Fazzolétto, a hand kerchife, a mucketer, a towell, a wiper, a barbers cloth.

Fazzuólo, as Fazzolétto.

Fè, as Féde. Also as Féce, he did or made.

Feáce, voluptuous, giuen to all sensuality.

Febbre, a feauer, an ague.

Febbre contínua, a continuall ague.

Febbre cotidiína, a quotidian ague.

Febbre quartána, a quartan ague.

Febbre terzána, a tertian ague.

Febbreggiánte, troubled with an ague.

Febbreggiáre, to haue an ague.

Febbricella, a gentle or easie ague.

Febbricitánte, troubled with an ague.

Febbricitáre, to haue or be sicke of an ague.

Febbriccióso, aguish, troubled with an ague.

Febbricóso, sicke of, or full of a feauer.

Febbróne, a violent ague, a burning feauer.

Febbróso, troubled with or hauing an ague.

Febea, vsed for Phebe or the Moone.

Febráio, Febráro, the moneth Februarie.

Fecatelle, as Fegatelle.

Fécato, as Fégato.

Fecáto, a kind of small wine made of the lees of other strong wines.

Fecatóso, as Fegatóso.

Feccia, dregs, lees or filth of wine, dregs or mother of oyle, drosse, ordure or riffraff of any thing.

Feccióso, dreggie, drossie, full of lees. Also loathsome or vnpleasing.

Féce, he did or made. Also as Feccia.

Feciále, an herauld, an embassador or officer of warre to denounce warre or peace.

Fecondáre, to fructifie, to make fruitfull.

Fecondézza, as Fecondità.

Fecóndia, as Fecondità.

Fecondità, fruitfulnesse, fertilitie, plentie.

Fecóndo, fruitfull, fertile, plentifull.

Feculente, like or tasting of dregs or lees.

Feculenza, dregginesse, drossinesse.

Féde, faith, trust, truth, religion, honestie. Also a ring made with hand in hand. Also a pasport, a warrant, a testificate, an assurance.

Fedeáno, a kind of coine in India.

Fedéle, faithfull, trustie, honest, loyall, of credit, religious. Also a trustie friend.

Fedeltà, fidelitie, faithfulnesse, loyaltie.

Federále, of or belonging to a confederacie.

Fédere, fédo, fedéi, fedúto, to wound, to hurt, to smite. Also to stinke.

Fedíre, dísco, díto, as Fédere.

Fedíta, a wound, a hurt with a weapon.

Fedità, stinkingnesse, a filthy smell.

Fedíto, wounded, hurt.

Feditóre, a smiter, a striker. Also a stinker.

Fédo, a filthy stinke or foule sauour.

Fédo, stinking, filthy, loathsome.

Fedóso, stinking, full of stinke.

Fedúto, wounded, hurt.

Féga. 

Fegáro, a fish called in Latin Glaueus.

Fegatelle, slices of liuer fried, liuerings.

Fegatello, a litle liuer. Also a liuering.

Fégato, the liuer of any creature. Also a fish like a Breame called in Latin Hepar.

Fegatóso, one that hath a great liuer, full of liuer. Also diseased in the liuer.

Feggiáre, as Fédere, to wound, to hurt.

Fegóso,, le frútta erano amáre, fegóse, & uiscóse.

Felce, ferne, blake or brake. Also a kind of disease. Also as Felze.

Fele, the gall of any bodie.

Feleggiáre, to make or bee as bitter as gall.

Felíce, happie, blisfull, blessed, luckie. Also Fearne, blake or brake.

Felíce memória, as we say of happie memorie.

Felicità, felicitie, happinesse, blisse.

Felicitáre, to make happie or blisfull.

Felizétte, a kind of daintie bird.

Felláre, to commit fellonie.

Felleo, of gall, as bitter as gall. 

Fellífluo, choller or flowing of the gall, rising commonly of rawnesse.

Fellio, a kind of musicall instrument.

Fello, fell, cruell, moodie, inexorable, fellonious, murderous. Also he did or made it.

Fellóne, a fellon or fellonious man.

Fellonía, fellonie, crueltie, trecherie.

Fellonóso, fellonious, fell, cruell.

Fellúca, as Felúca.

Felpa, the stuffe plush or shag.

Felpáre, to plush or shag.

Felpóso, plushie or shaggie.

Feltráre, to felt, or put on a felt-cloke.

Feltráro, a felt or hat-maker.

Feltri, raw or vntanned hides or fells.

Feltríni., Looke Détti, casting-counters.

Feltro, a felt hat, a felt cloke. Also a kind of limbecke or stillatorie.

Felúca, a kinde of swift barke or tift barge or pinnace. Also the crew of water-waiters.

Felzáta, a kind of course felt stuffe. Also such stuffe as our bargemen and water-men make their tilts to couer their boates.

Felze, the place of a barge or boate couered with a tilt where passengers sit, namely in Gurdolas in Venice.

Feme, the vpper and forepart of the thigh. Also the priuy parts of a woman. Also the parts about the pastell or pasterne or neather ioint of a beasts leg.

Femella, the female of any thing.

Fémina, a woman. Also a wife.

Fémina del móndo, a light woman, a whore.

Fémina del pópolo, idem.

Fémina di partíto, an hireling woman.

Feminábile, weake, of a womans nature.

Femináccio, a bawdie womanish fellow.

Femináccia, a filthy loathsome woman.

Feminaccioláre, to whore, to wench.

Feminacciuólo, a whoremonger, a wencher, a man giuen to women, an effeminate wanton.

Fémina di móndo, a common whore.

Femináre, to womanize, to effeminate.

Feminella, a silly litle woman.

Feminelle, litle clasps and hookes.

Femineo, womanish, of the feminine kind.

Feminésco, womanish, womanly.

Feminétta, a very litle pretty woman.

Femmézza, womanishnesse.

Feminiere, a wencher, a whoremonger.

Feminína, a very litle litle woman.

Feminíle, feminine, womanish.

Feminilità, womanishnesse.

Feminóso, as Feminile.

Feminúccia, a sillie wretched woman.

Fémmina, &c. , as Fémina.

Fémora, as Féme.

Fémore búbulo, the hearbe Oxethigh. 



Fenáia., looke Fálce.

Fenáio, of or pertaining to hay.

Fenaiuólo, a hay-man or mower. Also an hostler that keepes the hay. Also that waighes and makes hay into trusses or bottles.

Fenaruólo, as Fenaiuólo.

Fendente, cleauing. Also a downe-right cleauing blocke.

Fendere, fendo, fendéi, fendúto, to cleaue, to riue, to chap, to spall, to splint, to shiuer, to burst in sunder.

Fendéuole, that may be cleaft or chapt.

Fendíbile, as Fendéuole, findible.

Fendita, as Fenditúra.

Fenditóre, a cleauer, a riuer, a splinter.

Feuditúra, a cleaft, a cleauing, a chinke, a riuing, a chop, a splint, a flaw, a slit, a crauish, a gap, a splinting.

Fenestra, a window. Also a cacement.

Fenestra ferráta, a cacement of a window. Also a window with iron barres.

Fenestráre, to window, to make windowes.

Fenestráro, a glasier or window maker.

Fenestráta, windowed, holed through.

Fenestráta, a row of windowes.

Fenestrella, a litle window. Also a loopehoole, a spike hole. Also a button hole.

Fenestrétta, as Fenestrella.

Fenestréuole, full of windowes or holes.

Fenestríno, a litle hole or window.

Fenestróne, any kind of great window.

Fenestróso, full of windowes or holes.

Fengere, as Fíngere.

Feníce, a Fenix bird. Also an hearbe.

Feníco, a kind of musicall instrument.

Feníle, a house for hay, a racke where hay is put, a hay-ricke, a stacke of hay.

Fénno, fécero, féro, férno, they did.

Féno, as Fiéno, hay.

Fenocchiáre, as Finocchiáre.

Fenócchio, the hearbe Fennell.

Féno greco, the hearbe Fenugreeke.

Fenóso, full of hay, hayish.

Fénta, as Fínta, a faigning, a fiction.

Féo, or Féce, he did or made.

Fera, a fierce monster, a wilde beast.

Feráce, bringing forth, fruitfull, full off.

Feracità, fruitfulnesse, fertilitie.

Feraiuólo, a riding cloake.

Ferále, a torch, a quarrier, a taper.

Ferále, deadly, dismall, lamentable.

Feralétto, a litle torch or taper of waxe.

Ferália, a day dedicated to the Gods to pacifie them towards dead soules.

Feraruólo, as Feraiuólo, or Ferraiuóli.

Ferbótto, a Robin red breast.

Ferentárij, souldiers lightly armed among the Romanes.

Feretra, a quiuer for arrowes.

Feretráre, to quiuer, to enquiuer.

Feretro, a tombe, a hearse, a beare, a coffin.

Ferétta, a firret to catch cunnies with. 

Ferettáre, to firret, or fumble for.

Ferge, fetters for horses or other cattle.

Fergolástro, a kind of weede or hearbe.

Feria, a holie or festiuall day, a weeke day, a vacation, a holie daies life.

Feriále, festiuall, vacant from labour.

Feriáre, to make or keepe holy-day.

Feriáto, vacancy from labour, rest from worke, blindmans holy day.

Ferignità, as Ferità.

Ferígno, of the nature of iron, rusty, cankred. Also rude, cruell, fierce.

Ferína cárne, any kind of venison.

Feríngo, as Ferígno.

Ferinità, as Ferità.

Feríno, sauage, wilde, beastly, monstrous, inhumane, cruell, rude.

Feríre, rísco, ríto, to wound, to hurt.

Ferísto, the midle or chiefe post of a tent or any frame else.

Feríta, a wound, a hurt, a cutting blow.

Ferità, wildenesse, beastlinesse, fiercenesse, cruelty, monstrousnesse, inhumanity.

Feríto, wounded, hurt.

Feritóre, a wounder, a hurter.

Feritória, a loope or spike hole to shoot out at.

Ferla, a hawkes pearch, a crutchet.

Ferle, crutchets for lame men to goe on.

Férma, a stampe, a firme, a sealing, a signature, a marke of such as cannot write.

Fermagliáre, to adorne with ouches, brooches, iewels or eare pendents.

Fermáglio, as Formáglio.

Fermaménto, the firmament or skie. Also a firming or staying.

Fermánza, as Ferma, a confirmation.

Fermáre, to confirme, to settle, to establish, to ratifie. Also to affirme, to warrant. Also to make fast, to shut, to close, to locke. Also to firme or to seale. Also to stay.

Fermatíuo, affirmatiue.

Fermentáre, to leauen bread.

Ferménto, leauen for bread.

Fermézza, firmenesse, constancy.

Férmo, firme, steady, fixed, sure, fastened, fast, shut, lockt. Also sealed.

Fernanbúcco, brazill wood to dye with.

Ferneticaménto, a rauing, a doteing.

Ferneticáre, to raue, to dote, to frenzie.

Fernetichézza, frenzie, rauing, doting.

Fernético, franticke, frenzie, rauing.

Féro. Feróce, fierce, cruell, eager, hardharted, sterne, fell, headlong.

Fero, they did, made, or caused.

Feróce, as Féro.

Ferocía, as Ferocità.

Ferocità, fiercenesse, cruelty, felnesse.

Ferola, a reede, a sedge or bent or clouen cane growing by the water-side. Also the hearbe Sagapene or Fennel-geant. Also a kinde of Sheapheards mantle. Vsed also for a womans quaint or wicket.

Ferolágine, as Ferola.

Ferradóri, dores or grates of iron. Also iron forgers or Mungers.

Ferragína, as Ferraína.

Ferraíne, all manner of Iron-worke.

Ferraína, greene Barly cut for horses.

Ferráio, as Ferráro.

Ferraiuóla cavallería, soldiers that serue on horsebacke with cloakes ouer their armour.

Ferraiuóli, certaine horse-men in Germany vsing petronels and battle axes, and a kind of riding cloake ouer them.

Ferraiuólo, a Smith or cunning workeman in any manuall trade or iron worke. Also a riding-cloake.

Ferrále, Hábinsi ferráli di córno o ferro per impiombáre quálche ritenúta.

Ferráme, all manner of iron or iron workes.

Ferraménti, all manner of irons, iron-tooles, or iron-workes.

Ferraminóso, glutinous, clammy or fast-houlding together.

Ferrána, as Ferraína.

Ferránte, an Iron gray colour.

Ferráre, to trim, dresse or couer with iron.

Ferráre un cauállo, to shooe a horse.

Ferráre strínghe, to tagge points.

Ferrár la múla, a prouerbiall saying, that is, to steale or filch from ones master and deceiue him in his expences.

Ferraría, the arte or trade of Iron. Also a mine of Iron. Also an Ironmongers-shop. Also a smithes working house. Also an Iron-mill or forge.

Ferráro, an Iron-monger, an Iron-worker, a Lock-smith. Also a Ferrier, a Horse-smith or shooer of horses.

Ferrastrácci, a Tinckard, a mender of any mettall-pieces.

Ferrastrínghe, a tagger of points.

Ferraruólo, as Ferraiuólo.

Ferráta, as Ferriáta.

Ferráta mázza, an iron club.

Ferráto, ironed, couered or wrought with iron. Also shod with iron shooes.

Ferratúra, an iron working. Also the shooing of a horse.

Ferra vecchio, a crier or seller of old Iron.

Ferravézzo, as Ferrauecchio.

Ferrázza, a fish called a forke-fish.

Ferreo, of or pertaining to iron. Also of the nature or quality of iron.

Ferrétta, little irons, as tags for points.

Ferrería, as Ferraría.

Ferri, all manner of irons or iron-tooles. Also horses shooes. Also fetters or shakles of iron vsed in prisons. Also a



kind of play so called.

Ferriáta, a grate of iron for any window. Also a portcullise.

Ferriere, of iron. Also an Iron-munger. Also a herbenger, one that takes vp ledgings for others.

Ferrífero, iron bearing or bringing.

Ferrígno, as Ferígno.

Ferrísto, as Ferísto.

Ferro, the mettall iron. Also any iron toole. Also a horse shooe.

Ferro a ghiáccio, a horses frost shooe.

Ferroliche, fopperies, toies, idle trifles.

Ferro ritórto, vsed for an Ancker.

Ferróso, full of iron, or of iron.

Ferro stemperáto, soft-iron.

Ferro trómbe támburisonánte professióne, a Rodomomall word, as one would say Sword-trumpet-drumsounding profession.

Ferrúgine, rust of iron.

Ferrugineo, as rusty as iron. Also of an iron colour or nature. Also bearing iron.

Ferruginóso, full of iron-rust.

Ferrúzzi, all manner of iron tooles.

Fersa, a violent heat, a burning feauer.

Férsi, for si Fécero, were made or done or made themselues.

Fersóra, a frying-pan.

Fersúra, a frying-pan. Also a frying.

Fersúto, fried in a pan. Also scorched.

Fertile, fertile, fruitefull, storebringing.

Fertilíre, lísco, líto, to wax, to become or make fertile, fruitefull or plentious.

Fertilità, fertility, fruitefulnesse.

Ferúcola, as Ramárro.

Feruente, feruent, ardent, burning, parching Also fierce, violent or rageing.

Feruenza, as Feruóre.

Fernere, feruo, feruéi, feruúto, to burne, to rage or scorch with feruencie.

Feruidézza, as Fertuóre.

Feruido, as Feruente.

Ferula, as Ferola.

Ferulacea, an hearb resembling in stalke the great Dill or greate Mallowes.

Feruleo, like Ferola. Also full of reedes.

Feruoráre, to make or grow feruent.

Feruóre, feruour, feruency, raging heat, ardency. Also earnest violence.

Feruóso, as Feruente.

Ferúre, as Feríre.

Ferúta, as Feríta.

Ferúto, wounded or hurt. Also a disease in a horse called the swaying of the necke.

Feruúto, burned, scalded, parched or violently scorched.

Ferza, a whip, a scourge, a flaile. Also a scorching heat. 

Ferzáre, to whip, to scourge. Also to scorch or burne with violence.

Ferzatóre, a whipper, a scourger.

Ferzo, A'llamia vela appoggierò alcún ferzo.

Fesceia, a great dosser or pannier.

Fescenio, bawdy, filthy, obscene.

Fescína, a vinerols basket wherein he gathereth his grapes. Also a kind of pipe made of a reed.

Féssa, clouen, cleaft, burst. Also any cleaft, as Fenditúra.

Fessile, findible, that may be cleft.

Fésso, cleft, clouen, riued, splinted, burst. Vsed also for any cleaft, chinke, or broken hole. Also a womans priuy chinke, quaint or water-box.

Fessopiéde, clouen-footed.

Fessúra, as Fenditúra.

Fessuráre, to cleaue, to burst, to chop.

Festa, a feastiuall or holy day, a resting day from labour. Also a feast or a banquet. Also ioy, pleasure, solace or shew of kindnesse. Also a kind of simnell or cracknell bread. Also vsed for any good thing to eate.

Festa degli innocenti, childrens day.

Festánte, as Festóso.

Festáre, to feast or make holyday. Also to feast or banquet. Also to solace to sport, to reioyce, or shew kind and louing merry entertainement vnto.

Festatóre, a feaster or keeper of holydaies. Also a feaster or banqueter.

Festeggiánte, as Festóso.

Festeggiáre, as Festáre.

Festeggiéuole, as Festóso.

Festeggióso, as Festóso.

Festéuole, as Feitóso.

Festichína séta, a kind of raw steaue silke.

Festinánza, as Festinità.

Festináre, to hasten with speed, to dispatch.

Festinaménte, hastily, speedily, comming before time, quickly, nimble.

Festinità, haste, speed, quicknesse.

Festíno, a feast, a banquet. Also haste or speed, comming before time.

Festiuaménte, by way of sport, as in feasting or playing manner.

Festinále, feastiuall, as Festóso.

Festiuità, feastiuity, a feastiuall.

Festíuo, as Festóso.

Festo, as Festíuo.

Festóccia, as Monózzo.

Festoncello, a little Festóne.

Festóne, a garland, a wreath, a chaplet or coronet of leaues, flowres or boughs. Also a kind of worke in painting.

Festóso, feasting, keeping holy-day, feastiuall. Also feasting or banqueting. Also merry, iolly, ioyfull, blithe, iocond, gamesome, playing, solacing, sportfull. 

Festúca, a feskue or feasestraw that children vse to point their letters. Also chaffe, stubble, haume or straw. Also a stake, a single quarter. Also a stick or a staffe. Also a tooth-pick. Also a pruning iron.

Festucáre, to ramme in as Pauiers doe stones. Also to point at with a feskue.

Festúcco, as Festúca.

Festúga, as Festúca.

Fetente, stincking, ill-sauouring.

Fetenza, as Fetóre.

Fetidáre, to stinke, or to sauour ill.

Fetidézza, stinkingnesse, ill sauour.

Fetido, stinking, illsauouring.

Feto, all things brought forth by generation of man, foule, beast or fish, a brood or birth. Also a smell or sauour.

Fetóne, as Fettóne.

Fetóre, a stinke, an ill smell or sauour.

Fétta, a slice, a collop, a shiuer, a skin or cut of any meat or of bread.

Fétta di stáme, vsed for a girdle.

Fettáre, to cut in slices or collops.

Fettarella, a little slice or collop.

Fétte ed uuóva, collops and egges.

Fettóne, a disease in a horse called the running frush. Some haue also taken it for the fettlocke of a horse.

Fettóre, a stinke or ill sauour.

Fettúccia, a little slice, collop, or cutting. Also a snip, a iag or cut in a garment. Also any kind of viband. Also a kind of crisping wire that women vse to curle their haires with. Also a labell of a miter.

Fettucciáre, to cut into little slices or collops. Also to iagge or snip or cut a garment.

Feudatáre, to let or take in feude or feefarme.

Feudáli béni, goods held in feude.

Feudatário, a feudation or tributarie person.

Féudo, a feude, a fee, or tribute, but properly any place held in fee-farme.

Feudo-lígio, liege-fealtie.

Feudóso, that paieth feude, fee, or tribute.

Fía, shalbe, of the verbe E'ssere.

Fía, times, trè fía trè, three times three.

Fiabb áre, to chant or sing idle songs merily, as nurses doe in dandling of children.

Fiábbe, as Fanfalúche.

Fiácca cóllo, a tumbling downe headlong. Also a breake-necke.

Fiaccáre, to tire, to faint, to weary, to weaken, to wither, to droope. Also to bruise, to squease, to crush, to batter, to craze, to spoile, to hurt.

Fiaccáto, tired, faint, wearied, withered, faded, drooped. Also bruised, squeased, crushed, battered, crazed, spoiled, hurt, mard. 



Fiácche, as Fanfalúche.

Fiacchézza, wearinesse, faintnesse.

Fiácco, as Fiaccáto. Also weake, wearie, tired, languishing.

Fiáccola, a torch, a quarrier, a linke, a cresset light. Also a burning lampe. Also a bright firebrand. Also a blazing starre like a burning torch with a long traine, the forepart burning bright.

Fiaccoláre, to burne or blaze as torches.

Fía cheuuóle, happen or be what will.

Fiadoncello, as Fiadonello.

Fiadóne, a honie-combe. Also a Bee-hiue Also an egge-pie, doucet or custard.

Fiadonello, a flawne or egge-pie.

Fiála, a wine-glasse. Also a kind of wine measure.

Fiále délle ápi, as Fiadóne.

Fialóne, a great wine or oyle glasse. Also as Fiadóne.

Fiámma, a flame, a blaze, a flash, and by metaphor Amorous heate.

Fiammáce, flammie, flaming, blazing.

Fiámma di uólto, a blush colour.

Fiammáre, to flame, to blaze, to flash. Also to blush red. Also to streame or waue in the aire as streamers.

Fiámme, bannerols or streamers.

Fiammeggiánte, flaming, blazing.

Fiammeggiáre, as Fiammáre.

Fiammeggiéuole, flaming or blazing.

Fiammella, a litle flame or blazing.

Fiammeo, of a flame colour.

Fiammétta, a litle flame or blaze.

Fiammétte., Vsed of Dante for eyes.

Fiammífero, flame bearing or bringing.

Fiámmi, a kind of false dice called highmen.

Fiancáre, as Fiancheggiáre.

Fiancáta, a blow vpon the flankes. Also any kind of flanking.

Fiancheggiánte, flanking.

Fiancheggiáre, to flanke. Also to support armes. Also to pricke for ward, to prouoke.

Fiancheggiáta, a flanking, a flanke.

Fianchéggio, a supporter in armorie.

Fiánchi, flankes, hips. Also easements placed vnder the eares or shoulders of bulwarkes.

Fiáppe, as Fanfalúche, a flap with a foxe-taile.

Fiánco, a flanke, a hip, a hanch.

Fiappáre, as Fiaccáre. Also to flap.

Fiapparíe, fopperies, flappings.

Fiáppo, flappie, withered, droopie.

Fiáre, to fee.

Fiásca, a flagon, a flaske. Also a stale whore.

Fiascheggiáre, to quaffe or ply the bottle.

Fiaschétta, a litle flagon, a litle flaske.

Fiáschi, an Interiection of admiration, as Papæ in latin. Also bottles. 

Fiásco, a flagon, a bottle, a flaske.

Fiaschettíno, a litle bottle or flasket.

Fiascóne, a great flagon or flaske.

Fiáta, one time, one turne, once, a fit.

Fiatáre, to breath, to draw breath.

Fiáte, times, turnes, più fiáte, many times.

Fiáto, breath, winde, ayre, spirit. Also any smell or sauour brought by winds.

Fiatóre, any stinke or ill sauour.

Fiatóso, breathing, full of breath. Also stinking and of an ill sauour.

Fíbbia, a buckle. Also a latchet.

Fibbiáglio, any ornament or iewell that is fastened with claspes to ones breast, any kind of buckle or buckling.

Fibbiáre, to buckle, to claspe, to latch.

Fibbiatúra, a buckling, a clasping.

Fibbiétta, any litle buckle or latchet.

Fibella, hath beene vsed for the Moone.

Fíbra, the tip of ones liuer. Also the hem or skirt of a garment. Also a veine so called. Also the entrailes or guts of beasts. Also the filaments or small strings of trees, rootes or hearbes. Also the border or brim of a riuer. Also a Brocke, a Badger, a Graie, or Beuer.

Fibróso., Looke Fibra.

Fíbula, as Fíbbia, in building it is a brace to fasten beames. Also a crampe-iron or hooke to hold square stones together, the pin of a truckle, a cleauer or axe. Also a Chirurgions instrument where with a wound is stitched and drawen together. Also the lesser bone of ones leg. Also the nut of a crossebow. Also a haspe or little hooke of brasse.

Fibuláre, as Fibbiáre.

Fiburína, a kind of light-going pinnace.

Fica, a figge. Also a flurt with ones fingers giuen or shewen in disgrace, fáre le fíca, to bid a fig for one. Also vsed for a womans quaint, and women in Italie vse it as an othe to sweare by as our Englishwomen say by my apron-strings, &c.

Ficáccia, a Cake, as Focáccia.

Ficáia, a shade, an arbor or bower of fig-leaues. Also a discourse of figs or rather of womens quaints.

Ficáide, as Ficáia.

Ficáldi, a kind of figgs so called.

Ficárda, a wanton whore.

Ficarelli, a kind of litle figgs.

Ficarétto, a place set with fig trees.

Ficatelli, liuerings, a kind of meate.

Ficáto, the liuer of any creature.

Ficatóso, hauing the cough of the lungs.

Ficcafícca, thrust on, goe on, hold on.

Ficcáre, to thrust, driue, peg or fixe in.

Ficcárela pásta, to knead dough.

Ficcapáli, a great mallet or commander to driue stakes or poles into the ground.

Ficcáta, as Ficcatúra.

Ficcatóio, a mallet, a beetle to driue in. 

Ficcatúra, a driuing or fixing in.

Fícco, a driuing in. Also looke Tiráre.

Fíce, a fish that with Sea-weede makes his nest by the Sea shore for his yoong ones.

Ficedula, a bird called a Gnat-snapper.

Fichéto, a place planted with fig-trees.

Fichi fióri, yoong or greene figs.

Fíchi sécchi, dry or fraile figs.

Fíchi pagnottári, a kind of great figs.

Fíco, a fig tree. Also a fig. Also a disease in a horses foote called the fig. Also a fish like a Breame called in latin Hepar. Some take it for a Whitingmop. Also a kind of scab namely in the head or fundament of a man. Also a tuft or locke of haire or wooll or flaxe.

Fíco d'Egitto, a Sicamor-tree.

Ficolíni, yoong, litle or greene figs.

Ficóne, a glutton of figs or wenches.

Ficoncelli, great vnripe figs.

Ficóso, full of scabs, figs or sores.

Ficulíno, a litle fig tree, or made of figs.

Fículo, a litle fig-tree of fig.

Fída, a suertie, or warrantise.

Fidánza, trust, affiance, confidence.

Fidanzáre, to affiance, to contract, to betroth faith and troth for mariage.

Fidanzáglie, contractings, plightings or affiancings for mariage.

Fidanzáti, plighted, betrothed, affianced or contracted for mariage.

Fidataménte, confidently, vpon trust.

Fidáre, to trust, to affie, to credit.

Fidatissimaménte, most faithfully.

Fidáto, trusted, credited, affied.

Fidáto, trustie, secret, confident.

Fidáto, warranted by some pasport.

Fíde, as Féde.

Fidecommésso, put in trust, committed to ones charge. Also a feoffment of trust.

Fidecommessário, a feoffie of trust.

Fidecommessóre, a feoffie of trust, one put in trust to dispose and order a thing.

Fideiussóre, a suretie for an other in matters of monie.

Fideiussório, belonging to suretiship.

Fidéle, trustie, faithfull, confident.

Fideiussióne, securitie, assurance.

Fidelità, fidelitie, faithfulnesse.

Fidente, trustie, true, trusting.

Fidenteménte, confidently, faithfully.

Fidenza, trust, affiance, confidence.

Fidícula, as Polipódio.

Fidítio, a kind of parcimonious feasting among the Lacedemonians.

Fído, trustie, loyall, true, faithfull.

Fidúcia, trust, faith, confidence.

Fíe, shall be, of the verbe E'ssene.

Fiébole, weake, feeble.

Fiebolézza, weakenesse, feeblenesse.

Fiebolíre, lísco, lito, to enfeeble, or weaken. 



Fiedere, fiedo, fiedéi, fiedúto, as Feríre.

Fiedíta, a wound, a hurt.

Fiedóne di mele, a honnie-combe.

Fiedúto, wounded, or hurt.

Fiele, gall, vsed also for bitternesse of minde.

Fiele diterra, centaurie, er gall of the earth.

Fiena, as Hiéna.

Fienále, a hay-loft, rick, or stack.

Fienáro, a hay-mower, or seller, a hayman. Also a stack of hay.

Fienífero, hay-bearing, or bringing.

Fieníle, as Feníle.

Fieno, all manner of hay, or fodder.

Fieno autumnále, woodcock, or latter hay.

Fieno greco, the herbe fenugreeke.

Fienóso, hayish, full of hay.

Fier, Fiere, vsed of Dánte for Ferísce, he woundeth, he hurteth.

Fiera, any kinde of wilde or fierce beast. Also a faire, or publike mart.

Fierézza, fiercenesse, arrogancie, crueltie.

Fiero, fierce, fell, cruell, arrogant, wilde.

Fiero ócchio, Margelane, or the wilde and cruell eye.

Fieto, a smell, a sent, a sauour, or aire.

Fieuoláre, to weaken, or enfeeble.

Fiéuole, feeble, weake, faint.

Fieuolézza, feeblenesse, weakenesse.

Fieuolíre, lísco, líto, to enfeeble.

Fiézza, as Ciócca.

Fífaro, a piper, a fluter.

Figadello, as Fegatello. Also a purse of monie in the rogues language.

Figadétto, as Figadello.

Figáro, as Ficáro, a figge-tree.

Figaruóla, a womans quaint.

Figgere, fíggo, físsi, físso or fítto, to fixe in or vnto, to driue or thrust in.

Figlia, a daughter. Also a mayden.

Fíglia divíte, vsed for vine buds.

Figliánza, as Figliuolánza.

Figliáre, to bring issue or children, to filly, to fructifie, as well to women as beastes.

Figliástra, a daughter in law.

Figliáta, as Figliatúra.

Figliástro, a sonne in law.

Figliatióne, a filiation or adoption of a sonne howsoeuer.

Figliatúra, a birth bearing of any creature. Also a litter of whelpes or pigges, &c.

Fígli di Latóna, taken for the Sun and Moone.

Figlífera, child-bearing.

Fíglio, a sonne, a child, a barne, a filly.

Figlióccia, a god-daughter.

Fíglio della trísta, vsed for a harlots sonne or a bastard.

Figlióna, a handsome big lasse. 

Figlióccio, a mans god-son.

Figliuóla, a daughter.

Figliuolánza, issue of children.

Figliuoláre, as Figliáre.

Figliále, filiale or child-like.

Figliuolétto, any little child or sonne.

Figliuolíno, a little sonne.

Figliuól mò, my sonne or my child.

Figliuólo, a sonne or child.

Figliuól tò, thy sonne or child.

Figliuolózzo, a childish noddy or gull.

Figliuolúccio d'óro, a golden sonne, a sweet pigs-nie, a golden lad.

Figliózza, a god-daughter.

Figliózzo, a god-sonne.

Figménti, fictions, forged tales or lies.

Fignere, as Fíngere.

Fígnoli, agnels, cornes, pushes, felons or swellings in the flesh.

Fígo, as Fíco.

Figóra, all manner of figges.

Figula, any thing wrought, formed or shaped in clay or earth.

Figuláre, to worke or shape in clay.

Figuláro, as Figulíno.

Figulíno, a Potter or worker in clay.

Figulo, as Figulíno.

Figúra, a figure, a shape, an image, or resemblance. Also a picture. Also fashion, fauour or making. Cárta di figúra, a cote-card.

Figuráccia, a filthy shape.

Figurábile, that may be figured.

Figurále, bearing or hauing a figure.

Figuralménte, according to figure.

Figuránza, a figuring or imaging.

Figuráre, to figure, to forme, to image, to shape. Also to conceiue or fashion in minde.

Figurataménte, figuratiuely.

Figuratióne, a figuring or forming.

Figuratíuo, figuratiue, expressiue.

Figuráto, figured, wrought with figures.

Figúre ditéla, damaske or dyaper-worke.

Figuréssa, a shee ill fauored figure.

Figurétta, a little figure or image.

Figurína, as Figurétta.

Figurísta, a figurist, a figurer.

Fíla, files, rankes, rowes, orders or lines of such souldiers as doe stand or march consequently one after another in ordinance or aray of battell, reaching from the front to the traine of the battell.

Filáccio, course raw silke, thrid or yarne. Also Okame.

Filacétto, whip-cord, twine or marlin.

Filágine, Cotton-weed, Bloody flixwort.

Filágna, the cranes to lure a hawke with.

Filáio, as Filáto.

Filaménti, the filaments, thrids or beards of rootes that be like haires or strings.

Filándre, the filanders in a hawke.

Filándro, as Filocerdo.

Filárco, one that loueth to beare rule.

Filáre, to spin, to twist, to draw into thirds. Also to set on edge any weapon. Also a stroke or line drawen by any Mathematician. Also a ranke, a file, a row.

Filárgico, voluptuous.

Filargíria, loue of money or pelfe.

Filári, the vttermost ranges of vines, or the walles that empale them.

Filataménte, thrid by thrid. Also in spinning manner.

Filatáre, as Filáre,

Filatera, a web, a woofe. Also a deuise.

Filateríe, all manner of spinnings or weauings. Also as Filastróccole.

Filaterio, a precious stone which worne about one comforteth the spirits and expelleth melancholy.

Filatíccio, as Filáccio, or any thing of the nature of thrummy silke or thrid.

Filáto, spun or twisted. Also any kinde of spinning, yarne or thrid. Also sharpe, keene or hauing an edge.

Filatóia, a woman spinner.

Filatóio, a spinning-wheele, a silke-Mill.

Filatóre, a spinner, a twister.

Filatríce, a woman spinner.

Filastrócca, as Filastróccola.

Filastróccola, a flimflam-tale without rime or reason, as spinners tell to keepe them a wake, any idle businesse.

Fíl di terra, the hearbe Centaury or gall of the earth.

Filello, any fine thrid or string.

Fileolo della língua, the string of the tongue, which makes the child to speake.

Filera, a spinner. Also as Filágna.

Filétti, little water-chaines extending from one side of the port to the cheeke.

Filétto, any smale thrid or wire.

Filéul, a tree in India with a very broad leafe, and so sharp at the point that the Indians make them needls of them, and through the leafe goe certaine threeds that serue them in stead of threed, so that one leafe affords them needle and threed.

Filfílo, leuell, or by line and measure.

Filiatióne, as Figliatúra.

Filibustac chína, the burden of a countrie song, as wee say, hay downe a downe a.

Filicáre, to notch about the hedges indenturewise as ferne-leaues.

Filiera, per render perfetta úna pálla di ferro che sia tónda fánno vn perfettissimo tóndo in úna piástra di ferro la cui circomferenza táglia, quiui essendo la pálla vn póco più 



gróssa che il tóndo si và fregándo a póco a póco a quélla circonferenza tagliente, che togliendo dálla détta pálla sinche pássi da l'áltra bánda la rende per necessità perfettaménte tónda: & per trasláto si dice Filiera di consíglio, cioè saldézza di consíglio.

Filiera, an iron full of holes, through which wire-drawers draw their wires. Also a spinneresse.

Filíce, ferne, blake, or brake.

Filícula, as Polipódio.

Filígine, blacking of smoke for shooes.

Filígne, as Filígine.

Filpendola, dropwort, or red saxifrage.

Filisello, filiosell, or flouretsilke.

Filo, any kind of thrid, line, twist, twine, merlin, whipcord, or yarne. Also the string in the mouth where with children are tongue-tide. Also any kind of wine. Also the edge of any knife or weapon. Also any stile or manner. Also the brim of a riner.

Filocerdo, a wine-drawing chuffe, a miserable pinch-penie.

Fìlo del' ácqua, the brim of the water.

Fílo di ferro, wine of iron.

Filo di páternóstri, a paire of beades.

Filo d'óro, gold-wine.

Filo di spáda, the edge of a sword.

Filomela, a Nightingale.

Filoména, a Nightingale.

Filólogo, as Plulólogo.

Filología, as Philología.

Filóne, the maine or great veine in a mine of any mettall. Also a medicine to make one sleepe and for get paine.

Filónio, a kind of hearbe or flower.

Filosello, as Filisello.

Filopómpo, either of that name, or hee that loueth pomp, a louer of pomp.

Filosofále, Philosophicall.

Filosofánte, a professor of Philosophie.

Filosofáre, to play the Philosopher.

Filosofastro, a foolosopher, a foolish philosopher, a smatterer in philosophie.

Filosofía, Philosophie, knowledge, vertue, loue of vertuous knowledge.

Filosófico, Philosophicall.

Filósofo, a Philosopher, a louer of knowledge and vertue.

Filosofórma, a Philosopher in forme.

Filostócche, as Filastróccole.

Filostróccola, as Filastróccola.

Fíltro, a comely proportion and sweet behauiour of a mans bodie able to moue loue. Also an amorous potion, or medicine to make one loue. Also the hollownesse of the vpper lip vnder the nostrils.

Filúca, a kind of small boates in Italie.

Filza, a file, a rewe, a thrid or chaine of beades, of pearles or any thing.

Filzáre, to enthrid beades or pearles. 

Fima, as Fimáte.

Fimáte, a kind of swelling or inflamation about a mans priuities.

Fímbria, any kind of hem or skirt. Also a fringe, a welt, a garde, an edge or border of any garment. Also a friers belt or girdle. Some haue also vsed it for the Meridian line, and for the Horizon.

Fimbriáre, to fringe about, to hem about. Also to sag or wrinkle a garment.

Fímo, dung, or ordure of cattle or man.

Fimóso, filthie, full of dung or ordure. Also a disease when the nut of a mans yard will not be couered, or being couered will not be opened.

Fín', Fíno, as Fíno.

Fin ad hóra, vntill now.

Fin' alhóra, euen vntill then.

Fin'a mò, vntill now.

Fin'a quándo? vntill when? how long?

Fin'a quì, hitherto.

Fin'a tánto, whilest, vntill that.

Finále, finally, last, concluding. Also of or pertaining to bounds or limits.

Finalità, any end or finalitie.

Finalménte, finally, lastly, to conclude.

Fináre, to cease, to make an end, to desist. Also to refine, or to make fine.

Fin chè, vntill that, so long as.

Fine, the fine, end or successe of any thing. Also the end, the intention or purpose, scope, and drift of any thought or action. Also death and consumation of life. It hath also been vsed for Fíno.

Fineménte, finally, neately.

Fin'entro, euen within, so farre as in.

Fineráre, to refine, to clarifie.

Fineraménto, a refining, a clarifying.

Fincráta, as Fineraménto.

Fineratóre, a refiner, a clarifier.

Finestra, as Fenestra.

Finestráre, as Fenestráre.

Finestráro, as Fenestráro.

Finestráta, as Fenestráta.

Finestrella, as Fenestrella.

Finestrétta, as Fenestrella.

Finestréuole, as Fenestréuole.

Finestríno, a litle window. Also any peeping hole, a loope hole.

Finestróne, as Fenestróne.

Finestróso, as Fenestróso.

Finétto, fine and prettie. Also a slie subtle pinch-pennie.

Finézza, finenesse. Also subtletie.

Fingardággine, as Infingardággine.

Fingardáre, as Infingardáre.

Fingardígia, as Infingardággine.

Fingárdo, as Infingárdo.

Fíngere, fíngo, fínsi, finto, to faigne, to forge, to counterfeit, to dissemble.

Fingeuole, that may be faigned.

Fingiménto, a faigning, a forging. 

Fingitóre, a faigner, a dissembler.

Finhóggi, vntill this day.

Fin'hóra, vntill now.

Finíbile, finishable, that may be ended.

Finiente, ending, finishing.

Finiménto, a finishing, an ending. Vsed also for any furniture.

Finimóndi, worlds end, ends of matters. Also a conclusion or cloze in Musicke.

Finíre, nísco, níto, to finish, to end, to make or haue an end. Also to dye.

Finíta, an end, a fine, a finishing.

Finítimo, bounding or bordring vpon.

Finitióne, a finishing or ending.

Finitissimo, quit or most ended.

Finíto, finished, ended, accomplished.

Finíto il uespro delle uóci, talke being ended.

Fin là, so far as thither.

Fin quél dì, vntill that day.

Fin quest'hóra, vntill now.

Fin quì, hitherto, euen to this place.

Fíno, vntill, euen so far, whitst.

Fíno, fine. Also subile and craftie.

Fíno al di d'hóggi, euen vntill this day.

Fíno a quándo?, how long? vntill when?

Fíno a tánto, so long as, vntill that whilst.

Finocchiáre, as Infinocchiáre.

Finocchiáta, as Faggioláta.

Finocchiétto, a litle tuft, tassell or locke of wooll, flaxe, silke or haire.

Finócchio, Fennell. Looke Dáre finócchio. Also an Interiection of admiration as Papæ in latin.

Finócchio maríno, Sampeere.

Finta, a faigning, a fiction. Also an offer or proffer to doe any thing.

Fin tánto, vntill that, so long as.

Fin tánto che, vntill that.

Fintaménte, faignedly.

Fínto, faigned, dissembled, counterfeit.

Fío, a fee. Also a feefarme. Also a rent or tribute. Also fealtie and homage. Also a fine, a penaltie, or an amercement. Also in Lombardie vsed for Eíglio, a sonne, a child.

Fioccággio, all manner of tasselings. Also bushings, tuftings or locks of haire wooll, or silke.

Fioccáre, to flake, to snow. Also to betassel or to tift. Also to burst or breake out in laughter or weeping. Also to be or speake hoarce.

Fioccatúra, as Fiocággio.

Fiocchétti, as Fioccíni.

Fioccíni, little tassels, locks, flakes, or tufts. Also flakes of snow.

Fiócco, any kind of tassell, locke, bush or tuft of silke, haire or wooll. Also a flake of snow. Also hoarce in speaking. Also faint and drooping.

Fioccoláre, as Fioccáte.

Fióccoli, as Fioccíni.

Fioccóne, any great Fiócco.



Fiocáre, as Fioccáre.

Fiocíno, any litle bush or cluster.

Fióco, hoarse, faint, weake, drooping.

Fiólca, a Sea-crab called a Frill.

Fiómba, any kind of sling.

Fiombáre, to hurle in a sling, to sling.

Fiombatóre, a slinger.

Fiombíno, a slinger.

Fiónda, a sling to hurle withall.

Fiondáre, to cast with a sling.

Fiondáro, a slinge-maker.

Fiondatóre, a slinger.

Fioralígi, a flower de luce.

Fioramúzzi, budding loues, effeminate wantons, coy flourishings.

Fioraránci, Oring-flowers.

Fioráta, flowry to die blew with.

Fióre, any kind of flower, flouret or blossom. Also the prime or best of any thing. Also as Fúla. Also vsed as Boccáta.

Fiórbelle-piantáte, Grasse-flower de luce.

Fiór-campése, Hurt-sickle or Blew-bottle-flowre.

Fiórdalisáto, a flowre de luced or seene with flowre de luces.

Fiór dalíso, a flowre de luce.

Fiór delgráno, the flowre or mother of wheat.

Fiór d'aiúti, souldiers so called as being chiefest and readiest to helpe and second.

Fiór del' óglio, the flowre or mother of oyle.

Fiór del sóle, the sunne-flowre or Marygold.

Fiór del víno, the flowre or mother of wine.

Fiór di farína, the flowre of meale.

Fiór di Gióue, Iupiters flowre some take it for the Colombine.

Fiór di látte, the Creame of milke.

Fiór di lígi, a flowre de luce.

Fiór di múro, that parte of mud-walles whereof salt-peter is made.

Fiór di nótte, Blew-binde-weed.

Fiór di primauera, the dazie flowre.

Fiór di ráme, spanish greene or verd de greece.

Fiór di sále, the flowre of salt.

Fiór d'ógni mése, a Rud or Marygolde.

Fiórráncio, Oringe-flowre. Also a Robin-red-breast.

Fiór sóle, a Rud, Flowre soll or Marygold.

Fiór velúto, the Flowre-gentle.

Fioreggiánte, flowring, flowrishing.

Fioreggiáre, to flowrish, to blossom.

Fiorellíni, little flowres or buds of flowers.

Fíorente, flowrishing, flowring.

Fiorentinería, a propriety of speech in Florence and no where else. 

Fierentiníssimo, most Florentine.

Fiorentinità, as Fiorentinería.

Fiorentinísmo, idem.

Fiorentíssimo, most flowrishing.

Fiorenza, the faire City of Florence, which is interpreted a flowrishing sword.

Fiorétti, flowrets or little flowres. Also course ferret silkes. Also flowre works vpon lace or imbrodery. Also foiles to play at rapier and dagger. Also quauerings or flowrishings or running diuisions vpon any musicall instruments or in singing.

Fiorétto, the singular of Fiorétti. Vsed also for a crew of good fellowes that sticke close one to another.

Fióri, all manner of flowres. Also Clubs vpon the cardes.

Fióri crispíni., looke Allegrétti.

Fioridíssimo, most most flowrishing.

Fiorífero, flowre-bearing.

Fiorína, the chiefe scold in a parish.

Fioríno, a coine called a Florin.

Fiório, a till or drawer in a chest.

Fioríre, rísco, ríto, to flowre, to flowrish, to bloome, to blossome.

Fioriscente, flowrishing.

Fioríta, the creame of simpering milke. Also flowry to dye blew with.

Fioríta, flowred, flowrished.

Fioróni, all great-leaued flowres. Also great branches in damaske. Also garlands or chaplets made of flowres.

Fioróso, full of flowres, flowry.

Fiorugello, a silke-worme ready to spin.

Fiosciáre, as Fioccáre.

Fioscína, a kind of deuice or instrument to catch fishes with all.

Fioscíni, as Fioccíni.

Fióscio, as Fiócco.

Fiótta, as Fiótto.

Fiottáre, to flote or hull vpon the sea.

Fiótto, the flud, the floting, to foame, the eddy or furious stirring and tossing of the sea.

Fiótto della mórte, the last pang or gaspe of death.

Fíria, a kind of disease in a mans eare.

Firmáglio, as Fermáglio.

Firmaménto, as Fermaménto.

Firmáre, as Fermáre.

Firmézza, firmenesse, steddinesse.

Firsáda, some part of a ship.

Firugelli, silke wormes ready to spin.

Fisam énte, fixedly, attentiuely.

Fisále, fiscall, penall. Also an Atturney generall for a Prince.

Fiscáre, to fine, to amerce, to confiscate.

Fiscelláre, to plaite, to worke frailes or basket worke of straw or bull-rushes.

Fiscelle, frailes, wickers, plaites or baskets of rushes, straw or osiers to put figs in, to make hats or carry fresh cheese and other things in. 

Fiscello, as Fiscelle. Also a Bee-hiue.

Fischiáre, to whistle. Also to hisse as a Serpent. Also to whizze as a bullet or arrow in the ayre. Also to bleate. Also to siffle.

Fischiáta, a hissing, a whistling.

Fischiétto, a litle whistle.

Físchio, any kind of whistle. Also a siffle. Also a whistling, a siffling, a hissing. Also a whizzing of an arrow or bullet in the ayre. Also a bleating.

Fiscína, as Fescína.

Físco, a Princes treasurie or Exchequer where penalties are paied.

Físculo, a basket, fraile, or wicker.

Fisétro, a kind of Sea-fish.

Física, the arte or science of the nature of things, or of naturall Philosophie. Also Phisicke.

Fisicále, phisicall, according to naturall Philosophie.

Fisicáre, to practise Phisicke or naturall Philosophie, to vse Phisicke. Also to be snappish or captious, to take pepper in the nose.

Fisiciáno, a Phisicion.

Fisiciáre, to practise phisicke.

Fisico, a naturall Philosopher, a Phisicion. Also phisicall.

Fisicóso, snappish, captious, carping, one that will rather loose his friend than his iest.

Fisiológica, medicína naturále.

Fisionomía, Phisiognomie, the arte or rule to know a mans naturall affection by his visage or countenance.

Fisionomísta, a Phisiognomer.

Fisiónomo, a Phisiognomer.

Físo, fixed, fast, driuen in. Also earnest, attentiue or firme in opinion. Also fixedly.

Fisófolo, vsed for Filósofo.

Fisolára, as Fisoliera.

Fisoliera, a pinnace, a light-barge, a flie-boate a scouting-boate.

Físis, as much to say, Nature in Greeke.

Fisóne, gold, according to Alchimists.

Fisonomía, as Fisionomía.

Fisonomísta, as Fifionomísta.

Fissaménte, fixedly, fast, earnestly.

Fissáre, to fixe, to fasten vnto, to driue in.

Fissióne, a fixing or fastning vnto.

Físso, fixed vnto, fast, driuen in.

Fissúra, a chinke, a cleft, a creuise.

Fistera, a kind of great fish.

Fistiáre, as Fischiáre.

Fístio, as Físchio.

Fístola, a pipe, a sore called a fistula, because it groweth in length like a pipe. Also a spigget, a tap or cock for a conduit. Looke Cessiafístula.

Fistoláre, to infistulate, to grow to a fistula.

Fistolatióne, an infistulation. 



Fístolo, a Hag, a Sprite, a Hobgoblin, a Robin-good-fellow, a Hodgepocher, vsed vulgarly for any euill thing.

Fistolóso, full of fistules.

Fístula, as Fístola.

Fistuláre, as Fistoláre.

Fistulatióne, as Fistolatióne.

Fístulo, as Fistolo.

Fistulóso, as Fistolóso.

Fitéuma, a kind of hearbe.

Fítta, as Fítto. Also a thrust, a punch, a foine, a push. Also close driuen, or hard wouen. Also a slough of waters. Also the rut of a cart wheele in deepe and foule waies.

Fittagióne, a letting, a renting, a farming, a demising, a lease or indenture for letting of Lands.

Fittaiuóli, farmers, tenants, renters.

Fittáre, to demise, to let, to rent, to farme.

Fittaruóli, as Fittaiuóli.

Fittatóre, a farmer, a demiser, a letter, a Landlord, a renter of lands.

Fittibile, that may be fained.

Fittibilità, fainednes, fiction.

Fittíle, earthen, made of earth.

Fittióne, a fiction, a faining.

Fittitiaménte, fainedly, not naturally.

Fittítio, fained, artificiall, not naturall.

Fítto, fixed, fast, driuen or peged in. Also obstinate, wilfull, stubborne, stiffe, stedfast. Also fained or counterfet. Also the rent paid for any Lands.

Fítto meríggio, high-noone, iust midday.

Fittonéssa, a Witch, a Hag, an Enchantresse.

Fittónico, bewitched, charmed.

Fittúra, a fixing, thrusting, or driuing in.

Fiubba, hath beene vsed for a button of wooll or freeze, as are vsed on freeze Ierkins.

Fiumále, of or belonging to a riuer.

Fiumána, a riuer, a flood, a streame.

Fiumára, a riuer, a flood, a streame.

Fiumarella, Fiumarétta, a little rill.

Fiúme, any riuer or flood.

Fiumenále, fluuiall, fennie, watrie.

Fiumétto, a little brooke or rill.

Fiumicello, a little brooke or riuelet.

Fiumóso, streamie, full of riuers.

Fiutáre, to smell, to sent.

Fiutaríno, a blood-hound, a senting-dog.

Fiúta schifézze, a coy, nice and disdainefull woman, or gill.

Fiutatióne, a senting, a traine sent.

Fiutíno, a little flute.

Fiúto, a flute. Also a sent or a smell.

Flácco, as Flácido.

Flácido, wallowish in taste. Also faint or drooping. Also nice and effeminate. 

Flagellánte, scourging, plagueing, whipping.

Flagelláre, to plague, to scourge, to whip. Also to torment or punish.

Flagellatióne, a plagueing, or scourging. Also tormenting or punishing.

Flagello, a plague, a rod, a scorge, a flaile, a whip. Also a punishment. Also tribulation of minde.

Flagítio, a mischiefe, a detestable act, a villany or vngraciousnesse.

Flagitióso, lewde, wicked, full of mischiefe.

Flagránte, burning, flaming, flashing.

Flagránza, a flashing or burning. Also as Fragránza.

Flagráre, to burne, to flame, to flash.

Flammea, the panse-flowre.

Flámine, a high-priest among the Gentiles.

Flaminiáto, the high-priests office or dignity.

Flamínio, as Flámine,

Flammeo, flamy, of a flame colour.

Flammeolo, a little streamer or the point of a Lance.

Flámmola, the hearb Trinity or Hartsease.

Fláto, winde, ventosity, windinesse.

Flatulente, windy, full of winde.

Flatulenza, windinesse, ventosity.

Flatuosità, windinesse gathered in a bodie.

Flatuóso, windy, full of wind.

Fláuio, as Fláuo.

Fláuo, a high shining straw colour.

Flautáre, to play vpon a Flute.

Fláuto, a Flute. Also a Flutist.

Flebotomía, letting of bloud, Flebotomy.

Flegónite, a stone which put in water seemeth to burne with a great flame.

Flegma, as Flemma.

Flegmático, as Flemmáttico.

Flemma, fleagme, fleame, rhume.

Flemmático, flegmatike, rhumatike.

Flemmóne, a flegmon, a hot red inflammation of bloud, or in the body. Also a wind-gall, a great byle, or swelling.

Flessíbile, flexible, pliable, pliant, easie to be bowed or bended, tractable, gentle, tunable. Also mutable, wauering or inconstant.

Flessibilità, pliantnesse, easie-bending.

Flessiánimo, a minde easie yeelding or turning to any affection.

Flessile, as Flessibile.

Flessilóquio, that speaketh doubtfully, or that may be taken diuers waies.

Flesso, crooked, winding in and out.

Flessióne, a bending, a bowing, a pliantnesse, a crooking, a turning.

Flesso, wept, whined, wailed.

Flessúmini, an ancient name for knights or horsemen in Rome. 

Flessuósa vóce, a changing, a winding or turning voice.

Flessuóso, flexuous, winding in and out.

Fletere, fleto, flessi, flesso, to weepe, to whine, to waile.

Fleto, weeping, whining, wailing.

Flettere, fletto, flessi, flesso, to how, to bend, to yeeld to any force.

Fleuma, as Flemma.

Flobotomía, as Flebotomía.

Florália, certaine set feasts that plants might blow kindely, and shed their blossoms.

Florentíssimo, most flowrishing.

Flórido, flowrishing, flowring.

Florígero, flowres-bearing.

Flório, a kind of bird, betweene which and the horse there is such an antipathy, that if the bird doe but whistle, the horse as astonied runneth a way headlong.

Flosciáre, as Fioccáre. Also rauell as doth sleaue silke.

Flóscia séta, raueling or sleaue silke.

Flóscio, faint, drooping, lanke, lazie.

Flótta, a fleete, a nauy of ships.

Flottánte, as Fluttuánte.

Flottáre, as Fluttuáre.

Fluente, fluent, as Fluttuánte.

Fluenza, fluence, affluence, flowing.

Flúere, to flow, to come flowing in.

Flúida, a kind of running weed.

Flúido, fluent, moouing, running as cleare-water. Also thin, feeble, weake.

Fluíre, ísco, íto, to flow as the sea.

Flussáta, a play at cardes called Flush.

Flussíbile, fluxible, that may be molten or made to runne.

Flussibilménte, fluxibly.

Flussibilità, fluxibilitie.

Flússo, the flux or flow of the Sea, the current of a water. Also a flix or laske. Also flush at cardes. Also a fading, sliding or passing away. Also a womans monethly flowers. Also a broad copper monie in Persia.

Fluttánte, as Fluttuánte.

Flútto, a raging surge or mounting billow of the Sea. Also a troublous stirre, pang or passion.

Fluttuánte, floting, fleeting, wauing, hulling, surging, vnquiet.

Fluttuáre, to flote, to fleete, to waue, to hull at Sea. Also to be boistrous, to rise in waues or billowes as doth the Sea

Fluttuatióne, as Flútto.

Fluttuóso, as Fluttuánte.

Fluuiále, fluuiall, watrish, fennie, of or pertaining to the riuer.

Flúuio, a flood, a riuer, a streame.

Fò, of the verbe Fáre, I doe, I make, I cause. Also as Fù, he or she was.

Fóca, a fish called a Sea-calfe. 



Focáccia, any kind of Cake.

Focacciáre, to cake, to make cakes.

Focáia, firie, that hath fire in it.

Focále, any harth or chimney.

Focáre, to set on fire, to fire. Also to neale mettals. Also to seare or cauterize.

Focarello, a litle harth or fire.

Focaróne, a great fire, or bonefire.

Fóce, the mouth of a riuer, an out-let into the Sea, the closing of vallies. Also the gullet of ones throat. Vsed also for any narrow entrance.

Fóci, vsed for Fáuci.

Focilc, a steele to strike fire with. Also a tinder-boxe. Also a certaine bone in the armes.

Focíle minóre., looke V'lna.

Focilláre, to nourish, to cherish, to comfort, to foster, to refresh.

Focillatióne, nourishment, comfort, cherishing, a refreshment.

Focína, as Fucína.

Focináre, as Fucináre.

Fóco, fire. Also the element fire.

Focoláio, as Focoláre.

Focoláre, an harth, a chimney.

Focóne, a great fire, a bonefire. Also a remoouing furnace or barbers fire-pan.

Focosità, heate, firinesse.

Focóso, firie, full of fire, ardent, glowing or red hote. Also testie.

Fódera, a sheath, a scabberd, a lining.

Foderáre, to line any thing.

Foderáro, a scabberd or sheath-maker. Also a liner.

Fódero, a scabberd, a sheath. Also as Malicáta, as Záttera.

Foderétta, a pillowbeere.

Fódra, as Fódera.

Fodráre, as Foderáre.

Fodráro, as Foderáro.

Fodrétta, as Foderétta.

Fodrighétta, a pillowbeare.

Fódro, as Fódero.

Fóga, a flight or running away. Also furie or violent force.

Fogáccia, any kind of cake.

Fogacciáre, to cake, or bake into cakes.

Fogaménto, a stifling or choking.

Fogára, a chafing-dish, a warming-pan.

Fogáre, to choke, to stifle, to smoother. Also to drowne. Also to put to flight.

Fóggia, any kind of fashion, guise, manner, forme or new inuention, namely in clothes and apparell.

Foggiáre, to fashion, to follow fashions, to inuent new formes or fashions.

Foggiataménte, according vnto fashion, fashionably.

Foggiatóre, a fashioner, an inuenter or follower of new fashions.

Fóglia, any kinde of leafe, a blade of grasse. Also any foile for looking glasse, or set vnder transparent precicious stones. Also a flaw or honiecombe in any iron workes. Also a purse in the rogues language. Also a kind of game so named.

Fóglia di tólla, leafe of latten.

Fogliámi, all manner of foliage, leafe or branched workes.

Fogliánti, an order of Friers that eate nothing but grasse, hearbes and leaues.

Fóglia-plásma, a play so called.

Fogliáre, to come to haue leaues, to leafe. Also to foile precious stones.

Fogliaruóle, broad-leaued Coleworts.

Fogliáta, light-paste or puffe-paste.

Fogliétta, a certaine wine measure.

Fogliétte, yoong budding leaues.

Fóglio, a folio, leafe or sheete of paper.

Fogliolína, a litle leafe.

Foglióso, leafie, full of leafes or flawes.

Fogliúto, as Foglióso.

Fogliúzze, poore litle leaues.

Fógna, a common shore, sinke or iakes. Also any filth or carion. Also an Interiection of contempt as we say fough, fie, it stinkes.

Fognáro, a iakes or dung farmer.

Fogóne, any harth for fire, namely in a ship. Also the touch hole of any piece.

Fogóne cieco, a stopped, cloyed or poysoned touch-hole of any piece.

Fohonello, a Linnet bird.

Fói, fraudulent, false, wilie, deceitfull.

Fóia, bitchie, sault or beastly lust.

Foiággine, as Fóia.

Foianella, a lecherous woman.

Foiáno, a beastly lecherous man.

Foiáre, to bee sault as a bitch, to lust beastly.

Foiétta, a certaine wine pot or measure.

Foína, a Polecat. Also a Firret.

Foióso, sault or beastly lecherous.

Fóla, a fable, a leasing, a flim flam tale. Also as Fólla.

Foláre, to fable, to tell tales, to trifle.

Foláta di uento, agust, a gaile or berrie of winde.

Folcíno, a hedging bill, a bill hooke.

Folcíre, cisco, cíto, to sustaine, to vphold, to vnderprop, to strengthen.

Folcíto, sustained, vnderpropt, held vp.

Folcitóre, a setter vp, a sustainer.

Fóle, as Fólle, a foole. Also fables.

Foléga, a Coote-bird or Watercrow. Also a Moore-hen or Fen-ducke. Some say a Seamew.

Foleggiáre, to fable, or play the foole.

Folgente, fulgent, shining-bright, flaring.

Folgenza, fulgence, flaring, brightnesse.

Fólgere, fólgo, fólsi, folgiúto, to shine, to glister, to glitter, to flare, to twinkle.

Fólgola, the name of a gilders toole.

Folgiúto, shined, glittered, flared.

Folgoránte, flashing, lightning, blazing, blasting. 

Folgoráre, to lighten, to flash, to blaze, to blasten.

Folgoratézza, lauishnes or riotous spending in gay and costly clothes.

Folgoráto, huge and great, vnmeasurable, neuer heard of, beyond measure.

Folgóre, a lightning, a suddaine flash.

Folgoreggiánte, as Folgoránte.

Folgoreggiáre, as Folgoráre.

Foliáto, an oyle or oyntment composed of diuers hearbes and leaues.

Folíca, as Foléga.

Folicétti, the fowle we call Teales.

Folígine, as Follígine.

Fólio, a folio or sheete of paper.

Folícoli, as Follícoli.

Fólla, a presse, a throng, a croud or multitude of people close together. Also a course in the field where many horsemen or tilters after they haue runne single one to one they runne pell mell altogether.

Folláre, to full or tucke clothes, to presse, to throng, to croud.

Folláro, as Follatóre.

Folláta, a fulling, a tucking. Also a pressing, a thronging, a crouding. Also a Sea-ducke or Moore-hen.

Folláte, fooleries, foolish fables.

Follatore, a fuller, a tucker, a presser.

Fólle, vaine, fond, foolish. Also a foole, a gull, an idiot. Also a paire of bellowes. Also I doe or make them. Also the small chaffe of corne that remaines after threshing.

Folleggiáre, to foole or play the foole, to become foolish or fond.

Follétto, a hobgoblin, an elfe, a Robin-good-fellow, a hodge poker. Also a litle foole, or a paire of bellowes.

Fólli, the lights or lungs in any bodie.

Follía, follie, fondnesse, sottishnesse.

Follíca, as Foléga.

Follícoli, hollow things or puffs in some trees like a litle bagge. Also the greene huskes or hose of wheate. Also the hull, peele, or skin enclosing the seede. Also huskes of grapes being pressed.

Folligináre, to soot or smut, to grow darke, mistie and foggie, to smoulder.

Follígine, the soot or smut of a chimney. Also a darke mist or thicke fogge, any kind of besmouldring. Also blacking for shooes.

Folliginóso, sootie, smuttie, darke, foggie.

Fóllo, a tucking mill, a fulling fat. Also a paire of belowes. Also an earewig, an eare-creeper, or forke-taile vermine. Also I doe or make him or it.

Follóne, a fuller, or tucker of cloth.

Follóne d'ácqua, as Folóre.

Folminánte, as Fulminánte.

Folmináre, as Fulmináre.

Fólmine, as Fúlmine.

Fólo, as Fóllo.



Fólo del molíno, a mill-clapper.

Folóre d'ácqua, a black mack, or water-weazell.

Fólpo, a Porecuttle, or Cuttlefish.

Fólta, thick, spisse, darke, foggie, mistie, duskie, gloomie, pitchie. Also bushie as a thick wood or beard. Also a presse, a throng or crowd of people.

Foltaménte, looke Fólta.

Foltáre, looke Fólta.

Foltézza, thicknesse, Looke Fólta.

Foltíssimo, most thick and darke.

Fólto, as Fólta.

Foltrello, a little felt.

Fomentáre, to comfort, to nourish, to feede, to harten with any application.

Fomentatióne, a word borrowed from the leuen, that disperseth it selfe into the whole lump of the dough, a fomentation, a comforting, a strengthning with cordials, a nourishing with any plaister or application laid to any part of the body to comfort & warme. Also an abetting.

Fomentatóre, a comforter, a maintainer, a strengthuer, an abettor.

Fomentéuole, that doeth comfort, or may be comforted.

Fomento, as Fomentatióne.

Fomitáre, to pamper, to cocker.

Fómite, whatsoeuer exciteth, incendeth, or stirres vehemently to doe, any prouocation. Vsed also for Fomentatióne.

Fónda, hath been vsed for Gods plentie, or as we say, the world at will.

Fondacáro, as Fondacchiéro.

Fondacchiéro, a shop or warehouse keeper, a Marchants factor.

Fondácchi, all manner of lees or dregs in the bottom. Also mud or mire.

Fondáccio, as Fondácchi.

Fóndaco, a Marchants store-house, chiefe shop, or ware-house, namely of woollen clothes, or drapers.

Fondaghiero, as Fondacchiero.

Fondáglio, the bottom, dreg or lees of wine, or any thing else.

Fondamentále, fundamentall, that hath or is a ground and foundation.

Fondamentáre, to found or ground vpon.

Fondaménto, a ground or foundation. Also an ofspring, beginning, or groundworke.

Fondáno, wine that is neere the lees or bottom, low-running wine.

Fondáre, to ground, to settle, to found or lay a foundation.

Fondaría, a foundrie or founding house.

Fondataménte, from the very foundation, groundedly, vpon good ground or foundation. Also deeply or profoundly.

Fondatióne, as Fondaménto.

Fondáto, low, shallow. Also founded, or grounded vpon.

Fondatóre, a founder, or layer of a foundation.

Fondello, rundlets to lay vnder dishes as they vse in Germany. Also a funnell to fill any vessell with a narrow mouth. Also the dregs, lees, or bottom of any liquid thing, vsed also for a gunners cartage.

Fóndere, fóndo, fondéi, or fúso, fondúto, or fúso, to melt, to cast or found mettals. Also to thawe.

Fondíbile, fusible, that may be melted, cast, or founded. Also that may thawe.

Fóndico, as Fóndaco.

Fondígli, lees or dregs in the bottoms of pots or glasses, tappings of wine.

Fondíme, as Fondígli.

Fonditióne, as Fonditúra.

Fonditóre, a founder, a melter or caster.

Fonditúra, any kind of melting, founding, or casting of mettals.

Fóndo, a ground, a foundation. Also a bottome of any thing. Also a depth, a deepe, a dungeon. Also a mans wealth, stock, state, or free-hold.

Fóndo dotále, a womans dowrie, or iointer in Lands.

Fóndola, a fish called a Loch.

Fondúra, as Fonditúra.

Fondúto, melted, cast, founded, thawed.

Fonghíni, little mushroms or puffs.

Fóngo, any mushrom, earth-puffe, or tode-stoole. Also as Ghiáuo. Also a kind of windgall in a horse. Also the name of a kind of fish.

Fongóso, spungie, puffie as a mushrom.

Fongosità, spunginesse, fungositie.

Fònno, for Fúrono, they were.

Fontána, a fountaine, a spring, a well.

Fontanáccio, a continuall flow of water, a quagmire, a bogge.

Fontanella, a little fountaine. Also a fontanell or cauterie, or rowling, vsed also for the chiefe vein of a mans body.

Fontanella della góla, the wezelpipe.

Fontanétta, as Fontanella.

Fontaníle, of or belonging to fountaines.

Fontanóso, full of springs or fountaines.

Fónte, a source, a spring, a fountaine, a fount, a well. Also a beginning, vsed also for a funt or place of baptisme.

Fóntego, as Fóndáco.

Fóra, foorth, out, abroad. Also without or excepted. Also an auger, a borer, a piercer, a wimble. Also vsed of Dante for Ferúte, wounds, or hurts. Also holes or borings. Also a musketrest. Also as Sarebbe, of the verbe E'ssere, he, she, or it were or should be, and is rather vsed in verse then in prose.

Forabósco, a Wood-pecker, a Gnat-snapper. Also a sneaking or prying busie fellow.

Foracchiáre, to boare, to pierce, to hole, to make full of holes.

Foráce, some part of a ship.

Foraggiáre, to forage or to fodder. Also to stop with a wad of straw or haie.

Foraggiere, a forager, a fodderer.

Forággio, forage, fodder for cattell. Also a wad of straw. Vsed also anciently for Fuóra, out.

Forágna, a fish called a loch.

Foráme, any kind of hols, an arse.

Foráme gránde., Vsed for hell.

Foramello, a nice, a coy or squeamish fellow, a finde-fault or medler with other mens matters.

Foráre, to beare, to pierce, to hole. Also to make hollow.

Forasiepe, a bird called a wren.

Foratóio, auger, a piercer, a boarer.

Foratóre, as Foratóio.

Fórbici, cizers, sheares. Looke Fáre fórbici. Also as Zóccoli Zóccoli.

Forbiciáro, a maker of shears or cizers.

Forbiciáta, as Forficiáta.

Forbicétte, as Forbicíni.

Forbicíni, little cizers or shears.

Forbíre, bísco, bíto, to furbush, to burnish, to wipe, to make cleane, to frub, to polish.

Forbíto, furbished, rubbed, burnished, frubbed, polished.

Forbito, spruce, neat, fine, crafly.

Forbitóio, a furbushing iron, a burnishing toole.

Forbitóre, a wiper, a frubber of blades, a polisher. Also a burnisher.

Forbitúra, a burnishing, a frubbing.

Forbottáre, as Forbottoláre.

Forbottoláre, to mutter, to grumble. Also to spend or wast ones goods in secret corners. Vsed also to bang, to cudgell, to beat or rib-baste one with drie-blowes.

Forbottolóne, a grumbler, a mutterer. Also a spend-thrift in secret corners.

Fórca, a gallowes, a gibbet. Also a hayforke. Also a halter sacke, a wagge.

Forcábile, fit for the gallowes.

Forcámi, some part of a ship.

Forcáre, to forke. Also to hang vpon the gallowes.

Forcaríe, knauish or gallowes trickes.

Forcáro, a gallowes or forke-maker.

Forcáta, an enforking, a forkefull. Also a blow with a forke. Also a bending or forking. Also the mouth of the stomacke. Also a gallowes full.

Forcáto, all manner of forkes, namely forked irons vpon which pieces rest, and as the Gunner pleaseth turne vpon them. Also forked. Also hanged vpon the gallowes,

Fórce, cizers, sheares. Also pincers, mullets or litle tonges. 



Forcella, a forke, a flesh-hooke. Also a Musket rest.

Forcella délla víte, an vnder-prope or forke to hould vp a vine.

Forcella del petto, the mouth of the stomacke.

Forcelláre, to catch with a forke or fleshhooke, to vnderprop with forkes.

Forcellúto, forked, forkie.

Fórche, gallowes, gibbets. Looke Fáre le fórche.

Forchebéne, a knaue fit for the gallowes.

Forcheggiáre, to play the hangman, to hang dangling as on a gibbet.

Forchétta, a little forke, a little gibbet or gallowes. Also a hemp-wrester. Also a disease in a horse called the running frush. Also as Forcella.

Forchettáre, to enforke.

Forchétte, little forkes. Also the barres, trailes or vizards of a caske or helmet.

Forciáre, to forke, to make forked. Also to inforce, to compell, to constraine.

Forciere, as Forziere.

Forciglióne, as Porphirióne.

Forcína, a fisgig or harping iron.

Fórcola, as Forcella. Also the place wherin the oares play and stand as the Water-men row.

Forconáre, to inforke. Also to vphold with forkes or great hookes.

Forcóne, a great forke or flesh-hooke. Also a great paire of gallowes. Also a roague fit for the gallowes.

Forcúto, forked, forkie. Also the mouth of the stomacke.

Forcúzza, a notable gallowes-clapper.

Fóre, forth, out, abroad, without.

Forense, a forrener, an alien, a freeman, a stranger. Also a Country-swaine, or cloune. Also pertaining to the place of Common please or pleading.

Foresána, as Foresétta.

Foresáno, as Forense.

Forése, as Forense.

Foresennáto, as Forsennáto.

Foresétta, a pretty country wench or lasse.

Forsesótta, as Foresétta.

Foresta, any kind of forrest, wildernesse, desert or solitarie wood.

Forestáro, a forrester, a woodman.

Forestería, an Inne or hosterie for strangers.

Forestiere, a stranger, a forreiner, a friend.

Foresto, wild, sauage, rude, vnciuill, solitarie, desert.

Forétta, a pillowbeere.

Forfánte, as Furfánte,

Forfantáre, as Furfantáre.

Forfantaríe, as Furfantaríe.

Forfáre, to forfeit. 

Forfátto, a forfeit, a forfeiture.

Forfácchie, the forkes of any fish.

Forfacchiúto, forked.

Forfécchie, a kind of horse flie or gnat.

Forficétte, litle cizers or sheeres.

Forficáre, to pinch or snip with cizers.

Fórfici, as Fórbici.

Forficiáta, a snip, a cut or blow with a paire of cizers or sheares, or what they containe.

Forficíni, litle cizers or sheares.

Fórfora del cápo, the dandraffe in ones head.

Fórfora, dandraffe. Also a kinde of waight.

Forforóso, full of dandraffe.

Fórgia, a forge. Also vsed for Fóggia.

Forgiáre, to forge. Also as Foggiáre.

Forgiatóre, a forger, a fashioner.

Foríca, as Fógna.

Foricário, a iakes or dung-farmer.

Forichétta, as Forchétta.

Foriere, a harbenger for a Campe or Trince.

Forinséco, forreine, fremd aliene, outward.

Fórma, a forme, a modell, a frame or mould of or for any thing, a manner, a shape, a fashion, a method or order of any thing. Also a patterne or draught of any thing. Also a last for shooes. Also a cheesepresse. Also a whole cheese.

Formaceo., looke Múro.

Formábile, that may be formed.

Formaggiáre, to dresse with cheese.

Fórma d'huómo, gold according to the Alchimists phrase.

Formaggiáro, a cheese-munger.

Formaggiáta, a meate made of cheese, a cheese-cake. Also a flim flam tale.

Formaggiera, a cheese-presse, a dayrie-house, a dayrie-woman, a cheese loft.

Formággio, any kind of cheese.

Formáglio, a shoemakers laste. Also ouches, brouches or tablets & iewels that yet some old men weare in their hats, with Agathstones cut or grauen with some formes and images in them, namely of famous mens heads. Also a iewell or tablet worne as an ornament about the necke.

Formále, formall, according to forme.

Formalità, formalitie.

Formalizzáre, to formalize.

Formalizzáto, formalized.

Formáre, to forme, to shapen, to fashion, to giue forme or shape vnto.

Formatióne, a formation, a shaping, a forming, a framing.

Formatiuo, according to forme. Also that may forme, or that giueth forme.

Formatóre, a former, a framer, a shaper.

Fórme, as Formella.

Formella, a furrow in a garden. Also a litle Fórma. Also a swelling about the pasterne, ioint or corner of the horses hoofe being ouermuch trauelled when the horse was yoong.

Formentáccio, a formentie tart.

Formentáro, a meale or wheate man.

Formentáta, formentie pottage or tarte. Also houshold, wheaten or cheate-bread.

Forménto, any kind of corne but properly wheate. Vsed also for leauen.

Formentóne, the biggest kind of wheate. Also formentie.

Forméuole, that may be formed.

Formentóso, full of, or yeelding corne.

Formétta, any litle Fórma.

Formíca, an Emmet, an Ante or Pissemire. Also the shingles, the raging euill, or running worme.

Formíca di sórbo, a stiffenecked or obstinate man.

Formicáio, as Formicáro.

Formicáre, to itch, to craule or runne as a tetter or ring worme.

Formicáro, an Emmets nest.

Formicatióne, an itching, a crawling, a running of tetters or ringwormes, a pricking of wartles.

Formichíno pásso, a slow pace, an Emmets march.

Formícola, a bird called a Wrinecke.

Formicolaménto, as Formicatióne.

Formicoláre, as Formicáre.

Formicolatióne, as Formicatióne.

Formicóne, a great Emmet or Pissemire. Also a slie sneaking fellow.

Formicóso, full of Emmets or Pissemires.

Formidábile, to be feared, dreadfull, vndanted, terrible.

Formidándo, as Formidábile.

Formidánza, dread, dreadfulnesse.

Formidáre, to dread, to put in feare.

Formidóso, full of feare and dread.

Formíga, as Formíca, &c.

Formità, forme, formitie, shape.

Fórmolo, a mould, a modell or forme to cast any thing into.

Formosità, beautie, fairenesse, comelines, handsome and formall shape.

Formóso, beautious, faire, comely, of good shape, forme or lineaments.

Formulário, a formularie, a booke of presidents for a Lawyer or Scriuener. Also a drawer of presidents, a writer of writs, a Lawyers clerke, a practicioner or Atturney of the law.

Fornacálie feste, certaine feasts for the parching and baking of corne among the Romanes.

Fornáce, any kinde of furnace, or kill. Vsed also for a glasse-house.

Fornaceo, baked in an ouen. Also looke Múro.

Fornaciáro, a furnace-man, a lime-man, a kill-man, a glasse-maker.

Fornagiáio, as Fornaciáro.



Fornagiótto, a litle furnace or lime-kill.

Fornáia, Fornára, a she baker.

Fornáio, Fornáro, a man baker.

Fornáta, an ouen full, a whole baking, a batch of bread.

Fornello, any litle ouen or furnace. Also a kind of torture, racke, or litle ease.

Forn etto, as Fornello.

Fornicánza, as Fornicatióne.

Fornicáre, to commit fornication.

Fornicário, a fornicator.

Fornicatióne, fornication.

Fornicatóre, a fornicator.

Fornicatríce, a fornicatrix.

Forníre, nísco, níto, to furnish, to decke, to store, to supply, to garnish, to trap, to prouide vnto. Also to perfect, to accomplish, to finish or to make an end, to giue end and perfection vnto.

Fornim énti, furnishings, furnitures. Also all manner of prouisions.

Forníscila, dispatch and end it.

Forníto, furnished, stored with. Also finished, ended, accomplished.

Fornitóre, a furnisher, a prouider.

Fórno, an ouen, a furnace.

Fóro, a publicke market place. Also an open court or iudgement seate. Also the bore of any piece or Canon. Also any round hole. Also they were. Il mál fóro, a womans quaint, as one would say the deuils hole.

Foróncoli, as Gángolo, or Ciccióni, as Furúnculi.

Forolíno, Vsed for a mans trill or arse.

Foroncoláre, as Furunculáre.

Foroncolóso, as Furunculóso.

Foróre, vsed for Furóre.

Forosétta, a pretty country wench or lasse.

Forriero, as Foriere.

Forsanello, a kind of bird.

Fórse, perhaps, it may be, peraduenture, a note of doubt or vncertaintie.

Fórse chè, perhaps that, it may be that.

Fórse fórse, well well, it may perhaps.

Forsennáre, to runne mad or out of ones wit.

Forsennaría, madnesse, priuation of wit.

Forsennáto, mad, out of his wits.

Fortalézza, as Fortézza.

Fórte, strong, sturdie, tough, vndanted, forcible, powerfull, able. Also high or aloud, as Parlár fórte. Also much or greatly, hardly and fast-holding, strongly and forcibly.

Fórte, soft, as Fortézza.

Fórte gridáre, to cry aloud.

Fortelézza, as Fortézza.

Fórte temére, to feare greatly.

Fórte stáre, to stand fast.

Fortézza, a fort, a fortresse, a castle, a keepe, a skonce, a cittadell, a strength, a bulwarke, a hold, a block-house. Also fortitude, strength, force, power, valor. 

Forticello, a litle fort, some what strong.

Fortiére, as Forziere.

Fortificaménto, a fortifying or strenthning.

Fortificáre, to fortifie, to make strong.

Forrisicatióne, fortification.

Fortificatóre, a fortifier, an enginer.

Fortilícia, any litle fortresse.

Fortitúdine, fortitude, force, strength of minde.

Fortíno, rammishnesse or ranknesse in taste or smell.

Fortóre, a dampe, a stench, a smell, namely of the stomacke when one belcheth,

Fortuità, casualtie, vnexpected hap, accidentall euent.

Fortuíto, casuall, by chance or hap, accidentall.

Fortúna, fortune, chance, hap, lot, good or bad hazard, aduenture, lucke or euent. Also a storme, a tempest or ill weather at Sea.

Fortunále, casuall or accidentall. Also a storme or tempest at Sea. Also of or proceeding from fortune.

Fortunáre, as Fortuneggiáre.

Fortunáto, fortunate, luckie.

Fortuneggiáre, to flote vp and downe as fortune will. Also to liue as fortune will, to wander and trauell in this world and depend on fortune.

Fortunésimo, happie or vnhappie, lucke or chance.

Fortunéuole, that may fortune.

Fortúnio, a chance, a casualty.

Fortunóso, luckie, or vnlucky, fortunate or vnfortunate. Also stormy or tempestuous. Also subiect to chance or fortune.

Fortuóso, as Fortuíto.

Foruiáre, to stray or wander out of the way.

Fórza, force, power, might, strength. Also compulsion.

Forzáre, to force, to compell.

Forzatamente, forcibly, perforce.

Fórze d'Hercole, a kind of tumbling with carying diuers men one vpon another.

Forzeríno, as Forzieríno.

Forzéuole, forcible, that may be forced.

Forzíno, whip-cord, twine or merlin.

Forziere, any kind of coffine, chest, forcer or casket with locke and key.

Forzierétto, as Forzieríno.

Forzieríno, a little coffine or forcer.

Forzína., Vsed in Lombardy for Forchétta.

Fórzo, hath anciently been vsed for Fórza. Also for Sfórzo.

Forzóso, strong, powerfull, sturdy, tough, full of strength.

Forzúto, as Forzóso.

Fósca, duskie, glomy, thicke and darke, misty, foggie, lowring, scouling, dim, of a dume or swarty colour. Also sad, melancholike, troubled in minde.

Foscáre, to darken, to thicken, to be misty.

Foscína, as Fucína.

Foscináre, as Fucináre.

Fóscio, as Fósco.

Fósco, as Fósca.

Fóssa, a graue, a pit, a ditch, a trench, any fosse digging or mote about a house. Vsed also for a womans pleasure-pit, nony-nony or pallace of pleasure.

Fóssa asciútta, a dry ditch or trench

Fossáme, all kind of ditches or trenches, all manner of digging deepe.

Fossaménto, as Fossáme.

Fossáre, to digge deepe, to make ditches, to entrench, to mote, to fosse.

Fossáta, a little ditch in the middle of a greater ditch and deeper then it.

Fossatello, a little Fóssa.

Fossáto, as Fóssa. Also ditched, moted, entrenched.

Fossatúra, a ditching, a trenching.

Fósse chè, were it that.

Fósse chí volésse, were it whosoeuer.

Fossétta, a little Fóssa.

Fossettíne, little dimples or pits in some womens cheekes or chins.

Fossicella, as Fossétta, a little Fóssa.

Fossétto, as Cunéta, a little ditch.

Fossíle, that is minerall or digged out of the earth and will melt.

Fossina, a little Fóssa. Also a long pole to bob for Eeles.

Fósso, as Fóssa.

Fóssola, as Fóssa.

Fossoláre, as Fossáre.

Fóssole, a kinde of disease in a mans eies.

Fóstu, for Tù fósti, thou wast.

Fottaríe, iapings, fuckings, swiuings.

Fottente, fucking, swiuing, sarding.

Fóttere, fótto, fottéi, fottúto, to iape, to fucke, to sard, to swiue.

Fotterígia, a cramp-fish.

Fótti, I doe or make the.

Fótti, iape thow.

Fottisterio, a bawdy or occupying-house. Also the mistery of fucking.

Fottitríce, a woman occupier.

Fottitóre, a man occupier, a iaper, a swiuer, a sarder. Also a rammer.

Fottitúra, a iaping, a fucking, a sarding.

Fottiuenti, wind-fuckere, stamels.

Fottúta, as Fottitúra.

Fottúto, iaped, fucked, swiued, sarded.

Fouente, cherishing, nourishing, fostering.

Fouéte, fóuo, fouéi, fouúnto, to cherish, to nourish to foster.

Frà, a mongst, betweene. Also a Frier.

Frà di mè, with or betweene my selfe. 



Frà dúo vespri, at euening about twylight.

Fra'l, or Frállo, betweene the.

Frá lóro, among themselues.

Frà mè, with or betweene my selfe.

Frà mè stésso, betweene my selfe.

Frà quánto?, in what space?

Frà quì, here away, betweene heere.

Fràquì ad ótto giórni, betweene this and these eight daies.

Frà sè, with or betweene himselfe.

Frà sè stésso, betweene himselfe.

Frà tánto, in the meane time, whilest.

Fracassáre, to ruine, to destroy, to hauocke, to put to rout, to discomfite, to wracke, to make a ruinous noise.

Fracassea, as Fricassea.

Fracásso, a ruine, a hauocke, a spoile, a rout, a destruction, a discomfiture, a wracke, a hurly-burly, a breaking in peeces, a trampling vnder foote, any violent noise as it were of the falling of houses, walles or trees.

Fracasciáre, as Fracassáre.

Fracáscio, as Fracásso.

Fraccáre, as Fracassáre.

Fraccurádi, trifles, toyes, fopperies, carelesse trickes. Also a kind of sport with a puppet, set at the end of a staffe which stirred vp and downe with a thrid makes diuers motions and ridiculous gestures.

Fracidíccio, as Fracidúme.

Fracidíre, dísco, díto, to rot to putrifie.

Frácido, rotten, putrified, corrupted with age and continuance.

Fracidúme, putrefaction, rottennesse. Also, importunity or cloying with words.

Fradagliáre, to liue merrily in good company as louing brethren.

Fradáglia, a merry knot or brotherly crew of good fellowes.

Fradiciáre, as Fracidire.

Fradíccio, as Frácido.

Fradicciúme, as Fracidúme.

Frága, a Strawberry.

Fragábile, that may crush, rumble or clatter with fright and terror.

Fragára, a strawberry-woman.

Fragária, the Strawberry-bush.

Fragáta, a Strawberry-plot. Also a Frigate.

Fragelláre, as Flagelláre.

Fragello, as Flagello.

Fragibilità, as Fragilità.

Frágile, fraile, brittle, corruptible.

Fragilità, frailty, britlenesse.

Fragitíde, the twelue great veines appearing on each side of the necke.

Fragménto, a fragment or shard.

Frágnere, as Frángere.

Frágo, a fish called in Latine Pagrus.

Frágola, a Strawberry. 

Fragolára, a Strawberry-woman.

Fragoláta, a Strawberry-plot. Also as Fagioláta.

Fragolíno, a kind of fish so called in Rome and in Latin Erithinus, it is our Rochet or Gurnet. Also a Robin-redbrest.

Fragolóso, full of or yeelding Strawberries.

Fragóre, a crashing, a cracking, a rumbling noise, a clattring as of falling of towres or things broken in sunder causing terror and fright.

Fragóso, as Fragróso.

Fragránte, fragrant or sweet-smelling.

Fragránza, fragrancy or sweet-smelling.

Fragráre, to cast a sweet smell. Also to cracke violently causing terror.

Fragróso, sweet smelling. Also full of terrible clattering and cracking.

Frainteligenza, intelligence betweene one and another. Also misunderstanding.

Fraintendere, tendo, tési, téso, to haue intelligence one betweene another. Also to misunderstand.

Fraintenditóre, one that hath intelligence betweene others. Also a misunderstander.

Fraintéso, vnderstood with others. Also misunderstood.

Fraintessere, tesso, tesséi, tessúto., to enter weaue, or weaue betweene.

Fraintessiménto, an enterweauing.

Frále, fraile, brittle, subiect to breake.

Fràle dúe sére, at euening, about twilight.

Framésso, intermitted, interposed.

Framettenza, a putting betweene. Also an insinuating.

Framéttere, métto, mísi, mésso, to intermit, to interpose, to put betweene.

Framettitóre, an interposer, an intermitter. Also an insinuater.

Framménti, fragments, scraps, pieces.

Framponáto, a kind of high-horse-shooe, as the Brewers horses vse in London.

Frampóni, high-frost-horse-shooes.

Franaménto, a clammering vp some steepy place. Also a mouldring or rammeling of ruinous stones vnto earth and durt.

Franáre, to clammer vp any slippery or broken place. Also to breake in sunder, to rammell or moulder in pieces as sometimes mudwalles or great masses of stones will doe of themselues.

Francagióne, an infranchisement.

Francaménte, freely, franckly, bouldly.

Francáre, to infranchise, to release, to quit, to discharge, to exempt.

Francatríppa, a logger-head, a greasie scullion-like foolish fellow.

Francesáre, to frenchifie. Also to infect with the french-pox.

Francescáni, Franciscan Friers.

Francése, French, a French-man. Mále francése, the french euill.

Francésco, as Francése. Also the name Francis.

Francheggiáre, as Francáre. Also to cherish, to beare out, to harten vp.

Franchézza, as Franchígia. Also vertue, valour, woorth and frankenesse.

Franchígia, franchise, freedome, liberty, denizonship. Also freenesse, franknesse or bouldnesse. Also a sanctuary or place of refuge.

Frachigiáre, as Francáre.

Franciosáre, as Francesáre.

Francióso, as Francése.

Fránco, a franchise, a liberty, a sanctury, a priuiledged place or precinct.

Fránco, franke, free, at liberty, not subiect to any seruitude. Also quit or exempted and discharged. Also endenized or made free of any towne or corporation. Also liberall and free-harted. Also bold in speech, or vnrespectiue.

Fránco di dátio, scot-free, custome free.

Francolína, a bird called a God-wit.

Frangenti, fragments, shards. Also ruptures. Also squarings.

Frángere, frángo, fránsi, fránto, to breake, to splitter, to riue, to shiuer, to crush, to batter, or bruise in pieces.

Frangétte, all manner of small fringes. Also laces or garnishments of clothes.

Frángia, any kind of fringe.

Frangiáre, to fringe.

Frangíbile, brittle, subiect to breaking.

Frangiferro, a breaker of iron.

Frangiláncia, a breaker of lances.

Frángil'ósso, a bone-breaker.

Frangióne, any great or deepe fringe.

Frangipáne, a bread-breaker.

Frangipietra, a breaker or hewer of stones.

Frangitóre, a breaker, a splitter.

Frágna, may breake, shiuer, or splitter.

Frangolíno, as Fragolíno.

Franguello, as Frenguello.

Frantendere, as Fraintendere.

Frantéso, as Fraintéso.

Fránto, broken, splitted, shiuered.

Frantúmi, fragments, shreads, splittings.

Fraolíno, as Fragolíno.

Frap., Looke Crip.

Frapónere, to enterpose or put.

Fraponiménto, any enterputting.

Fráppa, a brag, a boast, a vaunt, a crack. Also a cheating, a cunnicatching, or cozening trick. Also the tongue, the lappat or latchet of any thing. Also a iagge, a cut, or snip in any garment. Also a tearing. Also a beating. 



Frappáre, to brag, to boast, to crake, to vaunt. Also to cheate, to cunnicatch, or beguile with ouerprating. Also to iagge, to snip or cut garments. Also to hale, to tug or drag along the ground. Also to beate, or bang.

Frappatóre, a bragger, a boaster, a vanter, a craker. Also a craftie pratler, a cunnicatcher, a cheater. Also a beater, a banger.

Fráppatúra, as Fráppa.

Fráppe, as Fráppa. Also iaggs, snips or cuts or lashes in garments. Also laces, fringes, gards, or enbroyderies vpon garments.

Frappóni, any kind of great Fráppe.

Frà quánto?  betweene what space?

Frà quésto mezzo, in this meane while.

Frásca, a twig, a bough, a sprig, or bush of any greene leaues. Also a Vintners bush, or ale-house frash. Also a knauish wag, a knaue, a craftie lad.

Frascáre, to couer or make a booth, a bowre, or shade of boughs, or greene branches. Also as Frascheggiáre.

Frascaríe, all manner of greene branches, boughs, or bowres. Also youthly, waggish or knauish tricks. Also any idle trifles or toyes.

Frascáta, a bowre, a booth, an arbour, or shadie place of greene boughs, of shrubs, bushes, or frashes.

Frascáti, bundles of shrubs or bushes. Also bauins or fagots of shrubs.

Frascatóre, the name of a diuell in Dante, an entangler, a boasting busiebodie, or medler.

Frascellíni, all manner of splinters.

Frásche, as Frásca, as Frascára.

Frascheggiáre, as Frascáre. Also to play the knauish wag.

Fraschétta, a little Frásca. Also a certaine toole that Printers vse.

Fraschétto, a Sea-mans whistle.

Frascheggióso, full of greene boughs, frashes, or branches. Also full of youthly and waggish tricks. Also merie and full of pratling.

Fraschiére, a youthfull wag, a merie pratling lad.

Frasconáia, any kind of Frásca, but specially any lush or lime-bush.

Frascóne, a great Frasca.

Frascóso, as Frascheggióso.

Frascinella, as Frassinella.

Fràsè, with or betweene himselfe.

Frassinella, Oke-ferne, or Polipodie. Some Herbalists take it for Salomons seale or White-wort, and others for a kind of bastard Dittanie.

Frassinelli, yong or little Ash-trees.

Frássino, an Ash-tree.

Frássola, a kind of waight in Ormuz.

Frastágli, cuts, iags, snips in garments.

Frastagliáre, to entercut, iag, or snip. Also to enterfere as some horses doe. Also to swagger and cut it or lash it out. Also to falter, or maffle.

Frastagliataménte, iaggingly, cuttingly. Also swagringly or lashingly. Also faltringly or stuttingly.

Frastagliatóre, a swagrer, a swashblade, an outlasher. Also a stammerer.

Frastornáre, to turne backe, to diuert.

Frastórno, a back-turning, a diuerting.

Frastuóno, a clattring noise, a huge roaring or thundring.

Fratacchiáre, to play the lazie filthie frier.

Fratacchióne, a filthie, fat, lazie frier.

Fratáccio, as Fratacchióne.

Fratáia, a friers wench, or leman.

Frataría, a frierie. Also the crue or order of friers, a frierhood.

Frataríe, friers tricks.

Fratársi, to become a frier, to enfrier.

Fráte, a frier. Also a brother.

Frà tè, with or betweene thy selfe.

Frateggiáre, to professe or play the frier.

Fratellánza, a brotherhood, or brotherlie loue and vnion.

Fratelleggiáre, to follow, to imitate or doe after ones brother.

Fratelléuole, brotherly.

Fratellíssimo, most brother or brotherly.

Fratello, a brother.

Fratello carnále, a carnall brother.

Fratello cugíno, a cosen germane.

Fratello naturále, a naturall brother.

Fratello vteríno, a halfe brother, a brother by the mother, but not by the father.

Fratel mò, my brother, brother mine.

Frateltò, thy brother, brother thine.

Frà témpo d'un mése, in a moneths time or space.

Fratería, a frierie, a brotherhood.

Fraterna, a brotherhood, a frierie.

Fraternále, brotherlie, fraternall.

Fraternità, a brotherhood, a fraternitie.

Fraterno, brotherly, fraternall.

Fràterra, within or betweene land.

Fratésco, frierlike. Also friers gray.

Fraticello, a little yong frier.

Fraticída, a murtherer of his brother.

Fraticídio, a brothers slaughter.

Fratíno, a little yong frier.

Fratricída, a killer of his brother.

Fratricídio, a murthering of a brother.

Fratrizzáre, to imitate ones brother.

Fráti godenti, erano certi Cauallieri di Sánta María, but taken for carelesse friers that liue merily, and enioy the world at will.

Frátta, any kinde of brake, bramble, or furbush, brier, or thicket of brambles.

Frattióne, a fraction, a fracture, a rupture.

Frátto, broken, shiuered, splitted.

Frattúra, a fracture, or fraction of bones, a rupture or breaking.

Fratturáre, to breake or split in pieces.

Fraudáre, to defraude, to beguile.

Fráude, fraude, guile, couine, deceit.

Fraudéuole, that may be defrauded.

Fraudolente, fraudulent, full of guile.

Fraudolenza, as Fráude, or Fróde.

Fraudolóso, as Fraudolente.

Fraudóso, as Fraudolente.

Frauía, by the way.

Frauicinánte, neighbouring betweene.

Frauicinánza, a neighbouring betweene.

Frauicináre, to neighbour betweene.

Frauicíno, an enterneighbour.

Fráuole, the fruite Strawberries.

Frauolíno, as Fragolíno.

Fráuto, as Fláuto.

Fréccia, any kinde of arrow, shaft, or dart.

Frecciáre, to shaft, to dart, to shoote arrowes. Also to cozen or to affront a man, to cheate, to cunnicatch.

Frecciaría, a place where shafts or arrowes are made, kept, or sold.

Frecciáro, a Fletcher. Also a shooter of arrowes or shafts. Also a cheater, a cozener, an affronter.

Frocciáta, a blowe or hit with an arrow or shaft. Also an affront.

Frecciatóre, as Frecciáro.

Fredda, a cold, a murre, a rhume.

Freddáccio, a filthie great cold.

Freddaggióne, as Frédda.

Freddáre, to coole, to take cold.

Freddétto, chillish, somewhat cold.

Fredézza, coldnesse, chilnesse, a cold.

Freddíccio, chillie, coldish.

Freddigliáre, to be chill and cold.

Freddiglióso, chillish, coldish.

Freddiménto, as Freddúra.

Freddíre, dísco, díto, to coole, to take cold.

Freddíto, cooled, taken cold.

Fréddo, a cold, a chilnesse.

Fréddo, cold, chill, breamie.

Fréddo, slow, faint, backward.

Freddolóso, chillie, cold, shiuering.

Freddóre, a coldnesse, a chilnesse,

Freddorífero, cold-bringing.

Freddóso, full of cold or chilnesse.

Freddúra, a coldnesse, a chilnesse, a shiuering.

Fréga, a catterwalling, a saultnesse.

Fregadenti, a rubber for teeth.

Fregagióne, as Fricatióne.

Fregaménto, as Fricatióne.

Fregagnuóla, a woman-frigger, or lim-lifter.

Fregapiátti, a Scullion, or rubber of dishes.

Fregáre, to rub vp and downe, to frigle, to frig, to claw, to frit. Also to chafe one. Also to cogge and foist, or gull one.

Fregáta, a frigate, a spiall ship. 



Fregaruólo, a fish, called a Menow.

Fregatóre, a rubber, a clawer.

Fregatína, as Fregáta.

Fregatúra, as Fricatióne.

Frégi, hath been vsed for borders, limits, or bounds of lands, as Frégio.

Fregiáccio, a filthie Frégio,

Fregiáre, to fringe, to border, to gard, to lace, to embroyder, to adorne or garnish any thing. Also to crowne, or wreath, or garland. Also to cut, to gash, to wound, to marke to brand or scar ones face.

Fregiataménte, finely, adornedly, as with laces, fringes, gardings, or other ornaments. Also like vnto scars or gashings in ones face.

Fregiáto, fringed, bordered, garded, laced, embroydered, adorned or garnished. Also gashed, cut, marked, branded or scarred in the face. Also the stuffe called Frizado.

Frégio, a fringe, a lace, a border, a gard, a welt, an embroyderie or any ornament and garnishing about clothes. Also a wreath, a crowne or chaplet. Also a cicatrice, a marke, a gash, a scar ouer the face. Also fame, praise, or honorable report of a man.

Frégna, a womans quaint, any beasts priuy parts. Also the smell of a sault bitch. Also a common trull, a flurting harlot.

Frégo, a rubbing, a galling, a clawing.

Frégola, a crum, a mite, a scrap, a mammocke. Also beastly lust or saultnesse.

Fregoláre, to crum, to crumble, to moulder. Also to goe a catterwalling.

Fregolatúra, a crumbling, a mouldring.

Frégole, crums. Also toyish or idle humors imitated of others.

Frégo tórto, an error in any writing or reckoning.

Fregóna, a whelping bitch.

Freguente, as Frequente.

Freguenza, as Frequenza.

Fremente, roaring, rumbling, raging, braying, ruffling, royning, gnashing.

Frémere, frémo, freméi, fremúto, to roare, to bray, to rage, to ruffle, to rumble, to royne as a Lion. Also to gnash the teeth.

Fremíre, mísco, míto, as Frémere.

Fremitáre, as Frémere.

Fremito, a raging, a rumbling or roaring as the Sea maketh, the royning or roaring of a Lyon, the braying of an wild Asse, the gnashing of teeth.

Fremóre, as Fremito.

Fremúto, raged, roared, royned, rumbled, brayed, gnashed.

Frenáio, a bit or curbe-maker.

Frenáre, to bridle, to curbe, to snaffle. Also to refraine or restraine. Also to gouerne, to moderate or rule. 

Frendíre dísco, díto, to grunt as a hog or wild Boare.

Frendíto, grunted or grumbled as a hog or wild boare. Also a grunting, a grumbling.

Frenegli, clasps, hookes, or latchets about garments.

Frenello, a litle bridle, bitt or snaffle. Also a curbe for a bridle. Also litle crisps of haire, or headbands for womens heads. Also an iron or wire that women vse to curle and crispe their haires with.

Frenesía, frenzie, rauing, madnesse.

Freneticáre, to raue, to be franticke.

Frenetico, mad, franticke, frenzie.

Frenguelláre, to chat, to prattle, to prate.

Frenguello, a Goldfinch, a Lobfinch, a Chaffinch, a Spinke, a Shaldpile.

Frenguello montáno, a brambling bird.

Freníre, nísco, níto, as Frendíre.

Freníto, as Frendíto.

Fréno, a bridle, a snaffle. Also a restraint or curbing. Also gouernment or moderation and discretion.

Frequentáre, to frequent, to haunt.

Frequentatióne, frequencie, haunting.

Frequente, frequent, haunting, populous.

Frequenza, as Frequentatióne.

Fréri, Herbengers for a campe or for Princes courts. Also vsed for brethren or Friers. Also Castor and Pollux, two starres so called neare the Pole. Vsed also for Hostes or Inneholders. Also hospitalers or spitlers.

Frescáccio, foule and filthy fresh.

Frescáre, to coole, to refresh.

Freschézza, freshnesse, coolenesse.

Frésco, fresh, coole, coldish. Also vnsalt, new-laid, new made, sweet. Also greene or lustie. Looke Stáre frésco.

Frescolíne, fresh, new, yoong, sweet.

Frescolíno, a fine pleasant freshnesse.

Frescótta, handsome and fresh, iolly and bonnie, yoong and lustie.

Fresóne, course frize or rug or shag.

Fressóra, a frying pan.

Fressoráre, to frie in a frying pan.

Frétia, a certaine colour vsed of Painters.

Fréto, a narrow Sea, or a straight betweene two lands.

Frétta, haste or suddaine speed, diligence.

Frettáre, to hasten, to make speed.

Frettolóso, hastie, speedie, full of hast.

Frézza, as Fréccia, &c.

Frezzaría, as Frecciaría.

Fricáre, as Fregáre.

Fricassea, a french fricassie, any manner of minced and fried meates.

Fricatióne, a frication or rubbing vp & downe gently.

Fricciáre, to frig, to wrigle. Also to tickle. Also to pricke forward, to vrge or molest with wordes.

Friccióso, wrigling, frigging, pricking. Also ticklish.

Friére, as Fréri.

Friéri, as Fréri.

Frifoláre, to bestir ones fingers nimbly vpon a pipe, flute or virginalls.

Frisolísta, a nimble piper or virginalls plaier, a light fingered fellow.

Frigatóio, as Fregatóio.

Frigefáre, to make very cold.

Frigefattióne, a making cold.

Frígere, as Fricciáre, or as Fríggere.

Fríggere, fríggo, fríssi, frítto, to fry in a frying pan.

Frigidézza, as Frigidità.

Frigidità, coldnesse, coolenesse, chilnesse.

Frígido, cold or coole in operation.

Frigíllo, a Chaffinch.

Frígio, a kinde of soft mouldring stone. Also a kind of worke in Arthitecture. Also a kind of tune or melodie wherin seemed to be a diuine furie.

Frigióne, an Embroyderer.

Frígna, as Frégna.

Frignóccola, a phip or flurt with ones fingers ends.

Frignoccoláre, to phip or flurt with ones fingers ends.

Frigotaménto, a shrugging or strutting ioy, an ouerioying.

Frigotáre, to shuckle, to shrug, or strut for ouerioy.

Friguláre, to cry as a Cuckoe doth.

Frilingótti, a kind of daintie chewet or litle minced pies.

Frínco, a Chaffinch.

Frinfrì, suddaine humors, headlong toyes, violent fancies.

Fringuelláre, as Frenguelláre.

Fringuello, as Frenguello.

Friníre, nísco, níto, to creake or squeake as Grashoppers doe.

Frinsóne, Frinzóne, a Greenefinch.

Frippáro, a fripper, a broker or seller of old clothes.

Frippería, a fripperie, a place or shop where old clothes are sold.

Frísa, the stuffe called frize or rugg.

Frisáccia, course frize or rugg.

Frisáda, the stuffe called Frizado.

Frisáre, to frize, to nap, to cotten. Also as Fregiáre.

Frisáro, a frize or rugg maker.

Fríscolo, a mill-hopper. Also a fraile for figs or reasins.

Frisella, as Frisétta.

Frisétta, fine frize, cotton, bayes, or penystone. Also fine frizado.

Frisétti, some part or worke of a ship.

Frisígna, a sowpig. Also a hoglouse. Also a wherle for a spindle.

Fríso., Vsed for Frégio.

Frisóggia, a frying pan.

Frisóne, course frize or thicke rugg, a 



rough rug garment as our Mariners weare in cold weather. Also a Frezeland man or horse. Also as Frusóne.

Frissóra, a frying-pan.

Frissoráre, to fry in a frying-pan.

Friteláca, as Ménta greca.

Fritella, fritters. Also wafers.

Fritelle di uénto, puff-fritters.

Fritóne, a fish called in Latin Lacerta.

Frítta, a kinde of composition that they vse to make Venice-glasses with.

Frittáre, to fry flat in a pan.

Frittáta, a froise, tanzie or pancake.

Frittelláre, to make fritters.

Frittelle, fritters. Also wafers.

Fríttfrítt, as we say cricket a wicket, or gigaioggie. Looke Fáre fríttfrítt.

Frittióne, as Fricatióne.

Frítto, fryed in a frying-pan.

Fríttole, as Fritelle, fritters, wafers.

Frittúra, a frying.

Friuoláre, to make vaine, friuolous, or of no effect.

Fríuolo, friuolous, vaine, voide, of no effect, vnprofitable.

Frízza, as Fréccia, &c.

Frizzánte, briske, frisking, tarte, or smacking in taste as good wine. Looke Frizzáre.

Frizzáre, to bite, to burne or be tarte vpon the tongue. Also to spurt as good wine doth being poured into a flat glasse, to friske and skip nimbly. Also to quauer or run nimbly vpon any instrument. Also to fry or scorch or parch. Also to crush, to squash, to bruise or squatter.

Frizzáta, a quicke tartnesse vpon the tongue. Looke Frizzáre.

Fróda, fróde, fródo, fraud, guile, couine.

Frodalente, fraudulent, guilefull.

Frodalenza, as Fróda.

Frodáre, to defraud, to beguile.

Frodatóre, a defrauder, a beguiler.

Fróde, fraud, deceit, guile.

Fródo, fraude, guile, deceite.

Frodolente, fraudulent, guilefull.

Frodolenza, guilefulnesse, couine.

Fróghe, Fróge, the nares or nosetrils.

Froíre, ísco, íto, as Fruíre.

Froitióne, as Fruitióne.

Fróle, as Fróllo.

Frolláre, to mortifie meat, to make it tender and short with hanging it vp.

Frollatúra, a mortifying of meat.

Frollíre, lísco, líto, as Frolláre.

Fróllo, tender, short, or mortified as meat with hanging it in the aire.

Frollóne, a great searce to sift meale.

Frollonáre, to searce, or sift coursely.

Frómba, a sling to hurle withall.

Frombáre, to hurle in a sling.

Frombáta, a cast or hit with a sling.

Frombatóre, a slinger. 

Frombeggiáre, as Frombáre.

Frómbola, as Frómba.

Fromboláre, to hurle in a sling.

Fromboláta, as Frombáta.

Frombolatóre, a slinger.

Fromboliére, a slinger.

Fromentária, of or pertaining to corne.

Fromentário, a kind of Grasse-hopper liuing in corne.

Fromentáta, as Formentáta.

Fromentatóri, horsemen that goe a foraging or a booty-hayling, booty-hailers.

Froménto, any corne namely wheat.

Fromentóso, corny, wheaty, grainy.

Frónda, any greene bough, or branch or blossome. Also a sling.

Frondáre, to bud, to blossome, to branch-greene. Also to sling.

Frondáta, a branching, as Frascáta. Also as Frombáta.

Frondatóre, a slinger.

Frónde, greene buddings or blossomes, greene boughes or branches.

Frondeggiánte, budding forth leaues, blossoms or branches.

Frondeggiáre, as Frondáre.

Frondífero, branches or buds-bearing.

Frondíre, dísco, díto, as Frondáre.

Fróndola, a hurling sling.

Frondoláre, to hurle in a sling.

Frondoláta, as Frombáta.

Frondolatóre, a Slinger.

Frondolóso, full of blossoms or greene leaues.

Frondóso, as Frondolóso.

Frontáccia, a broade filthie forehead.

Frontále, a frontlet, a fore-headpiece, a frontstale, a headband. Also a square as women weare on their heads being sicke. Also an outward medicine aplide to the forehead. Also a rowler to put on childrens heads to keepe them from hurt in falling.

Frontaménto, a fronting, a confronting.

Frontáre, to front, to come face to face.

Frontatóre, a fronter, a confronter.

Frónte, a front, a brow, a forehead. Also the forefront of a squadron or battell. Also the front or fore-part of a wall or bulwarke.

Frónte del balouárdo, the face or front of a bulwarke, that is, the wall from the point to the eare or shoulder.

Fronteggiáre, to front, to confront, to outface, to withstand. Also to frontire, to confine or border neere.

Fronteggiáre vn' árma, to enmantle a coate of armes.

Frontero, in front, right ouer against.

Frontespício, a frontispice or forefront of any building or house.

Frontiera, a frontire or bounding place. Also a skonce, a fort, a bastion, a defence, a trench or block-house vpon or about confines or borders.

Frontíle, as Frontále.

Frontíno, was the name of Rugiero his horse, commended for his courage and daring by Ariosto, but now it is vsed for a saucie, malapert, or impudent companion, one whom no shame can make to blush.

Frontíno, a little browe, a prettie forehead, a frontlet, or any front piece.

Frontóso, high, or broade-browed.

Frontóne d'un' árma, the enmantling of a coate of armes.

Frónza di córda, a round roule of cables, a coyle of cable, or any cordage.

Frónze, the stalks of coleworts.

Fronzále, as Frontále.

Fronzáre, to frounze. Also as Frondáre.

Fronzúto, as Frondóso.

Frótta, a troupe, a crew, a multitude.

Frottáre, to troupe in multitudes. Also as Fregáre.

Fróttola, a countrie song or roundelay, a wanton tale, or skeltonicall riming.

Frottoláre, to sing countrie songs or gigges, to tell wanton tales, to rime dogrell.

Fruánza, a wearing out of any thing.

Fruáre, to consume with wearing.

Frucáre, as Frugáre.

Frucatóre, as Frugatóre.

Frugacciáre, as Frugáre.

Frugále, frugale, sparing, thriftie.

Frugalità, frugalitie, thriftinesse.

Frugalménte, frugalie, thriftily.

Frugáre, to rub or claw gently. Also to grope or fumble vp and downe. Also to prouoke or prick on. Also to burnish. Also to pinch and spare miserably. Also to sift or purge from drosse. Also to feede vpon any fruites of the earth. Also to feede sparingly.

Frugatóio, as Frugatóre.

Frugatóre, a rubbing cloth, a rubber, a burnishing toole, a burnisher. Also a toole that founders vse. Also a fumbler or groper vp and downe. Also a sparer, a prowler, a frugall fellow, a pinchpenie.

Frugelli, Silke or spinning wormes.

Frugífero, plentifull, fruite-bearing.

Frugílego, a corne-gatherer, or hoarder.

Frugiperda, a spoile-fruite, a cornewaster, a spoiler of goods, a spendthrift, one that is good for nothing but to eate, called also vn Pán perdúto.

Frugivóro, a deuourer of fruite or corne.

Frúgo, frugall, thriftie, sparing.

Frugóne, as Frugo. Also a thump giuen with ones fist or elbow.

Fruíre, ísco, íto, to enioy, or haue fruition of. Also to frolike. Also to gaine.

Fruitióne, a fruition, an enioying.

Fruíto, enioyed, or had fruition of. 



Frúlla, a lirp or clack with ones fingers ends as Barbers doe giue. Also a flurt, a toy, a iest or matter of nothing.

Frúllare, to lirp or clack with ones finggers. Also to raue about nothing.

Frúllo, as Frúlla. Also a kind of small coyne. Also bones of calues-feet that children vse to play withall.

Fruménto, any Corne, namely Wheate.

Frusciáre, to frush or crush together.

Frusóne, a Bul-finch or houpe. Some take it for a Clotbird, a Smatch, an arling, or a staine cheeke.

Frússo, as Flússo, flush.

Frústa, a whip, a scourge. Also consumed with wearing.

Frústabordello, a common filthie whore, that hath past all brothels.

Frustáre, to whip, to scourge. Also to consume with wearing.

Frustáta, a scourging, a whipping. Also a wearing out to nothing.

Frustatóre, a whipper, a scourger. Also a consumer to nothing.

Frustatoriaménte, all in vaine.

Frustatório, to be made frustrate, void or in vaine.

Frústo, a shiuer, a splinter, a chip. Also a shiue or luncheon, as of bread and cheese.

Frustráre, to frustrate.

Frústro, frustrate, made void.

Frustuláre, to breake or make into small pieces or shiuers.

Frústuli, little sticks, stalks, pieces, splints, or shiuers of anything.

Frútta, Frútti, all manner of fruites.

Fruttaiuólo, a fruiterer.

Fruttáme, all manner of fruites.

Fruttaráre, to fructifie or yeeld fruite.

Fruttáre, to fructifie, to beare fruite.

Fruttaría, all manner of fruites. Also a market or store-house for fruites.

Fruttáro, an hort-yard or vine-yard bearing fruite.

Fruttaruólo, a Fruiterer.

Fruttáta, as Frittáta.

Frutteggiáre, as Fruttuáre.

Fruttétto, any little fruite. Also an apple-loft.

Frútti-anneuáti, all manner of white or hard candied fruites.

Fruttíce, any kinde of fruite, bearing shrub. Also a shrub growing of a yong shoote and riseth not to the bignesse of a tree. Also an hearbe with a great stem.

Fruttificatióne, fructifying, profiting.

Fruttífero, fruite-bearing, profitable.

Fruttificáre, to fructifie, to beare fruite.

Fruttíuo, fructifying, fruite-bearing.

Fruttiuosaménte, fruitefully, profitably.

Frútto, any kind of fruite, or profit.

Fruttóso, fruitefull, or bearing fruite.

Fruttuále, fructuall. Also one that enioyeth the fruites or profits.

Fruttuário, as Fruttuále. Also as Fruttáro.

Fruttuáre, to fructifie or bring foorth fruite. Also to benefite or doe good vnto.

Fruttúoso, fruitefull, profitable.

Fruzzicáre, to fumble, to wrigle, or iumble and grope a wench.

Ftísi, a disease in the lungs, with a consumption of the whole bodie. Also Dionie.

Ftísico, diseased in the lungs, and in consumption.

Fù, fùe, he, she, or it was.

Fucáre, to paint the face with artificiall complexion.

Fucatióne, a false coloring, painting, or disguising.

Fucáto, painted, disguised. Also pufft.

Fúcì, vsed of Dánte for Ci fù, was heere or there.

Fucíle, a steele to strike fire. Also a tinder-boxe.

Fucína, a Forge, or Smiths worke-house. Also a place where riotous people meet.

Fucináre, to forge, or worke in a forge.

Fucinatóre, a forger.

Fúco, deceit, dissimulation, couine, guile. Also artificiall painting or complexion for womens faces. Also a kind of Bee or Drone.

Fúco maríno, Sea-weed.

Fúga, a flight, a running away, an escape. Also a rout or discomfiture.

Fugáccia, any kind of cake.

Fugacciera, a cake or wafer-woman.

Fugáce, flying, fleeting, fugitiue, slipping, escaping, flickering.

Fugaménto, a flying, a putting to flight.

Fugáre, to put to flight or make to runne away.

Fugatóre, one that puts to flight.

Fuggente, running away. Also a runaway. Also fleeting.

Fuggéuole, that may, or is apt to flie and runne away. Also that may be fled or shunned, slipperie or fleeting.

Fuggiásco, by stealth and flying.

Fuggíbile, as Fuggéuole.

Fuggi-fatíche, an idle, lazie or loitring laborer, a shun-labor.

Fúggil'ótio, any thing or sport to passe the time and shun idlenesse.

Fuggíre, fúggo, fuggíj, fuggíto, to flie, to runne or slip away, to fleete. Also to shun, to auoid or escape.

Fuggíta, a running or slipping away, an escape, a flight.

Fuggitíuo, a fugitiue, a run-away. Also fleeting.

Fuggíto, fled, run or slipt away.

Fúgo, as Fúco. Also an Idiot or gull.

Fúgolo, a whirle-poole, a whirle-winde.

Fugóne, as Fogóne.

Fúia, as Fóia.

Fuiáre, to hide from, to filch or pilfer by craft. Also as Fureggiáre.

Fuína, a Polecat, a foine. Also a firret.

Fúio, a filcher, a pilfrer, a craftie theefe.

Fúla, or Fióre, Sura is so called when it is setled, cleare and stale.

Fulgente;, shining, blazing, glistring, bright, fulgent, flaming.

Fulgenza, a shining, a bright-glistring, fulgencie, flaringnesse.

Fúlgere, fúlgo, fúlsi, fúlso, to shine bright, to glister flaringly.

Fulgidézza, as Fulgenza.

Fúlgido, as Fulgente.

Fulgináre, Confetti fulgináti di più sórte.

Fúlgolo, a whirle-pole, a whirle-winde.

Fúlgore, a flashing, a lightning, a sudden blazing.

Fulguráre, to lighten, to flash as before thunder.

Fulíca, as Foléga.

Fuligináre, as Foligináre.

Fuligine, as Folígine.

Fuliginóso, as Foliginóso.

Fulignáto, a lurker, a miching wretch, a sparing chuffe, a cunny-catcher.

Fulíma, a cobweb, a spider-web.

Fulisello, the cod of a Silke-worme.

Fúlle, was to hir.

Fúlli, was to him.

Fullóne, a kind of Beetle or flie.

Fulmánte, as Fulminánte.

Fulmáre, as Fulmináre.

Fúlme, as Fúlmine.

Fulminánte, flashing, lightning, thunder-stryking, bearing or flashing.

Fulmináre, to flash or lighten before thunder. Also to thunder-strike.

Fúlmine, a thunder flash or bolt.

Fulminigero, thunder-bearing.

Fulminóso, as Fulminánte.

Fulmóso, as Fulminóso.

Fuluiána, an hearbe good to eat.

Fuluidézza, as Fulgenza.

Fúluido, as Fulgente.

Fúluo, a gold or bright yellow. Also a weazell-colour.

Fumána, a great smoke. Also a great riuer or streame.

Fumaiuólo, as Fumário.

Fumánte, fuming, smoking, reeking.

Fumáre, to fume, to smoke, to reeke. Also to blote or dry in the smoke.

Fumária, fumitory or earth-smoke.

Fumário, a smoke-loft, a shanke or tunnell for a chimny to conueigh smoke.

Fumaróla, as Fumária. Also fumication or smoking and fuming.

Fumáti, all maner of smoke-dryed-meat, or blotted fish.

Fumicáre, as Fumáre.

Fumicóso, fuming, smokie, reekant.

Fumicotrémola, as Sgramfo.



Fumiére, dung or mucke. Also a dunghill or muck-hill.

Fúmite, as Fomite.

Fúmmo, as Fúmo. Also we were.

Fúmo, smoke, reeke, fume. Also vapour or exhalation.

Fumosità, fume, smoke, strength in wine. Also vapoures steaming into the head.

Fumóso, fuming, smokie, vaporous, steaming. Also heady, hasty.

Fumosterra, as Fumária.

Fumoterra, as Fumária.

Funále, the weeke or cotton of a torch or candle. Also a torch or a linke.

Funaruólo, a Roper, a Rope-maker.

Fúndaco, as Fóndaco.

Fundachiéro, as Fondachiére.

Fundatíssimo, most well grounded.

Fúne, a cable, a rope, a halter.

Fúne, a match to fire powder.

Funebre, funerall, mournefull, deadly.

Funerábile, as Funerále.

Funerále, as Funebre. Also a funerall.

Funeráre, to celebrate funerals.

Fúnere, a funerall. Also mourning.

Funereo, as Funerále.

Funeftáre, as Funeráre.

Funesto, as Funebre, deadly.

Funéti, arch-workes in vines or arbors tied with poles, or withes, or osiers.

Fúngo, any kind of toade-stoole or mushrome. Also a winde-gall in a horse. Also a Bee-hiue. Also that firy round in a burning candle called the Bishop.

Fúngo maríno, a coagulation of Seafome which becomes aliue, hath sence and mouth, but hath no distinct members, called a Sea-spunge.

Fungosità, hollownesse, spunginesse, or lightnesse in substance.

Fungóso, hollow, spungie, light in substance, puffie as mushromes be.

Funicella, a little rope, cable, or corde.

Funícolo, a little rope, corde, line or cable. Also a little handfull. Also a Persian measure of lands containing 60. of our furlongs.

Fúnne, there was to vs or from vs.

Fúnne, there was of it, or thereof.

Funtióne, a function, an executing of a charge or office.

Fúnto, as Defúnto, dead, deceased.

Fuocáre, as Infuocáre.

Fuocarello, a little fire.

Fuochétto, a little fire.

Fuóco, the element fire, sometimes vsed for a houshold or family. Also vsed for wrath, disdaine or amorous passion.

Fuóco a céncio, any thing giuen in pitty as if one would giue another fire vpon a ragge for want of a shouell. Also in begging maner.

Fuóco di Sánt' António, arising in the skin by hot bloud inixt with choller called the Shingles or Saint Antonies fire.

Fuóco di gióia, a bone-fire, a fire of ioy.

Fuóco sácro, as Fuóco di Sánt' António.

Fuocoláre, a harth or place for fire.

Fuocóne, a great fire. Also a great fire-shouell or fire-forke.

Fuógo, as Fuóco, &c.

Fuóra, out, forth, abroad, without. Also except or sauing.

Fuorauía, the outside of any thing. Also without, or on the outside.

Fuór ché, except, sauing, excepted.

Fuór di hóra, out of season.

Fuór di cása, abroad, from home.

Fuór di ceruello, one out of his wits.

Fuór di fórse, out of doubt.

Fuór di sè, out of his wits, beside himselfe.

Fuór di misúra, out of measure.

Fuór di módo, beyond all meanes.

Fuóri alcúni, some excepted.

Fuóri, as Fuóra, as Fuór chè.

Fuór di qui, out hence.

Fuóri di, out of. Also except that, or sauing forth.

Fuór di speránza, out of hope.

Fuór di stagióne, out of season.

Fuór di stráda, out of the way.

Fuorsennáre, to runne mad or out of his wits.

Fuorsennáto, mad, out of his wits.

Fuór solaménte, onely except, sauing onely.

Fuoruscíti, banished men or outlawes.

Fúra, any thing or pelfe gotten by hooke or crooke by filching or stealth.

Furacciáre, to filch, to pilfer, to proule, to purloine, to play the theefe.

Furáce, theeuish, giuen to filching.

Furáre, to steale, to filch, to pilfer.

Furaríe, stealings, pilfrings, filchings.

Furatóre, a stealer, a thiefe, a filcher.

Furáttola, a tipling house for knaues.

Furattoláre, to haunt tipling or tap houses as knaues and theefes doe.

Furattoliere, a frequenter of tipling houses.

Fúrba, as Béstrica.

Furbacchiaménti, filching, theeuish, knauish or cheating tricks.

Furbacchiáre, to play the filching or cheating companion.

Furbácchio, an idle, filching, pilfring or cunnicatching companion.

Furbacchióne, as Furbácchio.

Furbacchiótto, as Furbácchio.

Fúrbalíngua, the rogues language or pedlers french and gibbrish.

Furbáre, to play the cheater, the cunniecatcher or crosse-biter.

Furbaríe, cozening, cheating, cunnie-catching or crossebiting tricks.

Furbeggiáre, as Furbáre.

Furbésca língna, as Fúrba língua.

Furbésco, full of or like cheating, crossebiting or cunnicatching.

Furbettíno, a yoong or litle Fúrbo.

Fúrbo, a cheater, a cunniecatcher, a setter, a crossebiter.

Furchétta, as Forchétta.

Furcífero, forke-bearing. Also a craftie gallowes-deseruing fellow.

Furcína, as Forchétta.

Furegáre, to fumble or grope for secretly and as it were by stealth. Also to sweep an ouen. Also to grow clumsie.

Furegóne, a fumbler, a groper, a close prying fellow. Also a maulkin or ouen sweeper. Also a clumsie fellow.

Furente, furious, raging, outragious.

Furettáre, to ferret or hunt in holes.

Furétto, a firet to hunt cunnies with.

Furfantággine, as Furfantaría.

Furfantáglia, the base rascall rout.

Furfantáre, to play the rogue, the rascall or vagabond, to rogue vp and downe.

Furfantaría, roguing knauerie.

Furfánte da tútto pásto, a knaue in graine, a knaue all day long.

Furfánte, a rogue, a rascall, a knaue, a vagabond, a crossebiter.

Furfantello, a craftie rogue or knaue.

Furfantésco, roguish, knauish, rascall or vagabondlike.

Furfantéuole, as Furfantésco.

Furfantóne, a great Furfánte.

Fúrfura, branne.

Furfuróso, brannie, grettie.

Fúri, hath been vsed for Fuóra.

Fúria, furie, rage, madnesse.

Furiáre, to grow furious, to rage.

Furibóndo, as Furióso.

Fúrie, the three furies of hell.

Furigáre, as Furegáre.

Furigóne, as Furegóne.

Furiósa, a kind of vine that beares grapes twice a yeare.

Furiosità, furiousnesse, rage.

Furióso, furious, outragious, franticke, mad, enraged, bedlam, raging.

Furláno, a pratler, a mountibanke.

Furláre, to play the pratler.

Furmággio, as Formággio, &c.

Fúrno, as Fórno. Also they were.

Furo, fúron, fúrono, they were.

Fúro, a thiefe, a filcher, a pilfrer.

Fúron furóne, stealingly, like a thiefe, sneakingly, secretly.

Furóncolo, as Furúnculi.

Furoncoláre, as Furunculáre.

Furoncolóso, as Furunculóso.

Furóre, fury, rage, bedlam, madnesse.

Furtarello, a filching or theeuish tricke.

Furtiuaménte, by stealth, stealingly.

Furtíuo, by stealth, stealingly.

Fúrto, theefery, larceny, stealth. 



Furunculáre, to grow to knobs, knurs, bunches, or knots.

Furúnculi, any knobes, knots, knurres, bunches or snagges in trees, as Ciccióni.

Furunculóso, knobby, knotty, knurry, bunchy or snaggie as some trees.

Fusaiuólo, a swiuell for a spindle. Also a turner or spindle-maker.

Fusáno, Prick-wood, Prick-timber, or spindle-tree.

Fusárdo, as Fusaiuólo.

Fusáre, to spindle. Also to flatter or goe about the bush with one, to winde one about as women do their spindles. Vsed also to spin or twirle about.

Fusaríe, trifles, toyes, spindlings.

Fusáro, a spindle-maker.

Fusaruóle gambe, spindle-shankes.

Fusaruólo, as Fusaiuólo.

Fúsatórte, crooked spindles, but taken for hornes that women giue their husbands.

Fusberta, though it be the name of a sword much mentioned in Ariosto yet signifies it also any weapon of defence.

Fuscelláre, to stub, to pricke, to stalke.

Fuscellétto, as Fuscellíno.

Fuscellíno, a little Fuscello.

Fuscello, a stub, a sprig, a stalke, a shank, a shaft, a little sticke, a butchers prick, a short straw. Also spindle shankes or stalkeing legges.

Fuscielláre, as Fuscelláre.

Fusciello, as Fuscello.

Fuselláre, to boare through as shutting trunkes or pieces of ordinance are, or muskets. Also to spin a spindle full. Also to twirll spindles. Also to make or cast long flying squibbes or firy rockets.

Fuselli, little spindles, little pegges or prickes. Also little round beames. Also flying long squibes.

Fuserágnolo, a spindler.

Fusétti d'una ruóta, the spoakes of a wheele.

Fusétto, a small poinado, as Stillétto.

Fusíbile, any thing that wil melt or may be melted.

Fusíle, as Fusíbile.

Fusióne, a melting, a founding. Also a thawing.

Fúso, a spindle to spin with. Also a shank or shaft of any thing or weapon. Also the vpright beame of a tent, of a crane or any other frame. Also an axeltree of a cart, Scrócca il fúso, a spindle-ratler, but it is taken for a light-heeled trull, that cares not to horne hir husband. Also vsed for a false hypocriticall woman, that to deceiue will euer be spinning.

Fúso, melted, thawed founded or cast.

Fusoláre, as Fuseláre.

Fusóre, a founder, a melter.

Fusoría, the art of founding or melting.

Fússi, Fússe, Fússero, I, he, she, it or they were, might or should be.

Fústa, a Foist, a Flie-bote, a Pinnace.

Fustagnáro, a Fustian-maker.

Fustagnétto, fine thin fustian.

Fustágno, the stuffe called fustian.

Fustagnóso, full of or like fustian.

Fusterna, the hardest, most knottie, or knurrie part of timber. Also the vpper part of a firre-tree full of ioints and knurres.

Fustíbalo, as Balísta.

Fústibus, hath beene vsed of Boccace as an aduerbe, in furie, or in a rage.

Fustigáre, as Furegáre.

Fustigóne, as Furegóne.

Fústo, any kind of stock, stump, trunk, logge, or block. Also a trunk or bodie without a head. Also a stalke, a shaft, or shank of any thing. Also the tree of a saddle. Also a stock or breech of any peece of artillerie.

Fustóso, like a logge, a stock, a shaft, a shank, a stalke, &c.

Fúta, as Futatióne.

Fù talhóra, there was a time.

Futáre, to confute, to confound.

Futatióne, a confutation, a confusion.

Futatóre, a confuter, a confounder.

Futéuole, that may be confuted.

Futóni spíríti, wicked spirits, that foretell of things that neuer happen.

Fútta, Futtáre, as Futatióne.

Futuráre, to future, or come after.

Futúro, future, after-comming.

Fù vicíno, it was neere, or almost.

Fúuui, as Vifu, there was, or was to you. 


G.
Gabánio, an habite with broad and long sleeues that the ancient Grecians were wont to vse, but now it is a shepheards cloake or a fishermans frocke.

Gabállo, a kind of gum or perfume.

Gabanáre, to couer with a Gabánio.

Gabanella, a gaberdine, or sheapherds cloake.

Gábba, a mocke, a flout, a iest.

Gábba-chrísto, an hypocrite, a false puritane, a dissembler, a mocke-christ.

Gábba-dónne, a deceiuer of women.

Gábba-móndo, a deceiuer of the world.

Gábba-sánti, as Gábba-chrísto.

Gábba-tempo, a time deceiuer.

Gábba-villáni, a mocke-begger. Also a kind of faire but naughty peare.

Gabbáno, as Gabánio.

Gabbaménti, deceites, wily beguiles.

Gabbáre, to mocke and deceiue withall, to cozin, to cheate, to cunnicatch.

Gabbaríe, as Gabbaménti.

Gabbatella, a foole or vice in a play, or a foole painted vpon Italian cards.

Gabbatelle, as Bagatelle. Also a pretty playing dogge, a iuglers dogge.

Gabbatelliere, as Bagattelliere.

Gabbatóre, a deceiuer, a cheater.

Gábbe, a kinde of hazell nut, faire to looke vnto but without any kirnels.

Gabbéuole, that may be deceiued. Also full of mockes and floutes.

Gabbie, frailes for figges or reisins.

Gábbia, any kinde of Cage, Coope or pen. Also a womans quaint.

Gábbia déllanáue, the cage or top of the mast of a ship whereunto the shrouds are fastned.

Gabbiáre, to encage, to coope vp.

Gabbiáta, a cage-full.

Gabbínio, a cousener, a cunnycatcher.

Gabbiétta, a little cage.

Gabbiolína, a little cage.

Gabbióna, the place incompassed with gabbions where the gunners stand.

Gabbionáre, to strengthen or compasse with gabbions.

Gabbionáte, fortifications or fences made of gabbions.

Gabbionáto, Gabbionized.

Gabbióne, a Gabbion or great Cage, that is those baskets full of earth set by the ordinance in a campe to hid and defend the Cannoniers.

Gábbo, a deceit, a cheat, a wily-beguilie, a cunnicatching tricke, a mocke, a flout.

Gabella, custome, tallage or toll.

Gabelláre, to toll, to tallage, to custome.

Gabelliére, a Customer, a receiuer of customes, tallages or toles.

Gabellótto, as Gabbelliére.

Gabiáno, a fish in Latine Agònus.

Gabrína, an old, crafty, filthy woman, whore or witch.

Gaffáre, to filch, to prowle or snatch away by craft and deceit.

Gáffo, a snatching or taking hold of.

Gagaláre, as Gongoláre.

Gagáte, as Gagatrónica.

Gagatrónica, a stone found in Eagles neastes, called Ieat or Agathstone, which being burned smels of brimstone.

Gággia, as Gábbia.

Gággia di náue, as Gábbia dináue.

Gággia di sórgij, a mouse-trap or cage.

Gaggiándra, a kind of great whelke or snaile.

Gággio, mirth-bringing profite. Also a gage, a pledge, a pawne. Also a wager. Also a reward or wages giuen for seruice or as entertainment. Also rennet 



to cruddle milke with cheese-rennet.

Gaggiáre, to gage, to wage, to pledge, to pawne, to engage, to lay a wager. Also to coope or put into a cage. Also to crudle as fresh cheese. Also to giue wages vnto.

Gaggiúra, a wager, a rewarding.

Gagite, a stone which shaken sounds hollow.

Gagliárda, a dance called a galliard.

Gagliardággine, as Gagliardía.

Gagliardétti, streamers or bannerols.

Gagliardézza, as Gagliardía.

Gagliardía, lustinesse, galliardise, force, strength or nimblenesse of body.

Gagliárdo, strong, lusty, or nimbly disposed of body. Also frolike or blithe.

Gaglióffa, a secret pocket, a poke, or pouch. Also a baggage-queane.

Gaglioffáccio, a filthy Gaglióffo.

Gaglioffággine, as Gaglioffaríe.

Gaglioffáre, to pocket or poke vp. Also to play the baggage queane or knaue.

Gaglioffaríe, conycatching trickes, knauish prankes as giptians play that filch and steale what they can and pocket vp all.

Gaglióffo, a false crafty knaue, a cheating filching companion.

Gaglioffóne, a great Gaglióffo.

Gaglioffoneggiáre, as Gaglioffáre.

Gágno, the middle of any bottome.

Gagnoláre, to sound or gage the bottom of any vessel. Also to grumble or speake betweene the teeth.

Gaiándra, a Tortoise or Shellcrab.

Gáida, a kind of long habite in Spaine.

Gaieggiáre, to be or make merry, blith, iocond or cheerefull.

Gaiétta pelle, a bespeckled or partie-coloured skin.

Gaiétto, a pleasant conceited man.

Gaiézza, iolitie, mirth, glee, blithnesse, cheerefulnesse of heart, mirth of minde.

Gáino, a wilde rammish Hawke.

Gáio, blith, gay, iollie, cheerefull.

Gaióla, any cage for birds.

Gaioláre, to put into a cage.

Gaioláro, a maker of bird-cages.

Gaità, as Gaiézza.

Gála, an Oke-apple or gallnut. Also gallantnesse or brauerie in ornaments and apparell, pleasant to behold and yet not costly. Also cheerefull mirth, garishnes in shew, namely in new fashions and deuises in clothes. Also a puff of lawne or cipres as women weare about them.

Gála, to runne a drift or flote vp and downe the water as doth a gallnut or light piece of wood.

Galáico, as Galatíte.

Galaménte, pleasantly, gracefully both to the eye and minde.

Galána, a Tortoise or Shell-crab. Also a bird that commonly flies low and close to the ground.

Galánga, cats-taile or flags.

Galangále, as Galánga.

Galángola, a popiniay greene bird about the bignesse of a Fieldfare, whereof there are great store in Italie.

Galáno, gay in clothes, braue in apparell, pompous in ornaments, gallant in brauerie and neatenesse and handsomnesse.

Galánte, gallant, braue, handsome, decent, gracious, fault lesse, proper.

Galanteggiáre, to play the gallant.

Galánt'huómo, an honest proper man.

Galantería, gallantnesse, handsomnesse, propernesse, gracefulnesse, decencie.

Galantíno, quaint, neate, spruce, faire, pretty, minion-like, decent.

Galáre, to steepe in galles or Oke-apples. Also to flote light vpon the water. Also to adorne, to set forth or goe gay in fine light coloured clothes, to be braue in apparell or handsome in all brauery to the eye.

Galarícide, as Galatíte.

Galáscie, as Gallózza.

Galateísta, one professing good manners or ciuill curtesie, as Galateo writes of.

Galateo, the name of a booke teaching good manners.

Galatína, the sauce called Galantine.

Galatíte, a precious stone of a milkie colour with some red veines in it, very good to make a woman that giues sucke to haue store of milke, the stone put in ones mouth seemeth to taste of milke.

Galauróne, a humming bee, a beetle.

Galbáno, a kind of gum or liquor issuing out of a kind of férula.

Galbédro, as Gálgolo.

Gálbulo, as Gálgolo.

Gále, the plurall of Gála.

Galea, a Galley. Also a Sea-lamprey or Eelepout.

Galeázza, a Galleasse or great galley.

Galeáro, a galley-wright.

Galedóre, a Sea cob, a Sea-gull.

Galedragóne, an hearbe like to Saint Maries thistle.

Galeffággine, mocking, flouting, scoffing.

Galeffáre, to mocke, to flout, to scoffe at.

Galeffóne, a scoffer, a flouter, a mocker.

Galega, Italian-fitch or Goates-rue.

Galéna, blacke leade.

Galeo, a kind of Sea-lamprey or Eelepout.

Galeóne, a gallion, a great gallie. Also a kind of very long and flat fish.

Galeobdolóne, the hearbe Archangell.

Galeopsíde, the hearbe Archangell.

Galeoténe, a lizard called a Stellion.

Galeótta, a good, handsome big galley.

Galeótto, a galley-man, a mariner.

Galeríta, a Larke with a tuft on its head, 

Galero, a garment of Mercurie commended by Claudianus. Also a Doremouse. Also a Dogfish. Some take it for a Sea-calfe.

Galette, silke cods, cods of raw silke.

Galétte délle gámbe diétro del cauállo, the hought or splitterne of a horse.

Gálgolo, a Witwall, a Hickwall, a Woodwall, a Houpe or Huholl. Some say it is another bird, whom if a man that hath the yellow Iaundise behold he is presently cared and the bird dyeth.

Gálio, Galióne, Our ladies bedstraw, Maiden-haire or Chesse-renning hearbe.

Gálla, as Gála, as Galloría. Also a windegall.

Gallána, a land Tortoise or Shell-crab.

Galláre, as Galáre.

Gallaría, as Agalmónica. Also a Lamprey fish.

Gallássia, as Galatíte. Also the milkeway in the firmament.

Galassiáre, to white or become white.

Galláte vuóua, brood-eggs, or eggs that be chicked.

Gálle, the winde galles in a horse.

Galleggiáre, to runne a drift, to flote lightly vpon the water. Also come to windegalles. Also to cocker, to pamper, or to wantonize withall. Also to puffe cipres or lawne.

Gallería, a gallerie, a long close walke.

Galleríte, a Larke with a bush on his head.

Gallétte, as Galétte.

Galleóte, interpreters of strange signes in Sicilia.

Gallétto, a yoong or litle cocke, a spout or cocke of a conduit, a spiggot or tap of a barrell. Also a musitions wrest.

Gallétto di mággio, a Houpe bird.

Galliáre, as Galleggiáre. Also to saile in a galley.

Galliário, one that dischargeth other mens businesses.

Gálli-cánto, cock-crowing time.

Gállica;, a kind of Maple tree.

Gallicéntro, Sage of Rome.

Gallicínio, cocke-crowing time.

Gallína, any kind of hen.

Gallicrésta, the hearbe Clarie.

Gállico mórbo, the french poxe.

Gallinacea, the bastard Marioram.

Gallína bagnáta, a wet or drowned hen that is a milke-sop or fresh-water souldier, a faint-hearted fellow.

Gallináccia, a Woodcock-hen.

Gallína d'India, an Indian hen. Also the Colefish.

Gallína góbba, an Indian, Ginnie or Turkie hen.

Gallináio, a hens roost or coope.

Gallinaría, a place for hens or poultry.

Gallináro, a poultrer or seller of hens. 



Gallína rusticella, a Woodcocke hen.

Gallineggiáre, to play the hen.

Gallinelle, Wood-hens or Snites. Also yoong hens. Also the seauen starres that are euer neere Taurus.

Gallinenuella, a kind of play in Italie.

Gállistrúnij, a kind of red figs.

Gallitríco, the hearbe Clarie.

Gállo, any kind of cocke. Also gold according to Alchimists phrases.

Gállo alpestre, a Feasant pout.

Gállo crésta, the hearbe Clarie.

Gállo d'I'ndia, a Turkie or Ginniecocke.

Gállo di paradíso, a Houpe-bird.

Gallóne, a mans thigh, hip, or hanch.

Galloppáre, to gallop.

Gallóppo, a gallop, or galloping pace.

Galloppóne, a galloping pace.

Gallopiè, cock-footed. Also one that comes suddainly back as doeth a cocke.

Galloría, a gallerie, or long-couered walke. Also proud cockring or mirth. Also a cocks-crowing with iollitie and fluttring of his wings.

Gallósa, blith, cockrish, iocond.

Gallózza, a gall, a wind-gall, a blister. Also a bubble on the water, any kind of puff. Also a kind of gallages, startops, or wooden pattins.

Gallozzáre, as Galleggiáre.

Gallózzola, as Gallózza.

Gallugáre, to cocker or crow as a cock.

Gállule, seauen starres in Taurus, into which the seauen daughters of Atalanta were transformed.

Gallúta, a cockring, riggish, or wanton wench.

Gallúppo, a shallow pate, a logar-head, an ignorant gull.

Gallútia, cockring, wantonnesse.

Galluzzáre, as Galleggiáre.

Gallúzze, gall-nuts, or oke-apples. Also little bubbles, blisters, wind-galls, or puffs. Also hollow beades of gold or siluer vsed in chaines.

Galmóne, as Agalmónica.

Galógna, a kind of venemous hearbe.

Galóscia, as Gallózza.

Gálta, a cheeke, a iawe.

Galósa, as Gallósa.

Galtelli, gunners call them Capsquires.

Galózza, as Gallózza.

Galúppo, as Gualúppo.

Gamalióne, as Gamelióne.

Gamánto, the name of a Surgions toole.

Gamárro, a Lobster, or Sea-crab.

Gamáscie, gamashes.

Gamaút, a note in Musike. Also the name of a Barbers toole.

Gámba, a leg, a shanke. Also in mockerie vsed for Boccáta.

Gambáccia, a filthie leg. Also a sore leg.

Gámba córta, a short leg, or shanke. 

Gámba tórta, a crooked leg or shanke.

Gambále, greues, or armor for legs.

Gambarelli, Creuishes, Praunes, or Shrimps.

Gámbaro, a Crab-fish, a Lobster.

Gambaruóle, gamboll-tricks.

Gámbe, legs, shanks, shinnes.

Gambeggiáre, as Gambettáre.

Gambelo, vsed for a Camell.

Gamberáccia, a sore rankled leg.

Gambétta, a small leg, a spindleshanke.

Gambettáre, to shake the legs sitting.

Gambicello, a little leg, shanke, or shin. Also a little stalke or stem.

Gambiéri, greues, or shin-pieces.

Gambíglia, the shanke or foote of any vessell.

Gámbo, a stalke, a stub or stem of any flowre, the staffe or shaft of a candlesticke, the shanke or foote of any vessell.

Gambóne, a hanch, a gamon, a thigh, a hip, a gigot, a pestle.

Gambriéri, greues or shin-pieces.

Gambúccie, little spindle-shanks, or legs.

Gambúgio, a cole-cabidge.

Gambúto, legged, shanked, shinned.

Gambúzzo, as Gambone. Also a Cabidge.

Gamelióne, the moneth of Ianuarie dedicated to Iuno because of mariage.

Gámma, a note in Musike. Also a pipe or reede.

Gamórra, a womans frock or garment.

Gamúrra, as Gamórra.

Ganáscia, a iawe, a chap or iaw-bone.

Ganascióne, a blow, or boxe on the iawes.

Ganciáre, to sharpen at the point. Also to bend as a hooke. Also to run in as a staple.

Gáncio, sharp-pointed. Also the hooke or eye wherein a staple runneth. Also crooked: our gunners called them draught-hookes, or staple-hookes.

Ganduláre, as Gangoláre.

Gándule, as Gángole.

Gandulóso, as Gangolóso.

Gánga, a cheeke, a iawe. Also a pullie. Also a mothe.

Gangále, an eye, or cheeke-tooth.

Gangheggiáre, is properly when a horse doth wry with his vpper iawes.

Gangheráre, to set or hang vpon hinges. Also to stretch on tenter-hookes.

Gángheri, hinges. Also tenter-hookes. Also clasps or hookes. Looke Dáre.

Gánghero, the singular of Gángheri.

Ganghiéri, as Gángheri.

Ganghitella, a whirret on the cheekes.

Gangoláre, to grow to wartles, kernels, or glandules in the flesh. Also the dewlap of an Oxe.

Gongoláro, as Gangolóso.

Gángole, wartles, almonds, kernels, tonsils, or glandules in the flesh, namely in the throate.

Gangolóso, glandulous, full of kernels or wartles, namely in the throate.

Gangréna, a gangrene or mortifying and deading of the flesh.

Gangríre, grísco, gríto, to gangrene,

Ganguto, as Gangolóso.

Ganíre, Ganíto, as Ganníre.

Gannáre, as Ingannáre.

Gannatóre, as Ingannatóre.

Ganníre, nisco, nito, to snarle, to grin or bay as a dog, to howle as a Woolfe, to ball or barke as a Foxe.

Ganníto, snarled, grinned, howled, balled, barked.

Ganomaútto, taken for the fore finger.

Gánza, a dutch word, but vsed in Italy for a Goose. Also a kinde of copper coine in India.

Ganzára, a kind of long Whirrie, Liter, or Ship for burthen.

Ganzariuóla, as Ganzára.

Ganzéglie, fooleries, fopperies, trifles.

Gánzo, as Gáncio. Ardár' al Gánzo per divotióne.

Gára, an emulation or contention for the victorie, a strife, a iarring.

Garab áttolo, a poore homely shepheards frock, cloake, or gabardine.

Garabulláre, as Anfanáre, to raue.

Garafelli, a kind of peares in Italy.

Garáfono, as Garófano.

Garagnóni, old Stalions, or cast-horses.

Garamática, a precious stone like an Emerauld, with a white line athwart it. Also vsed in derision for Gramática.

Garamantiténo, a precius stone, like a rubie, or grenet.

Garamella, the wrist of ones arme.

Garamúffola, as Gramática in mockerie.

Garáncia, the stuffe Madder, vsed by Diers.

Garanciáre, to Madder, or die with it.

Garáre, as Gareggiáre.

Garátide, as Garamátide.

Garattiera, vsed for a garter.

Garauella., Colla garavella nélla súa cazzétta.

Garbáre, as Garbeggiáre.

Garbatézza, comelinesse, handsomnesse.

Garbáto, handsome, comely, proper, decent, gracefull, fine, neate, spruce.

Garbatúra, as Garbatézza.

Garbeggiáre, to be, to make, or to shew handsome, neate, comely, proper, decent, gracefull, spruce. Also to set foorth, to decore, to sute or square with, to giue a grace vnto. Also to taste sharp or sowre.

Garbella, a witwall, a hickwall.

Garbelláre, to garbell ware.

Garbellatóre, a garbler of wares.



Garbétto, somewhat soure, tart or sharp in taste. Also a merie, wittie, or sharp quip or mocke.

Garbézza, sourenesse, tartnesse, sharpnesse.

Garbíno, the South-west winde.

Gárbo, grace, handsomnesse, garbe, comelinesse, decorum. Also soure, tart, or sharp in taste.

Garbugliáre, to trouble, to entangle, to embroile, to garboile.

Garbúglio, a trouble, a garboile, a disorder, an entangling, a peck of troubles.

Garbuglióso, troublous, entangled, full of garboile or disorder.

Gardello, a Gold-finch, or Thistlefinch.

Gardíngo, an enclosed precinct or walke.

Gardolíno, as Gardello.

Gareggiáre, to chirp, to chat. Also to striue, to contend, or square for victorie: vsed also anciently for Accarezzáre.

Gareggiatóre, a chatter, a chirper, a pratler. Also a striuer or contender.

Gareggióso, chirping, chatting. Also contentious, or giuen to strife. Also cherrishing.

Garesólo, a bird called a Houpe.

Garettiera, vsed for a garter.

Garettáre, to hough any beast.

Garétto, the knee-pan. Also the hough of a horse or other beast. Also a garter.

Gargáncio, a Teale or Wigeon. Some take it for a Diuer or Diue-dapper.

Garganello, as Gargáncio.

Gargareggiáre, to gargarize, to gurgle. Also to ratle in the throate.

Gargarísmo, a gargarisme.

Gargarizzáre, as Gargareggiáre.

Gárgaro, a chiefe Ram, or leader of a flocke.

Gargarozzáre, as Gargareggiáre.

Gargarózzo, as Gargatóne.

Gargatíle, as Gargatóne.

Gargatóglio, as Gargatóne.

Gargatóne, the throat or ousell-pipe. Also a Mite or Weeuell that deuoureth corne.

Gargea, a Hearon.

Gargióne, as Garzóne.

Gargiólo, something about a Weauers loome.

Gargogliáre, as Gargareggiáre.

Gargózzo, as Gargatóne.

Gargózzolo, as Gargatóne.

Gárgulo, a Hearon.

Garibáre, as Garbeggiáre.

Garíbo, as Gárbo.

Gariétto, a dwarfe Hearon.

Garíglio, the kirnell of any fruite or Nut.

Garíre, as Garríre.

Garíto, as Garríto.

Garlétto, as Garétto.

Garóf, a blood-stone, that stancheth bleeding.

Garofanáre, to spice or dresse with Cloues. Also to adorne with Gillyflowres.

Gáro, a kinde of dainty meat for gluttons made of the fat and softroe of diuers fishes. Also a kinde of long fish which some take for the Pickerell. Also the dripping that comes from garbage or offale of fishes. Also fish-pickle or brine.

Garófano, a Cloue. Also a Gillyflowre.

Garófano., looke Partíre il pezzo.

Garófilo, as Garófano.

Garófolo, as Garófano.

Garóni, Pinkes or Gilly-flowers.

Gárolo, as Gárulo.

Garolóso, as Garulóso.

Gárra, as Gára.

Garráre, as Gareggiare. Also to cause, force, make or garre to do as the Scottish men say.

Garrattiéra., Vsed for a garter.

Garreggiáre, as Gareggiáre.

Garrési, the withers of a horse. Also the galling of the withers.

Garrétti, the houghes of any beaste.

Garríre, rísco, ríto, to chirp, to chant, to chat or sing as birdes. Also to chide, to brawle, to scould.

Garríto, chirped, chaunted, chatted or sung as birds do. Also chidden, brawled scoulded. Also a chirping, a chatting, a chiding, a scolding.

Gárro, as Garríto.

Garúgli, a kinde of nut so called.

Garuláre, as Garríre.

Garulità, chatting, pratling, babbling.

Gárulo, as Garríto.

Garulóso, full of pratling or babling.

Garúpo, some part of a ship.

Garrúzza, a little brawle or contention.

Gárza, a Piot or Magotapy. Also a rough teazell. Also a Hearon.

Gárza biánca, a white Hearon, or cryell dwarfe Hearon.

Garzára, a dwarfe Hearon.

Garzáre, to teazell cloathes.

Garzatóre, a Cloth-worker.

Gárze, a disease in a horses mouth. Also a kind of faire feathers or plumes.

Garzétta, a Piot or Magot a pie. Also a dwarfe Hearon or Mire dramble.

Garzícolo, a womans rocke or distaffe.

Garzignóle, a kind of peares so called.

Gárzo, a rough thistle or teazell.

Garzólo, as Garzuólo.

Garzonástro, a yongue, lusty or stout lad.

Garzoncello, a little boy or lad.

Garzóne, a boy, a lad, a stripling, a lacquey. 

Garzoneggiáre, to play the boy, lad, page or lacquey. Also to follow boies.

Garzónétto, a little boy, lad, or page.

Garzoníssimo, very yongue or boyish.

Garzuólo, a bale or handfull of flax. Also a kind of course sleaue silke.

Gasiáre, to worke purle or stitch worke.

Gasidáne, a precious stone which as some write, doth euery three monthes bring foorth yongue ones as other liuing creatures doe.

Gasimáto, wrought with any Gásio.

Gásio, a kind of purle or stitch-worke.

Gastaldía, the office of a Bailife or Steward ouer lands or country affaires.

Gastáldo, a Baylife or Steward ouer lands or farmes.

Gastigaménto, chastisement, punnishment.

Gastigáre, to punish, to chastise.

Gastigatóia., Vsed for Gastigaménto.

Gastigatóre, a punisher, a chastiser.

Gastìgatúra, as Gastigaménto.

Gastighéuole, punishable.

Gastígo, punishment, chastisement.

Gastramaglióne, a greedy gourmand, a rauenous glutton, a tall-feeder.

Gastrimáglia, a rauenous, greedy or insatiable lust to eate.

Gastronománte, a deuiner by glasses.

Gastronomantía, diuination by glasses.

Gatromeo, a kind of precious stone.

Gátta, any kind of she-Cat. Also a brable, a hard piece of worke, for as wee say he hath an ill Crow to pull, so the Italians say, luihà úna mála gátta a peláre.

Gátta cieca, as Gátta órba.

Gátta fúra, a kind of daintie tarte, or as some say daintie sops or pottage.

Gattaiuóla, as Grattaiuóla.

Gáttamórta, a dead cat. Also a slie, close or lurking companion.

Gátta órba, a blind cat. Also a Christmas game called blind is the cat.

Gattária, the hearbe Cat-mint or Nep.

Gattarigoláre, to claw & tickle withall.

Gattarígole, clawings and ticklings.

Gattarigolóso, ticklish.

Gatticciuóli, yoong cats or kitlins.

Gatteggiáre, to play the cat.

Gattésco, cattish. Also a scraping fellow.

Gattígli, as Gauelli.

Gattiláre, to mew or cry as a Cat. Also to kitten as a Cat.

Gattilatúra, the mewing of a Cat. Also the killing of a Cat.

Gátto, any kind of hee-Cat. Also an engine of warre to batter walles.

Gátto gátto, slily, sneakingly, gropingly, fumblingly in the darke as a Cat.

Gátto maimóne, a great Cat-munkie.

Gátto mammóne, as Gátto maimóne.

Gattoláre, to kittle. Also to mew as a cat. 



Gáttoli, yoong kitlings or yoong cats.

Gattolíni, idem.

Gattolóne, as Gátto gátto.

Gattonáre, to grope, to creepe, to sneake, to fumble in the darke as a Cat.

Gattóne, a great or old Cat. Also a close, craftie, slie or subtle knaue.

Gattón gattóne, as Gátto gátto.

Gattóne délla nóce, a kernell of a nut.

Gattoncíni, kitlings, yoong cats.

Gattórbola, as Gátta órba.

Gattorigoláre, to claw and tickle.

Gattorígole, clawings and ticklings.

Gattorigolóso, ticklish.

Gátto zibetto, a ciuet-cat, a muske-cat.

Gattucciáre, to kitten as a Cat.

Gattúccia, a yoong she-cat or pusse.

Gattuccíni, kitlings or yoong cats.

Gattúggie, false smooth running dice.

Gauágna, a great flasket or basket.

Gauagnáre, to put into flaskets or baskets. Also as Guadagnáre.

Gauágno, as Guadágno, gaine, profit.

Gauanello, a kestrell. Also a yoong pigge or porkeling.

Gauanétti, mad, yoong, or lustie lads.

Gauardína, a gabardine or frocke.

Gauázza, a hop, a skip, a leape, a iumpe, a gamboll, a tumbling tricke.

Gauazzáre, to hop, to iumpe, to skip, to leape, to tumble. Also as Gauocciáre.

Gauazzatóre, a iumper, a hopper, a leaper, a skipper, a tumbler.

Gauázzi, iumpings, hoppings, skippings, frisks, gambols, leapes.

Gaudente, blith, merry, reioycing.

Gaudiáre, to reioyce, to be glad.

Gaudífero, that bringeth gladnesse.

Gaudilóquo, one that speaketh with ioy or of glad tidings.

Gaúdio, ioy, glee, mirth, gladnesse.

Gaudióso, ioyfull, merry, blith, glad.

Gaudíre, dísco, díto, as Gaudiáre.

Gauelli, the fellowes of a wheele or pieces wherein the spokes are fastened.

Gauerne, certaine leauers to raise timber or great waights withall.

Gauétta, a skeane of yarne. Also a wodden tray, trug, trough, or washing bowle.

Gauettóne, a hogs trough, a draffe tub.

Gáuia, a Sea-gull or Sea-cob. Some take it for a bird that is a great enemie to the Locustes and Grashoppers.

Gauignáre, to clinch, to gripe or claspe fast, namely to seaze and take hold off vnder the armes as wrestlers doe.

Gauígne, the hold-fast vnder the armes that wrestlers take in wrestling.

Gauilláre, to cauill, to wrangle.

Gauillatióne, cauilling, wrangling.

Gauillatóre, a cauiller, a wrangler.

Gauillóso, cauillous, contentious.

Gauinello, a kestrell.

Gáuio, a Sea-cob, a Sea-gull. Also as Gauelli.

Gáuio maríno, a Sea-cob, a Sea-gull.

Gauíso, being glad or full of ioy.

Gauitella, a standing bowle or cup.

Gaulino, a Wit wall, a hicke or Woodwall.

Gáulno, as Gálgolo.

Gaulo, as Dardáni.

Gauocciáre, to swell round as a bile, a botch, a blane or plague-sore.

Gauóccio, a bile, a botch, a blane.

Gauoccioláre, as Gauocciáre.

Gauócciolo, as Gauóccio.

Gauótta, the name of a french dance.

Gauóni, as Lichéne, a kind of swelling. Also some part of a ship.

Gaurána, a kind of vine or grape.

Gausápe, a rough freezed garment as an Irish-rug good to weare and lay on the ground.

Gáusto, an hearbe the iuice whereof will make ones skin very blacke.

Gáuzo, bleare-eyde, pink-eyde, gogle-eyde, whale-eyde.

Gazonáre, as Gazzonáre.

Gazóni, as Gazzóni.

Gazophilátio, as Gazzophilátio.

Gázza, a Piot, a Magot a pie or Iay.

Gázza sparuiera, a kinde of Lanaret hawke called a Skreeke or Nine murther.

Gazzára, an Ambrie or Cubbord in a wall.

Gazzárra, a kind of pinnace or ship. Also a confused reioycing noise mixed with shouting and clapping of hands.

Gazzella, a beast like a Roe wherof commeth muske.

Gazzétta, a yoong Piot or Magot a pie. Also a small coine in Italie.

Gazzera, as Gázza.

Gazzería, as Gazzárra.

Gazzettáre, to chat as a Magot a pie. Also to write or report Gazzétte.

Gazzétte, running reports daily newes, idle intelligences, or flim flam tales that are daily written from Italie namely from Rome and Venice.

Gazzettiére, a writer or reporter of Gazzétte.

Gazzétto, as Gáuzo.

Gazzínio, a Piot-colour. Also as Gláuco.

Gazzíno., looke Molíno Gazzíno.

Gázzo, as Gáuzo. Also a pide-horse. Also as Gláuco.

Gazzoláre, to chat as a Piot or Iay. Also to prattle, to scold, to raile.

Gazzolóni, great Piots, or pratlers.

Gazzonáre, to couer or lay with greene turfes as allies are in gardens.

Gazzóni, turfes of earth with greene grasse on them.

Gazzophilátio, a treasurie, a iewell-house. Also a boxe or chest in the Temple for poore mens offrings and oblations.

Gazzótto, an old Magot apie.

Gazzouíglia, as Gozzouíglia.

Gazzouigliáre, as Gozzouigliáre.

Gazzuoláre, as Gazzoláre.

Gazzuolína, a yoong Magot a pie or Iay.

Gazzúrra, any idle chatting or pratling.

Gè, the letter G.

Géa. 

Gébo, a kind of meate so called.

Geénna, a torture, a racke, a torment.

Geennáre, to torture, to racke, to torment.

Gegníua, as Gengíue.

Geiétta, a kind of precious stone.

Gelábile, that may or is apt to freeze.

Geladía, the meate we call Gellie.

Geladína, as Geladía.

Gelaménto, a freezing, a frost.

Geláre, to freeze, to congeale.

Geláta, a frost, a freezing. Also Gellie.

Gelatíde, as Garatíde.

Gelatína, the meate Gellie.

Gelatióne di denti, teeth set on edge.

Gelauermi, a kind of congealed water that in winter time falleth in the morning, we call it a dew-frost.

Gelettía, a frost, a freezing. Also Gelly.

Gelidáre, to chill or quiuer with cold.

Gelidézza, freezing, frost, chilnesse.

Gelido, cold, freezing, chill.

Gellamína, a kind of minerall or stone.

Gelo, frost, Ice, freezing. Also Gellie.

Gelosáccio, a foule filthy iealous man.

Gelotophílida, an hearbe.

Gelosía, Ielousie, suspect or mistrust proceeding of loue. Also a lettise or false window. Also a kind of faire white flowre, which if one approach vnto, it shuts in its leaues. Also a kind of faire white stone.

Gelosíre, sísco, síto, to make or become ielous or suspicious.

Gelóso, iealous or suspicious.

Gelsa, a Mulberrie. Also a Raspisberry.

Gelso, a Mulberrie-tree. Also a Raspis-tree.

Gelsomíno, the Gesmine flowre.

Gelsomómo, a Mulberrie tree.

Gemáre, to winde thrid or yarne into clues or bottoms. Also to deuide or sunder.

Gemella, a kind of vine or grape.

Gemelli, twins, borne together. Also twin-apples or any other fruits.

Gemere, gemo, geméi, gemúto, to whur as Doues doe. Also to sob, to grone, to blubber, to throb.

Geminino, twin-like. Also of the nature or borne vnder Gemini.

Gemína or Zemína. Looke alla Zemína.

Gemináre, to twin, to double, to paire, to yoke. Also to ioyne and increase. 



Geminatióne, a twinning or ioyning or coupling together.

Gemini, twins or paires. Also one of the twelue signes in the Zodiake called Castor and Pollux.

Gemíre, mísco, míto, as Gemere.

Gemíte, a stone representing white-hands in it clasping one another.

Gemiti, whoorrings of Turtles or Doues. Also sobs, grones, throbs, sighes, pitious wailings, blubbrings.

Gemítio, as Gemiti, in the singular.

Gemma,  , a gemme, a iewell, a rich pearle or precious stone. Also a yoong shoote, sprout, twig, syen, impe, sprig or burgeon to engraffe or inoculate.

Gemma di uenere, a kinde of bright Amethist, as Pederétti.

Gemmáre, to engem or set and adorne with iewels and precious stones. Also to shoote, to bud or sprout forth as the vine doth.

Gemmáro, as Gemmiére.

Gemmiére, a Ieweller, or a Lapidarie.

Gemmífero, iem-bringing, iewely-calding.

Gemmóso, full of gemmes, iewels, pearles or precious stones. Also full of or yeelding buds, sproutes, burgeons, impes or yongue shootes and tendrels.

Gemo, a clew or bottom of thrid.

Gemónide, a stone, which some say doeth conceiue and bring foorth other little stones, very good and helpfull vnto women that trauell in childbirth.

Gemónie, certaine staires downe which the Romans were wont to cast the bodies of the condemned.

Gemúrsa, an inflamation like a Carbuncle.

Gemúto, sobbed, groned, blubbred, sighed. Also whoorred as a Doue or Turtle.

Genáio, Genáro, the Moneth of Ianuary.

Gene, iawes, cheekes or chapes.

Genealogía, a genealogie, a pedigree, or description of a kindred.

Genealogísta, a professor of Pedigrees, or Genealogies.

Genebro, a Iuniper-tree or wood.

Generábile, that may breed or be ingendred.

Gencraláto, the office of a generall or chiefe commander and leader.

Generále, generall, vniuersall. Also a generall or chiefe commander and leader.

Generalíssimo, most or chiefely generall.

Generalità, generality, vniuersality.

Generáre, to ingender or beget as the male. Also to conceiue, to beare or bring foorth as the female. Also to create, to breed, to make to inuent.

Generatióne, a generation, an ingendring, a begetting, a kind.

Generatíuo, that may ingender.

Generatóre, a father, a creator, a begetter, an ingenderer.

Genere, a generall kind, manner or sort of any thing.

Genericaménte, generally vnto all, of or belonging to gender.

Generico, generall or common to all, that is of or pertaineth to the gender.

Genero, a sonne in law, one that marieth another mans daughter. Also a linage, a stocke or a kindred.

Generosità, generosity, gentry, gentility, noblenesse, or excellency both of bloud and minde.

Generóso, generous, noble, excellent, of good-race, of a gentlemanlike disposion, nobly-borne.

Genesi, generation. Also natiuity. Also the planet vnder which one is borne.

Genestra, Spart or Spanish-broome.

Genestra spinósa, furze, furzen bushes, whines, gurse or thorne broome.

Genestráta, a kind of meat or pottage.

Gengébro, as Géngero.

Géngero, the spice ginger.

Gengeríno, Ginger-bread or Cake.

Gengeueráta, any confection of Ginger.

Gengídio, the hearbe Cheruill.

Gengíua mátre, as Dúra mátre.

Gengíe, as Gengíue.

Gengíue, the gummes wherein the teeth stand.

Gengíuo, Gengióuo, the spice Ginger.

Genía, the generation of any thing, namely of the basest kind of people.

Geniále, what so euer pertaines vnto a mans Genio, geniall. Also of or pertaining to mariage, to house-hould or to procreation. Also naturally pleasant, blithe or merry, or that is giuen to pleasure and recreation.

Geniána, a kinde of precious stone, or hearbe.

Geniáre, to follow the good or euill naturall genius of man.

Genio, the good or euill genius or angell of man. Also the instinct or spirit of man giuen him by nature.

Geníre, nísco, níto, as Generáre.

Genitále, the priuities of man or woman seruing for to ingender or to breede. Also the hearbe Glade or swordgrasse.

Genitále séme, the seed of generation.

Genitáli, the instruments of generation.

Genitáre, as Generáre.

Genitíuo, naturall, that hath power to ingender. Also the genitiue case. 

Geníto, begotten, ingendred. Also Spérma.

Genitóre, an ingenderer, a creator, a father.

Genitríce, a mother, shee that ingendreth.

Genitúra, an ingendring. Also a thing begotten or ingendred.

Gennetliáci Astrólogi., 

Geno, as Genero. Also as Genio.

Genocchiáre, to kneele downe.

Genócchio, a knee.

Genocchióne, kneeling, on his knees.

Genoflesso, with bended knees, humblie.

Gensola, the Iuiuba fruite.

Gensolo, the tree bearing Iuiuba.

Gentáccia, as Gentáglia.

Gentáglia, common or base people, rifferaffe, the scum of the earth, the base multitude of common people.

Gentále, borne of such a kindred.

Gentáme, as Gentáglia.

Gentarella, as Genterella.

Gente, men, people, folkes, nations. Also a family or whole generation both of men and women, sometimes vsed for an army of souldiers or hoste of men.

Gentea, as Gentáglia.

Gente a cauállo, men on horsebacke.

Gente accolitíccia, any route of people confusedly gathered together.

Gente al bósco, a phrase vsed when we will let one vnderstand that some meat, scraps or crums of bread sticke vpon his beard, for so soone as that word is spoken you shall see euery one shake or stroake his beard.

Gente a piédi, souldiers or men on foote.

Gente d'árme, men at armes.

Gente di sóldo, hired men or souldiers.

Genterella, poore, silly or meane people.

Gentiána, Gentian, Bitter-wort or fellwort.

Gentíle, gentile, gentle, courteous, kind, affable, milde, fine, quaint, gracious, tractable, supple, soft, pretty. Also a kinde of peare so called. Also nobly borne or of gentle bloud.

Gentilézza, gentility, gentlenesse, curtesie, affability. Also a quaint toy, a pretty deuise, a fine knacke. Also nobility or gentry of bloud.

Gentilésco, gentile or gentleman-like. Also of noble or gentle bloud.

Gentil dónna, a Gentle-woman.

Gentilhuómo, a Gentle-man.

Gentilhuómo délla bócca, a kings or Princes Sewer or Caruer. Also the officer about a Prince that we call Yeomen of the mouth.

Gentilíre, lísco, líto, to make or become



gentle or a Gentleman.

Gentilità, paganisme. Also as Gentilezza.

Gentilítia árma, a coat or armes peculiare to one name, family, town or people.

Gentilítia, ins égna, a Gentlmans coate, ensigne or badge.

Gentilménte, gently, kindely, affably. Also softly, smoothely, finely.

Gentilótto, a meane gentleman, as we say a franklin or halfe a Gentleman.

Gentózza, good homely plaine people.

Gentúccia, as Gentáglia.

Genuaménte, voluntarily, without constraint, of a mans proper instinct.

Genuflessióne, an humble bending of the knee.

Genuflesso, humbly, with bended knees.

Genuflettere, to bend with the knees.

Genuíni denti, the wit-teeth, the innermost iaw or cheeke-teeth, which are bred and die with a man.

Genuíno, naturall, genuine, peculiar.

Genúro, the tree or wood Iuniper.

Geo, Auens, hearbe bennet or blessed.

Geodéne, a stone inclosing a certaine eye good for sore eies.

Geografía, the description of the earth.

Geógrafo, a describer of the earth.

Geománte, a diuiner by circles & pricks.

Geomantía, diuination by circles and prickes.

Geomantína, as Geomantía.

Geometra, a Geometrician, a measurer of the earth or of lands.

Geometráre, to measure by geometry.

Geometría, Geometry or measuring of the earth.

Geometrico, according to Geometry.

Geometriggiáre, to practise Geometry.

Geometro, as Geometra.

Georgía, Culture or tillage of the earth.

Geórgiche, bookes treating of tillage.

Gera, a chape for any sheathe.

Gerachíde, a kind of blackish stone.

Gerádo, a kind of red flaming stone.

Geránio, or Geranióne, the hearbe Geranion or Storkes-bill, whereof there be diuers kinds, as Pink-need, Herb-robert, Cranes-bill, Blood-roote, Gratia dei, Bassinet-geranion, and Crowfoote-geranion. Also a Greeke measure of liquid things.

Gerarchía, a holy gouernment or principality, a Hierarchy of Angels.

Gerda, as Ghierda.

Gerettiera., Vsed for a garter.

Gergáre, to speake the pedlers french, the fustian tongue, the gibbrish, or the rogues language.

Gergo, Pedlers-french, Gibbrish.

Gergonáre, as Gergáre.

Gergóne, as Gergo.

Gergoniére, one that speakes Gergo.

Gerio, the Pilchard-fish. 

Gerliéro, a Porter with a Gerlo.

Gerlo, a kind of dosser or baskets that Porters carie burthens with, vpon their backs.

Gerlótto, as Gerlo.

Germána, a right lawfull sister. Also a kind of grape or vine.

Germaneggiáre, to professe or play the Germane, or Dutchman.

Germaníno, a kind of fine wire goldsmiths worke. Also a wire-drawers toole.

Germáno, a brother of one selfe-father and mother. Also the hearbe Germander. Also a Teale or Wigeon.

Germe, a burgeon, a sprig, a sprout, an imp, a tendrell, or bud of tree or hearbe.

Germína, as Méssa or Gémma.

Germináre, to bud, to burgeon, to sprout, to spring, to bloome, to blossome.

Germinatione, a budding, a burgeoning, a sprouting, a blooming.

Germini, buds, burgeons, sprouts, sprigs, tendrels, bloomes. Also a kind of playing-cards called terestriall triumphs.

Germinóso, budding, sprouting, burgeoning.

Germíre, mísco, míto, as Ghermíre.

Germógli, as Germini.

Germogliáre, as Germináre.

Germogliatióne, as Germinatióne.

Germoglióso, as Germinóso.

Germoláre, as Germináre.

Germoli, as Germini.

Geroglífico, a Hieroglifike, that is, certaine misticall or enigmaticall letters, caracters or cifers, vsed anciently among the wise and learned Egiptians, who vnder them comprehended and expressed whole words and sentences.

Geróndio, the gerund of a verbe.

Geróne, a Wag-taile.

Geroníte, a stone, named of the colour of a Crane.

Gerrio, the Pilchard fish.

Gersa. Dónna chè ténde à lísci, à belléttì, álle gerse & álle ácque artificiáli.

Gerso, as Gergo.

Gersomíno, as Gelsomíno.

Gesmíno, as Gelsomíno.

Géso, a kind of weapon.

Gessaiuólo, a chalke-man.

Gessare, to marke with chalke, to chalke.

Gesso, Chalke. Also Whiting.

Gessomíno, the gesmine flowre.

Gessóso, chalkie, full of chalke.

Gesta, a name, a blood, a descent, a lineage, a race or generation. Also a faction, a consort, a part.

Gestáme, any ensigne, armes or badge giuen for glorious deeds.

Gestáre, as Gesteggiáre.

Gestatióne, an exercise of the bodie in coach or on horse-backe.

Geste, as Gesti.

Gesteggiáre, to make or vse much iesture with bodie and hands. Also to acte, or declare with some signe or action.

Gesti, actes, deeds, doings, actions, gestures, memorable deeds or prowesse performed. Also the iesses of a hawke.

Gesticoláre, as Gesteggiáre.

Gestiénte, playing the apish gestures.

Gesticuláre, as Gesteggiáre.

Gesticulatióne, apishnesse, gesting.

Gesticulatóre, an apish gesture.

Gestíre, tísco, títo, as Gesteggiáre.

Geti, the iesses, or the traines of a hawke.

Gethióni, ciues or cibols good in May.

Getía, a kind of Nigromancie.

Gettáre, to cast, to throw, to hurle, to fling. Also to cast, to found or melt as melters and founders doe. Also to had, to burgeon, to sprout or spring forth. vsed also to shoote or dart from out any shooting weapon.

Gettáre artegliería, to cast ordinance.

Gettár' in ócchio, to hit or twit in the teeth, to vpbraid one.

Gettár la sórte, to cast lots.

Gettár'a mále, to cast away idlie, to spend riotously, to consume wastfully.

Gettáre tempo diétro a tempo, to cast time vpon time, to bestow ones time idly.

Gettaruólo, a hawkes cranes or lure.

Gettáta, a casting, a cast, a throw, a throwing, a hurling, a flinging. Also a melting, a founding or casting of mettals. Also a budding or casting foorth.

Gettatóre, a caster, a thrower, a flinger. Also a founder or melter.

Gettatúra, as Gettáta.

Getti, hawkes iesses, vói vi beccheréte i getti, you shall bite and gnaw your iesses as a hawke doeth, and yet can not escape. Also vsed for fetters, giues, manickles or shackles. Also yong buds, thornes, sprigs, sprouts, or briers.

Getto, the arte of casting or founding of mettals. Also any thing that is cast of mettall. Also a iet-stone. Also the casting of a hawke. Also a patch or space that is betweene beds in a garden. Also any thing cast foorth. Also vsurie.

Getto d'álbero, a burgeon, a tendrell, or budding or yong sprout of a tree.

Gettóni, counters to cast withall.

Gezo, a Lizard, or a Newt.

Ghebbio, as Gheppio.

Ghembáre, to bow, to bend, or writh crooked.

Ghémbo, bent, crooked, bowed, writhing.

Ghémo, a clew or bottom of thrid.

Ghengheráre, to wantonize, to test me­



rily, or play foolish gestures and toyes.

Ghenghería, wantonnesse, merie iesting, foolish toying, idle dalliance.

Ghennonáre, to play the munkie.

Ghennóne, a Munkie, a Marmoset.

Gheppio, a kinde of hawke that onely flies in the night.

Ghere, as Ghiere.

Gherminella, craftinesse, subtletie, slie deceit, wilinesse, iugling tricks, legerdemaine.

Gherminelláre, to play the cunning iugler, to play fast or loose.

Gherminettiére, a cunning wilie iugler.

Ghermíre, mísco, míto, to snatch or gripe for a pray as a hawke doth, to take hold of, to clinch fast. Also to cleaue, to stick, or cling fast vnto.

Ghermitóre, a snatcher, a griper, a clincher, a prouler.

Gheróni, the gores or gussets of a shirt or smock. Also the side pieces of a cloke. Also the skirts or quarters of a cote or ierkin.

Gherúzza, any kind of little Gára.

Ghétta, a kinde of Ore of mettales, but properly the first founding of them.

Ghétto, a place appointed for the Iewes to dwell in, in Venice and other cities of Italy.

Ghezzáre, to growe ripe or mellow. Also in birth to differ in colour & parts, to be or play the mungrell. Also to be or play the foolish or simple man.

Ghezzo, ripe and mellowe. Also ripe and withered. Also differing in hew and colour from the parents. Also a mungrell. Also a foolish fellow, a sillie gull, a shallow pate, vsed also for a cozening Egiptian, or Giptian.

Ghiabaldáno, a toy, a trifle, a matter of nothing, a flap with a foxe-taile.

Ghiacciábile, that may freeze.

Ghiacciána, a frozen water. Also a generall frost.

Ghiacciáre, to freeze, or come to frost.

Ghiacciarétti, as Giacciarétti.

Ghiacciatúra, a freezing, a frost.

Ghiaccíno., looke Ferro a Ghiaccíno.

Ghiáccio, all manner of frost or ice.

Ghiaccióso, frostie, full of frost.

Ghiacciuóli, ice-sickles. Also a kind of sugar-candied stuffes that lookes like ice. Also a kind of fine peares in Italy.

Ghiadáre, to freeze, to become frost. Also to benum or stiffen ones blood and lims with cold.

Ghiadatúra, a frost, a freezing. Also a benumming of the vitall blood through cold.

Ghiádo, as Gládio, a sword. Also an extreame cold frost or freezing, but properly lingring paine, wofull miserie, or miserable distresse, and is commonly ioined to the verbe Moríre, as Mórto a ghiádo.

Ghiáia, grauell or course sand, stonie grauell.

Ghiaiáre, to grauell, to sand.

Ghiaiáta, is properly that heape of sand grauell or mud fixed and setled in the bottome of a riuer or any water, which being dried they vse to cast or lay vpon bogs or fens with faggots and bushes to make them passable, and this is said Fáre ghiaiáta.

Ghiaióso, sandie, grauellie, grettie.

Ghiánda, an Acorne. Also Mast, or Oke-apples.

Ghiandáia, a Piot, a Iay, a Pye, but properly a Stock-doue, or Ring-doue.

Ghiandára, as Ghiandáia.

Ghiandáre, to feed with Mast or Acornes.

Ghiandoláre, to kernell or glandulate.

Ghiandífero, mast or Acorne-bearing.

Ghiándole, agnels, wartles or kernels in the throat. also the glanders in a horse. Also the meazels in a hog.

Ghiandóso, bearing or full of Acornes or Mast. Also glandulous or full of wartles. Also full of the glanders as a horse, or of the meazels as a hog.

Ghiandúccie, glandules or kernels in the groine. Also blanes or plague-sores.

Ghiándule, as Ghiándole.

Ghiandulóso, as Ghiandóso.

Ghiandúscia, the plague or murrien.

Ghiára, any grauell or course sand.

Ghiaráre, to grauell, to sand.

Ghiarella, small sand or grauell.

Ghiarétta, small sand or grauell.

Ghiaróso, grauelly, sandie, grettie.

Ghiaradádda, a compasse or circuit of ground. Also a towne of that name in Italie.

Ghiaróne, a broad coine of gold. Also red ruddockes or coystrels, or pieces of old gold laid vp in store by mizers and penny-fathers.

Ghiárra, any grauell or stonie sand.

Ghiattúra, as Giattúra or Iattúra.

Ghiáue, the stocke whereon a ship is built. Vsed also for the keele of a ship.

Ghiazzeríno, as Gorgeríno.

Ghiazzeruóla, a kind of ship or barke.

Ghíbbo, as Ghémbo, or as Góbbo.

Ghibbóso, as Gobbóso.

Ghiera, an arrow or bolt to shoot in a crosse-bow.

Ghierde, swellings or galles about the pasterne ioints of a horse. Some take them for the Spauens in a horse.

Ghiere, the furniture or pendents of a sword hung ouer tombes or funerals.

Ghíffa, tirar linee, piantár ghiffe & áltre operatióni. 

Ghíga, a fidle or acroud.

Ghigáre, to fidle or croud. 

Ghigáro, as Ghigatóre.

Ghigatóre, a fidler, a crouder.

Ghignacése, a leering gull, a smiling foole, a laughing Idiot.

Ghignáre, to smile, to leere, to simper. Also to grin.

Ghígno, a smile, a leering, a simpring. Also a grinning.

Ghignóso, smiling, leering, simpring. Also grinning.

Ghiminella, as Gherminella.

Ghimpháre, to set as ruffe bands.

Ghímphe, ruff-bands.

Ghindáre, to hale and draw.

Ghindáre le uéle, to hoise sailes.

Ghindaréssa, a kind of saile in a ship.

Ghinocchiáre, to kneele downe.

Ghinocchiétti, as Ginocchiétti.

Ghinocchióne, kneeling, or knees.

Ghióccia, a drop of any thing.

Ghiocciáre, to drop, to trill. Also to baste roste-meate, to trickle.

Ghiócciola, a litle drop or trill.

Ghioccioláre, to drop, to trill, to trickle.

Ghiocciolóso, dropping, trilling, trickling.

Ghiósa, a glosse, a scolion or exposition.

Ghiosáre, to glosse, to expound.

Ghiosatóre, a glosser, an expounder.

Ghiosatúra, a glossing, an expounding.

Ghiótta, a dripping-pan.

Ghiottaree, to drop, to trill, to trickle.

Ghiottarello, as Ghiottoncello.

Ghiottésco, gluttonously. Also knauishly.

Ghiótto, a glutton, a gourmand, a gulliegut. Also gluttonous. Also a slie, a craftie, a malapert or saucie companion.

Ghióttola, a dripping-pan.

Ghiottoláre, to drop, to trill, to trickle.

Ghiottonáre, to play the glutton.

Ghiottonaríe, saucie pranks, gluttonous tricks, wilie knaueries.

Ghiottoncello, a slie, craftie or lickorish knaue, a subtle lad.

Ghiottóne, as Ghiótto.

Ghiottoneggiáre, as Ghiottonáre.

Ghiottoncello, a gluttonous saucie iack.

Ghiottonía, gluttonie, gourmandize.

Ghiottornía, gluttonie, gourmandize.

Ghiózza, a drop or trill of any thing

Ghirozzáre, to drop, to trill, to trickle.

Ghiózzi, a kind of forced meate.

Ghiózzo, a Gul-head, a Millers-thumbe, a Cur-fish, or a Bull-head. Some take it for a Gudgeon-fish.

Ghirandoláre, as Girandoláre.

Ghirándole, as Girándole.

Ghirándolo, ioyned, interwrought, inlaid, laced or set together.

Ghiribizzáre, as Fantasticáre.

Ghiribízzi, suddaine humors, fantasticall conceits, humorous toyes.

Ghiribizzóso, humorous, fantasticall,



full of sudden toyes or humors.

Ghirigóri, any iagd, cut, or branched worke in wearing clothes.

Ghirlánda, any kind of garland, chaplet, circlet, coronall, wreath, or coronet of flowers or any thing else.

Ghirlandáre, to engarland.

Ghirlandella, a litle Ghirlánda.

Ghíro, a Doremouse, a Reremouse.

Ghísa, some part of a horses necke.

Ghisello, a gull, a sillie foole or ninnie.

Ghitándola, as Gauóccio.

Gì, Gía, he or she went or did goe.

Già, already, now, so soone.

Gía, whilom, erst, heretofore.

Gia, he or she went or did goe.

Già da hóra, now from this time.

Già Dío non uóglia, God forbid.

Già già, now now.

Giàlóngo tempo, now long time since.

Già mólto, now long since.

Già tempo fù, the time erst was.

Giaccáre, to arme with a iacket.

Giaccáro, a maker of iackets or shirts of maile.

Giáccchera, as Fagioláta.

Giácchere, foolish tricks, idle prankes.

Giacchétta, a litle iacket.

Giacchiáre, to catch in a net.

Giácchio, a fish-net, a fouling net, a haie for cunnies. Also as Giácco.

Giacciarétti, a kinde of moistnesse or crust vpon mudwalles like frost, whereof Saltpeter is made. Also Ise-sickles.

Giacente, bedrell, lying along that cannot stir out of his bed. Also iacent or couchant in armorie.

Giácco, a iacket or shirt of maile.

Giacére, giáccio, giácqui , or giacéi, giacciúto, to lye downe along. Also to lye or be in bed.

Giaciménto, as Giacitúra.

Giacinthíne, certaine night feasts among the Lacedemonians.

Giacínto, a stone called a Iacinth. Also a flowre called a Hiacinth.

Giacitório, a place to lye and rest in, and therefore vsed for a Church-yard.

Giacitúra, a lying downe, any kind of lying or posture of the bodie. Also a lying in bed or with a woman.

Giaciúto, Giacciúto, laine downe. Also slept or laine with a woman.

Giácomo giácomo, as much to say trembling or qualing for feare, as wee say his taile makes buttons.

Giálda, al fedíre che fécero i Tedéschi di costà i gialdoniéri lasciórono cadére le lóro giálde sópra inóstri caualliéri & mísersi in fúga.

Gialdoniére, a wafrer.

Gialláre, to dye or make yellow.

Giallástro, yellowish, somewhat yellow.

Giallétto, as Giallástro.

Giallézza, yellownesse, yellowishnesse. 

Giallíccio, as Giallástro.

Giallígno, as Giallástro.

Giállo, yellow, or Or in armorie.

Giallolíno, a kinde of colour called now adaies a Gingirline.

Giamái, euer, at any time.

Giamái, neuer, at no time. Also euer or at any time.

Giamáno, already, neare, or at hand.

Giambáre, to flout, to gibe, to mocke or dallie with in speeches.

Giambiére, a merry mocker, or flouting iester in speeches.

Giámbo, as Gámbo, Also a flout, a mocke, a gibe or scoffe in speeches.

Giammái, neuer, at no time. Also euer or at any time.

Giánda, as Ghiánda.

Giandáia, as Ghiandáia.

Giandóso, as Ghiandóso.

Giandúscia, the murren or plague.

Gianétta, a Spanish-gennet-mare.

Gianétto, a Gennet or Spanish horse.

Gianettóne, a horseman, a Gennet-rider.

Gianfruságlia, a rabble of rascally people. Also a huddle of absurdities.

Giáni, a kinde of triumphant arches so called.

Giannolíno, a kinde of blew vsed of Painters. Also a litle Iohn or Iack.

Giára, as Giárra.

Giárda, a mocke, a flout, a scoffe, a gibe.

Giarbelúccio, a kind of riding garment or horsemans-coate.

Giardáre, as Giambáre.

Giárde, as Ghierde.

Giardináio, a Gardner.

Giardinággi, all manner of gardnings.

Giardináre, as Giardineggiáre.

Giardineggiáre, to gardine, to loue or frequent gardines. Also to talke foolishly or loiter vp and downe idly, as walking in a garden.

Giardinétto, a little garden.

Giardiniere, a Gardner.

Giardíno, a Garden, an Hort-yard. Also a kind of ornament belonging to the poope of a ship or gally.

Giardóni, as Ghierde.

Giarelle, grauelly, or peble-stones. Also such stones as they giue hawkes.

Giarióli, Moore-hens.

Giaroncelli, as Giarelle.

Giaróne, a round, bigge, or hard peble or flint stone found in grauel or by the sea side.

Giaróso, as Giarróso.

Giárra, all maner of grauell or course sand. Also a measure called a iarre. Also a brazen vessell to put wine-pots in standing by the cup-boord. Also a deceit, a treachery or cheating tricke, a cozenage.

Giarráre, to grauell or sand. Also to cheat, to cozen, to cunny-catch.

Giarróso, grauelly, sandy, gretty. Also treacherous or deceitefull.

Giattabóndo, boasting, braging.

Giattánza, boasting, vaunting.

Giattáre, to brag, to boast, to vaunt.

Giattatóre, a bragger, a boaster.

Giattiménto, the questing of a dog.

Giattíre, tísco títo, to quest as a dog.

Giattúra, a braging, a boasting, avanting.

Giáua, a Mariners cabbin in a ship. I cápi, i póli & le giáve.

Giauellótto, a iauelin.

Giauerína, as Iauerína.

Giauétta, a fore-transom. Also a Mullet fish. Also a toole that Ropers vse. Also a bottom or clue of packe-thrid.

Giázza, as Bésola.

Gibáro, a kind of fish.

Gíbba, a bunch vpon ones backe.

Gíbbo, as Góbbo. Also a trunke or chest.

Gibbóso, bunch-backt. Also hilly, rugged, or full of knobs or mole-hilles.

Gibellíno, a beast called a Sable.

Greláre, as Geláre, to freeze.

Gieláta, as Geláta, a frost.

Gielatína, the meat Gelly.

Gielatúra, a freezing, a frost.

Giele, a game at cards so called.

Gielo, a frost, a freezing. Also Gelly.

Gielsa, as Gelsa.

Gielso, as Gelso.

Gielsomíno, the Iessemin flowre.

Gienca, Gienco, a Heifer, a Runt, a Steere, a Yearling, a Bullocke.

Gierda, Gierdóne, as Ghierdo.

Giergo, as Gergo.

Giergonáre, as Gergonáte.

Giergoneggiáre, as Gergonáre.

Giergoniére, as Gergoniére.

Gierliére, as Gerliére.

Gierlo, as Gerlo.

Gierusalemme, as Hierusalem.

Giesù, our sauiour Iesus Christ.

Giesuáto, a kind of meane order of Friers that are as seruants to others and not of the ranke of Iesuites.

Giesuísta, a Iesuite.

Giesuitizzáre, to play the Iesuite.

Giettáre, as Gettáre.

Giettatóre, as Gettatóre.

Giettatúra, as Gettatúra.

Gietti, as Getti.

Gietto, as Getto.

Gíffa, as Giráffa.

Gíga, a Violin, a fiddle, a croud, a kit.

Gigáre, to play vpon a fidle.

Gigáro, a fidler, a minstrell, a crouder. Also the hearbe Wake-robin, or Cuko-pintle.

Gigálo, a kind of hearbe.

Gigantággine, giantnesse, or greatnesse or quality of a Giant. 



Gigánte, a Giant.

Giganteggiáre, to act or play the Giant.

Giganteo, Giant-like.

Gigantésco, Giant-like.

Gigantothemachía. 

Gigis, a precious stone that as some write makes those inuisible that weare it about them.

Gigli, certaine fretted Flower-de-luced workes in masonry or Ioyners workes. Also Lillies.

Gigliáto, Lillied, stamped or wrought with Flower-de-luces. Also Flower-deluced or Seme with them. Also a coine in Florence stamped with a Flower-de-luce.

Gigliétti, little Flower-de-luces. Also a kind of bone-lace or any lace-workes in forme of them.

Gíglio, a Lilly or Flower-de-luce. Also a kind of game so called.

Gíglio azzúrro, the blew Flower-de luce.

Gigliolíno, a little or yongue Lilly. Also a Lilly-colour. Vsed also for a light bay-colour of a horse.

Gigníua, the gummes of the teeth.

Gigótto, a gigot of mutton, a legge of veale, a pestle or spring of porke, a ham or gammon of bacon, a hanche of venison.

Gíle, a play at cardes much like our poste and paire.

Gímbo, a bunch on ones backe.

Gimborúto, bunch-backt, as Gibbóso.

Gimbóso, as Gibbóso.

Gimína., looke Alla zemína.

Gímmo, as Gimborúto.

Gimnasiárca, as Ginnasiárca.

Gimnásio, as Ginnásio.

Gimnásta, as Ginnásta.

Gímnici, as Gínnici.

Gimnici giuóchi, as Gínnici.

Gimnosophísta, as Ginnosophísta.

Gina, helpe, aide, succor, reliefe.

Gináldo, a dogge or curre in gibbrish.

Gindaréssa, as Ghindaréssa.

Ginebráio, as Ginepráio.

Ginebro, as Ginepro.

Ginecánte, Briony. Also a kind of black wilde vine.

Ginepráio, a thicket, brake or bushy place of Iuniper. Also a Maze or Laberinth.

Ginepro, the tree or wood Iuniper.

Ginestra, Spart or Spanish-broome.

Ginestráta, as Genestráta.

Ginétta, a Iennet or Spanish horse. Also a kind of little beast like a Weazell. Also a kind of flinging Iauelin or dart vsed in war.

Ginettárij, horsemen that ride Spanish Iennets. Also such as carry and fight with a kinde of Iauelin called Ginétta.

Ginétto, a Iennet-horseman.

Ginettóne, a great large Iennet.

Gingebro, Ginger. Also Dittany.

Gingídio, Cheruill or Tooth-picke.

Gingíe, as Gengíue.

Gínie, kindes, genders.

Ginipreto, as Ginepráio.

Ginnasiárca, a rector, a ruler or principall of a Colledge or schoole.

Ginnásio, a Colledge, a schoole or place where learning or exercises either of body or minde are taught and practised. Also a place where Giunici acted and exercised their plaies.

Ginnásta, a master or one that teacheth exercises of body or minde.

Gínnici, players that play and act naked vpon the stage.

Ginnici giuóchi, a kinde of wrestling game by naked men among the Grecians.

Ginnosophísta, a Gymnosophist, which are certaine Philosophers or wisemen that goe naked among the Indians and are counted as Prophets.

Ginocchiáli, as Ginocchiétti.

Ginocchiáre, to kneele downe.

Ginocchiáta, kneeled. Also a kneeling.

Ginocchiétti, greues or knee-pieces. Also kneecushions. Also canions for hosen.

Ginócchio, the knee of any creature.

Ginocchióne, kneeling, on his knees.

Gío, he or shee went or did goe.

Gióbbia, the day Thursday.

Gióbbia grássa, the Thursday before Shroue-tues-day.

Giocacchiaménti, idle sports, foolish games, base plaies, filthy playings.

Giocacchiárc, to sport, game or play foolishly, idly and filthily.

Giocacchiatóre, an idle gamester, a foolish player.

Giocáre, to play, to game. Also to sport.

Giocáre a chè églie déntro? to play in or out, or fast and loose.

Giocáre a gli óssoli, to play at keeles, or nine pinnes.

Giocáre a dódeci, to play at twelue holes, or trou de Madame, with little bowles or balles.

Giocáre a grán póste, to play great stakes.

Giocáre a mirella, as Giocáre a dó- deci.

Giocáre al ballóne, to play at Ballone.

Giocáre al damiére, to play at Tables. Also to play at Chesse.

Giocáre a leuacúlo, to play at leuell cule, or itch buttock.

Giocáre allamóra, a play with casting of fingers and numbring together. 

Giocáre a dádi, to play at Dice.

Giocáre alle cárte, to play at Cards.

Giocáre al mátto, as Giocáre a dódeci.

Giocáre álla pálla, to play at Tenis.

Giocáre al nuóue, to play at Nouam. Also to play at nine holes.

Giocáre álle borelle, to play at Bowles.

Giocáre álle piastrelle, to play at quoits.

Giocáre alle póme., looke Póme.

Giocáre a scácchi, to play at Chesse.

Giocáre a sbrígli, to play at nine pinnes or keeles.

Giocáte a tarócchi, to play at Tarols.

Giocáre a zóni, as Giocàre a sbrígli.

Giocáre al tauoliere, to play at Tables. Also to play at Chesse.

Giocáre al trúcco, to play at Billards.

Giocáre delle máni, to play with ones hands, to hit or strike with ones hands, or be ouerbusie with them, which among Italians is taken as a great discourtesie, and therefore they say Gioco di mano, gioco di villáno.

Giocáre nétto, to play cleane, as we say to play hand ouer boord.

Giocáre di rónca, to play with a long staffe.

Giocarello, a prettie play or meriment.

Giocatello, as Giocarello.

Giocatóre, a plaier, a gamester.

Giocatória professióne, the arte of gaming.

Giocheu lménte, in sport, in play.

Gióco, any kind of game or play.

Gióco di máno., looke Giocáre délle máni.

Gióco di pálla, a Tennis-court, or Play.

Gióco márzo, a lurch at any game.

Gióchi, games, plaies, sports, delights.

Gióchi divéglie, all Christmas-games, or Wakes, plaid in the night.

Giócciola, a little drop, trill, or trickle.

Gioccioláre, to drop, to trill, to trickle.

Giocogliere, as Giocolatóre.

Giocolaménti, iugling tricks, tumbling tricks, or walking on ropes.

Giocoláre, to tumble or walke on ropes. Also to iugle or play the mountibanke. Also to play with Puppets. Also to dandle, to dallie or play with.

Giocolatóre, a tumbler or walker on ropes. Also a iugler or a mountibanke. Also a puppet-plaier. Also a dandler, a player, a dallier.

Gioco márcio, a lurch-game.

Giocondáre, to reioyce or be iocond.

Giocondézza, iocondnesse, iollitie.

Giocondità, iocondnesse, iollitie.

Giocóndo, iocond, merrie, blithe.

Giocosità, gaming, glee, iesting.

Giocóso, gamefull, merie, sportfull.

Gióga, a measure of land, as Giúgero.

Giogáia, a Buls dewlap. 



Giogáre, to yoke together. Also to perch on a frame as vines, that they may spread and growe. Also to make hillie or steepie.

Gioggiolíno, flesh, or brick-colour.

Gióglio, cockle, darnell, or corne-rose.

Giógna, a Bull, or Oxes dewlap.

Giógo, a steepie hill, or the top of any high hill. Also a yoke for oxen, or a yoke of oxen, and by metaphore, bondage, thraldome, tirranie, forced obedience, coupling, or coniunction.

Gióia, a ioy, a gemme, a iewell, or any precious thing. Also iouissance, delight, hearts-ease, or comfort.

Gióia., looke Tirare la gióia.

Gióia del pezzo, the ring or cornish of a piece at mouth or breech.

Gióia per gióia., looke Tiráre.

Gioiáre, to engemme or set with iewels. Also, to ioy, to delight.

Gióie, beames mortised one into another.

Gioiella, a little iem or iewell.

Gioielláre, to adorne with iewels.

Gioiellería, a iewell-house. Also the artes of lapidaries or iewelers.

Gioielliére, a ieweler, a lapidarie.

Gioiello, any precious iewell or iem.

Gioiétta, a little iem or iewell.

Gioiosétto, blithe, buckesome, ioyfull.

Gioióso, ioyous, iocond, iolly, blithe.

Gioíre, ísco, íto, to ioy, to reioice, to be merrie and blithe.

Gioliuità, iolitie, blithnesse.

Giolíuo, iollie, bonnie, buckesome.

Gioncáre, to rush or strew with rushes.

Gioncástri, as Giuncástri.

Gioncáta, as Giuncáta.

Giónchi, as Giúnchi.

Gióncho, as Giúnco. Also a kind of Ship.

Gioncóni, as Giuncóni.

Gioncóso, rushie, full of rushes.

Gióngere, gióngo, giónsi, giónto, to adde, to ioine vnto. Also to ouertake, or ouer-reach by the way. Also to attaine or reach vnto. Also to come or arriue to a place. Also to happen or come to passe.

Giónica, as Iónica.

Giongiménto, an adding vnto. Also a conioyning. Also an arriuing to a place.

Giónta, an adding or ioining vnto. Also an ouertaking or ouerreaching. Also an attaining or reaching vnto. Also an arriuing or comming to a place. Also an addition, an aduantage or to boote giuen in buying any thing, an odds giuen. Also a cheating, or cunnicatching tricke.

Giontaménte, iointly, or coupled together.

Giontaménto, as Giónta.

Giontáre, to beguile or ouer-reach one. Also to ioine vnto, or together.

Giontaríe, cozening, or cunnicatching tricks, cheatings.

Giontatóre, a cheater, an ouer-reacher.

Giontíno, a craftie ouer-reaching companion, a cozening fellow.

Giónto., looke Gióngere.

Giontúra, as Giuntúra.

Giornaláccio, an idle, lazie loitring fellow that spends the day idly.

Giornále, dayly. Also a iournall or daybooke, such as Shop-keepers vse.

Giornaliere, an obseruer of daies, one that cares but for to day, and lets to morow care for it selfe. Also a keeper of iournales or day-bookes. Also a iornie-man, or day-labourer.

Giornáta, the worke or labour of a day. Also a dayes iourney or trauell. Also a set battell giuen in one day.

Giornáta reále, a battell royall.

Giórne, párte d'un' edifício.

Giornea, a day-goune, or vppergarment.

Giorneáre, to goe or iet idlie vp and downe, or spend the day loytringly.

Gioneóne, as Giornálaccio.

Giorgiuláre, to play the wanton.

Giórno, a day.

Giórno delmemento, Ashwednesday.

Giórno di fefta, a holie or festiuall day.

Giórno di lauoro, a worke-day.

Giórno di segnatúra, a sealing-day.

Giórnográsso, a flesh-day.

Giórno mágro, a fish or fasting-day.

Giórno natalítio, a birth-day.

Giosefo, as much to say, increase.

Gióstra, a iusting, a running at tilt, a tilting.

Gióstra a múle, a tilter on Mules, a nick-name for Lawyers or Phisitions.

Giostraménti, iustings, tiltings.

Giostránti, iusters, tilters.

Gióstraprigionera, as Abómba.

Giostratóre, a tilter, a iuster.

Gióta, a iot, a whit, a mite, a crum.

Giottaríe, as Ghiottonaríe.

Giótto, as Ghiótto.

Gióttola, a dripping-pan. Also a drop.

Giottonáre, as Ghiottonáre.

Giottonaríe, as Ghiottonaríe.

Giottóne, as Ghiottóne.

Giottonía, as Ghiottonía.

Giottoncello, as Ghiottoncello.

Giottoncíno, as Ghiottoncello.

Giottornía, gluttonie, gourmandize.

Gióua, it auaileth or helpeth. Also some part of or about a sadle.

Gióuami, or Mi gióua, it auaileth me. Also it pleaseth or is agreeable vnto me.

Giouaménto, any helpe, auaile, profit or furtherance.

Giouanáccio, as Giouanástro.

Giouanástro, a yoong sturdie lad.

Giouanáglia, a rout or multitude of youthes or yoong men of all sorts.

Giouancello, a yoong pretty lad, a boy, a stripling.

Gióuane, yoong, youthly, youthfull, tender, newborne. Also a youth, a yoong lad, a yoong man. Also a yoong wench, lasse, girle or woman.

Giouanésco, youthly, youthfull.

Giouanétta, a handsome yoong woman. Also somewhat yoong or youthfull.

Giouanétto, a pretty yoong lad or man. Also somewhat yoong.

Giouanézza, youth, youthfulnesse.

Giouani, yoong men or women.

Giouaníle, youthly, youthfull, yoonglike.

Giouáre, to helpe, to auaile, to further, to bestead or doe good vnto. Also to please to be agreeable or delight and doe good vnto.

Giouatóre, a helper, an auailer.

Gióue, signifies the eldest begotten sonne of any Saturne, Ioue or Iupiter. Also the mettall Tinne according to Alchimists phrases.

Giouedi, the day Thursday.

Giouedì grásso, as Gióbba grássa.

Giouedì santo, holy-Thursday.

Giouénca, a runt, a heifer, a yeareling, a weaneling, a bullocke, a steere.

Giouencella, a yoong Giouénca. Also a yoong lasse or wench.

Giouénco, a yoong bullocke or runt.

Gióuene, as Gióuane.

Gioueníle, youthly, youthfull.

Giouentù, youth, youthfulnesse.

Giouentúdine, as Giouentù.

Giouéuole, helpefull, auailefull.

Gioueuolézza, as Giouaménto.

Giouiále, Iouiall, borne vnder Iupiter.

Giouincella, a yoong mare-colt. Also a yoong lasse or wench.

Giouincello, a yoong horse-colt. Also a yoong lad or boy.

Giouinézza, youth, youthlinesse, youthfulnesse.

Giózza, a drop, or a trilling.

Giozzáre, to drop, to trill, to trickle.

Gipsiéra, a faulkning or hauking-bag.

Gippiatúra, as Giúbba. Also a kind of worke or fashion that Tailors vse.

Girábile, as Giréuole.

Giracchiáre, as Giráre.

Girafálco, a Ierfaulkon.

Giráffa, a beast greater then a Leopard resembling a Panther with a long necke. Also a kind of fine drinking glasse or flowre-glasse.

Giraldelli, Moore-hens.

Giránda, as Girándola.

Girandáre, as Girandoláre.

Giraménto, a giring, a turning or compassing about. Also a change of state or condition.

Giralóndola, as Girándola.



Giralondoláre, as Girandoláre.

Girándola, a winding traine of powder. Also a long flying squib. Also a long tedious flim flam tale, an idle discourse.

Girandoláre, to wander, to scud or gad about. Also to talke or discourse tediously or goe about the bush with vaine circumstances in speech.

Girandoliere, an idle vaine pratler.

Girandolína, an idle house-wife, a fond-gadder, a pratling woman.

Girardína, a kind of fine singing bird.

Giraménti, girings, turnings, twirlings, windings, wheelings about, cranklings

Giráre, to gire, to turne, to twirle, to wind, to wheele or cranckle about or in and out. Also to circumuent or lead about. Also to goe about the bush with one. Also to gad or roue about.

Giráre il ceruello, a mans braine to turne, to run mad or light in the head.

Girasóle, the Turnesole or Sunne-flower, as Helitrópia. Also a kind of precious stone called Helitropium. Some haue taken it for fiue leafed grasse. Also vsed for changeable taffeties.

Girássa, as Giráffa.

Girasolióne, as Girasóle.

Giráta, a giring, a twirling, a winding or crankling about. Looke Giráre.

Giráto affátto, altogether mad or out of his wits.

Girauento, a fane or weather-cocke. Also a windmill of paper that at a stickes end children play withall in running.

Girauólta, as Giráta. Also a walking turne, as we say about.

Gíre, as I're, to goe, an imperfect verbe wanting many persons and tences.

Girella, a fane or weather cocke, any thing that turnes round, a twirle, a drill, a screw. Also any kind of pully of ship or well. Also a suddaine toye, an humorous fancy, a fond humour.

Girelláio, a light-headed, wauering, humorous, inconstant fellow.

Girelláre, to twirle or turne about, to drill or screw, to pully.

Girello, a twirle, a drill, a screw. Also a fish called in Latin Iulis. Also some part or thing about a horses furniture. Also a weather-cocke. Also a crosse made of cards and with a pin thrust in at the end of a sticke, which with running in the wind children will make to twirle about.

Giréuole, turning or twirling about.

Giribízzo, as Ghiribízzo.

Giribizzóso, as Ghiribizzóso.

Giríni, tadpoles, polewigges, yongue-frogs.

Girióli, a kind of dainty bird.

Girláre, as Giráre, or Girandoláre.

Gírlo, as Ciúrlo. Also as Pírlo.

Gíro, a gire, a twirling, a circle, a reuolution, or crackling about, a turne. Also a border, a compasse or going about.

Gíro di quadrétti, a border gobony in armory.

Gíro, Gíroli, a fish called a menow.

Giroella, as Girella.

Giroétta, as Girella.

Girománte, a teller of fortunes by palmestry.

Giromantía, the art of palmestry.

Girométta, a merry wanton country lasse. Also the name of a country song.

Girónda., looke A girónda.

Girondáre, as Girandoláre.

Giróne, any great round or outcompasse containing one or many within it.

Giróni, gerons in armory.

Gíspo, a kind of strong poison.

Gíta, a going, a departing away.

Gitarella, a little or short going.

Gítho, the weed Gith.

Gíto, a kind of coine in India.

Gittáre, as Gettáre.

Gittaménto, a casting. Also a founding.

Gittáre in ócchio, to twit or cast in ones eie or teeth.

Gittár sórti, to cast lots.

Gittáta, as Gettáta.

Gittár vía, to cast away.

Gittatóre, as Gettatóre.

Gítti, as Getti.

Gitto, as Getto.

Gittóne, Nard, Pepperwort or Coriander of Rome.

Giù, downe, below, beneath.

Gíua, he or she went or did goe.

Giuára, a kind of bird.

Giúba, the long fleece that hangs downe from beasts necks, namely of a Lion.

Giúbba, a iub, a trusse, a sleeuelesse doublet, ierkin, iacket or mandillion. Also any long and thinne robe, mantle or gowne.

Giubbarello, a litle Giúbba.

Giubbonáro, a iub or doublet-maker.

Giubbóne, any kind of doublet.

Giubébba, a drug called Iubebs.

Giubétta, a gibbet or paire of gallowes.

Giubetto, the perfume called Ziuet. Also a thin doublet.

Giubiláre, to ioy, to reioyce, to make merry or shout for ioy.

Giubilatióne, a reioycing or shouting for ioy and gladnesse.

Giubileo, the yeare of Iubile, of gladnesse, of freedome and remission of sins, the word is deriued of Iobel, which in Hebrew signifieth libertie or freedome.

Giúbilo, a reioycing with signes and voice expressing gladnesse. 

Giubilóso, full of gladnesse and reioycing with signes and voice.

Giucáre, as Giocáre, &c.

Giucatóre, as Giocatóre, &c.

Giucoláre, as Giocoláre. Also as Giulláre.

Giuculáre, as Giocoláre.

Giuculatóre, as Giocolatóre.

Giuculatóre, as Giocolatóre.

Giudáico, of the Iewes or Iudea.

Giudaizzáre, to play the Iew.

Giudécca, a place faigned by Dante in Hell where Traitors are punished.

Gindaísmo, Iudaisme.

Giudeo, a Iew, that is an incredulous or misbelieuing man.

Giudicábile, that may be iudged.

Giudicaménto, a iudgement, a doome.

Giudicáre, to iudge, to doome, to sentence, to giue iudgement, to decree, to censure. Also to deeme, to thinke, to suppose. It hath also beene vsed to bequeath by will and testament.

Giudicáto, iudged, doomed. Also the place, office, state or calling of a Iudge. Also bequeathed by will and Testament.

Giudicatóre, a iudger, a determiner, one that giueth sentence or doome.

Giudicatúra, a iudging, a determination, a iudicature. Also a Case of iudgement or decision. Also a Sessions holden.

Giúdice, a Iudge, a righter of causes.

Giudichéuole, that may be iudged.

Giudiciále, iudiciall, determinable, of or pertaining to iudgement.

Giudicialménte, iudicially.

Giudiciário, as Gindiciále.

Giudício, a iudgement, a sentence, a doome. Also a place or seat of iustice or iudgement. Also wit, discretion, learning or skill. Also opinion, deeming, supposing or estimation.

Giudicióso, iudicious, full of iudgement.

Giúe, as Giù, downe, below beneath.

Gíuero, a Diuer, a Didapper, or Arse-foole.

Giueróne, as Gíuero.

Giugále, of or pertaining to a yoake.

Giugále ósso, the iugall bone, which is a portion of the bones of the head and of the vpper iaw.

Giugáre, to yoake or couple together.

Giúgero, as much ground as one yoake of Oxen could eare in a day but now vsed for an acre of land.

Giuggiáre, as Giudicáre.

Giúggio, as Giúdice.

Giúggiola, the Iubed fruit. Also vsed of Dante for I iudge it or the same.

Giúggiolo, the Iubeb-tree.

Giugiúba, the Iubeb-fruites

Giúgnere, as Gióngere.



Giugniménto, as Giongiménto.

Giúgno, the Moneth of Iune.

Giúgnole, any fruit comming in Iune.

Giuguláre, to behead or cut ones throat.

Giúla, the hearbe Maudleine.

Giulebbe, as Giuleppe.

Giuliáre, to glad or be iolly.

Giúlio, the Moneth of Iuly. Also the name Iulius. Also a coine made by Iulius the Pope. Also blithe or merrie.

Giulità, iollinesse, iollity.

Giulióso, full of gladnesse or iollity.

Giulíuo, iolly, glad, full of ioy.

Giulláre, to iugle, to play the vice. Also to scoffe, to frump or flout, or play the iester or buffon. Also a buffon, a pleasant iester, or flouting companion.

Giulláro, a iugler, a pleasant vice, a buffon, a iester, a pleasant.

Giuménta, a Mare or breeding beast. Also any beast of yoake or cariage.

Giumentário, an ouerseer of Mares or of a Horse-race.

Giuncáre, to strew with rushes.

Giuncáro, one that selleth rushes.

Giuncástri, rush baskets or frailes.

Giuncáta, a prettie worke made of bents or rushes. Also any iunket, but properly fresh cheese and creame, so called because it is sold vpon fresh rushes.

Giunchéto, a rush-field, a bent-field.

Giúnchi, rushes, bull-rushes, bents.

Giúnco, any kind of rush or bent. Also the hearbe Galingale.

Giúnco di palúde, the marish reede.

Giúnco maríno, the Sea-rush.

Giúnco odoráto, Squinanth or Sweetrush.

Giuncóni, great bull-rushes or bents.

Giuncóso, full of, or yealding rushes.

Giúngere, as Gióngere.

Giúnger'al ségno, to come or reach to the marke.

Giúngo, as Giúnco, &c.

Giunióre, yonger, iunior.

Giúnta, as Giónta.

Giuntáre, as Giontáre.

Giuntaríe, as Giontaríe.

Giuntatóre, as Giontatóre.

Giúnte, as Giónte.

Giunto, as Giónto.

Giuntúra, as Giontúra.

Giuocacchiáre, as Giocacchiáre.

Giuocáre, as Giocáre.

Giuocatóre, as Giocatóre.

Ginóchi, as Gióchi.

Giuóco, as Gióco.

Giuocogliere, as Giocolatóre.

Giuocolaménti, as Giocolaménti.

Giuocoláre, as Giocoláre.

Giuocolatóre, as Giocolatóre.

Giúppa, as Giúbba.

Giupparello, as Giubbarello.

Giupponáro, a doublet-maker. 

Giuppóne, any kind of doublet.

Giúra, a Iurie of twelue men. Also a swearing or deposition by othe. Also a league or conspiracie.

Giuracchiaménti, swearings, othes, bannings, cursings.

Giuracchiáre, to sweare, to banne, to curse.

Giuradios, taken in mockerie for a swearing or bragging Spaniard.

Giuraménti, swearings, othes, depositions, binding promises.

Giuráre, to sweare, to protest, to depose. Also a water-fowle, in Latin Colimbus.

Giuratóre, a swearer, a deposer. Also a blasphemer or banner.

Giúri, othes, swearings, depositions.

Giuriconsúlto, a Lawyer, a professor or expounder of right or law.

Giuridicaménte, according to the due course of right and law.

Giuridicente, an Atturney, a Speaker or Counsellor at law.

Giuridíco, of or pertaining to law.

Giuridittióne, iurisdiction, power, or authoritie by law. Also dominion or gouernment. Also a territorie or precinct vnder ones power.

Giurisconsúlto, as Giuriconsúlto.

Giurisdittióne, as Giuridittióne.

Giurísta, a professor of the law, a Lawyer. Also legall or according to law.

Giúro, an othe, a swearing.

Giúso, downe, below, beneath.

Giuspatronáto, a patronage by law.

Giusquiámo, the hearbe Henbane.

Giústa, as the Latin Iuxta, neare vnto, hard by. Also euen like, as well. Also according.

Giustaménte, iustly, equally, vprightly, righteously, leuelly, euen.

Giustáre, to make iust, euen or leuell. Also to take leuell or ayme.

Giustáre un pezzo, to leuell a piece.

Giustézza, iustnesse, rightnesse, equitie.

Giustificábile, iustifiable.

Giustificáre, to iustifie, to cleare.

Giustificatióne, iustification.

Giustificatíuo, that iustifieth.

Giustificatóre, a iustifier.

Giustifichéuole, iustifiable.

Giustína, a coyne in Venice worth almost two of our shillings.

Giustítia, iustice, vprightnesse righteousnesse, equity. Also a place of execution.

Giustitiáre, to deale with according to iustice, that is to execute iustice vpon, or put malefactors to death.

Giustitiáro, a Iusticer, a Iustice of peace. Also an executioner or heads man.

Giustitiáto, executed according to law and iustice, put to death by law.

Giustitiére, as Giustitiáro.

Giustítio, a time of war, of plague or generall calamity when all exercise of law and religion ceaseth, as you would say, Law-stand, or in Latine Iurisstatio.

Giústo, iust, righteous, vpright, lawfull, vncorrupt, euen, right, straight.

Glaciále, that will or may freeze. Also of the colour of ice.

Glaciále máre, the frozen Sea.

Glacitáre, to bray as an Asse.

Glácito, the braying of an Asse.

Gládolo, as Gladióla.

Gladiáre, to fight, to fence or strike with swords or weapons.

Gládia potestà, Lordly or absolute power, as we say to hang and draw.

Gladiatóre, a fencer or flowrisher with swords or weapons.

Gladiatória árte, the art of fenceing.

Gládio, any kinde of sword. Also the sword-fish called the Emperour of the sea.

Gladióla, Sword-grasse, Sword-wort, Flags, or Petiegladen.

Glagópo, a kind of hearbe.

Glámo, a kind of long fish.

Glandíre, disco, díto, to cry as an Eagle.

Glanduláre, to glandulate or grow to kernels in the flesh.

Glándule, glandules, wartles, kernels or agnels in the flesh.

Glandulóso, glandulous or full of kernels in the flesh.

Glangíre, ísco, íto, as Glandíre.

Glángolo, as Ghirándola.

Gláno, a kind of fish that nibles the bait and leaues the hooke bare.

Glastáre, to woade or die with woad.

Glásto, woade to die blew withall.

Glaucáre, to stretch on Tenter-hookes.

Glauchiéra, a paire of Tenters.

Gláucia, the hearbe Celandine the great.

Gláucio, a kind of wilde Poppy.

Glaucióne, as Gláucia.

Gláuco, the hearbe Milke-wort, or Sea-Trifolie. Also a kind of Sea-fish neuer seene in Summer. Also a kinde of birde. Also any kinde of tenterhooke or naile. Also the colour of a Lions eye. Vsed also for the bay colour of a horse.

Glaucóma, a disease in the christaline humor of the eye, with firie rednesse in it. Some take it for a rawe or rawe eye.

Glaucomáto, one that hath red, sore, or enflamed eyes, or that is raw-eyde.

Glaucópo, any one that hath eyes like a Cat, a Lion, or an Owle.

Glauísco, a kind of long fish.

Gleba, a gleebe, a clod, a turfe, or lump of clay, or earth.



Glebáre, to gleebe or breake clods of earth.

Gleorophilida, an hearbe, which drunke with wine, will procure laughter.

Glesso, a kind of Amber in Germanie.

Gleucíno, a kind of oyle.

Glì, an article of the masculine gender, of the plurall number, of the datiue and accusatiue case, the, it is ioyned vnto nounes that begin with vowels, and is the plurall of lo.

Glì, a pronoune primitiue, being ioined with any verbe of the datiue case, him, or to him. Also of the accusatiue case, they, them, those. Also of the ablatiue case, with verbs of priuation, from him.

Gliándre, as Glándule.

Glicerítia, licorice wood.

Glicirizzóne, a kind of cheese made with milke and licorice.

Glicíside, the hearbe or floure Peonie.

Gliél, to him it, or it from him.

Glielà, to her it, or it from her.

Glielì, to him them, or them from him.

Gliel, ò, to him it, or it from him.

Glienè, for gli ne, to him thereof, or some. Also from him some or thereof.

Gliéro, a Dore-mouse.

Gliè véro, it is true.

Glinóne, a kind of Maple-tree.

Glimi profersi, I offred my selfe vnto him.

Gliomáro, a clue, or bottom of thrid.

Gliombáro, the licorice wood.

Gliorizzóne, licorice wood.

Gliótto, as Ghiótto.

Gliottonáre, as Ghionáre.

Gliottonaríe, as Ghiottonaríe.

Gliottóne, as Ghiottóne.

Gliottonía, as Ghiottonía.

Gliribizzáre, as Ghiribizzáre.

Gliribízzo, as Ghiribízzo.

Glírio, foolish, sottish, doting.

Glíro, a Dore-mouse.

Gliseromagróne, a kind of white marle to fatten ground.

Glítta, a Bistard or Horne-owle, which putteth foorth a long tongue.

Globáre, to make or become round.

Glóbo, a Globe, or round Tipe.

Globolità, roundnesse.

Globóso, full of roundnesse as a Globe.

Glocitáre, to bray as a wilde Asse. Also to clucke or cackle as a hen.

Glocitatióne, the braying of a wild Asse. Also the clucking of a broode hen.

Glomeráre, to wind round vpon a clue.

Glómero, a clue or bottome of thrid.

Glómo, as Glómero.

Glória, glorie, renoume, good name, fame, honour, greatnesse. Also vaunt.

Gloriáre, to glorie, to magnifie, to extoll, to praise. Also to boast or vaunt.

Gloriatióne, glorying. Also boasting. 

Gloriátto, any tride sewet, or tallow.

Glorificatióne, glorification.

Glorificáre, to glorifie, to magnifie, to make glorious and famous.

Glorióso, glorious, full of glorie, famous, renoumed.

Glósa, as Ghióso.

Glosáre, as Ghiosáre.

Glosatóre, as Ghiosatóre.

Glóso, a precious stone in forme of a mans tongue, which falles from heauen when the Moone is in the wane.

Glossopetra, as Glóso.

Glóto, as Glítta.

Glotoráre, to cry as a Storke doeth.

Glottocrísia, gluttie, fattie. Bócca glottocrísia, a mouth flowing with the fat of eloquence.

Glutináre, to glue, to glutinate.

Glutinatióne, gluishnesse, clamminesse.

Glutinatíuo, hauing the qualitie of glue.

Glutinóso, glutinous, clammie.

Gnáccara, a Cimball. Also a Rattle. Also a Bag-pipe.

Gnafálio, Cudwort, Chafweede, Peticotton, or small Bumbace.

Gnáffe, a word of affirmation, as we say, yes indeede, yea by our lady, truly yea, yea good sooth.

Gnáffe sì, yea by our ladie.

Gnáffe nò, no by our ladie.

Gnámi, or Gnámes, a kind of fruite in India.

Gnarità, skilfulnesse, knowledge.

Gnáro, skilfull, expert, knowing.

Gnaphalióne, as Gnafálio.

Gnatonáre, to play the parasite, the smell-feast, or trencher-friend.

Gnatóne, a parasite, a smell-feast, a trencher-friend, a flatterer.

Gnauità, actiuitie, lustinesse or quicknesse, to doe any thing.

Gnáuo, quick, lustie, or actiue to any thing.

Gnenè, as Glienè.

Gneo, as Neo.

Gnesióne, the rarest kinde of Eagles, an Eagle royall.

Gnídio, a kinde of graine growing, or Camelea, vsed in Phisike.

Gniffeguerra, a shifter in times of war, a warriour for profit.

Gniúno, no one, not one, no bodie.

Gnócchi, a Paste-meate, as Macheroni.

Gnócco, a gull, a grosse-pate, a shallowhead.

Gnómo, a Mathematicall instrument to measure land.

Gnomóne, the gnomon, or knowman of any diall, the shadow whereof pointeth out the houres. Also a colts tooth whereby a horses age is knowne. Also a rule, a square or squire to know any thing by. Also in the Mathematikes it is one diagonall with two complements of any parallelogram.

Gnomónica Architettúra, a kinde of Architecture so called, according to Geometrie, or the true arte and science to know the situation, lying, or measure of any place or countrie. Also according to the rule of dialing.

Gnomónico, that belongs to the measuring of shadowes.

Gnúdo, hath bin vsed for Núdo, naked.

Gnúno, as Gniúno.

Gnósia stélla, a certaine Starre.

Gò, Gói, a Quap-fish, which is poyson to man and man to him.

Góbba, a bunch, a knob or croope namely vpon ones backe. Also the Moone being eleuen daies old.

Gobbáre, to bunch, to knob, to croope.

Góbbe, a kind of round shell-fish.

Gobbétto, a man with a little bunch on his backe. Also a little man croopbackt.

Góbbi, a kind of hearbe good to eat.

Góbbio, as Ghiózzo. Also as Gózzo.

Gobbióne, as Góbbio.

Góbbo, bunch or croope-backt. Also a kind of Faulkon.

Gobbúto, that hath a bunch or croopebacke.

Gobiáno, Góbio, as Ghiózzo.

Góbola, a common speech, an ordinary saying, an vsuall prouerbe.

Goboláre, to speake the common language, sayings, prouerbes or adages.

Góccia, a drop, a trill. Also the gout.

Gocciáre, to drop, to trill, to trickle.

Gocciatúra, as Gocciolaménto.

Góccio de gli uccelli, the crop or craw of any birde, the panell or maw of a Hawke.

Gócciola, a little drop, trilling, trickling or drizeling. Also the Palsie. Also vsed for an Apoplexie. Also the V'gola.

Goccioláme, as Gocciolaménto.

Gocciolaménto, any kind of dropping, trilling, trickling or distilling.

Gocciolánte, as Gocciolóso.

Goccioláre, as Gocciáre. Also to hang downe dangling.

Gocciolatóio, a gutter or drayner.

Gocciolatúra, as Gocciolaménto.

Gocciolóne, one that is dropt downe by chance, a noddy-peake, a sneaker. Also vsed for one that hath a good toole that goes dingledangle.

Gocciolóso, full of drops. Also gouty.

Goccióso, as Gocciolóso.

Gocciúto, gorged, hauing a great gorge.

Godáno, a Witwall, or a Woodwall.

Godente, reioycing, enioying with delight.

Godére, gódo, godei, godúto, to enioy, to possesse, to hold or owe as his owne. Also to delight with, to bee glad of, 



or reioice for.

Goderéccia brigáta, a carelesse crew liuing in all sensualitie.

Godézzo, a strange bird in India.

Godéuole, that may be enioyed.

Godeuolíssimo, most ioyfully enioyed.

Godiménto, an enioying, a iouissance.

Godíno, as Godáno.

Goditóre, an owner, an inioyner.

Godúta, as Godiménto.

Goétia, a kinde of cosening Magicke, charme or enchantment.

Goéta, a cozening Magitian or enchanter.

Godúto, enioyed. Looke Godére.

Gófer, a kinde of wood whereof God commanded Noah to make the Arke, which some take for Codar or Terebinth.

Goffággine, grosse foolishnesse, gullishnesse.

Goffáno, as Góffo.

Goffaríe, grosse, foolish or bungling tricks.

Goffézza, as Goffággine.

Góffi, thumps with fists or knuckles.

Goffeggiáre, to play the gull or foole.

Goffità, as Goffággine.

Góffo, a grosse-pated, foolish, simple gull.

Góffo, foolish, grosse-witted, shallow.

Goffóne, a great foole, a lubbardly wit.

Gófo, as Gúfo, an Owle.

Gógna, the pumpe of a ship, the sinke of a house, a common shore. Also a cage or stocks for vagabonds. Also the dungeon in any prison. Also some part of a piece of ordinance.

Gogoláre, as Gongoláre.

Gogusciáda, a kind of bird.

Gói, as Gò, a Quap-fish.

Góla, the throat, the gorge or gullet of any creature. Also gluttonie.

Góla del belouárdo, the entrance, throat or necke of a bulwarke.

Goláno, a yellowish bird, on which if one looke that hath the yellow Iaundise he is presently cured and the bird dyeth.

Goláre, to long for with an earnest desire or greedy throat.

Golaríno, the dew-lap of an oxe or cow. Also a longing minde.

Golatióne., Vsed for Colatióne.

Goleggiáre, to gluttonize, to gourmandize.

Golétta, a gorget piece of armour. Also a pretty, a fine or litle throat or gorge.

Golfáre, to gulfe, to ingulfe.

Gólfo, a gulfe, a pit, a downefall.

Gólfo di setália, a brizly or shaggie gulf, that is a womans quaint.

Golíno, as Godáno.

Golomástico, a principal glutton, or gutling.

Golosáccio, a notable foule glutton. 

Golosíno, gluttonous, griedy, deuouring.

Golosità, gluttony, gourmandizing.

Golóso, gluttonous, greedy, deuouring.

Golpaccióne, an old crafty fox. Also as Sopiattóne.

Gólpe, as volpe, a Fox, a Cub.

Golpeggiáre, to play the Fox.

Golpóne, as Golpaccióne.

Golpíno, a Cub or yongue Fox. Also a slie, leering, or crafty companion.

Goluppáre, to winde vp, to wrap, to rowle or huddle vp as on a huddle. Also to flatter or stammer or maffle through ouer hasty speaking.

Goluppáto, wrapped, rowled or hudled vp.

Golúppo, a bundle or huddle rowled vp.

Goinbára, a kind of Hulke or Ship.

Gombíne, the leather straps or thonges that tye a flaile or hang vp bellowes.

Gombitáre, to push with ones elbow.

Gómbito, an elbow. Also a Cubite.

Gombitóso, bending as an elbow.

Gómedo, an elbow.

Gomédra, a kinde of bird. Also taken in mockery for a goodly great lady.

Goména, a great anker cable.

Goména gróssa, a breeching cable.

Gomenáre, to cable an anker.

Gomenáro, a Cable-maker, a Roper.

Gomiccioláre, as Gomitoláre.

Gomicciolo, as Gomítolo.

Gomitáre, as Gombitare.

Gomitello, a little elbow. Also part of a horse vnder the shoulders, or ioynt of them.

Gómito, as Gómbito, as Gúbito.

Gomitoláre, as Goluppáre.

Gomítolo, a clue of thrid, as Golúppo.

Gómma, any kind of gumme, humour or weeping of trees hardned together. Also that sicknesse which we call the scurwy.

Gómma arábica, Gum-arabike.

Gómma biánca, White-gumme. Also Quicke-siluer among Alchimists.

Gómma dragánte, Gumme-dragant.

Gommáre, to gumme, to glue, to size.

Gomména, an anker cable.

Gommosità, gummishnesse, gumminesse.

Gommóso, gummy, clammy, gluish.

Gomoreo, a Sodomite, a Gomorrhean.

Gonágra, the gout in the knees.

Góndola, a little boat or whirry vsed no where but a bout and in Venice.

Gondoláre, to saile or goe in a Gondola.

Gondoláro, a Gondola Wright or maker.

Gondoliere, a rower in a Gondola.

Gonfalóne, a chiefe standard.

Gonfaloniere, a chiefe standard bearer. 

Gonfiaménto, any kind of swelling or puffing. Also any little molehill or rising out of the ground. Also taken for swelling pride.

Gonfiagióne, as Gonfiaménto.

Gonfiáre, to swell, to puffe, to bladder, to fill with winde. Also to bagge or get with child. Also to become angry or proud.

Gonfiáre alcúno, to soothe and flatter one, to set one a gogge or with faire words bring him into a fooles Paradise, to make one beleeue any thing, to fill one with hopes or Court-holy-water.

Gonfiatóio, any thing that causeth swelling. Also a squirt to puffe vp and fill a ballone.

Gonfiatura, as Gonfiaménto.

Gonfiétto, as Gonfiatóio.

Gonfiéuole, that may swell.

Gonfiézza, as Gonfiaménto.

Gónfio, puffed, swolue, filled with wind. Also proud or haughtie.

Gonfióne, a man swolne or puffed with pride. Also a Súghero.

Gonfiótto, as Gonfióne, as Súghero.

Gónfo, a bundle or wadd of hay or straw or clouts as milke-maides vse on their heads vnder their buckets.

Góngero, a Conger-fish.

Góngola, a Scalop-fish.

Gongolacchiáre, as Gongoláre.

Gongolaménti, chuckings, heartie laughings and reioycings at the heart.

Gongoláre, to laugh till ones heart be sore or shoulders ake, to shuckle and be full of ioy, or excessiue gladnesse.

Gongolatióne, as Gongolaménti.

Góngolo, some part of a yoke.

Góngro, a Conger-fish.

Gónna, any long gowne, robe, mantle, or frocke.

Gonnella, a little gowne, peticoate, or sauegard, a cassock or gabardine.

Gonnelláre, to put into a gowne, robe, mantle, frock, or gabardine.

Gonnelláro, a robe or gowne-maker.

Gonnellína, as Gonella.

Gonnellúccia, a poore sillie gowne.

Gonorea, a gonorea, a running of the reines, or shedding of seede.

Gónzi, wide sleeues, trunke-sleeues, such sleeues as our Maisters of Artes haue. Also lither, lazie, idle, or loitring fellowes.

Góra, a goare, a goaring. Also a mill trouell. Also a sinke or gutter to conuey water vnder ground.

Góra mórta, a standing poole of water, a dead puddle.

Goráre, to goare. Also to chanell, to gutter.

Górga, a roaring noise of whirle-pooles, or vehement boiling of waters, a gur­



gle, a gulfe. Also as Górgia, or as Górgo.

Gorgáre, to gurgle, to engulph or swallow as doth a whirle-poole. Also to gurgle with vehement boiling as a pot of meate doeth.

Górbia, a tip or tipping at the end of any sticke, staffe, or weapon, be it of what soeuer.

Gorbiáre, to tip any staffe with horne or leade, or any mettall.

Gorgazzúle, the disease called Quinzey.

Gorgheggiáre, to gargarize, to gurgle or ratle in the throate. Also to wartle or quauer singing. Also to speake in the throate.

Gorghiera, as Gorgiera.

Gorghétta, the purling spring of water.

Gorghieríno, as Gorgieríno.

Górgia, a gorge, a throate, a gullet or weazon-pipe, the panell of a hawke.

Gorgiaríno, as Gorgieríno.

Gorgiera, a gorget, or any thing worne about the throate or necke, as a neckkercher, a partlet, a raile. Also a coller of harnesse.

Gorgieríno, any kind of gorget.

Gorgiétta, a little gorge, or gorget.

Gorgiólo, an Eawer, or a Spout-pot.

Górgo, a gurgle, a streame or swallow of waters, a gulfe, a whirle-poole. Also a gullet, a spout or gutter to conueigh water.

Gorgogliáre, to gurgle as water doth in running. Also to bubble in the water. Also to gargle or ratle in the throate. Also to breede or become full of little vermine, wormelets, or such creepers as breede in drie pulse.

Gorgogliestro, the weede bell-rags, belders, or water-parsley. Some take it for water-cresses.

Gorgoglíccia, the wood Licorice.

Gorgóglio, a gurgling, a bubble in the water. Also a blinde beetle. Also a kind of wormelet or vermin that commonly breedeth in drie pulse.

Gorgoglióne, as Gorgóglio.

Gorgoláre, as Gorgogliáre.

Gorgólio, as Gorgóglio.

Gorgolestro, as Gorgogliestro.

Gorgolíta, the Licorice.

Gorgónia, a kind of stone or corall.

Gorgónio tropheo, a trophee of Perseus victorie ouer Medusa, with her head in Mineruaes shield.

Gorgorísmo, a gargarisme.

Gorgorizzáre, to gargarize in the throate.

Gorgozzále, a mans throate or weazon-pipe.

Gorgozzáre, as Gorgogliáre.

Gorgozzuólo, as Gorgozzále.

Gorísco, a Mole-bout fish.

Górna, as Dóccia, a water-spout, or running gutter from off houses.

Góro, a kind of wine or colour of it.

Gorzarétto, a gorget.

Gorzaríno, a gorget.

Gossampíno, a tree, whereon growes store of good cotton.

Gossipina, cloth made of Gossipióne.

Gossipióne, cotton growing on Gossampino.

Gósso, as Gózzo.

Gossúto, as Gozzúto.

Góta, a cheeke, a iawe.

Gotáta, a whirrit, or blowe on the cheekes.

Gotholánica, a kind of Ship or Carauell.

Gotózze, plum, round, handsome cheekes.

Gótta, any drop, trilling or trickling. Also the gout.

Gottacciuóla, a little drop or trilling. Also a bunch, kernell, or wartle in a mans mouth. Also the Squinancie in the throate. Also a botch or bile, a blaine or Plague-sore. Also an easie gout, or spice thereof.

Gottanciuóla, as Gottacciuóla.

Gótte, the gouts. Also the weakenesse in the backe of a horse. Also drops.

Gottimbríllo. 

Gótto, any pot or drinking-glasse. Also the name of a starre in heauen.

Gottománo, a digger in mines or mineralls.

Gottonáre, to cotton, to frize, to thrum, or set a nap vpon.

Gottonáto, cottoned, thrummed, napped.

Gottonáto, cotton, frizado, peniestone, bayes, or buffine-sarge.

Gottóne, cotton, frize, frizado.

Gottóso, goutie, troubled with the gout.

Gottúccia, a little drop or trilling. Also a creeping nusled gout.

Gouernále, a gouernour, a keeper. Also the helme or rudder of a Ship.

Gouernaménto, a gouernment.

Gouernánza, a gouernment.

Gouernáre, to gouerne, to rule, to sway. Also to keepe or looke vnto. Also to moderate, to manage, or vse at his pleasure.

Gouernatióne, a gouerning.

Gouernatóre, a gouernour, a ruler.

Gouernatríce, a gouernesse.

Gouernéuole, that may be gouerned.

Gouerno, gouernment, rule, sway. Also moderation, administration or care, and looking vnto.

Gousanghína, a Goudgeon-fish.

Gozzáia, the dewe-lap of an Oxe. Vsed also for vnkindnesse or spleene betweene men, as when they bee not friends, and grudge one at another. 

Gozzáre, to be merrie and make good cheere. Also to prattle as one merrie in cups.

Gozzariglia, all manner of good or bellie-cheere together. Also pleasure and iollitie in good companie, namely, making good cheere.

Gozzauigliáre, to make good cheere, and to be merrie together.

Gozziuaiáre, to mish-mash as a galliemafrie or hodge-pot.

Gozziuáio, a mish-mash, a hodge-pot. Non paréva ne gríllo, ne gozziváio.

Gózzo, a bunch in the throate called the throate-bole. Also the mawe.

Gozzouíglia, as Gozzauíglia.

Gozzouiglióne, a merrie companion, that loues to make good cheere.

Gozzúto, that hath a Gózzo.

Graboróna, a common tipling-house.

Graboronáre, to haunt tipling-houses.

Grácchia, a Chough, a Iack-dawe. Also a Chough-fish.

Gracchiáre, to chat as a dawe. Also to prattle, to babble, to tattle, to scold.

Gracchiatóre, as Gracchióne.

Gracchióne, a chatter, a pratler, a babler, a tatler. Also a railer, a scold.

Gracchiuóla, a common scold or pratler.

Gracchiuoláre, to prattle and scold.

Gráccula, as Grácchia.

Gracculáre, as Gracchiáre.

Gracidáre, to croake as a Toade or Frog. Also to squeake or hisse as a Goose.

Graciláre, to make or become leane, thin, small, slender, or sterill, and barren.

Gracíle, leane, slender, thin, small, prettie. Also sterill and barren.

Gracilente, as Gracilénte.

Gracilláre, to cackle as a broode hen.

Gracilità, leanenesse, or slendernesse.

Gracíllo, the Cornish Chough. Also a kind of fish called also Monédula.

Gracillóso, full of cackling, or chatting.

Gracitáre, as Gracidáre.

Graciúghe, a kind of pincers or mullets that Goldsmiths vse.

Gráda, a grate, a grater, a gridiron. Also a letice-window. Also a net.

Gradáre, to giue a degree vnto.

Gradataménte, by degrees, gradatim.

Gradatióne, a gradation, a degree.

Gradeggiáre, as Gradáre.

Gradella, as Gráda.

Gradéuole, acceptable, gratefull.

Grádi, degrees, steps, greeses. Also staires, waies, or meanes.

Gradíce, a hurdle, as Gratíccio.

Gradíle, a step or greese to ascend by.

Gradíre, dísco, díto, to be pleased with, to accept in good woorth, to esteeme or acknowledge thankefully & grate­



fully, to agrade.

Graditaménte, gratefully, acceptably.

Gradíto, accepted in good woorth, dearely accoumpted, agraded, thankefully taken.

Gradíuo, that goeth faire and softly by degrees.

Grádo, a degree to ascend by, a step, a greese or step of any staires or ladder, a meane, an entrie or way to any thing. Also a pace or step that is two foote and a halfe. Also a dignitie, a condition, a state, a calling or office. Also a will, a desire, an intent, a minde, size, or proportion. Also a thankefull acknowledgement. Also deare or acceptable vnto. Also gratitude or remuneration.

Gradóra, as Grádi, steps, degrees.

Gradualménte, gradually, by degrees.

Graduáre, to graduate, or take or giue degrees, as in Schooles.

Graduáto, one that is a graduate, or hath taken degrees in Schooles.

Graduatióne, a gradation, a degree.

Gráffi, scratches, scrapings. Also hookes, crookes or harping irons, graffs, taches, flesh-hookes.

Graffiaménto, as Graffiatúra.

Graffiáre, to scratch, to hooke, to scrape.

Graffiatúra, a scratch, a scratching.

Grafficáne, the name of a diuell vsed by Dante, as much to say opression, a claw-dog.

Gráffia sánti, a dissembling puritane, a claw-saint, a Saint-seeming woman.

Graffiere, a registrer, a remembrancer, a writer, or clarke of records.

Graffignáno, a scraper, a lurcher, a snatcher of goods, a pincher, a pinchpenie.

Graffignáre, to gripe, to scratch.

Graffígne, gripes, clawes, pounces.

Graffigno, a scratch. Also as Gráffi.

Gráffio, as Gráffi.

Graffióne, a great scratcher or scraper. Also a great dragging or flesh-hooke.

Graffióse máni, scratching, clawing, or hooking hands.

Graffiuólo, the name of a ioyners toole.

Gragniuóla, small haile, drizling raine. Also small haile-shot.

Gragniuoláre, to haile, to drizle.

Gráio, a Gray, a Brocke, a Badger.

Grállo, a Witwall, a Wood-pecker.

Gramáglia, a long robe of state. Also any long mourning garment.

Gramagliáre, to clad in mourning attire.

Gramáia, as Gramáglia.

Gramáre, to make or become sad, wailefull, or wretched. Also to wish or couet.

Gramátia, a kind of Iasper-stone, with white lines in it.

Gramático, vsed for coy, squemish, selfwise, or self-conceited.

Gramatísta, a professor of Grammar.

Gramégna, as Gramígna.

Gramenáre, to hassell or breake flaxe or hemp. Also to kneade dough.

Gramercè, as Grammercè.

Gramézza, wretchednesse, poore plight. Also a wretched longing of what can not be had, a dumpish melancholy, or louring sadnesse.

Grámso, as Gránfo.

Grámie, the droppings of sore eies or of any fleagme.

Gramigna, Dent de chien, Dog-grasse, Quoich or Quich-grasse. Also any kind of grasse or Stitch-grasse.

Gramignóso, full of grasse.

Graminea téla, calico cloth.

Gramineo, made or being of grasse.

Grámma, as Grómma.

Grammaménte, greatly.

Grammátia, as Gramátia.

Grammática, Grammer, that is, the arte of Grammar or to teach to speake well, or to write correctedly.

Grammaticále, according to Grammar rules, Grammaticall.

Grammático, a Grammarian, one that teacheth to speake and write truely well.

Grammaticúccio, a silly Grammarian.

Grammatísta, as Grammatico.

Grammercè, great thankes, godamercy, gramercy, I thanke you.

Grámo, sad, woefull, wretched, in poore plight. Also couetous or griedy.

Grámola, a bing that receiues the meale being ground. Also a kneading-tub. Also a hassell to breake flax with. Also a cheeke or a iaw.

Gramoláre, as Gramenáre.

Gramoláto, ranged bread.

Gramolázzo, a kinde of wilde great beast.

Gramóne, as Grámola.

Gramóso, as Grámo.

Grampella, a kind of Sea-crab.

Gramúffa, in derision vsed for Grammática. Also a stareing puffing looke.

Grán, as Gránde. Vsed commonly before consonants. Also as Gráno.

Grána, graine to die scarlet.

Granáglia, the graine of stone, wood, cloath, leather or silke.

Granáio, a garner, a barne, a maund.

Granalétti, as Granatelli.

Granáre, to graine or kerne as corne.

Granáro, as Granáio.

Granáta, a Pome-granate. Also a Granate-stone. Also a broome or beesome.

Granatáre, to sweepe. Also to brush. 

Granáte, a kind of fire-workes called of vs Garnets, because they seeme like flying broomes.

Granatella, a little broome, a brush.

Granatelli, little graine, little beades as of corall, little cornes as of Pepper.

Granatíno, a little broome or brush.

Granáto, a Pome-granat-tree. Also grained or kerned as corne.

Granáto fíno, the finest colour in graine.

Grancelli, creuises, praunes, shrimps.

Granceóli, as Grancelli.

Grancétti, as Grancelli. Also roagueing beggers that liue by cozenage, and hooking and stealing cloathes out of houses and off from hedges.

Granchiáre, to gripe, to clinch.

Granchiáto, forked or clawed like a creuise.

Gránchio, a crab, a creuise. Also a crampe or shrinking of the sinnewes in man or horse. Also as Gráffi. Also a crooked hooke or iron that Gunners vse. Also a kinde of waspe or hornet with hornes. Also as Sgrámfo. Pigliár ungránchio, as we say to fish faire and catch a frog, or as we say to misse the cushion. Vsed also for a silly gull or simple foole.

Granchiolíni, shrimpes or praunes.

Granchipóro, a Sea-crab. Also a kinde of shrub.

Gráncia, as Grángia.

Granciáto, as Granchiáto.

Gráncio, as Gránchio.

Gránde, great, big, huge or large both in quality & quantity, but hauing relation to a man, great in age, of condition, of quality and state, or a man that is mighty in power, or a principall man in authority and riches.

Grandeggiáre, to swagger or play the great man.

Grandézza, greatnesse, bignesse, whether it be in quality or quantity, of body or of minde.

Gránd' hóra, a great or late hower.

Grandicello, somewhat great or big.

Grandígia, as Grandézza, but properly, haughtinesse, pride or vain-glorie.

Grandigiáre, to play the prouder haughtie-minded man, to be vaine-glorious.

Grandimássimo, great and chiefe.

Grandináre, to haile. Also to bespeckle with little spots.

Grandináta, a storme of haile.

Grandináto, hailed. Also bespeckled with little spots as it were haile.

Grandinella, little small haile.

Grándine, all manner of haile.

Grandinóso, full of haile, stormy.

Grandiloquenza, high or lofty speakeing. 



Grandilóqui, such as speake with a high and lofty stile.

Grandíre, dísco, díto, to make or become great.

Grandíto, made or become great.

Grándo, great haile.

Grandóne, very great, huge and big. Also a lubber or a loggarhead.

Grandótta, somewhat great handsome and great.

Grandúra, as Grandézza.

Granelláre, to graine, to kernell.

Granelli, all manner of graines, cornes, or kernels. Also certaine graines that Apothecaries sell. Also the testicles of any creature.

Granello, scarlet-graine, cuchinilla.

Granellósa, Sengreene, Housleeke or Pricke-madame.

Granellóso, full of graines or kernels.

Granfáre, to cramp. Also to clinch.

Granfátto, hardly, with much adoe.

Grán fátto, a great matter.

Gránfo, as Gránchio.

Gráncia, a grange, a country farme.

Grángio, as Gránchio.

Gráni, all manner of graines.

Granífero, corne, bearing or bringing.

Graníre, nísco, níto, to sift or searce. Also to reduce into graines or cornes.

Graníta póluere, Corne-powder. Also sifted or searced.

Granitáre, as Graníre.

Granitóre, a searce, a sieue.

Graníto, a kind of speckled stone.

Granmercè, godamercy, thankes.

Gránne, hath beene vsed for Gránde.

Gráno, any kind of graine or corne. Also a graine waight. Also a coine in Naples.

Gráno d'órzo, a barly corne waight or measure.

Grán pezzo, a great while.

Grán pórta, as véna pórta. Also any great gate or dore.

Grán romóre et póca lána, great noise and little wooll, or as we say much a doe about nothing.

Grán signóre, a great lord, but properly ment by the Great Turke.

Grántempo fà, it is a great while.

Gráphie, a kind of engine of war. Also delineations of any worke.

Gráppa, a draging or grapling hooke, a clinch, a gripe, a scambling, a snatching. Also a playing at musse, a snatch.

Grappáre, to grapple, to dragle, to snatch, to clinch, to gripe or seaze on as a hawke on hir pray. Also to scamble for.

Gráppe, a scabbe in a horse called the paines.

Grappella, that little iron burre at the point and end of a Launce or staffe to runne at tilt withal.

Grappello, a grapling hooke. Also a little bunch or cluster of grapes.

Gráppi diferro, iron-caltrops.

Gráppo, as Gráppa. Also a bunch or cluster of Grapes. Also a Caltrop.

Gráppola, a bunch or cluster of Grapes. Also a handfull or griping.

Grappoláre, to gleane vineyards of bunches of Grapes. Also to cluster.

Grappoláta, a gleaning of bunches of grapes. Also a clustering.

Grappoleggiáre, as Grappoláre.

Grappolísta, a gleaner of grapes.

Gráppolo, any cluster of grapes.

Grappolóso, as Grappóso.

Grappóso, full of clusters or bunches.

Gráscia, all manner of flesh meat. Also any fat or grease. Also all manner of whit-meates as cheese and butter and oyle. Also any kind of good fare and great cheere. Also plenty and aboundance of all manner of victuals. Also pastime, a merry life, or ease and good fellowship as the effect of good cheere.

Grasciáre, to fatten, to grease, to annoint. Also to fare well and wallow in good cheere.

Grasciere, a Purueyer, or ouerseer of all sortes of victuals.

Grasciúme, as Gráscia.

Graselle., looke Bótta.

Graspáre, to graspe or to grapple.

Graspea, as Gráspia.

Gráspia, household wine, the smallest and last wine that is pressed.

Gráspie, the grapes when the wine is pressed out of them.

Gráspo, any bunch or cluster.

Gráspod'úua, a bunch of grapes.

Graspoláre, to cluster.

Gráspolo, any bunch or cluster.

Graspolóso, clustry, full of clusters.

Graspóso, as Graspolóso.

Graspugliáre, to scrape as doth a hen.

Graspuglione, a scraping pinch penny.

Grássa, as Gráscia.

Grassaménte, fatly. Also faring well.

Grassáre, as Grasciáre.

Grassarello, plum and pretily fat.

Grassella, insence, frankinsence.

Grasseróne, a kind of hearbe.

Grassettíno, as Grassarello.

Grassétto, somewhat fat or greasie.

Grassézza, fatnesse, greasinesse. Also vsed for plenty, wealth and ease.

Grassína, all manner of fat meate.

Grásso, fat, oylie. Also rich or fertile, wealthy and at ease.

Grásso, any kind of fat, fatnesse, grease, tallow, sewet, oyle or butter.

Grásso del gráno, the fat or flower of wheat.

Grásso del'ólio, the fat or flower of oyle. 

Grásso del uíno, the flower or mother of wine.

Grássola, part of a horses shoulder.

Grassolíno, pretty and fat.

Grassóne, very fat or greasie.

Grassótto, plum-round, faire and fat.

Grassúme, as Grasciúme.

Grásta, a flower-pot, a lillie-pot, a pot to set geelie-flowers in.

Gráta, a grate, a grater, a gridiron. Also a lettice window. Also a hurdle.

Grataménte, gratefully, thankefully.

Gratáre, to grate.

Gráte, grates of iron, gridirons.

Gratella, a litle grate or gridiron.

Gratelláre, to grate, to broile on a gridiron.

Grátia, grace, comelinesse feature, ornament. Also a grace, a pardon, a fauour.

Gratiábile, gracefull, to be graced, that may be graced.

Grátia dei, blew Crow-foote or Cranesbill.

Gratiaménti, gracings. Also thanks.

Gratiáno, a foole or selfe-conceited fellow in a play or comedie.

Gratiáre, to grace, to decore, to adorne. Also to giue thanks vnto. Also to fauour, to pardon, to priuiledge.

Gratiáto, graced, adorned. Also fauoured, pardoned, countenanced, priuiledged. Also as Gratióso.

Graticciáre, to set with iron grates. Also to broile vpon a gridiron. Also to hurdle or make as hurdles. Also to grate as spice or bread. Also to make or set with lettice windowes.

Gratíccij, small iron grates. Also hurdles of rods.

Graticcióne, a great grate or hurdle.

Gratícola, as Gratícula.

Graticoláre, as Graticciáre.

Graticoláto, a grate of iron before a dore or window, or a gutter. Also a hurdle. Also that is grated. Also broiled vpon a gridiron. Also grated as bread or spice. Also made as a lettice window.

Gratícula, a grate, a grater, a gridiron. Also a lettice window. Also a hurdle. Also a kind of torture to make malefactors to confesse.

Graticuláre, as Graticciáre.

Grátie, the three graces, Agália, Thália, Euphrosína. Also thanks.

Gratificáre, to gratifie.

Gratificatióne, gratification.

Gratífico, gratifying.

Gratificóso, gratifying, gratefull.

Gratigliáre, to tickle and be morry withall Also as Graticciáre.

Gratiglióso, ticklish and merry.

Gratiósa, the Rud, the Mariegold or Sunne-flower.

Gratiosità, graciousnesse, gracefulnesse.

Gratióso, gracious, gracefull. Also come­



ly, fine, wellsauoured, gentle.

Grátis, gratis, for god a mercie.

Gratitúdine, gratitude, thankefulnesse.

Gráto, acceptable, gratefull, thankefull or deare in esteeme. Also kind and curteous.

Grátta cáscio, a cheese-grater.

Grátta cúlo, a hip of a rose.

Grattaiuóla, a grater to grate spices.

Grattalíce, a grating, a scraping.

Grattaménto, a scratching, a clawing.

Grátta páne, a bread-grater.

Grátta púgia, a wire-brush.

Grattáre, to scratch, to scrape.

Grátta specie, a spice-grater.

Grattatíccio, giuen to scratching.

Grattatóre, a scratcher, a scraper.

Grattatúra, as Grattaménto, a scratch.

Grattera, a grater. Also a mouse-trap.

Grattíccia, as Gratúggia. Also a hurdle.

Gratúccia, as Gratúggia.

Gratucciáre, as Gratuggiáre.

Grattuggína, a grating trull, one that will soake a man dry.

Gratúggia, any kind of grate or grater. Also a shauing iron that Tanners vse. Also an itching or manginesse. Also vsed for a womans quaint.

Gratuggiáre, to grate. Also to shaue or scrape as Tanners doe leather. Also to itch and scratch withall.

Gratuggióso, itchie, mangie.

Gratuíre, ísco, íto, to gratifie.

Gratuità, gratuitie, thankefulnesse.

Gratuíto, gratified, thanked.

Gratulánza, as Gratulatióne.

Gratuláre, to gratulate, to salute and welcome.

Gratulatióne, gratulation, wellcomming.

Gratulatórialettera, a letter of congratulation.

Gráua, a breach in the earth, a deepe, a dungeon, a hollow trench.

Grauacciuólo, lumpish or heauie.

Grauaccióne, a heauie, lumpish, leaden-wit.

Grauágni, a kind of bird in cold countries supposed to breed of shrubs or sprigs of trees.

Grauáme, as Grauaménto.

Grauaménto, a grieuance, an aggrauating, a burthening, a trouble, an oppression, wrong, iniurie, heauinesse, griefe, labour, difficultie.

Grauáre, to grieue, to aggrauate, to burthen, to charge, to molest, to oppresse.

Grauáto, grieued, aggrauated, burthened, molested, oppressed, troubled.

Grauatóre, a grieuer, an aggrauator, a burthener, an oppressor, a troubler.

Gráue, heauy, grieuous, burthenous, troubleous, dolorous, noysome.

Gráue, graue, solemne, important.

Grauella, grauell or sand. Also the grauell in the kidneis or bladder.

Grauelláre, to grauell or to sand.

Grauellóso, grauellous, sandie, grettie.

Grauenza, as Grauézza.

Grauézza, as Grauaménto. Also any grieuous subsidie, imposition or tallage.

Grauézza di petto, griefe in the breast.

Grauiáre, as Grauáre.

Grauiceinbalo, an instrument of Musicke like our Claricoes.

Gráuida, Gráuido, great, big, with child.

Grauidánza, a being great, with child.

Grauidáre, to beget with child.

Grauidézza, as Grauidánza.

Gráuio, as Grauaménto.

Grauità, grauitie, grauenesse. Also esteeme, authoritie or reputation.

Grauitonánte, heauie thundring.

Grauláno, Gráulo, as Goláno.

Grauóre, as Grauaménto.

Grauóso, grieuous, heauie, lumpish, irkesome, tedious, and hard to be borne.

Grebáni, old ruinous rubbish, rammels, or stones of houses.

Grebare, to rammell or become rubbish.

Grebbéno, a crag, a rocke or broken cliffe.

Grecánica, a certaine frame to grind corne.

Grecánico, the colour of copper mixt with leade or tinne.

Grecheggiáre, to play the Grecian. Also to saile a North-east course.

Grechésco, greekish.

Greco, a Grecian, a Greeke Also Greeke wine. Also the North-east winde.

Greco leuánte, a North-east winde.

Greco tramontána, Fast and by North.

Gregále, vulgar, common, of or belonging to a common flocke.

Grecóstasi, a place in Athens where others Ambassadors rested themselues.

Grecula, a kind of vine or grapes Also a kind of Rose. Also a kind of Apple.

Gregária, as Gregále.

Gregge, a flocke of any thing, as of sheepe, goates, swine and horses. Vsed also for a troupe or multitude of men or women.

Greggia, all manner of flockes.

Greggiáre, to flocke together.

Greggiaría, as Grezzaría.

Greggiáro, a keeper of flockes.

Greggio, as Grezzo.

Greggióso, rich in flockes of sheepe.

Gregnácola, as Grignáppola.

Grégne, sheafes of corne, handfuls of flowers, wads of straw, bottles of hay.

Grembiále, any kinde of apron or lap-piece. Also a halfe kirtle.

Grembiúle, as Grembiále.

Grembo, a lap or bosome.

Gremiále, as Gremiólo, as Grembiále.

Gremígna, as Gremitóre.

Gremignáre, as Gremíre.

Gremire, mísco, míto, to tug, to plucke, to gripe or teare as doth a hawke on her meate. Also to pinch or clinch fast, to snatch with violence.

Gremitóre, a tugger, a griper, a snatcher, a plucker, a clincher, a slie filcher.

Gremmiále, as Grembiále.

Gremmo, as Grembo.

Grémola, bran or course meale, grit.

Gremolóso, brannie, gritty.

Greppia, a stall, a manger, or racke for cattle.

Greppo, a crag, a broken clife, a rugged rocke, a hillock. Also a turfe or rugged clod of stone or earth. Also a hogs trouell of one piece.

Greppola, dregs, drosse, leese of any thing.

Greppoláre, to make or become rugged, rockie, cliffie, craggie or hilly. Also to grow to drosse, to dregs or leese as wine doth.

Greppolóso, rockie, craggie, rugged, cliffie. Also drossie or full of dregs.

Greppóso, rockie, craggie, rugged.

Grespia, raspise-wine.

Greto, a fennie, muddie or moorish place full of reedes or canes. Also vsed for a slie grating fellow or cheating companion.

Gretole, the partitions betweene osiers in fish-weires.

Gretolóso, moorish, fennie, muddie.

Gretta, leane, meagre, gant, spinie, lanke. Also bare and straight.

Grettitúdine, lankenesse, leanenesse, spininesse. Also nicitie, finicalitie.

Gretto, flat, squeased, crushed, squatted, shotten, as a shotten Hering.

Grettole, narrow cliffes, crags or rockes. Also chinkes or creuises.

Gréue, heauie, waightie, ponderous.

Grezza, of a duskie hempen colour.

Grezzaría, grittinesse, ruggednesse. Also rawnesse or vnskilfulnesse.

Grezzo, grittie, rugged. Also raw, vnskilfull, not yet taught.

Gricciáre, to lust, to desire or long for suddainly. Also as Griccioláre.

Gríccio, as Grícciolo.

Griccioláre, to chill, as in the fit of a cold Ague, to shiuer for cold. Also to be or become toyish, humorous, fantasticall, or fond-conceited.

Grícciolo, a chilnesse or shiuering in Agues. Also a longing lust or desire. Also a fantasticall humor, or suddaine motion or toy in the bead.

Gricciolóso, chillie or shiuering through cold. Also humorous, toyish, fantasticall, wauering, skittish. Also lustfull, and longing for toyes.

Griccióne, a kind of water-foule. 



Griccióso, as Gricciolóso.

Grída, a cry, an out-cry, a crying. Also a calling, a proclamation. Also a chiding, a brauling, a contention, a clamor.

Gridáre, to cry, to whine, to call out. Also to publish or proclaime. Also to chide, to braule, or contend.

Gridáre all'árme, to cry out allarum.

Gridatóre, a cryer. Also a proclaimer.

Grído, as Grída. Also fame, or report.

Gridóre, a crying, a noise, a clamor.

Grieue, heauie, waightie, ponderous.

Grifágno, any rauenous bird, or that hath gripes and clawes. Also a haggard hawke. Also hooked. Náso grifágno, a hawkes nose.

Grifálco, as Girifálco.

Grifáno, as Grifágno.

Grifáre, to gripe or seaze on as a hawke doth, to clinch. Also to feede as a hog.

Griffáre, as Grifáre.

Grífo, Gríffo, a gripe, a claw or pounce of any rauenous bird. Also a hogges snout. Also a hawkes bill or beake. Also a kind of shepheards garment. Also a scornful blurting of the mouth.

Grifóne, Griffóne, a Griffon, who is hairie, hath foure feete, and a beake like an Eagle.

Grigiello, any home-spun, or sheepes-russet cloth. Also welch freeze.

Grigiétto, as Grigiello.

Grígio, a gray, or sheepes-russet colour. Also as Grigiello. Also a kind of shepheards weede, frocke, or garment.

Grigióne, a course, gray, dunne, homespunne cloth. Also a Grison, or man borne in the countrie of Grisones. Also as Frusóne.

Grignáppola, a night-bat or rearemouse. Also a man or womans geare, quaint, or priuities.

Grignáre, to grin or snarle as a dog.

Grígno, a grinning, a snarling.

Grilláia, a cricketing. Also a crickethole, a place where crickets frequent. Also vsed for a filthie puddle or poole of rotten waters. Vsed also for a merie companie, or crue of merie lads.

Grillánda, any kind of garland, or encircling about.

Grillandáre, to engarland, or encircle about.

Grillánte, cricketing. Also blithe, iollie, or skipping for ioy.

Grilláre, to creake as a cricket. Also to leape or skip for ioy.

Grílli, crickets. Also toyes, crickets, or bees-neasts in ones head.

Gríllo, a cricket. Also a kind of little creuis or praune. Also a kind of warlike engine to batter walles. Also a fond humor, or fantasticall conceit.

Grillóso, toyish, full of crickets. 

Gríma, a beggers scrip, bag, or satchell. Also a mam, a dame, or mother. Also withered, wrimpled. Also sillie, wretched, and in poore plight.

Grimaldelláre, to pick locks.

Grimaldelláio, a cunning pick-locke.

Grimaldelli, pick-lock irons or tooles. Also a kind of darting weapon.

Grimaldelliére, a pick-locke.

Grimaldelleríe, pick-lock-tricks. Also filching, or cunnie-catching tricks.

Grimáre, to wither, to wrimple.

Grímma, as Gríma.

Grímo, as Gríma. Also a dad, or sir.

Gríncia, withered, wrimpled. Also a wrimple, a crowes-foote in ones face.

Grinciáre, to wither, to wrimple.

Gríncio, withered, wrimpled. Also a Gournet, a Rotchet, or red fish.

Grincióso, withered, full of wrimples.

Grínfa, any beasts clawe, clinch, or pipe.

Grinfáre, to clinch, to gripe.

Grínza, as Gríncia.

Grinzáre, as Grinciáre.

Grínzo, as Gríncio.

Grinzóso, as Grincióso.

Grípho, as Gríso.

Grípia, as Gríppia.

Gríppia, a boxe or leather case wherein a mason puts his cizels and other small tooles. Also a wisp or wad of straw. Also a botle of hay.

Gríppo, a little skiffe, or cock-boate.

Gríppola, the dregs of wine sticking to the vessell.

Grippóne, a good big skiffe, or cockboate.

Grisáre, to make or become grizlie, or gray, or hoarie.

Griscella, a Loach-fish.

Grisétto, as Grigiello.

Gríso, as Grígio.

Grisomele, an Apricoke.

Grisóne, as Grigióne.

Grisopázzo, a greene stone, with veines of gold in it.

Grisuólo. 

Grítta, a kind of Sea-crab.

Grízzolo, as Grícciolo, &c.

Gróbio, a precious stone like Corall.

Grócchi, as Gnócchi

Grofoláre, to grub or roote vp as hogs do. Also to filch, to pilfer, to purloine, to shift for, to scrape or hoord together be it by hooke or crooke.

Grógna, stubble of corne. Also thatch.

Grognáno, grograine, or mokado.

Gróla, a Chough, a Daw, a Rooke.

Grólla, as Gróla.

Gróma, as Grómma.

Gromáre, as Grommáre.

Gromíre, as Gremíre.

Gromóso, as Grommóso.

Grómma, the scurfe or durt sticking to any thing, the crust or lees that wine leaues sticking to the vessell, the dregs or mother of any liquid thing, the viscositie of any fish. Also lome or morter laid on walles. Also mossinesse. Also gum or glue. Also vsed for scabbednesse, or scuruinesse.

Grommáre, to make or become crustie, scuruie, drossie, dreggie, viscous, mossie, gummie, gluish, rugged, or scabbed. Looke Grómma.

Gronimóso, full of Grómma.

Gromphéna, a bird in Sardinia like to a Crane. Also a kind of hearbe.

Grónda, a top or height. Also the ridge of the haires about the eye-lids. Also the eaues of a house. Also a gutter vpon the roofe of a house.

Grondálla, as Grondára.

Grondára, the top of any thing, the ridge or vppermost part of a roofe or house. Also a penthouse. Also a gutter betweene two houses. Also a pipe or gutter of leade to conueigh raine-water from tops of houses.

Grondáre, to drop as water from gutters. Also to shoure violently.

Gróngár-gánphéstro-phialóne, the name of a terrible Giant.

Gróngo, a Cunger-fish.

Grophéna, as Gromphéna.

Gróppa, the crupper of a horse. Also a rump. Vsed also for Fóccia.

Groppaménti, all manner of knottings.

Groppáre, to knot, or tie in knots.

Groppeggiáre, is when a horse doth knit himselfe together, carying himselfe vpon his hinder parts, and drawing them vp as though he would yarke. Vsed also to loue the rump, or to feede vpon rumps.

Gróppi, knots, nods, knobs, bunches.

Groppiéra, the crupper of a horse.

Groppizzáre, as Groppeggiáre.

Gróppo, a knot, a node, a bunch, a knob.

Gróppo di vénto, a stiffe gust of winde. Also a whirle-winde.

Groppolóne, cowring together close and lowe vpon ones taile.

Groppóne, the crupper of a horse. Also the rump of any fowle.

Gropponeggiáre, to pick for good morsels, to feede on rumps.

Groppolóso, as Groppóso.

Groppóso, knottie, nodie, full of knots.

Gróssa, grosse, big, fat. Also with child and big with all. Also course and lumpish. Also the chiefe, or maister-cable in a Ship, an anker-cable. Also a measure, answering our gallon, or foure quarts.

Grossággine, grossenesse, coursenesse. Also clownishnesse, or grosse foolishnesse.

Gróssa d'un fiúme, the swelling of a riuer, or ouer-flowing of it. 



Grossaménte, grossely, coursely, rudely, clownishly, lubbardly.

Gróssa pásta, course paste. Also taken for a grosse-headed gull, a rough fellowe.

Grossáre, to make big, grosse or course. Also to get or bag with yong ones.

Grossería, as Grossággine.

Grossétta, somewhat big, or grosse.

Grossettína, as Grossétta.

Grossézza, grossenesse, bignesse, greatnesse, quantitie, massinesse, coursenesse.

Grossissimaménte, most grossely.

Grósso, grosse, big, great. Also a coine called a grote. Also course.

Grósso bestiáme, course big cattell, all manner of great cattell.

Grósso del'hóste, the maine strength or pith of an armie or battell.

Grósso di pásta, grosse-pated, shallow-witted, lubbardly.

Grossográno, the stuff called grogarain.

Grossolággine, as Grossolanería.

Grossolanería, grossenesse, coursenesse. Also clownishnesse, or bungerlinesse.

Grossolanissimam énte, most clownishly.

Grossoláno, grossely, coursely. Also a logger-head, a lubber, a lumpish fellow.

Grossolóne, as Grossoláno.

Grósta, hath been vsed for Crósta.

Grótta, a grot, a caue, a den, a cauerne or hole vnder ground. Also a certaine disease in a hawke.

Grottésca, anticke or landskip worke of Painters.

Grottíglia, as Grottésca.

Grótto, as Grótto molináro.

Gróttola, a little grot, caue, or den.

Grottoláre, to enden, to encaue.

Grótto maríno, as Grótto molináro.

Grótto molináro, a bird like a Swan that brayeth like an Asse.

Grottóso, full of grots, cauerns or dens.

Grottóso ósso, a bone in a mans head.

Gróui, a kind of Sea-fish.

Grozzáre,, as Gorgheggiáre.

Grózzo, as Górgo.

Grù, Grúe, a Crane. Also a long fish.

Gruário, a nest or roost of Cranes.

Grúccia, a Hawkes pearch. Also a stake to fasten an Owle vnto when they goe a fowling with them. Also a lame mans crouch or crutchet.

Gruffáre, to snatch ones meate and feed greedily vpon it. Also as Grufoláre.

Gruffignáre, as Gruffáre.

Gruffignóne, as Gruffóne.

Gruffóne, a greedy muncher or feeder.

Grufoláre, as Grofoláre.

Grúga, a bird called a Crane.

Grugnáre, to grunt or grumble as a hog. Also to put ones snout into any thing. 

Grugníre, ísco, íto, as Grugnáre.

Grúgno, the snout or muzzle of a hog. Also the hearbe Cicorie.

Grúgno di pórco, as Grúgno.

Grúgnolo, a litle snout or muzzle.

Grugnolóso, grunting, grumbling.

Grugnóne, a great snout.

Gruíre, ísco, íto, to crankle as a Crane. Also as Grugnáre.

Gruíto, the grunting of a hog. Also the crankling of a Crane.

Grúllo, as Brúllo. Also a foolish gull.

Grúma, the eye of a needle. Also as Grómma.

Grúmma, as Grómma.

Grummóso, as Grommóso.

Grúmo, a cob, a huddle, a lumpe or huddle or masse or heape of any thing.

Grunello, a kind of wild beast.

Gruníre, ísco, íto, as Grugnáre.

Gruníto, as Gruíto.

Grúnnio., looke Corocótta.

Grúno, as Grífo.

Gruógo, Saffron.

Gruppáre, as Groppáre.

Grúppo, as Gróppo.

Grúppia, a racke or manger for cattle.

Grusoláre, to grow to a hard scurfe, or scalde, or crustie scab.

Grúsole, scurfes, hard scabs.

Gruzzáre, as Ruspáre.

Gruzzoláre, as Ruspáre.

Grúzzolo, a scraping fellow.

Gúa, a kind of casting net.

Guaccétto, as Guazzétto.

Guácchi, a kind of water-fowle.

Guáco, as Guaiáco.

Guadábile, foardable, wadable.

Guadagnábile, that may be gained.

Guadagnáre, to gaine, to winne, to profit, to get, to acquire. Also to deserue.

Guadagnatóre, a gainer, a winner.

Guadagnería, any kinde of vnlawfull gaine or getting.

Guadagníno, a fellow giuen all to gaine and thriuing, a good husband.

Guadágno, any kind of gaine, profit, getting, winning or cheuissance.

Guadagnóso, gainefull, profitable.

Guadáre, to wade, to ferrie or foarde ouer any riuer. Also to dye with Woad.

Guádo, a ferrie, a foard, a wading place or passage of any riuer without a bridge. Also the bottome or bed of any water or riuer. Also the stuffe Woad to dye blew with. Also a plash of water, or a wash-poole. Vsed also for the way, course or race of mans life.

Guadóso, a place full of foardes, or that may be waded and ferried ouer. Also ground bearing Woad, or full of Woad.

Guadiáre, as Guadáre.

Guadiere, a ferry-man.

Guagína, a sheath or a scabbard. 

Guagináre, to sheath or put into a scabbard.

Guagináro, a sheath or scabbard-maker.

Guagnástra, a common whore or strumpet in the rogues language.

Guagnelo., Vsed for Vangelo, the Gospell.

Guagnelle, a country mans othe, as we say by the masse or holy Gospell.

Guái, woes, vexations, stowres, lamentations of sorrow. Also griefes or afflictions.

Guaiáre, as Guaíre.

Guái auói, woe be vnto you.

Guaiáco, Guacum, Pockwood or wood of life.

Guaiáua, a kind of fruit in India.

Guaimè, woe is me, alas and welladay.

Guaíme, the second grasse or herbage that growes in August after hay-haruest.

Guaimembro, a fine bird in India that onely feedeth vpon deaw.

Guaína, any sheath or scabbard.

Guaináre, to sheath or scabbard.

Guaináro, a sheath or scabbard-maker.

Guainelle, as Caróbe. Also Capers.

Guaióso, woefull, full of woes and sorrowes.

Guaíre, ísco, íto, to bee or make full of woes and sorrowes. Also to whine, to pule, to yell or cry out pitifully. Also to cry as a Hare. Also to quest about for a pray as a Spaniell doth.

Guála, a kind of bag-net tied vnto two stickes and so cast into the water.

Gualáno, a plough-man, a husbandman.

Gualáre, to waile, to lament, to pule.

Guálca, a fullers or tuckers mill. Also a calender or cloth-presse.

Gualcáre, to tucke or full clothes, to calender or presse linnen clothes.

Gualcatore, a tucker, a fuller, a presseman, or calendrer of clothes.

Gualchiera, as Guálca.

Gualchieráre, as Gualcáre.

Guálda, an outrode against enemies. Also a bootie-haling, a freebooting.

Gualdána, the fury of souldiers when they spoile or pray vpon the enemies. Also the noise and crie that the ging of Gally-slaues makes when they land in any place. Vsed also for a disordered rout of souldiers. E'rano dipinti in gualdána.

Guáldo, Woad to dye blew with.

Gualíf., looke Gríp.

Gualláre, to burst or haue a rupture as when the guts fall into the cods.

Gualloppáre, as Galloppáre.

Guallóppo, as Gallóppo.

Gualloróso, burst, open-bellied.

Gualúppo, a base minded man. Also a 



lackey or horse-boy, a drudge.

Guancétto, a little claspe or kirble hooke about a horses bit.

Guáncia, a mans cheeke.

Guanciále, a pillow to rest the cheeke vpon.

Guancialétto, a little pillow.

Guanciáta, a whirret on the cheeke, a cuffe or box on the eares.

Guanciatóre, a cuffer or striker on the cheekes. Also a iugler, a pilferer.

Guanciétta, a little prety cheeke.

Guanciétto, as Guancétto.

Guangiáre, to knead dough. Also to clap on the cheekes. Also to rub.

Guantáre, to gloue, to gantlet, to mitten.

Guantáro, a Glouer.

Guánti, all maner of gloues. Also a kind of paste-meat fashioned as hands.

Guantiere, a Glouer.

Guánti da présa, a kinde of gantlet to clinch and hould fast with.

Guánto, a gloue, a gantlet, a mitten.

Guantone, a great gloue or gantlet.

Guarállo, a kinde of noysome beast in Africa.

Guárda bráccio, a vant-brace.

Guárda cása, a good-house-wife one that keepes in.

Guárda cénere, a brazen vessell to couer the ashes when the fire is raked vp.

Guárda cuóre, any kind of stomacher, but properly a fishers or Mariners habite with a flap ouer the belly.

Guárda dónna, a Midwife or woman-keeper when she lies in child-bed.

Guárda festa, a holy day keeper, that is an idle loytring fellow.

Guárda gióie, a master of iewels or of a iewell house. Also a casket to keepe iewels in.

Guárda góte, a cheeke-case, a defence for the cheekes.

Guárda náppa, a cupboord long cloath. Also a presse for napery, a napkin.

Guardaménto, a looking, a viewing, a beholding. Looke Guardáre.

Guárdanáso, a defence or case for ones nose, a nose-armour, a shield-nose.

Guárda pórci, a Swine or Hog-heard.

Guárda róbba, a ward-robe. Also a Buttery, a Lardery, a Pantery or Store-house where any thing is kept. Also a Keeper of goods. Also a Wardrobe keeper, a gentleman or master of the Robes. Vsed also for a retyring place where a close-stoole is kept.

Guárda robbiére, a Wardrobe-keeper, a Master or Gentleman of the robes.

Guárda róbbo, a Wardrob-keeper. Also a sparing niggardly chuffe.

Guardánte, looking, viewing, behoulding. Also gardant in armory. 

Guardáre, to looke, to view, to behould. Also to guard, to keepe, to defend, to shield. Also to breed, to respect, to ouersee. Also to beware, to consider, to regard, to take heed, to looke vnto. Also to discerne or distinguish. Also to procure or indeuour to doe. Also to abstaine from.

Guárdati, take heede. Looke to thy selfe.

Guardatóre, a looker, a behoulder, a viewer. Also a guardian, a warden, a keeper, an ouerseer, a tutour, a protector.

Guardatúra, a looke, an aspect, a countenance, a semblance, a viewing.

Guárdia, a gard, a watch, a keeping, a looking vnto, an ouersight, a heed. Also a tuition, an ouerseeing, a custodie. Also a protection or a defence, a ward. Also the ward of a locke or of a key. Also the hilt of a sword. Also some part of the bit of a horse. Also a Lardery or a Store-house. Also a Ward-robe. Also the gard that infoulds a child in the mothers wombe. Looke La guárdia.

Guardiáno, as Guardatóre.

Guárdie, the plurall of Guárdia.

Guardígno, heedy, vigilent, considerate, respectiue, nearly looking vnto. Also scrupulous, precise or nice.

Guardignóni, stillions that liue abroad with mares.

Guardíngo, as Guardígno.

Guardíuo, as Guardígno.

Guárdo, as Guardatúra.

Guárdoli, the rands of a paire of shooes.

Guarentáre, to warrant or to assure. Also to backe, to defend and shield.

Guarentígia, warrantise, assurance.

Guarentíre, tísco, títo, as Guarentáre.

Guarento, a warrant.

Guarenza, a healing, a recouery, a cure.

Guári, much or mikle, be it of time or things, but namely of time.

Guári di tempo, much time.

Guarigióne, as Guarenza.

Guariménte, hath beene vsed for Guári.

Guárinone, it is not much or long since.

Guaríre, rísco, ríto, to cure, to heale or recouer from some hurt or sicknesse.

Guaríto, cured, healed, recouered.

Guárna, as Guarnáccia.

Guarnácca, as Guarnáccia.

Guarnáccia, a kinde of vpper garment for women. Also a kind of wine like Malmesie, that is (as we say of strong Ale) meate and drinke and cloth.

Guarnalétto, a womans vpper safe-gard or vpper frocke.

Guarnello, the stuffe Bustian or Carell. Also a womans vpper long vaile.

Guarnigióne, any furniture, furnishing or garnishing, any decking or trimming, any lace, garde or fringe for garments or other househould stuffe. Also any habillement of war. Also a Garizon of souldiers.

Guarniménto, as Guarnigióne.

Guarníre, nísco, níto, to garnish, to furnish, to adorne, to trime, to beawtifie, to set foorth. Also to store, to pourueigh or to munite.

Guarníto, garnished, furnished, trimmed. Also stored, munited, prouided with.

Guarrò, Guarrái, Guarrà, I, thou, or he shall cure or heale.

Guárti, looke to thy selfe, take beed.

Guarúgli, a kind of fruit.

Guásca, a kind of dry measure.

Guastáda, a glasse, or bottle-glasse to bring wine in to the table, and thence to powre it in to drinking glasses.

Guastadella, a little violl or bottle glasse.

Guastadétta, as Guastadella.

Guastadóri, pioners, diggers, destroyers or spoilers in a campe.

Guásta-leggende, a Legend-spoiler, one that marres a tale in telling it.

Guastaménto, a wasting, a spoyling, an vndoing, a marring, a defacing, a corruption. Also an execution.

Guastára, as Guastáda.

Guastáre, to waste, to spoile, to mar, to  spill, to vndoe, to deface, to corrupt, to consume. Also to besot or entangle in loue. Also to execute or put to death.

Guastársi, vsed for a man to breake, maime or misplace any ioynt of his body, as also to burst his codes. Also for a woman with child to miscary or haue some mischance.

Guastáto, wasted, spoiled, marred, spilt, vndone, defaced, corrupted. Also besotted in one. Also executed or put to death violently.

Guastáre il mercáto, to mar a bargain, id est, to fall out or square.

Guastatóre, a waster, a spoiler, a marrer, a destroyer. Also as Guastadóri. Also a hangman or executioner.

Guastatóri, as Guastadóri.

Guastatúra, as Guastaménto.

Guásto, as Guastáto, as Guastaménto.

Guatáre, to prie, to peepe, to toote, to watch, to looke narrowly vnto. Vsed Also for Guadáre.

Guatáro, as Guatatóre.

Guatáro di puttáne, a bawde, a pander, an apple-squire, a keeper of whores.

Guatatóre, a prier, a peeper, a tooter, a watcher, a spie. 



Guatatúra, a prying, a tooting, a narrow looke or looking vnto.

Gúati, snares, ambushments, ambuscadoes, watchings or tootings.

Guáto., Vsed for Guádo.

Guátta, a Quab-fish. Also as Baccello.

Guattarello, a little Guáttaro.

Guáttaro, a drudge, droile or scullion in a kitchin.

Guáttero, as Guáttaro.

Guátto, squatted, whoosht, close-lurking.

Guattón guattóni, as Gátto gátto.

Guanliáre, to whine or pule as children.

Guázza, a plash of water, a puddle. Also the morning deaw.

Guazzábile, wadable, foordable.

Guazzabugliáre, to mash or mingle as a hotchpotch.

Guazzabúglio, a mash, a hotchpotch, a mingle mangle, a galiemafrie.

Guázza letto, a word of disgrace for children, as we say a Cack-a bed.

Guazzáre, to dash, to plash or trample and dabble in the water. Also to wade or foorde ouer a riuer. Also to riot or lauish in good cheere.

Guazzaróne, a drudges or scullions canuase frocke, or a womans vpper frocke to saue her clothes when she scoureth or spinneth. Also as Gheróne. Also the top-saile of a ship.

Guazzettáre, as Guazzáre. Also to make good cheere with fine dishes or sauces vp to the knuckles.

Guazzeróne, as Guazzaróne.

Guazzettíno, as Guazzétto.

Guazzétto, any kind of fine sauce for meate. Also a kind of daintie pottage.

Guazzíno, as Guazzétto.

Guázzo, any plash of standing water or washpoole. Also lauishnesse in belly cheere. Also any kind of painting in water or wash colours.

Guazzoláre, to chat, to babble, to prattle, to tittle tatle.

Guazzóso, plashie, fennie, waterish. Also wadable or foordable. Also lauish in good cheere and gluttonie.

Gúcchia, any kind of needle.

Gucchiáre, to thrid a needle.

Gucchiáro, a needle-maker.

Gucchiaruólo, a needle-maker.

Gucchiáta, a needlefull. Also a pricke with a needle. Also a stitch with a needle.

Gúccio, a gull, a sot, a ninnie, a foole.

Gueffa, a Bishops mitre.

Gueffáre, to mitre as a Bishop.

Gueffe, Mílle cappanúcci, è mílle gueffe. 

Guegno, a sillie gull, a ninnie-hammer.

Guendír., Looke Crip.

Guercio, squint-eyde, bleare-eyde.

Guerciétto, some what squint-eyde. 

Guere, as Ghiere.

Gueríre, rísco, ríto, as Guaríre.

Guerminella, as Gherminella.

Guernigióne, as Guarnigióne.

Guerniménto, as Guarniménto.

Guerníre, nísco, níto, as Guarníre.

Guerníto, as Guarníto.

Guerra, warre, or warfare. Also strife, contention, discord, enmitie, &c.

Guerra máschia, ouert, earnest or proclaimed open warre.

Guerreggiánte, warring, warfaring.

Guerreggiáre, to warre, to warfare. Also to striue, to contend, to iarre.

Guerreggiáta guerra, open warre.

Guerreggiatóre, a warriour.

Guerreggiéuole, warrable, warlike. Also proudly threatning.

Guerreggióso, warrious, full of warre.

Guerrésco, warlike, warrious.

Guerrettóne, as Verettóne.

Guerriáre, as Guerreggiáre.

Guerriéra, a shee-warriour.

Guerriére, a warriour.

Guetto, as Ghetto.

Gúffo, an Owle called a Horne cout with feathers on each side of his head like eares. Also a simple foole or grosse-pated gull, a ninnie patch.

Guffóne, as Gúffo.

Gúfo, Gufóne, as Gúffo.

Gugella, a kind of wild beast in India.

Gúglia, any kind of needle. Also a spire of a steeple or any sharpe pointed thing.

Gugliáre, to thrid a needle. Also to spire or make sharpe-pointed.

Gugliáro, a needle-maker.

Gugliáta, as Gucchiáta.

Gúia, as Gúglia.

Guiárdo, an hearbe that sheepe loue to feede vpon.

Guiáre, as Gugliáre.

Guiáta, as Gucchiáta.

Guída, a guide, a leader, a director, a conductor, a conuoy, a chieftaine.

Guidaléschi, the bare and leane ribs of a horse. Also the gallings, the gore blood running from horses sores. Also rogues or vagabonds.

Guidaménto, a guiding, a leading, a conuoy.

Guidardonáre, as Guiderdonáre.

Guidardonatóre, as Guiderdonatóre.

Guidardóne, as Guiderdóne.

Guidáre, to guide, to leade, to conuoy.

Guidaréschi, as Guidaléschi.

Guidatóre, a guider, a leader.

Guidático, a guiding, a conuoy. Also a passe-port, or safe-conduct.

Guidatúra, as Guidaménto.

Guidégi, certaine veines in the throate.

Guiderdonáre, to guerdon, to reward, to recompence.

Guiderdonatóre, a rewarder, a recompencer.

Guideróne, a guerdon, a recompence, a reward, a remuneration.

Guideréschi, as Guidaléschi.

Guído, a dog in the roagues language.

Guidonáccio, a common wandring roague.

Guidóne, a guider or banner or cornet for horse-men that be shot or argolettiers. Also a roague, a vagabond, a crosse-biter or vpright man.

Guidonésco, roaguish.

Guíggia, any string or latchet for shoes. Also a shirt string. Also a whip wherwith Friers discipline themselues.

Guiggiáre, to tie or latchet. Also to whip or scourge.

Guígi, the stuffe called Satin of Briges.

Guíncia, as Grínza.

Guindoláre, to reele, or wind silke.

Guindolatóre, a silke-winder.

Guíndolo, a rice, or reele for silke.

Guinedra, a word of mockerie for the Tartares Queene or Empresse, as we say, Queene Guiniuer.

Guinzáglio, a slip or couple for dogs. Also the rings vpon dogs couples. Also among riders a long raine, called a quinzell.

Guinzáre, to couple vp dogs. Also to wither, or wrimple.

Guinzo, withered, out-worne or wrimpled through age.

Guísa, guise, fashion, maner, custome, vse, vre, forme, similitude, wont.

Guisáre, to guise, to fashion, to enure.

Guístrico, prime-print, or priuetprint.

Guizzáre, to slide, to glide or slip away as an Eele out of ones hand. Also to glide as fishes in the water. Also to brandish or flourish a sword in the aire. Also to lill out ones tongue. Also to wither and fade away.

Guizzáta, as Guízzo.

Guízzo, the motion of any fish in the water. Also a sliding, a gliding, a slipping away, a glibbing. Also a brandishing or flourishing in the aire. Also a lilling out of ones tongue. Also slipperie. Also wrimpled, withered or faded for want of sap or nourishment.

Gulóne, a beast like a Beauer or Badger very greedy and vnsatiable. Also a Sea-gull or Sea-cob. Also a gulling, a gullie gut, a belly-god.

Guluppáre, as Goluppáre.

Gulúppo, as Golúppo.

Gumedra, as Gomedra.

Guména, as Goména.

Gumína, as Goména.

Gúmma, as Gómma.

Gummáre, as Gommáre.

Gummóso, as Gommóso.

Gurgétta, as Gorgiera.

Gurgiaríno, as Gorgiaríno.



Gurgiera, as Gorgiera.

Gurgitáre, to swallow or glut downe as a Whirlepoole doth.

Gurgitatióne, a swallowing or englutting as doth a Whirlepoole.

Gúrgite, a swallow, a gulfe, a deepe pit, a Whirlepoole, a deuouring rage.

Gurgúglio, a mite or weeuell that eateth graine.

Gurgúzzoli, swellings, agnels or kernels in the throat.

Gúrro, a kind of fish, il pésce in Máre cérca di schifáre il gúrro.

Guscella, as Gusella, a pinne.

Guscellína, a little pinne.

Gúscia, as Gúscio, as Scórza.

Gusciare, to shale, to shell, to huske, to pare off the rinde or barke.

Gúscio, a huske, a shale, a cod, a shell namely of egges or nuts.

Gúsci di uento, a gust or berie or gale of winde.

Gúscio in cápo., looke Col gúscio.

Guscioláre, as Gusciáre.

Gúsciolo, as Gúscio.

Gústa-boccóni, a taste-morsels, a saucie fellow.

Gustáre, to taste, to assay.

Gustatóre, a taster, a sewer, an assayer.

Gustéuole, tastesome, pleasing to the taste, sauory, tasting well, that may be tasted.

Gústia, as Gúscio, or Scórza.

Gustiáre, as Gusciáre.

Gústio, as Gústia.

Gústo, the sence of tasting.

Gustóso, tasting well, sauory.

Guttarósa, as Glupea.

Gútture, a throat or weazon pipe.

Gúuo, as Gúffo.

Gúzzo, as Gózzo. Also a little whelp. 


H.
H, Some count it no letter but an aspiration, others haue very seuerely banished the same from their writings, to be short, the best writers haue vsed and vse it, for that it many times giueth pulse vnto the letter ioyned vnto it, and many times it doth cleere doubts and remooue AEquiuocations.

Hà, hee or shee hath. Also an Interiection of chiding, haugh, what?

Hà, sometimes in sence of Sóno, as Hà Sette ánni, seauen yeeres are.

Habbiente, hauing. Also that hath.

Hábbio, Hággio, hò, I haue.

Hábile, able, fit, apt, proper for.

Habilità, ability, fitnesse, power.

Habilitáre, to inable, to make fir or proper or powerfull.

Habitábile, inhabitable, lodgeable.

Habitabilità, a dwellingnesse or dwelling.

Habitácolo, as Habitatióne.

Habitánte, dwelling, inhabitant.

Habitánza, an habitation, a dwelling.

Habitáre, to dwel, to inhabite, to woone.

Habitatióne, an habitation, a dwelling.

Habitatíuo, inhabitable, fit to dwell.

Habitáto, dwelt. Also an dwelling.

Habitatóre, a dweller, an inhabitant.

Habitatúra, an habitation. Also as Hábito.

Habitello, any little weede, habite or garment.

Habitéuole, as Habitábile.

Hábito, an habite, a fashion, a forme, a custome, a qualitie, a disposition of mind or bodie. Also an attire or sute of apparell.

Habituánza, as Hábito.

Habituáre, to habituate, to accustome.

Habituatióne, an habituation, a custome.

Habitúri, dwellings, frequented places.

Habitúdine, habitude, plight, state of bodie.

Hácca, the letter H.

Hácci, for Cihà, hath vs, vs hath, hath to vs. Also there hath.

Haffè, in good faith, truely, by my faith.

Hadrobolóne, a gum that the tree of Bidelio beareth.

Hadropchéro, a kind of broade-leaued Spikenard.

Hagáb, holie, not prophane, not heathnish. Also a kind of deuouring Grashopper.

Hággio, I haue, as Io hò.

Hágio, as Hagáb.

Hái, as Haimè, also thou hast. Also an hearbe, that will blacke ones teeth.

Haimè, aie is me, woe is me, alas, welladay.

Haiáre, for Hauére. Also for Aiutáre.

Háiati dío, God help thee.

Háia tù, haue thou.

Haláre, to breathe, to exhale, to vent, to euaporate, to fume, to smoke.

Halcacábo, as Haliacacábo.

Halatióne, an exhaling, a breathing.

Hálec, a Herring, or a Pilchard.

Halcionei, as Alcionei. Also a foame of the Sea thickned vsed in Phisike.

Halciónidi, as Halcionei.

Haléci, Herrings, or Pilchards.

Haliacabóne, as Haliacacábo.

Haliacacábo, an hearbe called the winter-cherrie, very soporiferous. Some take it for Dogs-grasse. 

Halieto, a very quick-sighted Ospray that liueth on fish.

Halínthio, a kind of cuit or sweet wine.

Halipheleo, a kind of hard Oke-tree.

Halipleumóne, as Pólpo maríno.

Halitáre, to breathe, to pant.

Halitatióne, as Hálito.

Hálito, a breath, a breathing, a panting.

Hálla, he hath her, or it.

Hálle, hath them, or hath to her.

Hálli, hath them, or hath to him.

Hállo, hath him, hath it.

Hallumáre, as Alumáre.

Hallúme, as Alúme.

Halmirrága, a kind of Nitre.

Halmirídia, a kind of small Cole-wort.

Hálo, the plant called Bugle.

Halóni, a circle about the Starres or Moone.

Halophánto, one that for base rewards will be hired to tell a lye.

Hamadríadi, wood-nimphs.

Hamáre, to catch with a fishing-hooke.

Hamássa, the seauen-Starres, called Charles-waine, or Vrsa maior.

Haméth, a kind of medicinable thing.

Hámmelo, for Me lo hà, him or it he hath to me.

Hámmi, for Mi hà, hath me, or to me.

Hammíte, as Hanníte.

Hammónio córno, a most precious and sacred stone called Hammons horne, it is of the colour of gold, and is found in Aethiopia.

Hámo, a fish-hooke. Also Dittander.

Hamóne, as Hammónio córno.

Hamóra, fish-hookes.

Hamóride, as Hemmoróide.

Hanéga, the fourth part of a measure in Italie of about 600 pound waight.

Haneláre, to pant, or draw for breath.

Hanelatióne, a panting, or drawing for breath.

Hanníre, nísco, níto, to hem or cleare the voice with hemming.

Hanníte, a stone resembling the spaune of fishes.

H'annocisi, for Ci si hánno, there are had, or they haue themselues to vs.

Hargól, a kinde of cruell Lizard that fights with Serpents.

Hargolottiere, a souldier on horsebacke vsing a caliuer with a snaphance.

Haringáre, as Aringáre.

Haríngo, as Aríngo.

Harioláre, to deuine, to guesse, to foretell.

Hariolatióne, diuination, soothsaying.

Hariólo, a soothsayer, a deuiner, a wizard.

Harmogéne, apt coherence of one colour or proportion one with another.

Harmonía, harmonie, melodie.

Harmonióso, harmonious, melodious, sweetely sounding.



Harmonizzánte, as Harmonióso.

Harmonizzáre, to make harmonie.

Hárpa, a Harpe.

Harpága, a kind of Amber in Syria.

Harpagonáre, to graple with grapling hookes or harping irons.

Harpagóni, grapples, grapling hookes or harping irons.

Harpatóre, a Harper.

Harpía, a monster called a Harpie.

Hássene, for Se ne hà, there is had of it.

Hássis, a kind of hearbe vsed by the Morabites, which as Tobacco hath the vertue to make them very merry and almost drunke and out of their wits.

Hásta, a launce, a speare. Also a shaft, a staffe seruing for any thing.

Hásta foderáta, an armed pike.

Hásta uelitáre, a Iauelin vsed in skirmish that one may fling like a dart.

Hastáre, to arme with a launce, a speare or staffe, to staue, to shaft.

Hastáro, a launce or speare-maker.

Hastatóre, a launce or speare-man.

Hastáti, launciers or pikemen.

Hastétta, a litle launce, speare or staffe.

Hasticciuóla, as Hastétta.

Hastíle, the wood, the shanke, the staffe, the shaft of any weapon: or that may be handled as a staffe, iaueling or speare.

Hastífero, launce or speare-bearing.

Hástula regia, a kind of hearbe.

Hauente, hauing, that hath.

Hauere, Hò, Hábbio, or Hággio, Hebbi, Hauúto, to haue or hold in possession, a verbe much vsed and the principall auxiliare verbe in all the Italian tongue, whereof read more in my rules and obseruations. It is sometimes vsed for the verbe Essere, as Non ui hà, there is not.

Hauére, as a noune Substantiue, a mans substance, abilitie, wealth, riches, goods, stocke, chattle or possessions.

Hauére a capitále, to haue in esteeme, to hold in speciall accompt.

Hauér' a cáro, to haue deare, to hold deare and be glad of.

Hauére a cúra, to haue in care, to haue in cure.

Hauére a dispetto, to haue in despight, to despise.

Hauére a dispiacére, to bee displeased with.

Hauér' a grádo, to prise or haue and take in good worth and esteeme.

Hauére a fáre, to haue to doe, to haue businesse.

Hauér' a fastídio, to loath or be wearie of, to haue in abhomination.

Hauér' ágio, to haue leasure and conueniencie, to haue ease. 

Hauér' a mále, to haue or take in ill part. Also to loath.

Hauér'a máno, to haue ready or at hand. Also to haue in hand.

Hauér' alle máni, to haue in hand, or be in hand with.

Hauére a ménre, to haue in minde, to remember well.

Hauér' ánimo, to dare or haue courage. Also to haue minde vnto.

Hauére a nóia, as Hauére a fastídio.

Hauére a petto, to haue to heart.

Hauér' ardíre, to dare or be bold, to haue courage or hardinesse.

Hauére a scherno, to haue in scorne or contempt.

Hauér' a schífo, to loath or haue in abhomination, to detest.

Hauére a tornáre, to bee or haue to returne.

Hauér'a uíle, to haue in contempt or hold in scorne.

Hauér bisógno di, to haue neede of.

Hauér cáldo, to be warme or hot.

Hauér cár,o', to haue or hold deare, to make accompt of.

Hauér che perdere, to haue wealth, to haue something to loose.

Hauér dell'ásin,o',  to haue or bee of an Asses condition.

Hauer debito, to be endebted. Also to haue debts.

Hauér del tóndo, to haue little wit, to be gullish or shallow-witted.

Hauér destro, to haue good occasion or conueniencie.

Hauér di bisógno, to haue neede.

Hauér di grátia, to be glad of, and deeme it as a grace and fauour.

Hauér di chè, to haue wherewith or whereof.

Hauér fáme, to haue or feele hunger, to be hungry.

Hauér fatíca, to haue labour. Also to haue scarsitie.

Hauér fréd do, to be a cold, to feele cold.

Hauér féde in, to haue trust in.

Hauér fréddo a piédi, to stand or be in great neede.

Hauér fréga, to haue a lustfull longing as Cats haue in March.

Hauér frétta, to haue haste.

Hauér dietro, to haue in contempt, not to care a turd for.

Hauér d'huópo, to neede or haue neede.

Hauér gl'ócchi adósso, to heed, to eye, or watch one diligently.

Hauér dieci o uent' ánni, to bee ten or twentie yeares old.

Hauér góla, to haue a longing desire.

Hauér grádo, to haue or hold accept able, to be glad of.

Hauér grátia, to be behoulden vnto.

Hauér in sórte, to haue in lot.

Hauér huópo, to haue neede of. 

Hauér' il tórto, to haue wrong. Also to be in the wrong.

Hauér' in púnto, to haue in a readinesse.

Hauér' in calére, to haue care of.

Hauér' in cónto, to make accompt or esteeme of.

Hauér' in ordíne, to haue ready.

Hauér' in guárdia, to haue in guard or keeping.

Hauér la scolagióne, to haue the running of the raines.

Hauér língua, to haue word or intelligence, to haue a language.

Hauér l'ócchio a pennello, to haue an heedy eie to ones businesse.

Hauér luógo, to haue place or power. Also to be expedient or necessary.

Hauér mále, to be sicke or sore.

Hauér mercéde, to haue or obtaine reward or guerdon.

Hauér mercè, to haue mercy. Also to be glad of, and take it as a fauour.

Hauér mestiéri, to neede, to haue need.

Hauér mezzo, to haue meanes.

Hauér módo, to haue meanes.

Hauér' óbligo, to be behoulding vnto.

Hauér ódio a, to beare ill will vnto.

Hauér martello, to be iealous or passionate with panting for.

Hauér paúra, to feare or be fearefull, to be a fraide of.

Hauér per béne, to take in good part.

Hauér pensiere, to haue care. Also to be suspicious of.

Hauér séte, to thirst or to be thirsty.

Hauér per mále, to take in ill part.

Hauér per iscusáto, to hould as excused.

Hauér sónno, to be sleepy.

Hauér piéde, to haue footing.

Hauér rúggine al'ánimo, to haue rancor or grudge in minde.

Hauére sdégno, to beare a grudge or disdaine vnto.

Hauér tórto, to be in the wrong.

Hauér vóglia, to haue a longing desire.

Hauúto, had, possessed, enioyed.

Haustório, a wheele of a well to draw water. Also a water bucket. Also a scoope to wet sailes with. Also a kind of pot, iugge or cruse.

Hazienda, a Spanish word as Facenda, but a great office in Spaine.

He, an Interiection, ah, oh, alas, I pray you, for gods sake.

Hebano, Hebane-wood. Also a sad or sable colour.

Hebbe, hee or shee had.

Hebbero, they had.

Hebeno, as Hebano.

Hebére, bésco, béi, búto, to make blunt, weake or dull, to quaile.

Hebetatióne, a blunting, a dulnesse, a quailing, a diminishing. 



Hebetúdine, as Hebetatióne.

Hebraísmo, a propriety of the Hebrew.

Hebúto, blunted, weakned, dulled, quailed.

Hecatómbe, a sacrifice of a hundred.

Hecatómpo, a fish with a hundred feete.

Hecatonchíto, one with a hundred hands.

Hechinometri, a kinde of Sea-hedgehog.

Hedera, the weed Iuy.

Hedera spinósa, Bind-weed or Iuy.

Hecele, an hearbe.

Hecíra, a mother in lawe.

Hederóso, full of Iuie.

Hediósmo, the hearbe mint.

Hedisáro, the hearbe mint.

Hedisimóne, a kind of venemous Serpent.

Hedipnóida, a kind of wilde cicquorie.

Hedismáta, all manner of oyles or oyntments composed of the bodies of simples.

Hefestíte, a stone of a firie colour, which as a looking-glasse reflecteth any thing.

Hegíra, a mother in lawe.

Helebria, black Setword, or Bearefoote.

Helacatáno, a kind of Sea-fish.

Helcisíma, the drosse or refuse in refining of siluer.

Helena, the name of a cursed, dreadfull, and threatning Meteor.

Helenio, the hearbe Elicampane.

Heliáco, belonging to the Sunne. Also as Eliáco.

Helespóntio, the name of a winde called also Cecia, blowing about Helespont.

Heli, an hebrew word, signifying onely God, or my dietie.

Helianthéno, as Helióne.

Heliáco, belonging to the Sunne.

Heliáco órto, the appearance of some Starre which before was hidden by his neerenesse to the Sunne.

Heliáco, occáso, is when a Starre which before was seene can not be seene because of the Sunne.

Helicábo, as Haliacacábo.

Helíce, the Signe called Vrsa maior, or Charles-waine. Also a kinde of Iuie bearing no berries. Also the worme or winding of a screw.

Helichrísio, yellow Cammomill, or golden flowre. Some take it for the Marigold.

Helicónidi múse, the nine Muses.

Helímo, Alímo, Sea-wort, which is of a brackish taste.

Helio cálide, as Helióne.

Heliochríso, as Helichrísio.

Helióne, Ground-elder, Wall-wort, or Dane-wort.

Heliópoli, a kinde of warlike engine to batter Cities. 

Helioscópio, a kind of Sunne or Turnesoll flowre, the Sunne Tithimale.

Heliosélino, Ache, or Smallage.

Heliotrópio, as Helitrópio.

Helitrópia, as Helitrópio.

Helitrópio, the Turnesoll, Ruds, Waterwort, or Sunne-flowre, which turneth with the Sunne both at rising and going downe. Some take it for the Marigold. Also a precious stone, which as a burning glasse receiueth the Sunne.

Helléboro, an hearbe whereof there be two kinds, and are much vsed in Phisike to purge melancholy, as Helléboro biánco, called in English Lingwort, the roote whereof maketh neezing-powder, and Helléboro négro, called in English, Beares-foote, Tetwort, or Setwort.

Hellera, the weede Iuie.

Hellera spinósa, binde-weede, or Iuie.

Helleróso, full of Iwy.

Hellespónto, the name of a wind.

Helói, Helóis, as Heli.

Helópe, as Elópe, a kinde of fish.

Helsíno, Parietary of the wall that Partriges loue to feede vpon.

Heluatióne, gluttony, gourmandizing, greedy eating and deuouring.

Heluenacaníte, a kind of Vine.

Helueolo, a kind of wine.

Helúo, a greedy deuourer or destroyer.

Hemacháte, a kind of Agate-stone.

Hemaríte, a kinde of red Magnet or Lodde-stone. Also the red bloudstone.

Hematinóne, a kind of red but not transparent glasse.

Hematíte, as Hemaríte.

Hemerbio, a flie or worme liuing but one day, called a Day-flie.

Hemeri, a kind of Oke-tree bearing the best kind of gales.

Hemerocálle, the Day-lilly.

Hemeróso, that dureth but one day.

Hemicíclo, a halfe or demy circle.

Hemicránea, a sickenesse comming by fits called the migram or an ach on one side of the head.

Hemicránio, subiect to the migrame.

Hemína, a greeke measure of nine ounces or three quarters of a pint.

Hemiólio, an Arithmethicall proportion called a Sexquiplex or Sesquialter, which, so much and halfe so much againe.

Hemiónio, the hearbe Hartes-tongue.

Hemioníte, as Hemiónio.

Hemipléssia, a palsie in one halfe of the body.

Hemispherico, halfe compassed or round.

Hemisphero, halfe the compasse of the visible heauen. Also a kind of Sunne- dyall. Also a halfe round musicall instrument.

Hemístico, an halfe verse.

Hemitritea febbre, a Semitertian feauer.

Hemoreo, certaine Serpents causing flux of bloud where they touch.

Hemoroidáli uéne, the veines whereby the bloud passeth backward.

Hemoróide, the pyles or hemoroydes.

Hendecasílabo, a verse of eleuen sillables.

Henui, a whitish stone the ground wherof is of a yellowish tauney.

Hepáro, the liuer of the Sea-fish called Hepáte.

Hepatário, that pertaineth to the liuer. Also a disease or griefe of the liuer.

Hepáte, the liuer. Also a daintie fish like a Breame.

Hepática, Nobe agrimonie, hearbe Trinitie, three leafe Liuerwort, white Crowfoote or water Crowfoote.

Hepática uéna, the liuer veine.

Hepático, diseased in the liuer, liuergrowen, pertaining to the liuer.

Hepatíte, the master liuer veine. Also a precious stone of the figure of a liuer.

Hepatizóne, a temperature of the ayre representing a colour of the liuer.

Hepente, a drinke deuised by Helena to glad the minde.

Hepheftíte, as Hefestíte.

Hepistíte, as Hefestíte.

Hepséno, a kind of Cuit or sweet wine.

Hepta, the number of seauen in Greeke, much vsed in compositions.

Heptameróne, a worke of seauen daies or of seauen parts.

Heptafilóne, as Tormentílla.

Heptapleuróne, a kinde of Plaintaine hauing seauen leaues.

Heracleótico, a kind of great Sea-crab. Also Origanum or Marioram.

Heráclio, a kind of wild Poppie. Also a touch-stone. Also vsed for one that hath a singular, fine ready wit. Also a kind of fine water-rose. Also the hearbe Greimile. Also a lode-stone.

Heracliteggiáre., 

Heradione, as Dispirón.

Herba, any kind of simple, hearbe, weed, grasse or wort.

Herba benedétta, Setwall, Sidewall, Sparewort or hearbe Bennet.

Herbacceo, grassie, greene, springing like hearbes, of grasse or hearbes.

Herbáccia, any filthy weede or hearbe growing wild or naturally.

Herbáculo, any ioyle or ointment made of or with hearbes.

Herba cásta, the hearbe Pionie.

Herba da buói, Calues-grasse. But vsed often for a prime-cock-boy, a fresh man, a nouice, a milke-sop, a boy new 



come into the world.

Herba del uento, the Winde flowre.

Herba di múro, Pellitorie of the wall.

Herba di San Giouánni, the hearbe Clarie. Also Saint Iohns wort.

Herba di San Pietro, Sampeere. Also the great Cowslip.

Herba di Sant' António, Lead wort.

Herba festíca, a kind of wild Oates.

Herba fuluiána, an hearbe.

Herba gátta, Catmint or Nep.

Herba ímpia, Cudweed or Chaffeweed, no beast doth eate of it but feeleth some hurt.

Herba latáce, the hearbe Thrift. It is a token of plenty, and they say that who first findeth it shall want nothing.

Herba látte, Milkewort.

Herba lúpa, as Orobánche.

Herba militáre, the souldiers hearbe.

Herba murále, Pellitorie of the wall.

Herba nésa, Goates rue, or Italian fitch.

Herba nicosiána, the hearbe Tobacco.

Herba regína, the hearbe Tobacco.

Herba pratése, the hearbe Melilot.

Herba róssa, Culerage or Arse-smart.

Herba Santacróce, the hearbe Tobacco.

Herba Scítica, the wild Caroway.

Herba topiária, the hearbe Perewinkle.

Herba tórpa, as Orobánche.

Herba túrca, the hearbe Burstwort.

Herbággi, all manner of hearbes, herbage.

Herbággio, all manner of herbage or grasse. Also a stuffe like Water-Chamlot.

Herbáio, a Simpler, an Herbalist, an hearbe-man. Also an herbale. Also an hearbe-plot where hearbes grow.

Herbaiuólo, as Herbáio.

Herbále, an hearball. Also of or pertayning to hearbes.

Herbalísta, a Simpler or Hearbalist.

Herbária árte, the Arte of Simpling.

Herbáro, as Herbáio.

Herbaruólo, as Herbalísta.

Herbeggiáre, to spring as grasse, to bring foorth weedes. Also to strew with hearbes.

Herbéi, a kinde of Mountaine Partridge.

Herbeo, grassie. Also grasse-greene.

Herbella, a kind of broad-leafed-grasse.

Herbéna, the hearbe Verueine.

Herbescente, growing to an hearbe.

Herbétta, small, yongue or budding grasse.

Herbiccíne, all manner of tender Pothearbes or Salade-hearbes. Also a kind of greene pottage made of fine hearbes.

Herbido, full of hearbes, weeds or grasse. Also of a grasse colour.

Herbífero, grasse bearing or bringing. 

Herbigráda, a kind of snaile euer creeping and going in grasse.

Herbile, of or belonging to grasse or hearbes. Also feeding on hearbes or grasse.

Herboláio, as Herbáio.

Herboláre, to grase or feede on hearbes.

Herboláta, any kind of greene sauce, salade or tart, or pottage made of hearbs.

Herbóso, grassie, full of grasse or weeds.

Herbúccie, little, wilde or yongue weedes.

Hercína, a Princesse or Lady of rare and excellent vertues.

Hercole, signifies glory in earth or in the aire. Also glorious in battels. Also the name of a star in heauen.

Herculánea, a kind of sore-stinging nettle. Also a kind of stinging pissemire.

Herculóni, a kind of good figges.

Hereda, a woman heire.

Heredáre, to inherite.

Herede, an heire, an inheritor, a succeeder in a mans goods or land.

Heredéuole, inheritable.

Heredificáre, to build for ones heires.

Here dificatióne, a building for ones heires.

Heredificatóre, a builder for his heires.

Heredigo, vsed for heresie.

Heredità, inheritance, heritage, patrimony.

Hereditággio, as Heredità.

Hereditáre, to inherite.

Hereditário, hereditary, by inheritance.

Hereditéuole, inheritable.

Hereditiere, an heire, an inheritor.

Heremíta, an Hermite, a solitary person.

Heremitággio, an Hermitage, a solitarinesse.

Heremitáno, as Heremitággio.

Heremitório, as Heremitággio.

Heremitóso, full of solitarinesse.

Herémo, an Heremite, a solitary person.

Heresía, heresie.

Heresiárca, a chiefe hereticke.

Heretico, a hereticke.

Heríce, heath or ling to make brushes of.

Hericóso, heathy, full of ling. Also desert, barren, vncouth, wilde.

Heríle, Lordly, imperious, swaying.

Herisipílla, as Erisipílla. Also taken for the running scuruy.

Heritággio, inheritance, heritage.

Heritánza, as Heritággio.

Hermafrodíto, an hermafrodite, one that is both man and woman.

Hermesía, the hearbe Ceterach.

Hermenía, an interpretation.

Hermesióne, a stone of a firy colour yeelding golden beames.

Hermíno, the hearbe Clary.

Hermióne, the hearbe Mercuries fingers, Dogs-stones, or wilde Saffron.

Hermisíno, Taffetay-sarcenet, or Cendall.

Hermíta, as Heremíta.

Hermitággio, as Heremitággio.

Hermo, solitarie, alone, hermit-like.

Hermodátile, as Hermióne.

Hermofrodíto, as Hermafrodíto.

Hermonióne, the hearbe Coterach.

Hermóso, full of solitarinesse. Also taken from the spanish for beautifull, faire, and well-fauored.

Hermula, an image without hands.

Hermupóa, an hearbe.

Hernia, a kind of swelling or inflamation in a mans stones or cods. Also a rupture or bursting in a man when the bowels fall into the cods.

Hernióso, one that is burst, and hath his bowels falne into his cods.

Heródio, a kind of Eagle or Faulkon.

Heróe, a heroe, a noble-worthie, a famous man, one in whom is more vertue and excellencie, than in others.

Heróico, heroicall, noble, magnanimous.

Heroína, a Princesse, or chiefe woman.

Heroíno, the hearbe Asphodel.

Herománte, a kind of magician, or foreteller.

Heromantía, a kind of magicall diuination.

Herpes, a certaine liuing creature so called. Also a disease called the Shingles, the wild-fire, the woolfe, or as some call it the running worme, and some Saint Antonies fire, which is cured by the said creature.

Herpete, as Herpes, or Erpete.

Herpicáre, to harrow, or grub vp.

Herpíce, as Herpicóne.

Herpicóne, a grubbing iron.

Hesámetro, an exameter verse.

Hesónicon, as Dispirón.

Hespera, an hearbe that smels more in the night than in the day.

H'espero, the euening starre. Also twylight in the euening. Also the euening it selfe, or euen-tide

Hesságono, six-angled.

Hessecontalítho, a little stone of sundrie colours.

Hesterno, of yesterday, or before yesterday.

Hesitánza, as Hesitatióne.

Hesitáre, to stick, to doubt, to stagger, to stammer, to entangle or wrap in the briers, to stand vpon doubts and feare.

Hesitatióne, a doubting, a staggering, a stammering. 



Hesitatóre, a staggerer, a stammerer, a stutter.

Herteróclito, declined otherwise than the commen nounes or verbs are.

Heterogenio, not of the common kind, of another kind.

Heteróscij, those which haue their shadowes cast but one way: or those which dwell in either of the temperate Zones: we that dwell in the North temperate haue at noone the Sunne alwaies South, and therefore our shadowes North. Those that dwell in the South temperate haue the Sunne at noone euer North, and therfore their shadowes alwaies South.

Heterocránca, a disease in the head, aking and swelling, with little pushes rising vp.

Hì, an old word vsed as a signe of a iesting question, as we say, ha, hum, &c.

Hiacinthíno, of the colour of the Hiacinth. Also blewish.

Hiacinthizónte, a Berill stone.

Hiacíntho, a precious stone called a Hiacinth. Also a flowre of that name, of some called Crow-toes. Also vsed for blew silke. Also a purple colour.

Híade, the fiue starres in the head of Taurus.

Hialíno, a glassie greene colour.

Hialóida, the third humor of the eyes, for that it is like moulten glasse.

Hiástio, a kind of musike among the Grecians.

Hiáto, an opening or bursting of a man. Also a wide opening or yawning of the mouth. Also an open vnpleasant sound with ones mouth.

Híbbo, a Kite, or Buzard. Also a kind of fish.

Hiberida, the hearbe Lepidium, Cardemantice, wilde or Sciatica-Cresses.

Hibísco, a kind of wild Parsenep roote. Some take it for the Hollie-hock.

Híbre, as Hibríde.

Hibríde, a mungrell, or borne of parents differing in countries. Also halfe wilde, or ingendred betweene tame and wilde.

Hictiofági, feeders on fish, caters of fish.

Hidátide, a precious stone so called, worne by. Apollo in his Crowne.

Hídra, a Serpent with seauen heads. Also a certaine signe or starre in heauen.

Hidrargíro, a kind of artificiall quicksiluer.

Hidráulica, a certaine machine to conueigh water aloft and on high. Also Organes that went with water-works.

Hídri, water-Snakes.

Hídria, a kind of pot, pitcher, or measure.

Hídro, a kind of Serpent breeding in Nilus that feedeth on froth.

Hidrocelico, a waterish rupture in some bodies.

Hidroceleno, Water-persley.

Hidrographía, a description of waters.

Hidrográfo, a describer of waters.

Hidrolapátho, the water docke.

Hidrología, a treating of the measuring of waters.

Hidrománte, a deuiner by waters.

Hidromantía, diuiuation by calling spirits in the water.

Hidromele, a kinde of drinke as Methegline or water and hony.

Hidropépe, Arse-smart or Culerage.

Hidrophóbia, a simptom befalling them that are bitten by mad-dogges whereby they are afraid of water.

Hidrópico, a man that hath the dropsie.

Hidropisía, the disease called the dropsie.

Hiecora, now, euen-now, at this instant, now presently.

Hiemále, of or belonging to Winter.

Hiena, a beast of all others the most subtle, about the bignesse of a Woolfe, it counterfeits mans voice, it hath a maine like a horse, the dung it yeelds is called Ciuet. Also a precious stone taken out of the Hienas head. Also a fish that at his pleasure puts foorth and drawes in his head.

Hieracíte, a precious stone but euer changing colour.

Hierácio, Hawke-weed or Sow-thistle. Also a kinde of composition or collyrie.

Hierápicra, a bitter confection to purge choller.

Hierarchía, a holy gouernment or sacred principality.

Hierática, was wont to be the name of paper, that is to say sacred and holy.

Hierecíte, a stone named by the colour of a faulkon.

Hierde, as Ghierde.

Hieri, Yeasterday.

Hieria, a kind of precious stone good against the falling sicknesse.

Hierica, a kind of lectuce that hawkes loue to feede vpon.

Hiermattína, Yeasterday-morning.

Hiernótte, Yeasterday-night.

Hierobotáne, the hearbe Verueine.

Hierofánre, an expounder of mysteries or holy Scriptures.

Hieroglífico, mysticall ciphers or enigmatic all letters, signifying whole sentences, vsed by the AEgyptians.

Hieróne, a Hearon.

Hieronnimóne, a kind of precious stone.

Hierséra, Yeasterday-euening.

Hierúsalem, as much to say, Vision of peace and flower of our felicity.

Híle, a kinde of salt vsed by Alchimists. 

Higlemplástro, a kind of liquid implaster.

Hillántho, a kind of gentle Thistle.

Híllare, cheerefull, blithe, ioyous, glad.

Hillária, the eight day of the Calends of Aprill, when the daies beginneth first to increase and bee longer than the night. Vsed also for Shrouing times or other times of mirth.

Hillarità, gladnesse, cheerefulnesse, glee, reioycing, mirth, iocondnesse.

Híllo, the litle gut.

Hílo, the North-winde.

Himantópodo, a long-legged and highstalking bird.

Himeccére, an Interiection of admiration, as wee say, good Lord! who would haue thought it.

Himenei, weddings, mariages, or espousals.

Himeneo, the God of mariage or espousals.

Himnóne, a kind of Adamant stone that on the one side drawes iron to it, and with the other driues it away from it.

Hín, a certaine measure.

Hinchinchiáre, as Fóttere.

Hinchinchiatóre, as Fottitóre.

Hinchinchiatúra, as Fottitúra.

Hinníre, nísco, níto, to neigh as a horse.

Hinníto, neighed. Also the neighing of a horse.

Hínno, a Himne, a praising song.

Hinnuláre, a kind of squeaking Kite or Buzzard.

Híno, a Mule gotten betweene a hee-Mule and a Mare.

Hínulo, a Mule gotten betweene a Horse and a shee-Mule.

Hiosciámo, Dwale or Henbane.

Hioseri, Dwale or Henbane.

Hioptálmo, a stone named by the eye of a Swine.

Hiósio, Dwale or Henbane.

Hiosquiámo, Dwale or Henbane.

Hipángi, the Planets are so called when they are hidden with the light of the Sunne.

Hipelatóne, Horse-tongue-laurell.

Hipenémo, a wind-egge whereof nothing wilbe ingendred.

Hiperbási, a figure when words are transposed from the Grammaticall order.

Hiperbatón, an hearbe that will cure hurts of poisoned arrowes.

Hiperbiríco, the moneth October.

Hiperbole, an Hiperboll or excesse in aduancing or depressing. Also a certaine crooked lyne comming of the cutting of a Cone or Cylinder.

Hiperbólico, Hiperbolicall, beyond all credit or estimation, of likelyhood or truth. 



Hiperbolizzáre, to hiperbolize, to aduance or depresse any thing beyond likelyhood or truth.

Hiperbórei, they which dwell aboue the blowing of the North-winde, who commonly liue aboue a hundred yeares

Hiperdúlio, aboue, or ouerseeing the seruice of slaues and bondmen.

Hiperico, Saint Iohns-wort, Perforata or Hipericon.

Hipericóne, as Hiperico.

Hiperni, a kind of figs earely ripe.

Hiperzeugma, that is when in a sentence the verbe seruing for all commeth behind.

Hipheáro, a kind of Missletoe. Also a kind of gum the Boxe-tree yeeldeth.

Hipíce, an hearbe growing among corne, which chewed in ones mouth taketh away hunger.

Hipicóne, as Hipíce.

Hipocáusto, a stoue or hot-house.

Hipochisíno, a cataract or suffusion of the eyes.

Hipocísta, an hearbe resembling an vnripe Pomegranate.

Hipocístida, a kind of Iuie.

Hipocondría, the forepart of the belly and sides vnder which lyeth the liuer and spleane.

Hipocondriáli párti, the flankes or soft parts vnder the short ribs.

Hipocrisía, hipocrisie, dissimulation, faigned holinesse.

Hipócrita, an hipocrite, a dissembler of another mans person.

Hipocrítico, hipocriticall, full of dissimulation or faignednesse.

Hipócrito, as Hipócrita.

Hipocritóne, a notable hipocrite.

Hipodório, a kinde of graue accent in Musicke.

Hipoflomóne, the white Mandrage.

Hipofrígio, as Hipodório.

Hipogáustrio, that part of the belly which reacheth from the nauell to the haires of the priuy parts.

Hipogesóne, Sengreene or Houseleeke.

Hipogrífo, a beast that is halfe like a Horse and halfe like a Griffon.

Hipolídio, a kinde of accent or note in graue Musicke.

Hipópij, the bones that be vnder the eyes.

Hipóstasi, a substance. Also a residence in vrine flitting towards the bottome.

Hipostático, personall, substantiall or in the Trinitie.

Hipothesía, an argument or matter whereupon one should dispute and argue.

Hipotecáre, to morgage, to pawne.

Hipotetica, a word of the ciuill law importing pledge, baile or maineprise.

Hipoteticáre, as Hipotecáre.        

Hip, ozeugma, a figure when euery clause hath his proper verbe.

Hippagreto, such a one as is Captaine ouer armed men. It is vsed in Xenophon.

Hippáce, cheese of mares milke.

Hippáro, Hippárico, as Hippúro.

Hippea, a Comet or blazing-starre hauing maines like horses, most swift in motion, and euer turning.

Hippia, Chick-weed.

Hippíce, as Hipíce.

Hippicóne, a Greeke measure of fiue hundred paces or halfe an Italian and English mile.

Híppo, as Hipúro. Also the Greeke word for a horse. Also the Coast crab-fish.

Hippocámpo, a Sea-horse. Also a fish called a Sea-light.

Hippocampíno, as Hippocámpo.

Hippodámo, a breaker, a tamer or rider of horses and colts.

Hippodrómo, a place where horses are exercised in games, in races, in running or coursing.

Hippodamático, a kind of Greeke wine.

Hippocentáuro, a creature that is halfe a horse and halfe a man.

Hippochéri, an hearbe hauing a pricke or thorne in euery ioint.

Hippochiéso, as Hippochéri.

Hippóe, a Sea-crab called a Hippey.

Hippofáe, as Hippofouáda.

Hippofeóne, the flowre of a kinde of Thime.

Hippofeste, as Hippofouáda.

Hippofouáda, an hearbe much vsed in Phisicke for horses.

Hippofrígio, a kind of musicke or accent and sound in musicke.

Hippodónio, a kind of musicke or sound in musicke.

Hippoglósso, horse-tongue or double-tongue.

Hippoglotóne, horse tongue-laurell.

Hippolapáto, the hearbe Patience, Tall-docke or Monkes rheubarbe.

Hippolídio, a kind of musicke or sound in musicke.

Hippolífo, a beast that is a Horse and a Stagge together.

Hippomarátro, wild Fennell or Dill.

Hippomáre, a kind of strong poison.

Hippómene, a bunch of flesh in some horses foreheads, which the Damme as soone as the fole is borne bites off. Some say it is vsed in charmes to procure loue in wantons and luxurious persons.

Hippópe, an hearbe growing by the Sea side vsed in medicines for horses.

Hippopéda, of the forme of a horses foote, horse-footed. Also as Hippópe.

Hippophasióne, a kind of pricke-weede or bush growing by the Sea-side.

Hippophestóne, a kinde of bramble or shrub growing as Missletoe on other trees.

Hippophía, as Hippópe.

Hippopotámo, as Hippotámo,

Hippotámo, a beast liuing in the riuer Nilus, hauing feete like an Oxe, backe and maine like a Horse, tusked like a Boare, and a long winding taile, commonly called a Sea-horse.

Hippúro, the hearbe Horse-taile or Catstaile. Also a fish called the Stay-horseman.

Hipúro, as Hippúro.

Hirco, a hee-goate, a wild-buck-goate.

Hircoceruo, a beast engendred betweene a hee-goate and a Hinde, as Chimera.

Hirculo, an hearbe of a goatish strong smell.

Hirondinária, as Celidónia.

Hiróndine, a Swallow, a Sea-swallow.

Hironía, as Ironía.

Hirsúta, Clauers or Goosegrasse.

Hirsutézza, brizlinesse, hairinesse, shagginesse, ruggednesse.

Hirsúto, brizlie, hairie, shaggie, rough, prickie, horrid, sharpe. Also sluttish.

Hírto, as Hirsúto.

Hirúndine, a bloud-sucker, a horse-leach.

Hirúndo, a kind of venemous Serpent.

Hisgíno, stammell-colour or lustie-gallant.

Hisopíno, Hysope wine.

Hisópo, the hearbe Hysope.

Hispidézza, as Hirsutézza.

Hispido, as Hirsúto.

Hispidóso, as Hirsúto.

Historía, an historie, a storie, a declaration of true things in others set downe vnto posteritie.

Historiagrafáre, as Historiáre.

Historiále, historicall.

Historiáre, to write or tell histories, to worke with stories, to storie.

Historiáto, storied, wrought with stories.

Histórico, an Historian or writer of histories. Also historicall.

Historiografía, description of stories.

Historiógrafo, a writer of histories.

Hístrice, a Porcupine.

Histrionáre, to act or play the Comediant or on stages.

Histrióne, a stage-plaier, a Comediant.

Histrionía, the feate or science of stageplaiers.

Hittalópi, such as see nothing by night.

Hittiofági, fish-eaters, feeders on fish.

Hò, hággio, I haue.

Hóbo, a tree, the roote whereof if a man hold but a piece of it in his mouth it yeeldeth so much water as hee shall feele no thirst.

Hodierno, moderne, of this day, a late man or thing. 



Hóggi, this day, to day.

Hóggi a un' ánno, this day twelue-moneth.

Hóggi al terzo dì, three daies hence.

Hóggi dì, now a daies, at these times, in these daies, at this day.

Hóggi fà l'ánno, this day a yeare since.

Hóggi giórno, as Hóggi dì.

Hóggi mái, now adaies, now at last.

Hóggi tútto l' dì, all this long day.

Hóio, hó-hó, what ho, who-hoop.

Holà, what ho, who is there?

Hoisè, alas him selfe.

Hoimè, alas my selfe.

Holestio, a kind of hearbe.

Hólco, as Arístida, an hearbe drawing spills out of the flesh.

Holgói, certaine witches in the Philippine Ilands much reuerenced among them.

Holiostróphio, an hearbe, the touch whereof killeth Scorpions.

Hólla, I haue her or it.

Hólle, I haue them, or to her.

Hólli, I haue them, or to him.

Hóllo, I haue him or it.

Holocáusto, a Sacrifice killed and laid whole on the altar and burnt.

Holochríso, the yellow golden flowre.

Holoscéno, a kind of long rush.

Holosteóne, a kind of hearbe.

Holotário, a kind of hard shell-fish.

Homaccio, as Homaccióne.

Homaccióne, a great, big or lubbardly man.

Homaggiáre, to doe homage vnto.

Homággio, homage, fealtie, liegenesse, fidelitie, vassalage, or recognition.

Homái, now, at last.

Homè, aye me, alas, woe is me.

Homelia, an Homily, a Preaching.

Homeráli, shoulder-pieces, pouldrons.

Hómeri, the shoulders.

Homerica, the hearbe Moly.

Hométto, a little or prettie man.

Homeromástici, back-biters and tearers of men, namely of Homer.

Homiccíno, a little pretty man.

Homicciuólo, a little pretty man.

Homiciátto, a lubbardly coxcombe.

Homicída, a man killer or slayer.

Homicidiále, guilty of mans murther.

Homicidiário, as Homicída.

Homicídio, mans slaughter or murther.

Homicidióso, full of mans slaughter, murtherous.

Homicránea, a dizzinesse or giddinesse in the head.

Homífero, man bearing or bringing.

Homificáre, to make, to shape or become perfect man, to mannifie.

Homificatióne, a becomming man.

Homília, an Homily, a Sermon.

Homiliáre, to preach Homilies. 

Homináccij, filthy men.

Homíssimo, most-man, throughly man.

Hómo, a man.

Homoemere, likenesse of parts, all the parts of a body that haue affinity with the braine, liuer and heart.

Homogeneo, of one kind.

Homografia, like writing, describing or painting.

Homología, a confession, a consent, an agreement.

Homoncióne, as Homaccióne.

Homóne, as Homaccióne.

Homoncíno, a little little man.

Homonea, concord, agreement.

Homonímia, where diuers things are signified by one word.

Homóri, as Humóri.

Homúncio, a little little man.

Honestà, Honestáde, honesty, vprightnesse of minde or body.

Honesta, as Honesto, honest, vpright in minde or body.

Honesta da cámpi, a dissembling woman that seemes honest abroad.

Honestaménte, honestly. Also indifferently, meanely, or so so.

Honestáre, to honest, to make honest. Also to excuse or colour a fault.

Honesto, honest, vertuous, vpright in minde and body.

Honoránza, as Honóre.

Honoráre, to honour, to worship.

Honorário, the fee giuen to a Lawyer by his client.

Honorándo, honorable, worshipfull.

Honoráto, honored, worshiped.

Honóre, honour, worship. Also credite, reputation, the reward of vertue.

Honorétto, a little honour. Also any small present or gist.

Honréuole, honourable, worshipfull.

Honoreuolézza, honorablenes, worship.

Honorífero, honor bearing or bringing.

Honorificatíuo, making honourable.

Honorificenza, honour, worship.

Honorífico, honourable, worshipfull.

Honránza, as Honóre.

Hóra, an houre. Also now, at this instant houre. Also now and then or sometimes. Also much vsed for a begining or continuation of speech.

Hóra ánno, now a yeare since, this time twelue-moneth.

Hóra mái, now, at last, now at last.

Horaménte, hourely.

Horamò, now, euen now at this houre.

Horánza, honour, worship.

Hóra-pezza-fà, it is now a while or long since.

Horário, of or belonging to the space of an houre.

Hóra si, yea mary now, now indeed.

Hóra tánt'è, so it is now.

Hór béne, well, go too, it is well now. 

Hór' hora, euen now, presently, by and by.

Hórda, a rout or assembly of souldiers among the Tartares.

Hor'ecco, loe-now, behold now.

Hórco, a kind of mettall.

Horeónia, a kind of vine or grape.

Hordeária, a kind of plumbe ripe in Barly-haruest.

Horétta, a little or a short houre.

Horfanità, orfanisme.

Hórfano, an Orphane or fatherlesse child.

Horgiáta, any kinde of meat or drinke made of Barly. Also Barly-water.

Hórgio, the graine called Barly.

Horiuoláro, a dyall or houre glasse-maker.

Horiuolétto, as Horiuólo.

Horiuólo, any kind of horologe, diall, houre-glasse, or watch.

Horiuólo a póluere, an houre-glasse.

Horiuólo a sóle, a Sunne-diall.

Horizónte, as Orizónte.

Horizontále, belonging to Orizónte.

Hor l' úno hor l' áltro, now one, and then another, some times one, sometimes another.

Hormesióne, a precious stone of a firie colour.

Hormínio, Clarie, or Sage of Rome. Also Spurge.

Horminóde, a precious stone of the colour of Clarie, with a circle of a golden colour about it.

Hormíno, Bucke, or Horne-wheate.

Hormisíno, Taffate Sarcenet.

Hormoniáco, an Apricok tree.

Horneo mele, the second honie, called Summer-honie.

Hornotíno, of this yeare. Also of one yeares continuance.

Horologiáre, a clock-maker, or keeper.

Horologiére, a clock-maker, or keeper.

Horológio, any kind of clock, horologe, or striking-houre instrument.

Horológio del sóle, a Sunne-diall.

Horologiographía, a description of clocks, or horologes.

Horolóio, as Horológio.

Horoscópo, the ascendent of ones natiuitie. Also that part of the firmament that riseth euery houre from the East. Also any thing wherein houres be marked, as in dials. Also a diligent marking of the time of the birth of a childe.

Horránza, as Honóre.

Hór quínci, hór quíndi, now hence, now thence.

Horrendissimo, most horrible.

Horrendo, horrible, frightfull, grizelie, gastly, vglie, hideous, dreadfull, strange.

Horréuole, honorable, worshipfull. 



Horreuolézza, honorablenesse.

Horríbile, as Horrendo.

Horribilità, horriblenesse, gastlinesse, fright, or trembling for feare.

Horridézza, horridnesse, frightfulnesse, vglinesse, gastlinesse.

Hórrido, horride, terrible, gastlie, grizely, vglie, frightfull, loathsomnesse to behold, that maketh one quake for feare.

Horrífico, as Hórrido.

Horrisuóno, a roaring, or fright causing an horrible noise.

Horrisuonánte, horribly roaring, frightfully sounding.

Horróre, horror, fright, shiuering for feare or cold. Also a horror mouing sound. Also vsed for a reuerend or awefull feare. Also a frouning or lowring countenance. Also a loathing, as when one can not away with a thing.

Hortággi, as Hortáglie.

Hortáglie, all manner of fruits or profits that Gardens yeeld.

Hortáia, as Hortáglie.

Hortámi, as Hortáglie.

Hortáre, as Esortáre.

Hortatióne, as Esortatióne.

Hortatóre, as Esortatóre.

Hortense, of or pertaining vnto, or growing in gardens or hort-yards.

Hortéuole, that may be exhorted.

Horticello, a little garden.

Hórti di venere, womens quaints.

Hórto, a garden. Also an hort-yard.

Hortoláno, a Gardner. Also a daintie bird so called.

Hortóra, gardens, or hort-yards.

Horsù, as Horuía.

Horsúso, as Horuía.

Horuía, an aduerbe of encouraging, goe to, away, now forward, to it now.

Horzáda, as Orgiáda.

Hórzo, any kind of Barlie.

Hospedále, an Hospitall, a Spittle.

Hospedatóre, as Hospitaliero.

Hospitábile, keeping hospitalitie.

Hospitalárij, of or belonging to an hospitall. Caualliéri hospitalárij, hospitall knights, or almes-knights, such as are at Windsor.

Hospitále, an hospitall, a spittle. Also pertaining to hospitalitie.

Hospitaliero, a spitler. Also a keeper of hospitalitie.

Hospitalità, hospitalitie, entertaining of friends and guests.

Hóspite, an hoste, an entertainer of guests. Also a guest.

Hospitiáre, to hoste, or entertaine guests.

Hospítio, an Inne or hosterie, or lodging-house for friends and guests.

Hospitóso, full of hospitalitie.

Hostággio, an hostage, a pledge. 

Hostále, as Hostággio.

Hostaría, an Inne, an hosterie, a house where meate and drinke and lodging is to be had for men and horse. Also a tauerne, or victualing house.

Hóste, Fem. an hoste, a camp, or an armie of men.

Hóste, Mas. an hoste, an Inne-keeper, an hostler. Also a guest.

Hóste d'ammaláti, a proctor of a spittle-house, a spitler.

Hostegliere, as Hosteriero.

Hostelláno, as Hosteriero.

Hostellería, as Hostaría.

Hostelliere, as Hosteríero.

Hostello, an hostell, a place of habitation, a mansion-house.

Hostería, as Hostaría.

Hosteriero, an Inne-holder, an hostler.

Hosteriétta, a little Hostaría.

Hostéssa, an hostesse.

Hóstia, an hoste or sacrifice.

Hostiário, an hostia-keeper.

Hostiere, an hoste, an Inne-holder.

Hosteggiáre, to make an hoste of men. Also to march in an hoste. Also to besiege with an hoste, or to make warre vpon and against.

Hosteggiaménto, a besieging or a marching with an hoste of men.

Hostellággio, as Hostello.

Hostiatóre, an hoste, or Inholder.

Hostiéro víso, a grim commanding face, an host-like face.

Hostigiáre, to hoste, to lodge or lye in an hosterie or Inne.

Hostíle, hostile, of or belonging to an enemie, and warre.

Hostilità, hostilitie, warlie fewde.

Hostilménte, with hostilitie.

Hostoláno, as Hosteriero.

Hótta, as Hóra.

Hótta a hótta, euery howre, howre by howre.

Hótta catótta, euen now, at this howre.

Hóuuelo, for ve lo hò, I haue it to you, or, I haue him there.

Hóuui, for vi hò, I haue you, I haue to you, or I haue there.

Hù, as Húi.

Húggia, as V'ggia.

Huggiáre, as Vggiáre.

Huggióso, as Vggióso.

Húi, oh, alas, aye me, welladay.

Humanaménte, humanely. Also courteously and gently.

Humanáre, to make or become humane.

Humanáto verbo di Dío, vsed for our Sauiour Iesus Christ.

Humanità, humanitie. Also ciuilitie or courtezie in manners.

Humanísta, a professor of humanitie, an humanist. 

Humáno, humane. Also ciuill, affable, courteous, milde, gentle.

Humeggiáre, to moisten. Also to runne as a sore doeth.

Humeráli, shoulder-pieces, pouldrons.

Húmeri, the shoulders of any creature.

Humettáre, as Humeggiáre.

Humettatióne, a moistnesse.

Humidáre, as Humeggiáre.

Humidétto, somewhat moist or wettish.

Humidézza, as Humidità.

Humidíccio, as Humidétto.

Humidíre, dísco, díto, as Humeggiare.

Humidità, humiditie, moistnesse.

Húmido, humide, moist, watrish.

Humidóre, as Humidità.

Humidóso, full of moistnesse.

Humigáre, as Humeggiáre.

Humiggiáre, as Humeggiáre.

Húmile, humble, meeke, lowly. Also poore, base, despised, in low estate.

Humiliáre, to humble, to lowly, to bring low and poore, to depresse.

Humiliatióne, humiliation, lowlinesse.

Humiliáti, a kind of Friers so called.

Humillímo, most humble and lowly.

Humilità, humilitie, lowlinesse, meekenesse.

Humiltà, as Humilità.

Humorále, of or proceeding from humors.

Humóre, humour, moisture, liquor, iuice or sap. Also a toyish conceit, a humor, or wilfull fansie.

Humóre del córpo, any catarre, fleagme or melancholy.

Humorísta, a fantasticall man, an humorist, one passionate in his humors.

Humoróso, full of humors, moistnesse, or sap. Also humorous, new-fangled.

Humór sálso, vsed for vrine.

Huói, to day, this present day.

Huóma, a woman or Mannesse so called in Genesis 2. Chap. 23. verse.

Huomicciátto, a poore sillie man.

Huomífero, man-bearing, or bringing.

Huominésso, a weake-backt man, one that hath no pith or marrow in his bones.

Huómini, all sorts of men.

Huómini cappáti, chosen trained men.

Huómini da fátto, men of seruice or employment for any action.

Huominésco, mannish, man like.

Huomicíno, a little little man.

Huómo, any kind of man.

Huómo a cáso, an odde fellow, as it were a man made by chance.

Huómo da béne, an honest man, a man of good, a man of worth.

Hómo da núlla, a man of no worth.

Huómo di bardella, a yong rider that can hardly sit in the saddle. 



Huómo di buóna testa, a wise man, a man of a sound wit.

Huómo di córte, a Courtier.

Huómo di grósla pásta, a grosse loggarheaded man.

Huómo di mezza sella, a man but of the middle degree in the arte of riding.

Huómo di móndo, a worldly man, a man of the world.

Huómo di póca leuatúra, a man of small woorth, or scarse worthie the taking vp.

Huómo di testa, a testie, wilfull, or head-strong man.

Huómo di tútta sella, a compleate, or perfect rider, or horseman.

Huómo-lígio, a liege-man, a subiect or vassall that oweth fealtie, homage, or faithfull seruice vnto one by oath, and duetie.

Huómo materiále, a grosse conceited man, a plaine homely man.

Huópo, neede, want, lacke. Also good, profit, or stead for a man.

Huóse, high shooes, or galoshes.

Huóuo, any kind of egge.

Hurláre, to howle as a Woolfe.

Hurlatóre, a howler.

Húrli, howlings.

Hurlóso, howling as a Woolfe. 


I.

I', as I'o, I, I my selfe, my selfe, namely when it is Apostrophed.

I'a, an article of the Nominatiue and Accusatiue cases, of the Plurall number, they, or the.

I'a, a kind of Violet.

Iáccio, a kind of fishing or casting-net. Also vsed for Ghiáccio.

Iáce, a kind of Corell breeding in the red Sea.

Iacente, iacent, couchant, lying flat.

Iacére, as Giacére.

Iacínto, a Hiacinth-stone.

Iácolo, as Iáculo.

Iácono, a Deacon of a Church.

Iaculáre, to cast, to dart, to fling.

Iaculatióne, a darting, a flinging.

Iacúlatóre, a darter, a hurler, a flinger.

Iáculo, a dart, a light Iauelin. Also a kind of very swift Serpent.

Iáda, a kind of greene precious stone.

Iáia, any grauell or stony sand.

Iaióso, grauelly, sandy, gretty.

Iámbi, Verses called Iambikes.

Ianchétto, a Pilchard or Sparling fish.

Ianícolo, a kind of Serpent.

Ianízzeri, Ianizers, the Turkes gard.

Iáno, in the AEgyptian tongue signifieth nothing but wine. 

Iantíno, as Hiacínto.

Iapíga, the Westerne wind.

Iasióne, a kind of smooth Binde weed, or Wildewort.

Iá pe, a stone called Iasper-stone.

Iaspónico, a kind of Iasper-stone.

Iáte., Vsed for Andiáte, you may goe.

Iatraleptica, curing of diseases by outward applications of oyntments or frications.

Iattabóndo, boasting, bragging, vanting.

Iattánza, bragging, vanting, boasting.

Iattáre, to bragge, to vant, to boast.

Iattatóre, a bragger, a vanter, a boaster.

Iattúra, losse, hurt, or casting away.

Iauerína, a Iauelin with a barded head and may be hurled as a dart.

Iberide, the weed wilde Cresses.

I'bi, a kind of bird in AEgypt which hath very stiffe legges and a long bill, wherewith when he is sicke he glistereth himselfe with salt water, some write that Hippocrates did first learne of this bird, called the Blacke-storke, to giue glisters.

Ibíce, a kind of wilde and most swift Goate, of some taken for the Roebucke.

I'bide, I'bi. 

Ibór, Ibóre, a bird that nigheth like a horse.

Ibórno, colde, chill, and withall weary and faint.

Icáde, certaine holy daies anciently kept euery twentieth day of the Moone.

Ichneumóne, a Rat of India, which creeping into the Crocodils mouth when he gapeth, eateth his bowels and killeth him. Also a kind of little Waspe.

Icílij, erano persóne principáli della plebe di Róma.

Icilóne & Phantáso, are supposed to be two children of Sloth and Idlenesse, as much to say, lazinesse and idle dreaming.

Icnografía, a modell or plot of a house drawne in paper describing euery roome of it.

Iconología, a description or modell of Images.

Icosaedro, a kind of geometricall figure.

Ictiocólla, a fish of whose skin water glew is made. Also mouth or water glew.

Iddea, a Goddesse. Also the Mountaine Lawrell. Also the hearbe Elecampane.

Iddei, Iddíj, as Dei, Gods.

Iddei-dáttili, a stone of an iron colour in forme of a mans thumbe.

I'de, the Ides of euery moneth, that is, the eight day after the Nones, called so for deuiding the Monthes, I'de di Febráio, the 13.of February.

Iddía, a Goddesse.

Iddío, God almighty.

Iddío grátia, thankes be to God.

Iddío non vóglia, God forbid.

Iddío vel díca, and may God tell it you for I cannot.

Idea, the Idea, figure or forme of any thing conceiued in the imagination.

Ideábile, that may be modelled in minde.

Ideále, ideally or figuratiuely by imagination.

Ideáto, figured or figured in mind.

Identia, an imaginary figure of any thing.

Identificáre, to imagine any thing figuratiuely in minde.

Ideo, the bramble called Raspis.

Idiáchi giórni, the fatall or vnluckie daies that be in the yeere.

Idióma, a proper perfect speech or language.

Idiomísta, a professour of a proper language.

Idióta, an idiot, a naturall, a foole. Also ignorant or illiterated.

Idiotísmo, idiotisme or naturall simplicity.

Idiotizzáre, to play the idiot.

Idirittaménte., Vsed for indirectly.

Idolatráre, to commit Idolatrie.

Idolatría, Idolatry, spiritual fornication.

Idolátrico, full of Idolatrie.

Idolátro, an Idolater.

I'dolo, an Idoll, a carued or hewed resemblance or image of any thing.

Idóneo, conuiement, fit, apt, sufficient.

I'dria, a kind of vessell for water.

Idrománte, a Soothsayer by the ayre.

Idromantía, diuination by the ayre.

Idropesía, the Dropsie.

Idrópico, troubled with the Dropsie.

Iella, the roote of Elecampane.

Iemo, a bottome or clue of thrid.

Ierda, as Ghierde.

Ieri, yesterday.

Ier l'áltro, the day before yesterday.

Iesse, vsed for Gísse, should goe.

Ieuolo, a Catbill or Woodpecker.

Ifidríno, a precious stone good against the stone in the bladder.

Ifsilónne, the letter Y.

Igiéna medicína, that giueth rules of health or serueth thereto.

Ignáme, the roote we call Potatoes wherof in some places they make bread.

Ignatonáre, as Gnatonáre.

Ignatóne, as Gnatóne.

Ignário, that hath fire in it as a flintstone.

Ignáuia, dulnesse, sluggishnesse, lithernesse, basenesse of minde, dastardlinesse. 



Ignáuo, lither, dull, sluggish, dastardlike, base of courage, a coward.

Igneo, fierie, of the nature of fire.

Ignifero, fire-bearing or bringing.

Ignifluo, full of fire, fire-flowing.

Ignigeno, ingendred by or in fire, of a fierie kind.

Ignipiede, that hath fierie-feete.

Ignipotente, powerfull in or by fire.

Ignispíscio, diuination by looking in the fire.

Igníte, a precious stone like glasse.

Igníto, fired, enfired, set on fire. Impressióni igníte, fierie impression.

Igniúno, as Ignúno.

Ignóbile, ignoble, base, dishonored.

Ignobilíre, lísco, lito, to ignoble.

Ignobilità, ignobilitie, basenesse.

Ignoccággine, sottishnesse, gullishnesse.

Ignoccáre, to play the foole or sot.

Ignoccheggiáre, as Ignoccáre.

Ignócco, a foole, a sot, a patch, a ninnie.

Ignomínia, reproach, dishonor.

Ignominióso, reproachfull, dishonorable.

Ignorantáccio, a most ignorant foole.

Ignoránte, ignorant, vnskilfull.

Ignorantésco, ignorant-like.

Ignorantóne, as Ignorantáccio.

Ignoránza, ignorance, vnskilfulnesse.

Ignoráre, not to know, to be ignorant of.

Ignóto, vnknowen, vncouth.

Ignudáre, to make naked or bare.

Ignudézza, nakednesse, barenesse.

Ignúdo, naked, bare. Also a Dace or Merlune fish.

Ignúno, no one. Also any or euery one.

Igualáre, to equall, to euen, to match.

Iguále, equall, alike, euen, match.

Igualità, equalitie, euennesse.

Igualménte, equally, iustly, euen.

I'l, an article of the masculine gender and singular number, of the nominatiue and accusatiue case, the.

I'l, being ioyned to any verbe is a Pronoune primitiue of the Accusatiue case, him, or the same, and it, speaking of things.

Il bello e, the faire or best is.

Il ciel u'aiúti, heauens helpe you.

Il colei, vsed for hers.

Il con quánto, with how much.

Il cólui, vsed for his.

Il ciel uolésse, oh that heauens would.

Il cúi, whose, the whose.

Il di sópra, the ouer or vpper part.

Il di álto, the vpper or aboue.

Il di sótto, the lower or vnder part.

Il di chè, the where with.

Il di fuóri, the outward or the without.

Ileo, the third gut from the ventricle.

Il dì inánzi, the day before.

Il di dentro, the in ward or within.

Il dinánzi, that which is before.

Il dì del gindítio, the day of doome. 

Il d'intórno, that which is about.

Il di souerchio, that which is superfluous.

Il di sù, that which is aboue.

Iliáco dolóre, an obstruction or stopping of the small guts, causing a great paine or wringing in the belly.

Il dóppo, that which is after.

Il dóppio più, the double more.

Il dóue, the place where.

Ilì, the small guts in any beast through which the foode passeth.

Il fátto mío, my affaires, or my state and businesse.

Il fátto ftà, the matter is or the case stands.

Ilío, Ilióne, Illióne, as Ileo.

I'lio ósso, that bone which is ioyned or committed to the transuerse processes of ósso sácro; albeit in old bodies this seemeth to be but one bone, yet because in children it is by a cartillage intersected with three lines, therefore the Anatomists deuide it into three parts, calling the first (which is the supreme part thereof, being the broadest of the rest and ioyned to ósso sácro) by the name of the whole I'lio ósso: the second ósso púbe, and the third ósso cossendico.

Illaccáre, to vernish, to enuernish.

Illápso, a sliding or falling in or downe along.

Illásso, as Illápso.

Illatióne, an illation or bringing in. Also an inference or thing that must follow.

Illecebra, a fleering enticement, a delightfull allurement, a blandishing delight. Also a kind of Sengreene or Houseleeke. Also a kind of wild Purcelane.

Illecitézza, vnlawfulnesse.

Illécito, vnlawfull, against right.

Illeiáre, to make or enter into her.

Illepido, without grace or pleasance.

Illéso, vnhurt, vnoffended.

Illetamáre, to vndung, to vnmucke.

Illetterággine, as Illetteratúra.

Illetteráto, vnlearned, illiterate.

Illetto, not read, vnread.

Illetteratúra, ignorance of learning.

Illibáto, vntouched, vnspotted, vncorrupted.

Illiberále, not liberall, miserly.

Illiberalità, couetise, auarice, niggardlinesse.

Illíbito, as it were vnlawfull.

Illibitaménte, as it were vnlawfully.

Illicitézza, vnlawfulnesse.

Illícito, vnlawfull, against right.

Illíce, an Oke-tree.

Illimitábile, vnlimitable, vnboundable.

Illimitáto, vnlimited, boundlesse.

Illiquábile, that can not bee melted or made liquid.

Illiquidíre, dísco, díto, to enmoisten or make liquid.

Illitterággine, as Illitteratúra.

Illitteráto, illiterate, vnlearned.

Illitteratúra, ignorance of learning.

Illordáre, as Inlordáre.

Illúdere, lúdo, lúsi, lúso, to illude, to delude, to flout, to frumpe, to mocke, or deceiue with any false apparence.

Illuiáre, to enter or turne into another then himselfe.

Illuminánte grátia, enlightning grace.

Illumináre, to illuminate, to enlighten.

Illuminatióne, illumination, enlightning.

Illuminatóre, an enlightner.

Illuminatíno, that doth illuminate.

Illusióne, mocking, illusion, delusion, any false or deceiuing apparence.

Illusíuo, illusiue, deceitfull.

Illusóre, a mocker, a deluder.

Illustránza, as Illustrézza.

Illusória árte, the arte of deluding.

Illustráre, to illustrate, to dignifie.

Illustratióne, an illustration.

Illustratóre, an illustrator, a giuer of honors or dignities.

Illústre, illustrious, bright. Also excellent, honorable, famous, worthy.

Illústre memória, famous memorie, worthy renowme.

Illustréuole, that may bee illustrated or renowmed.

Illustrézza, illustriousnesse, brightnesse, excellencie, worthinesse, shining aboue others.

Illustríssimo, most illustrious, most excellent, most worthy and faire-shining.

Illustrità, as Illustrézza.

Illuuiáre, as Diluuiáre.

Illuuióne, as Diluuióne.

Il mal'anno chè Dío ti día, an euill yeare that God giue thee.

Il méno, the least. Also at least.

Il meglio, the best.

Il pásso, any way or passage.

Il mi credéua, I thought it.

Il perchè, wherefore, the reason why, for which cause.

Il mio, what euer is mine.

Il per tánto, as Il perchè.

Il per tútto, what is euery where.

Il più, for the most part, the most.

Il più ch'io pósso, the most I can or am able.

Il più délle uólte, most times.

Il più tósto, the soonest that may be.

Il príma chè, so soone as, the first time that.

Il pur dirò, I must needs tell.

Il quándo, the houre, time or when.

Il símile, likewise.

Il sópra più, the ouerplus or remainder.

Il súo, what euer is his. 



Il ti perdóno, I forgiue it thee.

Il tútto, the all or whole.

Il ui dirò, I will tell it yow.

Im, a Particle locall and of priuation euer in the beginning of compounded words, as In, and dis or un or in, namely before all the vowels and B. and P.

I'ma, low, deepe.

Imagéne,, uále próle & descendente. 

Imaginábile, that may be imagined.

Imaginaménto, a surmising or imagining.

Imagináre, to imagine, to thinke, to suppose or haue opinion of.

Imaginário, imaginarie, supposiue.

Imaginatióne, imagination, thought, opinion or surmise.

Imaginatíua, that is or may bee imagined.

Imaginatóre, an imaginer, a surmiser.

Imágine, an Image, a similitude in forme, a figure. Also a colour for any thing. Also an imagination, a thought or opinion of any thing. Also remembrance or apprehension of a thing.

Imaginéuole, that may bee imagined, thought or surmised.

Imágo, as Imágine.

Imbabolaménti, blubbrings with ones eyes.

Imbaboláre, to blubber with ones eyes.

Imbacuccáre, as Imbauccáre.

Imbagagliáre, to packe vp all manner of cariage, or bag and baggage.

Imbagliáre, as Imbagagliáre.

Imbagnáre, to wash or bath into.

Imbaligiáre, to put vp into a Male or Cloake-bagge. Also to suppresse.

Imballaménti, impackings or packes.

Imballáre, to packe vp in packes.

Imballatóre, Packers. Also Wool-wineders.

Imballordággine, dizzinesse or giddinesse.

Imballordiménto, dizzinesse, or giddinesse.

Imballordire, dísco, díto, to become, to be, or make dizzie or giddy in the head.

Imballordito, become or made dizzie.

Imbalsamáre, to inbalme.

Imbambaciáre, as Imbambagiáre.

Imbambagiáre, to bumbase. Also to stuffe, to fill, or quilt with bumbace

Imbambináre, to become childish, to dote.

Imbambire, bísco, bíto, as Imbambináre.

Imbambolággine, a blearing or dazeling in the sight. Also a dim translucency. Also a childish doting.

Imbambolaménto, as Imbambolággine.

Imbamboláre, to dazle or bleare the sight. Also to besot or make a child of one with blandishments and flatteries. Vsed also to make through-shining.

Imbancáre, to bench, to imbench.

Imbancadúra, the benching in a Galley.

Imbandigióne, any kind of napery or linnen seruing to set forth a table with foulded cloathes of diuers fashions, as they vse at Princes boardes in Italy. Also a Sewers cloath or napkin. Also preparing of dishes and dishing of meats for a table. Also all manner of swathings or bandellings.

Imbandiménto, as Imbandigióne.

Imbandíre, dísco, díto, to swathe or bandell about. Also to spread or lay a broad, or a Cup-boord with foulded napery. Also to sewe or goe before meat as a Princes sewer. Also to dish vp meates for the table. Also to crie or proclaime by Proclamation.

Imbanditóre, a Butler or Napery-man, that layeth the boorde. Also a Gentleman Sewer. Also a disher of meates. Also a swather. Also a common cryer or proclaimer.

Imb árba, ouer-against in sight, paralell to ones beard.

Imbárba grátia, for the loues of ones beard, or for ones faire lookes sake.

Imbarazzáre, to intangle, to imbroile, to disorder, to put into confusion.

Imbarázzo, an intangling, an imbroyling an incombrance, any kind of trash or trumpery or luggage. Also a let, a hinderance or a turmoyling.

Imbarbáre, to imbeard, as Abbarbicáre.

Imbarbigliáre, as Imbardáre.

Imbarberescáre, a word taken from those that teach Barbary horses, as much to say, to teach any creature to doe any thing, as to breake a horse, to run a race, to come to the staffe, to hunt, to stop, &c. to inseame. Also to enter a dogge or a hawke.

Imbarberíre, rísco, ríto, to become barbarous.

Imbarbottáre, ouéro Imborbottare. 

Imbarbugliáre, as Imbarazzáre.

Imbarbúglio, as Imbarázzo.

Imbarcaménto, an imbarking or shipping. Also a shipping place.

Imbarcáre, to imbarke, to ship, to take shipping. Also to imbarke or put or draw or fetch one into some businesse.

Imbarcatióne, as Imbarcaménto.

Imbárco, an imbarking or shipping place.

Imbardáre, to imbard or trap a horse. Also to dight or set foorth brauely. 

Imbardársi, to intangle himselfe in foolish loue, or to loue adulterously.

Imbardigliáre, as Imbardáre.

Imbarilláre, to imbarrell or barrell vp.

Imbaronáre, to imbaron. Also to whip about with twine or merlin, as a bowstring.

Imbarraménto, an imbarring.

Imbarráre, to imbar, to stop.

Imbasciáta, an Embassage.

Imbasciatóre, an Embassador.

Imbasciería, an Embassage.

Imbasilischíto, become as a Basiliske or of it's venemous nature.

Imbastaggiáre, to pad or put a Packesaddle on. Also to harnish a teeme of horses.

Imbastardáre, to bastardize, to corrupt, to degenerate from true kinde.

Imbastardíre, dísco, díto, as Imbastardáre.

Imbastáre, as Imbastaggiáre.

Imbastináre, as Imbastaggiáre.

Imbastíre, tísco, títo, as Imbastaggiáre. Also to stuffe, to quilt, or driue in. Also to furnish or dight. Also to baste as taylers doe.

Imbásto, a pad or Pack-saddle.

Imbastonáre, as Inalberáre.

Imbattagliáre, to arange, to imbattell.

Imbáttere, bátto, battéi, battúto, to meete or light vpon by chance. Also to beate in.

Imbattiménto, a meeting or lighting vpon by meere chance.

Imbattúto, met or lighted vpon by chance.

Imbauagliáre, to imbib ones breast. Also to muffle ones face.

Imbauagliaménto, an enmuffling, an imbibbing.

Imbauaiuoláre, as Imbauagliáre.

Imbauecáre, as Imbauccáre.

Imbauccáre, to maske ones face, to muffle ones mouth, to hoode-winke ones eies.

Imbeccáre, to imbill or cram foule. Also to bill or smouch.

Imbeccáta, an imbilling, a cramming of foule. Also a smouching, a billing.

Imbeccatóre, a crammer of poultry.

Imbeccatúra, as Imbeccáta.

Imbeccoláre, ', as Imbeccáre.

Imbecheráre, to put into ones head or fansie, to teach one to doe or say any thing. Also to allure or deceiue one.

Imbecille, weake, feeble, faint.

Imbecillíre, lísco, líto, to make or become weake, faint or feeble.

Imbecillità, imbecillity, weakenesse.

Imbelle, vnapt to warre, vnarmed, naked, sance defence, timorous, weake.

Imbellettaménti, womens paintings. 



Imbellettáre, to paint as women do.

Imbelliménto, as Imbellettaménti.

Imbellire, lisco, líto, to imbellish, to beautifie.

Imbeluíre, ísco, íto, to become sauage or cruell as a wilde beast.

Imbendáre, to inscarfe, to blind fould.

Imbendatúra, an inscarfing, or blinding.

Imberbe, beardlesse, without a beard.

Imberciáre, to shoot, to hit, to but or stick in the marke one shootes or ames at.

Imberciatóre, a shooter or hitter of a marke.

Imberettáre, to cap or en bonnet.

Imbertescáto, made scaffold-like. Also fortified with block-houses or scaffolds.

Imbertonággine, adulterous louing.

Imbertonáto, adulterously in loue.

Imbertestáto, a loft, surmounting others.

Imbestialáre, as Imbestiáre.

Imbestialíre, lísco, líto, as Imbestiáre.

Imbestiáre, to become a beast or beastlie.

Imbénere, béuo, béuui, beuúto, as Imbuíre.

Imbiaccaménto, a blanching with Ceruse.

Imbiaccáre, to whiten or daube with Ceruse.

Imbiadáre, to fill with prouender.

Imbiancaménto, a whitning, a blanching.

Imbiancáre, to whiten, to blanch. Also to become pale, white or wan.

Imbiancheggiáre, as Imbiancáre.

Imbianchíre, chísco, chíto, as Imbiancáre.

Imbianchíto, whited, emblanched.

Imbiasimábile, not to be blamed.

Imbibitióne, an embibing, a drinking in, or receiuing any liquor into.

Imbigóncia, in a Pulpit, or chaire of an Orator.

Imbigonciáre, to entre, sit, or be in a Pulpit, or Orators chaire.

Imbiondiménto, a making Biondo.

Imbiondíre, dísco, díto, to make Biondo.

Imbissacciáre, to put vp into a satchell or wallet.

Imbissáto, enbissed, or clothed with Bisse.

Imbitumáre, as Bitumáre.

Imbiutáre, to lute or stop with clay.

Imbizzaráre, rísco, ríto, to make or become fond, fantasticall, or fangled.

Imblandiménti, emblandishments.

Imblandíre, dísco, díto, to emblandish.

Imblanditóre, an emblandisher.

Imboccaláre, to put into drinking pots.

Imboccaménto, a mouthing in. 

Imboccáre, to mouthe-in, to feede or cram, to put into ones mouth. Also to stop the mouth of a Cannon. Also to runne into some riuer or creeke of the land, as the Sea doeth in many places. Also for a Ship to enter the mouth of any riuer, as we say to embogue.

Imboccáta, a mouth-full. Also a mouthing. Also an emboguing of a riuer.

Imboccatúra, as Imboccáta. Also the mouth of a horses bit.

Imbogliáre, to embog, or sinke in mud or mire. Also to stocke or bulke any thing in a Ship. Also to packe vp into bundles.

Imbóglio, a bundle or fardle packed or rouled vp. Also stoage or bulke in a Ship.

Imboláre, as Inuoláre, to steale.

Imbolatióne, a stealing, a pilfring or purloining out of sight.

Imbolatóre, a stealer, a theefe, a pilfrer, or a hider from another.

Imbolgiáto, engulfed. Looke Bólgia.

Imboliáre, as Inuoláre, to steale.

Imbólio, as Imbolatióne, a stealing.

Imbolláre, as Bolláre.

Imbombáre, to ensteepe, to lay in steepe.

Imbonáccia, at ease, and in plentie.

Imboniménto, a making good.

Imboníre, nísco, níto, to make or become good.

Imborbáre, to bemire with durt.

Imborbottáre ouero Imbarbottáre, mandórono mólte bárche imborbottáte.

Imborcáre, to put into cloth of gold.

Imborchiáre, to enstud with broade nailes.

Imborgáre, to emborough.

Imboriáto, become or made proud.

Imbóro,, vna linea segnáta cóme quelle che fánno imarangóni con l'imbóro. 

Imborricáto, enfrocked, or in a quilted waste-coate. Also quilted or counterpointed.

Imborsaménto, an embursing.

Imborsáre, to emburse, to put into a purse.

Imboscáre, to grow to a wood, to enwood, to enforest. Also to enter or goe into a wood, to take couert or shelter as a Deere doeth. Also to grow wilde or desert. Also to lay in ambush.

Imboscáta, an ambush, an ambuscado.

Imboschíre, chísco, chíto, as Imboscáre.

Imbosimáre, to stiffen or size linnen cloth.

Imbossáre, to worke embossed worke, to embosse.

Imbossatúta, an embossing.

Imbossoláre, to put into boxes. Also to deck or dight any roome or chamber with all necessaries, as it were an Apothecaries shop, where their boxes are so curiously ranged, that nothing is misplaced.

Imbossoláta, put into a boxe. Also dighted with all necessaries.

Imbottaménto, a putting into buts or pipes.

Imbottatóia, a funnell. Also a leather pipe to conueigh wine from out the vessels in the streete into other great vessels lying in sellars.

Imbottáre, to embarell, to entunne, or put into pipes and hogsheads. Also to swell as a Toade.

Imbottíre, tísco, títo, to stuffe, to quilt, to counterpoint, to fill with bumbaste.

Imbottitúra, a quilting, a counterpointing.

Imbottonáre, to embutton, to button together.

Imbozzaménto, as Imbozzatúra.

Imbozzáre, to drawe the first rough draught of any draught, to hew out roughly. Also to vnderlay or boulster any thing with wads of straw, &c.

Imbozzatúra, a rough or first draught of any writing or worke. Also a boulstring or vnderlaying with any wad or soft thing.

Imbozzimáre, as Imbosimáre.

Imbracáre, to embreech, to put into breeches. Also to brack or set artillerie vpon his stock and cariage.

Imbraccáto, embrached, become a brache.

Imbracciaménti, embracements, collings, huggings, enclaspings.

Imbracciáre, to embrace, to coll, to hug, to enclasp.

Imbracciatúra, an embracing. Also a target or shield with braces.

Imbragáre, as Imbraccáre.

Imbragiáre, to enkindle red whot, to set on fire, or burne as embers.

Imbramábile, not to be wished for.

Imbrandíre, dísco, díto, as Brandíre.

Imbrattaménto, any sulling, fouling, poluting, defiling, or besmearing.

Imbrattáre, to foule, to sullie, to besmeare, to polute, to defile.

Imbrattaría, as Imbrattaménto.

Imbrattatúra, as Imbrattaménto.

Imbrátti, foule rags, filthy trash.

Imbrátto, as Imbrattaménto.

Imbrattúzzo, beastly and filthy.

Imbrauáre, to make or become braue.

Imbreda, a breake-fast.

Imbredáre, to breake ones fast.

Imbrenáre, as Imbrigliáre.

Imbrentína, an ouer busie woman.

Imb reuiáre, as Abbreuiáre.

Imbreuiatióne, as Imbreuiatúra.

Imbreuiatúra, as Abbreuiatióne.

Imbriacábile, that may be drunken. 



Imbriacággine, drunkennesse, tipsinesse.

Imbriacaménto, as Imbriacaggine.

Imbriacáre, to make or become drunken

Imbriachézza, drunkennesse.

Imbriáco, drunken. Also a drunkard.

Imbriacóne, a filthy great drunkard.

Imbriaconáccio, as Imbriacone.

Imbriágo, the Sea-hare. Also drunken or tipsie.

Imbricáre, to roofe or couer with tiles.

Imbriccáto, become a Sbrícco or Brícco.

Imbríci, ridge-tiles. Also roofe-tiles.

Imbrigamento, an embroiling, an entangling, an enstrifing.

Imbrigáre, to enstrife, to molest, to embroile. Also to entangle.

Imbrigantíto, become a Brigánte.

Imbrigliáre, to bridle, to curbe, to snaffle.

Imbrigliatúra, a bridling, a snaffling.

Imbroáccia, a kind of dressing of meate.

Imbroccáre, to hit with or giue an Imbroccado, that is a thrust giuen ouer the dagger. Also to stud or set with studs. Also to put into cloth of gold. Also to hit in shooting the white, the peg, the middle or clout of any butte or marke: as Dáre di brócca.

Imbroccáta, an Imbroccado or thrust giuen ouer the dagger. Looke Imbroccáre.

Imbroccatúra, as Imbroccáta.

Imbrocciáre, to broche vpon a spit.

Imbrodoláre, to foule or fill with dishwash, with broth or with swill.

Imbrogliáre, to embroile, to entangle, to intricate, to enwrap, to encomber, to garboile.

Imbroggiáre, as Imbrogliáre.

Imbróggio, as Imbróglio.

Imbróglio, an embroiling, an entangling, an intricatenesse, an enwrapping, a garboile, a mish mash.

Imbroglióne, a busie garboiling fellow.

Imbrucare, to fill or deuoure with Caterpillers. Also to spoile and waste.

Imbrunáre, as Imbruníre.

Imbruníre, nísco, níto, to make, or become duskie, darke, or browne. Also to burnish.

Imbrunitáre, a burnisher, a frubber.

Imbrunitúra, a frubbing, a burnishing.

Imbruscáre, to ensowre or make sharp.

Imbuáre, to enmud, to enbog, to enmire.

Imbucáre, to lay or wash in a bucke. Also to put or creepe into a hole.

Imbucatáre, to lay or wash in a bucke.

Imbuiménto, a sinking into, a moistning, a steeping into. Also a tainting or a distaining. Also a teaching, a training vp vnto, an enduing.

Imbuíre, ísco, íto, to sinke into, to wet or moisten-in. Also to steepe into. Also to embrue. Also to taint or distaine. Also to teach, to traine vp, or put into ones braine.

Imbuíto, sunken into, moistned in, steeped into, embrued. Also tainted or distained. Also taught, endued, trained vp, or put into ones head with oft teaching.

Imbum énto, a tainting, a distaining.

Imburberáto., looke Búrbero.

Imburchiáre, as Imburcáre. Also as Imbecheráre.

Imburiassáre, as Imbecheráre. Also to stuffe or fill full. Also to beate or bang.

Imburiassáto, perswaded or forced to beleeue. Also stuffed. Also banged or beaten.

Imburiassóne, an earnest perswader or teacher, a forcer of one to beleeue him. Also a common barater, a false witnesse, a knight of the post. Also a stuffer. Also a beater or banger.

Imburiáto, vsed for Infuriáto.

Imbussáre, as Imbossáre.

Imbústo., Vsed for Bústo.

Imbutiráre, to butter. Also to become butter.

Imbutíre, tísco, títo, as Imbottíre.

Imbúto, as Imbuíto.

Imiagoláre, to meaw or cry as a Cat.

Imiei, my folkes or goods.

Imitábile, that may be imitated.

Imitándo, to be followed or imitated.

Imiráre, to imitate or doe the like.

Imitatióne, imitation.

Imitéuole, as Imitábile.

Immacchiáre, to enter into, or grow to bushes, brakes or brambles.

Immacchionáre, as Immacchiáre.

Immaceráre, as Immoláre. Also to make leane, to macerate.

Immaculatézza, vnspottednesse.

Immaculáto, vnspotted, vndefiled.

Immagráre, to become or make leane.

Immagríre, grísco, gríto, as Immagráre.

Immandráre, to reduce into flockes.

Immáne, wilde, brutish, bloudy-minded, fell, fierce, outragious, moodie, cruell.

Immaneggéuole, vnmanageable.

Immanente, that remaineth in.

Immanicáre, to sleeue a garment. Also to put into sleeues. Also to put a handle, a hilt or haft vnto or vpon any thing.

Immanità, wildnesse, brutishnesse, bloodthirstinesse, fiercenesse, fell-crueltie.

Immansuero, vnmild, sauage, wild, vntamed, vngentle, vnmeeke.

Immansuetúdine, vntamednesse, wildnesse, vngentlenesse, vnmildnesse.

Immantáre, to enmantle, to enrobe.

Immantelláre, as Immantáre.

Immantinente, presently, incontinently.

Immarcessíbile, vncorruptible, that cannot rot.

Immarchesáta, a woman hauing her monethly flowers vpon her.

Immarcíbile, that cannot rot.

Immarcíre, císco, cíto, to rot, to adle.

Immargináre, as Margináre.

Immariuoláre, to become a Mariuólo.

Immarmoráre, to enmarble.

Immarzapanáto, made or become a marchpaine. Also finely deckt or trimmed.

Imniarzáre, to engraffe with yoong shootes.

Immascheráre, to enmaske.

Immaschíre, chísco, chíto, to become mankind.

Immastelláre, to lay or put into tubs.

Immatassáre, to skeane vp into skeanes of thrid, silke or yarne.

Immateriále, vnmateriall.

Immatíre, tísco, títo, to become mad.

Immaturaménte, vntimely, vnripely, vnseasonably, out of time.

Immaturità, vnripenesse, vntimelinesse. Also vnseasonablenesse.

Immatúro, vnripe, vnseasonable. Also vntimely, out of season, out of time.

Immazzettáre, to imbundle, to insheafe, to make into handfuls.

Immeabile, vnpassable through.

Immedagliáre, as Inmedagliáre.

Immediataménte, immediately.

Immediáte, immediately, next.

Immedicábile, vncureable.

Immeditataménte, without premeditation, extempore, suddainely.

Immeditáto, vnpremeditated.

Immedusárfi, to become monstrous, like as Medusa was.

Immegliáre, to mend or better.

Immembráre, to member or put together. Vsed also for to carue in peeces.

Immemorábile, vnmemorable.

Immemore, vnmindefull, not remembring.

Immemoréuole, as Immemorábile.

Immemória, forgetfulnesse.

Immensità, boundlesse, largenesse.

Immensitúdine, as Immensità.

Immenso, vnmeasurable, boundlesse.

Immensurábile, vnmeasurable.

Immensuréuole, vnmeasurable.

Immerdáre, to beray, to beshite.

Immergáre, as Immergere.

Immergere, mergo, mersi, merso, to plunge, to drench, to ducke, to sinke or drowne vnder water, to diue.

Immergiménto, a plunging, a drenching, a diueing or ducking vnder water.

Immeritaménte, vndeseruedly.

Immeritéuole, vndeseruing, not worthie. 



Immerito, vndeseruing, vnworthinesse.

Immerso, plunged, drowned, drenched, diued or ducked vnder water.

Immeschiáre, to mash or mixe together.

Immescoláto, vnmingled, vnblended.

Immetriáre, as Immitriáre.

Immezzáre, to part, goe, come, or deuide betweene or in the middle.

Immezzo, in the middle, betweene.

Immiáre, to enter into or become my selfe.

Immigráre, to enter into a place.

Immigratióne, an entring into a place.

Immilláre, to enter or put into thousands.

Imminente, as Eminente.

Imminenza, as Eminenza.

Imminuimento, a diminishing.

Imminuíre, ísco, íto, to diminish.

Immiserábile, vnmeasurable.

Immisericórdia, vnmercifulnesse.

Immisericordéuole, vnmercifull.

Immisericordióso, vnmercifull.

Immísto, vnmixed, vnblended, pure.

Immitriáre, to enmiter, to crowne with a miter as a Bishop.

Immisurábile, vnmeasurable.

Immisuréuole, not to be measured.

Immíte, vnmilde, cruell, vnmeeke.

Immitézza, vnmildenesse, cruelty.

I'mmo, yea but, but rather.

Immóbile, stedfast, vnmoueable.

Immobilità, immobility, stedfastnesse.

Immobilménte, vnmooueably.

Immoderánza, as Immoderatióne.

Immoderatióne, immoderation, insaciety.

Immoderáto, immoderate, vntemperate.

Immodestía, immodesty, vnciuility.

Immodesto, immodest, vnchaste, vnciuill.

Immódico, excessiue, much exceeding.

Immoláre, to offer sacrifice.

Immolatióne, an offring of a sacrifice.

Immolíre, lísco, líto, to build, to erect.

Immolitíuo, as Imolitíuo.

Immolláre, to mollifie, to soften, to allay. Also to lay or steepe in water. Also to become wanton or effeminate.

Immollíre, lísco, líto, as Immolláre.

Immollíto, mollified, softned. Also moistened or steeped in water. Also become effeminate.

Immondézza, as Immondítia.

Immondítia, vncleanelinesse, filthinesse.

Immóndo, vncleane, polluted, filthy.

Immoránza, an abiding-in fast.

Immoráre, to continue or abide fast in.

Immorigeránza, vnmannerlinesse.

Immorigeráto, vnnurtured, vntaught.

Immormoráre, to murmure, as Mormoráre.

Immorsáre un cauállo, to embit a horse.

Immortaláre, to immortalize.

Immortále, immortall, neuer dying.

Immortalità, immortalitie, aye-during.

Immortalménte, immortally.

Immotézza, stedfastnesse, immobilitie.

Immóto, fast, vnmoueable, stedfast.

Immóuere, to make an vprore or commotion.

Immuggíre, gísco, gíto, as Muggíre.

Immúne, discharged of any office, law or payment, exempt, quit, free.

Immuníre, nísco, níto, to vnfurnish of any thing or munition.

Immunità, immunitie, franchise, libertie.

Immuragliáre, as Immuráre.

Immuráre, to immure or wall in.

Immuschiáre, to enmuske or perfume.

Immúso, a kinde of yoong Eagle or Ospray.

Immutábile, constant, vnchangeable.

Immutabilità, immutabilitie, constantnesse.

Immutánza, as Immutabilità.

Immutáre, to change or transforme into.

Immutatióne, vnchange ablenesse.

Immutéuole, vnchangeable, constant.

Immutíre, tísco, títo, to become mute or dumbe.

Immutíto, made dumb, become mute.

Immutolíre, lísco, líto, as Immutíre.

I'mo, low, deepe, deepest.

Imolitíuo, a medicine to soften any hard swelling.

Impaccáre, to pack vp, to empack.

Impacchiugáre, to beray, to sullie, to slurre, to durtie, to foule. Also to squatter, to blurre, or bedawbe.

Impacciáre, to empeach, to meddle with. Also to hinder, to trouble, to disturbe.

Impacciársi, to meddle with any thing.

Impacciáto, impeached, hindered, disturbed, encombred.

Impáccio, hindrance, disturbance, trouble, impeachment, encombrance.

Impacciuccáre, as Impacchiugáre.

Impaciente, as Impatiente.

Impacienza, as Impatienza.

Impadelláre, to put into any pan.

Impradronírsi, nísco, níto, to become possessor, Lord, owner or master of.

Impaduláre, as Impaludáre.

Impagábile, that cannot be paid.

Impagáre, to pay home throughly.

Impagliáre, to fill with or lye in straw or litter. Also to plight faith or betroth in mariage. Also to lye in child-bed.

Impagliuóla, a woman laid in childbed.

Impagliuoláre, to lye in child-bed.

Impagliuoláta, laid in child-bed. Also a woman lying in child-bed.

Impalagióne, as Impalaménto.

Impalaménto, an empailing, an enstaking. Also an vndersetting with stakes or poles.

Impaláre, to empale, to enstake, to empole, to empalisado, to fortifie with poles or stakes, to raile or paile in. Also to vnderset with poles or stakes, as they doe Vines and Hops. Also to put bread into an ouen with a peele. Also to put to death with a stake as Turkes doe Christians putting a sharpe stake in at the fundament which comes out at the mouth, and so fixe the other end into the ground.

Impaláto, empaled, enstaked, empoled, empalisadoed, fortified with poles and stakes, railed or paled in, vnderset with poles or stakes. Also put into an ouen with a peele. Also put to death with a stake at the fundament.

Impalatióne, as Impalaménto.

Impalazzáre, to empallace.

Impalidíre, dísco, díto, to waxe or become pale and wan.

Impalizzáre, as Palificáre.

Impalizzáta, as Palificáta.

Impalmáre, to fasten hand in hand, to plight faith and troth by shaking of hands, to affiance or betroth man and wife in mariage.

Impalmáta, a woman affianced.

Impalmáto, affianced, betrothed.

Impalpábile, impalpable, without a bodie, that cannot be felt.

Impalpabilità, vnfeelingnesse.

Impalpáre, to feele or grope into.

Impálpo, a feeling or groping into.

Impaludaménto, an enmarishing.

Impaludáre, to make or grow fennie, waterish, moorish, or boggie.

Impampanáre, as Pampanáre.

Impanáre, to make into bread or loaues.

Impanatióne, a reall turning of another substance into bread.

Impaneáre, to bench, to enbench.

Impaniáre, to make slimie, clammie, or gluish. Also to entangle or catch with bird-lime.

Impaní, o, an entangling, an enliming.

Impannarazzáre, to hang or dight with tapistrie or hangings.

Impannarazzáta, hanged or dight or furnished with tapistrie or hangings.

Impannáre, as Appannáre, to cloze or shut with boord, or paper-windowes.

Impannáte, certaine drawing windowes of boord or paper vsed in Italie.

Impantanáre, to bemire, to bemud. Also to enbog.

Impanterársi, to become like a Panther.

Impapaficáto, clothed or couered with a gabardine called a Papafico.

Impapuláto, full of angrie red pimples or pushes in the skinne.

Imparadisáre, to emparadize. 



Imparánte, learning. Also a learner.

Imparagonábile, not to be compared.

Imparáre, to learne, or conceiue in mind.

Imparáre a ménte, to learne by rote.

Imparentársi, to ioine in alliance.

Impargolíre, lísco, líto, to make or become little and prettie withall.

Impári, odd in number, vnequall.

Imparità, odnesse, imparitie.

Imparnassáre, to bring or come to Parnassus.

Impartíbile, that can not be parted.

Impartiménto, an imparting.

Impartíre, tísco, títo, to impart, to deuide.

Impasciúto, vnfed.

Impassábile, vnpassable.

Impassíbile, impassible, that can not suffer or be moued with perturbation.

Impassibilità, impassibilitie.

Impassionáre, to appassionate.

Impassíre, sísco, síto, to fade or wither as flowres in the Sunne, to dry as reisins and prunes, to grow flappie and wrimpled.

Impastáre, to empaste, to raise paste, to put into paste, to mould, to kneade paste or dough, to lay leuen for bread. Also to cram poultrie. Also to beplaister.

Impastáta, any kind of paste or pasting.

Impasteggiáre, as Impastáre.

Impasticciáre, as Impasteggiáre.

Impasticciáto, laid in paste.

Impastoiáto, taken or put into shackles or fetters, or pasterns.

Impásto, an engorging, or cramming.

Impastricciáre, to bedawbe, to beplaister, to besmeare, to bedabble.

Impastricciatúra, a bedawbing, a beplaistring, a besmearing.

Impasturáre, to pasture, to feede.

Impatíbile, vnsufferable, intolerable.

Impatibilità, vnsufferablenesse.

Impatiente, impatient.

Impatienza, impatience.

Impatronírsi, as Impadronírsi.

Impattáre, to bargaine, to couenant. Also to chalenge with contempt. Also as we say, to fasten a iest or wrong vpon one.

Impátto, a couenant, a bargaine.

Impauidézza, vndauntednesse, boldnesse.

Impáuido, vndaunted, fearelesse, bold.

Impauríre, rísco, ríto, to put in feare.

Impauríto, put in feare.

Impazzáre, to assot, or become mad.

Impazzíre, zísco, zíto, as Impazzáre.

Impeccábile, vnsinfull.

Impeccabilità, vnsinfulnesse.

Impeciáre, to bepitch, to enpitch.

Impeciatúra, an empitching.

Impecorársi, to become sheepish.

Impedaláre, to fixe or take good footing, to roote in, or take roote very fast.

Impedicináre, as Impedaláre.

Impedíbile, that may be hindred.

Impediménti, lets, luggage, bag and baggage.

Impedimentíre, tísco, títo, as Impedíre.

Impediménto, an impediment, an hinderance.

Impedíre, dísco, díto, to hinder, to let, to disturbe, to thwart, to crosse, to encumber.

Impedíto, hindred, let, encumbred.

Impeditóre, a hindrer, a letter.

Impegnáre, to paune, to engage.

Impégno, a paune, a gage, a pledge.

Impegoláre, as Impeciáre.

Impegolatúra, a bepitching, a tarring.

Impegríre, as Impigríre.

Impelagársi, to engulfe into the Sea.

Impeláre, to enhaire, to bud haires.

Impelíre, lísco, líto, as Impeláre.

Impellente, impelling, inforcing.

Impellere, pello, pelsi, pellúto, to impell, to thrust violently, to inforce, to mooue, to driue forward, to put to, to perswade as it were by compulsion.

Impellicciáre, to enfurre, to clothe in furres.

Impelliccionáre, as Impelliceiáre.

Impendente, pendent, depending.

Impendenza, a dependencie, or by-hanging.

Impendere, pendo, pési, péso, or pendùto, to hang vp, or by.

Impendola, hangling, or dangling.

Impendoláre, to dangle, or hang downe.

Impenetrábile, that can not be pierced.

Impenetréuole, impenetrable.

Impennacchiáre, to dight with plumes.

Impenitente, impenitent.

Impenitenza, vnrepentance.

Impennacchiáre, as Impennáre.

Impennáre, to enfeather, to enplume, to fludge, or begin to haue feathers as yong birds. Also to fill a featherbed. Also to decke with feathers. Also to impe a hawkes feathers.

Impennársi, to bound or plunge iadishly.

Impennáta d'inchióstro, a pen-full of inke.

Impennáte, as Impannáte.

Impennáto, feathered, plumed, imped, fludged, filled with feathers.

Impennelláre, to impensell.

Impensábile, not to be thought.

Impensáto, not thought, extempore.

Impensíbile, without consideration.

Impensierággine, carelesnesse.

Impensieráre, to enthought.

Impensieráto, full of thought.

Impepáre, to pepper, to dresse with Pepper.

Impepáta, a meate made of much Pepper. 

Imperánte, raigning, commanding.

Imperáre, as Imperiáre.

Imperatíuo, Imperatiue, commanding.

Imperatóre, an Emperour, or chiefe Ruler, a Generall of an army.

Imperatória, an hearbe whereof there be two sortes.

Imperatório, belonging to an Emperor.

Imperatríce, an Empresse. Also an hearbe.

Imperciò, therefore, forasmuch.

Imperciochè, because that.

Impercettíbile, vnperceiueable.

Impercettibilità, vnperceiuablenesse.

Impercósso, vnstricken, vnhit.

Imperdíbile, not to be lost.

Imperdonábile, vnpardonable.

Imperdonánza, vnforgiuenesse.

Imperdonéuole, vnpardonable.

Imperfettionáre, to make imperfect.

Imperfettióne, an imperfection.

Imperfettíbile, not to be perfected.

Imperfetto, vnperfect, not finished.

Imperiále, Imperiall, Maiesticall.

Imperialísta, one depending on, or takeing part with the Emperour.

Imperialità, Empiry, Imperiality.

Imperiáre, to rule, to rule or command absolutely as chiefe head.

Imperiáto, as Imperio.

Imperiére, as Imperatóre.

Imperio, an Empire, an Empiry, a Monarch, a Royall power, a Supreame preheminence, a Princely iurisdiction, an Imperious sway.

Imperiosaménte, Imperiously.

Imperiosità, Imperiousnesse.

Imperióso, Imperious, Maiesticall. Also proud, haughty and disdainefull.

Imperítia, vnskilfulnesse, vnexperience, ignorance.

Imperíto, vnexpert, vnskilfull.

Imperláre, to impearle, or set with pearles.

Impermésso, vnpermitted, vnlawfull.

Impermettéuole, not to be permitted.

Impermissíbile, not to be permitted.

Impermutábile, vnchangeable.

Impermutánza, vnchangeablenesse.

Impermutatióne, vnchangeablenesse.

Impernicciáre, Scaldár l'ácqua, peláre, ed impernicciáre. 

Impero, as Imperio.

Imperò, therefore, for somuch as.

Imperpetuále, not perpetuall.

Imperpetualità, not perpetuity.

Imperoché, because that.

Imperquéllo chè;, because of that.

Imperquésto chè, because of this.

Imperscrutábile, that cannot be searched into.

Imperscrutéuole, not to be searched into.

Imperseueránza, negligence, inconstancie. 



Impersonále, Impersonall.

Impersonalità, Impersonality.

Impersuasíbile, not to be perswaded.

Impersuáso, vnperswaded.

Imperturbábile, not to be disturbed.

Imperturbáto, vndisturbed.

Impertánto, for somuch, therefore.

Impertánto chè, for somuch as that.

Imperterríto, stout, vndanted, vnabashed.

Imperuers ággine, peeuishnesse, peruersnesse.

Imperuersáre, to grow peruerse, furious, wilde, and fantasticall.

Imperuersaménto, peruersenesse, frowardnesse.

Imperuertíbile, not to be peruerted.

Imperuertíre, tísco, títo, to peruert into.

Imperuio, froward, peeuish, skittish.

Impéso, hanged vp.

Impestáre, to infect with the plague.

Impestatúra, an infecting with the plague.

Impestiáre, to imboult, to boult a doore.

Impestiáto, boulted fast as a doore.

Impetenáre, to white-wash a wall.

Impetigináre, to grow to a tetter, a scurfe or a ring-worme.

Impetígine, any kind of Ring-worme, tetter, scurfe, itch or manginesse.

Impetiginóso, full of itch or Ringewormes.

I'mpeto, a violent or suddaine fury, brunt, force, motion, rage or passion.

Impetrábile, that may be obtained by intreaty or prayer.

Impetragióne, as Impetratióne.

Impetránza, as Impetratióne.

Impetráre, to obtaine by intreaty. Also to petrifie or grow hard to a stone.

Impetratióne, an obtayning by intreatie.

Impetréuole, as Impetrábile.

Impetríre, ísco, íto, to instone, to petrifie.

Impettoláre, to entangle. Also to beblur, to bedash, to bedawbe.

Impetuosità, as I'mpeto.

Impetuóso, impetuous, violent, rash.

Impeueráre, to pepper.

Impeueráta, a meat made of pepper.

I'mpia, vide Herba impia.

Impiagábile, not to be wounded.

Impiagáre, to wound or hurt one.

Impiagatúra, a wounding, a hurting.

Impiantábile, not to be planted.

Impiantáre, to plant or set into.

Impiastracciáre, as Impiastráre.

Impiastracciaménti, as Impiastraménti.

Impiastrácci, beplaistrings or saluings.

Impiastratíccio, clammy or sticking vnto as a plaister. 

Impiastraménti, playstrings, saluings.

Impiastráre, to salue, to beplaister. Also to bedawbe or loame ouer.

Impiastratióne, as Empiastratióne.

Impiastratíuo, clammy as a plaister.

Impiastratóre, a plaisterer, a saluer.

Impiástri, all manner of playsters.

Impiástro, any kind of plaister or salue.

Impiattare, to squat or lye downe flat. Also to endish or emplatter.

Impiccáre, to hang vp.

Impiccatello, a crack-rope, a haltersacke.

Impiccatóio, a hooke to hang by.

Impiccatóre, a hang-man.

Impicchiapótte, a kinde of prouoking dish, as one would say, kindle-cunt.

Impicciáre, to kindle, to set on fire.

Impicciéuole, that may be kindled.

Impicciatúra, an enkindling.

Impicciníre, nísco, níto, as Impicciolíre.

Impicciolíre, lísco, líto, to grow litle, to make lesser.

Impicciolíto, made or growen little.

Impiccolíre, as Impicciolíre.

Impiegábile, not to be folded, inflexible. Also that may be imployed.

Impiegáre, to infold. Also to imploy. Also to bend in ward.

Impiegatióne, a bending or imploying vnto. Also a bending inward.

Impieghéuole, as Impiegábile.

Impiégo, an infoulding, an imployment.

Impietà, impietie, vngodlinesse.

Impietóso, cruell, vnpittifull.

Impietráre, to grow or become stone.

Impietráto cuóre, a stonie heart.

Impigliáre, to seaze vpon, to claspe in.

Impignoccáto, a candied Pine-apple. Also candied as a Pine-apple.

Impigraménte, out of hand, without delay.

Impigríre, grísco, gríto, to make or become idle, lazie, sluggish or slow.

Impiíssimo, most wicked and vngodly.

Impilloláre, to make into round pils.

Impiménto, a filling, are plenishing.

Impinguáre, to make or grow fat.

Impíngue, fat, grosse, greasie.

Impínguere, pínguo, pinguéi, pinguúto, as Impinguáre.

Impinguíre, ísco, íto, as Impinguáre.

Impinzáre, to enkindle or set on fire. Also to driue or put in perforce.

I'mpio, impious, vngodly, blasphemous.

Impiombáre, to leade in, to enleade

Impiombatúra, a fastning with leade.

Impiráre, to prime in, to peg in, to boult in. Also to enfirke with a caruing forke.

Impíre, as Empíre.

Impírio, as Empireo.

Impironáre, as Impiráre.

Impíso, hanged vp. 

Impisciáre, to bepisse, or pisse into.

Impíto, filled. Also accomplished.

Impittóre, one that is no Painter.

Impiumacciáre, as Impiumáre.

Impiumáre, to feather, to enplume.

Impizzáre, to enkindle, to set on fire.

Impizzatóio, any thing to enkindle with.

Impizzicáre, to raise vp to the top.

Implacabile, vnappeasable.

Implacabilità, vnappeasablenesse.

Implácido, vnpleasant, vnpleasing.

Implausíbile, vnplausible.

Implessionársi, for a man to stir vp his affections to be offended at any thing.

Implicáre, to infold, to inwrap, to imply.

Implicatióne, an infoulding, an implication.

Implicataménte, by way of implication.

Implicità, implicitie, obscuritie, intricatenesse, an entangling, an infolding.

Implícito, doubtfull, obscure, infoulded, intricate, intangled.

Implorábile, that may be implored or gotten by sute and crauing.

Imploránza, an imploring or beggerly crauing.

Imploráre, to implore, to craue beggingly.

Imploratióne, as Imploránza.

Impoctusimále linea, a line equally deuiding a circle.

Impoderáre, as Impadronírsi.

Impoderóso, vnmightie, vnpowerfull.

Impoetársi, for a man to become a Poet, to empoet.

Impoláre, to enter the poles of the world.

Impolíre, lísco, líto, to empolish.

Impolitézza, vnpolishednesse, vncleanenesse.

Impolíto, vnpolished, rough, rude.

Impólla, as Ampólla.

Impolláre, to put into an Ampólla. Also to hatch as chickens are hatcht, or egges to haue chickens in them.

Impoltronággine, sluggishnesse, cowardlinesse, lazinesse.

Impoltronáre, to become or make sluggish, lazie or cowardly.

Impoltroníre, nísco, níto, as Impoltronáre.

Impolueráre, to bedust, to bepowder. Also to become dust or powder.

Impolueríre, rísco, ríto, as Impolueráre.

Impoluerizzáre, as Impolueráre.

Impolutióne, impolution, vndefilednesse.

Impolúto, vnpoluted, vndefiled.

Impomicáre, to polish with a Pumiestone, to make sleeke or smoothe.

Impomiciére, as Impomicáre.

Impomoláre, to pomell, or set a pomell on. 



Impónere, póngo, pósi, pósto, to impose, to lay any imposition vpon. Also to ascribe vnto, to lay vnto, or impute vnto.

Impopoláre, to people, to empeople.

Impórre, as Impónere.

Importábile, importable.

Importánte, important, of moment.

Importantíssimo, most important.

Importánza, importance, moment.

Importáre, to import, to be of moment.

Importunaménte, importunately.

Importunáre, to importune, to vrge.

Importunataménte, importunately.

Importunéuole, full of importunity.

Importunità, importunity.

Importúno, importunate, out of season.

Importunóso, full of importunitie.

Importuóso, without ports or hauens.

Impositióne, an imposition.

Impositóre, an imposer, an enioiner.

Impossanza, impuissance, vnabilitie.

Impossente, impuissant, vnable.

Impossessare, to enpossesse.

Impossessáto, enpossessed.

Impossíbile, impossible.

Impossibilità, impossibilitie.

Impósta, an impost, a taxation, a tole, a tallage, an imposition. Also any in-laid thing. Also a staple of a dore.

Impostáre, to beguile with false promises.

Impostema, an impostume.

Impostemáre, to impostumate.

Impostematióne, an Impostumation.

Impostemíre, mísco, míto, to impostumate.

Impostumáre, to impostumate.

Impostumatióne, an Impostumation.

Impósto, in-laid, put in. Also imposed, enioined, laid vpon. Also an impost.

Impósto, as Impósta.

Impostóre, an impostor or deceiuer by false promises, a iugler.

Impostúra, an imposture, a deceiuing by false promises, a iugling trick.

Impotente, impotent, vnable.

Impotenza, impotencie, vnablenesse.

Impoueríre, rísco, ríto, to empouerish.

Impozzáre, to put into a well.

Impraticábile, vnconuersable.

Imprecábile, that may be wished or desired by way of imprecation.

Imprecáre, to desire or wish euill or good vnto by prayer, or cursing.

Imprecatióne, an imprecation, an imploring. Also a cursing.

Impregionáre, to emprison.

Impregióne, emprisoned, in prison.

Impregnábile, that may be gotten with childe. Also the contrarie, barren and that can not be gotten with child.

Impregnággine, a getting with child. Also a bagging with yong ones, the couering or lining of any beast. 

Impregnáre, to get with childe. Also to couer or line any beast.

Impregnatíuo, as Impregnábile.

Impregnatúra, as Impregnággine.

Imprendere, prendo, prési, préso, to learne. Also to vndertake or enterprise.

Imprenditóre, a learner. Also an vndertaker, or enterpriser.

Imprensióne, an imprehension.

Imprénta, a stamp, a print, a brand.

Impréntare, to emprint, or stamp in.

Imprénto, a stamp, or print.

Impremeditataménte, without premeditation.

Impremeditánza, impremeditation.

Impreparáto, vnprepared, vnreadie.

Imprésa, an attempt, an enterprise, an vndertaking. Also an impresse, a word, a mot or embleme. Also a iewell worne in ones hat, with some deuise in it.

Imprescia, haste, speede, in haste.

Impresciáre, to hasten, to make haste.

Impréso, learned. Also vndertaken.

Impresláre, to impresse, to imprint.

Impressionáre, to impresse, or giue impression vnto.

Impressionáto, hauing an impression.

Impressióne, an impression, a stamping.

Impresso, impressed, imprinted, stamped.

Impressóre, an inprinter, a stamper.

Imprestánza, a lone, or lending.

Imprestáre, to lend, or giue to lone.

Imprestatore, a lender.

Impréstito, in lone, lent, giuen to lone.

Imprésto, as Impréstito.

Impretársi, to become a priest.

Impreténso, vnpretended.

Impretírsi, to become a priest.

Impreuisíbile, not to be foreseene.

Imprigionáre, to emprison.

Imprigióne, emprisoned, in prison.

Impríma, first, before, earst, sooner, at first, inprimis.

Impríma chè, before that, ere that.

Imprímere, prímo, pressi, presso, to imprint, to impresse.

Improbábile, that can not be prooued.

Improbabilità, improbabilitie.

Improbalità, as Improbabilità.

Improbáre, to improoue, to impugne.

Improbità, dishonestie, wickednesse.

Improbitáre, to become dishonest.

I'mprobo, dishonest, wicked, lewde.

Improfittáre, to disprofit.

Improfittéuole, vnprofitable.

Improfítto, losse, disprofit.

Impróle, he that hath no children, or is not yet come to mans estate.

Improméttere, to promise, to warrant, to assure.

Improméssa, a promise.

Impromessióne, a promise. 

Impromésso, promised.

Imprónta, a stamp, a print, a brand.

Improntaménte, readily, at hand, quickly.

Improntáre, to stamp, to print, to brand, to emprint.

Improntatóre, a stamper, an enprinter.

Improntézza, as Improntitúdine.

Improntitúdine, vnreadinesse. Vsed also for importunitie.

Imprónto, vnreadie, vnprepared. Also importunate and arrogant.

Improperáre, to vpbraid, to twit, to impute vnto, to cast in ones teeth.

Improperatióne, shame, reproach, imputation. Also an vpbraiding, or casting in ones teeth.

Improperio, as Improperatíone.

Impropagábile, not to be propagated.

Improportionábile, vnproportionable.

Improportionále, vnproportionable.

Improportionalità, disproportion.

Improportionáre, to disproportion.

Improportióne, a disproportion.

Impropósto, impertinent, an impertinencie.

Impropriáre, to impropriate.

Impropriatióne, an impropriation.

Improprietà, improprietie.

Impróprio, vnproper, vnfit.

Improsperáre, not to prosper.

Improsperit à, improsperitie.

Impróspero, vnprosperous.

Improsperóso, vnprosperous.

Improteruíre, ísco, íto, to enfroward.

Improuáre, to improoue, to impugne.

Improuatióne, an improouing.

Improuatóre, an improouer.

Improueráre, as Improperáre.

Improueratióne, as Improperatióne.

Improueratóre, an vpbraider, a twitter.

Improuerio, as Improperatióne.

Improuedúto, vnprouided.

Improuidaménte, vnprouidently.

Improuidente, vnprouident.

Improuidenza, improuidence.

Impróuido, improuident, vnforeseeing.

Improuisáre, to sing, or say extempore.

Improuisatóre, an extempore-sayer.

Improuíso, vnprouided, extempore.

Improuisóre, as Improuisatóre.

Improuísta, on a suddaine, extempore.

Improuistaménte, vnprouidedly, suddainely, vnforeseeingly.

Improuísto, vnprouided. Also suddaine, quicke, without foreseeing.

Improuostársi, to become a Prouost-Marshall, so vsed by Caro.

Imprudente, vnwise, imprudent.

Imprudenza, follie, imprudencie.

Imprunáre, to prune or emprune trees. Also to couer with, or come to brambles, briers, or thornes. 



Impúbero, children of the first age, before they be twelue yeares old.

Impubertà, a childes age before twelue.

Impudente, impudent, shamelesse.

Impudenza, impudencie, shamelesnesse.

Impudíca, vnhaste, incontinent.

Impudicítia, vnchastenesse, incontinencie.

Impugnáre, to clinch with the fiste. Also to impugne or resist.

Impugnatióne, a resisting, an impugning.

Impugnatúra, a clinching with the fiste.

Impueríre, rísco, ríto, to grow or become a child or childish.

Impulsáre, to impulse, to perswade often, to prouoke, to set on.

Impulsióne, a motion or perswasion, or instigation to a thing.

Impulsíuo, impulsiue, that may or hath power to encite or perswade.

Impúlso, as Impulsióne.

Impulsóre, a vehement enciter, perswader or prouoker.

Impúne, scot-free, without danger or punishment of law.

Impunitaménte, vnpunishedly. Also without cause.

Impunità, impunitie, lacke of punishment, libertie.

Impuníto, vnpunished, scotfree, quit from all danger.

Impuntáre, to fasten, to fixe. Also to point or sharpen. Also to stand vpon points. Also to charge or lay to ones imputation. Also to falter or stammer in speach as if one were afraid to speake.

Impúnto, fastened, fixed, &c.

Impurgábile, not to be purged.

Impurità, impuritie, vncleannesse.

Impúro, impure, vncleane, polluted.

Imputaníre, nísco, níto, to become a whore or whorish.

Imputábile, that may be imputed.

Imputare, to impute, to ascribe vnto. Also to charge or blame.

Imputatióne, imputation.

Imputáto, imputed, ascribed vnto.

Imputridíre, dísco, díto, to rot, to putrifie.

Impuzzáre, to fill with a stinke.

Impuzzolíre, lisco, líto, as Impuzzáre.

In, the Particle or Preposition locall. In, into, or at, also, with, as In diligenza, with diligence, also, for, by, or through, as In cortesía, for or through courtesie: in grátia, for the loue or fauor. Also on or vpon, as in cápo, on ones head, in dósso, on ones backe, In gróppa, on the crupper, In cóllo, on ones necke.

In, a Particle or Preposition locall and of priuation vsed very much in composition and beginning of other words, as we vse vn, or dis, or lesse in English, as Incapáce, vncapable, Infelíce, vnhappie, Intrepido, fearelesse, and to put in, to enter in, or worke in, as Incauáre, to digge into, Insignorírsi, to enpossesse himselfe, &c.

Inabandóno, carelesly, in forsaken manner.

Inabilíre, lísco, líto, to enable.

Inábile, vnable.

Inabilità, vnablenesse, disabilitie.

Inabissáre, to sinke, to ouerwhelme, to tumble downe, to precipitate as it were downe into hell.

Inabondéuole, vnplentious, scarse.

Inabondánza, in aboundance, plentiously.

Inabondánza, scarsitie, disaboundance.

Inabondáto, in aboundance or plentie.

Inaccadéuole, vnlikely to chance or befall.

Inaccendíbile, not to be kindled.

Inaccettábile, vnacceptable.

Inaccettéuole, vnacceptable.

Inacciácco, to all ruine, hauock or trampling.

Inaccialíto, steeled, ensteeled.

Inaccomodábile, vnaccomodable.

Inaccóncio, vndressed, marred. Also fittingly, orderly, handsomly drest.

Inaccordábile, vnaccordable, not to bee agreed vpon.

Inacerbáre, to ensharpen, to ensoure. Also to exasperate, to excite to wrath.

Inacerbíre, bísco, bíto, as Inacerbáre.

Inacessíbile, inaccessible, vnaprochable.

Inacesso, hauing no accesse vnto.

Inacetáre, to ensoure as Vineger.

Inacetíre, tísco, títo, as Inacetáre.

Inacostábile, vnaprochable.

Inacquáre, to water as they doe Gardens, to put into water, to put water into wine, to sprinkle with water.

Inacquistéuole, vnpurchasable.

Inacríre, rísco, ríto, as Inacerbáre.

Inadietro, backward. Also heretofore.

Inadolcíbile, not to be sweetned.

Inadulábile, not to be flattered.

Inaffábile, vncourteous, vnaffable.

Inaffabilíre, lísco, líto, to become affable.

Inaffabilità, discourtesie, inaffabilitie.

Inaffettáto, vnaffected, not curious.

Inaffiaménto, a watring of grounds.

Inaffiáre, as Inacquáre. Also to fill with winde or breath.

Inaffiatóio, a watring pot or spout.

Inágata., Looke Andáre in ágata. Also a kind of building among Architects.

Inagitáto, vnmooued, vntossed.

Inagliáre, to fill or dresse with Garlike.

Inagnellársr, to become a Lambe or like a Lambe. Also to become milde or gentle.

Inagríre, grísco, gríto, to make or become sharpe, soure or tarte.

Inaguáto, in watch and ambush. 

Inalbáre, to whiten or make white.

Inalberáre, as Inalboráre.

Inalboráre, to become a tree, to set or furnish with trees. Also to climbe or get vp into trees. Also to rig a ship with mastes, to set an ensigne vpon a staffe, to aduance the pikes. Also to shaff or staff any weapon. Also among Alchimists to put into a Limbeck.

Inalborársi, is when a horse doth rise on his forefeete and is ready to fall backward.

Inalcúna guísa, in any sort.

Inalcún luógo, in any or in some place.

Inaleghéuole, not to be alleadged.

Inalienáre, to alienate, to estrange.

Inalmáre, to quicken or infuse a soule into.

Inalterábile, constant, not to be altred.

Inalterabilità, constancie, stedfastnesse.

Inalteratione, stedfastnesse.

Inalteréuole, vnalterable, constant.

Inalto, on high, aloft.

Inálto máre, in the maine Sea.

Inalzaménto, a raising vp or aduancement.

Inalzáre, to aduance or raise vp.

Inamábile, vnamiable, vnlouely.

Inamabilità, vnamiablenesse, vnlouingnesse.

Inamaríre, rísco, ríto, to make or become bitter.

Inambitióso, not ambitious.

Inamenità, vnpleasantnesse to the eye.

Inaméno, vnpleasant to the view.

Inamicáre, to fall into friendship with.

Inamiríre, rísco, ríto, to make bitter.

Inamorzábile, not to be quenched.

Ináne, emptie, vacant, voide.

Inanelláre, to ring or linke together. Also to curle, to frizzle or crispe haires. Also to put on a ring. Also to wed with a ring.

Inanelláti críni, curled or crisped haires

Inanimále, voide of life, hauing no soule.

Inanimáre, to giue life or soule vnto. Also to animate, to encourage.

Inanimáto, without soule or life. Also animated or encouraged.

Inánti, as Inánzi.

Inantiueggibile, not to be foreseene.

Inánzi, before, sooner, rather, eare, lieuer. Also foremost, beforehand, foreward.

Inánzi, sost. Those that be or stand foremost, that be of the vantgard.

Inánzi che, rather then, sooner then. Also before that.

Inánzi l'álba, before dawne of day.

Inánzitrátto, before hand or ones cast.

Inánziuía, before hand.

Inapassionáre, to empassionate.

Inapellábile, not to be appealed.

Inaperto, vnopen, shut, close.

In aperto, openly, publikely. 



Inapostolíto, become an Apostle.

Inaprocciéuole, not to be approached.

Inapetíbile, not to be longed for.

Inaprossiméuole, vnapprochable.

Inarábile, vnarable land.

Inaráto, vntilled, vnploughed.

Inaráti, vnploughed or vntilled balkes.

Inarboráre, as Inalboráre.

Inarcáre, to enarch, to bowe, to bend. Also to make vault or arch-wise. Also to frowne or scoule with ones lookes.

Inarcáta, a bending or enarching.

Inarcáto, bowed, crooked, bent. Also arched or vaulted. Also frowned or scouled.

Inarcatúra del cóllo, the bending of the necke.

Inarchitettóre, one that is no Architect.

Inárco, bending, crooked, bow-like.

Inardíre, dísco, díto, to endare, to enhardie.

Inargentáre, to siluer, to ensiluer.

Inargentatóre, a siluerer of any thing.

Inargúto, vnwitty, grosse, blunt, dull.

Inariáre, to enaire, to weader.

Inaridíre, dísco, díto, as Aridíre.

Inarnése, in readinesse or harnished.

Inarrábile, not to bee declared or reported.

Inarráre, to declare or report. Also to giue earnest vpon any bargaine.

Inarsicciáre, to sindge or scorch.

Inárte, vnartnesse, ignorance, vnskill.

Inartificiále, vnartificiall, without Arte.

Inartifício, as Inárte.

Inarticoláta vóce, an vndistinguished voice.

Inartigliáre, to catch with ones clawes or talons.

Inartísta, one that is no Artist.

Inascoltáto, vnheard.

Inascólto, listning, in listning manner.

Inasinággine, assishnesse, sottishnesse.

Inasiníre, nísco, níto, to make or become an Asse.

Inaspaménti, reelings or windings of yarne.

Inaspáre, to reele or winde yarne.

Inaspedírsi, to become as deafe as an Adder.

Inasperáre, as Inacerbáre.

Inaspettáto, vnexpected, vnlooked for.

Inaspícuo, hard to be seene.

Inaspettéuole, vnexpectable.

Inaspreggiáre, as Inacerbáre.

Inaspríre, ísco, íto, as  Inacerbáre.

Ináspro, vnsowre, sweet, vnsharpe.

Inassáre, to imboord or implanke.

Inassettáre, to range, to settle, to place things in good order.

Inassetto, setled or ranged in good order.

Inásso, in barenesse, in pouerty.

Inastáre, as Inalboráre.

Inasuéto, vnaccustomed. 

Inaudáce, vndaring, cowardly, fearefull, vnbould.

Inaudácia, cowardise, vndaringnesse.

Inaudíbile, vnaudible, not to be heard.

Inaudíto, vnheard, neuer heard.

Inauedutaménte, vnaduisedly.

Inauedúto, vnaduised, vnwary.

Inaueníre, in time to come.

Inauentúra, at all aduenture.

Inauersábile, vnauoidable, vnresistable.

Inauertente, heedlesse, vnwary.

Inauertenteménto, vnwarily.

Inauertenza, vnwarinesse, negligence.

Inauertíre, tísco, títo, to neglect, to forslow, not to heed or regard.

Inauertitaménte, vnaduisedly.

Inauguráre, to aske counsell of the Augures, to consecrate to soothsaying, to appoint a place of diuination and there marke the flying of birds. Also to forebode good lucke or wish good successe vnto.

Inauguratióne, counsel asked of the Augures, consecration to soothsaying, obseruing the flight of birdes, foreboding good lucke or wishing good successe vnto.

Inauguráto, aduised by soothsaying, foreboded or wished good lucke and successe vnto.

Inaumentéuole, not to be augmented.

Inauráre, to guild, to couer with gold.

Ináuso, vndaring, vndared.

Inauspicáto, vnluckie, presageing some ill fortune, not counselled by the Augures.

Inauspício, ill lucke, ill presage.

Inazzurráre, to inazure, to inblew.

Inbáda, in delay, at a bay.

Inbandáre, to side to inbandy.

Inbandináre, to lebard a scaine of thrid, yarne or silke. Also swathe or bandle.

Inbandíre, dísco, díto, as  Inbandináre.

Inbándo, that stands banished or outlawed.

Inbárba dì gátto, most curiously and exquisitely framed and built.

Inbarcaménto, an inbarking, a shipping.

Imbarbottáre, as Imborbottáre.

Inbarcáre, to inbarke, to ship.

Inbárco, an inbarking place.

Inbasaménto, as  Basaménto.

Inbásso, below, beneath.

Inbeluíto, become a sauage beast.

Inbcuibile, not to be drunke.

Inbiánco restáre, to haue the canuase in any suite.

Inbilatióne, glad-giuing, free-gift.

Inbíscia, winding in and out as a snake or a paire of winding staires, cranckling as some riuers. 

Inbisciáre, to become snakeish. Also to make winding wise or cranckling.

Inbisognóso, vnneedfull, needlesse.

Inbistánte, in doubt or vncertainty.

Inboláre, as Inuoláre, to steale.

Inbolatóre, as Inuolatóre, a stealer.

Inbondáto, fórse chè non durárono in bondáto.

Inbordelláre, to inbrothell.

Inbracáre, as Imbracáre.

Inbramábile, not to be wished for.

Inbreue, in briefe, briefely, shortly.

Inbriacáre, to make or become drunken

Inbriachézza, drunkennesse.

Inbriáco, drunke, tipsie.

Inbrigáta, in company or troope.

Inbrigliáre, to inbridle, to insnaffle.

Inbulíma, pell mell, in route or confusion.

Inbuóna, in good amity.

Inbuónafè, in good faith.

Inbuón hóra, in good time.

Incacáre, to beshite, to becacke. Also to bid a turd for one, to scorne.

Incáccia, in chase.

Incaciáre, as Informaggiáre.

Incadenacciáre, to boult or barre.

Incagionáre, to lay the cause or blame vpon one, to charge or impute vnto, to tax and blame as the cause of.

Incagliáre, to curd as milke for cheese.

Incagliatúra, runnet to make cheese.

Incagnársi, as Incagníre.

Incagnésco, doggedly, currishly, snarlingwise. Also coyishly, nicely.

Incagníre nísco, níto, to become dogish, currish or churlish.

Incahossáre, to bring to a chaos or confusion.

Incalandríto, become or made a silly gull.

Incalappiáre, as Calappiáre.

Incalcábile, not to be troden vpon.

Incalcáre, as Incalciáre.

Incalcioménto, a kicking, a pursute, a chasing, an assaulting, a charging as it were at ones heeles and vpon aduantage.

Incalciáre, to kicke vpon. Also to vrge, to pursue at ones heeles, to assault or charge with aduantage.

Incalciatóre, a kicker, a pursuer, a follower one at his heeles.

Incalcináre, to calcinate, to couer with, or mix with lime or morter.

Incálcio, a whot pursuite at ones heeles, a suddaine charge giuen.

Incálco, as Incálcio.

Incalére, in care or thought.

Incaligináre, to insult.

Incallíre, lísco, líto, to become or grow hard, tough or brawny as cornes in labourers hands or mens feete. Also to make or take a habite that one cannot leaue.

Incálma, at quiet, in a calme. 



Incalmáre, to ingraffe, to inbranch.

Incalmatóre, a graffer.

Incalmatúra, an ingraffing.

Incálmo, a graffe, a syen, a yongue sprout.

Incaluáre, to make or become bald.

Incaluáto, become balde or without haire.

Incaluíre, ísco íto, as Incaluáre.

Incalzáre, Incálzo, as Incalciáre.

Incámbio, an exchange, in stead.

Incameráre, to chamber, to inchamber.

Incameráto cannóne, a chambred cannon.

Incaminábile, not to be gone or walked.

Incamináre, to addresse or set in the way.

Incamíno, in the way, addressed.

Incamíscia, naked in a bare shirt.

Incamisciáre, to inshirt, to insmocke. Also to charge with any stratagem or Camisado. Also to cloake, to couer or lay ouer, to dawbe, to plaister, to parget, or lome ouer with morter, lome, lime, mud or clay.

Incamisciáta, a Camisado.

Incamisciatúra, as Incamisciáta. Also a playstering or pargetting ouer.

Incamocciáre, to tan or dresse leather like chamois.

Incampanáto pezzo, a piece bell-bored or taper-bored.

Incamutáre, to enterchange.

Incancaríre, rísco, ríto, to canker, to fester, to ranckle.

Incancaríto, canckred, ranckled, festered.

Incanelláre, to spice or dresse with Cynamond. Also to chamfure or worke hollow.

Incanestráre, to put into baskets.

Incaníto, indogged, become currish.

Incannáre, to winde silke vpon bobbins.

Incanouáre, to put into Cellars.

Incantábile, that cannot be sung.

Incannucciáta, a plot of reedes and canes.

Incantábile, that may be inchanted.

Incantagióne, a spell, an inchantment.

Incantaménto, as Incantagióne.

Incantáre, to enchant, to bewitch, to charme. Also to sell goods by a Cryer at who giues most?

Incantatóre, an inchanter, a sorcerer.

Incantatríce, a sorceresse, an inchantresse.

Incantésimo, as Incantagióne.

Incánto, as Incantagióne. Also a place where goods are soulde by a Cryer at who giues most.?

Incantonáre, as Cantonáre.

Incantináre, to put into cellars.

Incanutíre, tísco, títo, to become white, gray or hoary through age.

Incapáce, vncapeable, not able to conceiue.

Incapacità, incapacity, vncapablenesse.

Incaparbíre, bísco, bíto, to become peeuish, skittish, rash or froward. Also to take pepper in the nose and be wilfull.

Incapáre, as Intestársi.

Incaparucciáre, to hood or cowle.

Incapelláre, to put on a hat. Also to hood as they doe hawkes.

Incapestráre, to halter, to intramell, to binde or intangle.

Incapitoláre, to inchapter.

Incápo, on high, at the head. Also at the end.

Incápo all'ánno, at the yeeres end.

Incapocchiársi, to become a doult or loggar-head, to take a foolish conceite.

Incápo di tánto tempo, at the end of so much time.

Incaponíto, incaponed, guelded.

Incappáre, to couer or muffle with a cloake. Also to meet, to fall, to light on, or stumble vpon by chance. Also to leaue or giue earnest for.

Incapparráre, to giue or leaue earnest beforehand for any thing.

Incapricciársi, to take a toy or conceit in ones head.

Incappiáre, to enknot, to ensnare.

Incapucciáre, to enhood or encowle.

Incarbonáre, to blacke or besmeare with coles. Also to broile as a carbonado.

Incarbonáta, a carbonado, a rasher on the coles.

Incarbonchiáre, to grow to a Carbuncle. Also to blast or mildew, to sindge.

Incarbonchiatúra, a blasting, a mildewing, a sindging.

Incárca, a charge, a taske, a burden. Also a blemish or imputation resting vpon one. Also vsed for a mans mortall bodie.

Incarcáre, to charge or lay heauily vpon. Also to blame or impute vnto.

Incarcatóre, a charger of one.

Incarceráre, to emprison, to put in prison.

Incarceratióne, an emprisoning.

Incarco, as Incárca.

Incardinaláto, become or made a Cardinall.

Incaricáre, as Incarcáre.

Incárico, as Incárca.

Incaríre, rísco, ríto, to endeare.

Incarnadíno, a carnation, or flesh colour.

Incarnagióne, as Incarnaménto.

Incarnaménto, an enfleshing, an incarnating, an incarnation.

Incarnáre, to incarnate, to enflesh. Also to flesh a dog. Also to enter a hawke.

Incarnatíno, as Incarnadíno.

Incarnatióne, as Incarnaménto.

Incarnatíuo, that doeth incarnate.

Incarníre, nísco, níto, to enflesh.

Incarognáre, to carion, or infect.

Incarráre, to encart, to put into carts. Also to mount a piece of ordinance into his cariage.

Incartáre, to paper, to put into paper, to encard. Also to hit or fix into a marke. Also to write, or record in paper.

Incartocciáre, to put into coffins of paper.

Incartonáre, to put into paste-boord.

Incása, at home, home. Also within.

Incascáre, to fall into.

Incasciáre, to encheese, or dresse with cheese.

Incáso chè, in case that, if so be that.

Incassáre, to put into a chest or coffine. Also to stocke any peece of ordinance. Also to enchase or set a stone in any ring or iewell.

Incassatúra, an enchesting. Also an enchasing or setting of a stone in a ring. Also the hollownesse of ones eyes.

Incastelláre, to encastle, to fortifie with castles, to reduce or bring to a castle. Also to be hoofe-bound, that is, when a horses hoofe is dride vp, so that it sounds hollow.

Incastellatúra, a hoofe-binding, that is, a shrinking of a horses hoofe, and a dry hollownesse in it, proceeding of want of moisture.

Incastigáto, vnpunished, vnchastised.

Incastità, vnchastnesse.

Incásto, vnchaste.

Incastraménto, as Incastratúra.

Incastráre, to enchase or set a stone fast into a ring or iewell. Also to ioine, to fixe or worke close together as they do stone and leade together.

Incastráto, enchased or set with precious stones, it is taken in Grisone when the rowell in the bit or mouth of a horse is set close, and so well ioined to the other parts as if it were of one piece.

Incastratúra, an enchasing, or ioyning close together.

Incástro, a Farriors pairer of hoofes.

Incastroníto, become sheepish, or foolish.

Incatásta, piled in piles. Looke Catásta.

Incatastáre, as Catastáre.

Incatenáre, to enchaine, to binde in chaines.

Incaténe, in chaines, bound in chaines.

Incattiuáre, to encaptiuate.

Incattiuíre, ísco, íto, to grow bad.

Incauagnáre, to put into baskets.

Incaualcáre, to mount, or horse. Also to mount or brack a piece of ordinance. It is also when a horse doeth set one 



foote ouer the other in turning round.

Incaualláre, to lap one thing ouer another, but properly to hold your rod ouer the right shoulder of a horse to make him bring in the right forefoote ouer the left. Vsed also for to horse, or furnish with horse.

Incaualláre le bráccia, when a horse doeth set one forefoote ouer another.

Incauallatúra, the ridge of a house. Also the height or end of a thing.

Incauallíto, enhorsed, become a horse.

Incauáre, to encaue, to dig or make hollow. Also to chamfure, to indent, or graue deepe. Also to free from vnder.

Incauáto sásso, a hollow stone.

Incauatúra, a digging or making hollow.

Incaucináre, as Incalcináre.

Incauernáre, to encaue, to encauerne, to endenne.

Incauernáto pezzo, a piece full of flawes or honie-combes.

Incauezzáre, as Incapestráre.

Incauicchiáre, to peg in, or together.

Incauicchiatúra, a pegging in, or together. Also the pricking of a horse.

Incáuo, the hollow of any thing.

Incáusa, because, why.

Incautézza, vnheedinesse, vnwarinesse.

Incáuto, vnwarie, vnheedie, fond.

Incazzáre, to enrage as it were with or for a standing prick.

Incazzíre, ísco, íto, as Incazzáre.

Incelebro, nothing famous.

Incedere, cedo, cessi, cesso, to walke or stalke vp and downe proudly and aloft.

Incelebráto, not celebrated.

Incendere, cendo, cési, cése, to enkindle, to incense or set on fire.

Incendiário, a boutefell, a cast-fire, a kindler, one that setteth on fire.

Incelestiáre, to enheauen, to make celestiall, to bring into heauen.

Incendiária, a kind of vnluckie scrich-owle.

Incendiáre, to enkindle or set on fire.

Incendíbile, that may be kindled.

Inendiménto, any enkindling, or burning.

Incendio, a burning, a flashing of fire.

Incendióso, burning, flashing, flaming.

Incendióla, a bird enemie to the Owle.

Incenerare, to cinder, to burne to ashes.

Incenere, consumed to ashes or cinders.

Inceneríre, rísco, ríto, as Inceneráre.

Incensaménto, an incensing.

Incensare, to incense, to burne or offer incense.

Incensióne, an enkindling, an enflaming.

Incensíbile, that may be kindled.

Incensiére, as Incensório.

Incensíuo, as Incentíuo.

Incenso, incense or frankincense. Also enkindled, or set on fire.

Incensório, a censor, or incense-pan.

Incentíuo, an enkindling, an incensement, a prouoking, an incensing.

Incento dóppio, a hundred fold.

Incentráre, to encentre, or goe to the midle or centre. Also to ioine together in one.

Inceraménto, a searing, or seare-cloth.

Inceráre, to grow to waxe, to ceare. Also to stop with waxe.

Inceratúra, as Inceraménto.

Incerberársi, to become like Cerberus.

Incercábile, vnsearchable.

Incerchiáre, to hoope in, to encircle.

Incérchio, round in a circle.

Incerimonióso, vnceremonious.

Inceruiáto, become a Stag, or Hart.

Incertamente, vncertainely.

Incertare, to warrant, to assertaine.

Incertézza, vncertaintie.

Incertitúdine, vncertaintie.

Incerto, vncertaine, vnsure.

Inceruogiáto, filled or drunke with ale or other strong drinke.

Inceruello, warie, with his wits about him.

Incéso, enkindled, set on fire.

Incespáre, to stumble into, to trip. Also to entangle as bushes of thornes.

Incespicáre, as Incespáre.

Incespitáre, as Incespáre.

Incespugliáre, as Incespáre. Also to grow or become shrubbie, or bushie.

Incessábile, vncessant, neuer ceasing.

Incessanteménte, vncessantly.

Incesso, a manner of pace or going. Also farre off, distant, or apart.

Incestáre, to put into baskets. Also to commit incest.

Incesto, incest, pollution or letcherie committed with one neere in blood and kin.

Incestuóso, incestuous, full of incest.

Incetta, an engrossing or forestalling the market or price of any thing. Also an enquirie.

Incettáre, to engrosse or forestall the market. Also to enquire.

Incettatóre, an engrosser or forestaller of the market. Also an enquirer.

Inchè, in what, in which.

Inchesta, as Inchiesta.

Inchéto, at quiet, in quiet.

Inchianeáre, to paue with flat stones.

Inchianettáre, to arme with a helmet.

Inchiappáre, to take or surprise. Also to pinch on the buttocks as a dog doeth a Deare.

Inchiassáre, to embrothell.

Inchiatáre, to wound, to strike or hurt.

Inchiatáto, as Inchiáto.

Inchiáto, wounded, strucken and hurt. 

Inchiauáre, to shut or lock in with a key.

Inchiauelláre, as Inchiodáre.

Inchiauellatúra, as Inchiodatúra.

Inchiedere, chiedo, chiési, chiesto, to enquire. Also to request.

Inchierere, as Inchiedere.

Inchiesta, an inquest, a searching out. Also as Incetta.

Inchiesto, enquired, requested.

Inchietta, as Incetta.

Inchiettáre, as Incettáre.

Inchináre, to encline, to stoupe vnto.

Inchinatióne, an inclination, a bending.

Inchinéuole, enclinable, enclining.

Inchíno, enclined, bended, stooped.

Inchíno, a louting, a reuerence, a cursie.

Inchiócca, plentie, by whole handfulls.

Inchiodáre, to naile in or fast. Also to clowe or pricke a horse with a naile. Also to clowe or poison ordinance.

Inchiodáto, nailed, pricked with a naile.

Inchiodatúra, a nailing in or fast, a clowing or pricking of a horse.

Inchiostráre, to cloister vp, to immure, to encloister. Also to blur with inke.

Inchiostráro, an Inke-maker, or seller.

Inchióstri, vsed for writings, or records.

Inchióstro, Inke to write withall. Vsed also for a poeme, or composition.

Inchiouáre, as Inchiodáre.

Inchiouatúra, as Inchiodatúra.

Inchióue, the fish Anchoues.

Inchristallíre, ísco, íto, to encristall, or become cristall.

Inchristíto, entred into Christ.

Inchiúdere, as Inclúdere.

Inchiusióne, as Inclusióne.

Inchiusíuo, as Inclusíuo.

Inchiúso, included. Also shut in.

Inchristianità, paganisme, barbarisme, inchristianitie.

Inciampáre, to stumble vpon, to trip, to meete a rub by the way. Also to encounter with, or light vpon by chance.

Inciampatúra, a stumbling, a tripping, a rub, a let or impediment by the way.

Inciámpo, as Inciampatúra.

Inciancáre, as Inzancáre.

Inciancatúra, as Inzancatúra.

Incidentalménte, incidently.

Incidente, incident.

Incidenteménte, incidently.

Incidenza, incidencie. Vsed also for a digression in speach.

Incídere, cído, císi, císo, to cut into, to make an incision, to gash, to slit, to lance. Also to make a digression in speach.

Incieláre, to place in, or enter heauen. 



Incielo, in heauen.

Inciermáre, to charme.

Inciermatóre, a soothsayer, a wizard, a charmer.

Incigoláre, to fasten, to ioyne, to close or claspe together.

Incimentare, as Cimentáre.

Incimieráto, crested or encrested.

Incinabráre, to make red with Cinabre.

Incináre, as Vncináre.

Incináro, a hooker, a dragger.

Incineráre, as Inceneráre.

Incineratióne, an incineration.

Incíngere, cíngo, cinsi, cínto, to gird or compasse in. Also to get with child.

Incinghialáto, become a wild Boare.

Incinghiáre, to encingle or gird in.

Incíno, as Vncíno. Also an Vrchin or Hedgehog.

Incíno di máre, a kind of fish with prickles on his backe. Some take it for a Sea-urchin.

Incínqua, at fiue times, in fiue.

Incinquáre, to make or become fiue, to enter into fiue.

Incinta, vngirt. Also with child.

Incintáte, to get with child.

Incintéuole, that may bee gotten with child.

Incínto, vngirt. Also girt in.

Incioccáre, as Accioccáre.

Incipiente, an incipient, a beginner.

Incipolláre, to dresse with onion. Also to be like an Onion.

Inciprigníre, gnísco, gníto, feríta che uicína al guaríre tórna a putrificáre ed a rincrudelíre si díce Ciprigníre ouero Inciprigníre, to fester or to rankle as some sores doe.

Incírca, about. Also in circle.

Incircondéuole, vncompassable.

Incirconcíso, vncircumcised.

Incirconcisióne, vncircumcision.

Incirconscrittíbile, that cannot bee described or circumscribed.

Incircuíbile, that cannot be circled.

Incischiáre, to chip, to mince, to slice or cut in small pieces. Also to wrangle or dodge about a matter of nothing.

Incíschio, uále minutézza.

Incisióne, an incision, an incutting.

Incíso, cut into with an incision. Also gashed or slit. Also grauen or carued in.

Incíso, a short member of a sentence.

Incisóre, a maker of incisions.

Incisórij, the fore-teeth of any creature.

Incisúra, as Incisióne.

Incitaménto, an encitement, an alluring.

Incitánza, as Incitaménto.

Incitáre, to incite, to allure.

Incitatióne, as Incitaménto.

Incitatóre, an inciter, an allurer. 

Incitéuole, that may be encited.

Incittadináto, become a citizen or a denizon of a Citie.

Inciuilíre, lísco, líto, to grow or become ciuill or mannerly.

Inciuile, vnciuill, vnmannerly.

Inciuilità, inciuilitie, vnmannerlinesse.

Inciuiltà, as Inciuilità.

Inciuittíre, tísco, títo, to become of the qualitie of an Owle.

Inclastáre, as Incastráre.

Inclastatúra, as Incastratúra.

Inclásto, as Incastratúra.

Inclaustráre, as Inchlostráre.

Inclemente, mercilesse, fell, rigorous.

Inclemenza, inclemencie, mercilesnesse.

Inclináre, as Inchináre.

Inclinatióne, as Inchinatióne.

Inclinéuole, as Inchinéuole.

Inclíno, enclined. Also as Inchíno.

Inclità, as Inclitézza.

Inclitézza, fame, glorie, renowme.

I'nclito, famous, glorious, renowmed.

Inclúdere, clúdo, clúsi, clúso, to include, to containe, to shut in.

Inclusióne, an enclosing, an including, a containing, a shutting in.

Inclusiuam énte, inclusiuely.

Inclusíuo, inclusiue, containing.

Incoáre, to begin and leaue off. Also to finish or performe.

Incoatióne, a finishing, a performing.

Incoatíuo uerbo, deriued of a verbe of the second Coniugation and of a certaine Adiectiue.

Incoátto, voluntarie, not compelled.

Incoccáre, as Accoccáre. Also to nocke or set in the nocke. Also to falter or stammer in the throat.

Incodardíto, become or made a coward.

Incodáre, to set a taile on or vpon.

Incogitántia, vnaduisednesse.

Incógliere, to gather in. Also to take napping in some fault.

Incoherente, vncoherent.

Incoherenza, incoherence.

Incogitábile, not to be thought.

Incógnito, vnknowen, vncouth, vnkend.

Incolà, beyond, further that way.

Incolaménto, a gluing together.

Incoláre, to glue together.

Incolatúra, a gluing together.

Incolfáre, as Ingolfáre.

I'ncoli, inhabitants, dwellers.

Incolláre, to fasten or glue together.

Incolleráre, to put into choller.

Incoloréuole, vncolourable.

Incollonnáre, to fill or set with columnes or pillars.

Incoloríre, rísco, ríto, to colour.

Incolerico, not cholericke or angry.

Incólpa, in fault, in blame.

Incolpáre, to blame, or lay the fault vpon.

Incolpáta uíta, a blamelesse life. 

Incolpéuole, blamelesse, faultlesse.

Incolto, as Incúlto. Also vngathered. Also gathered in. Also as Colto.

Incoltráre, as Incoltrecciáre.

Incoltrecciáre, to enwrap in a quilt.

Incólume, whole, safe, sound, vndistained.

Incolumità, safetie, healthfulnesse, soundnesse.

Incombente, an incumbent, one that hath a charge to serue vnder.

Incómbere, cómbo, combei, combúto, to leaue, to stay or rest vpon. Also to bend or encline vnto. Also to ouerburden one till hee sinke vnder. Also to withstand violently.

Incombustíbile, that cannot be burnt or consumed by fire.

Incombináto, vncombined.

Incombústo, vnburnt or vnconsumed by fire.

Incomendéuole, vncommendable.

Incomendáto, not commended.

Incominciaménto, a beginning, a commencement.

Incominciáre, to begin, to commence.

Incominciatóre, a commencer, a beginner

Incómite, that hath no fellow or companion.

Incomitáto, alone, without companie.

Incomodáre, to incommode, to disturbe.

Incomodità, discommoditie, disturbance.

Incómodo, incommodious, troublesome.

Incommestíbile, not to be mixed.

Incommouíbile, vnmooueable.

Incompagnía, in companie, together.

Incompatíbile, incompatible, vnsufferable, not to be borne with.

Incompatibilità, vnsufferablenesse.

Incomparábile, matchlesse, incomparable.

Incomparabilità, matchlesnesse.

Incomparársi, to engossip himselfe.

Incompassionéuole, vncompassionable.

Incompetenza, incompetencie.

Incomplesse paróle, vncomposed words, words not well described.

Incompetente, not competent.

Incompasséuole, not to be compassed.

Incomponéuole, not to be composed.

Incomportábile, vnsufferable.

Incomportéuole, vnsufferable.

Incompossíbile, vnpossible with.

Incompósto, vncomposed, vnperfect.

Incomprábile, not to be bought.

Incomprehensíbile, incomprehensible.

Incomprehensibilità, incomprehensibilitie.

Incompréso, vncomprehended.

Incompresso, not compressed.

Incomutábile, immutable, stedfast.

Incomutabilità, immutabilitie.

Incomunicábile, not to bee communicated. 



Incomunichéuole, not to be communicated.

Inconcesso, vngranted, forbidden, denied.

Inconciábile, not to be amended.

Inconcinnità, an ill garbe or grace, an ill fashion, vnhandsomenesse, an vnhandsome garbe, vnfitnesse.

Inconcínno, vnhandsome, ill fashioned, without garbe or grace, vnfit, vnmeet.

Incóncio, handsomely, fit for the purpose.

Inconclusióne, an vncertaintie. Also finally or in conclusion.

Inconclúso, vnconcluded, vndetermined.

Inconculcábile, not to be conculcated.

Inconcussíbile, that cannot be shaken or rumbled.

Inconcússo, vnshaken, firme, stable, vnmooued.

Incondensáto, not condensed, cleare.

Incondenséuole, not to be condensed.

Incondità, rudenesse, vnhandsomnesse, gracelesnesse.

Incóndito, gracelesse, rude, vndrest, vnhandsome, vndight.

Incondíte úiuánde, vnseasoned meates.

Inconfesso, not shriuen or confessed.

Inconfidente, distrustfull.

Inconfidenza, distrustfulnesse.

Inconfináto, vnconfined.

Inconfórme, not conformed.

Inconforméuole, not to be conformed.

Inconformità, accordingly, in conformitie.

Inconfúso, vnconfused, not confounded.

Incongelábile, not to bee congealed or frozen.

Incongruaménte, absurdly.

Incongruente, absurd.

Incongruenza, absurdnesse, incongruitie.

Incongruità, incongruitie, absurditie, absurdnesse.

Incóngruo, against forme or rule, absurd.

Inconigliáto, become as a Cunny, fearefull.

Inconniuente, one that mooueth not his eye-lides.

Inconocchiáre, to winde about a distaffe. Also to huddle and take vp all that comes. Also for a man to intangle himselfe about womens matters.

Inconocchiáta, a distaffe full.

Inconómica, a treatise belonging to househould affaires.

Inconoscíbile, not to be knowen.

Inconquassábile, not to be tossed.

Inconquásso, in confusion or hurly burly.

Incónscio, vnwitting, vnguilty, vnknowing.

Inconquistéuole, vnconquerable.

Inconserua, in conserue. Also in consort or company as ships goe at sea.

Inconseruábile, not to be preserued.

Inconsiderábile, not to be considered.

Inconsideránza, vnconsideratenesse.

Inconsideratióne, rashnesse, inconsideration.

Inconsideráto, vnaduised, inconsiderate.

Inconsolábile, not to be comforted.

Inconstánte, vnconstant, wauering.

Inconstánza, inconstancy, ficklenesse.

Inconsueto, vnwont, vnaccustomed.

Inconsuetúdine, vnwontednesse.

Inconsultábile, not to be consulted.

Inconsultaménte, without consultation.

Inconsultatióne, rashnesse.

Inconsúlto, not consulted vpon.

Inconsumábile, not to be consumed.

Inconsumáto, vnconsumed.

Inconsuméuole, not to be consumed.

Inconsúnto, not consumed.

Inconsutíle, without any seame.

Incontábile, vncountable, numberlesse.

Incontaminábile, not to be polluted.

Incontamináto, vndefiled, vnspotted.

Incontána, as Quintána.

Incontanente, presently, out of hand.

Incontánti, in ready money.

Incónto, vncounted, vnreckoned. Also vnkemd, discheueled, disordered.

Incontégno, squemishly, nicely, vpon points, disdainfully.

Incontemplábile, not to be contemplated.

Incontentábile, not to be contented.

Incontentéuole, not to be contented.

Incónti, vnkembd, discheueled haires.

Incontinente, vnchast, vncleane of life.

Incontinenza, incontinency, intemperance.

Incontínuo, vncontinuall.

Incontinuéuole, not to be continued.

Incónto, in account, in part of payment.

Incóntra, against, opposite, contrarie.

Incontradicente, not gainesaying.

Incontradicéuole, not to be gainesaid.

Incontráre, to encounter, to meet. Also to happen or come to passe, to chaunce vpon.

Incontrário, on the contrary, against.

Incontrátto, vncontracted.

Incóntro, oueragainst, opposite.

Incóntro, an encounter, a meeting.

Incóntrogli, against him.

Incontumáre, to charge or accuse of contumacy.

Inconuenéuole, not conuenient.

Inconueneuolézza, inconuenience.

Inconueniente, an inconuenient.

Inconueniente, vnfit, vnconuenient.

Inconuenienza, an inconuenience

Inconnersabile, not to be conuersed.

Inconuerséuole, vnconuersable.

Inconuertíbile, not to be conuerted.

Inconuiuente, that mooueth not or twinkleth not the eyes.

Inconuiuenza, an vnmoouing or not twinkling of the eies.

Incópia, in abundance or store.

Incóppia, in couples, in company, in consort.

Incoppiáre, to incouple.

Incopríre, as Copríre.

Incoraggiáre, as Incoráre.

Incoráre, to incourage, to harten.

Incorázza, armed with a cuirace.

Incorazzáre, to arme with a cuirace.

Incorbáre, to put into a basket. Also to inrauen. Also as Incuruáre.

Incorbelláre, to put into paniers.

Incordaménto, as Incordatúra.

Incordáre, to corde, to string an instrument. Also stiffe or benum with colde, or with some disease, to incord or burst as a horse.

Incordáto, strung or corded as an instrument. Also stifned or benummed with colde. Also incorded as a horse.

Incordatúra, a stringing or cording. Also a stifning or benumming through colde. Also the incording or bursting of a horse.

Incornáre, to horne, to inhorne. Also a woman to cuckold her husband.

Incornutáre, to horne, to make cuckold.

Incoronaménto, as Incoronatióne.

Incoronáre, to crowne, to ingarland. Also to reduce to a perfect shape or forme.

Incoronatióne, a coronation.

Incoronáto, crowned. Also reduced to a perfect state and forme of body.

Incorottíbile, vncorruptible, sound.

Incorótto, vncorrupted, sound.

Incorporále, that hath no body.

Incorporalità, hauing no body.

Incorporáre, to incorporate, to inbodie.

Incorporatióne, an incorporation.

Incorporeità, vnbodilinesse.

Incorpóreo, incorporeall.

Incorreggíbile, not to be corrected.

Incórrore, to incur or run into.

Incorretto, vncorrected, vnpolished.

Incorriggíbile, not to be corrected.

Incorrottíbile, as Incorruttíbile.

Incorrottibilità, vncorruptednesse.

Incorrottaménte, vncorruptedly.

Incorrótto, vncorrupted, sound.

Incorruttíbile, incorruptible, sound.

Incorruttióne, soundnesse, incorruption.

Incorsióne, as Incursióne.

Incórso, run into, incurred. Also roauing, courseing or wandring about. 



Incortáre, to shorten or shrinke in.

Incortegianáto, incourtiered.

Incortesía, in or for courtesie.

Incortináre, to encourtaine.

Incosi fatta maniera, in such manner.

Incostà, further of, that way beyond.

Incostánte, inconstant, vnstedfast.

Incostánza, inconstancy, vnstedfastnesse.

Incostáre, to inrib or thrust into the ribs.

Incostì, as Incostà.

Incostumáto, vnaccustomed.

Incotál méntre, in such while.

Incótta, raw, vnsodden, vnrosted.

Incottáto, incoated, hauing a coat on.

Incótto, vnsodden, vnbaked, vnrosted, vnboyled. Also singed with some blast or scalded. Also one whose haire goes off.

Incottúra, a scalding or singeing with some blast.

Incottíli, pots or pans luted and tinned or glased within.

Incozzáre, as Accozzáre.

Incozzonáto fúrbo, a perfect knaue, a cunning villen, a sly cozener.

Incrassáre, to make thicke, grosse or sluttish.

Increáto, vncreated, not created.

Incredente, vnbeleeuing.

Incredenza, on credite or trust.

Incredenza, vnbeliefe.

Incredíbile, incredible.

Incredibilità, incrediblenesse.

Incredulità, incredulity.

Incredulo, incredulous, vnbeleeuing.

Increménto, increase, augmentation.

Incremesì, in graine, in crimsin, scarlet.

Increpáre, to reprooue and threaten.

Increpatióne, a chiding and threatning.

Incréscemi, it grieueth me, I am sorry, it is tedious vnto me.

Incréscere, crésco, crébbi, cresciúto, to be sorry for, to grieue inwardly, to thinke the time tedious and irkesome. Also to molest, to grieue and vexe.

Increscéuole, tedious, irkesome, grieuous.

Incresciménto, a grieuing or thinking the time tedious and irkesome.

Increscióso, as Increscéuole.

Incresciúto, molested, grieued.

Increspaménto, as Increspatúra.

Increspáre, to crispe, to curle, to frouze. Also to wrimple.

Increspatúra, a crisping, a curling, a frouzing. Also a wrimpling.

Incrocettáto, crosse-crosseleted in armorie.

Increstaménto, an encresting. Also a setting a coxecombe vpon ones head.

Increstáre, to encrest. Also to set a coxecombe vpon one. 

Increstatúra, as Increstaménto.

Incretáre, to lome or dawbe with clay.

Incrocchiáre, as Incrocicchiáre.

Incrociáre, as Incrocicchiáre.

Incrocicchiáre, to crosse, to set a crosse. Also to goe on crutchets.

Incrocicchiaménto, a crossing, a crosseletting, a crutchetting.

Incrocicchiáto, In Saltier in armorie.

Incroiáre, as Croiáre.

Incrostaménto, as Incrostatúra.

Incrostáre, to crust, to encrust, to grow to a crust or scurfe. Also to parget or rough-cast.

Incrostatúra, a crusting, a growing to a scurfe. Also a pargeting.

Incrúccio, in anger, angerly.

Incrudelíre, lísco, líto, to become or make cruell.

Incrudelíto, made or become cruell.

Incrudele, vncruell, milde.

Incrudíre, disco, díto, to make or become raw. Also as Incrudelíre.

Incruente, not bloudy, sans bloud shed, not bloud shedding.

Incruenteménte, without bloud-shed.

Incrustolire, lísco, líto, as Incrostáre.

Incúbi, certaine Spirits that trouble men sleeping. Also the night-mare or witch.

Incubatióne, a hatching, a lying-in.

Incucíre, cúcio, cucíj, cucíto, to sew in.

Incucoláre, to encowle or enhood as a Munke. Also to coure downe squat.

Incúde, a Smithes anuill or stithy. Also one of the instruments of hearing.

Incúdine, as Incúde.

Incúgine, as Incúde.

Incugnáre, to wedge or coyne in.

Inculáre, to thrust into ones arse. Also to recoyle or draw backe.

Inculáta, a recoyling into.

Inculcáre, to thrust or presse in perforce, to inculcate, to repeate often.

Inculcatióne, a pressing or thrusting in, an often repetition.

Inculináre, to encradle.

Inculláre, to encradle.

Incúlto, vnmanured, vntilled, vnpolished, wild, desert, barren.

Incúmbij, certaine Spirits who in the sleepe of women will subiect themselues to men. Also as Incúbi.

Incuócere, cuóco, cóssi, cótto, to boyle, bake or roste in. Also to sindge, to blaste, to scalde.

Incuoráre, to hearten, to encourage.

Incurábile, not to be cured, incurable.

Incúria, neglect, carelesnesse.

Incuriáre, to neglect, not to set by.

Incuriosità, incuriositie.

Incurioso, nothing curious, carelesse.

Incursióne, an incursion, an inrode, a forrey, an inuasion.

Incursóre, a maker of incursions.

Incustodíbile, that cannot be kept. 

Incustodíto, vnkept, not looked vnto.

Incuruáre, to bend or make crooked.

Incuruatúra, a bending in.

Incúruo, crooked, bending in.

Incusáre, to accuse, to complaine of, to rebuke.

Incusatióne, a blaming or complaining of.

Incussióne, a dashing, a bruising.

Incustodíbile, not to be kept.

Indagábile, that may be searched or sifted out or enquired after.

Indagáre, to seeke out, to search after, to enquire or sift out carefully.

Indagatióne, a seeking, an enquiring or sifting out with diligence.

Indanaiáto, bespeckled with small spots as it were nits.

Indaracáre, to become fierce as a Dragon.

Indárno, in vaine, for nothing, bootelesse.

Indebitaménte, vnduly, vnlawfullie.

Indebitáre, to indebt, to grow in debt.

Indebitáto, indebted, in debt.

Indebito, vndue, vnlawfull.

In debito, in debt, indebted.

Indebilitáre, to weaken, to enfeeble.

Indobolíre, lísco, lito, as Indebilitáre.

Indebolíto, weakned, infeebled.

Indecente, vndecent, vncomely.

Indecenteménte, vndecently.

Indecenza, indecencie, vncomelinesse.

Indecisíbile, not to be decided.

Indecíso, vndecided, vndetermined.

Indeclinábile, not to be declined.

Indecóro, an indecorum, an vnseemlinesse.

Indefaticábile, vnweariable.

Indefenso, vndefended, without defence.

Indefesso, vnwearied, vntireable.

Indeffensíbile, not to be defended.

Indeffessíbile, vnweariable.

Indeficiente, neuer failing, indeficient.

Indeficienza, a neuer failing.

Indefinitíuo, not to be defined.

Indefiníto, vndefined.

Indeflesso, constant, not bowed.

Indegetto, not cast downe or deiected.

Indegnaménte, vnwoorthily.

Indegnáre, to disdaine, to be angry.

Indegnità, indignitie, vnwoorthinesse.

Indégno, vnwoorthy, vndeseruing.

Indegnóso, full of disdaine.

Indelebile, not to be razed out.

Indelebilità, a not razing out.

Indelettéuole, vndelectable.

Indelibáto, vndiminished, whole, sound.

Indéllo, within the, in the.

Indemno, harmelesse, hurtlesse.

Indemoniáre, to endiuell, to possesse one with some diuell or euill spirit.

Indemoniáto, endiuelled, possessed with some diuell or euill spirit. 



Indemonstr éuole, not to be demonstrated.

Indenaiáre, to store with monie.

Indenne, harmlesse, free from harme.

Indennità, indemnitie, freedome from harme.

Indentáre, to set with teeth, to indent.

Indentrársi, to inward himselfe.

Indéntro, inward, within, in.

Independente, absolute of himselfe, not depending of others.

Independenza, independencie.

Indeplorábile, not to be deplored.

Indeploráto, not bewailed, vnlamented, not wailed for.

Indeprauáto, not corrupted, not depraued.

Indeprecábile, not to be entreated.

Inderíso, vnderided, not mocked.

Inderítto, indirect. Also addressed vnto.

Indeserto, not desert, frequented.

Indesiáre, to make or become desirous.

Indesiderábile, not to be desirous.

Indesinente, euer continuing, vncessant.

Indesterità, indexteritie, vnaptnesse.

Indestrézza, indexteritie, vnaptnesse.

Indestro, vnnimble, vnapt, vnproper.

Indeterminábile, not to be determined.

Indetermináto, vndetermined.

Indettaménto, an enditing.

Indettáre, to endite, to indict.

Indettatúra, an inditement.

Indétto, endicted, endited. Also commanded by proclamation. Also an enditement.

Indeuenáre, to reele or winde yarne.

Indeuenatóio, a reeling sticke.

Indeuisíbile, not to be deuided.

Indeuotióne, vngodlinesse, irreligion.

Indeuóto, vngodly, without deuotion.

I'ndi, thence, from thence, an aduerbe or note both of time and place.

I'ndi, a kinde of plum so called.

Indiamantáre, to endiamond.

Indi a póco, shortly thence.

Indiáre, to become deuine or godlike.

Indiáto, become deuine or godly.

Indiauoláre, as Indemoniáre.

Indiauoláto, as Indemoniáto.

I'ndica, an Indian precious stone of a reddish colour, which being rubbed, sweateth purple drops.

I'ndica pietra, the lode-stone.

Indicáre, to shew, to declare, to vtter. Also to endite and accuse.

Indicatíuo, that whereby any thing is shewed and declared.

Indicatíuo díto, a mans forefinger.

I'ndice, the forefinger of a hand. Also the Gnomon of a diall. Also the index, the table or direction of a booke. Also a touchstone. Also the inscription or title of a booke. Also an inuentorie or summary of a mans goods. Also a guide or direction, a signe or a token. Also the trumpe carde that is turned vp.

Indícere, díco, díssi, détto, to intimate, to denounce, to manifest, to declare, to noise abroad. Also to accuse, to appeach or to detect.

Indicéuole, as Indicíbile.

Indicíbile, vnspeakeable, not to be spoken.

Indício, as Indítio.

Indicióso, as Inditióso.

Indicisíbile, not to be decided.

I'ndico, a precious stone in India that is euer sweating. Also blew Inde. Also a kinde of musicall instrument with strings.

Indiebus íllis, in those daies.

Indietare, to endiet.

Indietro, behinde, backward.

Indietro, after, afterward.

Indietro ánni, in former yeeres.

Indiffensíbile, not to be defended.

Indiffésa, in defence, vpon ones guard.

Indifféso, vndefended, not forbidden.

Indiffiníbile, not to be defined.

Indigente, needie, wanting, poore.

Indigenza, need, want, penury.

Indígere, dígo, digéi, digiúto, to haue need, want, or lacke.

Indigeríbile, as Indigestíbile.

Indigestíbile, not to be digested.

Indigestióne, indigestion.

Indigesto, vndigested, vnconcocted. Also confused or vnpolished.

Indignáre, to disdaine, to anger.

Indignatióne, indignation, anger.

Indignità, indignitie, vnworthinesse.

Indígno, vnworthy, vndeseruing.

Indigrósso, by great, in grosse.

Indileguáto, vnthawed, vnuanished.

Indiléguo, vanished or thawed.

Indiligente, negligent, slothfull.

Indiligenza, negligence, carelesnesse, sloth, sluggishnesse.

In diligenza, with diligence.

I'ndigo, as I'ndico.

Indiluuiáre, to diluge, to ouer flow.

Indimestichéuole, vnconuersable, not familiar, not to be tamed.

Indíre, díco, díssi, détto, to endite.

Indirettióne, indirection.

Indiretto, indirect. Also directed.

Indirigíbile, that may be addressed.

Indirítto, as Indiretto.

Indirizzaménto, an addressment.

Indirizzáre, to direct, to addresse.

Indirizzáre, to raise or set vpright.

Indirízzo, an addresse or direction, an addressment.

Indiscernéuole, not to be discerned.

Indisciplinéuole, as Indisciplinábile.

Indisciplinábile, not to be taught.

Indisciplinabilità, rudenesse, vnteaching. 

Indisciplináto, vntaught, vndisciplined.

Indiscretézza, indiscretion, fondnesse.

Indiscretióne, indiscretion, fundnesse.

Indiscreto, indiscreet, fond, rash.

Indiscutéuole, not to be discussed.

Indisdétta, in disgrace, or ill lucke.

Indiserto, vneloquent.

Indisiáre, to possesse with a desire.

Indispárte, a part, seuerall, remote.

Indispensábile, not to be dispensed with.

Indispenséuole, not to be dispensed.

Indispositióne, indisposition, vnlustinesse.

Indispósto, indisposed, vnlusty, crazed.

Indisprezzábile, not to be despised.

Indisquárto, out of the common roade.

Indisseccábile, that cannot be dried vp.

Indissímile, most vnlike.

Indissimulábile, not to be dissembled.

Indissociábile, not to be disasociated.

Indissolúbile, indissoluble, inseparable.

Indissolubilità, inseparablenesse.

Indissolúto, not dissolued, still knit, not loose.

Indistinguíbile, not to be distinguished.

Indistintaménte, without distinction.

Indistintióne, an indistinction.

Indistínto, vndistinguished, confused.

Indisusánza, vnuse, disuse.

Indisusáto, disused, vnused.

Inditiáre, to inditiate, to giue a marke, a signe, a note or signification.

Indítio, a signe, a shew, a note, a manifest argument.

Inditióne, as Indittióne.

Inditióso, full of notes, signes or shewes.

Indittáre, to indite. Also as Indícere.

Indittatúra, an inditing, an inditement.

Indittióne, an indiction, an inditement Also an intimating. Vsed also for the space of fifteene yeares, and also for time it selfe.

Indittóre, an inditer, a denouncer. Also an intimater.

Indítto, indited, indicted. Also intimated.

Indiuerse maniere, in diuers manners.

Indiuerse párti, in diuers parts.

Indíuia, the salade hearbe Endiue.

Indiuiduale, indiuiduall.

Indiuidualità, as Indiuiduità.

Indiuiduità, vnseparablenesse.

Indiuíduo, inseparable, not to be diuided.

Indiuináre, as Indouináre.

Indiuinatória árte, the Arte of deuining.

Indiuinatóre, a Deuiner, a Guesser.

Indiuinéuole, that may be guessed. 



Indiuisáto, vncomparted, vndeuided.

Indiuisibile, not to be diuided.

Indiuisibilità, inseparablenesse.

Indiuíso, vndeuided, vnseparated.

Indócile, vnapt to learne, a dullard.

Indocilità, hardnesse of learning.

Indóglia, a haggasse-pudding.

Indogliáre, as Indoglíre.

Indoglíre, ísco, íto, to become, to make or be full of paine, smart or griefe.

Indoglíto, full of smart, paine or griefe.

Indóia, da un cápo délla trómba difuóco farái acconciáre una indóia di ferro. 

Indólce, vnsweet, vnpleasant in taste.

Indolciménto, an ensweetning.

Indolcíre, císco, cíto, to ensweeten.

I'ndole, a good or bad naturall inclination, a towardnesse or aptnesse to good or euill. Also a vertuous disposition.

Indolenza, sencelesnesse of paine.

Indolenzíre, zísco zíto, to ake or feele paine, smart or griefe.

Indolére, dólgo, dólsi, dolúto, as Indoglíre.

Indomábile, sauage, vntamable.

Indomabilità, vntamednesse.

Indomáre, to vntame, to make wilde.

Indomesticábile, as Indimestichéuole.

Indomestichéuole, as Indimestichéuole.

Indoméuole, vntamable, sauage.

Indomità, vntamednesse, wildnesse.

Indómito, wilde, vntamed, vnruly.

Indonnáre, to enwoman. Also to become or make Lord or possessor of any thing.

Indonnársi, to become womanish. Also to become Lord or master of.

Indonníre, nísco, níto, as Indonnársi.

Indóno, in gift, in free gift.

Indoppiaménto, an endoubling.

Indoppiáre, to endouble.

Indoppiatúra, an endoubling.

Indorábile, not to be gilded.

Indoraménto, any kind of gilding.

Indoráre, to gild, to engild.

Indoráta, gilt or gilded. Also Wallferne, Stoneferne, Sealeferne, Fingerferne, Miltwast or Ceterach.

Indoratóre, a gilder.

Indoratúra, any kind of gilding.

Indormentáre, as Indormíre.

Indormíre, dórmo, dormíj, dormíto, to fall, to bring or lull a sleepe. Also to bid a fig for one, or not to care for one no more then for a dreame.

Indossáre, to put or lay vpon ones backe.

Indósso, about or on ones backe.

Indotáre, to endow.

Indotáto, not endowed with any gift.

Indótta, as Induttióne.

Indottíuo, induciue, perswasiue.

Indottoráre, to giue or take the degree of a Doctor, to doctor.

Indótto, vnlearned. 

Indótto, induced, perswaded or drawen vnto.

Indottrinábile, not to be taught.

Indottrináre, to endoctrine, to instruct.

Indottrináto, endoctrined. Also vnlearned and sans doctrine.

Indouanadóre, a silke-winder.

Indouanadúra, a silke-winding.

Indouanáre, to winde or reele silke.

Indouáre, to goe or enter whether.

Indonáto, gone or entred whether.

Indouinaménto, as Indouinatióne.

Indouináre, to guesse, to deuine, to foretell, to soothsay.

Indouinatióne, a diuination, a guessing, a foretelling, a soothsaying. Also a ridling.

Indouinatóre, a deuiner, a soothsaier, a foreteller.

Indouinello, a tell-truth, a tom-tell-troth, a true guesser. Also a riddle.

Indouinéuole, that may be guessed, deuined or foretold.

Indouíno, as Indouinatóre.

Indozzaménto, as Induttióne.

Indozzéna, bording in commons as Schollers doe, standing at liuerie.

Indozzenáre, to make vp in dozens. Also to be or borde in commons.

Indracáto, endragoned, become a Dragon.

Indragáto, as Indracáto.

Indragonáto, as Indracáto.

Indrappáre, to enrobe or put into clothes.

Indrappello, in troupes or bands.

Indrizzaménto, a directing, an addressing.

Indrizzáre, to direct, to addresse.

Indrízzo, a directing, an addressing.

Indubaménto. 

Indubáto. 

Indubbiáre, to make or put in doubt.

Indubbiéuole, not to be doubted.

Indúbbio, in doubt, doubtfull.

Indubbio, certaine, not doubted.

Indubbióso, vndoubtfull, doubtlesse.

Indubitabile, as Indubitéuole.

Indubitáto, vndoubted, doubtlesse.

Indubitéuole, not to be doubted.

Induáre, to make or become two.

Inducáre, to become a Duke.

Indúcere, dúco, dússi, dútto, to induce, to bring or lead into, to mooue, to perswade.

Induciménto, an inducing, an induction, a perswading vnto, an inducement.

Inducitóre, an inducer, a perswader.

Indugaménto, an inducement.

Indugáre, to induce, as Inducére.

Indúgia, as Indúgio.

Indugiáre, to tarrie, to abide, to delay, to slow, to linger.

Indúgio, stay, delay, tariance, a lingring, a demur, a slownesse. 

Indulgente, indulgent, bearing with a fault, milde, permitting.

Indulgentia, indulgence, permission, a milde dispensation and forbearance.

Indulgiáre, as Indúlgere.

Indulgentiáto, hauing indulgence or permission to doe any thing.

Indúlgere, dúlgo, dúlsi, dúlto, to permit with fauour, to dispence with.

Indúlto, permitted or dispensed with. Also pardoned, borne with.

Induráre, to harden, to obdurate, to stiffen.

Induráre, to endure, to last. Also to suffer, to beare, to tolerate.

Induratíuo, that doth harden. Also that may be endured.

Induréuole, not durable, not lasting. Also that may be endured.

Induríre, rísco, ríto, to harden, to obdurate, to stiffen.

Indúrre, as Indúcere.

Indústre, as Industrióso.

Indústria, industrie, endeuour, diligence.

Industriáre, to endeuour, to vse industry, labour or trauell.

Industrióso, industrious, Laborious.

Induttíno, inductiue, inducing.

Induttióne, an inducement, an entrance.

Indútto, induced, perswaded, led in.

Induttóre, an inducer, a perswader.

Inebriáre, to be or become drunken.

Inebriézza, drunkennesse, tipsinesse.

Ineccellénza, excellently.

Inédia, famine, want of meat & drinke.

Inedióso, hungrie, full of famine, wanting reliefe.

Ineffábile, vnspeakable, vneffable, not to be expressed.

Ineffabilità, vnspeakablenesse.

Ineffetto, in effect, indeed, in good sooth

Ineffettuále, vneffectuall, of no force.

Ineffettuóso, as Ineffettuále.

Inefficáce, vneffectuall, of no force.

Ineffacácia, vneffectualnesse.

Inefigiáto, vnshapen, vnfashioned.

Ineguále, vnequall, vneuen, no match.

Inegualità, inequalitie.

Inegualménte, vnequally.

Inelegánte, vnelegant, without grace.

Inelegánza, vnhandsomnesse, rudenesse.

Ineloquente, vneloquent, rude speaking.

Ineloquenza, vneloquence.

Inemendábile, not to be amended.

Inemendéuole, not to be amended.

Inenarrábile, vnspeakable.

Inéntro, within, inwardly.

Inequále, vnequall, vneuen, not match.

Inequalità, inequalitie.

Inequiparábile, vncomparable.

Inequità, vnequite, partialitie.

Inericuperábile, vnrecouerable.

Inerme, vnarmed, vnfenced.

Inerpicáre, to rake with rakes of iron. Also to clammar vp with hookes. 



Inerránte, fixed, not wandring.

Inertícula, a kinde of vine or grape.

Inertia, lithernesse, ignorance of artes, lacke of knowledge.

Inerto, lither, ignorant, vnlearned, artelesse, dull, base minded, cowardly.

Ineruáre, as Ineruoráre.

Ineruditióne, ignorance, vnlearnednes.

Inerudíto, vnlearned, vninstructed.

Ineruoráre, to vnsinew, to weaken, to enfeeble, to benum ones limmes.

Inesaudéuole, not to be harkned vnto.

Inesaudíbile, as Inesaudéuole.

Inesaustábile, as Inesáusto.

Ines´usto, that cannot be drawne dry.

Inescáre, to lay a baite for, to entice, to allure, to inueagle. Also to prime a piece.

Inescatóre, a baiter, an enticer, an allurer. Also a primer of a piece.

Inescogitábile, beyond mans thought, not to be imagined.

Inescogitánza, a thoughtlesnesse.

Inescrutábile, past finding out.

Inescusábile, not to be excused.

Inescuséuole, not to be excused.

Inesercitáto, vnexercised.

Inesercitéuole, not to be exercised.

Inesperienza, inexperience, vnskilfulnesse.

Inespérto, vnexpert, vnskilfull.

Inespiábile, inexpiable, marble-minded

Inespiéuole, not to be purged or appeased.

Inesplébile, that cannot be filled vp.

Inesplicábile, inexplicable, intricate.

Inesploráto, vnsought out.

Inespresséuole, not to be expressed.

Inespressibile, not to be expressed.

Inespugnábile, inprennable, inuincible.

Inessiccábile, not to be dried vp.

Inessistente. 

Inessistenza. 

Inessorábile, inexorable, not to be entreated.

Inessorabilità, vnexorablenesse.

Inessoráto, that cannot be appeased.

Inestaménto, an engraffing.

Inestáre, to graffe, to engraffe.

Inestatóre, a graffer, an engraffer.

Inestatúra, a graffing, an engraffing.

Inestumábile, inestimable.

Inestiméuole, vnualuable.

Inestinguíbile, vnquenchable.

Inestínto, not quenched out.

Inestirpabile, not to be rooted out.

Inestricábile, not to be dissolued.

Inestricáre, to intricate, to infould.

Ineterno, eternally, euerlastingly.

Inetríre, trísco, tríto, to play the vntoward or froward foole.

Inetriménto, as Inettitúdine.

Inettaménte, foolishly, vnto wardly.

Inettia, as Inettitúdine.

Inettitúdine, vnaptnesse, vntowardnes.

Inetto, vnapt, vntoward, foolish.

Ineuitábile, vnauoydable.

Infabricábile, not to be built.

Infabricáto, vnbuilt, not wrought.

Infacchinársi, as Affacchinársi.

Infáccia, insight, before ones face. Also front or ouer against.

Infacciáre, to vpbraide, to hit in the teeth.

Infacendáre, to embusie, or lay some businesse vpon one.

Infacendáto, busied, imbusied.

Infaceto, vnpleasant, not merry.

Infacóndia, rudenesse in speech.

Infacondióso, as Infacóndo.

Infacóndo, vneloquent or rude in speech.

Infagottáre, to faggot or bundle vp.

Infaldáre, to infould, to inwrap.

Infaldatúra, an infoulding, an inwraping.

Infaldelláre, as Infaldáre.

Infallíbile, infallible, not to faile.

Infallibilissimaménte, most infallibly.

Infallibilità, a neuerfailing.

Infállo, a misse, mistaken, in error.

Infáma, as Infámia.

Infamáre, to defame, to detect, to shame.

Infamatóre, a defamer, a reprocher.

Infamatório, defamatory, reprochfull.

Infáme, infamous, reproachfull, defamed.

Infameménte, infamously.

Infámia, infamy, shame, reproach.

Infamigliársi, to become familiar or to inhoushould himselfe.

Infamosità, as Infámia.

Infamóso, as Infáme.

Infanciulláre, as Ribambíre.

Infanciullíre, lisco, líto, as Ribambíre.

Infándo, as Nefándo.

Infangáre, to bemire with durt.

Infangoso, that is not myrie.

Infánta, a woman infant.

Infantáre, to be deliuered of child.

Infantasticáto, become fantasticall.

Infánte, a man child or infant.

Infantería, infantery, souldiers on foote.

Infantescársi, to become a maide-seruant.

Infántia, infancy, childishnesse.

Infantilità, as Infántia.

Infarciménto, a farcing, a stuffing.

Infarcíre, císco, cíto, to farce, to stuffe.

Infardáre, to bedawbe, to besmeare.

Infardelláre, to infardle, or bundle vp.

Infaretráre, to arme or put in a quiuer.

Infarína pastináche, a gull, a foole.

Infarináre, to bemeale, to beflower.

Infarraríto. 

Infasciáre, to inswath or binde together. Also to infesse in armory.

Infáscie, in swadling clouts. Also infesse in armory.

Infascináre, to binde vp as faggots.

Infastidíre, dísco, díto, as Fastidiáre.

Infastidíto, troubled, disturbed, molested.

Infastídio, troublesome, wearisome.

Infaticábile, vnweariable.

Infaticabilità, vnwearinesse.

Infatigábile, vnweariable.

Infátti, in deed, infact, in effect.

Infátto e'n fíne, when all is done and said.

Infatuáre, to make or become foolish.

Infauáre, to become a beane. Also to be turned or coupled into a mans priuities.

Infauorábile, not to be fauoured.

Infauóre, in fauour or grace of one.

Infauoréuole, vnfauorable.

Infausto, vnluckie, dismall, dyre.

Infebbríre, rísco, ríto, to become aguish.

Infèbuóna, in good faith or sooth.

Infecondáre, to become fruitfull.

Infecondità, vnfruitfulnesse.

Infecóndo, vnfruitefull, barren.

Inféde, in testimonie.

Infedéle, vnfaithfull, infidell, disloyall.

Infedeltà, vnfaithfulnesse, infidelitie.

Infédemía, on my faith.

Infè di Dío, by the faith of God.

Infelíce, vnhappy, dismall, vnluckie.

Infelicità, vnhappinesse, infelicitie.

Infelloníre, nísco, níto, to become a fellone.

Infelloníto, become a fellone or cruell.

Infeltráre, to enfelt. Also to grow stiffe and starke as a horse when he is cold.

Infelpáre, to emplush, to shagge.

Infeminíre, nísco, níto, to become womanish or effeminate.

Infeminíto, as Effemináto.

Infendíbile, not to be cleft.

Inferente, inferring, implying.

Inferénza, an inference, an implying.

Inferióre, inferiour, vnder, lower.

Inferiorità, inferioritie, a lower state.

Inferíre, rísco, ríto, to inferre, to implie.

Inferíto, inferred, implied, signified.

Infermáre, to sicken, to fall sicke.

Infermáre, to close, to locke or shut in.

Infermaría, a spittle, a lazaret.

Infermería, a place for sicke folkes. Also sickenesse, murian, or mortality.

Inferméuole, crazie, sickly, sickish.

Infermiere, one that keepes or tends sick folkes. Also sickish or queasie.

Infermíccio, as Inferméuole.

Infermità, infirmity, sickenesse, weaknesse.

Inférmo, sicke, crazed, weake diseased. 



Infernále, hellish, infernall.

Infernáre, to bring, or come into hell.

Infernitichíre, ísco, íto, to grow franticke.

Inferno, hell, the deepest deepe.

Infernóso, as Infernále.

Inferocíto, become fearce, cruell or fell.

Inferráre, to locke in irons or fetters.

Inferratúra, a shooeing of a horse. Also a putting into iron.

Inferriáto, as Inferríto.

Inferríto, put into iron, become iron.

Infertà, Vsed anciently for Infermità, or infection.

Infertílire, lísco, líto, to grow fertile.

Infertile, vnfruitfull, barren.

Infertilità, vnfruitfulnesse, barrennesse.

Inferuoratióne, a growing feruent.

Inferuoráto, growne feruent or earnest.

Inferuoríre, rísco, ríto, to make or grow feruent or earnest.

Infesta, as Infesto.

Infesta, in feast, in ioy, in glee.

Infestaménto, molestation, annoyance.

Infestagióne, as Infestaménto.

Infestáre, to infest, to molest, to annoie.

Infestatióne, as Infestaménto.

Infestatóre, a vexer, a molester.

Infestéuole, that is infesting or tedious.

Infestíuo, nothing sportfull.

Infesto, odious, hatefull, infestuous.

Infesto, annoyed, infested, infected.

Infestuccáre, to ramme in with a beetle as pauiers doe stones.

Infettáre, to infect, to taint, to polute.

Infettatióne, as Infettióne.

Infettióne, infection, contagion.

Infettiuo, infectiue, contagious.

Infetto, infected, tainted, polluted.

Infettóso, contagious, infectious.

Infeudáto, enfewded, brought to tribute.

Infeudo, enfewde, or fee-farme.

Infiaccáre, to weaken, to faint, to wearie.

Infiacchíre, ísco, í, to, as Infiaccáre.

Infiaccoláto, full or stored with torches.

Infiagióne, a swelling, a puffing.

Infiammábile, that may be enflamed.

Infiammagióne, an inflammation.

Infiammáre, to enflame, to kindle.

Infiammatióne, as Infiammagióne.

Infiáre, to swell, to puffe, to blow vp.

Infiascáre, to inflagon, to inflaske.

Infiatióne, a swelling, an inflation.

Infiatúra, a swelling, a puffing vp.

Infibbiáre, to buckle or claspe together.

Infibráre le uéne. Lat.

Inficáto, entred into a womans quaint. 

Inficcáre, to thrust, to fixe or driue in.

Inficióso, vnofficious, negligent.

Infidáto, trustlesse, not trusted, faithlesse.

Infidéle, vnfaithfull, disloyall.

Infideltà, infidelity, vnfaithfulnesse.

Infído, faithlesse, trustlesse, disloyall.

Infieuolíre, lísco, líto, to infeeble.

Infielíre, lísco, líto, to ingall.

Infieríto, become wilde or fierce.

Infíggere, fíggo, fissi, fisso, to fixe into, to infix.

Infigliuoláre, to inchilde.

Infigúra, figured. Also set as a song.

Infigurábile, not to be figured.

Infiguráre, to infigure, to shapen.

Infila, in file or due ranckes.

Infilacciáre, as Infiláre.

Infilacciáta di paróle, a huddling of wordes.

Infiláre, to spin or thrid together. Also to range or marshall men in files.

Infilzáre, to thrid as pearles or beades, to thrid a needle. Also to fillet. Also to range in files as souldiers.

Infilzatríce, a thridder of pearles.

Infilzatúra, a thridding of pearles.

Infiminatióne, a low-basenesse.

Infimità, infirmitie, low-basenesse.

I'nfimo, basest, lowest, most abiect.

Infin'., looke Infíno.

Infinattánto, whilst, vntill that, so long as.

Infíne, in fine, in conclusion.

Infingardággine, lithernesse, lazinesse, sluggishnesse, retchlesnesse, slothfulnesse.

Infingardía, as Infingardággine.

Infingardíggine, as Infingardággine.

Infingardíre, dísco, díto, to grow Infingárdo.

Infingardíto, growen Infingárdo.

Infingárdo, lither, lazie, sluggish, dull, slothfull, retchlesse, idle.

Infíngere, as Fíngere.

Infingéuole, that may be faigned.

Infiníbile, that cannot be ended.

Infinità, infinitie, vnmeasurablenesse.

Infinità., Vsed for generalitie.

Infinitaménte, infinitely.

Infinitézza, as Infinità.

Infinitiplicáre, to multiply in infinitie.

Infinitíuo, infinitiue, defining neither time, number nor person.

Infiníto, infinite, endlesse, numberlesse.

Infinitudine, infinitenesse, endlesnesse.

Infíno, vntill, vntill when.

Infíno, euen, so farre, so farre forth.

Infíno ad hóra, vntill now.

Infíno ad hóggi, vntill this day.

Infíno al cuóre, euen to the heart.

Infíno all'hóra, vntill then.

Infíno a quándo? vntill when? how long?

Infino a qui, vntill this time or place. 

Infíno a tánto, so long as, vntill that.

Infíno a tánto chè, vntill such time that.

Infíno chè, vntill that, so long as.

Infíno di quà, euen from hence.

Infinocchiáre, to enfennell.

Infinocchiáta, as Gonfiáre alcúno.

Infinocchiáta, an enfenneling.

Infin quà, hither vnto.

Infín quésto dì, vntill this day.

Infínta, a faigning, a shew, a fiction.

Infintánto chè, vntill such time that.

Infintézza, faignednesse, dissimulation.

Infinto, faigned, dissembled, counterfeit.

Infío, in fee-farme, as a fee.

Infioráre, to bloome, to floure, to flourish. Also to dresse with flowers.

Infióre, in flowre, in prime, in youth.

Infioríre, rísco, ríto, as Infioráre.

Infirmáre, as Infermáre.

Infirmaría, as Infermaría.

Infirmiére, as Infermiére.

Infirmità, as Infermità.

Infírmo, as Inférmo.

Infísso, enfixed, fastned or fixed into.

Infistoláre, to infistulate, to fester.

Infistolatióne, an Infistulation.

Infistolíre, lísco, líto, as Infistoláre.

Infiumáre, to enflud, to enriuer.

Inflaccidíre, dísco, díto, to make or become faint or drooping.

Inflatióne, as Enfiagióne.

Inflesséuole, inflexible, vntractable.

Inflessíbile, inflexible, that cannot bend.

Inflessibilità, inflexibilitie.

Inflessióne, inflexibilitie.

Inflesso, vnbent, firme, right, straight.

Inflíggere, flíggo, flíssi, flítto, to inflict, to smite against.

Inflittióne, an infliction or inflicting.

Inflítto, inflicted, smitten against.

Influente, giuing influence.

Influenza, an influence, a flowing in. Also a fatall gift.

Influíre, ísco, íto, to flow in, to sinke or runne into as water doth. Also to giue influence vnto.

Influssióne, as Inflússo.

Inflússo, an influence or flowing in.

Infocáre, to enflame, to set on fire or a burning. Also to neale or bake red-hot.

Infocáto, enflamed, set on fire or a burning. Also nealed or baked red-hot.

Infoderáre, to sheath or put into a scabbard. Also to line a garment.

Infóggia, in fashion.

Infoggiáre, to enfashion, to accustome.

Infogliáre, to enleafe or grow greene.

Infoiáre, to grow letcherous as a Goate or sault-bitch.

Infolláre, to become foolish or fond. Also to thicken, to presse, to enthrong.

Infollíre, lísco, líto, as Infolláre.

Infolpáre, to become foolish or simple. 



Infondáre, to sinke downe. Also to reach to the bottome. Also to founder a horse.

Infóndere, fóndo, fúsi, fúso, to infuse or powre into.

Infóndersi, a disease in Hawkes or Horses, called the melting of the grease.

Infondíbulo, a tunnell, a funnell.

Infonditóre, an infuser, a powrer into.

In fóndo, in the bottome.

Inforcáre, to enforke. Also to hooke.

Inforcáta, an enforking.

Inforcatúra, an enforking.

Inforcináre, as Inforcáre.

Inforgicáre, to forge, to frame or ideate in minde what one can not expresse, and hee that listneth cannot rightly conceiue.

Infórma, in forme, in fashion.

Informábile, that may be informed. Also that cannot be formed.

Infórma cámmera, an informer.

Informaggiáre, to encheese, to crud.

Informagióne, as Informatióne.

Informáre, to giue forme, frame or shape to any thing. Also to set a shooe vpon a last, to put a cheese into a presse or cheese-fat. Also to informe, to instruct, to giue knowledge or information.

Informatióne, information, notice or knowledge.

Informatíuo, that informeth, or that may be informed.

Informatóre, an informer, an instructer.

Infórme, formelesse, shapelesse.

Informidábile, vndreadfull, not terrible.

Informità, informitie, shapelesnesse.

Infornáre, to put into an ouen.

Infornáro, as Infornatóre.

Infornáta, a batch or ouen full of bread.

Infornatóre, a baker or putter into an ouen.

Inforníto, vnfurnished, vnstored.

Infórra, a furring of a garment.

Inforráre, to enfurre a garment.

Inforsáre, to put in doubt, to make doubtfull.

Infórse, in doubt or peraduenture.

Infortíre, tísco, títo, to grow or make strong. Also to grow soure and strong as Vineger or Vertiuice.

Infortúna, a misfortune, a mischance.

Infortunáto, vnfortunate, vnluckie.

Infortúnio, a misfortune, a mishap, a mischance.

Infortunità, as Infortúnio.

Infortúno, as Infortúna.

Inforzáre, to enforce, to enstrengthen.

Infoscaménto, as Infoscatióne.

Infoscáre, to make or grow darke, cloudy, mistie, duskie, gloomie or foggie.

Infoscatióne, a mistinesse, a duskishnesse, a fogginesse, a darknesse.

Infossáre, to ditch or to entrench. 

I'nfra, betweene, among, amidst. Also vnder, namely in composition.

Infra cassáre, as Fracassáre.

Infracidáre, to rot, to putrifie, to fester. Also to wearie with fond discourses or foolish behauiour.

Infracidíre, dísco, díto, as Infracidáre.

Infradicciáre, as Infracidáre.

Infragidíre, dísco, díto, as Infracidáre.

Infrágile, vnfraile, vnbrittle, durable, not fraile.

Infragilità, vnfrailenesse, vnbrittlenesse.

Infrágnere, as Infrángere.

Infralíre, lísco, líto, to make or become fraile.

Inframè, betweene my selfe.

Inframéssa, an interposition.

Inframésso, interposed, intermitted. Also inlaide or wrought betweene, inserted.

Inframettente, interputting. Also an insinuating fellow.

Inframéttere, métto, mísi, mésso, to intermit, to interpose, to put between. Also to inlay or worke in betweene and among other things, to insert.

Inframezzáre, to intermixe. Also to enterlard.

Inframezzo, in the midle or meane while.

Infranciosáto, frenchified, or full of the French-pox.

Infrángere, as Frángere.

Infrangiáre, to fringe, to infringe.

Infrangíbile, not to be broken.

Infránto, as Fránto.

Infrantóio, an Oyle-presse or Mill. Also any thing that breaketh.

Infranotáre, to note vnder or betweene.

Infrapórre, as Inframéttere.

Infraquesto, in this meane while, betweene this.

Infrascaménto, as Infrascáta.

Infrascáre, to grow to shrubes, to twigs, bushes, rods or branches. Also to intangle, to inbrier, to inbush. Also as Gonfiáre alcuno.

Infrascáta, an Arbour or Bower of leaues, boughes, or branches.

Infrasconáre, as Infrascáre.

Infrasconárele uéle, to fasten the sailes to the mastes.

Infrascritta, an vnderwriting.

Infrascrittióne, an vnderwriting.

Infrascrítto, vnder-writing.

Infrascríuere, to vnder-write.

Infrastagliáre, as Frastagliáre.

Infra tánto, in the meane while.

Infratársi, to infrier himselfe.

Infratelláre, to inbrother.

Infratóio, as Infrantóio.

Infrátto, vnbroken, vnbruised, whole.

Infrattúra, a fracture, a breaking.

Infreddaggióne, a colde, a rhume. 

Infreddáre, to coole, to make colde.

Infreddíre, dísco, díto, as Infreddáre.

Infreddúra, as Infreddaggióne.

Infréga, a catter-walling, proud or sault as bitches be.

Infregáre, to rub or clawin.

Infregiáre, as Fregiáre.

Infrenáre, to inbridle, to refraine.

Infrenáto, vnbridled, vnruly.

Infréno, bridled, restrayned, curbed.

Infrequentáto, vnfrequented.

Infrequente, vnfrequent, seld, not frequent.

Infrequenza, vnhauntednesse.

Infrescáre, as Rinfrescáre.

Infrescatóio, as Rinfrescatóio.

Infrétta, in hast, with speed, hastily.

Infrettáre, to hasten, to make speed.

Infrigidaménto, a cooling, a chilling.

Infrigidánte, that cooleth, cooling.

Infrigidatióne, a cooling, a chilling.

Infrigidíre, dísco, díto, to coole.

Infríngere, fríngo, frínsi, frínto, to breake or teare in pieces. Also to infringe or transgresse.

Infringitóre, an infringer.

Infrínto, infringed, transgressed.

Infrizzáre, as Frizzáre.

Infroggiáre, to besot with flatteries.

Infrollíre, lísco, líto, as Frolláre.

Infrondáre, as Frondeggiáre.

Infrondársi, vestírsi di frónde. 

Infrótta, in troupes, in squadrons.

Infrottáre, to introupe, to insquadron.

Infruente, influent, inflowing.

Infruenza, influence, inflowing.

Infruíre, as Influíre.

Infruscáto, confused, intangled.

Infruttífero, vnfruitfull, fruitelesse.

Infruttuóso, as Infruttífero.

Infúga, to flight. Also in route.

Infugáre, to prouoke, to incite.

Infugatióne, a flying vnto. Also a prouocation, or inciting vnto.

Infuiáre, to pilfer, to steale, to hide into.

Infúla, an ornament or Miter that Priests and Bishops were wont to weare on their heads. Also a Labell hanging on the sides of Miters.

Infuláre, to inmiter or impale as Bishops be.

Infuliginíre, nísco, níto, to insutt.

Infumáre, as Affumáre.

Infumatióne, an infuming, a bloting.

Infúndere, as Infóndere.

Infuocáre, as Infocáre, &c.

Infuóra, a broad, without, outward.

Infuóra, except, sauing, excepted.

In fuorchè, onely excepted.

Infuóri, as Infuóra.

Infurbáto, become a cheater or a knaue.

Infurfantáto, become a rascall, inrogued. 



Infúria, in a fury, rageingly.

Infuriáre, to grow into fury or rage.

Infurióso, not furious, sans fury.

Infusióne, an infusion, a powring in.

Infuso, infused, powred in, melted.

Infustáre, as Inalboráre, as Imbracáre.

Infustíto, instaked, inshanked.

Infusúra, an infusing. Also a melting.

Infuturáre, to set vp vnto posterity.

Infutúro, in time to come, heereafter.

Infusáre, to inspindle, to shaft.

Ingabbáre, to incage, to coope vp.

Ingábbo, in mockery, floutingly.

Ingaggiáre, to ingage, to wage, to pawne.

Ingaggiáre battáglia, to wage battell.

Ingaggiáto, ingaged, gaged, pawned.

Ingagliardíre, dísco, díto, to make or become Gagliárdo.

Ingaglioffáre, to pocket vp.

Ingaglioffíre, físco, fíto, to become crafty, slie, knauish or a cheater.

Ingaláre, as Ingalláre.

Ingalláre, to steepe in gaules.

Ingallonársi come una náue, to be ready to sinke and hang on one side.

Ingalosciáto, hauing galoshes on, or clogges on his feete.

Ingalluzzársi, to become wanton, riggish or proud vpon some humour, to strout.

Ingamasciáto, hauing gamashes on.

Inganciáre, as Aganciáre.

Ingangheráto, hanged on hinges.

Ingannáre, to deceiue, to beguile.

Ingannatóre, a deceiuer, a beguiler.

Ingannavilláno, mocke-clowne. Also the name of a leape or sault in Italy.

Inganneuóle, guilefull, deceitfull.

Ingánno, guile, deceit, fraude. Also an errour, a misse, a mistaking.

Ingannoso, deceitfull, guilefull.

Inganzáre, alcúrn fúrono impalátied alcúni inganzáti dà túrchi.

Ingarafonáro, to sticke with Cloues. Also to set or decke with Gilloflowers.

Ingarbársi le bráccia, when a horse doth cunningly set downe his forefeet after the maner of true horsemanship.

Ingarbugliáre, as Garbugliáre.

Ingarbúglio, as Garbúglio.

Ingarzabelláre, alcúni non sapendo compórre villanelle s'ingarzabellíscono cóme se sapéssero fáre sonétti o canzóni.

Ingasiáre, to worke purle or stitchworke.

Ingastighéuole, vnpunishable.

Ingattéccio, a catter-walling.

Ingattírsi, to become curst or cattish.

Ingauitáre, to put in seare or mistrust.

I'nge, the name of a very louing bird. Also vsed for loue dalliances.

Ingegnársi, to indeuour or apply ones care and wits about any matter. 

Ingegnéuole, as Ingegnóso.

Ingegniere, an Enginer, a deuiser of Engines, Machines or Stratagems, one skillfull in fortifications. Also an Artificer or maker of any tooles.

Ingegnétto, a little prety wit or toole.

Ingégno, the nature or inclination of a man. Also wit, arte, skill, cunning, knowledge or discretion. Also any engine, machine, toole, implement or deuise.

Ingegnóne, a notable great wit. Also a very great engine or machine. Also the whole frame that containes the Mill-stones of a Mill.

Ingegnóso, witty, ingenious, cunning, inuentiue, full of inuention.

Ingelábile, that cannot freeze.

Ingélido, vnfrozen, not frozen.

Ingelosíre, sísco, sito, to become iealous.

Ingelosía, in iealousie or suspect.

Ingemináre, to double, to twine.

Ingeminatióne, a doubling, a twyning.

Ingemmare, to eniem, to eniewell. Also to ingraffe with yongue shootes or syens. Also to bud foorth as Vines or Willowes doe. Also to winde vp into clues as thrid.

Ingemmatióne, an eniemming. Also an ingraffing. Also a budding foorth.

Ingenerábile, not to be ingendred.

Ingenerabilità, ingenerability.

Ingeneráre, as Generáte.

Ingeneratióne, as Generatióne.

Ingeneráto, vnbegotten, vnborne.

Ingenere, in generall kind.

Ingenículo, a figure among the starres now called Hercules.

Ingeniere, as Ingegniere.

Ingenito, vnbegotten, naturall.

Ingengiarello, a pottage made of Ginger.

Ingente, great, excellent, famous.

Ingentilíre, lísco, líto, to make or become gentle, curteous, or noble.

Ingenuaménte, ingeniously, in good sooth, freely, according to ones conscience.

Ingenuità, ingenuitie, a free and honest disposition according to conscience.

Ingenuo, naturall, freeborne, of an honest inbred disposition.

Ingénza, greatnesse, famous excellency.

Ingeríre, rísco, ríto, voluntarily to presse into, to insinuate or offer himselfe vndesired. Also to bring, to put or caste into.

Ingeríto, pressed, insinuated or offred himselfe voluntarily, brought or caried in.

Ingessáre, to enchalke, to white with chalke, to plaister with clay or earth.

Ingesto, as Ingeríto, as Inserto.

Ingettáre, to iniect or cast in.

Ingettióne, an iniection or conueying of any liquid medicine by siring into any hollow part of the bodie.

Ingehzzáto, become swarthy as Turkes or Saracins be.

Inghiottíbile, that may be swallowed or englutted.

Inghiottíre, tísco, títo, to englut, to swallow in.

Inghiottonáre, to become a glutton, or a craftie knaue.

Inghiottonire, nísco, níto, as Inghiottonáre.

Inghiozzáre, as Inghiottíre.

Inghiribizzito, possessed with some fond humour or fantasie.

Inghirlandáre, to engarland.

Inghistára, a glasse to bring wine in.

Ingiaccáre, to put on a iacket or shirt of maile, to eniacket.

Ingialláre, to grow or become yellow.

Ingiallíre lísco, líto, as Ingialláre.

Ingiardináre, to make or reduce into gardens, to engarden.

Ingiarráre, to fill with grauell or sand.

Ingigantíto, become a Gyant.

Ingigliáre, to lilly, to fleudelise.

Ingignità, pouertie, want, lacke.

Inginocchiáre, to kneele downe.

Inginocchiáte, kneeling places.

Inginocchiatóio, a kneeling place or pewe as they have in churches.

Inginocchiatóre, a kneeler.

Inginócchio, on knees or kneeling.

Inginocchióne, kneelingly.

Ingióco, in plaie or sport.

Ingiocóndo, vnpleasant, sad.

Ingiocondità, sadnesse, vnpleasantnesse

Ingioielláre, to eniewell or eniem.

Ingioncáre, to put vp into rushes. Also to strew with rushes.

Ingioncáta, as Gioncáta.

Ingióngere, gióngo, giónsi, giónto, to inioyne, to command, to will, to impose.

Ingiontióne, an iniunction, a charge.

Ingiónto, inioyned, willed, commanded.

Ingiorneáre, as Giorneáre.

Ingioueníre, as Ringioueníre.

Ingiouentù, in youth.

Ingirábile, not to be turned about.

Ingíro, giring, about, compassing.

Ingiù, downward.

Ingiubiláre, to fil with ioy or gladnesse.

Ingiubbáto, encoted, hauing a coate on

Ingiudicábile, not to be iudged.

Ingiudicióso, without iudgement.

Ingiurábilc, not to be sworne.

Ingiúgere, as Ingióngere.

Ingiúre, Sáuio ingiúre, wise in the law.

Ingiúria, an iniurie, an offence, a wrong. 



Ingiuriáre, to iniurie, to wrong, to abuse.

Ingiuriatóre, an iniurer, a wronger.

Ingiurióso, iniurious, wrongfull.

Ingiuncáre, as Ingioncáre.

Ingiuncáta, as Ingioncáta.

Ingiúso, as Ingiù, downeward.

Ingiustaménte, vniustly.

Ingiustáre, to leuell, to make euen.

Ingiustificábile, not iustifiable.

Ingiustitia, Iniustice, false dealing.

Ingiústo, vniust, false, vneuen, wrong.

Inglandulíre, lísco, líto, to glandulate, to kernell.

Inglobáre, to englobe, to make or become round.

Inglomeráre, as Glomeráre.

Inglória, shame, reproch.

Inglorióso, inglorious, shamefull.

Ingluuiáre, to englut or deuoure.

Inglúuie, gluttonie, insatiate deuouring. Also the craw or gargill.

Ingluuióne, a glutton, a gourmand.

Ingluuióso, gluttonous, rauenous, insatiate in deuouring.

Ingobbáre, to become bunchie or crooked.

Ingobbíre, ísco, íto, as Ingobbáre.

Ingoffáre, as Ingoffire.

Ingóffi, ogniúno vuole la súa parte de gl' ingóffi. 

Ingoffíre, ísco, íto, to become sottish, foolish, grossepated or clownish.

Ingóffo, not foolish, but wise.

Ingógna, as Gógna. Also hurt or domage.

Ingognáre, to torture, to torment, to hurt, to endomage. Looke Gógna.

Ingogliáre, as Ingoláre.

Ingoiáre, as Ingoláre.

Ingoióne, a great swallower.

Ingoióso, full of greedie swallowing.

Ingoíte, ísco, íto, as Ingoláre.

Ingoláre, to englut, to swallow, to engorge without chewing.

Ingolatríciónde, glutting waues.

Ingolfáre, to engulfe.

Ingoluppáre, to enwrap or roule vp.

Ingolúppo, an enwrapping, a bundle.

Ingombraménto, any kinde of encombrance, impediment or luggage.

Ingombráre, to encombre, to let.

Ingómbro, as Ingombraménto.

Ingonfiáre, to swell, to puffe vp.

Ingonnáre, to enrobe, to engowne.

Ingordézza, as Ingordígia.

Ingordígia, greedinesse, rauenousnesse.

Ingordità, as Ingordígia.

Ingórdo, greedy, rauenous, insatiable.

Ingorgaménto, a gurgling, a gargarizing, a gulching, a swallowing. Also a ratling in the throat. Also a place where springs gurgle vp.

Ingorgáre, to engurgle, to gargarize, to gulch, to swallow, to choake or ouerdrowne with water. Also to rattle in the throate.

Ingorgáre la língua, when a horse doth swallow or draw vp his tongue.

Ingorgiáre, to engorge. Also to cram capons.

Ingórgo, as Ingorgaménto.

Ingorgogliáre, as Ingorgáre.

Ingossáre, as Ingorgiáre, to choake.

Ingottáto, goutie, hauing the goute.

Ingozzáre, as Ingorgáre.

Ingráozzáta, a gulping, a swallowing.

Ingozzatúra as Ingorgaménto.

Ingrádare, to entre into some degree.

Ingrádo, acceptably, in grace.

Ingramáre, as Gramáre.

Ingramaticársi, to engrammar himselfe.

Ingramíre, ísco, íto, as Gramáre.

Ingrammatíre, to emgrammar himselfe.

Ingránatínto, died in graine.

Ingranciáto, hooked, forked or clawed as a Creuise. Also fastned as with clawes.

Ingrán cópia, in great store.

Ingrandiménto, a becomming great.

Ingrandíre, dísco, díto, to make or become great. Also to aduance or raise.

Ingrandíto, made or become great.

Ingranella, grauell or little stones in the bladder or kidneies.

Ingranelláre, to graie, to make or become cornes, graines or kernels.

Ingrán frétta, in great haste.

Ingraníre, nísco, níto, to encorne.

Ingranitóre, a searce for gunpowder.

Ingranníre, ísco, íto, as Gramáre.

Ingrassaménto, a fatning.

Ingrassáre, to fatten, to become or make fat.

Ingrátia, in fauour loue or grace.

Ingratiábile, not to be graced.

Ingratiáre, to engrace, to put in grace.

Ingratiársi, for a man to engrace or insinuate himselfe into fauour.

Ingratitúdine, ingratitude, vnthankefulnesse.

Ingratitudiníssimo, most vngratefull.

Ingráto, vngratefull, vnthankefull.

Ingráto, vnacceptable, vnpleasant.

Ingrauáre, as Agrauáre.

Ingrauidánza, as Grauidánza.

Ingrauidáre, to beget with childe.

Ingrecáre, to make or become fondly wilfull, or obstinately headstrong.

Ingredere, gredo, gressi, gredúto or gresso, to enter, to goe or put in.

Ingrediente, ingredient, entring in.

Ingredienza, any ingredience.

Ingredúto, entred, gone or put in.

Ingreggiare, to enflocke.

Ingrembo, in the lap.

Ingremíre, as Gremíre.

Ingressióne, an ingression or entring in.

Ingresso, entrance, egresse, accesse.

Ingressúro, readie to enter into.

Ingriccioláto, become toyish or humorous through feare or chilnesse of cold.

Ingrinzáto, enwrimpled.

Ingrognáre, to grumble, to grunt.

Ingrommáre, as Grommáre.

Ingróppa, in or on the crupper.

Ingroppáre, as Agroppáre.

Ingrossamento, an engrossing.

Ingrossáre, to engrosse, to make or become bigge or grosse. Also to get with childe.

Ingrósso, in grosse, by great.

Ingrottáre, to engrot, to encauerne, to endenne, to encaue.

Ingruente, violently approaching, at hand or comming vpon.

Ingruenza, a sudden approaching or comming vpon.

Ingrugnáre, as Ingrognáre.

Ingruppáre, as Agroppáre.

Ingrúppo, as Gróppo.

Inguagiáre, to engage, to gage.

Inguaíre, ísco, íto, to make wofull.

Inguantáre, to engloue, to engantlet.

Inguárdia, in guard or keeping.

Inguáto, as In aguáto.

Inguazzábile, vnwadable, vnfoordable.

Inguercio, squintingly.

Inguerríre, as Aguerrire.

Ingufáto, hoodded, muffled about the head like an owle.

Ingugiáre, as Ingoláre.

Inguidarescáre, looke Guidaléschi.

Inguináglia, as Inguináia.

Inguináia, the grieme or parts neere the priuities of man or woman.

Inguinária, Cudwort, Sharewort.

Inguísa, in maner, in sort, in fashion.

Inguísa chè, in such maner as.

Inguisáre, as Insoggiáre.

Inguistára, as Inghistára.

Ingustábile, not to be tasted.

Ingustéuole, not to be tasted.

Ingurgitáre. 

Ingurgitatióne. 

Ingustóso, tastlesse, wallowish.

Inhábile, vnable, vnfit, vnapt.

Inhabilità, disabilitie, vnaptnesse.

Inhabilitáre, to enable, to make apt.

Inhabitábile, vnhabitable, vndwellable.

Inhabitabilità, an vndwellingnesse.

Inhabitánza, an enhabitation.

Inhabitáre, to inhabite, to dwell in.

Inhabitatióne, an inhabitation.

Inhabitatóre, an inhabitant, a dweller.

Inhabitéuole, that may not be dwelt in.

Inhalatióne, a breathing into.

Inhastáre, to enstaue, to enshaft.

Inherbáre, to engrasse or enhearbe.

Inheritánza, an inheritance.

Inheritáre, to inherite.

Inheritéuole, inheritable.

Inhiáre, to breath in or vpon. 



Inhiáto, a breathing in or vpon.

Inhiatióne, as Inhiáto.

Inhibíre, bisco, bíto, to inhibite, to forbid.

Inhibitióne, an inhibition, a forbidding.

Inhibíto, inhibited, forbidden.

Inhibitóre, an inhibiter, a forbidder.

Inhomíre, ísco, íto, to become man.

Inhonestà, dishonestie, indecencie.

Inhonestáre, to dishonest.

Inhonesto, vnhonest, dishonest.

Inhonoráto, dishonored, vnhonored.

Inhorribilíre, lísco, líto, to make or become horrible.

Inhorridíre, dísco, díto, to enhorrid, to be or make affrighted.

Inhospitábile, as Inhospitále.

Inhospitále, a churle, a snudge one that keepes no hospitalitie.

Inhospitalità, ill vsing of strangers, rudenesse or inciuilitie in house-keeping.

Inhóspite, vnfrequented of friends or guests. Also as Inhospitále.

Inhumanáre, to become inhumane.

Inhumanità, inhumanitie, vngentlenesse.

Inhumáno, inhumane, vngentle.

Inhumidíre, dísco, díto, to enmoisten.

Inhumidíto, enmoistned, watered.

Inhúmido, vnmoist, dry, saplesse.

Inimaginábile, not to be imagined.

Inimaginéuole, not to be imagined.

Inimicáre, to make or become enemie.

Inimichéuole, enemie or foe-like.

Inimicítia, enmitie, fewde, variance.

Inimíco, an enemie, a foe, an aduersarie, a back friend. Also quick-siluer according to the phrase of Alchimists.

Inimitábile, inimitable, without compare.

Ininfiníto, infinitely.

Ininteligente, vnunderstanding.

Ininteligíbile, not to be vnderstood.

Ininuestigábile, vnsearchable.

Iniquità, iniquitie, wickednesse.

Iníquo, impious, wicked, vnrighteous.

Iniscámbio, in exchange, in stead.

Inísola, standing like an Iland.

Inispecie, especially, namely.

Inispecialità, especially.

Initiaménti, the first instructions or beginnings of any science.

Inistento, in languor or pining.

Initiáre, to instruct or enter into any thing, to admit or receiue into, to commence, to begin, to initiate.

Initiáto, instructed in the principles or beginnings of any rules.

Inítio, a beginning or entrance into any knowledge or rule.

Iníto, the act of generation betweene beasts, the lining of a bitch, the leaping of a horse, the couering of a mare.

Initránte cauallo, a neighing horse. 

Initráre, to neigh as a horse.

Inizzáre, as Aizzáre.

Inizzóso, as Aizzóso.

Inlà, beyond, further that way.

Inlà, In Lè, In Lì, In Lò, in the.

Inlacciuoláre, as Inlacciáre.

Inlacciáre, to enlace, to ensnare.

Inlacerábile, not to be rent or torne

Inláci, thitherward, beyondward.

Inlagáre, to ouerflow as a Lake.

Inlanguidíre, dísco, díto, to enlanguish.

Inlánguido, vnlanguishing.

Inlardáte, to enterlard, to enlard.

Inlasséu le, vnweariable.

Inlassitúdine, vnwearinesse.

Inlattáre, to enmilke.

Inlauábile, not to be washed.

Inlauáto, vnwashed.

Inlaudábile, not to be praised.

Inlecitáre, to make vnlawfull.

Inlecitézza, vnlawfulnesse.

Inlecito, vnlawfull.

Inlegíttimo, vnlawfully begotten.

Inlegníre, ísco, íto, to become wood.

Inleìársi, to come or enter into her.

Inlendináre, to store or fill with nits.

Inlendiníre, nísco, níto, as Inlendináre.

Inlettáre, to enbed, to lay in bed.

Inlepríto, become a hare, or fearefull.

Inletterársi, to become lettered or learned.

Inletterággine, vnlearnednesse.

Inletteráto, vnlettred. Also enlettred.

Inliberále, vnliberall, sparing.

Inliberalità, vnliberalitie.

Inlibra, in ballance, in doubt.

Inlibráre, to waigh by pounds.

Inlimitáto, vnlimited, vnbounded.

Inlimpidíre, dísco, díto, to make or become cleare as water or Christall.

Inlioníto, enlioned, become a Lion.

Inliquidíre, as Illiquidíre.

Inlistáto, enbended in armorie.

Inlistáre, to enlist, to enseluage, to enter the liste or check-rolle.

Inlísta, in liste or check-roll. Also in bend.

Inliuidíre, dísco, díto, to beate, to make or become blacke and blew as it were with stripes. Also to enuie or hate or grudge at secretly.

Inliuidíto, blacke, blew, wan, pale, as it were with stripes or of the colour of ashes. Also enuied or grudged at secretly.

Inlíuido, as Inliuidíto.

Inlordággine, pollution, defiling.

Inlordáre, to defile, to pollute.

Inluógo, in liew, in stead, in place.

Inlúce, in light, publikely.

Inlucidáre, to enlighten.

Inluiáre, to goe or enter into him.

Inlúnga, in length, at length.

Inlúng'andáre, in processe of time. 

Inlustráre, as Illustráre.

Inmagagnáre, as Magagnáre.

Inmacchiáre, to enspot, to speckle.

Inmacchiáto, vnspotted, enbraked.

In mácero, in steepe.

In mál'hóra, in an ill houre.

In mál púnto, in an ill houre.

In mal sénno, in ill sence.

Inmaneggiéuole, not to be managed.

Inmangiábile, not to be eaten.

Inmandráre, to enpen or enfole.

Inmaniera chè, in manner that.

Inmáno, in hand, fast-holding.

Inmantáre, to enmantle, to enrobe.

Inmantelláre, as Inmantáre.

Inmantenente, presently, forthwith.

Inmaráre, to become or enter into a Sea.

Inmariuoláto, become a cut-purse.

In máschera, a masking.

Inmascheráre, to enmaske.

Inmattíre, ísco, íto, to become mad.

Inmattonáre, to enbricke, to bricke.

Inmaturéuole, that cannot ripen.

Inmatúro, vnripe, vntimely.

In mè, in me, within my selfe.

Inmeábile, vnpassable-through.

Inmedagliáre, to medaill, to eniewell.

Inmei, alas my selfe, aye me, woe to me.

Inmelíre, ísco, íto, to enhonie.

Inmén d'un chè, suddainely, in a trice.

Inmén d'un bátter d'ócchio, on a suddaine, in lesse then the twinkling of an eye.

Inméntre, whilst, whilst that.

Inméntre chè, whilst that.

Inmercantársi, to become a marchant.

Inméttere, to put or place in.

Inmezzo, in the midst or middle.

Inmiáre, to enter into mine.

Inmilláre, to enthousand.

Inmiráre, to looke inlie into.

Inmissióne, a putting or sending in.

Inmísto, vnmixed, vnmingled.

Inmitriáre, to crowne with a Mitre.

Inmódo, in manner, in sort.

Inmolláre, to ensteepe, to moisten.

In módoalcúno, by any meanes.

Inmódochè, so that.

Inmóglie, to haue to wife.

In mólle, in steepe, in moistnesse.

Inmonacáto, enmunked, ennunned.

In mottéggio, in mockerie, in iest.

Inmúnto, not drawen dry.

Innaffiáre, to sprinkle with water.

Innagríre, ísco, íto, to ensoure.

Innalberáre, as Inalboráre.

Innalzaménto, a raising, an aduancement.

Innalzáre, to raise, to aduance.

Innamaríre, rísco, ríto, to make bitter.

Innamicáre, to allie or tie in bonds of friendship againe.

Innamoracchiáre, to fall wantonly or foolish in loue or lust. 



Innamoraménto, an enamoring or wanton falling in loue.

Innamoránza, as Innamoraménto.

Innamoracciáre, as Innamoracchiáre.

Innamoráccio, fond, or lustfull loue.

Innamoráre, to enamour, to fall in loue.

Innamoráta, a shee-louer or mistris.

Innamoráto, enamored, in loue.

Innamoráto, a louer, a sweet-heart.

Innamorbaménto, an infecting, a contagion. Also a festring.

Innamorbáre, to infect, to pollute, to fester, to cankre.

Innaneráre, as Narráre.

Innaneratióne, as Narratióne.

Innanimáre, to animate, to encourage. Also to breath life or spirit into.

Innaníre, ísco, íto, to endwarfe.

Innanelláre, as Inanelláre.

Innánti, as Inánti.

Innánti chè, as Inánti chè.

Innánzi, as Inánti.

Innánzi chè, as Inánti chè.

Innapetenza, a disapetite, an vnlist or no desire to any thing.

Innapetíbile, not to be wished or longed for.

Innarpicáre, to climbe or clammer vp some high place, as Agrappáre.

Innarrábile, as Narrábile.

Innarráre, as Narráre.

Innáscere, to inbreed, to engender in one.

Innascíbile, not to be borne.

Innascóso, secretly, hiddenly.

Innaspáre, to reele or winde yarne.

Innaspaménto, a reeling vp of any thing.

Innaspatóre, a reeler or a winder.

Innaspettatióne, vnexpectation.

Inaspettáto, vnexpected, vnlooked for.

Innassáre, to enbord, to catch in a net.

Innásso, at random. Looke Lasciáre.

Innassólto, vnabsolued.

Innastráre, to adorne with ribands.

Innástri, knots or roses of ribands.

Innatábile, not to be swimmed.

Innáto, inbred, inborne, naturall.

Innatráre, to make or become blacke.

Innaturále, vnnaturall, vnkind.

Innaturalità, innaturalitie, vnkindnesse.

Innaueráre, to wound or hurt to death.

Innauigábile, innauigable.

Innebriáre, to make or become drunken.

Ineccitábile, not to be encited.

Innegráre, to enblacke, to obscure.

Innegríre, ísco, íto, as Innegráre.

In néllo, within the.

Innentráre, to inward or enter into.

Innéntro, inward, within, in towards.

Inneruáre, to ensinnew.

Innescáre, to enbaite, to allure.

Innessaltáto, vnexalted.

Innestamento, any kind of engraffing. 

Innestáre, to engraffe.

Innestáre a bucciuólo, to graffe by setting buds in the stocke.

Innestáre a gemma, to graffe with yong shootes or syens.

Innestáre a márze, to graffe syens in the stocke by cleft.

Innestáre ad ócchio, to inoculate, to graffe by way of oculation.

Innestáre a uergelle, to engraffe with yoong or little sprigs.

Innestatióne, an engraffing.

Innestatóre, a graffer, an inoculater.

Innesto, a graffe, a yoong syen.

Inneuitábile, vnauoidable.

Innicchiáto, that hath a hard shell.

Innidáre, to ennest, to enroost.

Innimicáre, to make or become enemie.

Innispidíre, dísco, díto, to brizle.

Inniúna guísa, in no fashion.

Inniún luógo, in no place.

Inniún módo, in or by no meanes.

I'nno, as Hínno, any Hymne.

Innobilitáre, to ennoble.

Innocciuoláre, to enhuske, to ennut.

Innocente, innocent, harmelesse, guiltlesse.

Innocenza, innocency, integrety, guiltlesnesse, true intent, harmelessnesse.

Innocentíssimo, most innocent.

Innoculáte, to inoculate a tree.

Innoculatióne, an inoculating.

Innoculatóre, an inoculater.

Innócuo, harmelesse, hurtlesse.

Innominábile, not to be named.

Innomináto, vn-named, namelesse.

Innominéuole, not to be named.

In non cále, in non care.

Inoperábile, not to be set a worke, not to be wrought.

Innoráre, to inguilde, to guild.

Innorgogliáto, become or growen proud.

Innorgoglióso, without pride.

Innorláto, orled in armory, hemmed.

Innosseruábile, not to be obserued.

Innosseruánza, inobseruance.

Innosseruáre, not to obserue.

Innostráre, as Inostráre.

Innotábile, vnnoteable, not to be noted.

Innouáre, to alter, to innouate.

Innouatióne, innouation, alteration.

Innouatóre, an innouater, a disturber.

Innoueráre, to number or count in.

Innoueréuole, not to be numbred.

Innúba, shee that was neuer maried.

Innúbo, he that was neuer maried.

Innumerábile, innumerable, numberlesse.

Innumerabilità, numberlesse.

Innumerále, as Innumerábile.

Innumeralità, vnnumbernesse.

Innumeráto, in ready told money.

Innúmero, vnnumberlesse, sance number 

Innunáre, to single or reduce into one.

Innubiláto, inclouded.

Innuuoláto, inclouded.

Ino, being added to any Positiue noune it expresseth smalnesse or littlenesse, as Cauallíno.

Inobediente, disobedient, stifnecked.

Inobedienza, disobedience.

Inobedíre, dísco, díto, to disobey.

Inobliquábile, that cannot be made crooked.

Inoblíquo, vncrooked, straight.

Inodiáre, as Odiáre, to hate.

Inoffensibíle, vnoffensible.

Inofféso, vnoffended, vnwronged.

Inofficióso, vnofficious, vngentle.

In ógnicáso, in euery case.

Inógniguísa, in euery fashion.

Inógniluógo, in euery place, each where

Inógnimódo, by all meanes, howsoeuer.

Inógnipárte, euery where, in euery part.

Inóltra, beyond, furthermore.

Inoltráre, to goe further or beyond.

Inóltre, as Inóltra.

Inombráre, to inshadow, to darken.

Inominábile, not to be named.

Inondare, to surround, to ouerflow.

Inondatióne, an inundation, a deluge.

Inondéuole, subiect to inundation.

Inontióne, an vnction, an annointing.

Inopáco, open, bleake, not shadowed.

Inopacità, vnshadinesse, bleakenesse.

Inópe, poore, needy, full of want, destitute.

Inópera, in or at worke.

Inoperáto, vnwrought, vnoccupied.

Inópia, penury, lacke of necessaries.

Inopinábile, that no man would thinke contrary to opinion.

Inopináto, vnlooked for, not thought on.

Inopióso, needy, poore, full of want.

Inoportúno, as Inopportúno.

Inopportúno, vnfit, vntimely, vnseasonable, vnnecessary, out of season.

Inoppósito, in opposition.

Inopresséuole, not to be oppressed.

Inorbáto, blinded. Also vnblinded.

Inordinánza, in order, in array.

Inordinário, not ordinary or common.

Inordinatézza, inordinatnesse, excesse.

Inordináto, inordinate, immoderate.

Inorécchij, in listning manner.

Inorgánico, that hath no Organe, instrument or conueyance.

Inorinci, to the furthest boundes.

Inorláto, Orled in armory. Also vnhemmed.

Inórme, as Enórme.

Inormità, as Enormità.

Inornáto, disadorned, vntrimmed.

Inorpelláre, as Orpelláre.

Inorráre, finíta la guerra per vittória 



et per inorráta páce potéua lasciáre.

Inospitábile, as Inhospitábile, &c.

Inossáre, to inbone, to grow into the bones.

Inosseruábile, not to be obserued.

Inosseruánza, inobseruance.

Inosseruéuole, not to be obserued.

Inossíre, ísco, íto, as Inossáre.

Inosticáto, hard to be mooued, become obstinate, stiffnecked, wilfull or froward.

Inostráre, to dresse with purple or graine colours. Also to dresse with knots with roses or such deuises of coloured ribond as women doe their heads.

Inotráre, to put into a Iarre.

Inpacífico, vnquiet, vnpeacefull.

Inpadelláre, to put into a pan.

Inpágo, in payment or satisfaction.

Inpalése, openly, in view of all men.

Inpaludáre, as Paludáre.

Inpaníre, ísco, íto, to become bread or loues.

In párte, in part, partly.

Inpartíre, to impart.

Inpartíte, party per fesse, per chiefe, per pale, per saltier, &c.

Inpárto, in labour of child-bed.

Inparuccáre, to attire with a periwig.

Inpassábile, vnpassable, not to be passed.

Iupassíbile, vnpassible, without passion.

Inpassibilità, vnsueffrance.

Inpatíbile, vnsufferable.

Inpatibilità, vnsufferablenesse.

Inpauríre, as Impauríre.

Inpendente, hangingly, in suspence.

Inpendenza, in hanging or dangling sort.

Inpendere, to hang or dangle by.

Inpennacchiáre, to infeather to inplume.

Inpensábile, not to be thought.

Inpensieráre, to inthought or thinke.

Inpensieráto, thoughtlesse, carelesse.

Inpendíbile, not to be lost.

Inpermanente, not permanent.

Inperláre, to inpearle.

Inpermettíbile, not to be permitted.

Inpermutábile, vnalterable.

Inpersuadíbile, vnperswadable.

Inperpetuo, for euer, perpetually.

Inpertánto, therefore, whereupon.

Inpertinente, impertinent.

Inpertinenza, impertinency.

Inperuccáre, as Inparuccáre.

Inpestiáre, to boult or barre in.

Inpetrarcáto, Petrarchized.

Inpeueráre, to pepper.

Inpeueráta, a kinde of pottage of Pepper.

Inperuersáre, to grow peruerse.

Inpiaciménto, for loue or pleasure of some. 

Inpiè, on foote, standing, vpright.

Inpiè, in liew, instead, in place.

Inpiédi, Inpiè.

Inpiega, in rout, bending wise, in disorder and as it were running away.

Inpiegáre, as Impiegáre.

Inplacábile, vnasswageable.

Inplacabilità, vnappeaseable cruelty.

Inplessionársi, to incomplexion himselfe.

Inpóco stánte, shortly after.

Inpói, except, sauing.

In pói, afterwards, in time to come.

Inpontáre, to point in or vnto, or at.

Inpónto, as Inpúnto.

Inporcíto, inhogged, inswined.

Inportáre, to bring in, to inport.

Inportatíle, that may be remooued.

Importatióne, a bringing in, an importation.

Importatóre, a bringer in.

Inporchíto, inswined, become a hogge.

Inpotestà, in the power or iurisdiction.

Inprendere, prendo, prési, préso, to learne, to vndertake, to enterprise.

In presenza, in presence, before one.

Inprésa, as Imprésa.

Inprestánza, in lone, or borrowed.

In prestito, as Inprestánza.

Inpría, as Inpríma.

Inprigionáre, to inprison.

Inpríma, first, at first, before.

Inprimachè, before that.

Inptocesso di tempo, in processe of time.

Inprocínto, about or in areadinesse to doe.

In prò dì, in good or profit of.

Inpróle, without issue of child.

Inprontáre, to inprint. Also to borrow.

Inprónto, ready, prompt, prepared.

Inprónto, borrowed, in lone.

Inpropósito, in purpose, to the purpose.

Inprospetto, in view, oueragainst.

Inproteruíre, as Improteruíre.

Inpruóua, for the nonce, of set purpose.

Inpúnto, in a readinesse.

Inpurgábile, that cannot be purged.

Inputáre, as Imputáre.

Inputatióne, as Imputatióne.

Inquà, hitherward, hitherto.

Inqua adietro, heretofore, in times past.

Inquadernáre, to bring to perfect quires.

Inquàed in là, hither and thither.

Inquadráre, to insquare.

Inquadráre un pezzo, to set or mount a piece leuell.

Inquadráta, a thrust at fence, where he that offers it turnes presently his back to his enemy.

Inquálche módo, in some sort, some way. 

Inqualmaniéra si vóglia, in what maner or howsoeuer.

Inqualúnque módo, in what maner soeuer, howsoeuer.

Inquánto, as touching, as concerning, in as much, as for.

Inquánto chè, as Inquánto.

Inquánto si potrà, in as much as may bee.

Inquartaménto, as Inquartatúra.

Inquartáre, to quarter in armory.

Inquartataménte, quarterly.

Inquartáto, quartered in armory.

Inquartatúra, a quartering in armorie.

Inquatráre, to enter into foure.

Inquélla, at that instant.

Inquéllo, in that meane while.

Inquel mezzo, in that meane while.

Inquel mentre, in that meane while.

Inquel mezzo tempo, in that meane time.

Inquel tánto, in that space.

Inquésta, vpon this occasion of time.

Inquésta stánza, in this abode.

Inquestionéuole, vnquestionable.

Inquésto, in this meane time.

Inquésto mezzo, in this meane while.

Inquésto stánte, in this meane while.

Inquésto mezzo tempo, idem.

Inqueto, in quiet, in peace, in rest.

Inquietáre, to disquiet, to molest.

Inquietaménto, a disquieting.

Inquiete, vnquietnesse, vnrest, molestation.

Inquieto, vnquiet, without rest.

Inquietúdine, as Inquiete.

Inquilináre, to dwell in a strange place.

Inquilinatióne, a dwelling in a strange place.

Inquilinaménto, a dwelling in a strange or forren place.

Inquilíno, one that dwels where nor he nor his ancesters were borne. Also an In-mate.

Inquinaménto, as Inquinatióne.

Inquináre, to pollute, to defile, to distaine, to dishonest, to dishonour.

Inquinatióne, a polluting, a defiling, a distayning, a dishonesting.

Inquintána, as Quintána.

Inquiríre, rísco, ríto, to inquire, to make inquisition, to search after.

Inquisiría, an inquiry, an inquiring, a searching after, a promooting.

Inquisitióne, inquisition, inquiry, a searching after, a diligence to know, an examination.

Inquisitíuo, inquisitiue, inquiring.

Inquisíto, inquired, examined.

Inquisitóre, an inquisitor, an examiner. Also a promooter.

Inquisitúra, as Inquisiría.

Inraccapricciáto, become toyish or humorous through suddaine feare. 



Inradiáre, to enray, to enbeame.

Inraiáre, as Inradiáre.

Inramáre, to enbranch. Also to encopper.

Inramáte., looke Pálle inramáte.

Inramarráto, become an eft or nute.

Inrancoráre, to enrancor, to enfester.

Inrationále, vnreasonable, brutish.

Inrationalità, vnreasonablenesse.

Inrecuperábile, vnrecouerable.

Inredento, vnredeemed, vnransomed.

Inrediméuole, not to be redeemed.

Inredimíto, vnredeemed, vnransomed.

Inreiterábile, not to be reiterated.

Inremediábile, not to be remedied.

Inreparábile, not to be repaired.

Inreppatáre, to fasten in and vnto.

Inreprensibile, not to be reprehended.

Inreprobábile, vnreproueable.

Inresistéuole, vnresistable.

Inresistíbile, not to be resisted.

Inresolutióne, irresolution.

Inresolúto, vnresolued, irresolute.

Inreuelábile, not to be reuealed.

Inreuerente, vnreuerent.

Inreuerenza, vnreuerence.

Inribrezzírsi, as Incapricciársi.

Inricchíre, ísco, íto, to enrich.

Inricompenséuole, not to be recompensed.

Inricoueréuole, vnrecouerable.

Inrigáre, to enrule. Also as Irrigáre.

Inrigoríto, become rigorous.

Inrigoróso, milde, not rigorous.

Inriguárdo, in regard, in respect.

Inrimprouerábile, vnreproueable.

Inrimuneréuole, not to be rewarded.

Inrimuneráto, vnrewarded.

Inrispondéuole, vnanswerable.

Inrispettéuole, not to be respected.

Inrispettóso, vnrespectiue.

Inristrétto, closely, in short, in summe.

Inritáto, froward, peeuish, skittish.

Inritrosíre, ísco, íto, to grow froward.

Inríuaal máre, by the Sea-shore.

Inrocáre, to make or become hoarse.

Inrognóso, without scabs.

Inrolláre, to enroule, to roule vp.

Inrosáre, to enrose, to decke with roses.

Inroselláre, to baste or dredge roste meate.

Inrospíre, ísco, íto, to become toadish.

Inrotelláre, to roule vp in roules.

Inrorolare, as Inrolláre.

Inrótta, in route, defeated, put to flight

Inrozzíto, become rude, or a iade.

Inrubináre, to enrubie, to make red.

Inrubiginíre, as Iruginíre.

Inrubiníre, nísco, níto, as Inrubináre.

Inrugiadáre, to moisten with deaw.

Inruginíre, nísco, níto, to enrust.

Inruinéuole, not to be ruined.

Insabbionáre, to ensand, to engrauell.

Insaccáre, to enbagge, to sacke vp, to pocket vp. 

Insácco, in the sacke, bagge or pocket.

Insaccocciáre, to satchell or pocket vp.

Insaffranáre, to ensaffron.

Inságna, a letting of bloud.

Insagnáre, to bleed or let bloud.

Insalámi, all manner of dry salt meates.

Insaláre, to salt, to pickle, to enbrine.

Insaláta, any kind of Sallade.

Insalatúccia, a medly Sallade.

Insaldáre, as Saldáre.

Insaldatúra, as Saldatúra.

Insalegare, as Salicáre.

Insalicáre, as Salicáre.

Insalicáta, as Salicáta.

Insalicatóre, as Salicatóre.

Insalsíre, ísco, íto, to ensalt or make brackish.

Insaluatichíto, ensauaged, become wilde.

Insaluábile, not to be saued.

Insalúbre, vnhealthfull, contagious.

Insalubrità, vnhealthfulnesse.

Insáluo, vnsafe, in no safetie.

Insáluo, safe, in safetie, in safegard.

Insalutáto, vnsaluted, vngreeted.

Insanábile, incurable, recurelesse.

Insanáre, to make vnsound or vnholesome. Also as Insaníre.

Insanéuole, as Insanábile.

Insanguinácci, as Sanguináccij.

Insánia, madnesse, dotage, foolishnesse, vnrulinesse, rage, witlesnesse, skittishnesse.

Insaníre, ísco, íto, to be or become mad, doting, foolish, vnruly, to raue, to dote, to rage.

Insáno, foolish, doting, vnruly, mad, witlesse, skittish, raging, furious, an Idiot.

Insáno, vnsound, vnhealthie.

Insantità, vnholinesse, prophanenesse.

Insánto, vnholy, prophane.

Insaponaménto, as Saponáta.

Insaponáre, as Saponáre.

Insaponáta, as Saponáta.

Insaporáre, to ensauour or giue a taste vnto.

Insapóre, in sauour so as ones teeth run a water through longing.

Insaporétto, as Insapóre.

Insaporíto, vnsauorie, tastelesse.

Insaracináto, become a Saracine.

Insassíre, ísco, íto, to enstone, to petrifie.

Insassóso, vnstonie, without stones.

Insataláre, to become a Satelite, a halbard-man, a Sergeant or a catchpole.

Insataníre, to insathan or indiuell.

Insatelíre, lísco, líto, as Insataláre.

Insatiábile, insatiable, greedy.

Insatiabilità, insatiety, greedinesse.

Insatietà, insatiety, greedinesse.

Insatiénole, as Insatìabile.

Insátio, insatiate, greedy.

Insatiríto, become a Satire, id est, shamelesse, wanton or rageing luxurious. 

Insatoléuole, vnsatiable, greedy.

Insaturábile, as Insatiábile.

Insaturità, as Insatietà.

Insáturo, insatiate, greedy.

Insauíre, ísco, íto, to become wise.

Insauorráre, to stuffe, or fill with rubbish or grauell. Also to ballast a ship.

Insberleffo, askew, askance, all afflant.

Inscaccáre, to checquy in armory.

Inscacchiére, checquy in armory.

Inscalábile, not to be scaled.

Inscambiéuole, vnchangeable.

Inscámbio, in exchange, instead, in liew.

Inscelerársi, to become a wicked villen.

Inscemità, diminution.

Inschembo, a thwart, a skew, a wrie.

Inschiauíto, inslaued, inthralled.

Inschieraménto, an introuping.

Inschieráre, to introupe, to insquadron.

Inschifóso, vncoy, vnnice, vnloathsome.

Inschiodonáre, to broch or spit.

Insciabicáre, to catch in a net.

Insciapíto, become wallowish or tastelesse.

Insciaticáto, that hath the Sciatica.

Inscíbile, that cannot be knowen.

Inscibilità, ignorance, vnwittingnesse.

Insciemáre, to diminish, as Scemáre.

Insciemità, a diminution.

Insciente, ignorant, not knowing, vnwitting.

Inscienteménte, vnwittingly, ignorantly.

Inscienza, vnskill, ignorance.

Inscimuníto, as Scimoníto.

I'nscio, ignorant, vnskilfull, a foole, vnwitting.

Inscíre, to ignore, not to know.

Inscítia, ignorance, vnskillfulnesse.

Inscoglióso, without rockes or cragges.

Inscolpíre, ísco, íto, to ingraue.

Inscolpíto, vncarued, vngrauen.

Inscoltóre, an Ingrauer, a Caruer.

Inscoltúra, an ingrauing, a caruing.

Insconciáre, as Sconciáre.

Insconciatúra, as Sconciatúra.

Inscóncio, as Discóncio.

Inscórcio, a front as some pictures are.

Inscorpionáto, become a Scorpion.

Inscrembo, as Inschembo.

Inscríuere, to write into.

Inscrittióne, an inscription.

Inscrítto, in written, an inscription.

Inscrittóre, a writer in, a Secretary.

Inscrittúra, an inwriting, an inscription.

Inscrutábile, vnsearchable, inscrutable.

Inscrutabilità, vnsearchablenesse.

Inscuráre, to obscure, to darken. 



Inscrutéuole, as Inscrutábile.

Inscudelláre, to indish, to put into dishes.

Inscuffiáre, to inquoife, to inhood.

Inscúlto, vngrauen, vncarued.

Inscuoláre, to inschoole.

Inscuríre, rísco, ríto, as Inscuráre.

In sè, in him selfe.

Insecábile, that cannot bee sawed or sawen.

Inseccábile, that cannot be dried.

Insecchiáre, to put into pales or buckets.

Insécco, on dry land.

Insedábile, not to be calmed.

Inségna, a marke, a signe, a note, a token, a badge. Also an ensigne, a banner, a standard, a flag. Also a band of men: that is, so many as march vnder one ensigne Also vsed for any iewell worne in mens hats, namely such as haue pictures or medailes in or hanging at them.

Insegnábile, that may be taught.

Insegnaménto, a teaching.

Insegnáre, to teach, to instruct.

Inségne, ensignes, armes, cotes of armes, badges, scutcheons, monuments.                              

Insegreto, secretly, in secret.

Inseiáre, to enter into or make sixe.

Inselciáre, to paue with flint stones.

Inselciáta, a pauement of flint stones.

Inselciatóre, a Pauier.

Insella, in the sadle, as Mónta in sella.

Inselláre, to ensaddle, to saddle.

Inseluáre, as Imboscáre.

Insembre, as Insieme.

Insembráre, to assemble or put together.

Insemitáre, to follow ones tracke or footing.

Insempiternáre, as Insempráre.

Insempiterno, for euer and euermore.

Insempráre, to perpetuate for euer.

Insempre, for euer and euermore.

Insempremái, for euer and euer.

Insenáre, to embosome.

Insenáta, an embosoning. Vsed also for a Bay within any land.

Insensábile, as Insensíbile.

Insensággine, sencelesnesse, insensibilitie.

Insensáre, to be or make insensible.

Insensatággine, as Insensággine.

Insensáto, sencelesse, insensible.

Insensáto, foolish, mad, out of reason.

Insenséuole, Insensíbile.

Insensibile, senselesse, insensible.

Insensibilità, senselesnesse, vnfeelingnesse.

Insensíle, vnsensible.

Insensitíuo, sencelesse, vnfeeling.

Insenso, incensed, enflamed, prouoked.

Insensualáre, to become sensuall.

Insensuáre, to make or become sensuall.

Insentenza, in summe, in substance.

Inseparábile, inseparable. 

Inseparabilità, vnseparablenesse.

Inseparabilménte, vnseparably.

Insepólto, vnburied.

Insepoltúra, buried, in his graue.

Insepoltúra, the vnburying of one.

In serbo, safe in keeping or in store.

Inseréno, cloudie, not cleare.

Inseríre, rísco, ríto, to insert, to ioine with, to engraft, to put or adde into.

Inseríto, as Inserto.

Inserpentíto, ensnaked, become a Serpent.

Inserráre, to locke or shut in.

Insertáre, as Inseríre.

Insertatióne, an inserting, an insertion.

Insertatóre, an intermedler, an inserter.

Insertióne, an inserting.

Inserto, inserted, ioyned, medled with, engraffed, put or added into.

Inseruente, not seruing, vnfit, vnapt.

Inseruiente., Vsed for seruing to the purpose.

Insessióni, certaine bathing medicines.

Insesso, a bathing tub wherein one may sit vp to the middle in decoction. Also beset, besieged.

Insetaménto, as Innestaménto.

Insetáre, as Innestáre, to engraffe.

Insetatióne, as Innestaménto.

Insetatóre, as Innestatóre.

Insettíbile, that cannot be dissected.

Insettili, as Insetti.

Insetti animáli, small vermine beasts that haue no bloud, flesh nor sinew, and cannot be dissected as flyes, gnats, grubs or Pissemires.

Inseuáre, to tallow, to grease.

Inseueríre, rísco, ríto, to make or become seuere, cruell, sterne or austere.

Insída, the name of an office in Venice belonging to the custome-house.

Insídia, a craftie wile, a tretcherie, a close ambushment, a secret entrapping.

Insidiáre, to practise wiles, to lye in waite with purpose to deceiue, to ensnare, to entrap, to lye in ambush, to plot some secret tretcherie.

Insidiatóre, one that seeketh by wiles and tretcheries to ensnare, to deceiue, to entrap or catch in some plot or ambushment.

Insidiosaménte, tretcherously by way of some plot or ambushment.

Insidióso, tretcherous, false, craftie, full of snares and secret plots.

Insieme, together, withall, with, ioyntly, yfere, in company, therewith.

Insiemeinsieme, ioyntly with, altogether.

Insiememénte, wholy and altogether, ioyntly with and in company.

Insiemeséco, together with himselfe.

Insiepáre, to close in with hedges.

Insiepáta, a hedgeing in.

Insígne, notable, apparent, excellent, renowmed, remarcable, egregious.

Insignifichéuole, vnsignificant.

Insigníre, gnísco, gníto, to dub-knight, to giue some marke of honour vnto.

Insigníto, marked or insigned with some remarcable note of honour, made noble or famous.

Insignorírsi, to inlord, or become Lord, Patron or possessor of any thing.

Insignoríto, inlorded, made or become Lord, owner or possessor of a thing.

Insilicáre, as Salicáre.

Insilicáta, as Salicáta.

Insín, Insíno, as Infíno.

Insincero, not sincere, false, impure, corrupt.

Insincerità, falsehood, corruption.

Insinguláre, namely, specially, singularly.

Insíno, as Infíno.

Insíno a quando? as Infíno a quándo?

Insíno a tánto, as Infíno a tánto.

Insíno chè, as Infíno chè.

Insín'hóra, vntill this time.

Insinuáre, to insinuate, to conioyne, to creepe closely into ones bosome or minde.

Insinuatióne, an insinuation, a close creeping into ones bosome. Also a colourable beginning of an Oration whereby we couertly creepe into, the Auditories fauour.

Insinuatóre, an insinuator, a slie creeper into ones besome or fauour.

Insinuéuole, insinuating.

Insípa, as Insípido.

Insipidezza, as Insipidítia.

Insipidíre, dísco, díto, to take away all sauour or taste, to depriue of reason.

Insipidítia, vnsauouring, wallowishnesse, tasting of nothing. Also fondnesse, want of wisdome or discretion.

Insípido, wallowish, vnsauoury, tastelesse, without relish. Also foolish, witlesse, or without reason. Also quickesiluer among Alchimists.

Insipiente, foolish, ignorant, insipient, without discretion or knowledge, fond.

Insipienza, ignorance, foolishnesse, wanting discretion, dotishnesse, follie.

Insirocchiáre, to ensister.

Insistente, insisting, persisting.

Insistenza, insistence, persistance, an insisting.

Insístere, sísto, sistéi, sistúto, to insist, to persist, to continue or rest vpon. Also to vrge, to enforce, to pursue, or sollicite.

Insistéuole, that may be insisted.

Insistíuo, as Insistéuole.

Insistóre, an insister, a persister.

Insistúto, insisted, persisted, continued vpon. Also vrged or enforced.

Insitaménto, a ioyning into or together. Also an engraffing or inoculating.



Insitáre, to ioyne or put into or together. Also to engraffe or inoculate.

Insitatóre, a ioyner into or together. Also a graffer or inoculater.

Insíto, a natureall instinct. Also a graffe a sien, a stocke, a plant. Also engraffed.

Insoáue, vnsweete, vnpleasant.

Insoauíre, ísco, íto, to ensweeten.

Insoauità, vnsweetnesse, vnpleasantnesse.

Insobrietà, insobrietie, drunkennesse.

Insóbrio, vnsober, drunken.

Insoccoréuole, vnsuccourable.

Insociábile, insociable, wilde.

Insociabilità, vnsociablenesse.

Insofferente, vnsuffering.

Insofferéuole, vnsufferable.

Insoffiáre, to blow or puffe into.

Insoffríbile, not to be suffered.

Insognábile, that may be dreamed.

Insognáre, to dreame, to raue.

Insógno, a dreame. Also in dreaming.

Insoláre, to diminish, to lessen.

Iusoldatársi, to become a souldier.

Insolcábile, not to be furrowed or sailed.

Insolchéuole, as Insolcábile.

Insolente, insolent, proud, arrogant.

Insolente, vnwonted, vnaccustomed.

Insolentíre, tísco, títo, to grow insolent.

Insolenza, insolence, pride, arrogancie.

Insolenza, vnwontednesse, strangenesse.

Insolfáre, to enbrimstone. Also to sol fa or set pricke-song.

Insolferáre, to ensulpher or enbrimst one.

Insolidáre, to ensolidate.

Insólido, vnsolide, vnsound. Also a law word. In the whole and for the whole, or throughly and fast.

Insolitézza, vnwontednesse.

Insólito, vnwont, vnused, vnaccustomed.

Insolláre, to make loose or vnsteady. Also to hollow or flaw in working.

Insolubile, vnsoluble, indissoluble.

Insómma, in summe, in fine, finally.

Insommergíbile, not to be drowned.

Insomméuole, not to be summed.

Insómmo, at full, plentie, at the height.

Insonáre, to entune or sound in.

Insongiáre, to tallow or grease.

Insoniáre, to dreame, to raue.

Insónio, a dreame, also indreaming.

Insonnadáto, halfe sleeping, halfe waking.

Insonnáre, to lull or bring asleepe.

Insonóro, vnshrill, vnsounding.

Insopíto, not drouzie, watchfull.

Insoporággine, drouzinesse.

Insoporáre, to make drouzie.

Insoppottábile, intolerable.

Insopportánza, intoleration. 

Insopportéuole, vnsufferable.

Insordíre, dísco, díto, to make deafe.

Insórdido, absurd, filthy, corrupt.

Insorelláre, to insister.

Insórgere, súrgo, súrsi, súrto, to rise vp or make an insurrection.

Insorgiménto, an insurrection.

Insorire, rísco, ríto, to loath the sight of.

Insormontéuole, not to be surmounted.

Insórso, risen vp. Also a rising vp.

Insórte, in lot, by chance, by fortune.

Insospettéuole, not to be suspected.

Insospettíre, ísco, íto, to grow suspicious.

Insospetto, vnsuspected.

Insospettóso, vnsuspicious.

Insossiegáto, possessed with Sossiégo. Looke Sossiégo.

Insostantióso, vnsubstantiall.

Insostánza, in summe, in substance.

Insotteráto, vnburied.

Insottilire, ísco, íto, to make subtill or fine.

Insouertíbile, not to be subuerted.

Inspálla, on ones shoulders.

Inspagáre, to binde or twist about with twine, merlin or packthrid.

Inspeciále, in especiall, especially.

Inspeciáre, to spice, to inspice.

Inspecie, as Inspeciále.

Inspeculábile, not to be speculated.

Insperábile, not to be hoped.

Insperataménte, vnhopedly.

Insperáto, vnhoped, vnexpected.

Inspessáre, to thicken, to inspice.

Inspessíre, ísco íto, as Inspessáre.

Inspiedáre, to broch or spit.

Inspirábile, that may be inspired.

Inspiráre, to inspire or breath into.

Inspiratióne, inspiration or breathing in.

Inspiritáre, to put life or spirit into.

Inspiritáre, to possesse with an euill spirit.

Inspiritáto, hauing life, spirit or pulse.

Inspiritáto, possessed with some diuell.

Insporcáre, to foule, to sully, to pollute.

Insprezzábile, not to be despised.

Insquadronáre, to insquadron.

Instábile, wauering, fickle, vnstable.

Instabilíre, lísco, líto, to establish.

Instabilità, instability, ficklenesse.

Instagióne, in season.

Instagnéuole, vnstanchable.

Installáre, to install, to instable.

Instancábile, vnweariable.

Instancáre, to trie, to inweary.

Instanchéuole, vnweariable.

Instánte, an instant, a moment, without ceasing. Also nigh standing or at hand.

Instánte, instant, vrging, pressing, earnest, importunate. Also in an instant.

Instanteménte, instantly, pressingly, earnestly, importunatly. Also presently.

Instánza, instance, earnestnesse, importunity, continuall vrging and diligence.

Instáre, to instance, to vrge, to presse with diligence, to importune.

Instauráre, to reforme, to repaire, to restore, to re-edifie or make new.

Instauratióne, a repayring, a restauration, a re-edifying.

Instauratóre, a repayrer, a restorer.

Instazzonáre, to instation.

Instento, in languor or sorow.

Instercoráto, beraide, beshitten.

Insterilíre, to grow barren or sterill.

Instigaménto, as Instigatióne.

Instigáre, to mooue vnto, to egge on, to sturre on, or pricke forward.

Instigatióne, instigation, prouocation.

Instigatóre, an instigater, a prouoker.

Instilláre, to instill, to trill or drop in.

Instillatióne, an instilling, an infusion or dropping in by little and little.

Instillatúra, as Instillatióne.

Instínto, a naturall instinct, an inward motion, a genuine disposition.

Institóre, as Institutóre.

Instituíre, ísco, íto, to institue, to appoint, to depute, to instruct or traine vp. Also to found, to inuent, or set in good order.

Institutióne, an institution, a deputation. Also an iniunction. Also an instruction or training vp. Also a booke or precept preparing a way or direction to some Arte. Also an ordinance, a decree, a statute. Also a custome.

Institúto, as Institutióne.

Institutóre, an instituter, an ordainer. Also an instructer or trainer vp.

Instizzáre, to prouoke, to egg on, to exasperate or stirre vp as fire-brands.

Instizzíre, ísco, íto, as Instizzáre.

Instoltíto, become a foole or a sot.

Instraccábile, vnweariable.

Instraccáre, to tire or wearie.

Instracciábile, not to be rent or torne.

Instruíre, ísco, íto, to instruct, to teach.

Instruíto, taught, instructed.

Instrumentále, instrumentall.

Instrumentalménte, by deed, instrument, euidence or writing, instrumentally.

Instrumento, any kind of instrument, any toole or implement of a Tradesman, any engine, deuise, machine or instrument of warre. Also any meane, helpe or direction. Also any writing, bond, obligation, indenture, euidence, conueyance, patent, charter or deed.

Instruttióne, an instruction, a teaching.

Instruttíuo, instructiue.

Instruttóre, an instructer, a teacher.

Instruttúra, a structure, an instructing. 



Instupidíre, dísco, díto, as Stupidíre.

Instupíre, as Stupíre.

Insturióne, a fish called Sturgeon.

Insù, vpward, aloft, on high.

Insuále, that ascendeth vp wards.

Insuánto, a Captaine ouer three Captaines.

Insuáre, to ascend vpward.

Insuáue, vnsweet, vnpleasant.

Insuauità, vnsweetnesse, vnpleasantnesse.

Insubiáre, to pricke with an Awle.

Insubbiáre, to rowle vpon a beame as Weauers doe their webs.

Insuccedéuole, not likely to succeed.

Insuccessíbile, not successefull.

Insúcchio, with ones teeth on water.

Insuccidíre, as Succidíre.

Insudáre, to sweate, to ensweate.

Insudicíre, as Insuccidíre.

Insueto, vnaccustomed, vnwonted, vnwont, not vsed.

Insuetúdine, discustome, vnwontednesse.

Insufficiente, insufficient, vnable.

Insufficienteménte, insufficiently.

Insufficienza, insufficiencie.

Insuiáre, to entre into his.

Insuláre, of or belonging to an Isle.

Insuláre, to come to be an Iland.

In sul bello, in the nicke or fairest.

In sul fár del'álba, by breake of morne.

In sul fár del di, by breake of day.

In sul fár di nótte, in the beginning of the night.

In sul fátto, ipso facto, on the deed, in the nicke, at the instant, napping.

In su le sécche di Barbería, on the sands of Barberie, that is, when one is laide of the French poxe, and hath the vnction.

In sulla fíne, in or vpon the end.

Insulsáre, to make or taste vnsauorie, wallowish or tastelesse.

Insulsità, vnsauorinesse, wallowishnesse.

Insúlso, vnsauorie, wallowish, vnrelishing, tastelesse.

Insultaménto, a wrong, an insulting, an iniurie, an affront. Also a leaping or skipping for ioy.

Insultáre, to insult, to offer wrong, to affront, to iniurie with scorne and aduantage. Also to skip or leape for ioy.

Insultatióne, as Insultaménto.

Insultatóre, an insulter a scornefull wronger, an affronter, a proud iniurer, or disdainefull reprocher.

Insúlto, as Insultaménto.

Insultóre, as Insultatóre.

Insuperábile, vnuanquishable.

Insuperabilità, vnuanquishablenesse.

Insuperáto, vnouercome.

Insuperéuole, vnconquerable.

Insuperbíre, ísco, íto, to make or become proud and haughtie. 

Insuppáre, to ensop, to sop. Also to cram or feed with sops.

Insurettióne, an insurrection, a rebellion, an vprore.

Insúrgere, súrgo, súrsi, súrto, to rise vp against, to rebell, to resist by force.

Insurgiménto, as Insurettióne.

Insurgitóre, a rebell, a resister.

Insurgitúra, as Insurrettióne.

Insúrto, rebelled, risen and resisted.

Insusáre, to aduance, to raise or lift vp.

Insúso, vpward, on high, aloft.

Insussuráre, to whisper or buzze into.

In sù stánte, vpright standing.

Intabaccággine, a besotting or doting for the loue namely of boyes.

Intabaccáre, to besot or dote for lust of boies. Also to panderize.

Intabacchinare, as Intabaccáre.

Intabarráre, to encloake, to cloake.

Intabárro, a man in a cloake.

Intabáre, as Attaccáre. Also to ioyne, to binde, to claspe or mortize any thing or piece together. Also to cleaue or hew timber. Also to disable or blame one howsoeuer, right or wrong, to charge him with some wrong, fault, or imputation. Also to slit the barke of a tree.

Intaccatúra, a binding or fastning vnto or in, a mortizing of pieces of timber, a ioyning together or into. Also a cutting, a slitting or lancing of the barke of a tree. Also as Intácco.

Intácco, a holdfast against one. Also a charge or imputation laid vnto.

Intacconáre, to clout or cobble shooes.

Intágli, shreddings cuttings, iaggings, snippings in workes or garments, all maner of cut workes. Also caruings or grauings.

Intagliábile, not to be cut.

Intagliáre, to cut, to graue or carue into. Also to suite, to fit or square with.

Intagliatóre, a caruer, a grauer.

Intagliatúra, a caruing, a grauing.

Intáglio, as Intágli. Also sutable, fit, handsome, curious, well fashioned.

Intalentáre, to possesse with a will or desire.

In tál guísa, in such sort, in such manner.

In tál módo, as In tál guísa.

In tál sórte, as In tál guísa.

Intamináto, vndistained, not defiled.

Intanagliáre, as Tanagliáre.

Intanáre, to inden, to incaue.

Intangíbile, that cannot be touched.

Intánto, in the meane time, whilest.

Intánto chè, whilest that. Also in so much as. Also so that.

Intánto quánto, in so much as that.

Intapezzáre, to hang with tapestry.

Intaraccáre, to arme with a Target.

Intaracconáre, as Intaraccáre.

Intargáre, to arme with a Target.

Intarláre, to moth-eate, to worme-eate.

Intarlatúra, a worme-eating.

Intarsiáre, to worke mosaico, marquetry or inlaid worke. Also to embroyder.

Intarsiatóre, one that workes mosaico, marquetry or inlaid workes. Also an Embroyderer.

Intarsiatúra, any manner of mosaico, inlaid or marquetry worke. Also any kind of embroyderie.

Intarsíre, ísco, íto, as Intarsiáre.

Intasáto, hauing the pose or murre, stopt or stuft with a cold.

Intascáre, to pouch or pocket vp.

Intátto, vntouched, vntainted, immaculate, vndistained, vnspotted.

Intauernáre, to entauerne.

Intáuola, cut or made tablet-wise. Also vpon the bord or table.

Intauoláre, to enbord, to planke, to table, to wanescot, to pale about with bords. Also to set any dittie or song in pricksong or with notes. Also to bring a game at Chesse to a stale or a dead mate. Also to set vpon the table or make a table ready and furnished.

Intauoláto, emborded, planked, tabled, wanescotted, paled in with railes. Also a Parke-pale, a floore of bordes. Also set to prick-song. Also a game at Chesse brought to a stale or dead mate.

Intauolatúra, as Intauoláto.

Intauoláreil giuóco, to bring a game at Chesse to a stale.

Integíre, gísco, gíto, il Rèféce prender' un dì nomáto tútti i Tempiéri, ed integíre tútte le lóro chiése, magióni, et possessióni. 

Integerrímo, vpright, honest, entire.

Integrále, whole or integrall.

Integraménte, entirely, vprightly.

Integráre, to make whole or entire.

Integríssimo, most entire or vpright.

Integrità, integritie, honestie, innocencie.

Intégro, whole, entire, not broken, whole and sound of winde and lim. Also vngelded, as a stone-horse. Also vpright, honest and righteous.

Integrále, massie, lumpish, entire, consisting of entirenesse.

Integralità, a whole entire masse.

Integratióne, a restoring or renewing.

Intelegentiále, intelligentiall, intelectuall.

Intellettíuo, that may be vnderstood, or that hath vnderstanding.

Intelletto, vnderstanding, knowledge, capacitie, wit, skill, reason, discourse, perceiuing, sence, iudgement, memorie. Also vnderstood.

Intelleituále, intellectuall, belonging to vnderstanding. 



Intellettualità, intellectuality.

Intelligente, intelligent, vnderstanding.

Intelligenza, intelligence, vnderstanding.

Intelligentiere, an intelligencer.

Intelligíbile, that may be vnderstood.

Intelligibilità, intelligiblenesse.

Intemerándo, holy, consecrated, not to be prophaned.

Intemeráta, vndefiled, not prophaned, not violated, vnspotted. Also as Fagioláta.

Intemeráto, idem.

Intemperánte, intemperate, immoderate, not master of his owne appetites.

Intemperánza, intemperance, vnrulinesse of minde.

Intemperáre, to distemper.

Intemperáto, intemperate.

Intemperie, vnseasonablenesse or euill disposition. Also rage, furie, torture, or intemperance of minde and conscience. Also vnholesomenesse. Also furious follie.

Intemperie del'ária, vnseason or intemperatenesse of weather.

Intempestiuità, vntimelinesse, vnseasonablenesse of time.

Intempestíuo, vntimely, vnseasonable, abortiue, out of time. Also that giueth a signe of some euill to come.

Intempesto, the dead time of night, the time of midnight when all things are silent and at rest.

Intempiáre, to entemple.

Intempiatúra, an entempling.

In tempra, in temper, in sute, in order.

Intendácchio, a fellowe as wise in vnderstanding as Waltams calfe.

Intendánza, as Intendenza.

Intendente, hauing knowledge and vnderstanding. Also intending. Also an auditor and listner vnto. Also one that hath intelligence with another.

Intendentíssimo, of most, vnderstanding.

Intendenza, a correspondencie of friends. Also an assignation.

Intendere, tendo, tési, téso or tendúto, to vnderstand or haue skill of. Also to intend, to purpose, to meane. Also to apply vnto. Also to listen or hearken vnto.

Intendérsi, to haue intelligence or consent one with another.

Intendéuole, that may be vnderstood.

Intendiménto, as Intelletto. Also a purpose, an intendment or intending. Also intelligence or correspondencie one with another.

Intenditóre, an vnderstander.

Intendúto, vnderstood.

Intenebráre, to endarken, to obscure.

Inteneríre, rísco, ríto, to soften, to mollifie, to make or become tender. 

Inténgoli, as Intíngoli.

Intensaménte, intensiuely.

Intensióne, intention, attentiuenesse.

Intensiuaménte, intensiuely.

Intensíuo, intensiue, attentiue.

Intenso, attentiue, intentiue, fixed, earnest. Also inward.

Intentábile, not to be attempted.

Intentaménte, attentiuely.

Intentáto, vnattempted, vnassaied.

Intentionále, intentionall.

Intentionalità, intentionalitie.

Intentionáre, to intention.

Intentíssimo, most attentiue or fixed.

Intentióne, an intention, a purpose, an earnest consideration of the minde.

Intentiuaménte, with great attention.

Intento, as Intenso.

Intenza, as Intentióne.

Intepidíre, as Tepidíre.

Interaiutáre, to enter-ayde or helpe.

Interaménte, entirely, wholy, compleatlie.

Intercaláre, to put betweene, to enterlay.

Intercaláre ánno, the Leape-yeare.

Intercaláre calende, the Calends of March, because in the latter end of Februarie which is reputed as the Calends of March, the odde daies of the Leape-yeare were added.

Intercaláre giórno, the odde daies of the Leape-yeare. Also a time put or set betweene, that the yeare may agree with the course of the Sunne.

Intercaláre uerso, a verse interlaced. Also the foote or refret of a verse or dittie.

Intercalário, as Intercaláre.

Intercalatióne, a putting betweene.

Intercápulo, the place betweene the loines and the backe.

Intercedente, interceeding, suing or going betweene.

Intercedenza, as Intercessióne.

Intercedere, cedo, cessi, cesso, or cedúto to interceed, to make intercession, to sue for another, to goe betweene, to mediate, to vndertake for another. Also to forbid, to prohibite, to gaine-say.

Interceditóre, as Intercessóre.

Intercedúto, made intercession, mediated, gone between, vndertaken for another. Also forbidden or prohibited.

Intercépere, cépo, cepéi, cepúto, to intercept, to preuent, to forestall, to incroach.

Intercessióne, an intercession, a mediation, a surety. Also a prohibition.

Intercesso, as Intercedúto.

Intercessóre, an intercessor, a mediator, one that sueth, goeth betweene or is surety for another. Also a prohibiter or forbidder.

Intercettáre, as Intercépere.

Intercettáto, as Intercetto.

Intercettéuole, that may be intercepted, preuented or forestalled.

Intercetti, interceptings of forbidden goods.

Intercettióne, an intercepting, a preuenting, a forestalling.

Intercetto, intercepted, preuented, forestalled, incroached.

Intercettóre, an intercepter, a preuenter, a forestaller, an incroacher.

Interchiúdere, to interclose or shut in betweene.

Interchiusióne, an enterclosing or shutting betweene.

Interchiúso, enterclosed, shut betweene.

Interchiusúra, an enterclosure, a shutting betweene.

Interciáre, to entresse, as Interzáre.

Interciáto, entressed, as Interzáto.

Intercidente, falling, cutting, decaying or perishing betweene.

Intercidenza, a cutting, a falling or perishing betweene.

Intercídere, to enter cut.

Intercíglio, the space betweene the eyebrowes where the nose beginneth.

Intercípere, to entercept.

Intercisióne, a cutting off or betweene, an entercutting.

Intercíso, cut off or betweene, entercut.

Intercíso giórno, a day, the morning wher of is wholy dedicated to the seruice of God, and the rest to any other labour.

Interciúto, entressed, as Interzato.

Intercolónnio, the place betweene collumnes or pillars.

Intercolonnáto, enter-collumned, or set with pillars betweene.

Intercomertio, an enter-trafficke, an entertrading or comerce.

Intercorente, running betweene.

Intercórrere, to entercourse or run.

Intercórso, an entercourse or running.

Intercutane véne, veines in or vnder the skin.

Intercúte, betweene the skin and the flesh, that is, secret and hidden.

Interdétto, interdicted, prohibited, forbidden. Also as Interdittióne.

Interdíre, dísco, díssi, détto, to interdict, to forbid, to prohibite, to bar, to condemne, to excommunicat, to keepe from.

Interdittióne, an interdiction, a prohibition, a hindrance. Also an excommunication. Also an iniunction made by the Magistrate, an interdict.

Interdítto, as Interdétto.

Interdolére, to intersorrow or grieue.

Interdonáre, to enter-giue.

Interdóno, an enter-gift.

Interemptíuo, killing, murthering, destroying. 



Interessáre, to interesse, to touch or concerne a mans maine state or fee-simple, to concerne a mans reputation. Also to let out or take vpon interest.

Interessáto, interessed, touched in state, in honour or reputation.

Interesse, the interest or profit of money let or put out. Also what toucheth or concerneth a mans state or reputation.

Interézza, as Integrità.

Interfettióne, a killing or murthering.

Interfettóre, a killer, a murtherer.

Interfínio, the bridge or middle part of the nose.

Intergeríni múri, partition-walles.

Intergettáre, to cast betweene.

Intergettióne, an interiection, a casting or putting betweene.

Interghiettióne, as Intergettióne.

Intergiacente, interiacent or lying betweene.

Intergiacére, to lie betweene.

Intergiónto, entire ioyned or come.

Intergodére, to enter-ioy, to inter-enioy, or enterpossesse.

Intergodiménto, an entire inioying or possessing.

Interígli, all manner of entrailes, guts or chitterlings good to eat.

Interim, time betweene, in the meane space.

Interióra, the entrailes or inward parts or bowels of man or beast.

Interiorità, inwardnesse.

Interióre, inward, interior. Also the inward minde or heart of a man.

Interíto, destruction, vtter ruine or decay, the end or delation of all things.

Interizzáre, to rise or grow stiffe standing, to rise betweene.

Interlacciáre, to enterlace or snare.

Interlasciáre, to enterleaue.

Interlassáre, to enterweary.

Interlineáre., to enterline or rule.

Interlocutióne, an interlocution, an interposition of speech.

Interlocutóre, an interlocutor.

Interlóquio, an enterspeech.

Interlúcere, to entershine.

Interlunáre, betweene Moone and Moone.

Interlúnio, the time or space when neither the new nor the old Moone is seene, as Intermestre.

Intermediáre, to enter-mediate.

Intermedio, that lieth or is betweene two, an Intermedium, the musike that is, or shewes that are betweene the acts of a play.

Intermescere, to entermix or mingle.

Intermésso, intermitted, put betweene. Also discontinued, left off, giuen ouer. 

Intermestre, belonging to the space betweene the new and the old Moone, the time or first howre of the new Moone.

Intermestro, idem.

Interméttere, métto, mísi, mésso, to intermit, to put betweene. Also to put off, to giue ouer or discontinue.

Intermettitóre, an intermitter, an interposer.

Intermezzáre, to entermediate. Also to interlace or worke betweene.

Intermezzo, betweene, in the middle. Also an interspace.

Interminábile, not to be determined. Also boundlesse, vnlimitable.

Intermináto, boundlesse, limitelesse.

Intermissióne, an intermission.

Intermísto, intermixed, mixt among or betweene.

Intermittente febbre, a feauer comming by fits with some rest betweene.

Intermóndio, the space and distance betweene worlds according to Epicurus.

Intermurále, that is betweene two walles, being betweene walles.

Intermuráre, to entermure or wall.

Intermutábile, enterchangeable.

Intermutáre, to enterchange. Also to entermute a hawke.

Intermutatióne, an enterchange. Also an entermuting of a hawke.

Internále, internall, inward.

Internaménte, internally, inwardly.

Internáre, to internate, to inward, to enter into ones minde secretly. Also to reduce to three.

Internáscere, to spring vp among, or be borne betweene.

Internecióne, deadly desolation, deadly ruine, death and spoile.

Interno, internall, inward, inmost. Also the inward minde or heart of man.

Internodare, to enterknot or knit.

Internódo, an enterknot.

Internúntio, a messenger that goeth betweene man and man.

Internúto, entred, gone or passed in.

Intéro, as Intégro.

Interogáre, to aske, to examine, to demand, to question.

Interogatióne, an interrogation.

Interogatíuo púnto, a point of interrogation.

Interogatório, an interrogatory.

Interogatóre, an examiner.

Interómpere, to intercept, to breake off.

Interottióne, an interruption.

Interótto, interrupted, let, hindred.

Interparlánte, enter speaking.

Interparláre, to speake betweene.

Interpelláre, to interrupt. 

Interpellatióne, an interruption.

Interpellatóre, an interrupter.

Interpetráre, to interpret.

Interpetrábile, interpretable.

Interpetratióne, interpretation.

Interpetre, an interpreter.

Interpollataménte, at certaine seasons, not continually, tide-wise.

Interpónere, póngo, pósi, pósto, to enterpose, to entermit, to put betweene.

Interponiménto, an interposition.

Interpórre, as Interpónere.

Interpositióne, an interposition.

Interpósito, interposed, put betweene.

Interpósto, interposed, intermitted.

Interpretábile, that may bee interpreted, declared or expounded.

Interpretáre, to interpret, to declare, to expound.

Interpretaménto, an interpreting, a declaring, an expounding.

Interpretánza, idem.

Interpretatióne, an interpretation, an exposition.

Interpretatóre, an interpreter, a declarer, an expounder.

Interprete, an interpreter, an expounder.

Interra, in the ground, on the earth.

Interraménto, an interring, a buriall.

Interráre, to interre, to burie.

Inter-rè, one that gouernes in an Interregno.

Interregnáre, to raigne betweene.

Interregno, an enter-raigne, the space of gouernment betweene the death of one Ruler and the creation of another.

Interríto, vndanted, vnamazed, fearelesse. Also as Móscio.

Interrompiménto, as Interruttióne.

Interrómpere, rómpo, rúppi, rótto, to interrupt or breake off betweene.

Interrótto, interrupted, broken off.

Interruttióne, an interruption.

Intersaltáre, to enter-leape.

Interscálmio, the space betweene the oares in a boate.

Interscapílio, the space betweene the two shoulders.

Interscrítto, an enterwriting. Also entre-written or lined.

Intersecáre, to entersaw or cut off betweene.

Intersecatióne, an entersawing or cutting off betweene.

Intersegáre, as Intersecáre.

Interseríre, rísco, ríto, to intersert, to entreweaue or worke together, to insert.

Intersertáre, to intersert or worke betweene.

Interserto, enterserted or wrought betweene.

Intersettióne, an entersection.

Intersiáre, to square or hew timber. 



Intersiatóre, a squarer of timber.

Intersítio, a space, diuision or distance betweene, the space betweene the old and the new Moone.

Intesitióne, an inserting.

Intersoccórrere, to entersuccour.

Intérsonáre, to entersound.

Interspiratióne, a breathing betweene.

Interstítio, as Intersítio.

Intersuccédere, to enter-succeed.

Intersuóno, a sound betweene.

Intertagliáre, to entercut, to entrefeere.

Intertenére, tengo, ténni, tenúto, to entertaine, to delay or put off.

Interteniménto, an entertainement.

Intertenitóre, an entertainer.

Intertenúto, entertained.

Intertessere, tesso, tesséi, tessúto, to enter-weaue, to worke betweene, to entrelace.

Intertessitúra, an enterweauing, an enterlacing or working betweene.

Intertessúto, enterwouen, enterwrought, enterlaced.

Intertessitóre, an enterweauer.

Intertigine, an enterrubbing, a clawing or galling the skin with going or rubbing one limme against another. Also filthinesse of sweating. Also a numnesse or chilling through cold. Also a panching of any beast.

Intertrafficáre, to entertraffike or trade.

Intertráffico, entertraffike or trade.

Intertrígine, as Intertígine.

Intertrouáre, to enterfinde.

Interualláto, enteruallied.

Interuállo, a distance or space betweene, both of time or place.

Interuedére, to enteruiew or see.

Interuedúta, an enteruiewing.

Interueniente, that commeth or hapneth betweene.

Interuenio, a space betweene veines.

Interueniménto, a hapning, a meeting or comming betweene or among.

Interueníre, uengo, uénni, uenúto, to happen, to befall, to chance or come betweene or among.

Interuentióne, as Interueniménto.

Interuenúto, hapned, befallen, come or met betweene or among.

Interuento, as Interueniménto.

Interuoláre, to enterfly.

Interuolére, to enterwill.

Interzaménto, a packing, setting or pricking of the cardes. Also an entressing.

Interzáre, to entresse, to plait or ioyne and worke together. Also to put three and three together. Also to packe, to set or pricke the cardes.

Interzo, by a third, in three. Also a packing, pricking or setting of cardes.

Intésa, heed or attentiuenesse.

Intesifoníto, become furious as Thesifon. 

Intéso, vnderstood, applyed. Also attentiue, intentiue, diligent, heedy.

Intessere, as Intertessere.

Intessitóre, as Intertessitóre.

Intessitúra, as Intertessitúra.

Intessúto, as Intertessúto.

Intestábile, intestable, that by law can make no Testament or Will.

Intestáre, to put into ones head or minde.

Intestársi, to take a head-strong opinion.

Intestáto, intestate, one that dyeth without making a Will or Testament. Also put into ones head or minde. Also become head-strong in some conceit.

Intestatúra, a head-strong opinion.

Intestíno, intestine, inward. Also long borne in minde, hidden, secret. Also belonging to the inward parts of the bellie as any bowell, gut or garbage.

Intestíno cieco, the blind gut or fourth gut, which by reason of the seuerall enfoldings and diuers turnings of it seemeth to haue no end.

Intestíno digiúno, the second gut from the ventricle called the Hungry gut, because it is alwaies emptie.

Intestíno prímo, the beginning of the guts, or the gut which is fastned to the neather mouth of the ventricle called in Latin Pilorus.

Intestíno retto, the straight or Arsegut.

Intestíno tenuo, the small guts.

Intestúre, a contexture or weauing and framing in.

Inteuidíre, as Intepidíre.

Intiero, as Intégro.

Intígnere, as Intíngere.

Intigníre, ísco, íto, to enscalde, to enscurfe, to entettar as childrens heads.

Intignosíre, as Intigníre.

Intigníre, ísco, íto, to become Tigrelike, to entiger.

Intimaménte, most inwardly.

Intimáre, to intimate, to denounce, to signifie, to proclaime, to set abroch.

Intimatiónc, an intimation, a denouncing, a signifying, a setting abroch.

Intimatóre, a denouncer, a declarer.

Intimelle, pillow-beeres or pillowes.

I'ntimo, most inward, most secret, hartie affectionate, entirely beloued.

Intimoríre, ísco, íto, to possesse with feare, to make or become fearefull.

Intináre, to entunne, to put into tunnes, vattes, or pipes as wine is.

Intíngere, tíngo, tínsi, tínto, to dip into, to steepe or put in water, to keech vp. Also to slabber, to dabble or bedawbe.

Intingoláre, to dip into. Also to dresse meate with sauces.

Intingolétti, fine sauces to dip meate in and to prouoke appetite.

Intíngoli, as Intingolétti.

Intínto, dipped into. Also dyed in.

Intitíso nel sángue, stained or defiled in bloud.

Intitizzáre, to grow stiffe or benummed with cold. Also to stretch forward.

Intirizzáto cóllo, a stiffe and long outstretched necke.

Intiranníto, become a Tyrant.

Intisichíre, ísco, íto, to grow tisike, purcie or sicke of a consumption.

Intitoláre, to entitle, to lay claime vnto.

Intitolatióne, an entitling.

Intitolatória epístola, an entitling Epistle.

Intituláre, as Intitoláre.

Intitulatióne, as Intitolatióne.

Intizzáre, as Attizzáre.

Intizzoníto, become a fire-brand.

Intoccábile, not to be touched.

Intoccáto, vntouched, vnfelt.

Intocchétto, meate drest in a sauce so called.

Intócco, as Intoccáto.

Intodescársi, to become dutch or drunke.

Intolerábile, intollerable, vnsufferable, impatient, not to be borne.

Intolerándo, intolerable, not to be borne, vnsufferable.

Intoleránte, as Intolerándo.

Intoleránza, intollerablenesse, impatience.

Intollíre, lísco, líto, la città era tútta intollíta ed in paúra.

Intonacaménto, a pargeting or roughcasting of any wall or floore. Also a putting on a Fryers frocke.

Intonacáre, to rough-vast or parget a wall. Also to put on a Friers frocke.

Intonacatúra, as Intonacaménto.

Intonáre, to entune, to make to sound, to tune voice or instrument, to raise the voice, to resound. Also to fit any thing according to proportion. Also to thunder or make a rumbling.

Intonatúra, an entuning, a fitting of any thing according to proportion.

Intonicáre, as Intonacáre.

Intonicatúra, as Intonacaménto.

Intónso, vnshauen, vn-notted.

Intoppáre, as Inciampáre.

Intoppicciáre, as Inciampáre.

Intóppo, as Inciámpo.

Intoráto, become moodie as a Bull.

Intorbiáre, as Intorbidáre.

Intorbidaménto, as Intorbolaménto.

Intorbidánza, as Intorbolaménto.

Intorbidáre, as Intorboláre.

Intorbidíre, dísco, díto, as Intorboláre.

Intorbolaménto, a troubling as of water. Also a confounding. Also a molestation.

Intorboláre, to trouble as water. Also to stirre, to vexe or molest.

Intórcere, as Tórcere.

Intorcétta, a taper or litle torch. 



Intórcia, a torch, a taper, a linke.

Intorciáre, to entorch, to light with a terch.

Intorcíbile, not to be bended or wrested.

Intorcicchiaménto, as Torciménto.

Intorcicchiáre, as Tórcere.

Intorcìgháre, as Tórcere.

Intorcigliatúra, as Torciménto.

Intorciménto, as Torcunénto.

Intorciúto, as Torciúto.

Intormentíre, tísco, títo, to possesse or benum as sencelesse with torments.

Intornáre, to circle or goe round,

Intorneaménto, as Torneaménto.

Intorneáre, as Torneáre. Also to enuiron or compasse about.

Intorneatóre, as Torneatóre.

Intorniáre, to enuiron, to turne round.

Intorniatúra, a turning round.

Intornidóre, a Turner.

Intórno, about, giring, reeling. Also touching or concerning.

Intórno fà, it makes or is about.

Intórno intórno, round about.

Intórno uía, neere about.

Intorpíre, ísco, íto, to benum as sencelesse.

Intortigliáre, to entangle, to entramell.

Intórto, a skew or crookedly.

Intórto, wreathed in, entangled.

Intortogliáto, entangled, entrameld. Also a kind of wreathed simnell or cracknell.

Intosábile, not to be notted or shorne.

Intossicáre, to enpoison, to enuenome.

Intossicatóre, an enpoisoner.

I'ntra, among, betweene.

Intracciáre, to entrace.

Intracórrere, to runne betweene.

Intrafátto, in the meane while, as whilst one is doing of a thing.

Intrassichéuole, vntrafficable.

Intraghettéuole, not to be ferried ouer.

Intráglie, entrailes, bowels.

Intralasciáre, to leaue off or betweene, to entermit. Also to omit.

Intralciaménti, any kind of grate or entergrated workes of Osiers or Willowes. Also entanglings. Also enterlacings.

Intralciáre, to entangle, to intricate as with boughes, to enbranch. Also to enterlace.

Intralciatúra, as Intralciaménto.

Intrámbi, both together.

Intrámbo, both together.

Intrambústo, in ruine and confusion.

Intrameábile, passable through.

Intramendúo, betweene both together.

Intraméttere, to put betweene.

Intramezzaménto, an entermeane.

Intramezzáre, as Intermezzáre.

Intramezzo, as Intermezzo.

Intramazzáre, to enterkill.

Intransportéuole, vntransportable. 

Intránza, an entrance, an entry.

Intrapassábile, not to be passed ouer.

Intraperto, enteropen. Also when a horses fore-legs and shoulders are (as we say) split or stretched wide from the bodie, that he hath no vse of them.

Intrapertúra, a splitting of a horses lims. Also an enteropening.

Intrapónere, as Interpónere.

Intrapositióne, as Interpositióne.

Intrapósto, as Interpósto.

Intrapréso, enterprised, vndertaken.

Intrapríre, to enteropen.

Intraprírsi, is properly when a horse doth split himselfe to enteropen.

Intráre, to enter or goe in.

Intrarómpere, as Interrómpere.

Intrascórso, cursorie, in running. Also in tract of time.

Intraségna, a marke, a badge or cognisance with other armes, a note, a signe betweene, an entermarke.

Intrasegnáre, to entermarke.

Intrasmutábile, vntransmutable.

Intrasportábile, not to bee transported.

Intráta, as Entráta.

Intratánto, in the meane while.

Intráte, as Entráte.

Intrateila, a poore or small comming in.

Intratenére, as Intertenére.

Intrateniménto, as Interteniménto.

Intrattábile, vnruly, vntractable.

Intrattabilità, vntractablenesse.

In trátto, in order, in readinesse.

Intratúra, an entring, an entrance.

Intrauagliáre, as Trauagliáre.

In trauaglio, in trauell or trouble.

Intrauáre, to enraft, to enbeame.

Intrauegnente, as Interueniente.

Intraueniménto, as Interueniménto.

Intraueníre, as Interueníre.

Intrauentúra, a chance comming betweene.

Intrauersáre, as Atrauersáre.

Intrauerso, a crosse, a thwart.

In trè ánni, in the space of three yeares.

Intreáre, to enter into or become three.

Intrebbiáto, fall of Trebbiáno wine.

Intrecciaménto, an entressing.

Intrecciáre, to entresse, to entramell, to plaite in tresses. Also to packe, to pricke or set the cardes. Also to fold or wring ones hands.

Intrecciáta, an intressing, a playting.

Intrecciatóio, a curling or crisping wire. Also any dressing about the haire.

Intrecciatura, as Intrecciáta.

In tréccie, in her tresses.

Intrè dì, in three daies.

Intreguáre, to intruce, to colleague.

Intremendo, vnfearefull, dreadlesse.

In trèmódi, three manner of waies.

Intrepidézza, stoutnesse, vndantednes.

Intrepidità, as Intrepidézza.

Intrepido, vndanted, fearelesse, stout. 

In trésca, all a hoit, in ieasting maner.

Intréspoli, lets, hindrances, stumbling-blockes.

Intricaménto, as Intríco.

Intricáre, to intricate, to intangle, to inwrap, to garboile.

Intricatíuo, full of intricatnesse.

Intríco, an intangling, intricatenesse, garboyle.

Intricóso, intricate, intangled, garboyled, full of inwrappings.

Intrídere, trído, trísi, trísco, to minze, to slice or cut small. Also to knead meale or make paste or batter. Also to inwrap or infould. Also to mingle, to dip or steepe into.

Intrigaménto, as Intricaménto.

Intrigáre, as Intricáre.

Intrígo, as Intríco.

Intrigóso, as Intricóso.

Intrinceáre, to intrench.

Intrincieráre, to intrench.

Intrínco, as Intríco.

Intrínseco, as Intrínsico.

Intrinsicaménte, most inwardly.

Intrinsichézza, most inwardnesse.

Intrinsicársi, to become inward with one.

Intrinsichíssimo, most inward.

Intrínsico, most inward or familiar. Also the inward part of any thing.

Intrisióne, a minzing very small. Also a mingling or steeping into.

Intríso, minzed small. Also mingled or steeped into. Looke Intrídere.

Intristíre, ísco, íto, to make or become bad or worse or knauish. Also to make or become sad or pensiue.

Intrizzáto, stiffned or benummed with colde, clumzie.

Introclúdere, to shut or close in.

Introclusióne, a shutting in.

Introclúso, shut or closed in.

Introdúrre, dúco, dússi, dútto, or dótto, to introduct, to bring or lead in.

Introduttióne, an introduction.

Introdútto, introducted or brought in.

Introduttóre, a bringer in.

Introduttório, a meane to bring one in.

Introíre, to enter or goe in.

Introíto, entred or gone in. Also an entrance, an entry or going in.

Introméttere, métto, mísi, mésso, to put in, to conueigh in, or intromit.

Intromésso, put in, intromitted, conueighed in. Also an Vmpier, a Iudge, an Arbitrater, a Compromiser.

Intromissióne, a putting or conueighing in.

Intronaménto, as Intronággine.

Intronáre, to inthrone. Also to tingle in ones eares. Also to amaze, to astony, or confound as it were with a thundering noise. Also to chide or braule aloud, or raise ones voice very high. 



Intronáto, inthroned. Also tingled or rung in ones cares. Also amazed.

Intronággine, a tingling in ones eares. Also an astonishing of the minde. Also a brawling or chiding with a loud and threatning voice.

Introncáre, to cut in sunder.

Intronizzáre, to inthrone.

Intropiccáre, as Inciampáre.

Intropiccáta, as Inciámpo.

Intróque, in, further in. Also there whilest.

Introsíre, as Inritrosíre.

Introuábile, not to be found.

Intrúdere, trúdo, trúsi, trúso, to intrude or thrust in violently.

Intrusióne, an intrusion, or intruding.

Intrúso, intruded or thrust in.

Intuáre, to become or enter into the.

Intúbo, Brooke-lime. Also Endiue.

Intúbo errático, Wilde-endiue.

Intuffáre, to ducke or plunge in.

Intuíre, ísco, íto, to looke vpon, to consider or marke inwardly.

Intuíto, regarded or marked with heede. Also a looking into.

Intuitíuo, that is not without reason but with the eye of the minde.

Intumoríre, rísco, ríto, to grow to some tumour or swelling. Also to grow or make proud.

Intuonáre, as Intonáre.

Inturbáto, vntroubled, not disturbed.

Inturbolare, as Intorboláre.

Intútto, in all, wholy, altogether, aboue all.

Intútto e per tútto, wholy and altogether.

Inuacchíre, ísco, íto, to become a cow.

Inuácuo, vnempty, vnhollow.

Inuadére, uádo, uási, váso, to inuade, to enter and assault.

Inuadíbile, vnwadable, vnfordable.

Inuaghiménto, a falling in loue or becomming amorously desirous.

Inuaghíre, ghísco, ghíto, to fall longingly in loue, to become amorously desirous. Looke Vágo.

Inuaghíto, become longingly in loue, or amorously desirous, fallen in loue.

Inualére, to disualue, to make or be of no value, worth or auaile.

Inualéuole, vnauailefull. Also vnualuable.

Inualicábile, vnfordeable, vnwadeable.

Inualidáre, to inualue or make forcible.

Inualidità, inualidity.

Inuálido, of no force, vertue or worth.

Inualigiáre, to put vp into a cloakebag.

Inualisgiáre, as Inualigiáre.

Inualitúdine, feeblenesse, weakenesse.

Inualoróso, vnualiant, vnualorous.

Inualláre, to inually, to enter or come into a vally.

Inualúto, disualued, vnualued. 

Inuampáre, as Auampáre, to inflesh.

Inuanaglorióso, not vaine glorious.

Inuaníre, nísco, níto, to enter into vanity, to decay or come to nothing. Also to grow proud and vaine.

In uáno, in vaine, voide, bootelesse.

Inuarcábile, vnfordable, vnpassable.

Inuariábile, vnuariable, constant.

Inuariabilità, vnuariablenesse.

Inuarietà, inuariety, constancy.

Inuasáre, to put into any vessell. Also to bring or put into a fooles paradise.

Inuasáto, put vp in any vessell. Also put or brought into a fooles Paradise. Vsed also for one that is possessed with some euill spirit or diuell.

Inuasáti dal sónno, oppressed or drowned in sleepe or by sleepe.

Inuasióne, an inuasion.

Inuáso, inuaded or assailed.

Inubidiente, as Inobediente, &c.

Inuccidéuole, that cannot be killed.

Inudíto, vnheard, neuer heard of.

Inuecchiáre, to grow old or aged.

Inuecchiáia, in age.

Inuecchiuzzíre, zísco, zíto, to grow or become aged, weake and crazed.

In uéce, in liew, in stead, in place.

Inueceríe, as Smanceríe, worldly vanities.

Inuehíre, ísco, íto, to inueigh.

Inuéggia, as Inuídia.

Inuegetáre., looke Vegetáre.

Inueggiáre, as Inuidiáre.

Inueggióso, as Inuidióso.

Inuelenáre, to inpoison, to inuenome.

Inueleníre, nísco, níto, to fill with venom.

Inueltráto, beset or bayted with Grayhounds. Also become a Gray-hound.

Inuelutáre, to put or cloath in Veluet.

Inuendíbile, not to be sould.

Inuendicáto, vnreuenged.

Inuendichéuole, not to be reuenged.

In véndita, in saile or to saile.

Inuenia, as Inuentióne.

Inueniménto, a finding or searching out, an inquiring out.

Inueníre, ísco, íto, to find, to search and inquire out.

Inuenitóre, a finder, an inuenter, a searcher or inquirer out of any thing.

Inuentáre, to inuent, to deuise.

Inuentióne, an inuention, a deuise.

Inuentário, a register, an inuentory of any thing namely of goods.

Inuentítia, found or to be found out.

Inuentíuo, inuentiue, that can find out.

Inuento, found out. Also an inuention.

Inuentóre, an inuenter, a finder.

Inuentíua, an inuention, a finding.

Inuentráre, to inwombe, to embowell.

Inuentríce, a she finder or inuenter.

Inueráre, to auer, to verifie.

Inuer', as Inuerso.

Inuerdíre, dísco, díto, to grow greene.

Inuerecóndia, vnbashfulnes, impudency.

Inuerecóndo, vnbashfull, impudent.

Inuerisímile, vnlikely, vnlike.

Inuerità, in truth, in verity, or sooth.

Inuermigliáre, to vermillion.

Inuermicáre, to inuermine, to fill with or grow to wormes.

Inuermicoláre, as Inuermicáre.

Inuermináre, as Inuermicáre.

Inuermire, ísco, íto, as Inuermicáre.

Inuernále, Wintry, Wintrish, for winter.

Inuernáre, to winter, to passe the winter.

Inuernáta, a Winter, a Wintring.

Inuernecciáre, to varnish.

Inuerneggiáre, to varnish.

Inuernicáre, to varnish.

Inuernicatóre, a Varnisher.

Inuerno, a Winter, the Winter season.

Inuernóso, wintry, full of Winter.

Inuéro, in truth, verily, in verity.

Inuersáre, to inuert, to inuerse.

Inuersiáre, as Inuersáre.

Inuersióne, an inuersion, an inuerting.

Inuerso, inuerted, turned one against another, wrested to another sence, turned in. Also toward or towards. Also in respect, or in comparison. Also in verse or rime.

Inuertere, verto, versi, verso, to inuert, to turne one against another, to peruert, to turne to another sence, to turne in.

Inuertíbile, that may be inuerted.

Inuertibilità, an inuerting.

Inuertíre, tísco, títo, as Inuertere.

Inuertóre, an inuerter, a peruerter.

Inuescaménto, an insnaring, an intangling, an inueagling, an intraping, a catching with lime twigs. Also an alluring.

Inuescáre, to insnare, to intangle, to inueagle, to intrape, to catch as with bird-lime, to intice or allure with some baite.

Inuescatóre, an insnarer, an intangler.

Inuescatúra, as Inuescaménto.

Inueschiáre, as Inuescáre.

Inueschiaménto, as Inuescaménto.

Inuescouársi, to become a Bishop.

Inuespíto, inwasped, instinged.

Inuestigábile, that may be searched, sifted sought or found out.

Inuestigaménto, a searching or seeking out.

Inuestigándo, as Inuestigábile.

Inuestigáre, to seeke, to search or find out diligently, to trace out, to discouer by the steps or prints of the foote.

Inuestigatióne, inuestigation, a diligent searching or finding out.

Inuestigatóre, a diligent searcher out.

Inuestiménto, as Inuestitúra.

Inuestíre, vesto, vestíj, vestíto, to inuest, to enrobe, to enstall, to put in 



possession, to endow. Also to charge vpon an enemie and to hit, hurt or wound him. Also to employ or lay out ones money vpon any bargaine for aduantage.

Inuestíta, as Inuestitúra.

Inuestitióne, as Inuestitúra.

Inuestitóre, an inuester, an installer. Also one that chargeth his enemie.

Inuestitúra, an inuesting, an enstalment, an enrobing or putting into possession of any lands or goods.

Inueterábile, that may become old.

Inuetetáre, to inueterate, to become old and aged.

Inueteráto, inueterated, confirmed by long vse, become aged.

Inuetriáre, to glasse, to inuitriate, to calcinate as earthen pots be within.

Inuetriáta, a glasse window.

Inuetriáto, glased, inuitriated, calcinated. Also a brasen face.

Inuetta, in the height, on the top, as it were watching on some towne.

Inuettáre, to grow old or stale.

Inuettióne, as Inuettíua.

Inuettíre, ísco, íto, to enueigh, to write against in words.

Inuettíua, an inuectiue, a cursing or railing discourse, an outrage in words.

Inuettíuo, an inuecting or railing man.

Inuguále, vnequall, vneuen.

Inugualità, inequalitie.

Inuia, in or by the way.

Inuiaménto, a sending or addressing, or a setting in the right way.

Inuiáre, to addresse, to send or set in the right way.

Inuiataménte, directly in the way.

In více, as Invéce.

Inuidáre, as Inuidiáre.

Inuidenza, as Inuídia.

Inuídia, enuie, spite, hatred, grudge, ill will, repining, griefe to behold and heare that another prospereth. Also Endiue.

Inuidiáre, to enuie, to spite, to grudge at, to maligne, to hate.

Inuidióso, enuious, spitefull, grudging, full of hate and malice.

I'nuido, as Inuidióso.

Inuietáto, vnforbidden.

Inuigilánte, vnuigilant, vnwatchfull.

Inuigilánza, vnwatchfulnesse.

Inuigiláre, to grow or make vigilant.

Inuigoríto, become or made vigorous, strong, or forcible.

Inuiliménto, a vilifying, an embasing, a disabling.

Inuilíre, ísco, íto, to embase, to vilifie, to despise, to disable, to disparage. Also to become base or a coward.

In uílla, in the countrie, abroad out of the citie.

Inuillaníto, become a clowne or villain. 

Inuiluppáre, as Viluppáre.

Inuiluppábile, that may be enwrapped.

Inuilúppo, as Vilúppo.

Inuincéuole, vnuincible.

Inuincíbile, inuinsible, vnconquerable

Inuincibilità, vnuinciblenesse.

Inuíosentiere, an vngone, vntroden or vncouth path or way.

Inuiolábile, inuiolable.

Inuioláre, to adorne with violets.

Inuioláto, vnuiolated, vnspotted, vntainted. Also firme and constant. Also dressed with violets.

Inuiolettáre, as Inuioláre.

Inuiperággine, a viperous condition.

Inuiperáre, to enuiper, to ensnake.

Inuiperíto, enuipred, ensnaked.

Inuirilíto, become man, enmanned.

Inuiríto, as Inuirilíto.

In virtù, by meanes or vertue of.

Inuirtuáre, to become vertuous. Also to endeuour or applie ones vertue or industrie.

Inuirtuíre, ísco, íto, as Inuirtuáre.

Inuirtudióso, vicious, vnuertuous.

Inuirtuóso, vnuertuous, vicious.

Inuischiáre, as Inuescáre.

Inuischiatúra, as Inuescaménto.

Inuisíbile, inuisible, not to be seene.

Inuisibilità, vnuisiblenesse.

Inuisitáto, vnuisited.

In uíso, as In uista.

In uísta, in sight, in view, in presence.

Inuísto, vnseene, not seene.

Inuitábile, alluring or enuiting.

In víta, in or during life.

Inuitaménto, an enuiting, a bidding or calling vnto. Also an alluring or enticement. Also a vying at play.

Inuitáre, to enuite, to bid, to desire or call vnto to doe a thing. Also to allure, to perswade, to entice for to come. Also to vie at plaie.

Inuitáre a fár bríndesi, to enuite one to drinke a health.

Inuitáre al giuóco, to vie, to reuie, to drop vie at any game.

Inuitáta, as Inuitaménto.

Inuitáto, enuited, desired, bidden or called to come. Also a bidden guest. Also vied at plaie.

Inuitátore, an inuiter, a bidder.

Inuitatório, that doth enuite.

In víte, made like a skrew.

Inuíto, as Inuitaménto. Also against ones will, perforce, or vpon constraint.

Inuitéuole, that may be enuited, or vied at plate.

Inuitiáre, to grow vicious or wicked.

Inuítto, inuincible, vnuanquished.

Inuittorióso, vnuictorious.

Inuiuente, vnliuing, not liuing.

I'nula, as Elecampáne.

I'nule, Skirwoort roots.

In último, at last. 

In últo, without danger, sans ieopardie, not punished, vnreuenged.

In ún, In úno, in one, at once, withall.

In úna, at once, in one.

In úna pósta, at one stake.

In un baléno, in a flashing, suddenly.

In un bátter d'ócchio, in the twinckling of an eie, as quicke as thought.

In un cólpo, at one blow.

In un credo, as In un bátter d'ócchio.

In un fiáto, in a breath suddenly.

In un' instánte, in an instant.

In uniuerso, vniuersally.

In un momento, in a moment.

In un mónte, in one heaps.

In un sóffio, at a blast, in a breath.

In un súbito, at a sudden.

In un súccio, in a sip, at a draught.

Inuníre, ísco, íto, to vnite into one.

In úno, in one, at once together.

In uno stánte, at once with.

Inuocábile, that may be called vpon for aide.

In un trátto, at once, at a cast.

Inuocáre, to inuoke or call vpon for aide.

Inuocatióne, an inuoking or calling vpon for aide.

Inuóglia, an enuoluing. Also a table basket wherein napkins, kniues, salt, spoones, forkes, and bread is brought to the table.

Inuogliáre, to en will, to become or make one willing, longing, or desirous. Also to enuolue or fold vp.

Inuogliáta, any enuoluing, enfolding or wrapping vp into a bundle.

Inuogliáto, enwilled, made or become willing, longing or desirous. Also enuolued or folded vp.

Inuoglióso, vnwilling, lustlesse.

Inuógliere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, to enwrap, to enuolue or folde vp.

Inuóglio, an enwrapping, an enuoluing, an enfolding. Also a bundle, a fardle, a trusse. Also the hull or outward huske of any fruite.

Inuoláre, to steale, to filch, to pilfer, to purloine, to hide in himselfe, or out of sight.

Inuolatóre, a stealer, a close theefe, a pilfrer, a priuie filcher, one that conueieth out of sight by stealth.

Inuólgere, as Inuógliere.

Inuolgiménto, as Inuóglio. Also a winding a turning or gadding about.

Inuolontáre, to enwill or make willing.

Inuolontário, vnuoluntarie, vnwilling.

Inuolonteróso, vnwilling.

Invólta, about, round turning, rouing or wandring about. Also backe turning or turning backe. Also ouerturned or put to route. Also enarched or vault like.

Inuoltigliaménto, as Inuolgiménto.

Inuoltigliáre, as Inuógliere.



Inuoltoláre, as Inuógliere.

Inuoltáre, to enarch or make vaultlike. Also to put to route, to ouerturne. Also as Inuógliere.

Inuólto, enwrapped, enuolued, enfolded, rouled or swathed vp.

Inuólto, in the face, in view, in sight.

Inuoltura, an enuoluing or intricatenesse.

Inuoluére, as Inuógliere.

Inuolúcro, that membrane which couereth the heart of any creature.

Inuóluolo, a grub or worme called the diuels gold-ring or vinefretter. Also as Inuóglio.

Inuoluppáre, as Inuiluppáre.

Inuolúppo, as Inuiluppo.

Inuolutáre, to enmud, to enmire.

Inuoltióne, an enuoluing, an enwrapping, an enfolding.

Inuolúto, vnwilled, not consented. Also enuolued. Also as Intestíno cieco.

Inuolutáre, to become voluptuous.

Inuoraginóso, the contrarie of Voraginóso.

Inuorticóso, the contrarie of Vorticóso.

Inuostráre, to make or enter into yours.

Inuotáre, to enuow, to vow vnto.

Inuotíre, tísco, títo, to enuow, to promise.

In voto, in vaine, bootelesse.

Inurbanità, inurbanitie, rudenesse, clownishnesse, vnmannerlinesse.

Inurbáno, rude, clownish, vnciuill, vnmannerly, discourteous.

Inurbáre, to endenizen, to become or make a citizen or townes-man.

Inúrto, in shocking manner.

Inusánza, in vse, wonted.

Inusitánza, disuse, vnwont.

Inusitáre, to vnuse, to disaccustome.

Inusitáto, vnwonted, disused.

Inusitéuole, vnusuall, vnwonted.

In úso, in vse, accustomed.

Inustióne, an inward burning.

Inútile, vnprofitable, to no vse.

Inutilíre, lísco, líto, to make vnprofitable or of none effect, to disanull.

Inutilità, disprofile, inutilitie.

Inuulnerábile, inuulnerable, that cannot be hurt, pierced or wounded.

Inuulnerále, as Inuulnerábile.

Inuulneráto, vnhurt, vnwounded.

Inzaccheráre, to dash with durt or mire.

Inzafiráre, to adorne with Zafires.

Inzaffáre, to catch with a catchpole. Also to become a catchpole.

Inzaffránare, to ensaffron, to staine or colour with saffron.

Inzampognáre, to put or hang a bell about some cattles necke. Also as Gonfiare alcúno.

Inzainprognáre, as Gonfiáre alcúno.

Inzancáre, to enclaw, to enchase, to enclaspe or conioyne iron or lead to stone or wood.

Inzancatúra, an enclawing, an enchasing, an enclasping or conioyning of iron or leade to iron or wood as Masons vse.

Inzauoráre, to ballast a ship with grauell or stone.

Inzazzeáre, as Zazzeáre.

Inzazzeráre, to weare a Zázzera.

Inzegnóne, a cog-wheele in a Mill.

Inzeppáre, to fill brim-full.

Inzessáre, as Ingessáre.

Inziáre, to enunkle.

Inzigaménto, as Instigaménto.

Inzigáre, as Instigáre.

Inzingaríto, become a roguing Giptian.

Inzoccáre, to enblocke, to enstocke.

Inzoppáre, to make or become Zóppo.

Inzotichíre, chísco, chíto, to make or become blockish, rude or foolish.

Inzuccheráre, to sugar, to comfit, to candie.

Inzuccheráta, any sugar paste or cake.

Inzuppáre, to sop or lay in sops. Also to ensteepe.

Inzúrlo, in a round. Looke Zúrlo.

Inzúrro, in iest, in iesting manner.

I', o, the first Pronoune primitiue, sing, I, I my selfe. Also a kind of wood that they vse to make Oares with.

I'o per mè, as for me, as for my selfe.

I'o próprio, I my selfe.

I'o t'afferro, I haue you fast, that is, I know your minde.

I'ot'hò per il bécco, I haue you by the bill, I haue you by the fingers end.

I'o t'hò dóue si sóffianole nóci, I haue you in my tale, I care not a turd for you, for, the hole of a nut is called in Italian il cúlo della nóce.

I'ouì díco dinò, I say no vnto you.

Ióba, a kind of Turkie Millet.

Iocineróso, that hath a weake and diseased liuer.

Ióne, a March-violet. Also a precious stone of the colour of a March-violet, which being rubbed drawes paper and straw vnto it.

Iónica, one of the foure Greeke tongues that were commonly spoken. Also a kind of ancient Architecture and Musike among the Grecians.

Iónici, a kind of verses so called.

Iónuo, a kind of Ray or Thornebacke.

Iósa, good store, hold-bellie-hold.

Ióta, a iot, a whit, a crum, a nothing.

Iotarello, any litle iot or whit.

Ióuis gémma, a kind of white, light and soft stone.

Iózzo, as Ghiózzo.

Iperbole, as Hiperbole.

Ipáte, a string of any musicall instrument that is euer graue.

Iperbolizzáre, as Hiperbolizzáre.

Iperbórei, as Hiperbórei.

Iperdúlia, seruice or adoration due to higher powers.

Iphióne, a March-violet, as Ióne.

Ipericóne, the hearbe Saint Iohns-wort.

Ipostático, as Hipostático.

Ipóstasi, as Hipóstasi.

Ipótesi, a supposition or conditionall.

Ippopatámo, as Hippotámo.

Ipricóne, as Hipérico.

Ipsilónne, the Greeke letter Y.

Ipso fácto, vpon the nicke, at the instant.

I'ra, anger, ire, wrath, rage, desire of reuenge, or such passions that last not.

Iracóndia, as I'ra, but that it lasteth.

Iracóndo, raging, irefull, wrathfull, full of anger, moodie, testie, fretfull.

Iradiánte, shining, lightning, flaring, radiant, streaming, casting his beames vpon.

Iradiáre, to shine, to streame, to flare, to streame or cast his beames vpon.

Iradiatióne, a shining, a flaring, a streaming or casting of beames.

Iradióso, as Iradiánte.

Iraggiánte, as Iradiánte.

Iraggiáre, as Iradiáre.

Iraggióso, as Iradiánte.

Iragionábile, vnreasonable.

Iragionabità, vnreasonablenesse.

Iragionéuole, as Irationále.

Iráre, to anger, to vexe, to put into choller or wrath.

Iráto, angry, vexed, wroth, mooued.

Iráscere, to be angry, mooued or displeased. Also to grieue or be sorrie for.

Irascíbile, subrect to anger or wrath.

Irascibilità, irefulnesse, angernesse.

Irataménte, angerly, ragingly.

Irationále, vnreasonable, brutish.

Irationalità, vnreasonablenesse.

Irationabilità, vnreasonablenesse.

I're, Gíre, Andáre, an irregulare verbe, to goe, to wend, to walke, to wander, to march, to yode.

I're a fighíne, to goe to such a place, but taken to goe to iumble or tug a wench.

Ireconciliábile, not to be reconciled.

Ireconciliáto, vnreconciled.

Iregorígano, a kind of Origanum.

Ireiáte, a kind of precious stone.

I'ri, as I'rride.

Iríce, an Vrchin, or Hedge-hog.

I'ripe, as I'rride.

Irínge, Eríngo, or Sea-holly.

Iríngo campestre, looke Eríngo.

Iríno, an Oyle or oyntment made of Lillies.

Irióne, Turkie-corne.

Iriós, the Oris-roote.

Iritábile, that may be prouoked to ire.

Iritáre, to irritate, or prouoke to ire.

Iritatióne, as Irritatióne.

Iritéuole, as Iritábile.

Iritézza, as Irritatióne.



Iritíre, tisco, títo, to make voide or of no effect, to disappoint. Also to asswage.

Irítto, as Irríto, vnlawfull, vnright.

I'rmále, to goe ill.

I'ro, a kind of bird.

Ironía, a figure in speaking when one meaneth contrary to his word.

Ironicaménte, ironically, scoffingly.

Irónico, erronious, meaning contrary to his word.

Iróso, irefull, wrathfull, cholerike.

Irpíce, a grubbing or weeding-hooke.

Irradiáre, as Iradiáre.

Irraggiáre, as Iradiáre.

Irradicáre, to inroote, to take roote.

Irragionále, as Irationále.

Irragionalità, vnreasonablenesse.

Irragionéuole, vnreasonable.

Irragioneuolménte, vnreasonably.

Irragioneuolézza, vnreasonablenesse.

Irrecompensábile, not to be requited.

Irreconoscente, as Sconoscente.

Irreconoscenza, as Sconoscenza.

Irrreconóscere, as Sconóscere.

Irrecompensa, an vnrecompence.

Irrecordabile, not to be remembred.

Irrecordánza, forgetfulnesse.

Irrecordéuole, not to be remembred.

Irrecuperábile, vnrecouerable.

Irrecuperéuole, vnrecouerable.

Irrefragábile, vnreprehensible.

Irregoláre, irregular, out of rule, but properly one fallen in danger of ecclesiasticall censures or punishments.

Irregolarità, irregularity. Also ecclesiasticall censures, interdicts or excommunications.

Irreligióne, irreligion, vngodlinesse.

Irreligiosità, irreligiousnesse.

Irreligióso, irreligious, vngodly, profane, without feare of God, vndeuout.

Irremeábile, neuer to returne or passe againe.

Irremediábile, remedilesse, recurelesse.

Irremissíbile, vnremissible, vnpardonable, not to be forgiuen.

Irremissíuo, as Irremissíbile.

Irremsuíbile, vnremooueable.

Irremunerábile, not to be rewarded.

Irremuneránza, a disrewarding.

Irremuneráre, to disreward.

Irremunatiónc, a disreward.

Irremuneráto, vnrewarded.

Irreparábile, not to be withstood.

Irreprehensíbile, faultlesse, vnreproueable.

Irreprobábile, vnreprooueable.

Irréprobo, not reprobated.

Irreprouéuole, vnreproueable.

Irrepugnábile, not to be withstood.

Irresolutióne, irresolution.

Irresolúbile, vnresolueable.

Irresolúto, irresolute, wauering.

Irrespettéuole, vnrespectiue. 

Irrespondéuole, vnanswerable.

Irretáre, to ensnare or take in a net.

Irretíre, ísco, íto, as Irretáre.

Irretrogradábile, that cannot retrograde.

Irreuerente, vnreuerent, rude.

Irreuerenza, vnreuerence, rudenesse.

Irreuocábile, not to be reuoked.

Irricciáre, to curle, to crispe, to frizle.

Irrichíre, ísco, íto, to enrich.

Irríde, the Raine-how. Also a flower de luce. Also a precious stone that sparkleth all the colours in the raine-bow. Also the circle that is betweene the white and the apple of the eie replenished with diuers colours.

Irrídere, as Derídere.

Irrigaménto, a watering of any field by little chanels or gullets.

Irrigáre, to streame any thing by lines. Also to water or bring water into any grounds or fields by little chanels or gullets.

Irrigatióne, as Irrigaménto.

Irrigidíre, dísco, díto, to benume or grow clumzie or stiffe with cold.

Irrisióne, as Derisióne.

Irrispettóso, vnrespectiue.

Irrimissibile, as Irremissíbile.

Irritábile, quickly mooued to anger.

Irritáre, to prouoke to anger.

Irritatióne, a prouoking to anger.

Irritéuole, as Irritábile.

Irríto, void of effect or force.

Irritrosíre, as Inritrosíre.

Irrítto, vnright, vndue, vnlawfull.

Irriuscíbile, that cannot sort to effect.

Irrocáre, to make or become hoarce.

Irrocchiáre, as Irrocáre.

Irrochiménto, a becomming hoarce.

Irrochíre, ísco, íto, as Irrocáre.

Irrocità, a hoarcenesse in voice.

Irrogiadáre, to bedew or sprinkle.

Irróndine, any kinde of Swallow.

Irrompiménto, a breaking, bursting, or rushing by maine force.

Irrómpere, rómpo, rúppi, rótto, to breake, to burst, or rush in with violence to make a forcible entrie.

Irronía, as Ironía.

Irrónico, as Irónico.

Irrottióne, a violent breaking, bursting or rushing in.

Irrótto, broken, burst or rushed in by maine violence.

Irrugáre, to grow or make full of wrinkles, to enwrinkle.

Irrugiadáre, to bedeaw or sprinkle.

Irrugiadóso, full of deaw, deawie.

Irruginíre, as Inruginíre.

Irruginóso, rustie, full of rust.

Irruggíre, as Ruggíre.

Irrumáre, to commit all maner of villanie or mischiefe.

Irtáre, to thrum, to shag, to make hairie, brizlie or bushie. 

Irtióla, a kinde of vine or grape.

I'rto, thrumed, shaggie, brizely, hairie, bushie, filthie. Also as E'rto.

Isagogía, a beginning or introduction, the first precepts or rudiments of any arte or science.

Isagóge, a briefe instruction or treatise of any first precepts.

Isagógico, of or belonging to an introduction or beginning.

Isáme, as Essáme.

Isamináre, to examine.

Isaminatióne, an examination.

Isaminatóre, an examiner.

Isáti, as Isátide.

Isátide, a kinde of garden lettuce. Also woad to die blue withall.

Isattióne, an exacting or receiuing.

Isattóre, an exacter, a receauer.

Isbadagliáre, as Sbadagliáre.

Isbadigliáre, as Sbadigliáre.

Isbadiglióso, as Sbadiglióso.

Isbaiaffáre, as Sbaiaffáre.

Isballáre, as Sballáre.

Isbalzáre, as Sbalzáre.

Isbálzo, as Sbálzo.

Isbarbáre, as Sbarbáre, to vnroote.

Isbarleffáre, as Sbarleffáre.

Isbarleffo, as Sbarleffo.

Isbárra, as Sbárra.

Isbarráre, as Sbarráre.

Isbáttere, as Sbáttere.

Isbattúto, as Sbattúto.

Isbauáre, as Sbauáre.

Isbigottiménto, as Sbigottiménto.

Isbigottíre, as Sbigottíre.

Isbizzaríre, as Sbizzaríre.

Isboccágginc, as Sboccággine.

Isboccáre, as Sboccáre.

Isboccáto, as Sboccáto.

Isbollársi, as Sbollátsi.

Isboráre, as Sboráre.

Isborsaménto, a disbursing.

Isborsáre, as Sborsáre, to disburse.

Isborsatióne, a disbursing.

Isborsatóre, a disburser.

Isboscáre, as Sboscáre.

Isbracciáre, as Sbracciáre.

Isbracciáta, as Sbracciáta.

Isbramáre, as Sbramáre.

Isbranáre, as Sbranáre.

Isbrancáre, as Sbrancáre.

Isbrattáre, as Sbrattáre.

Isbrigliáre, as Sbrigliáre.

Isbruffáre, as Sbruffáre.

Isbucáre, as Sbucáre.

Isbuffáre, as Sbroffare.

Isbuttafattóre, as Sbuttafattóre.

Iscacchiere, as Scacchiere.

Iscacciaménto, a chasing or expelling.

Iscacciáre, as Scacciáre.

Iscadére, to decline or fall downe.

Iscadiménto, a declining, a downe-fall.

Iscaffáre, as Scaffáre.

Iscála, as Scála.



Iscaláre, as Scaláre.

Iscaláta, Scaláta.

Iscalciáre, as Scalciáre.

Iscaldatóio, as Scaldatóio.

Iscaléuole, as Scaléuole.

Iscaltriménto, as Scaltriménto.

Iscaltríto, as Scaltríto.

Iscambiáre, as Scambiáre.

Iscámbio, as Scámbio.

Iscampanáre, as Scampanáre.

Iscampáre, as Scampáre.

Iscámpo, as Scámpo.

Iscappáre, as Scappáre.

Iscapricciáre, as Scapricciáre.

Iscápoli, as Scápoli.

Iscapucciáre, as Scapucciáre.

Iscariera, as Cariera.

Iscárso, as Scárso.

Iscarmigliáre, as Scarmigliáre.

Iscarognáto, as Scarognáto.

Iscarpóne, as Scarpóne.

Iscartáre, as Scartáre.

Iscartáte, as Scartáte.

Iscaualcáre, as Scaualcáre.

Iscauáre, as Scauáre.

Iscauezzáre, as Scauezzáre.

Iscede, as Sceda.

Isceleratézza, as Scelerággine.

Isceleráto, as Sceleráto.

Iscemáre, as Scemáre.

Iscémpio, as Scémpio.

Iscendere, as Scendere.

Iscésa, as Scésa.

Ischcmeóne, wilde Hirse or Stanch-bloud.

Ischermíre, as Schermíre.

Ischermo, as Schermo.

Ischerníre, as Schermíre.

Ischernitóre, as Schernitóre.

Ischerno, as Scherno.

Ischerzáre, as Scherzáre.

Ischerzéuole, as Scherzéuole.

Ischerzo, as Scherzo

Ischía, a disease as the Sciatica.

Ischiacciáre, as Schiacciáre.

Ischiacciáta, as Schiacciáta.

Ischiáda, the white Thistle.

Ischiamazzáre, as Schiamazzáre.

Ischiamázzo, as Schiamázzo.

Ischiantáre, as Schiantáre.

Ischiaríre, as Schiaríre.

Ischiátta, as Schiátta.

Ischiéna, as Schiéna.

Ischiettézza, as Schiettézza.

Ischietto, as Schietto.

Ischifáre, as Schiuáre.

Ischifiltà, as Schifiltà.

Ischifézza, as Schifézza.

I'schio, the huckle bone of the hip.

I'schio, the Holme tree.

I'schio, a kind of wilde Radish.

Ischiodáre, as Schiodáre.

Ischiúdere, as Schiúdere.

Ischiúma, as Schiúma.

Ischiumáre, as Schiumáre.

Ischiusióne, an exclusion.

Ischiusíuo, exclusiue.

Ischiúso, excluded, shut out.

Isciabórdo, as Sciabórdo.

Isciagúra, as Sciagúra.

Isciaguráto, as Sciaguráto.

Iscialacquággine, as Scialacquággine.

Iscialacquáre, as Scialacquáre.

Isciancáre, as Sciancáre.

Isciancáto., as Sciánco.

Isciede, as Sceda.

Isciente, witting, knowing.

Iscientiáto, as Scientiáto.

Iscienza, science, knowledge.

Iscilócco, as Scirócco.

Iscimonito, as Scimoníto.

I'scio, whosht, still, silent.

Isciorináre, as Sciorináre.

Iscipíre, as Scipíre.

Iscipitézza, as Scipitézza.

Iscipíto, as Scipíto.

Iscíre., Vsed anciently for Vscíre.

Iscíta, as Vscíta, a going out.

Iscludére, to exclude or shut out.

Isclusióne, an excluding.

Isclúso, excluded, shut out.

Iscnotesía, a certaine incongruity in speech.

Iscodella, as Scudella.

Iscogitáto, thought vpon.

Iscoláre, as Scoláre.

Iscolláre, as Decapitáre.

Iscolatúra, as Scolatúra.

Iscoméssa, as Scoméssa.

Iscomésso, as Scomésso.

Iscométtere, as Scométtere.

Iscolpáre, as Scolpáre, to disblame.

Iscolpéuole, as Scolpeuole.

Iscomiatáre, as Licentiáre.

Iscompagnáto, as Scompagnáto.

Iscompigliáre, as Scompigliáre.

Iscompíglio, as Scompíglio.

Iscompisciáre, as Scompisciáre.

Iscompósto, vncomposed, out of frame.

Iscomputáre, to disreckon.

Iscompúto, a discomputation.

Iscomúnica, as Scomúnica.

Iscomunicáre, as Scomunicáre.

Isconchiúdere, to disconclude.

Isconchiusióne, a disconclusion.

Isconchiúso, disconcluded.

Isconciáre, as Sconciáre.

Isconciatúra, as Sconciatúra.

Iscóncio, as Scóncio.

Isconfidáre, to distrust.

Isconfidenza, distrust.

Isconfitta, as Sconfítta.

Isconflíggere, as Sconflíggere.

Isconoscente, as Sconoscente.

Isconoscenza, as Sconoscenza.

Isconosciutainénte, vnknowenly.

Isconosciúto, as Sconosciúto.

Isconquassáre, as Sconquassáre.

Isconquazzáre, as Squaccaráre.

Isconsigliáre, to disswade, to discounsell. 

Isconsíglio, a disswasion, a discounsell.

Isconsoláto, as Sconsoláto.

Iscontráre, as Scontráre.

Iscóntro, as Scóntro.

Isconuenéuole, as Sconuenénole.

Isconueneuolézza, as Sconueneuolézza.

Isconueníre, as Disconueníre.

Iscopáre, as Scopáre.

Iscorciáre, as Scorciáre.

Iscória, as Iscúria.

Iscorticáre, as Scorticáre.

Iscorzáre, as Scorzáre.

Iscossále, as Scossále.

Iscósso, as Scósso.

Iscótere, as Scuótere.

Iscretio, as Scrítio.

Iscriuáno, as Scriuáno.

Iscríuere, as Scríuere.

Iscrítto, as Scrítto.

Iscrittúra, as Scrittúra.

Iscroccánte, as Scroccánte.

Iscroccáre, as Scroccáre.

Iscrócco, as Scrócco.

Isctolláre, as Scrolláre.

Iscróllo, as Scróllo.

Iscúdo, as Scúdo, a shield.

Iscuoiáre, as Scuoiáre, to vnskin.

Iscuráre, to obscure, to darken.

Iscúria, a disease or stopping of a mans water in the bladder or passage of it.

Iscurità, obscurity, darkenesse.

Iscúro, obscure, darke.

Iscúsa, as Scúsa, an excuse.

Iscusábile, excusable.

Iscusáre, to excuse.

Iscuscíre, as Scuscíre.

Iscuscitúra, as Scuscitúra.

Isdebitáto, as Sdebitáto.

Isdegnáre, as Sdegnáre.

Isdégno, as Sdégno.

Isdegnóso, as Sdegnóso.

Isdentáto, as Sdentáto.

Isdicéuole, as Disdicéuole.

Isdogliársi, as Sdogliársi.

Isdruscíbile, slippery, sliding.

Isdruscioláre, as Sdruscioláre.

Isdrusciolóso, as Sdrusciolóso.

Isdruscíre, as Sdruscíre.

Isdrúsciolo, as Sdrúsciolo.

Isdrusolina, as Sdrusolína.

Isfacciatággine, as Sfacciatézza.

Isfacciatíssimo, most impudent.

Isfacciáto, as Sfacciáto.

Isfacendáto, as Sfacendáto.

Isfacchinársi, as Sfacchinársi.

Isfagumáto, as Sfagumáto.

Isfamáre, as Sfamáre.

Isfalcáre., looke Sfalcatúra.

Isfalcatúra, as Sfalcatura.

Isfasciáre, as Sfasciáre.

Isfatáre, as Sfatáre.

Issiláre, as Sfiláre.

Isfilatúra, as Sfilatúra.

Isfiníre, as Sfiníre.



Isfioráre, as Sfioríre.

Isfioríre, as Sfioríre.

Isfogáre, as Sfogáre.

Isfoggiataménte, beyond all fashion.

Isfoggiáto, as Sfoggiáto.

Isfógo, a vent, a breathing hole.

Isfortunáto, as Sfortunáto.

Isforzáre, as Sforzáre.

Isfór, zo, as Sfórzo.

Isfratáre, as Sfratáre.

Isfregiáre, as Sfregiáre.

Isfrenáto, as Sfrenáto.

Isfrondáre, as Sfrondáre.

Isfrontáto, as Sfrontáto.

Isfugiásco, flying or fugitiue.

Isfuggíre, as Sfuggíre.

Isfuggito, a run-away, a runagate.

Isgallináre, as Sgallináre.

Isgannáre, as Disingannáre.

Isgaráre, as Sgaráre.

Isgarríre, as Garrfre.

Isgombráre, as Sgombráre.

Isgomentáre, as Sgomentáre.

Isgomento, as Sgomento.

Isgommáre, as Sgommáre.

Isgorgáre, as Sgorgáre.

Isgramaticáre, as Sgramaticáre.

Isgrassáre, as Sgrassáre.

Isgrigiáto, a graie or grizle colour.

Isgualembro, as Sgualembro.

Isguarguáto, a watch, a guard, a conuoy. Also a sentinell or skout.

Isidosplocamóne, a shrub growing in the sealike Corall, called Isis-haire.

Isitále, a kinde of snake or serpent.

Isitáre, to chirp or cry as a Stare.

Islándra, as Slándra.

Isleále, as Disleále.

Islealtà, as Dislealtà.

Isleánza, as Dislealtà.

Islogáre, as Slogáre.

Islongáre, as Slongáre.

Ismaccáre, as Smaccáre.

Ismácco, as Smácco.

Ismagáre, as Smagáre.

Ismagríre, to grow leane.

Ismaltáre, as Smaltáre.

Ismaltíre, as Smaltíre.

Ismálto, as Smálto.

Ismanceríe, as Smanceríe.

Ismánia, as Smánia.

Ismaniáre, as Smaniáre.

Ismaníre, as Smaniáre.

Ismarríre, as Smarríre.

Ismascelláre, as Smascellare.

Ismascheráre, as Smascheráre.

Ismattonáre, as Smattonáre.

Ismemoránza, forgetfulnesse, obliuion.

Ismemoráre, as Smemoráre.

Ismemorággine, as Smemorággine.

Ismenticággine, as Smemotággine.

Ismerdáre, as Smerdáre.

Ismerdoláre, as Smerdáre.

Ismetriáre, as Smetriáre.

Ismidolláre, to vnmarrow. 

Isminuzzare, as Sminuzzáre.

I'smo, as I'stmo.

Ismoccoláre, as Smoccoláre.

Ismoderáto, as Smoderáto.

Ismoltáto, balde, shauen.

Ismontáre, as Smontáre.

Ismóuere, as Smóuere.

Ismósso, as Smósso.

Ismouitúra, as Smóssa.

Ismucciáre, as Sdruscioláre.

Isnello, as Snello.

Isneruáre, as Sneruáre.

Isnoccioláre, as Snoccioláre, to vntie, to vnknit, to vntangle.

Isochele, a triangle that hath two long sides and one short, or onely two sides equall.

Isochório, that which containeth iust asmuch as another thing.

Isocinnámo, an hearbe which some call Daphnoide.

Isocólo, when two sentences are alike in length.

Isodómo, a forme of building where euerie thing is equally straight, leuell worke.

Isodomóne, a wall of pible or flint stones couched by line and leuell.

Isofágo, the throate or vzell pipe.

Isoeto, Houseleeke, Sengreene.

I'sola, an Iland, a place compassed with water.

Isoláno, Isoláre, an Ilander, or of an Iland.

Isoláre, to reduce into an Iland, to compasse about with water.

Isolétta, a little Iland.

Isonomía, equalitie of lawes to all manner of persons.

Isoperimíte, that which is of equal compasse or circuite to any thing.

Isoperometro, of equall compasse.

Isopiróne, the hearbe Phaselium.

Isopleuro, a figure with all the sides equall.

Isópo, the hearbe Isope.

Isoscelo, as Isochele.

Isostáte, he that ouerseeth any thing to be equall and right.

Ispacciáre, as Spacciáre.

Ispáccio, as Spáccio.

Ispálle, shoulders, as Spálle.

Ispalleggiáre, as Spalleggiáre.

Ispándere, as Spándere.

Isparagnáre, as Sparagnáre.

Isparágno, as Sparágno.

Isparáre, as Sparáre.

Isparauiére, as Sparauiére.

Isparecchiáre, as Sparecchiáre.

Isparería, a discharging of ordinance.

Ispárgere, as Spárgere.

Ispargiménto, as Spargiménto.

Isparígli, an odde number.

Isparmiáre, as Sparagnáre.

Ispármio, as Sparágno.

Ispartéuole, that may be parted.

Ispartiménto, as Spartiménto.

Ispartíre, as Spartíre.

Isparúto, as Sparúto.

Ispassáre, as Spassáre.

Ispassegiáre, as Spasseggiáre.

Ispásso, as Spásso.

Ispátio, as Spátio.

Ispauentéuole, as Spauentóso.

Ispauento, as Spauento.

Ispauríre, as Spauentáre.

Ispecchiáre, as Specchiáre.

Ispecchio, as Specchio.

Ispediente, as Espediénte.

Ispedagliera, a Spitler or Spitle-keeper.

Ispedíre, as Spacciáre. Also to broach.

Ispedíto, as Spedito. Also spitted.

Ispeditióne, as Speditióne.

Ispegnáre, as Spegnáre.

Ispegnere, as Spegnere.

Ispeláto, as Speláto.

Ispendere, as Spendere.

Ispendio, as Spendio.

Ispennacchiáto, as Spennacchiáto.

Ispensieráto, as Spensieráto.

Ispergiúro, as Spergiúro.

Isperienza, as Sperienza.

Isperimentáre, as Sperimentáre.

Isperimento, as Sperimento.

Ispésa, as Spésa.

Ispéso, as Spéso.

Ispessíre, as Spessíre.

Ispésso, as Spésso.

Ispetiále, as Spetiále.

Ispetialità, as Specialità.

Ispetialitàde, as Specialità.

Ispettácolo, as Spettácolo.

Ispettoráre, as Spettoráre.

Ispezzáre, as Spezzáre.

Ispiággia, as Spiággia.

Ispianáre, as Spianáre.

Ispianatóre, as Spianatóre.

Ispiáre, as Spiáre.

Ispiatórij, as Espiatórij.

Ispiccáre, as Spiccáre.

Ispiccáte, as Spiccáte.

Ispicchiáre, as Spicchiáre.

Ispícchio, as Spícchio.

Ispiditióne, as Speditióne.

Ispidocchiáre, as Spidocchiáre.

Ispiedáre, to broach, to spit.

Ispiede, a broach, a spit.

Ispietáto, as Spietáto.

Ispiegáre, as Spiegáre.

Ispilláre, as Spilláre.

Ispilorcería, as Spilorcería.

Ispimacchiáto, as Spimacchiáto.

Ispióne, as Spía.

Ispionía, as Spionía.

Ispiráre, as Spiráre.

Ispiratióne, as Spiratióne.

Ispiritáre, as Spiritáre.

Ispiritáto, as Spiritáto.

Isplicáre, as Esplicáre.

Isplicatióne, as Esplicatióne.



Ispóglia, as Spóglia.

Ispogliáre, as Spogliáre.

Ispónere, as Espónere.

Isporcáre, as Sporcáre.

Isporcítia, as Sporchézza.

Ispórco, as Spórco.

Ispórre, as Espórre, to expose, to expound.

Isposa, as Spósa.

Isposáre, as Sposáre.

Ispositóre, as Spositóre.

Ispositíuo, expounding, declaring.

Ispositióne, as Spositione.

Ispóso, as Spóso.

Ispósto, as Espósto.

Isposueníre, as Posueníre.

Ispretáre, as Spretáre.

Ispresso, as Espresso.

Isprezzáre, as Sprezzáre.

Isprezzo, as Spregio.

Isprimentáre, as Sperimentáre.

Isprimento, as Sperimento.

Isprímere, as Esprímere.

Isprométtere, to dispromise.

Ispronáre, as Spronáre.

Ispronella, a mullet in Armorie.

Isproportióne, as Sproportióne.

Ispruzzáre, as Spruzzáre.

Ispugnáre, as Espugnáre.

Ispuláre, as Spuláre.

Ispulsióne, as Espulsióne.

Ispultríce, as Spultríce.

Isputacchiáre, as Sputacchiáre.

Isputáre, as Sputáre.

Ispúto, as Spúto.

Isquádra, as Squádra.

Isquadráre, as Squadráre.

Isquádro, as Squádro.

Isquadernáte, as Squadernáre.

Isquarciáre, as Squarciáre.

Isquarscína, as Squarcína.

Isquassáre, as Squassáre.

Isquatráre, as Squatráre.

Isquátro, as Squádro.

Isquietáre, as Squietáre.

Isquisitézza, as Squisitézza.

Isquisíto, exquisite, perfect.

Isregoláto, irregular, out of rule.

Isreuerente, as Irreuerente.

Isreuerenza, as Irreuerenza.

I'ssa, euen now, presently, at hand, by and by.

Issáto, woad that Dyers vse.

I'ssia, the hearbe Chameleon.

Issilón, the letter Y.

Issióma, an Axiom, a principle.

Isso fátto, as Ipso fácto.

Issúto, as Státo, or Súto, bin. Also as Vscíto.

I'sta., Vsed for Quésta.

Istábile, as Stábile.

Istabilire, as Stabilíre.

Istabilità, as Stabilità.

Istaccáre, as Staccáre.

Istadicáre, as Stadicáre.

Istádico, as Stádico.

Istamáne, this morning.

Istáme, as Stáme.

Istamína, as Stamína.

Istancáre, as Stancáre.

Istanchézza, as Stanchézza.

Istánco, as Stánco.

Istánga, as Stánga.

Istangáre, as Stangáre.

Istanótte, this night.

Istánte, as Instánte, as Ostánte.

Istánza, as Instánza.

Istantiáre, as Stantiáre.

Istantíssimo, most earnest or instant.

Istáre, as Stáre.

Istaséra, this euening.

Istáte, as Státe.

Istático, as Stático.

Istáto, as Státo.

Isteccáto, as Steccáto.

Istécco, as Stécco.

Istellificáre, as Stellificáre.

Istendáre, as Stendáre.

Istendere, as Stendere.

Istentáre, as Stentáre.

Isténto, as Sténto.

Istenuáre, as Stenuáre.

Istenuatióne, as Stenuatióne.

Istermináto, as Stermináto.

Isternutáre, as Sternutáre.

Istesaménte, at large, extensiuely.

Istéso, as Stéso.

Istessità, as Stessità.

Istésso, as Stésso, or Medésimo.

I'stia, a coope or pen for poultry.

Istiacciáre, as Schiacciáre.

Istiettézza, as Schiettézza.

Istigánza, an instigation.

Istigáre, as Instigáre.

Istigatióne, an instigation.

Istigatóre, as Instigatóre.

Istilláre, to distill, to trickle.

Istillatióne, as Distillatióne.

Istíma, as Stíma.

Istimatióne, as Stimatióne.

Istimáre, as Stimáre.

Istimiéra, as Stimiéra.

Istínguere, as Estínguere.

Istiniéri, greues or Shin-pieces.

Istínto, as Instínto, as Estínto.

Istipuláre, as Stipuláre.

Istiracchiáre, as Stiracchiáre.

Istirpáre, as Stirpáre.

Istitichézza, as Stitichézza.

Istítico, as Stítico.

Istituíre, as Instituíre.

Istitutióne, as Institutióne.

Istitúto, as Institúto.

Istizza, as Stízza.

Istizzáre, as Stizzáre.

Istizzóne, as Stizzóne.

Istizzonáre, as Stizzáre.

I'stmicì giuócchi, certaine sacred games among the Grecians.

I'stmo, a narrow path or part of a land or countrie where two seas are but a narrow or small distance a sunder enclosing the land on both sides. Also the middle part or bridge of a mans nose.

Istmós, a stone of the colour of saffron, which is so soft that it may be spunne, and no fire can consume it.

Istoccáta, as Stoccáta.

Istócco, as Stócco.

Istoltíre, as Instoltíre.

Istólto, as Stólto, as Distólto.

Istólto, as Stólto.

Istomacággine, as Stomacággine.

Istomachéuole, as Stomachéuole.

Istomacóso, as Stomachéuole.

Istordiménto, as Stordiménto.

Istordíre, as Stordíre.

Istordíto, as Stordíto.

Istória, an historie.

Istoriále, historicall.

Istoriáre, to write histories.

Istórico, an historie writer.

Istoriógrafo, an historie writer.

Istorlomía, as Astronomía.

Istórlomo, as Astrónomo.

Istormáre, as Stormáre.

Istórmo, as Stórmo.

Istórre, as Distórre.

Istortúra, as Stortúra.

Istraboccáre, as Straboccáre.

Istrabocchéuole, as Strabocchéuole.

Istraccaménto, a tiring, a wearying.

Istraccáre, as Stancáre.

Istracchézza, as Stanchézza.

Istracciáre, as Stracciáre.

Istráccio, as Strácio.

Istraccióso, as Straccióso.

Istrácco, as Strácco.

Istracuratággine, as Stracuratággine.

Istracuráre, as Stracuráre.

Istrágio, as Strascíno.

Istramortíre, as Stramortíre.

Istraniánza, strangenesse.

Istrapazzáre, as Strapazzáre.

Istráscico, as Strascíno.

Istratiáre, as Stratiáre.

Istrátio, as Strátio.

Istrátto, an abstract.

Istremáre, as Stremáre.

Istremità, as Estremità.

Istrenuità, as Strenuità.

Istrenuo, as Strenuo.

Istrétta, as Strétta.

Istrettézza, as Strettézza.

Istrétto, as Strétto, streight.

Istriáno, a kind of Istria marble.

I'strice, an Vrchin, a Porkepine.

Istríngere, as Stríngere.

Istrionía, the professing of an Historian.

Istrología, as Astrología.

Istrólogo, as Astrólogo.

Istromento, any kind of instrument.

Istroncáre, as Stroncáre.

Istrónzo, as Strónzo.



Istruffáre, as Struffáre.

Istrúffo, as Strúffo.

Istruíre, as Instruíre.

Istrumentále, as Instrumentále.

Istrumentário, instrumentall.

Istrumento, as Instrumento.

Istruttióne, as Instruttióne.

Istrútto, as Instrútto.

Istruttóre, as Instruttóre.

Istuccáre, as Stuccáre.

Istúccio, Istúcchio, as Stúccio.

Istúcco, as Stúcco.

Istudiáre, as Studiáre.

Istupíre, as Stupíre.

Istupóre, as Stupóre.

Isturáre, as Sturáre.

Isturióne, the fish Sturgeon.

Isuagáre, as Vagáre.

Isualigiáre, as Sualigiáre.

Isuaporáre, as Suaporáre.

Isuarietà, as Varietà.

Isuegliáre, as Suegliáre.

Isuellere, as Suellere.

Isuelto, as Suelto.

Isuenáre, as Suenáre.

Isueníre, as Sueníre.

Isuentáre, as Suentáre.

Isuentáte, as Suentáte.

Isuentoláre, as Suentiláre.

Isuentúra, as Suentúra.

Isuenturáto, as Suenturáto.

Isuenturataménte, vnfortunately.

Isuergináre, as Suergináre.

Isuergognáre, as Suergognáre.

Isuernáre, as Suernáre.

Isuiáre, as Suiáre.

Isuigoríre, as Disuigoríre.

Isuillaneggiáte, as Suillaneggiáre.

Isuisceráre, as Suisceráre.

Isuisceráto, as Suisceráto.

Isuiuagnáta, both liuely and bold.

Isuolgarizzáre, as Suolgarizzáre.

Isuoltáre, as Suoltáre.

Isuoltoláre, as Suoltoláre.

Isuolazzáre, as Suolazzáre.

Isuolázzi, as Suolázzi.

I'ta, Vsed of Dante for yea, or yes, or so.

I'taco, as Gálgolo.

Italianeggiáre, to play the Italian.

Iteráre, to iterate, to redouble, to repeate.

Iterário, a booke or note of repetitions.

Iteratióne, an iteration, a repetition, a redoubling. Also amongst husbandmen, the second tilth or fallow called Stirring.

Itifálico uerso, a verse of filthy bawderie.

Itenerário, a booke of remembrance. Also a Commentarie. Also a Calender of miles as the gestes or remoues of Princes or Trauellers.

Itínere, a way, a going, a passage. Also a course, a trade, or a meane.

I'to, Gíto, gone, walked, wandred.

Itterítia, as Mál uerde.

I'ttero, a bird of some taken for Gálgolo.

I'ttide, Itticle, a Ferret.

Ittidíre, dísco, díto, to Ferret or hunt in holes.

Ittiócola, a fish taken for Sturgeon.

I'ua, hearbe Iuy, Ground-pine, or Field Cipres.

Iuáne, a kind of Serpent in India which is very good meat.

Iubár, the day starre called Lucifer. Also a Sunne beame or brightnesse.

Iubére, iúbo, iubéi, iubúto, to bid, to will, to charge, to command, to enioyne.

Iubiláre, as Giubiláre.

Iubilatióne, as Giubilatióne.

Iubileo, as Giubileo.

Iudaizzáre, to play the Iew.

Iudicáre, as Giudicáre.

Iúgero, as Giúgero.

Iúdice, as Giúdice, a Iudge.

Iudítio, as Giudício, iudgement.

Iuéntro, there within.

Iuguláre, as Giocoláre.

I'ui, there, yonder, in that place.

I'ui a non guári, not much after.

Iui éntro, there within.

Iui sù, there upon, vp there.

Iuiúma, al tempo délla iniúma trenta iuiúmisíanoperfetti. 

Iúlca., looke Fóce.

Iumenta, as Giumenta.

Iunícoli, old decaying branches of a vine.

Iunióre, as Giunióre.

Iurisconsúlto, as Giurisconsúlto.

Iúrgio, a brawling, a chiding, a scolding.

Iurisdittióne, as Giurisdittióne.

Iurísta, as Giurísta.

Iusdicente, as Giurisconsúlto.

Iusgiurándo, Law swearing.

Iuspatronáto, as Giuspatronáto.

Iusquesíto, a right, a iust or lawful suite, demand or request.

Iusquiáno, the hearbe Henbane.

Iustítia, as Giustítia.

Iustificatióne, as Giustificatióne.

Iuuenca, as Giouénca. Also a stopping of the throat, a kind of squinancie.

I'usto, as Giústo.

I'zza, as Stízza, anger fretting.

Izzáre, as Aizzáre, as Stizzáre.

Izzóso, as Stizzósoso, as Aizzóso.


L.
La, an article or signe of the feminine gender comming before nounes, the. 

Là, being ioyned vnto verbes it is a pronoune deriuatiue of the accusatiue case and feminine gender, she, her, it, or the same.

Là, an aduerbe of place, there, thither, yonder, in that place.

Là, a note in musicke, La.

Labánte, as Labente.

Labárda, as Alabárda.

Labardiere, as Alabardiere.

Labáro, a banner, a streamer or ensigne hung vp in churches ouer Princes and noble mens tombes and hearces. Also a rich banner or foure square purple cloth beset with pearles and precious stones, that vntill Constantines time, who commanded the figure of the crosse to be caried before him, was wont to be caried before the Emperours of the East, wherein were richly embroydered certaine letters in golde, namely the letter Chi and Rhò, which signifieth Christ, and was worshipped of their souldiers. Also a kind of birde.

Lábbia, a mans face, looke or countenance. Also vsed for the belly, because in it is all filth and corruption, which in Latin is called Làbes. Vsed also for the lips of any creature, or the brim of any thing.

Labbíále, of or belonging to the lips.

Labbióso, lipped, or that hath great lips. Looke Lábbia.

Labbreggiáre, to lip, to lip it, to smacke or licke with the lips.

Lábbro, a lip of any creature. Also the brim or brinke, the tip or edge of any thing, as of a fountaine, a cup or drinking pot.

Lábbro asciútto, a dry lip. Also a drie fellow, one that to spare will not drinke.

Lábbro di venere, a kinde of Teazell called Venus-lauer.

Lábbro fésso, a clouen lip, a harelip.

Lábbro mólle, a wet lip, that is a bibber, a quaffer, a tipler, a tosse-pot.

Labbróso, as Labbióso.

Labbrúccie, prettie, fine, thinne lips.

Labbrúto, as Labbióso.

Labdáce, filthinesse in the mouth.

Labdóide, that Suture or seame which is in the hinder part of the head and in the foundation thereof, where it goeth on both sides to the eare, the going vp of which in the beginning is broade, but ascending higher becommeth narrower.

Lábe, a spot, a blot, a blemish. Also a violent fall or torrent of raine waters.

Labefátto, broken, disioynted, made loose.

Labente, as Lábile.

Labeóne, one that hath great lips, a 



blabber lipt man. Also a blinde nettle that stingeth not.

Labére, lábo, labéi, labúto, to wauer, to fal or sinke down, to falter, to faint.

Lábile, that may be to wash withal. Also fleeting, sliding, slippery, fading, passing away, falling to decay and out of sight and vse, vnstable, easie to fall.

Labirínto, Labiríntho, a Laberinth or Maze or place full of intricate windings and turnings, so made that whosoeuer came into it could not get out againe without a guide or a thrid directing him. It is also taken for any intricate, difficult or intangled thing.

Labízzo, a gum like Mirrhe but much more odoriferous and precious.

Lábole, as Lábile.

Labóre, labour, paine, trauell, worke.

Laborióso, laborious, painefull, full of labour.

Laboriasità, laboriousnesse, painefulnesse.

Labrétto, a litle, fine or prettie lip.

Lábro, as Lábbro. Also a fish with a faire broad taile.

Labrúíca, as Lambrúsca.

Láca, as Lácca.

Lácca, Lac or white leade. Also a kind of vernish. Also a puddle or muddie place. Also a rocke, a cliffe or ruinous hilly downefall.

Laccaménto, a kind of vernishing.

Lácca ogliáta, a kind of ointment for swellings and tumors.

Laccáre, to cast or yeeld moistnesse, to shed teares. Also to varnish.

Lácche, Spaniels or Hounds with long flapping eares.

Lácchia, as Láccia. Also a kinde of drinke made of spices and honnie.

Lacchiétto, the sweet bread of a breast of Veale.

Láccia, a Cheume fish. Some take it for a Blaie or a Bleake.

Lacciáre, to lace, to binde, to tye. Also to ensnare, to tramell, to claspe together, to latch.

Lacciáro, a snare or halter-maker.

Lacciétto, as Lacciuólo.

Láccio, a latch, a latchet, a lace, a snare, a tramell, a binding lace. Also a halter. Also a springe or gin to catch birdes with. Also a fish who for desire of a veine in a Tunnies iaw killeth him.

Lacciuò., Vsed as the plu. of Láccio.

Lacciuólo, a little Láccio.

Lacerábile, that may be torne.

Laceráre, to teare, to rend, to lacerate.

Laceratióne, a tearing, a rending in pieces, a laceration.

Lacerna, a garment to keepe out the raine. 

Lácero, torne, rend, dismembred, ragged.

Lacerto, the arme from the elbow to the pitch of the shoulder. Also the brawne or sinnewes or muskles of a mans armes or legges. Also a Lizard. Also a Muskle because it is like a Lizard. Also a certaine disease in a horse among the muskles and sinnewes. Also a fish that grunteth as a Hog. Some haue taken it also for a makrell fish.

Lacessíre, sísco, síto, to vexe, to molest, to prouoke or stirre vnto wrath, to abuse in speech, to raile against one.

Lacessità, a vexing, a prouoking or abasing in speeches.

Lacessitóre, a prouoker or abuser in speeches.

Lachè, a lacquey, a footeman.

Lachétta, as Lácca.

Lachezzíni, prouokings, allurements.

Lachina, the bending downeward.

Lacì, there about, there away.

Lácie, the smallest guts which conueigh the foode.

Lacínio, a milke pan or bowle. Also a Barbers bason.

Lacinióso, cut in sundry fashions, iag'd, snipt. Also crankling in and out, intricate, or full of windings and plaites.

Lácno, a dogs name, as we say Shaghaire, Ruffe, or Ruffian.

Láco, as Lágo.

Lacónico, laconicall, briefe, short, wittie or compendious in speaking.

Lacónici, a kind of faire large figs.

Laconísmo, a short, compendious and succinct kind of speaking vsed among the Lacedemonians, containing in few words much matter.

Laconizzáre, to speake compendiously.

Lacrária, Spurge or milke weede.

Lácre, a kind of gum where of they make in India their vernish, and also Spanish waxe.

Lácrima, any kind of dropping, trilling, trickling, namely a teare in weeping. Also any kind of gum-drops as Rosin or Terpentine. Also small drops or haile-shot. Also a kinde of pleasant wine.

Lacrimábile, to bee bewailed, lamentable.

Lacrimabóndo, ready to weepe.

Lácrima Chrísti, a kinde of precious wine about Genoua.

Lácrima diuíte., Vsed for wine.

Lacrimále, as Lacrimábile.

Lacrimáli, the corners or angles of the eyes towards the nose where teares appeare first.

Lacrimáre, to shed teares, to weepe, to distill, to drop, to trill, to trickle.

Lacrimárij, certaine vessels vsed in old times they vsed to put their teares in, when they bewailed the death of their deare friends.

Lacrimáti, as Lacrimáli.

Lacrimatióne, as Lagrimatióne.

Lacrimétta, a little teare or trilling.

Lacriméuole, as Lacrimábile.

Lacrimeuolménte, weepingly.

Lacrimóso, shedding teares, weeping, dropping, distilling, trilling, trickling. Also wailefull, lamentable, sorrowful, dismall, drearie.

Lacrimúccia, as Lacrimétta.

Lacúna, a fen, a moore, a marish, a fennie, a moorish or waterish ground, a wash. Also a furrow or trench whereby grounds are drained. Also a ditch wherein water standeth.

Lacunóso, fennie, washie, moorish, marish, watrish, boggie.

Lacutúrri, a kind of Coles or Cabidges.

Láda, a kind of Iuy. Also a kind of Cassia smelling of wine mingled with spices. Also a swift runner.

Lada' begli ócchij, shee with the faire eies.

Ládano, the gum Ladanum. Also a kind of fish.

Ladétta, a Hymne, a Psalme or Song of praises.

La di Chrísto légge, the law of Christ.

L'adietro, the time heeretofore.

Ladimáne, the morrow or next day after.

Ladíno, large, wide or broad. Also easie, plaine and facile.

La Dío grátia, by Gods grace.

La dío mercè, by Gods meere grace.

Ladóne, the name of a dogge, as we say harier or hunt-hare.

Ladótte, there where, whereas.

Ladraríe, pilfrings, filchings, stealings, larcenies, thiefish trickes.

Ládro, a theefe, a stealer, a filcher.

Ladronáre, to steale or play the theefe.

Ladroncelleríe, as Ladraríe.

Ladroncellésco, theeuish, filching.

Ladroncellína, a pretty fine theefe.

Ladroncello, a little theefe or filcher.

Ladróne, a great thiefe, a highway thiefe or robber.

Ladronéccio, larcency, theaft, stealing.

Ladroneggiáre, as Lardronáre.

Ladúnque, wheresoeuer.

Láe., Vsed for Là, there, in that place.

Laéntro, there within, in there.

Lagána, a kinde of Chough in India.

Lagagnosía, lithernesse, idlenesse, Lazinesse.

Lagáre, as Allagáre.

Lagári, a kinde of bird.

Lagaríno víno, a kind of wine.

Lagáro, the part of the body from the stomake to the nauill.

Lagea víte, a kind of vine or Grape.

Lagéna, a kind of flagon or wine-bottle 



narrow at the mouth and broad in the middle.

Laghétto, a little lake, pond, or poole.

Lággio, the aloy or size of money.

Lagíne, a kinde of Clemátide.

Lagióno, as Lambéna.

Lagiù, Laggiúso, there below.

Laglicála, his anger falles.

Laglimónta, hee takes pepper in the nose.

Lágna, wayling, moaning, or complayning.

Lagnáre, to waile, to lament, to moane.

Lágo, a Lake, a poole, a Meare, a deepe place euer full of water. Also a kind of water foule that alwaies loues stormes and foule weather.

Lagópo, a rough hairefooted bird very dainty in the dish. Also the hearbe Hares-foote, some take it for Trinity-grasse or Trinitie-hearbe.

Lagonopóne, the paine in the small guts.

Lagotálmo, a disease in the eies, when the vpper eye-lid mooues not downeward.

Lágrima, as Lácrima.

Lagrimábile, as Lacrimábile.

Lagrimáli, as Lacrimáli.

Lagrimáre, as Lacrimáre.

Lagrimáti, as Lacrimáli.

Lagrimatióne, a distilling or shedding of teares, a weeping, a dropping.

Lagrimétta, a hardly-fetcht teare.

Lagriméuole, as Lacrimábile.

Lagrimeuolménte, weepingly.

Lagrimóso, as Lacrimóso.

Lagrimúccia, as Lagrimétta.

Laguárdia, the garde or hilt of any sword. Also a kind of cheeke of a horses bit, so called by Grison.

Lagúme, as Lacúna.

Lagúna, as Lacúna.

Lagunóso, as Lacunóso.

Lái, layes, waylings, mones, lamentations.

Láia, Sea-grasse, Duck-weed, Reeke.

Laicále, temporall or Layman-like.

Laidaménte, filthily, illfauouredly.

Laidézza, illfauourednesse, deformity.

Láido, foule, illfauoured to looke vpon.

Lainero, a Lanard or Lanaret Hawke.

Laiuólo, the place where fishers stand to draw their nets on shore.

Laletáno víno, a kind of wine.

Laldétta, a song of praise or thankesgiuing.

Lalsisióne, a kind of fole or colt in Africa good to be eaten.

L'altrhieri, the day before yesterday.

L'altrúi, that which is other mens.

Láma, any blade of a sword, a blade of grasse, any thin plate of metall, a gad of steele, a sow of lead, a bar of iron, a wedge of tinne. Also as Gunners tearme it a Capsquire, which serues to locke the trunion of a piece from starting out. Also a launde, a downe, or flat-plaine. Also a shallow standing water, or ditch with little water in it. Also a kind of stuffe much worne in garments, that is striped with gold or siluer or copper beaten flat.

Lamána, the tree that yeeldeth the gum Mastike.

Lambéna, a fish that in the spring time is dun and speckled, and all the yeere after pure-white.

Lambéno, per comandaménto del Rè andórono, á cercár lambéni per commutatióne déll' óro délla mína. 

Lambicáre, to limbecke, to distill.

Lambicársi il ceruello, a man to busie his braines and wast his wits.

Lambicatóre, a distiller of waters.

Lambíchi, Limbeckes, Stillatories or Stils.

Lambico, any kind of Limbecke or Still.

Lambire, bísco, bíto, to licke or lap with the tongue. Also to glide smoothly, to slide gently, to flow and scarce be perceiued. Also to touch softly.

Lambráce, a fish that hauing swallowed a hooke doth so much shake himselfe that he casts it vp againe.

Lambrácca, as Lambrúsca.

Lambrúsca, sauage, wild, rurall, desert. Also a kinde of Vine that doth neuer ripen. Also a kinde of small and soure wine.

Lambruscáre, to prune or crop Vines.

Lamella, as Lamína.

Laména, as Lamína.

Lamentábile, as Lamentéuole.

Lamentánza, as Lamentatióne.

Lamentáre, to lament, to weepe or mourne for, to bewaile, to bemone.

Lamentársi, to complaine of.

Lamentatióne, lamentation, wayling.

Lamentatória, to be lamented, wailefull.

Lamentéuole, lamentable, dolefull, wailefull, dreary, mornefull.

Lamenteuolménte, lamentably.

Laménto, a lamenting, or bewayling.

Lamentóso, full of wayling and lamenting.

Lamercè Dío, by Gods mercy.

Lamétta, as Lamína.

Lami, to me it, or she to me, or she me.

Lamíapássera enel nído, my Sparrow is in the nest, it is the name of a kinde of Christmasse game vsed in Italy.

Lámia, a beast that hath a face like a man, and feete like a horse. Also a sea-dogge or dogfish. Also a kinde of fish with so great a iaw, and is so rauenous, that it will deuoure an armed man. Also women that were thought to haue such eyes as they could at their pleasure pull out and put in againe, or as some describe them, certaine Diuels in a counterfeit shape that with flatterings allured faire yoong springals or boyes, and taking vpon them the likenesse and fashion of women were thought to deuoure them and bring them to destruction. Some thought them to be Ladies of the Fairies, or such as make children affraid, or such witches as sucke childrens blood and kill them. Vsed also for any kind of hag, witch or sorceresse. Vsed also for an impudent whore or shame-lesse strumpet. Vsed also for an high arched vault or such hollow place in roofed buildings.

Lamiera, as Lamína.

Lamíglia, as Lamina.

Lamína, any kind of thin blade, plate or shingle, namely of mettall, as a wedge of gold, an ingot of siluer, a barre of iron, a gad of steele, a sow of leade, a shingle of such thin plate as they tag points with. Also any kind of little Láma, or fine stuffe striped with thin plate of siluer or gold.

Laminétta, as Lamína.

Lámio, as Lámnio.

Lamióla, a kind of Dog-fish.

Lamíro, as Lamióla.

Lámma, the Ore digged out of mines of gold or siluer.

Lámnio, the dead or blind Nettle which stings not at all. Some call it. Archangell.

Lámpa, as Lampáda.

Lámpada, any kind of Lampe. Also a streame or beame of fire or brightnesse.

Lampádie, blazing Starres like vnto burning torches.

Lampána, as Lámpada.

Lampanáio, a Lampe-maker or keeper.

Lampánte, bright, shining, blazing.

Lampáre, as Lampeggiáre.

Lampáro, a Lampe-maker. Also the socket of a candlesticke.

Lampásco, a disease in a horses mouth called the Lampase.

Lampázzo, a Clot-bur.

Lampeggiánte, blazing, flashing, sparkling, twinkling, bright-shining.

Lampeggiáre, to blaze, to flash, to sparkle or lighten suddainly.

Lampere, as Lampádie.

Lampióne, a great Lampe in a Church.

Lampiríde, Gloe-wormes, Gloe-birdes, or Glasewormes.

Lampíro, a kind of Lizard or euets.

Lámpo, a suddaine blaze or flash.

Lampreda, a Lamprey or Suck-stone.

Lampredóccie, lamperns.

Lampriáre, to dresse meate with a kind of soure-sweet sauce as they doe 



preis in Italie.

Lampriáta, a kind of soure-sweet sauce like our Venison sauce.

Lampríde, as Lampiríde.

Lampsána, a weede growing among corne.

Lampúro, white taile or foxe.

Lána, all manner of wooll or fleece.

Lanáio, as Lanaiuólo.

Lanaiuólo, a wooll-man, a wooll-winder.

Lanáre, to wooll, to nap, to fleece.

Lanária, Cudwort, Cottonweed or Fullers hearbe. It is giuen to sheep to breed milke.

Lanário, a Lanard or Lanaret hawke.

Lanáta, a spunge that Gunners vse with a sheepes skin and wooll vpon it to stop pieces that are charged.

Lanáta uíte, a kind of vine with doune vpon the leaues and branches of it.

Lanáto, woolled, cottoned, fleeced, napped. Also a fish called a Seapike.

Lánce, a ballance or scale for ballances.

Lancella, as Lancétta.

Lancétta, a lancent or fleame to let bloud with. Also a certaine measure. Also a Gunners lintstocke.

Lánci, as Lánzi.

Láncia, a launce, a speare, a iauelin.

Láncia-cantóne, a notable byer.

Lanciaménto, as Lanciáta,

Lanciáre, to lance, to cast, to throw, to fling, to hurle, to dart, to pitch. Vsed also for Sbalestráre.

Lanciáre il dárdo, to fling a dart.

Lanciáre il pálo, to pitch the barre.

Láncia spezzáta, a demie Launce-man.

Lanciáta, a launcing, a darting.

Lanciatóre, a launcer, a darter.

Lanciere, a Launcier, a souldier seruing on horsebacke with a launce, but not so heauily armed as a man at armes.

Lanciería, the order or companie of Launciers or Launce-men in a Campe.

Láncio, a lancing, a throw, a hurle, a darting. Also a skip, a friske, a hop.

Lancióla, a lancet to let bloud. Also the hearbe Ribwort.

Lancióne, a great launce or speare.

Lanciottáre, as Lanciáre.

Lanciótto, a litle launce or speare.

Lanciuólo, as Lanciatóre.

Lánda, a laund, a downe. Also a going.

Landóso, laundie, full of laundes.

Landríca, the flower of Virginitie.

Lanéfice, woolly, wooll-bearing.

Laneggiáre, to fleece or grow to wooll. Also to cotten or nap. Also to deale with or lye in wooll.

Lánfa, sweet Orenge-water.

Lánga, as Lánda, as Langúria.

Langaníno, a kind of bird.

Lánge, a kind of bird. 

Lángio, a disease in a horses crupper.

Langóre, as Languóre.

Langoróso, as Languoróso.

Languente, as Lánguido.

Languenza, as Languóre.

Languidétto, some what languishing.

Languidézza, as Languóre.

Lánguido, languishing, pining, drooping, as it were without life or spirit.

Languíre, ísco, íto, to languish, to pine, to droope, to weare and faint away.

Languíto, languished, pined, drooped, decaied in spirit and strength.

Languóre, languor, drooping, pining, failing of strength and spirit.

Languoróso, as Lánguido.

Langúria, a kind of beast or fish.

Langúrio, a languet of Amber like to a Beade-stone.

Laniáre, greedily to teare in pieces.

Laniatióne, a tearing or renting in pieces.

Laniatóre, a greedy tearer in pieces.

Lánica, a tearing launce.

Lanício, the trade of wooll or making of any kinde of woollen-clothes, or the trade of spinning and weauing of wooll.

Lanífero, wooll-bearing.

Lanifício, as Lanício.

Lanífico, fruitefull in bearing wooll.

Lanígero, as Lanífero.

L'ánno, the yeere, euery yeere.

Lanosità, woollinesse, fleecinesse.

Lanóso, woolly, soft, full of nap or wooll.

Lantána, the way-faring mans tree.

Lanterna, any kind of Lanterne, but amongst Gunners it is a cace of wood, into which they put stones or any haile-shot.

Lanrerna secréta, a darke Lanthorne.

Lanternáre, to make Lanthornes, but taken for to goe loytring about and spend the time in foolish and idle matters.

Lanternáro, a Lanthorne-maker. Also an idle or foolish loyterer.

Lanternétta, a little Lanthorne.

Lanterniére, as Lanternáro.

Lanternóne, any great Lanterne.

Lanúgine, the first wooll of Lambkins, the first downe feathers in yong birds, the soft downe or tender haires that first appeares on childrens faces and womens, the soft wooll, furre, cotten or mossinesse on fruits or hearbes, as on Clary. Also Nappy-downe. Also Linsey-wollsie. Also Doune-seed.

Lanuginóso, downy, soft, woolly, mossie, full of nap or soft haire.

Lanúto, as Lanóso. Also a sheepe.

Lánza, as Láncia.

Lanzáre, as Lanciáre.

Lánzi, dutch muffes, ritters or lanceknights. 

Lanzinetto, a duch muffe or swartritter.

Lánzo, as Lanzinétto.

Là óltre, there beyond.

Lápa, as Láppa.

Laónde, whereupon, whereon. Also there-whence.

Lapáto, the wild Docke or Patience.

Lápida, all manner of stones.

Lapicída, a stone digger or cutter.

Lapidáre, to stone, to kill with stones.

Lapidário, a Lapidary, a Ieweler.

Lapidatióne, a Lapidation, a stoning.

Lápideásio, a stone so called.

Lápide volgáre, a kind of hearbe.

Lapidicína, a stone-quarry.

Lapidóso, stony, gretty, full of stones, grauely.

Lapiéna, the full sea or tide.

Lapilláre, as Lapidáre.

Lapíllo, any little stone.

Lapillóso, stonie, full of stones.

Lapisbiánco, white chalke.

Lapíslázuli, a blew Azull stone.

Lapis rósso, red Oker.

Lapitúdine, as Lippitúdine.

Lapiùpárte, the most part.

Láppa, any kinde of Burre, Clotburre, Lapping or Burre-docke.

Láppa boária, a kinde of Burre.

Láppa canária, the little burre.

Láppa cenária, a kind of Burre.

Lappágíne, teazils, maidens lips, or sheapheards rod.

Lappáre, to lap as a dog, to lop trees.

Láppe, il cúlo gli fà láppe, as we say, his taile makes buttons for feare.

Láppola, as Láppa.

Lappoláre, to stick vnto as a burre. Also as Lappáre.

Lappolétte, stubbles, little sticks of strawe.

Lappolóso, burrie, sticking as a burre.

Lapsana, a kinde of wilde Cole-wort.

Lappolóne, an importunate fellow, that will stick as close to one as a burre.

Lápso, lapsed. Also a laps, a fall, a sliding.

Lapúr tólse, yet he tooke her.

Laqueáre, the roofe of a chamber embowed and fretted. Also a chiefe beame in any roofe.

Larántola, a kinde of Sea-crab or Lobstar.

Larbasóne, as Alabástro.

Lardáre, to larde, to enterlarde.

Lardaruóla, a lardrie, a larding pin.

Lardaruóli, such as sell larde and all manner of salt meates, as Bakon, Neates-tongues, Bolonia Sauseges, poudred beefe. Also Chandlers.

Lardatóre, a larder of rost-meates.

Lardelláre, as Lardáre.

Lardegli, as Lardelli.

Lardelli, lardets, or little pieces of larde 



that be put into rost-meate. Also a kind of daintie greene figs. Also wittie scoffs, or quipping taunts.

Larderíni, as Lardelli.

Lardiera, a lardrie. Also a larding-sticke.

Lardiero, a larder.

Lárdo, all manner of lard.

Lardóni, as Lardelli.

Lardirólo, as Lardiróne.

Lardiróne, a Ferret, some say a Weazell.

Lárese, as Lárice. Also some part of a Ship. Some take it for the larborine.

Laresíno, a kind of fish.

Largaménte, largelie, amplie.

Largáre, to enlarge, to make broad, wide or open. Also to make roome.

Largheggiáre, to roaue or goe wide, to shew larges or bountie.

Largheggiáre di paróle, to be lauish in speach, to speake vnaduisedly.

Larghézza, largenesse, widenesse, breadth. Also largesse, bountie or liberalitie.

Largiloquente, lauish or liberall in speach, wide-mouthed in words.

Largiloquenza, liberall speach.

Largíre, gísco, gíto, to giue largely, to bestow liberally, to graunt freely. Also to enlarge.

Largità, larges, bountie, free-gift. Also largenesse.

Largitióne, as Largità, an enlarging.

Largitóre, a large giuer.

Lárgo, large, wide, open, ample. Also free, franke, bounteous or liberall. Also largely, at large or broadly.

Lári, the sides of an ouen.

Lárij dei, good or euill angels, home or household gods, familiar spirits.

Lárice, the larch or larix or turpentine tree, which doth neuer rot, nor no fire can consume.

Larínce, a bone in the head of a man, by which he receiueth and putteth forth his breath, and also formeth his voice.

Laríno, a kinde of coine in Ormuz, sixe of which make eight venetian pounds.

Láro, a Sea-cob, a Sea-gull.

Lárua, a night-ghost, a bag, a walking or appearing spirit, but properly those vaine apparitions and strange shapes that a man seemes to see although his eyes be shut, which suddainly vanish. Also vsed for a maske or vizard. Also according to Bocace, a kind of vpper garment like a Porters frock or sacke, or such sacks as tumblers tumble in.

Lárue, hath been vsed for broade slate stones to couer houses with.

Laságna, a kinde of thin paste-meate dressed with butter, spice, and cheese.

Lasagneggiáre, to feede on Laságna.

Lasagnatúro, a sticke to roule Laságna vpon. 

Lasagnera, a woman that maketh or selleth Lasagna.

Lasagnóne, a slouenly gull, a grosepated ninnie, a homely shallow-wit.

Lásca, a fish like our Seuerne Shad. Some take it for the Roch-fish. Also thin wouen, or limber in feeling.

Lascáre, to slacken or let loose, to let goe and slip faire and softly.

Láscia, a legacie, a bequeathing, a gift or donation left to another. Also a lease of any lands. Also a leash for dogs.

Lásciami-stáre, let me alone, but taken for an importunate foole or wench.

Lasciaménto, as Láscia.

Lasciáre, to leaue, to lin, to let, to permit, to let alone. Also to forgoe, to forsake. Also to slacken or let loose. Also to bequeath or leaue as a gift. Also to demise or let to lease. Also to leash as hunters doe.

Lasciáre in Násso, to leaue and forsake one in time of most neede, and when one thinks least of it: the phrase is taken from the ingratitude of Theseus, who left Ariadna in the Ile of Násso.

Lasciáre in Sécco, idem, the phrase is taken from a fish left on the land or on dry sands.

Lasciárci del pélo, to leaue some good thing behinde, to pay so well for any thing that a man shall euer remember, as if he had left his haire.

Lasciár córrere, to let runne, that is, to let the world goe and care for nothing.

Lasciáta, as Láscia.

Lasciár fáre, to let one doe.

Lasciár póste, to leaue stakes behinde.

Lascíbile, giuen to lust and lasciuiousnesse.

Láscita, Láscio, as Láscia.

Lascíuia, lasciuiousnesse, letcherie, lust, vncleanenesse of life, wantonnesse.

Lasciuiáre, to liue lasciuiously, to commit letcherie in bodily lust.

Lasciuétto, some what lasciuious.

Lasciuíre, ísco, íto, as Lasciuiáre.

Lascíuo, lasciuious, letcherous, lustfull, wanton, womanish.

Lasciuólo, a night-bird, some take it for a rere-mouse, or night-bat.

Laséne, brizles, or stiffe haires which Shooemakers vse, and brushes are made of. Also the arme-pits.

Láser, a kind of tree producing a medicinable kind of gum. Also the iuice of Laserwort, vsed in Phisicke. Some take it for Benioni, or Asa dulcis.

Lásera, the gum of Láser.

Lásere, wine that Laser hath beene steeped into.

Laserpitiáto, compounded with or of Laserpitium. 

Laserpítio, Laserwort, Angelica, Master-wort. Some take it for Fumitorie of Spaine.

Lásis, a composition much vsed in Barberie, the vertue where of is to glad the heart, and cause pleasant dreames, namely about Venus sports which it much farthereth and strenghneth.

Lasópra, there aboue or ouer.

Lasótto, there vnder.

Lássa, as Láscia.

Lassána, a kind of hearbe.

Lassáre, to make or grow wearie, to tire. Also as Lasciáre.

Lassatíuo, loose, laxatiue.

Lássero, as Láser.

Lassézza, wearinesse, faintnesse.

Lássi, leaches for Dogs.

Lássito, as Láscia.

Lassitúdine, as Lassézza.

Lásso, wearie, tyred, faint, out of breath. Also alas, aye me, welladay.

Lásso., Vsed also for Láscia.

Lassù, Lassúso, there aboue, vp there.

Lassultáta, Costemarie or great Balsamint.

Lástra, as Lamína. Also a lath or broad splinter of wood. Also vsed for ballast for a ship. Also a flat slate stone or table.

Lastráre, to couer with thin plate. Also to slate a house. Also to lath. Also to ballast a ship.

Lastregáre, to paue with flat broad stones. Also to slate a house.

Lastregatóre, a Tauier, a Slater.

Lastricaménto, as Lastricatúra.

Lastricáre, as Lastregáre.

Lastricatóre, as Lastregatóre.

Lastricatúra, a pauement of broad flat stones, a slating.

Lástrico, as Lastricatúra.

Lastróne, any great Lástra.

Lasù, Lasúso, vp there, there aboue.

Lasua mercè, God a mercie to him.

Láta, as Lamína, or as Lástra.

Latáce., looke Herba latáce.

Latále, such a woman.

Latarína, a fish, in Latin Atherína.

Latebra, darknesse, secrecie, obscuritie. Also a secret corner or a lurking hole. Also a caue or den for beasts. Also a forme of a hare, a couert or layre for Deare.

Latebroso, full of secret corners, dens, caues or darke and lurking holes.

Lateggiáre, to side it, to be, to stand or goe on the sides.

Latente, close, secret, priuie.

Latenteménte, secretly, lurkingly.

Latentiuóro, a priuy deuourer.

Laterále, laterall, of one or some side, belonging to a side.

Laterína, a fish in Latin Atherína. Vsed also as Lateríno.



Lateríno, a close-stoole or priuie.

Laterna, a lanthorne.

Lathiríde, the hearbe Spurge.

Láti, sides. Also a kind of flat fish, as Epóde.

Latíbulo, a lurking place.

Láti cámpi, broad wide fields.

Latíce, broad, wide, large, spacious.

Laticláuio, a kind of long Imperiall robe, royall habite or mantle of State, that Emperors, triumphant Generals, laureated Poets, or chiefe Senators were wont to weare in Rome, richly embroydered, broched and studded. Also a Senator, an Alderman, one that weareth rich purple garments.

Latifólio, broad-leaued. Also a kind of Oke-tree that hath very broad leaues.

Latína, the mizen saile of a ship.

Latináre, to speake or write Latine.

Latinísmo, as Latinità.

Latinità, a proprietie of Latine.

Latinizzáre, as Latináre.

Latíno, Latine, the Latine tongue. Vsed also for an Italian or the Italian tongue. Also broad, wide, spacious, cleare and open.

Latióne, a bearing, a burdning.

Latitánte, hiding or lurking.

Latitánza, a hiding or lurking.

Latitáre, to hide, to lurke.

Latitúdine, latitude, breadth, widenesse, spaciousnesse, largenesse.

Láto, broad, large, ample, wide, spacious. Also the side of any thing. Also the flanke or side of any bodie. Also brought or carried.

Láto quadráto, as Qua dráta radíce.

Latóra, the plurall of Láto.

Latóre, a bringer, a bearer.

Latraménto, a barking, a bawling.

Latráre, to barke, to bay or bawle as a Dog.

Latráto, barked, bayed, bawled as a Dog.

Latráto, the barking or baying of a Dog.

Latratóre, a barker, a brawler.

Látria, dutie, homage, seruice or reuerence to God, the deuine seruice of God.

Latrína, a iakes, a priuie, or close-stoole.

Látro, Latróne, as Ládro.

Latrocináre, to steale, to commit larcerie.

Latrocinatióne, larcerie, theft, stealing.

Latronéccio, as Ladronéccio.

Latroneggiáre, as Ladroneggiáre.

Latrocínio, as Ladronéccio.

Látta, a kind of Cassia or Canell.

Lattáce., looke Herba latáce.

Lattaccínij, all manner of white meates, or any thing made of milke. Also all manner of white Purcelane dishes. Also the burres or sweet bread of a breast of veale. Also the soft roes of any fish.

Lattaccíno, a custard, a flaune or eggepie. Also a kind of white composition that glasse-makers vse to make Venice glasses with. Also the burre or sweelbread of a Calfe.

Lattacciuóli, as Lattaccínij.

Lattaménto, all manner of milke.

Lattaiuóla, as Lattária.

Lattaiuóli, any sucking creatures, suckers, sucklings. Also the first teeth that any creature hath. Also such as sell milke, or that make white meates. Also as Lattaccínij.

Lattánte, giuing sucke or milke. Also that sucketh, sucking.

Lattáre, to giue milke or sucke. Also to milke. Also to sucke.

Lattária, Milke-weede, Spurge-weede, Tithimale, Wartewort. Also a Dearie or milke house.

Lattaríni, any soft rowed fishes namely Mackrels.

Lattário, that is made of milke or that bringeth forth milke.

Lattáro, as Lattaruólo.

Lattaruóla, a dairie or milke maide.

Lattaruólo, a dairie or milke man. Also a fresh cheese. Also a custard.

Lattatríce, a Nurce that giueth sucke.

Látte, any kind of milke. Also the soft rowe of any fish.

Lattea uía, the milke way.

Látte cauallíno, Mares milke.

Lattee, milke Peares or Apples.

Látte di pésce, the soft rowe of fishes.

Látte mele, a kind of clouted creame.

Latteo, milkie, milken. Also whitish.

Latteo círcolo, the milke way.

Látte premulo, curds, curded milke.

Látte rapréso, curds, or curded milke.

Látte quagliáto, curded milke.

Latteróli di cóppo, a kind of meate.

Latteróne, Milke or Sow-thistle.

Látti, the small guts by which meate passeth first out of the stomacke. Some take them for two kornels vnder the Canell bone, which in men are slender, but in beasts some what thicker.

Latticcínio, as Lattaccíno.

Lattifero, milke-bearing or bringing.

Lattifíglio, a nurce or sucking child.

Lattíme, the scurfe or scalde in some childrens heads.

Lattisício, milkish, milkie, whitish.

Lattítio, a kind of Muske or Ziuet-cat.

Lottoário, as Elettuário.

Lattonáio, a Brazier.

Lattóne, the mettall Latton.

Lattónzi, yoong sucking Calues.

Lattóre, as Herba lattáce.

Lattórzo, a sucking Calfe or Colt.

Lattóso, milkie, fat, full of milke.

Lattouáro, as Elettuário.

Lattúca, the hearbe Lectuce.

Lattúca caprína, Goates lectuce.

Lattúca romána, Romane lectuce. 

Lattucella, Milke or Sow-thistle.

Lattúche, all manner of Lectuce. Also all kinds of thicke ruffe bands. Also all kinds of chitterlins.

Lattugíno, of or belonging to Lectuce.

Lattugóni, any kind of great Lectuce.

Lattúme, all sorts of milke or white meates, or made of milke.

Lattuóso., Vsed for Luttuóso.

Latúmie, fens, meares, as Lacúne.

Latumióso, fennie, as Lacunóso.

Láua, a wishing place, a plash of water, a streame or gutter suddainly caused by raine and which washeth where it goeth and runneth.

Lauábile, that may be washed.

Lauacéci, a washer of rags, shitten clouts or dish-clouts, that is to say, a base drudge or scullion.

Lauacénci, as Lauacéci.

Lauacéti, as Lauacéci.

Lauacciáre, to wash, to dable, to rense or plash in the water.

Lauáccio, dish-wash, or Swines draffe. Also any sudge.

Lauácro, a Lauer, a Font, an Eawer.

Lauagnótto, a kind of Ship or Pinnace.

Lauamáno, as Lauácro.

Lauaménto, all manner of washing.

Lauána, as Lauanése.

Lauánda, the hearbe Lauender. Also any washing or sudge.

Lauandáia, a Landresse, a Washer.

Lauandára, as Lauandáia.

Lauáre, to wash, to laue, to bath.

Lauarétto, a kind of fish.

Lauaróne, a fish in Latin Atherína.

Lauár la testa all'ásino, to wash an Asses head, that is to loose both water, sope, paine and labour.

Láua stráccij, as Lauacéci.

Lauatáre, to dable or plash in water.

Lauatína, a washing, a rencing.

Lauatióne, a washing, a lauing.

Lauatóio, a Lauer, a washing or bathing place.

Lauatóra, a washing or bucking-tub.

Lauatório, as Lauatóio.

Lauatríce, a Landresse, a Washer.

Lauatrína, a place or sinke in a kitchin where they wash dishes or conueigh filth away.

Lauatúra, a washing, a lauing. Also all manner of filthy sudge.

Láuda, as Láude.

Laudábile, laudable, praise-worthy.

Laudáno, as Ladáno.

Laudáre, to praise, to laud, to commend.

Laudársi, to praise or boast himselfe.

Laudársi di alcúno, to accompt himselfe well pleased and satisfied at ones hands.

Laudatióne, commendation.

Laudatíua, commendatorie, praising.

Laudatíuo, that may be praised. 



Laudatória, as Laudatíua.

Láude, laud, praise, commendation, thanksgiuing. Also the hinder part of the heal.

Laudentio, the fiftieth part of any bargaine or brokage.

Laudési, such as sing songs of praises or thanksgiuing.

Laudèuole, as Laudábile.

Laudicéna, one that for a supper will praise any mans humor and commend him.

Lauè, there where, where as.

Laueggiáre, to boyle in a Lauéggio.

Laueggiáro, a Lauéggio maker.

Lauéggio, a kinde of pot in forme of a kettle, made of a kind of thin blackestone in Lombardy, wherin they boyle their meals.

Lauello, a lauer in a Barbers shops.

L'auero, Water-cresses.

Là verso, there towards.

Lauézzo, as Lauéggio.

Lavólta, towards. Also a course held in sayling or wandring.

Lauorággio, all manner of labourage or workemanship. Also tilling or manuring of grounds.

Lauoránte, a labouring-man, a workeman, a labourer, a day labourer.

Lauoráre, to labour, to worke, to trauell, to take paines. Also to occupy.

Lauoratíuo, labouring, to be wrought.

Lauoráto, wrought, laboured.

Lanoratóre, a labourer, a worker.

Lauoratríce, a worke-woman.

Lauoratúra, worke-manship.

Lauorécci, any grosse, bungling, foolish and imperfect workes.

Lauorétti, all fine or little workes.

Lauoriáre, as Lauoráre.

Lauoriéra, tillage, husbandry.

Lauoriéro, a workeman, a labourer. Also any kind of worke.

Lauorío, as Lauóro.

Lauóro, any kind of labour or worke. Also vsed for worke-manship.

Lauóro d'intáglio, any manner of incut or carued worke.

Laurea, of Bay or Laurell. Also a crowne or garland of Laurell.

Laureáre, to Laureate, to crowne with Bayes.

Laureáto, laureated, crowned with Bayes.

Lauree, a kind of greene figges.

Laureo, as Lauríno.

Laureóla, Lowry, Lawrell or petty Bay, or the hearbe perwinkle.

Lauréto, a groue of Laurels or bayes.

Lauríci, a dainty dish made of Leurets or rabet-sackers cut out of their dams-bellies.

Laurífero, Laurell-bearing.

Laurígero, Laurell-bearing. 

Laurína, hath beene vsed for Vrína, a mans water or vrine.

Lauríno, made of Laurell or of the colour of Laurell.

Lauriotíno, a kinde of Spódo found in Furnaces where siluer is tried.

Láuro, Láurio, Laurell or bayes.

Laustíbi, the Daffodill flowre.

Lauteggiáre, to liue or fare daintily, and merily withall.

Lautézza, daintinesse, mirth and curiosity in banquetings.

Lautíe, presents that the Romans sent to Ambassadors of other kingdomes.

Lautítia, as Lautézza.

Láuto, daintily seasoned and trimmed, rich and stately, costly and merry withall.

Lautríce, the wiues of two brethren.

Lauúnque, wheresoeuer.

Lázza, as Lásca.

Lazzaréto, an Hospitall of sicke folkes.

Lazzaríco, a fruite called in Latine Hipomelis or Trigonium.

Lazzarína, a kinde of thin leprosie.

Lazzaríno, a Lazer or Leprous man.

Lazzaríto, a Lazer or a Leprous man.

Lazzaróso, a worme breeding in a horse whereof there be eight kinds.

Lázzaro, as much to say as helped or relieued.

Lazzaruóli, a kind of fruit in Italy.

Lázzo, soure, sharp or tart in tast. Also withered or flappy as drie gales.

Lázzoli, a Lazull or Azure stone.

Le, an article of the Feminine gender and Plurall number, the, Le cóse, the things.

Le, being with verbes, it is a Pronoune deriuatiue and of the Accusatiue case and Plurall number them, Io le uiddi I saw them.

Le, with Verbes it is sometimes a Pronoune primitiue of the Singular number and Datiue case. Io le diédi, I gaue her or to her, and sometimes of the Ablatiue case namely being with verbs of priuation, as Io le tólsi. I took from her.

Lea, a kind of broad-leaued, smooth and plaine Cole-wort.

Leáchi, certaine Visitors or such officers in China.

Leále, loyall, true, trusty, vpright, faithfull, sincerely-honest.

Lealtà, loyalty, truth, integrity, alleagance, vprightnesse, faithfulnesse.

Leándro, as Rododaphne.

Leana, as Lealtà.

Leánza, as Lealtà.

Leárdo, dapple, flee-bitten with red spots.

Leárdo argénto, a whit dapple like siluer.

Leárdo pomáto, a dapple gray. 

Lealáre, as Leáre.

Leárdo rotáto, a dapple gray.

Leáre, to make or become true and loyall.

Lebárre, the barres where the bit doth or should rest in a horses mouth.

Lebbra, the Leaper or saint Magnus euell.

Lebbráccia, a filthy scuruy leaper.

Lebbrosità, a leaprosie.

Lebbróso, leaprous, full of the leaper.

Lecanománte, a practiser of Lecanomantia.

Lecanomantía, diuination by water put into basons or fish-shels.

Lecáro, a fish in India ten paces broad and as long as gally.

Lécca, a kind of coine in Ormuz.

Lécca altári, a dissembling puritan, one that lickes Altars.

Léccafúne, a licke-halter, a knauish wag, a gallowes-clapper.

Leccággine, as Leccardía.

Leccámi;, all manner of lickings, all maner of lickerish or dainty meates.

Leccardía, lickerishnesse, gluttony, licking or lapping, friandise.

Léccapiátti, a lick-dish, a scullion.

Léccapignátte, a licke pans or pots.

Leccárdo, a friand, a lickerish fellow, a gourmand, a gully-gut.

Leccardóne, as Leccárdo.

Leccare, to licke, to lap. Also to claw or faune vpon, or flatter.

Leccársi, for a man to flatter or a woman to paint and smug her selfe vp.

Lécca spína, a lick-spigot.

Leccáto, hath beene vsed for Delicáto.

Leccatíuo, that may be licked.

Leccatóre, a licker. Also a flatterer.

Leccatúra, a licking. Also as Leccardía.

Leccétto, a groue of Holmes. Also a Maze or Laberinth.

Leccheggiáre, as Leccáre.

Lecchétto, a friand morsell, a lickerish bit. Also a baite or inticement. Also a little pleasant roule in the mouth of a lit.

Lécchia, a kind of fish like a Tunny that hath no scales, some take it for a kind of Dog-fish, some for a kind of Mackrell, and some for a Seauern-shad.

Léccio, a Holme-tree.

Lécco, a friand or lickerish fellow. Also friand or lickerish. Also the mistris or block at bowles or quoits where at men cast and play.

Leccóne, a greedy glutton or gourmand.

Leccornía, as Leccardía.

Léce, it is lawfull or seemely.

Lecernite, the choise or cullings of any thing, namely the choise companies of trained men or soldiers. 



Lechár, as Lecáre.

Lecitánza, lawfulnesse.

Lecitáre, to allow or make lawfull.

Lecitézza, lawfulnesse.

Lécito, lawfull, good in law.

Lecóra, as Lecóro.

Lecóro, a bird called in Latine Liguris, or Nicedula.

Leda, a plant that yeeldeth Ladanum.

Ledano, the sweet gum Ladanum.

Ledere, ledo, lési, léso, to offend, to wrong, to iniurie in word or deede.

L'e détta, it is said, the word is spoken, agreed, the match is made.

Léga, the aloy, worth or qualitie of gold or siluer that is coined. Also the solder to solder or vnite mettals. Also any kinde of binding together. Also a league, a combination or vnion. Also a french league, that is, two english miles by land, and three by sea. Also a kind of measure of corne so called in Italy.

Legáccia, any kind of binding, swathe, bandell, fillet, rowler, or broade garter.

Legáccio, as Legáccia.

Legácciolo, as Legáccia.

Legággio, any kind of binding or swathing. Also a bond, an obligation, a bill, a scedule, or recognison or note in writing that tyeth and bindeth to any condition. Also a bundle, a packet, a fardle or trusse of any bound vp together. Also the hire the Porters haue for binding or packing vp of packs of marchandize. Also the note, ticket or bill that marchants giue of their goods in the Custome-house.

Legále, of, belonging or according to law, lawfull, good in law, triable by law.

Legalità, legalitie, lawfulnesse.

Legáme, as Legaménto.

Legaménto, a binding, any thing that bindeth, any kind of ligament. Also the ligatures, filaments, or strings of the bodie wherwith the ioints of bones and the gristles, are compact and bound together, so that by euery violent motion they can not be loosed one from another: they are a white substance hard and void of sence. Also as Legatióne.

Legáre, to bind, to league, to combine, to tye or fasten together. Also to solder or vnite mettall. Also to set or enchase any precious stone in a ring or iewell. Also to binde, to tye, or nicke a cast at dice. Also to agrize or set ones teeth on edge. Also to leaue or bequeath any legacie by will or testament, also to goe to lawe. Looke also Legatióne.

Legar' idádi, to tye, or nicke a cast at dice. 

Legár'i denti, to set ones teeth on edge.

Legáre vn'huómo, to bind or so charme a man that he can not vse a woman.

Legársi, for a man to combine, binde, or tye himselfe, or enter into any league.

Legatário, a legacier, an ouerseer of Legacies.

Legatelli, certaine little wedges to fasten pieces in their cariages, withes, bindings.

Legatía, a legacie or bequeathing left by will and testament.

Legatióne, a legacie. Also an embassage by a legate. Also a substitution or deputation. Also a binding or combination. Also a kind of charming or enchanting of a mans pricke that it cannot stand, nor can a man haue the vse of a woman, a practise much vsed in France.

Legáto, bound, fastned, tyed, combined. Also soldered or vnited together. Also left or bequeathed by will and testament as a legacie, left by will, and good in law. Also nicke and tide at dice. Also set or enchased as a precious stone in a ring or iewell. Also agrized, or set ones teeth on edge

Legáto, a Legate, a Delegate, an Embassador, a Substitute, or Deputie, namely from the Pope.

Legatóre, a binder.

Legatóre dipálle, a binder of Marchants packs.

Legatório, of or pertaining to legacies.

Legatura, as Legaménto, as Legatióne.

Legge, the law. Also a rule and ordinance, a decree or statute enacted and made to be kept inuiolably.

Legge agrária trà Románi., 

Leggenda, a legend, a writing to be read, a booke containing the life and manners of holie men.

Leggendário, a legendarie. Also of or belonging vnto legends.

Leggere, leggo, lessi, letto, to reade or pronounce what is written.

Leggerézza, as Leggierézza.

Léggia, fleshie, braunte, tough, fast.

Leggiadraménte, gallantly, beautifully, finely, comely, graciously, seemely, handsomely.

Leggiadría, beautie, gallantnesse, graciousnesse, comelinesse, finenesse, seemelinesse, handsomnesse, ornament, goodlinesse.

Leggiádro, gallant, faire, beauteous, bonnie, fine, gracious, comely.

Leggíbile, legible, that may be read.

Leggierézza, lightnesse. Also nimblenesse, and swiftnesse. Also inconstancie, ficklenesse, and mutabilitie.

Leggieri, Leggiere, as Leggiero.

Leggiero, light. Also easie, nimble, swift, fleete. Also fickle in minde.

Leggio, a deske standing in a Church.

Leggislatóre, a law-giuer or maker.

Leggísta, a Lawyer, a professor of law.

Leggitóre, a reader.

Léghe, the plurall of Léga.

Legionário, of or pertaining to a legion.

Legióne, a legion or squadron containing as the Romanes were wont to haue them, sixe thousand footemen, and seauen hundred and thirtie horsemen.

Legislatóre, as Leggissatóre.

Legísta, as Leggísta.

Legístra, as Leggísta.

Legistráre, as Registráre.

Legístro, vsed for Regístro.

Legitimánza, as Legitimatióne.

Legitimáre, to legittimate, or make lawfull and good in law.

Legitimatióne, a legittimation.

Legítimo, legittime, right borne, truly begotten, lawfull, good, or right in law.

Légna, any kind of fewell, or fine wood.

Legnággio, a linnage, a pedigree, a kinred, a blood, a stocke, a generation.

Legnamáro, a timber-man or seller, a woodmonger.

Legnáme, all kind of timber for building, or wood to frame any thing of.

Legnáro, a woodmonger, a dealer in timber or wood. Also a Carpenter. Vsed also for a Ioyner.

Legnaruólo, as Legnáro.

Legnáta, a blow giuen with any cudgell or piece of wood.

Legnáto, any pile or heape of wood or timber. Also a frame of wood. Also woodded or wanescotted.

Legnétto, a little piece of wood. Also a little bote or whirrie.

Legnífero, wood-hearing, or bringing.

Legníno, the taste or smell of the caske of any vessell.

Légno, any kind of wood. Also any kind of Ship or Barke. Also a kind of musicall instrument. Also taken for the wood Guaiaco.

Légno d'A'quila, a kind of sweet wood vsed for incense.

Legnóso, wooddie, or full of wood, or of the qualitie of wood.

Legóro, a hawkes lure. Also as Lugaríno.

Legraménto, a kinde of blacking that Coblers vse to blacke leather with.

Legumáro, one that sels all manner of pulse, as beanes, or peason.

Legúme, any kind of pulse, as beanes, peason, &c.

Legumóso, full of pulse, pulse-bearing.

Léguro, an Eft, an Eute, a Lizard. Also as Lugaríno.

Legústro, as Ligústro.



Lei, a pronoune primitiue of the singular number, of the feminine gender, of the nominatiue case, she, her selfe.

Lella, the hearbe Elicampane.

Lelláre, as Nicchiáre.

Léma, an humor congealed within the eye-sight, matter like sniuell in sore eyes. Also thicke milke or creame.

Le máni a cíntola., looke Stáre.

Lemargía, gluttonie, friandise.

Lemárgo, a glutton, a friand.

Lemba, a kind of flat bottomed ship.

Lembáre, vide Lembo.

Lembáta d'óglio, a great staine of oyle vpon ones clothes like a waue.

Lembíre, bísco, bíto, to cut or teare in pieces. Also to licke or lap. Also to touch very softly.

Lembo, the skirt of any garment. Also a purfle, a welt, a lace, a border, or garding about or vpon any long garment.

Le mi diè, he or she gaue them me.

Lémma, an argument, a reason.

Lemoncello, as Limoncíno.

Lemóne, a Lymon fruit or tree.

Lemoníno, a little Lymon. Also a Lymon-colour.

Lemóri, as Lemúri.

Lemósina, as Elemósina.

Lemosináre, as Elemosináre.

Lemosinário, as Elemosinário.

Lemosiniere, as Elemosináro.

Lempárdo, as Leopárdo.

Lemúri, the ghostes or spirits of such as dye before their time, hobgoblins, black-bugs, or night-walking spirits.

Léna, breath, winde, or naturall breathing. Also naturall strength, wind, spirit or vigor to hold out any labour of bodie. Also Helena, as we say Hel. Also vsed for a bawde or pander.

Lenáre, to leane towards.

Léndene, as Léndini, &c.

Lendináre, to nit, to chit.

Léndini, nits before they be lice, chits.

Lendinóso, nittie. Also louzie, chittre.

Lenesíno, the sweete bread of veale.

Léngua, as Língua, &c.

Lenguággio, as Linguággio.

Lenguáttola, the Sole-fish.

Lenguella, Lenguétta, as Linguella.

Lenióso, one troubled with the hardnesse or swelling of the spleane.

Lenísce, a lancet to let blood with.

Lenità, lenity, meekenesse, gentlnesse.

Lenitíuo, lenity, appeasing, asswageing.

Lénnia, a kinde of swageing medicament.

Léno, milde, gentle, meeke. Also as Lénto, slow. Also leaning towards.

Lenocínio, bawdry, letchery. Also blandishment or inticement.

Lenocinióso, bawdy and letcherous. 

Lenóne, a bawd or pander that bringeth men and whores together.

Lenonía, bawdery, letchery.

Lenósa, a kind of lenitiue plaister for a horse.

Lensa, as Lénza.

Lentáccio, a filthy sluggard or loyterer.

Lentáre, to slacke, to relent, to slow. Also to linger, to loyter, to draggle.

Lente, Fan-lentill or Duckes meat. Also a Lendine.

Lentécchia, as Lente.

Lentézza, slownesse, lingering, slackenesse.

Lenthía, lasciándo le lenthíe quándo l'artegliería sarà alzáto.

Lentícchia, as Lente.

Lenticoláre sigúra, a kind of geometricall figure.

Lenticolária, as Lente.

Lentícula, Lentill-seede or Duckesmeat.

Lenti di palúdi, Fen-lentill. Duckesweed.

Lentígini, Sauce-fleames, speckes, pimples or freckles in the face red and wan like lentils.

Lentiginóso, saucefleamed, speckled, pimpled or full of speckles or freckles.

Lentíma, a kinde of fine sackcloth or canuase vsed in doublets.

Lentísco, Prick-wood or Foule-rice, some call it Lentiske or Mastike-tree.

Lento, slow, slacke, lazie, lingring.

Lento-lento, very slowly, faire and softly.

Lenza, fine linnen cloth, as Lawne or Cambricke. Also a longing to laugh when one dares not, but stops his breath to keepe it in. Also a small or fine hand-net to catch fish with. Also a fine or broad linnen-swathe bundle or rowler sometimes worne about the head. Also a scarfe.

Lenzáre, to swathe or binde about with a scarfe or rowler-cloth.

Lenzuolétto, any little sheet.

Lenzuólo, a sheet for a bed.

Lenzuólo di rénza, a fine Lawnesheet.

Leocórno, as Liocórno.

Leocrocúta, as Crocúta.

Leofánte, an Elephant.

Leóna, a Lionesse, a shee Lyon.

Leonáto, a Lyon, or tan-colour.

Leoncello, a Lyons whelpe.

Leoncíno, a Lyons whelpe.

Leóne, a Lyon. Also a riuer Lobster or Creuise of a yellow colour.

Leoneggiáre, to play or imitate the Lyon, to roare and be furious as a Lyon.

Leonésco, of a Lyons nature, Lyonish.

Leonéssa, a she-lyon, a Lyonesse.

Leonfánte, an Elephant. 

Leonfáto, made or coloured as a Lyon.

Léon maríno, a certaine starre or signe in Heauen.

Leonína, an hearbe whose floure is like a Lyons mouth when he gapeth.

Leoníno, borne vnder Leo, or of the nature of a Lyon, Lyon-coloured.

Leonpárdo, as Leopárdo.

Leontíce, the wilde Caraway.

Leóntio, a stone of the colour of a Lyons skin and therefore so named.

Leontófano, a little worme breeding where Lyons goe, which if a Lyon chance to eat he dieth, for he is very venemous, and called the Lyonsbane.

Leontopetalóne, the hearbe Lyons-foot or pawe. Also Patte de Lion.

Leontopódio, as Leontopetalóne.

Leónza, a Lyonesse, a shee Lyon.

Leónza gattésca, an Ounce or Cat of the mountaine.

Leopárdo, a Leopard. Also a certaine starre or signe in Heauen.

Lepe, the wombe, the belly or panch of a man.

Lepida, thin scales of brasse vsed in Physicke.

Lepídio, the hearbe Passerage, Dittander or Pepper-wort.

Lepidità, a stone of diuers colours like scales of fishes.

Lepido, pleasant, blith, cheerefull, gamesome, neate and pretty.

Lepidóre, as Lepidità.

Le più vólte, the most times.

Lepo or Móle, a kind of stone fish.

Leporáccio, as Lepídia.

Leporário, a kind of rauenous Kite. Also a Hares forme where she doth squat or sit.

Lépore, a bucke of a Hare.

Lepóre, pleasantnesse and grace of speech Also comelinesse and pleasant grace.

Leporína, a Leuret or yongue Hare. Also as Lepídio.

Leporíni, a kinde of disease in the eyebrowes of a man.

Leporíno, a Leuret, a yongue Hare.

Leppo, as Líppo.

Lepra, a Doe-hare.

Leprátti, Leurets, yongue Hares.

Lepre, a Buck-hare. Also the name of a starre in Heauen.

Lepreggiáre, to play the Hare.

Lepre marína, a venemous fish called the Sea-hare, which as he is poison to man, so is man poison to it.

Lepréro, a Harvier, a Gray-hound.

Leprettíno, a Leuret, a yongue Hare.

Leprétta, a Leuret, a yongue Hare.

Leprosíta, the Leper or Leprosie.

Lepróso, Leprous, Lepery.

Leprótto, a yongue Hare, a Leurer.

Lepto, a Greeke minute weight. 



Lepto centáuro, the little Centaury.

Leptóne, the hearbe Centaury.

Leptophilóne, a kind of Tithimale.

Leptorága, a kind of Vine or Grape.

Lepúsculo, a Leuret, a yongue Hare.

Lequila, a bird called a Siskin.

Ler., looke Críp.

Lerce, as Lerze.

Lerciáre, to foule, to spot, to defile.

Lercio, foule, defiled, spotted, tainted, beraied, beshitten.

Lerco, a glutton, an epicure, a gourmand.

Lercola, as Lergola.

Lergola, a bird called a Bunting.

Lerlichiróllo, a Merle or blacke Marle bird.

Lerna, a Water-snake or Serpent.

Lerzáre, to beat and leaue the markes of the beating blacke and blew.

Lerze, the blacke or blew wales or markes of a blow or stripe, some haue taken this word to signifie legges or shankes.

Lesa-maestà, treason or offence against the publike state or Kings maiestie.

Lesbia, a precious stone found in Lesbos.

Lescia, as Láscia. Also as Líscia.

Lesciáre, as Lisciáre.

Leségno, a bale of flaxe.

Lésina, a Shooe-makers awle, or thrids end. Also taken for good husbandry or thrift, for miserable sparing and pinching.

Lesinággine, as Lesinería.

Lesinánte, a miserable pinch-pennie, a niggardly chuffe, a thriuing good husband.

Lesináre, as Lesineggiáre.

Lesineggiáre, to play the niggardly pinch-pennie, the miserable chuffe, or scraping thriuer.

Lesinésco, niggardly, thristie, pinching, scraping for worldly pelfe.

Lesiniéro, a pinch-pennie, a sparing wretch, a scrape-goods, a miserable chuffe.

Lesióne, offence, treason. Also hurt, losse, domage, anoyance, hinderance.

Léso, hurt, wronged, offended, iniured, domaged, wounded, violated.

Lessáre, to boile or seeth meate.

Lessico, as Lessicóne.

Lessicóne, a Dictionarie of words.

Lessipíride, a medicine to driue away aged fits.

Lésso, boiled, all manner of boiled meats.

Lesto, nimble, quickt, slie, quick-sighted, full of agilitie, liuely, wimble and wight.

Lestraría. 

Lestrigóne. 

Letále, as Lethále.

Letamáio, a muck-heape, a dung-hill. Also a mucker or dunger, or scauinger. 

Letamáre, to mucke, to dung or marle.

Letame, all manner of mucke, dung or marle.

Letamináre, as Letamáre.

Letaminatúra, any kind of mucking.

Letána, as Letanía.

Letanía, a Letanie sung in Churches, a publicke praier, or generall supplication.

Letáne, as Letanía.

Letanizzáre, to say or sing Letanies.

Letargía, a Letargie or drousie euill, which is a disease contrarie to frantikenesse, wherein is leanenesse and a necessitie of sleeping in a manner not to be resisted, whereby memorie and reason almost perisheth, and the power sensitiue is greatly annoyed.

Letárgico, drouzie, dull, heauie, sleeping, sicke of the drouzie euill.

Letárgio, as Letargía.

Letárgo, as Letargía.

Lethále, deadly, obliuious, pestilent.

Lethargía, as Letargía.

Lethárgico, as Letárgico.

Lethárgio, as Letárgio.

Lethargírio, as Letárgio.

Lethárgo, as Letargía.

Lethe, obliuion, mortalitie, pestilence.

Letíe, as Lezíe.

Letítia, gladnesse, ioy, mirth, or reioycing of the minde.

Letitiáre, to glad, to reioyce, or make merrie.

Letificáre, as Letitiáre.

Letificatióne, as Letítia.

Letregáni, a kind of fish.

Letróso, froward, akeward, wayward.

Letta, a Mullet-fish. Also beds.

Lettáccio, a filthy couch or bed.

Letteggiáre, to lye long or much a bed.

Lettera, a letter, a caracter. Also an epistle, a letter, a missiue or any writing. Also literature or learning.

Lettera di cámbio, a bill of Exchange.

Lettera di procúra, a letter of Aturney.

Lettera di credenza, a letter of credence, of trust, of fauour or of credit.

Letterággine, as Letteratúra.

Letterále, literall, according to learning.

Letteralménte, literally.

Letteráre, to endoctrine or literate.

Letteráto, learned, literated, endoctrined.

Letteratúccio, a meane Schollar.

Letteratúra, learning, lore, literature.

Lettere di scátola, plaine great letters as in Apothecaries shops are vpon their boxes.

Letterescaménte, according to learning.

Letterína, a little letter or writing.

Letterétta, as Letterína.

Letteroni, great, or text letters.

Letteróso, full of letters or learning. 

Letterúzza, a foolish or fond letter.

Lettíca, a litter, a horse-litter.

Letticáio, a litter-man, or maker of litters.

Letticello, as Letticiuólo.

Letticciuólo, a little bed or couch.

Lettíga, as Lettíca.

Lettióne, a lesson, a lecture, a reading. Vsed also for Ellettióne.

Lettiéra, any kind of couch or bedstead.

Lettipedi, feete or pillers or columnes that beare vp any frame as bed-postes. Also an hearbe like Serpillo.

Lettisphágine, a kind of wine anciently vsed in Greece, but now out of vse.

Lettisternij, certaine beds laid along in Temples among the Romanes at the celebration of bankets.

Letto, any kind of bed or couch. Also the bottome, the bed or channell of any Riuer. Also the lower part or groundworke of any frame, worke or engine.

Letto, the Participle of Leggere, read.

Letto da giardíno, a square or bed in a Garden.

Lettoário, as Elettuário.

Lettóre, a Reader, a Lecturer, a Lector. Vsed also for Ellettóre.

Lettúccio, a sillie poore bed or couch.

Lettúra, a lecture, a reading, a lesson.

Leua, as Lieua.

Leuacúlo, itch-buttocke, leue le cull.

Leuáme, leauen for bread. Also ease, comfort, raising from sorrow.

Leuaménto, leauen for bread. Also any raising or rearing vp. Also a remoouing or taking away.

Leuánte, any country lying East. Also the Sunne-rise. Also the Easterne-winde. Also a lim-lifter, an vp-taker, a bold pilfrer, one that hath learn't his taking vp.

Leuantiere, an Easterly-winde. Also one dwelling in the East.

Leuantíno, an Easterling, one borne or dwelling in the East. Also as Leuánte, a bold vp-taker.

Leua-mácchie, one that takes out spots. Also a stealer of clothes from of hedges or fields.

Leuáre, to raise, to aduance, to leauie, to heaue, to hoist or lift vp, to set vp, to eleuate. Also to take or set away, to remooue. Also to draw a draw-bridge. Also to leauen bread. Also to bring a woman a bed or deliuer her of child. Also to ease, to lighten, to abate from, to asswage, to vnburthen, to ease, to make easie or light.

Leuár'il náso, to lift vp ones nose, that is to take pepper in the nose.

Leuár'il capello, to put of ones hat.

Leuár'il páne, to leauen bread.

Leuár'in cápo, to lift vpon ones head, that is to raise or aduance on high. 



Leuár la berétta, to put off ones cap.

Leuár le cárte, to cut or lift the cardes.

Leuár li pánni della scéna, a Prouerbe, that is to manifest or make apparant the secret of any matter.

Leuársi, to rise or stand vp on ones feet. Also to depart away.

Leuáta, a leauy, a raysing, a heauing, a rising or rearing. Also a remoouing or taking away. Also a woman deliuered, brought a bed, and risen. Also the vp-sitting, or vp-rising of a woman after she hath laine in. Also the name of a march vpon a Drumme and Trumpet in time of warre. Also a hunt is vp.

Leuáta, a man of small worth, scarce worth the takeing vp.

Leuatelli, a kinde of dainty chewets or little pies.

Leuáto, leuied, raised, aduanced, set vp, hoisted, eleuated, risen. Also remooued or taken away. Also leauen for bread, or leauened. Also made easie or light.

Leuatóia, that may be raised or lifted vp. Also a draw-bridge or trapbridge. Also any kind of leauer.

Leuatóre, a raiser, a lifter, a leauer.

Leuatríccia pórta, a gate with a Percullis.

Leuatríce, a Mid-wife, a womans keeper.

Leuatúra, as Leuáta, as Leuaménto.

Leuatúro, leauen for bread.

Leuca, a measure of ground contayning fifty paces. Also a kind of hearbe.

Leucacántha, the White or Saint Maries Thistle.

Leucacáthe, a kind of whitish Agate stone.

Leucádio, a kind of wine of Leucádie.

Leucanthámide, the hearbe Camomill.

Leucanthéme, Camomill.

Leucántho, Mother-wort, some take it for Feuerfew.

Leucargílla, all manner of white clay.

Leucathéme, Camomill.

Leucéno, a kind of white strong Radish-roote.

Leucereóne, Lyons-pawe, Pied de Lion.

Leuci, the White-poplar-tree. Also an  hearbe like Mercury. Also certaine birdes that haue but one eye. Also a foule spottinesse ouer the body like morphew. Also a kind of measure among the Grecians.

Leucísco, the Mugle or Lamp-fish, some take it for a fresh-water Mullet.

Leucochríso, a kinde of Iacinth stone with white veines.

Leucóchro, a kind of wine.

Leucocóne, a Criell or Dwarf-hearon. 

Leucocúta, a great wild beast, very swift in running, that hath all his teeth of one piece, it is as bigge as an Asse, with necke, breast and taile like a Lyon, headed like a Camell, some write like a Badger, it is clouen-footed, and doth much counterfet the voice of man.

Leucocrúta, as Leucocúta.

Leucogagea, as Galátide.

Leucogeo, white earth, or soile.

Leucografía, as Galatide.

Leucoióne, the stock-Gilloflowre. Also a kind of white Vitrioll.

Leucóma, a web in a mans eye.

Leucopétalo, a kind of white stone, yeelding a lustre of gold.

Leucopetra, as Galátide.

Leucopheo, a white russet colour.

Leucophoróne, a kind of glue or size vsed in guilding of wood.

Leucopígo, Capitáno del cúlo biánco.

Leucoplemmántia, a kinde of dropsie rising of fleagme in all parts of the bodie, which makes all the bodie to swell.

Leucrocúta, as Leucocúta.

Leuce, as Leggiero.

Leuero, a Carpenters leauer.

Leuertígi, hops to brue beere with all.

Leuiatúra, an arrogating, or heaping sinne vpon sinne.

Leuifido, light of faith.

Leuipede, light-footed.

Leuisíni, some take them for the burres or sweet-bread of a Calfe.

Leuisónno, vigilant, soone awake.

Leuístico, a Priuet-bush. Also Alisanders, or Louage.

Leuità, leuitie, lightnesse. Also inconstancie. Also smoothnesse or polishing.

Leuitáre, to make or become light, or inconstant. Also to smooth or polish. Also to leauen bread.

Leuitístico, an hearbe growing in Fens.

Leuito, leauen for bread.

Leure, any kind of hare.

Leuriera, a bitch-harier, a hunt-hare.

Leuriero, a dog-harier, a hunt-hare.

Leuri, certaine hand-barrowes vsed to carie corne with.

Leurocúta, as Leucocúta.

Leusóne, a kind of Pitch of Firre tree.

Leúto, any kind of Lute.

Lezíe, any childish or wanton behauiours.

Lezza, a stinking puddle, or dead standing water. Also a sinnefull life.

Lezzáre, to stinke filthily or rammishly. Also to liue sinnefully and beastly.

Lezzo, a rammish, goatish, sweatish, filthie, or letcherous carion stinke. Also a sinnefull, beastly, stincking life.

Lezzóso, foulie, stinking of goates, of sweate, of rammishnesse, rammish, goatish. Also giuen to all riotous beastlinesse, or filthie pollution.

Li, an Article of the Masculine gender, of the Plurall number, of the Nominatiue and Accusatiue case, the.

Li, being ioyned vnto verbes, it is a Pronoune primitiue or deriuatiue of the Plurall number, of the Accusatiue case, them.

Li, with a verbe is sometimes a Pronoune deriuatiue of the singular number and Datiue case, to him. Io li diédi, I gaue him. It may also be of the Ablatiue case being with verbes of Priuation, as Io li tólsi, I tooke from him.

Lì, an Aduerbe of place, there, in that place.

Liánza, alliance by mariage. Also kindred.

Liárdo, a lyard or dapple-gray dappled with red spots or flea-bitings.

Liárdo argénto, a white Lyard like siluer.

Liárdo pomáto, a dapple-gray.

Liaárdo rotáto, a dapple-grizell-gray.

Liáre, to ally by mariage.

Liático, a kind of wine so called.

Libádio, the lesse Centaury.

Libadióne, the greater Centaury.

Libáme, as Libaménto.

Libaménto, whatsoeuer was tasted and offered by the Priests in old Sacrifices.

Libamína, any kind of perfume mixed with Frankincense.

Libánico, made of Frankincense.

Líbano, the Frankincense-tree. Also a kind of wine whose grape smelleth of Incense.

Libanóchro, a stone yeelding a moisture like hony.

Libanótide, Rosemary. Also the Southern wind.

Libanóto, as Libanótide.

Libáre, to taste or assay with the tip of ones lips or tongue. Also to sacrifice.

Libárda, as Alabárda.

Libardiere, as Alabardiere.

Libatióne, a tasting in offrings or sacrifice, as Libaménto.

Libáto, tasted, or offred in Sacrifice.

Libatório, of or belonging to tastings, to assayes, or sacrifices.

Líbbra, as Líbra, &c.

Libéccio, the South-west winde.

Libella, a coine that waighed the tenth part of a pound of siluer in Rome.

Libelláre, to write libels, to libell.

Libellatóre, a libeller, a maker of libels.

Libello, a little or manuall booke, a libell, a pasquine, or defaming writ. Also a declaration of a mans plea or processe. Also a iudiciarie demaund or petition giuen; in writing to a iudge. 



Libente, willingly, with a good will.

Libenza, pleasure, willingnesse.

Liberaláccio, franke and prodigall.

Liberále, liberall, franke, bountifull, free in giuing or larges.

Liberalità, liberalitie, bountie, franknesse.

Liberalóna, alla liberalóna, after the plaine and free-hearted fashion.

Liberándo, to be freed.

Liberáre, to deliuer, to free, to enfranchise, to quit, to release, to rid out from, to disoblige.

Liberatióne, a deliuerie, a setting free.

Liberatóre, a freer, an enfranchiser.

Líbero, free, at libertie, quit, discharged, not bound and yet seruing for wages.

Libertà, freedome, libertie, free-choise.

Libertíno, a libertine, a free-man, one that is manumissed, or borne of one that was once bound and is now free.

Liberto, a freed-man, one that of a bond-man is made a free-man.

Libidináre, to commit all manner of lust, luxurie, incontinencie or sensualitie.

Líbico, a kind of wilde Sperage.

Libicócco, the name of a Diuell faigned by Dante signifying burning or beastly lust.

Libidine, all manner of lust, luxurie, sensualitie, concupiscence, burning lust or vnlawfull appetite.

Libidinóso, luxurious, sensuall, incontinent, fleshly, burning in wanton lust.

Líbito, selfe-will, pleasure, will.

Líbo, the South-west winde.

Líbra, a pound waight. Also one of the twelue signes in the Zodiake.

Librále, of or belonging to a pound waight.

Libráre, to poise, to weigh by pounds. Also to houer or sore in the ayre.

Libraría, a Librarie.

Libráro, a Stationer, a Booke-seller.

Librea, any kind of liuerie.

Libreáre, to liuerie.

Librería, a Librarie.

Librétto, a little booke.

Libricciuólo, a little booke.

Libríno, borne vnder the signe Libra.

Libripendi, such as in Rome weighed money and were pay-masters.

Líbro, any kind of booke.

Libro-maéstro, a chiefe booke of accompts or of a shop.

Libróne, any kind of great booke.

Líbso, the South-west winde.

Librúccio, any poore scuruie booke.

Libúrna, as Libúrnica.

Libúrnica, a kinde of light and swift Foiste or Pinnace that Pirates were wont to haue. 

Lica, the span from the thumbs end to the sore-fingers end stretched out.

Licáno, the fore-finger-string.

Licantrophía, a kinde of madnesse or frenzie, which makes those that haue it to forsake the companie of men, and hide themselues in caues and holes, howling like Wolfs.

Licántrofo, one troubled with Licantrophia.

Licaóne, a kind of Wolfe shaggie about the necke, & of all colours in the rainebowe.

Lícce, vsed for Líste.

Liccétte, a sliding knot.

Licchétto, liquorishnesse. Also a liquorish fellow. Also a bait for fish. Also an allurement.

Licchétto del mele, a bonie-combe. Also a bonnie-pot.

Lícci, as Lici.

Líccia, as Lísta, any list.

Licciatúra, the ends or thrids of a web.

Líce, it is lawfull, conuenient, or permitted and allowed.

Licentia, licence, leaue, sufferance, permission. Also boldnesse, licenciousnesse, vnrulinesse.

Licentiáre, to licence, to giue licence, to permit or giue leaue vnto.

Licentiáto, licenced, permitted, giuen leaue vnto. Also a licentiate in any science, as we say, a batcheler of diuinitie or law, one permitted to practise.

Licentiosaménte, licenciously.

Licentiosétta, somewhat licencious.

Licentiosità, licenciousnesse.

Licentióso, licencious, as Libidinóso.

Lícere, lício, licéi, liciúto, to be or make lawfull.

Liceriáne, a kind of Peares.

Lichéna, the hearbe Liuerwort. Also a kind of skinnie gum.

Lichéne, rugged warts called Malanders, or any rigwormes, running scabs, or tetters.

Lichínco, a kinde of sparkling stones, which rubbed, drawes sticks vnto it.

Lichnee, as Lichéne. Also a kind of swelling in the chinne.

Lichniágria, Calues-snout, or Muzle.

Líchni, as Lichníte.

Lichníde, as Lichníte.

Lichníte, a precious stone like the blaze of a candle. Also a kinde of Primerose or Cowslip, which if Scorpions eate, they lose their sences. Also taken for the Rosecampion.

Líci, lícci, there or in that place. Also hurds of hemp or flaxe. Also the ends, thrids, or thrum of any seluage, or at the end of any web of cloth.

Licídia, a bird so bright and shining, that in a darke night he is seene a farre off. 

Licíne, a kind of little Oliues but very good.

Licínia, the base or flat Verueine.

Lício, as Licióne.

Licióne, a medicine or composition made of a bitter plant like vnto Priuet, called in English Boxe-thorne, or Thorne-boxe.

Licísco, a dog engendred betweene a Wolfe and a Bitch, a mungrell cur.

Licitaménte, lawfully.

Licitánza, lawfulnesse.

Licitáre, to make lawfull.

Licitézza, lawfulnesse.

Lícito, lawfull.

Líco, a Wolf-spider. Also the name of Bacchus the god of wine.

Licófo, bright day-light, or the first appearing of day-light.

Liconóbio, on that turnes day into night and vseth it instead of day.

Licontopía, as Licanthrophía.

Licópo, the hearbe Motherwort.

Licopódio, the Mosse called Woolfesclaw.

Licopsíde, Orchanet. Also Houndes-tongue.

Licophtálmo, a stone of foure colours resembling the eye of a Wolfe.

Licóre, any kind of liquor or moistnesse.

Licórno, as Lioncórno or Monoceróte.

Licoróso, full of liquor.

Licostáphilo, Water-elder, or Dwarf-plaine-tree.

Licostómo, a kind of Long-fish.

Licotóno, a kind of poyson that Hunters kill Wolues with, wolues-bane.

Licuíde, an hearbe bearing a faire flowre.

Lídio, a Touch-stone to trie Gold. Also a kinde of mournefull solemne musike.

Lído, a banke, side, shore, coast or strond of the sea or any riuer.

Lidúna, the ebbing of the Sea.

Líe, lì, là, there, in that place.

Liéne, the milt or spleene.

Liénico, sicke in the spleene.

Lientería, a flux of the stomacke which can keepe nothing but presently voydeth the same vndigested.

Lienterico, on sicke of Lientería.

Liéntro, there in, there within.

Liepráro, a Harier or Gray-hound.

Liepre, a Hare, a Leuret.

Liésina, as Lésina, &c.

Lietíssimo, most glad and ioyfull.

Lieto, glad, blith, merry, ioyfull, ioyous, frolike, cheereful. Also fortunate.

Lieua, a leauer or iron crow to lift any thing. Also a racke, a bender or a gaffell to bend a crosse-bow with. Vsed also for worth, authority or sufficiency. 



Lieua lieua, away away, begone, trudge. Also triflingly or slightly.

Lieuáme, as Leuáme.

Lieuáre, as Leuáre.

Lieuáta, as Leuáta.

Lieuáto, as Leuáto.

Lieuatóio, as Leuatóio.

Lieuatóre, as Leuatóre.

Lieuatríce, as Leuatríce.

Lieuatúra, as Leuatúra.

Lieue, light. Also mutable, vaine, or brainelesse. Also slippery. Also wanton or effeminate. Also smooth and polished.

Lieueménte, lightly, easily.

Lieuéro, as Leuáme. Also as Lieua.

Lieuézza, as Leggierézza.

Lieuitáre, to leauen-bread.

Lieuito, leauen for bread.

Lieuo, as Lieua.

Lifiási, a disease about a mans eyes.

Líga, as Léga.

Ligáccio, as Legáccio.

Ligáme, as Legáme.

Ligaménto, as Legaménto.

Ligáre, as Legáre.

Ligatelli, as Legatelli.

Lígatióne, a bending.

Ligáto, as Legáto.

Ligatóre, as Legatóre.

Ligatúra, as Legatúra.

Ligidíno, a kind of Marble-stone so soft that there with they make boxes.

Lígio, a Liege-man or bounden vassall, a subiect that oweth fealty.

Lígio-homággio, a bond of homage or vassalage: quasi ligamon hominum vel humanum.

Ligístra, as Leggísta.

Ligístro, a Regester.

Ligistráre, to register.

Lignággio, as Legnággio.

Lignaiuólo, as Legnaiuólo.

Lignáme, as Legnáme.

Ligneità, woodinesse, quality of wood.

Ligneo, of wood, or of the nature of wood.

Ligníte, a precious stone of a glasse-colour.

Lignóla, a marke-line or streeke with red Oker or chalke.

Lignoláre, to marke or strike with a line chalked with red Oker, as Carpenters doe their timber.

Ligóne, the Chast-withy or Willow.

Ligorítia, the Lycorice-wood.

Lígula, a measure in Greece of three drams and a scruple. Also any binding or fillet, lace, swath, or garter. Also a shooe-latchet. Also a lingell, a tenon, or little tongue. Also a little slice, spoone, skimmer or ladle that Apothecaries vse.

Liguriáre, to eat greedily, to gourmandise. 

Liguríno, a Canary-bird.

Ligurióne, a gourmand, a greedy deuourer.

Ligúrioso, a precious stone that stancheth the bloudy-flix, and draweth strawes.

Ligúro, an Eft, an Eute, an Aske, a Lizard.

Ligústa, a kind of fish.

Ligústico, Lombardy Loueach or Leuish.

Ligústro, the priuet or prime-print vsed in gardins for hedges. Also a kind of White-flowre.

Lílij, certaine fretted or imagery workes ouer pillars or columnes. Also Lillies.

Líma, any kind of file to file withall.

Limáca, as Lumáca

Limáccia, a snaile without a shell.

Limaccióso, muddy, miry, boggy, slymie.

Límalíma, euerfiling, neuer idle, alwaies hammering as we say.

Limáre, to file. Also to fret or gnaw. Also to correct or polish ouer.

Limária, a Tuny-fish.

Limáro, a filer or maker of files.

Límasórda, a deafe file, the noise wherof cannot be heard, theefes and picklockes vse them. Also a slie, lurking and insinuating fellow.

Limáto, filed. Also polished or corrected.

Limatóne, a great file.

Limatóre, a filer.

Limatúra, filing, or file-dust.

Limbello., looke Cauáre fuóri il limbello.

Limbellétto, a Carpenters toole.

Limbico, a Limbecke or Stillatory.

Límo, a certaine rich robe that Dukes were wont to were. Also vsed for Lémbo. Also as some consture it, a place where holy fathers expected the comming of Christ.

Limbríci, roofe-files.

Limbúto, a kinde of instrument so called.

Limea, an hearbe wherewith hunters poyson arrowes, called Stagge-poison.

Límfe, fresh siluer-streaming springs.

Limiei, mine, such as be mine.

Limiero, a Lime-hound, a Bloudhound.

Liminále, the haunse, trestle or first step of a dore. Also a frontire or first entry. Also a beam a trauerse or transome laid ouer a doore. Also a mantle of a chimny. Also a limite, a bound, a marke or meare-stone diuiding lands, a stint, a prescription, a land-marke, a butting in fields.

Limíno, as Liminále.

Límio, a kind of hearbe.

Limíro, a kind of Sea-fish. 

Limitábile, that may be limited.

Limitále, as Limínale.

Limitánza, as Limitatióne.

Limitáre, to limite, to bound, to stint. Also as Liminále.

Limitário, as Liminále.

Limitaménte, within compasse or limites.

Limitatióne, a limitation, a bound, a stint.

Límite, as Límito.

Límito, a limite, a bound, as Liminále.

Límo, mud, mire, puddle, slime in water.

Limocchióso, muddie, durtie, boggie.

Limonaro, a Lemmon hort-yard.

Limoncello, a little Lemmon.

Limoncíno, a little Lemmon.

Limóne, a Lemmon fruit or tree.

Limonea, a sauce made of Lemmons.

Limónia, the hearbe Antemone. Also the Winde-flower or Passe-flower. Also a kind of Artichocks.

Limoniáto, a Smaragdus stone.

Limoníno, a litle Lemmon, or Lemmon-colour.

Limónio, wilde Beetes or Winter-greene.

Limósa, a kind of Mud or Moore-hen.

Limósina, as Elemósina.

Limosináre, to giue almes. Also to beg almes, or goe a begging, or liue by almes.

Limosináro, an Almoner or almes-giuer.

Limosiniere, an Almoner or almes-giuer.

Limóso, muddie, mirie, slimie, boggie. Also as Palamite.

Limpiáre, as Limpidáre.

Limpidáre, to make or shew as cleare as the clearest water.

Limpidézza, through-shining-clearenesse namely of water.

Limpidíre, dísco, díto, as Limpidáre.

Límpido, through-shining, cleare.

Limpitúdine, as Limpidézza.

Limula, a litle file.

Lináccio, course flaxe or canuase.

Linaiuólo, a Flaxe-man or dresser.

Linaménto, linnen. Also lint for tents or sores.

L'inánzi, the time to come.

Linaloè, the bitter Aloes-tree.

Linária, Toades-flaxe. Also a Lenetbird or Lack-backer.

Linaruóla, a Flaxe-woman.

Linaruólo, a Flaxe-man or dresser.

Línce, a Los or Linx, which is a beast like a Woolfe full of spots and exceeding quicke of sight, as Lúpo ceruiére. Also a Hickway or Wrynecke.

Línci, thence, from that to this place.

Lincúrio, a stone shining like fire, it is congealed of the vrine or water of a Lizard, and as the Adamant drawes iron, leaues and strawes vnto it. 



Lindézza, neatenesse, finenesse.

Líndo, neate, spruce, fine.

Lindúra, as Lindézza.

Linea, any kinde of line, streake or draught in generall, a Carpenters or Gardners line, a sounding plummet, an angling or fish-line. Among Mathematicians it is a line without breadth or thicknesse. Also a degree or line in bloud or kindred.

Linea álba, the white line, the vmbelicall veine, the line or hollow tying from the nauell.

Lineále, lineall, successiue.

Lineaménti, lineaments, features, proportions or draughts of body or visage. Also lines, streakes or draughts in painting or Geometrie.

Lineaménto., Vsed for marquetry or inlaid worke.

Lineáre, to lineate, to line, to streake in lines the figure of any thing.

Lineatióne, a delineation of any thing.

Lineo, flaxie, or made of flaxe.

Linétta, any kind of little line.

Línfe, siluer-streaming springs.

Línfico, a kind of precious stone.

Língua, a tongue in generall. Also a language or speach. Also the word giuen among souldiers. Also a little spatle or languet to take salues out of a boxe. Also a narrow piece of land or long ridge running into the Sea like a tongue lilling out of the mouth. Also a kind of hearbe good against the falling of the haire called Adderstongue.

Língua bouína, Buglosse, Langue-deboeuf, Oxe-tongue.

Linguáccia, the hearbe Adders-tongue. Also a filthy railing tongue.

Linguáce, as Linguacciúto.

Linguacciáre, to talke lauishly, to raile at one, to speake all one knowes.

Linguacciúto, a long-tongued blab, pratler, tell-tale or railer.

Língua ceruína, Harts-tongue.

Linguacità, vaine babling.

Linguáculo, as Linguacciúto.

Língua d'agnello, Lambes or Sheepesgrasse.

Língua di búe, as Língua bouína.

Língua di cáne, Hounds or Dogs-grasse.

Língua di cauállo, Horse-tongue, Double-tongue or Tongue-blade.

Língua di ceruo, Harts-tongue.

Língua fúrba, the rogues gibbrish or pedlers french.

Linguággio, any tongue or language.

Língua pagána, as Língua di cauállo.

Linguário, an instrument wherewith ones tongue is stopped.

Língua serpentina, Adders tongue.

Linguátta, the Sole-fish.

Linguáttola, the Sole-fish. 

Linguella, as Linguétta.

Linguétta, any kind of languet or little tongue, the little tongue of a paire of ballances, the tongues of a Rauens quils vsed in Virginals. Also as Vgóla.

Linguipotente, powerfull in tongue or speach.

Linguiuelóce, swift-tongued.

Língula, as Linguétta. Also that part of the barre which is put vnder the weight, and sticketh in the roller, the point, end or languet. Also a little tenor that Carpenters vse in ioyning to put into a morteise. Also a sharpe promontorie or hill butting out into the Sea. Also the hearbe called Seggs or Gladen.

Linguláca, the hearbe Adders-tongue or Serpents-tongue. Also vsed for a blab, or scolding woman, one full of words or long-tongued.

Linguóso, full of tongue, euer pratling, euer babling, full of words.

Linguúto, tongued, as Linguóso.

Líni, all manner of linnen clothes. Vsed also for sheetes. Also for sailes.

Liniaménti, as Lineaménti.

Linífero, flaxe-bearing or bringing.

Linígero, as Linífero.

Linimento, that is thicker then oyle and thinner then oyntment.

Linnáte, a surname of Diána.

Linnéte, a surname of Diána.

Líno, line or flaxe. Also linnen. Also any thing that is spunne and is fit to bee wouen. Also as Camelea.

Linósa, a handful or distaffe full of flaxe. Also a staple of flaxe or towe.

Linóso, flaxie, full of flaxe.

Linostrophóne, the hearbe Horehound.

Linozóste, the hearbe Mercurie.

Linteáta legióne, a Legion so called, because the place where it lay was couered with sheetes.

Linterna, as Lanterna.

Linternáro, as Lanternáro.

Linzuólo, any kind of sheete for a bed.

Liocórno, as Lioncórno.

Liofánte, an Elephant.

Liofantíno, a yoong Elephant. Also of the colour or qualitie of an Elephant.

Lióna, Lionéssa, as Leonessa.

Lionáto, as Leonato.

Lioncíno, as Leoncíno.

Lioncórno, an Vnicorne, or his borne.

Lióne, a Lyon, whose necke is of one bone.

Lioneggiáre, as Leoneggiáre.

Lioníno, a little Lyon, a Lyons whelpe.

Lionpárdo, a Leopard.

Lipára, a kind of Oleous plaister vsed in Phisike or vncteous liniment.

Lipáre, a stone that hath the propertie to draw all wilde beastes vnto it. It is very vnctious and yeeldeth a strong perfume.

Lipári, Liperi, a kind of Sea-fish. Also a kind of Lizards.

Lipária, as Lipáre.

Lipíria febbre, an Ague or Feauer very hote within, and outwardly very cold.

Liposichía, a swouning, when one seemeth to be dead.

Líppa, a cat or trap as children play at.

Lippáre, to cry or pule like a Kite.

Lippitúdine, a bleare-eyednes or bloodshot of the eyes. Also rednesse, and running of sore eyes.

Líppo, bleare-eyed, one whose eyes are waterish and runne matter, vsed also for sandblind, purblind, or dimme of sight. Also vile, base, or of no reputation. Also a fish that is poison vnto man, and man vnto him.

Lippoftalmía, an inflammation through sharp humors in the eyes, which makes them almost blinde.

Lipresso, neere there.

Liptóta, a figure, when as the force of words is not answerable to the matter.

Liquábile, any thing that may melt. Also moist or liquide.

Liquáme, any kind of liquor, namely, the fat that runnes from fishes being long kept close together. Also any thing that is moulten or tride, as sewet, or fat.

Liquáre, as Liquefáre.

Liquatióne, any melting.

Liquefáre, fáccio, féci, fátto, to thawe, to melt, to dissolue, to make liquide.

Liquefattióne, a thawe, a melting, a dissoluing, a making liquide.

Liquefátto, thawed, melted, dissolued, made liquide.

Liquerítia, the wood Liquorice.

Líqui d'ámbro, liquid Amber.

Liquidáre, as Liquefáre. Also to lay open any matter, or to make vp an euen reckoning.

Liquidézza, as Liquidità.

Liquidíre, dísco, díto, as Liquidáre.

Líquide, liquids, as L.M.N.R.

Liquidità, moistnesse, waterishnesse, dampishnesse, humorousnesse.

Líquido, liquid, moist, wet, melted, dampish. Also pure, neate, sheere.

Liquirítia, the wood Liquorice.

Liquóre, any kind of liquor.

Líra, an instrument of musike called a Lyra or Harp. Also the Harp-star, or Arcturs star. Also a coine in Florence worth ninepence sterling. Also a pound, or twentie shillings sterling. Also a pound weight or measure about a quarte of ours. Also a crooked furrow. Also a balke, or ridge of land.

Liráre, to play vpon a Lyra. Also to rake or harrow the ground that is 



sowed to hide the seede in it. Also to make ridges.

Liratióne, a raking or harrowing of sowed ground, with a fine toothed harrow.

Lireggiáre, as Liráre.

Lírico, a kind of verse or song made to the Harpe.

Lirinóne, oyle of Lillies.

Lirísta, a player on the Lira.

Liróne, an hearbe like Plantane. Also any kind of great Lira.

Liróso, huómo mólto liróso et pró digo.

Lisáro, a kind of narrow cotton, cloth.

Liscézza, smoothnesse, or softnesse in feeling.

Lísca, lische, the finnes or bones of fishes. Also the course hurds of hemp or flaxe.

Líscia, a Sled or Skid with low wheeles to remooue packs and ordinance.

Liscía, all manner of buck-lye.

Lisciáre, to draw vpon Sleds. Also to wash in lye or in a bucke, to bucke clothes. Also to slip, to glide or slide smoothly as vpon ice. Also to smooth, to sleeke, or to polish. Also to paint as women doe their faces. Also to flatter or cog withall. Also to stroke or claw smoothly and softly.

Lisciaménto, a washing in bucke or lye, a sliding or gliding vpon ice. Also a smoothing, a sleeking or polishing. Also a painting of womens faces. Also flattring, cogging or clawing.

Lisciáto, buckt or washed in lye, glided or slipt vpon ice. Also smooth, smoothed, sleeked or polished. Also painted as women doe their faces. Also clawed and flattred.

Lisciatríce, a woman that painteth either her selfe or others.

Lisciatúra, a smoothing or painting of a face.

Líscio, as Lisciáto. Also any kind of painting for womens faces.

Liscioláre, to slide or glide vpon ice.

Liscíua, any kind of buck-lye.

Lisciuáre, to buck or wash in lye.

Liségna, a handfull or distaffe full of flaxe or hurds. Also a locke or tuft of wooll, haire, or any thing else.

Lisimachía, willow-hearbe, water-willow, or loose-strife, of which if a horse eate, he loseth his courage, and becommeth very faint.

Lísina, as Lésina, &c.

Líssa, a Sled or Skid with low wheeles.

Lissáre, as Lisciáre.

Lissigáre, to slide or glide vpon Ice.

Lissigóso, slipperie, sliding.

Lissimáco, a stone like marble with streakes of gold in it.

Lissiua, buck-lye.

Lísta, a frontlet or scarfe about the fore-head. Also a flat slate-stone. Also properly any kinde of list or seluage. Also a bendlet in armorie. Also a garding or border about any garment Also the listes when tiltings or turneaments are vsed. Also an inuentorie, a check-roule, or catalogue of names. Also a row, a file or ranke of any thing.

Listáre, to list, to seluage, to gard, to border, to welt, or lace about.

Lísta strétta, a cottice, or a bendlet in armorie.

Listello. 

Listóne, a broad garde vpon a garment.

Listóso, full of listes or seluages.

Lístra, as Lísta.

Listráre, as Listáre.

Litamáre, as Letamáre.

Litamáro, as Letamáro.

Litáme, as Letáme.

Litargía, as Letargía, &c.

Litargírio, as Letargírio.

Litárgo, as Litargírio.

Litáre, to please, to appease, to satisfie or obtaine by sacrifice.

Litatióne, an appeasing, and an obtaining by sacrifice.

Líte, strife, contention, variance, controuersie. Also a sute, a plea, or processe in law.

Literále, literall, according to the letter.

Literário, of or pertaining to learning or letters.

Literatúra, learning, literature.

Litergírio, as Letargírio.

Litharíci, such as haue a cramp that causeth the bodie to be stiff and starke.

Lithiási, a little white or hard push or swelling growing vpon the eye-lids. Also the cruell disease of a stone ingendred in mans bodie.

Lithizónte, a kinde of Rubie, or Carbunkle.

Lithóide, the bone in the temples which in the vpper part towards the Sagittall Suture, is equally circumscribed with the scalie agglutinations, but behind with the additions of the Suture Labdoides.

Lithospermo, the hearbe Greimile.

Litíga, Litíca, as Letíca.

Litigánte, a litigious wrangler.

Litigánza, as Litígio.

Litigáre, to pleade, to sue or contend in law. Also to striue, to contend, or debate.

Litigatióne, as Litígio.

Litígio, a plea, a sute, a processe or controuersie in law. Also strife or contention.

Litigióso, litigious, contentious, debatefull, full of strife and contention. 

Líto, as Lído.

Litóra, the plurall of Lído.

Litorále, of or belonging to any shore or side. Also bordring or dwelling neere the Sea-shore.

Litoráno, as Litorále.

Litospermo, Greimile, or Grummell. Some take it for Stonecrop.

Litotóma, a Chirurgion that cutteth out the stone in a mans bladder.

Lítra, a worme in a dogs tongue which if it be not taken out makes him mad.

Lítta, as Lítra.

Litterággine, as Letteratúra.

Litterále, as Letterale.

Litteráto, asLetteráto.

Litteratúra, as Letteratúra.

Littóri, Sergeants or such like ministers to execute corporal punishment vnder the Consuls among the Romans.

Littostráre, to paue with square stones of sundry colours.

Littostráto, a pauement of little square stones of diuers colours.

Lítuo, a crooked staffe that Augures vssed in diuinations to point the quarters of the firmament. Also a Crosier or Bishops staffe. Also a kind of crooked horne or trumpet or horne-pipe.

Líue, there, there away.

Liuell ábile, fineable, taxable.

Liuellam énto, a leauying of taxes or fines. Also a leueling or ayming at. Also a sounding or fadoming of the water or any thing else. Also a soaring or houering in the aire. Also a swinging in the aire.

Liuelláre, to leauy or raise fines and taxes. Also to leuell or ayme at. Also to sound or fadome. Also to sore or houer in the aire. Also to swing or cast.

Liuellatóre, a leauier or raiser of taxes or fines. Also a leueler or aymer. Also a sounder or fadomer. Also a swinger.

Liuello, a fine leauied or tax raised. Also a leuell, a squire, or a plummet. Also plaine, euen, leuell and plaine.

Liuente, as Líuido.

Liueránza, a deliuerance.

Liueráre, to free and deliuer.

Líuero, free, at liberty, deliuered.

Liuiáde, a kind of Dates full of good liquor.

Liuidáre, to bruse and beat blacke and blew. Also to fester and rankle. Also to grudge at, to enuy, to malice or priuily to spite.

Liuidézza, the blacke and blew print of stripes or beatings, a deadly bluish or brused colour, a palenesse or gastlinesse, a wan ash-colour. Also a priuy grudge, rancor, enuy or spite. Also a festering or rankling. 



Liuidità, as Liuidézza.

Líuido, brused blacke and blew as with stripes. Also of a leaden, deadly and gastly colour. Also swollen, festered and ranckled. Also enuious or pining away with enuy.

Liuidóre, as Liuidézza.

Liuidóri, a kind of black running-worme or tetter.

Liuóre, as Liuidézza.

Liuidúra, as Liuidézza.

Liuráre, to free and deliuer.

Liurea, any kinde of liuery or sutable garment.

Liureáre, to liuery, to giue or put into liueries. Also to loyter or goe idly gazing vp and downe.

Liúta, a kind of barke or ship.

Liutáro, a Lute player or maker.

Liutiere, as Liutísta.

Liutísta, a professor or player on a Lute.

Liúto, any kind of Lute.

Lízza, as Lísta.

Lizzáre, as Listáre.

Lo, an article of the Masculine gender and Singular number, of the Nominatiue or Accusatiue cases, comming euer before Nounes beginning with vowels or words beginning with S. and another consonant following, as Lo sténto or Lo spírito, the.

Lo, a Pronoune deriuatiue of the Accusatiue case, namely being with a verbe, him or it. Io lo védo, I see him or it.

Lo adietro, the time past.

Lóba, the graine Turkie-Millet. Also the leafe of euery kind of graine that groweth next to the ground.

Lóbi, the laps or extreame parts of the liuer.

Lobricáre, as Lubricáre.

Lobríco, as Lubríco.

Lobricità, as Lubricità.

Lobricóso, as Lubricóso.

Locále, locall, of or pertaining to place.

Località, placing or localitie.

Locánda, that may be placed. Also that is to be let or hired. Cámera locánda, an hired or to be hired chamber. Also a Si quis or bill denoting the letting or selling of a house or any thing else.

Locandiera di cámere, one that letteth chambers.

Locáre, to place, to lay vp or settle in some place. Also to let for rent.

Locarna, a kind of fish.

Locáro, as Lugarino.

Locarino, as Lugaríno.

Locagióne, as Locatione.

Locatióne, a location, a placing. Also a letting or setting for rent.

Locato, the thing placed.

Lócca, Lócclua, a Cob or Gudgeon fish.

Loccaióni, great Owles.

Locchétto, any kind of pad-locke. 

Lócco, any kind of Owle or Owlet. Vsed also for a gull or ninnie-hammer.

Lo chè, the which, that which.

Lóci, liquid medicines for the lungs to be licked or let goe downe leasurely.

Locignóli, as Lucignóli.

Lóco, as Luógo.

Lócolo, a bird in Latin Nictionate.

Locotenente, as Luogotenente.

Locótte, a claspe, a buckle. Also a padlooke.

Locuíno, a kind of flie that shines very bright in the night.

Locupleto, stored or hauing lands and places.

Locústa, a Locust or great Grassehopper. Also a Lobstar or Sea-crab.

Locústra, as Locústa.

Locutióne, a locution or phrase of speech.

Lóda, as Láude, praise.

Lodábile, laudable, praise-worthy.

Lódano, the sweet gum Lodanum.

Lodáre, as Laudáre, to praise.

Lodársi, to commend himselfe.

Lodatóre, a praiser, a commender.

Lóde, as Láude, praise.

Lodéuole, laudable, praise-worthy.

Lódola, the bird we call a Larke.

Lódra, as Lóntra.

Lodráre, to lure a Hawke, to call with a lure. Also to allure.

Lódro, a Hawkes lure. Also as Lóntra.

Lóffa, a fizle, a fyste, a close-fart.

Loffáre, to fizle, to fyste.

Lóg, that measure among the Hebrewes as Sextarius Atticus was among the Greekes.

Logára, a lure for a Hawke.

Logáre, as Locáre.

Logaríno, as Lugaríno.

Lógaro, a Hawkes lure. Also a baite.

Logatióne, as Locatióne.

Lóggia, any kind of lodge. Also a faire hall, a dining chamber, a banquetting house. Also an open terrace or gallerie, a walking place. Also a faire porch vpon the streete-side.

Loggiáre, to lodge, to harborough.

Loggiétta, a little Lóggia.

Loghétto, any little place or lodge.

Lógica, Logike, Dialect, the manner or arte of reasoning, or the meanes and way to reason. Also a subtle disputation according to the arte of Logike without Rhetoricall ornaments.

Logicále, according to the rules of Logike or Dialect.

Lógico, a Logitian.

Logicóne, the brest-plate of iudgement made of gold, blew silke, scarlet, purple and fine linnen, being foure square and double, hauing in it twelue precious stones.

Logísta, he that casteth an accompt, and doth diligently weigh a thing. Also one that causeth writings to bee made.

Logístico, hath beene vsed for an Arithmetician.

Logistilla, hath beene vsed for Reason it selfe.

Logliáto forménto, wheate full of cockle

Lóglio, darnell or cockle in corne.

Loglióso, full of cockle or darnell.

Logo-dedalo, an inuenter of new words or forger of strange termes.

Logomachía, a contention in wordes, a verball altercation.

Logoránza, a wearing out.

Logoráre, to weare out, to consume with wearing. Also to lure a Hawke.

Logoráto, worne, or consumed with wearing. Also lured.

Lógoro, as Logoráto. Also a Hawkes lure.

Lográre, as Logoráre.

Lógro, as Logoráto.

Lóica, as Lógica.

Lóico, as Lógico.

Lo inánzi, the time to come.

Lo in chè maniera, the manner how.

Lo in un trátto, the suddainly.

Lolígine, as Lullígine.

Lolígno, as Lullígine.

Lólla, hawme, stuble, chaffe, litter.

Lombágine, as Lumbágine.

Lombárdo, a kind of Sea-crab.

Lómbi, as Lúmbi.

Lómboli, as Lúmbolo.

Lombricelli, as Lumbricelli.

Lombríci, as Lumbríci.

Lombrína, a fish called an Halibut.

Lóme., Vsed of Dante for Lúme.

Lomento, beane-flower. Also a kind of fine washed pouder made of Azure, vsed in painting.

Lomnísci, ribands or laces to bind garlands or coronets of flowers.

Lonchíte, wilde Spleene wort.

Lónga, a long in musike, as Lúnga.

Lónga dimóra, a long abode or delay, but properly a place so called in the Tower of Pauia, which was wont to be the prison for notable prisoners as the Tower of London is, and so called because whosoeuer was sent thither, either seldome or neuer came forth againe.

Longaménte, longly, a long time.

Longágnola, a fishing-pole, an angling-rod. Also as Lóngoli.

Longanimità, long-sufferance, long constancie of minde.

Longanóne, the arse-gut, the straight-gut reaching to the fundament.

Longaóne, as Longanóne.

Longáre, as Lungáre.

Longéuo, long-liued, of long life.

Longheríe, delaies, protracting of time, demurs.

Longhésso, neere along, along by. 



Longhézza, length, longitude.

Lóngi, a farre of, distant of.

Lóngia, Lónza, a loyne.

Lóngia di castrato, a loyne of mutton.

Longiétta, a little loyne.

Longimáno, long-handed.

Longinquità, long distance of place, length of time, long lastingnesse.

Longinquo, far distant, farre off, long.

Longitúdine, longitude, length of time, of place, or any other thing.

Lóngo, long. Also tedious or irkesome. Also along, or alongst.

Lóngo il múro, alongst the wall.

Lóngoli, faulkners call them the lewins of a hawke.

Longóne, a long langrell, a slimme, a tall slang, one that hath no making to his length. Also very long and tedius in discourse.

Lóngo trátto, a long tract or shute.

Longúrio, a long and thwart transome beame or piece of timber laid a crosse.

Longurióne, as Longóne.

Lontanánti, men that dwell, haue bin, or goe afarre off.

Lontanánza, distance of place.

Lontanáre, as Allontanáre, to distance.

Lontaníssimo, most farre or distant.

Lontano, farre, farre off, distant in place.

Lóntra, an Otter, a Beuier, that liues both on land and in the water.

Lóntro, a Canoa, or Indian boate made of one tree or piece of wood.

Lónza, hath bin vsed for a Lionesse, but is properly an Ounce, a Panther, or cat of the mountaines. Also a loyne.

Lopádi, a kind of hard shell-fish.

Lopello, a disease in a horse proceeding of corrupt and venemous humors.

Lópola, a Cob, or Gudgeon-fish.

Lóppa, clods or flakes of sut in a chimnie. Also any kind of trash, drosse, filth, or dregs. Also a lump or stople of clay that Founders vse.

Loquáce, talkatiue, pratling, full of words and much speaking.

Loquacioso, as Loquáce.

Loquacità, loquacitie, babling, much speaking, or tittle-tattle.

Loquela, Loquella, speech, speaking.

Loquente, speaking, talking.

Loquentia, speaking, talking.

Lóra, as Váppa. Also a tunnell.

Loraménto, a thong of leather, a strap. Also a scurge, or whip.

Lorário, one that whippeth other seruants at his masters commandement.

Lordáre, to foule, to sullie, to defile.

Lordézza, ordure, filthinesse, foulenesse.

Lordo, foule, filthie, full of ordure.

Lordóne, a foule filthie slouen.

Lordítia, as Lordézza.

Lordura, as Lordézza.

Loríca, a breast-plate, a cuirace, a brigandine or cote of maile. Also the coping or head of a wall made to cast off the raine. Also a place vpon walles like an open gallerie, with grates or hurdles on the sides to keepe men from falling. Also a scaffold with hurdles vpon it for worke-men to stand on. Also a cote, a couer, or crust of day or durt or lome vpon a wall.

Loricáre, to arme with a cuirace, brest-plate, habergeon, or cote of fence. Also to couer or dawbe ouer with clay, morter, or lome.

Lorinóne, oyle of Lillies.

Loripéde, crump-footed, or splaie-footed.

Lóro, wine weake in taste, or that hath lost his strongth. Also as Loraménto.

Lóro, a Pronoune primitiue of the plurall number of the nominatiue and accusatiue cases, they, them. Also of the Datiue case, them, or to them. Also with verbs of priuation of the Ablatiue case, from them. Also a pronoune possessiue, theirs.

Lósa, a trap or springe to catch birds with. Also any bait for fish or foule.

Loscare, to looke blearing or squintingly.

Loschétto, some-what dim-sighted, or pur-blinde.

Lósco, dim-sighted or pur-blinde, one that seeth some-what by day-light, worse after Sunne-rising, and no whit at night. Also squint or bleare-eyde, or hauing but one eye.

Lo si, in liew of. Se Lò.

Losingáre, as Lusingáre.

Losingatóre, as Lusingatóre.

Losínghe, as Lusínghe.

Losinghéuole, as Lusinghéuole.

Lotáre, as Lutáre.

Lótho, an hearb with a floure like Poppie. Also as Lóto.

Lo tì, as Tèlo.

Lotióne, a lotion, that is, a liquor to bathe, to wash or cleanse any part.

Lóto, the Lote-tree, of whose fruit whosoeuer eateth forgetteth his owne countrie and state. Also mire, mud, slime, puddle, lome or clay somewhat hardned.

Lotofági, men that eate of the Lote tree, and liue as sencelesse and forgetfull of all things.

Lotométra, as Lóto, Lotóne, an hearbe much commended by Homer.

Lotóne, a tree called the Greeke beane, or of some Colocásia.

Lotóso, durtie, mirie, slimie, muddie.

Lótta, Lútta, the game of wrestling.

Lottáre, to wrestle. Also to cast lots.

Lottaría, Lottería, a Lotterie, a casting of lots. 

Lottatóre, a wrestler. Also a caster of lots.

Lótte di práto, turfes, or clods of the fields.

Lótto, a lot or chance in a lotterie.

Lottonáro, a Brazier, a Copper-smith.

Lottóne, the mettall Lattin, or Brasse.

Lonaiuólo, a disease called a Wolfe.

Louázzo, as Lupásso.

Lóue, as Dóue, where.

Louersiáre, to twinkle with the eyes.

Louino, a kind of fruite.

Lubente, willingly, with a good will.

Lubenza, willingnesse, pleasantnesse. Also the goddesse of pleasure and good wall.

Lubiáno, a kind of linnen cloth.

Lubricáre, to slip, to slide, to stagger.

Lubricità, slipperinesse, sliding, staggering.

Lubricità del córpo, a loosenesse of the bodie.

Lúbrico, slipperie, sliding, glibbie. Also wauering and inconstant. Also quicksiluer, according to Alchimists phrases.

Lucánica, Lucániga, any kind of Pudding, Sausedge, or Haggas, made in guts.

Lucanicáro, a Pudding-maker.

Lucano, a kind of Beetle.

Lucáre, as Lucciáre.

Lucária, feasts wont to be solemnised in holie woods and groues.

Lucaríno, Lucáro, as Lugaríno.

Lucciáre, to shine, to glitter, to glare, to glowe, to sparkle.

Luccicáre, as Lucciáre.

Luccicóso, as Luccióso.

Lúccide, as Lúcciole.

Lúccio, a Luce, a Pike, a Pickrell-fish.

Luccióla, Adders or Serpents tongue hearb.

Luccióla del' ócchio, the apple of the eye.

Lúcciole, gloe-wormes, or glaze-wormes.

Lucciólo, a lacke, or little Pickrell-fish.

Luccióso, shining, bright, glittring.

Lucchétto, a little pad-locke.

Lúcco, any kind of pad-lock. Also a kind of ciuill and noble garment worne in Florence.

Lúce, any kinde of light or shining, namely, of the Sunne, of the day, or of fire. Also the sight of a mans eyes.

Lúce del' ócchio, the sight of the eye.

Lucégni, the angles or corners of a lampe.

Lucégnola, a kinde of running itch, or tetter.

Lucégnolo, the weeke or cotton of a lamp.

Lucello, as Lucégnolo.

Lucente, lucent, shining, resplendent. 



Lucerdo, the cricke in a horse, which makes him to carrie his necke awry.

Lúcere, lúco, lucéi, luciúto, to shine, to giue light.

Lucerna, a light, a lamp, a candle. Also the Lantern-fish, which lilling foorth his tongue, yeelds a great blaze or light. Some haue taken it for the Gournard, or Rotchet-fish.

Lucernále, any thing that giueth light as a lampe or a candle. Also Torchhearbe, or Lungwort.

Lucernário, as Lucerniére.

Lucernétta, a little light or lamp.

Lucerniére, a stock for a lamp to stand in or vpon. Also a Candle sticke made of plate to hang vpon walles. Also a lamp, or light-bearer, or he that hath the charge of the Lamps in a Church.

Lucerta, as Lucertola.

Lucertola, a Lizard, an Eft, a Neut.

Lucertóne, a great Eft or Lizard.

Luchela, as Loquéla.

Luchétto, as Locchétto.

Lúci, all manner of lights. Vsed also for eyes.

Lucíbile, that which is light of it selfe.

Lucidézza, shining, brightnesse, splendor.

Lúcido, bright, shining, splendent, lucent.

Luciferésco, of the nature and qualitie of Lucifer. Luciferiane.

Luciferíno, as Luciferésco.

Lucífero, that bringeth light. Also vsed for Lucifer, the Diuell.

Lucifúgo, that flieth light and loueth darkenesse. Also a blind beetle.

Lucígno, a weeke, a match, or cotton of a candle, of a lamp or of a torch. Also match.

Lucignóla, a gloe-worme, or glazeworme.

Lucignoláre, to put the weeke, match, or cotton in a lamp, torch, or candle. Also to giue fire with a match. Also to frounse, to crisp or curle and dresse with fine knots or glittering iewels, as women doe their haires and heads.

Lucignoláto, I finde it vsed for an Aborne colour of a womans haire.

Lucignolétti, the diminutiue of Lucignóli.

Lucignóli, or Lucignuóli, weekes, cottons, or matches for candles, lamps, or torches. Also match-cords for gunners. Also bundles or rules of flaxe or wooll readie for the spinners. Also locks, tuffs, tassels or feakes of haire or wooll or any thing else. Also peakes or tips of beards. Also sliding-knots, curlings, or entramelings of haires and ribands enterlaced together as women weare on their heads. Also spanglings, or sparcklings. 

Lucimóni, men so called of their madnesse, because they made the places where they came vnluckie, and vnhappie.

Lucinéro, a suddaine flash or lightning in the ayre caused by heate.

Lucínio, pinck-eyde, or hauing little eyes.

Lúcio, a childe borne at the Sunne-rising.

Lucísco, one that seeth little in the night and in the morning.

Lúco, a groue vncut and vntouched, consecrated to gods or nimphs.

Lucóre, a great light, blaze, or splendor.

Lucráre, to gaine or profit.

Lucrático, gainefull, and profitable.

Lucrifúgo, shunning profit.

Lúcco, lucre, gaine, profit, vantage.

Lucróso, full of lucre, gainefull, profitable.

Lucubráre, to study or worke by candlelight.

Lucubratióne, study or worke by candle.

Luculéntia, brightnesse, shining, splendor.

Luculénto, faireshining, beautious bright.

Luculléo, a kind of shining bright Marble.

Lucumóne, a man that makes the place vnhappy where he commeth.

Ludíbrio, a mocking-stocke to be laughed at.

Ludibrióso, to be mocked and laughed at.

Ludícro, as Ludíbrio.

Ludicróso, as Ludibrióso.

Ludificatióne, a deceitfull mocking, a diabolicall illusion.

Ludimaéstro, a schoole-master.

Lúdo, a game, a play, a sport. Also a scorne, a mocke, a scoffe, or iest.

Lúdro, a bait. Also a Hawkes-lure.

Lúe, a generall pestilence, murrian, or common destruction of men and cattle. Vsed also for the french-pox.

Lúffo, a skirt or quarter of any coat. Also a lap or fould of a garment.

Luganello, as Lugaríno.

Lugániga, Lugánica, as Lucánica.

Luganigáro, a pudding maker.

Luganighétte, little puddings or sausages.

Lugaríno, a Siskin-bird, some take it for a Gold-finch, and others for a Canary bird.

Lugáro, as Lugaríno.

Luggiála, an hearbe very sharpe in taste.

Lúglio, the Moneth of Iuly.

Lugliático, that commeth in Iuly.

Luglióla, as Lugliático.

Lugúbre, mourning, funerall, grieuous and deadly. Also mourning apparell.

Lúi, a Pronoune primitiue, he, him.

Lúi medésimo, or stésso, he himselfe.

Lúlla, a caske or barrell boorde to make barrels of, but it is properly the crosse board or the bottom of a hogs-head. It is also taken for a barrell, puncheon or pipe.

Lullígine, a kind of sea-fish neere Mauritania which come in so great sholes that if they meet a ship they put it in danger to be ouerthrowne, called a Seacut or Calamary.

Lumáca, any kind of round snaile. Scála a lumáca, a winding paire of staires.

Lumáca di máre, a Sea-snaile, Wealke, Cockle, or Perwinkle.

Lumáccia, as Lumáca.

Lumachiero, one that sels snailes. Also a hole where snailes breed.

Lumacóne, a great snaile. Also a sneaker, or lurking companion. Also a dull louby, a slow-gull, a heauy iolt-head.

Lumáre, to light, to inkendle.

Lumáto, lightned, inkendled.

Lumbágine, ache or feeblenesse in the loines.

Lúmbi, the loynes or reines of any body. Also the chine of a body. Also the ridges of a house.

Lúmbolo, a little loyne.

Lumbricelli, little Earth or Mawwormes.

Lumbríci, litle Casses or Earth-wormes. Also Belly-wormes or Maw-wormes.

Lúme, any kind of light or shining. Also the eye or eyesight of a man. Also the space of a day. Vsed also for Alume.

Lúme catína, a kind of Alum.

Lúme di rócca, Roch Alum.

Lúme scaiuóla, a kind of Alum.

Lúme zuccarína, a kind of Alum.

Lúmi, all maner of lights. Also eies.

Lúmia, the slime of fishes.

Lumiccíno, a little light. Also a size-candle.

Lumiéra, the touch-hole of any piece Also any kind of light, shining or brightnesse. Also a torch, a lampe or candle-burning. Vsed also for Gunners match.

Lumiliáco, the fruit or plumbe called an Apricot or tree thereof.

Lumináre, to shine, to giue light, to illuminate. Also as Luminário.

Luminário, any kind of light, or lightgiuing thing, as a candle, a lampe, a torch, a beacon, a lanterne, a signe-fire.

Luminário córpo, any light-giuing bodie, as the Sunne and Moone.

Lumináto, lightned, illuminated.

Luminello, the socket of a lampe or candlesticke. 



Luminóso, full of light, splendent, shining.

Lumóso, as Luminóso.

Lúna, the great Planet the Moone. Also siluer, among Alchimists.

Lúna crescénte, the Moone encreasing.

Lúna nuóua, the new Moone.

Lúna piena, the full Moone.

Lunáre, of or pertaining to the Moone. Also in forme or fashioned like the Moone. Also a womans monethly disease.

Lunária, as Nittigréto, an hearbe of great vertue called Torch-hearbe or woollblade.

Lunário, a Moone or monethly Calender.

Lúna scéma, the Moone waning.

Lúna secónda, the second quarter of the Moone.

Lúna silénte, the very moment that the Moone changeth.

Lúna terza, the third quarter of the Moone.

Lunaticáre, to be or become lunatike.

Lunático, moone-sicke, lunatike, frantike at certaine times of the Moone. Also one that hath the falling sicknesse. Also the falling sicknesse it selfe. Also a kind of staggering or falling disease in a horse.

Lunatióne, a shining of the Moone, belonging to, or of the Moones space or moneth, the time, space or effect of a whole Moone.

Lund máne, the morrow next, the next day following.

Lune, Moones. Also Monday.

Lunedì, Monday.

Lunétta, a Croissant or litle Moone. Also as Destra.

Lunétte, litle Moones. Also spectacles. Also certaine glasses to looke through, which some vse when they ride to keep the dust out of their eyes. Also a kind of horse-shooe called halfe-moone-shooes. Also a certaine crooked toole that Goldsmiths vse.

Lúnga, a long in Musike.

Lungagnóla, as Longágnola.

Lúnga hóra, a long time, a good while.

Lúnga dimóra, as Lónga dimóra.

Lungaménte, longly, a long time.

Lunganóne, as Longanóne.

Lungáre, to lengthen, to prolong.

Lúnge, farre off, distant, wide from.

Lunghería, length of time, tediousnesse.

Lunghésso, alongst it or him.

Lunghéssomè, alongst my selfe.

Lunghésso méco, alongst with me.

Lunghésso sè, alongst him or her.

Lunghésso séco, alongst with him or her.

Lunghésso tè, alongst thee.

Lunghésso téco, alongst with thee.

Lunghétto, somewhat long or tedious. 

Lunghézza, as Longhézza, length.

Lúngi, as Lúnge.

Lúngo, as Lóngo.

Lungóne, as Longóne.

Lúngo trascórso, a long time past.

Lunifero, Moone-bearing.

Lunistítio, the instant or moment of the full Moone beginning to change.

L'uno & l'áltro, the one and the other.

L'úno dell'áltro, one of another.

L'úno per l'áltro, one for another.

Luogáre, Luocáre, as Locare.

Luoghétto, any little place or Luógo.

Luógo, Luóco, a place. Also a stead, a roome, a seate. Also state, condition, or qualitie. Also occasion or leasure. Also a point in the tables or checkbord. Also a Church or Monasterie. Also a part or lim of ones bodie. Also a stocke, bloud, kindred or generation.

Luogóra, the plurall of Luógo.

Luogotenentáto, a Lieuetenencie, a Lieutenants place or office.

Luogotenente, Luocotenente, a Lieutenent, a Deputie, a Substitute, a Vicar.

Lúpa, a shee-wolfe. Also a disease so called. Also a disease in a horses legs.

Lupachíno, any yoong Wolfe.

Lupága, a kind of great Sea-crab.

Lupanári, Wolues-dens. Also brothel-lhouses or common stewes.

Lupárdo, a gluttonous deuouring fellow, a bloud-thirstie-man.

Lupária, the hearbe Wolues-bane.

Lupásso, a Gourmand or Red-fish.

Lupáto, a dun-wolues-colour of a horse.

Lupázzo, as Lupásso.

Lupéca, Lupécca, a houpe or dung-hill Cocke.

Lupegaiáre, to play the Wolfe.

Lnpercália, solemne sacrifices and plaies dedicated to Pan.

Luperci, certaine Priests of Pan or Bacchus.

Lupertica, as Liuidézza.

Lúpi, a kind of Spiders that neuer spin webs.

Lupicíni, whelpe-wolues, yoong Wolues.

Lúpi di fiúme, Sea-wolues, Sea-pikes.

Lupinaménto, Lupinággine, wolfishnesse.

Lupíno, wolfish, of the nature or qualitie of a Wolfe. Also a kind of pulse called Lupines or Figbeanes.

Lúpo, a Wolfe. Also a Sea-wolfe or Seapike. Also a disease called a Wolfe. Also a kind of dragging hooke to drag things from out deepe places. Also the name of a certaine Starre or signe in heauen.

Lúpo ceruiero, a Lince, a Luzard, a Linx or Ounce, it is like a Wolfe, but much spotted and exceeding quicke of sight. 

Lúpo dell' ápi, a Woodpecker or Eate-bill.

Lúpo di salcéti, the wild Hops.

Lúpuli, wild Hop or Hops.

Lurcáre, to lurke or deuour gluttonously.

Lúrco, a glutton, a cormorant, a greedie deuourer, a gullie-gut, a gourmand.

Lurcóne, as Lúrco.

Lúria, a certaine potion made of Honie and Vineger.

Lúrido, pale, wan, of a deadly hew.

Luriuóle, a kind of plumbe in Italie.

Lusardo, a Lizard.

Lúsca, a litle cloud appearing in a cleare day.

Luschétto, some what purblind.

Luscignólo, a Nightingall.

Lusciólo, a Night-bat, a Reare-mouse.

Lúsco, as Lósco, purblind.

Lusignuólo, a Nightingall.

Lusínga, adulation, flatterie, blandishment. Also enticement or allurement.

Lusingáre, to flatter, to blandish.

Lusingaría, as Lusinga.

Lusingatóre, a flatterer, a blandisher.

Lusingatríce, a flattering woman.

Lusinghéuole, flattering, blandishing.

Lusinghiere, as Lusingatóre.

Lusneáre, to flash, lighten or flare suddainly.

Lusnéo, as Lusneocióne.

Lusneocióne, a sudden flash or lightning in the firmament caused by heate.

Lusone, a gamester, a player.

Lusquiáme, Henbane or Dwale.

Lussáre, to commit or liue in all luxurie, sensualitie and voluptuousnesse.

Lussáti, such as haue dislocations or members out of ioint.

Lússo, all manner of luxurie, sensualitie or wordly pleasure.

Lussuráre, as Lussuriáre.

Lussureggiáre, as Lussuriáre.

Lussúria, luxurie, letcherie, lust, all superfluitie and excesse in carnall pleasures, riot, and ranknesse.

Lussuriánte, excessiuely rioting.

Lussuriánte herba, Rank-grasse.

Lussuriáre, to commit or liue in letchery, luxurie or carnall lust, to exceed in all manner of wordly pleasure and riot. Also to grow ranke.

Lussurióso, luxurious, letcherous, lustfull, wanton, riotous, ranke.

Lústra, a den, a cauerne, a caue, a grot, or hole where wild beasts doe abide and breed. Also a shew or proffer to do any thing, a countenance vpon any matter. Also a shew of faire words, a mockerie, a iest, or faire shew. Vsed also for a brothell-house or stewes. Also whore-hunting in secret corners or lurking-holes.

Lustrále, certaine ceremonies or sacrifi­



ces that were vsed euery fiue yeeres.

Lustráre, to giue a lustre or glasse vnto. Also to shine bright, to burnish, to sleeke paper. Also to purge, to cleanse or prune. Also to purge or expiate by way of Sacrifices, as in ancient times they were wont to doe euery fiue yeeres.

Lústre., looke Fáre le lústre.

Lustrézza, bright-shining, clearenesse.

Lústro, a lustre, a glasse or bright-shining. Also the space or time of fiue yeeres. Also a purging by way of Sacrifices.

Lustróre, as Lústro.

Lustróso, splendent, full of brightnesse.

Lúta, a sparke of fire.

Lutacéne, an hearbe vsed in Phisike and charmes or enchantments.

Lutáre, to lute as Alchimists doe their pots.

Lutárie, a kind of Barble-fish.

Lutatióne, a lutation or a luting

Lutea, the hearbe Weld or Yellowes, vsed of Dyers to dye yellow.

Lutello, an oyle pot or vessell.

Lutense, any creature that liueth or is bred and nourished in mud.

Luteo, a yellow like the yolke of an egge.

Luteráni, of Luthers religion and faction.

Lutéro, a kind of beast so called.

Lúto, any kind of mud, clay or lute. Also a kind of deepe measure.

Lutóso, durtie, mirie, muddie, boggie.

Lútra, Lóntra, an Otter, a Beauier.

Lutrea, a ranke of shields and scutcheons of armes hanged ouer Sepulchres.

Lútta, a wrestling, as Lótta.

Luttáre, to wrestle. Also to mourne or blubber. Also as Lutáre.

Luttatóre, a wrestler.

Luttífero, that bringeth mourning.

Lútto, Lúto, weeping, wayling, mourning, blubbering. Also mudde, lute, durt, clay.

Luttóso, Lutoso, full of mourning or blubbering. Also muddy, durty, clayish.

Luttulente, as Luttóso.

Luttuóso, as Luttóso.

Luzzióla, as Luccióla.

Luzziólo, as Lucciólo.

Lúzzo, as Lúccio.


M.

Mà, But, but if, but that, yea but. Also except, sauing. Also being ioyned vnto other Nounes it signifieth Mía, mine, as Madónna, my Mistris.

Ma', Mà, Mái. , Vsed for Máli, euils. 

Macalépo, a kind of sweet perfume.

Macanopoiético, an Engine maker.

Macárco, a Barrell, a Tub, a Steane, a Tunne.

Macarello, a Mackrell-fish, some (as the French) haue vsed the word for a Bawde or Pander. It is also a kind of rauenous foule or cormorant.

Macaroneggiáre, to eat Maccaróni. Also to liue an idle gullish life.

Mácca, any print or marke of a bruize. Also a spoile or hauocke. Also Gods-plenty or hold-belly-hold. Also a kind of frocke or vpper garment to keepe other cloathes cleane.

Maccagnáno, as Magágna.

Maccáre, to bruise, to batter, to pester. Also to hauocke or spoile.

Maccarella., Vsed for a bawde, but it is rather French then Italian.

Maccarelli, the fish Mackrels.

Maccatúra, a bruise or battering.

Maccaróne, a gull, a lubby, a loggarhead that can doe nothing but eat Maccaróni.

Maccaróni, a kind of meat made of round peeces of paste, boyled in water and put into a dish with butter, spice and grated-cheese vpon them.

Maccatelle, vsed for trickes of bawderie.

Maccheróni, as Maccaróni.

Mácchia, any kind of spot, speckle, staine or blemish. Also a touch, a taint or note of infamy and reproach. Also a brake of briers, a firzie place, a thicket of Brambles or Briers, a place full of bushes and shrubs.

Mácchia nell' ócchio, a blemish in the eie, a pin and web.

Macchiáre, to spot, to staine, to blemish, to speckle. Also to taint or shame.

Mácchie, hath beene vsed for the Zones, as Zóna.

Macchiétta, a little Mácchia.

Macchióne, a great Mácchia.

Macchióso, as Maccolóso.

Máccina, as Mácina.

Mácco, as Mácca.

Máccole, spots, staines, speckes, speckles, freckles or flea-bitings.

Maccolóso, full of spots or staines, specked, speckled, flea-bitten.

Macedónica, the name of an hearbe.

Macégnole, broad and flat stones to couer houses with.

Macégno., Vsed for Macígno.

Macelláio, Macelláro, a Butcher, a Slaughter-man, a Shambler.

Macelláre, to butcher, to slaughter.

Macello, a Butchery, a Shambles, a Slaughter-house, a Flesh-market.

Maceráre, to macerat, to mortifie, to suppresse. Also to tame, to mortifie with beating or pressing, to make leane or bring low. Also to soake in water. 

Maceratióne, a maceration, a mortifying, a making leane, a soakeing.

Macéria, leanenesse, barrennesse Also mortification. Also a row or set of teeth.

Macérie herbe, all manner of knowen or vsuall pot-hearbes.

Mácero, macerated. Looke Maceráre.

Maceróni, an hearbe good in salads.

Mách, a kinde of beast that hath no ioynts in her legges.

Ma chè, but that, so that.

Ma chè, but what? but what then?

Machéra, a kind of wood-knife or curtelax.

Machíla, the robe of the Ephod made altogether of blew-silke, hauing round about the skirts thereof seauenty two Pome-granates of blew-silke, purple and scarlet, and as many bels of gold betweene them round about.

Máchina, any kind of mathin, frame, engine, edifice or deuice in building. Also a scaffold. Also a contriuing, a complot, a conspiracy or machination.

Machinále sciéntia, the arte of framing any machine or engine or complotting.

Machinaménto, as Machinatióne.

Machináre, to machine, to frame, to build, to contriue, to complot, to conspire.

Machinatióne, a machination, a framing, a contriuing, a complot, a conspiracy.

Machinatórè, a machinator, a framer, a contriuer, an enginer, a conspiratour.

Machinóso, plotting, deuising or framing.

Macholíno, a wild beast like an Alce called Machlis.

Mácido, hoary, musty, mouldy, rotten.

Macignáre, to grow rough, rugged, stony, hard, crabbed, or rockie.

Macígno, craft, subtilty or deceit vnder hand in preiudice and wrong of others. Also rough, gritty, rugged, stony, crabbed, rockie. Also a kind of hard rugged stone to make grinding or Mill-stones of.

Macilente, leane, meagre, bare-boned.

Macilenza, leanenesse, meagrenesse, barenesse.

Mácina, a Mill or Grinding-stone. Also a Mill.

Macináre, to mill, to grind as Corne.

Macinatióne, a grinding of Corne.

Macináto, grinded. Also greest-corne.

Macinatóia, a grinding-stone.

Macinatóre, a Miller, a Grinder.

Macinatúra, a grinding, a milling.

Mácine, grinding or Mill-stones, taken also for iawes and teeth together.

Macinella, a kitchin or Mustard-mill.

Macinétte, little Mils or grinding-­



stones. Also little Mils. Also a kinde of Shrimps or Praunes.

Macinéuole, that may be ground.

Macínio, greest or grinding-corne, taken also for carnall copulation.

Mácis, the spice called Mace.

Maciúlla, a brake, a hutch, a kneading-tub to knead dough in. Also a hassell to breake Flax or Hempe.

Maciulláre, to chew as one doth meat in his mouth. Also to breake Hemp or Flax.

Maciullóne, a chewer, or continuall feeder.

Máclo, a kinde of beast that hath no ioynts at all.

Mácola, as Mácchia.

Macoláre, as Macchiáre.

Macónide, a kind of bitter Lactuce and full of milke.

Macónio, as Mecónio.

Mácra, a kind of hearbe to Dye withall.

Macráre, to make or grow leane.

Macrézza, meagrenesse, leanenesse.

Mácro, megre, leane, gant, thin.

Macrocóla, a kinde of large Royall-paper.

Macrocósmo, a great world.

Macrología, idle and tedious talke wherein is no substance. Also a kind of figure in speech of ouertedious and long describing of any thing which might be done in fewer words.

Macrólogo, an idle, tedious and friuolous pratler.

Mácula, as Mácchia. Also as Telicárdo.

Maculáre, as Macchiáre.

Maculóso, full of spots staines or freckles.

Mád., Vsed for Mà, but, but that.

Madáglio della campána, a Bell-clapper.

Madaíno, a certaine coyne among the Turkes.

Madále, a Barrow-hog.

Madáma, madame, my lady.

Madáma d' Orliens, the name of a kind of french dance.

Madamigella, a damzell, a waiting woman, my damzell.

Madarázzo, a clounish looby, a loggarhead.

Madefáre, to madefie, to wet or moysten.

Madenò, no for sooth, no indeed my Sir.

Madéra, Mather to die red with.

Maderla, or Maderlo.

Madernále, maternall, motherly.

Madesì, yes for sooth, yes indeed my Sir.

Madía, a hutch, a kneading tub. Also a maund or spoke-shaue to put in bread.

Madiáta, a batch of dough kneaded for bread, a kneading.

Mádido, wet and moist.

Madóne, an hearbe. Also a kinde of wilde white wine.

Madóni, treene dishes, bowles or trayes.

Madónna, Mistris mine. Madame. Also taken for our Ladie.

Madónna nò, no for sooth mistris mine.

Madonnétta, any little madame, mistris, or else our Ladie. Vsed also for a beggers treene dish that hee clatters and begs with at good womens dores.

Madónna sì, yes for sooth mistris mine.

Madonnéssa, a mistris or ladie, but vsed in iest and mockerie.

Madornále, as much to say as lawfully borne, and of a true and lawfull Mother.

Mádre, a mother, a damme, a mammie. Also the matrix or wombe of a woman. Also a disease among women called the Mother. Also the Earth as the generall Mother and producer of all things, wherefore she is called Mádre-mágna. Also the hard and thick pannicle or membrane, which in compassing the braine about gathereth the same not straightly and closely together, but loosely, and in remisse order, after the manner that Pericardio enuolueth the heart, which is called Dura mádre. There is also Piamádre, that is, the calmes or filmes of the braine. Madre is also a kinde of Hornet that liueth two yeares. Also the mother of any oyle or water.

Mádre bósco, Wood-binde, Honniesuckle.

Mádre dúra., looke Mádre.

Madrégna, a stepdame, a mother in law.

Madrégni, as Padrégni.

Mádre mágna, the earth as mother and producer of all things.

Madrémma, Madréma, my Mother, or mammie.

Mádre perla, a mother of pearle.

Mádre pía, the calmes or filmes of the braine.

Mádre sélua, Woodbinde, or Honniesuckle.

Mádre víte, a chiefe or maister screw or wrench. Also that which is wound.

Madrezzuóla, Wood-binde, or Honniesuckle.

Madrifóglio, Knapweede, Bull weede, or Matfellon.

Madrigalétti, Songs called Madrigals.

Madrigáli, Madriáli, Madrigall songs.

Madrígna, Madrína, a step-dame, or mother in law.

Madrignále, as Matrignále.

Madróne, a disease called the Mother.

Madúne, a Brick or square pauing-ston. 

Madunelli, small bricks, or pauing-stones.

Maedíno, a small coine in Aléppo.

Maésa, land that lieth fallow.

Maesáre, to make land fallow.

Maestà, Maiestie, royall auctoritie, soueraigntie, lordly supremacie.

Maestále, maiesticall, royall, stately.

Macstàlésa, treason against Maiestie.

Maestéuole, Maiesticall, full of Maiestie.

Maestóso, full of Maiestie, Maiesticall

Maéstra, a maister-beame or sommer in any building.

Maéstra, a Mistris, a chiefe. Looke Acqua. Looke Stráda.

Maestrále, Maister-like, Magistrale. Also a Magistrate, or supreme ouer others.

Maestránza, maistrie, or skill and cunning.

Maestránze, all manner of manuall tooles to worke with, all sorts of implements.

Maestráre, to maister, to teach, to instruct.

Maestráto, maistred, taught, instructed. Also as Magistráto.

Maestreggiáre, to play the Maister. Also to saile North-west.

Maestréssa, a Mistris, a commandresse.

Maestréuole, skilfull, maister like, cunning, artificiall.

Maestría, as Maestránza. Also skill, industrie, cunning, arte, and wit.

Maéstro, a maister, a ruler, a teacher, an ouerseer, an instructer of others. Also the North-west winde. Also a great Vat or vessell, such as Bruers vse to brue in.

Maéstro d'áscia, a Carpenter. Also a Ship-wright.

Maéstro d'árte, a Maister of Artes.

Maéstro delle póste, a Poste-maister.

Maéstro di cámpo, a maister of the field, a Marshall of a camp.

Maéstro di cása, a maister of the houshold, a stuard of an house, a controuler. Also the maister or chiefe gut in any body, and in a horse it is taken for his whole or great panch, as Mástro.

Maéstro di legnáme, a master-carpenter.

Maéstro dimúro, a Brick-layer. Also a Mason.

Maéstro di scrímia, a Master of fence.

Maéstro di scuóla, a Schoole-master.

Maéstro di stálla, a maister of the quierie, a gentleman of the horse.

Maéstro di stráda, an ouerseer or maister of high-waies, and to see them repaired and well kept.

Maéstro di tínello, an Vsher of a noblemans hall or place where common ser­



uants eate.

Maéstrotramontána, a North-west winde.

Mafáro, the saile of the fore-mast. Also the bung of a barell.

Mafattóre, as Malfattóre.

Maffè, in good faith, by my faith.

Mága, a Sorceresse, an enchantresse, a Magitian, a Witch. Also the Arte Magike.

Magáce, a kind of musicall instrument of twentie strings. Also the bridge of a Lute that holdeth vp the strings.

Magáde, as Magáce.

Magágna, corruption, rottennesse, or putrefaction in any fruite. Also a defect, a fault, an imperfection or falsehood in any thing. Also a ranckling or festring of any sore.

Magagnáre, to rot, to corrupt, to putrifie, to taint. Also to ranckle or fester. Also to make or become faultie, false, defectiue, vnsound, or imperfect.

Magagnóso, rotten, adle, full of corruption, faultie, tainted, ranckled.

Magálda, a trull, a queane, a harlot, a strumpet, an old trot, a gixie.

Magára, as Mága.

Magári, I would to God it were so.

Magaría, Witchcraft, Sorcerie, Magike.

Magási, as Maggioríni.

Magazzinétto, a little Magazzino.

Magazziniéro, a store-house keeper.

Magazzíno, Magazzéno, a warehouse, a store-house, a magizin.

Magazzíno d'artegliaría, an Arsenall or store-house for Artillerie.

Magazzíno di gráno, a store-house for corne.

Magazzíno público, a publike storehouse.

Magazzíno reále, a store-house for a King.

Magése, as Maiése, or Maggése, or Magiése.

Magestà, as Maestà.

Maggiése, or Maggése, all manner of fallow land.

Mággio, the moneth of May. Also as Máio. Also as Máglio. Also vsed for Maggióre Also moody, mad or rageing.

Maggiorále, hath beene vsed for Maggióre.

Maggiorána, the hearbe Mariorant.

Maggioránza, eldership, seniority.

Maggioráre, to out-goe in greatnesse.

Maggiorascáto, a priority or preheminence in place or office aboue others.

Maggiorásco, a chiefe man among others, but taken in mockery.

Maggiordomaría, the office or authority of a Steward.

Maggiordómo, the Steward or chiefe officer of a house.

Maggióre, maior, greater, senior, higher, more ancient, elder.

Maggiorello, somewhat bigger or elder.

Maggioréngo, an Alderman, a Burgamaster, an Elder or Chiefe man of any Society or Towne, a Warden of a Company, one of the greatest sort.

Maggiorénte, as Maggioréngo.

Maggiorétto, somewhat greater or elder.

Maggióri, eldest, elders, Aldermen. Also our progenitors or forefathers.

Maggióri di bócca, something in a ship.

Maggioríni, a kinde of Wigin or Mallard.

Maggiorità, as Maggioránza.

Maggiuóli, as Súrculi.

Magheráre, as Magráre.

Magheríte, as Magríre.

Mághero, as Mágro.

Mági, Wise-men, wise Philosophers.

Magía, naturall Magike or Sorcery.

Mágica, the arte Magike or Sorcery.

Magicále, according to Magike.

Mágico, a Magitian or Enchanter.

Magidaríno, the stalke or stem of Laserpítio, vsed in physike.

Magíde, a drinking mazer, or round bottomed dish.

Magiése, as Maiése, or Magiétte.

Magiétte, hookes and claspes such as women vse on their cloathes.

Magináre, as Imagináre.

Maginatióne, as Imaginatióne.

Magióne, a Mansion house, a habitation.

Magiorána, the hearbe Marioram.

Magiriáno, a kinde of Serpent which is said to grow out of a dead mans backe or chine-bone.

Magiríscia, pretty images or mannikins set or wrought in drinking cups.

Magistério, Magistéro, maistery, mistery, arte, cunning, skill.

Magistrále, as Maestrále.

Magistráto, a Magistrate, a Iudge. Also the office or power of a Magistrate.

Máglia, a maile-hole, a net-hole, an Oilet-hole. Also a shirt of maile. Also a mesh of a net.

Máglia degl' ócchij, a pin and web or other spots in the eies

Máglia lárga. Certain net-worke so called of Semsters.

Máglia lónga. Certain net-worke so called of Semsters.

Máglia quádra. Certain net-worke so called of Semsters.

Máglia strétta. Certain net-worke so called of Semsters.

Máglia tónda. Certain net-worke so called of Semsters.

Magliáre, to maile, to arme with a iacket or shirt of maile. Also to beat with a mallet or beetle. Also to thump or beat close and hard. Also to worke maile-worke or net-worke.

Maglie, mailes, little holes through.

Magliétta, a little Máglia.

Máglio, a mallet or beetle or commander, or sledge as Carpenters vse. Also one of the instruments of hearing, called the hammer.

Magliuóli, little mallets. Also little stakes driuen into hedges. Also slips of Vines to be set to grow.

Magliuólo, a little mallet or hammer.

Mágma, all maner of dregges or grounds of oyntments.

Mágna., looke Mádre.

Mágna árte, as Algébra.

Mágna-béne, a good feeder, a tall-trenchir-man.

Magnaguadágno, as Mangiaguadágno.

Magnagnerra, a kinde of strong Greeke wine.

Magnalmità, as Magnanimità.

Magnálmo, as Magnánimo.

Magnamáre, some part of a ship.

Magnaménte, greatly. Also nobly, magnificently, or heroically.

Magnanimità, magnanimity, high courage, greatnesse and noblenesse of minde.

Magnánimo, magnanimous, highminded, all-daring, stout-harted.

Magnána menestra, a kind of principall good pottage.

Magnáno, a Lock-smith, a Key-maker. Also a Forger. Also a Tinkard.

Magna pagnótte, a deuourer of pap or panados, a gluttonous feeder.

Magnáre, to eat, to feed. Also to make great.

Magnaríe, all manner of eatings.

Magnário, a chiefe man or ouerseer of others.

Magnáti, the Elders, Aldermen, Wardens, Ancients or Chiefe men of any Towne or Corporation. Also the chiefe Peeres, Noblemen or Priuy Counsellours of any Realme or State.

Magnatióne, a ripening or corroding plaister or medicament.

Magnatíno, that may be eaten.

Magnatóra, as Mangiatóio.

Magnatóre, a feeder, an eater, a deuourer.

Mágn' áua, a Great-grandmother.

Mágna zía, or ámeda a great Aunt.

Magnésia, the Magnet or Loade-stone.

Magnete, the Magnet or Loade-stone.

Magnéti, a stone called Cat-siluer.

Magnificáre, to magnifie, to exalt, to aduance or honour.

Magníficat, the song of our Lady in Luke the first Chapter.

Magnificatióne, a magnifying.

Magnificente, magnificent, nobly minded.

Magnificentia, magnificence, sumptuousnesse, doing or atchiuing of great things. 



Magnífico, nobly-minded, magnificent. Also a Magnifico of Venice.

Magniloquentia, a lofty or high stile and maner of speaking.

Maguilóquio, as Magniloquentia.

Magnilóquo, a lofty or high speaker.

Magnitúdine, magnitude, amplenesse, greatnesse, largenesse, bignesse. Also a continued quantity.

Mágno, great, ample, large, high, big. Also mighty and noble, maine.

Mágno áuo, a Great-grandfather.

Mágno barba, or zío a Great-vnckle.

Magnósa, a caule or quoife.

Magnosétta, a little quoife or caule.

Mágo, a Magitian, an Enchanter, a Sorcerer. Also a Wise-man or a Philosopher in the Persian tongue.

Mágolo, as Mágo.

Magóna, cì sono le magóne chè émpiono il contádo et di bestie èt di persóne. 

Magóne, the maw, the craw, or gizard of any foule.

Magótto, a kind of bird or foule.

Magrána, the disease called the Megram.

Magráre, to make or grow leane.

Magrásio, an Eft, an Nute, an Aske.

Magrería, any kind of leanenesse. Also a colde, poore, or silly iest.

Magrézza, leanenesse, meagrenesse.

Magríno, somewhat leane or me agre.

Magríre, as Magráre.

Magritúdine, as Magrézza.

Mágro, meagre, leane, gant, lanke.

Maguei, Méth, as Cardóne.

Magudáro, the hearbe Lazerpitium.

Magúno, a kinde of Cormorant or Seagull.

Mái, euer, at any time. Also neuer or at no time. Also the plurall of Máio.

Máia, a kind of Crab called a Crampell, a Grit or Pungier.

Maidè, tush no, fie no, away.

Maiése, fallow land. Also as Magiétte.

Maiestà, as Maestà, Maiestie.

Maimóne gátto, a Cat of mountaine.

Maináre, to amaine, that is to strike saile, for so our Sea-men say.

Maináre úna náue, as Amaináre.

Mainò, tush, no indeed, no neuer.

Máio, a greene bough or branch or Maypole newly cut from the tree. Also a mallet or beetle to cleaue with. Also a sledge or great hammer, or iron-crow. Also a kind of Sea-crab, called a Crampell, a Grit or Pungier.

Maiólica, as Maiórica.

Maiolichíno, a kind of small coine.

Maiorále, a kind of officer in a ship.

Maiorána, the hearbe Marioram.

Maioránza, as Maggioránza.

Maiorchíno, a kinde of hard and salt cheese made in Maiórica.

Maiordómo, as Maggiordómo.

Maióre, as Maggióre.

Maiórica, the earth we call Purcelane, China or Purcelane dishes.

Maioríne, a kind of big Oliue.

Mai più, neuer any more.

Maisempre, for euer, euer and euer.

Maisì, yeamarie, yes indeed. Also tush, away, yfaith Sir yea.

Maiúscula, the text letters. Also a thing greater then others.

Maiz, Indian or Turkie wheate.

Mál, as Mále.

Mála, the ball of a mans cheeks. Also taken for a iaw or cheeke-bone.

Malabátro, a kind of leafe that swimeth in Pooles or Lakes without any apparant roote, whereof is made a kind of sweet oyle.

Malabbiáto, euill-had, or ill-gotten.

Mal'accólto, ill entertained, vnwelcome.

Malabbiáti béni, ill-gotten-goods.

Mal' accórto, vnheedie, ill-warie, ill aduised, simple, heedlesse.

Malachíte, a stone of a darke greene colour.

Malácia, a disease in women with child when their stomakes long for strange things, as sometimes candles ends, chalke, coles, and such like stuffe.

Mála códa, taken for the Diuell, a foule feend.

Mála creánza, euill nurture, vnmannerlinesse, inciuilitie, bad education.

Maladétto, cursed, banned, ill spoken.

Maladicenza, as Maldicenza.

Maladíre, díco, díssi, détto, to curse, to banne, to blaspheme, to speake ill.

Mála dispositióne, ill disposition, crazednesse in bodie or minde.

Maladittióne, malediction, cursing, banning, euill speaking.

Mal'ad órdine, in ill plight.

Maládra, a Wigin or Teale fowle.

Mal' affáre, euill doing.

Malageuoláre, to make hard or vneasie.

Malagéuole, hard, difficult, vneasie.

Malageuolézza, vneasinesse, difficultie

Malággia, a curse, as we say an ill yeere or mischiefe on him.

Malaghétta, the flower of Paradise.

Malagiáto, ill at ease, ill prouided for, ill looked vnto, hardly bestead.

Malágma, a kind of mollifying plaister.

Malagmáti, such as are hurt in the head and whose braine is toucht and offended.

Malagrádo, vnacceptable, ill accepted.

Malágro, a disease in a Hawkes head.

Malaguéta, as Grána di paradíso.

Malaguráto, vnfortunate, vnluckie.

Malahóth, a name giuen to God, that is Lord of the high Kingdomes, or else Exercise of vertues. 

Malandáre, to goe or fall into danger and destruction.

Malandáta, a going or falling in danger and destruction.

Malandáto, wasted, spent, consumed to nothing. Also straied or mis-gone.

Malandrináre, to rob by the high-way, to play the high-way-theefe or robber.

Malandríno, a robber or high-way-theefe.

Mal' ánne, an ill yeere, continuall trouble, vsed in Italie for a Curse to ones enemie, as Il mal' ánno che Dío ti dij, an ill yeere God giue thee.

Malanúro, a kind of fish.

Mála pásqua., Vsed as Mal' ánno.

Maláre, to fall sicke, to sicken.

Malarriuáre, to come to some ill.

Mála sórte, ill hap, lucke, chance or fortune.

Malatía, Maladía, a maladie, a sicknesse.

Malatíccio, sickish, subiect to sicknesse.

Maláto, sicke, sickened, crazed, fallen sicke.

Mal' attaccatíccio, any contagious euil.

Mal' auedúto, as Mal' accórto.

Mála uentúra, ill fortune, hap, or lucke.

Malauenturáre, to misaduenture.

Malauenturáto, vnfortunate.

Malauenturóso, vnhappie, vnfortunate.

Mal' auézzo, ill fashioned, vnmannerly, ill brought vp.

Malauoglienza, ill-will, dislike, hatred.

Maláuro, ill lucke, malheur, ill hap.

Malauróso, vnluckie, malhereux, vnhappie.

Malbauísco, Marsh-mallowes.

Mal cadúco, the falling sicknesse.

Mal compósto, ill framed, ill composed.

Mal cóneio, ill drest, in ill plight, ill handled, hardly bestead.

Mal conoscente, ill acknowledging.

Mal contento, displeased, malcontent.

Mal creáto, vnmannerly, ill nurtured.

Maldacóne, as Brocóne.

Mal dell' ánimo., looke A'nima.

Mal del córno, a disease in a horses necke.

Mal del pánno, a disease in a horses head.

Maldestro, vnhandsome, vnproper, vnfit.

Maldétto, cursed, banned, fore spoken.

Maldicente, ill-speaking. Also a backbiter.

Maldicenza, ill-speaking, backbiting.

Mal di febbre, a Feauer, or Ague.

Mal di mórte, a deadly disease.

Mal di petto, the heart-burning.

Mal di pietra, the stone-chollike.

Mal di púnta, a stitch, or pleurisie.

Mal dispósto, ill disposed, crazed, vnlustie. 



Mal di tísico, a consumption, or pining disease.

Male, ill, bad, euill. Also any kind of ill, badnesse, euill, or sicknesse.

Mále affáre, as Mal'affáre, ill doing.

Mále affetto, ill affected.

Maleáre, to forge, to hammer, to mallet.

Male arriuáto, ill ariued, brought to an euill passe, in ill plight, in bad taking.

Maleatióne, Malleatióne, a forging, or hammering.

Mále bólge, a place in hell vsed in Dant, a receptacle of all mischiefes.

Mále bránche, a diuels name, ill clawes, ill pawes. Vsed also for a Cat.

Mále comitiále, the falling-sicknesse.

Mále de lómbi, the paine of the reines or loynes.

Mále del orzuólo, a falling or staggring disease in a horse.

Mále de póndi, the bloodie flix.

Maledétto, as Maladétto.

Maledicenza, as Maldicenza.

Maledicéuole, as Maldicente.

Maledíco, a cursed or cursing-man, ill tongued, an euill speaker, a detracter.

Mále di mádre, a disease in many women.

Maledittióne, as Maladittióne.

Mále fámmi, a nick-name for an ill neighbour, as wrong me or harme me.

Malefattóre, a malefactor, a misdoer.

Maleferíto, a disease in a horse.

Maleficenza, ill doing.

Maleficiáre, to misdoe, to doe any euill. Also to charme or inchant.

Malefício, an ill fact, a misdeed, a bad act. Also a charme or bewitching.

Maléfico, hurtfull, ill doing, wicked.

Mále insuperbíto, ill and wickedly growen proud.

Malemerito, that deserueth ill.

Malenággia, a Curse as one would say, ill may betide him.

Malenánza, as Malenoléntia.

Máleo, Málleo, a mallet or hammer.

Maléoli, little mallets, the ankles or ankle bones. Also a kind of bolt or little dart.

Malescálco, as Mariscálco.

Mal' essere, euill being, ill plight.

Malestánte, being ill.

Malettióne., Vsed as Maledittióne.

Maleuadóre, a suretie, a baile, a pledge.

Maleuolentia, maleuolence, ill will, grudge.

Maleuolére, to hate or beare ill wil vnto.

Maléuolo, bearing ill will, spitefull.

Mal dell'ánca, broken-hipt, hip-broken.

Mal del fíco, a disease breeding in the sole of a horses foote, of euill curing some former disease therein.

Mal di língua, the sorenesse of the tongue in a horse. Also backbiting.

Mal di nápoli, the Neapolitane disease, that is the french poxe.

Mal del dósso, a hurt in the backe, which in some horses is suffered to runne so long, that it is not easie to bee cured afterward.

Malfámmi, as Malefámmi.

Malfáre, fáccio, féci, fátto, to misdoe, to doe euill, to misact, to commit euill.

Malfátto, misdone, ill done, ill made. Also a misdeed, a bad act, a fault.

Malfattoría, the arte of euill doing.

Malferíto, the name of a disease in a horse.

Malfóro, the diuels arse, a mischieuous hole, taken for a womans quaint.

Malfrancése, the french euill or pox.

Malfranciosáto, full of the french-pox.

Malfússo, an vnluckie or ill boding fellow.

Malgradéuole, as Malgrádito.

Malgradíre, to take in ill part.

Malgradíto, ill accepted, taken in ill part, displeasing.

Malgrádo, maugre, in despight.

Malgrámma, a Gold-smithes toole.

Mal gratióso, vnhandsome, without grace.

Mál' hábbia, ill may he haue.

Malhóra, an ill houre and vnluckie.

Malía, witch-craft, sorcery.

Maliárda, a witch, a sorceresse.

Maliárdo, a man witch or sorcerer.

Maliáre, to bewitch, to charme.

Maliáta, a floty or rast of timber bound together instead of a flat-boat.

Malichíte, a precious stone of the colour of greene Malloes.

Milicório, the rynde of Pomegranates. Also the Curriers or Tanners shrub.

Mali del sesso, hamoroides, piles, or chaps in the fundament.

Malíe amatórie, loue-charmes.

Malífero, ill-bearing or bring-euill.

Malificáre, to doe or commit euill.

Malificióso, full of euill doing.

Malígie, Ciues, Cibols or Scalions.

Malignánza, as Malignità.

Malignáre, to maligne, to malice, to enuie.

Malignità, malignity, spite, enuy.

Malígno, malicious, wicked, spitefull.

Mal' in arnése, ill dight, poore.

Malinconía, melancholy, blacke choler, -sadnesse, pensiuenesse.

Malincónico, melancholike, full of blacke choller, sad, sullen, pensiue.

Malinconióso, as Malincónico.

Mal' in córpo., looke A mal' in córpo.

Mal' in órdine, ill prepared.

Malióso, full of witch-craft, or charmes.

Maliscálco, as Marescálco.

Malisciálco, as Marescálco.

Malíssimo, most, or exceeding ill.

Malistálla, a Poune for cattell. 

Malítia, malice, enuie, spite. Also craft, sleight, or wile. Also badnesse or euill qualitie. Vsed also for maladie or sicknesse.

Malitiáre, to malice, to enuie, to spite.

Malitiáto, vsed for Malitióso.

Malitiosétto, some what malicious.

Malitióso, malicious, shrewd, spitefull.

Malittióne, vsed for Maledittióne.

Maliuoglienza, ill will, maleuolence.

Malíuolo, ill minded, maleuolent, churlish.

Mal'in assetto, in ill plight, in bad state.

Mal'in órdine, as Mal' in assetto.

Mal'in púnto, as Mal' in assetto.

Malleggiáre, to euill-intreate, to rifle, to ransake, or strip, and rob.

Málleo, a woodden mallet, or beetle.

Malleólo, a little woodden mallet or beetle. Also the lower part of the leg or ankle bone. Also a bundle of sticks pitched all ouer, and bound together, and set on fire, are flung ouer walles among enemies.

Malleuadóre, a baile, a suretie, a pledge.

Malleuería, baile, maineprize, or suretiship. Also a trespas, or offence.

Mállo, as Máglio.

Mállo, the barke of any tree. Also a mallet.

Malmenáre, to misuse, to euill-intreate.

Malmenáto, ill vsed, euill-intreated, brought to some hard state.

Malméndo, a fault added to another fault, fault vpon fault.

Malmerito, ill merit, or deseruing.

Mal napolitáno, the Neapolitane euill, that is, the french poxe.

Mál náto, ill-borne, id est, vnluckie.

Malnétto, vncleane, foule, defiled.

Malobátro, a tree that yeelds an oyle that perfumers vse.

Malomello, a Sweeting-apple.

Malopéno, a kind of Mallow.

Malóre, euill, harme, or ill lucke. Also any swelling blane, sore or disease.

Malósso, a choaking-bit, a hard bone to gnaw.

Málpica, the hearbe Water-cresses.

Mal prò, harmefull, that doth no good.

Malpúnto, any ill card, or that is no encounter at priméro.

Malsáno, vnholesome, vnhealthy.

Malsicúro, vnsafe, vnsure, dangerous.

Malsottíle, a consumption, a pining or lingring disease.

Málta, morter, lime, plaister of Paris. Also mudde or mire. Also a kinde of monstrous Sea-fish.

Maltáre, to morter, to lome, to parget.

Maltaruóla, a Brick-layers trowell.

Maltatóre, a Pargeter, a Plaisterer.

Maltémpo, ill weather. Also ill lucke.

Maltíccio, all manner of rubbish of bro­



ken wals. Also any bedawbing with loame or morter.

Maltíre, tísco, títo, to digest, to brooke. Also to put ouer as a hawke.

Maltolétto, as Maltólto, ill gotten or ill taken goods, any pilfring or filching.

Maltrattaménto, euill vsage, bad vsage.

Maltrattáre, to misuse or euill intreat.

Málua, Málba, the weed Mallowes.

Maluaceo, like or of Mallowes.

Maluagía, Maluasía, the Wine Malmesie.

Maluágio, wicked, bad, ill, naughty.

Maluagità, badnesse, wickednes, shrewdnesse, naughtinesse, false-hood, iniquity.

Maluarésca, Marsh-mallowes, Watermallowes, or White-mallowes.

Maluática, Malmesie wine.

Maluauísco, as Maluarésca.

Maluauóne, as Maluarésca.

Maluedére, to see with an ill will.

Maluedúto, ill seene or ill welcome.

Maluenúto, ill welcome.

Maluérde, the greene sicknesse. Also the yellowes or yellow iaundise.

Maluézzo, an ill custome, a bad habite.

Maluíccio, a Thrush, or Fieldfare.

Maluolére., sost. Ill will, enuie, being a verbe, to hate.

Maluolontiéri, vnwillingly.

Maluolúto, hated, ill willed.

Malusáre, to vse ill, to abuse, to misuse.

Malúso, an ill vse, custome or fashion.

Mamalúcco, souldiers that the Soldans of Egypt were wont to haue for their guard and chiefe strength.

Mamáu, a Machound, a Bugbeare, a Raw-head and bloudie bone.

Mámma, a pap, a dug, a mam, a breast. Also Mam, Mother-mine or Mammie, as children first call their Mothers.

Mammána, a Midwife. Also a Nurcemother.

Mammatà, thy Mammie, thy Mother.

Mammella, a litle dug, pap or teat.

Mammelláre, to sucke a dug.

Mammétta, a little Mammie or Mother.

Mammillári processi, processes in the temple bones hanging downe like the broken browes of banks, representing the fashion of dugs or teats.

Mammina, as Mammétta.

Mámmola, an old maide, or sillie virgin that will lead Apes in hell.

Mámmole, paps, dugs or teats.

Mámmole uióle, a kind of faire Violets.

Mammolíno, whosht or still as a child a sleepe at his dug.

Mámmolo, a god-father. Also a foster-father. Also an old craftie lad or babie. 

Mammóne, a kind of Cat of the mountaine.

Mammóso, hauing, or full of paps or dugs.

Mammúccia, a childs babie or puppet.

Mammucciáre, to play the puppet or babie, or to play with babies.

Mamóse, a pap or teate-peare.

Mamúcco, a kind of great foule in the Moluccos, that liueth by the aire, and is most swift in flying, in running and in swimming.

Man, as Mágno. Carloman, for Carlomágno.

Mána., Vsed for Manáia or Manára.

Manácchia, a Cornish chough.

Manacórdo, as Monacórdo.

Managétto, a kind of little Chough.

Manáia, Manára, an axe, or an adze.

Manantiále, endlesse and euercomming as are the flowings of the Sea.

Manarétta, Manaríno, a hatchet.

Manáta, a handfull, a sheafe, a bundle. Also a handling with the hand.

Manátto, a fish in India, round in shape, with two feete and a head like a Calfe.

Mánca, mano mánca, the left-hand. Also it or he wanteth or lacketh.

Mancaménto, want, lacke, defect, ayling. Also the waining of the Moone.

Mancánte, wanting, defectiue, ayling.

Mancánza, want, lacke, defect, ayling.

Mancánza délla lúna, the wane of the Moone.

Mancár di féde, to faile of word and promise.

Mancáre, to lacke, to want, to aile, to be defectiue. Also to faile, to misse, to erre. Also to fall, to abate, to defalke. Also to decrease as the tide or to wane as the Moone.

Mancatór di féde, a breaker or failer of his word.

Mancatóre, a wanter, a lacker, an ayler.

Mancheggiáre, to saile on the left-hand or larbord.

Manchéuole, wanting, defectiue.

Manchézza, as Mancánza.

Máncia, a free-gift, a new-yeeres-gift, a drinking-pennie, a handsell.

Manciáta, as Máncia. Also a baite by the way for man or horse. Also a bundle, a handfull, a wad, or wispe of any thing.

Mancináre, to play or do any thing with the left-hand. Also to dissemble.

Mancíno, a left-handed-man, left-handed. Also a blow with the left-hand.

Mancíno e drítto, both right and left-handed.

Mancipáre, to enthrall, to enbondage, to depriue of libertie. Also to sell, to let, to farme or hire by order of law.

Mancipatióne, an enthralling, an enbondaging. Also a selling, a letting, 
or farming by course of law. Also a liuerie and season.

Mancípio, a manciple, a bond-man, a thrall, a vassall. Also taken with the hand.

Manciúlla, as Maciúlla.

Mánco, lesse, lesser, not so much. Also ailing, wanting, defectiue, or imperfected. Also a maimed man, one wanting some lim, or that hath but one hand. Also the contrarie of the right hand or side, also vsed for want or defect. Also the least.

Mancóso, as Manchéuole.

Mánculo, left-handed.

Mandáia, Mandára, as Manáia.

Mandaménto, a sending for, a warrant, a commission a mittimus, a mandate.

Mandár' a chiamáre, to send, or call for.

Mandár'a crésima, to send or defer a matter vntill doomes day.

Mandár'a díre, to send word.

Mandár'a deffetto, to bring, to passe, or effect.

Mandar' al palégro, to send to ones last home.

Mandar'a mále, to consume, or waste to nothing, to send, or bring to some mischiefe.

Mandáre, to send, as it were by way of commandement, to send and signifie vnto, to let one vnderstand. Also to addresse and send vnto. Also to send for, or to call for.

Mandár giù, to send downe. Also to swallow downe, to disgest, or put ouer, as a hawke doth her meate.

Mandár' in lúngo, to prolong.

Mandaría, as Mándra.

Mandár mále, as Mandár' a mále.

Mandár per, to send for.

Mandatario, any officer, that hath power to send for another.

Mandáto, sent, sent for, addressed. Also a mandate, a command, a warrant, a mittimus.

Mandatóre, a sender.

Mandatório, a mandatory, a mittimus.

Mandatúccio, a silly commandement.

Mandestra, the right hand.

Mandestro, a right-handed-man, or blow.

Mandíbula, the mandible or iaw wherin the teeth be set and stand.

Mandiglione, a iacket, a mandillion.

Mándola, Mándorla, an Almond.

Mandoláta, an Almond tart or milke.

Mándolo, Mándorlo, an Almond-tree.

Mandóne, a continuell feeder.

Mandorlína, an Almond-plum.

Mándra, a heard or droue of any cattell. Also a fould, a poune, a pen or sheepecote for any cattell. Also a stable, a stall or cratch for fodder.

Mandrágola, Mandrágora, a man­



drake, which is of so colde a temperature, that it is vsed to cast men into deepe sleepes when they are to be cut by Chirurgions, and for other purposes in physike.

Mandráno, Mandráro, a heards-man, a Neat-heard. Also a Drouer of cattle. Also a Grazier.

Mandrétta, a little Mándra.

Mándria, as Mándra.

Mandriále, as Mandráno. Also as Madrigále.

Mandriáno, as Mandriále. Also the name of a toole that Founders vse.

Mandrítto, a right-handed, or downeright blow.

Mandrolína, a little Almond. Also a daintie trull, a prettie wench.

Manducaménto, any kind of eating meate.

Manducáre, to eate, to feede, to chew.

Manducatióne, any eating, or feeding.

Mandúco, a disguised or vglie picture to make children afraid, as wee say, a snap-dragon, a turke, a bug-beare.

Máne, earlie, betimes, in the morning.

Manécchia, the haft or handle of any thing.

Maneggiábile, as Maneggiéuole.

Maneggiáre, to manage, to handle, or touch with the hands. Also to exercise, to trade, to solicite or follow businesse.

Maneggiatóre, a manager, a handler.

Maneggiaménto, a managing, a handling, a dealing, a negotiation, a trading.

Maneggiánte, as Maneggiéuole.

Maneggiáre a repolóni, to pace, to trot or gallop a horse too and fro in one path, and still returne to the same.

Maneggiére, as Maneggiatóre, a manager, one that doth handle his businesse well.

Maneggiéuole, manageable, that may be handled, tractable, pliable, gentle.

Manéggio, importance, consequence, great imployment of affaires, management, businesse, handling, negotiation.

Manéggio di cauálli, a riding-place. Also the arte of managing of horses.

Maneggióne, a Trunion, or Munion, so called of Carpenters.

Manególdo, a hangman, an executioner.

Manelle, sheafes, or handfuls. Also bracelets.

Manente, a hiding, or remaining.

Manéra, as Maniera. Also a hatchet.

Manére, mángo, manéi, manúto, to remaine, to abide, to stay, to dwell.

Maneróso, mannerly, full of manners.

Manescállo, Manescálco, as Marescálco.

Manescaménte combatténdo, fighting lustily with bestirring the hands.

Manésco, readie or nimble-handed, working with his hands, a tall man of his hands. Aso that may be handled.

Manestra, looke Menestra.

Manétra, a muffe, a snuffkin, a mitton.

Manétte, manickles, or giues for hands. Also graplers, or gantlets, or mittons, or manchons, or long gloues.

Marézza di férro, an arming gantlet.

Manézze, as Manétte. Also bracelets.

Manfrígolí, a kinde of daintie forced dish.

Manganáre, to presse all manner of clothes. Also to throw, to cast or hurle great stones or weights or engines of warre, as our forefathers vsed at the siege of Townes. Also to frame or modell in pastboord, or such light stuffe.

Manganáro, a presser of linnen clothes. Also a framer of casting engines.

Manganeggiáre, as Manganelláre.

Manganella, a leauer to heaue or lift vp any great weight. Also an engine of warre or frame to cast wilde-fire or great weights and stones into the enemies campe or any besieged place. But now vsed for a crane such as be at the custome house in London.

Manganelláre, to lift, heaue or raise vp with a Manganella. Also to cast, hurle or throw with a Manganella.

Manganello, some part of a Mill. Also a little Fustian-mill. Also a kind of poore garment that shepheards weare. Also a kinde of bag-pipe. Also as Mángano. Looke Súcula.

Manganése, a kind of minerall stone. Also a kinde of stuffe to make glasses with.

Mángano, a kind of presse to presse fustians, buckerams or any linnen clothes to giue them a glasse or luster. Also as Manganáro.

Mangáno, a certaine warlike instrument to fling or dart stones and weapons as Manganella.

Mangeóla, as Mangétta.

Mangeríe, all manner of eatings or meates. Also as Angaríe.

Mangétta, a Runt, a Steere, a Heafer.

Mangétto, a Runt or yongue Steere or Calfe called a yeereling. Also a kind of meat.

Mangiábile, that may be eaten.

Mangiacadenázzi, a swagrer, an eater of iron boults.

Mángia-córpi, a stone that consumeth all flesh and deuoureth all flesh.

Mangiáglia, all manner of eatings or foode, all manner of feeding or bellie-cheere.

Mangiaguadágno, an eate-gaine, a fellow that eates another mans gaines, that is good for nothing but to steale another mans dinner away.

Mángia-guérra, a kind of strong wine in Greece.

Mangiamári, a kind of ship or vessell in Ormuz that brooketh the Seas well.

Mangiaménti, as Mangiáglia.

Mangiapáne, a fellow that is good for nothing but to eate bread.

Mangiáre, to eate, to feed. Also meate or food.

Mangiáre a mále in córpo, to eate against stomake, as it were with loathing.

Mangiár'a scrócco, to eate and drinke or make good cheere shiftingly at other mens cost.

Mangiáre e bére, to eate and drinke. Also all manner of meate and drinke.

Mangiár' in tinello, to eate in a hutch, to feed in the common Hall among the basest kind of people in some Noblemans house.

Mangiár pan pentíto, to eate bread of repentance, to feed vpon repentance.

Mangiatiuo, eatable, that may be eaten.

Mangiatóia, a manger, a crib, a cratch, a bowzey, a staule for cattell.

Mangiatóre, an eater, a feeder, a deuourer.

Mangiatório, consisting of eating.

Mángio, as Mánzo.

Mangiolíno, a kind of weight in Góa.

Mangiólo, as Mangétto.

Mangióne, a great eater, a glutton. Also vsed for a great Oxe or Boeuf.

Mangiucóne, a glutton, a deuourer.

Mangiúnte, a man giúnte, with ioined or clasped hands.

Mangúrro, Io tì darò quálche mangúrro.

Máni, hands. Also files, rowes, or rankes of men or things. Also the good or bad Angels, Ghostes or Spirits of dead men. Also elfes, hobgoblins or such misshapen spirits or imaginarie ghosts that Nurces fray their children with to make them leaue crying, as wee say bugbeares or raw-head and bloudy bone. Also taken for the punishments that the Soules of the dead abide.

Mánia, a disease rising of too much abundance of good bloud hauing recourse to the head, which causeth the partie to bee braine-sicke and to fall into furie and rage, madnesse, furiousnesse or braine-sicknesse.

Maniáre, to be or become mad, frantike, furious or braine-sicke.

Mánica, any kind of sleeue, manch or manchon. Also as Mánico.

Mánica diferro, a clout of iron to couer the axell-tree.

Mánica d'un Elefánte, as Probólide.

Manicáre, to sleeue any garment. Also 



to haft or handle any weapon. Vsed also for to eate or feede.

Manicarétti, small minced meates, forced dishes, daintie sauces or quelquechoses.

Manicatóre, a sleeuer. Also a hafter. Also an eater or feeder.

Manicatório, consisting of feeding and be stirring ones chaps.

Manicelle, Maníne, little hands or bracelets.

Mániche, sleeues, manches, manchons.

Mániche di brodóni, a kind of hanging sleeues.

Mániche di ferro, sleeues of maile or iron.

Manichétto, a little haft or handle.

Manichíno, a hand-muffe, a snufkin, a manchet.

Manichrísto, a Manus-christi.

Mánico, a handle, a haft, a helue.

Mánico di scópa, a broome handle. Bocace doth vse it for a hard turd.

Manicóne, a great sleeue or manchon, a muff, a snufkin. Also as Doricnióne.

Manicórdo, a rigoll or claricords.

Manicótto, any sleeue or manchon.

Manicóttolo, as Manicótto.

Maniéra, manner, fashion, guise, vse, custome, stile or course. Vsed also for a kind or sort. Also for qualitie. Also for mannerlinesse and ciuilitie.

Manieráno, manageable, that may bee handled.

Maniéro, that is manageable, gentle or tractable, a reclaimed Hawke. It hath also beene vsed anciently for a Mannor-house.

Manicróso, mannerly, full of manners or gentlenesse. Also pliable, flexible or manageable.

Manifattóre, a handie-crafts-man.

Manifattúra, handie-worke or labour.

Manifatturáre, to frame by Arte or hands.

Manifestaménto, a manifesting, a declaring, a demonstrating, a publishing.

Manifestáre, to manifest, to reueale, to publish or make apparant, to diuulge.

Manifestário, a notorious and most manifest man, taken in ill part.

Manifestatióne, a manifestation.

Manifestatíuo, that may be manifested, reuealed, published or diuulged.

Manifestatório, as Manifestatíuo.

Manifestéuole, that may be manifested.

Manifesto, manifest, vndoubted, apparant.

Manígli, bracelets, manicles.

Manigliáre, to manicle, or put on bracelets.

Maníglie, bracelets. Also manicles.

Manigoldággine, a tricke or part of a hang-man.

Manigoldáre, to play the hang-man. 

Manigoldaríe, hang-mans trickes.

Manigoldeggiáre, as Manigoldáre.

Manigóldo, a hang-man, an executioner.

Manigoldóne, a notable roague.

Maníli, bracelets. Also manicles.

Maninconeggiáre, to be melancholike.

Maninconía, as Malinconía.

Manincónico, as Malincónico.

Maninconióso, sad, melancholious.

Maníne, little pretty hands. Also a kind of round and white Mushroms.

Maníni, hath beene vsed for bracelets worne vpon the hand-wrest.

Manióso, furious, mad, brainesicke.

Manípola, a handfull, a gripe, a bundle, a bottle. Also a part of so many rankes or files of souldiers throughout a battle or squadron of pikes drawne foorth to march through any streight or passage. Some thinke it to be but a band of ten souldiers vnder one Captaine, as it were but a handful in comparison of a greater number. Also a gantlet.

Manipoláre, Manipuláre, to gripe or claspe with the hands. Also to reduce into bottles or handfuls, to bundle vp. Also to arme with a gantlet.

Manípolo, Manípulo, a handfull, a little bundle, a wad. Also a gantlet. Also a racket to play at tennis.

Manipotente, mighty of his hands.

Manipotentia, might of hands.

Maniscalcheria, as Marescalchería.

Maniscálco, as Marescálco.

Maniscíntola, a lazie slothfull companion that houlds his thumbe vnder his girdle. Also lazinesse, sloth or lithernesse.

Manízza, as Manézza.

Manízze, mittons or hand muffes. Also gantlets.

Manliáno, cruell, seuere, as Manlius Torquatus was.

Mánna del cielo, Manna or the dew of heauen, which in the Scriptures is said to be a delicate thing that God caused to fall from heauen in maner of deaw, white and like a Coriander seede, and very pleasant in eating, in physike it is a kind of deaw congealed on plants and trees in certaine whot countries which is gathered and reserued and giuen as a gentle purge for choler.

Mannáia, Mannára, as Manáia.

Mannaríno, a chiefe Ram, or other cattell that leades the whole flocke or heard a Bel-weather.

Máno, a hand. Also power, authority, assistance, aide, helpe protection sway or dominion. Also a ranke, a row or file of any thing. Also a maine set, cast at or drawne at play. Also a kind of weight in Ormuz. Also the hand of a dyall.

Manoále, any handy-craft-man, Manouále.

Manoáldo, as Manouáldo.

Manoalménte, manually, handily.

Manócchia, a handfull. Vsed also for a gantlet.

Manócchie, turfes or earth.

Manocórdo, as Manicórdo.

Máno destra, or drítto, the right-hand.

Máno di ferro, an iron gantlet.

Manoella, a bar or stang. Also a handspike, a leuer or barre or crow. Also a Falde.

Máno mánca, the leaft-hand.

Máno mancína, the leaft-hand.

Máno rítta, the right-hand.

Máno sinístra, the leaft-hand.

Máno stánca, the leaft or weary hand.

Máno strétta, a nigardly hand, a close-hand.

Máno zánca, the leaft-hand.

Manométtere, métto, mísi, mésso, to manumit to enfranchise, to set at liberty. Also to begin or set a broach any thing.

Manomésso, manumitted, enfranchised, set at liberty. Also begun or set a broach.

Manomissióne, a making free, a manumission or deliuerance out of bondage.

Manondiméno, but neuerthelesse, but that.

Manópola, as Manípola.

Manoprétio, reward for handy-labour.

Manoualdería, an administration or prouing of ones will. Also suretiship, baile or maine-prise.

Manouáldo, an Administrator of ones will. Also a surety or baile.

Manóuale, manuall, of or belonging to ones hands. Also a handy-crafts-man, a trades-man, a day-labourer. Also that may be handled or wrought with hands.

Manoualménte, manually, artificially, with handy-labour.

Manouelle, little handfuls, bundles or sheaues. Also little peeces or parcels. Also the name of a Rope-makers toole.

Man rítto, as Mandrítto.

Man rouescio, a backe-blow.

Mansáno, a Coopers-toole or some part of a tub or barrell.

Mánse, meeke, humble, milde, gentle.

Mansinístro, a blow giuen with the left-hand.

Mansionáro, a houseling, a home-keeper.

Mansióne, a Mansion-house or abideing place.

Manso, meeke, milde, humble, gentle.

Mansório, a muscle, which springing in circled sort from the throate-bone, and from the first bone of the vpper iaw, 



moueth the neather iaw.

Mansuefáre, fáccio, féci, fátto, to enmilden, to make humble, meeke, or tractable.

Mansuefátto, made milde, meeke, or humble.

Mansuetáre, to enmilden, to humble, to make or become meeke.

Mansuéto, milde, meeke, lowly, humble.

Mansuetúdine, mildnesse, meekenesse, lowlinesse.

Mánta, a mantle, a robe, a long cloke.

Mantacáre, to blow with bellowes.

Mantáco, a paire of bellowes.

Mantacúzzo, as Mantáio.

Mantáio, the name of a Gold-smiths toole.

Mantáre, to enrobe, to enmantle, to cloke.

Mantáro, a riding-cloke, or vpperfrocke.

Mánte, a diuiner or guesser, a foreteller of things to come.

Mantefétti, a paire of bellowes.

Mantegáte, a kinde of daintie paste-meate.

Manteghilia, as Mantegáte.

Mantelétto, as Mantilétto.

Mantelláccio, a filthie great course cloke. Also an hypocrite vnder course clothes.

Mantelláre, to enmantle, to cloke, to couer, to shroud. Also to flatter and cog.

Mantelláro, a cloke, or mantle-maker.

Mantellétti, little clokes. Also shrouds shelters, penthouses, vpper couers.

Mantellína, a little loose mantle or mantlet or mandillion, as women weare ouer their gownes.

Mantellizzáre, to mantle. Also to flatter or fawne vpon, to court one with faire words or giue court-holy-water.

Mantello, any kind of mantle or cloke. Also the coate or colour of a horse or any other beast. Also a kind of broad flat-fish.

Mantenére, tengo, tenni, tenúto, to maintaine, to vphold, to sustaine, to protect, to backe, to countenance, to defend and keepe in state.

Manteniménto, maintenance, sustenance, vpholding, protection, backing.

Mantenitóre, a maintainer, an vpholder.

Mantenúto, maintained, vpheld.

Mantía, diuinacion, foretelling of things to come. Also a kind of bush.

Mántica, a bag, a wallet, a budget, a capcase. Also the broad boord of a paire of bellowes.

Manticciáro, a maker of bellowes.

Manticciuólo, a little poore silly cloake. 

Mántice, a paire of bellowes. Also the guts whereby euery creature drawes breath, the lungs.

Manticello, as Manticciuólo.

Mántici, as Mántice, bellowes.

Mántico, as Mántice, a paire of bellowes.

Manticóra, a wilde beast in India, with three rankes of teeth, clouenfooted, face and eares like a man, bodied as a Lyon, with a sting in his taile as a Scorpion, a voice sounding as a flute and trumpet together, and couets much mans flesh.

Mantíglia, a kinde of clouted creame which we call a foole or trifle.

Mantíle, a boord-cloth, a table-cloth, a spredding-cloth, a napkin.

Mantilétto, a napkin, a drinking or cupboord-cloth. Also a couering or penthouse made of boordes to keepe and shelter ordinance vpon a platforme from raine and foule weather, called of vs a houell or shed.

Mánto, a mantle, a robe, a long vpper garment, a cloke. Also the coate or colour of a horse or any beast.

Mantóne, a great robe or mantle.

Mantouaríe, Mantoan or bawdy tricks.

Mantrauerso, a crosse-blow.

Manuále, as Manouále.

Manualísta, a handy-crafts-man.

Manualménte, as Manoualménte.

Manuário, any thing gotten by handie-labour.

Manúbia, the spoile taken of a noble person that yeeldeth himselfe prisoner, or the ransome that is made of him. Also the pray or booty taken from enemies. Also the Generals or chiefe Captaines share of any booty or spoile.

Manubiále, partayning to spoiles.

Manubrétte, shooe-buckles, buckles for buskins.

Manucáre, to eat or feede hungerly.

Manucatóre, an eater or hungry feeder.

Manúche, a fine-coloured bird in India which neuer toucheth the ground but when he is dead.

Manucodiáta, the Paradise-bird, which is said to haue no feete.

Manudúrre, to lead by the hand.

Manuduttióne, a leading by the hand.

Manuella, as Manoella.

Manuelle, as Fálde.

Manufáre, to worke or make by hand.

Manufátto, made or wrought by hand.

Manufattúra, handie-worke, or handie-workemanship.

Manumésso, as Manomésso.

Manuméttere, as Manométtere.

Manumissióne, as Manomissióne.

Manupretio, as Manopretio.

Manútia, the plough taile.

Manúto., Looke Manére, remained. 

Manúzza, a little hand or bracelet.

Mánza, a yoong Cow or Heifer. Also a prettie wench or lasse. Also a mans loue, mistris, or sweet-heart. Also as Máncia.

Man zánca, the left-hand.

Manzétto, a yong Calfe, Runt or Steere.

Mánzo, a yoong Runt, Steere or Bullocke.

Maóna, a kinde of ship or hulke for burden.

Mapertánto, yet or but for all that.

Máppa, a Map, a Tipe or Carde.

Mappamóndo, the Map of the world. Also the world at will, or pleasure.

Mappello, a kind of poison or sublimate.

Ma púre, but yet for all that.

Maraboláno, as Miroboláno.

Maragóne, a Cormorant.

Marána, a kind of hulke or hoy. Some haue vsed it for a light Pinnace.

Maranello, a yoong pig or porkeling.

Marangonáre, to play the Carpenter.

Marangóne, a Carpenter, a Wright. Also a Cormorant.

Maráno, a nick-name for Spaniards, that is, one descended of Iewes or Infidels and whose Parents were neuer christned, but for to saue their goods will say they are Christians. Also as Marána.

Marasándola, a water Lizard or Newte.

Marásca, a kind of soure Cherrie.

Marásco, a soure Cherrie-tree.

Marásmo, the third degree or extremitie of an Hectike and consuming Feuer, when vnnaturall heate hath so preuailed in the substantiall parts, that the naturall moisture thereof is cleane exhausted, and thereby is become incurable.

Marasmóde, a kind of Hectike-feauer following a burning Ague so farre spread as it consumeth the humor of the whole bodie.

Marásso, a venemous Viper.

Maráthro, garden Fennell.

Marauedis, pícciola monéta in spágna, foure and thirtie of them make sixe-pence sterling.

Marauíglia, a maruell, a wonder.

Marauigliáre, to maruell, to wonder.

Marauigliársi, to wonder or admire at any thing.

Marauiglióso, maruellous, wondrous.

Márca, a bound, a confine, a limite or marches of any country or dominion, thereof came the title of Marchése: for, he was called a Marques that had the charge of some bordering country, or that kept the Marches. Also a marke, a stampe, a print, or branding iron. Also a coine called a Marke. Also a kind of weight of siluer. It hath also (but very strangely) beene vsed 



for a horse or steede.

Márca., Vsed of Dante for the race or course of a mans life.

Márca mortále, mortall life or race.

Marcantáre, to marte, to marchandize, to cheapen, to bargaine, to trade.

Marcánte, a Marter, a Marchant, a Chapman, a Trader.

Marcantésco, marchant-like.

Marcantía, any kind of marchandize.

Marcáre, to marke, to brand, to stampe.

Marcasíno, a stone whereof Mill-stones are made.

Marcasíta, as Marchesíta.

Marcello, a coine currant in Rome.

Marcessíbile, corruptible, that may rot.

Marcézza, rottennesse, putrefaction.

Marchesána, a Ladie-marques.

Marchesáta, a woman hauing her monethly flowres running vpon her.

Marchesáto, a Marquisate, or Marquisdome.

Marchésco, of or belonging to Saint Marke, the protector, or Saint of Venice.

Marchése, a Lord Marquesse, vsed also for the monethly flowres of a woman: and therefore when a woman in Italy hath them, if any man come to her she will say, Il Signor Marchése è in cása non si può entráre.

Marchesíta, a Marquesite, or fire-stone.

Marchétto, a little coine in Italy.

Márchia, a march, or marching.

Marchiáre, to march in order by sound of drum. Also to marke or brand.

Márchio, a branding-iron. Also a brand or marke vpon any horse, or other thing. Also as Colíbro.

Márchio délla stadéra, a counterpoise, or any thing in the skales to make euen weight.

Márcia, as Márchia, but properly any kind of rotten matter, corruption, or putrefaction comming from any filthie sore or fistula.

Marciacótto, the mettall whereof Venice glasses are made, as it is boiling in the pots within the furnaces.

Marciaménto, a marching. Also a rotting.

Marciánte, marching, going in order.

Marciapáne, a marchpane, a punterfish.

Marciáre, to march, or goe in order.

Marcidíre, dísco, díto, to rot, to putrifie.

Márcido, rotten, putrifide. Also withered, flaggie, drooped, fainted.

Marciliána, a kind of brode great hulke.

Márcio, rotten, adle, putrifide. Also a lurch or maiden set at any game.

Márcio nel giuóco., Lat. Geminat a sponsio.

Marcíre, císco, cíto, to rot, to adle.

Márcita, as Márcia.

Marcíto, as Márcio.

Márco, a marke, or brand or stamp vpon any thing. Also a weight that Goldsmiths vse. Also a coine called a marke.

Marcózza, a kind of lurch-game.

Mardóre, a beast called a Martinet.

Máre, the Sea, the maine Ocean.

Marea, the tide, ebbe, or flow of the Sea.

Mareggiáre, to keepe the Sea or course thereof. Also to flote or hull vpon the Sea. Also to goe by Sea, or in Ship.

Mareggiáta, as Marezzata. Also the course or tide of the Sea.

Marémma, the Sea-strond, or shore, or as we say in Norfolke, the washes.

Maremmáno, of, borne, dwelling or pertaining neere the Sea-shore.

Marénda, as Merénda.

Marendáre, as Merendáre.

Maréue, a kind of faire great Cherrie.

Mareótide, a kind of wine or grape.

Marescálco, a marshall of a camp, towne, or house. Also a farrier, or horsesmith.

Marescalchería, a Marshalsie, or Marshalship. Also a Farriers forge, or shop.

Maresciállo, as Marescálco.

Marése, as Marea. Also any marish ground.

Maresíno, the wash of the Sea.

Marétta, a floating or hulling of the Sea, the wash or billowing of the Sea.

Marezzáta, a Sea-flud, or Sea-flowing, the wash or billowing of the Sea.

Márga, a kind of earth named marle, which is a fat clay and chalke together to fatten, dung, or manure fields. Also a plough-share, or hedge-bill, or pickaxe.

Margare, to marle, dung, mucke, or manure with marle.

Margaríta, a pearle or margarite. Also a deizie-flowre.

Margaritáro, one that pierceth or boareth pearles. Also a maker of bugles.

Margaritíne, seed-pearles, or bugles.

Margaúlzo, a strange bird in India.

Margello, snot or sniuell of ones nose.

Margentína, a kind of wine or grape.

Margináre, to marginate, to leaue or make a margine or side. Also to heale vp a scarre or wound. Also to saile or keepe alongst and close to a shore.

Márgine, a margine, a brimme, a brinke, a border, an edge or side of any thing. Also a signe, a marke or scarre of any cut or hurt healed vp.

Maginóso, that hath a side or margine.

María órba, a play called hood-man-blinde.

María, as much to say as illumination. Vsed also for the Pole-starre. 

Maríche, a wilde beast in China, that hath a body like a Lyon, a face like a woman, and a taile like a Scorpion.

Maricónda, a kind of little pies or chewets vsed in Italy. Also a kinde of creame.

Marína, of or belonging to the Sea or Sea-coast. Also the Sea-coast it selfe.

Marináccio, the filthie smell or vapour of the Sea at a low water.

Marináio, as Marináro, a Mariner.

Marináre, to trauell or goe by Sea, or along the Sea-coast. Also to play the Mariner. Also to dresse or souse fish with salt and vineger and spice, to make it keepe long. Also to storme, to chafe and rage as the Sea doth. Also to skold and wrangle aloud that all may heare.

Marinarésca árte, the arte of Sea-faring, the Marincrs arte.

Marinarésco, Mariner or Sea-man-like. Also of or belonging to the Sea.

Marinarézza, the arte of Nauigation, or Sea-faring trade. Also the whole crew of Mariners belonging to one Ship, or to an whole fleete.

Marináro, a Sea-man, a Mariner, a Sailer.

Marináto pésce, soused, or marlet fish.

Maricusach, as Maríche.

Maríne, Marinelle, soure Cherries.

Marinella, Setwall, Valerian, or Capons-taile.

Marinelle, as Maríne, soure Cherries.

Marinería, as Marinarézza.

Marinésco, as Marinarésco,

Marinése, as Marinarésco.

Maríno, of or belonging to the Sea, borne or bred in the Sea, neere or bordering vpon the Sea. Pesce maríno, Sea-fish. Vérde maríno, Sea-water greene.

Maríno pescatóre, a kind of Sea-frog.

Maríntóndo, a kind of bird.

Marioláre, to play the cutpurse.

Mariolarie, cutpurse, or cunnie-catching tricks.

Mariólo, a cutpurse, a cunnie-catcher.

Mariscálco, a Marshall, or gouernor of Camp, or Court.

Marísche, the piles, or hemorrhoides.

Marísci, a kind of Figs.

Mariscialláre, to marshall, to gouerne, or direct.

Marisciállo, as Mariscállo.

Mariscone, the smooth rush.

Maritábile, as Maritéuole.

Maritáccio, a filthie husband.

Maritággio, a mariage, a wedding.

Maritále, of or pertaining to a husband.

Maritáre, to marrie, to wed, to spouse.

Maritáta, a wife, a maried woman.

Maritáto, wedded, a maried man.

Maritello, an vnable husband. 



Maritéssa, a wife that weares the breeches, and commands her husband.

Maritéuole, mariagealle.

Marítimo, as Maríno.

Maríto, a husband, a wedded man.

Mariuóla, a cunnie-catching whore.

Mariuolággine, a cutpurses qualitie.

Mariuoláre, to play the cunning cutpurse.

Mariuolía, a cutpurses tricke.

Mariuólo, as Mariólo, a cunning cutpurse.

Marízzo, as Marezzáta.

Marmáglia, a crew of rascalitie, a confused companie, a rabble of people.

Marmaríta, the hearbe Beare-breech.

Marmaritíno, as Marmaríta.

Marmégge, a kind of water-foule.

Marminiliáni, Figs, or other fruites, resembling dugs, or paps.

Marmíta, a flesh-pot, or pipkin.

Marmiteggiáre, to frequent flesh-pots.

Marmitóne, fr. a slouenlie lick-dish, or kitchin-haunter.

Mármo, any kind of marble.

Marmócchio, a simple gull, a noddie-foole.

Mármo míschio, mingled, or speckled marble.

Marmoráto, marbled.

Marmoreo, of a marble kind or colour.

Marmoríno, as Marmoreo.

Marmoríre, rísco, ríto, to enmarble, to make or become hard as marble.

Marmoróso, as Marmoreo.

Marmotána, a Marmotan or kinde of Cat as big as a Brocke or Badger.

Marmótta, a marmoset, a pug. Also a childes babie.

Máro, a kind of drug vsed in perfumes.

Maroácche, the fish Mégge bloted or dried in the smoke.

Maróbio, as Marrobiástro.

Maroelle, the piles or hemorrhoides.

Marólla, the marrow of bones.

Marollóso, full of marrow, marrowie.

Maroncíni, a kind of simnell or cracknell.

Maróma, un' áncora d'argento fermáta di úna maróma di séta.

Maronéo,  kind of wine.

Maróni, a kind of male great Chesnuts.

Maróso, moorish, or fennie, or boggie, full of rotten waters or pudles.

Maróso, stormie, rough, blustring.

Márra, a mattocke, a pick-axe.

Marrána, a kind of ship or hulke.

Márre, some part of a horses backe.

Marrobiástro, Marrube, Horehound, or Egrimonie.

Marróbio, as Marrobiástro.

Marrochíno, Marocco or Spanish-leather.

Marróne, a great mattocke or pick-axe.

Marróso uíno, turned-wine, wine that hath lost his strength. 

Marrouescio, as Manrouescio, a backblow.

Marrúbio, as Marrobiástro.

Marrúcca, the Ram or Harts-thorne. Also a hempe or flaxe-pit to rot it in.

Marruffino, the yongest prentise in a house, a drudging seruant. Also a swabber in a ship.

Marsiliána, a kind of ship or hulke.

Marsióne, the Merlane fish.

Marsóri, a kind of pot or pitcher of glasse.

Marsúpio, a pouch or purse. Also a kind of pot for Alchimists.

Martagnóne, a kinde of hearbe and flower.

Martánica, Goates-rue or Italian-fitch.

Mártaro, as Mártora.

Márte, Mars the God of warre. Also warre or battle. Also Mars one of the seauen Planets. Also the second day of the weeke called Tuesday. Also the mettall iron, according to the Alchimists phrases.

Márte aperto, ouert or open warre.

Martedi, the day Tuesday.

Martedì grásso, Shroue-tuesday.

Marteggiáre, to follow mars or warres, to professe armes.

Martegóne, as Martagnóne.

Martelláre, to forge, to hammer. Also to make one iealous or appassionate. Also to beate, to thump or knocke, and by metaphore to vexe and punish.

Martellatóre, a hammerer or forger.

Martellétto, a litle hammer.

Martello, a hammer. Also iealousie in loue, panting or throbbing of the heart, an earnest desiring of a thing absent, Sonáre le campáne a martello, to ring the bels backward as in times of warre, of danger or of fire.

Márte occúlto, secret warre or vnderhand.

Martéra, a boulting or kneading-tub.

Martiále, a Martiall-man, a Martialist.

Martialísta, a Martialist or Marsetman.

Martigéno, begotten of Mars.

Martilógio., Vsed for a Calander.

Martinácci, a kind of rauenous Cormorant.

Martinella, the name of a great common bell in Florence, which they ring out in times of warre or imminent danger.

Martinello, a bender, a gaffell or racke of a crosse-bow. Also a wrench or winch that Gunners vse. Also a kind of instrument to heaue or raise vp ordinance and other heauie things. Also a familiar Spirit or hobgoblin that waites vpon witches or enchanters.

Martinétto, as Martinello.

Martingála, a kind of slops, trouses or breeches. Also a martingale for a horse. 

Martinísti, Martinists.

Martíno, taken for a mans bum or arse.

Martínopescatóre, a fish resembling a frog, in Latin Piscatrix. Also a Kings fisher.

Mártire, a Martir, one suffering for and in witnesse of another.

Martire, as Martírio.

Martírio, martiredome, affliction.

Martirizzáre, to martire, to torment.

Mártora, a beast called a Martine.

Mártore di uílla, a base country clowne, a rusticall swaine, a filthy hinde.

Martorella, a yoong Martinet.

Mártori, the furre of Martins.

Martória, as Martorélla.

Martoriáre, as Martirizzáre.

Martorizzáre, as Martirizzáre.

Martório, as Martírio.

Martóro, as Martírio.

Martúrio, as Martírio.

Marúbia, Marube, Egrimonie, Horehound.

Marúca, as Marrúca.

Marúcco, a prating selfe-conceited foole.

Marúda, a kind of Greeke measure.

Marulóse, a kind of salt or soused-fish.

Marúzza, a kind of rugged shell-fish.

Márza, as Márcia. Also a yoong shoote, impe, graffe, syen or bud.

Marzacótto, a toole that Potters vse.

Marzaiuólo, a kinde of wheate that is ripe in three moneths. Also a Hagardhawke.

Marzapáne, a marchpaine. Also a fish called a Punter.

Marzáro., Vsed for a Shooe-maker.

Marzaruólo, as Marzaiuólo.

Marzemíno, a kind of wine, in Latine Armisium.

Marziliána, a kind of ship or hulke.

Marzíre, as Marcíre, to rot.

Márzo, as Márcio. Also the moneth of March.

Marzócca, a kind of game at cardes.

Marzócco, a nick-name for a Dog, an Island-cur. Also a pug or puscat.

Marzolíno, that is sowed or groweth in March. Also a kind of daintie cheese made about Florence.

Marzóne, a Gudgeon fish.

Mascagnía, subtletie, knauerie, craftinesse, warinesse, wilinesse, slyenesse.

Mascágno, knauish, slie, craftie, subtle, wilie, wittie, warie.

Mascalzonáre, to play the Mascalzóne.

Mascalzóne, an abiect, a base chuffe, a shifting companion, a filthy raskall.

Máscara, any kind of maske or vizard.

Mascaráre, to maske, to mum, to cloke.

Mascaráta, a maske, a masking.

Mascaróne, a filthy vizard or maske. Also antike faces vpon shoulder pieces.

Mascárpa, a kind of curds or fresh cheese. 



Mascella, a iaw or cheeke, as Mandíbula.

Mascelláre, belonging to the iaw-bone.

Mascellári, the grinders or iaw-teeth.

Mascellóne, a blow or whirret on the iawes.

Mascellóni, great iawes or big cheekes.

Máschera, as Máscara, as Beffána.

Mascheránte, masking. Also a masker.

Mascheráre, as Mascaráre.

Mascheráro, a masker, a vizard-maker.

Mascheráta, as Mascarata.

Mascherezzáre., Vsed for Macchiáre.

Máschia guerra, open or earnest warre.

Maschiézza, malenesse, the male gender.

Máschile, of the masculine or man-kind.

Máschio, a male, a mankind, a masculine. Also as Máscolo. Also a keepe, a fort or tower in the midst of a Towne or Castle.

Maschiofémina, an Hermafrodite.

Máscina, a grinding or mill-stone.

Mascináre, to grinde as corne.

Mascinatóre, a Grinder of corne.

Mascolári dénti, iaw-teeth, cheeke-teeth.

Mascoláti, great trailes of veines.

Mascolíno, as Máschile.

Máscolo, Máschio, a piece of Ordinance called a chamber wherein the powder is placed, vsed in all sorts of Petrier.

Masè, but if, but what if.

Maselli, some thing about minerals.

Másena., Vsed for Mácina.

Masenétta, a kind of sea-fish.

Ma se púre, but yet if, put case that.

Masgaláno, sp. , the brauest, finest or most gay in shew and with least cost.

Masnáda, a crew, a rout, a knot, or company of theeues or good fellowes.

Masnadáre insiéme, to goe in troupes, in knots or in companies as theeues.

Masnadiero, a high-way theefe, a robber. Also a swagrer or swash-buckler. Also a highway wanderer or earth-planet.

Másolo, cánape filáto a másolo. 

Maspéto, the leaues of Laserwort.

Mássa, a masse, a lump, a pile, a cub, a heape, a huddle, or Chaos of any thing.

Mássa, a word vsed at gresco or hazard, as much to say, a by, or at the by.

Massacára, a kind of Prawne or Shrimp.

Mássa di fichi, a fraile or toppet of figges.

Massáia, as Massára.

Massára, a huswife, a kitchin maide.

Massáre, to a masse, to heape or get together.

Massáre, sost. a weed that yeeldeth a good smell, or mosse gathered of from grapes.

Massáre, to play or cast at the by, at hazard or gresco.

Massário, as Massáro.

Massarítie, all manner of househould stuffe or necessary implements in a kitchin.

Massaritióso, thrifty, full of good husbandry.

Massáro, Massáio, a good husband or thriuing man, one that lookes well to husbandry. Also a groome, an ouerseer or a bailife of an other mans husbandry. Also a stocke-fish.

Massáta, as Mássa, an amassing.

Masséra, as Massára.

Massería, is commonly taken for a Country house, Farme, place or habitation.

Masseritiáre, to husband thriftily.

Masserítie, as Massarítie.

Masseritioso, as Massaritióso.

Masséro, as Massáro.

Mássi, rockes or cragges or heapes of stones.

Massíccio, massie, lumpish, substantiall.

Mássima, a maxime, an axiom, a rule a principle. Also as Cóppa di Gióue.

Massimaménte, as Mássime, especially.

Mássime, especially, namely, most of all.

Mássimo, greatest or most in estimation.

Massíuo, as Massíccio.

Másso, a high rocke, a cragge, a cliffe. Also a heape, a lump, an amasse.

Mastella, a washing or bucking tub, any woodden vessell as a trough, a boule, a Bruers or Vintners fat or vat. Also a kinde of measure of liquid things.

Mastelláro, a Cooper or Tub-maker.

Mastelláta, as Mastellétta.

Mastellétta, a little tub, a woodden boule, tray, trough, or vessell of brasse at a cup-boord to put pots in. Also a round marmelade box.

Mastellíno, as Mastellétta.

Mastello, as Mastella.

Mástica, as Mástice.

Masticáre, to chew, to champ, to play on the bit.

Masticatório, a Champing-bit for a horse.

Masticatúra, a chewing, a champing.

Mástice, the gumme called Mastike.

Masticéne, the Thistle mastike.

Mastináre, to play the Mastiue or Curre.

Mastíno, a Mastiue-dogge, a Bandogge.

Mastio, as Máschio.

Másto, an hearbe.

Mástra, as Maéstra, chiefe, head.

Mástra dattía, the chiefe office of or belong to a Custome-house. 

Mástra pórta, a chiefe or master gate.

Mastráre, to master, to teach, to instruct.

Mastricáre, to glew together, to patch.

Mástrice, all manner of glew, or size.

Mástro, as Maéstro, a master, a teacher.

Mástro d'áscia, a hewing Carpenter.

Mástro di cámpo, a Camp-master, a Marshall of a camp or field.

Mástro di cánto, a Master of a Chapple, a singing master.

Mástro dádi, a chiefe Groome-porter.

Mástro di cása, as Maéstro di cása.

Mástro di legnáme, a Master carpenter.

Mástro di sála, an Vsher of a Hall.

Mástro di tinello, as Maéstro di tinello.

Mástro giuóco, a chiefe Groome-porter.

Mástro giustitiére, a Lord chiefe Iusticer.

Mástrorígo, the name of an old common song in Italy.

Mastrózzo, a wad or wispe as milkemaides vse on their heads.

Mastruca, a garment of Woolues, Deeres or Goates skins, the rough side outwards.

Mastupráre, as Masturbáre.

Mastupratióne, as Masturbatióne.

Masturbáre, to touch dishonestly the priuy members of a man.

Masturbatióne, a dishonest touching of the priuy members of a man.

Mastúrzo, the weede Water-cresses.

Masuóle, a Glasse-makers toole.

Matapáne, a kind of base coine.

Matára, a bing, a hutch, or maund for bread.

Mataráccio, a Matterasse for a bed.

Matarázzo, a Matterasse or flock-bed.

Matarózza, a Wood-cleauers beetle. Also a Bell-clapper, but properly the head thereof. Also the fastning sinnewes that hang the clapper to the Bell.

Matássa, a skeane of thrid or yarne.

Matassára, a reeler of yarne or thrid.

Matassáre, to make vp into skeanes.

Matassína, a little skeane, a locke of wooll.

Matemática, the arte, profession or knowledge in Mathematike, that is, skill in Augury, Geometry, Astronomy and casting of natiuities.

Matematicále, Mathematicall, of or pertaining to the Mathematikes.

Matemático, a prosessor of Mathematike.

Matera, as Materia.

Materáccio, as Matarázzo.

Materazzáro, a Matiresse-maker.

Materázzo, as Matarázzo.

Materazzólo, a bunch to hange keyes at.

Materia, matter, stuffe or substance 



whereof any thing is or may be made. Also any subiect, ground or argument. Also cause or occasion of any thing.

Matería, madnesse, folly, fondnesse.

Materiále, materiall, substantiall, made of or consisting of any matter. Also vsed for a dull or shallow witted and grosse fellow, wanting forme.

Materialità, Materiality.

Materiáre, to matter, to import.

Materióso, Materious, materiall.

Materna, motherly, maternall, of the mothers side.

Materno, as Materna.

Materózzolo, as Matterózzolo.

Matertera, an Aunt by the Mothers side.

Matésia, as Mathésia.

Mathesia, learning by demonstration.

Maticáre, to heale the shrunken sinewes in a horse.

Matína, as Mattína.

Matináta, as Mattináta.

Matíta, a kind of Oker or Blacke-lead.

Matonzini, a kind of Goldsmithes work in chaines.

Matráuo, a Grandfather by the mothers side.

Mátre, as Mádre.

Matrebósco, Wood-bind, or Hony-suckle.

Mátre dúra., looke Mádre.

Matreggiáre, to follow the steps or qualities of ones mother.

Mátre mágna, as Mádre mágna.

Matrégna, a Step-dame, a Mother in Law.

Matrémma, Mother mine or Mammy.

Matreperla, the mother of Pearle.

Mátre pía., looke Mádre.

Mátre sélua, as Mátre bósco.

Mátre-síluia, as Mátre bósco.

Matrezzuóla, as Mátre bósco.

Matric áli vapóri, as Prefocatióne.

Matricária, Feuerfew, or Motherwort.

Matríce, the matrix or wombe of a woman wherein she conceiueth.

Matricída, a murtherer of his mother.

Matricídio, a mothers murther.

Matrícola, as Matrícula. Also a taxe that all Artificers pay to the Duke of Florence at opening first their shops or when they set vp.

Matricoláre, as Matriculáre.

Matrícula, a Check-role or Register of names, a Colledge booke where all the names of the Schollers are Registred. Also as Matrícola. Also a Sea-snaile or Venus-shell.

Matriculáre, to matriculate, to inregister or admit of a Society or Vniuersitie.

Matriculatióne, a matriculation, an admitting, an approuing. 

Matrígna, as Matrégna.

Matrignále, as a Stepdame, vnnaturally.

Matrimoniále, matrimoniall, of or belonging to mariage or matrimony.

Matrimoniáre, to marry, to wed, to spouse.

Matrimónio, matrimony, mariage, wedlocke, spousall, a wedding.

Matróna, a Matron, a graue sober woman, a sage dame.

Matronále, Matron-like, grauely.

Mattacchióne, a carelesse merry lad.

Mattacciuólo, a poore silly gull or foole.

Mattacináre, to play or dance the Mattachíno.

Mattacíni, as Atteláni, a kinde of antique moresco or mattacino dance.

Mattafellóne, the name of a furious horse, a kill fellon.

Mattalóne, a shallow pate, a great gull.

Mattána, Vsed in iest for Mattína. Also a madding or gadding humor.

Mattapáne, a kind of base small coine.

Mattáre, to play the foole or bug-beare. Also to mate or giue a mate.

Mattarello, a little silly foole or madman.

Mattaríe, mad trickes, foolish prankes.

Mattarózza, the head or bigge end of a club, or beetle.

Mattéa, as Poáuola. Also as Mattána.

Matteggiáre, to become or play the foole or mad-man.

Mattélico, a foolish conceited fellow.

Máttera, as Madía.

Mattérie, mad trickes, foolish prankes.

Mattéro, a short cudgell, sticke or truncheon. Also a Butchers pricke or peg.

Matterózzolo, a knob at a bunch of keies the head of a club or beetle. Also a silly gull or foolish noddy.

Mattésco, foolish, mad-like, fond-like.

Matézza, madnesse, folly, fondnesse.

Mátti, fooles, or mad-men. Also a Ropemakers cart, which as the rope twists so it creepes.

Mattía, madnesse, folly, fondnesse.

Mattína, a morning, a forenoone.

Mattináre, to sing or say Mattins. Also to sing or giue musike in a morning at some window. Also to be vp early in a morning.

Mattináta, a Mattins, a mornings time or labour. Also a hunt is vp or musike plaid vnder ones window in a morning.

Mattíno, timely or early. Also as Mattína. Also a Mattins sung in Churches.

Mátto, mad, fond, foolish. Also a foole or mad-man. Also a mate or cheeke-mate at Chesse. Also the middle or ninth pin at keeles. Also the blocke or mistris at bowles or quoites. Also a kind of running squibs of wilde-fire.

Mattonáio, a Bricklayer or Brickmaker.

Mattonáre, to paue or lay with brickes.

Mattonáro, as Mattonáio.

Mattonáto, paued or laid with brickes. Also a pauement. Also an open street or Market-place. Also a foole borne.

Mattóne, any kind of bricke.

Mattonelle, the name of a Weauers toole.

Mattonelli, little square brickes. Also playing or casting quoites.

Mattóni cótti, red or baked brickes.

Mattóni crudi, vnbaked or white brickes.

Mattoniéra, a Brick-keele.

Mattonzíni, a kind of worke in chaines of Gold vsed in Italy.

Mattorelle, some part of a Weauers loome.

Mattótta, a harlot, a queane, a strumpet.

Máttra, as Madía.

Mattutína, earely or of the morning.

Mattutína stélla, the morning starre.

Mattutináre, to sing or say Mattins, or pray in a morning.

Mattutino, earely in the morning.

Maturaménto, any kind of ripening.

Maturaménte, ripely. Also considerately.

Maturáre, as Maturíre.

Maturatióne, a ripening.

Maturatíuo, that doth ripen as any bile, botch or sore.

Maturéuole, that may ripen.

Maturézza, ripenesse, maturitie, good season.

Maturíre, rísco, ríto, to ripen, to come to full grouth or perfection. Also to grow due.

Maturità, ripenesse, maturitie, ripe age, good or due season.

Matúro, ripe, full growne, mature, perfect. Also due as any paiment. Debito matúro, a due or ripe debt. Also graue, wise, perfect, or considerate.

Mauíso, for Maluíso, an ill face.

Maumetísta, Maumetáno, a Mahometist, a Turke, a Paxen.

Máuro, a darke gray-colour of a horse.

Mauseólo, a great tombe, or rich monument.

Máza, a kind of meate, grewell, or hastie pudding that countrie people were wont to eate, made of milke, water, oyle, meale, and salt.

Mazeráre, as Maceráre. Vsed also to kill, to racke, or torment.

Mázza, any kind of beetle or club with a great bead or knob at the end. Also a great sledge or hammer. Also a pole-axe, or battle-axe. Also among gunners a rammer, as also among pa­



uiers. Vsed also for a Sergeants mace caried before Princes, or great officers.

Mazzabuò, hath beene vsed for death, or killing. Looke Andáre alla mázza.

Mazzabuò, a sledge, or commander of iron, or a beetle of wood to driue any things in.

Mazzabuò, a Butcher, an Oxe-killer.

Mázzacabállo, a great knobbed club.

Mazza cáne, a kill-dog. Also bats, rubbish, or broken stones, or shards.

Mazzácara, the tender part of any bird, in a goose we call it the soule. Also a kind of shrimp, prawne, or little crab.

Mazzacauállo, a kill-horse, a ranke-rider, a great Poster.

Mazzácchera, as Mazzapícchio. Also vsed for an angling-rod, or fishing-pole.

Mazzacótto, as Marciacótto.

Mazzafáme, a good feeder, a tall trencher-man, a kill or quell-hunger.

Mázzaferráta, any iron club, or mace.

Mazzafrústo, any club with a piece of lead or iron fastned vnto one end of it with a chaine. Also a sling to hurle stones withall.

Mazzagátto, a kill-cat. Also a bugbeare, a raw-head and bloodie-bone to feare children.

Mazzagattóne, as Mázza gátto.

Mazzagente, a swagrer, a kill-people.

Mazzapedócchij, a kill-louse.

Mazzapéngolo, as Mazzaruólo.

Mazzapícchio, a long pole that fishers vse to bob vp and down for Eeles, and also to make fish to stirre. Also a kind of meate or custard in some parts of Italie made with milke and egges.

Mazzapórei, a kill-swine.

Mazzapréda, a kind of great pullie.

Mázza-prete, a kill-priest. Also some thing about a Ship or Gallie.

Mazzapúlci, a kill-flea. Also flea-bane.

Mazzáre, to kill, to slay, to quell, to knocke on the head with a club.

Mazzarénghe, as Mazzáte.

Mazzarósto, an eater of roste-meate, a kill-roste.

Mazzaruólo, a lar in the chimnie, a sprite, a hob-goblin, a hodge-poker.

Mazzaséte, a good drinker, a tosse-pot, a kill-thirst.

Mazzasórda, the weede-flags, or cats-taile.

Mazzasórgij, a Rat-killer, or catcher.

Mazzáta, a blow with a club, or cudgell.

Mazzáte, vsed for Bastonáte, bangs, thumps, blowes.

Mazzenétta, a kinde of Prawne, or Shrimp.

Mázzera, as Mazziéro, as Mázza.

Mazzeráre, as Mazzáre, as Macerare.

Mazzétta, a kind of little round anuile.

Mazzétto, any little bunch, bundle, trusse, or fardell, a bunch of cards, or keyes, a sheafe of corne, a handfull, a nosegay of flowres, a little club, a mace or verge borne before great officers.

Mazziáta, a lamming with a cudgell, or banging with a staffe.

Mazzicáre, as Bastonáre. Also to swallow without chewing. Also to murther, or quell.

Mazzicáte, as Mazzáte. Also swallowings without chewing. Also murtherings, quellings.

Mazziére, Mazziéro, a Mace-bearer, a Serieant of the Mace, a Verger, a Pole-axe-man, a Princes Pencioner.

Mazzína, a little club or mace. Also a little bunch, or handfull.

Mázzo, a great bunch of any thing, a masse, a heape, a lump. Also a beetle, a club, or a mace. Also a great commander or sledge. Also a Cod-fish. Vsed also for a packet of letters.

Mázzodi cárte, a bunch, or set of Cards.

Mázzo di córda, a gunners bunch of match.

Mázzo di fióri, a nosegay, a bunch of flowres.

Mazzócca, as Mazzócchio, the great end, head, club, or knob of any thing.

Mazzócchio, a bunch, a bundle, a handfull, or bottle, as of grasse, hey, flowres, or any thing. Also a round beetle to knock with.

Mazzocchiúto, knobbie, clubbie, bunchie, big-headed as a beetle.

Mazzóccola, a rowler for a womans head.

Mázzo di dádi, a bale of dice.

Mázzo di fióri, a bunch of flowres.

Mazzolétto, as Mazzétto.

Mazzolíno, as Mazzétto.

Mazzóne, a great club, or beetle.

Mazzúcco, a kind of euill or disease and giddinesse in the head.

Mazzuóla, any little club or beetle.

Mazzuólo, as Mazzétto.

Mè, me, my selfe. Also to me, or to my selfe. Also from me. Also as Meglio. It hath also beene vsed anciently for the mid-place of any thing.

Méa, mine, mine owne.

Meábile, passable, that hath passage through, that may passe or turne away.

Meándro, a winding, or crankling in and out.

Meánta, a kind of water-fowle.

Meáre, to passe on, farther, or through.

Meateología, vaine-speaking, or foolish babling. 

Meateólogo, a vaine speaker, an idle pratler.

Meáto, gone, or passed through. Also a way, a passage through, or moouing course. Also the pores or holes in any bodie.

Mecánico, a mechanicall man, a man of occupation, a handie-crafts-man, in whom is a good hand and a good wit.

Meccere., Vsed for Messere in mockerie.

Méccole, a kinde of swelling in horses legs.

Mecenáto, a Mecenas, a Patron, a fauourer of learning.

Méco, with me, together with me.

Méco medésimo, or stésso, with my selfe.

Mecóne, Poppie. Though some take it for Sea-spurge.

Mecóni, a kinde of Lectuce yeelding milke at the stalke.

Meconianaphróde, a kinde of frothie Poppie.

Mecónio, the iuice of Poppie vsed to stupifie the sences.

Mocónite, a kinde of stone like vnto Poppie heads.

Medagiólo, a litle cottage or poore house couered with reedes.

Medáglia, any ancient medaile, coine, stampe or image. Also a iewell, an ouch, a brouch, any embossed or grauen worke of mettals. Also vsed for a womans quaint.

Mèdagliétta, a little Medáglia.

Medaglísta, a professor of Medáglie, an antiquarie of old coines.

Medea, a kind of precious stone first found by Medea, it is of a blacke colour with little veines in it, it yeelds a sweat like Saffron, and tastes like wine.

Medéla., Hath been vsed for Medicína.

Medémo, as Medésimo.

Medesimaménte, likewise, in such sort.

Medesimità, selfenesse, samenesse.

Medésimo, selfe, same, selfe-same, the same.

Medésmo, as Medésimo.

Média, meane, betweene both.

Mediále, a blacke Sacrifice which was offred at Noone-day.

Mediáne uéne, the middle or blacke-veine, branches of Cefalica and Basilica, constituting the common veine in the arme.

Medianità, mediation, as Mezzanità.

Mediáno, a frankling, one that is neither a Gentleman nor a Hynde, but betweene both. Also a mediator.

Mediánte, by meanes, through, by, or with ones helpe and fauour.

Mediastíni, poore seruants that attend 



Phisitions to emptie vrinals and closestooles.

Mediastíno, that partition that is made by certaine thin skins, deuiding the whole breast from the throat to the midriffe into two bosomes or hollowes: the one on the right-side, the other on the left. Also a drudge or kitchin-slaue.

Mediáte, by meanes or intercession.

Mediatóre, a Mediator, an Intercessor.

Medica, a woman Phisition. Also Spanish-trefolie or Clauer-grasse. Some take it for Elecampane.

Medicábile, as Medicále, curable.

Medicále, medicinable, curable.

Medicáme, as Medicaménto.

Medicamentaria árte, the arte of curing.

Medicaménto, a medicament, a medicine, a remedie, a curing, a salue.

Medicánte, a Phisition, a Leach.

Medicáre, to medicine, to dresse, to phisike, to cure, to salue, to leach. Also to professe Phisike.

Medicária, the arte of Phisike, saluing, healing or curing.

Medicástro, an Empirike, an ignorant Phisition, as we say a quag-saluer.

Medicatióne, a curing by Phisike.

Medicatíuo, as Medicinále, that healeth.

Medicatório, as Medicatíuo.

Medicína, the arte of curing the sick by Phisik. Also a medicine, a purgation.

Medicinále, medicinall, good for Phisike.

Medicinare, as Medicáre.

Medico, a Medicine, a Phisition, a Leach. Also a kind of tree in Media, which at all times hath blossomes, Apples halfe ripe, and Apples full ripe, which as they fall others come presently in their place.

Medicúccio, a poore sillie Empirike, a quag-saluer.

Medielínio, an Astronomicall instrument so called.

Medietà, halfenesse, middlenesse.

Medímno, a certaine Greeke measure.

Médio, a kind of blacke stone as Medea. Also the midle finger. Also an hearbe.

Mediócre, meane, indifferent, moderate.

Mediocrità, mediocritie, meane, due-measure, indifferencie.

Medióne, an hearbe.

Meditabóndo, pensiue, musing.

Meditáre, to meditate, to studie or thinke on with diligence, to muse with the minde, to consider.

Meditatióne, meditation, exercise of the minde, musing or deepe consideration.

Mediteráneo, in the maine or middle of the Land, farre from the Sea, in-land. 

Meditóre, a mower of hay or corne.

Medólla, marrow, pith, core, substance.

Medollo, a rammer, a tampion as Gunners call it.

Medollóso, full of marrow, strong, lustie, pithie.

Medóne, a drinke called Meadh made of honnie and water with spices.

Meffe nò, no Sir, no in good sooth Sir.

Mefíte, as Mephíte.

Megacósmo, a great world.

Megálio, a kind of sweet ointment made of many precious drugs.

Mége, a disease in horses feete.

Mégge, a kind of Sea-fish.

Mégge, as Mégge.

Megistáni, Princes, Peeres, States, Chiese-men, Nobles, Gouernours in any State.

Megliácco, as Migliáccio.

Megliarína, a Yellow or Golden-hammer, or the Yewbring-bird.

Meglio, better, best. Also more. Also rather or more willingly.

Meglio ámo, I had rather.

Meglio al múro, a play among boyes in Italie like our Span-counter.

Megliorábile, that may bee bettred.

Meglioraménto, a bettering, a mending. Also a kind of salt or pickled-fish.

Meglioráre, to better, to mend.

Meglióre, better, best.

Megliorità, a bestnesse.

Meguei, a tree among the Indians, wherof their Gardens bee full, of whose leaues they make their shooes, and vse them in stead of paper to write vpon: of whose iuice they make wine, vineger, honnie and sugar, and eate the rootes and fruit thereof as very good meate.

Mei, a kind of fish like the Cesalo. Vsed also for Meglio, better. Also vsed for right ouer against. Also vsed in mockerie for my selfe.

Mel', for Mi il, to me it, to me him, me it, me him. Also from me it or him.

Méla, any kind of Apple.

Méla áppia, a kind of Apple in Italie.

Melabátro, an hearbe like to Camomill.

Melacchíno, full of honnie, honnied. Also a kind of very sweet wine.

Meláccia, the filth or dregs of honnie.

Melácia, as Malácia.

Melacória, a kind of soure Pomegranate, the rinde whereof is vsed to dye leathers.

Melacoríphi, a kind of birdes.

Melacotógno, a Quince-apple.

Melácra, as Brocóne.

Méla délla terra, Hart-wort or Birtwort.

Melagmáti, emollitiue plaisters.

Melagrána, a Pomegranate.

Melagranáta, a Pomeguanate. 

Melagráno, a Pomegranate-tree.

Melagrida, a kind of Ginnie-hen.

Méla insána, an Apple in latin Melongeua.

Melamphíllo, as Acanthus, or Brankursine.

Melampíco, Capitáno del cúlo négro.

Melampíro, an hearbe full of branches with a seed like Fenigreeke.

Melámpo, a Dogs-name, blacke-footed.

Melampódio, the hearbe blacke Helebore.

Melamprasióne, blacke Horehound.

Melampsíto, a kind of sweet wine.

Melanaté, o, a kind of Eagle, the least, but yet the strongest. Some take it for a Saker.

Meláncio, an Orenge-tree.

Melanconeggiáre, to be or make melancholike.

Melanconía, as Maninconía.

Melancónico, as Manicónico.

Melanconióso, melancholike, sad.

Melancorípho, a bird called a fig-pecker or Black-head.

Melancráni, the female rush.

Melandraníno, the female rush.

Melándrie, pieces of the fish Tunny, poudred and cut in slices like Oke shingles.

Melandríno, a kind of broad flat fish.

Melándrio, an hearbe growing among corne.

Meláne, a stone which yeeldeth a iuice.

Melané, o, a Dogs name, as much to say cole-blacke.

Melanéto, a kind of hawke called a Saker.

Melángole, a kind of Citron or Lymon. Also the perings of them.

Melaníe, blacke spots or speckes or marks in the skin.

Melanióne, a kind of paste-flowre.

Melano, sweet like hony.

Melantería, Inke or blacke, vsed of Physitions to consume putrified flesh.

Melanthenióne, a Cammomill.

Melanthióne, as Melántio.

Melántio, Nard, Gitte or Pepper-wort. Also a kind of dainty Mushroms.

Melanúro, the blacke taile Percke, the sea ruffle, or as some thinke the Seabreame.

Melanzána, the mad or raging apple.

Melápia, the Peare-apple or Pomepoire.

Méla púnica, a Pome-granate.

Melaráncia, an Orenge.

Melaráncio, an Orenge-tree.

Meláre, to hony, to sweeten.

Melário, the place in the hiue where the hony is found.

Méla rósa, a kind of apple.

Melaspermóne, as Melántio.

Melatióne, the season or gathering of hony. 



Meláto, honied, sweetned, made of honie.

Mele, hony. Also apples of any sort. Also bummes or round buttockes.

Meleágri, a kind of birds or foule.

Meleágride, a bird with many coloured feathers.

Melecérie, as Melecéride.

Méle cotógna, a Quince apple.

Méle cótte, quodlings, boyled apples.

Méle d'ápi, Bee-hony, stone-hony.

Méle di cánna., Vsed for Sugar.

Meléga, the graine Turkie-hirs, Mill or Millet, as Saggína.

Melensággine, dulnesse or simplicity of wit.

Melensáre, to play or become a silly-gull.

Melénso, foolish, simple witted, gullish.

Méle rugiadóso, as Mánna.

Melesiogállo, the birde called a Witwall.

Meléto, a groue or Hort-yard of apple-trees.

Melfrúgo, the Corne or graine Panike.

Melgranáto, a Pomegranate-tree.

Mélia, a kind of earth vsed in physike of the vertue of Allum, Painters vse it to make their colours last the longer. Also a tree yeelding a sweet fruit.

Meliáci, a kind of Apricots.

Melíca, as Meléga.

Melicémbalo, a kind of Wilke or Winkle shelfish.

Melicéride, impostumes that run a kind of matter like hony.

Melichloróne, a stone partly yellow and partly of an hony colour.

Melichrísi, a kinde of Iacint of a hony colour.

Melichróta, a kind of stone coloured like hony.

Melichíno, the drinke called Methegline.

Melíco, musicall or musician-like.

Melíco poema, a lyrike poeme.

Melicrato, a drinke of water and honie.

Melífero, Mellífero, honie-bearing.

Melificáre, to make, or bring foorth honie.

Melífluo, Mellífluo, honie-flowing.

Melígine, mell-deaw, or honie-deaw.

Meliloquente, sweetly-speaking.

Melilóto, the hearbe Melilot, or Clauer.

Meliméla, the Pome-paradise, or Honie-apple.

Melína, an apple-plum, or honie-sweete.

Melíno, honie-sweete, honie-tasting. Also honie-colour. Also a kinde of sweete smelling yellow oyntment.

Melíre, lísco, líto, to honie, to sweeten.

Melíssa, baulme-gentle, baulme-mint.

Melissopíllo, as Melíssa.

Melissophilóne, the hearbe Baulme, of some taken for the wilde Ash.

Melíte, a yellow stone, which broken and put into water smelleth of honie.

Melitei, a kind of pretie fine little dogs breeding in Malta.

Melitena, Melliténa, the hearbe Baulme.

Melitéra, a dry medicine to fill the hollownesse of vlcers being cleansed.

Melitíssimo, most honied, most sweete, most mellifluous.

Melitíte, as Melíte, a kinde of honnied wine.

Mellígine, the iuice or liquor of any fruite. Also mell-deaw falling on trees, or corne, honnie-deaw.

Mellonággine, as Melensággine.

Mellone, a Mellone. Also rowels in the mouth of a horses bit. Also a kind of play that children vse in Italie. Also a grosse-headed gull.

Mélo, a Brocke, a Grey or a Badger. Also any kind of Apple-tree. Also an axle-tree of any Cart. Also a naue of a wheele.

Mélo assírio, the Citron, or Assyrian tree.

Melobátro, a sweet gum, or drugs vsed in perfumes.

Melochíte, a kind of greenish stone.

Meló de, melodious, harmonious.

Melodia, melodie, harmonie, sweete or tunable singing, whereof be three kinds, Harmonia, Chronia, Diatonia.

Melodiáre, to sing or make melody.

Melodióso, melodious, harmonious.

Melofólia, a leafe-apple.

Melógna, a kind of muddy fish.

Melomédico, the Median apple-tree.

Melonággine, as Melenxsággine.

Melonáia, a woman that sels Mellons. Also a Mellon-plot.

Melonaio, a plot of Mellons or one that sels them.

Melonáre, as Melensáre.

Melóne d'acqua, a Cucumber.

Meloparadíso, the Paradise apple.

Melopepóni, Quince-pompions.

Melóso, full of, or tasting of hony.

Meloterágno, a kind of Low-shrub bearing faire apples.

Melotrhóne, a kind of white wild wine.

Melpoméne, as much to say continuation or perseuerance.

Melrúsio, a Hadocke or Codfish.

Melúzze, rotten apples, fallings. Also little buras or buttockes.

Mélza, the spleene or milt of any body.

Memacilóne, the fruit of the Arbute-tree.

Membrána, a membrane, the vppermost thin skin of any thing. Also the pill or skin betweene the barke and the tree Also vellame or parchment. 

Membrána cárta, Vellame or Parchment.

Membráne, fine membranes or skins that enwrap other parts of the flesh, as eyes, or braines.

Membránza, remembrance, memorie.

Membráre, to forme, to giue or shape lims, parts and members in due proportion. Also to remember.

Membratúra, a setling of lims or members.

Membréuole, proportionable in lims & parts. Also mindefull.

Mémbro, a member, a limme, or part of of any bodie or thing. In an Oration, it is a short sentence or clause. Vsed also for a mans priuy member.

Mémbro genitále, the priuities of any creature.

Membróso, as Membrúto, full of lims.

Mémbro uiríle, the priuie member of a man.

Membrúto, limmed, well membred.

Memento, a remembrance. Looke Giórno.

Memfíte, a stone that is fattie and of diuers colours, vsed of Chirurgions in cutting of limmes and dismembrings, for it taketh away sence and feeling without any danger.

Mémma, a most boggie ground and full of springs.

Memónide, a kind of bird in Ethiopia, much giuen to fighting.

Memorábile, memorable, to be remembred.

Memorággine, as Memória, mindfulnesse.

Memorándo, as Memorábile.

Memoránza, as Memória.

Memoráre, to remember.

Memoratíua párte, the memoriall part.

Mémore, as Memoróso.

Memoréuole, as Memorábile.

Memória, memorie, remembrance, souenance. Also the crowne of ones head. Vsed also for Times, Chronicles, Histories, Euidences, Records.

Memoriálc, a memoriall, a record. Also of or belonging to memorie.

Memorióso, as Memoróso.

Memoróso, mindfull, that remembreth.

Men', as Méno, lesse, lesser. Also Me ne, to me of it or thereof. Also my selfe hence or thence, as Io men uádo, I goe hence.

Ména, the behauiour, motion, condition, fashion, or cariage of a man. Also a cackrell-fish, because it maketh them that eate of it laxatiue, which in Sommer is black, and in winter white. Also a kind of weight. Also any secret practise, plot, complot, or conspiracie secretly managed.

Menacórda, a Claricord instrument. 



Menacúlo, a smug, nice, effeminate fellow.

Menáia, as Manára.

Ménadi, certaine women that were wont to sacrifice to Bacchus, running and dancing at the sound of hornes, carying certaine iauelins or staues in their hands, wreathed about with vine-leaues, chanting and crying as mad women.

Menáide, as Corintháde, an hearbe.

Menái délla stélla, some part of a Ship.

Menále della táia, some thing about a pullie, or a pullie rope.

Menaménti, leadings, guidings, conductings. Also wriglings, friggings, or stirrings. Also secret practises or complots. Also behauiours or comportments & proceedings of any man.

Menáre, to leade, to conduct, to direct, to guide, to bring by the hand. Also to iumble, to wag or stirre too and fro, to frig or to wriggle. Also to treate, to handle or manage.

Menár' álla mázza, to bring or leade vnto death and destruction.

Menár'a lúnga, to prolong, to put off, to delay.

Menár beffe, to leade on with mocking.

Menár cólpi, to lay about him with thicke blowes.

Menár di púnta, to thrust or foine at.

Menár di táglio, to strike edgeling.

Menár giù, to bring or leade downe. Also to put ouer as a hawke her meate.

Menár i denti, to bestirre ones teeth, that is, to eate apace.

Menár'il cáne per l'áia, to leade a dog about, that is, to play the foole.

Menár'il cázzo, to frigle ones &c.

Menár' i mántici, to blow the bellowes.

Menár'i pié di, to skud or runne away, to shew a faire paire of heeles.

Menár la dánza, to leade the dance.

Menár l'agresto, as Menár'il cázzo.

Menár la língua, to bestir ones tongue, that is, to prattle apace.

Menár la rílla, as Menár'il cázzo.

Menár l'arósto, to turne the spit.

Menár le cálcole, to tread the tredles as a Weauer, that is, to iog ones heeles, to play the whore, to be still doing.

Menár le gámbe, as Menár'i piédi.

Menár le ganáscie, as Menár'i denti.

Menár le máni, to bestirre ones hands, to lay about, to goe freely to worke.

Menár l'órso a módena, to bring a Beare to the stake, to vndertake a hard matter.

Menár móglie, to marrie, to bring home a wife, to take a ceaselesse trouble in hand.

Menarósto, a iack to turne the spit. Also a turne-broche or spit.

Menár per il náso, to lead by the nose, that is, to make a foole of one.

Menárspúzza, to keepe a stinking coile.

Menár tánta púzza, to keepe a slinking coyle, to keepe much adoe.

Menár uíta, to lead a life.

Menáta, a leading, a guiding, a bringing. Also a frigging, a wrigling. Also a handfull or bundle as much as one can hold in his hand.

Menatína, a little Menáta.

Menatóre, a leader, a bringer, a guide. Also a Chieftaine or Conductor.

Menché, lesse or lesser then.

Ménchia, a womans quaint or geare. Also gamesome sport, pleasure, delight.

Menchiattáro, a foolish merry lad.

Menchiátte, a kind of game at cardes.

Menchionáre, to play the simple gull. Also to flout or gull one in wordes.

Menchionaríe, simple or gullish trickes.

Menchióne, a simple gull, a sot, a noddie.

Ménda, a fault, a blemish, an imputation. Also a fee, a fine, or forfaiture. Vsed also for correction or amendment.

Mendáce, false, lying, vntrue, leasing.

Mendácia, a lye, a leasing, an vntruth.

Mendácio, a lye, a leasing, an vntruth.

Mendasquárci, a botcher, a cobler. Also a find-fault with others, a mender.

Mendatário, a trespasser, an offender, a delinquent, a malefactor.

Mendatóre, as Mendasquárci.

Mendésio, a kind of precious oyntment anciently vsed in Rome.

Mendicaménte, beggingly, beggerly.

Mendicánte, begging. Also a begger.

Mendicánti fráti, begging Friers.

Mendicáre, to beg, to craue.

Mendicaría, the arte of begging.

Mendicità, beggery, beggerlinesse.

Mendíco, a begger, a needy poore body.

Mendicóso, full of beggery, begging, beggerly.

Méndo, faulty, that may be mended. Also amends, mends or satisfaction.

Mendosaménte, faultily, corruptly.

Mendóso, faulty, full of faultes.

Men dótto, lesse learned, lesse then eight.

Mend'vno, lesse then one.

Méne, the Plurall of Ména.

Me nè, to me thereof or of it. Also from me thereof or of it. Also mee selfe hence.

Menescálco, as Mariscálco.

Menestra, any kind of pottage or broth.

Menestráre, to kiche vp pottage or broth.

Menestrella, any fine thin pottage or broath.

Menestrína, as Menestrella.

Menestríno, a little pottage dish.

Menestróne, a great messe of pottage. Also a filthy feeder or sup-pottage, a pottage-bellie.

Menfíte, as Memfíte.

Ménia, a certaine piller in Rome whereunto fugitiues and theeues were bound.

Menína, trà violóni ed il cárro andáuano sei menine.

Menínce, the thin skin or filme enwrapping the braine.

Menínce dúra, as Dúra mádre.

Ménna, a dugge, a pap, a teat, an vdder.

Menno, as Méno.

Mennóni, a kind of bird said to slie about gardens.

Mennónia, a kind of precious stone.

Méno, lesse, lesser. Also I bring or lead.

Méno di, lesse or lesser then.

Ménola, a fish. Looke Ména. Some take it for a Pilchar-fish.

Ménoma párte, the least part.

Menomaménto, a diminishing, or lesning.

Menománza, as Menomézza.

Menomáre, to diminish, to lessen.

Menoméuole, Menomábile, diminishable.

Menomézza, diminution, or littlenesse.

Menomíssimo, most-most little.

Menomità, as Menomézza.

Ménomo, the least. Also a simple gull.

Menomóne, a kind of honnie that driueth those that taste it into rage and madnesse.

Menón, a kind of thin and soft spunge.

Menospreggiáre, to scorne, to despise, to contemne.

Ménsa, a table or bord to eate me at on. Also a Merchants counting-bord. Also the broader part of the grinding teeth which cheweth the meat. Also that which wee call a messe or seruice of meat.

Mensále, of or pertaining to a table or borde. Looke Mensáli.

Mensáli, such as sit and eat together at a borde. Also borders.

Mensárij, such as sit at a table telling money.

Mensáti, as Mensárij.

Menscredénza, misbeliefe, miscredence.

Ménso, without order, forme, or proportion.

Ménsola, a stay of stone or timber, Carpenters call it a Braget: Masons a Corbell, some others a shouldring piece, some a shelfe. Also a little table.

Ménsole, shiuers, so called of Millers. Also certaine little statue workes, carued and placed vnder pillars at corners, to hold them vp.

Mensório., lat. Mensor.

Menstruále, menstruall. Looke Menstruo.

Ménstrue illuminatióne ouéro, oscura­



tióne, an Astronomicall phrase.

Ménstruo, a womans monethly termes, issues, fluxes, sheddings or flowers. Also siluer among Alchimists.

Mensuále, monethly, mensuall.

Ménsula, as Ménsola.

Ménta, the hearbe Mint. Also a mans yard.

Mentágra, a foule tetter or scab running ouer the face, necke, or breast of some.

Ménta greca, the Romane sage.

Mentále, mentall, pertaining to memorie.

Mentalménte, mentally.

Mentástro, wilde Mint.

Ménte, the highest and chiefest part of the soule, the mind, vnderstanding, memorie, iudgement, intent, thought, imagination, conceit, or foreknowledge.

Mentecággine, follie, simplicitie of wit.

Mentecattággine, as Mentecággine.

Mentecátto, rauished of his wits, besides himselfe.

Mentegáte, a kinde of daintie paste-meate.

Mentígine, a scab among sheepe called the pocks.

Mentionáre, to mention, to ming, to nominate.

Mentióne, mention, minging, nomination.

Mentíre, ménto, mentíto, to lye, to belye, to giue the lye, to speake falsely. Also to faine.

Mentíta, a lye, an vntruth, a leasing.

Ment taménte, vntruely, lyingly, leasingly.

Mentito, lide, belide, spoken vntruely. Also a partie belide. Also vntrue, false, forged, counterfet, fained, or desguised.

Mentitóre, a lyer, a leaser, a speaker of lyes.

Ménto, a chinne, or vnder-chap.

Mentoáre, to mention, to ming, to name.

Méntola, a mans or womans priuities.

Mentóne, a chinne, or vnder-chap.

Mentouánza, a mentioning, a nominating.

Mentouáre, to mention, to nominate.

Méntre, whilst, whilst that, so long as.

Méntrechè, whilst that, so long as that.

Méntre il cáne si grátta, la lépre senè và.

Méntre il lúpo píscia, la pécora si sálua.

Mentúccia, yong Mint. Also as Méntola.

Méntula, as Méntola.

Menutézza, as Minutézza.

Menzógna, a lye, a leasing, an vntruth. 

Menzognáre, as Mentíre.

Menzogniére, as Mentitóre, a lyer.

Menzonáre, as Mentoáre, to mention.

Menzóni, certaine ordinarie or set-windes.

Menzoniére, as Mentitóre.

Méo, a nick-name that some vse to call their tame Asses by. Vsed also for Mío, mine, mine owne. Also the hearbe Spignell, Mew, Bearewort, or Baldemonie.

Meónide, a kind of strange bird.

Mephíte, a damp, or stinke of corrupt water mixed with mud or brimstone.

Méra, vsed of Dante for merry or blithe, but properly meere, pure, cleane, simple, or sheare.

Meraménte, meerely.

Merauíglia, a maruell, a wonder.

Merauigliáre, to maruell, to wonder.

Merauiglióso, maruellous, wondrous.

Mercadánte, a Marchant, a chap-man.

Mercadantía, marchandise, or ware.

Mercadantáre, to marchant, to mart.

Mercadantésco, Marchant-like.

Mercantáre, to marchant, to cheapen.

Mercánte, a Marchant, a Chapman.

Mercantésca máno, the Marchants hand.

Mercantésco, Marchant-like.

Mercantía, merchandise, ware.

Mercantíle, full or marting or traffike.

Mercantúccio, a poore sillie Chapman.

Mercáre, to marke, or brand. Also to buy or purchase or bargaine at a rate as the market goes.

Mercatále, a Market-place.

Mercatantáre, to marchand, to cheapen.

Mercatánte, a Marchant, a Marter, a Trader.

Mercatantésco, of or belonging to a Marchant.

Mercatantia, marchandize, ware.

Mercatantúccio, a poore silly Marchant.

Mercatantuólo, as Mercatantúccio.

Mercatáre, to trade, to marchandize.

Mercáto, a Market, a Faire, a Mart, a Market-place, a Cheap-side. Also cheapned, barganed, traffiked, marchandised, or conditioned. Also cheap or bargaine. Buón mercáto, good-cheape, a good bargaine. Also branded or marked.

Mercáto bouário, the Market place for cattell.

Mercáto cáro, a deere bargane, deere.

Mercatúra, the trade of marchandize.

Merce, a reward, a meede, a wages, a hire. Also mercies, or thankes, or god-a-mercy. Also mercy, pitty or commiseration. Also ware, goods, or marchandise.

Merce, any ware, goods or marchandise namely such as Mercers or Habardashers sell.

Mercéde, as Mercè.

Mercè di Dío, by Gods mercy.

Mercenále, as Mercenário.

Mercenário, mercenary, hireling, that laboureth for hire, or corrupted for money.

Mercenúme, what soeuer is giuen for hire or reward.

Mercería, as Merciaría.

Mercè vóstra, godamercy you.

Merciáio, a Mercer, a Habardasher, a Pedler.

Merciaría, a street where Mercers, Habardashers, or Pedlers dwell. Also a Mercers shop.

Merciaríe, Mercery-wares, or Pedlers stuffe.

Merciáro, as Merciáio.

Mercimónio, that which is gotten in buying and selling of ware.

Merco, a marke, a stamp or branding iron for horses or packes of marchandise. Also a marke to shoot at.

Mercole, the day Wednesday.

Mercoldì, the day Wednesday.

Mercoledì, the day wedensday.

Mercore, the day Wednesday.

Mercoredì, the day Wednesday.

Mercorella, the hearb Mercury or Dogs-caule.

Mercorella saluática, wilde Mercurie.

Mercurrále, of the nature of Mercurie. Also as Mercorella.

Mercurialista, as Mercuriále.

Mercúrio, Mercurie, the messenger of the Gods; the God of Eloquence and Marchandise. Also as Mercorella. Also Mercurie or quick-siluer.

Merda, the ordure of man or beast, a turd.

Merdáre, to beray, to beshite.

Merdóso, full of turdes, beshitten.

Merénda, a nunchin, a beuer, an andersmeate, a repaste betweene dinner and supper.

Merendáre, to eat betweene dinner and supper, to nunchin.

Merendína, a little or hungry nunchin.

Merendóne, an idle logard head, that is good but to eate sixe meales a day.

Meretríce, a whore, a harlot, a strumpet.

Meretrício, whorish, adulterous. Also whoredome.

Mergere, mergo, mersi, merso, to diue, to ducke, to drench, to plunge or sinke vnder water.

Mergo, a diuer, a di-dapper, or arse-foote. Also a name common to diuers birds of the Sea, as a Cormorant, a Sea-gull, a Pewet, &c.

Mergoláre, to diue or ducke as a Didapper. Also as Merláre.

Mergolo, as Mergo. Also as Merlo.



Mergóne, as Mergo.

Méri, the throat or winde-pipe.

Mérica, a kind of wine or grape.

Meríce, a kinde of Sea-fish called the Burnet-fish.

Mericónda, a kind of white-pot or pudding.

Meridiáno, a meridian, the noone-marke, the meridian noone-tide, the South.

Meridionále, of, or belonging to the Meridian or South part of the world.

Merígge, as Meríggio.

Meriggiáno, as Meríggio.

Meriggiáre, to dine or feede at noone. Also to watch and not sleepe in the day.

Meríggio, mid-day, high-noone, noonetide. Also the South part of the world.

Merinottiále, of, or belonging to midnight.

Merinóttio, the time of mid-night.

Merísmo, the figure Distributióne.

Meritaménte, deseruedly, worthily, iustly, vpon good reason.

Meritánza, a deseruing, a meriting.

Meritáre, to merit, to earne, to deserue. Also to reward, to guerdon or recompence. Also to make worthy of.

Meritéuole, deseruing, meriting.

Meriteuolézza, deseruednesse.

Meritíssimo, most worthy or deseruing.

Mérito, a merit, a desert, a reward, a recompence. Also the vse, interest, or profit that ariseth of money lent or put out to vsurie.

Meritório, meritorious, deseruing.

Meritríce, a whore, a harlot, a strumpet.

Meritrício, whorish, adulterous.

Merla, a Whiting or Merlin-fish. Also a kind of Moore-hen.

Merláre, to make or build with battlements, with pinacles, or with loope and spike holes. Also to verrie or varie as Heraulds say.

Merláto, made with battlements, pinnacles or spike holes. Also verrie or varie in Armorie.

Merlatúra, any battlements, or verrie in Armorie.

Merlétti, little battlements. Also the seuerall wards of a locke. Also a kind of bone-lace with purles.

Merli, battlements, pinnacles, spires, or little turrets vpon walles.

Merlo, an Owsell, a Blackmacke, a Merle or Blacke bird. Also a Whiting or Merling-fish, or Sea-merle. Gesnerus saith that it is a fish that cheweth his meat like a beast, and takes it for the Guilt-head. Also the singular of Merli.

Merlo alpático, a bird that feedes much vpon nuts and will cracke them.

Merlo delle uesti, a gard, a welt, a hem, a fringe or binding about a garment. 

Merlo di muráglia, the high battlements of a wall. Also a spike-hole in a wall.

Merlóne, as Merlótto, a great Merlo.

Merlottággine, gullishnesse, simplicitie of wit.

Merlótto, a simple gull, a witlesse patch.

Merluzzo, a Haddock-fish. Some say a Merling or Whiting-fish.

Mermácia, a kind of blacke stone full of rising werts.

Méro, meere, simple, pure, true, sheare, very right, without mixture. Also merrie and blithe.

Meróide, as Ethiópida.

Merópe, a great bird that eateth Bees, whose nature is to feede and keepe his parents, who neuer come abrode. It is called an eate-bee or wood-pecker, and euer builds her nest in the ground.

Meróre, vsed for Dolóre.

Merótte, a greene stone, which rubbed, yeeldeth a milkish humor.

Merrà, as Menerà, shall leade, or bring.

Merso, diued, ducked, plunged, drenched.

Mertáre, to merit, to deserue, to earne.

Mérto, a merit, a desert, a reward.

Merula, as Merlo.

Merzamíno, a kind of very strong wine.

Merzaría, as Merciaría.

Mésa, a kneading-tub. Also a hutch, a bing, a maund or spoke-shaue for bread. Also victuals or prouisions for trauellers, or way-faring men. Also vsed for the pith and best flaxie part of hemp.

Mesále, as Mensále.

Mesánca, a fish, in Latine Phycites.

Mesareóne, as Mesenterio.

Mesáta, the time, the space, or the employment of a moneth. Also a moneths pay, or wages of a moneth.

Méscere, méscio, mescéi, mesciúto, to mixe, to mesh, to mingle, to blend. Also to skinke, to fil or powre out wine from one pot into another lesser, or into a glasse.

Méschia, as Mescolánza. Also a braule, a fray, a quarrell, a hurlieburlie.

Meschiánza, as Mescolánza.

Meschiataménte, mingledly.

Meschína, a maid-drudging-seruant.

Meschináccio, a foule wretched gull.

Meschinággine, wretchednesse.

Meschinaménte, wretchedly.

Meschináre, to beg or drudge for hire.

Meschinello, sillie, wretched, miserable.

Meschinézza, as Meschinità.

Meschinità, wretchednesse, drudgerie. Also pinching miserablenesse.

Meschíno, a poore wretch, a drudging seruant. Also wretched and sillie.

Meschinóso, full of wretchednesse.

Méschio, meshed, mingled, or blanded together. Also a medlie or partie-coloured colour.

Mesciándola, as Mescolánza.

Mescianza, idem.

Mesciáre, as Mescoláre.

Mésciere, as Méscere.

Mesciróbba, a lauer, an ewer, a waterpot. Also a great charger, or dish.

Meschíta, a Church among the Turks.

Mescitóre, a mesher, a mingler, a blender. Also a skinker, or filler of wine.

Mesciúto, mingled, meshed, blended. Also filled out wine, or any other drinke.

Méscola, a kind of pot or pan to dresse meate in. Also a kinde of measure much about one of our bushels. Also a melting-ladle, or any other great ladle, skimmer, or spoone. Also a brick-layers trowell. Also a Masons squire, ruler, or plummet. Vsed also for a busie pratling woman, a medling huswife, one that will meddle with others matters, or a durtie drigle dragle. Also a mesh, a medlie, a hotchpotch, a blending.

Mescolaménto, as Mescolánza.

Mescolánza, a medlie, a melling, a mesh, a blending, a hotchpotch of diuers things mixed together without order. Also a salate of diuers sorts of hearbs together.

Mescoláre, to mingle, to mesh, to blend, to mell, or confound together.

Mescolársi, to intermeddle with.

Mescolataménte, confusedly, pell-mell.

Mescoláte, minglings, medlings, mellings.

Mescoláto, mixed, meshed, mingled, blended, changable colour. Also a mixture, a mesh. Also a medlie or mothie cloth. Alla mcscoláta, confusedly, pellmell.

Méscolo, as Mescúglio.

Mescolíno, a little Mescuglio. Also a busie fellow, an intermedler of others matters.

Mescugliáre, as Mescoláre.

Mescúglio, a mingle mangle, a hotchpotch of diuers things mingled together.

Mése, any of the twelue moneths. Also the middle string of any instrument. Also a lamire in musike. Also a spoke of a wheele. Also a great Vat, or Cesterne of wood.

Mesentérie véne, branches of vena pòrta, which conuey the iuice of meate concocted from the stomacke, to the liuer.

Mesentério, the double fat skinnes that fasten the bowels to the backe, and each to other, enclosing a number of veines being branches of véna pórta, by which the guts are nourished, and 



the iuice of the meate concocted, is conueighed to the liuer to be made blood. Also taken for the middle of the bowels or entrailes.

Meseráiche véne, as Mesenterie.

Mési, the monthes or issues that women haue.

Mésio, the moneth of May.

Meslea, an ancient word vsed for Zuffa. Also for Mescolánza. Also for Méschia.

Mesochóro, one that standing amongst singers giueth a signe when they should begin to sing.

Mesocráneo, the crowne of any bodies head, the middle of the skull.

Mesolábio, an instrument to finde out one or many middle proportionall lines.

Mesoléuco, a blacke precious stone hauing a white stroke through the middest.

Mesoleucóne, an hearbe like Marcorella.

Mesomélo, a precious stone hauing a blacke veine parting the colours through the middest.

Mesophóro, a kind of middle size Spicknard.

Mesopleuría, the middle place betweene the ribs.

Méssa, a Masse or Sacrifice. Also the bud, twigge, shoot, sprig, burgeen or sprout of any tree. Also a messe of meate, a cource or seruice serued at a table or feast.

Méssacára, a kinde of Prawne or Shrimp.

Messaggiére, a messenger, an Embassadour.

Messággio, a message, an Embassage.

Messále, a Missall or Masse-booke.

Messe, haruest or haruest time.

Messedánza, a mingling or blending together.

Messedáre, as Mescoláre.

Messére, a Sir, a master. Also my Sir.

Messernò, no my Sir, no my master.

Messersì, yes my Sir, yes my master.

Messér tále, master such a one.

Messettaría, a Magistrate in Venice ouer Brokers, to punish and correct their abuses.

Messetti, brokers or messengers that goe betweene man and man to make bargaines.

Messía, an Hebrew word, our annointed Lord and Sauior Iesus Christ.

Messióne, as Missióne.

Messisicáre, to sing or say Masse.

Mésso, a Messenger, but properly a sumner, a Paritor, or Pursiuant. Vsed also for an Embassadour. Also a message or embassage. Also the Participle of Méttere, put, placed, set, laid, seated. Also a Messe of meat, or as we call it a course of dishes serued at a table.

Mésso a óro, wrought or set in gold.

Mésso a réte, wrought net-worke.

Messogíte, a kind of Greeke wine.

Mestára, as Mestura, as Méstola.

Mestáre, to stir and mash together, as Mescolare.

Mestiánza, as Mestióne.

Mestiere, Mestieri, as Mestiero.

Mestiero, a mystery, a trade, an occupation, an arte, an exercise, a profession. Vsed also for neede or necessity.

Mestiero mí e, it is needfull to me.

Mestiéuole, as Mestionéuole.

Mestionáre, to mix, or blend, or mash together.

Mestióne, a mixing, a mingling, a mashing.

Mestionéuole, that may be mixed or blended.

Mestítia, sadnesse, pensiuenesse, heauinesse.

Mesto, sad, pensiue, heauy in heart.

Méstola, as Méscola. Also a simple houswife that can doe nothing but skum the pot.

Méstola foráta, a skummer.

Mestoláre, to skum the pot, to stir with a ladle. Also as Mescoláre.

Mestolíno, a little Mestolóne.

Mestolóne, an idle gull, a loggarhead good for nothing but to handle a ladle.

Mestro, as Ménstruo.

Mestruo, as Ménstruo.

Mestúra, any filthy matter or mixture.

Mesturánza, as Mestióne, a mixture.

Mesturáre, as Mestionáre, as Mescoláre.

Méta, an high Piramides. Also a Beacon. Also a land or sea-marke. Also a marke, an ayme or But to shoot or leuell at, a marke or gole in the field whereunto men or herses run, a staffe or stake set at the end of a race. Aso a bound, a confine, a limite, a Mearestone. Also a stacke of Corne, a ricke of Hay, a pile of wood, &c. Also the size of any thing or limitation. Also a kind of high-growing Piramidall Cipresse-tree, it hath beene also taken for a high, great and soft turd.

Metà, a moity or halfe.

Metacárpio, the backe of a mans hand.

Metacísmo, a certaine incongruity in speech.

Metáde, a moity or halfe.

Metadella, a kind of little measure.

Matafísica, things supernaturall.

Metafísico, a professour of supernatural things.

Metáfora, a metaphor or figure when a word is translated from his proper signification to another.

Metafréno, the part of the backe that is against the heart.

Metafórico, metaphoricall, figuratiue.

Metaláphio. 

Metalessi, a figure whereby a word is put from his common signification.

Metalláro, a founder or dealer in mettals.

Metállico, minerall, bearing mettall, mettallous.

Metalliére, as Metallísta.

Metallífero, that bringeth foorth mettall.

Metallificáre, to grow to or become mettall.

Metallificársi, to grow to mettall.

Metallíno, made of mettall, of the colour of mettall, namely iron. Also a kind of stone.

Metallísta, a Mettalist, a founder of mettals.

Metállo, any kind of mettall. Also mettall in Armorie, as Or and Argent.

Metallóso, full of, or hauing mettall in it.

Metamorphósi, a transformation or changing of one likenesse or shape into another.

Metaphoreggiáre, to speake figuratiuely.

Metaplasmo, a figure called a transformation when something is necessarily changed.

Metátesi, a transposition when one letter is put for another.

Metáura, as Methéore.

Metella, a kind of Indian nut. Also a kind of viper.

Metempsicósi, a passing of the soules from one bodie to another.

Metéore, as Methéore.

Meteoría, speculation of high things.

Meteorólogo, a student of high things as of Starres and Planets.

Meteorología, studie of high things.

Meteoroscópo, a beholder of high things, that obserueth the differences of the eleuations and distances of the Starres and Planets.

Meteoroscópica árte, the arte that teacheth with instruments to finde and perceiue the differences of the eleuations and distances of Starres and Planets.

Métere, méto, metéi, metúto, to mow or reape corne or hay.

Meth, as Cardóne.

Metheología, as Meateología.

Metheológico, as Meateológico.

Methéore, meteors, vnperfect mixt things engendred in the ayre.

Metheórico, belonging to meteors in the ayre.

Metheorología, a description or speaking of meteors. 



Metheorológico, as Metheórico.

Metheoroscópico, as Metheórico.

Methódico, methodicall.

Méthodo, a method, a ready way or forme to teach or doe any thing.

Méthrida, hearbe Robert or Doues-foote.

Metitóre, a mower, a reaper Also a measurer.

Metódico, methodicall.

Método, as Méthodo.

Metonomía, a figure when the cause is put for the effect.

Metópe, the distance or space betweene. Denticulo and Triglipho in building.

Metópio, a kind of artificiall oyle. Also the tree that yeeldeth Ammoniáco.

Metoposcopía, iudging by Physiognomie or looking in the face or forehead.

Metoposcópo, a Metaposophist, one that by the face or fauour of a man, will guesse his qualities and conditions.

Métra, a Bishops mitre. Also meeter.

Metráre, to crowne with a Mitre. Also to ryme or meeter. Also to measure.

Metráro, a Mitrer, a Rimer, a Measurer.

Metrenchíto, an instrument with which Phisitions vse to conueigh medicines into the belly or matrix.

Metrétta, a measure in Greece containing about eleuen of our Gallons.

Métria, any kind of measuring.

Métrico, according to measure or meeter.

Métro, any kind of measure or demension. Also any kind of verse or meeter.

Metrocomía, a chiefe village or towne amongst other townes or villages.

Metrópoli, the chiefe Cittie in a country.

Metropolitáno, a Metropolitane: that is, a chiefe Bishop of a chiefe Cittie.

Metroposcopía, a guessing of mens conditions by looking in their faces.

Metroposcópo, as Metoposcópo.

Mettecále, a coine of gold in Babilon.

Méttere, métto, misi, mésso, to put, to place, to lay, to set or situate. Also to bet or lay a wager. Also to bud or send forth and burgeon, namely speaking of Plants or Trees. Also as Sboccáre, namely speaking of waters or riuers. Also to lay forth or expose vnto danger.

Métter' a cauállo, to horse or set on horse.

Métter' adósso, to lay vpon, to put on. Also to lay to ones charge.

Métter' a ferro e a fuóco, to put to fire and sword.

Métter' a fil di spáda, to put to the edge of the sword.

Métter' a fuóco, to lay or set to the fire.

Métter' alla pruóua, to put to the triall.

Métter' all' incánto, to put or set to sale by a cryer at who giues most.

Métter' alla uentúra, to put in aduenture. 

Métter' a láto, to lye downe by ones side.

Métter' alle máni, to set together by the eares.

Métter' all' órdine, to set in order, to put in a readinesse, to prepare, to settle.

Métter' a máno, to set in hand to begin, to broch.

Métter' a mónte, to put into the packe againe, to heape vp, to swig at cardes.

Métter' a móre, to settle ones loue or affection vpon any thing.

Métter' a mórte, to put to death.

Métter' a non calére, to set at naught.

Métter' a partíto, to put in doubt or bring one to some irresolution and vncertainty.

Métter' a ríschio, to put in hazard or danger.

Métter' a sácco, to put to the spoile, to sacke, to ransacke, to massacre.

Métter' a táu la, to sit downe at boord.

Métter' auánti, to propose, to exhibite, to set forward, to aduance.

Métter béne, to place or set well. Also to sute or square well with. Also to turne or redound to ones good or profite.

Métter cása, to set vp house.

Métter compassióne, to mooue vnto pitty.

Métter cónto, to place or set in account. Also to answer ones expectation.

Métter cúra, to apply care vnte.

Métter da bánda, to lay aside, to put by.

Métter d'attórno, to put on or about one.

Métter déntro, to bring or let and put in.

Métter dilig énza, to vse all diligence.

Métter fuóco, to burne or set on fire. Also to sow sedition.

Métter fuóra, to put out, to expell, to set foorth, to lay out, to publish. Also to burgeon or bud foorth.

Métter' il capello, to put on ones hat.

Métter' il chiauistello all' uscio, to set a barre before the doore, to set a bolt vpon the doore.

Métter' il fréno, to put on a bridle, to refraine one, to bridle, to snaffle.

Métter' il pélo, to burnish as Deere doe, to spred in squarenesse.

Métter' in abbandóno, to set at naught to abandon and neglect.

Métter' in áia, to put or set in a threshing or open place, that is, to bring one into a fooles Paradise, to put a man in hope or feede him with faire words. Also to intermeddle with businesse that one hath nothing to doe with.

Métter' in assetto, to settle in good order.

Métter' in ánzi, to prefer, to propese, to put forward, to put in consideration. 

Métter' in auentúra, to put in hazerd.

Métter' in bánco, to put into banke or safety.

Métter' in cápo, to bring into the field. Also to propose or lay foorth a matter.

Métter' in cárcere, to put in prison.

Métter' in cássa, to put vp in chests, to lay vp safe or in store as men doe money.

Métter' in cuóre, to put into ones heart.

Métter' in cóncio, to put in order, or dresse vp.

Métter' in chéto, to appease, to whosht.

Métter' in sílo, to put in ranke or in file.

Métter' in dósso, to clothe or put on.

Métter' in facénda, to set a worke.

Métter' in fóndo, to sinke or ouerthrow.

Métter' in fúga, to put to flight or rout.

Métter' in fracásso, to put to spoile.

Metter' in letto, to lay or bring to bed.

Métter' in lúce, to set out, to publish.

Métter' in mal'ánno, to put in trouble.

Métter' in máre, to put to sea.

Métter' in ménte, to put in minde.

Métter' in mólle, to lay in steepe.

Métter' in non cále, to set at naught, to care nothing for, not to set by, to neglect.

Métter' in nouelle, to set out as a laughing-stocke.

Métter' in ópera, to put in practise.

Métter' in ordinanza, to place or set in order, in due course, files or rankes.

Métter' in órdine, idem.

Métter' in paróle, to put in strife or contention. Also to giue cause of speech.

Métter' in perícolo, to put in danger.

Métter' in riuólta, to ouerturne, to put to confusion and to run away.

Métter' in rótta, to put to rout or flight, to defeate, to ouerthrow.

Métter'in scrítto, to set downe in writing.

Métter'in stámpa, to put in print.

Métter'in terra, to land or goe on land.

Métter'in vóce, to publish vnto others. Also to set a dittie into musicall parts.

Métter'in vólta, to put to flight. Also to ouerturne.

Métter la cása sópra il camíno, to put the house ouer the chimnie, that is, to place the woman aboue the man.

Métter la céna, to prepare supper.

Métter la chiésa sópra il campaníle, to place the Church ouer the steeple, that is, to set the woman or wise aboue her husband.

Métter la fáua nel bacello, to put the beane in to the cod, that is, &c.

Métter la vía trà le gámbe, to set the



way betweene ones legs, that is, to begin, or take a iourney in hand.

Métter la táuola, to lay the boord.

Métter légge, to impose a law.

Métter máno, to manumit. Also to tame, to begin or set abroach, to lay hands on.

Métter méglio, to fit handsomely, to be for the best.

Métter ménte, to looke well vnto, to heed and marke diligently.

Métter nel cápo, to perswade or put into ones head.

Métter nelletto, to put or bring a bed.

Métter nella vía, to adresse, or put in the way.

Métter paúra, to put into feare.

Métter pégno, to paune, to lay a wager.

Métter scála, to come or ride at anchor neere the shore. Also to land.

Méttersi, to cloath, or put on ones backe. Also to put or medle himselfe with. Also to determine. Also to put or prepare himselfe to doe any thing.

Méttersi a fáre, to settle himselfe, or begin to doe, to take in hand to doe.

Méttersi a partíto, for a man to hazard himselfe vnto any danger.

Méttersi a perícolo, to put himselfe in danger or perill.

Méttersi a prestáre, to begin to lend, or put money to vsurie.

Méttersi a ríschio, to put himselfe into hazard or danger.

Méttersi a táuola, to sit downe at the boord.

Méttersi auánti, a man to aduance or put himselfe forward.

Méttersi in ceruello, to put into ones wit. Also to call his wits together.

Méttersi in letto, to lye downe, or goe to bed.

Méttersi in máre, to goe, or put forth to Sea.

Méttersi in vía, a man to put himselfe in the way.

Méttersi la vía trà le gámbe, to put the way betweene ones legs, that is, to begin a iourney.

Méttersi le scárpe, a man to put on his shooes, that is to say, to prepare himselfe for any iourney or employment.

Méttersi su un cúrro, earnestly to follow some fond humor or passion.

Métter sótto, to subdue, to put vnder. Also to lay or set vnder.

Métter sótto sópra, to turne topsie turuie.

Métter strída, to skreeke, or crie out.

Métter sù, to bet, or lay a wager.

Métter táuola, to set vp a boord.

Métter'úna camíscia, to put on a shirt.

Métter'vn pezzo a cauállo, to mount a piece vpon his cariage, to mount a piece. 

Métter'vn púlce nell' orécchio, to put a flea in ones eare, to put a toy in ones head.

Mettigarzóni, a placer of boyes or laqueis.

Mettimassára, a woman that placeth maids into seruice.

Mettitóio, a toole that Goldsmiths vse.

Mettitóre, a layer, a setter, a placer.

Mettúto, put, laid, set, placed.

Méu, an hearbe like to Dill or Anise, called Meon.

Mezza, a thing that is mellow, or almost rotten ripe. Also a measure of about a pottle of ours. Also a moitie, or halfe. Vsed also for the Moone, when she is iust seauen daies old.

Mezza áquila, a demy eagle in armorie.

Mezza ária, is among horsemen, when a horse doeth bound high, continuing without rest, whereof commeth Mezza ária áspra, which is, bounding with a yerke.

Mezza árma, a halfe-sword, any halfe weapon, or armes.

Mezza colobrína, a demy-Culuerin.

Mezzalána, any woolsie, or linsiewoolsie stuffe, halfe wooll and silke, or linnen.

Mezzaláncia, a demy-Lance.

Mezzana, that is in or of the middle. Also a mediatrix, or a meane. Also the poope or mizen saile in a ship. Also a meane string of an instrument. Also a middle bell of any ring.

Mezzanaménte, meanely, indifferently. Also by way of mediation, or intercession.

Mezzanáre, to mediate, to deale or come betweene others.

Mezzanáro, a mediator, an vmpier, a compromiser, an arbitrator.

Mezzannáta, a halfe-yeares rent, wages, employment, time, or space.

Mezzanità, a meane, a mediocritie, a mediation, or going betweene others. Also a remedie, an interposition, an indifferencie.

Mezzáno, a meane man, betweene great and little, indifferent, betweene both. Also a meane, or countertenor in musike. Also a mediator betweene parties. Also any middle thing. Also a middle-finger.

Mezzára, the play of keeles, or nine pinnes.

Mezzáre, to mellow or ripe halfe rotten. Also to deuide in the midle or halfe.

Mezzaría, the mid, midle centre, or midst part of any thing.

Mezzaría délla gióia, the midle of the mouth of a piece.

Mezzarólo, a partner in any thing, a sharer at halfe, a compartener.

Mezzársi, to grow rotten, or mellow-ripe.

Mezzaruóla, a small wine measure, a pint.

Mezza sella, the second kind of saddle vsed to colts. Also the time of the riders or horses exercise. Looke Huómo and Cauallo.

Mezza testa, a kind of halfe skull, or halfe head-peece.

Mezzatúra d'árme, a deuiding or partition of cotes or armes.

Mezzéne, the midle ribs of any bodie.

Mezzenóci, a kind of drinking-glasse.

Mezzétta, a wine-measure, about a pint.

Mezziauólo, a meane franklin, or hinde.

Mezzína, as Mezzétta.

Mezzissima péra, a most rotten-ripe Peare.

Mezzo, a moitie, a halfe, or mid-part, a demy of any thing. Also a demy in armorie. Also a meane, or mediation. Also a mediator, or intercessor. Also a space or interuall of time or place. Also vsed for mediocritie, or meanenesse. Vsed also for a neutrall, or indifferent man. Also almost halfe or wel neere. Also mellow or rottenripe, taken for the Latin word Mitis.

Mezzo cannóne, a demy-Cannon.

Mezzo dì, mid-day, high noone. Also the South part of the world.

Mezzo giórno, as Mezzo dì.

Mezzolanità, a meane state, or condition.

Mezzoláno, of a meane state, or indifferent condition, of a midle qualitie.

Mezzolióne, a demy Lyon in armory.

Mezzo-mándolo, Seamsters call it the halfe-almond stitch.

Mezzo-festa, halfe-holiday.

Mezzo póme., looke Póme.

Mezzo púnto, halfe a point. Looke Púnto.

Mezzo ságro, a demy-Sacre, of vs called a Minion.

Mezzo sapóre, neither soure nor sweet.

Mezzo vénto, a halfe winde.

Mezzo vérde, greene-rosted, or raw-sodden.

Mezzule, the midle ribs of any creature. Also the midle boords of any barrell.

Mì, a preposition added in the beginning of words for halfe or mid.

Mì, to me. Also me, or my selfe. Also from me. Also a note in Musike.

Mía, mine, mine owne, my. Also as Miáci.

Miáci, a kind of shell-fish yeelding foule yellowish pearles.

Miagolaménti, whining, puling, wailing. Also the meawings of a Cat.

Miagoláre, to whine, to pule, to waile. 



Also to meaw as a Cat. Also as Nicchiáre.

Miágro, the hearbe Cameline.

Miáio, a thousand.

Miarése, a thousand weight.

Miáro, as Miáio, a thousand.

Míca, a crum, a whit, a iot, a nothing.

Micáncolo, Cockle, or Niggell weede.

Micánte, glistring, shining.

Micanthóne, a kind of wild Asperage, or Sperage.

Micáre, to glister, to shine, to shew it selfe.

Mícca, the pottage, broth or pitance that Friers haue. Also scot and lot. Also a paiment or shot paid in a tauerne. Also draffe for Swine.

Micchi, as Michi, in Latine, to me.

Míccia, gunners match. Also a Pug, a Musse-Cat. Also an Ape or Munkie. Also a niggardlie, a paltrie or foolish wench.

Micciánza, dispósta a ricéuere la mála micciánza.

Míccie, scraps giuen for foode to Asses.

Miccíno, a little bit, crum, or minzing-bit.

Míccio, a gunners match, a Snaphance. Also the weeke or cotton of a Candle.

Mícciole, small crums of bread.

Mícco, a becke, a signe, a nod.

Micéi, all big Cattell, as Oxen and Asses.

Michelázzo, a lazie loitring fellow.

Michíni, a kind of bunnes, or manchets.

Micì, mee-there.

Mícia, a pusse-cat, a kitlin, a pug.

Micída, a murtherer, a man-slayer.

Micidiále, murtherous, man-slaughter.

Micídio, murther, man-slaughter.

Micísta, a kind of pouder made of dride beefe, which in Barberie, and among the Fuoruscites of Italie they vse to giue their horses and souldiers to keepe them in breath, and neuer ride or goe without some of it about them, affirming, that with halfe a pound of it a horse will hold out and goe a hundred miles vpon the spurre.

Mícola, as Míca, a crum, a iot.

Micoláre, to crum, or crumble.

Micolíno, a little little crum, or whit.

Micónij, people of the Iland of Mycos, which be euer balde.

Micónio, as óppio, or opium.

Microcósmo, a little world. Vsed for man.

Micrología, curiositie about idle things and of no worth.

Micrólogo, a fellow curious to talke of trifles and small things of no value.

Micrópsico, heartlesse, faint-hearted, wanting pulse or courage.

Midólla, the marrow or pith of bones.

Midólla dell' álbero, the pith or sap of a tree.

Midollóne, the strong pith of any thing.

Midollóso, full of marrow, pithie.

Midriási, a disease in the eyes, which though it change not the colour of them, yet it makes euery thing or obiect seeme lesse then it is.

Míe, my, mine, mine owne.

Miédere, as Miétere, to mow, to reape.

Miéi, my, myne, myne owne.

Mieláre, to enhonnie, to sweeten.

Miele, honnie.

Miétere, miéto, mietéi, mietúto, to mow, to reape corne or grasse.

Mietéuole, that may bee mowed or reaped.

Mietitóre, a mower, a reaper.

Mietitúra, mowing-time, a corne-haruest. Also a mowing or reaping.

Mietúto, mowed, or reaped.

Míga, as Míca, a crum, a iot, a whit. Also nothing at all, not any thing.

Míglia, miles of a thousand paces.

Migliáccio, a kind of tarte or haggas made of millet and hogs-bloud.

Migliáia, thousands. Also a Millet-field.

Migliáio, a mile of a thousand paces. Also a thousand.

Migliára, as Migliáia.

Migliarése, a kind of coine in Italie.

Migliáro, a thousand.

Míglio, the graine hirse or millet. Also a mile or thousand paces.

Migliorábile, that may be bettred.

Miglioraménto, a mendment, a bettering.

Miglióne, a million.

Miglioránte, bettering, amending.

Miglioránza, a mending, a bettering.

Miglioráre, to mend, to better, to make or become better.

Miglióre, better. Also best.

Miglioréuole, that may be bettered.

Miglioría, a mendment, a bettering.

Migliosóle, the hearbe Gromell.

Mignardaggiáre, to mignardize, to minion.

Mignardággine, minionisme, wantonnesse.

Mignardáre, to wanton, to mignardise.

Mignardígie, mignardises, minionismes.

Mignárdo, a mignard, a minion, a wanton.

Mignardóne, a foolish mignard or minion.

Mignátta, a horse-leach, a bloud-sucker.

Mignattáre, to sucke bloud, to play the bloud-sucker.

Mignátti, a kind of silke-wormes.

Mignáttola, a bloud-sucker, a horse-leach

Mignattóne, an old craftie bloud-sucker, a shifting companion, that cares not whose bloud he sucks.

Mignella, a slie, sneaking, bloud-sucking companion. 

Mignéra, a horse-leach, a bloud-sucker.

Mignócco, a meacocke, a sillie gull, a sot.

Mignolo díto, the little finger.

Mignóne, is properly in Italian the chanell that runnes from the priuie parts vp aboue the fundament. It is now vsed for a minion, a darling or a sauorite, and is commonly taken in ill sence.

Mignoneggiáre, to play the Mignóne.

Mignoneríe, minion-trickes, wanton toyes.

Mignóre, as Minóre, lesse, lesser.

Migráre, to issue or goe out, to remoue or goe and dwell from one place to another. Also to returne backe againe.

Migratióne, a remouing from place to place. Also a returning backe.

Miguerra, mid or halfe warre.

Míla, thousands.

Miláce, the Mast-holme or Ilex-tree.

Milánta, a number numberlesse.

Milantáre, to brag of impossibilities.

Milantaríe, vnlikely brags or boastings.

Milantatóre, a vaine boaster or vaunter

Milantésimo, the thousandth in order.

Milantiére, a vaine vaunter or bragger.

Milánto, a vaunt, a brag, a boast.

Milástia, the flaxie part of hempe.

Milecóme, a kind of flye or beetle. Also a kind of worme.

Milensággine, as Melensággine.

Milenso, as Melenso.

Milésia, a kind of Rose.

Milésimo, the thousandth in order.

Míli, a Gold-drawers toole.

Mília, thousands.

Miliáci, a kind of Apricots.

Miliáia, thousands.

Miliáia, a thousand.

Miliára, thousands.

Miliáre, of or belonging to a thousand.

Miliária, a weede that choketh and killeth Millet.

Milícchio, a surname giuen to loue, pleasant, sweet, milde and gentle.

Milióne, a million in number. Also a Glede, a Kite, a Buzzard, a Puttocke.

Miliosóle, the hearbe Gromell.

Militánte, militant, warring, fighting.

Militáre, to fight, to warfare. Also militarie or warlike.

Milite, a man or knight at armes.

Milítia, warfare, militarie profession. Also an armie of souldiers or warriers.

Militíte, a kind of bloud-stone.

Millánta, as Milánta.

Millantáre, as Milantáre.

Millantarie, as Milantaríe.

Mílle, a thousand. Also thousands.

Milledóppia, a thousand-fold or double.

Millefiate, a thousand times.

Millefóglio, Millfolie, Yarrow or Noseblead.

Millenário, a thousand. Also of a thousand yeeres. 



Millepiédi, a worme hauing many feete, called a Furrie, a Palmer, a Woollhead. Also a Sow, a Swinetike, a Wood-louse, a Cheeselip. Also another long worme with hairie feete biting sore and dangerously.

Milleplicáre, to thousand-fold, or multiply by thousands.

Millésimo, the thousandth in order.

Mille nólte, a thousand times.

Millióne, a million in number.

Millosphílo, as Meliténa.

Mílo, a Goldsmiths toole.

Milónio, a kind of Greeke wine.

Miltóne, as Minio.

Miluágo, a fish called the Sea-kite.

Míluio, a Glade, a Kite, a Puttocke. Also as Miluágo.

Míluo, as Míluio.

Miluógo, a midst, or middle place.

Mílza, the spleane or milt.

Milzóso, spleenie, full or big spleened.

Míma, a wanton wench counterfeiting others gestures.

Mimallónide, as Ménadi.

Mimáre, to iest, to scoffe, or counterfeit mens actions as Mimikes doe.

Mimési, a figure called imitation or counterfeiting of wordes and gestures.

Mimiámbo, a wanton discourse.

Mímico, mimike, full of iestings or counterfeiting of mens actions.

Mímmulo, Pennie-grasse.

Mímo, a iester, a vice in a play, a counterfeiter of other mens actions and gestures.

Mimógrafo, a writer of wanton matters.

Mína, a minerall mine, a sapped mine. Also a coine worth ten crownes. Also a mans countenance or looke. Also a kind of measure for dry things. Also naturall copper.

Minacciaménto, a menacing, a threatning.

Minacciáre, to menace, to threaten.

Minacciatóre, a threatner, a menacer.

Minacciatório, minatorie, threatning.

Mináccie, threats, menaces.

Minacciéuole, full, of threats or menaces.

Minaccióso, threatning, menacing.

Mináce, threatning, menacing.

Mináide, a kind of venemous hearbe.

Minále, a measure of about a bushell.

Mináre, to mine or dig vnder ground.

Minatóre, a Miner, a digger of Mines.

Mínchia, as Ménchia.

Minchionáre, to play the simple gull.

Minchionaríe, foolish or simple trickes.

Minchióne, a simple gull, foole, or sot.

Mínda, the play, blind-hob, or blindmans-buffe, or hood-man-blind.

Minea, the first kind of wild Mirrhe.

Minella., looke A'lla minella.

Minella, a measure of about a pecke.

Mineo, Frankincense.

Minéra, a Minerall Mine.

Minerále, Minerall, containing mettall.

Minerárie, Minerals, pertaining to Minerals.

Minerista, a Miner, a finder or tryer of Minerals.

Mineróso, minerous, miny, full of mines, that hath mines.

Minerua, Nature, wit, craft.

Minestra, as Menestra, any pottage.

Minestráre, as Menestráre.

Minestríno, as Menestríno.

Mingherlína, a minikin-wench, a smirking-lasse, a pretty trull.

Mingól, a kind of drinke proceeding from the Palme-tree vsed in India.

Miniánthe, a kind of Trefoly or Clauergrasse.

Miniáre, to limne, to paint or colour with Vermilion, or Sinople.

Miniário, as Miniatóre.

Miniatóre, a Limner with Vermilion.

Miniatúra, a limning with Vermilion.

Mínima, a minime in musike.

Minimaménte, leastly, least of all. Also at no hand, in no case, in no wise.

Mínimi, minimes, leasts of all. Also a kind of order of Friers.

Mínimo, a minime, the least or smalest.

Mínio, a minerall found in siluer mines called Vermilion, Minium or Sinople. Also limning.

Minióso, hauing Vermillion in it.

Ministério, a function, a vocation, a ministery, a seruice, a labour, an office, an administration.

Minístra, a she officer or ministrer.

Ministrále, a minister or officer of iustice.

Ministráre, to minister or afford vnto.

Ministratóre, one that doth minister vnto.

Ministriere, a messenger sent to execute some charge or office. Also an officer. Also a Minstrell or a fidler.

Minístro, a Minister, a Vicar, a Preacher, an Officer, one that ministreth or dealeth for others, a seruant, a Deputy.

Minóne, a kind of game at cardes.

Minoránza, iuniority, minority, lessenesse.

Minoráre, to outgoe in lessenesse or smalenesse.

Minoratióne, as Minoránza.

Minoratíuo, that maketh or may be made lesser.

Minóre, lesser, smaller, yonger, the least.

Minorétto, a minorite, a yonglin, somewhat lesse, smaller or yonger. Also a kind of game both at cardes and dice.

Minoríngo, on of the least of a company, as we say a iacke out of doores or one of the court but none of the counsell.

Minorità, minority, lessenesse, iunioritie.

Minorménte, lesse, lessely, least of all.

Minotáuro, a minotaure, halfe a man and halfe a bull.

Minúccie, foolish trifles, little toyes, small trash.

Minuccioláre, to reduce into small crums.

Minúcciole, as Minúccie.

Minúccioli, all manner of scraps, crums, leauings, mammockes, shreds or small pieces.

Minuéllo díto, the little finger, or least.

Minuente, diminishing.

Minúgia, the smalest guts of any creature. Also the giblets of any foule. Also any little scraps, or crummes, or shreds, or small baggage things.

Minugiáre, to reduce into Minúgie. Also to play the ioyner in small workes.

Minugiere, a ioyner of small workes.

Minuibile, diminishable.

Minuiménto, a diminishing.

Minuíre, ísco, íto, to diminish, to abate, to appaire, to make lesse, to lessen. Also to fauour the voice in singing, or fall with the voice.

Minuitióne, a diminishing, a diminution.

Minúscula, a least or smallest.

Minúscula lettera, the smallest letter.

Minúta, small as dust. Also a short draught or first coppy of any writing, or letter.

Minutáglia, the least, the meanest or basest kind of people or any thing else, all manner of small wares, as Minuzzarie.

Minutáglia di pésce, the fry of fish.

Minutaménte, piece-meale, distinctly.

Minutáre, to mince or make very small.

Minutelli, the giblets of any soule, Hare or Pig.

Minutézza, smalnesse, littlenesse.

Minúti, a Gunners square which is diuided into twelue equal parts, by vs called degrees, euery degree is subdeuided into foure and of some into six equall parts, called Minutes or Minims.

Minútia, as Minúta. Also as Minúgia.

Minutílle, as Minutáglia.

Minutióne, a diminution.

Minutíni, the little fishes called Mennowes.

Minutíssimo, most-most little or small.

Minúto., Looke Minúti, a minute. Also small minced or written, as small as dust. Also a kind of hearbe. Also a kind of small coine.

Minúto bestiáme, small cattell sheepe and Goates. 



Minuzzáre, as Minutáre, to shred small.

Minuzzámi, as Minuzzaríe.

Minuzzaríe, all manner of small pieces, scraps, shreds, mammockes or mincings of any thing, the smallest triftes.

Minuzzoláre, as Minutáre.

Minuzzolaríe, as Minuzzaríc.

Minúzzoli, as Minuzzaríc.

Mio, Miei, my, mine, mine owne.

Miónzo, a minion, a darling, a sweetheart, a wanton louer.

Mióphono, an hearbe with very strong stalkes.

Miósola, Mouse-eare, some take it for Chick-weed.

Miosóti, as Miósola.

Miosotóne, as Miósola.

Miottonóne, as Cammaróne, it hath power with the sent to kill Mice and Rats.

Mi púr diede, yet he gaue mee.

Míra, an aime or leueling at any thing. Also an intent, purpose or looking at. Also the sight-hole of a stone-bow or any other artillery, namely the sight through which the top of the dispart and the marke whereat one shootes & leaueleth is seene.

Mirabáo, a sneaking companion, a prying knaue, an eaues-dropper.

Mirabile, admirable, wonderfull, strange.

Mirabília, wonders, maruels.

Mirabilità, wonderment, admiration.

Miraboláno, a Nut of Egypt called a Ben. Also a kind of dainty plumb. Also a kind of precious sweet oyntment. Also the setlings or grounds of oyntments.

Mirabóndo, admiring, looking with admiration.

Miráce, a stone glittering foorth many colours against the sunne.

Mírach, as Abdomen.

Mirácolo, a miracle, a thing exceeding ordinary reason, a wonder.

Miracolóso, miraculous, wonderfull.

Miragliáto, the office of an Admirall.

Miraglio, a looking glasse. Also an Admirall.

Miramúlo, Peny-grasse.

Mirándo, admirable, to be wondred at.

Miránte, as Miráglio, an Admirall.

Miráos, a kind of dainty pottage.

Míra piè, a kind of excellent Peare.

Miráre, to behold, to view, to looke at with earnestnesse. Also to ayme or leuell at. Also to consider, to aduise or ponder.

Mirasólc, as Girasóle. Also a vermine called a Tike. Also a kind of Shrub.

Mirátron, a Prince of faces.

Miráusto, saporósi boccóni di miráusto.

Mirella, a boord with nine holes whereat they play and troude madame, or nine little bowles.

Míria, a kind of small weight or measure.

Miríce, the shrub Tamariske.

Mirífico, wonder-breeding, maruellous.

Miriofíllo, Yarrow or Milfolly.

Miríte, a yellow precious stone, which rubbed with woollen cloth yeelds a sweet smell.

Mirmacíte, a stone with the forme of Pismires creeping in it.

Mirmécia, warts in the priuy parts.

Mirmecióne, a kinde of venemous Spider.

Míro, the Male or Milter of the fish Lamprey. Also a measure of liquid things. Also wondrous or maruellous.

Miroboláno, as Miraboláno.

Miróni, such as for any deformity in the face are greatly wondred at.

Miropetalóne, as Sanguinária.

Mírra, the gumme Myrrhe or tree that beareth it. Also an hearbe like Hemlocke.

Mirráre, to preserue with Myrrhe, or to embalme. Also to make to continue.

Mirrhíno, hearbe Robert or Doues-foot. Also a kind of precious stone, or boxes made of it.

Mírrho, Preseruation, taken from mirrhe because it preserueth dead bodies.

Mírride, as Mirrhíno.

Mirríte, as Miríte.

Mirsinéo, wild fennell or Dill.

Mirsiníte, a stone coloured like hony, and smelling of mirtle. Also a kind of Tithimale.

Mirtea, made of mirtle. Looke Coróna.

Mirtéto, a groue of Mirtle-trees.

Mirtídano, of Mirtle or tempred with it, a kind of meat made of Mirtle-berries. Also a knob, gall or bunch growing on Mirtle-trees.

Mirtílli, yongue Mirtle-trees.

Mírto, a Mirtle-tree.

Mirtóide, like, or of a Mirtle leafe.

Mirtuóso, mirtly, full of mirtle.

Mís, an adiunct added to Verbes or Nounes to alter the sence of them to a bad or contrary signification, as Mis in English.

Misagiáre, as Disagiáre.

Miságio, as Diságio.

Misagióso, as Disagióso.

Misalta, a lusty trull, a smirking lasse, a bounceing wench.

Misaláto, halfe or demie-salted.

Misantropía, hate of mens company.

Misantrópo, a hater of men.

Misaucntúra, misaduenture, ill-lucke. 

Misauenturáre, to misaduenture.

Misauenturáto, vnluckie, vnhappy.

Misauenturóso, vnfortunate.

Miscelláme, as Mescolánza, a mishmash.

Miscellióni, such as hold no certaine opinion but are of diuers and mixt iudgements.

Mísche, a kind of long Cockles or Muskle-fish.

Míschia, a fraie, a braule, a quarrell, a contention, a hurly-burly, a riot. Also a swarme. Also as Mescolánza. Also that which we call a medly or mothy cloth.

Mischiaménto, as Mescolánza.

Mischiánza, as Mescolánza.

Mischiáre, as Mescoláre.

Mischiataménte, mingledly, pell-mell.

Mischína, as Meschína.

Mischíno, as Meschíno.

Míschio, mixed. Also as Mescolánza.

Misciáre, as Mescoláre. Also to awaken.

Mísciobárbaro, he that hath a Grecian to his father and a Barbarian to his mother.

Mísco, a kind of long Muskle-fish.

Miscocéto, as Misco.

Miscóne, as Mísco.

Miscontentaménto, a discontentment.

Miscontentáre, to miscontent.

Misconténto, miscontent, discontent.

Miscredente, misbelieuing.

Miscredenza, misbeliefe.

Miscrédere, to misbeleeue.

Miscredúto, misbeleeued.

Miscúglio, as Mescúglio or Mescolánza.

Míse, the little Muskle-fish. Also he did put, set, or lay, of Méttere.

Miserábile, miserable, wretched.

Miserabilménte, miserably, wretchedly.

Miseráccio, as Miseróne.

Miseraménte, miserably, wretchedly.

Miserándo, miserable, full of misery.

Miseratióne, commiseration, pitty, ruth.

Miserello, silly, wretched, miserable.

Miserére, the name of one of the Psalmes.

Miseréuole, miserable, to be pittied.

Misereuolménte, miserably, wretchedlie.

Miséria, misery, aduersity, calamity, wretchednesse, distresse. Also niggardize, sparing, miserablenesse, or auarice.

Misericórde, as Misericordióso.

Misericordéuole, as Misericordióso.

Misericórdia, mercy, pitty, compassion.

Misericordiáre, to haue or shew mercy, to compassionate.

Misericordióso, mercifull, full of mercie. 



Miserítia, as Miseria.

Mísero, miserable, wretched, to be pittied. Also niggard, sparing or straightbanded. Also of Méttere, they laid, set or put.

Miseróne, a miserable chuffe, a niggardlie wretch, a pinch-penny.

Miserrimo, most wretched & miserable.

Miseríssimo, as Miserrimo.

Misfáre, to misdoe, to trespasse, to offend.

Misfátto, misdone. Also a misdeed.

Misfattóre, a misdoer, a trespasser.

Mísi, a kinde of excressence of the earth called Misons passing sweet in smell and taste.

Misintelligenza, misunderstanding.

Misintendente, misunderstanding.

Misintendere, tendo, tési, téso, to misunderstand.

Misintéso, misunderstood.

Mísio, yellow Vitrioll or coppresse.

Mì sì scórda, I doe forget.

Misléa, as Mesléa, as Mischía.

Misleále, disloyall, false, vntrue.

Mislcaltà, disloyalty, falsehood.

Misleánza, faithlesnesse, disloyalty.

Misoginía, hate or contempt of women.

Misogíno, a hater or contemner of women.

Misolídio, mournefull or graue Musike.

Míssi, fruits of Hebesten.

Missisicáre, to say or sing Masse.

Missióne, a mission, a sending.

Missíua, a missiue, a letter to be sent.

Missíuo, missiue, to be sent.

Missolídio, as Misolídio.

Mislóne, a kind of fish.

Missóre, as Bécca in cáuo.

Místa, he that learneth or he that is expert in the misteries of religion.

Mistà, friendship, amitie.

Mistágono, as Mistagógo.

Mistagógo, a chiefe interpreter of misteries or ceremonies, one that had the keeping and shewing of Church reliques vnto strangers.

Mistaménte, mixedly, confusedly.

Mistáte, as Mistà. Also a kind of measure.

Míste, a plumbe graffed vpon a Seruice-tree.

Misterio, a misterie or secret in holy things, a thing secretly hid in wordes or ceremonies, whereunto the common sort might not come.

Misterióso, misterious, containing some misterie or secret meaning.

Mistero, as Misterio.

Mistiáto, mingled, a mingled colour.

Mistiánza, as Mistúra, or Mescolánza.

Mistiáre, to mash, to blend or mingle.

Misticále, as Místico.

Misticánza, a mingling, a medly, a blending. 

Mistic áre, to mingle or blend together, to mash.

Místico, misticall, secret, figuratiue.

Mistiere, as Mestiero.

Mistilineo, entermixed with lines.

Mistionáre, as Mescoláre.

Mistióne, as Mistúra, as Mescolánza.

Místo, mixed, mingled, blended.

Mistúra, a mixture, as Mescolánza.

Misturággine, as Mescolánza.

Misturánza, as Mescolánza.

Misturáre, as Mescoláre.

Misuéndere, uéndo, uendéi, uendúto, to mis-sell.

Misueniménto, a falling into any fault or error, a mischancing or miscomming, a swouning.

Misueníre, uéngo, uénni, uenúto, to come or fall into any error and fault, to mischance or miscom.

Misuentúra, as Misauentúra.

Misuenturáto, as Misauenturáto.

Misuenúto, miscome, decaied, fallen into a swoune.

Misúra, a measure, a rule, a proportion, a meane, a temper.

Misurábile, measurable, that may bee measured.

Misurabilità, measurablenesse.

Misuránza, a measuring. Also measurablenesse.

Misuráre, to measure, to proportion. Also to ponder, to consider, to proportion.

Misuráre a péso, to measure by weight.

Misuráre ad ócchio, to measure by the eye.

Misuratióne, as Misuránza.

Misuráto, measured. Also considerate or warie.

Misuratóre, a measurer.

Misurétta, any little or short measure.

Misuríno, as Misurétta. Also a kind of play.

Misusáre, to misuse, to abuse.

Misúso, a misuse, an abuse.

Mità, a halfe, a moitie, a mid.

Mitáde, a halfe, a moitie, a mid.

Míte, meeke, lowly, humble, milde.

Miteménte, meekely, mildly, lowly.

Miticáre, as Mitigáre.

Mitificatióne, a softning.

Mitigaménto, a mitigating, an asswaging.

Mitigáre, to mitigate, to asswage, to allay.

Mitigatióne, a mitigation, an asswaging.

Mitigatíuo, that doth mitigate.

Mitigatório, hauing power to mitigate.

Mitighéuolc, that may be asswaged.

Mitissimaménte, most meekely or mildly.

Mitología, a declaration of fables, a moralizing of a tale.

Mitólogo, an expounder of fables or tales. 

Mítra, any kind of miter, namely of a Bishop. Also the skin wherein the cods or stones be wrapped.

Mitráce, a stone of the colour of Damaske roses, which laid in the Sunne, shineth of diuers colours.

Mitráre, to enmiter as Bishops be.

Mitráto, mitred as a Bishop.

Mithridáte, a confection vsed in Phisike, Mitridate. Also as Mitráce.

Mithridatióne, a kind of hearbe.

Mítria, as Mítra.

Mitriáre, as Mitráre.

Mitropedia di Sammuelle Rè., 

Mítulo, the Limpin-fish or Muskle-fish.

Míuolo, a kind of drinking glasse.

Mizzáre, to grow mellow or rotten-ripe. Also to wither, to fade, to flag, to squease.

Mizzáto, mellow or rotten-ripe. Also flaggie, withered, faded, squeased.

Mízzi frutti, mellow, withered, squeased.

Mízzo, as Mizzáto.

Mò, euen now, at this very instant. Also ioyned vnto other words, myne, as Fratellomò, brother myne. Vsed anciently also for a mans wife, as an abreuiation of Móglie.

Móbile, moueable, mutable, inconstant.

Móbili, chattles, immoueable goods.

Mobilità, mobilitie, mouing, ficklenesse.

Mobilitáre, to mooue often. Also to furnish with moueable goods.

Mobilménte, moueably, waueringly.

Móbola, quándo la párte Guelfa di Firenze fà móbole non ritórnano i Ghibellíni.

Moboláre, to furnish with moueable goods.

Móboli, moueable goods.

Mò cáncaro, adu. marie a vengeance come of it.

Mócca, a mowing or apish mouth.

Moccaiáro, Mokado stuffe.

Moccaiórro, Mokado stuffe.

Moccaiuólo, a mucketer, a snuffer.

Moccaménto, a snuffing of the nose or of a candle. Also a mocking or flouting.

Moccáre, to snuffe or blow the nose. Also to snuffe a candle. Also to flout, to mocke, to scoffe or iest at.

Moccáto, snuft the nose or a candle.

Moccatóio, as Moccatóre.

Moccatóre, a snuffer, a mucketer. Also a paire of snuffers. Also a mocker, a flouter.

Moccatúra, as Moccaménto.

Mócceca, as Moccicóne.

Moccenígo, a kind of coine in Venice.

Mocchiáre, to heape, to masse or hudle vp.

Mócchio, any heape, masse, hudle or pile.

Mocchignóso, snottie, full of sniuell. 



Mócci, snots or snuffings or sniuels.

Mocciáccia, a trull, a harlot, a flurt.

Mocciáre, as Moccáre. Also to pare.

Mocciatúta, as Moccaménto.

Moccichíno, a handkercher, a mucketer.

Moccicóne, a snottie gull, a slouenly foole.

Moccicóso, snottie, sniuely, slouenly.

Moccignóso, as Moccicóso.

Móccio, snot of ones nose, sniuell, snuff.

Moccióso, as Moccicóso.

Moccióne, any great Móccio.

Mócco, as Móccolo.

Moccoláre, as Moccáre.

Moccolíno, a litle snuffe or candles end.

Móccolo, filthy snot or sniuell. Also a snuff or candles end. Also wild fitch or chichling.

Moccolóne, a snottie gull, a sniueling foole.

Moccolóso, snottie, sniuely, slabberie.

Mocenígo, as Moccenígo, a coine in Venice.

Mocheríno, a stamp of an arme without a hand.

Mochi?, but who now?

Móco, a kind of pulse called Tares.

Mócolo, a candles end, a snuffe of a candle. Also the fore-part of a horses nose.

Modále, according to Moode and forme.

Modelláre, to modell, to example, to frame.

Modello, a modell, a frame, an example.

Módeno, a toole that Stone-cutters vse.

Moderábile, that may be moderated.

Moderánza, moderation, temperance.

Móderáre, to moderate, to temper.

Moderataménte, moderately, temperately.

Moderatióne, moderation, temperance.

Moderáto, moderate, temperate.

Moderatóre, a moderator, a temperer.

Moderéuole, that may be moderated.

Modernáglie, moderne things. Also taken for young wenches.

Modernále, moderne, of this age.

Modernáre, to make moderne or new.

Moderno, moderne, of this age.

Modestia, modestie, ciuilitie, shamefastnesse, temperance, discretion.

Modesto, modest, shamefast, ciuill, discreete, temperate.

Módi, meanes, fashions, manners. Also times, rests, or pauses in Musike.

Módica, a modicum, a bit, a some-what.

Módico, a modicum, a bit, a somewhat.

Modificáre, to modifie, to temper, to measure, to poise, to ponder, to moderate, to reduce to some better forme.

Modificatióne, a modification, a tempering, a moderation, a reformation.

Modiglióne, as Ménsola. Also something about a Mill that Millers call Shiuers. Also a kind of Yonike worke in building.

Módio, a measure, containing halfe our bushell.

Modióne, as Modiglióne, as Ménsola.

Módo, manner, fashion, guise, meane, forme, size, rule, measure, way, power, abilitie. Also a Moode of a Verbe.

Modolántia, modulation, musicall measure, tuneable singing.

Modoláre, to sing tuneable, or according to due accent and number.

Modolatióne, as Modolántia.

Modolatóre, he that singeth in measure, tune, and accent.

Módolo, a modell, a frame, the measure, the bignesse or quantitie of a thing. Also that whereby a whole worke is measured or squared. Also a conueiance of water through pipes or conduits. Also a hand-spike.

Modórra, the drouzie euill.

Modulántia, as Modolántia.

Moduláre, as Modoláre.

Modulatióne, as Modolántia.

Modulatóre, as Modolatóre.

Módulo, a measure in Musike. Also melodie. Also as Módolo.

Mófola, a kind of great horned Goate, whose hornes are so hard, that fall he neuer so high vpon them he neuer hurts himselfe.

Móggia, the measure called bushels.

Moggiáre, to heape vp, or measure by bushels.

Móggio, a measure called a bushell. Also a heape, a masse, a stacke of corne, or a ricke of hay.

Móglia, a wheele of a clocke.

Mogliáccio, foolish wiuing.

Mogliamà, my wife, wife mine.

Móglia-maéstra, the maister or chiefe wheele of a clocke.

Mogliatà, wife thine, thy wife.

Mogliáre, to wet, or steepe in moist. Also to wiue.

Mogliázzo, foolish wiuing.

Móglie, a wife, a wedded wife.

Mogliémma, wife mine, my wife.

Mogliera, a wife, a wedded wife.

Mogliere, a wife, a maried wife.

Moglietà, wife thine, thy wife.

Mogliétte, as Molétte.

Mógnere, as Móngere.

Mogníne, as Moíne.

Móia, let him dye. Also tush, gup, what? no, no, good Lord.

Móia móia, tush, tush, fye, fye.

Moiána, a piece of ordinance about eight foote long, of a demy-Culuerine bore, and accordingly fortifide.

Moiétte, mullets, pincers, nippers.

Moína, a blandishing-face, a simpring countenance. Also a prettie Nunne. Also a leering wench. 

Moinárda, a blandishing, simpring, fauning, or leering woman.

Moináre, to blandish, to flatter, to simper, to leere, to faune vpon.

Moinatóre, a blandisher, a flatterer, a simprer, a leerer, a foister.

Moíne, blandishings. Looke Dáre moíne.

Moinéro, as Moinatóre.

Moinóso, full of flatteries, blandishments, or simprings.

Moise, deriued of Mois, that is to say, water, signifieth, found in the water.

Móla, a lump of flesh in womens bellies called a moone-calfe, or a timpanie, any lump of flesh without shape. Also the whirle-bone of the knee. Also a mill-stone, or grinding-stone. Also as Móle. Also the cheefe wheele of a Mill. Also a great stone to couer a graue or tombe.

Móla del ginócchio, the whirle-bone of the knee.

Molagrána, a loue-apple.

Moláre, to grinde, to wheele, or turne about. Also a stone to make mill or grinding-stones. Also a mill-stone.

Molári denti, the great iaw or eye-teeth of any bodie, called the grinders, or cheeke-teeth.

Molcére, mólcio, mólsi, molciúto, to make much of, to hug, to appease, to comfort, to asswage, to make tame and gentle, to stroke, to smooth, or annoint.

Molcíre, císco, cíto, as Mólcere.

Molciúto, made much of, hugd, fauned vpon, appeased, asswaged, comforted, made tame and gentle, stroked or smoothed with blandishments.

Moldúre, empossings or mouldings in Architecture.

Móle, a masse, a lump, a chaos, a cub, or heape of any thing. Also a iawe, an eye, or cheeke-tooth. Also any great pile. Also as Móla. Also as Molécche.

Molécche, a kind of Crab-fish, or Lobstar.

Molech, an Idell that the Ammonites did worship and Sacrifice vnto. Leuit. 18. 21.

Molegnáre, a kind of plam so called.

Molemónio, as Polemónio hérba.

Moléna di páne, the soft or crustlesse part of bread, a crum of bread.

Molénda, the Millers tole which he takes for grinding.

Molendináio, whatsoeuer belongs to a Mill.

Molestaménte, troublesomely.

Molestáre, to molest, to trouble, to disquiet.

Molestatióne, molestation, disquietnesse.

Molestázzo, some part of a Mill. 



Molestia, molestation, vexation, tediousnesse.

Molesto, troublesome, irkesome, offensiue.

Molétte, mullets, pincers, nippers.

Mólgere, as Móngere.

Móli, Rue, Hermall, or Hearbe-grasse. Also as Halicacábo.

Molibdéna, leade-ore, ore of leade. Also the hearbe Leade-wort.

Molíchíno, as Molochíno.

Molináia, a Woman-miller or grinder.

Molináio, a Miller, a Mill-keeper.

Molinaménto, a wheeling or turning as a Mill.

Molinára, a Woman miller.

Molináre, to grind in a Mill. Also to mill or full cloth. Also to wheele or turne round as a Mill. Also to wrest or pinch a matter. Also as Ghiribizzáre.

Molináro, a Miller, a Mill-keeper.

Molinello, any kind of little Mill. Also a spinning wheele. Also a wheele for a Dog to turne the spit in. Also as Ventarello.

Molinétto, as Molinello.

Molíno, any kind of Mill.

Molino a bráccia, a Hand-mill.

Molíno a copello, a Water-mill, framed by some standing Lake that runnes from some hill downe some gutter or gullet.

Molíno ad ácqua, a Water-mill.

Molíno a uento, a Winde-mill.

Molíno da póglia, an Oyle-mill.

Molíno gazzíno, a kind of Fulling-mill.

Molíno terrágno, a Water-mill placed neere some low-running streame.

Melioditíno, Letharge or fome of leade.

Molíri, a Locust that destroyeth corne.

Molitóre, a bird like a Swan, that brayeth like an Asse. Also a Miller.

Molitúra, any grinding or milling. Also as Mulenda.

Mólla, the chiefe or spring wheele of a Clocke that moueth all the rest.

Molláre, to mollifie, to moisten, to laue, to wet, to bathe, to steepe in wet. Also to slacken, to loosen or let goe a hold. Also to leaue off, or giue ouer.

Mólle, soft, tender, gentle. Also limmer, lithe, pliable, fluxible, flexible. Also effeminate, nice, remisse, wanton, delicate, calme or milde. Also moist, wet, waterish. Also soft vnder foote. Also a paire of tongs, mullets, pincers or nippers. Also a flat in Musike. Also any soft fish, as Pescemólle, a Whiting-fish or map.

Molléchi, all manner of soft-row-fishes.

Mólle di fuóco, a paire of fire tongs.

Mollegnáre, a kind of farced meate.

Molleménte, softly, gently, limmerly. Also effeminately or wantonly.

Mollesíno, soft or smooth in feeling. 

Molletíne, little pincers, nippers or mullets.

Mollétte, pincers, nippers, mullets.

Mollétte dafuóco, little fire tongs.

Mollézza, as Mollítia.

Mollíca, any crumme or crumbling.

Mollicáre, to crumme or crumble.

Molliccíco, soft, boggie, and withall slippery.

Mollíche, crumnes. Also a kind of pulse.

Mollicícchio, soft, and tender in feeling and eating.

Mollicíne, a kind of garment mentioned by Plautus.

Mollificaménto, as Mollificatióne.

Mollificáre, to mollifie or make soft. Also to mitigate or asswage.

Mollificatióne, a mollifying, a making soft and tender. Also a mitigation.

Mollaficatíuo, that hath the quality to mollifie.

Mollipéde, tenderfooted.

Mollitia, softnesse, smoothenesse, tendernesse. Also delicatnesse, nicenesse, effeminacy.

Mollitiuo, that doth soften or supple any hardnesse.

Móllo, as Mólle. Also the sost or spunginesse of any thing as of crummes of bread.

Mollúgo, any kind of Teazell, or weed.

Mollúme, all manner of dampish moistnesse. Also softnesse as of crummes of bread.

Mollúsco, as Brúsco.

Mólo, a Wharfe or Hithe by the water side made by arte we call it a key. Also an artificiall baths.

Molobátro, an oyntment of Mallowes.

Molochenagriáno, a kinde of weed or roote like a Parsenep.

Molochíno, a kind of whitish purple like the flowres of Mallowes.

Molochíte, a precious greene stone of the colour of Mallowes.

Molocúccia, a kinde of small Mallowes.

Molóne, an hearbe.

Molósso, a Bull-dogge, a mastiue-dog. Also a foote of a verse of three long sillables.

Mólta fatíca & póca biáda, much labour and little corne, a prouerbe.

Mólte cóse, many and sundry things.

Mólte vólte, many times, often.

Mólti, many, diuers, sundry.

Mòlticoloráto, motlie, manie-coloured.

Moltifidi, cleft or clouen many waies, full of slits or scotches.

Moltifórme, of many formes or shapes.

Moltiformità, a multiformitie.

Moltigenio, of diuers kinds or sorts.

Moltilátero, hauing many sides.

Moltiloquacità, much speaking or babling.

Moltiloquénte, that speaketh very much. 

Moltilóquio, an ample discourse.

Moltimódo, of many waies or fashions.

Moltinómio, hauing many names.

Moltipiédi, as Millepiédi. Also many feete.

Moltiplicábile, that may be multiplied.

Moltiplicáre, to multiply or encrease in number.

Moltiplicatain énte, by multitudes.

Moltiplicatióne, a multiplication, an encrease.

Moltiplícatóre, a multiplier, an augmenter.

Moltíplice, manifold, of diuers sorts.

Moltipotente, of great or much power.

Moltiradíce, the lesser Centorie.

Moltíssimi, very very many.

Moltità, muchnesse Also as Quantità.

Moltitúdine, a multitude, a many.

Moltiuágo, much wandring.

Moltiuarietà, much or diuers varietie.

Moltiuário, of much varietie.

Moltiúnico, of much or great vnitie.

Moltiuocatióne, much signification.

Moltiuóco, of many significations.

Moltízzo, a Skinners toole so called.

Mólto, much, mickle, store, very very much, a great deale. Also a long time, or great while. Vsed also for oftentimes.

Mólto a buon hóra, very timely, or earely.

Mólto béne, very well.

Molto fà, long time agoe, long since.

Molto meglio, much better, or rather.

Mólto méno, much lesse.

Mólto per tempo, timely, or very earely.

Mólto più, much more, mickle more.

Mólto più tósto, much sooner, or rather.

Mólto volentiéri, very, or most willingly.

Moltúra, as Molitúra, or Mulénda.

Molúa, the Cod, or greene-fish.

Molúcro, a square piece of imber, whereon Painims were woont to Sacrifice.

Molúsce, a kinde of small Nut, or Pilberd.

Momeggiáre, to play Momus, to carp, to find fault, to reprooue.

Momentále, of moment, of consequence. Also during but a while.

Momontáno, momentarie, transitorie.

Momentáre, to moment, or be of moment.

Moménto, a moment, a minute, the least part or space of time which can not be assigned. Also the least quantitle, portion, or iot of any thing. Also a graine, or little more then weight. Also the consequence, worth, moment, respect, value, weight, or importance of any matter.

Momentóso, of moment, weight, or importance. 



Mommea, a mumming.

Mommeáre, to mum, or goe a mumming.

Mommeo, a mummer.

Momò, now now, euen now, at this instant.

Mómo, Momus, the god of reprehension, one that carpeth at all things.

Momórdica, hearbe Robert, or Doues foote.

Móna, a nickname for a woman, as we say, Gammer, or goodie such a one. Also a Pug, an Ape, a Kitlin. Also as Gátto mammóne.

Mónaca, a Nunne, or solitarie woman.

Monacále, Munke or Nun-like, Monasticall.

Monacáre, to become a Munke or Nun.

Monacaríe, the parts or trickes of Nunnes.

Monacelle, as Monacúccie.

Monacheggiáre, to play or liue as a Munke or Nunne.

Monachelle, a rauenous Water-foule.

Monachésimo, the office or function of a Munke or Nunne.

Monachétta, a yongue little Nunne.

Monachétto, a yongue little Munke.

Monachíle, of or belonging to a Nunne.

Monachína, a yongue nouice Nunne.

Monachíno, a yongue Munke or nouice.

Mónaco, a Munke or solitary man. Also a fish called a Sea-munke.

Monacúccie, the flowres of Galingale, Sword-grasse or Corne-flagge. Also little Nunnes.

Mónado, single, onely one, alone, vnity of it selfe.

Móna finócchia, a goody flatterer.

Monáio, a Miller.

Monángolo, being of, or hauing but one corner.

Monánno, a yeere agoe, the last yeare.

Monárca, a Monarch or Sole-ruler.

Monarcacída, a Monarch-murtherer.

Monarcacídio, the murther of a Monarch.

Monarchía, a rule of one alone, a Monarchie.

Monáro, a Miller.

Monasteriále, belonging to a Monasterie.

Monasterio, a Monastery, a Conuent, a Nunnery, a Cloister for solitary liuers.

Monaftero, as Monasterio.

Monástico, monasticall, liuing solitary.

Menátto, a burier of the dead.

Monáulo, a Piper or a Recorder.

Moncáno., Looke Frenguello.

Moncára, dry, barren, parched, Sunburnt.

Moncáre, to stumpe, to maime, to dismember, to lame or cut off any lim.

Moncáto, as Mónco.

Monceráre, to commit vnnaturall Sin.

Moncheríni, stumpes of armes without hands.

Moncheríno, a stumpe of an arme handlesse.

Mónco, stumped, maimed, dismembred of some lim, namely of a hand.

Moncóne, a stumpe, or arme without a hand.

Moncugíno, my cousin. But taken in ill part for a cozener.

Mondáccio, a bad filthy world.

Mondanitá, mundanitie, worldlinesse.

Mondáno, mundane, worldly, of the world.

Mondáre, to make cleane or neate, to purifie or cleanse. Also to winnow or purge. Also to pare, to pill, to shale, to vnhuske.

Mondatióne, a cleansing, a paring.

Mondatóre, a cleanser. Also a parer.

Mondatóre dell' arátro, the plough-staffe.

Mondatúre, all manner of parings.

Mondazzáro, a dung-hill, a muck-hill, a mixen where all sweepings are cast, a heape of sweepings. Also vsed for a Scauenger or sweeper of streetes.

Mondecáro, as Mondacáro.

Mondézza, cleanelinesse, neatenesse. Also sweepings. Also dung or ordure of man or cattle. Also worldlinesse.

Mondezzáro, as Mondazzáro.

Mondiále, of or pertaining to the world.

Mondiále máchina, the worlds frame.

Mondicáre, as Mondificáre.

Mondicórde, cleane-hearted.

Mondicórdia, cleane-heartednesse.

Mondificáre, to make cleane, to mundifie.

Mondi ficatióne, a purification, a cleansing.

Mondificatíuo, that doeth purifie.

Mondíglia, as Mondézza.

Mondíglie, hulls, husks, or chaffe of corne cleanzed.

Mondíno, a little measure for dry things.

Mondítia, as Mondézza.

Móndo, the world, the vniuerse. Also a Mound or Globe, as Princes hold in their hands. Also cleane, cleansed, pure, neate, spotlesse, purged. Also pared, pilled. Also winnowed, &c. Also, as we say, a world, a multitude, or great quantitie.

Móndo cieco, the blind world, vsed for Hell.

Móndo fátti con dio, farewell world.

Mondóra, worlds. Also the parts of the world.

Monduáldo, as Monouáldo.

Monedula, a Chough, or Daw.

Monelle, wenches, trulls, or whores, in the roagues language.

Monéta, any kind of coine or monie that is stamped. Vsed also for a womans wombe.

Monetáccia, any base, or filthie monie.

Monéta di tognóne, clipt monie.

Monetáio, a monier, a minter, a coiner.

Moneta présta, readie monie.

Monetário, a monier, a minter, a coiner.

Monéta sénza cónio, monie without a stamp, faire words without deeds.

Monéta spiccioláta, clipt monie.

Monetella, any little or small monie.

Monetiére, a monier, a minter, a coiner.

Monetóso, monied, pecunious, full of money.

Mongána., Looke Vitella, a sucklin, a teatting.

Mongára, a kind of meat in Italy.

Mongáro, moist, waterish, fenny, marrish.

Móngere, móngo, mónsi, mónto, to milch or draw any cattell dry. Also to sucke.

Mongibello, a burning hill in Cicilie, a continuall burning flame.

Móngiere, as Móngere.

Mongíle, as Moníle.

Mongitóre, a milcher of any cattell.

Mongiuácche, as Couaméle.

Mongiúto, as Múnto.

Móngo, a kind of wine drawne from the leese of other wine.

Mongrellíno, a coy, fond, nice, effeminate, or spruce smell feast, a quaint parasite.

Moniáche, the fruite Apricots.

Moniáco, an Apricot-tree.

Moniále, flattering, alluring, blandishing.

Moníbile, that may or will be admonished.

Monícchio, a pug, a Munkie, an Ape.

Moniláre, to adorne with earerings, with carcanets or bracelets.

Monílo, a Carcanet, a border, a collar, a iewell, a necklace of pearles or precious stones. Also an earering. Also a tablet. Also a poitrell of a horse.

Moniménto, a monument, a memorial, a record, a chronicle, a remembrance of some notable act leaft to posterity. Also a graue, a tombe or sepulcher.

Monína, a pretty pug or iakeanapes. Also a womans geare or quaint.

Monipólio, as Monópola.

Monire, nísco, níto, to admonish, to warne, to aduertise of something to come. Also to furnish or munite with preparation for defence.

Monistero, as Monasterio.

Monitionáre, to munite, to strengthen with munition or preparation for defence. 



Monitionáto, munited, stored with munition.

Monitióne, all manner of munition or preparation for warre and defence. Also a warning or admonition.

Monitioniére, a munition maister.

Moníto, munited for defence. Also warned, or admonished.

Monitóre, an admonisher, an informer. Also a prouider of armour and munition.

Monitório, that warneth of something to come. Also a writ of appearance.

Mónna, as Móna.

Mónna coruína, good wife crow, goody slut and rauenous withall.

Mónna-tále, goodwife such a one.

Mónno., Vsed for Móndo, a world.

Monnosíno, that is very tender or dainty in eating.

Móno, the number single or one, or of vnity namely in composition.

Monócca, a Nunne or single woman.

Monocentáuro, a faigned beast like a horse and a man.

Monoceróte, a strange monster that hath the bodie of a Horse, the feete of an Elephant, the taile of an Hog, the head of a Stag and one long shining horne in his forehead, which some take for the Vnicornes horne, called a Liocorne.

Monochíno, a kind of grayish colour that Nunnes weare.

Monocórdo, an instrument with many stringes of one sound, which with little pieces of cloth make distinct sounds.

Monocróma, a picture all of one colour without any mixture.

Monocromáte, as Monocróma.

Monóculo, that hath but one eye. Also the blind gut.

Monodía, a mournefull song where one singeth alone.

Monódo, he that hath but one continued tooth in his mouth.

Monogamía, a marying of one wife and no more all ones life.

Monología, a long tale of a single matter, much babling about nothing.

Monólogo, one that talkes much of nothing or idle matters.

Monolosphéro, the name of a booke treating of the Mathematikes.

Monomachía, a single combate, a fight betweene one man and another.

Monómaco, he that fighteth alone, a single combatant.

Monophagía, a liuing alwaies with one kind of meate. Also feeding alone.

Monophágo, he that feedeth alone, or but with one kind of meate.

Monopódij, tables, desks or cupboords supported with one foote. 

Monópola, as Monopoliére.

Monopoláre, to forestall or engrosse into ones hand, to make a monopolie.

Monopoleggiáre, as Monopoláre.

Monopoliere, an engrosser of any commoditie into one mans hands.

Monopólio, as Monópolo.

Monopolifta, as Monopoliére.

Monopolizzáre, as Monopoláre.

Monópolo, an engrossing of any marchandize into ones hand that no man may sell but he, or the place where such Monopolies are kept. Vsed also for a conspiracie or secret conuenticle.

Monoptóto, a word hauing but one sense.

Monoscelli, people hauing but one leg yet very nimble to runne and hop.

Monosílaba, hauing but one sillable.

Monosíno, as Mollesíno.

Monóstico, that consisteth of one verse.

Monotrópo, of one fashion, euer solitarie, alwaies single or vnmaried.

Monouáldo, nóme di Magistráto. 

Monsignóre, my Lord, a title of honour and superioritie, heretofore giuen to Princes and great Lords, but now only to Prelates and Church-lords.

Monsónni, a kind of ships in Malácca.

Monstrífico, monstrous, prodigious.

Mónstro, as Móstro.

Monstruóso, as Mostruóso.

Mónta, a mounting, an ascent. Also a blocke to get vpon horse-backe. Also a Stalions couering of Mares.

Montágna, any mountaine or hill.

Montagnáro, a man borne or dwelling on the mountaines, a high-land man.

Montagnétta, a hillocke, a little hill or mountaine.

Montagnuóla, as Montagnétta.

Montagnuólo, as Montagnáro.

Mónta in bánco, a Mountibanke.

Mónta in sélla, a charge that Trumpeters vse to sound to prepare and call men to take horse and get vp.

Montanaría, an hillie ascent, hillinesse.

Montanáro, as Montagnáro.

Montanello, as Frenguello.

Montanína, the name of a bell in Florence.

Montáno, as Montagnáro. Also as Frenguello. Also a kind of Eagle or Faulkon Also of or pertaining to hills or mountaines.

Montáre, to mount, to ascend, to climbe or get vp, to rise, to goe or flow vp, to amount, to heape vp. Also to encrease or grow deare in price. Also to grow or become greater. Also to doe good, to worke effect, to import, or bring helpe vnto. Also to aduance, to raise vp or exalt.

Montár'a cauállo, to mount on horsebacke. 

Montár' adósso, to get vpon.

Montár'il páne, the price of bread to rise.

Montár'in bánco, to play the Mountibanke.

Montár'in bárca, to take boate.

Montár'in cóllera, to grow angry.

Montár' in máre, to launch out to Sea.

Montár'in náue, to take shipping.

Montár l'ácqua, to flow as the tide doeth.

Montár lamósca, to take pepper in the nose.

Montár niente, to amount, or come to nothing.

Montár sul fíco, to get vpon a woman.

Montár sul frútto, to get vpon a woman.

Montáta, an ascent, an ascending, a mounting vp, a paire of staires. Also a heaping vp.

Montatóre, a mounter, an ascender, a getter vp. Also an engrosser, or raiser of prises.

Montatúra, an ascent or mounting vp. Also any riding or mounting beast.

Mónte, any hill, mount, or mountaine. Also a heape, a lump, or a hudle. Also a full bunch, stocke, or paire of cards. Andár'a mónte, to goe to the stocke, that is, to swig, and deale againe. Mónte is also vsed for a banke of monie.

Mónte di vénere, the hill or line of Venus in a mans hand. Also a womans quaint.

Mónte di letáme, a mucke, or dunghill.

Monteficálle, a womans mountfaulcon, a womans quaint hanging-place.

Montemári, Seaes and mountaines, impossibilities. Prométtere mari & mónti, to promise Gods cope, or heauen and earth, as we commonly say.

Montera, as Montiera.

Montiána, a kind of countrie Cheesecake.

Monticello, a hillocke, a little hill, or mount.

Montiera, a kind of cap or hat hauing no brim behind, now worne in Italy, and was deuised in Spaine. Also a paire of staires, or ascending place. Also a blocke for a man to get on horsebacke. Also a stoole or any thing else to lift vp a woman on horsebacke. Also a little ladder to goe into a Coach with.

Mónt'in Sella, as Móntain Sella.

Montísta, a Mountist, or that keepes a mount or banke.

Montiuágo, a wandrer vpon mountaines.

Montóne, a Ram, a Tup, a Mutton. 



Also one of the twelue Signes in the Zodiacke. Also a cob, a great hill or heape. Also a kind of Sea-fish. Also a kind of coine in Italy. Vsed also for a simple gull, or loggar-head.

Montonílc, Mutton, or Sheepe-like, faced like a Sheepe. Also a kind of Sea-fish.

Montolíno, any thing that is of Mutton.

Montonína, any sheepes leather, or fell.

Montóre, an ascent or mounting and ascending place.

Montóso, hillie, mountainous.

Montuáre, to heape vp. Also to extoll, to raise vp, or to aduance.

Montuóso, hillie, mountanous.

Monuménto, as Moniménto.

Monzícchio, a heape of any thing.

Móra, a demur, a stay, a delay. Also a Moore-woman. Also a black-berie. Also a mulberie. Also a kind of game much vsed in Italy with casting of the fingers of the right hand, and speaking of certaine numbers. Vsed also for a wall or walles, as the plurall of Muro, or as some take it, a great heape of stones, or stone wall without morter.

Móra-móra, as Móia-móia.

Morabíti, certaine Hermits or religious men among the Turks.

Moráglia, as Muráglia.

Moráglie, as Muráglie. Also a kind of pincher, or deuice to pinch a horse about the nose to tame him when he is shooing, or let blood.

Morále, morall, pertaining to manners.

Moraleggiáre, to moralize.

Moralétti, as Moráli.

Moráli, pieces of timber, or rafters.

Moralità, moralitie, a morall sence.

Moralóso, full of moralitie.

Morare, as Muráre. Also as Dimoráre.

Moráro, a blacke or Mulberie tree.

Moráto, a blacke colour like a Mulberie. Also as Morigeráto.

Moratóre, vsed for Muratóre.

Moratória, a dispensation to stay. Also a Mortuarie.

Morbáre, to infect with any contagion.

Morbézza, an infection, a contagion.

Morbézzi, wanton toyes, foolish tricks.

Morbidaménte, softly, smoothly, wantonly, effeminately, luxuriously, lasciuiously. Also rankly, or fruitfully.

Morbidézza, softnesse, wantonnesse, effeminacie, lasciuiousnesse, ease, world at will. Also smoothnesse. Also fruitfulnesse, or rankenesse.

Morbidíre, dísco, díto, to make or become soft, nice, wanton, effeminate, lasciuious, or wanton. Also to make or become smooth, delicate, and daintie. Also to make or become ranke, fruitefull, and luxurious in growing.

Morbidíto, looke Morbidíre.

Mórbido, smooth, soft, wanton, effeminate, lasciuious, delicate, delicious, and nice. Also ranke, or proud in growing.

Morbisciátto, a wanton wag, a miskin lad, a spruce minion.

Mórbo, any euill, disease, or contagion.

Mórbo régio, the Kings euill. Vsed also for the yellow iaundise.

Morbóso, contagious, full of infection. Also full of diseases.

Mórbo sontíno, the falling-sicknesse.

Mórca, a kind of fruite like an Oliue. Also a kind of stinking oyle made of them. Also the filth or dregs of oyle. Also the stinking snuffe of a Candle. Also the filth, the tare, or dreg of any thing.

Mórchia, as Mórca.

Morchiáre, to grow or become Mórca.

Morchióso, full of dregs, leese, or mother.

Mordáce, biting, mordant, nipping snipping, pinching, or sharp, be it with teeth or words, bitter in detracting or taunting.

Mordaceménte, bitingly, nippingly.

Mordacità, sharpnesse in biting or snipping. Also bitternesse in taunting.

Mordella, a whelke, or blister-flye.

Mordente, as Mordace. Also a kind of colour that Painters vse.

Mórdere, mórdo, mordéi, mordúto, to bite, to snip, to champ, or pinch with teeth. Also to taunt, to quip with bitter words, to detract, or backbite, to reprooue.

Mordicatíuo, biting or stinging, as Senuie-seede.

Mordiménto, a biting, a gnawing, a champing, a snipping, or pinching with teeth. Also a taunting, or backbiting with words. Also a remorse, a compunction, or repentance of the minde.

Morditóre, a biter, a snipper, a pincher, a champer. Also a taunter, a detracter, or backbiter.

Morditúra, as Mordiménto.

Mordúto, bitten, snipt, pincht, champt. Also taunted, or detracted.

Moréci, the piles, or hemorrhoides.

Morcdále, a close stoole.

Morella, a Buy, such as they tye at Anker-ropes. Also a Cob, or Gudgeon-fish.

Morello, the colour Murrey, or darke red. Also the name of a Sawyers toole.

Morellótto, ruddie, firie red, a high red.

Moréna, as Muréna.

Morésca, a Morice, or Antique dance.

Morésco, a Moore. Also a Barbery horse. 

Morétto, a little Moore. Also a kinde of bird.

Morettóne, a kind of bird, or Rauen.

Morféa, the morphew in some womens faces. Also in mockerie a womans quaint or geare. Also in the rogues language a mans mouth.

Morfia, as Morféa.

Morfino, a kind of Kite or Puttocke.

Morfíre, fisco, fíto, a Gibrish word, as much to say as to farewell and feede vpon good cheere without taking care for any thing.

Morganello, a kind of saile in a Ship.

Morgóne, a Diuer, a Didapper, or Arse-foote.

Moría, an infection, a pestilence, a murrian, a rot or mortalitie that comes among sheepe. Also vsed for follie and taken from the Greeke.

Moriáno, as Ombriáno.

Moribóndo, dying, ready to dye.

Moricciare, to mud or dry-wall about.

Moríccio, a mud-wall, a dry-wall.

Moríce, the piles or hemorrhoides.

Moricíno, a little Black-moore.

Moriente, dying, yeelding the last gaspe.

Morigeráre, to be or teach to be dutifull to obey, to doe as one biddeth, to bring vp mannerly or ciuilly.

Morigeráto, dutifull, mannerly, ciuill, well brought vp or taught to obey, obedient and well nurtured.

Morigiáre, as Morigeráre.

Morigónda, a kind of meate.

Morióne, a murion, a caske, a head-piece. Also the male Mandragora. Also a kind of blacke transparent stone.

Moríre, muóio, moríj, mórto, to dye.

Morír di fréddo, to dye with cold.

Morír di paúra, to dye with feare.

Morír di rábbia, to dye with rage.

Morír di ríso, to dye with laughing.

Morír di uóglia, to dye with longing.

Moríse, a muzle for a Dog

Moritúro, that will or is ready to dye.

Morlácco, a drunken tall trencher-man.

Mormíllo, a Sea-fish of diuers colours.

Mormíra, as Mormíllo.

Mórmo, as Mormíllo.

Mórmora, as Mormíllo.

Mormoraménto, a murmuring, a mubbling, a humming, a buzing. Also a grudging or repining. Also a close whispring. Also the noise of water running. Also the belching or rasping of the stomacke or rumbling in the guts.

Mormoráre, to murmure, to mutter, to grumble, to mumble, to grudge at, to repine.

Mormoratióne, as Mormoraménto.

Mormoréuole, murmurous, grumbling, muttrous, grudging, repining. Also roaring or making a broken noise as 



water doth running among stones.

Mormorío, as Mormoraménto.

Mormoroso, murmurous, full of murmuring.

Móro, a Moore. Also a Mulberrie-tree. Also a wart in a Horse called an Auburie.

Morócto, a stone in Egypt wherewith they make their linnen cloth very white.

Morogelso, a Mulberrie-tree.

Moróglie, the piles or hemorrhoides.

Morólogo, tipsie, wayward, full of wine and words.

Moróna, as Muréna.

Moróne, a Mulberrie-tree or fruit. Also a kind of fish like flesh, that is eaten in Lent.

Moronella, a kind of meate like Cauiaro made of the fish Moróne.

Morósa, a loue, a mistris, a paramour.

Morosaménte, peeuishly, frowardly. Also amorously.

Morosità, waywardnesse, frowardnesse, peeuishnesse.

Moróso, peeuish, froward, hard and diuers to please. Also a louer, a paramour.

Morótto, as Morócto.

Morphéa, as Morsea.

Morpheóso, that hath the Morphew.

Morplíno, a kind of Eagle or Faulcon.

Morrémo, Morréte, Morránno, wee, you, they shall dye.

Morrò, Morrái, Morrà, I, thou, he shall dye.

Morsáro, Morsáio, a bit-maker.

Morsatóia, a bit or bridle.

Mórse, the great pincers that Smiths vse to take hot iron out of the fire with. Also as Moráglie.

Morsecchiáre, to bite, to pinch, to snip.

Mórse di múro, the vtmost stones of any wall that is not finished.

Morselleggiáre, to mince or morsell.

Morsellétto, a little morsell or bit.

Morselli, little bits or morsels. Also nippers, claspers or pincers. Also a kind of daintie paste-meate.

Morsétti, as Morselli.

Morsicáre, to bite, to snip, to morsell, as Mórdere.

Morsicatúra, a snipping or biting.

Morsicatúra délle réni, a disease in a Horse called the weaknes in the backe.

Morsicello, a little bit or morsell.

Mórsico, a biting, a snip, a morsell.

Mórso, bitten, champed, snipt, pincht. Also a bit, a morsell or mouthfull. Also a bit or snaffle for a horse. Also a biting, a pinch or a snip. Also a checke, a taunt or a rebuke. Also a kind of fish.

Mórso di rána, the hearbe Frog-bit.

Morsudiáboli, the hearbe Diuels-bit or Forebit.

Morsugálline, Chickweed or Henben. 

Morsúra, a biting, a snipping, a nipping.

Mortadelle, a kind of Sauseges very hard and salt. Also a kind of meate of compressed flesh of Veale.

Mortáio, as Mottáro.

Mortaiuólo, a littler mortar. Also a litle chamber-piece or pot-gun. Also the blacke and blew marke, of any stripe or bruze.

Mortále, mortall, deadly, subiect to death. Also vsed for a man. Also vsed for mortalitie.

Mortalità, death, mortalitie, frailtie.

Mortál márca, the worlds frame.

Mortarello, as Mortaiuólo.

Mortáro, a piece of Ordinance called a Morter-piece, wherewith they shoot stone-bullets vpward into the ayre, which in their fall worke the effect expected. Also a mortar to stampe any thing in. Vsed also for a womans quaint.

Mortaruólo, as Mortaiuólo.

Mortatelle, as Mortadelle.

Mórte, death, priuation of life. Also ruine, decay or tribulation and anguish.

Mortella, a Mirtle-tree. Also as Vallonia.

Mortellétto, a groue of Mirtle-trees.

Mortello, as Mortella.

Mórte subitána, suddaine death.

Morticína cárne, flesh or carrian dead in some ditch.

Morticíni, dead hornes or hard cornes rising in some mens feete.

Morticínio, any dead thing or carcase or carrian, whither fish or flesh.

Morticíno, a kind of pale or wan ash colour.

Mórticórpi, dead or deceased bodies.

Mortífero, deadly, contagious, death-bringing.

Mortificábile, that may be mortified.

Mortificáre, to mortifie or make dead.

Mortificatióne, mortification.

Mortígno, a dead, a pale or gastly colour.

Mortína, the Mirtle-berry.

Mortíse, a mortise in wood.

Mortíta, a kind of meat like gely. Also a quagmire or poole of dead water.

Mórto, dead, deceased, past life. Also a pully in a ship, called the dead man he. Also ioyned with the verbes Hauére or E'ssere, vsed for killed, slaine or murthered. Also with an article, as Il mórto, a dead man or corpes.

Mórto agliádo, killed by the sword.

Mortóio, a funerall, an hearse, an obsequies.

Mortório, as Mortóio.

Mortúccio, a poore or wretched carcase.

Morzóne, a Gudgeon-fish. 

Mósa, a tree in India bearing a dainty fruite like an Apple. Also a moyse, or phroise made of egges, milke, butter and spice and so fride in a pan.

Mosáico, a kind of checkie or marquetry worke of diuers colours and stones.

Mósca, any kind of flie.

Mósca canína, a dog-flie, a brize.

Mósca cauallína, a horse-flie, a brize.

Mósca ciéca, the play called hood-manblind.

Moscadello, the wine Muscadine.

Mósca e montáta, the choller is vp.

Moscárda, a Muske-cat or a Ciuet-cat.

Moscardíno, a fish called in Latine Osmilus, which some say is a kind of shelfish in forme of a boat, and swimmeth with his belly vpward, some say it is a kinde of cuttle-fish. Also a kind of Muske-grapes or Peares. Also a kind of Muske-comfets.

Moscárdo, a Muske-hawke.

Moscáre, to muske, to perfume with musk.

Moscaruóla, any flap or fan to beat flies away. Also a net where with Carters horses are couered, with long pendents to shake flies away.

Moscaruólo, as Moscardíno. Also a worme breeding in a horse whereof be eight kinds.

Moscáta, noce moscáta, a Nut-meg.

Moscatella, the Muskadine-grape.

Moscatello, the wine Muskadine.

Moscatíni, certaine Muscadine Grapes, Peares or Apricots. Also Muske comfets.

Moscáto, Musked or perfumed with Muske. Also muske. Also a Graine or Pomander of Muske. Also Muscadine-wine. Also a dapple-gray, a speckled or flea-bitten horse.

Mosceutóne, a kind of Rose.

Moschea, a Church among Pagans.

Moscheríno, a kind of little flie. Also a Musket-hawke. Also Pepper in the nose.

Moschétte, little flies. Also little spots as flea-bitings, vpon horses. Also Muske-roses.

Moschettería, musketry, or shot of muschetiers.

Moschétti, a kind of Sparrowes in India so little as with feathers and all one is no bigger then a little Wall-nut, and yet wonderfull faire to behold, it is written that a whole nest full of them weigeth but foure and twenty graines.

Moschettiére, a Muskettier.

Moschétto, a Musket. Also a Muskethawke.

Moschétto a brága, a breech Musket out of vse with vs.

Moschétto a forcella, a Musket with a rest. 



Moschétto da giuóco, a piece called of our Gunners a Robinet if it be of brasse, and if Iron, a single-sling.

Moschettóne, a double Musket. Also a great Hornet or Horse-fly.

Móschio, as Móscio.

Mosciáre, to languish, to fade, to droop. Also to be stiffe and faint through cold.

Móscio, drooping, faint, languishing in limmes. Also benummed and stiffe with cold.

Mosciolíni, little flies or gnats.

Moscióni, great brizzes or Horse-flies.

Mósco, muske. Also mosse.

Moscoleáre, to perfume with muske.

Móscolo, a muskle of the body. Also a top, a gigge or twirle that children play with.

Moscolóso, muskly, full of muskles.

Moscóne, any kind of great flie.

Moscóso, mossie, full of mosse. Also muskie.

Móse, a tree among the Indians, which is thought to beare that fruit that Adam tasted of, for cut the fruit which way you will and you shall finde the figure of the crosse. Also as Moisè.

Móssa, mooued, stirred, iogged. Also a motion, a moouing, a remoue, a stirring. Also the start or first motion of any thing. Also the start or starting place of a horse when he begins his race.

Mossetíne, little motions, mouings, or slirrings. Also ioggings, yerkes or iumbling tricks.

Mósso, mooued, stirred. Also as Mósse.

Mostacciáta, a whirret or blow on the mouth.

Mostaccíno, a little snout or mostacho.

Mostáccio, a snout, a face, a mostacho.

Mostaccióne, a blow or whirret on the face.

Mostacciuóli, a kind of sugar or ginger bread.

Mostárda, mustard.

Mostardelle, a meate boiled in mustard.

Mostárdo, a Musket-hawke.

Mostázzo, as Mostáccio.

Mostázzo d'un pezzo, the muzle of a piece.

Mostazzóne, as Mostaccióne.

Mósto, must, new, or vnrefined wine.

Mósto rutáto, wine wherein Hearbe-rue is steeped.

Mostóso, tasting of must or vnrefined wine.

Móstra, a shew or view of any thing, any patterne or sight. Also the sacing of any thing. Also a Sunne-dyall. Also a watch that sheweth the houres Also a muster or mustering of souldiers. Also ostentation, bragging, or vaine-glorie. 

Mostrábile, that may be shewed.

Móstrache, it seemeth, or appeareth that.

Mostráno, hath beene vsed for Mostruóso.

Mostránza, as Móstra, a shewing.

Mostráre, to shew, to put to view, to demonstrate. Also to muster souldiers.

Mostratóre, a shewer, a demonstrator.

Mostrífica, that represents any shape or figure.

Mostrificaménte, by figure or demonstration.

Móstro, shewed, set to view, demonstrated, declared. Also a monster, or misshapen creature, any thing against the course of nature, a monstrous signe, a strange sight.

Mostrosità, as Mostruosità.

Mostruosità, monstruousnesse.

Mostruóso, monstrous, portentous, against the course of nature.

Móta, a Mote about a house. Also mud, bog, mire or puddle in the bottome of a pond.

Motacílla, a Wag-taile.

Motióne, any motion, or moouing.

Motíua, as Motíuo.

Motiuáre, to make a motiue, or motion.

Motiuità, motiuenesse, moouing, motion.

Motíuo, a motiue, a moouing, a stirring. Also a cause or beginning.

Móto, a motion, a moouing, or cause of stirring. Also dumbe, mute, or silent.

Móto d'accesso, a motion of accesse.

Móto direcesso, of motion of recesse.

Motóre, a moouer, a stirrer. Also God almightie, or the first moouer.

Moto reflesso, a reflected, or to and fro motion.

Motóso, muddie, mirie, boggie, dirtie.

Motteggiaménti, quips, taunts, iests, flouts, gibes, frumps in words.

Motteggiare, to quip, to flout, to taunt, to gibe, to frump with speaches. Also to shew or expresse amorous or lasciuious signes.

Motteggiatóre, as Motteggiére.

Motteggiére, a quipper, a frumper, one full of merrie and wittie quips, and iests.

Motteggiéuole, as Motteggiére. Also that may be quipped or iested at.

Motteggeuolménte, quippingly, iestingly.

Mottéggio, a wittie quip, a quipping iest.

Motteggióso, as Motteggiére.

Mottétto, as Mottíno. Looke Villancícco.

Mottíno, a little Mótto. Also a mutinie or rebellious tumult.

Mottiuáre, as Motiuáre.

Mótto, a word. Also a mot, a briefe, a posie or any short saying in any ring, shield or emprese. Also a short quip, a wittie iest, a merry taunt, a frumpe, a scoffe.

Mótto di rimándo, a quip or scoffe bandied too and fro.

Motózzo, a good word, quip or taunt. Also a tale of reioycing or good tidings.

Mótupróprio, of selfe motion or freewill.

Mouente, moouing, stirring.

Mouenza, moouing, motion, stirring.

Móuere, muóuo, móssi, mósso, or mouúto, to mooue, to stirre, to motion, to remooue or depart away. Also to stire, to prouoke or mooue vnto.

Mouetízza, moouing, wauering, stirring.

Mouéuole, as Mouibile.

Mouíbile, mooueable, subiect to motion.

Mouiménto, a moouing, a stirring.

Mouitóre, a moouer, a stirrer, a motioner.

Mouúto, mooued, stirred, as Mósso.

Mózza, a wench, a guirle, a lasse. Also vsed for a womans geare or quaint. Vsed also for a yoong bawde.

Mozzáfo, óuero Mozzáto, dál Rè di Ormúz fù giuráto nél mozzáto délla súa setta.

Mozzáre, to stumpe, to maime, to shread off, to cut or curtaile, to shorten, or breake off.

Mucceríeozzárgo, as Sgrámfo.

Mozzatúra, a cutting off, a stumping, a curtalling, a shorting, a paring.

Mozzenígo, as Mocenígo.

Mózzi, snots, dots, or sniuels of the nose.

Mózzi, heapes of sundry broken stones gathered together.

Mozzicáre, as Smozzicáre.

Mozzicóni, stumps of any thing. Also mammockes. Also a trunchions end, stumps of torches, candles ends.

Mózzo, cartald, cut off, stumped, maimed, shortned. Also a boy, a lad, a horse-boy. Also the stocke or nauell of a wheele. Also a bawde, or apple-squire. Also a Whiting-mop, or as some thinke, a Cod, or Cod-fish. Also vsed for a womans geare, or quaint.

Mózzo di stálla, a Horse-boy.

Mózzo di náue, a Ship-boy.

Mózzo ráso, a kind of course Satten.

Mucceríe, all manner of mockeries.

Mucchiáre, as Mocchiáre.

Mucchíno, an end or snuffe of a Candle.

Múcchio, as Mócchio.

Múccia, a kitlin, a pusse-cat, a young cat, a pug. Also a foxe-taile to brush withall. Dáre le múccie, to giue a flap with a foxe-taile, to giue a bob.

Mucciáccia, a wench, a girle, a lasse. Also a minx, a trull, a gixie, a harlot.

Mucciáccio, a lad, a boy, a lacquey, a page. 




Mucciáre, to scape, to flie, to sneake or slinke away by craft and closely. Also to mocke, to flout, or iest at.

Mucciáta, an escape, or close sneaking and flinching away. Also a flap, or bob with a foxe-taile. Also a mocke, a flout, or a ieast.

Muccichíno, a mucketer, a hand-napkin.

Muccilágine, as Mucilágine.

Muccíni, Kitlings, or yong Cats.

Muccíre, císco, cíto, as Mucciáre.

Múcia, as Múccia.

Mucidézza, any viscous moistnesse in plants.

Mucidíre, dísco, díto, to droope, to fade, to faint, to grow flappie. Also to become mustie, mouldie, hoarie, or finewed.

Múcido, drooped, faded, faint, flappie. Also mustie, mouldie, finewed, hoarie.

Múcido víno, mustie wine.

Muciláge, a kind of strange beast.

Mucilágine, slimie liquor drawen from some rootes or seeds.

Mucíni, Kitlins, or yong Cats.

Mucronáta, cartilágine, the notable gristle that groweth at the lower end of the breast-bone, the triangle cartilage.

Múcula, a precious stone of the colour of an Hart.

Múda, any change or shift. Also a sute of apparell. Also a hawkes miew or miewing.

Mudagióne, as Múda.

Mudáre, as Mutáre.

Mudáto, as Mutáto.

Múffa, mouldinesse, or mustinesse.

Muffáre, to grow mouldie, or mustie.

Muffáto, growne mouldie, or mustie.

Muffíre, as Muffáre.

Múffo, mouldie, or mustie.

Múffola, a kinde of colour that Goldsmiths vse to colourise mettals.

Muffolénte, mouldie, or mustie.

Muffóso, mouldie, or mustie.

Múffri, as Mufióne.

Mufióne, as Musmóne.

Mufocamóscio, a kind of ziuet Cat.

Mugánza, a kibe, or chil-blane.

Mugauéri, certaine souldiers in Ormuz.

Múgghia, bellowings, lowings, hideous cryes.

Mugghiáre, to bellow, to low as a Cow. Also to rore or royne as a Lion. Also to make a great noise, or yell out and shreeke for paine or griefe.

Múgghio, a lowing, or bellowing, a roring.

Mugghire, ghisco, ghíto, as Mugghiáre.

Múggia, as Mugghia. Also a kind of fish that so loueth his make or mate, that if he be taken, it will follow him to the shore, and there either be taken, or pine away. Some take it for the Mullet, and some for the sea-barbeill. Some take it for the fish Cestreo, and some thinks them both one.

Muggiáre, as Mugghiáre.

Múggine, as Múggia.

Muggíre, gísco, gíto, as Mugghiáre.

Muggíre, the Sea-Barbeil, as Múggia.

Muggíto,  a lowing, a bellowing, a roaring.

Múgile, as Múggia.

Múgio, as Múggia.

Mugliáre, as Mugghiáre. Also to shake together.

Muglíre, glisco, glíto, as Mugghiáre.

Múglio, soft, as Muggíto.

Muglíto, as Múglio.

Mugnáio, a Miller.

Mugnáro, a Miller.

Múgnere, as Móngere.

Mugnóne, Carpenters call it a Trunion, or a Munion.

Mugoláre, to meaw as a Cat.

Múgolo, the meawing of a Cat.

Muiáre, to rore as the Sea, or a fall of waters.

Muinárda, as Moinárda.

Muináre, as Moináre.

Muíne, as Moine.

Múla, a Mule, or Moyle.

Mulácchia, a Chough, a Daw, a Rooke.

Muláccia, as Mulácchia.

Mulárdo, the Mullet-fish.

Mulári, hérba.

Mulatiére, a Muletier, or driuer of Mules.

Mulatierésco, of or pertaining to Mules.

Múle, the Mullet-fish. Also pantofles. Also kibes, or chil-blanes. Among the Sarazens, Múle is as much to say as King.

Mulenda, that rate of corne or grist that the Miller hath out of euery measure for grinding, the Millers tole.

Mulétto, a little or yong Mule.

Múlgere, as Móngere, or as Mólcere.

Muliebre, of or pertaining to a woman or wife, womanish, effeminate.

Muliebrità, womanlinesse, effeminatenesse.

Mulierosità, vnlawfull lust after women, wenching.

Mulína, the plurall of Molíno.

Mulináio, a Miller.

Mulinaménti, as Molinaménto. Also close or cozening knaueries.

Mulináre, as Molináre. Also to plot knauerie, to contriue mischiefe, to practise deceit, to deuise any close villanie.

Mulináro, a Miller.

Mulinatóre, as Molinatóre. Also a plotter of knauerie, a contriuer of mischiefe, a practiser of close villanie.

Mulinello, as Molinello.

Mulinétto, as Molinello.

Mulíno, any kind of Mill, as Molíno.

Mulióni, a kind of Gnats.

Mulléi, a kind of shoe like Turkish shoes vp to the middle of the leg, that Kings and Princes were wont to weare.

Múllo, a Barbeill-fish.

Múllulo, a little Barbeill-fish.

Múlo, a Horse-mule. Also a bastard or misbegotten.

Mulomédico, a Horse or mule-leach.

Mulóne, an old great Mule.

Múlsa, the hearbe Clarie. Also as Múlso.

Múlso, a kind of drinke made of wine and honnie and hearbes and spices like Metheglin.

Múlta, a penaltie, a fine, an amercement, a punishment.

Multáre, to punish, to condemne, to fine, to depriue or cast off.

Multilústre, of many yeeres and ages.

Muluiáno, a kind of Quince good to bee eaten raw.

Múmia, as Múmmia.

Múmmia, Mummie, which is made of dead mens flesh. Also taken for the liquor that floweth out of the Cedar-tree.

Mummiáre, to mum or maske, to reuell.

Múmmie, mummeries or maskins, reuelings.

Munácchia, a Chough, a Rocke, a Daw.

Munáio, a Miller.

Munerále, pertaining to gifts.

Muneráre, to reward, to remunerate.

Muneratióne, a muneration, a reward.

Múngere, as Móngere.

Mungitóre., as Mongitóre.

Mungiuácche, a milker of Cowes.

Muniáca, an Apricot-plum.

Muniáco, an Apricot-tree.

Municipále, municipall, priuately belonging to the Burgesses of one Cittie.

Municipáli Città, Citties that paying tribute to some bodie liue free in all other things.

Muncipáli huómini, base conditioned, or priuate housholders that are neuer called to any publike office or authoritie.

Município, a free Cittie, hauing her owne and speciall officers, lawes and priueledges. Also a free-denizon.

Munífica, endowed with many gifts.

Munificente, as Munífico.

Munificentia, munificence, larges, bountie.

Munífico, bountifull, free, liberall. Also yeelding fruit and commoditie.

Muníre, nísco, níto, as Moníre.

Munistero, as Monasterio.

Munitióne, as Monitióne.



Muníto, as Moníto.

Munitóre, as Monitóre.

Múno, a reward, a bribe, a gift.

Múnto, milched, suckt or drawen dry.

Munúsculo, a little gift or present.

Muolíno dell' ónghia, the paring of nailes.

Muóuere, as Móuere.

Muouim énto, as Mouiménto.

Murábile, that may be walled.

Muráglia, any kind of wall.

Muragliáre, to wall, or strengthen with walles.

Muraiuóla, an hearbe growing vpon walles. Also Snailes breeding in walles Also a kind of small coine.

Murále, of or belonging to a wall. Looke Coróna.

Murálio, as Parténio.

Muráre, to build or make vp a wall.

Muráre a sécco, to make a dry or mudwall, that is to say, to build vpon vncertainties, or vpon no good or sure foundation.

Muratóre, a Mason, a Wall-maker.

Múrca, as Mórca.

Murcáre, as Morchiáre.

Murcido, cowardly and slothfull.

Muréce, as Muríce.

Murello, a little wall, a low wall.

Muréna, as Muríce.

Murétto, as Murello.

Muría, a kind of salt meat made of the fat of fishes. Also a kind of medicament.

Muríce, an engine of warre with sharpe points to cast in the enemies way called Caltrops. Also a kind of hard shell-fish or winkle called a Benet-fish, which some thinke will stay a ship if it sticke vnto it, of whose liquor a purple colour is made.

Muríccio, a weake or mud-wall.

Murícciolo, a weake or little wall. Vsed also for a fore-porch.

Murína, a kind of wine with mirrhe sodden into it.

Murmuráre, as Mormoráre.

Murmutatióne, as Mormoratióne.

Murmuratóre, as Mormoratóre.

Murmurío, as Mormoratióne, as Mormotío.

Múro, any kind of wall.

Múro a sécco, a dry wall.

Múro formaceo, a mud-wall.

Múro fornaceo, an arched wall, as it were the roofe of an ouen.

Múro in uólta, an arch or vault-wall.

Muróne, a kind of conserue or preserue.

Múrrha, as Murrína.

Murrína, a precious stone called a Cassidonie.

Murtella, the Mirtle-tree.

Músa, a Muse. Also a sweet song. Also the Muse-tree hauing very broad leaues. Looke Múse, the Plurall of Músa.

Musách cássa, a chest or Church box in the holy Temple of Ierusalem, wherein Kings were wont to cast their offerings and oblations.

Musáph, a booke so called among the Turkes which containeth all their Lawes.

Musáico, as Mosáico.

Musáre, to muse, to surmise. Also to goe idly vp and downe, or to hold ones muzle in the aire. Also to muzle or to muffle. Also to mocke or flout.

Musararuóla, a muffler. Also a muzerell or cauezan for a horse.

Musáta, a musing, a surmising. Also a muzling or muffling. Also a mocke or flout.

Muscáta, Noce muscáta, a Nut-meg.

Muscerda, a kind of Mouse. Also mouse-dung.

Muschétto, as Moschétto.

Muschíáre, to perfume with Muske.

Muschiáro, a Perfumer or Muske-seller.

Moschiéro, a Perfumer, or Muske-seller.

Múschio, the perfume Muske.

Múscia, a Mus, or Puscat, a kitlin.

Muscíno, any little flie or gnat.

Músco, Muske. Also greene tree mosse.

Muscoláre, to perfuine with muske.

Muscoleáre, as Muscoláre.

Múscolo, Múscoli, a muscle or fleshy part of the body consisting of flesh, veines, sinnewes and arteries, being an instrumental part of the body, seruing for voluntary moouing, being a substance harder and endued with lesse sence then a sinew; as also softer and indued with more sence then a ligature. It is also an engine of warre, vnder which the Romans were wont safely to approch the wals of a towne to fill vp the ditches. It is also vsed for a fish, which continually swimmeth before the Whale, and serueth as a gard vnto it, that it run not vpon rockes, called the Guid-whale and of some the Whirle-poole.

Muscolóso, full of muscles or braunes of hard and compact flesh.

Muscóso, full of muske. Also mossie, or ouer growne with messe. Also muskie or full of muske.

Músco maríno, Seamosse, Flauke or hearbe corall.

Muscoríni, Muske-grape-flowres.

Músculo maríno, a little fish called the Guide-whale, or Whirle-poole. Looke Múscolo.

Múse, Muses or Nimphes, properly the nine muses or Goddesses of learning, poesie and musike. Also learning or study of good letters.

Musella, an Oaten-pipe, a pipe of Reedes.

Musellare, to play on Oaten-pipes.

Muselli, collars or traces of any harnished horses. Also muzles or wads of Okame that Gunners put in the mouth of their pieces against ill weather.

Muséo, a studdy, a Library. Also a Colledge on Schoole-bouse of or for learning and Learned men. Vsed also for delightfull.

Muserágno, a kinde of Mouse called a Shrew, which is deadly to other beasts if he but bite them, and laming all if he but touch them, of whom came that ordinary curse, I beshrew you, as much to say, I wish you death.

Museruóla, as Musaruólo.

Musétte, a kind of dainty little apple.

Musétto, a little muzle or snout.

Musiáre, to worke Mosáico worke.

Musiatóre, a worker in Masáico worke.

Música, the Arte of Musike. Also any kinde of musike whether vocall, that is with the voice, Instrumentall, that is with the touch of the hand vpon any instrument, or Proportionall, that is with blowing or any winde instrument, it hath beene vsed for study of humanity, namely Poetry.

Musicále, musicall, according to musike.

Musicáre, to play musike.

Musichéuole, musicall, proportionall.

Músico, any kind of musition.

Musíllo, a little muzle or snout.

Musimóne, as Musmóne.

Musíno, a little muzle or snout.

Musmóne, a kind of beast in Corsica and Sardinia, engendred betweene a Ram and a Goate, very like a sheepe, with a shagge haire, more lyker the haire of a Goate, then the fleece of a sheepe, it is coated as a Stagge, and horned as a sheepe, and makes the best Cordouane or Spanish leather that is.

Múso, a muzle, a snout. Also a spout.

Múso del boccále, the snot of a pot.

Múso di cáne, a dogges snout or muzle.

Musoláre, to muzzle, to muffle, to snout.

Músoli, as Músculo maríno.

Musoliéra, a muzle, a museroll, a muffler.

Musóne, a great muzle, a snout or face.

Musórno, lumpish, heauy, sad, musing, collymolly, louting, pouting, that in good company will not speake to others.

Musoróne, Musórno. 

Musláre, to mumble betweene the teeth.

Mussatóre, a mumbler betweene the teeth. 



Músse, mumbling betweene the teeth.

Mussitáre, as Mussáre.

Músso, all manner of Mosse. Also soft speech or silence.

Mússolo, a kind of great Oyster. Also an Asse-hoofe. Also a winedrawers-toole. Also a kind of head-attire or turbant that the Persians weare.

Mussóso, mossie. Also full of silence.

Mustácchio, a horses lower part of the head which we call the mosell.

Mustácci, those we now call Marchpanes, some thinke was anciently a kind of paste made made with fine flower and sweet wine.

Mustáccio, as Mostáccio.

Mustaccióne, as Mostaccióne.

Mustáce, a kind of Lawiell or Bay.

Mústalo, a Wire-drawers-toole.

Múste, a kind of greene Quince. Also a kind of figges or cherry soone ripe.

Mustéa, the hasty-apple, because it is ripe very soone.

Mustella, a Weazle. Also a Pout or Eele-pout.

Mustellíno, the colour of a Weazell.

Musulmáno, a naturall borne Turke, that is not a renegad.

Musurmánno, as Musulmáno.

Múta, a row, a ranke, a course, a band. Also a shift, a turne, a cource or change of any thing. Also as Múda.

Múta a múta, by turnes, by shifts, changingly, one after another.

Mutábile, mutable, changeable, inconstant.

Mutabilità, mutability, inconstancy.

Mutáde, Dossers or Pannyers for horses.

Múta di piátti, a messe, a garnish or seruice of dishes.

Mutaménto, a mutation, a change, an alteration.

Mutánde, thin slops or vnder-breeches, such as wrestlers vse for lightnesse. Also any shifting clothes.

Mutándo, to be changed, mutable.

Mutánza, any shift or change as in a dance.

Mutáre, to change, to alter, to shift, to vary. Also to mue a Hawke or other foule. Also to make dumbe, mute or silent.

Mutár verso, to change cource or byace.

Mutáta, a changing, a shifting from place to place.

Mutatióne, as Mutaménto.

Mutáto, changed, altred, shifted, mued.

Mutatórie vesti, shifting or changeing garments.

Múte, the nine mute letters.

Muteggiáre, to be dumbe or play the mute man.

Mutéuole, as Mutábile.

Mutézza, mutenesse, dumbnesse, silence. 

Múti, verses called mutes or blankes.

Mutilaménto, a maime or maiming in some limme.

Mutiláre, to maime in or of some limme.

Mutilatióne, as Mutilaménto.

Mutiláto, maimed or cut off some limme.

Mútilo, as Mutiláto.

Mutína, a kind of wine or grape.

Mutináre, to mutiny or cause vprore.

Mutíno, a mutiny, an vprore.

Mutinóso, mutinous, rebellious.

Mutíre, tísco, títo, to make or become mute, silent or dumbe.

Múto, mute, dumbe, silent, speechlesse, quiet, tonguelesse. Also a blanke verse.

Mutolaménte, mutely, silently, dumbelie.

Mutolézza, mutenesse, dumbnesse.

Mútolo, as Múto.

Mutuále, mutuall, enterchangeable.

Mutualità, mutuality.

Mutuaménte, mutually, enterchangeably.

Mutuáre, to lend or borrow mutually.

Mutuatióne, a borrowing.

Mútuo, lent or borrowed.

Mútulo, among Masons it is a corbell or vp-stay, and among Carpenters a bracket or shouldring piece. Also a kind of Shell-fish called in Venice Cáppe or Capparuóle.

Múzza, as Mózza.

Muzzáro, as the fish Moscardíno.

Múzzo, as Mózzo.


N.
Nabíno, a beast called a Nabin, headed as a Camell, necked as a horse, footed as a Boeuf, full of white spots vpon a blacke groue.

Nabissáre, as Abbissáre, to grow furious and make a hellish noise.

Náblio, a musicall instrument called a Saltery or Viole, some say it is a wind instrument.

Nabúcco, Vsed for Nebucadnezar.

Nácca, a childes rattle to play with.

Náccare, drom-slades. Also childrens rattles. Also a kinde of bag-pipe or Country-croud. Also a kind of Musike made with two Drum-stickes beaten one against another. Also vsed for twatling fartes. Also a shell-fish called a Nackre.

Náccari, tush, no, gods me, fie, what.

Nácchere, as Náccare.

Naccherino, a kinde of winde-instrument or Cornet of Brasse.

Náchi, a kinde of slight silke wouen stuffe. 

Nadále, Vsed as Natále.

Naderóne, a kind of venemous Serpent.

Nádit, the point directly opposite to the Zenith, or right vnder our feet.

Náffe, as Gnáffe, but properly as we say by my fay, by our Lady.

Nafficáre, as Inaffiáre.

Nafissa, a woman taken in mockery for the aduocate and protectresse of all strumpets, whores, or bawdy houses.

Náfta, a kind of chalkie Clay called Petroll, which hauing fire put vnto it, wil so burne that no water can quench it. Also a kind of liquor like oyle.

Nagéne, Turnep or Rape-rootes.

Nárade, Nimphes or Fairies hanting riuers or fountaines.

Naíri, Milítia trà grán Préncipi Asiátici cóme i Giannízzeri trà Túrchi.

Nálba, a kind of hearbe.

Nálda, a kind of garment vsed anciently in the time of Bocace.

Namoráto, as Inamoráto, inamored.

Naneggiáre, to play the dwarfe, to dwarfe-it.

Nanerelli, pigmies, twattles, little dwarfes.

Nanétto, a pigmy, twattle or little dwarfe.

Nánfa, sweet water smelling of muske and Orenge-leaues.

Nanígio, horrour, contempt, lothsomnesse.

Nanigióso, lothsome, irkesome, horrible.

Naníno, as Nanétto.

Nánna, the name Nanne. Also a word that Nurces vse to still their children, as we say lullaby. Some thinke it may be vsed for a mournefull song, and others say for alluring verses. Also as Nénia.

Nannaménti, lullabies, lullings, dandlings.

Nannáre, to lullaby, to rocke or sing children a sleepe. Also to lull or dandle them in ones lap as Nurces doe.

Nanneaménti, as Nannaménti.

Nanneáre, as Nannáre.

Nánni, a name that men call their tame Asses by.

Náno, a dwarfe, a dandiprat, a twattle.

Nánti, before, eare, sooner, rather.

Nantílo, as Nautílio.

Nánzi, as Nánti.

Nanzipásto, a breake-fast, or eating before a meale. Also dishes that are first serued at a table for grace or appetite sake.

Nápa, a bird like vnto a Partridge.

Napée, Nimphes keeping among flowers.

Napello, the hearbe Woolues-bane. 



Náphta, a kinde of slimy, pitchie, bitumous or oylie water.

Nápi, a kinde of Mustard-seed. Also Nauews.

Napicciáta, a salt-stone giuen to Pigeons.

Náppa, any kind of drinking, table or Cupboord-cloath or napkin. Also the mantle of a chimny. Also that little tuft, tassel or fringe worne at a Lances point.

Nappamóndo, a Map of the world.

Napparíe, all maner of Napery or houshould linnen.

Nappatello, a little Náppo.

Náppe, the Plurall of Náppa. Also the iesses of a Hawke, some vse them for the varuels of a Hawke. Also labels hanging downe, or ribands and tassels of garlands.

Náppo, a mazor, a cup, a goblet, a godard or a drinking-dish.

Naráncia, an Orenge-fruit.

Naranciáta, Orengado.

Naranciáto, Orenge-coloured.

Naráncio, an Orenge-tree.

Natcíso, the hearbe White-laus-tibi. Also the whit Daffodilly-flower.

Narcissíno, a kind of precious oyntment made of white Daffodillies.

Narcissíta, a stone seeming to be distinguished with veines of Iuy.

Narcótica medicína, a medicine that with coldnesse doeth benum and stupifie.

Narcótico, causing astonishment or amazement and stupefaction.

Nardíne, a kind of figge or cherry.

Nárdo, Spike or Spikenard. Also an oyntment made of Spikenard.

Nárdo gállico, French-nard or Celtike-spikenard.

Nárdo saluático, Nard-sauage.

Nári, as Naríci.

Naríca, a kinde of little fish that swimmeth very softly.

Naríci del náso, the nostrils. Also the nayres of a Hawke.

Narídole, a shell-sish in Latin Nerita.

Naríglie, the nostrils or nares.

Narítia, a kind of pitch.

Naróna, a kind of wilde Flower-de-luce.

Narrábile, that may be told, declared, related, vttered or expressed.

Narraménto, as Narratióne.

Narráre, to tell, to vtter, to declare, to relate, to expresse, to discourse.

Narratióne, a narration, a relation, a declaration, a tale, a report.

Narratíua, as Narratióne.

Narratíuo, as Narrábile.

Narratória lettera, a narratorie letter.

Nárre, as Naríci.

Narréuole, as Narrábile.

Narthéca, a kinde of tall-growing Fenelgentle.

Narthécia, a kind of lowgrowing Fenelgentle.

Nasáda, as Nasadía.

Nasadía, a kind of ship vsed of the Vngarians vpon Danubius, in forme, in speed, and discipline like the Turkes foistes or swift Gallies.

Nasággine, a nosenesse or quality of a nose.

Nasáica, of or belonging to the nose, or to be blowne with the nose, or a fence for the nose.

Nasále, as Nasáica.

Nasáli, vsed for nose tents to put into the Nose.

Nasaménto, a sent, a senting, a traine sent.

Nasamoníte, a stone of a sanguine colour with little blacke veines in it.

Nasáre, to nose, to smell, to sent.

Násca, basterebbe un pò di násca, ouéro una tinózza.

Nascente, rising, growing, springing, beginning, new-budding.

Nascentie, all manner of vlcers, swellings or impostumations.

Nascentio, the hearbe Worme-wood.

Nascenza, a birth, a natiuity, an offspring, a growth or growing. Also the birth-time or falling of any cattle. Also a breeding, a springing or budding forth. Also a rising out or beginning from. Also any rising impostume or swelling of flesh in any part of the body.

Náscere, násco, nacqui, náto, or nasciúto, to begin from, to rise out, or to be borne, to breed, to be engendred, to bud foorth, to spring and grow. Also to come to passe, to come to light, to haue a beginning or off spring.

Násche, nóme di párte o membro d'un cauállo.

Nascíbile, that may be borne.

Nasciménto, as Nascenza.

Náscita, as Nascenza.

Nascitúro, readie to be borne.

Nasciúto, as Náto.

Nascondáglie, corners to hide in, lurking-holes. Also things hidden, sluts corners.

Nascóndere, scóndo, scósi, scóso, or scósto,  to hide from or out of sight, to conceale.

Nascondéuole, that may be hidden.

Nascondígli, as Nascondáglie.

Nascondiménto, a hiding from or out of sight.

Nascóso, as Nascósto.

Nascósto, hidden, concealed, out of sight.

Nasea, a tale, or discourse of noses.

Naseggiáre, to nose, sent, or smell. 

Nasello, a Cod-fish. Also a Whiting-mop.

Nasicáne, a dog-nosed fellow. Also a smell-feast.

Nasipúrgio, any liquor or other medicine to put vp or draw vp into the nose to purge the head withall.

Nasíto, as Nastúrcio.

Nasitórto, as Nastúrcio.

Náso, the nose of any creature. Also any beake. Also the naue of a wheele. Looke also Con tánto di náso.

Náso acquilíno, an Eagle-nose, a Hawke-nose.

Náso adúnco, a beake-nose, a crooked nose.

Náso amaccáto, a flat, brused, or squeased nose.

Náso camúso, a camuset or flat nose.

Náso del boccále, a beake, or spout of a pot.

Nasóne, a great or deformed nose.

Náso schiacciáto, a flat-cake nose.

Naspaménto, a reeling, or winding of silke.

Naspáre, to reele or winde any yarne.

Naspatóio, a rice, or reeler.

Naspatríce, a windresse, or reeler of thrid.

Nasperceríto, a kind of wine in Aegipt.

Náspo, a rice or reele for silke or yarne.

Nássa, a weele, a bownet, a haske or wicker pad to catch fish in.

Násseri, a word in mockerie vsed for crownes or monie, or pelfe, or chinke.

Násseri bizzeffi, idem. good store of crownes, or monie, or pelfe, or chinke.

Nássia, as Náxia.

Nassíno, made of Yew-wood. Also a yong Yew-tree.

Nássio, a kind of Marble-stone.

Násso, an Yew-tree. Some take it for a very venemous tree. Some-what like the Firre-tree. Also the naue of a wheels.

Nássita, as Nascenza.

Nástaro, as Nástro.

Násto, a kind of reede or cane whereof in times past they made arrowes and darts. Also a kind of meate made of meale, oyle, honie, and spice.

Nástro, any kinde of fine silke riband. Also any fine knot, rose, or deuice made of silke-ribonds as our women vse now to weare vpon their heads and about them. Also the name of a Signe or Starre in heauen. Also the part of a ring whereinto the stones is set, or the seale grauen.

Nastúrcio, wilde-mint, or nese-smert. Vsed also for water-cresses.

Nastúrgio, as Nastúrcio.

Nastúrzo, as Nastúrcio.

Nasúto, long-nosed, nosed, hauing a nose or beake or spout as an Ewer. 



Náta, a wenne growing vpon ones body.

Natábile, that may be swimmed.

Natále, natiue, or naturall, or belonging to ones birth or natiuitie. Also a birth-day or natiuitie. Vsed also for Christmas day or tide.

Natalítio, as Natale.

Natalítio giórno, a birth-day.

Natáre, to swimme, to flote, to hull.

Natátile, that swimmeth, or floteth.

Natatóio, that swimmeth, or floteth. Vsed also for a swimming-place.

Natatóre, a swimmer, a floter.

Natatório, as Natatóio.

Natéuole, as Natábile.

Naticchia, as Saliscende.

Nátiche, the buttocks or bummes.

Naticóso, as Naticúto, buttockt.

Naticúto, well buttockt, brode arst.

Natío, naturall, natiue, borne with one.

Nationále, nationall, of ones nation.

Nationále árma, an armes, a cote, a badge or ensigne proper to one nation.

Natióne, a nation, a countrie, a people. Also a race, a stocke, a lineage, or generation.

Natiuità, a natiuitie, or birth.

Natíuo, natiue, naturall, borne and bred with or in such a place.

Náto, borne, bred, framed by nature, descended from, descending of. Also had a beginning or off-spring. Looke Náscere.

Náto hiéri, borne yesterday, but taken for an ignorant or fresh man.

Natríce, an hearbe, whose roote stinketh like a Goate. Also a water-Snake.

Nátta, as Nata, a wenne. Also a white spot or pearle in ones eye. Also as Cilécca.

Náttico, a kind of Salt so called.

Nátto, as Nautílio.

Natúra, that, whereby a thing is properly in that kind that it is, the nature, qualitie, vertue, naturall inclination, instinct, motion, or constitution of any creature, which as Seneca saith, is nothing but God, or deuine reason sowen in all the world and all the parts thereof. Also the quaint of a woman, or priuie parts of any man or beast.

Naturáccia, a filthie nature, or womans quaint.

Naturále, naturall, or according vnto nature. Also a base borne, or bastard.

Naturalésco, according vnto nature.

Naturalézza, as Naturalità.

Naturalísta, a Naturalist, one professing the knowledge of naturall things.

Naturalità, naturalitie, nature, liberty.

Naturalizzáre, to naturalize.

Naturalménte, naturally, without arte.

Naturalóne, a plaine naturall man. Also a man well tooled, or great naturall toole.

Naturánte natúra, working or naturall nature.

Naturáre, to naturalize, to worke according vnto nature, to follow nature.

Natureggiáre, to follow nature.

Nauále, of or pertaining to ships or sailing. Looke Coróna nauále. Also a docke wherein Ships are built. Vsed also for a whole Nauile.

Nauaruóla, some part of a Ship, hánno la póppa álla nauaruóla.

Nauáta, a long or middle Islle or walke in a Church. Also a Nauie or Fleete of Ships. Also a ship-full.

Naucléro, a Master or Pilot of a Ship.

Náue, any kind of Ship or Sea-vessell. Also the middle Isle of a Church.

Nauegáro, of or belonging to sailing or to a Sailer.

Nauétta, as Nauicella.

Naufragáre, to wracke, to shipwracke.

Nauftagio, a wracke, a shipwracke.

Naufrágo, sea-beaten, ship-wrackt, wrackt.

Nauicábile, nauigable, where Ships may passe.

Nauicaménto, a sailing, a shipping.

Nauicánte, a Sailer, a Sea-man.

Nauicáre, to saile, or goe by Sea.

Nauicatióne, nauigation, sailing.

Nauicatóre, a Nauigator, a Sailer.

Nauícchia, that part of a Mill wherein the grinding stones lye and turne.

Nauicella, a little boate, barke, ship or pinnace. Also a Weauers shuttle. Also an Incense-pan. Also a kind of simnel-bread. Also a kind of coine. Also a bone in the knee, called, the knee-pan. Also a bone in the heele of a man, called, the bote or ship-bone.

Nauífero, ship-bearing.

Nauifórme, formed like a ship or boate. Looke ósso nauifórme.

Nauigábile, as Nauicábile.

Nauigánte, as Nauicánte.

Nauigáre, as Nauicáre.

Nauigatióne, as Nauicatióne.

Nauigatóre, as Nauicatóre.

Nauigiáro, a Ship-wright, a Shipper.

Nauígio, as Nauíglio.

Nauíglio, any kind of ship, barke, or sea vessell. Also any manner of shipping. Also a Fleete or Nauie of ships.

Nauíle, as Nauíglio.

Nauílio, as Nauiglio.

Nauipílio, a Cuttle or Pourcuttle-fish.

Nauità, quick-stirring.

Náula, passage or ferrie-money.

Nauláre, as Noláre or Noleggiáte.

Náulo, as Nólo or Nuólo.

Náuo, as Nauóne.

Nauóne, a kind of rape, a Nauew roote.

Náuplio, as Naupílio.

Naúsea, nausinesse, loathing of things. Also a desire to vomit, but no vomit.

Nauseánte, loathing of things.

Nauseóso, vomit-prouoking.

Náuta, a Ship-man, a Mariner, a Sailer.

Nautílio, a fish called the Boate-fish, which at a pipe vpon his backe casts out much water, and vseth certaine broad finnes he bath, both for wings to flie with, and as sailes to flote vp and downe the water, and is feete for oares, and his taile in stead of an helme or rudder.

Náxia, a kind of white stone.

Názanzísta, a kind of great hulke or ship of burden among the Turkes.

Nazareo, one that euer weares his haire long, and neuer drinketh wine. Also a Nazarite, that is, one that separateth himselfe from the world, and dedicateth himselfe to God. Numbers. 5.2.

Nazareáto, separation from the world and consecration vnto God.

Nazireo, as Nazareo.

Nazireáto, as Nazareáto. Also vsed for abstinence.

Ne, is first sometimes an Aduerbe of Distinction, or as some count it of Deniall or Refusall, and is commonly without a verbe, and in the beginning of sentences, signifying in English, Nor or Neither, and then it is vsually accented, as in these examples: Nè ti sóno amíco, nè ánco lo uóglio essere, perchè nè tù lo meriti, nè sì conuiene. Or otherwise, Nè quésto nè quéllo ti concédo, imperochè nè miámi, nè mi puói ucdére, &c.

Nè, serueth secondly for an Aduerbe locall or of place, or rather as some call it a Preposition, but then must the Article, I, bee vnderstood or implied, whether it be apostrophed or no, and signifieth in English, In, or In the; as for example: Spasseggiándo ne'cámpi m'mcontrái nè miei amíci, or else, Ne' líbri si leggono mólte cóse, ne'sáuij si truóuano i buóni consígli, et ne'uitij si perdono molti, &c.

Ne, thirdly being ioined vnto Verbes as often it is, either before or after, hath these three following significations, first it serueth for an Aduerbe of place, Hence, Thence or away, but then must the verbes euer bee of motion, as Andáre, Fuggíre, Veníre, &c. as for example, Io me ne uádo a spásso: uolendosene andáre; lui se ne e suggíto, Io me ne uénni uía, &c.

Ne, fourthly serueth for the Pronoune primitiue Noì or Ci, and is euer of the Datiue or Accusatiue cases, to vs, or vs, except with verbes of Priuation, with which it is of the Ablatiue, from vs, as for example: vedendone 



giuocáre, lui ne diede denári. Incontrándone, lui ne diede il buón giórno, lui ne hà tólto il nóstro ripóso, et furátonei denári.

Ne, lastly and fiftly doth most often and commonly serue for an Aduerbe of quantitie, signifying in English, Some, None, Part of, Any, Of it, Of them, Thereof, hauing euer relation to the chiefe Substantiue spoken of or mentioned in the sentence, as reciprocall vnto it, and is most elegantly so often vsed to auoide iteration thereof, as for example: Signór mío, uoi mi domandáte denári, Io non ne hò, se ne hauéssi, ve ne farei párte, quándo ne hauerò, uoi ne potréte dispórre, mi dispiáce non hauérne, uísto che tánti altri ne hánno, che non ne sóno dégni, which may thus be englished: Si, you aske me some money, I have none, had I any, I would impart some vnto you, when I shall haue any, you shall dispose thereof. I am sorry I haue none, seeing so many others to haue some, that are not worthy of it, &c. Read of this so necessarie Particle Ne, more at large in my rules.

Neáde, a beast in Samos with so strong a voice, that when it roreth, it shaketh the earth, whose bones are so big that they are kept for a maruell.

Nébbia, a cloud, a mist, a fog, a thickning of exhalations, hauing in it force to engender waters. Also vsed for a multitude together. Also a blasting of fruits. Also aduersitie or any thing whereby the knowledge of man is ouercast.

Nebbiáre, to be, to make or become cloudie, mistie or foggie. Also to blast fruites.

Nebbiarella, a little cloud, mist or fog, a deawie exhalation. Also a blasting.

Nebbiétta, as Nebbiarella.

Nebbigénio, engendred of or in a cloud, the Centaures were so called.

Nebbióne, a thicke fogge, a great mist, a stormie and rough cloud. Also a shallow wit, a lubbard.

Nebbióso, cloudie, mistie, soggie, duskie, stormie, rough, tempestuous.

Nebríte, a kind of precious stone consecrate to Bacchus.

Nébula, as Nébbia.

Nebulóso, as Nebbióso.

Necessário, necessarie, needfull, requisite. Also a priuy, a iakes, a house of ease.

Necessità, necessitie, need.

Necessitáre, to constraine of necessitie.

Necessitataménte, of necessitie.

Necessitáto, vrged, forced, compelled.

Necessitóso, needie, full of necessitie.

Necessitúdine, necessitie, need. Also kin or alliance. Also a knot of alliance.

Necesso., Vsed for Necessário.

Nécia, a funerall ceremonie at graues.

Necídalo, a silke worme of the second growth.

Neciománte, a foreteller by the dead or their ghostes.

Neciomantía, fortune-telling or foretelling by the dead or ghostes.

Necrománte, as Negrománte.

Necromántia, as Negromantía.

Ned, neither, nor, vsed before vowels.

Neénte, nought, nothing at all, as Niénte.

Nedetiandío, nor also.

Nefandería, wickednesse, mischieuousnesse, hainousnesse, execrablenesse, lewdnesse.

Nefándo, most lewd and wicked, hainous, execrable, not to bee spoken or named.

Nefariaménte, wickedly, lewdly, villanously.

Nefário, wicked, villanous, cursed.

Nefarióso, cursed and full of wickednes.

Néfa, , a wicked act, a cursed deed, a hainous matter, an vnlawfull villanie.

Nefásto, wicked, mischieuous, vnluckie, hainous, cursed, vnlawfull, dismall, fatall.

Nefásti giórni, such daies as all Law-courts are shut, no Iudges sit, and no Law is ministred, as one would say dismall daies.

Néfro., a kind of Eagle or Faulcon.

Negábile, that may be denied, deniable.

Negabóndo, one that denieth, denying.

Negaménto, a denyall, a refusall.

Negándo, to be denied.

Negántia, a denying or gaine-saying.

Negáre, to deny, to say no, to refuse.

Negatióne, a denyall, a refusing.

Negatíuo, negatiue, denying.

Negatúra, a denying, a refusing.

Neghienza, negligence, retchlesnesse.

Neghittóso, stupide, sencelesse, blockish.

Negletto, neglected, little regarded.

Négli, or Nélli, in the.

Negligendo, to be neglected. Also neglecting.

Negligente, negligent, carelesse, retchlesse.

Negligentia, negligence, retchlesnesse.

Neglígere, glígo, glessi, gletto, to neglect, to disregard, to contemne.

Négo, Niégo, a deniall, a refusall.

Negotiále, pertaining to businesse.

Negotiána, the hearbe Tobacco.

Negotiánte, a dealer in businesses, a negotiant, a factor, an occupier, a soliciter.

Negotiáre, to negotiate, to deale in businesse. Also to twigle a woman.

Negotiatióne, traffike, negotiation.

Negotiatóre, as Negotiante.

Negótio, a businesse, a dealing, an affaire.

Negotióso, full of dealings and businesse.

Negotiúzzo, any trifling businesse.

Negótta, nought, nothing, no whit.

Negráre, to blacke, to darken, to obscure.

Negreggiáre, to growe blacke, or obscure.

Negréssi conserue. 

Negrétto, some-what blackish, or swart.

Negrézza, blacknesse, swartnesse.

Negricánte, blackish, sable, swart.

Negríccio, blackish, suttie, dunne, swart.

Negríre, rísco, ríto, as Negráre.

Négro, blacke, swart, darke. Also sable in armorie. Also vicious, foule, or vncleane in conscience.

Negrománte, a nigromant, or enchanter, that raiseth, calleth vp, and talketh with the spirits of dead bodies.

Negromantía, a nigromancie, enchanting, or the blacke arte by calling.

Negróso, as Negríccio.

Nel, Nélla, Néllo, Nelle, Ne', Nei, Nelli, Negli, in the.

Nell' adietro, in times past.

Nella guísa, in or after the fashion.

Nell' aueníre, in time to come.

Nélle, in the. Also to her thereof.

Nel far del giórno, by breake of day.

Nel passáto, in times past.

Nel pieno della nótte, in the dead of night.

Nel preterito, in times past.

Nel tórno, about, in turning.

Nel verno, in the winter.

Nel véro, in truth, truely.

Nel'vn, ne l'áltro, nor one, nor the other.

Nembo, a suddaine storme of raine or haile, a tempestuous weather or blast and puff of wind. Also a cloud that Poets faigne the Painims gods were wont to descend into from heauen.

Nembo di vento, a gust, a whorre, or puffe of winde.

Nembóso, stormie, tempestuous, or rainie.

Nembrílla, a Halibut-fish.

Nemei, a sacred kind of games among the Grecians.

Ne míca, nor also, much lesse.

Nemicaménte, like an enemie, or foe.

Nemicáre, to make or become enemie.

Nemichéuole, that may be enmitied.

Nemicíssimo, enemie in the highest degree.

Nemicítia, enmitie, fude.

Nemíco, an enemie, a foe, a backefriend.

Nemíco del víno, that is to say, foe-wine. 



Nemistà, enmitie, fude.

Nemistánza, as Nemicítia, enmitie, fude.

Nemistáre, as Nemicáre.

Nemphára, a water-rose.

Néna, a nurse, or foster-mother.

Néncio, a foole, an idiot, a naturall.

Nénia, the name of a custumarie ceremonie vsed among the ancient Grecians in the funerals or burials, which was to hire a companie of men and women to accompanie them, and with wringing hands, piteous gestures, mournefull wailings and lored acclamations, to proclaime the noble deedes as well of the partie dead, as of his familie, and fore-fathers. Also as Nánna.

Néo, a naturall marke or mole vpon ones skinne in any part of the bodie.

Neomentía, the time of the new Moone.

Neotoloméo, a surname giuen to Pirrhus, as much to say, as new souldier.

Nepénte, an hearbe, which put into wine driueth away sadnesse.

Nepéta, Nep, Calamint, Cat-mint, or Hearbe-mint.

Nepetella, as Nepéta.

Nephélide, small spots in the eyes.

Nephríte, an ache in the reines of the backe. Also the grauell or stone in the kidneyes or reines of the backe.

Nephrítico, that is troubled with paine or the stone in the reines of the backe.

Nepitella, as Nepéta.

Nepitelli, the nipples of a dug, or teat.

Ne più ne meno, neither more, nor lesse.

Nepóte, a nephew. Also a grand-child.

Nepóti, posteritie, succession.

Nepotíno, a little nephew, or grandchild.

Ne púre, nor so much as, no nor so much.

Neputo, as Nepéta.

Nequíssimo, most lewd, or wicked.

Nequitézza, as Nequítia.

Nequítia, wickednesse, lewdnesse, badnesse.

Nequitóso, wicked, lewed, vngracious.

Neráre, as Negráre.

Nerbo, as Neruo.

Nerborúto, as Neruóso.

Nerbosità, as Neruosità.

Nerbóso, as Neruóso.

Nerbúto, as Neruóso.

Nereggiánte, as Negricánte.

Nereggiáre, as Negreggiáre.

Nereide, Sea-Nimphs. Also a monstrous fish. Also vsed for Mermaydes.

Nerétto, as Negrétto.

Nerézza, as Negrézza.

Neríccio, as Negríccio.

Neríne, a kind of blacke plum.

Nerióne, Oleander. Also as Rododéndro.

Neríre, rísco, ríto, to blacke, to darken, to obscure.

Néro, blacke, sable-colour, obscure.

Neronaríe, Neronian cruelties.

Neróso, as Negríccio.

Neruatióne, a sinnewing.

Neruígno, as Neruóso.

Neruisonóri, gut-strings for instruments.

Neruo, a sinnew, or nerue. Also strength, power, might, or vertue. Also a nerue, a veine, or sinnew in leaues. Also a string of any instrument. Also a mans yard.

Neruo crinále, a nerue or sinnew going from the head downe to the necke.

Neruo di búe, a Bulls pizell.

Neruorúto, as Neruóso,

Neruosità, sinewinesse, neruinesse.

Neruóso, neruie, sinnewie, pithie, strong.

Neruulo, a little nerue, or sinnew.

Neruúto, as Neruóso.

Nesciáre, to ignore, not to know.

Nesciente, not knowing, vnwitting.

Nescienteménte, vnwittingly, vnknowingly.

Nescientia, ignorance, vnwittingnesse.

Nescio, one that knowes nothing.

Nescióne, a most ignorant foole.

Nespola, a Medlar, an open-arse-fruite. Also a kind of musicall instrument without strings.

Nespolíno, a yong Medlar. Also a close, craftie, slye companion.

Nespolo, a Medlar, an open-arse-tree.

Nessunaménte, in no wise, by no meanes.

Nessúno, no one, not any one, no bodie.

Nestáre, as Innestáre, to engraffe.

Nestatóre, an engraffer, a graffer.

Nesto, a graffe, a sien, an imp, a set.

Netampóco, nor that neither, nor also.

Néte, a string of any musicall instrument but euer sharpe.

Netta dénti, a maker cleane of teeth, a tooth-picke.

Netta-ferri, a frubber or scourer of iron.

Nettaménte, neatly, cleanely, purely.

Nétta orécclie, an eare-picke.

Nettáre, to cleanse, to make cleane or neate, to polish, to mundifie, to purge.

Nettare, a pleasant liquor faigned to be the drinke of the Gods, called Nectar.

Nettarea, the hearbe Elecampane.

Nettareo, sweet, Nectar-like, deuine.

Nettaríta, a drink made of Elecampane.

Nettatóri, cleansers, wipers, or as Gunners call them, scourers, spunges or wads.

Nettézza, neatnesse, cleanelinesse.

Nettíssimo, most neate or cleane.

Nétto, neate, cleane, vnspotted, polished.

Nettúto, cleanzed, made cleane, purified.

Neuáre, to snow, to fill with snow.

Néue, snow. 

Neuegáre, as Neuáre.

Ne uéro? as Non e uéro? is it not true?

Neuicáre, as Neuáre.

Neuigáre, as Neuáre.

Neuigáre al mónte, to snow vpon the mountaines, that is, to begin to haue white haires about the temple.

Neuno, no one, not any one, no bodie.

Néuo, as Néo.

Néuola, as Nébbia, or as Núuola.

Neuóso, snowte, full of snow.

Neuráda, an hearbe, as Plurións.

Néurico, hauing the goute in the sinnewes.

Neurída, a kind of poison to enuenome weapons heads.

Neuríode, a kind of wilde Beetes.

Neuropastóre, the Cane or Canary-bird.

Neutrále, neutral, indifferent.

Neutraleggiáre, as Neutráre,

Neutralità, neutralitie, indifferencie.

Neutráre, to be neutrall or indifferent.

Néutro, neuter, indifferent, betweene both, neither way.

Nézza, a Niece.

Nezzína, a little Niece, a daughters daughter.

Niáso, an Eyase-hawke.

Níbbio, a Kite, a Glade, a Puttocke, a Gladestar. Also a kind of fish.

Nícchia, as Nícchio.

Nicchiáre, to wallow or twigle vp and downe as doth a woman when she is vpon the point of being deliuered of a child. Also to lament in corners, to grieue or grumble secretly, to shew some secret signe of discontent. Also to stand thrumming of hats, or to speake doubtfull words, to hang of and on, as if more money would make all well, to dodge.

Nicchiétti, little round pible-stones.

Nícchio, any close nooke or corner. Also such litle holes or cubbords in Churches as Images are put in or stand in. Also the shell of any litle Shell-fish. Also a kind of Shell-fish. Also a bird in India so great that it will take vp an Elephant aliue, and hauing him aloft in the ayre will let him fall vpon some rocke, and so kill him and then eate him, whose feathers are said to bee threescore foote long. Also a kind of musicall instrument.

Niccióla, any kind of small Nut.

Nicciuólo, as Nocciuólo.

Níccolo, a small pible-stone. Also as Nícchio.

Nicerobiáno, a kind of precious oyntment.

Níchilo., Vsed as Nihil in Latin, nothing

Nicissità, as Necessità.

Nicistà, as Necessità.

Nicistáre, as Necessitáre.



Nicistóso, as Necessitóso.

Nicolái, a kind of very great Date.

Nicophóro, a kind of Binde-weed like Iuie.

Nicópoli, as one would say a victorious Cittie.

Nic siána, the hearbe Tobacco.

Nidaménto, a nesting place.

Nidáre, to roost, to nestle, to build a nest.

Nidáso, an Eyase-hawke.

Nidáta, as Nidiáta.

Nidétto, a little nest or roost.

Nidiáce falcóne, a Hawke taken yoong out of his nest, a Eyase-faulcon.

Nidiáta, a nest-full, a couie, a beauie, an ayrie, a brood, a sitting, a hatching.

Nidificáre, to build or make a nest.

Nidífico, that maketh a nest.

Nídio, a nest, a roosting place.

Nído, a nest, a roosting place. Vsed also for a mans home, country, or bed, and resting place.

Nidóre, the sauour of any thing.

Niegáre, as Negáre.

Niégo, a denyall. Also as Néo.

Niello, a gull, a foole, a ninnie.

Niénte, nought, nothing, nought at all.

Niénte mánco, nothing lesse, notwithstanding.

Niénte di mánco, as Niénte mánco.

Niénte méno, as Niénte mánco.

Niénte di méno, as Niénte mánco.

Niéue, as Néue, Snow.

Niffoláre, as Musáre. Also as Nicchiáre.

Níffola, as Ceffo, or as Múso.

Níffolo, a frowning brow or face.

Nifo, all the space that is betweene the eye-lids, and the chin of ones face.

Nigella, Pepper-wort, Narde, or Coriander of Reme. Some take it for Githe, sweete sauour, or Bishops-wort.

Níggo, as Nibbio.

Nigína, as Nigella.

Nigligente, as Negligente.

Nigligenza, as Negligenza.

Nigótta, nought, no one drop, no-whit.

Nígra, the name of a kind of Blazing-starre.

Nigrédine, blackishnesse, pitchinesse.

Nigricánte, blackish, obscure, sable.

Negrígno, blackish, dun, sable, browne.

Nigrino, as Nigrigno.

Nigrománte, as Negrománte.

Nigromantía, as Negromantía.

Nigróre, blackishnesse, swartinesse.

Nilio, a stone like a Topace.

Nílo, the famous Riuer Nilus. Also a figure of Starres so called. Vsed also for Conduit-pipes to conuey water into Cities, or Princes houses.

Nímfa, any kinde of Nimph, Elfe, or Fairie. Also a Bride, or new maried wife. Also a thicke-ruffe-band, as women or effeminate fellowes weare about their necks. Also the void space or hollownesse in the neather lip. Also the cup of any flowre, gaping and opening it selfe. Also a little piece of flesh rising vp in the midst of a womans priuitie, which closeth the mouth of the necke, and driueth cold from it. Also the water-rose. Also yong Bees before they can flye.

Nimfadóro, an effeminate fellow, a spruce ladies courting fellow.

Nimfamtéri, a kind of Ferne.

Nimfaréna, a stone, resembling the teeth of a water-horse.

Nimfársi, to trim, to smug, to spruce or Nimph-like dresse himselfe.

Nimfeo, Nimph-like, effeminate.

Nimicalménte, most enemie-like.

Nimicáre, as Nemicáre, or Inimicáre.

Nimichéuole, as Nemichéuole.

Nimicítia, enmitie, fude, foedome.

Nimíco, an enemie, a foe, a foe-man.

Nimietà, excessiue quantity, too muchnesse.

Nimistà, enmity, fude, foedome.

Nimistánza, an enemity, fude, foedome.

Nimistáre, as Nemicáre.

Nímo, a gull, a ninny, a meacocke.

Nímpha, as Nimfa.

Nimphadóro, as Nimfadóro.

Nimpharsi, as Nimfársi.

Nímphe, yongue Bees beginning some shape, any flying creature that is not fledge. Also the Plur. of Nímpha.

Nimphéa, a Water-rose.

Ninfadóro, as Nimfadóro.

Ninferno., Vsed for Inferno.

Nínna, a foolish or wanton wagging of the head as some wanton and frenchifide trauellers doe. Fárela ninna, to play the wanton Also children before they can speake will call drinke so, as oures say Nin.

Nipitelli, as Nittalópí.

Nipóte, a Neaphew. Also a Grandchild.

Nipotella, as Nepéta. Also Pimpernell.

Nipotíno, a little nephew or grandchild.

Niquítia, iniquity, wickednesse.

Niquitóso, full of iniquity or wickednesse.

Níquo, wicked, vngodly, impious.

Nísi., Vsed in this frase. Senzaniun nísi, as much to say without any reply or exception.

Nísia, a kind of Iuy.

Níso, a iacke of a hobby. Also a kind of fish.

Nísso, the God of childe-baring. Also a child-bearing or child-birth. Also a signe or starre in heauen called in Latine Ingeniculum.

Nissunaménte, in no wise, by no meanes.

Nissúno, no one, not any one, no body.

Nitédula, a Glow-worme. Also a kind of field Mouse.

Nitelíno, a kind of Osier or willow.

Niterágno, as Niteráno.

Nitidità, brightnesse, faire-shining.

Nítido, cleane-shining, cleare & bright.

Nitoráno, a Night-rauen or Crow.

Nitóre, as Nitidità.

Nitraría, a Salt-peter or Niter-house.

Nitriménto, the neighing of a horse.

Nitríre, trísco, tríto, to neigh as a horse.

Nitríto, neighed, or the neighing of a horse.

Nítro, nitre, a matter white and like salt but. somewhat spungie and full of holes, boile and refine it, and it will be Borace that Gold-smiths vse. Some take it for Salt-peter. Also a stone-salt for Pigeons. Also the neighing of a horse.

Nitrosità, grettinesse, nitrositie.

Nitróso, grettie, full of nitre.

Nittalópi, purblind, such as can see neuer a whit towards night.

Nittalópia, a purblindnesse in the eyes.

Nittáre, to winke or twinkle with the eyes.

Nittatióne, a winking or twinkling with the eyes.

Nitticoráce, a Night-rauen or Skreech-owle.

Nittigréco, as Lunária.

Nittilópi, as Nittalópi. Also an hearbe whereof Geese are afraid, and shines by night.

Nittóre, brightnesse, clearenesse, gaynesse, glittering, garishnesse.

Niuále, snowish, snowie.

Niueo, snowie, of snow.

Niuello, a kind of fine singing bird.

Niueo, snowie, or snow-white.

Niunaménte, in no sort, by no meanes.

Niúno, no one, not one, not any one.

Nizzáre, to grow mellow or rotten ripe.

Nízzo, mellow or rotten ripe.

Nizzóla, a little beast like a Weazell. Also a pible-stone. Also a kinde of hearbe. Also any Filbird or Hazellnut.

Nó, no, nay, not.

Noále, any place, roome, or thing that containeth varietie of things, as Noes Arke did. Also generall or common. Also a birth day, or Christmas day.

Nóbile, noble, famous, excellent, greatly knowne, a Gentleman by birth or title. Also a coine in England called a Noble.

Nobilísta, a professor of nobilitie. Also an Herauld.

Nobilitáre, to ennoble, to make noble. 



Nobilità, as Nobiltà.

Nobiltà, nobilitie, renoume, excellencie, noblenesse of birth, race, or estimation.

Nóbole., Vsed for Nóbile.

Nócca, the knuckle of ones fingers. Also the nocke of a bow. Also a nut.

Noccáre, to nocke, to notch.

Nócche, knuckles, nocks, notches, nuts

Nócchia, as Nócca.

Nocchiáre, as Noccáre.

Nocchiarúto, as Nocchiúto.

Nocchiéro, a cunning Pilot, or director of a Ship at Sea.

Nócchio, any bosse, bladder, puffe, bunch, knob, knur, wen, nodositie, node, snag, knap, measill, snar, or ruggednesse in any tree or wood. Also the stone of any fruite, as Peach, or Oliue, or Date. Also the knuckle of ones fingers. Also the nocke of a bow. Also a notch in any thing. Also an hazell nut-tree. Also the play called kob-nut. Also a gull, a ninnie, a foole, a sot.

Nocchióso, as Nocchiúto.

Nocchiúto, knurrie, knobbie, crabbed, knottie, rugged, full of snags or nodes.

Noccióla, any kind of small nut.

Nocciólo, a small nut-tree. Also the stone of any fruite, as of Plums.

Nocciuóla, any kind of small nut.

Nocciuólo, as Nocciólo.

Nócco, as Nócchio.

Nóce, any kind of nut, or nut-tree.

Noce del cóllo, the nape of the head.

Nóce del ginócchio, the panne of ones knee.

Nóce délla balestra, the nut of a crossebow.

Nóce d'I'ndia, an Indian nut.

Nocella, any kind of small nut.

Nóce metello, a kind of Indian nut.

Nócemoscáta, a Nutmeg.

Nocente, nocent, witting, guilty, knowing.

Nocenza, nocency, wittingnesse, knowledge.

Nóce pína, a Pine-apple.

Nócere, nuóco, nócqui, nociúto, to hurt, to annoy, to endamage, to harme, to offend

Nocétta, any kind of small nut.

Nocéuole, hurtfull, harmefull, noysome.

Nóce vómico, a kind of Indian nut.

Nociménto, as Nocuménto.

Nociprúna, the Nut-plumbe.

Nociuo, as Nocéuole.

Nocitúro, likely to doe hurt.

Nociúto, hurt, harmed, offended, annoyed.

Nocuménto, harme, hurt, dammage.

Nodáre, to knot, to knit, to node, to knur. 

Nodatióne, any knotting.

Noddo, a noddy, a gull, a sot, a foole.

Nodegli, as Nócchio, Nóchij, any litle knots or knuckles, or ioynts in limmes.

Nodelli, as Nodegli.

Noderóso, as Nodóso.

Noderúto, as Nodóso.

Nódia, the Curreirs hearbe, Mulary.

Nódi di salomóne, loue knots or intanglings.

Nodificáre, to grow or make into knots.

Nódo, any kind of node, knot or knur. Also the ioint of any Cane. Also the hardnesse or difficulty of any thing.

Nódo ascendente, as Nodo celeste.

Nódo Celéste, or Celeste Nódo, the signe in the Zodiacke called Pisces. Also those two places in which the circle of the Moones motion is, or of any other Planet out of the Ecliptike. Also knuckles or turning ioynts in the chine or backe-bone.

Nódo descendente, as Nódo celeste.

Nodosità, hard knobs or nodes vpon ioyntes or other pockie and gouty parts, knottinesse, nodosity.

Nodoróso, as Nodóso.

Nódóso, full of knots, knotty, as Nocchiúto.

Nodricáre, as Nodríre.

Nodrigáre, as Nodríre.

Nodríre, nodrísce, nodríto, to nourish, to feede, to foster, to bring vp.

Nodriménto, nourishment, food, sustenance.

Nodritóre, a nourisher, a feeder, a fosterer.

Nodritúra, nouriture, nourishment.

Noéma, a sentence when one thing is ment and another spoken.

Nogáro, a Wallnut-tree.

Noglióso, as Noióso.

Nohiér l'áltro, the day before yesterday.

Nohierséra, the night before yesterday.

Nói, we, vs.

Nóia, annoy, annoyance, tediousnesse, sorrow, tribulation, molestation, fasherie.

Nóiáltri, we or vs others.

Noiánza, annoyance, noye, trouble.

Noiáre, to annoy, to trouble, to molest.

Nói celò, we it or him to vs.

Nói cenè, we our selues thence or therof.

Noiéuole, as Noióso.

Nóimedésimi, we our selues.

Noióso, noyous, noysome, tedious, troublesome.

Noistéssi, we our selues.

Nol, not him, not the, not it.

Noláre, to hire any moouing thing, as namely a horse or a ship.

Nolatóre, a hirer of horse or ship. Vsed also for a letter of horses, a hackney-man.

No'l díssi? did I not say it? 

Noleggiánte, as Nolatóre.

Noleggiáre, as Noláre.

Nolesino, as Nolatóre.

Nóli me tángere, a kind of Mercurie the seed whereof if one touch it skips away. Also a disease in the nose, as Polípo.

Nólla, as Non la, not her, not it.

Nóllo, as Non lo, not him, not it.

Nólo, the hire of any moouing thing, as of horse, ship or boate. Also the passage money in a ship or boate. Also the fraught-money of a ship.

Nomádi, certaine Arabian shepheards euer roming and shifting vp and downe.

Nomádi poéti, pastorall Poets.

Nománza, as Nominánza.

Nomárca, he that as a chiefe officer hath preheminence in the administration of lawes.

Nomáre, to name, to nominate, to hight, to call by name.

Nomataménte, namely, by name, specially.

Nómboli, trà bombardiérisóno stoppíni di córda d'arcobúgio solferáti.

Nóme, any name or nomination. Also a noune. Also a calling or title. Also certaine painefull sores which by creeping on, eat vp and consume the bodie. Also an Aduerbe of exception, but, but onely, except, sauing. Vsed also for fame, renowme, honour and reputation.

Nomenclatóre, he that knoweth the seuerall names of things and persons, and calleth them thereby

Nomenclatúra, the numbring of names or surnames of sundry things.

Nomentána uíte, a kind of red wine or grape.

Nomeráre, to number, to count, to tell.

Nómici poéti. lat.

Nominábile, that may be named.

Nomináglio, an officer or Bedell to call or register mens names.

Nommale, as Nominábile.

Nominánza, a naming, a nomination. Also fame or renowme.

Nomináre, to name, to nominate, to hight.

Nominataménte, namely, especially.

Nominatióne, as Nominánza.

Nominatíuo, the Nominatiue or right case.

Nomináto, named, nominated, hight. Also famous and renowmed

Nominatóre, a namer, a giuer of names.

Nominéuole, as Nominábile.

Non, with a verbe, least, least that, Témo non si fáccia mále.

Non, no, not, nay.

Nóna, noone, noone-tide, midday.

Non accáde, it needs not, or it falles not 



to the purpose.

Nonagenário, of ninety yeeres of age.

Nonagesimo, the ninetieth in order.

Non ánco, Nonancóra, not yet, not as yet.

Nonánta, ninety, fourescore and ten.

Nonanténa, one number of ninety.

Nonantésimo, the ninetieth in order.

Nonárie, of nine.

Nonchè, not onely, much lesse. Also vsed for Benchè, albeit.

Non così tósto, not so soone. Also no sooner.

Non couelle, fables of no worth, matters of nothing.

Noncupatória, a calling by name or mentioning by word of mouth.

Noncupáre, to call by name, to pronounce or mention by word of mouth.

Noncupatióne, a pronouncing, a calling for, or declaration of a will by word of mouth.

Non curánte, not caring, carelesse.

Nondimánco, neuerthelesse, notwithstanding.

Nondiméno, as Nondimánco.

Nóne, the Nones of euery Moneth, because from that day nine are counted to the Ides, they are the first daies after the Calends, that is to say after the first day of the moneth, in March, May, Iune and October there be six, and in all the other Monethes but foure. Looke Fárele nóne.

Nonè?, as the Latine Nonne? did not?

Non grán fátto, not very much, no great matter.

Nonetróppo, it is not ouermuch, it is nothing.

Non e guári, it is not long since.

Non hauér' ancóra rasciútti gl'ócchi, is ment by an ignorant gull or freshman, who as a new-borne babe hath not yet dried his eies.

Non hauér'il filello álla língua, not to be tongue-tide, to be nimble-tongued.

Non fórse, least peraduenture.

Non hà guari, it is not long since.

Non hiéri l'áltro, not Yesterday, but the day before.

Non hóra, not now, not at this time.

Non impórta, it skilleth not, it is no matter.

Non instánte, not with standing.

Nónio, the name of a colour.

Non istánte, not with standing.

Non mái, neuer, nor at any time.

Non méno, no lesse.

Non méno chè, no lesse then.

Non míca, no whit, no crum.

Non mólto stánte, not long after.

Non mólto adiétto, not farre or much behind. Also not long agoe.

Nonna, a good mother. Also a grandmother. Also the mother of a mans wife 

Nónne, but that, but onely, except. Also as the Latine Nonne?

Non niúno, not any one, or no body.

Nónno, a godfather. Also a grandfather. Also the father of a womans husband.

Nón nón, no no, nay nay, no indeed.

Non núlla, nothing at all, a matter of nought, not any thing at all.

Nóno, the ninth in order.

Nonóplo, ninefould, ninedouble.

Non ostánte, not with standing.

Non per dío, no by God, no for gods-sake.

Non per núlla, at no hand, by no meanes.

Non però diméno, notwithstanding yet.

Non per tánto, not for all that, notwithstanding.

Non piáccia a Dío, God forbid.

Non più chè, but, no more then.

Non più tósto, as Non príma.

Non pósso non, I can not choose but.

Non príma, no sooner, not so soone.

Non púnto, no whit, no iot, no point.

Non può sare di non veníre, also he can not choose but come.

Non può non, he can not but.

Non púre, not onely. Also much lesse.

Non sciente, not knowing, vnwitting.

Non síne quáre, not without cause or reason, or wherefore.

Non si può a méno, it can not be at lesse.

Non si può diméno, it can not be chosen, a man can not choose but.

Non si tósto, not so soone, no sooner.

Non sò chè, I wot not what.

Non sò chì, I wot not who.

Non sólo, not onely, not alone.

Non sò dóue, I wot not where.

Non sò quándo, I wot not when.

Non sò quánti, I wot not how many.

Non tánto, not so much, not onely.

Non tánto, vsed for albeit.

Non tantósto, no sooner, not so soone.

Nontiáta, taken for our Ladie.

Non váglia, let it not auaile.

Non véggo l'hóra, I see not the houre. Also me thinks the time long.

Non vna vólta, not once. Also least that one time.

Nonúpo, nine times double, nine-fold. Also a certaine taxation and payment vsed in Naples for some forfaitures.

Nóra, as Nuóra.

Nórma, a rule, a trace, a direction, a forme, a fashion, a precedent.

Normále, according to rule.

Normáre, to follow or giue rule, trace, direction, forme, or precedents.

Normataménte, according to forerules, traces, formes, or precedents.

Norméuole, that may or will beruled, directed, fashioned, or traced.

Nosca di perle, a shell, or mother of pearle.

Nósco, with vs, together with vs.

Nosella, any kind of little nut.

Nosellaro, a Filbird, or Hazell-nut-tree.

Nosello, as Noselláro.

Nosétta, a kind of Tart made of nuts.

Nostrále, of our countrie or kinde.

Nostralménte, according to our fashion.

Nostrano, as Nostrále.

Nóstri, I nóstri, our friends, our kinseman, our folks, our countrie-men.

Nóstro, our, ours, our owne.

Nóta, any kind of note, marke, signe or token. Also a blot, a blemish, or touch of infamie. Also a notice or obseruation. Also a note in Musike.

Notábile, notable, remarkeable.

Notabilità, notablenesse.

Notabilménte, notablie.

Notáio, as Notáro.

Notaiuólo, a pettie Scriuener, or a pettie fogger.

Notaiúzzo, as Notaiuólo.

Notaménto, a noting, a marking.

Notándo, notable, to be noted.

Notanteménte, notably.

Notáre, to note, to marke. Also to consider, to heed, or to obserue. Also to blot or blemish with some note of infamie. Vsed also for Nuotáre, to swim.

Notaría, as Notariáto, a Scriueners arte or profession.

Notariáto, the Office of a Notarie, or where it is kept.

Notáro, a Notarie, a Scriuener.

Notatióne, a notation, a marking.

Notáto, noted, signed, marked, obserued.

Notatóre, a noter, a marker. Also a swimmer.

Nóte, all manner of notes, but often vsed of Poets for plaints, layes, or lamentations.

Notéuole, notable, to be noted.

Noteuolézza, notablenesse.

Nótia, a precious stone falling downe with showres.

Notificáre, to notifie, to make knowne, to signifie vnto.

Notificatióne, a notifying, a publishing, a signifying vnto.

Notificatóre, a proclaimer, a publisher, a signifier.

Notionále, notionall, according to knowledge, or vnderstanding.

Notióne, knowledge, notion, vnderstanding. Also the examining of a cause in iudgement.

Notítia, notice, knowledge.

Nóto, noted, knowen, marked, obser­



ued, cleane, famous, manifest, acquainted. Also the South-winde.

Notomía, as Anatomía.

Notomísta, as Anatomísta.

Notomizzáre, as Anatomizzáre.

Notoriaménte, notoriously.

Notorietà, notoriousnesse.

Notório, notorious, knowne, marked, manifestly knowne.

Notricáre, as Nodríre.

Notriménto, as Nodriménto.

Notríre, as Nodríre.

Notritóre, as Nodritóre.

Nottáre, to grow or become night.

Nottáta, a nights space, or worke.

Nótte, night. Also darkenesse. Also quick-siluer, according to Alchimists.

Notteggiáre, to grow or become night. Also to frequent, or doe night-works.

Nottífero, night-bringing, or bearing.

Nottifúga, night-flying. Also a little beast that shines by night. Also the Moone when she shines at night.

Nottilúche, that shines by night as glee-wormes, or glaze workes.

Nottiuágo, night-wandring.

Nóttola, a Bat, or Reare-mouse. Vsed also for a Schreech-Owle.

Nóttua, as Nóttola, as Ciuétta.

Nottuáre, as Ciuettáre.

Nóttule, Weeuils. Also an Owle, or Howlet.

Notturnále, nocturnall, nightly.

Nottúrno, nocturnall, nightly.

Notuláni, all manner of night-birds.

Nóua, a noueltie, a new report.

Nouag enário, of foure-score and ten yeares old.

Nouále, a field that is sowed euery second yeare, as we say, fallow.

Nouaménte, newly, freshly, lately.

Nouánta, the number of ninetie.

Nouanténa, one foure-score and ten.

Nouantína, as Nouanténa.

Nouástro, nowish, moderne, of our times.

Nouatióne, a renuing, an innouation.

Noue, nine. Also newes or nouelties.

Nouecénto, nine hundred.

Nouella, a nouel, a new discourse, a tale, a fable, a parable. Also a tiding or newes.

Nouelláccie, filthy or stale newes.

Nouellaménte, newly, lately.

Nouellánte, a teller of newes and tidings, a teller of tales, fables, and fond discourses. Also a merry iester, a pleasant buffon.

Nouelláre, to tell nouels, newes or tales.

Nouellatóre, as Nouellánte.

Nouelle, as Nouella. But often vsed for idle newes, foolish pratlings, or iesting speeches.

Nouellétte, as Nouellúzze.

Nouelliéro, a new-come, a start-vp, a fresh-man.

Nouelliéro, as Nouellánte.

Nouellíni, tendrels, yoong buds, sprigs, sprouts, tender plants.

Nouellísta, as Nouellánte.

Nouello, new, fresh, moderne, of late.

Nouellóne, a kind of new coine of gold.

Nouelluzze, idle tales, foolish newes, fond nouels, trifling fables, newfangles.

Nouémbre, the moneth of Nouember.

Nóue mílle, nine thousand in number.

Nouenário, nine foote euery way one from another.

Nouendiále, of nine daies space or continuance. Also a solemnitie or sacrificing at burials vsed nine daies after the partie was dead.

Noueráre, to number, to count, to tell.

Nouerca, a step-dame or mother in law.

Nouercále, of a step-mother.

Noueréuole, numerable, that may bee numbred.

Nóuero, a number, a summe.

Noueróso, numerous, full of numbers.

Nouicello, a nouice, a fresh-man, a start-vp.

Nouilúnio, the time of the new Moone.

Nouína, a stanza of nine verses.

Nouiplicáre, to multiply by nine, ninefold.

Nouíssimo, most new, late or fresh.

Nouità, noueltie, hewnesse, strangnesse.

Nouítia, as Nouízza.

Nouitiáre, to play the nouice, to nouitiate.

Nouitiáto, the state of a nouice. Also a place for nouices to bee brought vp in. Also nouitiated or entred and past a nouice.

Nouítio, a yoong nouice, a fresh-man.

Nouízza, a nouice-bride, a new-maried wife.

Nouízzo, a nouice-bride-groome. Also a nouice, a new beginner, a man vnskilfull.

Nóuo, new, fresh, not seene before.

Nózze, nuptials, weddings, mariages.

Núbe, as Nébbia, a cloud.

Nubente, wedded or maried.

Nubífero, cloud-bringing.

Nubigenio, as Nebbigenio.

Nubilare, as Nebbiáre, to cloud.

Núbilo, as Nebbióso, cloudie.

Nubilóso, as Nebbióso, cloudie.

Núca, the nape of the head.

Núcca, as Nócca.

Nudáre, to make or strip naked, to discouer or make bare. Also to vncouer or make plaine and euident, to lay open and apparant.

Nudézza, nakednesse, barenesse, nuditie.

Nudità, nuditie, nakednesse, barenesse. 

Núdo, nude, naked, bare, discouered. Also poore, beggerly, and depriued of.

Nudríce, a nourisher, a nurce.

Nudriménto, as Nodriménto.

Nudríre, nudrísco, nudríto, as Nodríre.

Nudritíuo, nutritiue, nourishing.

Nudritóre, a nourisher, a fosterer.

Nudritúro, nourishment, nutriture.

Nugáre, to trifle away the time with superfluous repetition of one same things.

Nugatióne, a superfluous repetition of one same things, a trifling away of time.

Nugatóre, a trifler away of time with idle and vaine or superfluous repetition.

Nugiáre, as Nugáre.

Núgie, trifles, toyes, idle vanities.

Nugiuende, a seller of trifles.

Núgola, a cloude.

Nugoláre, to ouer-cloude, to cloude.

Núgolo, a cloud.

Nugolóso, cloudie, full of clouds.

Nugolúzza, a little cloud, or miste.

Nugoluzzáre, to ouer-cloud with little clouds.

Núi, as Nói, wee, wee our selues.

Núlla, ought nothing, nought at all, not any thing. Also affirmatiuely, something, any thing, any one thing. Also some, or any one. Also not any, or not one.

Núlladimánco, neuerthelesse.

Núlladiméno, neuerthelesse.

Nullaménte, in no wise, by no meanes.

Núlla ostánte, notwithstanding.

Nulla più óltre, nothing further.

Nulláre, to anull, to make voide, or frustrate.

Nullità, a nullitie, or annihilation.

Núllo, no one, not any one. Also some one, or any one. Also vaine, blanke, void, of no effect.

Numáchia, a fight, or combate by Sea.

Núme, a soueraigne power, or deuine maiestie, a God, an heauenly power, a dietie. Also an oracle, or deuine iudgement. Also the power, the maiestie, or will of God.

Numella, a Tumbrell wherein malefactors were punished. Also a kind of fetters, stocks, or Pillorie. Also collars, or leashes for dogs.

Numentíne, a kind of Peares.

Numerábile, numerable, to be numbred.

Numerále, numerall, consisting of numbers.

Numerándo, that may be numbred.

Numeráre, to number, to tell, to count, to summe.

Numerário, as Numerále.

Numeratióne, any numeration.

Numeráto, numbred. Also ready monie. 



Numeratóre, a teller, a numbrer.

Numeréuole, numerable, to be numbred.

Numérico, consisting of numbers.

Número, any kind of number, an account, a sum. Also order, due time, or proportion. Also a true verse, or measure in sillables or verses.

Número del méno, the singular number.

Número del più, the plurall number.

Numerosità, a numeration, a numbernesse.

Numeróso, numerous, of a great number. Also framed in iust measure and number of feete as right verses.

Numídici, a kinde of Turkey or Ginnie-hen.

Numídico, a kind of Marble-stone.

Numidíno, a kind of Marble stone.

Númine, as Núme. Vsed also for the liuing God.

Numisiána víte, a kinde of Vine, or Grape.

Numísma, a monier, a minter, a coiner.

Númmo, any kind of monie or coine.

Nummóso, monied, rich in monie.

Nummulária, Penie-grassie, moniewoort.

Nummulário, a Bankier, an Vsurer, a dealer in monie.

N'un, N'uno, vsed for vno, one. Also as Niúno, not one, or nobodie.

Nuncupáre, as Noncupáre.

Nuncupatióne, as Noncupatióne.

Nuncupatória, as Noncupatória.

Nuntiánte, denouncing, or bringing newes.

Nuntiáre, as Annontiáre.

Nuntiáta, as Nuntiatióne. Also the Annuntiation, or our Ladie day in Lent.

Nuntiatióne, a declaration, a shewing, or bringing of tidings.

Nuntiáto, the office of a Legate.

Nuntiatóre, a shewer, or bringer of tidings.

Núntio, a bringer of tidings, an Embassadour.

Nuócere, as Nócere.

Nuocéuole, as Nocéuole.

Nuociménto, as Nociménto.

Nuocíuo, as Nocíuo.

Nuoláre, as Noláre.

Nuolatóre, as Nolatóre.

Nuólo, as Nóla.

Nuóra, a mans sonnes wife, a daughter in law.

Nuóta, a waue, a swimming as in damaske or chamblet.

Nuotáre, to swim, to waue, to flote.

Nuotatóre, a swimmer, a floter.

Nuóto, swimming, floting, wauing.

Nuóua, a news, a new report. Also new. 

Nuóua dónna, a new married wife.

Nuóua spósa, idem.

Nuóue, newes. Also nine in number.

Nuouità, nouelty, newnesse.

Nuóuo, new, of late, strange.

Nuóuo pésce, a new fish, a fresh-man, a new gull, a fresh-water souldier, a silly gull.

Nuóuo spóso, a new maried man.

Nuóuo huómo, a new maried man.

Nuóuo tempo, the spring time.

Núpero, late, hapned, done or come.

Núra, as Nuóra.

Núro, a birde of a fairer colour then a Poping-iay and speaketh more plaine.

Núto, a nod or becke with head or eie.

Nutréuole, nourishable, that nourisheth.

Nutríbile, as Nutréuole.

Nutricáre, as Nodríre.

Nutricatióne, nourishment, feeding.

Nutríccia, a nurce, a nourisher.

Nutricciáre, to nurce or nourish, to foster.

Nutríce, a she nurce or nourisher.

Nutriménto, nourishment, foode.

Nutríre, nutrísco, nutríto, as Nodríne.

Nutrítio fíglio, a foster sonne.

Nutrítio pádre, a foster father.

Nutritíuo, nutritiue, that nourisheth.

Nutritóre, a nourisher, a feeder.

Nutritúra, nourishment, nurture.

Nuttiále, nuptiall, bridall.

Nuuiláre, as Nebbiáre, to cloud.

Nuuilétta, as Nebbiarella.

Núnola, a cloud, a fog, a mist.

Nuuoláre, as Nebbiáre, to cloud.

Núuole, cloudes. Also a kind of simnell.

Núuolo, a cloud, a mist, a fogge.

Nuuolóso, cloudy, misty, foggie.

Nuuolosità, cloudinesse, mistinesse. 


O.
O, The vowell, O. Also an Aduerbe of doubt or exception, either, or, or else. Also the signe of the Vocatiue case, oh. Also an Interiection of griefe, of derision, of calling, of admiration, of chiding, of exclamation, or of reproch, as, oh, alas, aye-me, good Lord, what, hoe, oh that, hola, tush, figh, puh, fie, a way a way, and such like.

O'bba, a kind of drinking cup, tankard, pot or glasse, vsed among the ancient Romans.

Obbligagióne, a bond, an obligation.

Obbligánza, a bond, an obligation.

Obbligáre, to bind or oblige by writ or word. 

Obbligatióne, a bond or obligation.

O'bbligo, any bond, binding or obligation.

Obbrigánza, a bond or obligation.

Obbrigáre, to oblige or bind by word or writ.

Obbrigatíone, any bond or obligation.

O'bbrigo, a bond, an obligation, a dutie.

Obbrobriáre, Obrobriáre. 

Obbróbrio, as Obróbrio.

Obbrobrióso, as Obrobrióso.

Obduráre, to harden or obdurate.

Obduratióne, obduration or hardnesse.

Obediente, obedient, obeying, yeelding vnto.

Obedientia, obedience, obeissance, humblenesse.

Obedientiále, of or belonging to obedience.

Obedientiéri, Friers that vow obedience.

Obedienza, as Obedientia.

Obedíre, dísco, díto, to obey, to doe according.

Obeli. Lat.

Obelísco, an Obeliske, that is a great square stone broad beneath and growing very small to the top, and very high, there were diuers in Rome.

Oberáto, charged or pressed with a heauy burden of brasse, that is to say much indebted.

O'bero, a burden, a lode, a charge. Cauállo d'óbero, a horse of burden.

Obiáta, thin Wafers or Sugar-cakes.

Obesità, fatnesse and grossenesse withall.

Obeso, fat and grosse withall.

Obiettábile, that may be obiected.

Obiettáre, as Oggettáre.

Obiettióne, as Oggettióne.

Obietto, as Oggetto.

O'bito, the death or decay of any thing. Also dead or departed out of this world.

Obláre, to offer sacrifice or oblation.

Oblatióne, an oblation, offer or sacrifice.

Oblettaménto, as Oblettatióne.

Oblettáre, to delight, to recreate, to take pleasure.

Oblettatióne, delectation, recreation, pleasure.

Obliánza, obliuion, forgetfulnesse.

Obliáre, to forget.

Obliatióne, obliuion, forgetfulnesse.

Oblicáre, as Obliquáre.

Oblíco, as Oblíquo.

Obligáre, to oblige or bind by word or writ.

Obligatióne, a bond, an obligation.

Obligatório contrátto, a binding contract.

O'bligo, a bond, an obligation.

Oblío, obliuion, forgetfulnesse. 



Oblióso, obliuious, forgetfull.

Obliquáre, to make crooked, bending or trauerse.

Oblíqua sphéra, that place of the world where the inhabitants haue the Equinoctiall cutting their Horizon, not plumb-downe, but sideling.

Obliquità, crookednesse, thwartenesse, obliquity.

Oblíquo, oblique, crooked, trauerse, thwart.

Oblíre, blísco, blíto, to forget.

Oblitánza, forgetfulnesse, obliuion.

Oblitáre, to forget, to blot out.

Obliteráre, to forget, to blot out.

Obliteratióne, a blotting out.

Oblíto, forgotten, blotted out.

Obliuióne, obliuion, forgetfulnesse.

Obliuióso, obliuious, forgetfull.

Oblóquio, obloquy, ill report.

Obnossità, guiltinesse, faultinesse.

Obnósso, guilty, faulty, that hath deserued to be punished. Also dishonest. Also crazed or diseased.

Obnubiláre, to ouer-cloud, to darken.

O'bolo, halfe a scruple weight. Also a coine worth a penny and farthing.

Obombráre, to circle or shaddow about.

Obombratióne, a shaddowing about.

Obrigáre, to oblige, to bind.

O'brigo, a bond, or obligation.

Obrízo óro, a kind of the finest gold.

Obrobriáre, to reproch, to shame, to slander, to checke, to taunt, to reuile. Also to twit or cast in ones teeth.

Obróbrio, reproch, shame, slander. Also a checke, a taunt, a reuiling, a rebuke. Also an vpbrayding or casting in the teeth.

Obrobrióso, reprochful, shameful, opprobrious, slanderous.

Obsessióne, a possession with.

Obsesso, possessed with.

Obsiána, a kind of bright stone that doth often change his colour.

Obsíde, a pledge, a surety, an hostage.

Obsídere, sído, sísi, síso, to answer or be surety for. Also to lay siege vnto.

Obsidiáno, a kind of blacke glasse. Also that is of a pure blacke colour.

Obsidióne, a siege or besiegeing.

Obsistenza, resistance.

Obsístere, sísto, sistéi, sistúto, to obsist, to withstand, to resist.

Obsistéuole, resistable.

Obtestánte, humbly, crauing and calling to God for witnesse.

Obtestáre, to obiect or call God for witnesse. Also humbly to craue or beseech.

Obtestatione, obtestation, calling to God to witnesse. Also an humble beseeching.

Obtrattáre, to detract, to backe-bite, to slander. 

Obtrattatióne, detraction, slander, backbiting.

Obtúso, as Ottúso.

Obuía, withstanding or meeting.

Obuiáre, to withstand or meet in the way.

Obumbráre, to circle or shadow about.

Obumbratióne, a shadowing round about.

O'ca, a goose or a gander.

O'ca bagnáta, a wet-goose, a milke-sop, a drowned Rat, a silly-gull.

Ocagionáre, to cause, to occasion.

Ocagióne, as Occasióne.

O'ca marína, a Sea-cob. Also a Seagull.

Ocarella, a Goslin or Greene-goose.

Occáre, to harrow or breake the earth.

Occasáre, to set or goe downe into the West, as the Sunne doeth.

Occasionáre, to occasion, to cause, to chance.

Occasióne, occasion, season, opportunitie of time. Also a cause. Also a chance.

Occáso, the West part of the world, the setting or going downe of the Sunne. Also death or decay of life.

Occástro, a Wide-goose.

Occatóre, a harrower or breaker of earth.

Occatúra, a harrowing or earth-breaking.

Occhiáie, the hollow of the eies.

Occhialáro, a maker of spectacles.

Occhiále, an oylet a buttonhole.

Occhiáli, spectacles. Also as Asprézzi.

Occhiára, a dimnesse of sight. Also as the fish Oculáto.

Occhiáre, to eye or looke neerely vnto.

Occhiáta, a looke, a glance, or winking with the eyes. Also as the fish Oculáto.

Occhiatella, as Sgrámfo.

Occhiatína, a little looke, glancing or winking with the eies.

Occhiétti, little eies. Also little oylet-holes. Also the Pinke-flowres

Occhiéttofálso, a false wanton eie.

O'cchij, a tree like to a figge-tree, that euery morning distilleth hony. Also eyes.

O'cchij líuidi, blew or blubbered eies.

O'cchio, an eye. Also an oylet-hole. Also wit, iudgement or vnderstanding to discerne. Also the first bud or burgeon of any tree. Looke Non hauére. Also the whirle-bone of any creatures knee. Also the port-hole of a ship to shoot out at. Also the hearbe Sengreen or House-leeke.

O'cchio bouíno, a birde called an Oxeye.

O'cchio ceruiéro, a Linx his eies that is a quicke or pierceing sight. 

O'cchio d'árbore, the burgeon of a tree.

O'cchio délla víte, the burgeon of a Vine.

O'cchio del tetto, a louer of any house.

O'cchio di búe, the hearb Ox-eie, May wood or stinking Cammomill.

O'cchio di Ciuétta, an owles ore, but taken for a faire piece of gold or coystrell.

O'cchio di gállo, a sharp tacke or tenter-hooke.

O'cchio di gátta, a kinde of precious stone.

O'cchio e dimóra aiútano il uéro. 

Occhiolíno, any little eye or oylet-hole.

O'cchio sano, a sound eie, that is to says wise, discreet, not passionate.

O'cchio spárso di sángue, an eye bloud-shotten.

Occhiutíssimo, most sharp sighted.

Occhiúto, eyed, that hath or is full of eyes. Also a warie and vigilant fellow.

Occidentále, Westernly, of the Western parts.

Occidente, the West part of the world, the Sunne-set. Also the Western-wind. Also any declining or drawing to an end. Also quick-siluer among Alchimists.

Occídere delsole e délla lúna, to set or goe downe in the West as the sunne doeth.

Occídere, cído, císi, císo, to kill, to slay, to quell, to murther or wound to death.

Occiditóre, a killer, a slayer, a queller.

Occipúte, the noddle, the nape of the necke or hinder part of the head, the third bone of the head ending at the labdal suture, disioyned in the foundation of the head from Osso sphenóido by the sixt suture ouerthwartly chanceing.

Occisióne, slaughter, killing, slaying, murthering to death of man or beast,

Occíso, slaine, killed, quelled, murthered.

Occorenza, an occurrence, a chance, a hap.

Occorenze, occurrences, accidents.

Occórrere, córro, córsi, córso, to occur, to happen, to chance, to betide, to come to passe. Also to meet with or runne vnto.

Occórso, hapned, chanced, befalne. Also an accident, an encounter or meeting with.

Occultaménto, an hiding, a concealing.

Occnltáre, to hide, to conceale, to close.

Occultatióne, as Occultaménto.

Occultáto, as Occúlto.

Occúlto, hidden, concealed, secret, close. 



Occupáre, to occupy, to vse, to possesse or be seazed of. Also to vsurpe from. Also to keepe or hinder from.

Occupatióne, occupation, vse, possession, seazure. Also an vsurping from.

Occupáto, occupied, vsed, possessed, seazed on, busied. Also gotten or vsurped.

Occupatóre, an occupier, a possessor, a vser, a seazer. Also an vsurper.

Occáno, the Ocean, the Sea, the maine deepe that compasseth the world.

O'ce, the swiftest kind of Swallow that is.

Ocelli, such as are pinke-eide or haue little eies.

O chè fósse, oh that it were.

Ocheggiáre, to play the Goose or Gander.

Ochíso, a kind of corne that growes very quickly.

O'chra, as O'cra.

Ociáre, to be idle or be at leasure.

Ocímo, Bolimong or Prouander-corne. Also Basill-royall, gardin-basill or Basil-genile.

Ocimóide, as Ocímo.

O'cio, as O'tio.

Ocióso, as Otióso.

O'cra, Oker or Rudle, or Red-oker.

O'cria, as O'cra.

Oculáre, as Occhiáre. Also ocular or pertaining to the eies. Also an eiewitnesse.

Oculária, the hearbe Eye-bright.

Oculatella, as Oculáto.

Oculáto, as Occhiúto. Also a kind of Cramp-fish called the Seauen-eye-fish.

Oculáto testimónio, an eie witnesse.

Oculeo, full of eies, well sighted.

Oculísta, an oculist, a professor to know or cure the sores in eies.

O'culo, as Occhío.

O'd, either, Or, or else, but before vowels.

O'da, a song called an Ode. Also let him heare.

Oddurare, to darden, to obdurate.

Odduratióne, hardnesse, obduration.

O'de, Odes, songs. Also he heareth.

Odeo, a place like a theater for plaies.

Odéma, a moist and waterish swelling, thin and without griefe, consisting of a cold intemperature and flegmatike matter, it is easily pressed downe with the finger and leaueth a dent or hollownesse.

Odiachetóne, a kinde of prickie shrub or thorne.

Odialcáni, a kind of very precious stone.

Odiále, of or belonging to hatred.

Odiáre, to hate, to beare ill will vnto.

Odiária, a quotidian ague.

Odiatóre, a hater, a bearer of ill will.

Odíbile, hatefull, to be hated, odious. 

Odinoliónte, the Stay-ship or Remóra, or Echenéide, which bound to any part of a woman with child and in paine will cause her to haue presant deliuery whereof it hath his name, as one would say Ease-paine, or Loose-throwes.

O'dio, hate, hatred, grudge, ill will.

Odiosità, hatefulnesse.

Odióso, odius, hatefull, full of grudge.

Odíre, ódo, vdij, odíto, to heare, to harken

Odíto, heard, listned, harkned. Also the sense of hearing.

Odománte, a kind of Soothsaier.

Odomantía, a kind of soothsaying.

Odontíde, a kind of weed amongst haie.

Odontóide, a round and long processe, in fashion like a tooth, rising from the middle of the second turning ioynt of the necke.

Odoraménto, a smelling, a senting.

Odoráre, to odoure, to sent, to sauor, to smell, to perfume. Also to perceiue or smell out a matter, to doubt or suspect a thing.

Odorária, the best kind of mirrhe vsed as perfume in temples.

Odoratióne, sauouring, smelling.

Odoráto, odored, smelt, sented, sauoured. Also the sense of smelling.

Odóre, an odour, a sent, a smell, a sauour. Also a doubt, a suspect or inkling of a thing.

Odorífero, odoriferous or smelling.

Odoróso, odoriferous, sauory, smelling.

Oeconomía, the guiding, or ordering of matters pertaining, to household.

Oeconómico, Economical, belonging to order or gouernment of a house.

Oeconómo, a house-keeper or master of a house, one that hath the gouernance of a house.

Oenántho, a birde that is neuer seene when the Dogge-star shineth.

Oesípo, as Osípo.

O'ffa, a Lump-fish. Also any lump or gobbet of meate or paste. Also a kinde of pye or bag-pudding.

Offelláro, a Waferer or Wafer-maker.

Offelle, Wafers or thin Sugar cakes.

Offendere féndo, fési, féso, to offend, to trespasse, to wrong, to displease.

Offend éuole, offensiue, offensible.

Offenditóre, an offender, a trespasser.

Offendúto, offended, trespassed.

Offensácolo, a cause of offence.

Offensíbile, offensiue, offensible.

Offensióne, as Offésa.

Offensíuo, offensiue, that doeth offend.

Offensóre, an offender, a trespasser.

Offerente, Offering. Also an offerer.

Offerenza, any offering.

Offerére, as Offeríre.

Offeríre, fero, fersi, ferto, to offer, to proffer. 

Offerta, an offer, an offring, a proffer.

Offerta da spándere, a drinking-offering.

Offerta di panática, a meate offering.

Offerto, offered, profered.

Offertório, an offertory or offering place.

Offésa, an offence, a crime, a trespasse.

Offéso, offended, trespassed, wronged.

Offiási, a sore like a tetter in childrens heads causing the haire to fall of.

Officiále, an officer. Also officiall.

Officiáre, to execute an office. Also to giue an office or make an officer. Also to say seruice in a Church.

Officiário, an officer. Also an officiall.

Officiáta Chiésa, a Church officed or serued.

Officiáto, officed, serued with due office.

Officina, any shop or worke house.

Officio, an office, a place of office, a duty, a charge. Also a duty in honesty or behauiour in reason. Also the due seruice in a Church.

Officiosaménte, officiously, dutifully.

Officiosità, officiousnesse, seruiceablenesse.

Officióso, officious, dutifull, seruiceable.

Officiuólo, a little seruice booke.

Offiláre, to refine, to purifie, to polish.

Offíta, the serpentine marble.

Offránda, as Offrénda.

Offrénda, an offring.

Offrire, óffro, offríj offer to, to offer, to proffer.

Offuscaménto, a dimming, an obscuring.

Offuscáre, to dimme, to darken, to obscure.

Offuscatióne, as Offuscaménto.

Offúsco, darke, obscure, dimme.

Oftalmía, an inflammation of the vtmost skinne of the eyes through sharp humors.

Oggettáre, to obiect, or cast against one, to lay before ones eyes and sences.

Oggettióne, an obiection. Also a laying to ones charge, or reproching vnto.

Oggetto, any obiect, whose qualitie moueth the sences to their naturall working, a thing before a mans eyes and that may be seene.

O'ggi, to day, this present day.

O'ggidì, now adaies, in these times.

Oggimái, this day and euer.

Oghétto, a march that Trumpeters and Drummers sound, called, to the watch, to the round or sentinell.

Ogliára, an oyle-glasse, or pot.

Ogliáre, to oyle, or dresse with oyle.

Ogliáro, an oyle-maker, or seller. Also an oyle-pot, or glasse. 



Ogliaruólo, as Ogliáro.

O'glio, any kind of oyle. Also cockle or darnell among corne.

Oglio di ben gioíre, oyle of gladnesse. Vsed also for a sound iumbling of a wench.

O'glio di rauazzóne, Rape-oyle.

O'glio di vézzo, Rozin, or Turpentine.

O'glio d'olíue, oyle of Oliues.

O'glio rosáto, oyle of Roses.

O'glio sánto, as O'lio sánto.

Oglióso, oylie, fattie, glibbie, full of oyle.

Ognella, a Purple-fish.

O'gni, each, euerie, euery-one, all.

O'gni áltro, each, or euerie other.

O'gni cósa, euerie thing, what thing soeuer.

O'gni cósa piéno, that is altogether.

O'gni di, euerie day, each day.

O'gni dóue, euerie-where, in euerie-place.

O'gni hóra, each houre, at all houres.

O'gni-huómo, euerie man.

Ogn'Iddío, a title or epithete giuen to God, all-God, all and euerie God.

Ogniloquente, each, or all-speaking.

Ogniloquenza, speaking of all things.

O'gni módo, howsoeuer, euerie way.

Ognindì, euerie day, dayly.

Ogni qual giórno, what day soeuer.

O'gni qual' hóra, what day soeuer, at what houre soeuer, at euerie whatsoeuer houre.

O'gni qual nótte, what night soeuer.

O'gni quál vólta, at what time soeuer.

O'gni qualúnque cósa, any thing soeuer.

O'gni quándo, at euerie time when, whensoeuer.

O'gni quánto, euerie much, neuer so little.

O'gni sánti, all-Saints day, all-hallowes.

O'gni tánto, euerie little, neuer so little.

Ogniúno, each one, euerie one.

O'gniuólta, euerie time, at all times.

O'gniuólta chè, euerie time that.

Ogn'óra, for, at all times, or houres, still.

Oh, alas, oh, aye me. Also what hoe.

Oh chè, oh that, would to God.

Oh Dí, o, oh God, would to God.

Oh Dío che, oh would to God that.

Ohibó, fough, figh vpon, figh.

Ohimè, alas, aye me, welladay, oh.

Oi, oh, alas, woe is me, aye me.

O'ia, a fish called a Sea-breame.

O'i lasso, oh alas, aye me, alas.

Oimáre, to waile, to cry alas, or aye me.

Oimè, aye me, welladay, alas, oh.

Oiméne, woe is me, ayeme, alas, oh.

Oisè, alas to him, alas him, or her selfe.

Oíssa, the cry of Mariners hoisting sailes, waying of ancker, &c. hoyesse.

Oissáre, to cry Oíssa, or oh-iss.

Ol, etther the, or the, or els the.

Olà, oh there, what ho!

Oladíga, a fish called a Roach.

Oláro, a potter, a pot-maker.

Olásso mè, aye me, alas.

Oldáno, the drug or gum Oldanum.

Oleágine, a kind of precious stone of an oylie colour. Also a kinde of yellow Grape.

Oleándro, the weede Oleander. Also a Daffadounedillie. Also a Rose-Bay-tree.

Oleáre, to smell, to sent, to sauour.

Oleário, a place where oyle is made, kept, or sold. Also an oyle-man.

Oleástro, a wilde Oliue-tree. Also a kind of Boxe-tree. Also an oyle-colour.

Oléba, a kind of rough-headed Owle.

Olére, ólo, oléi, olúto, to sent, to smell, to sauour.

Olezzáre, as Olére.

Olfácere, as Olére.

Olfare, as Olére.

Olfáto, the sence of smelling. Also smelt.

Olfatório, a strong sent or perfume vsed to awaken such as haue the lethargie.

Oliára, an oyle-glasse, or pot.

Oliáre, to oyle, or dresse with oyle.

Oliáro, as Ogliáro.

Oliaruólo, as Ogliáro.

Olibáno, the gum Olibanum.

Olidóro, a kind of bricke.

Oligarchía, a state or common-wealth, where a few haue all the auctoritie.

Olígine, a fish so called.

O'lim, of late, of yore, in times past.

Olímpia, a winde blowing aloft neere to Olimpus in Greece. Also the space of fiftie moneths or foure yeares, allowing thirtie daies to euery moneth. Also as a man would say, heauenly diuine, all-shining, or farre-splendent.

Olimpiáde, as Olímpia.

Olímpici giuóchi, the Olimpike games among the Grecians, instituted by Hercules in honour of Iupiter, celebrated euery fiftieth moneth with fiue exercises, that is, the whurle-bat, that is, a kind of weapon with a plummet of leade at the end, the second, running, the third, leaping, the fourth a kind of quoite or heauie stone cast in the aire, and the fifth wrestling.

Olímpio, a flowre that turnes with the Sunne.

Olímpo, is sometimes taken for seauen.

O'lio, as Oglio, any kind of oyle.

O'lio benedétto, Holie-oyle.

Olio Comiránti, a kind of oyle.

Olio di sásso, a stone-oyle, peter-oyle.

O'lio gleucíno, a kind of oyle.

O'lio líno, Linseed oyle. 

O'lio petrólio, as O'lio di sásso
.

O'lio sánto, holie-oyle. Also the last vnction. Also the last gaspe.

Oliosità, oylinesse, fatnesse, glibbinesse.

Olioso, oylie, fat, glibbie, oyleous.

Olípia, a winde that bloweth much in Eubœa.

Olíra, a kind of Rice, or Amel corne.

Olíte, ólo, olíj, olíto as Olére.

Oliua, any kind of Oliue.

Olíua perpetua, gold, according to Alchimists.

Oliuáccie, filthie wilde Oliues.

Oliuale, like an Oliue, or of an Oliue colour, swart, forswanke.

Oliuástro, a wilde Oliue tree. Also as Oliuále.

Oliuáto, as Oliuále.

Oliuella, the Priuet, or Prime-print bush.

Oliuelle, small or little Oliues.

Oliuétte, little Oliues.

Oliuéto, an Oliuet, or groue of Oliue trees.

Oliúífero, Oliues-bearing, or bringing.

Oliuígno, of an Oliue colour, swartie.

Olíuo, any kind of Oliue tree.

O'lla, any pipkin, possenet, or pot. Also either the, or else the.

Olláio, a potter, or pot-maker.

Ollaría, pot-brasse, or pan-mettle.

Olláro, a potter, or pot-maker.

Ollométro, a kind of Mathematicall instrument to measure with.

Olmário, an Elme-plot, a groue of Elmes.

Olmétto, as Olmário.

O'lmo, an Elme-tree.

Oloátro, the hearbe Louage.

Olocáusto, burned Sacrifice.

Oloconíte, the hearbe Moli.

Olocrísio, the hearbe Semper vium.

Olofánzij, certaine ancient well practised, and trained souldiers among the Turks.

Ololigóni, the male-Frogs.

Oloráre, to smell, to sauour, to sent.

Olóre, any smell, sauour, or sent.

Oloschéno, a kind of Bull-rush.

Olotíri, a kind of stinking shell-fish.

O'ltra, beyond, further, forwards. Also besides or moreouer. Also sauing, or except.

Oltraciò, beyond that, moreouer.

Oltracotánza, ouerweening, presumption.

Oltra diciò, besides that, furthermore.

Oltracotáto, ouer-weening, presumptuous, sawcie.

Oltrafíno, superfine, finest of all.

Oltraggiáre, to outrage, to misuse, to wrong.

Oltraggiatóre, an outrager, a misuser.

Oltrággio, outrage, wrong, misusing.

Oltraggióso, outragious, iniurious. 



Oltrall'usáto, beyond custome.

Oltramarauiglióso, most maruellous.

Oltramarináre, to passe beyond the Seas.

Oltramaríno, of beyond the Seas.

Oltramíni, a kind of fish.

Oltramirábile, most wonderfull.

Oltra misúra, beyond measure.

Oltramódo, beyond meanes.

Oltramondanità, beyond worldlinesse.

Oltramondáno, superworldly.

Oltramontáni, that dwell beyond mountaines.

O'ltra naturále, supernaturall beyond nature.

Oltrandáre, to goe beyond, to outgoe.

Oltraníni, a kind of fishes.

Oltránza, might and maine.

Oltra passáre, to goe or passe beyond.

Oltra ragióne, beyond reason.

Oltrare, to goe through, or beyond, or ouer.

Oltrárno, beyond the riuer Arnus.

Oltra sapére, to know beyond.

Oltrauedére, to see beyond.

Oltra vía, beyond and away.

O'ltre, as Oltta. Also much or very.

Oltre a diciò, moreouer, or besides that.

Oltre máre, beyond the Sea.

Oltre mónte, beyond the mountaines.

Oltrepassáre, to out-goe, or passe beyond.

Olusátro, the hearbe Alisanders. Also Garden-mint, or sweete senting.

Omái, now at last, now at length.

Omási, all manner of tripes, guts, or chitterlins.

Omáso, the thicke and fattie part of the bellie or paunch. Also a full gut.

Omátici, a kind of Figs.

Ombe, well, goe too, t'is well, how now?

Ombilicáli arterie, two arteries marching from the nauill thorough Peritoneo vnto the sides of the bladder, they are the first arteries that are begotten in infants.

Ombilicário, of or pertaining to the nauill or middle of any thing, but properly a little knife or lancet, wherewith Midwiues vse to cut away the nauill-strings of infants new-borne.

Ombilicáto, that hath a nauill, or is fashioned as a nauill. Looke Ombilíco.

Ombilíco, the nauill of any creature. Also the midle or centre of any thing. Also any great or round bosse or bullion, such as are set on the out-side of bookes, or bucklers. Also a kind of fish called an Halibut, some say a writhen shell-fish like a Cockle wrinkled like a nauill. Also a little round and smooth stone fashioned like a nauill. Also a little circle made like a nauill in the grounds to discerne the coasts of the winds, in hilles it is taken for that which standeth out and swelleth aboue the rest. Also the crowne, top, or head of the apple iust against the stalke.

Ombilíco di Vénere, the hearbe Venus nauell, Hipwort, Peniewort, or Peniegrasse.

Ombilíco dell'anello, the beazill, colet, bead, or broad part of a ring, wherein the stone or signe is set.

Ombilíco delsóle, the little circle, in the middle whereof the gnomon of a dyall is fastned.

Ombilíco dell'vuóuo, the streine or kenning of the egge.

O'mbra, any shade or shadow. Also a ghost, a larue, or spirit and vision of any person. Also any least cause or inklin of suspicion. Also a pretence, a colour, or excuse. Also the first draught in painting or drawing before it be finished. Vsed also for darkenesse.

Ombrácolo, any thing to keepe off the Sunne, any place to stand in the shadow, any shadowing thing.

Ombragióne, a shading, or shadowing.

Ombraménto, a shadowing.

Ombráre, to shadow, to shade. Also to startle for feare as some horses doe.

Ombrataménte, shadowingly.

Ombrático, starting, suspicious.

Ombrátile, shadie, or liuing in shades.

Ombratióne, a shadowing.

Ombreggiánte, shading, or casting a shadow. Also figuring, pourtraying, or lineating.

Ombreggiáre, to shade, or cast a shadow. Also to figure, to pourtray, or lineate as Painters.

Ombrella, a Canopie, a Testerne, or cloth of state for Princes. Also a womans Fanne or Ombrell as they vse in Italy to ride with ouer their heads to shadow them from the Sunne. Also a bonegrace for women. Also a kind of broade-brim'd hat to keepe off heate, Sunne, or raine. Also any little shade or shadow. Also any broade bunch or tuft, as of Fenell, Dill, or Elderbloomes, wherein the seede is. Also a buske or cod full of seede or corne.

Ombrétta, a fine shade, or little shadow.

Ombréuole, that may be shaded or shadowed.

Ombría, a thunder-bolt falling in great stormes. Also as O'mbra.

Ombriána, an Halibut-fish. Some say it is a kind of writhen Cockle or shellfish wrinkled like a nauill.

Ombriáno, a horse that goes with his head low as it were looking on the ground and on his shadow.

Ombrífero, shadow-bringing.

Ombrína, as Ombriána. Also any little shadow, or shadie-place.

Ombrío, as Ombróso.

Ombrízzo, the waue or water of damaske.

Ombrosità, shadinesse. Also duskishnesse.

Ombróso, shadie, shadowie. Also startling through feare or suspition as horses doe.

Ombúste délle vesti, the tucks of a garment.

Ombúto, a Tunnell.

Omè, aye me, aye me alas.

Oméga, the last letter of the Greeke. Alphabet, but vsed for the last.

Oméi, woes, sorowes, welladaies, griefs.

Omenággio, waging law. Also the top of a towre.

Oméne, Omén, the lucke or fortune of some-thing to come, gathered of something spoken or done, good or ill luck.

Omenóso, ominous, luckie, or vnluckie.

Omento, a fat pannicle, caule, sewet, rim, or couering, which being inserted with many veines springing in branches from Véna pórta, representeth the forme of a net, properly the caule, sewet, rim or kell wherein the bowels are lapt. Also the rinde or thin skin enwrapping the brains called Píamáter, or Máter pía.

O'mer, as Hómero.

Omeschita, as Meschíta.

Omésso, omitted, past-ouer, forborne, left off, neglected.

Ométtere, métto, mísi, mésso, to omit, to forbeare, to leaue off, to passe ouer.

Ominóso, ominous, portending good or ill lucke.

Omicída, a man-slayer, or murtherer.

Omicídio, man-slaughter, or murther.

Omíne, as Oméne, good or ill lucke.

Omméttere, as Ométtere, to omit.

Omnífero, all things bringing forth.

Omnifórme, hauing or of all formes or shapes.

Omniformità, all-formitie.

Omnimodaménte, any manner of way.

Omninaménte, at no hand, by no meanes. Also in any wise, of force, or howsoeuer. Also wholie, or euerie way.

Omniparente, father or mother of all things.

Omnitenente, all-containing, holding all.

Omniuágo, wandring euerie-where.

Omniualente, all-worthie, all-able.

Omniuolente, all-willing, all-desiring.

Omniuóro, all-deuouring.

Omofági, raw-flesh-eaters.

Omogéneo, of one and the same kind.

Omología, congruence, or due proportion.

Omonimía, a kind of construction. 



Omphacíno, soure, oyle of vnripe Oliues.

Ompháico, Oliue-vertiuice.

Omphalocarpóne, Erith, or Goosegrasse.

On, for Ouéro úno, or una.

O'n, for Ouéroin, or una.

Onágra, the hearbe Asse-hoofe.

Onágro, a wilde Asse. Also a kinde of warlike engine in fashion of a Scorpion.

Onáro, a kind of tree.

Oncáre, to rore or cry as a Beare.

Oncástro, is properly the noise of a Beare.

O'ncia, the weight of an ounce. Also the measure of an inch. Also an ounce, or cat of mountaine.

Onciáre, to way by ounces. Also to measure by inches.

Onciária, of an ounce waight, or of an inch-measure.

Oncináre, as Vncináre.

Oncinatóre, as Vncinatóre.

Oncinelli, as Vncinelli.

Oncíno, as Vncíno.

O'nco, some part, or piece of a cart.

Oncóntro, as Incóntro.

O'nda, a waue, an vndie, a billow, a surge.

Ondánte, as Ondeggiánte.

Ondáre, as Ondeggiáre.

Ondáto, vndie, nebulie, dancie, or wauie in armorie.

Ond' è, ? whence is it?

O'nde, whence, from whence, whereby.

O'nde, vndie, waues, billowes, surges.

O'nde, the shells of any shell-fish.

Ondeggiaménto, a wauing, a billowing.

Ondeggiánte, wauing, billowing. Also floting. Also dangling. Also wauie or vnding in armorie. Also waued chamblet, or damaske worke.

Ondeggiáre, to waue, to vndie, to billow.

Ondeggiatóre di ciambelótto, as Pauoneggiatóre.

Ondeláto, waued, as Damaske, or Chamlet.

O'nde Sei?, whence art thou?

Ondóso, full of waues or billowes.

Ondúnque, whence-soeuer.

O'ne, being added to any noune positiue, it importeth greatnesse and hugenesse.

Oneráre, to lode, to burden, to charge.

Onerário, a Ship or Hulke for burden.

O'nero, a burden, a heauie lode, a waight.

Onerocrítica, interpretation of dreames.

Oneróso, onerous, burdensome, waightie.

Onestà, as Honestà, honestie.

Onestare, as Honestáre, to make honest.

Onfadíllo, a kind of hearbe.

On'fra, for Ouéro ínsra, or else betweene. 

O'ngaro, an Hungarie-ducket.

Onghiáro, O'ngere, as V'ngere.

O'nger'i stiuáli. Look V'ngere.

O'nghia, any kind of naile in fingers or toes of a man or beast. Also the hoofe of a horse, or other beast. Also the tallon, pounce, or claw of a hawke or other rauenous bird. Also a certaine hooke or crooke that Chirurgions vse, ordained and vsed for the drawing out of a child that is dead in the Mothers wombe. Also a crooked hooke to cut Grapes with. Also an instrument vsed in mounting of ordinance made of a piece of timber like an hand-spike, headed with iron, and hath two holes in it. Also a kind of tormenting iron toole, with two peakes or hornes to pinch, to cut, or slit the offender with. Also the head of the Rose-leafe, or white part thereof. Also a disease in the eyes, namely in horses, called the hawes. Most men vse V'nghia for O'nghia, &c.

O'nghia baldáno, the paring of ones nailes, that is a trifle or matter of nothing.

O'nghia cauallína, as Tussilágine.

O'nghia de gli ócchij, a disease in the eyes, namely in Horses, called the Hawes.

O'nghia di cauállo, as Tussilágine.

O'nghia odoráta, as Onghia odorósa.

O'nghia odorósa, a kind of aromaticall gum, named in Exod. 30.34.

O'nghiáre, to come to haue nailes, claws, talons, gripes, pounces, pawes or hoofes. Also to scratch, to clinch, to catch or hold and seaze on with nailes, clawes, gripes, pounces, tallons, or hookes.

Onghiáro, a scraping filching fellow, whose euery finger is a lime-twig, a clincher.

Onghiáta, a scratching with nailes, a clinching, a griping. Also a kind of combe.

Onghiáto, hauing nailes, clawes, pawes, gripes, clinches, pounces, tallons or hoofes.

Onghiella, a pin and a web in ones eyes, but some take it for the hawes in the eies.

Onghiétta, any kind of little O'nghia.

Onghione, any kind of great O'nghia.

Onghióso, as Onghiáto.

Onghita, oyle of Iuniper.

Ongimáni, bribes put into ones hands.

Ongiúme, as Vngiúme.

Ongiúto, ointed, annointed, greased.

Onguentaménti, all manner of ointment.

Onguentaría, as Vnguentaría.

Onguentáro, as Vnguentáio.

Onguento, as Vnguento.

Onguento da fístole, a salue for all sores, id est, a false letcherous knaue.

Oníce, an Onix or cornaline-stone. Also a kinde of Marble whereof they were wont to make cups. Also a kind of shell-fish.

Onícchio, as Oníce.

Oníchia, a kind of aromaticall gum.

Onichíne, n kind of peares. Also a kinde of little onix-stone.

Onichíno, like vnto, or made of onix or Cornaline-stone. Also a kind of thin Burato or bumbasin-stuffe.

Onichipúnta, a kind of Iasper stone.

Onichite, a kind of brasse-ware, bluish and full of fleshes or spots.

Onigéna, a kinde of Cuttle or Pourcontrell fish.

Oníre, onísco, oníto, to shame or reproch, it is vsed in Cento nouelle antíche, whence the french takes Hony about the garter of England.

Ontiprásio, a kind of Origanum.

Onisio, as Millepiédi, a lope or hundred foote worme.

Oníte, a kind of orgament.

Onitíno, a kind of Stechas or Buglosse.

Onito, shamed, reproached.

Onízo, a kind of tree.

Omniparente, father or mother of all things.

Onnipatente, all things, suffering.

Onnipatentia, sufferance of all things.

Onnipotente, almighty, omnipotent.

Onnipotentia, omnipotency, almightinesse.

Onnitenente, all things containing.

Onniualente, worth all things.

Onniuolente, all things willing or desiring.

Onniuóro, all things-deuouring.

Onobrícho, an hearbe growing about welles.

Onocárdio, a kind of Thistle.

Onocentáuro, a beast whose vpper part resembleth a man, and the nether an Asse.

Onochílo, the hearbe Orchanet or Alkaret.

Onocícle, a kind of gentle Thistle.

Onoclea, as Onochílo.

Onocrótalo, a rauenous birde like a Swan, which brayeth as an Asse, and hath a gorge beneath his mouth wherein he swalloweth his meat very greedily, and then at leasure chewes it againe.

Onogíro, a kind of rough and sharp hearb very good against poyson.

Onólida, Best-harrow, Pety-whin, or Cammocke.

Onománte, a deuiner by names.

Onomantía, diuination by names.

Onomatopéia, the fayning of a name or figure whereby a word is made by a sound.



Onóne, as Onólida.

Onopísso, a kinde of Saint Maries Thistle.

Onopóndo, an hearbe.

Onoránza, worship, honour.

Onoráre, to honour or worship.

Onóre, honour or worship.

Onoréuole, honorable, worshipfull.

Onóri, as Onólida.

Onórico, a kind of diuellish charact vsed by nigromants.

Onorógano, the issue or running of a mans seede in his sleepe.

Onósma, as Onólida.

Onoterra, the hearbe Asse-hoofe.

Onothéra, the hearbe Asse-hoofe.

O'nta, shame, reproch, disgrace, spite, iniury, wrong, offence.

Ontáno, a kind of tree or fruit.

Ontáre, to shame, to disgrace, to spite, to wrong, to iniury, to outrage, to offend.

Ontáre, to annoint, to grease, to oint.

Ontífero, spite-bringing, disgrace-bearing.

Ontióne, as Vntióne.

O'nto, as V'nto.

Ontóso, shamefull, disgracefull, spitefull.

Ontóso, as Vntóso.

Onto sottíle., Vsed for butter.

Ontúme, as Vngiúme.

Ontúra, annointing. Also vnction.

Onustáre, to lode, to burthen, to charge.

Onústo, loden, burdened, heauy-charged.

O'nza, as O'ncia.

Onzáre, as Onciáre.

Opáco, thicke or bushy with trees, shady, darke, duskie, gloomy.

Opacità, vmbrage, shadinesse, thicknesse, duskishnesse of boughes or trees.

Opália, feastes to the Goddesse Ops.

O'palo, or Pedéro an Opale-stone of diuers colours wherein appeareth the firy brightnesse of the Carbuncle, the shining purple of the Amethist, the greene luster of the Emerauld, all shining together.

Opéfice, a worke-man, a crafts-man.

Opelláre, as Orpelláre.

Opello, as Orpello.

Openióne, as Opinióne.

O'pera, any kind of manuall worke, or labour, finished and done. Also any action or deed. Also any handy-laboure or workmanship. Also meanes or aide. Looke Dáre ópera.

Operábile, that may be wrought.

O'pera distésa, thin-drawne worke.

Operággio, any worke, or workemanship.

Operáio, as Operário.

Operaménto, a working, a labouring. 

Operánte, working, actions. Also as Operário.

Operáre, to worke, to labour, to make, to act. Also to doe, to procure, to endeuour or vse labour, meanes and diligence.

Operário, a worker, a worke-man, a craftes-man, a handy-labourer.

Operatióne, operation or working.

Operatíuo, that doth or may worke.

Operatóre, as Operário.

Operétta, as Operína.

Operína, a little or pretty worke.

Operosità, workingnesse or operation.

Operóso, full of worke or operation.

Operto, opened, set open, ouert.

Opertúra, on ouerture, an opening.

Opéta, as Calamíte.

Ophácio, a kinde of soure wine or vertiuice.

Opheoftaphiléne, as Cáppari.

Ophiamáco, a kind of Grasse-hopper called an Hargoll.

Ophiasi, as Ofiási.

Ophicardellóne, a blacke stone enclosed with two white circles or lines.

Ophidióne, the Eele-pout-fish.

Ophióne, a beast in Sardinia, which some take to be the Muffie, it is lesse then a Stagge.

Ophiónico, a kinde of Liz that fightes with Serpents.

Ophiostaphilóne, a kinde of wild white Vine.

Ophite, the Serpentine-marble.

Ophiuleo, halfe a Serpent, halfe a Bull.

Ophiúsa, as Ophiústa.

Ophiústa, a dangerous hearbe to looke on, and being drunke doth so strangely terrifie the minde with sight of horred and dreadfull Serpents that condemned malefactors for feare thereof were wont to kill themselues, and therefore was it giuen to such as committed sacriledge.

Ophiúco, a certaine starre or signe in heauen.

Ophtalmía, as Oftalmía.

Opidáno, a townes-man.

O'pido, a walled-towne.

Opífero, aide or helpe-bringing.

Opífice, as Operário.

Opificína, a shop or worke-house.

Opifício, workman-ship, handy-worke.

Opiláre, to stop or shut with obstruction.

Opilatióne, opilation, stopping or obstruction of the liuer or chiefe entrailes.

Opimaménte, plentifully, richly, fatlie.

Opíme spóglie, rich or fat spoiles which were taken when a King or Generall of any Army slew with his hand the King or Generall that was his enemy.

Opimità, abundance, plenty. 

Opímo, plentious, aboundant, rich, fat, well furnished, royall, princely.

Opinábile, that may be surmised.

Opinánte, musing, surmising, thinkeing.

Opináre, to thinke, to suppose, to hould opinion.

Opinatióne, as Opinióne.

Opinatíuo, as Opiniário.

Opiniáno vínò,  a kind of wine anciently vsed in Rome.

Opiniário, opinatiue, headstrong, willfull in opinion, selfe-conceited, stubborne, stiffnecked.

Opiniástro, as Opiniário.

Opiniataménte, opinatiuely, stiff neckedly.

Opiniatíuo, as Opiniário.

Opinionáccie, base filthy opinions.

Opinióne, an opinion, a conceit, a thought Also fame, esteeme or reputation. Also iudgement, esteeme, deeming, censure or opinion.

Opinióso, as Opiniário.

O'pio, as O'ppio.

Opiperáto, daintily prepared.

Opiftotóne, a painefull crampe or cricke in the necke, that drawes one backe so as he cannot turne his necke nor bow forward.

O'po, as Huópo, neede or want of.

Opobálsamo, Balme-liquor.

Opobásamo, as Opobálsamo.

Opocarpáso, a most venimous kind of beast.

Opocarpáto, a most venemous hearbe, or the iuice of Carpatho.

Opopanáce, the hearbe Panax or iuice thereof.

Oporíce, a composition or medicine made of fruites.

Oporíno, belonging to Autumne or Haruist.

Oppiáre, to oppiate, or stupifie the senses.

Oppiáta, a confection of Oppium or Poppie seed to prouoke sleepe.

Oppidáno, belonging to a Towne. Also a Townes-man.

Oppiéto, a plot or place set with Popler-trees or Poppy.

O'ppio, Poppy, Piet or Wich-hazell, or the iuice thereof.

O'ppio néro, the blacke Popler.

Oppónere, as Oppórre.

Oppórre, póngo, pósi, pósto, to oppose, to obiect, to lay against.

Opportunaménte, opportunely, conueniently, in due, fit or good time, fitlie.

Opportunità, opportunity, fitnesse, good occasion, conueniency of time or place.

Opportúno, fit, opportune, meete, conuenient, commodious, for the purpose. 



Oppositióne, opposition, contrariety. Also a charge or imputation laide to one.

Oppósito, opposite, contrary, against.

Oppositóre, an opponent, an oppositor.

Oppósto, opposed, laid against, obiected.

Oppressáre, as Opprímere.

Oppressatióne, as Oppressióne.

Oppresséuole, that may be oppressed.

Oppressióne, oppression, suppression, extortion, ouerchargeing.

Oppressiuo, oppressiue, that oppresseth.

Oppresso, oppressed, grieued, suppressed, ouerlaid, violently wronged.

Oppressóre, an oppresser, a suppresser.

Opprímere, prímo, priméi, presso, to oppresse, to represse, to suppresse, to ouercharge.

Oppugnábile, that may be oppugned, withstood or resisted.

Oppugnáre, to oppugne, to withstand, to fight or labour against.

Oppugnatióne, an oppugnation, withstanding, resistance or fighting against.

Oppugnatóre, an oppugner, a resister, a fighter or labourer against.

Oppugnéuole, as Oppugnábile.

Opra, as Opera.

Opráio, as Operáro.

Opráre, as Operáre.

Opráro, as Operáro.

Oprétta, as Operína.

Oprína, as Operína.

Opríre, as Apríre, to open.

Opropriáre, Obrobriáre. 

Opróprio, as Obróbrio.

Oproprióso, as Obrobrióso.

Optábile, to be wished for.

Optáre, to wish for.

Optatíuo, wishing for.

O'ptica, as O'ttica.

O'ptico, as O'ttico.

Opulente, plentious, wealthy, rich.

Opulenza, wealth, riches, plenty.

O'pulo, the Stitch-hazell-tree.

Opúntia, an hearbe good to eate.

O púr, O púre, or yet, or also.

Opúscula, a little worke or labour.

Or', as O'ra.

O'ra, now, at this howre, time or instant. Also an howre or space of an howre. Also sometimes, at times or now and then. Also the ayre, a freshwind, a sweet gale or pleasant blast. Also the brim, bound or end of any thing. Also the beginning of a thing. Also a climet of the firmament deuided.

Orácolo, an Oracle, a Prophecy, a sentence, a counsell or answer giuen by God. Also a worthy saying or notable iudgement. Vsed also for an Oratory.

Oráde, a fish called a Guilt-head or Dorie. 

Orádiga, as Oráde.

O'rafo, a Gold-smith or worker of Gold.

Oramái, now at last, at last, more then time.

Orándo, to be praied or sued vnto.

Oráre, to pray, to beseech. Also to plead or preach. Also to make an Oration or speake as an Orator. Also to guild or garnish with gold.

Oraría, a shore-bote, or ship.

Oráta, a fish called a Dory or Guilt-head. Also Stone-ferne or Finger-ferne.

Oratióne, a prayer, an Oraison, an Oration, a speech. Also eloquence, vtterance, speech or stile.

Oráto, prayed, entreated, spoken an oration, pleaded, preached. Also guilt.

Oratóio, as Oratório.

Oratóre, an orator, a prayer, a pleader, a preacher, a beades-man, a spokesman, an eloquent speaker, an embassador. Also a guilder.

Oratória, Oratorie. Also Rhetorike.

Otatório, an Oratorie, or place of prayers, a Chappell. Also a Pulpit.

Orbácche, as Orbachelle.

Orbachelle, beries, as of Eayes, or Iuniper.

Orbachéno, as Orbathióne.

Orbaménto, a blinding, a reauing of sight.

Orbáre, to blinde, to reaue of sight or goods, or anything else, to bereaue.

Orbathióne, an hearbe, resembling an vnripe Pomegranate.

Orbatióne, as Orbaménto.

Orbatúra, as Orbaménto.

Orbauilláno, a kind of bright changeable colour. Also a mock-begger.

Orbe, well now, goe too, how now?

O'rbe, an Orbe, a Spheare, a round compasse, the world, a continuall succession of things. Also a particular region or countrie. Also a fish called a Lump, a Paddle, or Sea-owle.

Orbesína, an Oxe-eye, or Titmouse bird.

Orbéuole, that may be blinded.

Orbézza, blindnesse, as Orbità.

O'rbi, as O'rpho.

O'rbico, as Orbiculáre.

Orbiculáre, orbiculare, sphericall, round. Also the hearbe Sow, or Swinebread.

Orbiculáte, the round-apples.

Orbiéra, a blinding-boord for a Horse, or curst Cow.

Orbità, blindnesse, want of sight, depriuation of sight, or any thing else one loues.

Orbíta, a blind way, a crooked or windingpath. Also the rut or way of a Cart.

O'rbo, blind, sightlesse, bereft of sight, or any thing else one loues. 

O'rbo budello., Looke Cieco, or Intestíno.

Orbona, a Goddesse of the Gentiles, that depriued fathers of their children.

O'rca, a great fish called a Whirlepoole that is enemie to the Whale. Also a kind of precious stone of foure colours, white, yellow, greene and white. Also a kind of great vessell, or earthen pot.

Orcádi, mountaine Nimphs.

Orcána, a Lump, a Paddle, or Sea-owle fish.

Orcáre, to bray as an Asse. Also to hang vp or wring asunder, as one doeth a chickins necke.

Orcáste, a precious stone, good against the failing sicknesse.

Orcáto, braide. Also hanged vpon the gallowes, wrung in sunder.

Orcelláre, to dye with, or steepe in Orchall.

Orcello, Orchall-hearbe to dye Purple with.

Orchéssa, as O'rca. Also a kinde of great base Violl, or such instrument.

Orchestra, a Theater wherein musitions and singers sit, a chiefe place betweene the Stage and the common seates of a Theater. Also a dancing place. Also a kind of winding staires.

Orchétta, a kind of round Crab-fish.

O'rchi, as O'rpho. Also the hearbe Rag-wort, Gander-goose, or Dogstones, hauing a roote like a little codstone.

O'rchio, as O'rcio.

Orchíte, the great round Oliues.

Orciéro, something about a Mariners compasse.

Orcíno, a kind of Sea-fish, or Sea-vrchin.

O'rcio, any kind of pitcher, cruze, ing, or pot, iarre for oyle, or melting pot.

Orcioláio, a pitcher, or pot-maker.

Orcioláro, a cruze, or pitcher-maker.

Orciolétto, as Orciuólo.

Orciolíno, as Orciuólo.

Orciólo, as Orciuólo.

Orciuólo, any little pot, cruze, or pitcher.

O'rco, as O'rca. Vsed also for the pitchie darkenesse of hell.

Orcoménio, a kind of flaxe made of fennie reedes. Also a Pipe-cane hollow throughout.

O'rda, a confused troupe or multitude.

Ordeárij, Barlie-grounds, Barlie-men, Malt-men.

Ordégno, as Ordígno.

Ordígno, any manuall engine, mechanicall toole, implement, frame, or instrument. Vsed also for any Caliuer or hand-gun. Also a plot, a complot, a deuise, a conspiracy, or appointment. 



Ordiménto, as Orditúra.

Ordinále, according to order, orderly.

Ordinali, a kind of Mushroms.

Ordinaménto, an order, or ordering.

Ordinánza, an ordinance, an institution, a rule, a forme, a methode. Also a march vpon Drum or Trumpets, calling to an armie, or filing of men.

Ordinánza di soldáti, an aray, a marshaling, or putting of Souldiers in ranke.

Ordináre, to ordaine, to order, to dispose, to prepare, to marshall, to range, or set in aray. Also to direct, to command, or enioine. Also to giue or take any order of religion, or calling.

Ordinário, ordinarie, common, vsuall. Also a Priest that hath a proper or peculiar charge. Also a carier of Letters, or an ordinarie messenger. Also a priuie, a iaks, or close stoole. Also an ordinarie place where Gentlemen meete at sport or repast. Also an ordinarie or commissarie in Church iurisdictions. All' ordinário, after the ordinarie fashion, ordinarilie.

Ordinataménte, orderly.

Ordinatióne, as Ordinánza. Also a disposing, appointing, or administration.

O'rdine, an order, a rule, a method, a manner, a forme, a course. Also a state or degree concerning fortune or goods, a dignitie of men of any ranke or calling. Also a range, a file of souldiers. Also a command, a charge, a direction, an instruction or commandment laid vpon any man.

O'rdine, O'rdini, orders, rules, lawes, degrees.

Ordíre, dísco, díto, to warpe, or lay a web as Weauers doe. Also to lay, to deuise, to contriue or complot any frame or worke.

Ordíto, warped, or laid as a web. Also contriued, complotted, or deuised any frame, or deuise, or worke. Also as Orditúra.

Orditóre, a warper, or layer of any web. Also a contriuer, or complotter.

Orditúra, a warping, or laying of a web, a weaning. Also a complotting.

Ordúra, any filth, dung, or ordure.

Oreádi, mountaine Nimphs.

Orécchia, the eare of any creature.

Orécchia di tópo, the hearbe Mouse-eare.

Orecchiára, as Orécchia di tópo.

Orecchiáre, as Origliáre.

Orecchíni, night-caps. Also little eares. Also pendents or iewels to hang in ones eares.

Orecchíno, a little eare. Also a nightcap.

Orecchióne, a great eare, but properly that part of a bulwarke which enginers call the pome, the gard, the shoulder or eares to couer the casamats. Also a kinde of paste-meate of the forme of an eare.

Orecchióni délla cázza, the eares of the ladle, so called of our gunners.

Orecchióni del pezzo, the Trunions or Munions of a piece of Ordinance that two handles or eares let down into the cariage, vpon which the piece is moued higher or lower, hauing no other meanes to hang but by them.

Orecchioniere, the holes on either side of the cariage, called of gunners the Trunion-holes, for on them the Trunions play and rost.

Orecchiúto, eared, hauing eares.

Oréfice, a Gold-smith, a worker in gold.

Orefícina, the trade or worke-house of a Goldsmith. Also a Gold-smithsrow, as Cheap-side.

Oréfo, as Orésice.

Oréggia, breath, ayre, blast, or winde, a pleasant smell, or sent. Also a shadie place where no Sunne commeth.

Oreggiáre, to breathe, to blow, as aire or winde, to sent, or smell pleasantly. Also to shade with greene boughes.

Oreólo, a Makrell fish.

Oreóne, a kind of Blood-wort.

Oreoselíno, Ach of the mountaines, or Persley.

Oreótico, a kind of wine in Greece.

Oressi, a good stomacke, or greedinesse to eate.

Oresta, a Skreeke, or Ninemurtherer.

Orestióne, the hearbe Elecampane.

Orézza, as Oréggia.

Orézzare, as Oreggiáre.

Orézzo, as Oréggia.

Orfanelli, orphans, fatherlesse children.

Orfanità, orphanisme.

O'rfano, an orphane, a fatherlesse child. Also a stone that glisters in the darke.

O'rfo, a Gold-smith. Also as Orpho.

Organále, organall, instrumentall.

Organáre, to giue organes or instruments vnto, to make organicall, or instrumentall.

Organáro, an Organe-maker.

Organeggiáre, to play on Organes, as Organáre.

Organétti, claricords, little Organes.

Orgánico, organicall, instrumentall.

Organísta, an Organist, a Player on Organes.

Organizzáto, organised, that hath Organes, that is well proportioned.

O'rgano, an Organe. Also a Conduite or pipe of conueighance. Also any kind of instrument to do or make any thing withall. Also any instrument to measure land with. Also any kind of Ordinance or engine of ware. Also a fish called in Latine Orcynus. Also the hearbe Origan or wilde Marioram.

O'rgia, a pace or step of foure cubites or sixe foot.

Orgiárij, as Ordeárij.

Orgiáta, water-grewell, or Barly-water.

O'rgio, Barly, Sprit-barlie.

O'rgio maríno, an hearbe called in Greeke Phenicéa.

Orgóglio, pride, haughtinesse, disdaine.

Orgoglióso, proud, haughty, disdainefull.

Oría, Vsed for Orientále.

Oriáre, to come or descend or begin his ofspring.

Oricálco, shining-brasse. Also a Trumpet.

Oricánio, a casting bottle for sweet-water.

Oricánno, as Oricánio.

Oríce, as Oríge.

Oricello, as Orcello.

Oríchico, as Gómma arábica.

Orientále, Orientall, borne in the East. Also Orient and bright, as Oriente.

Oriente, the East part of the world. Also the East-winde. Also shining, bright, glistering and oriant, sun-shining. Also Gold among Alchimists.

Oriéte, as Orite.

Orífero, gold-bearing or bringing.

Orifício, the orifice or brim of any thing.

Orígano, Origane or wilde Marioram.

Oríge, a wilde beast in Egypt, like a Goate, clouen-footed, with a great horne in his fore-head, his haire contrary to other Goates, which they say stands full against the Dogge-starre when it riseth, as it were, worshiping the same by sneesing.

Origíge, as Oríge.

Originále, originall, that which one hath from his birth, an ofspring. Also an originall or beginning.

Origináre, to begin or descend from the beginning, originall or offspring.

Originario, originary, that hath a thing from a beginning or off-spring, or that is born in a place natural. Also a chiefe ruler that commandeth others.

Originatióne, a beginning, an off-spring a rising from. Also the originall of any thing, namely of a word according to his naturall or proper deriuation, an Etymologie.

Orígine, a beginning, an off-spring, an originall, a head, a well-spring, or ground and birth of any thing or parson. Also a pedigree, a stocke or kindred. Also the ground worke or cause of any thing. 



Origliáre, to care, to set on or giue eares vnto. Also to pricke or set vp ones eares for to listen and giue eare attentiuely, to whisper closely to ones eares, to sneake or lurke about for newes, to be an eaues-dropper.

Origliére, a soft pillow or Pillow-beare.

Origlióne, a whisperer, a listner, a sneaker, an caues-dropper, a lurking knaue.

Origlióso, listning to heare, quicke of hearing, open-eared.

Origo, Origan or wild Marioram.

Orimpéle, Painters Gold.

Orína, vrine, pisse, mans water.

Orinále, a vrinall, a pisse-pot.

Orináre, to vrine, to pisse, to stale, to make water.

Orínci, a common word in Florence signifying a most farre and distant place or time.

Orínda, a kind of Cake or bread made of Orindo-meale with honny and Pepper.

Oríndio, a kinde of graine growing in Egypt.

Oríndo, as Oríndio.

Orínthia, a wind comming seauenty and one daies after the Winter-solstitium, when birdes begin to appeare, and bloweth but nine daies.

Oriólo, as Oriuólo.

Orióndo, hauing his off-spring or discent from.

Orióne, the name of a starre called Oryon.

Oripelárgo, a kind of white Eagle, some take it for the Mountaine-storke.

Oríte, a kinde of precious stone whereof there be three sortes, one blacke and round, another greene with white spots, and another yellowish.

Orithoíni, such as cannot breath but sitting vpright.

Oritopnéa, difficulty of drawing breath but sitting vpright.

Oriuólo, a Sunn-dyall, an houre-glasse, an houre watch. Also a birde called a Wit-wall.

Oriuólo a póluere, an houre-glasse.

Oríza, a kind of Rice or Amelcorne.

Orizónte, an ender, a limiter, a bounder, the Horizon, that is a circle deuiding the half of the Spheare or Firmament, the seene halfe from the on seene halfe.

Orlandésche pruóue, Orlando-feates, Heroicall deedes, valiant prowes.

Orláre, to welt or hem. Also to brim or border about, to edge, to seluedge. Also to orle in armory, to place any thing in, about or vpon a border.

Orláto, welted, hemmed, brimmed, bordered, ledged, seluaged. Also orled.

Orlatríce, a Seamstresse, a welter, a hemmer. 

Orlatúra, a welting or hemming.

Orlétto, an orlet, a little O'rlo.

Orlíccio, the vtmost hem, welt, brim, seluage, crust or paring of any thing.

Orlíque, hath beene vsed for Relíquie.

O'rlo, a hem, a welt, a brim, a ledge, a seluedge, an edge, a border, of any thing. Also an orie in armory, the placing of any thing in, about or vpon a border.

O'rlo álla spagnuóla. Certaine hemes so called of Seamsters.

O'rlo créspo. hemes so called of Seamsters.

O'rlo pertugiáto. hemes so called of Seamsters.

O'rlo piáno. hemes so called of Seamsters.

O'rlo retíno. hemes so called of Seamsters.

O'rma, a rule or direction, a track, a footing, a trace, a foot-step, the view of a Hare, the pricke of a Deere, &c. Also a custome, vre, fashion or way and manner.

Ormáre, to rule, to direct, to track, to trace, to follow the steps. Also to enure or accustome.

Ormésia, a kind of red precious stone.

Ormesíno, sarcenet, Taffate-sarcenet.

Ormíno, a kind of wilde Sperage or Asperage, some take it for Clary or Sauge of Rome, and some for Spurge-wort.

Ormisíno, as Ormesíno.

O'rna, as V'rna.

Ornaménto, an ornament, a decking, a trimming, a garnishing, a gracing, an embellishing of anything. Also honor, grace, dignity or commendation.

Ornándo, to be adorned, decked or garnished. Looke Ornáre.

Ornáre, to adorne, to decke, to dight, to trimme, to garnish, to grace, to furnish, to prepare, to set foorth, to make readie, faire or meete, to embellish.

Ornataménte, adornedly, with ornaments, comely, gracefully, gayly, elegantly.

Ornatúra, as Ornaménto.

Ornatuzzo, fine, spruce, smug, superfine.

Ornitogále, Dogs-onion.

O'rno, a wilde. Ash or Guicken tree. Also a kind of measure for wet things.

Or non è? is it not now?

O'ro, any kind of gold, Or in armorie.

Orobáce, the Pionie flowre.

Orobánche, the hearbe Choke-eruill, strangle-tare, choke-fitch, or kil-weed, which round about where it groweth killeth all manner of Pulse, whereof if a Cow eate, she runneth presently to a Bull.

Orobathióne, as Orbathióne.

Oróbe, as Orobánche. Also a kinde of Pulse-corne. Also a Pionie-flowre. Also a kinde of Frankincense in little graines. Also a kind of grasse-greene colour.

Oróbia, a kind of Frankincense in little graines.

Orobíno, a kind of colour made of a yellow hearbe.

Orobíte, the hearbe Carneole, or Sauge aquatike. Also artificiall Borace.

Orobitíno, as Orobíte.

Orocantaríno, a kind of false gold that Painters vse to gild withall, called Orpine.

Orochíno, as Orecchíno. Also a gilded glasse.

Orománte, a deuiner by Oromantía.

Oromantía, a kind of diuination by looking into glasses full of water.

Oroméno, a kind of glistring stone.

Oromúsico, as Orocantaríno.

Oro, obrízo, the finest pure gold that is.

Oropendulo, as Galengola.

Oropigménto, as Orpello.

Oropiménto, as Orpello.

Oróscopo, as Horóscopo.

Orosità, fattinesse, pituitie, sliminesse.

Orpellaménto, as Orpellatura.

Orpelláre, to gild with Orpine or Painters gold. Also to set a faire shew vpon.

Orpelláta, fained or dissembled or flattring praises, the metaphor taken from Orpéllo, a mixture shining like gold. but nothing worth.

Orpellatúra, a gilding with Orpine or Painters gold. Also as Orpelláta.

O'rpello, Orpine, or base Painters gold.

O'rpho, the Lump-fish, Pudle-fish, or Sea-owle, hauing great eyes and teeth like a saw, it keepes euer by the shore.

Orpiménto, as Orpello. Vsed also for Tar-tare.

Or púre, now at last, or finally.

Orribile, horrible.

Orribilità, horriblenesse.

Orróre, horror.

O'rsa, a she-Beare. Also a Signe or Star in heauen called Charles-waine.

Orsácchia, a she-Beare, or Beare-whelp.

Orsácchio, a Beare-whelp, a yong Beare.

Orsaccíno, as Orsácchio.

Orsát to, as Orsácchio.

O'rsa maggióre, a Signe or Star called Charles-waine.

Orsétta, a fish called a Lock-fish.

O'rsa minóre, a Star or Signe in heauen neere to Charles-waine.

Orsétto, a yong Beare-whelp.

Orsíno, of the nature of a Beare. Also Beere-garlike.

O'rso, a hee-Beare. Also as O'rsa.

Orsù, on, goe too, a way, to it, now vp, lustily.

Orsù col nóme di Dío, goe to in the name of God.

Orsù mò, goe to now, vp now, now lustily.

Orsù nò, not now, I bid you no.

Orsúso, as Orsù.

Orsusomò, as Orsù mò.



Ortáccio, a filthie Garden, or Hortyard.

Ortággi, all manner of fruites, flowres or hearbs that Gardens yeeld.

Ortáglia, as Ortággi.

Orténse, of or belonging to a Garden.

Orte tríce, a Midwife.

Orthomestica, the brest-apple.

Ortíca, any kind of Nettle. Also a fish which pricketh as a Nettle, and as soone as he is touched changeth his colour, called a Sea-nettle, or Nettlefish.

Orticáre, to sting with a Nettle, to nettle.

Ortíce, a Quaile.

Orticello, a little Garden, or Hortyard.

Ortichéto, a desert place where nothing but nettles grow.

Ortichíno, Calico, or Nettle-cloth.

Ortígia, as Ortíca.

Ortigométra, a great Quaile, that in flight leadeth the rest, the captaine Quaile.

Ortío,  a foote of a verse of fiue sillables.

O'rto, any kinde of Hort-yard. Also a kitchin-garden. Also the East part of the world, the rising of the Sunne, the first appearing of the heauenly bodies in our Hemispheare. Also an off-spring, a rising, a beginning, a natiuitie or generation.

Ortodóro, a Greeke measure of ten inches.

Ortodossía, the right opinion, or faith.

Ortodósso, that hath a true, and good, and right opinion, faith, or beliefe.

Ortogónio, euen cornered, right angled. Also a right corner, equall on both sides.

Ortografizzáre, to write true Orthographie.

Ortográfo, an Orthographer, a teacher or professor of Orthographie.

Ortographía, the arte of Orthographie or true writing. Also a plot of building drawne out with the figure and order of the whole worke.

Ortográphico, Orthographicall.

Ortographísta, as Ortográfo.

Ortoláno, a Gardner, a keeper of an Hort-yard. Also a kind of daintie bird.

Ortoponéa, such a straightnesse of breath or cough by stopping of the lights, that one can not breath but holding his necke vpright.

Ortoponéico, he that hath the pipes of his lights so stopped, that he can not breath but holding vp his necke.

Ortóra, Gardens, or Hort-yards.

Ortragorísco, the grunting Molebout-fish.

Orúre, all things of gold, or gildings. 

O'rza, a rope in a Ship called the Lare-boord sheat, which a man standing at the poope of a Ship with his face on the prow is euer on the left hand, therfore is Orza-- by a metaphore taken for the left hand.

Orzáre, to saile more on the left then on the right hand, to goe, to saile, to hull, or lye on Lar-boord.

Orzáta, as Orgiáta.

O'rzo, Barlie, sprit-Barlie.

Orzo-pésto, ground Barlie, or Mault.

Orzuólo, as Orciuólo. Also a disease in the eyes called in Latine Grithe.

Osánna, signifies in Hebrew, saue or quicken vs now we pray thee our viuification. The Iewes called so the willow branches, which they bare in their hands at the feast of Tabernacles. Some vnderstand it for inexpressible ioy.

Osannáre, to sing and call on God with great ioy and praise-giuing for sauing vs.

Osáre, to dare, to aduenture, to ieopard.

Osattíni, little buskins or thin bootes.

Oscédine, an impediment which wil not suffer a man to stay long from often yawning and gaping. Also a kind of sore that comes in childrens mouthes.

Oscenità, ribauldry or villany in acts or words, bawdry, filthinesse, vncleannesse.

Oscéno, bawdy, filthy, vncleane, vnhonest, vnciuill, foule, obscenous.

O'sci, as Attaláni, or Mattacíni.

Osciáre, as Attalanáre, as Mattacináre.

Oscíno, a bird with hooked tallons, and sings sweetly which by his voice signifieth something to happen.

Oscitánza, negligence, sluggishnesse, lazinesse. Also a yauning or gaping with the mouth proceeding of sloth.

Oscitatióne, as Oscitánza.

Osculáre, to kisse and hug together.

Oscuráre, to obscure, to darken, to dim, to hide, to keepe in silence from the knowledge of men. Also to make of no fame or reputation.

Oscuratióne, an obscuring, a darkning, a dimming.

Oscurétto, somewhat darke, dim, or obscure.

Oscuréuole, that may be obscured or darkned.

Oscurézza, as Oscurità.

Oscurità, obscurity, darknesse, dimnesse. Also basenesse of birth or place.

Oscúro, obscure, darke, dim, mirke, black, not-shining, hidden, secret, hard to finde, of base place or parentage.

Oscuróso, full of darkenesse and obscuritie.

Osè, oh if it would please God. 

O sia, or, or else. Also whither it be.

Osiacánta, a kind of tree in Egypt.

Osibáfo, a kind of Greeke measure.

O sì chè, yea marry now.

Osigónio, as Ortogónio.

Osipo, sweate, filth or fattinesse that stickes on sheepes-wooll.

Osiríte, an hearbe of excellent vertue, called Toades-flax.

Osmónda, Osmond, Water-ferne or Water-man.

Osníle, a kind of fish.

O'so, dared. Also daring or aduenterous.

Osofágo, the mouth of the stomacke.

Osolaménto, a spying, a prying, a peeping, a tooting.

Osoláre, to spie, to prie, to peepe, to toote.

Ospitále, an Hospitall, a spittle.

Ospitalità, hospitality, good-house-keeping.

O'spite, a guest. Also an hoast.

O'sla, all manner of bones.

Ossálide, wilde Sorrell or Souredocke.

Ossálme, a sharpe brine or pickle made of salt and vineger.

Ossáme, all manner of bones or boneworke. Also a heape of bones.

Ossaménto, all the bones of ones body together.

Ossáre, to bone. Also to set bones together.

Ossatúra, as Ossaménto.

O'sse, words cast foorth at vnwares presaging somewhat.

Ossecrándo, that may be entreated or desired.

Osseo, of the nature of bone.

Ossecráre, to pray or desire for Gods-sake.

Ossecratióne, a speciall desire for Gods-sake.

Ossequénte, as Ossequióso.

Ossequénza, obeissance, awefull obedience.

Osséquie, dutyfull attendance, obedient seruice, pliant awe-fulnesse.

Ossequióso, obsequuous, awe-full, pliant, seruiceable, obedient, ready at hand.

Osseruábile, that may or ought to be obserued, respected or had in reuerence.

Osseruagióne, as Osseruatióne.

Osseruándo, worshipfull or to be obserued, to be obeyed and had in awe and respect.

Osseruandíssimo, right worshipfull or most worthy of regard.

Osseruánte, obseruing, regarding, dutifull, espying occasions to doe a pleasure.

Osseruantína, an obseruer, an obedient keeper of beheasts, a heedfull regarder.

Osseruánza, as Osseruatióne.



Ossernáre, to obserue, to regard, to respect, to awaite with eie and minde. to reuerence with loue and awe. Also to marke, to heed, to watch.

Osseruáre le battúte, to keep due time as good Musitions doe.

Osseruár féde, to keepe ones word, faith, vow or promise.

Osseruatióne, obseruance, obseruation, regard, respect, awe-full reuerence, awaite with eies and mind. Also an obseruing or custome.

Osseruatóre, an obseruer, a regarder, &c.

Osseruéuole, as Osseruábile.

Ossessióne, a besiegeing, a besetting, an ouercharging, or closeing in.

Ossesso, beset, besieged, ouercharged, closed in.

Ossétto, a little bone, a gristle-bone.

O'ssi, Woodsorrell, or Cuckous-meate. Also keeles, skales or nine-pins.

O'ssia, a sharpe disease whereof a man either dieth or recouereth quickly.

O'ssicédro, a kind of Cedar with a hard and prickie lease.

Ossicello, a little gristle-bone.

Ossicíni, little yongue or gristly-bones.

Ossicráto, water and vineger together.

O'sside, as O'ssi.

Ossidiáno, the blacke Iet-stone.

Ossidionále, of or partayning to a siege. Looke Coróna.

Ossidióne, any siege or besiegeing.

Ossifero, bones-bearing.

Ossifrága, a kinde of Eagle or Hawke called an Ospray or bone-breaker, because that with hir beake shee breaketh great bones. Also a kind of furious beast.

Ossifrágo, bones-breaking.

Ossigála, a kind of curds when butter is made or reduced into cheese.

Ossilapátho, Sorrel, Souredocke, or sharp pointed docke.

Ossimáthe, one that learneth or goeth to schoole in his old age.

Ossimathía, a learning when one is old.

Ossimele, Oximell or honied Vineger.

Ossimirsíno, Butchers-broom or ground Mirtle. Also a kind of sowre grape.

Ossimóra, a sentence spoken with such affectation of wit and grauity that it seemeth foolish.

Ossíno, a kind of rush of the male kind. Also a little bone.

Ossipheníci, a kind of Dates.

Ossipóri, antidotes penetratiue and of quicke operation. Also a kind of fish-brine.

Ossipóto, any sauce made of Vinegre.

Ossischenóne, the Sea-rush.

Ossitriphilóne, a kind of Clauer, or Trifolie.

O'sso, any kind of bone. Also the stone of any fruite, as Oliues, Plums, or Dates, &c.

O'sso basilláre, as O'sso cuneále.

O'sso cosséndico, the middle part of Ilicosso, which is straighter and thicker, and outwardly engrauen with a large and deepe caue.

O'sso cuneále, the Cuneall bone, which beeing as it were a ground to the braine, is thrust in like a wedge betweene the bones of the head, and the vpper iaw.

O'sso ílio., looke I'lio.

Ossoláre, to picke out bones of anything

O'ssoli, knuckles, or knuckle-bones. Also keeles, or nine pinnes to play withall. Also bobbins to winde silke vpon.

Ossolieri, shirt-strings, or bobbin-laces. Also strings to tye vp slops.

Ossolíni, little or small gristly bones.

O'sso málo, the cheeke-bone, which being in diuers places spongeous, containeth also in it selfe a large cauitie, tenderly walled on each side with thin scalie bones for lightnesse, so ordained of nature.

O'sso nauifórme, a bone next to the ankle in the inside, called in English the ship, or betelike bone.

Osse púbe, the second part of Osso Ilio, which being not so broade as the former, is throwed on each side with a large hole.

O'sso sácro, the great bone whereupon the ridge-bone resteth.

O'sso sphen órdo, as O'sso cuneále.

Ossóso, bonie, full of bones.

Ossuário, a charnell-house, a shrine or place where bones are kept.

Ossúto, bonie, boned, full of bones.

O'sta, the name of a rope in a Ship.

Ostácolo, an obstacle, a let, an impediment, an hindrance, an opposition.

Ostággio, an hostage, a pledge.

Ostánte, withstanding, hindring, letting, resisting, opposing, standing against.

Ostánte chè, not with standing although.

Ostáre, to with or gainestand, to oppose.

Ostáta, the stuffe called Woosted.

Ostaticáre, as Staticáre, to counterpledge.

Ostático, as Stático, a counterpledge.

Ostatióne, as Ostácolo.

Ostatríce, a Midwife.

O'ste, as Hóste.

Ostéa, the stuffe called Woostade.

Osteggiáre, to beleger with an host of men. Also to fight a battell.

Osteggióso, quarrellous, brangling, fighting, hauing an host of men.

Ostelería, as Hostaría.

Osteliéro, an hoste, an hostler, an Inneholder. 

Ostello, as Hostello.

Osténdere, téndo, tési, téso, to show or point at. Also to pronounce or declare forth.

Ostensióne, a shewing or pointing at.

Ostentáre, to boast, to brag, to vaunt or shew a thing for vaine-glory.

Ostentatióne, ostentation, a vanting, a boasting, a shewing foorth of vaineglory.

Ostentatóre, a vanter, a vaineglorious bragger.

Osténti, foretokens, prodiges, monsters, wonders, all things comming against the ordinary course of Nature or that betoken somewhat to come.

Ostentóso, prodigious, monstrous, ill-boding, that maketh a monster.

Ostería, as Hostaría.

O'stia, an Hoaste, a Wafer-cake made for an Hoast or Sacrifice. Also the entry or mouth of a great riuer where it embogues or falles into the Sea.

Ostiário, one that keepes the Hoastes in a Church. Also a Porter, an Vsher or a Doore-keeper.

Ostíca, as Ostiga.

Ostiére, an Host. Also an Hostler.

Ostico, hard and bitter as a choke-peare

Ostíga, a kind of scab in sheepe, lambes, and Kids about their lips, that is deadly to them whilest they are sucklings. Also an Oyster.

Ostígine, as Ostíga.

Ostinársi, to be or become obstinate, stubborne, wilfull or stiffenecked.

Ostinatióne, obstinacy, wilfulnesse, selfwill, stifnesse in opinion, stifeneckednesse.

Ostinato, obstinate, stifnecked, wilfull, stubborne, opinatiue, fixed in opinion.

Ostipánte, a medicine that stoppeth the mouth of the vessels of the body.

Ostipáre, to stop holes or chinkes. Also musingly to lay the head a side vpon ones arme or shoulders.

Ostráci, such as wore punished by ostracisme.

Ostracísmo, a kind of banishment of the best men in Athens, vsed not so much for punishment of any offence, as to abate the immoderate power of Noble men, it was for ten yeares, and was done by deliuering of certaine shels, with the names of the condemned persons written in them.

Ostrácia, a stone somewhat like an Agathe, and informe of an Oyster-shell. Also obstinacie, stiffenesse in opinion or stubbernesse.

Ostracíte, as Ostrácia. Also a kind of grose, foule, and blacke base Ore.

Ostracizzáre, to practise Ostracismo.

Ostréa, as Ostrácia. Also the Oysterfish. 



O'streca, any oyster-fish.

O'strega, any oyster-fish.

Ostregáro, a seller or dragger of oysters.

O'stria, an oyster-fish. Also a kind of solitary tree growing about Moistrochs.

O'strica, an oyster-fish.

O'striga, any kind of oyster-fish.

Ostrigáro, a seller or dragger of oysters.

Ostríno, of the colour of O'stro.

Ostrióne, as O'stria.

O'stro, graine to dye Scarlet with. Also the Scarlet or stammell colour. Also Scarlet it selfe. Also the liquor of a fish whereof the Purple or Violet colour is made. Also the South part of the world. Also the South-wind.

Ostrocísmo, as Ostracísme.

Ostrogarbíno, the South-west-wind.

Ostrosirócco, South and by West.

O'strus, the Gad-bee, or Horse-flie.

Ostruso, obstruce, hidden or hard to finde.

Ostruttióne, obstruction or stopping.

Ostrútto, shut vp, stopped, hard to finde.

O'ta, hath beene vsed for Hóra, now.

O tále o quále, either such or such.

O tánto, or so much, or thereabout.

Otempóla, a kind of wine or grape.

Otenchíte, a pipe Chirurgions vse to conueigh medicines into the eares.

O'ti, a Bistard or Horne-owle which laies but two egges and in a Hares-skin hangs them vpon some tree.

O'tia, a fish called the eares of the Sea.

Otiáre, to loyter, to be or play the idle bodie.

O'tida, a kind of slow-flying Goose.

O'tide, as O'ti.

Otieggiáre, to be idle, to lazie, to sleth.

O'tio, leasure, conueniencie of time and rest, ease, quietnesse, light exercising of the mind and bodie, vacancie from studie, businesse, or labour. Also idlenesse, lazinesse, or sloth.

Otiosíta, idlenesse, sloth, lazinesse, leasurenesse.

Otióso, at ease or leasure, vnoccupide, quiet, without trouble, or businesse. Also idle, lazie, lither, or full of idlenesse.

O'to, an Howlet lesse then the like-Owle, and bigger then the Howlet.

Otónna, a kind of hearbe or weede.

Otórno, as Oresta.

Otráqua, is the name of Sura, when it is stale, and old, and cleere.

Otráre, to put into an ótro.

Otriánza, a grant, or concession.

Otriáre, to grant or yeeld vnto. Also to obtaine by intreatie.

Otricello, a little iarre, pot, or pitcher.

O'tro, a iarre or boracho of Goates-leather close sowed together to keepe oyle or wine in. Into such they were anciently wont to put patricides or parent-murtherers, and with other circumstances to cast them into the Sea, or some great Riuer to be drowned. Vsed also for any pot, or pitcher.

Otroiáre, as Otriáre.

O'tta, vsed anciently for Hóra, now at this instant. Also orderly in course.

Ottábile, that may be wished for.

Ottacatótta, by and by, euen now, at this houre.

Ottaédro, a Geometricall figure.

Ottagenário, of foure-score yeares.

Ottagonále, eight angled, or cornered.

Ottalmía, an inflamation of the vttermost skinne of the eyes.

Ottálmo, a kind of blew precious stone.

Ottángolo, eight angled, or cornered.

Ottánta, eightie, or foure-score.

Ottanténa, one, foure-score.

Ottantésimo, the eightieth in order.

Ottáre, to wish, to couet or haue rather.

Ottatíuo, the wishing or Optatiue Moode.

Ottáto, wished, desired, or longed for.

Ottáua, an octaue or eight in Musike. Also a spice of eight daies.

Ottauário, of or pertaining to eight.

Ottáuo, the eight in order.

Ottegnénte, obtaining, attaining vnto.

Ottemperánza, an obtaining ones will or instruction.

Ottemperáre, to obey or bee at command.

Ottenebráre, to obscure, or ouer darken.

Otténebre, darke, obscure, ouer-clouded.

Ottenére, téngo, ténni, tenúto, to obtaine.

Ottenéuole, that may be obtained.

Ottenitóre, an obtainer, an acquirer.

Ottentatóre, an attempter, an assaier.

Otténto, an obtaining. Also obtayned.

Ottestáre, humbly to beseech, to desire for Gods-sake or in the name and loue of any deere thing.

Ottestatióne, an humble desiring, or taking of God or some other deere thing for a witnesse.

O'ttica, the science whereby the reason of sight is knowen, the optike.

O'tticinerui, the sinewes which bring the vertue of seeing vnto the eies.

O'ttico, of or pertayning to the sight or optikes.

Ottimáti, cheefe persons among the people, Noblemen, Aldermen, best or principall men in any City or State by whom the rest are gouerned.

Ottimáto, a chief, best, or excellent high-man, an Alderman or Magistrate in any Stat or common-wealth. Also the state, office, or condition of Ottimáti.

Ottimíssimo, most good, chiefely excellent.

O'ttimo, excellent, exquisite, best right good, best of all, perfectly good.

O'tto, the number of eight, an eight vpon the Cardes. Vsed also for Ottóne. Also being added vnto a Positiue Noune it expresseth handsomnesse, and a thing well compact, faire, plum and round.

Ottóbre, the moneth of October.

Ottocénto, eight hundred.

Ottófero, a Charriot with eight wheeles.

Ottogenário, of eight hundred.

Ottogesimo, the eightieth in number.

Ottogonále, eight cornered, eight pointed.

Ottogonáre, to make eight cornered, or eight pointed.

O'ttomíla, eight thousand.

Ottonáio, a Brazier, a Tinker, a Copper-smith.

Ottonário, as Ottonáio.

Ottonáro, as Ottonáio.

Ottóne, Brasse, Latten, Candlestick-mettall.

Ottopede, that hath eight feete.

Ottoplicáre, to eight-fold, or multiplie by eight.

O'tto volte, eight times, or turnes.

Ottriánza, a grant, or concession.

Ottriáre, as Otriáre, to grant.

Ottracciáre, to stop vp, or close.

Otturáccio, a stopple, a wad, a gunners spunge.

Otturáre, to stop vp closse.

Ottusáre, to make dull, blunt, or sluggish.

Ottusétto, somewhat Ottúso.

Ottúso, dull, blunt, heauie, leaden-witted, sluggish, without spirit. Also in Mathematikes it is the propertie of an angle that is bigger then a right angle.

Ottúso ángolo, a blunt angle.

O'ua, all manner of egges.

Ouadelle, the seeds of Silke-wormes. Also the egges, hard-rows or spawn of any fish.

O'ua di pésce, the frie or spawne of fishes.

Ouále, ouale, like an egge, more long then round. Looke Coróna.

O'ua maritáte, egges in Moone-shine.

Ouánte, one that did triumph in the second degree. Looke Ouáre.

Ouáre, to shout or sing for ioy, to reioyce with noise, but properly to triumph in the second degree as they were wont in Rome, the first was mounted vpon a Chariot, the second rid on horsebacke, the first had a robe all be spang­



led, and beset with gold, the second a plaine Consuls gowne, the first was crowned with gold, and the second with Mirtle. Also to lay egges. Also to make ouale.

Ouáti, Tankard-apples or Peares.

Ouatióne, a small triumph of a Captaine or Generall, for a victory with out slaughter of men, which was done riding on horse-backe before his souldiers, singing and shouting for ioy, and crowned with a garland of Mirtle.

Ouáta, Looke Ouáre. Also as Ouále. Also enuecqued in armory.

O'ue, where, whether.

O'ue chè, whereas, where that.

Oueraménte, or else, or either.

Oueriére, a worker, a worke-man.

Ouéro, or else, or either.

Oueúnque, wheresoeuer.

Ouiáre, to come or spring from.

Ouiatúra, as Ostácolo.

Ouíle, a sheepes-pen, cot or fould, a poune.

Ouilità, sheepishnesse.

Ouípero, breeding of egges or spawne.

O'uo, any kind of egge.

O'uo frésco, a new-laid egge.

O vogliám díre, or else we meane.

O'ura, as O'pera.

Ouraggiáre, to worke as Operáre.

Ouraggiére, a worke-man, a worker.

Ourággio, worke or worke-manship.

Ouraggióso, full of worke.

Ouráio, a worker, a worke-man.

Ouráre, to worke, as Operárc.

Ouriére, a worker, a workeman.

Ouróso, full of worke or worke-manship.

Ouuiáre, as Ostáre. Also to meete with. Also to resist, to withstand, to encounter.

Ouuiatióne, as Ostácolo. Also a meeting.

Ouuiatóre, a gaine-stander. Also a meeter.

Ouúnque, where or wheresoeuer.

Ouúnque chè, wheresoeuer that.

Ouúto, as Ouáto.

Ozanítide, a tree that hath a strong and a stinking sauour.

Ozéna, a disease in the nose causing a stinking sauour, called Noli me tángere, and of some, the Ale-pox in the nose. Also a fish hauing many feete, so called by reason of his strong and ranke sauour.

Oxipóri, a kinde of pearsing medicine wherein is much Vineger.

Oxizáccara, a kind of drinke wherein is much Vineger and Sugar. 


P.
Pabuláre, to forage a broad for fodder. Also to fodder cattle, to booty haile.

Pabulatióne, a foraging or booty haling. Also a foddering.

Pabulatóre, a forager, a booty-haler, a fodderer.

Pábulo, as Ocímo, forage, fodder, stouer or prouender.

Pacále, peace causing or bringing.

Pacánza, a pacifying, a mitigation.

Pacáre, to pacifie, to asswage, to calme.

Pacatióne, as Pacánza.

Pacáto, pacified, calme, calmed.

Pacatóre, a pacifier, an asswager, a calmer.

Pacchétto, a packet of letters or any thing else. Also the Post or Carrier that carrieth it.

Pácchia, gourmandising, gluttony, lauishnesse or riotous excesse in feeding, belly-cheere.

Pacchiáre, to gourmandise, to lauish or riot in excesse of feeding and bellycheere.

Pacchiatóre, as Pacchióne.

Pacchierótto, as Pacchióne.

Pacchióne, an Epicure, a glutton, a gourmand, a waste-full-feeder, one that makes his belly his God, a riotous louer of belly-cheere.

Paccióso, full of ease, sloth and pleasure.

Páce, peace, concord, quietnesse, atonement, agreement, rest. Also a word commanding silence and quietnesse. Also leaue and permission, as Con páce vóstra, with your leaue, &c. Also a Pax.

Páce di marcóne, a peace that concludes with rem in re.

Paciáre, as Pacificáre.

Paciáro, a peace-maker, a pacifier.

Paciente, as Patiente.

Pacientia, as Patientia.

Pacífero, peace-bringing, or bearing.

Pacificaménte, quietly, peacefully.

Pacificáre, to pacifie, to appease.

Pacificatióne, a pacification, an appeasing, a peace-making. Also a peace-offring.

Pacificatório, that doeth pacifie. Also a peace-offring.

Pacífico, peacefull, peaceable, quiet. Also a peace-offring.

Paciózza, a good feeding, a nunchions, or meales-meate. Also a well-meaning peace.

Padella, as Nócchio, or Chiáuo.

Padella, any kind of flat or frying-pan.

Padelláta, a pan-full of anything. Also a blow giuen with a pan.

Padellétta, any little frying pan.

Padellina, a little frying pan.

Padiglionáro, a Tent, or Pauillion maker.

Padiglióne, a Pauillion, or Tent for the field. Also a Canapis, or Sparuier for a bed. Also a Tabernacle. Also a cloth of state.

Padiglióso, full of Tents, or Pauillions. Also poore, needie, and beggerlie.

Padiménto, a brooking, a disgesting. Also a Hawkes putting ouer hermeate.

Padíre, dísco, díto, to disgest, to brooke. Also to put ouer ones meate as a Hawke doeth.

Pádre, a Father, a Sir. Also a good religious man.

Pádre di famíglia, a household father.

Pádre e figliuólo, the name of an hearbe.

Padrèggiáre, as Patrizzáre.

Padregni, hills, mounts, or high raised works neere fortifications to ouer-looke them.

Padrégno, a father in law.

Pádre líbero, a surname of Bacchus.

Pádre patráto, a chiefe or foster-father.

Pádri, Fathers, fore-fathers, Ancestors, our Elders, or Ancients. Also graue Senators, Aldermen, or gouernors of a Citie or State.

Padricinóli, little fathers, or Sires.

Padríno, a God-father. Also a iudge or stickler in any controuersie or fight.

Pádri scolástici, Schoole-deuines.

Padrocínio, patronage, protection, safegard, bearing out, defence.

Padróna, a patronesse, a mistris, a dame, an owner, a defendresse.

Padronággio, as Padronáto.

Padronánza, as Padronato.

Padronáre, as Padroneggiáre.

Padronático, as Padronáro.

Padronáto, a patronage, a maistrie, the acte of patronage, or protection.

Padróne, a Patrone, a Maister, a Sir, a Lord, an owner, or protector, be that in trouble defendeth, he that maketh a bond-man free. Also an aduocate, an atturnie, a spokes-man, or a counseler.

Padróne del tútto, a Lord and maister of all.

Padróne di cása, the maister and Lord or owner of a house, a Landlord.

Padróne dináue, the maister of a Ship.

Padroneggiáre, to play the maister or patron. Also to patronize, to protect, to vphold, to beare out, to support, to maintaine and defend ones right.

Padronímico, deriued of the fathers or ancestors name. 



Padronità, as Padronáto.

Padúle, a fenne, a meere, a marrish soile, a fennie or boggie ground.

Padúlo, as Padúle.

Padulóso, fennie, moorish, marrish, boggle.

Paesáno, a countrie-man, a man of the same countrie. Also a peasant, a clowne, a swaine, a hinde.

Paesáre, to trauell countries, to wander abrode in diuers countries.

Paése, the countrie. Also a countrie, a land, a region, a prouince.

Paffúto, pampred, crammed, well or fattie-fed, plum-cheeked.

Pága, a pay, a wages, or hire.

Pagábile, payable, to be paid.

Pága dóppia, double pay, or reward.

Págali, a kind of good fish in Genoua, which some take to be our Roches.

Pagaménto, a payment.

Pága mórta, a dead pay.

Paganália, countrie-holydaies, wakes, or plough-mens feasts, as weekes of plough-men, or sheepe-shearing.

Paganelle, a kind of fish.

Paganésimo, as Paganía.

Paganía, the countrie of Painims, Pagans, or Heathens. Also paganisme, or heathenisme, or barbarisme.

Paganína, a kinde of Moris-dance in Italie.

Pagáno, a Pagan, a Heathen, an Infidell.

Pagáre, to pay, to apay, to satisfie. Also to punish on chastice, or giue one his due.

Pagáre contánti, to pay readie money.

Pagáre di monéta mórta, to pay with words.

Pagáre di pósta, to pay at impost.

Pagáre fío, to pay a fee.

Pagáre la buóna máno, to pay or giue a hansell, a new-yeares-gift, or drinking-pennie.

Pagáre la máncia, idem.

Pagáre le stréne, idem.

Pagáre lo scótto, to pay the shot.

Pagáto, paid, satisfide, rewarded.

Pagatóre, a payer, a pay-master.

Paggétto, a little Page, or Hench-man.

Paggiavellóne, a kinde of measure in India.

Pággio, a Page, a Hench-man.

Paggióne, a great Page.

Paggióre, some part of a Ship.

Paghéuole, as Pagábile, payable.

Página, a page or side of a leafe of a booke or writing. Also a writing.

Pagiólli, great double planks of timber.

Páglia, straw. Also chaff, or litter.

Pagliáccia, a pallet, or straw-bed. Also filthie straw, thatch, litter, chaff, or stubble.

Pagliacciáio, a Thatcher.

Pagliacciáre, to thatch houses. 

Pagliacciatóre, as Pagliacciáio.

Pagliáccio, thatch, or haume, or straw to thatch houses.

Pagliáio, a ricke or stacke of straw. Also a straw-kenell. Also a straw-bed.

Pagliardággine, filthie letcherie.

Pagliardáre, to commit letcherie.

Pagliárdo, a filthie letchard.

Pagliarella, a poore thatcht cottage.

Pagliarésco, strawish, or made of straw.

Pagliaríccio, as Pagliáccia.

Pagliáro, as Pagliáio.

Pagliaruólo, vsed for an Hostler.

Pagliáto, a pallet, or straw-colour.

Paglíccio, as Pagliáto. Also as Mondézza.

Paglióla, as Pagliuóla.

Paglióso, strawie, full of straw.

Pagliúcca, a little straw, a small straw.

Pagliúcche, chaff, stubble, thatch, haume.

Pagliúccia, any kind of small straw.

Pagliuóla, the lying in Child-bed of a woman. Also a Buls dew-lap.

Pagliuóla délla testa, as Fárfa.

Pagliuoláre, to lye in Child-bed.

Pagliuoláta, a woman laid in Childbed.

Pagliuólo, some part of a Mill.

Pagliúzza, as Pagliúcca.

Pagnósa, a kind of wide long garment.

Pagnótta, a bun, or loafe of bread. Also a kind of pap or panado of grated bread. Also whoosht, close, or squatting downe.

Pagnottáni, a kind of very good Figs.

Pagnottína, a little bun, or panado.

Págo, sost. as Pagam énto, a payment.

Págoli, paid, satisfide, apaid, pleased.

Págo, a Countrie, Towne, or Village.

Págoli, a coine of gold in Góa.

Pagolíno, a bird like a Sparrow, with a blew necke and a long bill, and liueth in the water.

Págolo, in stead of Páulo.

Pagóna, a Pea-hen.

Pagonáccio, a purple colour.

Pagóne, a Peacocke.

Pagoneggiáre, as Pauoneggiáre.

Págro, as Pagúro.

Paguríno, as Pagúro.

Pagúro, a kind of Crab-fish called a Grit, a Grampell, or a Punger.

Páia, paires, couples, braces, yokes, casts. Also, that he, she, or it may seeme.

Paiára, as Paiaróna.

Paiarína, as Paiaróna.

Paiaróna, a kind of course home-spun cloth made of hurds of hemp or flax.

Paiarízzo, the bird Yellow-hammer.

Paidiménto, as Padiménto.

Paidíre, as Padíre.

Painelle, as Panie.

Paio, a paire, a yoke, a couple, a brace, a cast. Also, I seeme, or appeare. 

Paióli, Paiuóli, as Pagióli.

Páipo, a bird with a forked taile.

Paisáre, to range about for a praie as a Kite or a Hawke doeth.

Paiuóla, a kettle, or flat brazen pan. Also as Pagliuóla.

Paiuoláno, a pan-maker, a Brazier, a Tinkard.

Paiuoláre, as Pagliuoláre. Also to frie or dresse in a pan.

Paiuoláro, as Paiuoláno.

Paiuoláta, as Pagliuoláta. Also a pan or kettle full.

Paiuólo, a kettle, or pan, or cauldron. Also a hogs trough. Also a scullion, or kitchin drudge.

Paiúla, as Paiuóla.

Pála, any brode-flat shouell, spade, or scoope. Also a fanne, or winnow for corne. Also a peele to put bread or pies in a ouen. Also a plate to lay vnder pies. Also the finne or blade of an oare. Also the flotes or flats of the great wheele of a water-mill. Also the finne of any fish. Also a tree that beareth a brode leafe and a great fig. Also a kind of brode-leafed docke. Also the flat of any thing. Also a beesome or a broome. Also among gunners a Rammer-head made taper-wise. Also the Pix vpon an Altar.

Palacráne, grosse and massie pieces of gold found in mines.

Palácre, as Palacráne.

Paladáre, to fanne, or winnow corne.

Paladelle, springes to catch Quailes.

Paladinésco, like a Paladine, or man at Armes.

Paladíno, as Palatíno.

Paladóre, a fanner, or winnower of corne.

Palaficáre, as Palificáre.

Palafiggere, as Palificáre.

Palafítta, as Palificáta.

Palafreniére, a Palfrie-man, a Horseboy, keeper, or courser, an Hostler.

Palafréno, a Palfrey, a Steed, a Horse.

Palagiétto, a little Palace.

Palagio, as Palázzo.

Palamagliáre, to play at Palamáglio.

Palamagliére, a player at Palamáglio.

Palamáglio, a pale-maile, that is a stick with a mallet at one end of it to strike and cast a woodden ball with, much vsed among Gentlemen in Italy. Also the game or play with it.

Palamáro, a fishing-poole, or angling rod.

Palaménto, all maner of poles or stakes, or any fence made of them. Also the vpper decke, or hatches of a Ship.

Palamíte, a fish called a Tunie before it be a yeare old, a Sommer-Whiting.

Palánca, any planke. Also a little narrow bridge ouer any ditch of one piece. 



Palancáre, to floore, or seele a roome. Also as Palificáre. Also to planke.

Palancáto, a floore. Also a roome floored. Also as Palificáta. Also a planking.

Palancóni, great planks.

Palandária, as Palándra.

Palándra, a long Turkish garment, or horse-mans coate beneath the knees. Also a kind of flat bottomed Barges or Ships vsed in time of war to transport Horses to and fro, and to make suddaine bridges.

Palandrána, as Palándra.

Palandrína, a common harlot, strumpet, or trull.

Palánga, as Palándra. Also a cowle-staffe. Also a leauer, or iron-crow. Also a rowling piece of timber to remooue great pieces of timber with, or to lay vnder Ships when they be remooued from the stocke whereon they were built and lanched out of the docke. Also a sting to carie burthens or barrels with betweene two, as our Brewers and fish-porters doe vse.

Palangário, an Ale-stand-bearer, or Porter, that carieth burthens with slings.

Palánge, the plurall of Palánga.

Palángra, as Palánga. Also the lap, the skirt, or side-quarter of a cote.

Palára, a Thrush, or Field-fare.

Palára, the vpper decke of a Ship.

Paláre, to cast with a brode spade, shouell, or scoope. Also to pale, to stake, or hedge about. Also to vnder-prop with poles and stakes, as Vines or Hops be. Also as Palificáre.

Paláre il gráno, to winnow corne.

Palascermo, as Paliscermo.

Paláta, a spade or shoouell full. Also a paling, a staking, or poling about, a Palisado.

Palatára, as Paretára.

Palatári, a disease in a Horse, as Palatína.

Palatína, the nape, or nole of the head, a skonce, or pate. Also an impostumation or swelling in the palat of the mouth.

Palatináto, a Countie Palatine. Also the iurisdiction of a Count Palatine.

Palatíno, a Count Palatine, a Paladine, a Knight at Armes. Also of or belonging to a Princes Court or Palace.

Paláto, as Palificáta. Also a Stage, or a Scaffold.

Paláto délla bócca, the palate, vuola, or vpper roofe of the mouth.

Palatóre, a caster with a spade or shouell. Also a staker, or empailer.

Palatúra, as Paretára.

Palázzo, a Pallace, a Kings or Princes Court, or Mansion house. Also a chiefe seate, or Court of Iustice.

Palázzo di consíglio, a Palace, Court, or Place, where the Parliament or Counsell is kept.

Palázzo reále, a royall Pallace, a Kings Pallace, Court, Mansion, or house.

Palcare, to seele, or floore. Also to make into Stages or scaffolds.

Palchétto, a little Sollar, seeling, floore, loft, terrace, stage, or scaffold.

Pálco, a stage, or scaffold. Also a roofe, a sollar, a floore, a seeling. Also an Elephants trunke.

Pálco básso, a low floore, or gallerie, or seeling, or decke of a Ship, a low stage, or scaffold.

Palcóne, a great Pálco.

Palcóra, the plurall of Pálco.

Pále, the plurall of Pála. Also those parts of the backe which stand out on the right and left sides of any man.

Paleáre, to turne or play at Top and scurge.

Pale del molíno, the flats or flotes of a Mill-wheele which the water turnes about.

Palégro, a Beere to carie dead folks on.

Palellare, to paralell.

Palello, a paralell.

Palenéza, a kind of little fish.

Palengáro, a kind of basket to catch fish in.

Paléo, a Top or Gigge that children play with. Also an Elephants trunke or snout.

Palesáre, to reueale, to bewray, to publish.

Palesatóre, a reuealer, a publisher.

Palése, publike, apparant, in open view.

Palesta, a greeke measure of foure handfuls.

Palestra, a wrestling place. Also the game or feate of wrestling. Also barriers, or other feates of bodilie actiuitie. Also any thing or place wherein a man doeth chiefely exercise himselfe.

Palestráde, iron hookes made fast in walles.

Palestrico, of or belonging to wrestling. Also one that vseth or teacheth wrestling.

Palética, the Plough-share.

Paléto, a kind of Grimaldello.

Paletóni, great, broade, or double planks.

Palétta, any kinde of shouell, spade, scoope, slice, spattle, lingle, flat spoone, trowell, or thistle-spade. Also a batledar to play at tennis, or shuttlecocke.

Palétta da fuóco, a fine shouell or slice, a fire-pan. Also a Censor.

Palétta di muratóre, a mazons trowell. 

Palétta di spetiále, a spattle, a lingell, a slice, a spoone or tenon that Apothecaries vse.

Palettáro, a shouell or slice-maker.

Palétti, little stakes, poles, staues, or perches.

Páli, the plurall of Pálo. Also pales in armorie.

Paliáre, to cloke, to mantle, to couer, to hide, to shroud, to shade.

Paliáro, a floure yeelding a iuice, whereof they make a kind of drinke in Ethiópia.

Paliatióne, a paliation, a cloking, a shadowing, a couering.

Paliatíua, that may be cloked, mantled, couered, shrouded, or shaded.

Palicelli, little sticks, or poles.

Palidézza, as Pallidézza.

Palidíre, disco, díto, as Pallidíre.

Pálido, as Pállido.

Palidóre, as Pallidézza.

Palificaménto, as Palificáta.

Palificáre, to make a foundation of timber, piles, poles, or stakes in the ground namely vnder water, and about a camp, to empalisado, to entrench as it were with rampards to defend an armie, to enstake. Also to make wiers with stakes in the water for the stay of fish.

Palificáta, a foundation of piles or timber driuen in the ground, namely in water-works, or about a camp, a palesado or enstaking. Also a wier made in a riuer to stay fish. Also a trench or ramper of stakes to defend an armie.

Palificatióne, as Palificáta.

Palilie, certaine feasts consecrated to Pallas, goddesse of Shepheards.

Palilígio, the seauen starres that appeare in Iune called the Hiades.

Palílli, little sticks, stakes, or poles.

Palilogía, a figure called a Repetition.

Palimbácchio, a foote of a verse consisting of one long and two short sillables.

Palimsesto, paper or skinnes so dressed that they may be written on and all wiped out againe, euen as the leaues of our writing tables be.

Palína, some part of a ballet.

Palingenesía, regeneration, new birth, or second natiuitie.

Palinodía, a recantation, or vnsaying of what one hath spoken, sung, or written.

Pálio, a cloke, a robe, a vesture, a mantle, a couer, an vpper garment as the Knights of the Garter or Parliament Lords weare, or Princes at their Coronation. Also a Prelates Cope or Surplesse. Also a Paule, or Hearcecloth. Also a Horse-cloth. Also a 



shroud or shelter. Also the prize or goale of any running, race, wrestling, leaping, or tilting, giuen as a signe of victorie. Also a race or running course for horses or men. Vsed also for a Princes Canopie, or cloth of state.

Pálio funébre, a Paule, or Hearcecloth.

Paliscálmo, a kind of small Ship, Pinnace, Gally, or Barge as Sea-men triumph in. Also the long Boate attending on a great Ship.

Paliscelli, small sticks that Chandlers vse to make candles with.

Paliscelmo, as Paliscálmo.

Paliscermo, as Paliscálmo.

Palischermo, as Paliscálmo.

Paliselli, as Palisceli.

Paliúro, a tree, yeelding an excellent fruite full of delicate liquor, called the Paliur tree, the Rame of Libia, Christes thorne, White-thorne, Searush, or Hollie tree.

Palizio, as Palificáta.

Pálla, any kind of ball, bullet, bowle, or round packe.

Pallacána, a kind of Onion, or Cibol, or Scalion, good in April and May.

Pálla da ginocáre, a Tennis-ball.

Pálla d'artegliaría, a bullet for Cannon.

Pálla del cielo, a thunder-boult.

Palladelli, little stakes or poles for Hops or Vines to rest and grow vpon.

Palládio professóre, one that professeth to know of Mineruas cunning.

Pálla muschiáta, a Pomander, or muske ball.

Pálle aláte, as Pálle inramáte.

Pálle cornúte, bullets that are vneuen, and cornered with hookes in them.

Pálle di ferro, balles of iron.

Pálle d ottóne, balles of brasse.

Palleggiáre, to turne, make vp, or cast round as a ball, or bullet.

Palle inramáte, a kind of clouen shot, a bullet deuided in two pieces, in either part whereof is fastned a barre of iron, which our Gunners call a Langret shot, and the Spanyard, Angioli.

Palle-lésine, balles of Shoemakers wax.

Pallésco, wannish, or palish.

Pálle stórte, crooked and wry bullets.

Pallétta, a little ball or bullet. Also as Palétta. Also the name of a bird. Also any little ball, bunch, knob, or gall growing on trees or leaues.

Pallettóni, Palettóni, Gunners call them Capsquires, which are plates of iron that fasten the Trunions.

Palliáre, as Paliáre.

Pallidétto, some-what pale, wanne, bleake, whitish, or sallow coloured. 

Pallidézza, palenesse, wannesse, sallownesse.

Pallidiccio, palish, wannish, sallowish.

Pallidíre, disco, dito, to be, to become or make pale, wanne, bleake, sallow, or whinsh, as it were through feare, or sicknesse.

Pallidità, as Pallidézza.

Pállido, pale, wanne-coloured, sallow, bleake.

Pallifério, a tree in India which no water can rot, and is as hard as iron.

Pallíni, little bullets. Also haile-shot that is round.

Pállio, as Pálio.

Pallóne, a ballon, or foote-ball. Also any great bullet, ball, or round packe.

Palloniéro, a ballonier, or ballon-maker.

Pallore, as Pallidézza.

Pallótta, any bullet, or round ball.

Pallottáre, as Ballottáre, but properly among riders, when a Horse doeth stand aduancing himselfe, attending the riders hand to turne on either side.

Pallóttola, as Bálla, or as Pálla. Also a Snow-ball. Also a bottom of thrid.

Pallóttole, round kernels, agnels, or wartles betweene the flesh and the skinne, namely, in the necke, or groine. Also any small shooting bullets.

Palluzzáre, to tosse and dandle as a ball.

Pálma, a Palme or Date tree. Also the glorie, triumph, bost, signe, crowne or reward of any triumph, conquest, or victorie. Also the palme of a mans hand. Also the space betweene the wrist of the hand and the first ioint of the fingers. Also a measure called a hand-shaft, or hand-breadth. Also the flat of an Oare. Also as Palmáro.

Pálma Chrísti, the hearbe Satirion.

Palmáre, to crowne with Palme in signe of some victorie. Also to gripe with the palme of the hand. Also to stroke or smooth with the palme of ones hand. Also to measure by the spanne, or hand-shaft.

Palmáta, a whirrit, a souse or blow giuen with the palme of the hand. Also a spanne, a handshaft, or breadth.

Palmáte, certaine stones that in their veines represent Date-trees.

Palmatóia, a Palmers or walking-staffe made of a cane or reede.

Palmeggiáre, as Palmáre.

Palménto, a Wine-presse, or Wine-vat.

Palméro, a great tree in some parts of India producing great and good nuts, of whose timber they build houses and great Ships, of whese leaues they make Sailes, of whose nuts Sugar, Wine, and Vineger. The tree being bored in the stocke or trunke, spouteth foorth a kind of white liquor like water, into which putting a few dride Raisins or Grapes it becommeth excellent good and wholesome drinke. Of the shales or busks of the nuts they make good Oyle. Of the rinde or barke of the tree they make better cables and cordage then of Hemp. Of the boughs they make very faire and strong chests. Of the leaues of yong branches they make strong Mats and Frailes. Of the rind or barke of the yong boughs they make Hurds or Okame for their Ships.

Palmétto, a groue or plot of Palme-trees. Also a little spanne or handbreadth.

Palmiére, a Palmer, a Pilgrim.

Palmifero, Palme-bearing, or yeelding.

Palmipéde, whole, flat, or plaine footed. Vsed also for splay-footed.

Palmiprímo, a kind of Wines made of Palmes or Dates, Palme wine.

Pálmite, any leauie branch of a tree.

Palmitio, the male of Palme-tree.

Palmite délla víte, as Pámpano.

Palmito, a groue of Palme-trees.

Pálmo, a spanne, a shaftsman, a handbreadth.

Palmúccio, a yong Palme tree.

Pálmula, the broder part of the ribs.

Pálo, a pole, a stake, a staffe, a pearch, a wodden barre. Also a crow of iron. Also a kind of Dog-fish.

Pálo di ferro, an iron barre, crow, or leauer.

Palómba, as Palómbo.

Palombáio, a Doue-house, a Pigeon-house. Also the highest place of a house. Also the top or highest of a Ship. Also a certaine officer in a Ship.

Palombáro, a Doue, or Pigeon-house.

Palombíno, a Doue-colour.

Palómbo, a Stock-doue, a Ring-doue, a Wood-culuer, or Quoisht.

Palómbole, a kind of excellent greene Figs.

Palpábile, palpable, that may be felt.

Palpaménto, any feeling.

Palpáre, to feele, to handle, to touch or grope gently. Also to vnder-feele, to flatter with, or deceiue with faire words.

Palpatióne, a feeling, or touching.

Palpebre, the eye-lids. Also the haires on them.

Palpebre dell'álba, vsed for the dawne or first breake of day.

Palpebróni, great or brizlie eye-lids.

Palpegóne, gropingly, fumblingly.

Palpetánte, as Palpitánte.

Palpetáre, as Palpitáre.

Palpicóne, as Palpegóne.

Palpitánte, panting, beating, throbbing.

Palpitánza, as Palpitatióne.



Palpitáre, to pant, to beate, to throb as ones heart doeth being wearie or out of breath. Also to moue or stirre as ones braine doeth sometimes.

Palpitatióne, a panting, a throbbing, or quicke mouing of the heart with throbs.

Palpítio, as Palpitatióne.

Palséro, a thumb of a hand. Also an inch.

Paltoneríe, paltries, dodgeries, cheatings, loitrings.

Paltoniére, a paltrie, cheating, loitring companion. Also a Farmer of any land, or office. Also a Carier, or Drouer.

Paltoníre, nísco, níto, to palter, to dodge, to cheate, to loiter.

Paltóno, a paltrie knaue, or varlet, a roguing companion, a base raskall.

Paltrócca, a slut, a drigle dragle, a paltrie trull, flurt, minxe, or gixie.

Paltrúfalo, a kind of fruite of a water-docke.

Paludaménto, a triumphant roabe, an imperiall mantle, a chiefe Captaines rich vpper garment. Also a Heraulds cote of Armes, a cote-armour.

Paludáre, to grow fennie, or moorish.

Palúde, a fenne, a moorish ground.

Paludóso, fennie, marrish, full of bogs.

Paluesána, as Paluése.

Paluscelli, as Paliscelli.

Paluése, a kind of old fashioned Shield or Target called a Palueise.

Palústro, as Paludóso.

Pambasília, a perfect kingdome or dominion, where one hath all in his owne power.

Pamberáto, pampred, or well fed.

Pambére, bread and drinke. Also a beauer or nunchions in an afternoone.

Pámpalo, a fish, in Latine Pompilius.

Pampanáre, to sprout or spring with buds and blossoms, namely of Vines. Also to shred or cut off superfluous leaues or branches of Vines that the Sunne may come at the Grapes to ripen them.

Pámpani, the first buds, sprouts, or tendrels that spring from the Vine.

Pampanóso, full of buds, sprouts, sprigs or tendrels, as Vines be.

Pampapáto, a kind of spiced Simnell, Wafer, or Cracknell bread.

Pamphági, people that feede on all things without distinction, all eating.

Pamphágo, the name of a dog, as much to say a rauener, or eate-all.

Pampinare, as Pampanáre.

Pampinário, a Vineyard yet bearing no fruite.

Pampinatióne, a pulling of the needelesse leaues and branches of a Vine. 

Pámpini, as Pámpani.

Pampinóso, as Pampanóso.

Pán, vsed often for Páne.

Pána, as Panía. Vsed of Dante for Péce, Pitch.

Panáce, an hearbe with a long stalke yeelding a precious baulmie liquor. Some take it for All-heale, or woundwort, some for Tobacco, some for Costmarie, some for Angelica, and some for Scab-wort, or Horse-heele.

Panachéa, as Panáce.

Panáda, a kind of Pap or Panado.

Panadella, a little messe of Panado.

Panadelli, little Taper-lights.

Panadína, a little messe of Panado.

Panáe, vsed of Dante for Lime-twigs.

Panággio, prouision of bread.

Panáia, a Binne, or bread-basket. Also a Pantrie. Also a bread-deuouring paunch.

Panáno, the hearbe All-heale.

Panára, as Panáia.

Panaréco, that containeth all vertue.

Panaríccio, a fellon or whitlow on fingers ends. Also duskish spots that appeare on some face.

Panário, a place to keepe bread in.

Panáro, as Panáia.

Panaruóla, a little Panáia.

Panáta, as Panáda.

Panatella, as Panadella.

Panatería, a Pantrie, or bread-stall.

Panathenáico, a kind of oyntment anciently vsed in Athens.

Panathenee, a kinde of solemnitie or games vsed among the Athenians.

Panática, any kind of foode or meate. Also a bread-offring, but properly prouision of bread, or as we say prouander for Souldiers.

Panatiera, a woman-pantler. Also a bread-house, or Pantrie.

Panatiere, a Pantler. Also a Baker.

Pánca, a bench, a furme, a settle.

Pancáli, benches, furmes, settles.

Pancasciáto, a kind of commixture of bread and cheese very salt to be eaten.

Pancáta, a benching, a bench full.

Pancétta, a little panch, or brest.

Pánche, brogues, or such thin shooes. Looke Picchiáre.

Panchétta, a little bench, furme, or settle.

Páncia, a paunch, or bellie.

Panciáno, as Pancióne.

Panciáre, to paunch, or vnbowell.

Panciaruólo, as Panciera. Also a stomacher.

Panciáta, a paunch, or bellie full.

Panciatúra, any kind of paunching.

Panciera, a bellie-piece of armour.

Pancieróne, a bellie-piece of armour.

Panciétta, a little paunch or bellie.

Panciolláre, to liue, sit, or lye at ease, and wallowing in all pleasure and sensualitie.

Panciólle, all manner of ease, pleasure, and sensualitie vp to the eares. Looke Stáre a panciólle.

Pancióne, a gulch, or gorbellie, a big-paunch.

Panciúto, big-paunched, gorbellied.

Pánco, a bench, a furme, a seate.

Pancontióne, a kind of wholesome Cichorie.

Pancrático, one cunning in all kinds of games, or feates of actiuitie.

Pancrátio, a wrestling or exercise in all feates of actiuitie. Also a kind of Garlike or Onion growing by or in the water.

Pancratísti, men expert in actiuitie, wrestlers with hand and feete.

Pancréa, a kernell vnder the ventricle to defend it from hurt, in a Hog it is called the Sweet-bread.

Pancréo, a part of the bodie in the neither rimme of the caule betweene the liuer and the stomacke.

Pancrésto, a medicine or saue for euery sore.

Páncro, a manie coloured precious stone.

Pancúcco, Nuts growing vpon Okeleaues.

Pánda, the goddesse of peace.

Pandente, manifesting, declaring, spredding, or stretching out.

Pandenza, a manifest spredding out.

Pándere, pándo, pánsi, pandúto, to manifest, or declare, to spred, or stretch out, to open, to set abrode.

Pandétte, Bookes of diuers arguments, treating of all matters, a volume of the Ciuill Law called Digestes.

Pandéuole, that may be manifested, declared, spred, or stretched out.

Pandiculáre giórno, all Saints day, wherein they Sacrificed to all the gods in common.

Pandiculatióne, a gaping, or stretching out of the bodie, that so the vapours may be blowne and puffed downe.

Pandólo, a kind of boyes-play in Italy.

Pandóra, a Croud, a Kit, or Rebecke with three strings. Also signifying all gifts.

Pandóri, a kind of people in India that in youth haue white haires.

Páne, any kind of bread, or loafe.

Páne aquático, water-bread.

Páne artolagéno, fine cake-bread sodden in oyle, and seasoned with a little wine.

Páne artotício, bread baked in a pan.

Páne ázimo, vnleauened bread.

Páne biscótto, Bisket-bread, Shipbread.

Páne bollíto, a Panado, or candle of bread. 



Páne buffétto, manchet, or cupbord-bread.

Páne cornúto, course crustie bread.

Páne del cospetto, the Shew-bread, so called, because there was euer some vpon the table before the Lord. Exodus 25, 30.

Páne délla propositióne, as Páne del cospetto.

Páne di cernita, choise bread, finest bread.

Páne di formentáda, wheaten bread.

Páne di rauisiciuóli, Rye, or Tiphe-bread.

Páne di segála, Rye, or Tiphe-bread.

Páne di sembolelli, vnranged, or chaff-bread.

Páne di sémola, branne, or chaff-bread.

Páne di tritello, Rye, or Typhe-bread.

Páne di zúccaro, a Sugar-loafe, or bread.

Panédra, a bird feeding on fishes.

Páne ficáto, a kinde of close Simnell-bread.

Páne fornacéo, ouen-bread, furnace-bread.

Páne frésco, new, or fresh bread.

Panegírico, that containeth commendations and praise, an Oration in praise of Kings, wherein they are flattred with many lyes. Also a licentious and lasciuious kind of praising, or speaking.

Panegli, flying squibs of fire.

Páne gramoláto, kneaded, or ranged bread.

Páne grósso, great course bread, or loaues.

Pánelauáto, Simnell-bread, washed bread.

Páne leuáto, leauened, or light bread.

Panella, a manchet, or roule of bread.

Panelláre, to charme, to enchant, to witch.

Panello, a charme, an enchantment. Also a little cloth, or clout. Also a riding or horse-cloth. Also a banneroll or streamer. Also a little loafe, or manchet of bread.

Páne muffáto, mouldie, or mustie bread.

Páne oftreário, bread made with Oysters.

Páne pagáto, Simnell, or washed bread.

Páne pepáto, Spice, or Ginger-bread.

Páne porcino, as Panporcíno.

Paneréccio, as Panaríccio.

Panerello, a little wicker Panier.

Panéro, a precious stone which helpeth women in trauell hauing it about them.

Panerúzzo, a bundle of clothes, or linnen.

Páne saracinésco, blacke or course bread.

Páne saracíno., idem. 

Páne speútico, hastie bread.

Panetáio, a Pantler. Also a Baker.

Panetaría, a bread-stall. Also a Pantrie.

Panetéra, a woman-baker, or pantler.

Panetiére, a Baker. Also a Pantler.

Panétto, any little loafe. Also an ingot, or lump of mettall new cast.

Páne únto, bread, or a toste and butter.

Pángio, a deuout, and most religious man.

Pangónio, a stone like Cristall of the length of a mans finger.

Páni, the plurall of Páne.

Panía, any slime, or bird-lime. Also a rispe, a lush, or lime-bush. Also any gluish, slimie, or clammie matter. Also deceit, treacherie, or wilie entrapping.

Paniáre, to lime, or slime lushes or twigs to catch birds. Also to clam together. Also to deceiue, to seeke to entrap, or catch with some tretcherie.

Panicácapo, the name of a kinde of drinke vsed in Mexico.

Panicello, as Panétto. Also a hand-towell, or little cloth.

Panício, as Paníco. Also that which men vse in stead of bread.

Paníco, the graine called Panike. Also a sudaine feare wherewith one is distraught and put besides his wit, comming without knowne cause.

Panicóne, a gorbellie, a gullie-gut feeder.

Panícula, a long round thing hanging downe of diuers hearbs and trees like a Cats-taile, as in Nut-trees, and others, called red-plum, or Cats-taile. Also any thing that groweth round and long.

Panieráro, a Panier, or Basket-maker.

Paniére, a Panier, a Basket, a Dosser. Also a kind of broade slowre.

Panierúzzoli, little cups, or beakers of floures.

Panifero, bread-bearing, or bringing.

Panifício, bread-making.

Panióni, Lime-twigs, or lushes to catch Birds with.

Paniuóro, a deuourer of bread.

Panízza, a Panádo of grated bread.

Panízzo, as Panício.

Pannáccio, any kinde of filthie course cloth.

Pánna di látte, a kind of clouted creame, or the pure creame of milke.

Pannaiuólo, a Draper, or a Clothier.

Pannaréccia, as Panaríccio.

Pannelli, as Pannícoli.

Pannésco., 

Pannétto, any kind of little cloth, as a Napkin, a Towell, a Mucketer, or Kerchiefe. 

Pánni, all manner of clothes, raiment, or apparell, be it wollen, or linnen.

Pánniallégri, Holie-day garments.

Pannicelli, as Pannícoli.

Pannicello di náso, a Hand-kercher, a Mucketer.

Pannícola carnósa, as Pannícula carnósa.

Pannícoli, all manner of little clothes, clouts, or rags. Also filmes, or thin skinlets.

Pannícula carnósa, a fleshie membrane or pannicle or skin that lieth next vnder the fat of the outward parts, and is the fourth couer that wrappeth all the bodie ouer.

Panniculóso, full of pannicles, or skinlets.

Pánni d'afflítto, mourning clothes.

Pánni del viso, freckles in the face.

Pánni di brúno, mourning clothes.

Pánni di corrótto, mourning clothes.

Pánni di gámba, hosen and shooes.

Pánni di duólo, mourning clothes.

Pánni di ferro, plates of iron. Vsed also for shirts of maile, or iackets.

Pánni di rázza, Tapistries, or cloth of Araze.

Pánni di scorúccio, mourning clothes.

Pannífero, cloth-bearing, or bringing.

Pánni láni, all manner of wollen clothes.

Pánni líni, all manner of linnen clothes.

Pánni líni di gámba, linnen hosen.

Pánnilinio, a linnen-draper.

Panníne, all manner of wollen clothes. Also the trade of wollen clothes.

Panníto, a course Frocke, or Cassocke.

Pánni véndoli, frippers, sellers of old clothes.

Pannizzuóla, a toole vsed of stone-cutters.

Pánno, any kind of cloth. Also a tent for a wound. Also a marke which a man hath by nature.

Pánno accottonáto, cottoned, or napped cloth.

Pánno álto, any manner of broade cloth.

Pánno básso, narrow cloth, as Carzies.

Pannócchia, any tufft, head, or bunch or knob growing vpon hearbs. Also the rump of any bird, the end of any taile, a docke. Also a stalke, stem, or eare of Panike, Milet, or Indian wheate. Also a knob, a bunch, or wenne of flesh. Also a great bile, a plague-sore, a pocke, an impostume about the priuie members, a cunt-botch, a winchester-goose.

Pannochiésco. 

Pánno cóllo, a neck-cloth.

Pánno dell'ócchio, a pin and a web in the eye.

Pánno di séta, any silke cloth.

Pánno lána, woollen cloth. 



Pánno líno, any linnen cloth.

Pannóro, a kind of measure in Italy.

Pannosità, a dimnesse ouer the eyes.

Pannóso, full of cloth. Also couered with a rine, or slimie skinne.

Páno, closely round, the round lying of a Snake, or Worme. Also a Weauers beame, or roule. Also a spungie swelling on trees like a Mushrom, whereof they make touch-wood. Also touchwood. Also agnels, wartles, almonds, or kernels growing behind the eares and in the necke. Also as Panaríccio. Also a hote swelling, bile, or inflammation of blood.

Páno, a kind of Grimaldéllo.

Panóso, breadie, full of bread.

Panpentíto, bread of repentance.

Pán perdúto, cast away, lost labour. Also as Frúgi perda.

Pán porcíno, the hearbe Sow-bread, good for women in labor to hasten their deliuerie.

Pansebásto, a stone that taketh away barrennesse from women.

Pansebaftóne, as Panéro.

Panselóno, the full Moone.

Pánso, brode-footed.

Pantaléna, a Barnacle-fish that sticks vpon the outside of Ships. Some take it for another kind of shell-fish.

Pantanéto, a place full of mud, a bog.

Pantáno, thicke mud, mire, or bog.

Pantanóso, muddie, mirie, boggie.

Pantegána, a great Rat.

Panteríno, speckled like a Panther.

Pántero, a precious stone of diners colours.

Panteróne, as Pántero.

Panthéra, a beast called a Panther. Also a net or haie to catch foule or connies with. Also as Pántero.

Pántice, a great fat paunch, or gorbellie. Also a laske or flux of the bellie.

Pántide, a kinde of stone called also Graida, for they say, it bringeth forth yong ones euery three moneths.

Pantiéra, as Panthéra, but properly a plash, a pond, a poole, or waterish place where Duks keepe.

Pantófole, Pantofles, Slippers, Chopines.

Pantónimo, a Player, a Dizard, or common Iester, that with his bodie and filthie gestures causeth laughter in counterfeting any others gestures and manners. Also a kind of Poeme.

Panurgía, craftinesse, subtletie, guile, deceit.

Panúrgo, a subtle, craftie, slye, guilefull, or wilie knaue.

Pánza, as Páncia.

Panzanaríe, foolish, or iugling tricks.

Panzáne., looke Dáre panzáne.

Panzáre, as Panciáre.

Panzáro, a kind of good Wine in Tuscanie.

Panzáta, as Panciáta.

Panzeróne, as Pancieróne.

Panzétte, as Pancétte.

Panziéra, as Panciéra.

Panzóne,  as Pancióne.

Paolíno, as Pagolíno.

Paonáccio, as Panonázzo.

Paonázzo, as Pauonázzo.

Paóne, a Peacocke.

Paoneggiánte, as Pauoneggiánte.

Paoneggiáre, as Paouneggiáre.

Paornare, to darken, to obscure, to sut.

Paórno, darke, obscure, suttie, duskie, pitchie, deadly.

Paornóso, full of darkenesse, suttinesse, pitchinesse, duskishnesse, drearinesse.

Pápa, a Pope or chiefe Bishop. Also vsed for Sathan in the Vocatiue case.

Papábile, able to be Pope.

Papadíndi, dad or father some money or chinke, as children vse to say.

Papafico, a kind of riding garment.

Papagállo, a wonderfull Cocke. For Pape, is admirable, and Gallo, a Cocke, a Popingiay, a Parrat, a Parochito. Also a Cocke of the game. Also as Merlúzzo.

Papágno, the hearbe Poppie.

Papáli, a kind of daintie Peares.

Papalísti, Papists, such as take part with the Pope.

Papardelle, as Pappardelle.

Paparello, a goslin, a yoong goose.

Paparíno, a yoong goose or goslin.

Páparo, a yoong goose or goslin.

Papásso, a chiefe Bishop or religious man among the Infidels.

Papático, the Papacie, the dignitie and office of the Pope, the Popedome. Also a kind of simnell or spiced bread.

Papáto, as Papático.

Papaucrále, wilde Poppie, which being subiect to falling off, doth soone loose his flower. Some call it Corne-rose.

Papaueráta, a garment wrought with flower-workes like Poppie flowers.

Papauerína, a kinde of hard cabidge-lectuce.

Papáuero, Poppie or Ches-boule.

Pape, a word of admiration, as Gods! oh! alas! aye me!

Papellóne, as Papiglióne.

Paperáre, to play the goose.

Paperello, a yoong goose or goslin.

Paperíno, a goslin or yoong goose.

Pápero, a goslin. Also Gunners match.

Papésco, popish, papisticall.

Papésimo, Papisme, Poperie or Papacie.

Papéssa, a shee-pope, a pope-Ione.

Papiglióne, any kind of Ladie or butter-flie. 

Papíro, a kinde of great rush in Egypt growing in fens or moorish grounds, called Papir-reede, whereof they were wont to make great leaues to write on, and thereof was the first paper made and to this day called paper.

Papíro délla candéla, the weeke, match, or snuff of a Candle.

Papironeo., looke Lucégnolo.

Papísti, the Papists, or Popish.

Papístico, Papisticall, Popish.

Papózza. 

Páppa, the first word that children are taught to call their Fathers by, as ours say Dad, Daddie, or Bab. Also a Nurce, or foster-Father. Also any kind of Pap, or water-grewell.

Pappafico, a kind of course riding garment.

Pappafíco, a daintie bird in Italy that feedes on Figs, called a Gnatsnapper.

Pappagalléscalíngua, the Parets language, as we say, the pedlers french, gibbrish, or fustian tongue.

Pappagalléssa, a pratling huswife.

Pappaménti, gourmandizings, surfettings.

Pappardelle, a kind of paste-meate vsed in Italy.

Pappáre, to feede with Pap. Also to pap, or sucke a dug. Also to cate or feede with small or chewed meate, as some Nurces doe their children. Also to call Bab, or Dad, as yong children do. Also as Pacchiáre.

Papparóto, as Páppa.

Papparótta, as Páppa.

Pappatóre, a feeder on pap. Also as Pacchióne.

Pappatúra, any kind of pap, or papping. Also as Pácchia.

Páppe, teats, paps, dugs. Also as Pápe. Also a kind of shell-fish.

Páppo, Bab, Dad, or Daddie, as children call their Father. Also pap, or papping. Also the hearbe Groundswell. Also the soft doune of flowres that the winde bloweth about, as Thistle-doune, or the mossinesse and cotton that groweth on some hearbes.

Pappoláta, as Fagioláta.

Papponáre, as Pacchiáre.

Pappóne, as Pacchióne. Also the seede of a kind of Thistle.

Pápula, any blister, push, whelke, botch, bile, impostume, swelling, or inflammation that riseth on the skinne with itch.

Papulóso, full of Pápule.

Papuzzána, a Worme called a Weeuell.

Par, a paire, a couple, a cast, a brace, a yoke. Also as Pári. Also as Páro, it seemeth.

Pára, paires, couples, braces, castes, yokes. 



Parabási, transgression, as it were speaking something besides the argument.

Parábile, that may be warded.

Parábola, a parable, a metaphore, a figuratiue speach, a similitude, a resemblance, or comparison. Also a certaine crooked line comming of the cutting of a cone or cilinder.

Paraboláno, a speaker of parables. Also a Mountibanke, a pratler, a babler.

Paraboláre, to speake parables, to prate or babble by way of similitudes.

Parabólico, like, or resembling.

Parabolóso, full of parables. Also vsed for Paraboláno.

Paracéntesi, a pricking or cutting of the skinne with a lancet or other sharp instrument, to draw water from them that haue the dropsie.

Paracentério, an instrument or lancet, whereby such a cure is done.

Parachinánca, as Parasinánca.

Paraciméno il mátto, pensándo al paraciméno ducále.

Paracísmo, as Parasísmo.

Paraclési, a comforting, or exhortation.

Paracléto, a comforter. Also a patron, or protector.

Paraclíto, a man defamed, or that hath an ill name, and is ill reported of.

Paracnástico, a kind of continuall hote and burning feauer, wherein the heate when it is at the greatest by little and little diminisheth and ceaseth.

Paracnémio, the vttermost bone in the shanke of the leg.

Paracóculo, a strange plant or thistle, called the Apple of Peru, or the thornie and prickie Apple.

Paracópe, alienation of the minde.

Paracóre, a stomacher, or cordiall defence of the heart. Also the Goose-giblets, or such Cookes vailes.

Paracucchíno, as Pancúcco. Also a flurt, a flap with a fox-taile, a trifle, or matter of nothing.

Paracuóre, as Paracóre.

Paradélo, the great Daizie, with the knob in the midst.

Paradéma, a kind of earthen pot, or pan, or dish.

Paradígma, as Paradímma.

Paradímma, an example of some ones fact, deede, or saying.

Paradisáre, to emparadise.

Paradiseo, the Paradise-bird, hauing very costly feathers.

Paradisétto, a little paradise or place of pleasure.

Paradíso, Paradise, which is a garden of pleasure or hortyard of delight. But vsed for a place of felicitie and true happinesse.

Paradossále, paradoxicall, contrarie to the common receiued opinion.

Paradósso, a paradox, a strange thing to heare, and contrarie to the common receiued opinion.

Parasimósi, some part or disease about a mans priuities.

Paráfo, a paraffe, a paragraph, or whatsoeuer is contained in one sentence.

Parafuóco, a skreene or any thing to keepe the fire away.

Paragálli, the name of a rope in a ship.

Patággi, the knuckles or turning ioints of the Chine or back-bone.

Paraggiáre, to prepare or make ready, to dight, to set forth.

Parággio, plight, state, cace, or terme of being. Also a preparation, a making ready, a setting forth, a dighting. Also paragement, paritie, match or equalitie. Also worth or estimation.

Paragóge, a figure when a letter or sillable is added to the order of a word.

Paragonábile, that may be compared.

Paragonánza, equalitie, comparison.

Paragonáre, to equall, to paragone, to compare.

Paragóne, a paragon, a match, a compare, an equall. Also a comparison or conferring together. Also a triall or touch-stone to try gold or good from bad.

Paragonéuole, that may be compared.

Paragráfa, a marke in a margent.

Paragrafáre, to paragraffe.

Paragráfo, a paragraffe, a paraffe, a pilcrow, what is contained in one sentence.

Paraguántos, money giuen by such as winne at any game to by-standers.

Paralelli, Paralello, as Parallelli.

Paralesía, a disease called the Palsie.

Paralióne, a kind of wild Poppie.

Paraliopési, a preuention, an anticipation.

Paralipómene, left out, that is not spoken or written of.

Paraliscia, a disease called the Palsie.

Paralísi, a resolution of the sinnewes, a depriuing of feeling and moouing or of both in any part of the bodie.

Paralísi herba, as Paralísis.

Paralísis, an herbe with a golden flower, which is a signe of the spring-time, the Primerose, the Cowslip, or Oxelip.

Paralísto, as Paralítico.

Paralítico, one sicke of the Palsie.

Parallássi, the difference betweene the true and apparant place of a Planet or Comet, by reason that we behold it not from the centre, but from the superficies of the earth.

Parallella sphera, the place of the world where the inhabitants haue the Equinoctiall and the Tropikes paralell to their Horyzon, as they haue who dwell vnder the North or Southpole.

Parallelláre, to paralell or measure equally distant one against another.

Parallelli, the circles and lines in the spheare of the world drawen from the East to the West hauing one of the poles for their centre, and in euery part equally distant one from another.

Parallello, euery where a like distant and paralell, as lines drawen in childrens copie-bookes to write by.

Parallello grámmo, of opposite lines set paralell.

Parálo, a kind of ship at Athens wherein certaine went euery yeere to Delos in the name of all the rest to sacrifice to Apòllo, and they which went in that ship were called Paráli.

Paralogísmo, a deceitfull conclusion or captious reasoning and fallacious arguing.

Paramensáli, some part of a ship.

Paraménto, any kind of dighting, preparation, trimming, garnishing or furniture.

Paramése, the fifth string, or next to the middlemost. Also E. fa. b. mi.

Paramósche, any fanne to beate away flies.

Paránco da dúo rággi. 

Parándo, to be prepared.

Parándoli ouéro áspi, scalétte co'suói parándoli ouéro áspi.

Parándra, a beast or bird of many colours.

Paranési, a precept, an admonition or exhortation, namely such a one as ought not to be gainesaid.

Paranético, containing precepts and instructions as should not be gainesaid.

Parángo, a span-measure or shaftisman as Drapers in London call it.

Parangonáre, as Paragonáre.

Parangóne, as Paragóne.

Paranímpha, he or shee that is ioyned with the bride or bridegrome to make him or hir ready, and to ouersee that all things be well, an ouerlooker of a mariage or wedding. It is now vsed in many parts of Italie for a mariagemaker. Also a wanten milkesop, an effeminate courtier.

Paraníte, a kind of Amethist-stone.

Parapécchio, one of the bones in a mans arme. Called also Badío.

Parapetto, a parapet, or wall breast-high, the vpper part of a wall which shadoweth the souldiers from the sight and annoyance of the enemie, battlements vpon high walles, a vantemure. Also a cuirace or a breast-plate.

Parapharnália, as Parapherna.

Parapherna, all things that a woman bringeth to her husband besides her 



dowrie called in Latin Peculium.

Paraphoróne, a kind of course Allume vsed for Dyers.

Paraphrási, a paraphrase, an exposition of one same thing by other words.

Paraphrástico, paraphrasticall, a larger exposition of any thing.

Paraphrásto, he that interpreteth the sentences of another plainly.

Paraphrosína, a kind of phrenzie.

Paráre, to ward or defend a blow, to repaire, to couer from, to shield, to shroud, to shelter. Also to teach a horse to stay and stop orderly. Also the stop in the action of horsemanship. Pára béne, he stops well. Also to dight, to adorne, to set forth, to garnish, to prepare, to make ready, or set in a readinesse. Also to propose an occasion.

Paráre dauánti, to ward, to defend, to shield, to stop or repaire before.

Parasánga, a Persian measure vsed much by Xenophon in describing marches, containing thirtie Stadios, and is about three miles and three quarters of ours.

Parascósole, some part of a ship.

Parási, a kind of disease in the eyes.

Parascéue, the eaue before the Passeouer. Also a preparation.

Parasímo, as Parasísmo.

Parasinánca, a kind of squincie or swelling in the outward muskles or fleshie part of the iawes with a rednesse. Some call it the Mumps in the throat.

Parásio. 

Parasísmo, a grudge, a fit, a stoure, an accession of an ague or other disease, an assault, a comming againe or remaining of an ague.

Parasitággine, fawning-flatterie or parasitenesse.

Parasitáre, to play the Parasite, to sooth one vp in all things, to fawne vpon and flatter for a meales-meate.

Parasitástro, a counterfeit Parasite.

Parasíto, a parasite, a flatterer, a smell-feast, a trencher or bellie-friend.

Parasóle, any thing to keepe or guard one from the Sunne.

Parastási, assistance or proofe by witnesse.

Parastátiche, the spindle bone in the shanke. Also two kernels full of seed in mans bodie growing at the end of the bladder receiuing the seed from other vessels brought thither by vasa deferentia.

Parastráte, stones set about pillers. Also as Parastátiche.

Paráta, a warding or defending. Looke Paráre, a dighting or garish setting forth.

Parathési, apposition. 

Parático, a Trades-man, or Artificer.

Paratílmo, a kinde of punishment by drawing out of haires of the priuie parts of poore men taken in adulterie.

Paráto, warded a blow, defended from, shielded, shrouded or couered from. Also dight, adorned, prepared, set forth, garnished, made ready, in a readinesse. Also prompt, ready, nimble, prouided.

Parauánghi, country labourers, ploughmen.

Parauénto, a fanne or defence for the winde.

Párca, soft, sparing, thriftinesse, parcimonie.

Parcáre, to pardon, to spare, to forbeare.

Párcere, as Parcáre.

Párche, the three Fates of mans life, Clóto, Lachesis, and Atropos.

Parcimónia, as Parcità.

Parcimonioso, as Párco.

Parcità, parcimonie, thriftinesse, niggardnesse, frugalitie, sparing, scarcenesse.

Párco, parcimonious, thriftie, sparing, scarce, frugall, niggard, miserly. Also a Sheepe-fold, or Parke for Deere, or any empailed piece of ground.

Pardái, a kind of flat bottom'd boate.

Pardaliánche, the hearbe Libards-bane, or choke-libard.

Pardálio, a kind of oyntment anciently vsed in Greece. Also a kind of precious stone speckled like a Panther, and therefore so called.

Pardálo, as Nabíno. Also the bird called a Plouer.

Pardáo, a certaine coine in Ormuz.

Pardello, a Menow-fish.

Pardíglio, a darke speckled, or daplegray.

Par di víso, it seemeth apparant.

Párdo, a Leopard. Also a Deere, or sandie-colour of a horse.

Párdolo, a bird like a Plouer of a dunne colour. Also a kind of boyes-play.

Páre, it seemeth, it appeareth.

Pareáso, or Pareási, a Serpent, hauing to the greatnesse and length of his bodie but a small head, yet so wide a mouth, that he is able to swallow downe a Pigeon whole. He maketh a furrow in the ground with his taile as he creepeth.

Parecchiáre, to prepare, to make readie.

Parécchij, many, sundrie, diuers, manifold, namely three, or aboue three.

Parécchio, a preparation, a making readie.

Parécchio, equall, euen, match, or like.

Pareggiaménto, equalitie.

Pareggiáre, as Paragonáre.

Pareggiatóre, as Equatóre.

Paréggio, as Puléggio, as Paragóne.

Paréglia, as Paragóne.

Paréglio, a receptacle, a harbor.

Parélio, any thing bright like the Sunne.

Parencéphali, the hinder part of the braine.

Parencíma, the substance of the liuer, spleane, and lights, so called, because it is supposed that they are congealed of much thicke and feculent bloud.

Parengáto, as Palificáta.

Parenite, a kind of Amethist stone.

Parentádo, alliance, parentage, kinred. Also an assemblie of kinsmen. Also a mariage, or allying together of houses. Also a stocke, a name of a blood. Also an ancestrie, or pedigree.

Parentággio, Parentage, as Parentádo.

Parentále, of or belonging to a kindred.

Parentália, feasts kept in memorie of parents or ancestors.

Parentáre, to become kin, or kinsmen. Also to allye, or ioine in mariage.

Parentáto, as Parentádo. Also allyde, or ioined in mariage.

Parente, a Parent, a Father, or Mother that begat and bare vs. Also the creator, the maker, or he that breedeth and bringeth foorth. Also a kinsman, or an allye.

Parenteggiáre, to follow or imitate parents, or kinsmen.

Parentela, as Parentádo.

Parentesi, a parenthesis, or interposition of words within a sentence, a clause comprehended within another sentence, which may be left out, and yet the sense may be perfect.

Parentéuole, familiar, or like a kinseman.

Parenteuolménte, like a kinseman, or parent-like.

Parentézza, as Parentádo.

Parenticída, a murtherer of parents, kinsemen, or deere friends.

Parentório, as Peremptório. Also as Parentádo.

Parentúccio, a poore kinseman.

Parére, an opinion, a seeming, a conceit, a mind, a thought.

Parére, páio, pársi, páso, or parúto, to seeme, to appeare. Also to resemble or be like. Also to suppose, to haue an opinion, or conceit.

Parergo, something put to, being nothing of the matter, all besides the purpose that one hath in hand.

Parési, negligence, slacknesse, weakening of the strength of bodie or minde.

Paretára, as Paretária.

Paretaría, binde-weede, with-binde, or Pellitorie of the wall.

Paréte, any kind of wall or partition in any house or building. 



Parétolo, a place where birds are taken or where lime-twigges are placed.

Paretónio, a colour so called. Also a kind of white fatty earth or clay growing.

Parétta, a kind of net to catch birds.

Paréuole, seemely, sightly, appeering, handsome, makeing a faire shew.

Pargoleggiáre, to play the pretty child, to dote and wauer, to be pretty or quaint.

Pargolétta, as Párgolo.

Párgolo, little, quaint, fine, dainty and small, pretty and handsome, yongue.

Pári, a like, euen, match, equall, peere, resembling. Also paires or couples.

Pariáno, a kinde of Needle-fish like a Snake.

Paríchi, a certaine poore and base kinde of people that mannure and till other mens lands in Turkie.

Paricída, a murtherer of his parents, kinsfolkes, equals or deere frindes.

Paricídio, murther of parents, kinsmen, equals or deere frindes.

Pári del régno, the Peeres of a kingdome, great men or Princes of a State.

Pári di Fráncia, the twelue Peeres or chiefe Princes of France.

Pári disp ári, euen and odde.

Parietária, as Paretária.

Pariéte, as Paréte.

Parigíno, a kind of french coine.

Parigióli, a kind of Mushroms.

Paríglia, as Paragóne.

Parigliáre, as Paragonáre.

Paríglio, as Paragóne.

Parília, certaine feastes vnto Diana the 21. of Aprill.

Parilità, as Parità.

Pariménte, semblaby, likewise, equally, in like manner, euen a like.

Pário, a kinde of excellent stone vsed in building.

Páriodispári, euen or oddes.

Pári pári, as Par-pári.

Parisóla, an Ox-eye or great Titmouse.

Paristhímia, two spungious kernels in the iawes contayning great aboundance of humidity, which serueth to moisten the great arteries, the stomake and all the parts in the mouth.

Paristhmíe, as Amiddáli.

Parità, parity, equality, similitude, likenesse, resemblance.

Paritello, a thin wall of reedes or rods.

Paritónio, as Paretónio.

Parladúra, as Parlatúra.

Parlágio, a Pallace. Also a Parlour or place to meet and speake together.

Parlamentáre, to parly or speake together.

Parlaménto, a Parliament. Also a parly. Also an assembly of the chiefe and wisest men assembled together to treate, to speake and consult of weightie matters.

Parlánte, speaking, parlying, discoursing. Also eloquent and well spoken.

Parlantína, a pratling or talking woman.

Parlánza, hath anciently beene vsed for any speech, talke or discourse.

Parláre, to speake, to parly, to talke, to say, to vtter in words. Also speech, talke or discourse.

Parláre álla múta, to speake by signes.

Parláre a tentóne, to speake gropeingly.

Parláre a vóto, to speake to the aire, to speake and not be regarded.

Parláre brianzésco, to speake tipple, drunken or whip-cat language.

Parláre co' cénni, to speake by nods.

Parlár fuóra de'dénti, to speake out plaine.

Parlár'in ária, to speake and not be heard.

Parláre lárgo, to speake at large.

Parlasia, the disease called the palsie.

Parláta, a speake or speaking, a speech, a flim-flam discourse.

Parláto, spoken. Looke Parláre. Vsed also anciently for Preláto, a prelate.

Parlatóio, a parlour in any house, but properly a place where men meete together to parly and treat of matters, as our Parliament house is.

Parlatóre, a speaker, a talker.

Parlatório, as Parlatóio.

Parlatríce, a woman speaker.

Parlatúra, a speaking, a speech.

Parlético, sicke of the palsie.

Parliére, a speaker, a talker.

Párma, as Paluése.

Parmegiáno, of Parma, Parmesan cheese.

Pármi, as Mi páre. it seemeth to mee.

Pármola, a part of the plowgh so called.

Parnasáico poeta, a Parnassus Poet.

Parnócchie, Shrimps or Prawne fishes.

Páro, a paire, a couple, a brace, a yoake. Also a kind of ship or bote.

Parócchia, a Parish, a precinct assigned to one Priest to haue charge of.

Parocchiáre, to parish, or dwell in a parish.

Parócchij, were anciently such as prouided the Embassadors of great Princes that were sent to Rome in publike manner, of wood, salt, bread, and other necessaries.

Parochétto, as Parochíto.

Parocchiále, of or belonging to a parish.

Parocchiáno, a Parish-priest, a Parishioner.

Parochíto, a little Parret or Parochito.

Parócide, swellings behind the eares.

Parocísmo, as Parasísmo.

Paróco, as Parocchiáno.

Parodía, a turning of a verse by altering some wordes.

Paródo, the beginning of the Chorus his speech.

Paróffia., Vsed for a Parish or precinct of a Church. Also a part or share.

Parossiále, as Parocchiále.

Paroffiáno, as Parocchiáno.

Paroffiáre, as Parocchiáre.

Parógli, a disease in the teeth.

Paróla, a word, a motto. Also the word or speech. Also word or promise.

Paroláre, to set or play at a grand part at dice.

Paroláta, a tale of many wordes.

Parolétte, short or little wordes.

Pároli, a grand part set or cast at dice.

Parolíne, litle, sweet or pleasing words.

Párolo, a Tinkard or Brazier.

Parolóni, high, big, rouing, long or bug wordes.

Parolóso, full of wordes, wordie.

Parolózza, a grosse vnseemely word.

Parolúzze, foolish or idle wordes.

Paroníchia, as Panaríccio. Also an hearbe growing on rockes good to cure any Panaríccio.

Parosolína, a Titmouse or Oxe-eye.

Paróssola, as Parosolína.

Paróti, an impostume or sere that commeth of matter distilled from the head into the burres or kernels of the eares.

Parótide, the two arteries on the right and left side neere the throat, and going vpward aboue the eares.

Parpaglióne, the great Butter-flie.

Parpagliuóla, a coine worth three pence.

Pár pari, alike, euen, well matcht, hand in hand, man to man without odd's, equall. Also a kind of play called euen and odde.

Parpeglióla, a Butter-flie, a Ladiebird.

Párra, a bird called the little Nonet.

Parrà, it will or shall seeme.

Parricída, as Paricída.

Parricídio, as Paricídio.

Parrócchia, as Parócchia.

Parrocchiáno, as Parocchiáno.

Parrúzza, as Parosolína.

Parsimónia, as Parcità.

Parsimoniáre, to spare and be thriftie.

Parsimonióso, as Párco.

Párso, as Parúto, of Parére.

Parsonáro, a Copartner, a Partaker.

Partággio, a partage, a share, a partaking.

Partánza, as Partenza.

Partataménte, seuerally, apart, by it selfe.

Párte, a part, a portion, a share or diuision of any thing. Also a partie, a faction, a partialitie, a sect or side. Also a partiall man. Also partly or in part. Also an office, a function or charge. 



Also a coast, a way, a turne or course.

Párte chè, partly that, whilst that.

Partecipánte, partaking, participating.

Partecipánza, as Partecipatióne.

Partecipáre, to partake, to participate, to take part or share with.

Partecipatióne, participation, a partaking, a partnership.

Partécipe, a partner, a partaker, a sharer, an adherent, a complice, a copartner, an accessarie or companion in any fortune.

Párte di sópra, the vpper part. Also a chiefe in armorie.

Parteficáre, to partake, as Partecipáre.

Partéfice, a partner, a partaker, as Partécipe.

Parteggiána, a partezan, a iauelin.

Parteggiaménto, a sharing, a diuidence.

Parteggianáta, a blow of a Partezan.

Parteggiáno, a sharer, a partner. Also a partiall man or factious man.

Parteggiáre, to share or take part with, to canuase for, to be factious.

Partenénte, pertaining or belonging vnto.

Pattenére, tengo, ténni, tenúto, to appertaine or belong vnto.

Parteniménto, apurtenance, pertaining or belonging vnto.

Partente, departing, going away.

Partenza, a departure, a departing or going away.

Parte per vguále, partie per pale. Also partie per fesse.

Partesána, a Partezan, a Iauelin.

Parthenia, virginitie.

Parthenideo, as Parthenio.

Parthenio, the sonne of a maide vnmaried, or of one supposed to be a maide when shee was maried. Also Mugwort, Motherwort, Whitewort, Saint Peterswort or Featherfew.

Párti, the plurall of Párte. Also seemes it to thee?

Partióle, partiall, factious.

Partialità, partialitie, factiousnesse.

Partíbile, that may be parted.

Particella, a little particle, parcell, part, share, portion or member.

Particelle, little particles in speech, as Mi. Ti.Si.ci. vi. and such.

Participatíuo, that doth participate.

Partícipe, as Partécipe.

Participiále, that soundeth like or hath some affinitie with a Participle.

Participio, a participle of a verbe.

Partícola, as Particella.

Particoláre, particular, seuerall, distinct. Also a particular.

Particolarità, a particularitie, a distinction.

Particolarizzáre, to particularize.

Partícolo, as Particoláre.

Partícula, as Particella.

Particuláre, as Particoláre.

Particularità, as Particolarità.

Partigiáno, as Partegiáno.

Partigióne, as Partiménto.

Partiménto, a partition, a diuidence, a share, a part, a diuision. Also a compartment. Also a departing, on going away.

Partíre, párto, partíto, to depart, goe away. Also to deaide, to part, to sunder. Also to distribute.

Partíte il pezzo, to dispart a piece, which is, to raise a peg of wood or wax vpon the mouth of the piece iust of the height of the breech, by which. Gunners direct their shot, which peg the Italian Gunners, call Garófano.

Partíta, a departure, a going away. Also a deuiding, a sharing, a sundring, a portion. Also a parcell or part of a reckoning. Also a set or match at any game. Vsed also for a seuerall liuorie.

Partitaménte, seuerally, by peece-meale, particularly, distinctly.

Partitióne, as Partiménto.

Partíto, departed, or gone away. Also parted, sundred, deuided, or shared.

Partíto, a course, a match, a resolution, an offer, or entertainement. Also a counsell, an aduise, a determination, or couenant concluded.

Partitóio, a partition, a diuision.

Partitóie, a kind of Peaches in Italy.

Partíto di víta, dead, deceased.

Partíto per mezzo, parted in the midst. Also partie per fesse in armonie.

Partitóre, a parter, a deuider.

Partitóri, certaine principall feathers in a Hawke.

Párti vergognóse, the priuities of any creature.

Párto, the fruite of any mans inuention, whatsoeuer any man, woman, or beast brings foorth, a birth, or deliuerance of a child, a laying, a whelping, a litter, a layrie, a farrowing, a hatching, a kitling, a caluing, an ewing, a fillying, a foling, &c.

Partóggio, a Beere to carie dead folks vpon. Also a Horse-litter, or carying chaire.

Partónda, cioe Dea del párto.

Partoríre, rísco, to bring foorth, or be deliuered of child, or yong. Also to lay, to whelp, to farrow, to calue, to ewe, to hatch, to kitten, to fillie. Also to breede and produce any labour or fruite of the bodie or minde.

Partoríto, brought forth, or deliuered of any fruite, child, yong, or labour.

Párto serotíno, a latter birth, or last bearing, or lag-fruite.

Parturíre, as Partoríre.

Porúcca, a Perwig, or Gregorian. 

Párue, it seemed, or did seeme.

Paruente, apparant, appearing, manifest.

Paruenza, apparance, or ones presence.

Paruézza, littlenesse, smalenesse.

Paruificáre, to diminish, or make little. Also to vilifie, or debase.

Paruificatióne, a making lesser, or little, a diminishing.

Paruipendità, little esteeme, small accoumpt, or neglect of one.

Paruità, littlenesse, smalenesse.

Párula, as Parisóla.

Páruo, as Páruolo.

Paruoleggiáre, as Pargoleggiáre.

Paruolélétto, a little one. Also a little child.

Páruolo, very little, a little babe. Also an Oxe-eye, or Titmouse. Also a small pot, Pipkin, Skillet, Possenet, or Kettle.

Parussóla, an Oxe-eye, or Timouse.

Parúta, a seeming to the eye.

Parúto, seemed, appeared. Also seemely, handsome, goodly in show, of good presence.

Pásca, as Pásqua.

Pascále, as Pasquále.

Páscere, pásco, pascéi, pasciúto, to giue, or take foode or nourishment, to feede, to eate, to nourish, to pasture, to giue meate vnto. Also to graze.

Pasceuole, that may be fed, or nourished.

Páschi, as Páscoli.

Pascibiétole, a gull, a ninnie, a foole.

Pascióna, foode or victuals, or prouent for men, fodder, or prouander for cattell. Also good fare, or a good feeding till ones bellie be full.

Pascionáre, as Pasciozzáre.

Pascióne, rents, reuenues, or customes of the people of Rome.

Pasciózza, as Pascióna.

Pasciózzáre, to fare well, to feede fully and merily to make good cheere.

Pascieóre, a feeder, a nourisher, a pasturer.

Pasciúto, fed, full fed, nourished. Also pastured, or grazed, eaten.

Pásco, as Páscolo.

Pascolamento, a pasturing, a grazing.

Pascoláre, to pasture, to graze or fodder.

Pascolatióne, a pasturing or grazing.

Pascolatóre, a pasturer, a grazier.

Páscolo, vsed for Haukes-meat. Also pasturage, pasture, grazing, or fodder for cattell. Also any foode or feeding. Also the common teazell.

Pascolóso, full of pasture-grounds, good for grazing, or seruing for pasture.

Pascuóne, a horse or cattle-stealer.

Paselino, a kind of Lillies.

Pasóne, a Cornish Chough with red feet. 



Pásqua, signifieth properly a passage or passeouer, celebrated in memory of the Passeouer or through-passage which the Angel of the Lord made in AEgipt smiting with suddaine death the eldest borne child in euery AEgyptians house, sparing all the Hebrewes and touching none of them; with vs it is called the holy time of Easter, or resurrection of our Sauiour Christ. Vsed also for any other solemne and festiuall day.

Pásqua di Mággio, Whitsondaie.

Pásqua di Natále, Christes-birth-day.

Pásqua di resuressi, Easterday.

Pásqua di Suressióne, Easterday.

Pasquále, Pascall, pertayning to the Pascall or Passeouer.

Pasquáre, to leaue fasting, to keepe Easter, to celebrate the holy communion.

Pásqua rosáta, Whitsondaie.

Pasqueggiáre, as Pasquáre.

Pasquináre, to make or write pasquins, railing libels or satiricall inuectiues.

Pasquinate, pasquins, railing libels, satiricall rimes or such detracting trash.

Pasquino, an old statue in Rome on whom all Satires, Pasquins, rayling rimes or libels are fastned and fathered.

Pasquíno, a nick-name that country men call their tame Asses by.

Pássa, it passeth. Also withered or dryed. Vua pássa, dried raisins.

Passábile, that may be passed, passable.

Passacauálli, a Horse-boate or Barge.

Passacháte, a kind of Agate-stone.

Passadiéci, aboue ten or passage at dice

Passadóre, as Passauolánte.

Passaggiére, a passenger, a way-faringman. Also he that receiueth any tole, custome or passage-mony.

Passággio, a passage, a passeouer. Also Tribute, Custome, Tole or Passage-mony.

Passamaníni, any little or small laces.

Passamáno, any kind of lace for garments.

Passamáno d' áccia, statute or crewell lace.

Passamáno di óro, any lace of gold.

Passamáno di séta, any kinde of silke-lace.

Passamantáre, to lace, to set with lace.

Passamantáro, a Lace-maker.

Passaménto, a passing, or passage.

Passamezzo, a passemeasure, a cinqupace.

Passamórto, a Ferry-man.

Passante, passant, momentary, transitory, passing. Also Passant in armory.

Passapórto, a Passe-port. Also a Ferry-man.

Passáre, to passe, to passeouer, to surpasse, to out-goe, to exceed, to goe beyond. Also to decease or leaue this life. Vsed also for Passeggiáre.

Pássare, as Pássera, a sparrow.

Passáre a guázzo, to wade or forde ouer.

Passáre alcúno, to surpasse some body.

Passáre a nuóto, to swim ouer.

Passáre con piè sécco, a fraise vsed in expressing that one speakes of any matter grauely and pithily and so passeth the same ouer well.

Passáre di quésta víta, to goe out of this life.

Passáre il tempo, to passe the time.

Passáre i termini, to exceed the bounds.

Passár la bánca, is when a Muster master alloweth of a souldier and his armes.

Passarétti, little Flounders or Plaice.

Passáta, a passado in fenceing, a passage or passing by.

Passatempo, a passe-time, a sport, a solace.

Passáti, our past or deceased fathers.

Passáto, past, exceeded, out-gonne.

Passáto dománi, to morrow next or past.

Passatóio, is properly that fee which euery Captaine makes his souldiers to pay out of his wages monethly. Also a passage, an entry, a gallery. Also as Passauolánte.

Passatóni, a kind of shooting arrow very pierceing.

Passatóre, a passer. Also a passage or transe from one roome to another. Also as Passauolánte.

Passauolánte, a kind of small, but farre-shooting piece of ordinance. Also a kind of swift-flying and piercing shaft or darte. Also a kind of fire squibs.

Passeggiaménto, a walking, a pacing. Also a walke or alley of pleasure.

Passeggiáre, to walke or pace for pleasure.

Passeggiáta, a walking or pacing.

Passeggiatóio, an allie or walking place.

Passeggiatóre, a walker for pleasure.

Passéggio, a walke, an allie, a walking place, a turne in a walking Also the noise made in walking.

Passera, a bird called a Sparrow. Also the Plaice or Halibut-fish. Some take it for the Flounder, others for the Sole-fish. Some for any kind of flatfish.

Passeragazzéra, as Regestola.

Pássere, as Pássera.

Passerelle, little Plaice or Flounders.

Passerina, a kind of dried grape in Italie.

Passeríni, yoong Sparrowes. 

Passeríni ócchij, little Sparrowes eyes.

Passerníci, a kind of white whet-stones.

Passéro, a kinde of very venemous Serpent.

Passerótto, a Cock-sparrow.

Passétti, little steps or paces. Also little round buttons or bosses of mettall.

Pássi, paces, steps, streds.

Passibíle, passible, full of passion.

Passína, a space of nine of our feete.

Passíno, leasurely or softly-pacing. Also any little pace or step.

Pássio., Vsed for Christ his passion.

Passionáre, to appassionate, to perturbe.

Passionáto, passionate, perturbed in minde. Also giuen to some passion.

Passióne, a passion or perturbation of minde, a passion, a sufferance, a feeling, an accident or symptome concurring with some disease to distemper the minde or bodie.

Passíre, sísco, síto, as Passoláre.

Passiuità, passiuenesse. Also variablenesse, or licentiousnesse.

Passíno, passiue, importing, or causing passion. Also variable or fickle.

Pásso, a pace, a stride, a step. Also the pacing of any creature. Also the measure of two foote and a halfe. Also a  passage, a foard or a ferrie. Also a common place alleadged in any booke. Also that hath suffered or felt any passion. Also withered or sered with the heate of the Sunne. Vsed also for dry and full of wrinkles.

Pásso a pásso, step by step, faire and leasurely.

Pásso d'ácqua, amongst Mariners a fadome of water.

Pásso d'ásino, the hearbe Assehoofe or Allhose.

Pásso geométrico, a pace of fiue foote, by which Italian miles are measured.

Passoláre, to wither or dry in the Sunne as they doe Prunes or Raisins.

Pássola úua, dried Raisins or Grapes.

Pássole, dried or withered fruites.

Pásso mezzo, a cinque-pace, a pace-measure.

Pássone, a pile or stake to driue into the water.

Pásso pásso, faire and softly, step by step.

Pásso víno, as Sápa, cuit-wine.

Passuro, that may or is to suffer.

Pásta, any kind of paste or dough.

Pastáccia, any course or filthy paste.

Pásta d'ámbra, pomander of Amber.

Pastadelle, as Pastegli.

Pásta di Génoua, paste of Genoua.

Pásta gróssa, course paste. Also a grosse pated or shallow witted fellow.

Pásta régia, a confection or paste that Phisitions giue to comfort the heart.

Pastáre, to paste, to bepaste, to make 



dough or knead together.

Pastécche, some part of a ship.

Pasteggiaménti, feastings of paste-meates.

Pasteggiáre, to feast with paste-meates.

Pasteggiatóri, feasters, good-cheere-makers.

Pastegli, fine little pasties, or paste-meates, tartes, pyes, chewets or march-panes. Also Troquisques. Also plaisters or beplaistrings.

Pastelli, as Pastegli.

Pastello, Woad to dye blew with.

Pasticciámi, all manner of pyes or paste-meates.

Pasticciáre, to make or eate pastie-meates.

Pasticciáro, a pastie or pye-maker.

Pasticciatóri, as Pasteggiatóri.

Pasticciére, a pastie or pye-maker.

Pasticciétti, doucets, chewets, litle pyes.

Pasticcíni, as Pasticciétti.

Pastíccio, any kind of pastie or pye.

Pastiéro, a Plummers toole or iron.

Pastilli, little pasties, pastelets, chewets.

Pastináca, a Parsenep-roote. Also a Forke-fish or Ray. Also a puffin. Also vsed for a mans toole. Also as Fagioláta.

Pastináca muranése, a dildoe of glasse.

Pastináre, to graffe or plant vines. But properly to digge or delue the ground.

Pastinatióne, a digging or deluing of ground for plants, namely in furrowes for vines.

Pastíngoli, a kind of chewet or daintie pyes.

Pastíni d'álberi, yoong buds, sprouts or branches or tendrels of trees, namely vines.

Pastíno, a new set Vineyard. Also as Pastinatióne.

Pastizzáio, a pastie or pye-maker.

Pastizzáre, to make or feede on pasties.

Pastizziére, a pastie or pye-maker.

Pastízzo, any kind of pastie or pye.

Pásto, foode, meate or feeding. Also a repast or meales-meate. Also a baite for fish or foule. Also Hawkes meate. Also pasture or pasturing. Also vaine wordes or court-holy-water.

Pastócchia, as Fagioláta.

Pastocchiáta, as Fagioláta.

Pastocchieríe, gulleries, as Fagioláte.

Pastóia, as Pastóra.

Pastoiáre, to pasterne, to fetter, to shackle, to gyue, to clog.

Pastóne, as Pacchióne. Also any great plaister namely for a horse.

Pastophóri, certaine sacred Priests in Egypt more honorable then others.

Pastóra, horses pasterns. Also a tumbrell, a stocke, a clog, a shackle, a pillorie, fetters or shackles to tie men by the necke or feete. Also barnacles for vnruly horses. Also a sheepheardesse or woman keeping cattle.

Pastorále, pastorall, rurall, belonging to Swaines or Shepheardes. Also a pastorall Comedie treating of Shepherds or Swaines. Also a verge or crosier caried before Prelates. Also a mans toole.

Pastoráre, as Pascoláre.

Pastoráto, a Pastorship.

Pastóre, a Pastor, a Feeder, a Preacher. Also a Shepheard, a Heards-man, a Heardgroome, a Grazier of cattle. Also a kind of tarte or custard.

Pastorella, a prettie Shepheardesse.

Pastoréssa, a Shepheardesse.

Pastorítia, the arte of Shepheards.

Pastósa, a good, full, plum-wench.

Pastóso, full of paste, plum-fat. Also soft and yet full in handling.

Pastorúccio, a poore sillie Shepheard.

Pastricciána, a kind of wilde Parsenep-roote, or Skirwit-roote.

Pastricciáno, a gullish grosse fellow.

Pastriccióne, as Pacchióne, as Lumacóne.

Pastrúgli, any kinde of made or forced dish.

Pastúme, all manner of paste or paste-meates.

Pastúra, as Páscolo, or Pásto. Vsed also for vaine hope or entertaining of hopes.

Pasturággio, as Páscolo.

Pasturále, a verge or crosier caried before Prelates.

Pasturáre, as Pascoláre.

Pasturóso, as Pascolóso.

Páta della lúna, the Epact of the Moone.

Patácchia, a kinde of flat-boate or patache. Also a kind of coine.

Patacchína, a siluer coine in India.

Pataccóne, as Patacchína.

Patággio, a Patache or flat-boate.

Patágo, that kind of plague that leaues Gods markes or tokens behind it.

Patanári, messengers among the Indians.

Patárij, certaine Ministers or Magitions that gaue the answers of Oracles.

Pataríno, a Porter or day-laborer, a base mecanicall fellow.

Patáscia, as Patácchia.

Patassa, as Patácchia.

Patássio, an Oxe-eye or Titmouse.

Patáte, the rootes we call Potatas.

Patécchi, walking stilts. Also chopines.

Patella, as Padella. Also the whirlebone or pan of the knee. Also a fish in Latin Lapas or Partella.

Patelláro, as Padelláro.

Pátena, any kind of dish, platter or charger, a treene dish or wooden tray.

Patentáre, to patent, or giue letters patents vnto.

Patentáto, a Patencie. 

Patentatóre, hee that giues letters patents, a Patentier.

Patente, open, wide, manifest, appearing.

Patente, subiect vnto, in danger.

Patente, a Patent, a Charter, a Priuiledge.

Pateóni, a kind of large Dates.

Patéra, a kind of sacrificing cup or chalice.

Paterécci, as Panaríccio, whitflawes or callositties in the feete.

Paterína, a hireling queane or drab.

Pateríno, il pádre et la mádre érano státi prési ed ársi per pateríni.

Paternále, fatherly, paternall.

Paternità, fatherhood, paternitie.

Paterno, fatherly, of or like a father.

Páter nóstri, Pater-nosters. Also all kind of beades. Also rundlets or round beades in the mouth of a horses bit.

Páter nóstro., Vsed for our Father or Dominicall praier, or Pater-noster.

Páter nóstro délla Bertúccia. Looke Díre il páter nóstro délla Bertúccia.

Pathético, patheticall, moouing affection, perswasiue, forcible.

Pátho, a very louely beautious flower.

Patíbile, tolerable, to be suffered.

Patíbolo, a gibbet or paire of gallowes.

Pático, a kind of Aloes.

Patiente, patient, bearing, suffering. Also a patient, a sufferer or endurer.

Patientia, as Patienza.

Patienza, patience, sufferance, forbearing, subiection to obedience. Also a kind of course rug or haire-cloth frock that Galley-slaues or certaine strict religious men weare.

Patiménto, suffering, enduring, forbearing.

Pátina, a dish or platter, a great charger.

Patináre, to frequent dishes or great platters.

Patináro, a platter or dish-maker.

Patíre, páto, patíto, to suffer, to endure, to beare or abide with patience.

Patír úna digratia, to suffer a disgrace.

Patír uóglia, to endure a longing.

Patíto, suffered, endured, borne.

Patitóre, a suffrer, an endurer.

Patrásso, a selfe-conceited chiefe man, a great Clarke or commander.

Patratióne, the finishing of any thing.

Patráto, done, committed, accomplished.

Patráuo, a Grandfather by the fathers-side.

Pattégna, a father in law.

Pátria, a mans owne Country or naturall Soile, or the City and towne where a man is borne.

Pátria d'hercole. Vsed for a name of the Loade-stone or Magnes. 



Patriale, according or pertayning to a mans owne naturall Country.

Patriárca, a Patriarke or Chiefe-father.

Patriarcáto, the place, dignity or function of a Patriarke or chiefe Bishop.

Patriáre, to patriate, to indenizen, or infranchise into a Country.

Patríce, as Patrícij.

Patricída, a murtherer of his father.

Patricídio, a fathers murther.

Patrícij, such as in Rome were descended of the race or stocke of Senators, sonnes of Senators.

Patrício, a Patrician, a Senators sonne, or one descended of noble race. Also of or belonging to the state of a Senatour.

Patrímo, that hath the father aliue, or borne of the same father. Poets say that Minerua was called Patríma because shee was borne of hir father alone.

Patrimoniále, patrimoniall, inheritable, of or belonging to inheritance.

Património, a patrimony, a birthright, a liue-lode or inheritance, the goods or lands that a father leaues to his children after his death.

Patrígno, a father in law.

Pátrio, as Paterno. Also of ones Country. Also naturally incident to some one Country.

Patriótta, a mans owne Country-woman.

Patriótto, a mans owne Country-man.

Patritiáto, the dignity of a patrician.

Patrítio, as Patrício.

Patrizzáre, to resemble or imitate ones father, to be of his fathers condition.

Patrocináre, as Padroneggiáre.

Patrocínio, as Padrocínio.

Patróna, as Padróna.

Patronáre, as Padroneggiáre.

Patronággio, as Padrocínio.

Patronático, a patronage or protecting.

Patróne, as Padróne.

Patróne del tútto, Master or Owner of all.

Patron di cása, a house-master.

Patron di náue, a Master or Owner of a ship.

Patroneggiáre, to patronise, to command as a master.

Patronímico, iust of the fathers condition, or deriued of the fathers name.

Patróno, an Atturney or Counseller at Law.

Pátruo, an Vnckle by the fathers side.

Pátta, accords, couenants, contracts, bargaines, conditions, agreements. Also the epact of a number.

Pattácchia, as Patáccia.

Pattacchiáre, to besmeere, to bedawbe, to bespaule, to beblurre, to beslauer. 

Pattacchióne, a slouenly, beslabred fellow, a gore-bellied gulch, a great foole.

Pattacóni, great broad pieces of money.

Pattáre, as Patteggiáre.

Pattarína, as Pataríno.

Patteggiaménti, as Pátta.

Patteggiáre, to couenant, to condition, to contract, to bargane, to cope, to indent.

Patteggiatóre, a bargainer, a conditioner, a contracter, a promiser.

Patteggióso, that may be couenanted, bargained or conditioned vpon.

Patteríno, hee that absolues the confessant.

Páttero di pánno. 

Pátti, as Pátta.

Páttico, a kind of very bitter Aloes.

Pátti epagáti, when all parties be pleased and all couenants performed.

Pattiggiáre, as Patteggiáre.

Pattíni, wooden-pattines or choppines.

Pattióne, a pact, a couenant, a condition.

Pattítio, done or to be done vpon couenant, condition or bargaine.

Pátto, a couenant, a pact, a bargaine, a condition, an accord, a contract.

Pattoíre, pattoísce, pattoíto, as Patteggiáre.

Pattoíto, couenanted, conditioned.

Pattouíre, as Pattoíre.

Pattuíre, as Pattegiáre.

Pattuíto, as Pattoíto.

Patúlcio, a gate so called about the temple of Ianus in Rome.

Pauána, a dance called a Pauen.

Páuaro, a goselin, a yoong goose.

Pauciloquente, little speaking.

Pauciloquenza, little speaking.

Paucilóquio, little talke or few words.

Paucità, littlenesse, fewnesse.

Pauegliátta, a butterflie, a lady-bird.

Pauendo, dreadfull, terrible.

Pauentáre, to feare or be afraide.

Pauento, as Spauento, feare, dread.

Pauentóso, as Spauentóso.

Pauerázzo, a butter flie, a ladie bird.

Paueríne, little butter flies.

Pauéro délla lucerna, the weeke or cotton of a candle. Also Gunners-match.

Pauesáta, a pauesado. Also the fights in a ship or arming of a ship with cloth and canuase to hide the Mariners from sight of the enemie. Looke Scapoláre.

Pauésce, as Pauése.

Pauése, a Target, a Shield, a Palueise.

Páuido, fearefull, timorous.

Pauiére, a kinde of wood vsed to make chaires like Wall-nut-tree-wood.

Pauiglióli, Butter-flies, Lady-birds. 

Pauiglióne, a Butter-flie, a Lady-bird.

Pauiglióne, as Padiglióne.

Pauimentáre, to paue, to terrace.

Pauménto, a pauement, a terrace.

Pauirázze, drie bushes, Brush-wood, Firres, or Thornes, Bauins to make fire. Also bone-fires or great lights.

Pauitáre, to tremble for feare.

Pauitatióne, a trembling for feare.

Pauóna, a Pea-hen.

Pauonácchio, as Pauonáccio.

Pauonáccio, a purple colour. Also of the colour of a Peacocke.

Pauonáccio cúpo, a darke purple, a puke.

Pauonáccio di grána, purple in graine.

Pationacéa, workes that shine like Peacockes feathers.

Pauonazzo, as Pauonáccio.

Pauoncíno, a Pea-chicking.

Pauóne, a Peacocke.

Pauoneggiánte, fondly gazing or proudly courting of himselfe.

Pauoneggiáre, to gaze fondly, or like a Peacocke proudly to court and wantonize with himselfe.

Pauoneggiatóre, a fond gazer or proud courtier and wantonizer of himselfe.

Pauonéssa, a Peahen.

Pauoníno, a Pea-chicken.

Pauónio, a kind of stone which drunke in wine, and then sweating a little prouoketh loue and likeing of him that gaue it.

Pauóre, feare, dread, terror, fright, skare, diffidence, awe-full suspect.

Paúra, as Pauóre.

Pauríre, rísco, ríto, as Spauentáre.

Pauríto, made a feard, frighted, skared.

Pauróso, fearefull, timorous.

Páusa, a pause, a rest, a stop, a stay.

Pausáre, to pause, to stay, to rest.

Paúsie, a kind of little round Oliues.

Pausilíppo, the third draught of wine in bankets, drunke as a health to Iupiter, so called because it driues away cares.

Pazzacchióne, as Pattacchióne.

Pazzacóne, as Pattacchióne.

Pazzarello, a little Pázzo.

Pazzarésco, as Pazzésco.

Pazzaróne, as Pattacchióne.

Pazzéda, a chirning vat to make butter in.

Pazzeggiáre, to dote or play the foole.

Pazzésco, foolish, fond-like, doting.

Pazzía, folly, fondnesse, madnesse, dotage.

Pazzíre, pazzísco, pazzíto, as Pazzeggiáre.

Pazzíto, as Impazzíto.

Pazziuóla, a silly fond or mad-woman.

Pázzo, a foole, a patch, a mad-man.

Pázzo, foolish, fond, mad, simple.

Pazzúccio, a silly gull or simple foole.

Pè, a foote, as Piéde.



Pe', for Per ì, for or by the.

Peána., Vsed for Apollo.

Peáni, hymnes, or songs of praises made or sung, to Apollo when any plague raged, as also after the obtayning of some victory.

Peántide, a kind of precious stone of the colour of frozen water.

Pécca, as Peccáto. Also a fault or blemish.

Peccábile, that may sinne or be sinned.

Peccabilità, sinnefulnesse.

Peccadíglio, a smale pardonable sinne.

Peccánte, sinning, offending.

Peccáre, to sinne, to offend, to trespasse, to swarue from right, to doe amisse.

Peccáta, sinnes, offences, trespasses.

Peccáti, as Peccata.

Peccáto, a sinne, an offence, a fault, a crime, a trespasse, E'peccáto chèla virtùnon viéne stimáta, it is pitty or it is a sinne that vertue is not esteemed. Also sinned, offended, done amisse, trespassed.

Peccáto gomoreo, vnnaturall sinne.

Peccatóre, a sinner, an offender.

Peccatríce, a woman sinner or offender.

Peccatáccio, a filthy, foule, abhominable sinne.

Peccatúccio, as Peccadíglio.

Pécchia, any kinde of Bee.

Pecchiáre, to sting as a Bee. Also to pecke.

Pecchiétto, a Robin-red-breast.

Pecchióne, a Drone, or humming Bee.

Péccia, pitch. Also as Páncia.

Péccio, a Pitch-tree.

Péce, any kind of Pitch, or Tarre.

Péce colofónia, a kind of Pitch.

Péce greca, Greeke Pitch.

Péce líquida, Tarre-pitch.

Péce nauále, Ship-pitch, or Tarre.

Péce spéssa, Stone-pitch.

Peciáre, to Pitch, to be-pitch, to Tarre.

Pecília, a Fish that chirpeth like a Thrush.

Peciosità, pitchinesse.

Pecióso, pitchie, full of pitch.

Peciúto, a kinde of Wine tasting of Peares.

Pécolo, the stalke of any fruite. Also the niple of a dug.

Pécora, any kind of Sheepe. Also a sillie gull, a harmelesse ninnie.

Pecorággine, sheepishnesse, simplicitie.

Pecoráio, a Shepheard.

Pecoráro, a Shepheard.

Pecoréccio, a Sheepe-cote, Pen, or folde. Looke Andáre.

Pecoreggiáre, to play the sheepe.

Pecorella, a Lamb, or yong Sheepe.

Pecoríccio, sheepish, of a Sheepe.

Pecoríle, sheepish. Also as Pecoréccio.

Pecorína, a Lambe, or little Sheepe. 

Pecorína, sheepe-skin, parchment, vellam.

Pecorino, of or pertaining to sheepe. Also Sheepes-cheese. Also a Sheepe-pen, or folde.

Pecoróne, a simple man, a harmelesse gull.

Pecoróso, full of Sheepe, hauing Sheepe.

Pectide, a musicall instrument like a Psalterie.

Pectúnculo, a Scalop-fish.

Pecuária, of or belonging to Sheepe.

Pecúglio, as Pecúlio. Vsed also for a flocke of Sheepe.

Peculiare, peculiar, speciall, particular, proper, pertaining to some one.

Peculiarità, specialtie, proprietie.

Peculiarménte, peculiarly, specially.

Pecúlio, any profit or gaine made of Sheepe, of wooll, of grazing, and of any Cattell. Also any substance, wealth, or riches, whether in money, or cattell, so it be properly ours, and gotten by our labour and industrie.

Peculióso, that hath great gaine, gettings, or profits comming in.

Pecúnia, any quoine or monie, because the first monie had the stamp of a Sheepe vpon it. Vsed also for wealth and riches.

Pecuniale, of, or pertaining to monie.

Pecuniáre, to monie, to store with monie.

Pecuniária, of or belonging to monie.

Pecuniatíuo, that may be had or dealt with for monie.

Pecunieggiáre, to deale, traffike, or handle monie.

Pecunióso, monied, rich, full of monie.

Pedaggiere, a foot-man, a lacquey. Also a receiuer of footemens passage-monie.

Pedággio, tole that foote-men pay at passages, commonly called passage-monie. Also fastnesse, or footing.

Pedagogággine, as Pedantággine.

Pedagoghería, as Pedantággine.

Pedagoghéssa, a Schoole-mistris.

Pedagogía, the office of a Pedagoge.

Pedagógo, a teacher or trainer vp of yong children, a tutor, or Schoolemaister, one that teacheth the first principles of learning.

Pedále, a foote, a base, a foundation, the stocke or roote of a tree or any thing else, a foote-stale, a foote-stoole, a supporter, a stake or forke to beare vp any vine, hops, or trees, a prop, or stay. Also the measure or space of a foote. Also a mans stocke, wealth, or substance. Also socks, or thin dancing pumps. Vsed also for a mans off-spring, stocke, lineage, blood, or descent.

Pedále d'vn' árbore, the roote, the stocke or maine bodie of a tree. 

Pedálí di líno, linnen socks.

Pedaménto, any foundation, groundworke, base, or footing.

Pedáne, on foote, or like a foote-man.

Pedantággine, pedantisme, profession of a pedant. Also vsed for fond selfe-conceit, or idiotisme, in vsing of inkepot tearmes, or affected phrases.

Pedánte, a pedant, as Pedagógo.

Pedanteggiáre, to play the Pedagógo.

Pedantería, as Pedantággine.

Pedantésco, pedanticall, like a pedagoge. Also fondly affected, foolish conceited.

Pedantúccio, a foolish, or simple pedant.

Pedáre, to foote, to tracke, to trace, to treade or trample with ones foote.

Pedárij., Some say, that all the Senators who were not of the number of those who were called Curules were named Pedárij, because they alwaies went on foote to the Senate-house. Others say, that Pedárij were certaine yong Romane Gentle-men that came into the Senate, but were not admitted to speake, nor to be numbred as Senators. Some others say, that Pedárij were Senators of Rome, so called, because they did not vtter their opinion in words, but went to the part and side of them whose opinion they did allow, as in deuiding the Parliament house.

Pedário, a foote-man, a lacquey.

Pedáta, a foote-step, a footing, a tracing, the print of a foote, the view of a Deere, the pricke of a Hare. Also a foote-breadth or length, twelue of our inches.

Péde, a foote, a measure of twelue inches.

Pedéma, a kind of dance, wherein they lifted their feete very high backward.

Pedéna, as Pedína. Also some part of a weauers loome whereon he treads.

Pederastía, vicious, and vnnaturall louing and vse of children, buggerie.

Pederásto, a vicious and vnnaturall louer of boyes, a buggerer.

Pederestáre, to commit buggerie.

Pederétti, as Pederíte.

Pederíte, a beautious manie-coloured stone or Opale, good against poison and drunkennesse, called also Gemma di vénere.

Pédero, as Pederíte.

Pederóta, the hearbe Brankursine, of some taken for Cheruill, or Senuie.

Pedestállo, as Piedestállo.

Pedestre, a foote-man, one that goeth or serueth on foote. Also of or belonging vnto footemanship.

Pedéculo, as Pécolo.

Pedetáre, to fart, or cracke behind.

Pedetáro, a loud or often farter.

Pedía, instruction, or teaching of chil­



dren, bringing vp in honest artes or trades.

Pedicáre, to commit buggerie.

Pedicatóre, a buggerer.

Pedicello, a little worme breeding betweene the skinne and the flesh.

Pedicíno, as Pedicello. Also a little foote.

Pedicíno déll'ótre, a little foote of any iarre, pitcher, pot, or kan.

Pedicóne, a buggerer, an ingler of boyes.

Pediculáre, to louze or fill with lice. Also the louzie euill.

Pediculáre herba, staues-acre, red-rattle, licebane, rattlegrasse, or louzewort.

Pediculária, as Pediculáre herba.

Pedículo, a louse. Also a fish called the Dolphins parasite, for he euer waites on him.

Pedigáre, to goe or wander vp and downe on foote.

Pedíglio, a little foote, vóce spagnuóla.

Pedignóni, angrie kibes, chilblanes, or bloodie falles comming of cold, kibed, chilled, or humbled heeles.

Pedína, a paune at Chesse.

Pédio, the plant or middle part of the foote from the first ioint of the toes to the instep, answering the backe of the hand.

Pedisségua, a maid-seruant euer following her mistris.

Pedisséguo, a man-seruant euer at his maisters heeles.

Peditáre, to fart, or cracke behind.

Peditáro, a farter.

Pédo, a sheepe-hooke, or forke.

Pedocchiáre, to louze, or picke lice.

Pedócchio, any kind of louse. Also a disease in a horse about the crupper.

Pedócchio maríno, a Sea-louse, or creeper.

Pedocchióso, louzie, or full of lice.

Pedománte, a kind of Soothsaier.

Pedomantía, a kind of diuination.

Pedóna, a paune at Chesse.

Pedóne, a foote-man, a Lacquey.

Pedóro, as Pederíte.

Pedóta, a Pilot, or guide by Sea.

Pedótta, a kind of flat fishers boate.

Pedottína, a little flat fishers boate.

Pedótto, a Pilot, or guide by Sea. Also a guide, or leader by land, a waymaister. Also a Sea-marke, or Beakon. Also a foote-man.

Pedrello, an ignorant ouer-weening gull.

Pedrinále, a peece called a Petrinell.

Pedrolína, a trull, a flurt, a minxe, a strumpet.

Pedúccij, all manner of feete, or petitoes.

Pedúccio, as Pedále.

Pedúli, linnen socks worne on feete, but properly the foote-part of hosen, or stockings.

Pedunculi, certaine creepers, or Sea-lice.

Pégala, Pitch, or Tarre.

Pegaláre, to Pitch, to Tarre.

Pegáme, a basting-ladle, or basting.

Pégaso, a Signe or Star in heauen so called. Also a kind of bird that hath a head like a Horse. Also a kinde of monstruous Horse that is winged, and hath hornes in his head.

Pegería, pledge, baile, maineprise.

Peggiáre, to answere, pledge, or be suertie for.

Peggiaría, suertieship, baile, maineprise.

Péggio, worse, more ill, worst, iller.

Peggioraménto, a growing worse and worse, an empairing.

Peggióránte, empairing, growing worse and worse.

Peggioránza, as Peggioraménto.

Peggioráre, to empaire, to grow worse.

Peggióre, worse, more ill, more bad.

Peggiorità, worstnesse, empairing.

Pegiáre, to pledge or be sueritie for.

Péglia, as Pelle. Also the outward pricking huske of a Chessenut.

Péglio, the haires aboue the eye-lids.

Pégma, a frame or pageant to rise, mooue, or goe it selfe with vices. Also a stage or high raised cupbord for plate.

Pegnáre, to pawne, to engage, to pledge, to morgage. Also to bet or lay a wager. Also to take a stresse or distraine for rent or debt. Also to baile or be suertie for.

Pégno, a pawne, a gage, a pledge, a morgage, a baile, a suertie, a sure signe, a wager, a bet, a stake at gaming. Also a stresse or distresse.

Pegnóra, as Pignóra.

Pegnoráre, as Pignoráre.

Pegnoratíuo, as Pignoratíuo.

Pégola, pitch or tarre, an infectious whore.

Pegoláre, to pitch, to bepitch, to tarre.

Pegolóso, pitchie, full of pitch or tarre.

Pegrítia, as Pigrítia.

Pégro, as Pígro.

Péi, as Pe', Péi piédi, by the feete.

Pel, by, for or through the. Also as Pélo.

Pelacáne, a dog-flear, a mercilesse or pittilesse or cruell varlet.

Pelafrónte vécchia et astúta, an olde craftie soaker or fleaer of a man.

Pelágia, as Pelágio.

Pelagigi, of, or liuing in the Sea.

Pelágio, of, or belonging to the maine Sea. Also a kind of Purple-fish.

Pelagióne, as Pelarella.

Pélago, the maine, the deepe or bottome of the Sea, the vaste Ocean sea.

Peláia, as Pelarella.

Pelamantello, a dresser of ould clothes. Also one that weares his clothes bare. Also a filcher of clokes.

Peláme, the cote or colour or haire of a horse or any cattle. Also a fish called a Summer-whiting or Tunnie before it be a yeere old.

Pelámide, as Palamíto.

Pelánda, as Palándra.

Peláre, to pull of the haire, the feathers or skin of any thing, to vnskin, to flea to the quicke. Also to singe or skald as they doe a Hog. Also to gall or plucke off the skin. Also to pill, to pare, to pole, to take from, to make bare.

Peláre gallíne, to pull or plucke hens.

Peláre la bórsa, to rob or empty ones purse.

Pelarella, a plaister to plucke off haires, feathers or skin. Also a disease that makes the skin or haires goe off.

Peláre pórci, to scalde or singe Hogs.

Peláre qualcúno, to pill or pole some bodie.

Pelárgo, a Storke.

Pelaruóla, as Pelarella.

Pelásgo, Horse-tongue-laurell.

Pelatía, as Alopácie.

Pelatína, as Pelarella.

Peláto, pulled, plucked, singed, scalded, galled, pilled or in any sort scalded off the skin, the haires or feathers, bare-pluckt, vnskinned.

Pelatóio, as Scorticatóio.

Pelatúra, taken for womens paintings, dawbings or strong waters to smooth their faces. Also singeing, pulling, plucking or scalding of any foule or hogs.

Pelecíno, taken for Axfitch.

Peléggio, as Puléggio. Also the maine Sea, as Pélago. Also a little path or way.

Pelegrinággio, as Pellegrinággio.

Pelegrinánte, as Pellegrinánte.

Pelegrináre, as Pellegrináre.

Pelegrinatióne, as Pellegrinatióne.

Pelegríno, as Pellegríno.

Peléra, as Pelarella.

Pelicáno, a bird called a Pelican. Some take it for a Shoueler with a broad bill. Also a Pelican-fish. Also a snap or dog to pull out teeth with. Also a kind of Serpentine limbecke.

Pelíce, a whore, a strumpet, a harlot.

Pelicinóne, the weed Axfitch.

Pelimpíssia, pitch thrice boiled.

Pella, for, by, or through thee.

Pelláce, full of faire words to deceiue.

Pelláccia, faire speech to deceiue.

Pellámi, all manner of fell, or skins.

Pelláre, to vnskin. Also to vnbowell.

Pelle, any kind of skin, hide or fell. Also any kind of furre.

Pelle di camóccia, a Shamoy-skin. 



Pelle di vácca, a Cowes or Oxe-hide.

Pelle di zebellini, a Sables skin or furre.

Pellegáte, little sinnewes that goe through the fleshie parts of any bodie. Also a flappie piece of meate.

Pellegrinággio, pilgrimage, peregrination.

Pellegrinánte, a Pilgrime, or one that windreth vp and downe.

Pellegrináre, to wander or goe on pilgrimage, to wander or be in a strange country.

Pellegrinatióne, a Peregrination, a going or being in a strange land, a voyage.

Pellegrinità, being in a strange country, strangenesse, the condition of such as be in strange countries, strangenesse in behauiour or speech.

Pellegríno, a Pilgrime, a palmer, a wandrer, an outlander. Also a fren, an alien, a forrener, a stranger. Also a Haggard-hawke. Vsed also for excellent, noble, rare, singular and choise.

Pelle-pelle, whosht, softly, ho-there.

Pelleri, the little pillers or garnishings of gates or chimnie pieces.

Pellesína, any thin skin, skinlet, caule, filme, membrane or pellicle. Also a thin creame ouer anything.

Pellétta, a kind of bird.

Pellettaría, the Skinners or Furrier trade.

Pellíca, as Pelliccióne.

Pellíccia, any kind of furred garment.

Pellicciáio, a Skinner or a Furrier.

Pellicciáre, to furre any garment.

Pellicciáro, a Skinner, a Furrier.

Pellicciería, a Skinners or Furriers ship. Also taken for a mans last home.

Pelliccína, as Pellesína.

Pelliccíno, a little furred garment. Also the eares or corners of a full sacke or packe, by which hold is taken.

Pelliccióne, a big furred garment, a great furred gowne.

Pellíce, a whore or concubine that lyeth with a maried man.

Pellicegli, as Pedicello.

Pellícola, as Pellesína.

Pelligáta, as Pellegáte.

Pellisína, as Pellesína.

Pellízza, as Pelliccia.

Pellizzáio, as Pellicciáio.

Pellizzáre, as Pellicciáre.

Pellizzóne, as Pelliccióne.

Pello, a carion Heron.

Pellolína, as Pellesína.

Pellóne, as Pello.

Pellóride, as Pelóre.

Pélo, any kind of haire. Also the cote or colour of a horse. Vsed also for the countenance of a man. Also as Boccáta.

Pélo cauallíno, a kind of stuffe made of horses haire.

Pelóne, a bare, a pennilesse, a clothlesse fellow.

Pélo d'ácqua, tiráre a pélo d'ácqua, a phrase vsed among Mariners, that is, to shute betweene winde and water.

Pelóni, great, long or shagged haires.

Pelóre, a shell-fish called a Palour.

Pelóride, as Pelóre.

Pelosella, the hearbe Mouseare.

Pelosína, the hearbe Mouseare.

Pelóso, hairie, full of haires, shaggie.

Pelottáre, to thumpe, to cuff, to ribbaste.

Pelótti, thumps, cuffs, bangs, stripes.

Pelpa, plush or shag made of silke and much vsed to line garments.

Pelpáre, to plush or shag.

Pelpassáto, in times past, heretofore.

Pelpóso, plushie, shaggie.

Pelpúto, plushie, shaggie.

Pelta, a shield or target like a halfe Moone.

Peltiféro, bearing a shield or target.

Peltráio, a Pewterer.

Peltráme, all manner of pewter stuffe.

Peltráro, a Pewterer.

Péltro, all manner of pewter.

Peluccáre, to pull, to picke or plucke out any haires.

Pelue, the braine tunnell.

Pelverso, according to the graine or biase or naturall course of any thing.

Pelúzzi, little, small or yoong haire.

Pémula, a kind of wine or grape.

Péna, paine, labour, swinke, punishment. Also affliction or passion of minde. Also penaltie or forfait. Also vpon paine or forfeiture of. Apéna, hardly, with paine. A gran péna, with much paine, very hardly.

Penáce, the hearbe Loueach or Liuish. Also full of paine, paining.

Péna la víta, vpon paine of death.

Penále légge, a penall Law.

Penalità, penaltie, forfeiture.

Penáre, to paine, to take paines, to giue or receiue paines. Also to linger in paine, to be in any difficultie, suspence or anguish of minde or bodie.

Péna talióne, a talion law.

Penáti, the secret parts of ones house. Also houshold or peculiar gods. Also hobgoblins or spirits of the butterie.

Penázzi, a kind of birds.

Pénco., Vsed in Lombardie for butter.

Pendáglio, any pendent or downe dangling thing as of a Trumpet.

Pendente, hanging, panchant, stooping, bending, enclining or dangling down. Also doubtfull, in suspence and vncertaine. Also pendent in Armorie. Also a pendent or iewell in ones eare. Also a paire of hangers for a rapier. Also the bending or slopenesse of a parapet outward. Also a steepinesse or bending of a hill.

Pendente da orécchio, an eare-pendent.

Pendenza, a dependence, a downe-hanging.

Péndere, péndo, peudéi, pendúto or péso, to hange, to dangle downe. Also to encline, to bend or encline on one side. Also to be in doubt or suspence. Also to poise, to ponder or consider. Also to deriue, to haue dependencie of, to depend off or to stay vpon.

Pendíce, a downe-hanging, the hanging or side of a hill, the ouer hanging of a rocke. Also the hanging labell or lambeaw of any thing. Also a penthouse or a houell. Also a hauen or rode for ships.

Pendíno, as Pendíce, as Pendente.

Pendíno d'orécchio, an eare-ring, iewell or pendent.

Pendinóso, as Pendente.

Pendí, o, as Pendíno, as Pendente.

Péndola, a wedge or forelocke.

Pendolánte, downe-hanging or dangling.

Pendoláre, to hang sloping, to dangle downe.

Pendolína, a kind of birde.

Péndolo, as Pendolánte.

Pendolóni, as Pendolánte.

Pendóne da spáda, a paire of hangers.

Pendóni, all manner of pendants.

Péndulo, as Pendolánte.

Péndule lábbra, blabred downe hanging lips.

Pendúto, Péso, hanged, of Péndere.

Péne, the Plurall of Péna.

Péne dell'inferno, the paines of hell.

Penése, a kind of officer in a Gally.

Penesti, men foyled in fight that voluntarily yeelde themselues to the victors.

Penéti, penets giuen for the cold.

Penetrábile, penetrable, to be pierced.

Penetrále, a most inward or secret place. Vsed also in the Bible for the most holy and secret part of the Temple called Sanctum Sanctorum.

Penetránte, as Penetratíuo.

Penetránza, penetration, through pierceing.

Penetráre, to penetrate or pierce through.

Penetratióne, as Penetránza.

Penetratíno, piercing, penetrating.

Penetréuole, as Penetrábile.

Penicílla, as Pennella.

Penilóni, audaúano inánzilo stendárdo mólti penilóni et confraternità. 

Penisola, a place almost compassed with water, that is almost an Iland.

Penitendo, that is to be repented. 



Penitente, penitent, repenting.

Penitentia, penitent, penance, repentance, forethinking misliking.

Penitentiale, penitentiall, of or pertayning to repentance or mislike.

Penitentiário, an officer in Rome, a penitentiary, a man professing penitence, but properly a Priest with particular authority to absolue the penitent.

Penitentiére, as Penitentiário.

Penitentiería, an office in Rome.

Penitenza délla quarésima, the passion penance or penitent time of Lent.

Pénna, any kinde of feather, quill, plume, or pen. Also a whole wing Also the finne of any fish. Also the Nacre-fish. Vsed also for a writing pen, and also for any written poem or composition.

Pennacchiáto, drest or full of feathers.

Pennacchiéra, a plume of feathers.

Pennacchiéro, a feather maker.

Pennacchíno, a little plume of feathers. Also a wag or tosse-feather.

Pennácchio, a plume or bunch of feathers.

Pennacciáro, a plume or feather-maker.

Pennáccio, a plume or bunch of feathers.

Pénna dascríuere, a writing pen.

Pennaiuólo, as Pennaruólo.

Pennáro da letto, a driuer of featherbeds.

Pennaruólo, a penner to put in writing pens. Also a needle-cace.

Pennáti, feathered, all manner of feathered foule or birds. Also hedge-bils, forrest-bils, welch-hookes, or weeding hookes. Also as Penáti.

Pennáto, a kind of cutting-hooke that Gardiners vse. Also feathered, winged, or fledged. Also a wing. Also a bunch of seathers. Also any flying foule or bird.

Pénne, vsed for the priuities of a man, of the Latine word Penis.

Pennécchio, hurds of hempe or tow to spin. Also a roule of woll or hemp, or tow to spin.

Pennella, a kind of soft spunge growing in the sea.

Pennelláre, to paint, to draw, to pourtray, to limne with a pensill.

Pennelláta, a draught or line with a pensill.

Pennellatóre, a Painter, a Limner or Drawer with a pensill.

Pennelleggiáre, as Pennelláre.

Pennellétto, hath beene vsed for a riueret of water, that runneth forthright or straight on.

Pennello, a Painters pensill. Also a phane or weather-cocke to shew the wind. 

Pennello da vénto, a light-headed, shallow pated, vaine-glorious fellow.

Pennello, fátto a pennello, perfectly or curiously wrought as with a pensill.

Pénne maéstre, a hawkes principall or chiefe feathers.

Pennétta, a small pen, quill or feather.

Pennífero, bearing feathers.

Pennigero, hauing feathers.

Pennína, as Pennétta.

Penníno, as light as a feather. Also a little little feather.

Pennipéde, wing-footed. Also rough or feather-footed.

Pennipoténte, mighty in wings, strong in flying, well feathered.

Pénnola, as Cúgno.

Pénnole di pésce, the finnes of fishes.

Pennoncello, a little plume or bunch of feathers. Also a little streamer or banderoll, tassell, pendent or fringes at the end of a lance.

Pennoncióne, a great plume or bunch of feathers, a pennon.

Pennóne, a pennon. Also a banner, an ensigne, or standard.

Pennóni, Pennons. Also little banderols on the tops of lances. Also as Pennoncióne. Looke Chiáui.

Pennóso, full of feathers, feathery.

Pennúto, feathered, winged, fledged.

Penócchij, a kind of long comfets.

Pénole, strings or veines in the liuer.

Penóso, painefull, laborious.

Pensabéne, a well-meaning good man.

Pensábile, that may be thought.

Pensabóndo, pensiue, sad, full of thoughts.

Pensamále, an ill meaning crafty companion.

Pensaménto, a thinking, a musing. Looke Pensáre, as Pensiére.

Pensánte, a thinking, a musing.

Pensáre, to thinke, to muse, to imagine, to deeme, to suppose, to surmise, to aduise, to consider, to meditate.

Pensáta, a thought, a surmise, a deeming, a conceit. Also a tricke or deuise.

Pensataménte, warily, with determination. Also purposely or for the nonce.

Penséuole, as Pensábile.

Pensierággine, thought, care, deeming.

Pensieráto, full of thought or musing.

Pensiére, thought, care, imagination, musing, surmising, deeming.

Pensiereggiáre, to take thought or care.

Pensiéro, as Pensiére.

Pensieróso, as Pensóso.

Pensierúccio, a little foolish thought. 

Pensíle, imaginary, musing.

Pensionáre, to pension, to stipend, to wage.

Pensionário, a pensioner, a stipendarie.

Pensióne, a pension, a yeerely fee.

Pensoláre, as Pendoláre.

Pénsole, as Pendolánte.

Pensorósa, as Pensóso.

Pensóso, pensiue, sad, full of care and thought, thought-full.

Pénsule, as Pendolánte.

Pénta, the number of fiue in Greeke, whereof many words be composed.

Pentácolo, any thing or table of fiue corners. Also certaine tables.

Pentadátile, a kind of Wilke or Winckle fish.

Pentadoróne, a bricke of three-foot and nine inches in length.

Pentadrámma, a Coine of fiue dragmas.

Pentagonále, fiue-angled or cornered.

Pentagonáre, to make fiue angled.

Pentálogo, a discourse betweene fiue.

Pentamétri, pentameter verses.

Pentanáccio, cì eun bel pentanáccio et sette cáse. 

Pentáno, a Village of fiue houses.

Pentapéne, Cinquefoly.

Pentaphilóne, Cinquefoly.

Pentápoli, of fiue Citties.

Pentárco, a Captaine of fiue men.

Pentateuco, a volume of fiue bookes, as the bookes of the Lawes of Moses.

Pentáthlo, he that won the best or was victor at the fiue kinds of games vsed among the Grecians in their Olimpike games. Looke Olímpici giuóchi.

Pentatóti, Nownes declined by fiue cases.

Pentáura, a precious stone shining and of the colour of fire, which is said to haue the seuerall vertues of all other stones, and if they be no bigger then it, it will draw them all vnto if selfe.

Pentecóste, the fiftieth. Also the feast of Pentecost or Whitsontide.

Pentemímeri, a certaine part of an heroycall verse.

Pentéori, the space of full foure yeeres, or that returneth euery fifth yeere.

Pentére, as Pentíre.

Penterína, a kinde of worke in linnen called luzard worke.

Pentháli, as Quinquertij.

Pentículo, a kind of fish about Taránto that will flye out of the water.

Pentína, a little Lance, Pike or Speare.

Pentiménto, repentance, penitency, sorowing for some thing done or past.

Pentíre, pénto, pentíto, to repent, to rue or be sorry for some thing done or past.

Pentirémi, a Gallie that hath fiue 



oares on a seate or banke.

Pentitaménte, penitently, with repentance.

Pentitissimo, most penitent or sorowfull.

Péntola, any kind of earthen pot, pitcher, pipkin or possenet. Also a Cauldron.

Pentoláio, a Potter or Pipkin-maker.

Pentolíno, a little pipkin or possenet.

Péntolo, a ball made of earth and filled with ashes.

Pentorobóne, the hearbe peony.

Pentúto, as Pentíto, repented.

Pénula, a kind of cloake for rainy weather.

Penúltimo, the last sauing one.

Penúria, penury, scarcity, want.

Penurióso, penurious, needy, wanting.

Penzoláre, as Pendoláre.

Pénzolo, as Pendolánte.

Penzolóne, as Pendolánte.

Peóne, as Peónico.

Peónia, Peony, Kings-bloome, or Rose of the mount.

Peónico, a foote in meeter of foure sillables, the first long and the three short, or the first three short and the forth long.

Peóra, a kind of Barke or Boate.

Peóta, a Pilote or Guide by Sea. Also a kinde of Barke or Flat-boate in Ormuze.

Peótta, a Pilot or Guide by Sea.

Pepáre, to Pepper.

Pepáto, a drinke made of Pepper and Hony, Pepper-wine. Also Ginger or Pepper-bread.

Pépe, the spice called Pepper.

Pépe acquático, Culerage, or Arsesmart.

Pépe dimónte, Widdow-waile, Spurge flax, or Dwarf-hay.

Pépe dirábo, Ginny-pepper.

Pépe montáno, as Pépe di mónte.

Peperáta, a kind of Pottage with Pepper.

Pépere, any kind of Pepper.

Peperella, Pepper-wort.

Peperígno, of the colour or taste of Pepper. Also a kinde of blacke buildingstone.

Péphago, a beast in India, as bigge as a horse, with a faire taile and fine haire.

Pepílio, Wilde-purcelaine, some take it for Diuels-milke or Pety-spurge.

Péplio, as Pepílio.

Péplo, a kind of hood, veile or kerchife menioned by Plautus.

Pépolo, as Pepílio.

Pepóne, a Pepone, a Pumpion.

Peptica, a medicine called a Maturatiue.

Pepuzziáni, a kinde of Heretikes that hold it lawfull for women to baptize and to minister in Churches as Priests.

Per, for, by, through. Also for to, ready to, about to. Also by reason of Also what-betweene, or in with. Also in, or midst any place.

Péra, a Peare. Also Peares. Also let him, shee; or it perish. Also a pouch, a satchell or pocket.

Péra caroelle, a kind of Peares.

Peraccidente, by chance.

Peraccóncio, fitly, conueniently.

Peracúto, very sharpe, throughly sharpe. Also witty, or subtill.

Peradiétro, heeretofore, in times past.

Peragitatióne, a wagging, a shakeing.

Peragratióne, a wandering about.

Peráio, a Peare-tree, an Hort-yard of Peares.

Peralcun pátto, by no meanes bargane.

Peralcun tempo, for a while or any time.

Per alhóra, for that time.

Perambuláre, to walke or goe through.

Perambulatióne, a through walking or going.

Per amicítia, for friendship.

Peramóre, for loue, for the sake, gratis.

Péra moscaróle, a kind of Peares.

Per ancóra, as yet.

Per andáre, ready for, or about to goe.

Per ánno, by the yeere, yeerely.

Perangústo, very strait and narrow.

Perantíco, anciently, of olde.

Perapuntíno, nicely, as Perapúnto.

Perapúnto, point by point, iust, iumpe, euen.

Per a quel tempo, against that time.

Péra sermentína, a kind of Peare.

Peráro, as Peráio.

Peraticóne, as Brocóne.

Peratórno, thereabout.

Perátto d'esempio, for example sake.

Perauánti, before, beforetime, formerly. Also hereafter, in time to come.

Perauentúra, peraduenture, perhaps.

Perbeáto, throughly happie.

Perbenchè, albeit, although, howbeit.

Perbio, as Pergámo, a Pulpit.

Per buón rispetto, for good cause or respect.

Perbollíre, lísco, líto, to perboile.

Perbóllo, a perboiling, a wambe.

Perbreue, very short or briefe.

Perca, a fish called a Pearch.

Percáccio, as Procáccio, a muletier.

Percadére, ready to, or about to fall.

Per cagióne, by reason, for because.

Percáro, for deare.

Per cása, vp and downe the house.

Per cáso, by chance, by hap.

Per cáusa, because, by reason.

Perce, the fish called Pearches. 

Per certo, for a certaintie, assuredly.

Percettióne, perceiuing, discerning.

Percettíbile, perceiuable, sensible.

Percettibilit à, perceiuablenesse.

Perchè?, why? wherefore?

Perchè, because, for that, for asmuch.

Perche cónto, for what cause.

Per chèmò, why? or wherefore now?

Per chè módo? how? or by what meanes?

Perchè nò? why? or wherefore not?

Per che vía?, what way? by what meanes?

Per chì? for, by, or through whom?

Perchia, a fish called a Pearch. Also a kind of Sparrow.

Per chiáro che sía, how cleare or manifest soeuer it be.

Per chi si sía, for, by, or through whom soeuer it be.

Per chi si vóglia, as Per chì si sía.

Per ciascún verso, euery way.

Perciáto, bored or pierced through.

Percicóne, andáua remigándo á percicóni. 

Percída, the Sea-pearch-fish.

Perciére, a Partridger-hawke.

Percingere, to gird about.

Perciò, therefore, whereupon, because, forsomuch, whereof, for which cause. Also for all that, or notwithstanding that.

Percióche, because or for because that, forsomuch as that. Also to the end that.

Percípere, to perceiue, to comprehend.

Perciúto, any kinde of smoke-dried meate.

Perclúdere, clúdo, clúsi, clúso, to shut in or throughly close.

Perclusióne, a throughly-closing in.

Perclúso, throughly-closed in.

Percnottéro, a Kite called a Eald-buzard. Also an Eagle keeping about pooles like a vulture with litle wings.

Per colà, as Per costà.

Per consequens, by consequence, then.

Perconsequente, then, by consequence.

Per cónto, for or by the accompt.

Per cóntra, ouer against, against, opposite.

Per conuento, vpon or by couenant.

Perconuerso, contrariwise.

Per corrótto, for mourning.

Percórso, runne through or ouer.

Per cósa alcúna, for or by any thing.

Percóssa, a stroke, a smiting, a blow.

Percósso, strucken, hit, smitten, beaten.

Per cósta, sideline. Also with the backe of a weapon.

Per costà, that way, there away.

Per costínci, there away.

Percórere, cóto, cotéi, cósso, to strike, to smite, to beate, to hit. 



Percotiménto, as Percóssa.

Percotitóre, a striker, a smiter, a beater.

Percotúto, as Percósso.

Percottáre, to parboile. Also to baste meate.

Percrocétta, a kind of multiplying by Arithmetike that Marchants vse.

Per cuóre, by heart, by rote.

Percuótere, as Percótere.

Percussare, to smite, to strike, to percusse.

Percussíbile, that may be smitten, stroken or beaten.

Percussióne, a percussion, a smiting.

Percussíuo, percussiue, smiting.

Percússo, as Percósso.

Percussóre, as Percotitóre.

Per da nislúno, for or by none at all.

Perdentro, within, withinward.

Perdenza, losse, loosing, domage.

Perdére, Perdo, Perdéi, or persi, perso, or perdúto, to loose, to foregoe, to let slip: Also to loose or be lesse in comparison. Also for a man to loose or confound himselfe. Also to faint and rest as quailed.

Perder di uísta, to loose the sight of.

Perder'il tempo, to loose time, to bee idle.

Perder'il tempo et la fatíca, to loose both time and labour.

Perderela credenza, to loose ones credit, to be bankerout.

Perderla liscía, et il sapóne, to loose both lye and sope, time and labour.

Perder la patientia, to grow out of patience.

Perder la vergógna, to loose shame, to forgoe honestie.

Perderfi d'ánimo, to loose ones courage, to become faint-hearted.

Perdéuole, as Perdíbile.

Perdézza, as Perdenza.

Per dì, by day, for euery day.

Perdíbile, that may be lost.

Perdice, a Partridge.

Perdício, Pellitorie of the wall.

Per dietro, behind, backward.

Perdifrútto, any barren tree, or seed that yeeldeth no fruit.

Per di fuóri, outward, without.

Perdigiornáta, a bird that feedeth but at night, and all day skips vp and downe idlely. Also a loiterer, a loose-time, and idle bodie.

Perdigiórno, as Perdi giornáta.

Perdigóni, round haile-shot or birdshot.

Per di là, that way, beyondward.

Per dilegióne, in mockerie.

Perdiménto, a losse, a loosing.

Per dinánzi, beforeward, foreward.

Per Dío, by God, for the loue of God.

Per Dio grátia, by Gods grace. 

Per di quà, heare away, this way.

Per di quì, idem.

Per di quínci, idem.

Per dir così, as a man would say.

Per dirítto, directly, by leuell or right.

Per disauentúra, by mishape.

Perdiséme, a kind of Willow called Spil-fruite or Loose-fruit.

Per disgrátia, by ill lucke or chance.

Per dispetto, for or in spite and disgrace.

Perdita, a losse, a loosing.

Per ditempo, as Perdigiornáta.

Perditióne, perdition, losse, loosing. Also damnation or ruine.

Perditóre, a looser. Also a spend thrift.

Per diuíso, by seeming or opinion.

Perdonábile, pardonable, that may be forgiuen.

Perdonánza, pardon, remission, forgiuenesse.

Perdonáre, to pardon, to forgiue, to remitte.

Perdonatóre, a forgiuer, a pardoner.

Perdónde, whence, whereby, what way.

Perdonéuole, as Perdonábile.

Perdóno, pardon, forgiuenesse, remission. Also a pardon. Also by gift.

Perdótto, as Perdútto.

Perdóue?, Which way? Whether away?

Perdúcere, dúco, dússi, dútto, to lead through.

Perdouúnque, which way soeuer.

Perduránza, a through-lasting.

Perduráre, to last or continue throughlie.

Perduréuole, that may throughly last.

Perdúrre, as Perdúcere.

Perduti, the forlorne hope. Also lost.

Perdúto, lost, forlorne, let slip.

Perdútto, led through.

Pére, all manner of Peares. Also hee, shee or it perisheth. Looke Péra.

Pére azeróle, a kind of peare.

Pere buóne christiáne, a kind of good Peare.

Pére carauelle, a kind of long peare.

Per eccellenza, excellently.

Perecóche, a fruite betweene a Peare and an Apricot.

Pére cotógne, the Quince-peare.

Pére d'angóscia, a kind of hard choke Peare.

Perédi, too greate or a rauenous and insatiate desire to eate.

Pére gabbauilláni, a faire, but hard choke peare.

Pereggiáre, to grow or make, or be like or in fashion of a Peare.

Peregrinággio, as Pellegrinággio.

Peregrinánte, as Pellegrinánte.

Peregrináre, as Pellegrináre.

Peregrinatióne, as Pellegrinatióne.

Peregrinatóre, as Pellegríno.

Peregrinità, as Pellegrinità.

Peregríno, as Pellegrino.

Perelegánte, most trim or elegant.

Pére moscatelle, the Muskadine-peare.

Peremptália, among Augures were those lightnings which did vtterly destroy and put away the significations of other lightnings and tokens preceeding.

Peremptório, peremptorie, sudden, rash, hitting to death without heed or care.

Peremptório editto, a peremptorie edict or warning giuen to him that maketh default in apparance, after which he shall neuer haue other day giuen him; but the Iudge shall proceed to a finall sentence.

Perénne, perpetuall, aye-during, euerlasting, neuer ceasing, euer running.

Perénnia, as Peremptália.

Perennità, perpetuitie, aye-lastingnesse.

Perenóne, a kind of Eagle to kill Ducks.

Perenoptéro, a kind of Eagle, or mountaine Storke.

Perentráre, for to, or about to enter.

Peréntro, within, inward.

Perentrouía, inward, within.

Pére pergamótte, a kind of excellent great Peare.

Pére riceárde, a kind of Peare.

Pére ruspide, a kind of rugged Peare.

Pére sementíne, a kind of stonie chokepeares.

Per esperienza, by triall or experience.

Peréto, an hortyard of Peare-trees.

Perétro, a kind of venemous weede.

Perétto, a little Peare. Also a kind of drinking pot, cruse or glasse.

Per fáma, by fame or report.

Per fáre, for to, ready or about to doe.

Per fas ouéro néfas. 

Perfettáre, to perfect, to performe, to finish, to accomplish or make compleat.

Perfettíbile, that may be perfected.

Pertettionáre, to make perfect, to bring to an absolute perfection.

Perfettióne, perfection, absolutenesse.

Perfettiuaménte, perfectly, compleatly.

Perfettíuo, perfectiue, compleat.

Perfetto, perfect, compleat, absolute, performed, atchiued, accomplished.

Perficiente grátia, an accomplishing or performing grace.

Perficienza, performance, accomplishment.

Perfícere, to performe or accomplish.

Perfídia, disloyaltie, tretcherie, treason, breach of faith, false dealing.

Perfidiáre, to be tretcherous, to practise disloyaltie, to betray, to be vnfaithfull.

Perfidióso, as Perfido.

Perfido, perfidious, disloyall, tretcherous, traitrous, false, vnfaithfull.

Perfin a tánto, vntill such time. 



Perfinchè, vntill that.

Perfino, vntill, so fare as.

Perfitóne, a diuination when the Diuell speakes in another man.

Perflábile, that may be blowen through.

Perfogliáta, Saint Iohns-wort, Thorough-wax, or Thorough-leafe.

Perfoliáta, as Perfogliáta.

Perfóndere, fóndo, fondéi, fondúto, fúso, to powre, to flow out and throughly. Also to sprinkle or wash all ouer.

Perforáre, to bore or pierce through, to thrust into or make a hole.

Perforáta, as Perfogliáta.

Performáre, to performe or fashion out.

Per fórza, perforce, of necessitie, vpon compulsion.

Per frónte, front-wise, ouer-against.

Perfúga, a run-away, one that runneth from his owne Captaine to the enemie.

Perfúgio, a place whereunto one runneth for succour, a place of refuge. Also an euasion, a starting hole.

Perfumáre, to perfume.

Perfumiére, a Perfumer.

Perfúmo, perfume, or sweet sent.

Perfúrto, by stealth, filchingly.

Perfusióne, a through shedding.

Perfúso, as Profúso.

Per gála, for lightnesse, shew or vanitie.

Pergaména, parchment or vellam.

Pergamína, parchment or vellam.

Pergamo, a pulpit or Orators chaire.

Pergamótte, a kind of Peare.

Pergente, through-going.

Pergere, pergo, pergéi, pergiúto, to proceed, to goe on, to continue or tell on.

Per giórno, by day, for euery day.

Per giúnta, for an addition.

Per giuóco, for sport, in game.

Pergiuraménti, periurings, for swearings.

Pergiuráre, to periure, to forsweare.

Pergiurítia, periurie, false swearing.

Pergiúro, periured, foresworne.

Pergola, any arbor, boure or close walke of boughes, namely of vines.

Pergoláre, to reduce into arbors, boures or close shadie places.

Pergoláto, as Pergola.

Pergolése, of or belonging to Pérgola, a kind of wine or grape so called.

Pergolétta, a little Pergola.

Pergolétto, a little pulpit or chaire.

Pergolo, pulpit, a chaire, as Pergola.

Per grádo, gratefully, acceptably.

Per grátia, for or through grace.

Per grósso, by great, in grosse.

Per hóggi, for this day.

Péri., Vsed for the Peeres of a kingdome.

Pericárdio, the membrane or thin skin inuoluing the heart like a case. 

Pericárpio, a kind of round roote.

Pericliméno, Woodbinde, Honniesuckle.

Periclitáre, to put in perill or danger.

Períclo, perill, danger, hazard.

Periclóso, perilous, dangerous, hazardous.

Pericoláre, as Periclitáre.

Pericolatóre., Hath abusiuely been vsed for Procuratóre.

Perícolo, perill, hazard, ieopardie, danger.

Pericolóso, as Periclóso.

Pericránio, the hairie scalpe or skin couering and compassing all the skull.

Peridóneo, very fit and apt.

Periermenía, as much to say as concerning Interpretation. Also the title of Aristotles first booke of Logike.

Periéro, as Petrié ro.

Periési, as Perísci.

Periergia, curiositie.

Periergo, curious.

Periféria, as Periphéria.

Perífero, peare-bringing or bearing.

Periflegetónte, the round-about-burning.

Perífrasi, a circumlocution, one word expressed by many words.

Perigéo, that point of the heauen wherin the Sunne or other Planet is nearest to the centre of the earth.

Períglio, perill, hazard, ieopardie.

Periglióso, perilous, hazardous, ieopardous.

Per il, for, by, or through the.

Per il chè, wherefore, for the which.

Periléuco, a precious stone with a white thrid or streake through it.

Per il mezzo, by the meanes. Also right ouer against.

Per il passáto, heeretofore, in times past.

Per il più, for the most.

Per il sottíle, distinctly, smally.

Per il tánto, wherefore, whereupon.

Perimétri, circumferences.

Per in ánzi, heereafter, in time to come.

Per inauertenza, vnawares, by ouersight.

Per incánto, by inchantment.

Períndi, thereaway, thereto wards.

Perinéo, a line like a seame parting the wrinkled skin of the cods in the midst, and reaching to the fundament. Some take it for the part between the rising of the yard and the fundament, or fundament it selfe.

Perineunomía, an inflamation or impostume of the lungs, with rednesse of the cheekes and yet shortnesse of breath.

Per infíno, vntill, vntill that.

Perinnánzi, as Perinánzi.

Peringiù, downeward.

Períno, a drinke made of Peares called Perin.

Perinsíno, vntill, vntill that.

Perióca, a briefe argument containing the summe of a whole discourse.

Periódico, as Periodicále. Also ending.

Periodicále, an ague returning her iust course from day to day, euery third, fourth or fifth day, an intermittent feuer.

Periódichi, diseases that are not continuall or that goe and come by fits.

Período, a period, an end, a conclusion, a full sentence, an end, a stint, a last date. Also a perfect compasse or round.

Perióstio, a little thin skin or membrane immediatly enwrapping the bones of any body, by reason of which skin and not of their owne nature the bones are supposed to haue feeling and to feele.

Peripatétici, a Sect of walkeing Philosophers, whereof Aristotle was chiefe.

Peripatía, a going or circumference about, the crooked line wherewith a circle is bounded in.

Periphéria, as Peripatía.

Peripneumonía, the inflamation of the lungs.

Peripneumónico, as Ecligmáto, that hath an inflammation of the lungs.

Períre, péro, or perísco, períj, períto, to perish, to miscary, to come to naught to be cast away.

Per ischerzo, in ieast, for sport.

Per isciagúra, through mishap.

Períscij, those that haue their shadowes cast round about them, as they haue that dwell in the cold Zones, for to them the Sunne after it is risen goeth round about their Horizon, and so casteth the shadowes round. Some cal them the people that dwell in one selfe paralell how distant soeuer East or West.

Per ispícchio, as it were glancingly, sidling, obliquely, cornerwise, peepingly out.

Perissología, superfluous speaking, a figure in speech or writing, wherein is vsed some needlesse particle or word, as Viuat Rex & non moriatur.

Perissólogo, a speaker of superfluous or needelesse words.

Perissóno, a kind of poison to inuenum weapons heads.

Peristereóne, the hearbe Veruine, as Alcéa.

Peristério, the hearbe Verueine.

Peristrómi, a kind of garment described by Lucilius.

Peritáre, to trie or experience. Also vsed anciently for to make or become fearefull.

Peritár si, to grow or become expert.

Perítia, experience, cunning, skillfullnesse. 



Períto, perished, miscaried, come to naught.

Períto, expert, cunning, skilfull.

Perítolo, as Peritróchio.

Peritóma, as Perizóma.

Peritonéo, the inner rimme of the belly ioyning to the caule and couering all the entrailes.

Peritóso, full of skill and experience, but properly fearefull, a mazed.

Poritróchio, the axeltree of a wheele.

Peritúro, perishing, subiect to perish.

Perizóma, a trusse worne about the priuy parts, or couer for them.

Perla, a pearle. Also for, by, or through the.

Per là, thereaway, that way.

Perla Dío grátia, by Gods grace.

Per la góla mentíre, to lie in the throate.

Per la maggiór párte, for the most part.

Per l'antíca, anciently, formerly.

Per la più párte, for the most part.

Per l'appúnto, euen, iust, point blanke.

Per la qúal cósa, for which thing.

Perláre, to empearle.

Perláro, the Lote or Nettle-tree.

Per l'aueníre, in time to come.

Perle, Pearles. Also for, by or through the.

Perlecébra, a thing that presently draweth a man to fauour it, a maruellous allurement or enticement.

Per le máni, in or through the hands.

Perleggiáre, to shine in Pearles, to grow or be of a pearles fashion.

Perlénga, a toy, a trifle, a nothing.

Per le póste, by post, in post-haste.

Perlétte, little, small, or seed-pearles.

Perlettíni, little, small or seed-pearles.

Perlífero, Pearles-bearing.

Per l'inánzi, in after times.

Per linea, by line and measure. Also point blanke. Also leuell-streight.

Per l'ingiù, downe-ward.

Per l'intórno, ouer-against, on the other side.

Perlitáre, to please God with sacrifice, to obtaine by sacrifice.

Per lo, for, by, or through the.

Per lo chè, wherfore, wherupon, for the which.

Per lo contínuo, continually.

Per lo contrário, on the contrary.

Per lo futúro, in time to come.

Per lo lúngo, all along, in length.

Per lo meglio, for the best.

Per lo méno, for the least.

Per lo mezzo, through the middest.

Per lo mezzo, by the meanes.

Per lo mighóre, for the best.

Perlóne, a big-pearle. Also a garish-gull, or well-clad foole.

Perlongáre, to prolong vnto posterity. 

Perlongatióne, a prolonging vnto future ages.

Per lo passáto, in times past.

Per lo più, for the most.

Per l'oppósito, on the contrary.

Per lo presénte, now, this present.

Per lo preterito, in times past.

Per lóro, for them, by themselues.

Perlóso, pearlely, full of pearles.

Per lo trauerso, a thwart, a crosse.

Perlucente, through-shining.

Perlúcido, throughly-bright.

Per lúngo, by, in, or at length.

Perlustránza, as Perlustratióne.

Perlustráre, to shine through.

Perlustratióne, a through-shining.

Per mála sórte, by ill chance.

Per mále, in euill part.

Permanente, permanent, remaining.

Permanenza, permanency, continuance.

Permanére, mángo, manéi, manúto, to abide, to remaine or continue to the end.

Permaneúole, durable, permanent.

Per maniéra di díre, as a man would say.

Per máno, by the hand through.

Permanúto, remained, continued, abided.

Per máre, by Sea.

Per mè, for mee, as for mee. Also my selfe alone. Also for the best.

Per mén mále, for least ill.

Per mercè, by meanes or grace.

Per metà, by the middle or halfe.

Perm ésso, permitted, suffered, borne with, giuen licence, power or authoritie.

Per me stésso, for or by my selfe.

Permettente, permitting, bearing with, suffering, giuing leaue or commission.

Permettente Dío, God permitting.

Perméttere, métto, mísi, mésso, to  permit, to suffer, to allow, to beare with.

Permettéuole, that may be permitted.

Permettíbile, as Permettéuole.

Per mezzo, through or by the middle or middest. Also by meanes, by way, through. Also among. Also ouer against, or right against.

Perminénza, preheminence, prerogatiue.

Per minúto, by small, by retale.

Per mio auíso, by mine aduice.

Permíro, throughly wonderfull.

Permissíbile, that may be permitted.

Permissióne, permission, toleration.

Permissíuo, that may be permitted.

Permissúro, that will permit.

Permistióne, a through-mixing.

Permisto, through-mixed.

Per mólti módi, by many waies or meanes.

Per módo chè, so that, in such manner as.

Per módo, by meanes or manner.

Per módo niúno, by no meanes.

Per mólto chè sía, how much soeuer it be.

Permúta, as Permutatióne.

Permutábile, that may change or be changed.

Permutaménto, as Permutatióne.

Permutánza, as Permutatióne.

Permutáre, to change one thing for another.

Permutatióne, a permutation, an exchangeing of one thing for another.

Permutéuole, as Permutábile.

Perna, a Nakre or Narre-fish.

Per náue, by Ship.

Perne, the finnes of fishes.

Per necessità, by necessity.

Perníce, a Partridge.

Perniciábile, mischiefe-bringing.

Pernície, perniciousnesse, mischiefe, death, vndoing or destruction.

Pernicióso, pernicious, most wicked and mischieuous, destruction-bringing.

Pernicità, swiftnesse, nimblenesse.

Pernicóni, old Partridges or Stagers.

Per niénte, for nothing, by no meanes. Also in vaine.

Pernigoncelli, yoong Partridges.

Pernióne, a kind of blacke transparent stone. Also a kibe on heeles, or chilblane on hands.

Per niúna guísa, by no meanes.

Per niún pátto, vpon no condition.

Perno, any kind of peg, bolt or pin of wood, a linch-pinne, a cheeuing-bolt, a Carpenters swallow-tale. Also the axletree of a carte. Also as Smithes call it a gudgeon or fastning pin. Also the stalke of any fruit, the pinnes of any instrument, legáta a pérno, is a ioint in the port or vpset of a bit, hauing a pin through it whereon the players in the midst doe hang.

Pernócchia, a Nakre or Narre-fish.

Per nóme, by name.

Per non potére, for not being able.

Pernottánza, a passing away of a night, a lodging all night.

Pernottáre, to abide, to watch, to stay or lodge all night, to passe the night.

Per núlla, for nothing, by no meanes.

Però, therefore, whereupon, then.

Péro, a Peare-tree. Also any Peare.

Péro a cappióne, the mouth of a bit hauing a porte set with Peares.

Però chè, because that, forsomuch as. Also albeit or although.

Però con tútto, notwithstanding all that.

Però di méno, nothing notwithstanding. 



Péro ghiacciólo, a kind of Cataraine Peares.

Péro moscatelléo, a Muskadine-peare.

Perólo, any little button or tassell in the middle of a knit-cap.

Per ógni intórno, euery way about.

Per ógni módo, by any meanes.

Per ógni úno, for euery one.

Per ógni vólta, for euery time.

Per ógni verso, euery way.

Peróna, a kind of hearbe.

Peróne, high-buckled clownes shooes.

Peroníchi, white flawes or callosities in the feete.

Per ópera, by meanes or worke.

Per oppósito, on the contrary.

Peroratióne, the last part of an Oration which most mooueth the hearer.

Per órdine, by order or rule.

Perósa rása, a rough Ray or Thornback.

Péro tardío, a late or late-ward Peare.

Péro zóccolo a kind of long Peare.

Perpellere, to force or constraine.

Perpendere, pendo, pendéi, pendúto, to perpend or hang downe right. Also to consider or measure diligently, to examine a thing exactly.

Perpendiculáre, perpendicular, directly, downe right.

Perpendicolarità, a right downe-hanging.

Perpendículo, a plummet-line or plumb-rule such as Carpenters vse.

Perpénsa, the hearbe Cabaret or Hazlewort.

Perpero, rude, froward, rough, wrong-doing. Also a kind of coine.

Perpessióne, sufferance, toleration.

Perpesso, that hath suffered.

Perpetrábile, perpetrable, that may be done.

Perpetránza, perpetration, actuall doeing.

Perpctráre, to commit, to act, to doe, to finish, to atchiue.

Perpetratióne, as Perpetránza.

Perpetratóre, an actuall doer or performer.

Perpetréuole, that may be done and acted.

Perpetuále, perpetuall, euerlasting.

Perpetuánza, perpetuity.

Perpetualit à, perpetuality.

Perpetuáre, to make endlesse or perpetuall.

Perpetuatióne, perpetuity.

Perpetuità, perpetuity, euerlastingnesse.

Perpetuo, perpetuall, eternall, euerlasting. Also continued or all of one piece.

Perpetuo cárcere, perpetuall prison, taken also for the whole world.

Perplessaménte, perplexedly, ambiguously, doubtfully, vncertainely. 

Perplessáre, to perplex or vex in minde, to entangle so that a meaning is not perceiued.

Perplessióne, perplexion or perturbation of minde, ambiguity in words or meaning.

Perplessità, as Perplessióne.

Perplesso, perplexed, troubled or doubtfull in minde, in word or meaning.

Per póco, for little, within a little.

Per pói, that then or afterward, against then.

Per potére, for to be able.

Per prática, by practise or experience.

Per pruóua, by proofe or experience.

Perpressa, as Perpénsa.

Per púnta, by the point.

Per púnto, point, by point, precisely.

Per quà, hereaway, hereabouts.

Per quálche luóco, some where, in some place.

Per quánd, o? Against or for what time? Against when.

Per quánto, so farre forth.

Per quánto, for asmuch, or concerning.

Per quánto? For how much? For as much.

Per quantúnque, for how much soeuer.

Per quauía, hereaway, hereabouts.

Per quéllo chè, as concerning that.

Per quésto, for, by, or through this.

Per quésto, not withstanding.

Per quì, hereaway, this way.

Per quínci, hereaway.

Per quíndi, thereaway.

Perquisíti, perquesites.

Perquisitióne, perquisition.

Perquisitóre, a perquisitor.

Per-rápe, as Prerápe.

Perráta, ratably, by rate.

Perro, as Perno.

Perrómpere, rómpo, rúppi, rótto, to breake, to splint, to riue or shiuer through, a funder, in the middest, by force or violence.

Persa, the hearbe Marioram. Also lost.

Persálso, throughly salte or witty.

Perscríuere, scríuo, scríssi, scrítto, to write through or to an end.

Perscrutábile, that may be searcht into.

Perscrutánza, as Perscrutatióne.

Perscrutáre, to search into, to inquire throughly, to scanne or gather diligentlie.

Perscrutatióne, a searching through.

Perscrutéuole, as Perscrutábile.

Persè, by, of, or for him, or it selfe.

Perseco, as Persico.

Persecutáre, to persecute, to prosecute, to pursue, to follow against.

Persecutióne, persecution, pursuite.

Persecutóre, a persecuter, a prosecuter.

Persega, a Pearch-fish.

Perseguente, a pursiuant, a prosecuter. 

Perseguíre, guísco, guíto, as Persecutáre.

Perseguitáre, as Persecutáre.

Perseguitóre, as Persecutóre.

Perséo, a tree like a Peare-tree, euer greene and loaden with fruite good for the stomacke. Also the name of a star or signe in Heauen.

Persequíre, quísco, quíto, as Persecutáre.

Persequitáre, as Persecutáre.

Perseueránte, perseuering, stedfast, continuing, constant.

Perseueránza, perseuerance, constancy, continuance.

Perseueráre, to perseuere, to abide stedfast, to continue constant.

Perseueratióne, as Perseueránza.

Persicária, Culerage, or Arsesmart-hearbe.

Persichi, the Pearch-fishes.

Persichíno, a Peach-colour.

Persico, a Peach-tree, fruit or colour.

Persico nápi, the hearbe Senuie.

Persicóne, a Nut called the Persian-nut.

Persisióri, Peach-flowers.

Persíllo, a vessell wherein was the oyntment that Remus annointed his arme with.

Per síngulo, singlely, seuerally.

Persímile, throughly semblable.

Persisténza, persistence, stout-stedfastnesse.

Persistere, sísto, sistéi, sistúto, to persist stedfast, to hold out stoutly to the end.

Perso, lost, forlorne. Also a darke or blacke mourning colour. Some take it for the colour of dead Marioram, for Persa is Marioram. Some haue also vsed it for a Peach-colour.

Persoláta, as Persolúta.

Persolúta, an hearbe vsed in Egypt to make garlands and coronets.

Persóna, a person, a personage of man or woman, a bodie, a wight. Also the qualitie whereby one man differeth from another. Also a charge or office or part of any man. Also a vizard or false face.

Persóna di male affáre, a wicked bodie.

Persóna di álto-affáre, a man of high worth, credit, reputation or employment.

Persóna di pezza., idem.

Persóna di portáta., idem.

Personággio, a personage, as Persóna.

Personále, personall, in person.

Personalménte, personally.

Personalità, personalitie.

Personáre, to personate, to act or play the part of any person.

Personáta, the Clotbur or great Bur growing in riuers. 



Personcína, a little person or wight or bodie. Also a womans bodie or waste.

Persópra, aboue ward, ouer.

Persórte, by hap, by chance, casually.

Per sottíle, smally. Also by retaile.

Per spasso, for sport or pastime.

Perspettíuo, perspectiue. Also a profossor of the perspectiues.

Perspicábile, that may quickly be seene into with wit and iudgement.

Perspicáce, perspicuous, quick-witted, quicke of iudgement and insight into any thing.

Perspicácia, as Perspicuità.

Perspicacità, as Perspicuità.

Perspicenza, as Perspicacità.

Perspichéuole, as Perspicabile.

Perspici éntia, as Perspicuità.

Perspicuità, perspicuitie, a quicke-insight, a through-perceiuing and quicke vnderstanding of a thing. Also clearenesse or plainenesse in wordes or sentences.

Perspícuo, as Perspicáce. Also easie, euident, cleare, or that may bee seene through.

Per squádra, leuell, or iust by rules or squires.

Per stráda, by the way or streetes.

Persuadére, suádo, suási, suáso, to perswade, to exhort, to animate for to doe or belieue.

Persua dénole, that may be perswaded.

Persuadúto, as Persuáso.

Persuasíbile, that may be perswaded.

Persuasibilità, perswasiuenesse.

Persuasióne, perswasion, animating.

Persuasíuo, perswasiue, to bee perswaded.

Persuáso, perswaded, made to belieue.

Persuasóre, a perswader, an exhorter.

Persuasória lettera, a perswading letter.

Persútto, any kind of dried bacon.

Per táglio, edgeling, with the edge.

Per talchè, in such manner that.

Pertánto, therefore, wherefore, then.

Per tánto chè, in as much as that.

Pertánto di méno, as Nondiméno Vsed of Dante.

Pertempestíuo, very earely, most timely.

Pertempíssime, most earely or timely.

Pertempo, betimes, timely, earely.

Pertenente, pertaining, belonging vnto.

Pertenenza, pertinencie, appurtenance.

Pertenére, tengo, tenni, tenúto, to appertaine or belong vnto.

Pertenuto, pertained, belonged vnto.

Per terra, by land.

Perterrefáre, to terrifie, to dante, to amaze, to affright, to skare.

Perterrefattióne, terror, fright, amazement.

Perterrefátto, terrified, danted, amazed, affrighted, skared, astonished. 

Perterríto, as Perterrefatto.

Pertica, a pearch, a long pole or rod to measure land or timber. Also a furlong.

Perticále, the beame of any coach, cart or plough.

Perticáre, to pearch, to measure by pearches, rods, furlongs or roodes.

Perticáto, pearched. Also a fence of rods or poles. Also a houel, a ricke, or a stack.

Perticatóre, a measurer by pearches, rods or furlongs.

Perticóne, a very long pole or pearch. Also a long gull, foole or slangrell.

Pertighétte, litle pearches or rods.

Pertináce, obstinate, stiffe-necked, headstrong. Also constant or resolute in good part.

Pertinácia, obstinacie, stubborne-wilfulnesse. Also constancie or firme opinion.

Per tornár' a cása, to come home againe. Also to come to the purpose againe.

Pertransénna, as Per tránsito.

Per tránsito, cursorie, in passing by.

Per transuerso, sideling or a flanke, transuersely.

Pertrátta, by drawing of lots, by scrutinie or chance.

Pertrattáre, to treat or handle throughly.

Pertrattatióne, a pertractation or handling.

Per trauerso, a crosse, a thwart.

Pertúgia, any kind of hole or boaring.

Pertugiare, to pierce or bore full of holes.

Pertúgio, any kind of hole or boaring.

Pertúgio puzzolente, a stinking hole.

Perturbábile, that may be perturbed.

Perturbaménto, as Perturbatióne.

Perturbáre, to perturbe or disquiet in minde.

Perturbatióne, perturbation, disturbance, disquietnesse, troublous passion.

Perturbatóre, a disturber, a disquieter.

Pertúrbo, as Perturbatióne.

Pertusáre, as Pertugiáre.

Pertúso, as Pertúgio.

Per tútte le vólte, for all times.

Per tútti iversi, by all waies.

Pertútto, euery where, in all places. Also for or through all, all ouer.

Pertútto ciò, for or with all that.

Per tútto quésto, for all this.

Peruagánza, a through-wandring.

Peruagáre, to wander through.

Peruagatióne, a through-wandring.

Peruagatóre, a wandrer through.

Per uanaglória, for vaineglorie or ostentation.

Perúcca, a perwig of false haire.

Peruccáre, to perwig with false haire.

Perucchiéra, a perwig-maker.

Perúccia, a little, hard or hedge Peare.

Per udíta, by hearing or heare-say. 

Per uedúta, by sight or seeing.

Perueniménto, a comming or attaining vnto.

Perueníre, uengo, uenni, uenúto, to some, to reach or attaine vnto, come to a place or iournies end.

Peruenúto, come, reached, hapned or attained vnto, come to a place or iournies end.

Per uento, for ambition and vanitie. Also as Prouento.

Peruentura, by hap or chance.

Per uergógna, for or through shame.

Per uéro, for truth, by truth.

Peruersáre, to make or become peruerse, froward, skittish or mischieuous. Also as Peruertíre.

Peruersióne, a peruersion or peruerting.

Peruersità, peruersnesse, crabbednesse, skittishnesse, waywardnesse, frowardnesse.

Peruerso, peruerse, wayward, skittish.

Peruersóre, as Peruertitóre.

Peruertenza, a peruerting, a subuerting.

Peruertere, verto, versi, verso, as Peruertíre.

Peruertíbile, that may be peruerted.

Peruertíre, verto, vertíto, to peruert, to subuert, to ouerturne, to marre and destroy, to wrest and turne to an ill sense.

Peruertíto, peruerted, subuerted, ouerturned, marred, destroyed, wrested to an ill sence, ouerthwarted.

Peruertitóre, a peruerter, a subuerter.

Peruestigatióne, a through-searching.

Per vézzi, by or through wantonnesse.

Perugíno, a Peare-tree or timber. Also a kind of Ioyners fretted or carued worke.

Peruía, by the way, along the way.

Per vía di díre, by way of speech.

Peruicáce, as Pertináce.

Peruicácia, as Pertinácia.

Per vicenda, by turne, successiuely.

Peruigilatióne, a through-watching.

Peruio, penetrable, that may be pierced.

Per vísta, by view or sight.

Per víta túa, a manner of speech to vrge one, as we say, As thou louest thy life.

Per víua fórza, by maine force.

Per un póco, for or within a little.

Per último, for last, lastly.

Per una uólta, for once.

Per un ui e uà, cursoriwise, glancingly, a snatch and away.

Per uolgáre, in vulgar sort.

Per uólta, at once, at a time, at sometimes.

Per usánza, by or through vse.

Perústo, parched or burned by fire.

Perúzze, wilde, hard or hedge Peares.

Pésa, a hundred weight, a tun weight, a weigh of cheese. 



Pesánte, heauie, poisie, pondrous, waightie.

Pesánza, waightinesse, ponderousnesse.

Pesáre, to weigh, to poise, to ponder.

Pesáro, as Pesatóre.

Pesataméate, pondrously, waightilie. Also considerately or grauely.

Pesáto, weighed, poised, pondred. Also graue, considerate, or discreet.

Pesatóre, a weigher, a pondrer, a poiser. Also a discreet considerer.

Pésca, all manner of fishing. Also a Peach. Also a yong mans bum.

Pescagióne, any kind of fishing or fish.

Pescáia, a fish-pond. Also a fish-market.

Pescáre, to fish, to catch fish.

Pescarézza, a Fishers-boate.

Pescaría, a fish-street, a fish-market.

Pésca sénza nocciuólo, a Peach without a stone. Also a mans bum.

Pescáta, fished. Also a fishing.

Pescatóre, a Fisher. Also a Fish-munger. Also a kinde of fish with a budget hanging at his necke, which like a net he lets in and out, and therwith catcheth other small fishes.

Pescatóre del Rè, the Kings fisher.

Pescatório, of or pertayning to fishing.

Pescatríce, a fish or fishing-woman. Also a kind of fish as Pescatóre.

Pescauento, an idle loiterer, a gadding gull.

Pésce, any kinde of fish. Also one of the twelue signes in the Zodiake.

Pésce argentíno, a kinde of fish whose scales shine like siluer.

Pésce armáto, any kind of shell-fish.

Pésce asiníno, the Haddocke-fish.

Pésce austrále, the name of a signe in Heauen.

Pésce balestra, a fish in Latine Zigæna.

Péscc bárco, the Bote-fish.

Pésce báti, a kind of Sea-fish.

Pésce calamáio, a Calamary or Cuttlefish.

Pésce cáne, a Dogge or Cur-fish.

Pésce caníno, a Dog-fish.

Pésce capóne, a Barble-fish.

Pésce coltello, the Sword-fish.

Pésce córuo, a fish that is yellow in the sea and blacke in fresh-water.

Pésce d'acqua frésca, fresh-water-fish.

Pésce di cónca, any kind of shel-fish.

Pésce di fortézza, a fish in Latine Blennus.

Pésce di pietra, a fish in Latine Blennus.

Pésce fíco, a Cod or Cod-fish.

Pésce ignádo, a Dace or Merlaine-fish.

Pésce in canella, a fish in Latine Enyx. 

Pésce légno, the Stock-fish.

Pésce marináto, soused or pickled-fish.

Pésce maríno, any kind of Sea-fish. Also as Pésce austrále.

Pésce martello, a fish in Latine Zygæna.

Pésce mólle, soft, smooth or slippery fish. Also the Whiting-fish.

Pésce montóne, the Ram-fish.

Pésce nárco, a fish in Latine Torpédo.

Pésce palómbo, the Lamprey-fish.

Pésce páne, the fish called poore Iohn.

Pésce papagállo, a fish in Latine Pauus.

Pésce pastináca, a fish. Looke Pastináca.

Pésce pescatóre., looke Pescatóre.

Pésce piáno, any flat fish as a Plaice.

Pésce polmóne, the Lung-fish.

Pésce pórco, the Molebout-fish, or Swine-fish, the Sea-swine, the Porpuis, Hog-fish or Sea-hog.

Pésce préte, a kind of fish that hath but one eie in his head.

Pésce rána, the Frog-fish.

Pésce rátto, a Ray or Skeate-fish.

Pésce róndine, a Sea-swallow. Also a Sea-bat or Rearemouse.

Pésce róspo, the Toade-fish.

Pésce rubello, the Rochet-fish or Gournard.

Pésce saláto, any kind of Salt-fish.

Pésce san Piétro, a Dory or Gold-fish.

Pésce sóglia, the Sole-fish.

Pésce spáda, the Sword-fish.

Pésce squaglióso, any sealy fish.

Pésce stella, the Star-fish or fiue-foote.

Pésce tarántola, a fish in Latine Scaurus.

Pescétto, as Pessétto.

Pésce vánga, a rough Skeate-fish.

Pésce volatóre, the flying fish.

Pescheggiáre, to fish. Also to grope ones bum.

Pescherello, a Blaise or Bleise-fish.

Péschia, a blow, a stroke, a knock, a thumpe, a bang.

Peschiáre, to strike, to smite, to thumpe, to bang, to beate.

Peschiéra, a fish-pond. Also a fishmarket.

Pesciaiuólo, a Fish-monger.

Pésci armáti, all shell-fishes.

Pesciarelli, any small fishes.

Pesciatelli, as Pesciarelli.

Pescieggiáre, to fish, to liue by fish.

Pescífero, fish-bearing, fish-bringing.

Pescína, a fish-pond or Poole. Also any Poole or Pond to receiue waters in.

Pesciolíni, all fry or little fishes.

Pescióni, all manner of great fishes.

Pescióso, fishy, full of fish.

Pesciótto, a good handsome big fish.

Pesciuéndolo, a Fish-munger or seller.

Pésco, a Peach-tree. Also a mans bum. 

Pescóso, fishy, full of fish.

Pescúglio, a little pibble-stone.

Peselli, small Peason or Fitches.

Pesétto, any little weight.

Péso, any kind of waight, charge, loade, burthen, or heauinesse. Also waighty or full weight. Also the whole body of a man. Also hanged or downe-hanging.

Pésol', as Pésolo.

Pésole, dangling or downe hanging.

Pésolo, hanging or dangling, downe weighing.

Pesolóne, as Pésolo, Di pesolóne, by maine weight.

Pessário, a pessary or deuise like a suppository put vpinto the naturall parts of a woman.

Pessétto, the brawny or fleshy part of a mans arme or thigh.

Pessimaménte, most ill, most wickedly.

Pessimare, to marre or make of bad worse.

Pessimo, most ill, exceeding naught.

Pesso, as Pessário.

Pessolo, as Pessário. Also a Creeke in the sea.

Pésta, any footing, tracke, or trace, the print or marke of a foote. Also the view of a Hare or pricke of a Deare. Also a way or path much beaten and frequented. Also a throng, a croud or presse of people.

Pestácchio, a pistacho, a fistike-nut, or bladder nut. Also a flurt with ones fingers.

Pestacciáre, as Pestáre.

Pestáglio, as Pestello.

Pestáre, to stampe, to punne, to bray, to bruse or breake with a pestell.

Pestáre l'agresto, as Menár l'agresto.

Pestáre la sálsa nel mortáio, to punne sauce in a morter.

Pestatóio, a pestle of a morter.

Pestatóre, a stamper, a punner.

Peste, the pestilence, the plague. Also death, poison, contagion or infection.

Peste., Vsed for trauels or troubles whether of bodie or minde.

Pestello, a punner or pestell of a morter, a stamper that Pauiers vse, a rammer that Gunners vse. Also taken for a mans toole or priuities.

Pestello di uétro, a dildoe of glasse.

Pestéro, a venemous Serpent in India.

Pestiáre, to boult a dore.

Pestífero, pestiferous, plague-bringing, contagious, pestilent, mortall, dangerous.

Pestilentia, as Pestilenza.

Pestilentiále, as Pestifero.

Pestilentióso, as Pestífero.

Pestilenza, a pestilence, a murrian, a plague, a contagion or infection of the ayre. 



Pestináca, as Pastináca.

Pesto, a bolte of a dore.

Pésto, punned, bruzed or trampled.

Pésto dicapóne, a cullis made of a Capon.

Pestóne, as Pestello. Also a bolte.

Pesulo, a bench, a forme, a long seate.

Péta, farts.

Petáccie, rags, clouts, dragles.

Petálio, the plate of pure gold which was set in the forefront of the High-priest hauing Iehouah grauen in it.

Petalismo, a kind of banishment vsed in Siracusa by writing the parties names in Oliue-leaues.

Petalíte, the hearbe Harts-horne.

Petamogéto, a weede growing in water.

Petardáre, to petard, to beate with a Petard.

Petárdo, a Petard to breake gates with. Also a farter.

Petáre, as Pettáre.

Petaruólo, as Petárdo.

Petasétto, a lid or round couer or hat.

Petasíte, Lagwort or Butter-bur.

Pétaso, a Persian hat, bonnet or Turbant.

Petáte, farts, fartings.

Petaurísta, a iugler, a tumbler.

Petécchia, a freckle in ones face.

Petécchie, the meazels or gods-markes.

Peteggiáre, to farte or blurt at one.

Petégola, a slut, a flurt, a pis-kitchin, a gill, an idle huswife, a chiefe scold, a trull.

Petegoláre, to play the idle slut, the common scolde, the trull or strumpet.

Petenécchio, as Pettinále.

Petente, a petitioner, requiring.

Petenza, a petition, a requiring.

Peteríggio, the pilling or going off of the skin about the nailes.

Peterráre, to shead, to spill, to scatter.

Petígine, a tetter, a ringworme.

Petiginóso, full of tetters or ringwormes.

Petignóne, the grine about the priuities where haire groweth.

Petílio, a flower like a wilde rose growing among brambles in the end of Summer.

Petimbórsa, Fell-wort or bitter Gentiane.

Petíme, a disease in the shoulder of a horse.

Petísie, a kind of little but very good Apple.

Petitézza, a littlenesse, a smallnesse.

Petitióne, a petition, a sute, a request. Also a certaine Magistrate in Venice.

Petitóre, a petitioner, a suter, a requester.

Petitória léttera, a letter of request.

Petítto, little, pettie, small.

Péto, goate-eyde, rouling-eyde, one that with a grace roules his eyes from one corner to another. Also looking a squint vpward.

Petolánte, as Petulánte.

Petolánza, as Petulánza.

Petonáre, to take Tobacco.

Petóne, the hearbe Tobacco. Also something about a Fullers-mill.

Petóri, such as are squint-eyde vpward.

Petoríte, a wagon, a coach or chariot vsed in old times.

Petórselo, a saucie or malapert companion.

Petra, as Pietra, any kind of stone.

Petráia, a quarrie of stones.

Petráio, a whet-stone. Also a Mazon or Stone-hewer.

Petrále, stonie or of stones. Also a quarrie of stones.

Petranciána, the hearbe Saxifrage.

Petráro, as Petráio.

Petraruólo, as Petráio.

Petráta, a hurle or hit with a stone.

Petrea, a kind of Colewort enemie to the Vine.

Petrelle, little stones. Also a Goldsmiths ingot.

Petreo, stonie, of the nature of stones.

Petreo hiperico, Saint Iohns-wort.

Petriéra, a quarrie of stones.

Petriéro, a kind of short mortar like a piece of Artillerie, heeretofore more vsed then now to shoot stone-shot in, called of our Gunners a Perrier.

Petriéro abrága, a breeched Perrier, called of our Gunners a Pouler, being but about foure inches diameter at the mouth, there is another sort of six inches diameter at the mouth called Port-piece.

Petriéro fémina, a kind of Perrier not so well mettalled or fortified in the breeches as the former called a female Perrier.

Petriéro máschio, a kind of Perrier well fortified in the breeches and well mettalled called a male-perrier.

Petrificáre, to grow hard as a stone.

Petrificatióne, a growing hard as a stone. Also a disease in the eye or eye-lids.

Petrígno, stonie, of the nature of stone.

Petrína, any little or small stone.

Petrinále, a petrinall or petronell.

Petríto, a kind of wine of Greece.

Petriuólo, a kind of burning gum.

Petronciána, as Petranciána.

Petróne, a huge stone, a great rocke.

Petronella, a Larke with a bush on his head.

Petronelli, as Pietranelli.

Petronello, as Pietronello.

Petrósa, a rough hard Skate-fish.

Petrosélino, stone Parselie or Ach of the rockes.

Petrosellino, as Petrosélino.

Petrosémolo, as Petrosélino.

Petrosillo, as Petrosélino.

Petróso, stonie, grauelly, grettie.

Petrúccia, a little stone, a pible stone.

Petruccióla, as Petrúccia.

Petrúzze, small pible stones.

Pettacchiáre, as Pettacciáre.

Pettacchína, as Petégola.

Pettacciáre, to botch, to clout, to coble, to sout. Also as Petteggiáre.

Pettacciáro, a botcher, a cobler, a clouter.

Pettánculo, a kind of Scallop-fish.

Pettardáre, to petard gate or wall.

Pettárdo, a Petard to force gates with.

Pettáre, to fart, to crackle, to rattle.

Pettáro, a farter, a cracker, a ratler.

Pettaruólo, as Petárdo. Also a farter.

Petteggiáre, to fart or blurt at.

Pettégola, as Petégola.

Pettegoláre, as Petegoláre.

Pettenéggio, haires about priuities.

Petteniéra, a combe-cace, a combe-box.

Pettenórzo, a kind of Scallop-fish.

Petti, all manner of breasts.

Pétti, all manner of fartes.

Pettído, a kind of musicall instrument.

Pettiéra, a stomacher or breast garment.

Pettiggiáre, as Petteggiáre.

Pettigióne, as Petignóne.

Pettignóne, as Petignóne.

Pettináio, a combe-maker.

Pettinále, as Petignóne.

Pettinára, a combe-case or box.

Pettináre, to combe, to currie. Also to carde wooll or flax. Also to feed merily or hungerly or at other mens charges, a phrase taken from the combe, because it hath teeth, to bestirre ones chaps. Also to rob, to pill, to proule or misuse one hardly and as it were to leaue him nothing.

Pettináre la lána, to carde wooll.

Pettináro, a combe-maker. Also a carder.

Pettinatóre, a comber, a currier, a scraper, a wooll-carder. Also a merry feeder, a bestirrer of his chaps.

Pettina zázzere, a Barber, because he combeth mens forelocks or bushes.

Pettíne, any kinde of combe to combe withall. Also a currie-combe. Also a hetch or hatchell to dresse flax. Also a paire of cardes to carde wooll with. Also the combe of a Weauers lombe through which his web goeth. Also any kind of rake or harrow. Also the grine where haires grow neere the priuities of man or woman. Also a kind of stick wherewith they play on Dulcimers. Also a Scallop-fish. Also the rough Skate-fish. Also a kind of indented hearbe.

Pettine d'auório, an Iuorie-combe.

Pettine dilégno, a woodden-combe.

Pettine ditessitóre, the stay of a Weauers loome. 



Pettine di vénere, venus-haire or maiden-haire.

Pettinícchio, as Petignóne.

Pettirósso, a Robin-red-breast.

Petto, that part of a bodie beneath the channel or neck-bone, called the breast. Also vsed metaphorically for worth, valour, wit or bodily strength.

Pétto, a fart, a crackle, a blurt.

Petto a bótta, a breast-plate or forepart of a corselet, round like the backe of a Toade.

Petto di castráto, a breast of mutton.

Péttole, fritters or pan-cakes.

Pettóncolo, a Scallop-fish.

Pettóne, a great loud farte.

Pettorále, a stomacher, a peitrell, a brestplate. Also belonging to the breast.

Pettorále del cauállo, a peitrell for a horse.

Pettoráli, such medicines or pectorals as are for breast or lungs.

Pettoralménte, breast to breast, as we say face to face or man to man.

Pettoráta, a shocke against the breast or bulke.

Pettoreggiáre, to shocke against the breast or bulke.

Pettoreggiáre, to blurt with the mouth.

Pettoreggiáre, to meete front or shocke with the force of ones breast.

Pettorína con lárdo, a fat breast of porke.

Pettoróso, as Pettorúto.

Pettorósso, a Rudcocke or Robin-redbreast.

Pettorúto, breasted, big breasted. Also whole-chested. Also bossed.

Pettózzo, a girding loud fart.

Pettúnculi, a kind of little Scallop-fish.

Pettúnculo, a Scallop-fish.

Petulánte, petulant, shamelesse, malapert, ribald, dishonest, ready to a wrong.

Petulántia, malapertnesse, saucinesse, ribauldrie, impudent or reprochfull speaking, dishonestie.

Petússo, a Robin-red-brest, a Rudcocke.

Peucedáno, Heg-fenell, Sulphur-wort, Sow-fenell, Maiden-weede, or Hare-strang.

Peucevíno, a kind of Wine of Greece.

Peuéra, a woodden-leauer. Also a tunnell.

Peueráre, to Pepper, to dresse with Pepper.

Peueráta, a meat or potage of Pepper. Also a seasoning with Spice or Pepper.

Peuerázze, a kind of Cockle-fish.

Péuere, the spice called Pepper.

Peuerígno, of the colour or taste of Pepper.

Peueríno, a Pepper-box.

Peueróne, Long-pepper. 

Peuménto, a kind of puffed and windy litharge.

Pezíci, a kinde of Mushroms, Todestooles, Fusses, Puffes, or Puff-bales.

Pezza, any piece, patch, clout, ragge or tatter. Also a while, a delay, an interual or space of time. Also a branching cloath or painting-clout. Also a whole piece of any stuffe.

Pezza di denáro, a piece of mony.

Pezza di formággio, a whole cheese.

Pezza di pánno, a piece of cloath.

Pezza di vellúto, a piece of Veluet.

Pezza lína, any linnen clout or ragge.

Pezzámi, all sorts of pieces, scrapes, mammockes, shardes, brick-bats, or tileshardes.

Pezzáre, to piece, to patch, to botch, to clout, to cobble.

Pezzaruólo, a botcher, a cobler, a patcher, a clouter, a tinker.

Pezzáto, vsed for a pyde-coloured horse.

Pezze, all manner of ragges, cloutes, tatters, patches, pieces or scrapes.

Pezzenáre, to begge for scrapes or broken pieces of meat.

Pezzénte, a begger for scrapes or broken pieces of meat.

Pezzétta, any little clout, ragge or piece. Also a small while or space of time.

Pezzétte di leuánte, painting clothes that women rub their faces with.

Pezzétto, as Pezzétta.

Pezzi da víte, skrewed pieces, which are charged behind the breech by taking out a skrew wherewith the breech is stopped.

Pezzigaruólo, as Pizzacágnolo. Also wanton, puling, itching, ticklish, pinching.

Pezzíre, zísco zíto, as Pezzenáre.

Pezzo, a piece of any thing. Also a while or space of time. Also a Pitch-tree.

Pezzo a Pezzo, piece by piece, by piecemeale.

Pezzo bucaráto, a piece Honnycombed.

Pezzo cauernóso, a piece Honnycombed.

Pezzo di campágna, a fielde-piece.

Pezzo ferriéro, an Iron-piece.

Pezzo fuscláto, a piece through boared.

Pezzo imboccáto, a piece imboct, that is when the mouth of a piece is broke by a bullet from the enemies Ordinance.

Pezzo incameráto, a piece chamber-bored.

Pezzo incampanáto, a piece taper or bell-bored.

Pezzo incassáto, a piece well stockt or breeched.

Pezzo inescáto, a piece that is primed.

Pezzo intiéro, a piece wel fortified with mettall.

Pezzo inzoccáto, a piece laid vpon logs or stockes.

Pezzola, a Purple clout that Cookes vse to colour meate with.

Pezzolána, course sand, stony grauell.

Pezzo póuero di metállo, a piece poore of mettall or weakely fortified.

Pezzo rícco di metállo, a piece rich in mettall or well fortified.

Pezzo seguénte, a piece vncambred, whose concauity is euen bored, of an euen height at mouth and breech.

Pezzo sólio, a piece euen and iust bored.

Pezzúco, as Perno.

Pezzulo, dangling or downe hanging.

Pezzuóle, as Pezzétte.

Pezzuóla, a kind of Purple clout wherwith Cookes colour some meates.

Pezzúto, patched, botched, pieced, clouted. Also keene or sharpe-pointed.

Pháco, a kind of wilde Lentiles. Also Sage.

Phagédena, a kinde of running canker or pocke, which eateth the flesh and fretteth through the skin.

Phagéro, a kind of stone-fish.

Phalacrocoráce, a kind of water Rauen, the Balcrauen or Plungeon.

Phalánge, a troupe or squadron of eight thousand men that the Persians were wont to warre with, being foure-square, and so marshalled, that they might encounter with their enemies foote to foote, man to man, and shield to shield. Also a kind of Spider. Also a kinde of billet, or certaine staues, bastons, or clubs vsed among the Grecians.

Phalángio, a kind of spider.

Phalangíte, an hearbe, as Leucanthereóne.

Phalárica, an engine of warre with wilde fire enclosed in it to set townes on fire.

Phálari, Petty-panike, Grasse-corne, Spanish-seede or Canary-seede.

Phaláride, as Phálari.

Phálera, an ornament that Roman Knightes were wont to weare.

Phálere, capparisons or trappings for bard-horses vsed among the Romans.

Phaléridi, a kinde of dainty Waterfoule.

Phanático, one that hath vaine visions.

Phantásma, a vaine vision, or image of things conceiued in the minde, an appearance in a dreame, a false representation.

Phantáso, Icilone, Morphéo, the three sonnes of sloth or lazinesse.

Pháree, a kinde of serpent that creepeth on his taile.

Pharétra, a quiuer for arrowes or shafts. 



Pharetráre, to put into a quiuer.

Pharetráro, a quiuer-maker.

Phária, a kind of wine or Grape.

Pharicóne, a kind of venemous hearbe or poison.

Pharisaísmo, as Farisaísmo.

Pharisei, as Farisei.

Phármace, that part of Physike that cureth with medicines. Also a curing medicine or remedy. Also any kind of drug good or euill vsed in medicines. Vsed also for a sorceresse or enchantresse.

Pharmáchia, as Phármace.

Pháro, a Sea-marke, a high Towre or Beacon by the Sea-cost wherein were continuall lights and sires to direct Sea-men to see the Hauen and safest entrance.

Phasélide, a kind of Dates full of good liquor.

Phaselióne, an hearbe.

Phasgána, as Gladióla.

Phasganióne, Glader or flagges.

Phásma, a horrible or gastly vision, a dreadfull or grizly sight.

Phebea, the Moone is often so called.

Phebo, the Sunne, Phebus.

Phebório víno, a kinde of wine that maketh women with childe to miscarry.

Phecásio, a kind of shooes that sacrificing Priests were wont to weare.

Phegmóne, a bruised place that lookes blacke and blue, a contusion.

Pheleóne, the Knap-weed or Marfellon.

Phelladrióne, an hearbe growing in Fennes.

Phemígno, a medicine causing rednesse and the body to breake out in pushes.

Phémo, a medicine good against the cholike.

Phenegíta, a kind of costly stone vsed in costly buildings.

Phenerico, a bird called the Red-taile.

Phengíta, as Phenegíta.

Pheníce, the Fenix bird. Also the Philosophers stone or quintessence of fire.

Phenicéa, an hearbe called in Latine Hordeum murinum.

Pheniceláto, the barke or yongue shootes of Date-trees.

Phenicéo colóre, a deepe-red, or scarlet colour.

Phenícia, a certaine wind betweene the South-East and the South.

Phenicíte, a stone resembling a Date.

Phenicobaláno, a kind of later growing Date or Palme.

Phenicobalóne, the Egyptian Date.

Phenióne, the Winde-flower.

Phenocoptéro, a kinde of dainty birde whose tongue is excellent meate.

Phenoméno, an appearance in the skie or ayre. 

Pheúlie, a kinde of big Oliue in Italy.

Phéuno, a shrub growing out of Oliue-trees.

Phì, foh, poh, fy-upon.

Phiála, a brode goblet or standing cup. Also as Fiála.

Phíci, a fish that somtimes is white and sometimes full of blacke speckes.

Phicisde, a kind of stone-fish.

Phicíte, a stone like Sea-weed or Lectuce.

Phicotalassióne, Sea-weed.

Phidície, the common suppers kept openly in streets with great temperance among the Lacedemonians.

Phigéthlo, a hard and red swelling rising either on the crowne of the head, in the arme-pits, or in the priuy parts, called of our Chirurgions a little loafe or manchet.

Phigthóngo, a kind of tune or harmony in musike.

Philadelphía, brotherly loue.

Philagátho, he that loueth goodnesse.

Philaléthe, a louer of truth.

Philánthio, an hearbe vsed to die Purple.

Philantropía, humanity, louing of men.

Philantrópo, a louer of man-kind, louing, gentle. Also the hearbe Goosegrasse, Loue-man, Erith or Clauers.

Philára, ropes or cordage made of a kind of Cane, Reede or Rush in Greece.

Philárco, one that loueth to beare rule.

Philargíria, couetise, or loue of money.

Plilatteria, scroles of parchment, hauing the commandements written in them, which the Pharisees were wout to weare about their heads and armes.

Philatterio, a preseruatiue against poison.

Philautía, selfe-loue, loue of ones selfe.

Pilerénio, a louer of solitarinesse.

Phileteria, an hearbe of some called Wilde-sage, but in Ecclesiasticall bookes it is vsed for enchantments.

Philíra, taken for the Linden-tree.

Philíre, glittering or twinkling spangles.

Phillíre, certaine bandes or ropes called Bazen ropes.

Phillíte, the hearbe Hartes-tongue.

Phillóne, an hearbe growing on rockes.

Philocalía, delight in, or loue of fairenesse.

Philócare, the hearbe Hore-hound.

Philocráte, constant in loue.

Philogínia, doting on women.

Philología, loue of learning or study.

Philólogo, a louer of learning and knowledge.

Philomathía, loue or desire of learning.

Philoméla, a Nighting-gall, a Philomele. 

Philoinúso, a louer of the Muses.

Philóne, the white Thistle.

Philopéda, the hearbe Hore-hound.

Philosárco, voluptuous, louing his flesh.

Philosofánte, one professing Philosophy.

Philosofáre, to studdy, to professe, to teach, to dispute or reason in Philosophy.

Philosofástro, a smatterer in Philosophy, a foolish, pedanticall Philosophaster.

Philosofia, Philosophie, loue of knowledge and wisedome.

Philosófico, Philosophicall, of or belonging to Philosophy.

Philósofo, a Philosopher, a louer or student of knowledge, vertue and wisedome.

Philosomía, as Phisiognomía.

Philósseno, a louer of hospitality, a cheerefull entertainer of guests and frindes.

Philossíno, as Philósseno.

Philostorgía, the loue of parents towards their children.

Philotéoro, a louer of speculation, one giuen to contemplation of things.

Phíltro, Philtri, amorous potions, poysons of loue, medicines to make one loue. Also the faire or comely proportion of ones body and his curteous behauiour, that with the sight purchaseth loue and fauour. Also the hollownesse or gutter in the vpper lippes vnder the nostrils.

Phílura, a little thin skin, that which is betweene the barke and the wood of a tree, of some called Tylia, whereon in old times they were wont to write. Vsed also for a leafe or sheete of Paper.

Phíma, a little swelling like a bile, but rounder and flatter. Also a kind of beast, which if a man looke vpon it makes him looke pale many daies aster.

Phimósi, a disease when the nut of a mans yard will not be couered, or being couered will not be opened.

Phióntidi, those creatures which Nature hath made deadly enemies each to other, as the Storke and the Frog, the Cat and the mouse, the spider and the Tode.

Phirána, a kinde of sweet gum or rosen.

Phisato, as Phisetéro.

Phisátro, as Phisetéro.

Phiséi, all maner of precious stones that be of diuers colours.

Phisemáte, hollow or abortiue pearles that come to no goodnesse.

Phisetéro, a mighty fish called a Whirlpoole, rising out of the sea like a pillar higher then the sailes of any ship, and 



spouting so much water out of his mouth as may well ouerwhelme and drowne a great ship.

Phisétro, as Phisetéro.

Phísica, the arte of naturall things, naturall Philosophy. Also physike.

Phisicále, naturall, Physicall, according vnto or belonging vnto naturall causes.

Phísico, an vnderstander or teacher of the causes of naturall things, a Physicion.

Phisiciáno, a Physician.

Phisiognomía, a Science to coniecture or rule to iudge of a mans naturall affections by his visage or forme.

Phisiógnomo, a professor, to know and iudge the natures of men by the view of their body, face, eies or forehead, a Phisiognomist, for Physis, in Greeke is Nature.

Phisiología, a searching out of naturall things, a reasoning of the nature of things.

Phisiólogo, a searcher of natural things, a disputer of naturall causes.

Phisionomísta, as Phisiógnomo.

Phisístro, as Phisetéro.

Phisitéro, as Phisetéro.

Phitáro, as Phisetéro.

Phitéuma, a kind of hearbe.

Phitóne, a kind of Great Serpent.

Phlegónte, a precious stone hauing, as it were a flame of fire in it.

Phlebotomía, blood-letting at a veine.

Phlémma, all manner of fleagme.

Phlemmático, flegmaticall.

Phlemmóne, an inflammation of blood, or white and red swelling against nature, called a Phlegmon.

Phleóne, an hearbe hauing prickes in leafe and stalkes.

Phlitténa, a rising like to a blister caused of scalding with hot water, and full of yellowish matter, called wild fire, or heat on the eyes.

Phlóce, a kind of flame coloured violet or Pancie.

Phlogíno, a stone like the Ostracia.

Phlómide, to Couslop or Primrose.

Phlomóne, as Verbásco.

Phóba, a graine called Turkie millet.

Phóca, a seale fish or sea calfe.

Phóce, as Phóca.

Phocída, a kind of peare in Chios.

Phominéo víno, a kind of wine.

Phonóce, the murthring Thistle.

Phórco, the sea dog fish.

Phormióne, a kind of fine Alume. Also an hearbe good for a pin and web in the eye.

Phosophóro, the day or morning star. Also the twylight morning or euening.

Phráse, a phrase or proper forme of speech.

Phréna, Phréne, the midriffe, which deuideth the vmbles of man or beast.

Phrenesía, frenzie, franticknesse, madnesse.

Phreneticáre, to be frenzie or franticke.

Phrenético, franticke, mad, frenzie.

Phrianióne, a kind of flie or Beetle.

Phriganióne, a kind of flie or Beetle.

Phríge, as Diphríge.

Phrígio, a melody, tune or musicke wherin seemeth to be a deuine fury.

Phrigióni, embroiderers of needle worke were anciently so called.

Phríni, frogs that liue in hedges and bushes.

Phrinióne, a kind of saxifrage, or rather maiden haire or Rutamuralis.

Phronesía, vsed for wisedome or prudence.

Phrónimo, prudent, wise, sage, witty.

Phróno, the murthring Thistle.

Phsilotróne, as Víte álba.

Phthiriási, a disease called the lousie euill.

Phthíst, a disease in the lungs with a consumption of the whole body.

Phthísico, that hath a consumption of the lungs.

Phthóe, the incurable sores of the lungs, or consumption of the whole body.

Phtiroforóne, the kernels within the catkins or the Firre tree.

Phthório, a medicine to kill children yet in the mothers wombe.

Phtóngo, a sound, a tune or a note.

Phu, valerian, Capons taile or great Setwall.

Pì, as Più.

Pía, as Pío, vsed also for a pide colour.

Piabiánca, a white pide horse.

Piábile, that satisfaction may be made for.

Piáccia a Dío, may it please God.

Piacendo a Dío, God willing.

Piacére, Piáccio, Piacqui, Piaciúto, to please, to like, to content, to satisfie, to delight. Also a pleasure, a delight, a liking, a kindnesse, a fauour, a good turne, a gratitude.

Piacente, pleasant, pleasing, delighting.

Piacenza, pleasance, pleasantnesse.

Piacérsi in alcúna cósa, to delight or take pleasure in any thing.

Piacerúccio, any foolish pleasure.

Pia césse a Dío, might it please God.

Piacéuole, pleasing, pleasurable.

Piaceuoleggiáre, to pleasant, iest, buffonise, or be mery.

Piaceuolétto, somewhat pleasing or pleasant.

Piaceuolézza, pleasantnesse, pleasingnesse.

Piaciménto, a pleasing, a delighting. Also will and pleasure.

Piaciúto, pleased, liked, delighted.

Piaculáre, that hath power to purge some fault or offence, Also showing some sorrowfull thing.

Piáculo, a sacrifice or any thing done or giuen for the purging or satisfaction of some hainous sinne. Also a grieuous offence to be purged by satisfaction.

Piadéna, an earthen or a treen dish or platter.

Piadétto. 

Piadíre, dísco, díto, to pleade, to sue or contend in law.

Piadíto, pleaded, or contended in law.

Piaditóre, a pleader or contender in law.

Piádo, a plea, a pleading, a processe.

Piadóso, pleading, litigious, contentious. Also as Pietóso.

Piadótto, a kind of course bread.

Piága, a plague, a wound, a hurt, a sore, an vlcer, a cut, an incision. Also a great losse, a hinderance, a heauie chance. Also a country, a region or portion of the world.

Piagábile, that may be wounded or hurt.

Piagáre, to wound, to hurt, to plague, to torment, to cut or make an incision into with any cutting weapon. Also to vex or molest sore.

Piagería, any pledge or pledging.

Piággia, a medow, a large field, a plot of ground. Also the strond of the sea shore, as betweene land and water. Also any rode or downes by the sea side, where no hauen is and yet ships may ride, vsed also for the steepe of a hill.

Piaggiáre, to stand doubtfull as it were between land and water. Also to lie low as it were squatting. Also to flatter, to fawne vpon, to sooth vp er smooth vp. Also to cogge and foist withall, to mocke and flout iniuriously. Also to reduce into medowes or open fields. Also to coast along the sea strond or shore. Also to pledge, to answer or be surety for.

Piaggiétta, a little medow, a little Piággia.

Piággie, vsed for zóne celesti.

Piaggiménto, a flattring soothing vp, cogging and foisting with intention to please.

Piaggióso, medewy, full of medowes. Also full of stronds or large shores.

Piaghéuole, as Piagábile.

Piágnere, as Piángere.

Piagnestério, a place of wailing and weeping.

Piagnéuole, as Piangéuole.

Píagnistério, out right or maine weeping or whining.

Piagnóne, a whining, weeping or wailing fellow, a dissembling puritane.

Piagnúto, as Piangiúto, wept.

Piálla, a carpenters or ioiners plane.

Pialláre, to plane, to smooth, to planish. 



Piállo, Piallóne, as Piálla.

Piallúre, shauings or planings of timber.

Pía máter, looke Mátre or Mádre.

Piaménte, deuoutly, godly, dutifully.

Piána, as Piálla, Sonáre alla piána, to toll a bell leasurely as for the dead. Also any plaine or flat piece of ground.

Pianaménte, plainely. Also softly and gently. Also with a low voice.

Pianáre, as Pialláre. Also to make plaine.

Piánca, any planke or planking.

Piane, flat tiles or slates to couer houses.

Pianella, as Piálla.

Pianelláio, a maker of pantofles or slippers.

Pianellaría, a place where Pianelle are made.

Pianelláro, as Pianelláio.

Pianelle, night slippers or pantofles.

Pianellétte, little or thin night slippers.

Pianeróttolo, the round harth in the midst of great halls to make fire on. Also the flat bottom or ground of any thing as of a paire of staires.

Pianéta, a planet or wandring star, vsed also for a chance, a lucke, or fortune.

Pianéto, a groue or plot with plane trees.

Pianézza, a plainenesse, an euenesse, a smoothnesse. Also a plaine field or leueld ground.

Pianézza dell' anello, the bezell of a ring.

Piangente, weeping, whining, mourning.

Piángere, Piángo, Piánsi, Piangiúto, to weepe, to whine, to waile, to moane, to blubber.

Piánger dirottaménte, to weepe out amaine.

Piangéuole, wailefull, to be wept for.

Piangiménto, a weeping, a whining, a wailing.

Piangiolente, weeping, whining.

Piangiúto, wept, whined, wailed.

Piangolaménti, whinings, wailings.

Piangoláre, to whine or pule as children.

Piangolína, a whining or puling woman.

Piangolóso, puling, whining, weeping.

Pianín pianíno, faire and softly.

Piannellóni, great pattins, or choppins.

Piáno, a plaine, an euen ground, a champaine, a large field. Also any kind of flat fish as a Plaise or Flounder. Also plaine, smooth, manifest, euident, cleare or flat. Also softly, flatly, smoothly, quietly, lowly or leasurely. Also low, as Cantár piáno, to sing low. Parlár piáno, to speake softly. Also a Plane-tree.

Piáno piáno, faire and softly, leasurely.

Piáno vn póco, soft and faire, not so fast. 

Piánta, any kind of plant, set, roote or tree. Also the flat or sole of ones foote. Also the platforme or foundation of any frame or building. Also among Anatomists as Pédio.

Piantábile, that may be planted.

Piantachése, any plant that is remooued.

Piánta dicuóio, the hearbe Sumache.

Pianta délla máno, the palme of the hand.

Piánta de'piédi, as Pédio, the sole of the foote.

Piánta di Lióne, the hearbe Lions-paw, or Pate de lion. Also Sauce or our Ladies-mantle.

Piantadóso., Anciently vsed for plentious or aboundant, but now for full of plants.

Piantágine, Plantaine or Way-bread.

Piantágine minóre, Ribwort, Lambes-tongue.

Piantágine aquática, Water-plantaine.

Piantagióne, any planting or plantation.

Piantále, a great stake to fixe in the ground.

Piantanimále, a fish with many feete.

Piantaménto, any kind of planting.

Piantáre, to plant, to set, to fixe in the ground. Also to cheate, to cunniecatch to giue one the slip.

Piantáre lo stendárdo nélla rócca, to set vp ones colours in the Castle.

Piantário, a place to plant trees in, a nurce or spring-garden, a coppise.

Piantársi, to stop and stand still, as some restie horses will doe.

Piantársila in quátro, to lye downe or abroad after the plaine or naturall fashion.

Piantáta, a slip or cunniccatching tricke.

Piantatóio, a Gardners dible.

Piantatóre, a planter or setter. Also a cheater or cunniecatching knaue.

Pianterelle, yoong or little plants.

Piantétto, a small whining or weeping.

Piantífero, plant-bearing.

Piánto, wept, whined, plained, wailed. Also greeting, weeping, whining, plaint.

Piantoncello, any little Piantóne.

Piantóne, any plant or tree to be set. Also a stocke of a tree to graffe vpon. Also any great stake or pile driuen in the ground. Also a suddaine slip giuen to one, a cunning cheating tricke.

Pianúra, a plaine far extending ground, a champaine field, a large downes.

Piasíre, a plate or leafe of any mettall.

Piássa., Vsed for Piázza.

Piástra, any kind of plate or leafe of iron or any mettall, namely, a breast-plate.

Piástra d'argento, a dollar of siluer in Spaine worth fiue shillings three pence of ours.

Piástra di ferro, a clout or plate of iron.

Piástra di metállo, any plate of mettall.

Piástre, vanes or bordes or any thing to turne round with the winde. Also the flotes of a wheele that turnes in the water as of a water-mill.

Piastrella, any litle Piástra. But properly a casting quoit. Also a brick-bat or tile-sharde. Also any thin slatestone.

Piastrelláre, to slate a house. Also to quoite.

Piastrello, a little plaister.

Piastrína, as Piastrella.

Piástro, a plaister.

Piatà, as Pietà.

Piatáno, the Platane or Plane-tree.

Piatánza, a pittance or allowance of meate and drinke. But properly any almes giuen for pitties sake or for the loue of God, namely to poore begging Frieres, consisting of meate and drinke. Also a dole of money and bread giuen at funerals or burials.

Piatióne, a purging by sacrifice, an expiation.

Piatíre, as Piadíre.

Piatitóre, a pleader in law.

Piáto, a plea, a pleading, a processe, a sute in law. Also as Piátto.

Piatosaríe, as Pietosaríe.

Piatóso, litigious. Also as Pietóso.

Piátta, a flat-bottom'd boate or barge. Also as Piána.

Piátta fórma, a platforme or ground worke.

Piátta fórma acúta, a sharpe platforme.

Piattaformáre, to platforme.

Piátta-fórma retta, a streight platforme.

Piátta fórma rouescia, an inuerted platforme, made inward to the tourne.

Piattáre, to squat, to lurke, to hide, to make flat.

Piátte, all manner of dishes or platters.

Piattegli, little dishes. Also crab-lice.

Piattellíni, little or small dishes.

Piattello, any little dish or platter.

Piátti, all manner of dishes or platters.

Piátto, any kind of platter, flat-dish, charger or plate. Also a messe, a dish, a course or seruice serued in at any feast or meale. Also the allowance giuen to any seruant or officer for his messe, or meate and drinke, the budge of Court. Also made flat, razed or leuell to the ground. Also squat, husht, lurking, secret, low, hidden, couring downe.

Piáttola, a kind of Flie or Beetle.

Piáttole, quoites, quoiting-stones. Also Crab-lice.

Piáttoli, a kind of fig so called. 



Piattonáre, to strike or hit flatlin or with the flat of any weapon.

Piattonáta, a blow giuen with the flat side of any sword or other weapon.

Piattoncella, a close, slie, lurking wench.

Piattóni, great platters. Also Crab-lice.

Piázza, any market-place, a chiefe street or broad way in any Cittie or Towne. Also an open court, a castle-yard, a court before great mens houses where people walke. Also an open place or seat of Iustice. Also any holde or fort or strong place.

Piázza da básso, as Casamátta, the low Casamat close to the ditch.

Piázza di mercánti, a place where Marchants meete, as the Royall Exchange in London or Rialto in Venice.

Piázza disópra, the nigher Flanke or Casamat right behind and ouer the higher Casamat that is close to the ditch.

Piazzáro, the common cryer or proclaimer of a Towne. Also an idle walker vp and downe or frequenter of the streetes or market places.

Piazzeggiáre, to walke or frequent the common streetes or market places idly.

Piazzétta, Piazzuóla, a litle Piázza.

Píca, a Pie, a Iay, a Piot or Red-shanke. Also a strange longing that some women haue. Also taken for vnkindnesse or pepper in the nose.

Picardía, the country of Picardie. But vsed for a place where men are hanged. Andár' in picardía, to goe to the gallowes or to be hanged.

Picaráre, to rogue vp and downe.

Picáre, to rogue, to cheate vp and downe.

Picaría, roguerie, foisting, cheating.

Picáro, a wandring rogue, a rogue, a foister.

Pícca, vnkindnesse taken, pepper in the nose, a grudge borne one, anger conceiued against one. Also a pike or spearepointed-staffe. Also a pricking or smarting.

Piccafíchi, as Pappafíco.

Piccánte, pricking, smarting, relishing somewhat sharpe or tarte, smacking, briske or biting vpon the tongue as some wines doe. Also a tartnesse or tang left vpon the tongue.

Piccapietre, a hewer of stones. Also a maker of stone Gun-stones. Also a Mason.

Piccáre, to pricke, to smart, to itch. Also to leaue a touch, a tang, a tartnesse or pleasing smacke vpon the tongue. Also to hang or fasten vnto. Also to pecke, to hew. Also to mooue to anger or prouoke to vnkindnesse, to pricke or touch till one be angry. 

Piccarello, a little wandring rogue, a knauish boy, a craftie wag, a halter-sacke. Also a little hammer or clapper hanged at dores to knocke with.

Piccáta, a blow with a pike. Also a thrust. Also a moouing to anger or vnkindnesse.

Piccáta uíte, a kind of wine or grape.

Picchería, the ranke or squadron of pike-men.

Picchiapetto, a knock-breast, id est, a dissembling Iesuite, an hipocriticall Puritane, a Saint-seeming man or woman that will euer be knocking of his breast.

Picchiáre, to pecke, to knocke. Also to thumpe, to bounce, to beate hard, to clap.

Picchiáre diétro le pánche, to houte, to shout or whistle after one in scorne.

Picchiarello, as Piccarello.

Picchiáta, a blow, a thumpe, a iob, a snap, a pecking, a knocking, a bouncing blow, a clap.

Picchiatóio, a knocker, a hammer to knocke at a dore with, a thumper, a clapper. Also a little bell that begging Friers vse to ring and beg at dores with.

Picchiére, a pike man.

Pícchio, an iron hammer, sledge or beetle. Also a pickax, a mattock. Also a rammer that pauiers vse. Also a knocke, a pecke, a clap, a iob, a snap, a thumpe or great stroke. Also a bird called a wood hacker, a wood wall, a wood pecker, a tree iobber, a hickway, a iobber, a spight, a snapper.

Pícchio arborário, as the bird Pícchio.

Picchióne, a great Pícchio.

Picchiouérde, a greene pecker or hicke-way.

Píccia, a bakers word and is properly six little loafes of bread or bunnes sticking together when they are taken out of the ouen.

Picciaferro, as the bird Pícchio.

Picciáre, as Picchiáre. Also to bill or beake. Also to pecke with the bill. Also to pinche, to snip, to itche or smart or burne. Also to kindle a fire.

Piccicágnolo, as Pizzacágnolo.

Piccicatúra, a billing, a pecking, a pinching, an itching, a smarting, a burning.

Piccichétto, a little pinch. Also a glouers toole.

Píccio, a pinch. Also as Piccicatúra.

Piccicóne, as Piccicótto. Also a pinch.

Piccicótto, a pinch or pinching. Also as much of any thing or powder as a man may take vp betweene the thumbe and the forefingers end.

Piccigáre, as Picciáre. Also to pinch.

Piccinácoli, pigmeis or dwarfs three spans high.

Piccináio, adwarse, a pigmey.

Piccináre, to make little, to shrinke in, to squat or shrug in close as a hare doth.

Picciníno, very little, slender or small.

Piccíno, as Piccino, as Picciolíno.

Píccio, as Picchio. Also any breaking or brusing with bill or beake of a bird. Also the beake or bill of any bird or foule.

Picciócolo, a stem or stalke of any thing.

Piccioláre, to make little or small. Also to turne a top or twirle a gig round.

Pícciole, a kind of Prawnes or Shrimps.

Picciolétto, very little or pretiy-small.

Picciolézza, littlenesse or smalnesse.

Píccioli, casting counters or small coines Vsed also for yongue infants or little children.

Picciolíno, very little or pretty-small.

Pícciolo, little, petty, small or short, in quality or quantity. Also a stalke of any fruit. Also a childes top, gig or twirle to play withall. Also a kind of very small coine or mony.

Piccióne, a Doue, or a Pigeon.

Picciríllo, a childes swathe or wasteband. Also a yongue infant or baby.

Picciuoláre, as Piccináre.

Picciuóli, tendrels or steeles of haues.

Picciuólo, little. Also the stem or stalke of any flowre or fruit.

Pícco, as Picchióne, siféce príma rícco et pói si féce pícco.

Piccolézza, littlenesse, smalnesse.

Piccolíno, very little, petty or small.

Piccóllo, the huske that encloseth the bottome of a rose or other flowre.

Píccolo, as Pícciolo. Also the stalke of any fruite.

Piccóne, as Picchióne.

Piccózzo, as Pícchio.

Piceástro, a wilde Pitch-tree.

Picéne, a kinde of little, but dainty Oliue.

Picentine, a kind of Peares.

Picéo, the Pitch-tree.

Piciéth, a kind of hearbe.

Picílla, a Farriers toole or shauer to pare the hoofe of a horse before hee shooe him.

Picíno, an Oyle made of pitch and other gums

Pício, a kind of Ruffe or Sea-breame.

Picnocomóne, an hearbe like to Rocket.

Píco, as Pícchio. Also a kind of menow fish. Also a shrub in the sea with broad leaues. Also a kind of measure that marchants vse in India.

Píco mártico, as the bird called Pícchio.

Píco vérde, a greene wood pecker.

Picróccoli, cholericke men.

Pidicelli, little lice or nits.

Pidocchiáre, to louse or vnlouse one. 



Pidocchiería, lousinesse. Also paltring, dodging, wrangling, filthinesse, nigardlinesse.

Pidócchio, a louse.

Pidócchio délla terra, a kinde of Beetle breeding in the earth.

Pidocchióso, lowsie full of lice.

Pidottáre, as Pilottáre.

Pidriéle., 

Piè, as Piede.

Piecora, as Pecora.

Piecoráio, as Pecoráio, a sheap-heard.

Piedácci, broad filthy great feete.

Piede, a foote. Also a base, a foote-stall or foundation of any thing. Also a measure of a foote or twelue inches.

Piede d'ásino, sauce alone, Iacke of the hedge, or Asse-hoofe.

Piede di ceruo, the hearbe called in Latine Polynathemum.

Piede di colómba, Doues-foote or Cranes bill.

Piede di gallína, Henes-feet which some take for Fomitory.

Piede di gállo, the hearbe Cockes-foote.

Piede di gátto, a kinde of bit that some riders vse, made like a Cats-foote.

Piede di lepre, the hearbe Hares-foote.

Piede stállo, the pedestall or base of any frame or engine, a foote-pace, a footestoole, the threshall of a doore. Also the socket of a candle-sticke.

Piéga, a folde, a plate, a bending, a bowing, a stopping, a yeelding, an enfolding. Also a wrinkling. Also wilinesse, doublenesse of minde, subtill craft.

Piegábile, as Pieghéuole.

Piegaménto, as Piéga.

Piegáre, to bow, to bend, to ply, to encline, to stoope, to yeeld, to wry. Also to fould or to plait. Also to appease or draw to what one list, to bumble or perswade.

Piegaría, as Piéga.

Piegatóie, benders, or pliers, or bowing pincers that Gold-smiths vse.

Piegatúra, as Piéga.

Pieggiáre, to pledge, to baile, or be suretie, and answer for.

Pieggiería, a pledge, a baile, a suretie, a maineprize. Also a suretieship.

Piéggio, a pledge, or suretie, a baile.

Pieghéuole, pliable, yeelding, sloping, bowing, bendable, enclinable, flexible, easie, tractable, limber, easie to mooue, or be mooued.

Piégo, as Piéga. Also as Plíco.

Piegora, as Pecora.

Piegoráio, a Shepheard.

Piéna, full, or filled. Also a fullnesse. Also a full tide, or spring tide, a flud of waters. Vsed also for a thicke croud, or full throng of people. Vsed also for sorrow and griefe. 

Piéna bótta, a full blow, or stroke.

Pienaménte, fully, wholy, compleatly.

Pienára, as Piéna.

Pienézza, fullnesse.

Pienézza délla lúna, the full of the Moone.

Pieníssimo, most full.

Piéno, full, filled. Also ample, large, whole, perfect, compleate. Also stored, plenteous, full of, stuft, gorged, glutted. Also a pudding or facing of any meate.

Pienótto, somewhat full, or plum.

Piercia, odds in number, vneuen.

Piérica, a kind of stone-pitch.

Piérida, a kind of bitter Endiue or Cichorie.

Piérie, the daughters of Pierus.

Pierla, as Perla.

Pieste, as Peste.

Piéta, a wailing or lamentation in acte to mooue compassion in others. Vsed also for Piéga.

Pietà, the dutie, the conscience or good affection that is due by man first vnto God, then to his parents, friends and children, pietie, deuotion, godly affection, righteousnesse, true zeale. Also naturall loue, reuerent affection, remorce, conscience, pitlie, mercie, ruth, compassion, or compunction of anothers harme.

Pietánza, as Piatánza.

Pietosaríe, pitifull actions, compassionate dealings, ruthfull conditions.

Pietóso, pitious, pitifull, ruthfull, compassionate, mercifull.

Pietra, any kind of stone. Vsed also for ruggednesse or hardnesse. Vsed also for a hard-hearted man, or that feeleth no passion.

Pietra ara, a superaltare stone.

Pietra colombína, a kind of stone good to make lime with.

Pietra cótta, bricks or baked stones.

Pietra da aguzzáre, a whet-stone, a grinding-stone.

Pietra da óglio, a whet-stone.

Pietra d'aratóre, a grinding or whetstone.

Pietra dégli I'ndi, gold, according to Alchimists phrases.

Pietra focáia, a Flint or Fire-stone.

Pietranelli, souldiers seruing on horsebacke armed with Petronels, Snap-hances or Fire-locke pieces and Cuirasses.

Pietra phrígia, a kind of hollow lumpish stone like a Pumish-stone.

Pietra piccata, hewen-stone.

Pietra póma, a Pumish-stone.

Pietra pómega, a Pumish-stone.

Pietra pulíta, a smooth or sleeked-stone.

Pietraría, a quarrie of stones. Also a Masons shop. Also all maner of stone-worke.

Pietráro, a Lapidarie, a digger, a cutter or worker of stones.

Pietra speculáre, Tale-stone or Glassestone.

Pietra spúgna, a kind of stone found in Spunges, which broken small and drunke in wine breakes the stone in the bladder.

Pietra uíua, a naturall hard stone, a flint-stone.

Pietre commésse, stone well ioyned or laid together.

Pietre cótte, bricke or baked-stones.

Pietricína, any little stone.

Pietrífero, stone-bearings

Pietronello, a Petronell or Snaphance-piece.

Pietróso, stonie, full of stones, grettie.

Pietrúccia, any little or small stone.

Piéua, a Parish or precinct. Also a Vicarage, a Curateship, a Personage. But properly a Chappell of ease depending of another Church. Also a Church or Chappell belonging to any Castle or Lords mansion house.

Pieuále, as Pieuiále.

Piéue, Pieuéra, as Piéua, as Plebe.

Pieuiále, a Bishops rochet. Also a coape or Church vestiment.

Pié, zo, as Pieggiaría.

Piezzaría, as Pieggiaría.

Piezzo, as Pieggiaría.

Pífara, any kind of pipe, fife or flute.

Pifaráta, a piping or fit of mirth.

Pifaro, a Piper, a Fifer, a Fluter.

Pífero, as Pífaro.

Piferóni, Pipers, Fifirs, Fluters.

Píffara, as Pífara.

Piffaráta, as Pifaráta.

Píffaro, as Pífaro.

Píffero, as Pífaro.

Pifferóni, as Piferóni.

Pígamo, bastard Reubarbe.

Pigárgo, a beast like a Fallow-deare or Roe-bucke. Also a kind of Hearne with a white taile, numbred among Hawkes. Some take it for a kind of Eagle of the second kind which keepes in Townes and fields neere Townes.

Pigázzo, a toole that Turners vse.

Piggioráre, as Peggioráre.

Piggióre, as Peggióre.

Pigiáre, to tread or trample vnder foote. Also as Picchiáre. Vsed also to fumble a wench.

Pigioláre, as Pigoláre.

Pigionáre, to farme or let or hire for rent any houses or lands.

Pigionáro, a farmer or renter of houses or lands.

Pigióne, a Doue or a Pigeon. Also rent for house or land. Also as Pígma. Looke Stáre a pigióne.

Pigísta, one that vseth buggerie. 



Pígliami tópo, a kind of play so called.

Piglia mósche, a flie-catcher.

Pigliapésci, a fish-taker, a fish.

Píglia píglia, a hue and cry, take and hold, catch and take, hold-hold.

Pigliáre, to take, to catch, to snatch, to take hold off, to surprise. Also to receiue, as Prendere in all phrases.

Pigháre a crédito, to take vpon trust or credit.

Pigliáre ad impréstito, to borrow, to take in lone.

Pigliáre ad interesse, to take vp at interest.

Pigliáre ad ónta, to take in scorne or as an iniurie.

Pigliáre a fítto, to take to farme or rent.

Pigliáre a giuóco, to take in iest.

Pigliáre alcúno, to take or catch some bodie.

Pigliáre álla riuersa, to take in a contrarie sence.

Pigliáre amóre, to conceiue or set loue vpon any thing.

Pigliáre ánimo, to take heart or courage.

Pigliáre a uettúra, to hire a horse by the day or at liuerie.

Pigliáre il légno, to take the wood or dyet drinke for the pox.

Pigliáre la púnta., Vsed for wine to grow sowre and loose his strength and vertue and haue a tang.

Pigliáre marróni, to gad, to roaue or wander idly vp and downe.

Pigliáre partíto, to take a resolution.

Pigliáre per il verso, to take by the right way or true byase.

Pigliáre pórto, to take vp a hauen, to come into a hauen.

Pigliáre queréla, to take a quarrell in hand.

Pigliárla con qualcúno, to picke or take a quarrell with some bodie.

Pigliáre la uólta, to take the turne.

Pigháre licénza, to take leaue.

Pigliár língua, to take aduertisement of spies, to take the word.

Pigliáre míra, to aime or leuell at.

Pigliáre medicina, to take Physike.

Pigliáre móglie., to take a wife.

Pigliáre ómbra, to suspect or apprehend suspicion, to take snuff or pepper in the nose.

Pigliáre partíto, to take any match or resolution in hand.

Pigliáre sesto, to take order or byase.

Pigliár'un gránchio., looke Gránchio.

Pigliársi cúra, to take care.

Piglia sórgij, a Mouse or Rat-catcher.

Pigliár sópra di sè, to take vpon him.

Pigliár terra, to take land, to land.

Pigliatóre, a taker, a catcher, a receiuer.

Píglia uccelli, a fowler, a bird-catcher.

Pigliár uendétta, to take reuenge. 

Píglio, a hold-fast, a taking hold of. Also a mans countenance or aspect.

Pígma, a Greeke measure of 22 inches.

Pigmáico, like a pigmey or dandie-prat.

Pigménto, the figures, colours, or ornaments of Rhethorike. Also Painters colourings. Also womens paintings, or false complexions. Also guilefull speaches.

Pigméo, a Pigmey, a twattle, a dandieprat, an elfe. Some say they be a kind of spirits ingendred of the corruption of the earth, as the Scarab of a horses dung.

Pígna, a stoue, or hote-house, or the furnace that heateth a stoue. Also a bunch or cluster of any fruite. Also a Pineapple.

Pignátta, any kind of earthen pipkin, posenet, pitcher, or pot to boile meate in.

Pignattáro, a Potter, or Pipkin-maker.

Pignattella, a little earthen pot, or pipkin. Also a pot of wild-fire.

Pignátto, a kind of basket.

Pignénte, thrusting. Also panting.

Pígnere, píngo, pínsi, pínto, to paint, to draw the forme and shape of any thing. Also to describe or set foorth a matter in colours. Also as Spíngere.

Pignéto, a groue or thicket of Pine-trees.

Pigníte, a kind of Térra Sigilláta.

Pígno, a Pine-apple-tree.

Pignoccáta, a kind of paste, conserue, or preserue made of Pine-apples.

Pignoláre, to hatchell Hemp, or Flax.

Pígnolo, a hetch or hatchell to dresse Flax. Also as Pignoccáta.

Pignóne, a wall of stone or foundation whereupon an arch of a bridge or arches are built.

Pígnora, a pledge, a paune, a baile, a suretie, a maineprize. Also a morgage. Also a distresse, or distraining.

Pignoráre, to pledge, to paune, to gage, to baile, or be suretie for, to morgage, to bind by assurance. Also to seaze, to distresse or distraine.

Pignoratíuo, that may be pauned, pledged, or gaged. Also baileable. Also that which is or may be morgaged or pauned. Also that may straine or be distrained.

Pignottánte, a smell-feast, a sneaker vp and downe for good cheere.

Pignottáre, to sneake vp and downe for good cheere, to smell feasts.

Pignuóli, a kind of Ducke or Maliard. Also the kernels of Pine-apples.

Pígo, a fish called in Latine Cyprinus.

Pigolaménto, a iangling. Also a croaking of a Chough, or Rauen.

Pigolare, to crie or chat as a Piot or a Iay. Also to iangle. Also to waue, to wauer. Also to twind in and out. Also as Nicchiáre.

Pigóne, as Pígma.

Pigózzo, as Picózzo.

Pigráccio, as Pigróne.

Pigrámma, an Epigram.

Pigrídine, as Pigrítia.

Pigrítia, sloth, lithernesse, idlenesse, lazinesse, sluggishnesse, dulnesse, slothfulnesse.

Pigritúdine, as Pigrítia.

Pígro, slothfull, lither, idle, lazie, sluggish, dull, slow, lumpish, heauie, negligent.

Pigróne, an idle, slow, sluggish, lazie, lither, heauie, and dull companion.

Pihuólo. 

Piíssima, most pious, or godly. Looke Pietà.

Píla, any ball or round thing. Also a bole of a fountaine, a funt in a Church. Also a lauer, or a water-pot. Also a dam, an arch, or bay made of planks or piles to beare off the force of the water. Vsed also for a great Cesterne. Also that side in monie which we call pile. Also any pile.

Pilaggiáre, as Pileggiáre.

Pilággio, as Piléggio.

Pilándra, as Palándra. Also a kind of bird.

Piláni, souldiers that fight with darts or iauelins.

Piláno, a Captaine of souldiers that fight with iauelins, or Pilo.

Piláo, hath been vsed for butter.

Piláre, a paine in a womans dugs or breasts caused by some haire swallowed by chance in drinking, which ceaseth not till it be sucked out, or goe out of it owne accord. Also to pile together. Also to make smooth, or plaine.

Pilário, a iugler.

Pilastráre, to set with pillers, or pilasters.

Pilastráta, a ranke of pillers or pilasters, or side posts.

Pilastrelli, all sorts of pillers, pilasters, or side posts.

Pilástri, as Pilastrelli. Also the cheekes or iambes of a dore or window.

Pilástro, any kind of piller, or pilaster. Also the base, or foundation of a piller.

Piláte, a kind of white stone.

Piláti, piled. Also as Pilóne.

Pilatúro, mullets to pull out haires with.

Píle, as Pilástro. Also piles, stakes in building. Also ground-works.

Pileggiáre, to pillage, to proule, to forage.

Piléggio, pillage, prouling, forage.

Pilella, the middle hole or lowest part of a well where the water bubbles vp. 



Pilello, the name of a Gold-smiths toole.

Pilento, a kind of Wagon, or Coach.

Piléo, an hat or cap of maintenance or libertie that some Bishops and Maiors haue.

Piliére, a standing piller, or pilaster.

Pilistrello, a Reare-mouse, a night-bat.

Pílla, a lime-pit. Also a pile of wood. Also a fire of great logs.

Pilláia, a Tanners pit. Also a lime-pit.

Pillára, a Thrush or Blacke-bird.

Pillíccia, as Pellíccia.

Pillicciáio, Pellicciáro. 

Pilliccióne, as Pelliccióne.

Píllola, a pill such as Phisicians giue.

Pilloláre, to make into round pils.

Píllole, all manner of pils.

Píllole cócchie, a kind of pils.

Píllole fétide, a kind of pils.

Píllole hermodátili, a kind of pils.

Píllole lúcis, a kind of pils.

Pillonáre, to punne, to stampe with a pestle.

Pillóne, a punner, a pestle of a morter.

Pillóso, rugged, rough, hairy, shaggie.

Pillósso, il fattóre tiéne quíui quaranta pillóssi.

Pillóte, a kind of meate or sauce beaten and well punned in a morter.

Pillótta, any round bundle or bal, namely a hand ball.

Pillottáre, to play at hand ball, or to winde vp or bundle vp round. Also to baste rostemeat. Also to lard roste-meate.

Pillótti, litle pieces of lard put into rost-meate.

Pillóto, a kind of small coine.

Pillucáre, to picke vp or gleane. Also to picke or pull out haires or feathers one by one. Also to dodge, to palter or to wrangle. Also to vex or molest.

Pillucóne, a picker, a gleaner. Also a dodger, a wrangler, a paltrer, a micher.

Píllula, any kind of round pill.

Pilluláre, to make into round pils.

Pílo, a boule of a fountaine. Also a funt, a lauer, a water-pot. Also any kinde of piller. Also a iauelin or dart with a head of steele. Also a trough of stone to receiue water into. Also a pestle of a morter.

Pilóne, a great pile or stake or timber driuen into the water. Also as Píla, or as Pílo.

Pilóro, the stomake or maw-gut, that is the neather orifice or mouth of the ventricle which transmitteth the meate changed into the entrailes.

Pilóso, hairy, shaggie, rugged.

Pilóta, a pilot or director of a ship.

Piloteggiáre, to play the Pilot.

Pilótta, a basting ladle. Also a snow-ball. Also a bundle round. Also a bal of wilde-fire.

Pilottáre, to baste roste-meate vpon the spit. Also to bang, to rib-baste, to cudgell or beat or thump. Also to fling snow-bals. Also to bundle vp.

Pilottáta, a basting, a thumping, a blow with a snow-ball.

Pilótto, a kind of wicker-basket.

Pilóttola, as Pilótta.

Pilucáre, as Pillucáre.

Piluccóne, a nickname, as Pilluccóne.

Pimacciáre, to boulster.

Pimáccio, as Piumáccio, a boulster.

Pimméi, pigmeis, twatles, dandy-prats.

Pimpinella, Burnit or Pimpirnel.

Pína, a spire, a sharpe-steeple, a turret, a pinacle. Also a Pine-aple nut.

Pináccia, a ship called a Pinnace.

Pinácolo, a pinacle or sharpe steeple.

Pinacothéca, a cubbord to place pictures in.

Pináro, a groue or thicket of Pine-trees

Pinástro, the wilde Pine, or Pinaster-tree.

Pinázza, a ship called a pinnace.

Pínca, a womans quaint.

Pincellóne, as Pinchellóne.

Pincerna, a fill-cup, a cup-bearer, one that waiteth on a Princes cup.

Pincétte, little pincers or snippers.

Pinchellóne, a chopping boy, a great pillicocke, a tall-striplin.

Pinchíno, a prime-cocke, a pillicocke, a darlin, a beloued lad.

Píncia, a fauorit, a darlin, a dilling, a minion, a pigs-ney, a sweet-heart.

Pincíno, as Pinchíno.

Pincióne, a doue or a Pigeon. Also a kind of bunne or roule of bread.

Pínco, a pillicocke, a pricke, a dildoe.

Pincóne, as Pínco. Also a great gull.

Pindatelli, a kinde of sparowes in India.

Pinello, a fire-forke to stire the fire.

Pinéto, a groue or place where Pinetrees grow.

Pinétto, as Pinéto.

Píngere, as Pígnere, as Spíngere.

Pinguedine, fatnesse, fattinesse, fat.

Pinguitúdine, as Pinguedine.

Pinífero, Pine-trees-bearing.

Pínna, a shell-fish called a Nacre. Also the finne of any fish. Also the flote of a wheele. Also the master or chiefe feather of a Hawke or any bird. Also the broad gristly part of a mans eare. Also a flap of any thing. Also the crest of an helmet. Also spires, pinnacles, turrets or battlements.

Pinnácolo, a pinnacle of a Towre.

Pínne, the flotes or flats of a Watermill wheele. Also the finnes of fishes.

Pinnofiláce, as Pinnotero.

Pínnole, the finnes on fishes backes. Also the outward sides of a mans nose or nostrils.

Pinnophiláce, as Pinnotéro.

Pinnotéro, a kind of shell-fish, or least kind of Crab-fish that is, euer hunting and in companie of the Nakre-fish.

Pínnule, as Pínnole.

Píno, a Pine-apple-tree. Vsed also for a ship. Vsed also for a kind of flower.

Pinocchiáta, as Pignoccáta.

Pinocchiáti, kernels of Pine-apples.

Pinócchij, kernels of Pine-apples.

Pínola, a through-looke or sight.

Pínta, a thrust, a iob, a iustling. Also a measure called a Pinte.

Pintarella, a litle Pinte.

Pintarína, a kind of hearbe.

Pínto, thrust, iobd, pushed, put by.

Pínto, painted, dyde, stained.

Pintóre, a Painter, a Drawer, a Limner.

Pintúra, a painting. Also a picture.

Pínza, a kind of tarte or white-pot.

Pinzáre, to fill full as an egge vp to the gorge, to cram full.

Pinzerna, as Pincerna,

Pínzo, full or crammed, glutted, full gorged.

Pinzoceráto, as Pínzo.

Pinzócchera., Is properly a woman that voweth chastitie without entring into any religious house. Also a dissembling or Saint-seeming woman.

Pinzoccheráre, to play the hipocriticall Puritane or begging Frier.

Pinzócchero, a Frier of the third order of Saint Francis. Also a dissembling hypocrite. Also a kind of figs.

Pinzóne, as Pincióne.

Pinzóni, a kind of buns or manchets of bread.

Pinzótta, a dissembling or hypocriticall Puritane-woman.

Pinzúto, long and sharpe. Also stalking aloft.

Pía, as Pío.

Pío, pious, full of pietie, deuout, religious, righteous, mercifull, good, iust. Also a Iay, a Piot or Pye.

Piodáre, to couer with slate-stones or tiles.

Pióde, slate-stones to tile houses with.

Pióggia, a raine or shower of raine.

Pioggiále, rainish, shouring, drizeling.

Pioggiána ácqua, raine water.

Pioggiáre, to raine or shower downe.

Pioggióso, rainie, full of raine, showrie.

Pióla, as Piálla.

Pioláre, as Pialláre.

Pioláro, a plainer or shauer of bordes.

Piolétta, a little plaine as Ioyners vse.

Piolíre, lísco, líto, as Pialláre.

Piombággio, a mine or veine of leade and siluer. Also leade ore or earth. Also a kinde of stone of the colour of leade. Also the hearbe Leadwort. 



Piombágine, file-dust of leade. Also leadinesse. Also the lesse wilde Tazill. Also the hearbe Leadenwort.

Piombáre, to leade, to couer with lead, to solder or fasten with leade. Also to leuell or measure or sound any depth with a plummet. Also to plumbe downe or fall violently and heauily vpon. Also to hurle, to fling or throw with violence.

Piombáro, a Plummer or dealer in leade.

Piombaruóla, a plummet of leade.

Piombáta, a terrace of leade, a leades.

Piombáto, leaded. Also any thing made of leade, a leades or terrace of leade.

Piombatóre, a Plummer, a Leader. Also a sounder of any depth. Also a violent hurler or flinger.

Piombatúra, a leading, a couering or fastning with leade. Also leade-file dust.

Piombello, a plummet of leade. Also a  piece of leade to rule bookes with. Also a boyes play with a plummet of leade tied to a thrid, which casting vp they seeke to catch at the hollow end of a sticke.

Piombéo, leadish, of the nature of leade.

Piombífero, leade-bearing.

Piombíno, leaden, of leade, of the colour or nature of leade. Also a plummet of lead or leuell that Carpenters vse. Also a seale or stamp of lead set to any Marchandise. Also lumpish, dull, heauie, or blockish. Also a bird called a Dob-chickin. Some take it also for a Kings-fisher. Also a marking, or writing, or ruling piece of leade.

Piómbo, the mettall leade. Also a plummet. Also a cataract, or suffusion of the eyes. Also a heauie-witted, or dull pate.

Piómbo, a Cataract, or suffusion of the eyes.

Piómbo argentário, the mettall Tin.

Piómbo biánco, white leade. Also Tinglasse.

Piómbo négro, blacke leade.

Piombóso, leadie, full of leade. Also lumpish, heauie, or dull minded.

Piompiozzáre, to eate ouer-greedilie, to deuoure, to tire, or gorge on meate.

Piompiozzóne, a greedie cormorant eater, a bellie gorging fellow.

Pióppio, a Poplar tree.

Pióppo, a Poplar tree.

Piórno, lowring, gloomie, duskie weather.

Pióta, a greene turfe of earth with grasse vpon it, asmuch as a spade will dig vp and hold. Also a kind of Roachfish.

Piotáre, to turfe, or couer with turfes. 

Pióte:, Vsed of Dante for the soles of ones feete.

Piottoláre, to play at, or cast quoites.

Pióttole, casting quoites, or flat stones.

Pióttolo, as Pimiólo, as Píuolo.

Pióua, as Pióggia, a showre of raine.

Piouaiuóli giórni, rainie, or wet daies.

Piouaiuólo, rainish, drizling, showrie.

Piouále, as Pieuále.

Piouána ácqua, raine water.

Piouáno, a Vicar, a Curate, a Parish Priest.

Piouégo, a Magistrate in Venice.

Piouelicáre, to drizle, to mizle, to raine.

Pióuere, pióuo, piouéi, piouúto, to raine, to shoure downe.

Piouétta, a small drizling raine.

Piouéuole, that may raine. Also showring or full of raine.

Piouiále, rainy, showring, mizling, drizling, moist.

Piouitóre, a rainer, a shourer.

Piouóso, rainy, shoury, wettish.

Piouúto, rained, shoured, drizled.

Pípa, the pipe of a hen.

Pipáre, to pipe, to cackle or clucke as a hen. Also to pule as a hawke.

Pipáta, a cackling or pipeing of a hen, the puling of a hawke. Also a childes baby or puppet.

Pipatióne, a puling, a whining.

Piperíte, Ginny, Indian or Calecut Pepper or Cooke-weed.

Piperna, as Piperíte.

Pipiáre, to cry as a Doue or Pigeon.

Pipiglióne, a kinde of bird. Vsed also for a Butter-flie. Also a kinde of snake or Adder.

Pipilláre, to chirp as a Sparrow. Also to squeake as a Peacocke.

Pipioncello, a yongue Doue or Pigeon.

Pipióne, a Doue or a Pigeon.

Pipíra, as Píra.

Pipíre, pipísco, pipíto, to pipe as a Chicken.

Pipistrello, a Night-bat, a Rearemouse.

Pipíta, the pip in a hen.

Pipítula, the Wortwales or Liuerages or skin going off about the nailes.

Píppa, a measure of liquid things.

Píppa di víno, a pipe of sacke or a but of Malmesie.

Pippionáta, as Fagioláta.

Pippióne, a Pigeon, a Doue. Also as Corríbo.

Píppo, a nickename that country men call their tame Asses by.

Píra, a pile of wood made to burne dead men in.

Pirále, as Piráusta.

Pirána, a kind of Rozin dropping from the tree Merodion.

Piramidále, piramidall, like a piramides. 

Piramidáto, made like a piramides.

Pirámide, a piramide or any great building, broad or fower square beneath, and vpward small and sharpe. Also a geometricall bodie, broad beneath and sharpe aboue with a right lined bottome. Also a pile in armorie.

Piráta, a Pirate or Roauer at Sea.

Piratáre, to rob by Sea, to commit Piracie.

Piratía, Piracie or robbing by Sea.

Pirática, piracie or robbing by Sea.

Pirátio, the drinke made of Peares called Perrie.

Piratísmo, Piracie or robbing by Sea.

Piráusta, a fire-flye, a candle-flye, a stout, a miller, a foule or bishop. Some say it is a worme bred and liuing in the fire and going from it dyeth, or flyeth into the leame of a candle.

Pírchio, a subtle, slye, prying, close pinch-pennie, a craftie chuff-pennie.

Piréna uíte, a kind of sad yellow wine or grape.

Piréne, a stone resembling the stone of an Oliue and thereof so named.

Pirétro, Pelitorie or Sneasing-wort.

Pírgo, a companie of horsemen in battell containing fortie souldiers.

Píria, a tunnell. Also a mill-hopper.

Piriólo, a spigot, or as Vintners call it a force-head. Also a tap for a barrell. Also a conduit cocke or robinet.

Piríte, a kind of marcasite or fire-stone, which being rubbed will burne ones fingers, wherof Mill-stones are made.

Pírla, a childes top, gig or twirle.

Pirláre, to twirle or turne round as a top.

Pírlo, as Pírla. Also a kind of boyes play.

Píro, a Peare-tree.

Pirobolário, a shooter of fire.

Pirographía, a description of fire.

Pirográpho, a describer of fire.

Piróis, the Starre of Mars. Also one of the horses of the Sunne.

Piróla, the hearbe Piroll or Wintergreene.

Pirólo, a winding stople of a flagon. Also any woodden peg or pinne for an instrument of musike. Also a top, a gig or twirle. Also any of the nine pinnes or skeales to play with. Also a kind of beast. Also a priming-iron.

Pirománte, a deuiner by fire.

Piromantía, diuination by fire.

Pironáre, to pin or peg in, to bolte or prime in. Also to prime a piece. Also to take hold on with a caruing or eating forke, to enforke.

Piróne, a pin or peg of Iron, of Gunners called a linch-pin or cheeuing bolte. Also a forke to carue or eate meate withall. Also the name of one of the 



wheeles in a clocke. Also as Chiauigióne.

Pirópo, a Carbuncle-stone.

Pirosáchne, as Camélea.

Pirotecnia, all manner of fire-workes.

Pirótico, a medicine seruing in stead of fire to restore life in decaied parts, a caustike.

Pirottáre, to pierce a But of wine.

Pirótti, Vintners force-heads or spiggots.

Pirrafárro, Speltcorne.

Pirréra, a quarrie of stones.

Pirrhopecilóne, a kind of hard stone to make morters on.

Pírrica, a kind of verse or song to dance by. Also a kind of dancing in Armorie.

Pírrico, a foote consisting of two short sillables, so called of the nimble moouing in the dance Pirrica.

Pirrocoráce, the Red-rauen.

Pírula, the bout or tip of ones nose.

Pirúne, as Piróne.

Piruólo, as Pirólo.

Písa, a kind of childes play.

Piscagióne, as Pescagióne.

Piscáre, as Pescáre.

Piscaría, as Pescaría.

Piscatóre, as Pescatóre.

Pisceuéndolo, as Pesciuéndolo.

Pisciánza, stale, pisse or vrine.

Pisciáre, to pisse, to stale, to vrine.

Pisciáre nel uáglio, Prouerbío, to pisse in a sieue, to loose ones time and labour.

Pisciatóio, a pisse-pot. Also a pissing place.

Pisciár néue, to pisse snow, but taken to spend riotously on wenches.

Pisciaruóla, a burnt pricke, a pisse-scald.

Pisciauino, a pisse-wine, a drunkard.

Piscína, a pissing place, a pisse-conduit. Also a pisse-kitchin wench. Vsed also for a shop for fish or a fish-pond. Also a poole or watring place for cattell.

Piscíno, borne vnder Pisces, of the fishes nature.

Píscio, pisse, stale, vrine.

Pisciótta, a pisse-kitchin woman.

Pisciótto, a pissing place, a pisse-conduit.

Pisciózza, as Pisciótta.

Píse, false dice, high-men or low-men.

Piselli, all manner of small Peason.

Pisellóne, a round shapelesse thing, a logar-head, a shallow-witted pate, a gull.

Piséra, a paire of ballance or scales.

Píside, a kind of brazen pot that Alchimists vse.

Pisistrello, a Night-bat or Rearemouse.

Pisitáre, to chirpe as a Sparrow or Stare.

Pisítta, the Plaise-fish.

Píso., Hath been vsed for Péso.

Pisoláre, to slumber or be drouzie.

Pisolóne, a slumberer, a drouzie-head. 

Pisórie, as Pestello.

Pispigliáre, as Bisbigliáre.

Pispíglio, as Bisbíglio.

Pispinelli, Night-bats or Rearemise. Also sudden gushings, spinnings or streamings out of bloud.

Pispíssa, a Wagtaile.

Pispola, a Wagtaile. Some say a Wren.

Pissacaro, a Woodcocke. Some say a Snite.

Pissalsphálto, as Múmmia.

Pissaphaltóne, all manner of pitch.

Pisseléo, a kind of pitch oyle.

Pisseleóne, an oyle made of Pitch or Rozin, or Firre-cedar.

Pissiacántho, the Barberie bush, or the Box-thorne.

Písside, the hollownesse wherein the knuckle-bone turneth. Also a box of Box-wood.

Pissíno, a kind of oyle made of Lillies.

Pissipíssáre, to whisper, to buzze with a low voice.

Pissipíssi, any buzzing, or whispering.

Pissoceróne, the second wax that Bees make, thinner and finer then Comosíno.

Písso e pásso, a kind of childs play.

Pista, as Pésta.

Pistacchiáde, a conserue or paste made of Pistachos, or Fisticke nuts.

Pistácchio, as Pestácchio.

Pistána, an hearbe called Sagitta.

Pistáre, as Pestáre.

Pistazzáre, as Pestáre.

Pistello, as Pestello.

Pisterna, a Bustard.

Pístico, a kind of fish.

Pistilente, pestilent.

Pistilenzéuole, pestilent.

Pistilenza, the Pestilence.

Písto, as Pésto, stamped, punned, rammed.

Pistóio, a Paper-mill, or any hand-mill to braie, punne, stamp, or bruse any thing.

Pistóla, a Pistoll, or a Dag.

Pístola, an Epistle, or missiue letter.

Pistolente, pestilent, plaguie.

Pistolentióso, pestilentious, plaguie.

Pistolenza, as Pestilenza.

Pistolése, a great dagger, hanger, or wood-knife.

Pistolétta, a little or short Epistle.

Pistólfo, a roguing begger, a cantler, an vpright man that liueth by cosenage.

Pistoliére, a Pistolier, a shooter in a Pistoll.

Pistolochía, as Aristolochía.

Pistolótto, any short Epistle.

Pistóne, as Pestello. Also a stamper or Rammer.

Pistóre, a baker of bread.

Pistrédo, a kind of very long fish.

Pistrello, a Night-bat, a Reare-mouse. 

Pistríce, a kind of Whale-fish. Also a signe in heauen like that fish. Also a shee-baker.

Pistrílla, a hand-mill, or Querne.

Pistrína, a Bake-house. Also a Mill or grinding-house, a place where before Mills were inuented men vsed to bray corne in morters, which because of the intolerable paines the Romanes vsed as a prison to punish their bond-men and slaues, the wheele in Bridewell may be called so.

Pistrináro, a Miller, or white Baker.

Pistríno, a hand-mill. Also as Pistrína.

Pitafátto, a kind of target that Amazons were wont to weare.

Pitalámio, a kind of mariage song.

Pitále, a close stoole, or the pan of it.

Pitánia, a kind of red fruite in India.

Pitáphio, an Epitaph vpon ones death.

Pitarúsa, a kind of berrie, or graine.

Pitéro, a pitcher, or earthen pot.

Pitéta, as Pithete.

Pitétto, little, petie, small.

Pithéte, blazing starres, Comets, or firie impressions in the firmament in forme of tunnes, enuironed about with a smokie light, as in hollow.

Píthij giuóchi, certaine games in honor of Apollo among the Grecians.

Píthio poema, an heroike Poeme, a Poeme describing the famous acts and noble exploits of ancient Heroes, or famous men.

Pithóne, as Pitóne.

Pithónici, as Pitónici.

Pítide, a kind of Pine-apple, or Nut.

Pitígine, as Pitígio.

Pitígio, a running itch or tetter, a ringworme. Also a horne in a horses leg neere the inside of the knee.

Pitignóne, as Petignóne.

Pitímia, as Pitígio.

Pitiocámpe, a worme breeding in Pitch trees.

Pitióne, a kind of bulbous or onion plant.

Pitissáre, to sip or taste by little and little.

Pitíta, the pip in a hen.

Pititáre, to pip as a hen.

Pitiúsa, a gum of the Pitch-tree. Also a kind of shrub like to Pitch-tree.

Pitoccáre, to begge vp and downe for broken pieces of meate or scraps. Also to dodge and palter.

Pitocchería, pouerty, beggery. Also dodging, paltring or wrangling.

Pitocchiáre, Pitoccáre. 

Pitócchio, as Pitócco.

Pitócco, an old crafty begger, a micher, a patcht-coat-begger, dodger, a paltrer, a wrangler.

Pítome, an epitomy or abreuiation of any discourse.

Pitóne, a kinde of spirit or Dæmon that 



was supposed to foretell things to come. Leuit. 19. 31. Also a kind of great Serpent.

Pitónici, such as foretell things to come by some diuelish spirit that is in them.

Pitonissa, a witch, or foreteller of things by spirits.

Pitonissáre, to bewitch by some wicked spirit.

Pitrimo, an assigne, an executor or administrator of ones will.

Pítta, any kind of cake, tart or White-pot. Also a broode hen.

Pittanóne víno, a kind of wine.

Pittáro, an earthen or gally-pot, a pitcher. Also a Menow-fish.

Pittelóni, Crablice.

Píttima cordiále, a cordiall pittime.

Pítto, painted, pourtraide, coloured.

Pittóre, a Painter, a Drawer, a Limner.

Pittório, of or belonging to a Painter.

Pittúra, a picture. Also the art of painting.

Pituíta, pituity or matter running out of sores. Also fleagme. Also sniuell or snots Also a waterish humour or disease in some trees. Also the pip in a hen.

Pituitária, the hearbe Staues-acre.

Pituitóso, slimy, fleagmy, mattery.

Più, more both in quantity and quality, in space or time, in waight, number or measure. Also sooner or rather. Also many or diuers and sundry. Also most, namely when it is ioyned vnto any of the seauen articles.

Píua, any kind of pipe or bag-pipe. Also a Piot, a Pie or Iay. Also a Butterflie. Vsed also for a mans priuy members.

Più ad éntro, more within or inwardly.

Più áltri, many others, many more.

Più ánni hà, many yeeres since.

Piuáro, a bird called a Pluuer.

Piuasórda, a still bag-pipe. Also a sordine to still the shrilnesse of a Trumpet.

Più béne, better, more good.

Più chè, more then, more then that. Also nothing else, but that.

Più chè mái, more than euer.

Più chè tánto, nothing at all, more then nothing.

Più chè più, more then more.

Più chè puói, the most thou canst.

Più chè tánto, more then so much.

Più d'úna vólta, more then once.

Più chè tróppo, more then to much.

Piúe., Vsed often for Più.

Più e più, more and more.

Piuéro, a bird called a Pluuer.

Più fiáte, many or more times.

Più giù, more low or downe.

Piuiále, as Pieuiále.

Piuiéro, a birde called a Pluuer. Vsed Also for Piouano, a parish Priest.

Piuicaménte, publikely, openly to all.

Piuicáre, hath beene vsed for Publicáre.

Piuicatióne, as Publicatióne.

Piuína, a feather. Also a feather-bed.

Più in là, further, beyond.

Più in quà, neerer, more on this side.

Piuiólo, any kinde of woodden pegge or pin, as of instruments. Also a gardiners dible. Also a poking or setting sticke to set ruffes. Also a socket of a candlesticke. Also a childs pillicocke, pricke or dildoe.

Piulà, further off that way.

Piúla, a kind of squibs or running fireworkes.

Piúna, any kinde of plume, or feather or downe for beds, or hats. Vsed also namely among Poets for sloth, lazinesse, luxury, or letchery.

Piumaccería, all manner of feathers fit for beds. Also a feather-makers-shop.

Piumaccétto, a little plume or bunch of feathers. Also a little pillow or boulster.

Piumácchio, as Piumáccio.

Piumacciáre, to boulster.

Piumacciáro, a feather or plume maker. Also an Vpholster.

Piumáccio, a plume or bunch of feathers Also a boulster or a pillow.

Piumacciólo, as Piumaccétto.

Piumacciuóli., Looke Fáre chiomaz- zuóli.

Piumáre, to plume or feather. Also to begin to haue downe of feathers.

Piumáto, plumed, feathered, fledged.

Piumazzáto, as Piumacciáro.

Piumázzo, as Piumáccio.

Piumeo, downy, plumy, feathery.

Piumétta, a little plume or feather, soft-downe. Also a quilt or counterpoint for a bed.

Piumígero, that beareth feathers.

Piumipiedi, feathery or roughfooted.

Piumóso, full of plumes or feathers.

Piùniénte, nothing more, nothing else.

Piùognihóra, still more and more.

Píuolo, a padle or a little spade, as Piuiólo.

Piuoláre, to pipe or cry as a chickin.

Più óltre, further beyond.

Piú o méno, more or lesse.

Più presto, as Più tósto.

Più quà, more hither.

Più si víue più si pécca, the more a man liueth, the more he sinneth.

Più tósto, sooner, rather, liuer.

Più tempo, more time or timely.

Più sù, more higher or ouer.

Piuuicaménte, publikely, in publike.

Piuuicáre, to publish, to diuulge.

Piuuicatióne, a publication. 

Più uólte, more, many or sundry times.

Píuuico, as Público, publike.

Pizza, any kinde of itch, skurfe, scald, tetter, or ringworme. Also a kind of rugged cake, simnell-bread or wafer. Also a kind of sugar tart.

Pizzacágnolo, a buckster, a regrater or retailer if victuals as our Chandlers are. Also a nickname for a miserly chuffe or hogs-snout.

Pizzacaruólo, as Pizzacágnolo.

Pizamósche, a Hedge-sparrow.

Pizzáre, as Picciáre.

Pizzaruólo, as Pizzacágnolo.

Pizzelo, any kinde of peason.

Pizzétta, a ioynt in the middest of a port or vpset of a bit, which our riders call a piece or compartment, whereat the plaiers of the port are fastned.

Pizzétti., looke Fráppa.

Pizzicágnolo, as Pizzacágnolo.

Pizzicaiuólo, as Pizzacágnolo.

Pizzicaquestióni, a picke-quarrell or questions.

Pizzicáre, to pinch, to twing, to itch, to smart, to pricke, to snip, to claw or to tetter. Also to hucke, to palter, to dodge, or wrangle.

Pizzicarína, a pretty handsome wench that will make a man itch till he haue her.

Pizzicaruólo, as Pizzacágnolo.

Pizzicáta, a pinch, a pinching, an itching, a twinging, a snipping, a pricking, a smarting, a tettering. Also a bucking, a dodging, or wrangling. Also a cluster or clother of anything. Also a kinde of paste or banqueting dish pinched about as pasties or tarts be.

Pízzico, a pinch. Also as Pizzicuóre.

Pizzicóre, as Pizzicuóre.

Pizzicótto, a pinch or a ship.

Pizzicuóre, an itching, a pinching, a griping, a smarting or gnawing, a snipping.

Pizzigamórti, such as carry dead folkes to be buried, buriers of the dead.

Pizzigótto, a pinch, a snip. Also as much as one can hold betweene two fingers.

Pízzo, a tip or peake of any thing.

Pizzócchera, an hipocriticall poore woman.

Pizzócchero, as Pinzócchero.

Pizzócolo, as Pinzócchero. Also a batcheler, a single or vnmaried-man.

Pízzo d'vccello, a birds bill or beake.

Pízzoli, small peason.

Pizzóni, Pigeons or Doues.

Pizzopázzo, a kind of boyes play.

Placábile, placable, flexible, soone qualified, that may be appeased.

Placabilità, flexiblenesse, calmnesse, appeasing, mildnesse, asswaging. 



Placaménto, an appeasing, an asswageing, a calming, a purgeing.

Placáre, to appease, to qualifie, to calme, to asswage, to allay, to quiet.

Placatióne, as Placaménto.

Placidaménte, pleasantly, gently, mildly, calmely, tractably, without noise or trouble.

Placidità, quietnesse, calmenesse, stillnesse.

Plácido, pleasant, calme, milde, quiet, tractable, patient, still, gentle.

Plácido, a soothing parasite, a smooth-tongued sicophant.

Placitáre, to please often.

Pláciti, a kind of Brasse-ore gathered on the walles and sides of furnaces.

Plácito, a firme consent in opinion.

Plága, as Piága, as Piággia. Also the meridian line. Also a region or country climate, or coast of a country.

Pláge, the regions of heauen.

Plagóso, plaguy, full of wounds or hurts. Also a beater or one that beateth much.

Plána, as Piána. Also a Plaise-fish.

Planarási, a kinde of Plough vsed in France going with two wheeles or rundles.

Plánco, flat-footed. Also as Anátria.

Planetáre, Planetarie, of or belonging to the Planets.

Planetísta, a Planetist or obseruer of the Planets. Also a fish snouted and tailed like a Dolphin in the riuer of Ganges.

Plángo, a kind of Kite or Buzard.

Planície, a plaine-field, a plaine, a leuell ground.

Planilo quenza, plaine or free-speaking.

Planilóquio, a plaine or free speech.

Planimétra, a measurer of lands or plaines.

Planimetría, measuring of lands or plaines.

Planipédia, a Comedie where the plaiers are bare-footed and simply araied.

Planipédio, a flat-foote as Water-foules haue. Also one that goeth bare-footed.

Planisphério, a plaine spheare. Also an Astrolabe.

Planítie, plainenesse, euennesse.

Plantáno, a kind of tree or fruit growing in India.

Plásina, a kind of coine or plate of siluer in Spaine. Also as Prássina.

Plasmáre, to dignifie, to make worthy. Also to forme or shape.

Plasmatióne, formalitie, shapenesse, a dignifying or making worthy.

Plástica, the arte of pargeting or plaistring or working of pots.

Plasticéa, the arte of Potterie.

Platanéto, a groue of Plane-trees.

Platanísta, a fish like a Dolphin, but bigger, in the riuer Ganges.

Plátano, the Platane or Plane-tree.

Platéa, a bird called a Shoueler, that is enemie to the Rauen.

Platiásmo, a certaine incongruitie in speech.

Platiceróti, broad-horned Stags.

Platiophtálmo, an oyntment made of Stibium for the eyes.

Platiphilóne, a kind of Tithimale.

Plátis, the name of a sinnew.

Pláudere, pláudo, pláusi, plaudúto, or pláuso, to applaud, to yeeld or consent vnto, with clapping of hands to encourage and shew that wee allow and praise one, to reioyce with countenance. Also to flatter or sooth one vp in any thing.

Plaudúto, as Pláuso.

Plausíbile, plausible, to be applauded.

Plausitáre, to waile or mourne as a Doue or Woodculuer.

Plausíuo, as Plausíbile.

Pláuso, applauded, consented vnto. Also an allowing with praise, a shouting or clapping of hands in signe of ioy and approbation, an applause.

Pláustro, any kind of carte, wane, wagon, chariot or tumbrell. Also Charles-wane nigh the North-pole.

Pláuto, flat or splay-footed, one that goeth flat with his feete. Also one with broad eares.

Plebáccia, the common, base or filthy kind of people.

Plebe, the common or meaner sort of people, the many-headed-monster-multitude.

Plebeio, of or belonging to the common or meane kinde of people, one of the communaltie, meane, base, of small accompt among Gentlemen.

Plebeiúzza, as Plebicciuóla.

Plebicciuóla, the poore, base or abiect kind of people.

Plebiscíto, a decree, a law or statute made onely by the consent of the common and base people without the Senate.

Plebità, basenesse, ignobilitie, meane or obscure estate.

Plecho, Pleco, the space betweene the groines and the thighes.

Pléiade, the seuen Starres about the Bull.

Plenária, plenarie, full, absolute, whole.

Pleniloquenza, full or absolute speaking.

Plenilóquio, one that speaketh fully and to the purpose.

Plenilúnio, the full or fulnesse of the Moone.

Plenità, as Plenitúdine.

Plenitúdine, fulnesse, plenitude, amplenesse. 

Pleonásmo, a figure in speach or writing whereunto is added a needlesse word, as in this, I haue walked with my legges and seene with mine eyes.

Plethóra, a head-ache caused of equall abundance of the foure humors of the bodie. Also a fulnesse of good humors in the bodie.

Plethórico córpo, a bodie ouer full of good bloud, iuice or good humors.

Pletóra, as Plethóra.

Pletro, a fidling fticke or bow. Also a quill to play vpon any instrument. Also a spurre of brasse set vpon a fighting Cooke. Also two processes breaking forth from the foundation of the bones of the temples, which are very small, long and hard. Also a Greeke measure of a pace, a step, six feete or foure cubites. Some say it is a hundred feete or threscore cubites. Others would have it to be as Giúgero.

Pletro délla cóscia, the hollownesse of the huckle or hip-bone.

Pleura, that thin membrane, smooth skin or pannicle, which closeth and encompasseth the ribs of any creature on the inner side.

Pleurísi, as Pleurisía.

Pleurisía, a Pleurisie, which is, an inward inflammation of the vpper skin girding the ribs and the sides, shooting with a continuall Feauer and shortnesse of breath.

Pleurítico, that hath or is subiect to a Pleurisie.

Pleuritisía, as Pleurisía.

Plicáre, as Piegáre.

Plichétto, a small packet, bundle or bolte.

Plíco, a packet, a bundle, a fardle.

Plilóce, a kind of flame-colour, violet or pancie.

Pliniáne, a kind of daintie Cherrie.

Plintérie, certaine holy-daies among the Athenians dedicated to Ceres.

Plisolochía, as Pistolochía.

Plocitaménto, the croking of a Rauen.

Plocitáre, to croke as a Rauen.

Plóia, as Pióggia.

Plombágine, the hearbe Leadewort. Also leadinesse.

Plombáta, a pellet of leade with iron pricks in it vsed in warre.

Plombé, o, leaden, leadish, of the qualitie or colour of leade. Also heauie or dull.

Plorándo, to be wailed or deplored.

Ploránza, weeping, wailing, deploring.

Ploráre, to waile, to weepe, to deplore.

Plóta, as Pióggia, raine, a shoure of raine.

Plótia, a kind of thin and slender cane or reede.

Plurále, plurall, that containeth many.

Pluralità, pluralitie, morenesse. 



Pluralítie, pluralities.

Pluralizzáre, to be or make vp pluralities.

Plutáre, to enrich, or grow rich.

Plutatióne, an enriching, or growing rich.

Pluteo, a kind of warlike engine made of boords like a penthouse, couered with raw hides or haire-cloth, vnder which souldiers marched when they aproched neere the walles of any town or fort, and kept them from the furie of stones, darts, or wild-fire. Also a woodden frame to set tables vpon. Also a place or distance betweene pillers. Also a presse, a hutch, or other fit place to keepe things in.

Pluuiále, rainie, showrie, drizlie. Also as Pieuiále.

Pluuiéri, the birds Pluuers.

Pluuióso, rainie, showrie, drizling.

Pneuma, a spirit, an inspiration, a blowing, or breathing into, a wind.

Pneumática, all manner of wind-musike.

Pneumatómfoli, such as with wind or inflation in the bellie haue their nauell thrust out.

Pnigíte, a kind of blacke earth, or clay.

Pnósi, a disease comming in the eyes.

Pò, as Può. Also as Póco. Also as Pói.

Poáuola, a childs babie to play with.

Poauoláre, to play the babie.

Póbbia, the Popler tree.

Pocággine, littlenesse, as Dapocággine.

Pócalána & gran romóre, pron. much adoe about nothing.

Póca úua, & mólta fóglia, idem.

Póccia, any pap, dug, or teat.

Pocciáre, to sucke a teat, to teat, to dug.

Pocciétta, a little teat, dug, or pap.

Poccína, as Pocciétta.

Pocénio, a banquet after supper, a reare supper.

Pochettíno, a very little, a little while.

Pochétto, a very little, a little while.

Póche vólte, few times.

Póchi, few in number, not many.

Póchi dì fà, a few daies since.

Pochíno, as Pochétto.

Pochíssimo, very very little.

Pocíllo, a little drinking cup, or goblet.

Póco, a little quantitie, a little while.

Póco ánzi, a little before.

Póco a póco, by little and little.

Póco appresso, a little neere, almost.

Póco auánti, a little before.

Póco d'hóra, a small time.

Póco da pói, a little while after.

Póco è, it is a little while since.

Póco fà, a little while agoe, not long since.

Póco fíla & mánco stórce, a nickname for an idle huswife.

Pocolíno, as Pochiétto.

Póco non e, it is not long since.

Póco o mólto, little or much.

Póco póco, a very very little.

Póco stánte, not long since, in a small while, within a while, or shortly after.

Poculáre, belonging to drinking.

Póculo, a drinking cup.

Podágra, the gout in the feete, which some say is grauell gathered in the ioints, whereby the gout is caused.

Podagróso, goutie in the feete.

Podárgo, the name of a dog, as much to say, swift-foote, or make-speede.

Podáre, as Potáre.

Podatóre, as Potatóre.

Podére, a Farme, a free-hold, a copiehold, a liuing in the Countrie. Also as Potére.

Poderétto, a little Farme, or copie-hold.

Poderíno, as Poderétto.

Poderosità, pourefulnesse, puissantnesse.

Poderóso, mightie, puissant, powerfull.

Podestà, power, might, puissance. Also office, rule, or auctoritie. Also a potestate, a Maior, a Shrieue, a Portrieue, a Prouost, or such chiefe powerfull Magistrate.

Podestáre, to possesse with, or giue power vnto. Also to rule with auctoritie.

Podestaría, the office, the auctoritie, or iurisdiction of a Podestà. Also a Guild-hall, a Maiors house, or chiefe Magistrates house.

Podestería, as Podestaría.

Pódice, the arse, or fundament.

Podicóso, big arst, well bummed.

Pódio, any out-standing, or place to leane vpon.

Podománi, to morow next, or aster.

Podrída, a kind of Spanish meate or dish of many meate s together.

Poema, a Poeme, a worke in verse, a Poets worke, composition, or inuention.

Poesía, Poesie, or Poetrie.

Poeta, a Poet, a writer in verse.

Poetággine, riming, poetishnesse.

Poetána, as Poetésta.

Poetáre, to poetize, to write Poetrie.

Poetástro, a Poetaster, a smattrer in Poetrie.

Poeteggiáre, as Poetáre.

Poetéssa, a Poetesse, a woman poet, or rimer.

Poetica, Poetrie, the Arte of Poetrie.

Poetico, Poeticall, pertaining to Poetrie.

Poetífero, Poet-bearing, or bringing.

Poetífico, Poet-making.

Poetría, Poetrie, Poesie, riming Science.

Poetúccio, a rimer, or sillie poet. 

Pò far chè, as Può far chè.

Poggétto, a billocke, as Poggiuólo.

Póggia, a rope in a Ship called the starbord sheate, which a man standing at the poope of the Ship with his face toward the Prow is euer on the right hand, therefore isPóggia by metaphor taken for the right hand.

Póggia piédi, a foote-stay, a footestoole, a rowers stretcher.

Poggiáre, to saile more on the right then on the left hand, to goe, saile, hull, or lye on star-boord. Also to mount or ascend some high hill. Also to sore vp as a Hawke. Also to poise or heaue vp. Also to leane vpon.

Poggiáre d'úna náue., Looke well Póggia.

Poggiatóio, as Pódio, as Póggia piedi.

Poggiétto, as Poggiuólo.

Póggio, a hill, a hillocke, a mounting side of a hill, a blocke to get on horsebacke.

Poggiuólo, a little hill, a hillocke, a little ascent or climbling place, a blocke to get on horsebacke. Also a leaning place. Also a turret or an high outbutting window.

Póglio., looke Molíno da póglio.

Pogniámo, let vs put or set, or presuppose.

Pogónie, blazing Starres that from the neather part haue a maine hanging downe like a beard.

Poiána, a Kite, a Glade or Puttocke. Some take it to be a Bittour.

Pói, after, afterward, than, then, since Vsed also for Poichè.

Pói a póchi dì, a few daies after.

Poichè, since that, now that, after that.

Pói da chè, as Pói chè.

Pói la nóna, in the afternoone.

Poína, a kind of fresh-cheese curds.

Poinaruóla, as Puinaruóla.

Póla, a Chough, a Rooke, a Iack-daw.

Polámi, all manner of poultry or foule.

Polána, a kind of course woollen cloth.

Polánda, a shell-fish like a Horne.

Polándra, as Palándra.

Poláre, of or pertaining to the two poles of the world. Also a kind of woollen stuffe.

Poláre círcolo, that circle described by the pole of the Zodiake being caried about the poles of the world.

Polastráro, a Poultrer.

Polastrelli, yoong Pullets or Chickins.

Polastrería, a Poultry.

Polastriéra, a woman-poultrer, a chicken-carier. Vsed also for a bawde.

Polástro, a pullet, a chicken.

Polcella, a maiden, a girle, a virgin.

Polcello, a batcheler, a virgin-lad.

Polcíno, a yoong chicke or chicken. Also a flea. 



Poleáno, the first ordure of a Colt when he is first foled.

Polédra, a mare-colt.

Poledríno, a yoong fillie or horse-colt.

Polédro, a horse-colt.

Poledrúccio, a yoong fillie or horse-colt.

Polegíne, by or neere water, riuer, flood or Sea.

Polégio, Penniroyall or Pudding-grasse.

Polégnia, as Pogónie.

Polemíta, warlike or militarie, a title giuen to Pallas.

Polemónia, wilde Sauge. Also Horsemint.

Polenta, Barley-grotes, a meate much vsed in Italie.

Pollenza, might or power.

Poleséne, a Venetian word, as much to say, halfe or almost an Island. Also a plot of good ground among fennes and marishes.

Polesíne, as Polegíne or Poleséne.

Polétto, a pullet. Also a kind of Butterflie.

Polezzuólo, Pudding-grasse or Penniriall.

Pólia, a stone with a graynesse in it, in manner of a Spart.

Poliacántho, the Star-thistle or Caltrop thistle.

Poliántho, the Butter-flower, Batchelers button, Golden-knap or Goldencup.

Poliárca, a gouernour of a Citie or of many.

Poliarchía, rule of many or gouernment of a Cittie.

Policáre, a thumbe of a mans hand.

Policáta, a thumbs breadth, an inch.

Pólice, a thumbe, a great toe. Also an inch.

Policnémo, as Poligála.

Polidória, magnificence or liberalitie.

Polifilésco, as we say by ironie foolosopher for Philosopher in mockerie.

Políga, a pullie.

Poligála, Milkwort, Spurie or Franke.

Poligamía, the hauing of more wiues then one.

Poligéma, as Poligála,

Poliginóide, a kind of Clemátide.

Poligonáto, Whitewort, White-thistle or Salomons seale.

Poligonatóne, as Poligónio.

Poligónia, that hath many angles. Also that is fruitfull.

Poligónio, Bloud-wort, Swine or Knotgrasse.

Poligóno, that hath many corners.

Poligonóne, as Poligónio.

Poligrámmo, a kind of Iasper-stone with white lines in it.

Poligraphía, of much writing.

Poligrápho, a writer of much or many things. 

Polihímia, one of the nine Muses, that is to say, Memorie or Remembrance.

Polihistría, a great and much knowledge of many things.

Polihístro, one knowing much or many things.

Poliménto, a polishing.

Polímia, as Polihímia.

Polimíta, a garment of cloth of tissice of sundry colours.

Polinemóne, Origane or wild Sauorie.

Políno, a flea, louse or worme breeding in Hawkes.

Polióne, the hearbe Poley, whose leaues in the morning are white, at noone purple, and at night greene. Some take take it for a kind of Narde or sweet shrub.

Poliorcete, a destroyer of Cities. So was Demetrius surnamed.

Pólipo, a disease in the nose called Noli me tángere, breeding a piece of flesh that often stifleth the nose and stoppeth the winde of it. Also as the fish Pólpo.

Polipódio, Polipodie, Okeferne, Wallferne or Mosseferne.

Polipóso, that hath the euill Pólipo.

Polipottóne, a conquerour of Cities. Virgill calleth Vlisses so.

Poliptóto, a Noune with many cases.

Políre, lísco, líto, to polish, to burnish, to scoure and make cleane, to smooth.

Polirrhizóne, an hearbe like vnto Mirtle.

Pólisa, as Póliza.

Politaménte, neatly, polishedly, cleanly.

Politello, somewhat neate, cleane or smug.

Politézza, neatnesse, cleanlinesse, finenesse.

Politheísta, one that belieueth and maintaineth the pluralitie of Gods.

Polithricóne, as Polítrica.

Politía, policie, politike or ciuill gouernance of a Towne or Common-wealth.

Política, a booke of Policie or ciuill gouernment of a State.

Político, politike, politicall. Also a Politician or States-man.

Políto, polished, neate, cleane, smug, smooth, scoured, burnished.

Polítrica, an hearbe full of thrids and ligaments called Maiden-haire.

Politríce, as Polítrica. Also a stone with so small veines in it as they seeme haires of ones head.

Politúra, as Politézza.

Poliuizóne, a kind of Aristolochía.

Póliza, a scedule, a bill, a note, a writing, an obligation, a ticket.

Polizétta, a little scedule, bill, note, writing, obligation or ticket.

Polizóno, as Politríce.

Pólla, a veine, a spring, a source, a spouting, a gushing or bubling of waters. Also a hen-pullet.

Polláglia, all manner of pullein or poultry. Also a kind of meate made of hens.

Polláio, as Polláro.

Pollaiuólo, a Poultrer, a Poultry-man.

Pollámi, all manner of poultry or pullein.

Pollaría, as Polláglia.

Polláro, a hens-roost, a capons-coope, a chickens-pen. Also a Poultrer.

Pollaruóla, a Poulirer or Poultry-man.

Pollastráro, a Poultrer or Poultry-man.

Pollastrelli, yoong chickens, pullets.

Pollastrería, a Poultry.

Pollastrieráre, to eat, to breed or sell chickens. Also to play the bawde.

Pollastriéra, a woman-poultrer. Vsed also for a bawde.

Pollastríni, yoong chickes or chickens.

Pollástro, a pullet, a chicken.

Pólle, drops, droppings, trillings.

Pollédra, a mare-colt.

Polledríno, a fillie or yoong horse-colt.

Polledrúccio, a poore, leane or little colt.

Pollédro, a horse-colt.

Polleggiáre, to chicke or hen.

Polléna, a kind of pan-pudding.

Polléntia, might, power, puissance.

Polleóne, an hearbe.

Polléra, a coope or roost for poultry.

Polléro, any kind of yoong colt.

Pólli, all manner of chickens.

Pollicíni, yoong chicks or chickens.

Pollicíno, a yoong pullet or chicken.

Pollíni, a Coltes teeth whereby his age is knowen.

Pollíno, Vsed for Hens-dung. Also a chicken.

Pollíre, as Políre.

Pollitézza, as Politézza.

Pollito, as Políto.

Póllo, a pullet, a chicken.

Póllo, a fillie or horse-colt.

Póllo, some part of a pumpe to draw water.

Polloncelli, Vsed for yong shootes, sprigs, or budding branches of trees.

Póllo pésto, a culleis. Essere a póllo pésto, to be at the last gaspe.

Pollóre, a branch, a burgeon, a sprout. Also the bubling or gushing of water.

Pollúro, a bird called a Coote.

Pollutióne, pollution, distaining, defiling, soiling.

Pollúto, polluted, defiled, distained.

Polmentaria, as Polmonária.

Pólmo, a fish that is without sence, which when be appeareth betokeneth stormes to be at hand.

Polmonária, Lungwort, Our Ladies Wildewort or Cowslips of Ierusalem.

Polmoncei, a dangerous cough from the lungs. Also a disease in a horse.

Polmoncello, a little Polmóne.



Polinóne, the lungs or lights of any creature. Also a disease in a horse called the Nauell-gall.

Polmón maríno, as Pólmo.

Polmonóso, full of lungs, big-lunged.

Pólo, the pole, end or point of the Axletree, or Axle-tree whereon Astronomers imagined heauen to be mooued, making two of them: one in the North, noted by a Starre called Pólo ártico, the other in the South out of sight, called Pólo antártico. It is also vsed of Poets for the whole frame of Heauen. Also any counter-poising beame lying a crosse any frame.

Pólo antártico, the South pole.

Pólo ártico, the North-pole.

Polognía, as Polegnía.

Polóno, as Morgóne.

Pólpa, the pulpe, pith or brawne of any flesh, fish, fruit or wood. Also a piece or lumpe of flesh closed in muscles without bandes. In wood it is that which may bee cleft or separated by the graine.

Pólpa délla gámba, the pith, brawne, pulpe, flesh or calfe of ones legs.

Pólpa di capóne, the white or brawne of a Capon.

Polpáre, to grow fat, pithie, plum, fleshie or brawnie, to pamper.

Polpastrella délle dita, the brawne, flesh or pulp-top of ones fingers.

Polpétte, Oliues of veale rosted.

Polpettóne délle díta, as Polpastrella.

Pólpo, a Pulpe-fish, a Pourcontrell, a Many-feete or Cuttle-fish.

Polpóso, pulpous, brawnie, pithie, fleshie, full of substance.

Polpúto, as Polpóso.

Polsáre, as Pulsáre. Also to beat or pant as the Pulse doth.

Pólso, the moouing of the Arteries called the Pulse, whereby the strength or weaknesse of the vitall power is discerned. Also panting or beating. Also meanes, wealth, substance or abilitie. Also force, power or vigor.

Pólta, as Poltíglia.

Poltíglia, a morsell, a gobbet, a collop, a steake or any brawnie piece of flesh. Also growell, battre or pap. Also a white-pot, a pan-pudding, a pudding-pie, a bag-pudding, a hastie-pudding, &c. Also a poultis or such plaister.

Póltra, a yoong mare-colt. Also a couch or bed.

Poltrággine, coltishnesse. Also as Poltronággine.

Poltráre, to fillie or colt. Also as Poltroneggiáre.

Poltreggiáre, as Poltráre.

Poltrémola. 

Poltríre, trísco, tríto, as Poltráre.

Póltro, a Colt, a Filly. Also a couch or bed. Also sluggish, idle, lazie, slothfull. Also as Poltróne.

Poltronáccio, a base-minded coward, an idle, lazie, slothfull or lither fellow.

Poltronággine, as Poltronería.

Poltronáre, as Poltroneggiáre.

Poltroncióne, as Poltronáccio.

Poltróne, a poltron, an idle fellow, a base coward, a lazie, lither or slothfull sluggard, a varlet, a rascall, a lout, a knaue, a rogue.

Poltroneggiáre, to play the poltron or base coward, to loll and wallow in sloth and idlenesse, to lye lazilie in bed as a sluggard.

Poltronería, cowardise, basenesse of minde, lazinesse, sloth, sluggishnesse.

Poltronésco, like vnto a Poltróne.

Poltroniére, like vnto a Poltróne.

Poltrúccio, a yong Horse-colt.

Pólue, all manner of dust or powder.

Polueráccia, vile, course, or naughtie gun-powder.

Polueráre, as Poluerizzáre.

Póluere, any kind of dust or powder.

Póluere da bombárda, gunne-powder.

Póluère d'arteghería, gunne-powder.

Poluereggiáre, as Poluerizzáre.

Poluere graníta, corne-powder. Also touch-powder.

Poluere ingraníta, as Póluere graníta.

Poluerína, small dust, fine touch-powder.

Polueríno, as Poluerína. Also a dustbox. Also a sand or dun colour of a horse.

Poluério, any great dust in the aire raised by the winde or trampling in the dust.

Poluerísta, a powder maker.

Poluerizzabile, that may be reduced into dust or powder.

Poluerizzáre, to bray, to pun or reduce into dust or powder. Also to dust, to powder, to bedust, to cast dust vpon, to besprinkle with dust.

Polueróso, dusty, full of dust or powder.

Poluerulente, dusty, full of dust.

Poluerulenza, dustinesse.

Poluízze, a kind of swilling in a horse.

Polzella, a maiden or virgin.

Polzóne, a pouncer, a cizle. Also as Bolzóne.

Pólazonétti, the two buttons with hookes at the ends, which passe through the branch and hould the water cheine.

Póma, a kind of Apple. Also vsed for a womans papes or dugges.

Póma áppia, a kind of Apple.

Pomáda, pomado or Lip-salue.

Pomáro, an Hortyard of Apples. Also an Apple-tree. Also a Costard-munger.

Pomário, an Apple-hortyard or loft. 

Pomáta, pomado or Lip-salue.

Pomáto, as Pomelláto.

Póme, any kinde of Apple. Also any knob or pomel. Also a play vsed of children in Florence euen like our barlybreake, which they say Giuocáre álle póme, and when one escapeth vntaken and comes to his place againe, they say, Ritornáre alle pome, and the mid place where they stand is called Mezzopóme.

Póme disdégno, a kinde of forced dish that Cookes make round as Apples.

Pómega, the Pumy or Pumish stone.

Pomeggiáre, to play with Apples. Also to grow or be round as an Apple or Pummell.

Poméla, as Pómice.

Pomelláto, bespecklid, pide, dapple-gray, a fleabitten horse. Also powdred in armory.

Pomelláre, to spot or bespeekle as it were with fleabitings, to powder in armorie.

Pomella, the pummell of a dagger, the head of a pin. Also the bery of any tree as of Baies.

Póme paradise, the Paradise apple.

Pomeridiáno, after-noone.

Pomettáre, as Pomelláre.

Pomettáto, pomety, pummeled. Also full or wrought with knops. Also as Pomelláto.

Pométto, a little Apple. Also a pummell of a sword or dagger. Also any knob or round.

Pométto, yongue, little or greene Apples.

Pomicáre, to rub or sleeke with a Pumy stone or with a Sleeke-stone.

Pómice, the Pumice or Pumy-ston. Vsed also for a Sleeke or Smoothing-stone.

Pomiceo, as Pomicóso.

Pomicóso, dry, spungeouss hollow, ruged, full of holes, or pores, gretty, of the nature of a Pumice-stone.

Pomiéro, any Apple-tree.

Pomífera stagióne, the Apple bearing season.

Pomilióne, a Dwarfe or Pigmey, a dandie-prat.

Pómmene, for mene Può, to me can thereof.

Pómmi, for Mi póne, puts or placeth mee.

Pómo, any Apple-tree. Also an Apple. Also the pummell of a sword or sadle. Also the apple of ones eie. Also any round knob. Also a mounde, a globe or round bal that Princes hold in their hands, an imperiall ball. Also a pinshead.

Pómo ápiolo, a kind of greene Apple.

Pómo citróne, a Pome-citron.

Pómo cotógno, a Quince apple. 



Pómo d' Adámo, a knob or bunch that some men haue in their throat.

Pómo délla spáda, the pummell of a sword.

Pómo del pezzo, that round knob of mettall which in cast pieces is fixed to the breech and makes them mooueable and manageable.

Pómo d'óro, a golden Apple. Also an Orange.

Pómo granáto, a Pomegranate.

Pómo guacciólo, a kind of Apple.

Pomolíno, a little pomell or Apple.

Pómolo, a pummell of a sword or saddle. Also a pinnes head, or any little round knob.

Pomóna, a Goddesse of the Pagans of their Apples and fruites.

Pómo náno, the Paradise apple.

Pómo ráncio, an Orange.

Pómo róso, a kinde of Apple.

Pomóso, full of Apples.

Pómo testo, a kind of Apple.

Pómpa, pompe, statelinesse, sumptuousnesse, glorious ostentation, magnificence, pride, vaineglory, brauery. Also a solemne sight. Also a pumpe for water or of a ship.

Pómpa funebre, a funerall pompe, funerall obsequies with sumptuousnesse.

Pompáre, to pumpe water.

Pompeggiánte, as Pompóso. 

Pompeggiáre, to shew pompe or statelinesse, to flant it, to lauish pompouslie.

Pómpholíce, the foile that commeth of brasse called Nill, which is so light that it flies away. Also Tuty.

Pómpilo, as Nautílo.

Pompóso, pompous, stately, sumptuous.

Ponáro, a place where hens lay their egges, a hens roosting place.

Ponchiási, a chiefe president in China.

Póndera, a griping or gnawing in ones belly. Also a bile, a push or swelling.

Ponderaménte, ponderously, waightilie.

Ponderánza, ponderousnesse.

Ponderáre, to ponder, to poise, to waigh.

Ponderézza, ponderosity, heauinesse.

Ponderosità, weightinesse, ponderositie.

Ponderóso, ponderous, waighty, heauie.

Póndo, a poize, a waight, a heauy thing, a charge.

Pondóra, a kinde of painefull bloudy flix.

Ponente, the West part of the world. Also downe lying. Also the Sunneset. Also the West-winde.

Ponente garbíno, the South West wind.

Ponente maéstro, the North west wind.

Ponente tramontána, the North West wind.

Pónere, póngo, pósi, pósto, as Pórre.

Pónere amóre, to settle loue, to place affection.

Pónere da cánto, to lay or set a side.

Pónere in ménte, to put in minde.

Pónere ódio, to put or place hatred.

Ponfolágine, as Ponpholíce.

Pongente, pricking, sharpe slinging.

Póngere, póngo, púnsi, pónto, as Púgnere.

Pongitópi, Knee-holme, Butchers-broom Petiegree or Knee-buluer.

Pongitóre, a pricker, a stinger.

Pongitúra, a pricking, a stinging.

Pongiúto, pricked, stinged.

Póngolo, as Púngolo, a pricke, a sting.

Poniám cáso, let vs put case.

Pónlo, puts him, or put him.

Pónno, for Póssono, they may or they can

Pónta, as Púnta, a point. Also a violent forceing or heauing with ones shoulders.

Pónta délla spáda, the swords point.

Pontále, the chape of a sword or dagger. Also a tagge of a point. Also an aglet. Also a supporter or vnderprop. Also punctuall, according to due points or line and measure, euen, iust or iumpe.

Pontáli, the Plurall of Pontále.

Pontalménte, punctually, point by point, precisely, particularly.

Pontapiè, as Póggia piédi.

Pontáre, as Puntelláre, to point. Also to thrust violently with ones shoulders, to heaue vp.

Pontaruóla, as Puntaruóla.

Pontataménte, as Pontalménte.

Pónte, any kind of bridge.

Pónte atcáto, an arched bridge.

Pontéfice, a chiefe Bishop, a Pope.

Pontéga, a bird enemie to Pigeons.

Ponteggiáre, as Punteggiáre.

Pónte leuatóio, a draw bridge, a falling bridge, a trap-bridge.

Pontelláre, as Puntelláre.

Pontellíni, little prickes or bodkins. Also little vnderpropes, supporters or staies.

Pontello, a little bridge. Also a bodkin or a pricke. Also an vnder-prope or staie.

Ponteruóla, as Puntaruóla.

Pontesísto, the name of a bridge in Rome, but taken for an impudent, vnblushing or brazen face.

Pónti, bridges. Also points or prickes.

Pontía, a stopping of the lungs, or hindrance from breathing.

Póntica, a pale but glittering stone.

Ponticello, a little or narrow bridge. 

Póntico, a fish called a Beauier. Also soure, sharpe or tart in taste.

Pontificále, Pontificall, like a Pope.

Pontificáto, the place, estate or dignity of a Pope or chiefe Bishop.

Pontífice, a chiefe Bishop, a Pope.

Pontifício, of or pertayning to a Pope or chiefe Bishop. Also the charge, office, function or authority of a Pope or chiefe Bishop.

Pontíglio, as Puntíglio.

Pontíle, any shore or vnder-prope, an vphoulder.

Pontíto, sharpe-pointed, hauing a point.

Pónto, as Púnto. Also a bridge.

Pónto, Apónto. Looke Púnto.

Pónto, Cárta di pónto. Looke Púnto.

Pónto fermo, a full point in a sentence.

Pontogópi, as Pongitópi.

Pontóne, a great bridge. Also a bodkin.

Pontuále, as Puntuále

Pontuáre, as Puntuáre.

Pontúra, as Puntúra.

Pontúto, pointed, hauing a point.

Ponzáre, to speak ones words drawingly.

Ponzecchiáre, as Punzecchiáre.

Ponzécchij, as Punzécchij.

Ponzelláre, as Punzelláre.

Ponzellatúra, a pricking, a stinging.

Ponzello, as Punzello.

Ponzello de bifólchi, a Plough-mans goade.

Ponzello delle ápi, the sting of Bees.

Ponzettáre, as Punzelláre.

Ponzétto, as Punzello.

Ponzettúra, a pricking, a goading.

Ponzonáre, as Punzecchiáre. Also to pounce, to pricke or worke pouncing worke.

Punzóne, as Punzóne, a pounce, a pouncer.

Pópa, he that strooke and cut the throat of sacrifises, then offred them, and bound them to the alter.

Popína, a Tauerne, a Tap-house, a Drinking-house, a Booth where meate and drinke is to be had for poore people.

Popinatióne, gluttony, gourmandizing.

Popizzaménto, a blurting with the tongue inward to encourage a horse.

Popizzáre, to blurt with the tongue, to encourage a horse.

Póple, the ham of ones legge behinde the knee.

Popò, a very very little.

Popoláccio, the base, vile or riffraffe people, the basest multitude.

Popoláglia, as Popólaccio.

Popoláni, a kind of ordinary Peaches.

Popoláno, a popular or common man that is no Gentleman. Also a parish Priest, or man of a Parish.



Popoláre, popular, of or belonging to the common people, fauoured of the common people, that pleaseth the people. Also to people any towne or place.

Popolarésco, as Popolésco.

Popolarità, popularily, the common people, familiarity with the common people, popular applause or fauour.

Popolarménte, popularly, commonly.

Popolatióne, a population, a peopling. Also any place peopled.

Popoláto, peopled. Also populous.

Popolázzo, as Popoláccio.

Popolésco, popular, of the common people.

Popolíni, a small coine. Also casting. counters.

Pópolo, people or folkes of a Nation or Country. Also the white Poplar-tree. Vsed also for the whole people of a Towne, a Towneship.

Popolóso, populous, full of people.

Poponáio, Luógo de popóni, a plot of Melons.

Pópóne, a Pepon or Muske Mellon.

Póppa, a teat, a pap, a dug, an vdder. Also the poupe of a ship.

Poppábile, that may be sucked or teatted.

Póppa délla náue, the poupe, the hindocke, the taile or castle of a ship, sometimes taken for the whole ship. Vsed also for the administration or gouernment of a common-wealth.

Poppára, a sucking girle, a yongue sucklin. Also a puppet or childes baby.

Poppáre, to sucke, to milch or draw a dug. Also to feele or grope dugs.

Popparella, a litle baby or puppet.

Poppeggiáre, as Poppáre.

Poppési, a shrouds about the poope of a ship.

Poppéuole, that may be sucked.

Póppio, a Popler-tree.

Poppiéro, a steares-man of a ship.

Poppolíne, little paps, teates or dugs.

Popul éa coróna, a garland or chaplet of a Popler tree.

Populeóne, a kind of drug or hearbe.

Pór', as Pórre or Pónere.

Porággio, as Potrò, I shall be able.

Porácchia, the hearbe Purcelane.

Poraschiáre l' ónghie, to pare ones nailes, as Raschiáre.

Pórca, a sow, a farrowing sow. Vsed also for a ridge betweene two furrowes.

Pórca, a kind of engine to mount Ordinance into the cariage.

Porcácchia, wilde Purcelane.

Pórca fattríce, a farrowing sow.

Porcággine, as Porchería.

Porcaio, a Hogheard, a Swineheard.

Porcária, a sowes wombe cut out of hir belly and so drist.

Porcáro, as Porcáio.

Porcaruólo, as Porcáio.

Porcástro, a Porkelet, a Heglet, a Porklin.

Porcella, a sow or yelt that neuer farrowed but once, a Porkelin.

Porcellána, the hearbe Purcelane. Also Purcelane earth or dishes. Also a purple fish.

Porcelle, as Pórche, the fine Cockle or Muscle shels which Painters put their colours in.

Porcellétte, as Porcelle.

Porcellétti, yongue pigs. Also Hog-lice. Also a worme with many feet, called a Palmer or Furrer, as Millepiédi.

Porcellíno, a yongue Pig, a Porklin.

Porcellióne, as Millepiédi.

Porcello, a Porklin, a pig, a hoglin.

Pórche, ridges betweene plowghed lands. Also the Porpuis fish.

Porcheggiaménto, a wallowing like a hog, swine-trickes, a playing the hogge.

Porcheggiáre, to play the swine or hog, to wallow in mire like a hog.

Porchéide, hoggishnesse, swinishnesse.

Porcheità, as Porchéide.

Porchería, hoggishnesse, swinishnesse, filthinesse.

Porchésco, hoggish, swinish, filthy.

Porchétta, as Porcella.

Porchétta, a Porklet, a Hoglet.

Pórci, to put vs, or to put there.

Porcíle, a hogs-stie, a place for swine.

Porcíle di uénere, a womans quaint, the hogs-stie of Venus.

Porcína, porke, swines or hogs-flesh. Also hoggish or swinish.

Porcináia, the hearbe Purcelane.

Porcináli, any meate or pudding of porke.

Porcíne, a kind of wilde hedge Peares.

Porcíni, yoong pigs. Also a kind of mushroms.

Porcíno, swines-dung, hogs-dung. Also hoggish or swinish.

Porciúto, as Presciútto, any bacon.

Pórco, a Hog, a Boare, a Porke, a Swine.

Pórco cignále, a wilde Boare.

Pórco cinghiále, a wilde Boare.

Pórco maríno, a Sea-swine or Porpuis.

Porcóne, a filthy Hog, a great Boare.

Porconeggiáre, as Porcheggiáre.

Pór dauánti, to put before.

Porezzuólo, Pudding-grasse, Peniriall.

Pórfido, fine marble of diuers colours, namely red, called Porphirie.

Pór fíne, to make an end.

Pór fío, to lay a fine vpon.

Porfirióne, a bird drinking as if he did bite the water, hauing long and red legs and bill, called a Redshanke. Also a Serpent in India with a white head and his bodie of a purple colour, hauing no teeth, that which he vomiteth out of his mouth consumeth what it toucheth.

Pórfiro, as Pórfido.

Pórgere, Pórgo, pórsi, porgiúto, or pórto, to reach or yeeld forth, to bring or afford, to lend or giue helpe, to offer with ones hand, to stretch, reach or spread out, to iettie, to iut or but forth as some parts of building.

Porgiménto, a reaching vnto, a yeelding or offering with ones hand.

Porgitóre, a reacher vnto, a deliuerer.

Pór giù, to lay downe.

Porgiúto, reached vnto, giuen or offered with ones hand, ietted or butted forth.

Póri, pores, which be small and vnsensible holes in the skin, whereby sweat and vapours passe out of the bodie. In the ioints. Póri, are swellings comming of thicke and earthie humors flowing vnto them.

Porísma, a consectarie, that is a thing that followeth out of things already demonstrated.

Pór la ménsa, to lay the borde.

Pór la míra, to take the aime.

Pór la uíta, to lay a mans life.

Pór légge, to impose a law.

Pórlo, to put him or it.

Pór l' ócchio, to set a mans eye, to marke heedfully.

Pór máno, as Métter máno.

Pór ménte, to apply or set ones minde.

Pór nóme, to giue name vnto.

Póro, among Phisitions is the brawne or hard thicke skin which ioyneth and fastneth vp the breaking of gristles and bones. Also the singular of Póri. Also a kind of stone like vnto marble.

Porósa, the hearbe Saint Iohns-wort.

Porosità, porositie, porousnesse.

Poróso, full of pores or little holes. Also tough, hard and strong.

Porphirióne, as Porfirióne.

Pórpo, as Pólpo.

Pórpora, purple or scarlet colour. Also a Kings coronation, robe or mantle. Also a Senators or graue Iudges robe. Also a kind of winkle or shell-fish, called the Purple-fish.

Porporáre, to empurple, to enscarlet, to enrobe with purple robes.

Porporáti, chiefe Senators or graue Iudges in their robes of purple.

Porporeggiáre, as Purpureggiáre.

Porporeo, of purple or scarlet hew.

Porporíno, a purple or scarlet colour.

Pór pregio, to set a price vpon.

Porpréso, as Compréso.

Porracéo, like to a Leeke or of a Leeke colour. 



Potradella, a kind of wilde Leeke.

Porráta, Leeke-pottage. Also as Fagioláta.

Pórre, póngo, pósi, pósto, to put, to set, to lay, to place, to pight, to put off, to set downe, to lay vp, to place well, to pight a field. Also to appoint, to establish, Also to set foote on ground.

Pórre a cauállo, to set on horsebacke.

Pórre aguáti, to lay ambushes or snares.

Pórre alfuóco, to lay to the fire.

Pórre amóre, to place or settle loue.

Pórre a mórte, to put to death.

Pórre a párte, to lay aside.

Pórre a perícolo, to put in danger.

Pórre a piè, to set on foote, to vnhorse.

Pórre a rúba, to put to stealing.

Pórre auánti gl'ócchij, to set before ones eyes.

Pórre bócca, to speake of or meddle with.

Pórre cámpo, to pitch or pight a field.

Pórre cúra, to put or take care, to endeuour.

Pórre da cánto, to lay aside.

Pórre diligenza, to vse diligence.

Pórre giúso, to lay downe.

Pórre il cámpo, to pitch a field.

Pórre in bándo, to proclaime.

Pórre in cámpo, to propose, to lay forth.

Pórre in cárta, to set in writing.

Pórre in cóllera, to mooue or put to anger.

Pórre in lúce, to publish or set forth.

Pórre in máno, to put into ones power.

Pórre in náue, to put or lay abord a ship.

Pórre ín oblí, o, to forget or put out of minde.

Pórre in ópera, to set a worke.

Pórre in órdine, to set or place in order.

Pórre in sbaráglio, to disorder, to confound.

Pórre in sicúro, to lay vp safely.

Pórre in táuola, to set or lay vpon the borde.

Pórre in uéndita, to put to sale.

Pórre in uóce, to publish or set a song.

Pórre in uólta, to put to rout.

Pórre l'assédio, to lay siege.

Pórre légge, to set or impose a law.

Pórre le máni ad ósso, to lay hands vpon.

Pórre le máni in ógni cósa, for a man to meddle with all things.

Pórre máno, to set ones helping hand or endeuour to any thing.

Pórre ménte, to heed, to apply ones minde, to consider, to obserue.

Porréo, of the colour of a Leeke.

Pórre órdine, to take or giue order.

Pórre paúra, to make affraid.

Pórre pensiére, to take care or thought.

Porrescia, a kind of Sea-fish.

Porrétto, any yoong or little Leeke. 

Porezzuólo, Peniryall or Puddinggrasse.

Porrífico, the piles or hemorrhoides.

Porrígine, dandraffe or scales in some heads.

Porriginóso, scuruie, full of scales.

Porrína, that head or part of a Leeke that is vnder ground.

Pórro, a Leeke. Also a wart or wartle. Also as Nócchio.

Porrò, I will put, place, lay or set.

Pórro capitáto, the bolled or headed Leeke or Porret.

Porrofíco, the piles or hemorrhoides.

Pórro settíuo, the cut Leeke or Porret.

Porrosità, porosittie, thicknesse of pores.

Porróso, full of pores or little holes. Also full of warts or wartles. Also as Nocchierúto.

Pórsi in letto, to lay downe in bed.

Pórta, any gate, dore, entrance or way to enter at. Also any gap. Vsed also for the great Turkes Court, Pallace or Counsell-chamber. Also brought.

Pórta berétta, a cap-case, a budget, a male.

Portábile, that may be caried, portable.

Pórta calcína, a Lime or morter-bearer.

Pórta del siánco, a side or back-dore.

Pórta di ferro, any iron gate. Also a certaine guard that Fencers haue.

Portaféde, a little veine in a horse proceeding from the liuer.

Portággio, the portage or cariage of any thing, the fraught or burthen of a ship, a Watermans fare, custome or impost for any cariage, the reward for bringing any thing. Also a horse-litter or carying chaire. Also a beere for dead folkes.

Pór táglia, to set a fine vpon.

Portagráno, a malt-man, a corne-man.

Portalettere, a budget to carie letters in. Also a carier, a currier, a poste, a messenger or bearer of letters.

Pórta leuatíccia, a gate with a percullis. Also a trap-dore. Also a draw-bridge.

Pórta maéstra, a chiefe great gate.

Portamantello, a male or portemanteaw.

Portaménto, cariage, portage, bearing, bringing. Also sufferance. Also the caridge, behauiour or demeanour of a man. Also any fashion or habite of the body. Also any fashion or manner of garment or any thing else.

Portamórsi, that part of a head-stall whereunto the eie of the bitte is made fast.

Portánte, bearing or suffering. Also an ambler or an ambling pace.

Portapennácchij, a tosse-feather, a flanter.

Portáre, to carry, to beare, to bring. Also to weaue clothes. Also to suffer or indure. Also for a man to behaue or demeane himselfe.

Portáre a Cauállo, to carry on horsebacke.

Portáre a Giórgio, to ride as Saint George.

Portáre afflítto, to weare mourning cloathes.

Portáre brúno, idem.

Portáre corótto, idem.

Portáre couécio, idem.

Portáre duólo, idem.

Portáre in pálma di máno, to carry in the palme of ones hand.

Portáre péna, to beare paine, to goe or be vpon paine.

Portáre perícolo, to beare or be in danger.

Portársi da paladíno, to behaue or demeane or carry himselfe valiantly, like a tall man.

Pórta seggiétte, a Bearer or Porter of chaires with men in them, as in Italie.

Pórta sónno, a drinke to make one sleepe. Also sleepe-bearing.

Portáta, a bearing, a burden. Also a seruice or messe of meats. Also as Portággio. Also worth, import or the consequence of any matter.

Portátile, portable, that may be carried.

Portáto, a bearing, a burthen, a fraight. Also carried, borne or brought.

Portatóre, a bearer, a carrier, a porter.

Portatúra, as Portáta or Portággio. Vsed also for any fashion of garment.

Portello, a Poster dore, a Wicket, a Watergap, a sluce, a porte-hole, an entrance.

Portendere, tendo, tési, téso, to portend, to betoken, to forebode, to foresignifie.

Portente, monstruous, strange, prodigious, betokening good or ill.

Portento, a monstrous prodigious thing forboding some euill fortune to come.

Portentóso, as Portente.

Porteuóle, portable, to be carried or worne.

Porthercole, a kind of rare choise wine in Tuscany.

Pórti, as Pónerti, to put thee.

Porticále, a porch before a house.

Porticáto, a porch. Also porch-wise, or full of porches.

Porticciuóla, a little wicket or doore.

Porticella, as Portello.

Pórtico, any kind of porch before a gate. Also an open gallery or walking place vnderset with pillers as before their houses they haue in Italy to walke in the shade. Also a portall. 



Portiéra, a port all at any dore. Also the hangings ouer a dore. Also the side or as we say the boote of a Caroch or Coach. Also a woman Porter.

Portiére, an Vsher, a dore-keeper, a Porter. Also a portall.

Portináio, as Portiére.

Portináro, as Portiére. Also as Duodéno.

Portionáre, to portion, to partage, to rate, to share or proportion equally.

Portióne, a portion, a partage, a share, a part, a rate, a proportion.

Portioncella, a small portion.

Portionéri, sharers, partners in trading.

Portítio, as Portiére.

Pórto, a Hauen, a Port, a Harborough or rode for ships, a place of refuge or succour against danger. Also repose, safety or place of quiet.

Pórto, as Portággio.

Pórto, the Participle of Pórgere, brought, reached.

Pórto, wilde Purcelane.

Portonáio, as Portiére. Also a Port keeper, or a Ferry-man, that receiueth tole or custome, or passage mony.

Portóne, a great gate.

Portório, the Fraught for cariages.

Portuále, hauing Ports, Hauens, Rodes, or Harborough for ships.

Portuláca, the hearbe Purcelaine the Wilde.

Portulánia, the office of any Port or Hauen.

Portúnno, the name of a certaine God among the Gentiles.

Portuóso, as Portuále.

Porzáne, a kind of bird.

Pósa, a pause, a ceasing, an intermission, a repose, a giuing ouer. Also an abode, a dwelling or resting place.

Posádà, as Pósa.

Posaménto, as Pósa, a pausing.

Posánte, resting, couchant, pausing.

Posáre, to pause, to repose, to rest, to staie, to cease, to giue ouer. Also to lay downe.

posáta, a pause, a pausing, a resting. Also a baiting place by the way for trauellers. Also a chamber or lodging or abiding place, a place of rest.

Posataménte, reposedly, laysurely, softlie.

Posáte, a rests which a horse makes in aduancing his fore-part. Looke Fáre le posáte.

Posatúra, as Posáta. Also the posture of any thing.

Posbrachiále, the space betweene the wrist of the hand and the first ioynt of the fingers. Also the backe of the hand.

Pósca, water or wine and vineger mixed together.

Poscéna, after supper. Also a rare supper.

Poscenáre, to eat after supper.

Póscia, after, afterward, then, since.

Póscia chè, since that, after that.

Poscimáne, to morrow next.

Poscrái, next day after to morrow.

Poscrítta, a post-script, an after writing.

Posdcscináre, after dinner, after noone.

Posdománi, to morrow next.

Pósero, they did put, lay, set or place.

Posgénito, after borne, or bred.

Pósima, as Bósema.

Posimáre, as Bosemáre.

Positióne, a position, a posture, a placeing, a putting, a situation, the state of. Also a termination or the fall of a clause in a sentence. Also a Primitiue word whence others are deriued.

Positiuam énte, positiuely, affirmatiuely. Also in a meane or orderly degree.

Positíuo, positiue, that is of it selfe.

Positóre, a positour, an affirmer.

Positúra, a positure, setting or standing of a man, going about to doe any thing Vsed also for the site or place where a man placeth himselfe, a stand, a station or standing.

Poslmínio, a returne of one which was supposed to be dead, and so restored to his house not by going ouer the threshold, but by making a hole in the wall.

Posmáne, after morning.

Posmórte, after death.

Posnótte, after night.

Posolíno. 

Posponderáre, to waigh or ponder afterward.

Pospórre, póngo pósi, pósto, to set behinde, to esteeme lesse, to omit, to ouerslip.

Pospositíuo, to be put behind or set after.

Pospósta, a kind of after-turne that cunning riders teach their horses.

Pospósto, set behinde, neglected, omitted.

Posprándio, after dinner. Also an afternoone. Also a nunchions or anders-meate.

Pospránzo, after dinner, after noone.

Póssa, puissance, might, power, strength, force, possibility. Also wealth or ability.

Póssa, that I or he may or can.

Póssa moríre, an oath of swearing, and may I die.

Possánza, as Póssa.

Posse dente, a possessor. Also possessing.

Possedére, séggo, sedéi, sedúto, to possesse, to enioy, to owne, to hould in possession.

Possedéuole, that may be possessed or enioyed.

Posseditóre, a possessor, an owner.

Possedúto, possessed, enioyed, owned, held.

Possénte, puissant, mighty, powerfull, able in power, in wealth or authoritie.

Possére, as Potére.

Possessioncella, a small possession. Also a little coppy hould, farme or piece of land.

Possessióne, a possession, a possessing, an owning, an enioying or houlding of a thing. Also a piece of land, a farme, a coppy-hold, or Country-house.

Possessíuo, possessiue, that may be possessed.

Possesso, as Possedúto, as Possessióne.

Possessóre, a possessor, an owner.

Possessório, of or belonging to possession.

Possétti, or Potétti, or Potéi, I could, might or was able.

Possíbile, possible, that may be.

Possibilíssimo, most possible.

Possibilità, possibilitie.

Poss'io moríre, an Oath much vsed, as we say, I would were dead, I pray God I dye, may I dye.

Possúto, as Potúto, been able.

Pósta, a running-poste or currier or hastie messenger. Also poste haste, as In pósta, in post haste. Also the station or stand where poste-horses may be had. Also the distance of miles between stations and postes. Also a standing watch, skout or sentinell, or the place and stand where the Sentinell must stand. Also a stake at any game. Also a good hand drawen or winning at any game, namely at dice. Also a good windefall or vnexpected good hap. Also a present, a bribe or gift. Also an assignment or appointment to meete or waite for in some place. Also an impostume or swelling. Also a kind of thin and narrow silke stuffe for garters. Also any kind of garter, philet, inkle, wasteband or girdle. Also selfe-choise, will, opinion or pleasure though it be with perill or danger. Also as Pósto. Also set-purpose or expresse will. Also looke Di pósta, taken at the volie as a ball before it fall or bound on the ground. Also looke Rispóndere álle póste. Also an Impostume.

Postá, A postá,  of set purpose, expresly.

Postá, A tua postá,  at thy choise or perill.

Postáre, to station, to prefix or appoint some time or certaine place. Also to runne poste.

Postáro, a setter or sizer of any thing, 



a setter of prices.

Postáro da fiéno, a Clerke of the market for hay.

Postáro da uettouáglic, a Clerk of the market for victuals.

Postautumnáli, a kind of Peare late ripe.

Postbrachiále, as Posbrachiále.

Postema, an impostumation, a swelling.

Postemáre, to impostume, to swell as a bile.

Postemástro, a Poste-master.

Postemétta, a little bile or impostume.

Postergáno rátto, a crampe in the hinder parts of the bodie, turning the head awry to the backe and shoulders.

Postergáre, to cast by at ones backe or behind, to despise or contemne.

Pósteri, successors, posteritie of children, those that succeed and liue after vs.

Posterióre, posterior, lag, later, succeeding after, comming behind, hinmost.

Posteriorità, after-comming, a being behind, lagnesse, after succession.

Posterla, any Posterne dore or gate.

Posterità, posteritie, the world to come, after-issue. Also as Pósteri.

Póstero, that followeth or commeth or succeedeth after, a successor.

Posthiéri, the day before yestarday.

Posthúmio, a child borne after the fathers death and buriall.

Póstumo, as Posthúmio.

Póstia, as Póscia.

Póstia chè, as Póscia chè.

Postíca, a line deuiding the sides from the East to the West, that part which is to ward the West or behind vs.

Postíccia, a thing laid vp for time, or against any time. Also the fights of a ship. Also as Postíccio.

Posticciaménte, falsely, forgedly, dissemblingly, counterfeitly.

Posticciáre, to falsifie, to forge, to counterfeit. Also to botch, to patch or clout.

Postíccio, false, forged, counterfeit, faigned, shewing what is not. Also any place or corner to place or set any thing vp or by. Also patched or botched.

Postíco, as Postíccio.

Postiére, one that rideth poste, a currier.

Postierla, as Posterla.

Postiglióne, a postillion, a fore-runner, a postes-guide. Also a currier or poste.

Postílla, a postill, a glosse, a short or compendious exposition. Also the image that a man sees of himselfe in a looking glasse or in the water.

Postilláre, to glosse, vpon or expound compendiously.

Postízza, some part of a ship.

Pósto, put, laid, set, placed, pighted, pitcht setled, fixed, the Participle of Pórre. Also put case, supposed or imagined. Also a standing place. Also a stand in a Parke. Also a stand or station for a scout or sentinell. Also a skonce, or a block-house.

Pósto chè, since that. Also supposed that.

Pósto scrítta, as Poscrítta.

Postremità, as Posteriorità, or Estremità.

Postremo, hinmost, last, lag of all.

Postrémolo., Hath beene vsed for a scarfe.

Postríboli, the scum of the world, basest people, horse boyes, drudging raskals.

Postríbolo, a brothell, a bawdie-house.

Postuláre, to require, to demaund, to complaine, to expostulate or sue and accuse by law.

Postulatióne, a demaund, an expostulation, a request, a complaint made against one.

Postulatóre, a complainer, a requirer.

Posthúmo, as Posthúmio.

Postúra, as Positúra. Also a complot, a conuenticle, or secret conuention.

Postútto, Alpostútto, wholy, altogether. Also when all is done.

Posueníre, uéngo, uénni, uenúto, to come after or behind.

Posuenúta, an after comming.

Posuenúto, come after.

Potábile, drinkable, that may be drunke.

Potácchio, any kind of pottage or broth.

Potaggiére, a maker or louer of pottage.

Potággio, as Potácchio.

Potagióne, as Potácchio, as Potatióne.

Potamantína, an hearbe which put into drinke and drunken, maketh them that drinke of it to runne mad.

Potamegetóne, as Potamogíto.

Potamogíto, the hearbe Water speeke, Pond-weede or Water-grasse, which is said to haue the power to make Crocodils tame and gentle.

Potamogitóne, as Potamogíto.

Potáre, to prune, to cleanse or lop trees, to cut off superfluous boughes, to cut or dresse vines. Also to drinke.

Potáte, the rootes Potatos.

Potatióne, a pruning of trees or vines. Also a potation or drinking.

Potatóre, a pruner of trees. Also a drinker.

Potatóre d'álberi, a Pruner, a lopper, a graffer or setter of trees.

Potatúra, a pruning, as Potatióne.

Potéa, Potéua, he might, could or was able.

Potentáto, a Potentate, a puissant-man. Also great power or dominion.

Potente, potent, puissant, powerfull, mightie, well able and strong.

Potentia, puissance, power, great strength might, force or authoritie. 

Potentiále, potentiall, that may be.

Potentiáre, to giue power vnto, to inable with authoritie.

Potentiáto, that hath power giuen vnto, that is inabled.

Potentílla, wilde Tanzie or Siluerhearbe, and as some thinke wilde Agrimonie.

Potenza, as Potentia.

Potére, pósso, potéi, potúto, or possúto, to haue strength, power or abilitie, to be able, to may, to can, to be possible. Also might, power, force, puissance or abilitie.

Potére áltro, to be able something else.

Poterio, as Phrinióne.

Poterióne, as Phrinióne.

Potestà, as Podestà, as Potenza.

Potestaría, as Podestaría.

Potestatíuo, full of power, powerfull.

Potionále, that may bee drunke in a potion, or hath the vertue of, or is like a potion.

Potióne, any kind of potion or drinke.

Potissíma, most forcible, efficient or powerfull. Also chiefe of all or principall.

Potissimam énte, most forcibly.

Póto, any kind of drinke.

Pótta, a womans cunt or quaint.

Pottácchia, a filthy great cunt.

Pótta marína, a fish in Latin Vrtica.

Potteggiáre, to vse, touch or play with cunts.

Pótto, any kind of drinking pot.

Pottúta, cunted, hauing a cunt.

Potuláno uíno, a kind of wine.

Potulente, that may be drunke.

Potúto, been able, had the power.

Pouéia, a Butter-flie or a Ladie-bird.

Pouento, any place that is defended or sheltred from the winde.

Pouerácci, poore beggerly people.

Poueráglia, the poorest kind or number of meane people.

Pouerello, a poore, sillie wretched man

Pouerétto, poore, silly and beggerly.

Pouerézza, as Pouertà.

Póueri, the poore kind of people.

Poueríssimo, most poore and beggerlie.

Póuero, poore, bare, needy, wanting.

Póuero di metállo., Looke Pezzo.

Póuero di pánni, poore in clothes, poore out wardly.

Pouertà, pouerly, beggerly, want, neede.

Pouertáde, as Pouertà.

Pouióni, Pigeons or Doues.

Pózza, a pudle or slough of water, a pit full of standing water.

Pozzále, that may be digged, or that is full of wels, springs or pits.

Pozzanghéra, as Pózza.

Pozzáre, to dig or make a well, to well.

Pozzáro, a Pumpe or Well-maker.



Pozzatóia, a pitcher or bucket to draw water out of a well.

Pozzétte, dimples or pits in womens cheekes.

Pozzettíne, little dimples in womens cheekes.

Pozzétto, a little well or pit of water.

Pózzo, a deepe pit or well of water.

Pozzolána, the hearbe purcelaine. Also sand or grauell to mingle with lyme and to make morter of.

Pozzolíno, a little pit or well.

Pozzoniéro, a well or wault maker.

Pozzuólo, a little well or pit of water.

Prágma, an act or businesse.

Pragmática, a pragmaticall act or law, a thing done in a common-wealth.

Pragmático, one expert in doing of things, one wont to stand by an Oratour or a pleder to instruct him in law points. Also a Procter, an Atturny or practicioner of statutes or lawes. Also a solicitor of sutes.

Pramnióne, a kinde of blacke transparent stone.

Prándere, prándo, pránsi, pránso, or prandúto, to dine, to eate ones dinner.

Prándio, a dinner, a feeding at noone.

Prandipeta, a dinner begger.

Pránnio, a kind of wine commended by Homer.

Pránso, dined. Also a dinner.

Pranzáre, to dine or feede at noone.

Prán, zo, a dinner. Also dined.

Prasíno, a kinde of yellowish greene, or Leeke-colour.

Prásio, the hearbe Hore-hound. Also as Prasóide.

Prásmo, as Prásio. Also a kind of fish.

Prasóide, a stone of the colour of Leekes.

Prasóne, a shrub growing in the Sea bearing broade leaues.

Prassína, a precious stone which placed neere poison will glitter with sparkes like fire.

Pratello, a little Medow or Field. Also the hearbe Melilot.

Pratense, of or belonging to Fields or Medowes.

Pratería, any Medow or Hay-ground.

Prática, practise, experience, skill, tryall. Also a canuasing, a triall or prouing to doe or get a thing. Also a haunt, a frequenting, a conuersation or acquaintance.

Praticábile, that may be practised. Also conuersable or to be frequented,

Praticáre, to practise, to put in practise, to trie, to experience, to put in vre. Also to haunt, to frequent and conuerse with. Also to shift or canuase for a thing.

Pratichéuole, as Praticábile.

Praticello, as Pratello.

Prático, practike, practised, expert, skilfull, full of triall and practise.

Praticóne, an old subtle fox, a well practised or experienced fellow.

Pratíno, as Pratello.

Práto, a field, a medow, a hay-ground.

Pratolíno, any fine or dainty Medow.

Prauaménte, shrewdly, prauely, wickedly, leaudly, peruersly, detractingly.

Prauità, prauity, shrewdnesse, wickednesse, leaudnesse, peruersenesse, detraction, badnesse, dishonesty, corruptnesse.

Praúo, wicked, shrewed, bad, depraued, leaud, peruerse, corrupt, dishonest, obstinate.

Prè, vsed much in composition before other words, as a going or acting before.

Prealegánza, a mentioning before.

Prealegáto, forealledged or mentioned.

Preambuláre, to wend or walke before.

Preambulatióne, a fore-wending or going.

Preámbulo, a preamble, a foregoing.

Prebenda, a prebend in a church, but properly any standing fee or pension that is giuen to a Clarke or Assistant in a Cathedrall Church. Vsed also for Prouenda.

Prebendáre, to Prebend. Also as Prouendáre.

Prebendário, a Prebendary, on that liueth by any Church pension or Prebend.

Prebendáto, one that hath a Prebend, or liueth vpon some Church pension.

Precário, granted to one by prayer.

Precatióne, a crauing, an intreating.

Precautióne, a precaution, a fore-heed.

Precáuto, fore-heedy or wary.

Precedente, precedent or going before.

Precedeutia, precedency, surmounting.

Precédere, cédo, cedéi, or cessi, cedúto or cesso, to precede, to goe before. Also to excell in any action.

Precedúto, as Precesso.

Precellente, pre-excellent, fore-excelling.

Precellenza, pre-excellency, fore-excelling.

Precellere, cello, celli, celsi, celso, to pre-excell.

Precessióne, a predecession.

Precesso, preceded, gone before, surmounted.

Precessóre, a foregoer, a precedent.

Precettióne, a precept, a forewarning, a document, a foreadmonition.

Precettíuo, of or belonging to precepts.

Precetto, a precept, a lore, an iniunction, a foreadmonition, a sore-lesson or rule.

Precettóre, a preceptor, an instructer, a teacher, a master, a tuter.

Precettoría, a rectorship, a maistership, a preceptory.

Precettória cítatióne, a commanding citation.

Préei, praiers, oraizons, supplications.

Precídere, cído, císi, císo, to cut off, to curtall, to fore-cut, to chop off. Also to note and tell precisely what one wil speake off.

Precíngere, cíngo, cínsi, cínto, to guird or compasse before or about.

Precínto, a precinct or compasse. Also girt in or compassed about.

Precípere, to command absolutely.

Precipíre, písco, píto, to teach or instruct.

Precipitántia, a rowling or tumbling downe from some high place. Also ouermuch rashnesse.

Precipitáre, to precipitate or tumble downe headlong from high into some pit or danger, to bring, to cast or throw downe headlong. Also to doe ouer rashly.

Precipitatióne, as Precipitánza.

Precipitáto., Looke Precipitáre. Also a kind of corousiue or corroding powder that Chirurgions vse to eat away rotten flesh out of sores.

Precípite, as Precipitóso. Also according to rule, precept or instruction.

Precipitiáre, as Precipitáre.

Precipítio, a precipice, a dangerous deepe downefall, a downe-right pitch or fall.

Precipitóso, ruinous, steepe-downe, dangerous, full of downefalles. Also furious, foole-hardie, violently rash, haire-brain'd, ouer hastie and headstrong.

Precipuaménte, principally, chiefly, specially, aboue all things.

Precípuo, principall, chiefe, speciall, aboue all, soueraigne.

Precipúto, absolutely commanded.

Precisaménte, precisely, determinedly. Also cuttedly, briefly, succinctly and clearely.

Precíse, as Precisaménte.

Precisióne, precisenesse. Also a cutting off. Also a breuitie in writing or speech leauing somewhat to be vnderstood.

Precíso, precise, exquisite, determined. Also cutted or cut off. Also a part of the bowels.

Precissióne, a precession or going before.

Preclarità, a clearenesse before others.

Precláro, cleare before others.

Preclúdere, clúdo, clúsi, clúso, to foreclose, to shut vp.

Preclusióne, a fore-closing, a shutting vp 



Preclusíuo, that may be fore-closed.

Preclúso, fore-closed, shut vp.

Precogitánza, a fore-thinking.

Precogitáre, to forethinke.

Precogitatióne, fore-thought, precogitation.

Precognitióne, fore-knowledge.

Precóio, a sheepe-cot or pen.

Precóndia, the skin about the heart.

Precóne, as Preconizzatóre.

Precónio, a praise, a glorie, a renowme, a setting forth. Also a Cryers office or solemne cry of any thing to be sold.

Preconizzáre, to publish and recommend, to notifie with some praise, to set forth with glorie and commendations.

Preconizzatóre, a publisher, a notifier, a setter forth of any thing or office that is to be sold, conferred or bestowed vpon others.

Preconoscentia, fore-knowledge.

Preconóscere, conósco, conóbbi, conosciúto, to fore-know.

Precontrattáre, to precontract.

Precontrátto, a precontract.

Precórdij, the fleshie skin called also Diafrágma, that is the midriffe separating the heart and lungs from the stomacke, the parts about the heart, as the liuer and other bowels. Also the heart-strings or the filme of the heart. Also the sides of the bellie vnder the ribs. Vsed also for the whole vmbles or entrailes. Also the minde or breast. Also inward affections, cogitations or passions of the heart.

Precórdio, as Precórdij.

Precórrere, córro, córsi, córso, to forerunne, to out-runne, to ouer-runne, to excell.

Precorritóre, as Precorsóre.

Precorsióne, a fore-running, a preuention.

Precórso, fore-runne, out-runne, preuented.

Precorsóre, a fore-runner, a foregoer.

Precóio, a Lardrie. Also a Dayrie-house

Precúio, as Precóio.

Precúlto, ploughed or tilled before.

Precursóre, a fore-runner, a fore-goer.

Preda, a pray, a bootie, a spoile, a pillage, a prize, a foraging, a robberie.

Predábile, that may be prayed or taken as a pray.

Predabóndi soldati, praying, pillaging, robbing or foraging souldiers.

Predagióne, as Preda.

Predáre, to pray, to spoile, to rob, to forage, to proule, to pole and pill.

Predatióne, as Preda.

Predáto, sost, any bootie that is taken as a pray.

Predatóre, a theefe, a robber, a spoiler, a prouler, a piller, a forager, a pray-taker 

Predatório, of or belonging to Preda.

Predecessóre, a predecessor, an ancestor, one that hath been or gone befor vs.

Predella, any kind of kneeling or footestoole. Also the reine of a bridle.

Predella, a stand for barrels to stand vpon in Cellars. Also a country house, a farme.

Predestináre, to predestinate, to preordaine what shall come after.

Predestinatióne, Predestination.

Predestináto, predestinate, fore-ordained.

Predestíni, those that are predestinated.

Predestíno., Vsed for Predestination.

Predétto, fore-told, fore-said, prophecied.

Predéuole, as Predábile.

Prédica, a Preaching, a Sermon, a publike or fore-declaration.

Predicábile, predicable, that may bee told or spoken of publikely.

Predicaménto, a predicament or subiect that may be spoken of.

Predicánte, a Preacher. Also preaching.

Predicáre, to preach, to make a Sermon, to publish or declare openly. Also to praise and commend in open speeches. Also to perswade vnto by faire words.

Predicatióne, a preaching or publike declaration, a publishing openly.

Predicatóre, a Preacher, or open declarer.

Predicitóre, a Foreteller, a Prophet.

Predisinitióne, a predefining, a foreappointing.

Predífeto, pray-bearing, bootie-bringing.

Predilettióne, a fore-louing.

Prediletto, beloued before others.

Predíre, díco, díssi, détto, to foretell, to prophecie.

Predispórre, póngo, pósi, pósto, to fore-dispose.

Predispositióne, a fore-disposition.

Predito, adorned, garnished.

Predittióne, a prediction, a foretelling.

Prediuinatióne, a prediuination or guessing.

Predominánte, predominant, fore-ruling.

Predominánza, predominancie.

Predomináre, to predominate, to forerule.

Predominatióne, predomination, forerule.

Predomínio, a fore-rule or predominion.

Predóni, high-way theefes, boote-halers.

Predóre, as Predatóre,

Predútio. 

Preeléggere, to fore-elect, to fore-chuse.

Preelettióne, pre-election, fore-chusing.

Preelétto, pre-elect, fore-chosen.

Prefatióne, a Preface, a fore-speech.

Prefáto, fore-named, fore-alleadged. 

Prefátto, done before, fore-done.

Prefenda, prouender for horses, fodder for cattell. Also as Prebenda. Also a kind of corne measure.

Prefendáre, to prouender horses, to fodder cattell.

Prefereuza, preferring, preferment.

Preferríre, rísco, ríto, to prefer or aduance.

Preferríto, preferred, aduanced, set before.

Preferto, as Preferrito.

Prefetto, a Captaine, a Ruler, a Gouernour, a Prouost-marsheall, a President a Shriefe, a chiefe officer or Lieutenent.

Prefettúra, a Captaineship, a Gouernment, a Marshalship, a Presidencie, a rule or authoritie and iurisdiction committed to the power of some officer. Also a Shireweeke.

Prefiggere, fíggo, físsi, físso, to prefix, to limit, to appoint, to fore-fasten.

Prefiguráre, to prefigure, to fore-shew.

Prefiniménto, a fore-ending or deciding.

Prefinire, nísco, níto, to end, to decide, to determine before-hand.

Prefinitióne, as Prefiniménto.

Prefissióne, a prefixing, a prefixion.

Prefísso, prefixed, forefastned.

Perfocatióne di madríce, a disease among women called the Mother, which is a choking or stopping of the matrix wherby they fall into swounes.

Preforáta, Saint Iohns-wort.

Pregádi, certaine chiefe Senators so called in the State of Venice.

Pregáre, to pray, to intreat, to beseech, to sue, to craue, to request.

Pregatíuo, entreatiue, beseeching.

Pregáto, praied, besought, entreated.

Pregatóre, a prater, an intreater, a beseecher.

Pregáudio, a fore-gladnesse or ioy.

Préghi, praiers, intreaties, beseeching.

Preghiéra, a praier, an entreating, a request.

Pergiacente, lying before, or fore-lying, preciacent, pre-existing.

Pregiáre, to prize, to value, to esteeme, to endeare, to honor. Also to make price for a thing.

Pregiaría, baile, suretiship, maineprize.

Pregiéuole, to bee prized, worthy of esteeme.

Prégio, prize, value, worth, esteeme, hire or reward, the price that is giuen for any thing bought or sold. Also honor, worship or estimation.

Pregionáre, to emprison, to take prisoner.

Pregióne, a prison, a goale. Also a prisoner. 



Pregionéro, a prisoner. Also a Goaler or keeper of a prison.

Pregionéuole, that may be imprisoned.

Pregionía, imprisonment, durance.

Pregiudicáre, to preiudge, to iudge aforehand, to iudge before another to whom the matter appertaineth, to preiudicate. Also to preiudice, to touch or concerne neere. Also to conceiue an ill opinion or iudgement of a thing before he come to heare it, or of a man before one see him.

Pregiudicataménte, preiudicately, with a fore-iudgement, with preiudice vnto another, with a fore-conceiued opinion.

Pregiudicatióne, a giuing of iudgement or sentence before, a conceiuing of iudgement before due time.

Pregiudiciále, preiudiciall, concerning or touching the state of something.

Pregiudítio, a fore-iudgement or foreconceiued opinion. Also a case which once decided maketh a rule or example to iudge semblably in like matters, as those we call, Law-cases. Also a manner of sentence giuen before Iudgement, as if two contend for one office, the Magistrate because the sute wilbe long, doth in the meane time appoint one of them to minister the office, wherein hee seemeth to iudge before hand for whom he fauoureth. Also preiudice, hinderance, or hurting of ones case.

Pregiudit óso, as Pregiudicále.

Prégna, a woman great with child, or a beast big and full of yoong ones. Also full of good sap or iuice.

Pregnante, pregnant, fruitfull, full of good sap or iuice.

Pregnánza, pregnancie, a being great with child, or yoong ones.

Pregnáre, to beget with child. Also to big or bag with yoong ones.

Pregnéuole, that may bee gotten with child, or bagged and made big with yoong ones.

Pregnézza, as Pregnánza.

Prégno, full, big, bag'd, wombed. Also full of good sap or iuice.

Prégo, a praier, an intreatie, a request.

Pregressióne, a going before, a preuention.

Pregresso, that is gone before, ouerpassed.

Pregustáre, to taste or assay before.

Prehauére, to fore-haue, to haue beforehand.

Prehemin énte, preheminent.

Preheminénza, preheminence, aduantage.

Preiacente, as Pregiacente.

Prelateggiáre, to play the Prelate.

Prelatésca dignità, a Prelaies dignitie.

Prelatésco, Prelate-like. 

Prelatióne, a prelation or prelateship. Also a preheminence or superioritie.

Preláto, a Prelate, a Cleargy-man. Also preferred, or more set by.

Prelatúra, the dignitie of a Prelate.

Prelettióne, a fore-lesson or Lecture.

Preliáre, to battle, to fight, to skirmish. Also of or belonging to a battle.

Preliáre giórno, a battle-day, a day anciently obserued as luckie to begin some onset or fight, or some siege.

Prelibáre, to assay or taste before.

Prelibáto, choise, singular.

Prélio, a fight, a combate, a battle, a skirmish, a foughten-field.

Prello, a kind of wine-presse.

Prelúdio, a proheme in Musike, a flourish or voluntarie before a song or any musike. Also a proheme, a preamble or entrance to any matter.

Prema, the name of the Goddesse of Flatterie and blandishment.

Premeditánza, as Premeditatióne

Premeditáre, to premeditate or forethinke.

Premeditataménte, with premeditation

Premeditatióne, a premeditation or fore-thinking.

Premeditéuole, that may bee forethought.

Prémere, prémo, preméi, premúto, to presse, to weigh downe, to tread vpon. Also to suppresse. Also to vrge, to presse on, to force or be instant vpon. Also to keepe vnder, to squise or crush or thrust downe. Also to concerne a mans person or state neere.

Prémere látte, to churne milke, to presse milke.

Prem éssa, a premise, a putting before.

Prem ésso, premised, put or set before.

Prem éttere, to send before.

Premiáre, to reward, to guerdon, to meede.

Premiatióne, a rewarding, a recompencing.

Premiatóre, a rewarder, a recompencer.

Premiéuole, that may be rewarded.

Preminénte, preheminent.

Preminénza, preheminence, prerogatiue.

Premio, a reward, a meede, a guerdon.

Premísse, premises.

Premitóre, a presser, a treader downe, a suppressor, an vrger, a crusher.

Premitúra, a pressing, a crushing.

Premoníre, nísco, níto, to forewarne.

Premonitióne, a forewarning.

Premoníto, fore-warned, fore-aduised.

Premósso, promoted, preferred.

Premostránza, a fore-shewing.

Premostráre, to fore-show.

Premostratióne, a fore-shewing.

Premostráto, fore-shewed, fore-declared.

Premúra, a close pressing or crushing. 

Premutáre, to fore-change, or shift.

Premúto, prest, pressed, suppressed, troden downe, crushed, squeased, forced downe. Also concerned or touch't neere.

Prenarráre, to fore-declare.

Prenarratióne, a fore-declaration.

Prénce, as Préncipe.

Prencipále, principall, chiefe, highest, of or belonging to a Prince, Chiefe or First.

Prencipalità, a principalitie, a chiefedome.

Prencipáto, a principalitie, a soueraigntie. Also dominion, rule or preheminence.

Préncipe, a Prince, a Potentate, a Soueraigne, a chiefe ruler. Also the first. Also a title giuen to Kings Sonnes.

Prencipéssa, a Princesse, a woman-ruler. Also a title giuen to a Kings daughter.

Prencipétto, a yong or litle Prince. Also a Kings yongest Sonnes.

Prendére, prendo, prési, préso, prendúto, to take, to receiue, to accept, to catch, to snatch. Also to deceiue or as we say to fetch ouer. Also to entice or entrap one with faire words. Also to vndertake or take in hand. Also as Pigliáre in all phrases.

Prendere a fáre, to take or vndertake to doe, to take in hand.

Prendere a fítto, to take to rent or farme

Prendere a nuólo, to hire ship or horse.

Prendere a uettúra, to take to liuerie, to hire a horse for so much certaine a day.

Prendere compenso, to take as it were a remedie, or amends.

Prendere conoscenza, to take acquaintance.

Prendere cúra, to take care.

Prendere fállo, to mistake, to commit an error or some ouersight.

Prendere fastídio, to take care or fasherie.

Prendere guárdia, to take heed or warning.

Prendere in erróre, to mistake.

Prendere in grádo, to take in good worth.

Prendere in iscámbio, to mistake.

Prendere in prestánza, to take to lone, to borrow.

Prendere in úrta, to take iustling.

Prendere la fortúna per il ciuffétto, to take fortune by the snout.

Prendere le mósse, to take the start.

Prendere ómbra, to take suspicion.

Prendere partíto., looke Pigliáre.

Prendere per la máno, to take by the hand.

Prendiménto, a taking, a catching.

Prenditóre, a taker, a receiuer, a catcher. 



Prendúto, taken, receiued, caught.

Prenestíne, a kind of small Nut or Filbird.

Prenestío, the thickest kind of gold foile.

Prenomáto, forenamed, surnamed.

Prenóme, a first or forename.

Prenominánza, a first or forenameing.

Prenomináre, to forename, to name first.

Prenomináto, forenamed, first named.

Prenonciánte, fore-shewing, fore-telling.

Prenonciáre, to fore-shew, to fore-tell, to pronounce.

Prenontiatióne, a fore-telling, a foreshewing.

Prenosticáre, as Pronosticáre.

Prenosticatióne, as Pronosticatióne.

Prenotióne, a fore-notion, a fore-knowledge, or fore-vnderstanding.

Prenotítia, fore-knowledge.

Prénze, as Préncipe, a Princesse.

Prenzéssa, as Prencipéssa, a Princesse.

Preocupáre, to preoccupate, to anticipate.

Preocupatióne, anticipation, preuention.

Preordinare, to fore-ordaine.

Preordinatióne, fore-ordayning.

Preparaménto, a preparing, a making ready.

Preparántia vása, the Seminall vessels.

Preparáre, to prepare, to make ready.

Preparatióne, a preparation, a makeing ready.

Preparatíuo, a preparatiue.

Preparatóre, a preparer, a prouider.

Preparatório, a preparatiue in Physike.

Preparentíno víno, a kind of wine.

Prepéde, swift or light in flying, Vccello prepéde, the birde that first shewed himselfe to the Augure, wherby he guesseth what is to come.

Prepensáre, to fore-thinke or imagine.

Preponderáre, to weigh before-hand.

Preponderatióne, a fore-weighing.

Prepónere, póngo, pósi, pósto, to put, to place or set before, to prefer, to aduance.

Preponúto, preferred, put, placed or set before, preferred.

Prepórre, as Prepónere.

Prepositióne, a placing, putting or setting before, a preposition in speech.

Prepositíuo, to be or that may be set before.

Prepositóre, a prepositor, an aduancer.

Prepositúra, a preferring before others. Also a name of dignity.

Preposteraménte, preposterously, arsiuersie, contrary to due course. 

Prepóstero, preposterous, arsiuersie, out of due course, ouerthwart.

Prepósto, placed, put or set before others, preferred, aduanced. Also as Prouósto.

Prepútio, the fore-skin that couereth the head or nut of a mans yard.

Preraccontáre, to recount before hand.

Prerápe, a kind of nauew roote betweene a Turnep and a Carote.

Prerogatióne, prerogation, preheminence.

Prerogatíua, a prerogatiue, a preheminence.

Prerogatíuo, the man or thing that is of more effect or prerogatiue then others.

Prerótto mónte, a forebroken hill.

Présa, a takeing, a receiuing, a snatching, a catching. Also a reprizall. Also a récipe.

Presagatióne, a presageing, a fore-deuining.

Preságia, the arte of presageing, foreboding or guessing of things to come.

Presagiáre, to presage, to forebode, to prophecy, to foreshew by some tokens.

Presagiente, presaging, foreboding, foreguessing, prophecying.

Presagiéuole, that may be presaged or foresignified.

Preságio, a presage, a foreboding, shewing or signifying of some thing to come.

Presagíre, gísco, gíto, as Presagiáre.

Preságlia, all manner of prizals or booties.

Preságo, a man that fore-guesseth, telleth, bodeth, or presageth any thing.

Presáme, rudle or rinnet to curd milke to make cheese.

Prescia, great haste, speed or hying.

Presciáre, to make haste or speed, to hasten, to hie, to presse to vrge.

Presciente, hauing certaine foreknowledge.

Prescientia, prescience or fore-knowledge.

Prescióso, hasty, pressing, vrgeing, full of haste.

Prescíre, to fore-know, to fore-vnderstand.

Prescíto, fore-knowne, vnderstood before. Also damned into hell.

Presciugáre, to dry before-hand.

Presciútto, any kind of dryed meat.

Prescríuere, scríuo, scríssi, scrítto, to prescribe, to assigne, to limite or write before.

Prescrittióne, a prescription, a precept, a forme or writen and determined rule.

Prescrítto, prescribed, assigned, limited or written and determined before. 

Presecutáre, to persecute.

Presecutióne, persecution.

Persecutóre, a persecuter.

Presedére, séggo, sedéi, sedúto, to presede to sit before, or in some place of preheminence.

Presedúto, preseded or sitten before.

Presentagióne, a presentation, a presenting.

Presentáneo, present, for the present onely.

Presentáre, to present with any gist. Also to make ready before ones presence. Also to bring before ones presence. Also to exhibite.

Presentatióne, as Presentagióne.

Presentatóre, a presenter, a representer.

Presente, present, in sight, in presence.

Presente, the time present or instant. Also presently, or now.

Presente, a present or a gift giuen.

Presenteménte, presently, euen now, suddenly.

Presente tútti, in presence of all.

Presentia, the presence or aspect of a man.

Presentiále, presentiall, personall, in person.

Presentialménte, personally, in presence. Also presently or suddainely.

Presentíre, sénto, sentíto, to heare, to vnderstand, to smell or sent before hand.

Presentíssimo remédio, a most present remedy.

Presentita, a fore-hearing or fore-vnderstanding.

Presentíto, fore-heard or vnderstood, fore-smelt, perceiued knowen or sented.

Presentúccio, a small gift a meane present.

Presepio, a cratch, a racke, a manger, an Ox-stall, a cribe, or critch in a stable.

Preseruáre, to preserue, to keepe, to saue.

Pre seruatióne, preseruation, sauing.

Preseruatíuo, preseruatiue, keeping.

Prési, prése, présero, I, he, or they did take.

Préside, a kind of tree in Egypt.

Préside, as Presidente.

Presidentáre, to play the part of a President.

Presidentáto, a President-ship.

Presidente, a President, a chiefe ruler, a gouernour, one that sitteth before others, a Lieutenant or chiefe next vnder a King. Also an example or patterne and precident to follow or shew to others.

Presidiále, of or pertayning to a President or presidency. Also that is ordai­



ned to aide others, Soldáto presidiále a souldier in garison for a maine defence.

Presidiáre, to munite, to fortifie or arme with a garison, to liue or stay in a garison. Also to besiege or beleagre.

Presidiárij soldáti, souldiers liuing in garisons and ready at all helpes.

Presídio, a helpe, an auaile, a defence, a re-enforceing of a campe, a force or supply of men or other forces, a Garison of men. Also a place of helpe or refuge.

Presidióso, that hath forces, auailes, defences, supplies or Garisons.

Presiedére, as Presedére.

Presignificáre, to foresignifie or betoken.

Préso, taken, receiued, caught, hent.

Preso dísputa, taken a disputation.

Presolúta, an hearbe, which who so hath it about him can commit no letchery.

Préso nélla réte, taken or caught in a net.

Presontióne, as Presuntióne.

Presontuóso, as Presuntuóso.

Pressa, as Prescia. Also as Cálca, any presse throng or croud of people.

Pressáre, as Presciáre. Also to presse. Also to throng.

Pressézza, neerenesse, neighbourhood.

Pressia, as Prescia, haste, speed.

Pressiáre, as Presciáre.

Pressióne, a pressing, a printing. Also a kind of Sinopis or duskish Bolearmin.

Presso, neere, by. Also with. Also almost.

Presso, a kinde of fast and flat kinde of Ocher that Painters vse.

Presso chè, neere vpon, almost that.

Presso di me, neere vnto mee, by mee.

Presso di quíui, neere there.

Pressóre, as Impressóre, as Oppressóre.

Pressóso, as Prescióso.

Pressoui, neere there, there neere.

Pressúra, oppressing, pressing, grieuance.

Prestaménte, quickly, readily, out of hand.

Présta monéta, ready mony.

Prestánte, excelling, surpassing in all readinesse, notable, regardfull, noble.

Prestantíssimo, most excellent, ready surpassing, notable or regardfull.

Prestánza, worthinesse, excellency, noblenesse, vertue in all readinesse.

Prestánza, lone or lending of any thing, an imprest.

Prestáre, to lend. Also to borrow.

Prestáre ad vsúra, to lend to vsury.

Prestár féde, to giue trust or credite.

Prestáre ópera, to lend ones hand.

Prestatóre, a lender. Also a borrower. 

Préster, properly a Serpent that sets them into a burning fire with touching him, called also Dipsas. Also a kind of rageing storme in summer the firmament seeming to open and burne.

Prestézza, quicknesse, nimblenesse, hasty-speed, dispatch, promptnesse, readinesse.

Prestigiáre, to prastise or play iuglings, legierdemaines or crafty conueighances.

Prestigiatóre, a iugler, a deluder of the sight, or plaier of legierdemaine.

Prestigiatória árte, the arte of iugling or legierdemaine trickes.

Prestígie, illusions, iuglings, legierdemains, subtle and crafty conueighances.

Prestigióso, deceitfull, slie, nimble, full of crafty inglings and slie conueighances.

Prestináro, a baker or kneader.

Prestíssimo, very or most quickly.

Prestitúto, as Prostitúto.

Présto, quicke, nimble, prompt, ready, fleet, swift, prepared, adressed, dight. Also quickly, out of hand, without delay. Also a lone or lending of money Also a place or banke where mony is lent.

Présto présto, by and by, very quickly. Also most ready, nimble and prepared.

Présule, a prior, a prelate or he that leadeth the dance among the Romane Priests called Salij Sacerdotes.

Presúmere, súmo, suméi, sumúto, to presume, to suppose or count himselfe. Also to preuent, to conceiue or take first.

Presuntióne, presumption, saucinesse, ouerboldnesse, fond coniecture. Also a preoccupation of our aduersaries obiection.

Presúnto, presumed, supposed, counted himselfe, preuented or taken first.

Presuntuóso, presumptuous, saucy, malapert, ouer-bould, arrogant, rash, insolent.

Presupónere, póngo, pósi, pósto, to presuppose, to admit or coniecture before.

Presupórre, as Presupónere.

Presupositióne, a presupposition, a foresupposition.

Presupósito, a presupposed matter, a forepurpose or intention, a presupposition, a fore-supposition.

Presupósto, presupposed, admitted or coniectured before. Also as Bresupósito.

Presúra, a taking, a receiuing. Also a catching, or laying hold of. Also an hearbe vsed for rennet to curd milke and to make cheese with. 

Presútto, any kind of dried bacon.

Pretacchióne, a lubbardly gor-bellied priest, a fat ignorant Priest.

Pretáccio, as Pretacchióne.

Pretaría, priest-hood, the order of Priests Also a Priests dwelling house, a parsonage.

Pretazzuólo, a silly hackney Priest.

Prete, a Priest. Also a kind of fish. Also as Becca in cáuo.

Preteggiáre, to play the Priest.

Pretella, as Predella.

Pretendente, pretending, intending. Also a pretender, an intender.

Pretendenza, as Pretensióne.

Pretendere, to pretend, to intend, to meane before hand. Also to challenge or lay claime vnto. Also to couer or hide with any thing, to lay for a cloke or excuse. Also to draw or spread before.

Pretend éuole, that may be pretended.

Pretendúto, pretended, intended, or ment before. Also challenged or laide claime vnto.

Pretensáre, to pretend, as Pretendere.

Pretensíbile, that may be pretended.

Pretensióne, a pretence, a pretext. Also a challenging or clayming.

Preténso, pretended.

Pretensóre, a pretender, a claimer.

Preténza, as Pretensione.

Preterea, moreouer, besides other matters.

Preteríre, rísco, ríto, to goe beyond, to passeouer. Also to leaue out and ouerslip. Also to transgresse or trespasse.

Preteríto, gone beyond, pastouer, left out, ouerslipt. Also transgressed, trespassed. Also dead and departed, and that is fore-past.

Preterito, as Preteríto.

Preterito perfetto, the Preterperfectence.

Preterito piu che perfetto, the Preterpluperfectence.

Preterméttere, métto, mísi, mésso, to pretermit, to omit, to neglect, to ouerslip, to leaue vntouched, to passe ouer.

Pretermésso, pretermitted, omitted, neglected, ouerslipt, past-ouer, leaft vntoucht.

Pretermissióne, a pretermission, an omitting, an ouerslipping, a leauing out.

Pretésa, as Pretensióne.

Pretésco, Priest-like, like a Priest.

Pretesémolo, the hearbe Parsely.

Pretésimo, Priest-hood.

Pretésmo, Priest-hood.

Pretéso, as Pretendúro.

Pretesta, along robe or gowne edged about with Purple-silke, that Noble­



mens children vsed to weare till seauen yeeres of age, who were called Pretestáti. It was also the robe of state that the Kings or Chiefest officers of Rome did were when they sate in maiesty, and was euer burned with them that died in their office: nor could a Iudge giue sentence on a man till hee had put off that robe. Also a coate that Captaines wore in triumphes, and that Senaters were knowne by from other Gentlemen. Vsed also for Pretesto.

Pretestáre, to pretext or vse a pretence.

Pretesto, a pretext, a pretence, a shew or cloke, or excuse for any thing.

Pretiáre, to set a price or giue a price of any thing. Vsed also for Pregiáre.

Pretiatóre, a prizer, a valuer, a sesser, a siser, an esteemer.

Pretignólo, a poore silly Priest.

Pretio, the price of any thing. Also vsed for Pregio.

Pretiosità, preciousnesse, dearnesse.

Pretióso, precious, full of value

Pretísmo, the office or function of a Priest.

Pretóre, a Pretor, a Captaine or chiefe in Iustice, an office among the Romans, hauing the rule of an army, was afterward as a chiefe Iustice, and had other iudges sitting vnder him, the Romans had as many Pretors as they had Prouinces subiect vnto their Empire.

Pretoriále, of or pertayning to a Pretor.

Pretório, a place of iudgement, a Court or Seate of Iustice, a place where Pretors gaue iudgement, the house or pauillion of a Pretor or chiefe Captaine, a Princes Court or Pallace.

Prétta, full perfect, right pretty, meerely-pure.

Pretúra, the office or dignity of a Pretor, a Preter-ship.

Pretúsio víno, a kind of wine.

Preualentia, the excellency or better value.

Preualére, váglio, válsi, valúto, to preuaile, to excell in worth and value.

Preualúto, preuailed, excelled.

Preuaricaménto, as Precaricatióne.

Preuaricánte, transgressing, swaruing from truth and honesty, working by collusion, pleading falsely for bribes, peruerting of law.

Preuaricáre, to transgresse or breake the law, to swarue from truth, to goe out of the right way. Also to worke by collusion in pleading, or betray ones cause to his aduersarie. Also to leaue out that which ought to be spoken. 

Preuaricatióne, preuarication, collusion in pleading, swaruing from trueth, a betraying of ones cause vnto his aduersary, an omitting of what should be spoken in strength of a cause.

Preuaricatóre, a transgressor, a breaker of the law, a swaruer from truth, a goer out of the right way, a worker by collusion in pleading, a Lawyer that for bribes will be corrupted to betray his Clients cause.

Preuatúra, prouender for horses, or fodder for cattell. Also a kinde of fresh cheese.

Préue, as Piéue.

Preuede, vsed for a Priest.

Preuedénza, as Prouidénza.

Preuedére, véggo, víddi, vedúto, to for-see.

Preuediménto, for-sight, fore-heedinesse.

Preueditóre, a fore-seer, a fore-heeder.

Preuedúto, fore-seene, fore-espide.

Preueniente grátia di Dío,, the preuenting or fore comming grace of God.

Preueníre, véngo, vénni, venúto, to preuent, to fore-stall, to come or goe before.

Preuentióne, preuention, anticipation.

Preuentíuo, preuentiue, that preuenteth.

Preuento, as Preuenúto.

Preuentóre, a preuenter, an anticipater.

Preuenúto, preuented, fore-come or gone.

Preuertíre, tísco, títo, to peruert before.

Preuertíto, peruerted before.

Preuía, a fore-way, a high-way. Also priuate or particular.

Preuíncia, as Prouíncia.

Preuisíbile, that may before-seene.

Preuíso, fore-seene, fore-spide.

Preuisóre, a fore-seer, a fore-spier.

Preuísto, fore-seene, fore-spide.

Preuósto, as Prouósto.

Prezza, as Prescia, pressing haste.

Prezzáre, as Pregiáre, to bargane or make price for any thing.

Prezzémolo, the hearbe Parsely.

Prezzo, as Pregio, as Pretio.

Prezzoláre, to hire or bargaine for price.

Prezzoléuole, that may be hired for price.

Prezzolíno, a hireling.

Pría, earst, sooner, before, first.

Pría che, before that, rather then.

Priapéa, all manner of filthy or bawdy verses touching priuities of men.

Priapísmo, priapise, pricke-pride, lust-pride, colts-euell, of or pertayning to a mans yard, the standing of a mans yard and yet without lust or desire, if it come with panting of the yard Physicians call it Satiriási or Tentígine. Also the office of the God of gardens.

Priápo, the God of Gardens. Also a mans yard or priuy member.

Priário, as Primáio.

Pricissióne, as Processióne.

Pridiáno, of the day before.

Priéga, as Preghiéra.

Priegáre, as Pregáre.

Prieghi, as Preghi, prayers.

Prieghiéra, as Preghiéra, a prayer.

Priégo, as Prégo.

Priémere, Priemúto, as Prémere.

Prigionáre, to imprison, to take prisoner.

Prigióne, a prison. Also a prisoner. Vsed also of Poets for mortall man as the soules prison.

Prigionía, imprisonment.

Prigioniére, a prisoner. Also a Goaler.

Prignuóli, a kind of Mushroms.

Priíte, a stone named of the stocke of a tree, because it will burne as wood.

Prima, first, earst, before, sooner, rather. Also the game at cardes called Primero or Prima vista. Also a Prime. Also vsed for the first houre. Also the chiefe, first, or prime-feathers of a Hawke. Also something about a wheele.

Príma chè, before that, or rather then.

Príma giónta, the first arriuall.

Primáio, primary, a first or chiefe man aboue others, of the first ranke.

Príma il párto, before the birth.

Primaménte, first, earst, sooner, before.

Primáno, as Primáto, as Primáio. Also the Tribune or Lieutenant that appointed wages to the first legion, or a souldier of the first legion.

Primáre, to prime, to choose or prefer first.

Primário, as Primáio.

Prímarósa, the Prim-rose flower.

Primaruóla, a woman that neuer had child, or beast that neuer bare.

Primatíccio, any fruite or other thing earely ripe, or that comes first. Also betimes or earely. Also sooner then ordinary.

Primatióne, any first beginning. Also the first beginning or first day of the new Moone.

Primáto, chosen or preferred first. Also a primary, a primate or chiefe in the Clergy. Also a chiefe magistrate or primary gouernour. Also primacy, highest place, first ranke, chiefe rule or auctority, superiority. 



Primauera, the spring-time of the yeare. Also a Primrose.

Príma vísta, a game at cards so called.

Príme notítie, maximes, axiomes, first notions, principles.

Primera, a game at cardes, primero.

Primeraménte, first or before all.

Primero, as Primiero.

Priméuo, the elder or of the first age.

Primícci frútti, as Primatíccio.

Primicéro, as Primocéro.

Primície, as Primítie.

Primiera, the game at cardes, Primero.

Primieraménte, first, erst, sooner, before.

Primieráno, as Primieránti.

Primieránti, Primierans, such as play at Primero.

Primiero, first, sooner. Also asPrimáto.

Primigénia, a first or originall comming of it selfe.

Primigénio, the first or originall, that commeth first of it selfe, and hath not the beginning of another.

Primináti, erst-borne, our forefathers.

Primipiláro, as Primopílo.

Primipílo, as Primopílo.

Primítie, the first offrings that are offered vnto Gods, or first fruites that Church-men pay vnto the King. Also the firstlings of yeerely fruites.

Primítio, the foremost or first.

Primitíua, the first cause or former matter.

Primitiuaménte, primitiuely.

Primitíuo, primitiue, that hath no beginning of another.

Prímo, prime, or first in ranke or number. Also chiefe or highest. Also erst, first, before, sooner.

Primocério, he that in a religious house hath charge of the wax, torches, tapers or lights. Also a Princes chiefe Secretarie. Also a supreme in dignitie.

Primogenito, first begotten or borne.

Primogenitúra, eldership in birth.

Prímo mouente, the first or chiefe moouer, GOD.

Primo náto, first-borne.

Prímo piátto, the first dish, or chiefe messe serued at a table. Also a yoong horse newly ridden, a yong ridden colt.

Primopílo, the ensigne or standard of the first squadron among the Romanes. Also the first ranke, file or order of the first squadron of souldiers. Also a Captaine of the vanguard, or be that fighteth next the standard or first begins the fight or to charge the enemic.

Primopotente, first or chiefe mightie.

Primórdio, a first off-spring or originall. 

Primórí, they that stand foremost in an armie or that begins the fight. Also noble & chiefe-men, peeres of a State.

Prímo soláro, the first flower. Also the vpper decke of a ship.

Prímo tempo, the next spring.

Primpílo, as Primopílo.

Prímula, a Primerose, a Cowslip.

Prínce, as Préncipe.

Principále, as Prencipále.

Principalità, as Prencipalità.

Principalménte, chiefly, principally.

Principatióne, a beginning, an off-spring

Principáto, as Prencipáto.

Príncipe, as Préncipe.

Principéssa, as Prencipéssa.

Principétto, as Prencipétto.

Principiánte, a beginner, a commencer.

Principiáre, to begin, to commence.

Principiário, consisting of beginnings.

Princípij, beginnings, principles.

Principíno, as Prencipétto.

Princípio, a beginning, a ground or chief originall, race and stocke of a thing.

Prióra, a Prioresse.

Priorático, as Prioráto.

Prioráto, a Priorie. Also prioritie or senioritie. Also a Priorship.

Prióre, a Prior. Also chiefe, senior, ancestor, former, more eminent.

Prioreggiáre, to play the Prior.

Prioréssa, a Prioresse.

Priorétto, a little Prior or Priorie.

Prioría, a Priorie or Priors office.

Priorità, prioritie, sinioritie, preheminence.

Priríta, the Marquesite stone.

Prísco, as Prístino.

Prísma, a kinde of Mathematicall figure.

Príste, a fish that is but slender, and yet of an exceeding great length, that in swimming cutteth the waues. Also a kind of long but narrow ship or galley in fashion of that ship.

Pristináro., Hath beene vsed for a Baker.

Prístino, of times passed, of old times, former, old, ancient. Also wonted or accustomed.

Pritánij, the Presidents of the Senate of Athens and Rhodes were so called.

Priuagióne, as Priuatióne,

Priuáre, to depriue, to bereaue, to take from, to spoile of, to reaue.

Priuário, priuate, as Priuáto.

Priuataménte, priuately, priuily, as a priuate man. Also namely or specially.

Priuatióne, priuation, depriuing, bereauing. Also prinatenesse.

Priuatíuo, priuatiue, that doth bereaue or depriue, or that may be depriued.

Priuáto, depriued, reaft, bereaued, taken from, spoiled of. Also a priuate person, one that hath no common office or authoritie. Also priuate, familiar, acquainted or inward with one. Also a mans owne or peculiar. Also particular or speciall. Also a priuie or house of office.

Priuáto humáno., Vsed for a priuie or iakes.

Priuígna, a daughter in law whose first husband is dead.

Priuígno, a sonne in law whose first wife is dead.

Priuilegiáre, to priuiledge, to giue preheminence or prerogatiue, a priuate grant.

Priuilegio, a priuiledge, a prerogatiue or preheminence aboue others.

Príuo, depriued, reaft, bereaued, spoiled of. Also sance or without, or naked and voide of.

Prò, good, profit, health, ioy, welfare, Buón prò or Buón pròui fáccia, much good may it doe you, well may you fare, or God giue you ioy. Also as Próde.

Próa, as Próda.

Proagógio, whoredome, adulterie.

Proámita, a great Aunt, a great grandfathers sister.

Proáua, a great grand-mother.

Proáuo, a great grand-father.

Proáuola, a great grand-mother.

Proáuolo, a great grand-father.

Proauúnculo, a great-great Vncle.

Probábile, probable, that may be prooued.

Probabilità, probabilitie, likenesse of truth.

Probárba, as Proauúnculo.

Probáre, to prooue, to approoue, to confirme, to allow, to perswade, or shew by reason.

Probáticapiscína, a pond where sheepe were washed that should be sacrificed.

Probatióne, an approbation, a probation.

Probéuole, as Probábile.

Próbio, as Obbróbrio.

Probità, honestie, sinceritie, goodnesse, vertue.

Problénia, a problem, a proposition or sentence proposed with a question annexed. In Mathematikes it is opposed to Theoréma, which is a proposition that is especially referred to practise or the doing of something.

Próbo, honest, good, vpright, sincere.

Probóscide, the snout or trunke of an Elephant.

Probóstide, as Probóscide.

Próbro, any reprochfull act.

Probróso, reprochfull, infamous.

Procácchia, the hearbe Purcelane.

Procacciánte, procuring. Also a procurer. Also a shifting companion.

Procacciáre, to procure, to shift for, to endeuour to get and obtaine. 



Procacciatóre, a procurer, a shifter for.

Procaccíno, a broker or procurer for others. Also a shifter for himselfe.

Procáccio, an ordinarie poste or carier, namely hee that goeth between Rome and Naples. Also a procuring, a procurement, a shifting or canuasing for. Also industrie, labour, diligence, and studie to obtaine.

Procáce, reprochfull, ill-tongued, shamelesse in asking, saucie in crauing, importunate in railing. Also a letcherous or wanton Epicure.

Procacità, saucinesse, malapertnesse, scoffing. Also a procuring or shifting for.

Procedente, proceeding, marching on, passing forward. Also a proceeder.

Procedentia, a proceeding or going on, a marching forward.

Procédere, cédo, cedéi, cedúto, to proceed, to goe on, forward or beyond, to keepe on a course, to passe forth.

Procédere alla carlóna, to proceed or behaue himselfe plainely or clounishly.

Procédere alla sfacciáta, to proceed or goe on shamelesly.

Procédere realménte, to proceed, goe on or behaue himselfe like an honest man.

Procediménto, a proceeding or going on, a marching forward, a behauiour.

Proceditóre, a proceeder, a goer-on.

Proceduta, as Procediménto.

Procedúto, proceeded, gone on or forward.

Procelemmático, consisting of foure short sillables.

Procella, a storme or tempest of winde and raine together. Also any danger, blustring, ruffling or tumult.

Procelláre, to storme violently, to bluster.

Procellóso, stormie, tempestuous, blustring.

Procerità, length, tallnesse, height.

Processáre, to processe, to sue, to call one in sute or law.

Processionále, of or belonging to a procession.

Processióne, a Procession, a going in procession, a going on, a proceeding, a progresse, a processe, a passing forward. Also publike praiers made by the Clergie and Laitie together going vp and downe. Vsed also for the reuenues or commings in of lands or houses.

Processo, that part of a bone that exceedeth in height the naturall places neer vnto it: the Greekes and Latines call it Apophisi, and our Anatomists call such bones Processes. Also a processe, a proxie or sute in law. Also space, processe or proceeding of time. Also progresse, increase or successe. Also proceeded. 

Processório, of or belonging to Processo.

Prochemási, a fortoken of a neere tempest.

Próchi, as Próci.

Prochíssi, corriuals or copartners in loue.

Próci, riuals or foe-fellowes in loue. Also a greedy letcherous man.

Procianaménte, neerely, approchingly.

Procianáre, to neighbour or approach.

Procianità, neerenesse, neighbourhood.

Prociáno, neere, nigh. Also a neighbour.

Procidéntia, a falling downe from his place, namely of the fundament or arsegut.

Procínto, the procinct or state of an armie or battle ready to giue the onset. Also girt or compassed about. Also prouision, promptnesse or readinesse to doe any thing. Also a precinct, a iurisdiction or a compassing about. Also in order, in a readinesse. Vsed also for Corníce.

Procióne, a Starre, called the fore-runner of the Dog-starre.

Procláma, a proclamation, a crying out.

Proclamáre, to proclaime, or cry aloud.

Proclamatióne, as Procláma.

Proclinatiónc, a bending forward.

Proclíno, bending forward.

Proclíuio, enclining, bending, readie to fall.

Procliuità, inclination, disposition, or facilitie vnto any thing.

Próco, a woer, or sutor to a wench.

Proconsoláre, of or pertaining to a Proconsull, or such officer.

Proconsoláto, a Proconsulship.

Procónsolo, a Proconsull, or commissioner sent with an extraordinarie power of a Consull into any countrie.

Procónte, an Earle. Also an Earles deputie.

Procrastináre, to linger the time, to deferre or put off from day to day.

Procrastinatióne, lingring of time, deferring, or putting off from day to day.

Procreaménto, as Procreatióne.

Procreáre, to ingender, to beget, to procreate, to make or bring forth.

Procreatióne, procreation, ingendring, begetting, or bringing forth.

Procróne, as Procióne.

Proculéta, quarters, beds, or ridges in gardens.

Próculo, he that is borne when his father is very old, or out of the countrie.

Procúra, a procurement, a precuration, a sollicitation. Also a commission, a proxie, a letter of aturnie, an administration or charge in doing a thing.

Procurábile, that may be procured.

Procurándo, to be procured.

Procuránza, as Procúra.

Procuráre, to procure, to obtaine. Also to play the Proctor, to doe, to follow, or haue the charge of anothers businesse, to solicite or care for.

Procuraría, the doing or procuring of another mans businesse by atturnieship.

Procuratía, a Proctor, or atturnieship.

Procuratióne, as Procúra.

Procuratíuo, procuring, that procureth.

Procuratóre, a procurer, a proctor, a sollicitor, an atturnie, an obtainer, a factor, an agent, or administrator for another.

Procuratória, a Proctorship, the office or charge of a Procurator.

Procurería, as Procuraría.

Procuréuole, that may be procured.

Próda, the prow, the fore-part, the foredecke, or forecastle of a Ship, or Gallie. Also the side, shore, or banke of a riuer.

Prodáre, to boord or graple Ships together. Also to come neere or touch the shore.

Prodáto, boorded or grapled a Ship. Also come neere the shore, or side.

Próde, valiant, hardie, stout, full of prowesse, notable, of great worth.

Prodenza., Vsed for Prudenza.

Prodéra, as Próda.

Prodéro, he that gouerns or stands at the prow of Ship or Gallie.

Prodése, the name of a cable in a Ship.

Prodéuole, as Próde.

Prodeuolménte, hardily, valiantly, stoutly.

Prodézza, hardinesse, valour, prowesse, stoutnesse, worthinesse, valiantnesse.

Prodiére, he that hath the charge of the prow in a Ship. Also a saile there.

Prodigále, as Pródigo.

Prodigalità, prodigalitie, vnthriftinesse, wastefulnesse, or lauishnesse in spending.

Prodigalménte, prodigally, wastefully, vnthriftily, excessiuely in expences.

Prodigáre, to play the prodigall man, to consume or spend wastefully.

Prodigénza, as Prodigalità.

Prodígio, a prodigie, a monstrous or vnnaturall thing, for boding good or euill.

Prodigióso, prodigious, monstrous, forboding strange signes of some good or euill.

Prodigità, as Prodigalità.

Pródigo, prodigall, excessiue, or wastfull in expences, ouer-liberall, vnthriftie, a spend-all, a waste-good.

Prodíre, dísco, díto, to betray as a traitor, to forsake in ones mind, to leaue succorlesse, to bewray, to apeach, to accuse falsely, to deceiue with treacherie.

Proditióne, treason, disloyaltie, be wray­



ing, vttring, descrying.

Prodíto, betraid, bewraid, apeached, detected, deceiued by treason.

Proditóre, a traitor, a betraier, a villaine, one full of tretcherie, an accuser.

Proditoriaménte, traiterously, tretcherously, disloyally, villanously, falsely.

Prodótti, the fruites or gaines of labour.

Prodótto, as Prodútto.

Prodrómi, a kind of earely Fig, as it were fore-running the rest.

Prodrómi, certain fore-running Northeast winds blowing aloft for the space of eight daies, the fifteenth day before the Kalends of August.

Prodrómo, a fore-runner, one running before to bring tidings of ones comming.

Producente, producing, forth-bringing.

Prodúcere, dúco, dússi, dútto, or dótto, to produce or bring foorth. Also to draw forward, to draw in length. Also to driue off with faire words and promises.

Producéuole, that may produce or bring forth. Also producing, or forth-bringing.

Produciménto, a producing, or bringing foorth. Also a drawing forward.

Producitóre, as Produttóre.

Prodúrre, as Prodúcere.

Produttióne, a production, or forth-bringing.

Produttíuo, producing, forth-bringing.

Prodútto, produced, brought foorth. Looke Prodúcere. Also a production.

Produttóre, a producer, a bringer forth.

Proeggiáre., looke Próda.

Proemiale, as Prohemiále.

Proemiáre, as Prohemiáre.

Proemio, as Prohemio.

Proéro, as Prodéro.

Prò et cóntra, for or with and against.

Profanáre, to profane, to vnhallow, to abuse or peruert holie things.

Profanatióne, a profanation, or making of an holie thing profane.

Profanatóre, a profaner, an vnhallower.

Profanità, profanenesse, abuse or peruerting of holie things.

Profáno, profane, vnhallowed, conuerted from an holie to a base vse.

Profáto, a generall proposition, or rule in any Science. Logitians call it a position or axiome, and Lawyers call it a principle, or maxime.

Profenda, a kind of Corne-measure.

Proferenza, a pronouncing or ready vtterance in speech.

Proferére, as Proferíre.

Proferìménto, as Proferenza.

Proferíre, prófero, proferíto, to recite, to rehearse, to pronounce, to vtter or shew foorth, to publish or tell abroade. Also to proffer or offer foorth.

Proferíto, as Proferto.

Proferta, a proffer, an offering foorth. Vsed anciently for a promise.

Proferto, pronounced or vttered foorth. Also proffered or offered foorth.

Professáre, to professe or make profession of. Also to auouch publikely.

Professióne, a profession, a quality, a faculty, a vocation. Also an open confession or auouching.

Professo, that hath auouched, professed, or made profession of. Also confessed.

Professóre, a professer, an auoucher.

Profesto giórno, a halfe-holy-day, a demie-working-day.

Profeta, a Prophet, a Sooth-sayer, a foreteller of things to come.

Profetále, of or belonging to a Prophet.

Profetáre, as Profetizzáre.

Profetéssa, a woman Prophet.

Profetía, a prophecy, a diuination.

Profetico, propheticall as a Prophet.

Profetiggiáre, as Profetizzáre.

Profetizzáre, to prophecy, to foretell truely. Also to preach, to interpret, or sing praises to God.

Profferíto., Vsed for Pórfido.

Proficáre, to profit or doe much good vnto.

Profícere, as Proficáre.

Proficiente, proficient, doing much good, helping.

Proficóso, profitable or doing good.

Profícuo, gainefull, profitable, good-oeing.

Profiláre, to draw, to limne, to paint, to portray. Also to border in armorie.

Profilatóio, a Goldsmiths-toole.

Profílo, a limning or portraying of any picture. Also a border in armory.

Prosío, as Profilo. Also as Pórfido. Also as I finde in Grisoni a round welt or ring filed and raised in the neather side of the scath to keepe the horse in subiection by pressing the gumme, not greatly needefull.

Profittábile, profitable, gainefull.

Profittáre, to profit, to gaine, to thriue.

Profittéuole, profitable, gainefull.

Profittíuo, profitable, gainefull.

Profítto, profit, gaine, vtility, cheuissance.

Profittóso, profitable, full of profit.

Profláto, a blast, a blowing

Profligáre, to put to flight, to driue away, to ouerthrow, to put to rout, to bring to destruction.

Profligatióne, a putting to flight or in rout, an ouerthrow.

Profluente, flowing forth or running pleasantly and aboundantly as a Riuer.

Profluenza, aboundance, plenty, flowing or store of.

Profluuiáre, to gush or streame foorth.

Proflúuio, an issuing, an out-gushing or streaming forth, an aboundant ouerflowing.

Profluuióne, a lauish or wastfull spender, one whose goods flow from him.

Profondáre, to sinke downe. Also to dig deepe. Also to thrust to the bottome.

Profóndere, fóndo, fondéi, fondúto, or fúso to powre or burst foorth aboundantly. Also to spend out of measure or lash out lauishly.

Profondimétra, a measurer of depthes.

Profondimetría, depthes-measuring.

Profondità, profundity, deapth, deepenesse.

Profondiuéde, a deepe or farre-seer.

Profóndo, profound, deepe, of much receipt. Also insatiable. Also a gulfe or deepe place of water, the maine sea, the vast deepe. Also the belly.

Profórzo, perforce, of necessity.

Profúgio, a sanctuary, a place of refuge, a place to fly vnto for safety.

Profúgo, a wanderer from place to place, a fugitiue, a fleeter, a runnegate.

Profumáre, to perfume, or smell sweet.

Profumaría, a Perfumers-shop.

Profumáro, a perfumer.

Profumatello, a wanton perfumed or effeminate fellow.

Profumáto, perfumed.

Profumatóre, a Perfumer.

Profumatúra, a perfumednesse.

Profumería, a Perfumers worke-house.

Profumicáre, to suffumicate by receiuing the fume as a perfume.

Profumicatióne, a suffumication or receiuing of smoke as perfume.

Profumiere, a Perfumer. Also an Apothecarie.

Profúmo, any perfume or sweet smell.

Profúndáre, as Profondáre.

Profúndere, as Profóndere.

Profúndità, as Profondità.

Profúndo, as Profóndo.

Profusióne, profusion, flowing or gushing out. Also lauishnesse in prodigalitie.

Profúso, profuse, flowing, gushing or streaming out. Also prodigall, wastefull, vnthriftie, lauish in expences.

Progalità, as Prodigalità.

Progeneratióne, a bringing forth.

Progenero, the husband of ones daughters daughter or niece.

Progenie, progenie, issue, generation, off-spring, a stocke or succession in bloud. 



Progenitóre, a progenitor, a grandfather.

Progettáre, to proiect, to cast off. Also to prostrate.

Progettióne, as Progetto, a proiecting.

Progetto, a proiecting, a proiect, a iutting out. Also prostrating. Also prostrate, cast forth, forsaken or contemned. Also the casting out of a thing. Also the iutting or leaning and butting out of any part of building.

Proglóssi, the forepart of the tongue.

Prognáta, meate or sauce made of prunes. Also galantine or venison sauce.

Prognáto, borne, begotten or descended of a lineage, bloud or stocke.

Prógne., Vsed for a Swallow.

Prognosticáre, as Pronosticáre.

Progrédere, grédo, gredéi, gresso, to proceed on or goe foreward.

Pregressióne, a progression, a proceeding on or going forward.

Progressiuaménte, according to due progressing or proceedingly.

Progressíuo, progressiue, proceeding, going forward.

Progresso, a progresse, a proceeding, a continuing, a course begun, a going on.

Prohemiále, of or belonging to a Proheme.

Prohemiáre, to make a Proheme or Preface, or to begin an Oration.

Proheminénza, as Preheminénza.

Prohemio, a proheme, a preamble, a preface, or beginning of a matter or discourse.

Prohemizzáre, as Prohemiáre.

Prohibíre, bísco, bíto, to prohibite, to forbid, to hinder, to stay, not to suffer.

Prohibitióne, a prohibition, a forbidding.

Prohibitíuo, that doth prohibite, or may be forbidden.

Prohibíto, prohibited, forbidden.

Prohibitóre, a forbidder.

Prohibitória, a kind of vnluckie Scrich-owle.

Proietto, as Progetto.

Prolápso, fallen or tumbled downe.

Prolatióne, a prolation, a prenouncing out. Also deferring or prolonging.

Proláto, pronounced or vttred forth. Also prolonged or delaied.

Próle, issue of ones bodie, off-spring of children, progenie, lineage.

Prolessi, a figure in speaking whereby we anticipate and dissolue what one was about to say or doubt. Also a certaine naturall knowledge conceiued in the minde.

Proletário, as Proletáro.

Proletáro, one of a poore condition, one that hath many children and little to maintaine them, one that hath nothing to giue his Common-wealth but a supply of children. Also a poore man vnfit for warre.

Proletárij, the poorer sort of the Romanes vnfit for warre.

Prolífero, issue-bringing.

Prolificáre, to bring issue, or increase in issue.

Prolificatióne, an issue-bringing, or encreasing in issue.

Prolissità, prolixitie, abundance or length and tediousnesse in speech.

Prolísso, prolixe, long or tedious in speech. Also large or, bounteous.

Prolocutóre, a prolocutor, a speaker for others or afore others.

Prologáre, to speake first, to make a prologue or forespeach.

Prológio, as Prólogo.

Prólogo, a prologue, a preface, a forespeech. Also he that speakes the prologue.

Prolónga, a prolonging, a delay, a deferring or putting off of time.

Prolongam énto, as Prolónga.

Prolongáre, to prolong, to put off in length, to defer, to prorogue.

Prolongatióne, as Prolónga.

Prolóquio, a fore-speech, a beginning, a proposition, a maxime, an axiome, an Aphorisme. Also a perfect sentence, or sure ground to prooue a thing.

Prolúbio, any appetite or earnest pleasing desire.

Prolúdio, a flourish vpon any thing, a proofe before hand of any matter.

Prolúuie, filth washed from any thing. Also a laske or loosenesse of the belly.

Prolúuio, a shedding of any thing in great aboundance. Also prodigality in spending.

Proluuióne, a riotous waste-full spender.

Prómere, prómo, proméi, promúto, to blend or mesh and mingle together.

Promerito, for merit or desert.

Promescere, to disclose or vtter what one knoweth or thinketh. Also to shed or powre forth aboundantly. Also to mesh or mingle together.

Promesciere, as Promescere.

Proméssa, a promise or vow promised.

Promessióne, a promise, a vow, a couenant.

Promésso, promised, vowed, answered for.

Promcttente, promissing. Also a promiser.

Prométtere, métto, mísi, mésso, or mettúto, to promise, to vow, to answer for.

Prométter mári & mónti, to promise heauen and earth or impossibilities.

Prometter Róma et tóma, idem.

Promettitóre, a promiser, a surety. 

Promettúto, as Promésso.

Prommentia, a prominence, that is, according to Anatomists what portion soeuer doeth surmount the parts circumiacent in thicknesse, as a hill in a plaine. Also vsed for a pent-house or out ietting thing.

Promíscuo, mingle-mangle, confused one with another, common to manie.

Promissióne, a promise, a vow, a couenant.

Prómo, a keeper of a Store-house.

Promolgáre, to publish, to noise abroade.

Promolgatióne, a publishing or proclayming abroad.

Promolgatóre, a publisher or proclaymer.

Promontório, a promontory or hill shuting out into the sea as an elbow.

Promósso, preferred, promoted.

Promotióne, promotion, preferment.

Promóto, promoted, aduanced.

Promotóre, a promoter, a preferrer.

Promóuere, to promote, to prefer.

Promulgáre, as Promolgáre.

Promulgatióne, as Promolgatióne.

Promulgatóre, as Promolgatóre.

Promúlso, a kind of sweet drinke.

Promuscíde, as Promusíde.

Promusíde, an Elephants truncke or snout.

Promutatióne, any charge or permutation.

Promutáre, to change for.

Pronepóte, the sonne of ones Nephew.

Pronézza, the daughter of ones Neece.

Proníca, a kinde of roote in Arithmetike.

Pronità, as Prontézza.

Próno, prone, inclined, ready, prompt, nigh at hand. Also quickly passing. Also bending downe. Also flatling or groueling with the face downeward.

Pronóme, a Pronoune, a surname.

Pronóntia, as Pronontiatióne.

Pronontiábile, that may be pronounced.

Pronontiáre, to pronounce, to vtter in speech, to declare and make mention of. Also to tell precisely, or to giue and pronounce sentence.

Pronontiatióne, a pronountiation, an vtterance in speech, a speaking out.

Pronontiáto, spoken and pronounced. Also vsed for Assióma, or Mássima.

Pronosticáre, to prognosticate, to foretell or fore-know any thing.

Pronosticatióne, a prognostication, a fore-telling, a token of a thing to come.

Pronosticatóre, a prognosticator, a fore-teller or fore-knower of things to come. 



Pronóstico, as Pronosticatióne.

Prontáre, to prompt. Also to prepare, or make in a readinesse. Also to presse, to vrge, to striue, to be instant, or assay with readinesse. Also to print or stampe or seale.

Prontézza, promptnesse, promptitude, pronenesse, readinesse. Also preparation.

Prontitúdine, as Prontézza.

Prónto, prompt, ready, at hand, prepared, nimble, speedy. Also bould and shamelesse.

Prontuário, a Store-house.

Prónuba, the Goddesse of mariage. Also a bride-maide, or she that bringeth a bride home to her husbands house, or that dresseth hir to goe to bed.

Prónubo, hee that brings a bride to Church and giueth hir to hir husband.

Prónulo, a kind of thorny bush.

Pronúntia, as Pronóntia.

Pronuntiáre, as Pronontiáre.

Pronuntiatióne, as Pronóntia.

Pronuóra, the wife of ones Nephew.

Propagábile, that may be propagated, dilated, extended or multiplied.

Propagáre, to propagate, to dilate, to extend, to multiply, to prolong and continue. Also to prune or cut Vines to make them grow the faster.

Propagatióne, propagation, extending vnto continuance, encrease.

Propagatóre, a dilator, an extender, a multiplier vnto continuance.

Propágina, as Propagatióne.

Propagináre, as Propagáre.

Propaginatióne, as Propagatióne.

Propagináto, as Propagáto.

Propaláre, to manifest or declare openlie.

Própe, neere, at hand, hard by.

Própe allúi, neere vnto him.

Propendente, pendant, downe hanging.

Propendere, pendo, pési, péso, pendúto, to hang for or downeward.

Propendiculáre, as Perpendiculáre.

Propendícolo, as Perpendícolo.

Propensióne, propension, naturall inclination or readinesse of minde.

Propensità, as Propensióne.

Propenso, inclined by nature, bent vnto and ready for.

Properántia, speed-making, ready haste.

Prophanáre, as Profanáre.

Prophanáto, as Profanáto.

Propheta, as Profeta.

Prophetáre, as Profetizzáre.

Prophetico, as Profetico.

Prophetizzánte, prophetizing.

Prophetizzáre, as Profetizzáre.

Propiáre, as Propriáre.

Propietà, as Proprietà.

Propietário, he that hath a propertie in any thing.

Propína, a place apart from another place. Also a drinking, a health, an enuiting one to a drinking. Also a pledge.

Propináre, to drinke healths, to drinke vnto.

Propinatióne, a drinking to one.

Propinquáre, to approach, to come neere.

Propinquità, propinquitie, proximitie, neighborhood, neerenesse, affinitie.

Propínquo, neere, adioining vnto, by. Also a neighbour, a nigh friend.

Própio, as Próprio.

Propitiábile, meete to Sacrifice with, soone pleased with supplications.

Propitiáre, to asswage God with Sacrifice, to appease, to reconcile, to attone.

Propitiatióne, propitiation, a Sacrifice to appease Gods displeasure.

Propitiatório, the place where God is pacified, or mercie seate of God. Exodus 26. 34. Also a table set on the Arke. Also of or belonging to the Sacrifice of propitiation.

Propítio, propitious, fauorable, gentle, louing, not displeased.

Própoli, as Propólio.

Propólio, a solide matter, and yet not perfect wax, where-with Bees fence the entrance of their hiues to keepe out the winde or cold, called Bee-glue.

Propolsáre, as Propulsáre.

Propolsáto, as Propulsáto.

Propónere, póngo, pósi, pósto, to propose, to propound, to appoint and determine, to purpose or intend. Also to publish and declare.

Proponiménto, a purpose, an intent, a designe. Also a proposing.

Propórre, as Propónere.

Proportionále, proportionall, according to due measure and proportion.

Proportionábile, proportionable.

Proportionalità, proportion, equalnesse.

Proportionalménte, proportionably, according to due proportion.

Proportionáre, to proportion, to rate, to make one thing answer another indue proportion.

Proportionáto, framed according to due proportion and measure.

Proportióne, a proportion, an equality, a correspondency, a due measure, a share, a rate, or size of any thing. Also a resemblance of reasons.

Proportionéuole, proportionable, each part answering other in due proportion.

Propóscide, the trunke or snout of an Elephant.

Propositióne, a proposition, an intention. 

Propósito, a purpose, an intent, a meaning, a deliberation. Also any subiect spoken of.

Propóso, as Propósto.

Propósta, a proposition, a purpose.

Propostáto, a Maioralty or Reefe-wike, or Baile-wicke, or Shriualty.

Propósto, proposed, purposed, intended, deseigned, ment. Also a purpose, an intent, a cleere, a determination, a designe intended. Also aduanced or preferred. Also a Prouost, a Maior, or such chiefe officer preferred aboue others.

Propréso, that part or compasse of ground taken in to lodge or incampe an Armie.

Propretóre, a Lieutenant or chiefe Iustice with the authority of a Pretor.

Propretoráto, the office or dignity of a Propretor.

Propriaménte, properly, particularly, as the nature of a thing requireth.

Propriáre, to appropriate, to make proper or especiall vnto one.

Propriatióne, an appropriation, an appropriating vnto one.

Proprietà, propriety, specialty, incidency, quality.

Proprietário, that is proprietary, or to be appropriated vnto one.

Próprio, proper, peculiar, incident, particular. Also ones owne, a mans propriety, proper goods or patrimony.

Prò Prò, much much good may it doe you, well may you fare.

Propúdio, dishonesty, abhominable vse of letchery. Also the party so abused.

Propudióso, that is filthily abused or doth abuse in abhominable letchery.

Propugnácolo, a bulwarke, a strong fortresse, a defence, a block-house.

Propugnáre, to fight, to defend, to contend or striue for, with fighting.

Propugnatióne, a fighting, or contention and striuing for by force of armes.

Propugnatóre, a defender, a fighter for, or champion for something.

Propulsáre, to repell, to beat backe, or driue downe.

Propulsáto, repelled, beaten backe or driuen downe.

Propulsióne, a repelling, a beating backe, or driuing downe, a propulsion.

Proquestóre, hee that is sent into any country in the place of a questor.

Próra, as Próda.

Proráre, as Prodáre.

Proráta, according to the rate, ratably, proportionably.

Proríga, he that hath the charge to looke to Stalions when they couer Mares.

Proríre, rísco, ríto, to itch, to smart with 



itching. Also to haue list to a thing.

Proritatióne, an itching, a smarting, a gnawing as of maw-wormes.

Proríto, itched, smarted, gnawen inwardly. Also an itch or smarting.

Proróga, as Prorogatióne.

Prorogáre, to prorogue, to prolong, to delay, to deferre, to driue off.

Prorogatióne, a proroguing, a prolonging a delaying, a driuing off.

Prorogatíua, a prerogatiue, a preheminence aboue others.

Prorómpere, rómpo, rúppi, rótto, to breake out, to rush or burst out with violence.

Prorótto, broken out, burst or rushed forth with violence. Also desperate.

Prórsi, limites, land-markes or bounds of land toward the East.

Prósa, a continued stile whether written or spoken not in verse, prose.

Prosáico, in prose. Also one that writes in prose. Also according to prose.

Prosápia, progenie, generation, race, linage or descent in bloud.

Prosáre, to write or speake in prose.

Prosáti, maximes, axiomes, grounds taken from approoued Authors.

Prosatóre, a writer or speaker in prose.

Proscenio, a stage for Plaiers to play vpon, but properly the place before a scaffold out of which the Plaiers come.

Prosciógliere, sciólgo, sciólsi, sciólto, to loosen from, to free, or set at libertie.

Prosciogligióne, as Prosciogliménto.

Prosciogliménto, a loosing, a freeing or setting at libertie.

Prosciólto, loose, free, at libertie.

Prosciútto, any kind of dried bacon.

Proscrittióne, a proscription, which is a condemnation, that whosoeuer findeth such a man may lawfully kill him and haue a reward. Also a banishment.

Proscrítto, proscribed, published or banished so that any man may kill him.

Proscrittóre, a proscriber, a publisher or proclaimer of proscriptions.

Proscríuere, scríuo, scríssi, scrítto, to proscribe, to publish or banish openly.

Prosecutióne, a prosecution, a pursuing.

Prosecutíuo, to be prosecuted or pursued.

Proséda, a common whore.

Prosedáno, an vnaptnesse to generation in beastes by ouermuch labour.

Proseguente, prosecuting, pursuing.

Proseguíre, guísco, guíto, as Proseguitáre.

Proseguitáre, to prosecute, to pursue.

Proselémo, before the Moone.

Proselíta, a stranger turned or conuerted to our manner of Religion and forme of liuing.

Proserpináta, Knot-grasse.

Prosétto, cut open or a sunder. Also the bowels of beastes cut out to be sacrificed.

Prosiniúrio, a place without the walles of Rome where the Bishops of the Gentiles made their diuinations.

Proslanaunoméno, a kind of tune or note in Musike.

Prosodía, the arte of accenting or pronouncing words truly, long or short.

Prosóne, a slow, warie or circumspect speaker of his words.

Prosontióne, as Presontióne.

Prosontuóso, as Presontuóso.

Prosopopeia, a representing of persons, a faigning of any person to speake.

Prosperáre, to prosper, to thriue, to giue prosperitie, to make prosperous.

Prosperéuole, that may prosper. Also as Próspero.

Prosperità, prosperitie, good successe, felicitie, happinesse.

Próspero, prosperous, successefull, thriuing, luckie, happie, fortunate. Also healthie and strong, or sound and lustie.

Prosperóso, full of prosperitie. Also as Próspero.

Prospettíua, that part of the Optikes which teacheth the reason of the differences of the direct beames of the sight.

Prospettíuo, a professor of the Perspectiues.

Prospetto, a prospect, a view.

Prospicentia, prouidence, foreheed, circumspection, consideration.

Prospicuo, goodly and faire to behold, that may be seene a farre off.

Prossimaménte, neere at hand. Also not long since.

Prossimáno, as Próssimo.

Prossimáre, to approach, to neighbour, to come neere, to adioyne vnto.

Prossimatióne, an approaching neere vnto.

Prossiménole, approachable.

Prossimità, proximitie, nighnesse, the nighest degree of kindred.

Próssimo, a neighbour, a neere dweller. Also a neere kinsman or allie. Also neere, next to, by, at hand, neighbouring, not farre off.

Prossimúrio, as Prosimúrio,

Prostasía, preheminence.

Prostáte, a Gouernour or Captaine that commeth to helpe in warres.

Prostendere, tendo, tési, téso, to stretch forth for lazinesse or want of sleepe.

Postergere, tergo, tergéi, tergiúto, as Prosternáre.

Prostergiúto, as Prosternáto.

Prosternáre, to ouerthrow, to beare or cast downe, to fell to the ground, to vanquish or defeat in battle.

Prosternatióne, an ouerthrowing in battle, a casting downe, a felling to the ground.

Prosternáto, ouerthrowen, cast downe, felled to the ground.

Prosternatúra, as Prosternatióne.

Prostéso, stretched out for lazinesse.

Poisthapherúsi, a number or part that is sometimes to be added and sometime to be taken away, called in Latine Equatio. In Astronomie it is vsed for the difference of the true and equall motion.

Prostíbula, a common whore or strumpet.

Prostíbulo, a brothell or whore-house.

Prostituíre, ísco, íto, to prostitute or abandon to euery mans abusing for money, to play the whore or bawde. Also to practise whoredome or bawderie.

Prostituíto, prostituted to euery mans abusing for money, plaied the whore or bawle. Also one that for money suffreth her selfe to be abused.

Prostitutióne, prostitution to others pleasure for money as whores doe.

Prostráre, to prostrate, to lye along. Also to foile or fell to the ground.

Prostratióne, prostrating, lying flat and along. Also foiled or felled to the ground. Also such an extreame weakenesse of the bodie, that being vnable to stand it makes one lye groueling in his bed.

Prostráto, prostrated, lying flat.

Prostríbolo, as Postríbolo.

Prosúmere, as Presúmere.

Prosúmia, a kind of small ship.

Prosuntióne, as Presontióne.

Prosúnto, as Presumúto.

Prosuntuóso, as Presontuóso.

Protagioríno, a kind of wine.

Protáno, the hearbe Southernwood.

Protásio, a proposition or prologue of a Comedie.

Protasophósso, a chiefe, wise and vnderstanding man.

Protática persóna, one that in the beginning of a Comedie is brought in to lay open the argument and appeareth no more.

Proteggere, teggo, teggéi, teggiúto, to protect, to maintaine, to backe, to countenance.

Protendere, tendo, tési, téso, to stretch or extend forth. Also to prolong.

Protensióne, extension, stretching out, distension.

Protento, prodigall, lauish.

Proteruia, as Proteruità.

Proteruirà, frowardnesse, peeuishnesse, waywardnesse, snappishnesse, skittishnesse.

Proteruo, froward, peeuish, wayward, snappish, skittish, curst, peruerse. 



Prótesi, a kind of figure in speech.

Protéso, put, cast, or stretched out, spred or prolonged, or extended, out-stretched.

Protesta, as Protestatióne.

Protestagióne, as Protestatióne.

Protestante, a Protestant.

Protestáre, to protest, to affirme, to sweare or denounce openly.

Protestatióne, a protestation, a swearing or open affirmation.

Protestatóre, a protester, a swearer or open affirmer, a denouncer.

Protesto, as Protestatióne. Also a pretext, a pretence, a colour or excuse for any matter.

Protettióne, protection, couert-barne, a defence, a backing, an vpholding.

Protetto, protected, countenanced, vpheld.

Protettóre, a protector, a maintainer.

Prothímia, promptitude, ready entertainment.

Protípo, made for an example or patterne. Also a forme or mould to cast things in.

Próto, a Greeke word vsed much before other words, as chiefe, first or principall.

Protocóllo, any thing first made and needing correction. Also a booke wherin Scriueners register their writings, and Lawyers their cases.

Protofisico, a chiefe or head Phisition.

Protógono, the first borne, or first child. Also of the first kindred.

Protomártire, a chiefe Martir or first witnesse.

Protomástro, a chiefe master.

Protomátto, a chiefe or principall foole.

Protomedia, an hearbe much vsed at banquets in Persia, that makes all them that eate of it merrie, and forget all sorrow.

Protomédico, a chiefe or first Phisition.

Protomísta, a chiefe Bishop or first Deane.

Protonotário, a chiefe Notarie, a principall Secretarie.

Protoparente, a chiefe parent or kinsman.

Protoplástico, first formed or made.

Protoplásto, first made or formed.

Prótopouíno, a kind of sweete strong wine of Greece. But properly vnpressed wine of the first running called Moregoute wine.

Prótosi, a disease or inflammation in the eyes, which by rupture makes them fall out of their place, or when the Membrane vuéa by rupture falleth through Cornea.

Protospadáro, a chiefe Cutler. Also a principall Sword-bearer before a Prince. 

Protospatáro, as Protospadáro.

Prototípo, a chiefe or first patterne.

Prototonánte, a chiefe-thunderer.

Protrárre, trággo, trássi, trátto, to protract, to deferre, to draw forth.

Protrattióne, a protracting or deferring and drawing forth of time.

Protrátto, protracted, drawen forth, deferred, prolonged.

Protribunále, in iudgement, before a Magistrates or Tribunall seate.

Próua, a proofe, a proouing, a triall, an experience. Also an attempt. Also the prow of a ship.

Prouána, obstinate, wilfull, head-strong. Also a bud or branch of a vine.

Prouanáre, to bee obstinate or headstrong, to bud or branch vines.

Prouanería, obstinacie, wilfulnes, stiffeneckednesse, stubbornnesse.

Prouáno, a proouer, a tryer. Also to be prooued or tryed. Also obstinate, stiffenecked.

Prouánza, a proofe, a probation, a proouing, a triall, a manifestation. Also obstinacie.

Prouáre, to prooue, to try, to experience, to put in proofe, to attempt, to assay.

Prouatióne, a probation, a proouing.

Prouatíuo, proouing, that may prooue.

Prouatóre, a proouer, a probationer, a tryer, a practicioner.

Prouatúra, as Preuatúra.

Prouedenza, as Prouidenza. But properly as Prouediménto.

Prouedére, uéggo, uíddi, uedúto or uísto, to prouide, to puruey, to prepare, to take order for, to see for, to forecast.

Prouediménto, prouiding, purueighing, prouision, supply, taking order or seeing for. Also prouidence or fore-seeing.

Proueditóre, a prouider, a purueigher, one that takes order for things.

Prouedúto, prouided, purueighed, seene for, taken order for, prepared.

Proveggiáre, to prooue. Also to get aduantage of.

Prouenca, as Prouínca.

Prouenda, prouander for horses, or fodder for cattle.

Prouendáre, to prouender or meat horses. Also to fodder cattle.

Proueníre, vengo, vénni, venúto, to come or proceed from, to come or step foorth. Also to be borne or brought into the world, to chance or come to passe, to grow or increase from. Also to prooue or come to good.

Prouento, good successe, yeerely rents or profits, the profit, increase or fruite that commeth or is gathered of any thing.

Prouentóri, purueighers. Also skoutes. 

Prouenúto, come or proceeded from. Also stept forth, happened or chanced, come to passe, borne or brought into the world. Also proued well or come to good.

Prouerbiále, prouerbiall, full of prouerbes, frumps or scoffs.

Prouerbiáre, to vse or speake prouerbs. Also to scoffe, to quip, to frumpe, to checke.

Prouerbiatóre, a speaker of prouerbs. Also a scoffer, a quipper, a frumper, a taunter.

Prouerbiétto, a short prouerbe. Also a witty quip, scoffe, or frump.

Prouerbio, a prouerbe, an adage, a short witty saying alluding to something.

Prouerbiosaménte, prouerbially. Also scoffingly, tauntingly, iniuriously.

Prouerbióso, full of prouerbs, short sentences, witty sayings, quips or scoffes.

Prouétto, full growne, sprung vp, far-spent, well aduanced, promoted.

Prouéuole, as Probábile, probable.

Proueuolménte, probably.

Prouidente, prouident, fore-seeing, forecasting, fore-heedy, fore-wary.

Prouidentia, prouidence, fore-sight, fore cast, foreheed, fore-warinesse.

Próuido, as Prouidente.

Pròuifáccia, well may you fare, much good may it do you, God giue you ioy.

Prouigióne, vsed for Prouidenza. Also as Prouisióne.

Prouínca, the hearbe Lesseron or Perwinckle.

Prouíncia, a Prouince, a Region, a Country, a Shire. Also a Country subdued.

Prouinciále, Prouinciall, of or pertayning to a Prouince. Looke Coróna.

Prouisánti, such as speake at randon or sing extempore. Also prouiders.

Prouisáre, to speake or sing extempore.

Prouisionále, prouisionall, of or pertayning to prouisions.

Prouisionáre, to prouide for. Also to giue prouision, pensions or a standing fee.

Prouisióne, prouision, prouiding for, purueighing. Vsed also for foresight.

Prouisóre, as Proueditóre.

Prouizzáre, to fore-spie, fore-heed, foresee, or for-marke with care.

Prouocábile, that may be prouoked.

Prouocáre, to prouoke, to call foorth, to stirre vp, to incite, to exhort. Also to challenge, to appeale or vrge one to fight.

Prouocatióne, prouocation, calling foorth.

Prouocatíuo, prouokeing, calling foorth. 



Prouocatóre, a prouoker. Also a challenger or vrger of one to fight.

Prouóle, a kind of excellent cheese.

Prouósto, a Prouost, a Marshall. Also as Propósto.

Prozío, as Probárba.

Prúa, as Próda.

Pruáre, as Prodáre.

Prudente, prudent, wise, wary, cunning, skillfull, witty, slye, chary, sage.

Prudenza, prudence, wisdome, warinesse, wit, cunning, sage knowledge.

Prudentíssimo, most prudent or wise.

Prueggiáre, as Proveggiáre.

Prugna, any Plum or Prune, a Prune sauce.

Prugnáta, a Prune-tarte.

Prúgno, a Plum or Prune-tree.

Prúgnola, any kind of small Plum.

Prúgnole, a Bullies, a Skegs or Slones.

Prúgnolo, a Plum or Bullies-tree.

Pruina, a White-frost, a Hoare-frost. Also a cold mist. Also a chilling-cold.

Pruináre, to freeze to a Hore-frost.

Pruíre, pruísco, pruíto, as Proríre.

Pruíto, as Prorito.

Prúna, as Prúgna. Also a Prune.

Prunáie, thicke hedges or brakes, or bushes, by metaphor, lets, hindrances.

Pruneggiáre, to Prune or Plumbe.

Pruneggióli, as Pruniggióli.

Prunella, any kinde of little plumbe or Prune. Also the hearbe Selfe-heale, Prunell, Hooke-heale or Carpenters-hearbe.

Prunéto, a place full or bearing brambles or shrubes.

Prúni, shrubs, bushes, brambles, brakes, thornes, firs. Also Plumb-tres.

Prunífero, a Plumb-bearing. Also bushes or bramble-bearing.

Pruniggióli, small thornes, shrubs, brambles, bushes or brakes.

Prúno, the singular of Prúni.

Prúno Idéo, the Raspise-bryer.

Prúnola, any kinde of Plumbe or Prune.

Prúnolo, as Prúgno.

Prunóso, shrubby, bushy, full of brambles or thornes, or brakes.

Prunótta, a kind of good big plumbe.

Pruóua, as Próua.

Pruouáre, as Prouáre.

Pruouatóre, Prouatóre. 

Pruriménto, as Proríto, an itching.

Pruríre, as Proríte, to itch.

Pruríto, as Prorito, an itch.

Prúsa, a Brizze or Horse-flie. Also a kind of fish so called in Genoua. Also a kinde of worme breeding in some fishes. 

Prusínia víte, a kind of wine or Grape.

Prúzza, a letcherous kind of itching.

Psáde, a kind of venemous worme.

Psalmo, as Sálmo, a Psalme.

Psalmodía, as Salmodía.

Psalmodiáre, to sing Psalmes.

Psalóide, as Salóide.

Psalterio, as Salterio, a Psalter.

Psarónio, a kind of hard stone to make morters of.

Pségma, a kind of cindry-drosse found in Brasse furnaces.

Psephísma, as Sephísma.

Pseudancúsa, a bastard Orchanet, or Alkaret.

Pseudisodómo, a building where the walles be of stones and of vnequall thicknesse.

Pséudo, false, forged, counterfeit.

Pseudobúnio, a Bastard nauew, or Turnep.

Pseudodíttamo, the bastard Ditamum.

Pseudographía, a writing of a forged or false matter, a counterfeit writing.

Pseudoinquisitóre, a false inquisitor.

Pseudólogo, a false speaker, a lier.

Pseudomártire, a false Martyre or witnesse.

Pseudoméno, a sophisticall argument, a fallacy in reasoning, a captious conclusion.

Pseudonárdo, the bastard Nard.

Pseudónimo, he that hath a counterfeit name.

Pseudopápa, a false or counterfeit Pope.

Pseudopastóre, a false or counterfeit Pastor.

Pseudopropheta, a false Prophet or teacher.

Pseudosínodo, a falsefier of Synodes.

Pseudosphéce, a kinde of bastard Waspe.

Pseudouéscouo, a false Bishop.

Psíce, a proper name. Vsed also for Anima, the soule.

Psíce, a beast with a voice like a man.

Psicomántio, a place where inchanters call vp Diuells or Spirits.

Psicotrophóne, the hearbe Betony.

Psidrácio, a swelling like a blister in the skin full of yellowish matter.

Psilli, a kind of Serpent.

Psíllio, an ointment to take away haire. Also Flea-wort or Flea-bane.

Psilótro, as Dipelatórij, Psíllio.

Psimmíthio, Ceruse, white leade or spanish white.

Psítio, a kinde of strong sweet wine of Greece.

Psolóe, a kind of lightning which doeth kill and destroy with the flash.

Psóra, a scurfe, a tetter, a running mange or cancerous scab, a Ringeworme.

Psoricóne, a kind of medicament.

Pterígio, a whitflaw, an vncom or fellon at the fingers ends, or going away of the flesh from the nailes. Also little pieces of skin rising loose about the nailes called wortwhales or liureges. Also a skin growing from the corner of the eye, and in continuance couering it.

Pterigóde, that hath his shoulder blades sticking out like wings.

Pterigóide, foure processes to the outward part of the cuneall bone at the foundation of the scull where the iaw-teeth or grinders are fastned, that is to say, on each side two, spredding like vnto the wings of a hat.

Pterino, a kind of Ferne.

Pterníca, the stem of a kind of Thistle good to eat.

Pthísica, the consumption of the bodie by putrified lungs.

Pthisico, one that is troubled with that disease.

Ptiáde, a kind of Adder somewhat greenish and of a golden colour.

Ptinge, a very rauenous and strong bird which fighteth so furiously with the Eagle, that in grapling they fall both to the ground and bee taken of Shepheards.

Ptisána, as Tisána, Barlie-water.

Puáuola, as Poáuola, as Pútta.

Púbe ósso, the second part of ósso ílio, which being not so broad as the former, is throwed on each side with holes.

Púbero, full growen, of the age of twelue or fourteene, able to get children.

Pubertà, the age of foureteene yeeres in men and twelue in women. Also the first comming of haires about the priuie parts.

Pubescere, besco, bescéi, besciúto, to begin to grow from a boy to a man, to wax ripe, to shoote out well, to begin to haue a beard.

Pubesciúto, begun to grow a man or to haue a beard.

Púbi, haires about the priuie parts.

Pública, an open court, yard or common place in any Prison or before a Castle to walke in. Also as Publicatióne.

Publicaménte, publikely, openly.

Publicáno, a Publican, he that tooke to farme at a certaine rent of the people of Rome the reuenues due to the Citie, and were reputed as Gentlemen, a farmer of common rents.

Publicáre, to publish, to diuulge, to proclaime, to set forth, to declare, to make knowen.

Publicatióne, a publication, a proclamation, a manifestation, a making knowen. 



Publicatóre, a publisher, a proclaimer.

Públice, a Flea.

Publichétta, a little Pública.

Público, publike, open, manifest, apparant, common, vulgar. Also the comminaltie or common people. Also the reuenues due to any State. Also the common-wealth.

Publícola, hee that reuerenceth, loueth and honoureth the common people.

Púccia biánca, a kind of daintie bread in Naples.

Pucétto, a blow or thumpe with a fist or knuckles.

Púche, the berry of any thing as of Iuniper or Baies.

Pucínovíno, a kind of wine.

Pudendagre, a disease or swelling about the priuy parts as a cunt-botch.

Pudende, the priuy parts. Also filthy, foule, vncleane and stinking.

Pudíca, voluntary chast, willingly cleane, honest and bashfull.

Pudicità, virginity, cleanlinesse of life, maiden-hood, honesty, purity.

Pudicítia, as Pudicità.

Pudóre, bashfulnesse, shamefastnesse, chastity, virginity. Also an vncleane act.

Pueríle, childish, of or pertayning to a child.

Puerilità, a childish act. Also infancie.

Puerilménte, Childishly, Infantlike.

Puerítia, childishnesse, infancy, childehood, noneage.

Púfera, as Búfera.

Pussino, a foule called a Puffin.

Púga, a pricke, a pillicocke, a dildoe.

Pugíle, a champion, a strong fighter, an errand Knight, a paladine.

Pugliána, a kind of rauenous foule.

Púgna, a fight, a fray, a braule, a skirmish, a combat, a buffetting. Also fistes, hufty-cuffes. Also blowes, thumps or cuffes giuen with fists.

Pugnáccio, a filthy fist. Also a fray foughten with dry blowes and hufty-cuffes.

Pugnáce, fighting, quarellous, ready to fight. Also a great fighter.

Pugnacità, a fighting, a combating. Also a desire or longing to fight.

Pugnácolo, a place where men doe fight.

Pugnaláre, to stab, wound or strike with a dagger.

Pugnaláta, a stab or hurt with a dagger.

Pugnále, a dagger, a poynard, a poynado.

Pugnalétto, a little dagger or poynard.

Pugnále veteríno, a dildoe of glasse. 

Pugnánte, fighting, pugnant, combating.

Pugnáre, to fight, to skirmish, to combat, to repugne. Also to strike with fists or cuffes. Also to dispute or reason contrary.

Pugnáta, a hand or fist-full. Also a cuffe or blow with a fist.

Pugnatóre, a fighter, a combatant.

Pugnázzo, as Pugnáccio.

Púgnere, púngo, púnsi, púnto, to prick, to sting, to foine at. Also to vex or disquiet, to prouoke, to thrust at, to nettle or touch to the quicke. Also to be sharpe vpon the tongue. Also to bud, to push or sprout foorth. Also to molest, to annoy, to reprooue.

Pugneréccio, that may be handled with ones fistes. Also belonging to fighting.

Pugnétto, a little fist or handfull. Also a little cuffe or fist.

Pugnitíccij di pórco, Pigs-pettitoes.

Pugnitíccio, vsed for the pricke or remorse of conscience.

Púgno, a fist, a cuffe. Also a fist or handfull. Also a cuffe or blow with a fist.

Púgnoro, a hands-breadth or shaftsman.

Puiána, a kind of birde called a Coote.

Puína, a kinde of fresh-cheese and creame.

Puinaruóla, a creame-dish.

Púla, a weede among Corne, that doeth much choke it. Vsed also for chaffe.

Púlce, a flea.

Pulcella, a Virgin, a Maiden, a damzell.

Pulcellággio, pucelage, virginity.

Pulcíno, a chicke, or yongue chicking. Also a little flea.

Pulcióso, full of fleaes, fleaie.

Púlcra, faire, beawtifull, well-fauoured.

Pulcrità, as Pulcritúdine.

Pulcritúdine, fairnesse, beawty, fauour.

Pulédra, a Mare-coult.

Pulédro, a Horse-coult.

Puleggiáre, to force, to make way as a ship doeth in the Sea, and yet not able to flie.

Puléggio, the way or speed that a ship makes at sea perforce and labour. Also any kind of pully.

Pulégio, Peniroyall, Pudding-grasse, or Puliall-royall.

Pulicáno, an instrument to draw teeth.

Pulicáre, Flea-wort, or Flea-bane.

Pulicária, as Pulicáre.

Púlice, a flea.

Pulimánte, as Pulinánte.

Puliménto, a polishing or makeing clean. Vsed also for washing away or clensing. Also anciently vsed for punishment, as Puliménto di peccáti. Vsed of Villáni.

Pulióne, as Pulicáre.

Pulinánte. i pulinánti chè col petto di palómbo.

Pulíre, as Políre, to polish. Vsed anciently also for Puníre, to punish an offence, but I rather thinke it should be vsed for to wash away and expiate any offence as in that phrase of Villáni, per pulire il peccáto délla loro ingratitúdine, and in another place, hauéuano albítrio di pulíre reále et personále.

Pulitello, as Politello.

Pulitel seluático, a wild Asse-colt.

Pulitézza, as Politézza.

Pulitióne, as Puliménto.

Pulíto, as Políto. Also as Puníto.

Pulitúra, a polishing, a neatenesse.

Pulláno, a Glade, a Kite, a Puttocke.

Púlla terra, gentle, soft, mellow, nor dry nor wet ground.

Pulláto, rude, gullish, ignorant.

Púlli, Pullets, Chickins. Also sucking Coults.

Pullipréma, a stealer of children or chickes.

Púllo, a Coult. Also a chickin.

Pullóre, a bird called a Coot.

Púllula, a little wheale or blister.

Pulluláre, to bud, to burgeon, to sprout, or shoot out yongue ones. Also to blister.

Pullulatióne, a budding or sprouting forth. Also a blistring.

Púlluli, yongue buds, bourgeons, shoots, sprouts, tendrels or blossoms.

Pulmentária, a kind of thicke grewell or pottage.

Pulmése, a kind of wine.

Pulmonária, as Polmonária.

Pulmóne, as Polmóne.

Pulmóni, the puffe-apple.

Pulmóni, a hard shell fish fashioned like the lungs of a man.

Púlpa, as Pólpa.

Púlpito, a Pulpit in a Church or Schoole.

Púlpo, a Pulp-fish, a Cuttle-fish, a Cuttle-bone.

Pulsánte, panting, beating, knocking.

Pulsáre, to pant, to beate, to thump, to knocke, to smite.

Pulsátile, panting, beating, thumping, knocking, smiting.

Pulsatílla, the Windeflower or Passe-flowre, some take it for Blacke-helebore.

Pulsatióne, a panting, a pulsation, a thumping, a knocking, a smiting.

Pulsatíuo, as Pulsatíle.

Pulsíuo, panting, purcy, broken wineded. 



Púlta, as Poltíglia.

Pultíglia, as Poltíglia.

Pulúco maríno, a kind of Sea-fish.

Pulucrolente, dusty, full of dust.

Puluináro, a Temple or Tabernacle for the image of some God to stand in.

Pulzella, as Pulcella.

Pulzellággio, a pucelage, or maiden head.

Púmice, as Pómice.

Pumiceo, as Pomicóso.

Pumicóso, as Pomicóso.

Puncella, as Pulcella.

Púnga, vsed of Dánte for Púgna, a fight.

Pungente, pricking, sharpe, stinging.

Pungentíno, a subtle stinger, a slie wit.

Púngere, as Púgnere.

Pungetópi, Butchers-broome, Kneeholme.

Pungettáre, to pricke or sting, as Púgnere.

Pungétti, litle prickes, stings or goades.

Pungétto, a Plough-mans goad, a sting.

Pungiglióne, the sting of a Bee or Waspe.

Pungiménto, a pricking, a stinging. Also compunction or remorce.

Pungoláre, to sting, to pricke, to goade, to prouoke.

Púngolo, a pricke, a sting, a goade.

Pungolóso, full of prickes, stings, prickles, goades.

Puníbile, punishable.

Púnico, a red Scarlet, or Tauney red.

Punigióne, as Punitióne.

Puníre, nísco, níto, to punish, to chastise, to take vengeance of.

Punitióne, punishment, chastisement.

Punitíuo, to be punished or that may punish.

Puníto, punished, chastised.

Punitóre, a punisher, a chastiser.

Punitório, to be punished, punishable.

Púnta, a stitch or the Pleurisie. Also a stitch with an Aule or any sharpe thing. Also a point, a sharpnesse, a sting, a pricke, a tip, a peake, a sharpe end. Also a foile or thrust with any weapon. Looke Pigliáre la púnta. Looke also Puntáre or Pontáre. Also the tange or sourenes vpon the tongue of any wine or soure beere.

Puntáglia, as Puntíglio. Also as Battáglia. But properly an appointment. Also a place of appointment and meeting.

Puntale, the chape of sword or dagger.

Puntalétti, as Puntáli.

Puntáli, tags of points, long aglets, sharpe bodkins. Also supporters, shoares, prope.

Puntalità, as Puntualità.

Púnta di coltello, the point of a knife.

Púnta di piédi, the tip of the toes. 

Púnta délle strínghe, the tags of points.

Puntalménte, point by point, particularly, nicely, coyly, distinctly.

Puntáre, as Puntelláre.

Puntáre, to pricke, to point, to tip, to peake, to stinge, to spurre. Also to appoint, to prefix, to fix. Also to foine, to pricke or thrust at. Also to sharpen or whet. Also to stitch, to quilt or counterpoint any worke. Also to linger or wyre-draw any matter. Also to prouoke, to vrge or egg-on. Also to oppose, to blame, to taxe, to carpe at or finde fault with. Also to set ones foote against any stay. Also to bud or shoot forth, to sprout out or peepe out of the ground as Onions or corne doth. Also to vex, to nettle or touch to the quick. Also with might and maine to set ones shoulders to vphold or heaue vp any thing. Also to resist and oppose with maine strength.

Puntaría, chigiostrándo farà puntaría, hábbia dúo cólpi.

Puntaruólo, a bodkin, a head-needle, a Goldsmiths pouncer. Also a nice, a coy or selfe-conceited fellow, a man that stands vpon nice faultes, a finde-fault, a carper, a captious or snappish fellow, a scrupulous ouer weening man.

Puntataménte, as Puntàlménte.

Puntáto, pointed, pricked, tipped, peaked. Also appointed or prefixed. Also spurred, foined or thrust at. Also sharpened or whetted and keene or hauing a point. Also stitched, quilted or counterpointed. Also lingred or wiredrawen. Also prouoked or egged on. Also blamed, taxed, carped at, or laid to ones charge. Also set ones foote against any stay. Also as Puntaruólo. Also budded, shot forth, or sprouted out of the ground as Corne or Onions. Also netled, vexed or toucht to the quicke. Vsed also for vnderpropped or vpheld. Also resisted and opposed with maine strength.

Púnte d'acciále, spikes of steele without heads.

Punteggiáre, as Puntáre.

Puntelláre, to vnderprop, to shore vp, to vnderset, to vphold.

Puntelli, vnderprops, shores, vpholders. Also the spokes of a carte.

Puntería., looke Tiráre di puntería, as A'nima délla cánna.

Punteruólo, a pricker or priming iron. Also a bodkin. Also as Puntaruólo.

Puntesíno, a little point or pricke.

Puntíglio, nice points or punctes of honour.

Puntíno, a little little point, or whit, or crum, or iot, or pricke.

Puntióne, a pricking, a stinging.

Púnto, a pricke, a point, a pricke with a pin or any sharpe thing. Also a point, an instant, a minute or moment of time. Also the least portion or quantitie of a thing that can be, a iot, a whit, a crum. Also any kind of stitch, point or counterpoint in any sewing or needle worke. Also the principall Proposition or chiefe point of an Argument. Also a full point in writing. Also a point vpon the dice. Also a cast or chance at dice. Also a point in the tables. Also a pricke or point or spot vpon the cardes. Also a game on the bead at cardes as one and thirtie or fiue and fiftie at Primero. Also a centre or middle point. Also as Puntáto. Also any state, occasion, terme or condition of any thing. Also a readinesse, as in these phrases, Hauére in púnto, to haue in a readinesse. E'ssere in púnto, to be in a readinesse, to be at a point. Also as the Participle of Púgnere, or Púngere, pricked or stung. Also pointed.

Púnto a cauallétto, amongst Gunners is that little bottome in a small Gun put vpon the top of the pieces mouth and in great ordinance Gunners in casting their pieces leaue sometimes a litle knob of mettall at the pieces mouth, by which they make or take their marke.

Púnto, Apúnto, iust, iumpe, euen so, in the nicke. Also as Boccáta.

Púnto, Cárta di púnto, a carde that hath no coate on it.

Púnto, any kind of stitch among Seamsters or Sewers, as for example:

Púnto a cauallétto, the high stitch.

Púnto a fílo, the true stitch.

Púnto alla crociára, the crosse stitch.

Púnto álto, the high stitch.

Púnto a réte, net-worke stitch.

Púnto a stóla, a kind of stitch.

Púnto a spína, the through stitch.

Púnto buffóne, the fooles or plaine stitch.

Púnto córri in diétro, the backe stitch.

Púnto del pézzo., Looke Trouáre and Tiráre.

Púnto di acciále, spikes of steeles without heads.

Púnto diffiláto, the Irish stitch.

Púnto di San Francésco, a kinde of stitch.

Púnto di squádra, a degree or point of the squires or quadrant.

Púnto dóppio, the double stitch.

Púnto d'un pézzo, the centre of a piece. Looke Cauáre il púnto.

Púnto férmo, a full point or period of a sentence.

Púnto frulláno, a kind of stitch.

Púnto in ária, a high-raised stitch.

Púnto in biánco, point blanke. Looke Tiráre púnto.


Púnto in terra, the plaine low stitch. 



Púnto largo, the broad stitch.

Púnto maéstro, a chiefe or master point.

Púnto mátto, the fooles stitch.

Puntóne, an Apothecaries padle. Also the chape of a sword or dagger.

Púnto púnto, a whit or iot, neuer a whit or crum, nothing or no whit at all.

Púnto reále, the royall stitch.

Púnto sáuio, the cunning stitch.

Púnto scrítto, drawen-worke stitch.

Púnto sémplice, plaine single stitch.

Púnto sgafiáto, a kind of Irish stitch.

Púnto sódo, the strong or Spanish stitch.

Púnto soprapánno, embroydred worke.

Púnto stórto, winding or crooked stitch.

Púnto tagliáto, cut-worke stitch.

Púnto zifára, the cipher stitch.

Puntuále, punctuall, nice, precise, standing on points.

Puntualita, punctualitie, precisenesse, or nice standing on points.

Puntuáre, as Puntáre.

Puntúra, as Púnta, a pricking, a thrust or pricke with any weapon. Vsed also for a stitch or pleurisie. Also griefe, paine and smarting. Also annoyance and importunitie.

Puntúto, pointed, keene, sharpe pointed.

Punzecchiaménto, as Punzellaménto.

Punzecchiáre, to push, to thumpe, to thrust, to elbow, to shoulder, to iustle, to shooue or heaue off with ones hands.

Punzécchij, thumps, cuffs, pushings, shouldrings, iustlings with ones elbow, hand or backe.

Punzella, as Pulcella, a Virgin.

Punzellaménto, as Punzécchio.

Punzelláre, as Punzecchiáre. Also to pricke, to stinge, to goade. Also to eg-on.

Punzello, a goade, a sting, a pricke.

Punzello de' bifólchi, a Plough-mans goade.

Punzello délle ápi, the sting of Bees.

Punzonáre, to pounce or worke pouncing worke. Also as Punzecchiáre.

Punzóne, a bodkin or any sharpe pointed thing. Also a Goldsmiths pounce or pouncer. Also any litle stampe or Printers letter. Also a thumpe, a push, a shouldring or iustling, a cuffe or blow with the fist. Also any barrell, piece, butt, punchion, tierce, rundlet or hogshead for wine.

Può, Puóle, Puóte, he can, may or is able.

Può fáre, an oath with Admiration that Italians vse much, by adding vnto it what they will sweare by, as Può fáre la natúra, Gods me, can nature, or is nature able to doe this?

Puóssi, for si può, it may be done, one can.

Puotére, as Potére.

Puotúto, as Potúto.

Puóuolo, a Popler-tree.

Puóuui, id est, vi può, to you may, there may.

Púpa, a baby or puppet like a girle. Vsed also for a lasse or wench.

Pupicella, a childes babby to play with.

Pupilaggine, pupilage, vnder-age, nonage, childishnesse.

Pupílla, a woman child within age, a pupill, a warde. Also the sight, the ball or apple of ones eye.

Pupilláre, of or belonging to a pupill or one vnder age. Also childish. Also to play the pupill or child. Also to cry as a Peacocke.

Pupíllo, a pupill, a warde, an orphlin, a fatherlesse child.

Pupína, as Pupicella.

Púpo, a puppet, a babie, a pigsnye, a daintie mop, a sweet heart.

Púpola, a bird called a Houpe.

Púppa, as Póppa. Also a puppet.

Puppáre, as Poppáre. Also to puppet.

Púppula, a bird called a Houpe.

Púr, as Púre, in all places.

Purágna, corruption of bloud, goare-bloud, clods of bloud.

Puraménte, purely, cleanely, vnspottedly, sincerely, honestly, without exception or condition.

Pur adesso, euen now, now now.

Pur assái, too too much, yea enough. Also too too many.

Pur allhóra, euen then, at that instant.

Pur chè, so that.

Purcóme, euen as, euen when, yet how.

Púr diánzi, euen before.

Púre, a Particle of great vse and ornament in the Italian tongue, yet, albeit, for all that. Also moreouer, besides, algates, notwithstanding any contradiction, when all is done and said, in the end. Also so much as, not onely, at least, euen, in case surely. Also onely. Also needes or of force, Mi conuién púre, I must needs or of force.

Puráccio, a well-meaning gull, a simple nice foole, a precisian noddie.

Puráta, as Purágna.

Purétto, somewhat neate, pure or precise.

Púrga, a purge, a purgation, a cleansing, a discharge. Also a scouring.

Purgábile, that may be purged or cleansed.

Purgaménto, a purging, a cleansing, a purgation, or cleare discharge. Also a reconciliation. Also any filth comming from that which is cleansed.

Purgáre, to purge, to cleanse, to cleare, to discharge. Also to scoure.

Purgatióne, as Purgaménto.

Purgatióne délle fémine, womens monethly issues.

Purgatíuo, that doth or may be purged.

Purgatóre, a purger, a cleanser, a scourer.

Purgatóre di pánni, a cleanser, a washer, a dresser or fuller of clothes.

Purgatório, a Purgatorie, a purging place.

Purghéuole, that may be purged.

Púr'hóra, euen now, not long since.

Pur'hiéri, euen yesterday.

Purificáre, to purifie, to cleanse, to purge.

Purificatióne, a purification or cleansing. Also Candlemas day or the Purification of the Virgin Marie. Also the day whereon women be churched.

Purità, puritie, purenesse, cleanelinesse. Looke Púro.

Puritáni, Puritanes, puritie-professors.

Puritanísmo, Puritanisme.

Púr mò, euen now.

Púr nondiméno, yet notwithstanding.

Púro, pure, neate, cleane, vnspotted, neat, naked, cleare, spotlesse, without filth or mixture, vnmixed, of it selfe, vncorrupted. Also sincere, vpright, plaine, iust, honest, vntainted.

Púr paróie, what nought but words? nothing but words.

Púrpura, a Purple-fish whereof the Purple colour commeth. Also the Purple colour. Vsed also for Scarlet. Also a Princes or chiefe Magistrates purple robe. Also the dignitie of a chiefe Magistrate, Iudge or Senator.

Purpuráto, purpured, enscarlated, clothed in purple or scarlet. Also a graue Senator, a Parliament-man, a Peere of a Realme, a chiefe Magistrate, Iudge or Senator. Also the place where Purple fishes be killed and taken.

Purpúre, yet, for all that, when all is done, not withstanding any contradiction.

Purpureggiáre, to purple, or goe clad with purple.

Purpureo, like vnto or of the colour of Purple or Scarlet.

Purpuríno, a liuely red colour that women vse for painting, called cheeke vernish. Also as Purpureo.

Purpuríssimo, a colour called of Painters Roset.

Purpurísso, as Purpuríno.

Purpuríte, a kinde of red Marble and full of white spots.

Purtróppo, yea too too much, enough & enough.

Pur vía, on away, goe to, on forward notwith standing any contradiction.

Purulente, purulent, full of filthy matter, mattery as some running sores.

Purulentia, filthy matter running from cankered or festred sores.



Pur úno, so much as one, not so much as one.

Pur' un tantíno, as much as nothing, a iotkin onely.

Pusílla, a yongue maiden or virgin. Also little, small or slender.

Pusillággio, virginity, pucelage.

Pusillità, as Pussilanimità.

Pusíllo, as Pussilánimo.

Pussilanimità, pusilanity, dastardise, basenesse of courage, faint-heartednesse.

Pussilánimo, base mineded, low-hearted, faint hearted, cowardly, a crauen.

Pusso, pusse or filthy matter of a sore.

Pustella, as Pústule.

Pusterla, a Posterne doore or wicket.

Pustuláre, to pustulate, to grow full of pimples, pushes or winde-galles.

Pustuláto, full of pimples, pushes, wheales scabes, tetters, or manges. Also full of winde-galles.

Pústule, red pimples, pushes, blisters or manges rising in the skin. Also wind-gals in a horse or the tetters in any creature.

Pustulóso, as Pustuláto.

Pustúra, hath anciently beene vsed for a conuenticle, a sedition, or set plot.

Púsula, as Pústule. Also the disease called Saint Anthonies fire.

Pusulóso, as Pustuláto.

Putábile, that may be thought, imaginarie.

Putána, a whore, a strumpet.

Putanáre, as Puttaneggiáre.

Putatíuo, to be thought, supposed or imagined, reputed, presupposed.

Putelle, little wenches, girles or lasses.

Putente, stinking, vnsauoury.

Putescere, tesco, tétti, tesciúto, as Putíre.

Pútica, the chiefe or longest beame of any frame.

Pútido, stinking, vnpleasant in smell.

Putígine, as Lentígine.

Putiginóso, as Lentiginóso.

Putíre, putísco, putíto, to stinke, to haue an ill smell or sauour. Also to be irkesome.

Putóre, a stinke or ill sauour. Also a beast called a fitch.

Putrédine, putrefaction, rottennesse.

Putrefáre, to putrifie, to rot, to be addle.

Putrefattíbile, subiect to putrefaction.

Putrefattióne, putrefaction, rottennesse.

Putrefattíuo, that doth putrifie or rot.

Putrefátto, putrified, rotten, addle.

Pútrido, putrified, rotten, addle.

Putridézza, putrefaction, rottennesse.

Pútta, a wench, a guirle, a lasse, a maiden. Also a whore, a trull, a harlot, a strumpet. Also a Iay, a Piot, a Magot-apy.

Puttána, a whore, a harlot, a strumpet.

Puttanáccia, a filthy common whore.

Puttanáre, as Puttaneggiáre.

Puttanaría, whoredome, whoring.

Puttaneggiáre, to play the whore. Also to follow wenches, to goe a whoring. Also to promse carelesly and not to keepe ones word as whors doe.

Puttanéggio, whoring, whoredome.

Puttanella, a yongue or pretty whore.

Puttanésco, whorish, whore-like.

Puttanésimo, whoredome, whorisme.

Puttaniére, a whore-monger.

Puttanína, a pretty yongue whore.

Puttanità, whoredome, whorishnesse.

Puttanúccia, a silly poore whore.

Puttíle, whorish, whore-like.

Puttína, a little guirle, a yongue lasse.

Pútti ócchij, greedy or whorish eies.

Pútto, a boy, a lad, a striplin, a lacquey.

Puttótta, a handsome plum cheeked wench.

Puuióne, a Doue, a Pigeon, a Culuer.

Púzza, a stinke, an ill smell.

Puzzáre, hee, shee, or it stinkes.

Púzza, to stinke, to smell ill.

Púzzo, a stinke, a stench, an ill smell.

Puzzóla, a Pole-cat, a stinking thing.

Puzzolente, stinking, yeelding an ill sent.

Puzzolentia, a stinke, a stench or ill sauour.

Puzzóre, a stinke, a stench, an ill sent.

Puzzoso, stinking, full of stinke.

Puzzulente, stinking, full of stinke. 


Q.

Qvà, heere, heather, in this place.

Qua', Quái, vsed often for Quáli, which or who.

Quácchera, an old Florentine word, as much to say, after foure daies.

Quaddentro, as Quadentro.

Quaddietro, as Quadietro.

Quadentro, heree within, within heere.

Quaderni, two quaters or foures at Dice.

Quaderno, foure square. Also a quire of foure sheetes. Also a mans bum.

Quadietro, heere behind, behind heere.

Quà di fuóri, heere, without.

Quádra, Dáre la quádra, to smooth or sooth vp, to giue court-holy-water.

Quadragenário, a squire, or quadrant staffe.

Quadragenário, of forty yeeres.

Quadragésima, the time of Lent. 

Quadragé simo, the fortieth in number.

Quadráne, a kind of flat Peares.

Quadrangoláre, foure square. Also to make foure square or foure cornered.

Quadrángoli di ferro, Caltrops.

Quadrángolo, quadrangle, foure-cornered.

Quadrantále, a measure for liquid things vsed in Rome. Also a figure square euery way.

Quadrantária, a common whore that wilbe hired for a farthing.

Quadránte, a quadrant, a foure square, a Sunne-dyall, a squire or ruler. Also sutable, squaring, fitting, proportionable. Also a weight of about 18 Ounces. also a measure of about a quarter of a Pinte. Also a little coine or piece of money vsed of old in Rome worth halfe an Assis.

Quadráre, to square, to make foure square. Also to sute well, or square well. Also quadrate, or to measure by the quadrant.

Quadráre un pezzo, to set a piece leuell by rule or quadrant.

Quadráta rádice, is that number which being multiplied in it selfe produceth any square number.

Quadráto, squared, made foure square. Also lozenged in armorie. Also well suted, squared or fitted and become. Also a square number. Also squarie, well pight, well made and fashioned, great and strong.

Quadráto aspetto, termine astronómico.

Quadráto número, e quéllo che da quálche número in se stésso moltiplicáto uiéne prodótto.

Quadratóre, a squarer. Also a fitter.

Quadratúra, a squaring of any thing. Also the halfe Moone, because then the Sunne and the Moone are a quarter of a circle asunder.

Quadrella, a squarer, a Crosse-bow arrow, a shaft. Also a thunderbolt.

Quadrelli, square coloured stones vsed in pauements. Also bricks, tiles, or slates.

Quadrétti, any square little thing.

Quadrétti di ferro, dice-shot of iron.

Quadrétto, any little foure square thing, a low stoole, a foote-stoole, a square picture, a square or bed in a garden, a bricke or square-stone, a Tailors cushion. Also a gusset. Also a trencher. Also a tablet, a table. Also a lozenge in armorie. Also plates or rundlets to put vnder dishes to keepe table clothes cleane. Also a kind of square worke in bone-lace. Also a square streamer or flag or banner vsed in ships. Also a square troupe of men. 



Quadri, all manner of squares. Also diamonds or picts vpon the cardes.

Quadridente, hauing foure teeth.

Quadriduenne, of foure daies continuance.

Quadrienne, the space of foure yeeres.

Quadrifido, deuided in foure parts.

Quadrifórme, hauing foure formes.

Quadrifórme, foure waies framed.

Quadríga, a chariot or cart with foure wheeles. Also a teame of foure horses.

Quadrigário, a Coach-man.

Quadrigáto, a coine stamped with a coach drawen by foure horses.

Quadrigemino, foure-double.

Quadrigenário, containing foure.

Quadríglio, a crue, a troupe, a companie.

Quadrilátero, hauing foure sides.

Quadrilíbro, weighing foure poundes.

Quadrilíngue, that speaketh foure tongues.

Quadrimáno, foure-handed.

Quadrimembrále, consisting of foure members.

Quadrímo, of foure yeeres of age.

Quadrinóttio, foure nights space.

Quadripárti, foure squared or parted.

Quadripartíto, deuided in foure parts.

Quadrirémo, a boate or gally with foure oares one a side.

Quadrisíllaba vóce, a word of foure sillables.

Quadríuio, as Quattríuia.

Quádro, foure square. Also any foure square thing, as Quattríuia.

Quadrúcci, a kind of square brickes.

Quadrunciále. 

Quadrupéde, foure-footed, with foure feete.

Quadruplicáre, to foure-folde or doubble.

Quadrúplo, foure-doubble, fouresquare.

Quà e là, heere and there.

Quà entro, heere within.

Quaggiù, as Quagiù.

Quagiù, heere be low downe heere.

Quagiúso, as Quagiù.

Quáglia, a birde called a Quaile.

Quagliáre, to curdle or congeale.

Quagliaruólo, a quaile pipe.

Quagliáta, a curdling or congealing.

Quagliáto, curdled or congealed.

Quagliera, a Quaile-net, a Quaile-pipe.

Quagliere, a catcher of Quailes. Also a Quaile-basket. Also a Tailors Cushion.

Quagliétte, yongue or little Quailes.

Quáglio, rennet to curdle milke with.

Quái, as Quáli.

Quál, as Quále.

Quálche, some, some part, some one.

Qualchedúno, some one, some body. 

Qual che fósse, what euer was.

Qual che si sía, what euer be.

Quálchesciócco, none but some foole.

Qualche vólta, sometimes, now and then.

Qualcósa, some thing, what thing.

Qualcosétta, some little or small thing.

Qalcuno, some one, some bodie.

Quál di, whither of which.

Quál dì, what day soeuer.

Quál di dúo, whither, or which of two.

Quále?, which? who? what?

Quále, like, such as, euen as.

Quále, sost. Also as, or how, or euen as, or like.

Quále, whosoeuer, what soeuer.

Quále, a relatiue, who, which, that.

Quále che senè fósse la cagióne, whatsoeuer were the cause of it.

Quále che senè sía la cáusa, whatsoeuer the cause be.

Quáles, a tree in Prouence, from out whose roote grow certaine bladders full of a kind of liquor as red as bloud, which dride in the Sunne, yeeld foorth certaine wormes, wherewith they dye crimzon in graine.

Qual hóra, at what houre, or time soeuer. Also sometimes.

Quali?, which? who? Looke Quále.

Qualificáre, to qualifie.

Qualificatióne, a qualification.

Qualità, qualitie, sort, condition, kind, state.

Qualitatíuo, that may be qualified. Also full of qualities, or condicioned.

Qualménte, how, in what sort. Also how as, or how soeuer.

Qual si sia, what, or who euer be.

Qual si vóglia, which, who, or whatsoeuer.

Qual tu uuói, which thou wilt.

Qualúnque, who or what soeuer.

Qualúnque fiáte, what time soeuer.

Qualúnque hóra, what houre soeuer.

Qualúnque si sía, whosoeuer it be.

Qualúnque si fósse, whosoeuer it were.

Qualúnque si vóglia, whosoeuer he be.

Qualúnque vólta, what time soeuer.

Qual vólta, what time.

Quándo, when, whereas, at what time. Also sometimes. Also if, or if so be.

Quándo béne, if so be sometimes.

Quándo che fósse, when euer it were or might be.

Quándo che sía, whensoeuer it be.

Quandocúnque, whensoeuer.

Quándo da príma, when first.

Quándo et quándo, sometimes, at somtimes.

Quándo fósse, when or if it were.

Quándo mái, whensoeuer.

Quándo príma, when first.

Quándo púre, if so be neuerthelesse.

Quándo sia che, if so be that. 

Quándo úno quándo un áltro, sometimes one sometimes another.

Quandúnque, whensoeuer, when euer. Vsed also for Quantúnque.

Quánno, hath beene vsed for Quándo.

Quánte?, how many?

Quánte, how or as many.

Quánte córna ha la cauálla?, how many hornes hath the Mare? a game vsed in Italy.

Quánte fiáte, how or as many times.

Quantésima párte, the how much part.

Quántè vólte, as often as, as many times as.

Quánti, how or as many.

Quantità, quantity, deale. Also store, and may be applied both to quality and number.

Quantitatíuo, consisting of quantity.

Quánto? how much? how far? how long?

Quánto, so much as, as much, both in quantity and quality. Also as for, touching, concerning. Also as far, as long, as big, as great, namely if it answer or follow Tánto. Also albeit, or although.

Quánto a quésto, as concerning this.

Quánto chè, as, as because, in answer of Cóme chè. Also albeit, or although.

Quánto e, as concerning, as touching, as for.

Quánto o tánto, how or so much.

Quánto più, how much more, by how much more. Also as much as may be, the most.

Quánto più tósto, how much or so much sooner. Also as soone as may be, the soonest possible.

Quánto presto, as, or so soone as may be.

Quánto príma, as, or so soone as may be.

Quánto sía, how much soeuer it be.

Quánto si vóglia, how much soeuer.

Quánto tárdi, as late as may be.

Quánto tempo, how long time? so long as.

Quantúnque, howbeit, although, albeit. Also who, or whatsoeuer he be. Also all whatsoeuer.

Quantúnque vólte, as often times as.

Quaránta, the number of fourty.

Quarantána, the space of fourty daies.

Quarantaplicáre, to fourty-fould or doubble.

Quaranté simo, the fourtieth in number.

Quarantía, a Magistrate of 40. in Venice.

Quaranzéi, fourty and six.

Quaranzétte, fourty and seuen.

Quárche, hath beene vsed for, Quálche.

Quáre, why, wherefore. Also a question. 



Quarésima, the fasting time of Lent.

Quaresimáre, to fast or keepe Lent.

Quaresimeggiáre, to fast or keepe Lent.

Qnarnára, the name of a rope in a ship.

Quarnáro, hath been vsed of some for the South winde, or South East.

Quarníra, as Quarnára.

Quáro, a kinde of bird.

Quárra, a kind of saile in a ship.

Quárta, the fourth, a fourth part, a quart measure. Also a quarter wind.

Quárta áustro verso garbíno, South and by East.

Quárta áustro verso scirócco, South East and by South.

Quárta di inaéstro verso ponente, North West and by West.

Quárta di maéstro verso tramontána, North West and by North.

Quárta di tramontána verso greco, North East and by East.

Quárta garbíno verso áustro, South and by West.

Quárta di tramontána uerso maéstro, North and by West.

Quárta di vento, any quarter winde.

Quárta garbíno verso ponente, South West and by South.

Quárta greco verso lcuánte, North East and by East.

Quárta greco verso tramontána, North East and by North.

Quárta leuánte verso greco, East and by North.

Quárta leuánte verso scirócco, East and by south.

Quárta maéstro verso ponente, North West and by West.

Quárta maéstro verso tramontána, North West and by North.

Quartána, a quartane ague.

Quartáni, souldiers of the fourth Legion.

Quárta ponente verso garbíno, West and by South.

Quárta ponente verso maéstro, West and by North.

Quartáre, to quarter, to deuide or cut into quarters or foure parts.

Quartária, a fourth part paied sometimes to Princes.

Quartário, a measure vsed in Greece.

Quárta scirócco verso áustro, South East and by South.

Quárta scirócco verso leuánte, South East and by East.

Quárta tramontána verso gréco, North East and by East.

Quarta tramontána verso maéstro, North and by West.

Quartería, a taking or paiment of the fourth part of any thing.

Quartése, a quarter age or quarters rent and profit. Also an imposition of any fourth part.

Quartétto, any little quarter. Also a quadren of a Sonet, or staffe of foure verses.

Quárti di diétro, the hinder quarters of any beast.

Quartiere, a quarter of a yeere or of any thing else. Also a quarter age. Also a quarters rent, wages or stipend. Also a quarter or part of a camp wheron soldiers be quartered or lodged. Also any quarter, part precinct or deuision of a Citty, as we say wards in London. Also the fourth part of a natural day, that is to say, the space of six houres.

Quartiménto, a quatring, a quarter where souldiers encampe or lie.

Quartiróne, as Quartiere.

Quárto, the fourth in number. Also fourthly. Also a quarter or fourth part of any thing. Also a quarto volume of a booke. Also a false quarter vpon the hoofe of a horse toward the salon.

Quárto cannóne, a quarter Cannon, which is but weakely fortifide or mettalled.

Quartodécimo, a fourteenth in number.

Quárto di castráto, a quarter of Mutton.

Quartogénito, the fourth begotten.

Quárto vento, a quarter winde.

Quartúccio, a little wine measure.

Quárza, the name of a saile in a ship.

Quás, a kind of drinke made in the cold Countries of Moscouy and Lapland of old mammockes or scrapes of mouldy bread and water sodden together.

Quási, almost, very neere, neerelike, little lesse in quantity or quality. Also as it were, as if, in a manner, as though.

Quá si chè, as if it were, almost that.

Quási cóme, almost as, neere like.

Quási díca, as if he said.

Quási dicéste, as if he would say.

Quassáre, as Conquassáre.

Quassatióne, a shakeing or tossing.

Quásso, as Conquásso.

Quassù, as Quasù.

Quasù, heere-aboue, vp heere.

Qua súso, as Quasù.

Quaternità, a quaternity, a company of foure together.

Quaterno, as Quaderno.

Quaterque, and foure times.

Quatórdeci, fourteene in number.

Quatordécimo, the fourteenth in order.

Quatrangoláre, as Quadrangoláre.

Quatrángolo, Quadrangolo. 

Quatriduáno, a foure daies continuance.

Quatríduo, the space of foure daies.

Quatríglia, a little squadion, crew or troope. 

Quatríno, a small coine of a fartling.

Quatriuio, as Quattriuia.

Quátro chiáui., Looke Chiaui.

Quátro in ásso et ásso, the worst kind of Gunpowder.

Quátro máni, a filching fellow whose each finger is as good as a Limetwig.

Quatruplicáre, as Quadruplicáre.

Quattáre, to squat, to cowre downe. Also to whosht and lie close, to lurke.

Quárto, squat, close, lurking, husht.

Quátto quátto, very squat, very whoosht.

Quattordicésimo, the fourteenth in order.

Quattrággio, a kind of cource, rugged or home-spunne cloth that Mariners slaues and Sheapheards vse. Also a certaine rate of cloth that is giuen aboue measure which Drapers call a handfull or shaft-man.

Quattríuia, a Carefoure, a way or crosse way that leadeth foure waies.

Quáttro, the number of foure.

Quáttro a quáttro, by foure and foure.

Quáttro fia tánto, foure times as much.

Quáttro tánti, foure times as many.

Quáttrotempora, the foure Embring weekes.

Que', Quéi, as Quégli.

Quégli, they, those, them, them same. Also he, that man, that same man.

Quél', as Quéllo.

Quelchè, that which, he whom.

Quél che tu uuói, what or which thou wilt.

Quél cotánto, that so much.

Quél désso, he the very same.

Quélla, shee, or that woman or thing.

Quélle, those or them women or things.

Quélle póche uólte, those few times.

Quélli, as Quégli.

Quéllo, that, yond, thilke, that or the same man or thing.

Quéllo istésso, the very selfe same.

Quéllo medésimo, the very selfe same.

Quel tánto, that much, that quantitie.

Quel'úno, that one, yond one.

Quennáro, a fish in Latine Atherína.

Quercetoláno, a groue or place full of Oakes.

Quercéto, as Quercetoláno.

Quercia, a Mast-holme or Oke-tree. Vsed also for Mustines.

Querciétto, a groue or thicket of Oakes.

Quercíno, made of. Oake or Wanescot.

Quercióla, Germander, or English treacle.

Querciólo, a little yoong Oake.

Querculo, a little yoong Oake.

Querela, a moane-making, a complaint. Also a quarrell, a contention, a fray.

Quereláre, to moane, to waile, to com­



plaine Also to quarrell, to contend, to brawle.

Querelatóre, a plaintife, a complainer, a wailer. Also a quareller, a brawler.

Querelóso, complaining, full of plaints. Also quarellous or quarelsome.

Querente, enquiring. Also an enquirer.

Querimónia, moane, wailing, complaint, a lamentable expressing with griefe.

Querimoniáre, to moane, to waile, to complaine, to lament with griefe.

Querimonióso, wailefull, moanefull, lamenting, complaining with griefe.

Quéro, as Quiríno.

Querquédule, a water-foule called a Teale.

Queruláre, as Querimoniáre. Also to shrill, to chirpe, to chatter as birdes doe.

Quérulo, as Querimonióso. Also shrill, chirping or chatting as birds.

Quesitánte, questioning, asking, demanding, enquiring. Also questing.

Quesitáre, to question, to aske, to demaund, to enquire of. Also to quest.

Quesitatóre, a questioner, a demaunder, an examiner. Also a quester.

Quesito, a question, a demaund, an asking. Also a questing. Also questioned, asked, demaunded, examined. Also quested. Also gotten or obtained.

Quésta, this, this same woman or thing.

Quésta máne, this morning.

Quésta nótte, this night.

Quésta uólta, this time or turne.

Quéste, these women or things.

Questi, these men or things. Also this man.

Questionábile, questionable, disputable. Also contentious or litigious.

Questionánte, questioning, disputing, contending, wrangling, brawling.

Questionáre, to question, to demaund questions, to examine, to dispute. Also to quarrell, to brawle, to fight a fray.

Questionário, as Questionábile.

Questioncella, a little Questióne.

Questióncula, a sillie question.

Questióne, a question, a demaund, an asking, an inquisition, an examination, a disputation. Also a fray, a brawle, a contention.

Questionéuole, as Questionábile.

Quésto, this, thilke, this same.

Quésto cotánto, this so much.

Quésto equéllo, this and that.

Quésto istésso, this selfe same.

Quésto medésimo, this very selfe same.

Questóre, a Treasurer, an Auditor, a receiuer of rents, a Chamberlaine of a Citie, a Treasurer at warres. Also a Iudge of criminall causes.

Questório, of or belonging to a Questóre. Also the Questors tent in a Campe. Also a place as the Exchequer of a Prince or Citie is, a Treasurie.

Quésto tánto, this so much.

Questuárij, busie-bodies, or questioning Preachers, wrangling Lawyers.

Questúra, the place, the office or dignitie of a Questor, of a Treasurer, of a Chamberlane or Chancellor of the Exchequer.

Quetánza, a quittance, or quieting, a discharge.

Quetáre, to quiet, to whosht, to appease, to pacifie, to calme, to still. Also to quit or discharge. Also to free and absolue.

Queto, quiet, whosht, still, calme, at peace and rest. Also a Quietus est or generall discharge. Also quit and discharged. Also freed and absolued.

Queto, Dáre un stácci queto, to giue one a quietus est, that is to giue one a sound whirret on the eares to make him hold his peace.

Queto queto, very quiet, still or whosht.

Quì, heere, very heere, in this place.

Quici, heere, in this very place.

Quíci éntro, heere within.

Quicónce, a kind of orderly planting and exact setting of trees by square, that which way soeuer one looke the trees stand equally distant, and directly one against another, it hath the name of the letter V. that signifieth fiue, and being double maketh ten, which may be multiplied many waies.

Quiddità, as Quidità.

Quidità, the whatnesse of any thing, the quidditie or substance of any thing.

Quíe, as Quì, heere, in this place.

Quiescere, esco, escéi, esciúto, as Quetáre.

Quietaménto, a quieting.

Quietanza, as Quiete. Also a quittance.

Quietáre, as Quetáre.

Quietatíuo, quietfull, quieting.

Quietatióne, a quieting or quietnesse.

Quiete, quietnesse, rest, repose, calmenesse, silence, ease, peace, tranquillitie. Also a quietus est.

Quietézza, as Quiete.

Quietitúdine, as Quiete.

Quieto, as Queto.

Quietúro, to be appeased or quieted.

Quifuóri, heire without.

Quil, a little beast like a Perret.

Quilibetto, a quidlibet.

Quilíno, as Aquilino.

Quilio, the burdon of a song.

Quilità, a quilitie.

Quillità, a quilitie.

Quinário, containing fiue. Also an halfe denire because it was worth but fiue Asses. 

Quinccntro, hence within.

Quínci, hence, from hence. Also thence.

Quíncia póco, from hence a little.

Quínci e quíndi, hence and thence.

Quincigiù, hence downe, hence downeward.

Quínci inánti, from hence forward.

Quinci in pói, from hence afterwards.

Quínci óltre, hence further.

Quíncisù, hence vp, hence vpward.

Quincónee, as Quicónce.

Quincúplo, fiue-fold, fiue-double.

Quíndeci, the number of fifteene.

Quindecie, fifteene times.

Quindécima, the second quarter or full of the Moone. Also a fifteene.

Quindécimo, the fifteenth in order.

Quindecimuiráto, was an office in Rome of fifteene men ioyned in commission equall.

Quindénìj, fifteenes, consisting of fifteene.

Quindénnio, of fifteene daies.

Quindi, thence, from thence.

Quindicésimo, the fifteenth in order.

Quíndici, the number of fifteene.

Quíndi e quínci, thence and hence.

Quíndi giù, thence downe, thence downe ward.

Quíndi innánzi, thence forward.

Quíndi in pói, thence afterward.

Quíndi sù, thence vp, thence vp ward.

Quíni, two cinques or fiues at dice.

Quinimò, yea rather, or moreouer and besides.

Quinquagenário, of fiftie yeeres.

Quinquagesimo, the fiftieth.

Quinquagentiáno, of fiftie yeeres.

Quinquátria, a feast vnto Minerua, comming about mid-March which continued the space of fiue daies.

Quinquefólio, the hearbe Cinquefolie or fiue-leaue grasse.

Quinquelibrále, of fiue pound weight.

Quinque mestro, of fiue moneths, fiue moneths old.

Quinquenário, of fiue yeeres of age.

Quinquennále, that is done euery fiue yeeres, or that lasteth fiue yeeres, or consisting of fiue yeeres.

Quinquennáli giuóchi, certaine games celebrated euery fiue yeeres.

Quinquenne, fiue yeere old.

Quinquennio, the space of fiue yeeres.

Quinquepartíto, deuided into fiue parts.

Quinquerémi, Gallies that haue fiue oares on a side and fiue men to an oare.

Quinquertij, certaine fiuefold games vsed among the Grecians.

Quinqueuiráto, the office of fiue in like authoritie.

Quinquiplicáre, to multiply by fiue.

Quinquiuio, a way going fiue waies. 




Quínta essentia, the quintessence or spirit extracted out of any thing.

Quintadecima, as Quindecima.

Quintále, a great measure in Spaine called a Kintale, being about a hundred pound weight.

Quintána, a Quintane, which is a sport vsed in some countries. Also an image made of rags or clouts for men to practise to shoot at, we call it a Turke.

Quintáni, souldiers of the fiefth legion band or ranke.

Quintáno, the fifth in order.

Quintáre, to deuide into fiue parts. Also to fiue-fold or fiue-double.

Quinténo, as Quinterno.

Quinternále, deuided into quiers.

Quinternáre, to reduce into quiers.

Quinterno, a quier of paper.

Quintíle, the moneth of Iuly, the fifth moneth from March, reckoning it for one.

Quínto, a fifth part, the fifth in order.

Quintodecimo, the fiftteenth.

Quintogénito, the fifth begotten.

Quintúple, fiuefold, fiue-double.

Quintuplicáre, to fiue-fold or double.

Quiriáne, a kind of good Apple.

Quirinália, the daies of sacrifices made to Romulus.

Quiríno, a surname of Romulus. Also a precious stone found in the Hoopes nest, which laid vpon a mans breast that sleepeth, it will make him tell what he hath done.

Quiritáre, to cry or waile for helpe in distresse.

Quiritatióne, a wailing in distresse.

Quiríto, a speare. Also enquired after. Also complained vpon or called after in distresse.

Quisquíglia, sweepings, filth, rubbish, vncleanlinesse. Also a sluts corner. Also a couer, a couerlet or hilling.

Quisquigliáre, to crosse, to hinder, to impeach. Also to sweepe vp into filthy corners. Also to couer.

Quísso., Hath beene vsed for Quésto.

Quistionábile, as Questionábile.

Quistionánte, as Questionánte.

Quistionáre, as Questionáre.

Quistióne, as Questióne.

Quistionéuole, as Questionábile.

Quitánza, a quittance, a discharge.

Quitáre, as Quetáre, to quit.

Quíue, as Quíui.

Quíui, there, yonder, in that place.

Quócere, quóco, quóssi, quótto, as Cuócere.

Quóco, as Cuóco, a Cooke.

Quóia, as Quóio.

Quoiáme, as Coráme.

Quóio, all manner of lether, as Cuóio.

Quólibet, a quodlibet.

Quomodocúnque, howsoeuer, vsed for a nickname, as one would say a pinching or greedie scraping fellow by what meanes soeuer, one to whom all is fish that comes to net.

Quóre, as Cuóre, a heart.

Quósi, red pimples or pushes in ones face.

Quotidianaménte, daily, euery day.

Quotidiáno, daily, quotidian.

Quotiente, the quotient in Arithmetike.

Quóto? how many in order? how long? how much? of what number?

Quóto, hath beene vsed of Dante for iudgement.

Quót quót, as many as. 


R.
Ra, a Participle vsed much in composition before other words, as much to say as doing againe, or redoubling any thing together, according as the word or verbe to which it is ioyned doth import, yet there is this difference between Rà and Rì, that the next letter after Rà is euer doubled, where as after Rì it is but single, as for example: Rabbáttere, Raccordáre, Raddomandáre, Raffrenáre, Rapportáre, and infinite others. Where as they say Ribáttere, Ricordáre, Ridomandáre, Rifrenáre, Riportáre.

Rabbárbaro, the drug Reubarbe.

Rabbaruffáre, to ruffle, to touze, to bicker together. Also to swell through pride of riches. Also to looke or make gastly or grisly.

Rabbáttere, bátto, battéi, battúto, to rebeate backe or downe, to clinch a naile. Also to meet or light vpon by chance or againe.

Rabbáttersi, to meet againe or by chance

Rabbattiménto, a rebeating backe or downe, a clinching of a naile. Also an encounter or meeting by chance or againe.

Rabbattúto, rebeaten backe or downe, clinched a naile. Also met by chance.

Rabbelliménto, a rebeautifying, a reembellishing, a readorning.

Rabbellíre, lísco, líto, to re-embellish, to re-beautifie, to re-adorne.

Rábbia, rage, furie, madnesse, moodinesse, woodnesse, fiercenesse, wrath.

Rabbiáre, to enrage, to be furious, raging, fell, moodie or wood.

Rabbicáne, a Horse that is fashioned in the bodie like a Grey-hound, or that hath a white taile or rumpe.

Rabbíno, a Rabine.

Rábbio, as Furigóne.

Rabbióso, raging, mad, furious, moodie.

Rabboffáre, as Rabbuffáre.

Rabbonacciáre, to make, to grow, or become calme, to calme, or enmilden.

Rabbracciaménti, re-imbracements.

Rabbracciáre, to embrace againe.

Rabbruscársi, for one to strout or rouse himselfe as an angry Turkie-cocke.

Rabbuffáre, to rufflle, to desheuell, to shag, to tug or touze by the haire, to looke staringly with ones haire an end as a mad man. Also to checke, to tante, to rebuke, to chide, to scould, or braule.

Rabbuffáto, ruffled, desheueled, shag'd, tug'd, or touzed by the haire, looking staringly as a mad man. Also checkt, tanted or rebuked.

Rabbúffo, a checke, a tant, a rebuke. Also a staring, a ruffling.

Rabbuiáre, to obscure or make darke.

Rabésco, Arabian, of Arabia.

Rábi, the Rabbies or Rabins.

Rabicáno, as Rabbicáne.

Rábido, mad or rageing as a dogge.

Rábie, the madnesse of a dogge.

Rabúscula, a kind of grape or wine.

Racanello, as Ramárro.

Racáno, as Ramárro.

Racaualláre, to horse againe. Also to doubble or turne the Horses or Oxen often in furrowing.

Raccamáre, as Ricamáre.

Raccamatóre, as Ricamatóre.

Raccámo, as Ricámo.

Raccappezzáre, to piece, to botch, to patch or halter and tye together.

Raccaprezzáre, to feele or haue suddain shiuerings as in the fit of an ague or through suddaine feare, to startle suddainely.

Raccaprézzo, a suddaine chilling or shiuering or startling through colde or feare.

Raccapricciáre, to looke staringly or startle suddainely with ones haire an end as frighted with spirites.

Raccatáto, regotten, or gotten againe.

Raccendere, to rekindle or set on fire againe.

Reccennáre, to becken againe.

Reccertáre, to reassure.

Reccéso, rekindled, set on fire againe.

Racchetáre, to appease or quiet againe.

Racchétta, a racket to play at Tennis.

Racchettáre, to tosse or beate with a Racket.

Racchiúdere, to re-enclose or shut vp againe.

Racchiúso, re-enclosed or shut vp againe. Also an enclosure.

Racciabattáre, as Rattaconáre.

Raccò, gather or collect thou. 



Raccoccáre, as Accoccáre.

Raccoglienza, as Accoglienza. Also a gathering together againe.

Raccógliere, to gather, to collect or assemble together againe, to gather in haruest. Also to receiue and entertaine friendly.

Raccogliménto, a gathering together.

Raccoglitíccij soldáti, souldiers gathered together or taken vp in haste.

Raccólta, a collection or gathering together, an assembly. Also the time of haruest or gathering in of the fruites of the earth. Also the fruites or haruest gathered in. Also friendly embracing, kind receauing or entertainment of ones friends. Also the call of souldiers together vnto any place of retreate of stand or rendezuous by sound of drum or trumpet.

Raccoltáta, a gathering or collecting.

Raccólto, gathered or collected againe. Also embraced or receiued friendly. Also as Raccólta.

Raccomandagióne, recommendation.

Raccomandáre, to recommend vnto.

Raccomandatióne, recommendations.

Raccomandatória lettera, a letter of recommendations.

Raccomandígia, a recommendation.

Raccominciaménto, a rebeginning.

Raccominciáre, to begin againe.

Raccompagnáre, to reaccompany.

Raccomunáre, to make or become common againe.

Raccomunicáre, to recommunicate.

Racconciaménto, as Racconciatúra.

Racconciáre, to mend, to dresse or reforme againe.

Racconciatóre, a mender, a dresser, a reformer.

Racconciatúra, a mending or dressing againe.

Racconciliáre, to reconcile, or atone againe.

Racconciliatióne, as Riconciliatióne.

Raccóncio, mended, dressed, reformed.

Racconfermáre, to reconfirme.

Racconfermatióne, a reconfirmation.

Raccomformáre, to conforme againe.

Racconfortáre, to comfort againe.

Racconoscenza, as Riconoscenza.

Racconóscere, as Riconóscere.

Racconosciménto, as Riconosciménto.

Racconoscitóre, as Riconoscitóre.

Racconsoláre, to recomfort or cheere vp.

Raccontábile, that may be recounted.

Raccontaménto, a recounting, a relating.

Raccontáre, to recount, to relate.

Raccontatóre, a recounter, a reporter.

Raccontévole, to be recounted.

Raccónto, a report, a relation, a recounting. 

Raccoppiáre, to coupple, huddle, or put together.

Raccorciaménto, a shortning, a curtaling.

Raccorciáre, to shorten, to curtall.

Raccordáre, to remember, to reaccord.

Raccórre, as Raccógliere.

Raccortáre, to shorten, to curtall.

Raccosciáre, to sit cowring downe or with legges a crosse as Taylors or women doe.

Raccozzáre, to huddle vp together, to patch or botch together againe. Also to shocke or but or front together againe.

Ráce, a Ray or Skate-fish.

Recemáre, to branch, to im-branch.

Recematióne, a branching, an imbranch ing.

Racémi, all maner of boughes, branches, or sprigs. Also tuffis, as Racémo.

Racémo., Looke Racémi. Also a bunch or cluster of Grapes. Also a Grape or the kernell of a Grape.

Recemóso, full of clusters, bunches or Grapes, or of berries and kernels.

Racente, sharpe, soure or tart in taste as vnripe grapes.

Racése, a kinde of small, sharpe or vnripe wine, hedge-wine.

Rácha, an Hebrew word signifying extreame anger of the person that speaketh to him that he speaketh vnto.

Rachetáre, to reappease or requiet.

Rachinársi, to stoope, bend, or incline downeward againe.

Racimíllo, as Racímolo.

Racimoláre, to cluster together.

Racímolo, a little or part of a bunch, a little cluster.

Racógno, a Lizard or an Eft.

Racóma, an hearbe.

Racontráre, to re-incounter or meete with.

Racóntro, a re-incounter or meeting with.

Racopiáre, to write or coppy ouer againe.

Racoppiáre, to coupple or doubble againe.

Racquetáre, as Rachetáre.

Racquistáre, to repurchase, to reobtain.

Racquistatóre, a repurchaser, a reobtayner.

Racquísto, a repurchase, a reobtaining.

Rácula, a kind of greene Frog.

Ráda, a Rode for ships.

Radámo, a kind of blacke stone.

Raddolcíre, císco, cíto, to resweeten. Also to molify, to appease, to calme.

Raddolciménto, a resweetning. Also an appeasing, a mollifying.

Raddolcíto, resweetned. Also appeased, pacified or molified againe. 

Raddomandáre, to redemand, to reaske.

Raddoppiaménto, a redoubling.

Raddoppiáre, to redoubble.

Raddoppiáta, a redoubling. Also a doubble turne or tricke in riding or dancing.

Raddossáre, to lay or heape vpon ones backe againe, or one vpon another.

Raddrizzáre, to straighten or set vp right againe.

Ráde, few, thin. Looke Rádo.

Rádere, rádo, rási, ráso or radúto, to shaue, to not, to poule, to scrape or make smooth. Also to skud, to cut, to scoure along or goe away swiftly. Also to raze or saile along the shore as a ship doth, to flie leuell to the ground as some birdes doe, to graze on the ground as an arrow or bullet.

Ráde vólte, few or seldome times.

Radézza, rarenesse, thinnesse, seldomnesse.

Radiáno, a bright blacke stone found in an old Cockes-head.

Radiánte, radiant, shining, blazing, casting beames of light, streaming, glittering, sparkling, glimmering, twinckling, flaring, leaming.

Radiáre, to ray, to shine, to blaze, to cast streames or beames of light, to streame, to beame, to radiate, to leame, to glitter, to glimmer, to twinkle, to flare, to sparkle.

Radiário d'un candelliére, the backe, the shaft or branch of a candlesticke.

Radiatióne, a shining, a glittring, a leaming, a beaming, a blazing, &c.

Radicábile, that may take roote.

Radicále, radicall, proceeding from a roote or beginning. Húmido radicále, the radicall or naturall moisture of any creature.

Radicáre, to roote, to take hold or roote, to plant, to set, to settle fast.

Radicatióne, a rooting, a taking roote.

Radícchio, the hearbe Cicorie. Also a kind of meate made of hearbes.

Radíce, any kind of roote. Also the foote or bottome of a thing as of a hill. In Mathematikes that number, which by one or often multiplication of it selfe bringeth forth any number. Also taken for a measure of land called a pole, a rod, a pearch, &c. Also a cause, a ground or beginning of any thing.

Radíce cúbica, as Cúbica radíce.

Radíce dólce, the wood Licorice.

Radicella, any little or small roote.

Rádico, a kind of salt so called.

Radicófano, a craftie filching fellow that will looke into or picke euery chest.

Radicóso, full of rootes, that hath a 



deepe or much roote.

Radícula, Sopewort or Fullersweed.

Rádie, certaine long Oliues.

Rádij, the plurall of Rádio.

Radificáre, to take root, to root.

Rádigo, abusiue putting of or deferring.

Radimadía, any kneading tub. Also a scraping toole that Bakers vse to scrape their kneading tubs cleane within.

Radimandáre, to redemaund, to re-aske.

Rádio, a ray, a beame, a leame, a blaze, a gleame, a glimps, a glittering or any streaming light of the Sunne, of a bright Starre or any other light. Also the brightnesse of the eyes. Also a flying squib of wilde fire. Also the hand or needle of a dyall or horologe. Also the shaft or shanke of a candlesticke. Also the spoke of any wheele. Also a Weauers shuttle. Also a certaine rod, yard or staffe that Geometricians vse. Also a round sticke to leuell measures of corne or salt. Also the sharpe prickles or weapon of the Ray or Skate-fishes. Also the vppermost and greater of the two long bones of the cubite, which are both ioyned together between themselues, as also with the shoulder bone and the wrist of the hand, which is also called Focíle maggióre. It is also vsed for the bigger bone of the shanke. Also a kinde of venemous Sea-spider. Also a yokesticke.

Rádio greco, a kinde of instrument to measure with.

Rádio latíno, idem.

Radióso, as Radiánte.

Raditóre, a Shauer, a Barber, a Notter.

Raditúra, a shauing, a notting, a pouling.

Rádo, rare to be had or seene, seldome, geason, daintie. Also thin, cleare, not thicke.

Radótto, as Ridótto.

Radrizzáre, to reare or set vp againe.

Radunánza, a re-assemblie.

Radunáre, to reassemble together.

Radunéuole, that may be assembled.

Radúrre, as Ridúrre.

Radúto, as Ráso of Rádere.

Radútto, as Ridútto.

Ráfano, any kind of Radish roote.

Ráffa, a rifling. Also a flesh or dragging hooke.

Raffanzonáte, as Raffazzonáre.

Raffardelláre, to fardle or trusse vp againe.

Raffáre, to rifle, to drag or catch with any hooke.

Raffatóre, a rifler.

Raffazzonáre, to fashion againe, to trim or tricke vp with new fashions.

Rafferma, an affirmation or firming.

Raffermáre, to re-affirme, to re-confirme. 

Raffernáre, as Raffrenáre.

Raffétto, a toole that Carpenters vse.

Raffiáre, to hooke or drag with hookes.

Raffibbiáre, to buckle againe, to rebuckle.

Raffibbiatúra, a rebuckling.

Raffiggere, to fix vnto againe.

Raffiguráre, to marke or view well and take the impression in ones minde.

Ráffij, all manner of flesh-hookes or any other dragging hookes.

Raffiláre, to whet, or make keene and sharpe againe.

Raffináre, to refine. Also to cease, to giue ouer or come to an end. Also as Raffiláre.

Ráffio, any flesh or dragging hooke, any crooke or rake.

Raffióli, little hookes or crookes.

Raffittáre, to hire, to let or farme againe for rent.

Raffoláre, to rake or huddle vp, to gather, to hoord vp, to scrape or pinch together by hooke or crooke.

Ráffola rúffola, riffe-raffe, by hooke or crooke, by pinching, raking and scraping.

Rafforzaménto, a re-enforcing.

Rafforzáre, to restrengthen, to munite, to fortifie, to repaire againe, to re-enforce.

Raffrancáre, to re-enfranchise or set at libertie. Also to re-encourage or hearten againe, to take heart of grace or courage againe. Also to giue the start to a running Horse at the beginning of a race.

Raffreddaménto, a cooling or taking cold.

Raffred dáre, to coole or take cold againe.

Raffreddáta, a cooling or cold taken. Also a cold in a Horses head being congealed in the braine.

Raffreddáto, cooled or taken cold againe.

Raffredatóio, any cooling thing or place.

Raffrenaménto, a refraining, a brideling, a restraining.

Raffrenáre, to refraine, to restraine, to bridle againe, to keepe short, to hold or pull backe with the bridle.

Raffrenatióne, as Raffrenaménto.

Raffrenáto, bridled, curbed, refrained, kept short, drawen or held with the bridle.

Raffrescáre, as Rifrescáre.

Raffrettáre, to hasten againe.

Raffrontáre, to re-affront, to re-confront, to reshocke, to compare together againe.

Raffrónto, sost. a re-affronting, a confronting or comparing together againe.

Rafióli, a kind of little paste-meates in fashion of little pasties, rauiols.

Rafiuóli, as Rafióli.

Ráfla, a rifling at dice for any thing. 

Rafláre, to rifle for any thing at dice.

Ragádij, chaps that come in the fundament or seate, as also in the hands and lips through cold.

Ragágno, as Ramárro. Also a Boore, a base clowne.

Raganello, a kind of instrument to make a rustling and ratling noise in the holy weeke.

Ragáno, as Ragágno, as Rainárro.

Ragáte, as Ragádij.

Ragátta, as Rigátta.

Ragattiéri, as Rigattiéri.

Ragauignáre, to recouer againe suddenly when one is almost fallen.

Ragázza, a lasse, a girle, a drudging wench. Also a Iay, a Piot, a Pie.

Ragazzáglia, base people consisting of boyes, lacqueis or footemen, raskalitie.

Ragazzétto, Ragazzíno, a little lad, boy, page, lacquey or foote-boy.

Ragázzo, a lad, a boy, a foote-man, a page, a lacquey, a seruing boy.

Raggeláre, to congeale or freese againe.

Ragghiáre, to bray as an Asse.

Rágghio, the braying of an Asse.

Rággia, a Raye or a Skate-fish. Also Rozin.

Raggiáre, as Radiáre, as Ragghiáre.

Raggiétti, little Rádij, of Radio.

Rággij, the shiuers or rundles of a pullie.

Rággio, as Rádio.

Raggióngere, to reioyne together. Also to ouertake againe.

Raggiónta, a reioynder, a reioyning. Also an ouertaking againe.

Raggióso, as Radiánte. Also full of Rozin.

Raggiornáre, to wax day againe. Also to reiourne, to adiourne againe.

Raggiraménti, as Aggiraménti.

Raggiráre, as Aggiráre. Also to gather into a round.

Raggiráta, a turning or winding about.

Raggiráto, turned or wound about.

Raggiúngere, as Raggióngere.

Raggiúnta, as Raggiónta.

Raggiúnto, reioyned or ouertaken againe.

Raggranelláre, to pecke, picke or shift vp and downe for graine or corne as the Emmet doth.

Raggranelláta, a picking or gleaning together of any graine or corne.

Raggranellatóre, a picker or gleaner of corne or graine.

Raggrauáre, to exaggerate, to aggrauate or ouerburthen againe.

Raggráuio, an aggrauating, or exageration or ouerburthening againe.

Raggrazzoláre, as Raffoláre.

Raggricchiáre, as Raggrinzáre.

Raggrinzáre, to wrinkle, to pucker. Also to shrinke vp close together. 



Raggrinzáto, wrinkled, puckred, shrunke vp close together.

Raggrúppo, a bundle, a fardle, a trusse close wrapped and bound together.

Raggruzzáre, to shrug or shrinke or crooch close together.

Raggruzzoláre, as Raggruzzáre.

Ragguaglianza, as Ragguáglio.

Ragguagliáre, to make equall or euen againe. Also to aduertise or giue true information of any thing. Also to guerdon or reward iustly.

Ragguagliáre partíte, to confront or make reckonings euen as Marchants doe.

Ragguagliáto, made equall againe. Also truly aduertised. Also rewarded.

Ragguáglio, an equalling againe. Also notice or true information of any thing. Also a iust reward or meede.

Ragguardáre, to regard, to behold, to respect.

Ragguardéuole, regardfull, respectfull.

Ragguárdo, regard, respect.

Rágia, any kind of Rozin. Also Balsamum. Also subtle or slie knauerie.

Rágia di bótte, casked Rozen.

Rágia mágra, course Rozen.

Rágia stercorína, a turd.

Ragiatúra, a disease in a horse called the Lax.

Rágio, a kinde of venemous Sea-spider.

Ragioíre, ísco, íto, to glad or ioy againe.

Ragionabilità, reasonablenesse.

Ragionalità, reasonablenesse.

Ragionaménto, a reasoning, a discourse, a speech, a talke, a parlie.

Ragionáre, to reason, to discourse, to speake, to talke, to parlie.

Ragionáre in sul sódo, to speake earnestly and to the purpose.

Ragionáto, reasoned, discoursed, talked, spoken. Also vsed for reguler or conformable vnto reason and iudgement.

Ragióne, reason, right. Also discourse, discretion, due consideration, equall iudgement, iustice, equitie. Also a cause, an account, a reckoning. Also a place of iustice or law. Also a pretence, a claime, a title or right claime. Also a pledge in drinking. Also Rozen. Also vsed for the ciuill Law.

Ragióne ciuíle, the ciuill Law.

Ragióne délle genti, the law of men.

Ragióne di guerra, the law of warre.

Ragióne di natúra, the law or reason of nature.

Ragióne dipáce, the right or law of peace.

Ragióne di státo, the law, reason or policie of State.

Ragióne diuína, the law, reason or ordinance of God.

Ragióne humána, humane law. 

Ragionéri, an Orator, a Discourser.

Ragionéuole, reasonable, endowed with reason, that hath the vse of reason.

Ragioneuolézza, reasonablenesse.

Ragióni, sorts, kinds or manners of things.

Ragioniére, a reasoner, a discourser. Also a keeper of a booke of accompts.

Ragióso, full of Rozin, gummie.

Ragliáre, to bray as an Asse.

Ragliáta, the braying of an Asse.

Ráglio, the braying of an Asse.

Rágna, a cobweb, a Spiders web or spinning. Also a fouling net, or hay to catch cunnies, any spring or entrapping.

Ragnatella, a little Rágna.

Ragnatello, a Sea-spider or Sea-dragon. Also any kind of litle Spinner or Spider.

Rágno, any kind of Spider or Spinner. Also a kind of Crab-fish.

Rágno moscáio, a Spider that hunts after Flies.

Ragnuóla, as Rágna.

Ragóide, the third skin that compasseth the eye wherein is the hole by which we see, called also Vuea.

Ragósta, a Crab-fish or Lobstar.

Ragrinzáre, to wrinkle, to wither. Also to pucker.

Ragroppaménto, a knotting or bundling vp together againe.

Ragroppáre, to knot, to tye or bundle vp together againe.

Ragruppáre, as Ragroppáre.

Ragruzzoláre, to scrape as a Hen doth.

Raguardáre, to behold, to regard.

Raguardéuole, regardfull, respectfull.

Ragunánza, an assemblie together.

Ragunáre, to assemble together.

Ragunáta, an assemblie.

Ragunatíui soldáti, hudled or gathered vp in haste.

Ragunatóre, an assembler, a collector.

Rahumiliáre, to rehumble, to meeken.

Ráia, as Rággia.

Raiáre, as Radiáre.

Raimondína, the secret arte of Alchimie of Raimundus Iulius.

Raína, a Raye or skate-fish.

Rainése, a kind of coine.

Ráio, as Rádio.

Raioso, as Radiánte.

Raitaménto, a crying, a yelling or walling as of a woman in labour.

Raitáre, to cry, to yell, to bawle, to waule or whine as a woman in labour.

Raítri, Swart-Rutters in Germanie.

Rallargáre, to enlarge or spread abroad.

Rallegraménto, a gladding, a reioycing.

Rallegráre, to reioyce, to glad, to blithe.

Rallentaménto, a relenting, a slacking.

Rallentánza, as Rallentaménto.

Rallentáre, to relent, to slacken, to yeeld. 

Ralleuáre, to raise or lift vp againe. Looke Leuáre.

Rálli, the birds called Railes. Also prickled Raly or Sallwort.

Rallieuáre, as Rileuáre.

Rallignáre, as Allignáre.

Rallumináre, to inlighten or illuminate

Ralluminatióne, a re-illumination.

Ralustráre, to re-illustrate or re-shine.

Ráma, as Rámo.

Ramággij, all manner of branches or branch-workes.

Ramaiuólo, a Brazier. Also a Grater. Also a Ramage-hawke.

Ramále di caténa, the linke of a chaine. Also a pot-hooke.

Ramánzi, Vsed for Románzi.

Ramargináre, to close vp a wound.

Ramárco, as Ramárico.

Ramaría, the trade or shop of a Brazier.

Ramaricaménto, a bewailing, a complayning, a whining, a weeping, a sorowing.

Ramaricáre, to bewaile bitterly, to complaine, to sorrow, to weepe, to bemone.

Ramaricatióne, as Ramaricaménto.

Ramaricchiáre, as Ramaricáre.

Ramarícchio, as Ramárico.

Ramarichéuole, to be bewailed, bemoned or sorrowed. Also dolorous or wailefull.

Ramárico, hearts griefe or sorrow, a bitter moane, wailing or complaining.

Ramaricóso, full of bitter sorrow, wailing, moane or complayning.

Ramário, a Brazier, a Copper-smith.

Ramárro, a Stellion, a Star-lizard, an Eft, a Nute, an Aske. Also a bird.

Ramaruóla, a ladle, or skimmer of brasse. Also a grate to grate with.

Ramassáre, to re-ammasse together.

Ramáta, a branch or boughfull of fruit. Also a blow with a bough.

Ramatáta, as Ramáta.

Ramática, full of boughes, branchie.

Ramázza, a kind of deuise that they vse in Italie to catch Blacke-birds when they are a sleepe.

Ramazzáre, to sweepe as a Chimney sweeper doeth a chimny, to rake. Also to catch Blacke-birds when they are a sleepe with a Ramázza.

Ramazzíno, a miserable scraping fellow that gets by hooke or crooke, by rakeing or scrapeing.

Ramazzótto, a chimny sweeper. Also a dragger, a raker, a farmer, a hooker.

Rambáta, as Rembáta.

Ráme, the mettall Copper or Brasse.

Rameo, a Brazier of brasse or copper.

Raméce, a swelling, a rupture or bursting in the cods.

Ramegliéro, a Brazier, a Copper-smith. Also a Tinker. 



Ramembránza, remembrance, memorie.

Ramembráre, to remember.

Ramemoráre, to remember.

Ramemoratióne, remembrance, memorie.

Ramengáre, to wander, to roaue, or gad vp and downe poorely and forlorne.

Raméngo, wandering, roauing or gadding vp and downe poorely and solitarily. Also a rammish hawke. Also when a horse goeth as it were in two mindes, as betwixt going and not going.

Ramentáre, to remember or put in minde.

Ramentatióne, remembrance, memorie.

Ramentéuole, mindefull, memorable.

Raménto, sost. a remembraace, a token to remember by.

Rameo, of or like a branch.

Rameríno, Rosemary.

Ramétto, a little bough, spray or branch.

Rami, boughes, spraies, sprigs, branches.

Ramíce, the Farsins or such sores in horses or other beasts. Also ruptures in the cods.

Ramicello, as Ramétto.

Ramicóso, branchy, full of branches.

Ramífero, branch-bearing.

Ramificáre, to branch.

Ramificatióne, an im-branching.

Ramígno, made of Copper or Brasse.

Ramingáre, as Ramengáre.

Ramíngo, as Raméngo.

Ramíni, all manner of Brasse vessels or implements belonging to a kitchin.

Rammantáre, to remantle, to cloke againe.

Rammarcáre, as Ramaricáre.

Rammárco, as Ramárico.

Rammaricatióne, as Ramaricatióne.

Rammarichéuole, as Ramarichéuole.

Rammaricchiáre, as Ramaricáre.

Rammarícchio, as Ramárico.

Rammaricóso, as Ramaricóso.

Rammaríno, Rosemary.

Rammariscáre, as Ramaricáre.

Rammassáre, to re-ammasse together.

Rammattonáre, to repaue with brickes.

Rammemoránza, remembrance, memory.

Rammemoráre, to remember.

Rammemoratióne, rememberance.

Rammemoratóre, a remembrancer.

Rammemoréuole, to be remembred.

Rammentánza, remembrance.

Rammentáre, to remember.

Rammentatióne, remembrance.

Rammentéuole, to be remembred. 

Rammezzaménto, a cutting into halfes.

Rammezzáre, to cut or deuide in halfs. Also to cut of in the middle.

Rammolláre, to moisten or soften againe.

Rammorbidaménto, a cockring, a pampering, a wantonizing, a softning.

Rammorbidáre, to make soft againe, to cocker, to pamper, to wantonize.

Rammorbidíre, dísco, díto, as Rammorbidáre.

Rammorbidíto, made soft or dainty. Also cockred, pampered or wantonized.

Rammorzáre, to quench or put out againe.

Rámno, a kind of Bramble.

Rámo, any bough, sprig, spray or branch. Also an arme or part ietting foorth. Also a branch of a house or linage.

Rámo di máre, a branch or arme of the Sea.

Ramógna, successe or following chance.

Ramognáre, to follow or trace ones way.

Ramolácci, blacke Winter Raddish.

Ramolóso, branchie, full of boughes.

Ramóra, as Rámi.

Ramoráccio, as Ramolácci.

Ramorbidáre, as Rammorbidáre.

Ramorbidíre, as Rammorbidáre.

Ramorúto, as Ramóso.

Ramosciolóso, as Ramóso.

Ramoscolóso, as Ramóso.

Ramóso, branchie, farre-spredding, full of boughes or branches.

Rampánte, rampant, clammering.

Rampárdo, a rampard, a rampier.

Rampáre, to rampe, to clammer, to climbe.

Rampáta, a ramping, a clammering. Also a blow giuen with a beasts paw.

Rampázzo d'úua, a bunch or cluster of Grapes.

Rampecáre, as Rampegáre.

Rampegáre, to grapple, to hooke, to dragge. Also to rampe, to clammer, to climbe.

Rampeggiánte, as Rampánte.

Rampeggiáre, as Rampáre.

Rampegonáre, as Rampegáre.

Rampegóne, a dragging or clasping hooke. Also in grapling or ramping manner.

Rámpi, flesh, dragging, grapling or clasping hookes or snagges.

Rampicáre, as Rampegáre.

Rampicóne, as Rampegóne, as Ráffo.

Rampináre, as Rampegáre.

Rampináto, dragged, hooked, grapled. Also clammered or ramped. Also full of hookes, claspes, snagges or tenterhookes. 

Rampinelleo, a little hooke or claspe. Also a hooker or hooking fellow.

Rampinétto, any little hooke or clasp. Also a kind of hooke that Gunners vse to put into the touchhole of pieces that are chambered, wherby they know how the piece is fortified in mettall.

Rampíno, any kind of little hooke, clasp, snag or tenterhooke.

Rampógna, a grumbling, a muttering, a grudging, a repining, a snuffing at in words.

Rampognáre, to grumble, to mutter, to grudge, to repine, to snuffe at in words.

Rampognóso, grumbling, muttering, grudging, repining, snuffing at in words.

Rampolláre, to bud fourth in branches or sprigs. Also as Scaturire.

Rampóllo, any kind of yongue or little branch, bud, sprig, spray, or bough.

Rampóllo d'ácqua, a branch, a riuelet, or gullet of water.

Ramponáto, a kind of high Horse-shooe, called a Calkin-shooe.

Rampóne, a Calkin in a horses shooe to keepe him from sliding. Also as Ráffo.

Rampónzoli, Rampe-rootes vsed much in salades.

Ramuscello, as Ramétto.

Rána, any kinde of Frogge or Padocke. Pesce rána, a Frogge fish. Mórso di rána, an hearbe with round leaues lying flat and spread vpon the water called Frog-bit. Also a kind of push or swelling in beasts tongues.

Ranabótolo, a yongue Frogge or Padocke.

Ranauótto, as Ranabótolo.

Ránca, hardly, with much a doe, scarcely. Also almost or aneanst.

Rancáre, to make a matter hard or difficult.

Ráncia, an Orenge-fruit. Also pale, wan, or sallow-coloured. Also as Ráncido.

Rancédine, as Rancità.

Ranciarósso, Orenge-tawny colour.

Ranciáta, sucket of Oranges called Orangiada.

Ranciáto, Orange-tawny coloure.

Rancidíre, dísco, díto, as Rancíre.

Ráncido, reazy, rammish, ranke, mouldy, or stinking as Bacon or things vinewed or rotten and tainted. Also vnpleasant and out of vse.

Ráncio, an Orange-tree or fruite. Also Orange-tawny, Also as Ráncido.

Rancíre, císco, cíto, to grow or become razie, rammish, ranke, mouldy, musty, stale, tainted, vinewed or vnpleasant in taste or smell. Also to yel, to make a noise or cry out as a Tiger. 



Rancità, reazinesse. Looke Rancíre.

Rancíto, growne, made, or become reazie, rammish, mouldy, vinewed, tainted or musty in taste and smell. Also brayed, yelled or cried like a Tiger.

Rancontráre, to reincounter or meete againe.

Rancóntro, a reincounter, a meeting againe.

Rancoráre, to rankle, to fester. Also to wax full of rancor, rage or spite. Also as Ramaricáre.

Rancóre, rancor, rage, spite, venime, deadly fude. Also rankling or festering.

Rancoróso, full of rankor or rage.

Rancúra, as Rancóre.

Rancuráre, as Rancoráre.

Ránda, as Ránca.

Randágio, a hard-harted, cruell, couetous and scraping man. Also one gadding wandering or roauing about, one that hath no home or resting place. Also a Haggard-hawke.

Randelláre, to beate, wrinch or throw with such a sticke. Also to hurle or fling furiously. Also to make a whirling noise. Also to bang or beate with a cudgell.

Randelláta, a blow or wrench with such a sticke. Also a violent flinging, a furious hurling, a whirling noise. Also a bange or blow with a cudgell.

Randello, a crooked sticke or cudgell that Cariers vse to wring or wrench their packes with. Also a whirling or whistling noise in the aire. A randello, at randon, in furious flinging manner.

Randióne, as Randágio.

Ranégga, as Brásci.

Rangífero, a Raine-deare, a beast in the Northren could countries, of the bignesse of a Mule, of the colour of an Asse, horned like a Stag, wonderfull swift in going, for in a day and a night they will goe a hundred and fifty miles, they make them tame and vse them instead of horses to draw sledges and Chariots.

Rangognáre, as Rampognáre.

Rangognóso, as Rampognóso.

Rangolaménti, as Rampógna.

Rangoláre, as Rampognáre.

Rangolóso, as Rampognóso.

Raníe, a worme or vermine growing in the rootes of Oakes.

Rannestáre, to graft againe.

Rannicchiársi, to shrinke vp close, to shrug or crinch in the backe as a Frog doeth before he leape. Also to coure and lie close together as an Vrchin or Hedgehog doth.

Rannícchi, a close shrinking vp, shruging, crinching or couring as of a Frog. 

Ranniére, a Barbers lie-pot.

Ránno, hot, strong, sharpe or scalding lie. Also a kind of poore folkes pottage or water-grewell. Also Ramne, Christs-thorne, Harts-thorne, Way-thorne, Bucke-thorne, or Rainberry-thorne.

Rannodaménto, a knitting together againe.

Rannodáre, to knit, ioyne or combine together againe.

Rannugoláre, as Rannuuoláre.

Rannuuoláre, to ouer-cloud, to be gloomy, cloudy, or duskie.

Ranócchia, a Frog or Padocke.

Ranócchia délla língua, the roote of the tongue.

Ranócchia terrestre, as Buféra.

Ranócchio, a Frog or Padocke. Also a toole to pull out teeth with.

Ranóncolo, a yoong Frog or Padocke. Also Crowfoote, Golden-knap or Butter-flower.

Rantacóso, as Rantolóso. Also hoarce in voice or speaking.

Rantolóso, drooping, withered, fading full of wrimples.

Ránula, an ingot or wedge of mettall.

Ránza, as Ráncia, as Fálce.

Ranzáta, as Ranciáta.

Ranzáto, as Ranciáto.

Ranzétto, of the colour of raw silke.

Ránzo, as Ráncio, as Ráncido.

Rápa, a Turnep or Rape-roote.

Rapáce, rauenous, greedy, pilling, deuouring, giuen to extortion.

Rapacità, rauenousnesse, greedinesse, extortion, insaciatenesse.

Rápano, a Raddish-roote. Also the hearbe Raiford.

Rapánte, rampant, clammering.

Rapáre, as Rampáre.

Raparíro, a Thistle-finch.

Rapáta, a hit or blow with a Turnep. Also a meate made of Turneps. Also a flout, a frumpe or Gudgeon swallowed.

Rapatumáre, as Rappatumáre.

Rapatúme, as Rappatúme.

Raperónzoli, as Rampónzoli.

Rapernogliólo, a Thistle-finch.

Rapezzáre, as Rappezzáre.

Rapezzatóre, as Rappezzatóre.

Ráphio, a beast called a Hindewolfe.

Rapianáre, to smooth or make plaine againe.

Rapicano, as Rabicáne.

Rapidézza, the violence, furie or swift running of a streame. Also suddaine haste.

Rapidità, as Rapidézza.

Rápido, furious, violent, or swift as a running streame. Also headlong or sudden.

Rapiménto, a rauishment, a forcing or taking away by violence. 

Rapína, rapine, rape, taking away by force. Also a violating or rauishment.

Rapináre, to rob, to rape, to rapine, to commit all manner of rapine.

Rapinaríe, robbings, rapines, filchings, all manner of rapes.

Rapinosaménte, rauenously, by way of rape or rapine.

Rapinóso, ranenous, full of rapines, robbings and rapes.

Rapíre, rapísco, rapíto, to rape, to rauish, to violate, to take away by force.

Rapito, rauished, raped, violated, forced, taken away by violent force.

Rapitóre, a rauisher, a raper, a forcer, a violater, a robber.

Rapóncoli, as Rampónzoli.

Rapóntico, Sowbread or Swinebread.

Ráppa., Looke Alla ráppa. Also a wrimple or puckering. Also a Coopers toole.

Rappacciáre, as Rappacificáre.

Rappacciume, as Rappatúme.

Rappacificáre, to appease or repacifie.

Rappallotoláre, to reduce into pils or little balles.

Rappallozzoláre, as Rannicchiáre.

Rappáre, to wrimple, to pucker.

Rapparíre, to appeare againe.

Rappatumáre, to whosht, to appease, to accord any controuersie, or rather as we say to patch vp a matter.

Rappatúme, an agreement, an appeasing or accord of any controuersie.

Ráppe, a scurfe in Horses called the Paines.

Rappelláre, to reappeale, to reuoke or to call backe againe.

Rappellatióne, a reappeale, a reuoking.

Rappello, a reappealing vnto.

Rappezzaménto, as Rappezzatúra.

Rappezzáre, to piece, to patch, to botch, to clout or coble againe.

Rappezzatóre, a piecer, a patcher, a botcher, a clouter, a cobler.

Rappezzatúra, a botching, a piecing, a patching, a cobling, a souting, a clouting.

Rappezzéuole, that may be pieced, botched, patched or clouted againe.

Rappianáre, to make plaine againe. Also to raze flat.

Rappiantáre, to replant or set againe.

Rappiastráre, as Rappiccáre.

Rappiccáre, to fasten, to cleaue, to ioyne or hang vnto againe, to glue together.

Rappicciáre, to rekindle or set on fire againe.

Rappigliaménto, as Rappigliatióne.

Rappigliáre, to take againe. Also to curdle as milke to make cheese, to rendle, to clod or congeale.

Rappigliatióne, a retaking. Also a crudling, a clodding, a congealing together.

Rappigliatúra, a taking againe. Also a crudling of milke, a clodding or 



congealing.

Rapportaménto, as Rappórto.

Rapportáre, to rebring or recarrie. Also to report or relate vnto.

Rapportatóre, a rebringer, a recarier. Also a reporter or relater vnto.

Rappórto, a rebringing, a recariage. Also a report or relation.

Rappréndere, préndo, prési, préso, as Rappigliáre. Also to shrinke vp sinnewes, or to founder as a Horse.

Rapprendiménto, as Rappigliatúra. Also as Rapprésa.

Rapprésa, is properly when a Horse is (as we call it) taken in his legs so as hee cannot stand or goe. Some take it for the foundring of a Horse. Also as Riprésa.

Rappreságlie, as Ripreságlia.

Rappresaménto, as Rapprésa.

Rappresentánti, as Rappresentatóri. Also Commissioners, Ambassadors or Deputies.

Rappresentáre, to represent or shew vnto. Also to play Comedies or Tragedies.

Rappresentatióne, a representation.

Rappresentatíno, that doth represent or may be represented.

Rappresentatóri, representers. Also Players or Comediants.

Rappréso, retaken. Also crudled, clodded or congealed. Also foundred or shrunk vp.

Rapsodía, a Rapsodie.

Rapsodiáre, to write or speake Rapsodies.

Rapsóidi, Interpreters or Rehearsers of Homers verses.

Rápto, as Rapíto. Also a thing rauished or violently taken away.

Rapúcci, yoong Turneps.

Raraménte, rarely, seldome, thinly.

Rarefáre, as Rarificáre.

Rarefattióne, a rarifying or making thin.

Ráre uólte, seldome or rare times.

Rarézza, as Rarità.

Rarificáre, to rarifie, to make thin.

Rarità, raritie, thinnesse, seldnesse, fewnesse, scantnesse, a spungie hollownesse.

Raritúdine, as Rarità.

Ráro, rare, thin, seld seene.

Rasagrásso, the fat or gum of any tree.

Rasáre, as Rádere, to shaue euen.

Rasatóre, a Shauer, a Notter, a Pouler.

Rásca, a cobweb, a Spiders web. Also the bone or finne of any fish. Also any scraping or burnishing toole. Also a measure of liquid things vsed in Italie.

Rascaménto, as Raschiatúra.

Rascáre, as Rasehiáre, as Rastelláre.

Rascássa biánca, as Bécca in cáuo.

Rascatóio, a burnishing toole. 

Rascétta, the wrist of ones hand. Also a kind of fine silke-rash.

Ráschia, as Raschiatúra, as Rásca.

Rasehiáre, to straine for to cough, to spawle or spit as it were from the lungs. Also to rake, to scrape or scratch together. Also to file, to burnish, to furbish, to scoure, to frub or scrape cleane. Also to scud nimbly away, or raze the ground as a bullet or arrow doth. Also to pare or scrape away.

Raschiáto, strained to cough, spauled or spitten as it were from the lungs. Also raked, scraped, or scratched together. Also filed, burnished, frubbed or scraped cleane. Also scudded away nimbly. Also pared and scraped away.

Raschiatóre, a cougher, a spauler, a strainer to spit. Also a raker, a scraper. Also a burnisher or frubber. Also a parer or scraper away.

Raschiatúra, a straining to cough, to spaule or spit. Also a scraping or raking together. Also a burnishing or frubbing. Also a seudding away. Also filing or file-dust. Also a paring or scraping away.

Ráschio, as Raschiatúra.

Ráscia, the stuffe called Rash.

Rasciáre, as Raschiáre. Also to shaue with a Razor.

Rasciáta, as Raschiatúra. Also a blow giuen with a Razor, a shauing.

Rasciatúra, as Raschiatúra.

Rasciére, a Rash-maker or weauer.

Rasciucáre, to wipe or dry againe.

Rasciugáre, to wipe or dry againe.

Rasciugatóio, a wiper, a rubber, a towel.

Rásco, as Rastello.

Rásega, any kind of sawe.

Rasegáre, to sawe in sunder. Also to ioyne close together.

Rasempiáre, to ensample, to exemplifie, to coppie, to match, to patterne.

Rasempiatúra, an exampling, a matching.

Raséne, any kind of Rozen.

Rasentáre, to come, to goe, or flie close or neere vnto, to slide by.

Rasénte, aneanst, neere or close vnto. Also leuell or full measure.

Rasénte la terra, close to the land.

Rasiére, a Razor. Also a shauer.

Rasíle, that part of a vine-stocke that lyes in the ground.

Rasin, a tree in Arabia whereof there is but one, and on it the Phœnix sits.

Ráso, shauen, shaued, smooth. Also fled neere the ground, or sailed neere the shore. Also razed or scraped out. Also grazed or glanced neere as an arrow or bullet on the ground. Also the the silke stuffe called Satten.

Ráso dell'ánima., Looke Tiráre or Trouáre.

Ráso de'metálli., Looke Tiráre or Trouáre.

Rasóio, a Razor to shaue with.

Rasóla, a paring-shouell, a scraping toole. Also a rough file.

Rasonáre, as Ragionáre.

Rasonáto, a Marchants counting boord.

Rasóre, a Razor. Also a Shauer or Notter.

Ráspa, as Rásola.

Raspáre, to file, to pare, to scrape. Also to rake and scrape together, to raze out.

Rasparuóla, a scraping toole. Also a little rough file.

Raspáto, filed, pared or scraped. Also raked or hearded vp. Also Raspise wine.

Raspatóre, a filer, a scraper, a raker together of any thing.

Raspatúra, a filing, a raking or scraping together. Also file-dust.

Raspello, a scraping pinch-pennie.

Ráspo, the fruit or berrie called Raspise. Also a kind of dry scurfe, scab, or tetter. Also a rake. Also a bunch or cluster.

Raspoláre, to gleane or picke for bunches or omitted clusters of Grapes.

Raspoláta, a gleaning of Grapes.

Raspoliéra, a gleaner of clusters or grapes.

Raspolísta, as Raspoliéra.

Ráspolo, a bunch or cluster of Grapes.

Raspolóso, full of clusters or bunches of Grapes.

Raspóne, as Raspello.

Rassaporáre, to sauour againe.

Rassáre, as Raschiáre.

Rassatúra, as Raschiatúra.

Rasségna, a rendezuous or retreate for souldiers. Also a summoning to a place. Also a catalogue or collecting of many things together. Also a generall muster of souldiers.

Rassegnáre, to sound a retreate, to call to a rendezuous, to muster together. Also to resigne or restore vnto. Also to collect or gather together in any one place. Also to muster men.

Rassembránza, a resemblance, an assembly.

Rassembráre, to resemble. Also to assemble.

Rassempláre, as Rasempiáre.

Rasserenáre, to cleare vp, to be bright or shining. Also to looke cheerefully.

Rassétta, a finde-fault, a mend-all, a busie-bodie.

Rassettaménto, a setling or placing in order or due place, a mending, a repairing.

Rassettáre, to settle in order or due place.

Rassetto, setled in good order.

Rassicuránza, a re-assurance. 



Rassicur áre, to warrant, to re-assure.

Rassodáre, to make tough, hard or solide, to stiffen, to strengthen.

Rassodía, as Rapsodía.

Rassodiáre, as Rapsodiáre.

Rassomigliánza, a resemblance.

Rassomigliéuolc, to be resembled.

Rassomigliáre, to resemble.

Rassúmere, as Resúmere.

Rassúnto, as Resúnto.

Rastelláre, to rake. Also to purcullise.

Rastellatóre, a Raker.

Rastellatúra, a raking.

Rastelliéra, a rake, a purcullise.

Rastello, a rake, a harrow, a drag. Also a hurdle. Also a racke, a cratch, or a manger in a stable. Also a grate or purcullis. Also a fludgate. Also a stile or yate in a hedge. Also an instrument to weede corne, or to rid away earth from vines. Also a labell or lambeaw in armorie.

Rastiáre, as Raschiáre.

Rastiatúra, as Raschiatúra.

Rastiatúre, shauings or scrapings.

Rastráre, as Rastelláre.

Rastratóre, as Rastellatóre.

Rastrelláre, as Rastelláre.

Rastrelliéra, as Rastelliéra.

Rastrello, as Rastello. Also a couetous raking or scraping fellow.

Rastremamento, a stone ietting out of any wall as a stay for beames to rest vpon.

Rastremáre, to reduce vnto a sharpnesse or out-iutting.

Rástro, as Rastello.

Rasúra, a shauing or paring away. Also a razing or scraping out of any writing.

Ráta, a rate, a share, a portion. Also the milt or spleane of any bodie.

Ratágli, as Ritágli.

Rataménto, ratable, portionable.

Ratáre, to rate, to ratifie, to confirme, to portion, to share or allot by equall portions.

Ráte, as Záttere.

Ratéuole, ratable, portionable.

Ratificáre, to ratifie, to confirme, to approoue, to allow of, to warrant.

Ratificatióne, a ratification, a confirming, an approouing, an establishing.

Ratifichéuole, that may be ratified, confirmed, or established.

Ratiocinábile, hauing vse of reason.

Ratiocinatióne, a resoning, a debating or disputing of matters.

Ratiocínio, as Ratiocinatióne.

Rationábile, as Rationále.

Rationále, reasonable, endewed with reason or capable of reason, humane. Also a Priests attire among the Hebrewes. Also a principall Court or Tribunall in Naples.

Rationalità, reasonablenesse, reason.

Ráto, rated, confirmed, ratified. Also a rate, a sharing by equall portions.

Ratrappáre, to ouertake. Also to entrap againe.

Ratrappírsi, písco, píto, to shrinke vp as with a crampe. Also to be stiffe or benummed in the ioynts with colde.

Ratrappíto, shrunke vp with a crampe, or stiffe, clumzie and benummed with colde.

Ratrátto, as Ratrappíto.

Ratristársi, to be sad or sorrowsull.

Rátta, as Ráta.

Rattaccáre, to fasten vnto againe.

Rattacconáre, as Rappezzáre.

Rattaménte, quickly, nimbly, swiftly.

Rattaménto, as Rátto, Rápto.

Rattemperaménto, as Rattemperánza.

Rattemperánza, a moderating againe.

Rattemperáre, to retemper, or moderate.

Rattenére, as Ritenére.

Ratteniménto, as Riteniménto.

Rattentáre, to reattempt, to reassay.

Ratténto, a reattempting, a reassaying.

Rattenúta, a retayning, a with-houlding, a stay. Also a Leape-weele or Weere-net to take fish. Also a Mill-dame.

Rattenúto, as Ritenúto.

Rattepidíre, dísco, díto, to allay the heate, to coole or asswage againe.

Rattézza, swiftnesse, speed, hasty-violence.

Rátto, swift, speedy, hasty, fleet, suddaine, quicke, nimble. Also high, craggie or steepe. Also rapt, raped, rauished, deflowred, taken or carried away perforce. Also a rape, a rauishment or deflowring of a woman against hir will and consent. Also a Rat or a Mouse. Also a Ray or Skatefish. Also rapine or greedy praying as wilde beasts commit.

Rátto chè, so suddainly as.

Rattopenágo, a Night-bat, a Rearemouse.

Rattopenúgo, a Night-bat, a Rearemouse.

Rattoppáre, as Rappezzáre.

Rattoppatóre, a botcher, a cobler, a souter.

Rátto rátto, most speedily, very suddainlie.

Rattóre, a robber, a spoyler, a rauisher, an extortioner or violent taker away.

Rattrappaménto de nerui, a contraction, a shrinking of sinewes.

Rattrappáre, to shrinke or become and make stiffe, starke, and benummed with crampe and exceeding cold. Also to ouertake or ouer-reach againe. 

Rattrappatióne, as Rattrappaménto.

Rattrátto, as Ritrátto. Also as Rattrappáto. Looke Rattrappáre. Also as Attrátto, lame, shrunken, atracted.

Rattúra, any griedy rape or rapine.

Ráua, a Rape-roote or Turnep.

Rauaggiólo, a kind of dainty Cheese.

Rauagliáre il fílo, to reele yarne.

Rauanello, a Raddish-roote. Also the crinits of a Hawke.

Rauaníglia, all manner of Raddish-rootes.

Ráuano, a Raddish-roote.

Rauanoságria, the wilde or Horse-raddish-roote.

Rauaríno, a birde called a Thistle-Finch.

Rauaríno, an Oyle made of Lillies.

Rauazzóne, Rape-seede. Also Rape-oyle.

Raucáre, to be or becom hoarce in speaking. Also to snort. Also to yell as a Tyger.

Raucisóno, that hath a hearce voice.

Raucità, hoarcenesse. Also snorting. Also the yelling of a Tyger.

Ráuco, hoarce in speaking or sounding.

Raued, the hearbe or roote Rewbarbe.

Rauedére, véggo, víddi, vedúto or visto, , to perceiue, to bethinke or be aware againe.

Rauediménto, fore-sight, heedinesse, perceiuing or warinesse, well aduised.

Rauedúto, perceiued, bethought, espide, aware with aduisednesse.

Rauelláre, to reueale, to manifest.

Rauellíno, a Rauelin, a wicket or Posterne-gate. Also the vtmost bounds of the wales of a Castle or Forts and Skonces, with out the wales.

Rauello, a little Turnep or Radish-roote.

Rauerústa, a kind of soure hedge Grape in Italie.

Rauet, as Raued.

Rauiáre, as Rauuiáre.

Rauíccie, a meate made of Turnep-leaues.

Rauíccio, as Radícchio.

Rauicináre, to approch neere againe.

Rauiggiólo, a kinde of dainty Cheese. Also a kind of conserue or sucket vsed after meate to close vp the stomacke.

Rauignóli, as Rafiuóli.

Rauiluppáre, to enwrap againe.

Rauincidíre, dísco, díto, to yeeld, to stretch or become tender and soft againe.

Rauióli, as Rafiuóli. Also a kinde of clouted creame or foole.

Rauisáre, to readuise or marke againe.

Rauisciuólo, a kinde of Rie or Tiphbread.

Rauisoláre, to recouer halfe againe. 



Rauísto, as Rauedúto.

Rauiuáre, to reuiue againe.

Rauiuóli, as Rauióli.

Rauízze, leaues or stalkes of Turnips.

Raumiliáre, to humble againe.

Raunaménto, as Radunánza.

Raunánza, an assembly.

Raunáre, to assemble together.

Raunáta, an assembly.

Raunéuole, that may be assembled.

Rauógliere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, as Rauólgere.

Rauóglio, a bundle, a fardle, a folding vp.

Rauogliuólo, a kind of fresh cheese.

Rauólgere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, to reuolue, to tosse or turne againe. Also to clue vp round, to enwrap or enfold in. Also to roule vp, to range or trudge about.

Rauolgiménto, a renoluing, an enfolding, a turning or rouling about.

Rauólto, reuolued, tossed and turned, infolded or enwrapped vp, rouled vp againe.

Raus, a game at cards vsed in Italy.

Rauuedérsi., looke Rauedére.

Rauuiaménto, a setting in the way or order againe.

Rauuiáre, to addresse or set in the way or forward againe.

Rauuificáre, to reuiue, or requicken.

Rauuificatióne, a reuiueing.

Rauuilluppáre, to inwrape againe.

Rauuillúppo, as Vilúppo.

Rauuinchiáre, to binde or claspe againe.

Rauuisáre, to consider, to view and readuise againe.

Rauuistáre, to readuise or heede againe.

Rauuiuáre, to reuiue, to requicken.

Rauuólgere, as Rauólgere.

Rauuolgiménto, as Rauolgiménto.

Rauuóluere, as Rauólgere.

Rauúnculo, the hearbe Crow-foote.

Rázza, a race, a kind, a broode, a stocke, a descent, a linage, a pedigree.

Razzaménti, all manner of Aras-workes or Tapistries, or hangings.

Razzáre, to hang with Tapistry or Aras-workes. Also as Raspáre.

Razzeggiánte, as Radiánte.

Razzeggiáre, as Radiáre.

Razzése, a kind of wine that is tart and biting vpon the tongue.

Rázzi, as the Plurall of Rádio. Also Aras-workes or Tapistries.

Razziére, all manner of Tapistries.

Razzimáto, smug, spruce, newly shauen.

Razzína, a race, but taken in ill part. Also a little roote.

Rázzo, as Rádio. Also a piece of Aras or Tapistry. Also a Ray or Skate-fish.

Razzoláre, to scrape and dig as a hen. Also to rake together.

Razzolatúra, a scraping and digging as of a hen. Also a rakeing together.

Rázzolo, as Razzolatúra.

Re, a King, a Soueraigne, a crowned Prince subsisting absolutely of himselfe. Also a note in musike. Vsed also in the beginning of verbes as a duplication, as Ra or Ri.

Readottáre, to readopt.

Reále, reall or essentiall. Also Royall, Royally, Kingly, like to a king. Also noble and sumptuous. Also honest, vpright, sincere, truely minded. Also a chiefe fort, a royall skonce, a middle Towre, or strong keepe in any Castle.

Realgáre, the fume, the vapour or smoke of minerals, and by a Metaphor the vile corruption in mans body causing diuers filthy diseases.

Realità, reallity, essentiality. Also royalty or kinglinesse. Also loyalty, vprightnesse and sincerity.

Realizzáre, to reallize or make Kingly. Also to exercise the true part of a King.

Realménte, really, essentially. Also royally, Kingly, or like a King and Princely. Also vprightly, loyally, sincerely and honestly, without frand or guile.

Reáme, a Realme, a Kingdome.

Reaménte, guiltily, offendingly, falselie.

Reáre, to commit wickednesse or guilt.

Rearello, a Kinglet, or petty-king.

Reassúmere, as Resúmere, to reassume.

Reassuntióne, a reassamption.

Reassúnto, reassumed.

Reatino, a bird called a Wren.

Reáto, a guilt, a crime. Also a guiltinesse. Also the state of a party araigned.

Reattióne, a reacting, or reaction.

Reatúra, guiltinesse of a crime.

Rebadochíno, as Ribadochíno.

Rebalzáta, as Ribalzáta.

Rebattézzato, rebaptized.

Rebechista, as Ribechísta.

Rebelláre, as Ribelláre.

Rebelle, as Ribelle.

Rebellióne, as Ribellióne.

Rebello, as Ribello.

Rebellóso, as Ribellóso.

Roboáre, to low or bellow againe.

Rebuffáre, as Rabuffáre.

Rebúffo, as Rabúffo.

Rebuóla, a kind of wine so called.

Recalcitráre, as Ricalcitráre.

Recáluo, fore-bald.

Recamáre, as Ricamáre.

Recamatóre, as Ricamatóre.

Recamatúra, embroydery, needleworke.

Recambiáre, as Ricambiáre.

Recámera, a with-drawing or backechamber.

Recámi, as Ricámi.

Recantáre, as Ricantáre.

Recantatióne, a recantation.

Recapitáre, as Ricapitáte.

Recápito, as Ricápito.

Recapituláre, to rehearse what hath been spoken before.

Recapitulatióne, a recapitulation, a rehearsing of a thing spoken before.

Recáre, to reach vnto, to bring. Also to fetch. Also to betake or take vnto. Also to perswade or draw vnto, to dispose to induce. Also to leade, to bring or conduct.

Recáre ad effetto, to effect or bring to passe.

Recáre in brieue, to reduce into breuitie.

Recáre in úno, to bring to a conclusion. Also to reduce into one.

Recáre a ménte, to remember, to call or bring to minde.

Recáre a partíto, to bring or draw to a bargane, composition or determination.

Recarsi, for a man to be drawne to yeeld vnto. Also to take a matter vnkindlie.

Recársi a cuóre, to take to heart.

Recársi a conscienza, to make conscience of a matter.

Recársi ad honóre, to take or repute it as an honour vnto himselfe.

Recársi ad ingiúria, to take any thing as an iniury or wrong.

Recársi ad ónta, to take and repute it as a shame or disgrace vnto himselfe.

Recársi adósso, for a man to draw vpon himselfe.

Recársi a glória, to take and repute it as a glory vnto himselfe.

Recársi a mále, to take in ill part.

Recár si álle cóse honeste, to be drawne vnto honest things.

Recársi a nóia, to be displeased with, to be weary of.

Recársi a piángere, to betake himselfe to weepe and waile.

Recársi in sè stésso, for a man to summon or call himselfe into himselfe.

Recársi sòpra disè, as Recár si in sè stésso

Recáta, a bringing vnto, a reaching. Also a fetching. Looke Recáre.

Recatáre, to regrate, to fore-stall the market or ingrosse any thing with purpose to make great gaine by retailing it againe.

Recatería, a regrating, an ingrossing or 



fore-stalling of the markes. Also a retayling againe. Also a frippery or Brokers-shop.

Recatiére, a regrater, a huckster, a retailer, a fripper, a broker.

Recato, reached or brought vnto. Also fetched. Also betaken or taken and reputed vnto. Also allured drawne or perswaded vnto. Also spettle, fleagme or such excrements.

Recatóre, a reacher, a bringer, a fetcher, a drawer vnto.

Recchióni, as Orecchióni, Trunnions. Also swellings in the necke called the mumps.

Recedere, cedo, cessi, cesso, to recoile, to retreate, to retire, to giue ground.

Recensióne, a reuiewing or examination of an account or number, a rehearsing.

Recentáre, to make fresh, new or recent. Also to wash, to rence or cleanse with water.

Recente, recent, fresh, new come, of late, newly or lately made.

Recenteménte, newly, lately, freshly.

Récere, récio, recéi, reciúto, to vomit, to cast, to spaule, to spue.

Recési, shady, pleasant, greene, Country, retiring or summer places.

Recessióne, a returne of any sickenesse or ague, a reaccesse or comming again. Also a recoyling or going backe.

Recesso, a retreate, a recoyling, a going backe or farther off. Also a close-retyring place or corner in some house. Also the ebbing or returning backe of the sea. Also the hollownesse of the mouth.

Recetta, as Ricetta.

Recettácolo, as Ricettácolo.

Recettárij, receipts, or medicines.

Recettióne, acceptance, reception.

Recetto, receiued, accepted.

Recettório, a vessell to receiue what distilleth from aboue.

Recéuere, as Ricéuere.

Receuitóre, as Riceuitóre.

Receuúto, receiued, accepted.

Rechedípno, a kind of garment anciently vsed of the Romans to sup in.

Rechiamáre, as Richiamáre.

Recídere, cído, cisi, ciso, to cut off, behind or in sunder, to cut againe, to pare away.

Recidiuatióne, relaps into sicknesse againe.

Recidíuo, that groweth or is restored againe to health. Also a relaps of sicknesse.

Recíndere, as Recídere, to cut off, to take away, to make voide, a law or repeale, an act.

Recíngere, cíngo, cínsi, cínto, to guird or compasse about or in againe. 

Recíni, yongue knets of budding fruites.

Recínio, as Recíno.

Recíno, a square garment like a Nimphs mantle, which who did weare did cast one lap of it ouer their shoulder.

Recínto, a circuit, a compasse, a precinct, a limite. Also guirded or compassed in.

Reciperánza, a league or entercourse betweene Princes for the surrendring of any thing.

Recipiente, capable to receiue. Also the receiuing part of a Limbecke or still.

Reciprocaménte, reciprocally, mutuallie, enterchangeably.

Reciprocare, to depend one of another by mutuall consequence. Also to returne from whence one came as the flow and ebbe of the sea doth.

Reciprocatióne, a returning to the place whence one came in orderly course, as the flowing and ebbing of the Sea doth.

Recíproco, reciprocall, mutuall, answerable, hauing recourse or respect to returne from whence one came, ebbing and flowing in due course.

Recirculáre, to recircle or compasse about againe.

Recirculatióne, a recirculation.

Recisióne, a cutting off, away or againe

Reciso, cut off, againe, behind or in sunder.

Recitaménto, a reciting, a rehearsing.

Recitánte, a reciter, a rehearser, a relater. Also an enterlude plaier.

Recitáre, to recite, to rehearse, to relate, to tell by heart or without booke, as players doe their parts in commedies.

Recitáre úna comédia, to recite a commedie.

Recitatíuo, that may be recited.

Recitatóre, as Recitánte.

Reciticcími, vomitings, spuings, castings. Also strainings to spue or cast.

Reciúto, vomited, spued, cast.

Reclamáre, as Richiamáre.

Reclamatióne, as Richiamatióne.

Reclináre, to bend or incline againe.

Reclinatório, rebending or inclining againe.

Reclíuia, a loosenesse of the skin from the nailes of ones fingers.

Reclíue, leaning vpward.

Reclusióne, an opening.

Recognitióne, a recognissance, a recognisson, a surueigh.

Recognitóre, an acknowledger, a knowwer.

Recolendo, worthy to be honoured.

Reconciliáre, as Riconciliáre.

Reconciliatióne, as Riconciliatióne.

Recompiláre, to compile againe.

Recompilatióne, a recompiling. 

Recondita, secrecy, profundity.

Reconditáre, to lay vp secretly, deepely and out of knowledge.

Recóndito, close, remote, deepe, laide vp, secret, hard to be knowne.

Reconfáre, to agree or sute with againe.

Reconuentióne, are conuenting.

Recopiáre, to coppy or write againe.

Recorrente, recurrent or running too and fro.

Recorrenti véne, the veines called the recurrant veines.

Recorrenza, a recurrency or running to and fro.

Recórrere, to run againe or too and fro.

Recouráre, to recouer, to reobtaine.

Recrastináre, to put off from day, to day.

Recreáre, as Ricreáre.

Recreatióne, as Ricreatióne.

Recreatíuo, as Ricreatíuo.

Recreménto, any superfluous drosse.

Recriminatióne, a fault in him that blameth others.

Recúmbere, cúmbo, cumbéi, cumbúto, to lay downe or along, to fall vpon, to leane on.

Recuperándo, recouerable.

Recuruità, a bending backe againe.

Recusábile, refuseable.

Recusánte, as Ricusánte.

Recusáre, as Ricusáre.

Recutíuo, circumcised. Also cut short or exulcerated.

Réda, an heire, an inheritor.

Redággio, any heritage or inheritance.

Redáre, to inherite.

Redarguíre, guísco, guíto, to controule, to disprooue, to reprehend, to blame, to shew by reason or argument what hath beene said is not true.

Redátto, constrained or brought againe.

Reddíre, to returne againe, as Rendere.

Redditióne, a rendring, a restoring.

Reddíto, returned againe. Also Réso. Also any yeerely rent, comming in or fruit and profit that lands doe yeeld.

Réde, an heire, an inheritor, a successor.

Redélla fáua, the King chosen by a beane in a cake on Twelfth day, an idle King.

Redentióne, redemption, redeeming.

Redentíuo, redemptiue, redeeming.

Redénto, redeemed, ranzomed, rescued.

Redentóre, a redeemer, a ransomer.

Rédere, to returne, to come or goe againe

Redibitóre, a restorer of any thing backe againe.

Re di cíbi., Vsed for Ceruelláto.

Redificáre, to re-edifie, to build againe.

Redígere, to bring againe by force or cunning. Also to cause or compell. 



Redimendo, that may be redeemed.

Redímere, dímo, diniéi, dimúto, to redeeme, to ransome, to rescue.

Rediméuole, that may be redeemed.

Redimíto, redeemed, ransomed, rescued.

Redimitóre, a redeemer, a ransomer.

Redimúto, redeemed, ransomed.

Redináre, to reine as a Horse doth.

Rédine, the reynes of a bridle. Vsed by metaphor for rule or gouernment.

Redinelle, false or little reynes of a bridle.

Redintegráre, to reintegrate, to renew, to make whole againe.

Redintegratióne, reintegration, renewing, or a beginning a fresh.

Redire, rédo, redíto, to returne home againe. Also to report or say againe.

Redita, a returne, a returning.

Redità, an inheritance, a patrimonie.

Reditággio, heritage, inheritance.

Reditáre, to inherite.

Reditióne, a returning, a rendition.

Redíto, returned, come againe.

Reditúro, returning, or to returne backe.

Redíuie, as Redúuie.

Redíuio, a worme called a Tyke, which sucketh bloud from man or beast.

Rediuíuo, that returneth to life againe. Also that hath long been vnused, and is now come in vse againe.

Redondándia, excessiuenesse, superfluitie, too much abounding, surcharging.

Redondánza, as Redondándia.

Redondáre, to redound, to abound superfluously, to result, to be so full that it runne ouer, to ouerflow.

Redoppiáre, to redouble.

Redóppio, a redoubling, a double blow.

Re d'uccelli, a bird called a Wren.

Redúcere, as Redúrre.

Redúnco, crooked vpward.

Redundánte, plenteous, redounding.

Redundánza, plenteousnesse.

Redundáre, to redound backward.

Redúnie, as Redúuie.

Reduplicatióne, a redoubling.

Redúrre, dúco, dússi, dútto, to reduce, to bring, to draw or lead backe againe.

Reduttióne, a reduction, a bringing, a drawing or leading backe againe.

Redútto, reduced, brought, drawen or led backe againe.

Redúuie, the clefts of the skin about the nailes called wort wales. Also the skins that Serpents cast off when they grow old. Also a gnawing of the wormes.

Reedificáre, as Riedificáre.

Refáre, as Rifáre, Also to thrid.

Réfe, any kind of sewing thrid.

Refellere, refello, refelsi, refellúto, to refell, to disprooue, to refute, to confute.

Referendáre, to report, to blab or tell tales from one to another. 

Referendário, a reporter, a blab, a telltale, an eawes-dropper. Also a Princes officer much like vnto that of England called the Kings Remembrancer.

Referendo, to be referred.

Referenza, as Riferenza.

Referína, as Refrína.

Referíre, rísco, ríto, as Riferíre.

Refermáto, reconfirmed.

Referto, referred. Also full endowed with, stuffed or replenished.

Referto, as Referíto, referred. Also full, repleat or replenished.

Refettióne, a refection, a refreshing, a repast, a taking of meate and drinke, a baite by the way. Also a repairing of that which is worne and decaied.

Refettíuo, refectiue, refreshing.

Refettório, a refectorie or eating place in a religious house, a bailing place.

Reficiáre, to comfort or strengthen with meat and drinke, to repaire.

Refiláre, to spin, to respin.

Refináre, as Rifináre.

Refiutáre, as Ricusáre, to refuse.

Refiuto, as Ricúsa, a refusall.

Refláto, a contrarie blast.

Reflessíbile, that may reflex.

Reflessióne, as Riflessióne.

Reflessíuo, as Riflessíno.

Reflesso, as Riflesso.

Reflettere, as Riflettere.

Refluente, reflowing or turning backe.

Refluíre, ísco, íto, to reflow, to turne backe.

Reflussione, a reflowing or reflux.

Reflússo, a reflux or flowing backe.

Refocillare, to whet againe or set a new edge on, to comfort or strengthen againe.

Refocillatióne, a comforting, a refreshing or strengthning againe.

Refocilláto, newly whetted, comforted or made lustie againe.

Reformáre, as Riformáre.

Reformatióne, as Riformatióne.

Refragábile, refragable, that may be repugned or gaine-stood.

Refragáre, to kicke against, to repugne, to gaine-say, to be against.

Refragránza, as Rifragránza.

Refrangére, as Rifrángere.

Refrattário, refractarie, obstinate, headstrong, wilfull in opinion.

Refrattióne, a bursting or refraction.

Refrenáre, as Raffrenáre.

Refrendáre, as Referendáre.

Refrendário, as Referendário.

Refrigeránte, cooling, refreshing.

Refrigeráre, to coole, to refresh. Also to recreate, to ease, to comfort.

Refrigeratíuo, cooling, refreshing. Also easefull or comfortable.

Refrigeratório, as Refrigeratíuo.

Refrigerio, a cooling, a refreshing. Also an ease, an helpe, comfort or recreation.

Refrína, an ancient ceremonie vsed with sacrificing of Beanes to the Gods for the obtaining of good successe in sowing of their corne.

Refrússo, as Riflússo, a reflux.

Refrustáre, as Rifrustáre.

Refrústo, as Rifrústo.

Refudagióne, a refusall, a refusing.

Refúga, a runnegate, a fugitiue.

Refuggíre, as Rifuggíre.

Refuggíto, as Rifuggíto.

Refúgio, as Rifúgio.

Refúgo, as Refúga.

Refúlgere, as Rifúlgere.

Refúlgido, bright, glittering, shining.

Refusati, the coursest Veluets that be called Refusados.

Refutábile, that may be refused.

Refutáre, as Rifutáre.

Refutatióne, as Rifutatióne.

Réga, as Ríga.

Regáglie, vailes, fees or perquisites.

Regalaménto, a present or larges bestowed vpon one. Also a cheerefull feasting or defraying of ones charges.

Regaláre, to present with gifts, to bestow larges vpon. Also to feast cheerefully or defray ones charges.

Regálbulo, a Witwall or Loriot.

Regále, as Reále, as Regio.

Regáli, Regalities, Lord-rights. Also instruments called Rigoles.

Regálie, tributaries to a Kingdome.

Regalítia, Licorice wood.

Regálo, as Regalaménto.

Regáre, as Rigáre.

Regátta, as Rigátta.

Regattáre, as Rigattáre.

Regattiére, as Rigattiére.

Regázza, a Iay, a Piot, a Pye.

Regendo, ruling. Also to be ruled.

Regeneráre, to regenerate, to ingender againe. Also to resemble in nature.

Regeneratióne, regeneration, new birth.

Regeneratíuo, that may be regenerated.

Regentále cáthedra, a Regents chaire.

Regentáre, to command as a Regent.

Regente, a Regent, a Gouernour.

Regermináre, to bud or burge on againe.

Regerminatióne, a burgeoning againe.

Regestola, a kind of Lanaret hawke called a Ninemurtherer or Shreeke.

Regettáre, as Rigettáre, to reiect.

Reggente, a Regent, a Gouernour, a Ruler. Also ruling or raigning.

Reggere, reggo, ressi, retto, to rule, to gouerne, to sway, to weeld, to command. Also to guide or direct. Also to maintaine, to sustaine and vphold. Also to endure, to resist or withstand.

Reggi. Vsed of Dante for thou returnest or commest backe againe. Also vsed anciently for great porches of houses, 



long and open galleries, large and faire cloysters in Pallaces or Religious houses.

Reggia, a Kings house, Pallace, Court, Seate or Throne.

Reggíbile, that may be ruled or swaied.

Reggiétta, as Seggiétta, or Séggiola.

Reggiménto, a regiment, a gouernment, a sway, a ruling. Also a Regiment of men, that is a number of sundry companies vnder one Colonell. Also the cariage, demeanour or moouing of ones bodie. Also a rule, a direction, a gouernance and prescription of a mans life, manners and dyet. Also the sterne or rudder of a ship.

Reggitóre, a Ruler, a Swayer, a Commander, a Director, a Gouernour.

Regi, Kings, the plurall of Re.

Regia, kingly, royall, maiesticall, vía regia, the Kings high-way. Also as Reggia.

Regiaménte, royally, kingly.

Regia spína, the royall Thorne.

Regicída, a murtherer of Kings.

Regicídio, a murthering of Kings.

Regifúgio, a feast celebrated among the ancient Romanes the next day after the feasts called Terminália.

Regiménto, as Reggiménto.

Regína, a royall Queene, a Kings wife. Also a fish called a Carpe.

Regína cápri, the herbe Maidens-sweet or Medow-sweet.

Regináre, to command, to sway, or liue as a Queene.

Regio, royall, kingly, of or pertaining to a King. Mórbo regio, the Iaundise or ouerflowing of the gall. Also a kind of reeling or falling sicknesse in a Horse, or staggering in other cattle.

Regio mórbo, the yellow Iaundise.

Regioíre, as Rigioíre.

Regióne, a Region, a Prouince, a Country.

Registráre, to register, to record, to enrowle into any booke.

Registratióne, a registration, an enroulemeut, a recording.

Registratóre, a Registrer, a Remembrancer, a keeper of Records.

Regístro, a Register, a Record, a file, a tallie. Also an Index of a Booke.

Regnánte, regnant, raigning, ruling.

Regnáre, to raigne, to rule, to sway, to beare rule or sway as a King.

Regnáto, a kingly sway or rule.

Regnatóre, a Ruler, a Raigner, a Gouernour, a Swaier, a King.

Regnícolo, a little Kingdome or Realme. Also a kinglet or pettie-king. But now vsed for such as are borne and dwell in a Kingdome, as Italians call the Neapolitanes.

Régno, a Kingdome, a Realme, a Dominion. Also a raigne or space of ralgning.

Regóglio, as Orgóglio, swelling pride.

Regoglióso, as Orgoglióso, full of pride.

Régola, a rule, a prescription, a method, an order, a patterne or example to follow, a briefe lesson or instruction. Also a squire, a square, a lathe, a splint, a ruler. Also an order of religion or forme of life.

Régola délla cósa, the chiefe rule or ground of Arithmetike.

Régola délle proportióni, as Régola délla cósa.

Régola del trè, idem.

Régola d'óro, idem.

Régola di traguárdo, a kind of instrument or rule vsed by Astronomers.

Regoláre, to rule, to temper, to moderate, to direct, to order, to gouerne. Also regular, or according to rule, order and prescription.

Regolarità, regularitie, moderation.

Regolarménte, regularly, temperately, according to rule and prescription.

Regolataménte, as Regolarménte.

Regolatióne, as Regolarità. Also a ruling.

Regolatóre, a Ruler, a Gouernor, a Moderatour, an Orderer. Also a certaine scluse or fence against waters in ordination.

Regolístico, a formall speaker, one that speakes all by rules, a precise speaker.

Regolítia, Licorice wood.

Regolo, a petie King, a Kinglet. Also a Prince, a Duke, a Kings Sonne or Nephew. Also a bird called a Wren. Also a Cocatrix. Also a Basiliske. Also a Carpenters rule, squire or square. Also a lath or splint. Also the hand, the stile or index of a dyall or booke. Also the name of one of the fixed Starres, and of the first Magnitude.

Regorgitáre, to regorge, to regorgitate.

Regorgitatióne, a regorging.

Regredere, to returne backe againe.

Regressióne, a regression or turning backe.

Regressíuo, that may regresse or turne backe.

Regresso, returned backe. Also a regresse.

Regrettáre, fr. to regret, to condole.

Regrettéuole, that may be regretted.

Regrétto, fr. regret, condolence, griefe.

Regulo, as Regolo.

Reiere, as Recere.

Reimpíre, as Riempíre.

Reiettáre, to reiect, to cast backe.

Reiettióne, , a reiecting, a casting backe.

Reietto, reiected, cast-backe.

Reíllo, a bird called a Wren.

Reína, as Regína. Also a Carpe-fish.

Reintegráre, to restore or make whole againe. 

Reintegratióne, a reintegration or making whole againe.

Reinuestíre, uesto, uestij, uestíto, to reinuest.

Reinuestitúra, a re-inuesting.

Réis, a kind of Porting all coine.

Reità, guilt, guiltinesse, crime, offence, faultinesse, blame, lewdnesse, guilt of conscience.

Reitáre, as Reiteráre.

Reiterábile, that may be reiterated.

Reiteránza, as Reiteratióne.

Reiteráre, to reiterate or repeate againe.

Reiteratióne, reiteration, repetition.

Reiúto, vomited, cast, spued.

Relápso, fallen or sunke downe againe.

Relápso, a relaps or falling downe againe.

Relássáre, Rilasciáre, to relax.

Relassatióne, a relaxation, a release, a releasing.

Relásso, as Riláscio, a relaxing.

Relatáre, to relate, to report, to declare.

Relatióne, a relation, a report, a discourse, a narration, an information.

Relatiuo, relatiue, hauing relation vnto something. Also that which hath relation or is related.

Relatizzáre, to haue relation vnto.

Reláto, related, reported, declared.

Reláto, brought backe againe.

Relatóre, a relator, a reporter, a declarer.

Relegáre, as Rilegáre.

Relegatióne, an exile or confining to a place.

Religióne, religion, holinesse, deuotion, scruple of conscience, a reuerent and awefull feare, or true worshipping of God or holy things.

Religióso, religious, holy, deuout, seruing and worshipping God or holy things, scrupulous in conscience to doe amisse. Also a religious man or one vowed to any religion, a Clergie-man.

Religiosità, religiousnesse.

Relínquere, línquo, linquéi, to relinquish, to leaue, to lay apart.

Relinquente, leauing, relinquishing.

Relíquia, a Relique or old monument, the ashes or bones of the dead, a remnant, a remainder, a fragment, any leauings. Also a grudging of a feauer.

Reliquiário, a shrine or any place to keepe Reliques or Monuments in.

Reliquatióne, any arrearages.

Reliquiéro, as Reliquiário.

Relitto, relinquished, left, forsaken, cast off, laid apart, reiected.

Relúcere, as Rilúcere.

Relúuio, as Redúuie.

Réma, the rheume or pose or running at the nose, a catare.

Remancipáre, to sell backe againe.

Remancipatióne, a selling backe againe. 




Remandáre, as Rimandáre.

Remanére, as Rimanére.

Remarcabile, remarkable, notable.

Remáre, to row with an oare.

Remáro, a rower, a maker of oares.

Remasticáre, as Rimasticáre.

Remásto, as Rimáso or Rimásto.

Remasúglia, any kind of leauings, fragments, scraps, od ends or reliques.

Remátiche cóse, are things hard and laborious, which sometimes makes a man with ouer study to fall into rhumes and cough.

Remático, rhumatike, moist, full of the pose or distilling at the nose and from the braine.

Rematóre, a rower in a Gally.

Rembáta, the side-ribes of a Gally or Ship.

Rembrencioli, lobes, bunches or pieces of flesh hanging loose like clusters.

Remediábile, remediable, to be remedied.

Remeggiáre, to row with an oare.

Remeggiatóre, a rower in any boate.

Remelígine, as Rémora.

Reméngo, as Raméngo.

Reménia, the weed Hen-bane.

Reménsa, the weed Hen-bane.

Remensáre, to huddle, to tosse, to tumble or turne ouer and ouer in seeking.

Remensáta, a hudling, a tossing, or tumbling ouer and ouer of any thing.

Reménso, hudled, tumbled, tossed, or turned vpside downe.

Remergere, to plunge againe.

Remeritáre, as Rimeritáre.

Reméro, a rower in any boate.

Remestíno, a busie-body, a medler with other mens matters, a picke-thanke.

Rémi, oares to row with, among horsemen, Rémi is taken for a mans legges when he is on horse-backe.

Remiéro, as Reméro.

Remigánte, a rower.

Remigáre, to row with an oare.

Remigatióne, a rowing in ships.

Remigatóre, a rower.

Remígio, the flying of birds in the aire. Also of or pertayning, to oares or rowing.

Remigráre, to turne or come backe.

Remigratióne, a turning or comming backe.

Remíllo, a thing like an oare.

Reminiscente, mindefull, remembering.

Reminiscentia, remembrance, mindefulnesse of that which before hath been in the minde.

Remíre, as Rimedíre. Also to row.

Remissaménte, remissely, remissiuely, demissely, basely, nothing liuely, faintly.

Remissíbile, remissible, pardonable. 

Remissióne, remission, forgiuenesse, pardon. Also a release or remitting. Also remissenesse or negligence. Also a loosing or slacking. Also a recreating of the minde from labour or study. Also the enterspace betweene the fits of an ague.

Remissíuo, remissiue, or remissible, pardonable.

Remísso, remitted, forgiuen. Also demisse, dull, negligent, crauin, slacke.

Remissória, as Rimissória.

Remísto, mingled or mixed againe.

Remisuráre, to measure againe.

Rémo, any kind of oare. Also as Réma.

Remogliáre, to wiue or marry againe. Also to wet or lay in steepe againe.

Remóglio, a wetting or steeping againe.

Rémola, as Sémola, cource bran.

Remoláta, a poulis is to suple a sore.

Remolázzo, a Raddish or Raifort-roote.

Remolcáre, as Remulcáre.

Remólco, as Remúlco.

Remoldáre, as Remulcáre.

Remóldo, as Remúlco.

Remolíno, a whirle-winde. Also a whirle-poole. Also a mark which some horses haue about them called the feather.

Remóri, birds which by their flight, or voice signifide that the thing purposed was not to be followed or attempted.

Rémora, a fish called a Sucke-stone or Sea-lamprey, which cleauing to the beake of a ship staieth it and hindereth the course therof. Also the weed Cammocke or Rest-harrow.

Remórdere, as Rimórdere.

Remordiménto, as Rimordiménto.

Rémori, birdes which by their flight or voice signified that thing purposed was not to be followed.

Remórso, as Rimordiménto.

Remotióne, a remoouing.

Remóto, as Rimóto, remote.

Remouíbile, remooueable, to be remooued.

Remulcáre, to tow a ship, to hale or draw a ship or barge with a lesser. Vsed also for to draw or pull to ones selfe. Vsed also for to asswage or pacifie.

Remúlco, a towing or rowing barge. Also the rope or cable wherewith a ship or barge being fastned to a lesser, is by force of men haled, towen or drawne. Also a rowling piece of timber wherwith ships be rowled on land or lanched into the water againe. Also an asswageing or pacifying.

Rémulo, the narrower part of the ribes which toucheth the turnings of the backe-bone. Also a little oare. 

Remuneráre, as Rimuneráre.

Remuneratióne, as Rimuneratióne.

Remuneratóre, as Rimuneratóre.

Remurchiáre, as Remulcáre.

Réna, the eating out of that little piece of flesh, which is in the bigger corner of the eye. Also grauell or sand.

Renágie, parables, ambiguous sayings.

Renáglie, as Renágie.

Renáio, a sandie place, a sand-pit, a place yeelding grauell.

Renále, of or belonging to the reines or kidneis.

Renáno, a kind of wilde Poppie.

Renáre, as Arenáre, to grauell, to sand.

Renascenza, as Rinasciménto.

Réndene, a Swallow.

Rendere, rendo, rési, or rendéi, réso, or rendúto, to render, to restore, to repay, to yeeld.

Rendere buónodóre, to yeeld a good smell.

Rendere cólpo per cólpo, to yeeld blow for blow, to be euen with a man.

Rendere cónto, to giue or yeeld account.

Render féde, to yeeld a testimonie.

Render frútto, to yeeld fruit, or profit.

Render grátie, to yeeld or render thankes.

Render honóre, to yeeld honour.

Render'il cámbio, to yeeld the like.

Render'il fiáto, to yeeld vp the ghost.

Render l'ánima, to giue vp the ghost.

Render la paríglia, to yeeld the like.

Rendere lo spírito, to yeeld vp the ghost.

Render mercéde, to yeeld thankes.

Render páce, to forgiue an offence.

Render páne per fogáccia, to giue bread for cake, to giue as good as one brings.

Render pári a pári, idem.

Render ragióne, to yeeld reason, to doe a man right.

Render rispósta, to yeeld or giue an answere.

Render scusáto, to yeeld excused.

Rendersi átto, to enable or yeeld himselfe fit for.

Render sicúro, to yeeld assured.

Rendersi fráte, to make himselfe a Fryer.

Render uersi per uersi, to yeeld rime for reason, to answer to the purpose.

Render ubidienza, to yeeld obedience.

Rendéuole, that may be rendred or repaid. Also plyable, yeelding, tractable.

Rendíe, rents, reuenues, incoms, profits.

Rendiménto, a yeelding, a rendring.

Rendita, rent, reuenue, incom.

Rendita délla terra, the fruit of the earth.

Renditóre, a restorer, a yeelder, a repayer.

Rendúto, rendred, restored, yeelded, repaied.

Réne., Vsed for the reines or kidneis. 



Renella, the grauell or stone in the bladder or kidne is. Also small grauell.

Renellóso, that hath grauell in the kidneis or bladder, grauelly, sandie.

Renga, a hearing fish. Also a pulp it to make an Oration in. Also an Oration.

Rengáre, to make an Oration or a formall discourse or declamation.

Rengatóre, an Orator or formall discourser.

Réni, the reines or kidneis of ones backe.

Reníccio, sandie, grauelly, grettie.

Renitente, resisting, skittish, stubborne, striuing againe.

Renitentia, resisting, froward skettishnesse.

Rennere., Hath been vsed for Rendere.

Renocerónte, as Rinocerónte.

Renóntia, a renouncing, a forsaking, an abiuring, a refusall, a resigning. Also a report or deposition of one sworne. Also a summons of an officer by word.

Renontiáre, to renounce, to forsake, to abiure, to refuse, to resigne, to giue ouer. Also to report and bring word againe. Also to signifie or shew openly.

Renontiatióne, as Renóntia.

Renóso, grauelly, sandie, grettie.

Rensa, fine Lawne or Cambricke cloth.

Renso, fine flax to spin Lawne with.

Rentifóglia, a kind of wilde Rose that hath no good smell or good fashion.

Renturizzáre, as Rintuzzáre.

Renumeráre, to number againe.

Renúntia, as Renóntia.

Renuntiáre, as Renontiáre.

Renza, as Rensa.

Renzo, as Renso.

Reo, guiltie, culpable, faultie, accused of, conuinced. Also a partie arraigned or condemned. Also one that is accused or sued of any crime. Also a defendent in any processe or challenge or sute of law.

Reo di Maestà, guiltie of high treason.

Reorgárza, a French dance vsed in Italie.

Repándio, a diuorcement.

Repándo, bowing or bending below.

Reparábile, that may be repaired.

Reparáre, as Riparáre, to repaire.

Reparatióne, as Riparatióne.

Repáre, to creepe or craule vpon the ground.

Repartiménto, as Ripartiménto.

Repastinatióne, a digging of ground againe.

Repatriáre, as Ripatriáre.

Repatratióne, as Ripatriatióne.

Repellendo, to be repelled.

Repellere, to repell or thrust backe.

Repensatione, a recompensing.

Repentáglio, as Ripentáglio.

Repente, suddenly, vnexpected, vnseasonably, vnawares, rashly. 

Repentinaménte, as Repente.

Repentinità, suddennesse, vnseasonablenesse, rashnesse, violence, haste.

Repentino, sudden, vnseasonable, hastie, rash, vnexpected, violent.

Repentiménto, repentance.

Repentire, to repent.

Repentíto, repented.

Repentíuo, repentant, penitent.

Répere, répo, persi, perto, to enter. Also to creepe or craule on the ground as a Serpent.

Reperíre, rísco, ríto, as Repertere.

Repertere, perto, pettéi, perto, to deuise, to get, to finde out, to perceiue.

Repertítio, that is founden or gotten againe.

Reperto, deuised, gotten, sound out, perceiued.

Repertóre, a deuiser, a getter, a finder, a perceiuer.

Repertório, a reportarie, a register, an inuentorie of ones goods, a memoriall.

Repése, the hearbe Orache.

Repetere, peto, petéi, petúto, to repeat, to reply, to rehearse, to say ouer againe.

Repetibile, that may be repeated.

Repetitióne, a repetilion, a rehearsing, a replication, a saying ouer againe.

Repetito, as Repetúto.

Repetitóre, a repeater, a replyer, a rehearser, a sayer ouer againe, an Vsher of a Schoole.

Repetúto, repeated, replyed, rehearsed.

Repicáre, to sound or langle as Bells, to clatter or clash as Armour doth.

Repícca, a double poste or vie at a game at cardes called Picchétto.

Repíceo, detrattióne & calúnnia, the children of Hate.

Repíceo, a chime of Bells. Also a iangling noise or clattring sound.

Repigneráre, to redeeme a pledge or gage. Also to replieue a distresse.

Repigneratióne, a redeeming of a gage or pledge. Also a replieuing.

Repilogáre, to repeat or rehearse from the beginning what hath been said.

Repítio, disdainefull grudging, enuious hatred, grumbling disdaine.

Replétere, pléto, plessi, pléto, to repleat, to fill, to replenish.

Repletióne, a repleating, a filling, a replenishing, a refection.

Repléto, repleat, filled, replenished, full fed.

Repletúdine, as Repletióne.

Repliáre, as Replicáre,

Replica, a reply, a replication, a repeating. Also a doubling, an enfolding.

Replicábile, that may be replied or repeated.

Replicáre, to reply, to repeat, to tell a thing twice. Also to double or enfold againe. 

Replicatióne, as Replica.

Repluere, to raine or showre againe.

Répo., Vsed of Dánte for, I creepe or crawle on the ground like a Serpent.

Repolóni. Looke Maneggiáre a repolóni, which is when a horse doth gallop in a right path: and still returneth in the same, it is now called in English a repolone.

Reportáre, as Riportáre.

Reportatóre, as Ripottatóre.

Reposáre, as Riposáre.

Repositório, as Ripostíglio.

Repóso, as Ripóso.

Repostiero, as Ripostíglio.

Repótia, banquetings at mariages. Also merry drinkings at womens child beds.

Reprehensióne, reprehension, rebuke.

Reprendere, as Riprendere.

Reprenditóre, as Riprenditóre.

Reprenduto, as Ripréso.

Reprensibile, reprehensible.

Reprensione, as Riprensióne.

Reprensíuo, reprehensiue, reprochfull.

Reprensóre, as Riprenditóre.

Represáglia, as Ripreságlia.

Represáre, as Ripresáre.

Representáre, to represent, to set forth liuely, to exhibit, to lay before or bring in presence, to shew himselfe present. Also to play a Players part.

Representatióne, a representation or representing of a thing or person.

Represo, as Ripréso.

Repressióne, as Ripressióne.

Represso, repressed, suppressed, refelled, quelled, kept downe or vnder.

Reprica, a reply, a repetition.

Repricáre, to reply, to repeate.

Repricatióne, a replication, a reply.

Reprímere, prímo, pressi, presso, to represse, to suppresse, to refell, to quell, to keepe vnder.

Reprobabile, reprooueable, condemnable.

Reprobággine, reprobatenesse, reprobation.

Reprobáre, to reprooue, to condemne, to reiect, to disalow. Also to reprobate.

Reprobatióne, reproofe, condemnation, disalowing. Also reprobation.

Reprobáto, reprooued, condemned, disalowed. Also a reprobate.

Réprobo, a reprobate, one reiected, or cast out of Gods fauour.

Reprofondáre, as Riprofondáre.

Reprométtere, as Riprométtere.

Reptíbile, as Rettíle.

Reptíle, as Rettile.

Reptitióne, a creeping.

República, a Common-wealth, a free-state, the weale-publike.

Repúbbrica, as República.

Repudiándo, to be forsaken or deuorced 



Repudiáre, to repudiate, to reiect, to cast off, to diuorce, to separate asunder.

Repúdio, a diuorce, a reiecting, a casting off, a separation of man and wife.

Repudióso, reprochefull, to be diuorced, dishonest, not to keepe company with.

Repugnáce, as Repugnánte.

Repugnánte, repugnant, contradicting, impugning, contrary, contentious.

Repugnánza, repugnance, contradiction, disagreement of things, contrariety.

Repugnáre, to repugne, to impugne, to contradict, to gainesay, to withstand.

Repúlsa, a repulse, a foile, a reiecting, a beating backe, a putting by.

Repulsáre, to repulse, to foile, to reiect, to put backe, to repell, to put by.

Repulséuole, that may be repulsed.

Repulsíuo, that doth repell.

Repúlso, repulsed, repelled.

Repurgáre, to purge, to cleare, to cleanse or skoure againe.

Repurgatióne, a repurging.

Reputáre, as Riputáre.

Reputatióne, as Riputatióne.

Reputéuole, to be reputed or regarded.

Requiáre, to take rest or quietnesse. Also to cease, to pause, to end or giue ouer. Also to whosht, to still, to quiet or appease.

Requie, rest, quietnesse, repose, ease, peaceablenesse.

Requiescere, as Requiáre.

Requietúdine, rest or quietnesse.

Requilítia, the wood Licorice.

Requisitióne, requisition, requiry, instance, intreaty. Also a searching out.

Requisíto, requisite. Also required.

Requisitória léttera, a letter of request.

Resarciménto, as Risarcimento.

Resarcináre, to load againe.

Resarcíre, as Risarcíre.

Résca, any sharpe prickle as of an eare of corne, a small sharpe bone of a fish. Also a flaw, a bracke, a rend or cracke namely in cloth. Also any fishing or fouling net, a dragnet, a hay.

Rescíndere, as Recíndere.

Rescíso, as Recíso.

Rescrítti, ancient records or writings.

Rescritto, writtten againe, answered in writing. Also a coppie or transcript.

Rescríuere, scríuo, scríssi, scrítto, to write again, to answer in writing. Also to coppy or write ouer againe.

Reséda, an hearbe vsed in charmes, and also to dissolue impostumations.

Resedére, as Risedére.

Résega, a saw, a long saw.

Resegáre, to saw.

Resegatúra, any saweing or sawe-dust.

Reségna, as Rasségna.

Resegnare, as Rassegnáre.

Reselláre, to baste or dredge roste-meate.

Reselliéra, a basting-ladle.

Resemináre, to sow or plant againe.

Resentáre, to wash or rense againe.

Reseruáre, as Riserbáre.

Reseruatióne, a reseruation.

Resía, heresie, as Heresía.

Residente, resiant, resident, remaining.

Residenza, residence, a bode, dwelling. Also the bottome leese, or dregs and remainder in the bottome of any vessell or glasse namely of wine, oyle or honny.

Resídere, as Risedére.

Residità, as Residentia.

Resíduo, a residue, a remainder, an ouerplus.

Resignáre, to resigne, to surrender.

Resignatióne, a resignation, a surrendering.

Résima, a Reame of Paper, twenty quires.

Résimo, Camey or Ape nosed, flat-nosed.

Résina, Rosen or Tree-gumme.

Resinóso, full of Rosin.

Resipílla, as Risipilla.

Resipiscenza, reacknowledging, repentance, returning to health or vnderstanding.

Resistente, resisting, withstanding.

Resistenza, resistance, gaine-standing.

Resístere, sísto, sistéi, sistúto, to resist, to withstand, to oppose, to kicke against.

Resistéuole, resistable, to be withstood.

Resistíbile, as Resistéuole.

Resistúto, resisted, opposed, withstood.

Résina, a Reame or twenty quires of paper.

Réso, rendered, restored, repaid.

Resolúbile, that may be resolued.

Resóluere, as Risóluere.

Resolutióne, as Risolutióne.

Resolúto, as Risolúto.

Resolutório, as Risolutório.

Resonábile, yeelding a sound.

Resonánza, as Risonánza.

Resonánte, resounding.

Resonáre, as Risonáre.

Resperso, sprinkled ouer againe.

Respetto, as Rispetto.

Respíngere, as Rispíngere.

Respínto, as Rispínto.

Respiraménto, as Spiráglio, as Respiratióne.

Respiráre, to breath againe, to take breath, to vent forth. Also to send forth any sauour. Also to pause, to rest to take comfort or be refreshed.

Respiratióne, respiration breathing, vaporing, venting, yeelding some sauour.

Respíro, a breathing, a respiration. Also a breathing time.

Resplendere, as Risplendere.

Respondente, as Rispondente.

Respondentia, as Rispondenza.

Respóndere, as Rispondere.

Respondéuole, as Rispondéuole.

Responsióne, as Risponsióne.

Responsíuo, as Risponsiuo.

Respónso, an answer.

Respóso, as Rispósto.

Respósto, as Rispósto.

Ressa, a ruling, a withstanding, a resistance. Also noyance, vexation or grudging of the minde.

Resso, as Retto. Looke Reggere.

Resta, an eare of corne, or a prickle of it. Also a small bone of any fish. Also a rest of a breast-plate or vaniplate. Also a rope, a corde, a string or a withe, as a rope of Onions or a bunch of Garlike. Also it resteth or remaineth. Also a rest, a stay of time or place.

Restagnatióne, an ouer flowing.

Restágno, a stuffe called Bustian.

Restánte, resting, remaining. Also a remnant, a rest or remainder.

Restánza, a rest, a remainder.

Restáre, to rest, to cease, to leaue, to lin. Also to rest, to remaine, to abide, to tarie or stand still in some place. Also to leaue or be left ouerplus. Also to set vp ones rest, to make a rest, or play vpon ones rest at Primero. Also to arrest or atache.

Restáre in un piè, to stand fast, to be constant, to be fixt in an opinion.

Restáre sopra di sè, to rest or relie vpon himselfe. Also to stand in doubt and muse with himselfe.

Restáta, a rest, a leauing, a remnant.

Restaurábile, that may be restored.

Restauráre, as Ristoráre.

Restauratióne, as Ristoratióne.

Reste, a disease in a Horse that our Horsemen call the Paines, there is smal difference between Reste and Crepáccie.

Restía, il máre ni è continuaménte gránde con restía & fortúna. 

Resticciuólo, as Restícolo.

Restíbile, that beareth euery yeere.

Restícolo, the least remnant or remainder, or smallest rest that may be.

Restinguíbile, that may be quenched.

Restínto, quenched againe.

Restío, reastie as some Horses be, idle, lazie, slow, backward, slug.

Restipuláre, to make answer to an acti­



on or case or sute in law.

Restipulatióne, an answer or reioynder to an action of law.

Restituibile, that may be restored.

Restituíre, ísco, íto, to restitute, to restore vnto, to render, to renew, to repaire, or set againe in his former place.

Restituíto, restituted, rendred, renewed, repaied or restored to his former state.

Restitutióne, a restitution, a restoring vnto againe, a rendring vnto.

Restitutóre, a restituter, a restorer, one that makes restitution.

Restiuaménte, restily, idly, faintly, backwardly, slowly, vnwillingly.

Restiuáre, to be or become reastie, faint, backward, slow, or vnwilling.

Restíuo, as Restío.

Resto, a rest, a remnant, a remainder, an ouerplus. Also a rest at Primero.

Restóppia, straw, buske, stubble, holme or haume that is left after reaping or threshing of corne.

Restoratóre, as Ristoratóre.

Restrettíuo, as Ristrettíuo.

Restrétto, as Ristrétto.

Restringente, as Ristrettíuo, restringent.

Restríngere, as Ristringere.

Restringitóre, a restrainer.

Restrittióne, restraint, restriction.

Resultáre, as Risultáre.

Resultánza, a resulting.

Resúmere, súmo, sónsi, or suméi, sónto, or súnto, to resume, to reassume, to recouer, to take or begin againe.

Resúnto, resumed, reassumed, taken againe.

Resupináre, as Risupináre.

Resupíno, as Risupíno.

Resúrgere, súrgo, súrsi, súrto, to rise vp againe. Also to grow or spring vp againe.

Resuressi., Vsed for the Ascension or day of Resurrection.

Resurrettióne, a resurrection or rising vp againe. Also an vprising.

Resúrto, risen vp againe.

Resuscitánza, as Resuscitatióne.

Resuscitáre, to rise or raise vp againe from death.

Resuscitatióne, a rising or raising vp againe from death.

Retà, as Retággio. Also vsed for Retágli. Also as Reità.

Retággio, heritage, inheritance, patrimonie.

Retágli, as Ritágli.

Retardaménto, as Ritardánza.

Retardánza, as Ritardánza.

Retardáre, as Ritardáre.

Retardatióne, as Ritardánza.

Retáre, to inherite. Also to net. Also to fret in armorie. 

Retáto, inherited. Also netted. Also fretted in armorie.

Réte, any kind of net for fish or fowle, a snare or haye. Also the caule of any bodie. Also any kind of net or cauleworke. Also a fret in armorie.

Réte del fégato, the caule of the liuer.

Réte del pónte, the netting or stancions of a ship.

Retentióne, as Ritontióne.

Retentíua, as Ritentíua.

Retentíuo, that holdeth and retaineth what is committed vnto it, keeping, detaining, withholding.

Reténto, ritained, with-held, kept backe.

Rethéa, a kind of wine or grape.

Retiário, a net-maker, or one that seekes to ensnare others.

Reticella, any little net, or casting net. Also any fine or small net or cauleworke. Also a fine searse or small sieu. Also a kind of paste-worke to put vpon dishes brought to the boord for ornament sake. Also vsed for Rerína.

Reticenza, a silence, namely a concealing or keeping a thing secret by counsell.

Reticíbile, that may be kept silent.

Reticína, as Reticella.

Retico, an Heretike, as Heretico.

Reticoláto, net-worke. Also lettise-worke.

Retificáre, as Ratificáre. Also as Rettificáre.

Retificatióne, as Ratificatióne.

Retína, the fifth thin membrane of the eye, lying more inwardly then doth Vuea, it is soft and white, and nourisheth the vitrious and glassie humor. Also as Reticella.

Retíne, the reines of a bridle.

Retinente, that diligently obserueth and keepeth or holdeth in minde.

Retinenza, diligent obseruation or fast keeping in minde.

Retinitíua, as Ritentíua.

Retíno, a grate. Also as Reticella.

Retórcere, as Ritórcere.

Retóre, a Rhetorician.

Retórica, Rhetorike, that is to say, the Science to speake well and wisely.

Retoricáre, to play the Rhetorician, to speake or teach, to speake well and wisely.

Retórico, a Rhetorician, an eloquent and well speaker. Also Rhetoricall.

Retórrido, scorched or burned.

Retórto, twisted againe.

Retrattáre, as Ritrattáre.

Retrattatióne, as Ritrattatióne.

Retrattatóre, one that recanteth.

Retribuíre, buísco, buíto, to retribute or reward for merit.

Retributióne, a retribution. Also a reward for merit. 

Retributóre, a retributer or a rewarder for some merit.

Retriménto, ordure, dung, excrement. Also dregs or drosse of any thing.

Retríuo, late comming, lag or last. Also slacke, slow, repining or grudging.

Retro, backe, backward, behind, a word vsed much in composition of other words.

Retrocámmera, a backe or withdrawing-chamber, a chamber backward.

Retrocedere, cedo, cessi, cesso, to retire or recoile backward, to guie backe.

Retrocessióne, a retiring, a recoyling or going backward.

Retrocesso, recoyled or retired backward. Also as Retrocessióne.

Retrocortíle, a back-court or yard, a court or yard behind a house.

Retrodúrre, to bring or lead backe.

Retroduttióne, a bringing backe.

Retrogradaménte, by way of retrogradation.

Retrogradáre, to retrograde, to goe or retire backe by degrees.

Retrogradatióne, a retrogradation, a recoyling or going backe againe.

Retrogrado, retrograde, that goeth backe. Also that is to be read backward.

Retrogressióne, a going backe.

Retroguárdia, the reareward or hindeward of a battle.

Retropíngere, píngo, pínsi, pínto, to thrust backe, to push backeward.

Retropínta, a thrusting backe, a pushing backeward.

Retropínto, thrust backe, pusht backeward.

Retrórso, backe-ward, backe or akeward.

Retroscríuere, to write backe againe. Also to write behinde.

Retroscrittióne, a writing backe againe. Also a writing behinde.

Retrosía, as Ritrosità.

Retrosità, as Ritrosità.

Retróso, as Ritróso.

Retrostánza, a backe-lodging.

Retroue dére, védo, or véggo, víddi, vísto, or vedúto, to seeke backe againe, to seeke backward.

Retrouéndere, véndo, vendéi, vendúto, to sell backe againe.

Retrouéndita, a selling backe againe.

Retrouenditióne, a selling backe againe.

Retruópico, that hath the dropsie. Also giuen to much drousinesse or lethargie.

Retruopisía, the dropsie. Also drousinesse or lethargy.

Retta, as Resistenza.

Rettaménte, as Rittaménte.

Rettángolo, right angled, euen cornered. 



Retta sphéra, that place of the world where the inhabitants haue the equinoctiall and the Tropikes plumb or perpendicular to their Horizon.

Retta sutúra, as Sagittále.

Rettíbile, that may be rectified, reformed or set straight. Also as Rettíle.

Rettificáre, to rectifie, to reforme, to amend, to set straight againe.

Rettificatióne, a rectifying, a reforming, or setting straight againe.

Rettíle, any thing that creepeth or crawleth in or vpon the ground.

Rettilíneo, right lined with euen lines.

Rettimétra, a right measurer.

Rettimetría, right measuring.

Rettína, a bird called a Wren.

Rettítio, as Rettíle.

Rettitúdine, rectitude, vprightnesse.

Retto, ruled, swaied, raigned, gouerned, directed, of Reggere Also right, vpright, streight, euen, iust, not crooked, nor bending.

Retto ángolo, a right angle or corner.

Rettoráto, a Rectorship, the office of a Ruler or Rector or Gouernour.

Rettóre, a Rector, a Ruler, a Gouernor, a director. Also a Rhetorician.

Rettoría, as Rettoráto.

Rettórico, a Rhetorician, as Retórico.

Retúso, dull, blunt, grosse.

Reubárbaro, the hearbe or drug Reubarbe.

Reueláre, as Riueláre.

Reueláta, a word vsed of Grisóni in his booke of horsemanship, folio 55.

Reuelatióne, as Riuelatióne.

Reuellíno, as Riuellíno.

Reuendere, as Riuendere.

Reuenditóre, as Riuenditóre.

Reuendúto, as Riuendúto.

Reuerberáre, as Riuerberáre.

Reuerberatióne, as Riuerberatióne.

Reuerbero, as Riuerbero.

Reuerendo, as Riuerendo.

Reuerendíssimo, as Riuerendíssimo.

Reuerente, as Riuerente.

Reuerenza, as Riuerenza.

Reueríre, as Riueríre.

Reueríto, as Riueríto.

Reuersáre, as Riuersáre.

Reuersióne, as Riuersióne.

Reuerso, as Riuerso.

Reuerténa, conuién pórrei baríli della póluere di bombárda in luógo a reuerténa alquánto da quélla discósti.

Reuertículo, a place to returne vnto.

Reueznólo, a bird called a Red-taile.

Reuificáre, to reuiue, or reuifie.

Reuíncere, to conuince againe.

Reuirescente, growing greene againe.

Reuirescenza, a growing greene againe.

Reuirescere, resco, rescéi, resciúto, to grow or become greene againe. 

Reuísa, as Reuisióne.

Reuisióne, a reuising or reuiewing.

Reuisitáre, to visite or goe to see againe.

Reuisóre, a reuisor, an ouerseer againe.

Réuma, a distillation of humours, a rhume, a catarre, a pose, a murre.

Reumóso, rhumatike, full of rhume.

Reuntóre, such as Phisicians, employ to annoint their patients.

Reuocábile, that may be reuoked, reuocable.

Reuólgere, as Riuólgere.

Reuólta, as Riuólta.

Reuoltáre, as Riuoltáre.

Reuólto, as Riuólto.

Reuoltúra, as Riuolgiménto.

Reuolúbile, that may be reuolued.

Reuóluere, as Riuóluere.

Reuolutióne, as Riuolutióne.

Reuolúto, as Riuolúto.

Reuúlso, plucked by force.

Rezza, a kind of net to catch birds with. Also as Résca.

Rezzáglo, a kind of slight net-worke Also as Résca.

Rezzáre, to shade with boughes. Also to catch in a net.

Rezzere, as Recere.

Rezzestólla, as Regestola.

Rezzo, any shade of greene boughes or trees, a coole Summers shade. Also any coole or shady place defended from the Sunne. Also vsed for ease, rest, and quiet.

Rezzola, a quoife or caule of Net-work.

Rezzolóso, shady, coole, full of shades.

Rezzúto, as Reciúto.

Rhà, a precious roote vsed to purge choler, some take it for Rubarbe.

Rhacíno, a kind of blacke fish.

Rhafaníte, a kinde of Ireas like a Raddish-roote.

Rhagióne, a kind of Spider resembling a Grape-kirnell.

Rhámno, a kinde of Bramble or Bryer called Christes-thorne.

Rhapeióne, an hearbe or weed.

Rhaphióne, a beast shaped like a Woolfe and speckled like a Libbard.

Rhapóntico, as Rhà.

Rhéa, a kind of Poppy.

Rheconía, the hearbe Rubarbe.

Rheóne, a kind of Rubarbe.

Rhessia, the hearbe Alkaret or Orchanet.

Rhetóre, a Rethorician. Also an Oratour.

Rhétre, certaine lawes that Licurgus made, which were held as Oracles.

Rhéuma, a rhume or catarre.

Rheumático, rhumatike.

Rheumatísmo, a flux or fleagme of humour.

Rhíbi, the bramble Raspis.

Rhína, the Skate-fish, a Raye-fish. 

Rhinoelísia, or Cálla, an hearbe.

Rhítia, a kind of iuice or liquer of some hearbe vsed in phisike.

Rhodéndro, Oleander.

Rhodite, a stone named of the rose and of that colour.

Rhododáphne, as Rododáfne.

Rhodóra, an hearbe or shrub.

Rhóico, one who is sore bruzed in his body.

Rhómbo, as Rómbo.

Rhombóide, as Rombóide.

Rhus-erithreo, Sumach.

Rì, as Rà. Looke Rà.

Ría, culpable, guilty, faulty, wicked.

Riabbracciáre, to embrace againe.

Riaccendere, to kindle againe.

Riaccéso, kindled or lighted againe.

Riaccoglienza, a gathering, a collector receiueing againe.

Riaccógliere, cólgo, cólsi, cólto, to gather, to collect or receiue againe.

Riaccólto, gathered, collected or receiued againe.

Riaccompagnáre, to reaccompany or associate againe.

Riadirare, to anger againe.

Riaffíggere, to fixe vnto againe.

Riallargáre, to inlarge againe.

Riálto, as it were, Ríuo álto, a high shore. Also a high place for princes seats. Also an eminent place in Venice where Marchants commonly meete, as on the Exchange at London.

Rialzáre, to raise or lift vp againe.

Riamáre, to reloue, to loue againe.

Riamazzáre, to kill or slay againe.

Riamicáre, to make or become frindes againe.

Riandáre, to goe ouer againe, to surueigh againe, to consider ouer.

Riandáta, a going or surueighing ouer againe.

Riapelláre, to recall, to reappeale.

Riapello, a recall, a reappeale.

Riaperto, opened againe.

Riaprendere, to learne againe.

Riapríre, to open againe.

Riárdere, to burne againe.

Riardiménto, a reburning. Also a redaring.

Riarmáre, to arme againe.

Riarsióne, a burning, a scorching, a blasting.

Riarso, burnt, scorched, parched, tanned by the heate of the Sunne. Also blasted.

Riarsúra di febbre, a burning of an Ague.

Riassalíre, lísco, líto, as Riassaltáre.

Riassaltáre, to assault againe.

Riassíso, sitten or seated againe.

Riassálto, a re-assault.

Riassúmere, as Resúmere.

Riassúnto, as Resúnto.



Riatíno, a bird called a Wren.

Riátolo, as Riatíno.

Riattaccáre, to fasten vnto againe.

Riauampáre, to burne or flash againe.

Riáuolo, a broad slice, a spade, a ladle, a trowell, a cole rake to make cleane an ouen.

Riazzuffáre, to bickre or skirmish againe

Ribadíre, dísco, dito, to clinch or riuet againe.

Ribadochíno, a small piece of ordinance called of vs a Robinet.

Ribaldáccia, a filthy queene.

Ribaldáglia, the basest or vilest kind of people, the common rascalitie.

Ribaldería, ribauldrie, knduerie.

Ribáldo, a ribauld, a varlet, a knaue, a lout, a rascall.

Ribaldóne, a great or filthy ribauld.

Ribálta, a gate or doore to passe by vpon any bridge or ditch.

Ribaltáre, to subuert, to beat or turne downe, to ouerwhelme, to ouerthrow.

Ribalzáre, to bound and rebound as a ball.

Ribalzáta, a rebounding. Also a trapdore. Also a drawing window.

Ribálzo, a rebounding or rebound.

Ribambíre, bísco, bíto, to dote, to become a child or dotrell againe.

Ribambito, doted, become or plaied the dotrell or child againe.

Ribandiménto, a reuoking from banishment.

Ribandíre, dísco, díto, to banish or proclaime againe. Also to reuoke from banishment.

Ribandíto, rebanished or proclaimed againe. Also reuoked from banishment.

Ribándo, a revocation from banishment.

Ribasciáre, to kisse or busse againe.

Ribassare, to abase or stoop againe.

Ribáttere, bátto, battéi, battúto, to beat or strike backe or againe, to clinch.

Ribattezzáre, to rebaptise, to christen againe.

Ribattiménto, a rebeating backe, a refelling. Also a reclinching backe of a naile.

Ribattúta, as Ribattiménto.

Ribattúto, beaten backe or againe clinched.

Ribando, as Ribáldo.

Ríbe, bastard Corans, or common Ribes, red or beyond-sea Gooseberries.

Ribebba, a kind of deepe measure in Italie. Also as Ribecca.

Ribeccaménto di paróle, a checking or rebuking with taunting words.

Ribecca, an instrument called a Rebecke, a Croud, or Fidlers kit.

Ribeccáre, to pecke or bill againe.

Ribecchíno, a little fidle, rebecke or croud. 

Ribecchífta, a fidler vpon a rebecke or croud.

Ribeláre, to bleat often or againe.

Ribellánte, rebellious, rebelling.

Ribelláre, to rebell or rise against authoritie.

Ribelle, a Rebell, a riser against authoritie or his Prince.

Ribellióne, rebellion, rising against authoritie, or right, law and Prince.

Ribellóso, rebellious, rising against.

Ribenedire, disco, dito, to blisse againe.

Ribenedittióne, a rebenediction.

Ribenedétto, reblessed, blest againe.

Ribes, as Ribebba.

Ribichíste, as Ribecchista.

Ribobolare, to speake Prouerbs.

Ribóboli, short Prouerbs, taunting words

Ribobolóso, full of short or taunting words.

Riboccáre, to re-enbogue, to remouth, to fill vp.

Ribólla, the wine called Cult.

Ribolliménto, a reboyling or seething.

Ribollíre, bóllo, bollito, to reboile or seeth.

Ribollóre, a reboyling or seething.

Ribombánte, rebounding, resounding, re-ecchoyng or ringing backe.

Ribombánza, as Ribombo.

Ribombáre, to rebound, to re-eccho, to resound or ring backe againe.

Ribómbo, a hollow re-ecchoyng or resounding and back-ringing noise.

Ribrezzáre, to shiuer, to chill or quiuer for cold in a fit of an Ague, or for feare. Also to terrifie, to wrong, to astonish, to affright, to iniurie.

Ribrezzo, a quiuering, a shiuering, a chilnesse, a quaking for cold or for feare. Also a suddaine toy or skittish humor. Also a feare or astonishment. Also a spite, an iniurie or disgrace.

Ribúe, as Ribebba.

Ribuffáre, to rebuke, to checke, to rate, to rebuffe, to chide, to shent or to taunt.

Ribúffo, a rebuke, a checke, a rating, a shenting, a chiding, a taunt, a rebuffe.

Ribuólo, the wine called Cuit.

Ribussáre, to strike, to knocke, thumpe or bang againe.

Ributtaménto, as Ributtáta.

Ributtáre, to reiect, to cast backe or againe. Also to clinch a naile.

Ributtáta, a reiecting backe againe, a repulse.

Ríca, a kind of womens garment.

Ricacciáre, to rechase or driue againe, to hunt againe.

Ricadente, falling or ready to fall againe.

Ricadére, cádo, cáddi, cadúto, to fall againe, to relapse. Also to escheat vnto or fall vnto by remainder. 

Ricadía, a relaps or falling into a fault or sicknesse againe. Also a guilt of conscience. Also an escheat or falling vnto by remainder. Also amoyance, tediousnesse or vexation of minde, a relaps.

Ricadiménto, as Ricadía.

Ricadúta, as Ricadía.

Ricadúto, fallen againe or into a relaps. Also escheated vnto.

Ricagnáte, to be or become doggish, currish, or curst and froward. Also to shrug or shrinke close together.

Ricagnáto, become dogged, mastiue-like, currish, curst and froward. Also shrunke or shrugd vp elose. Also flat-nosed as a Dog.

Ricaláre, to fall, to decline or abate againe. Looke Caláre.

Ricalcáre, to tread, to presse, to throng or croud downe againe.

Ricalcitráre, to kicke, to winze, to spurne or striue againe or against.

Ricamáre, to embroyder. Also to worke needle-worke vpon a frame.

Ricamatóre, an Embroyderer. Also a worker of any needle-worke.

Ricamatúra, any kind of embroyderie. Also needle-worke.

Ricambiáre, to exchange, to barter, to coarce or trucke againe. Also to reward or redeserue againe.

Ricamétti, small embroyderies or needle workes.

Ricámo, any kind of embroyderie or needle worke.

Ricamúzzi, as Ricamétti.

Ricangiáre, as Ricambiáre.

Ricantáre, to recant or sing againe.

Ricantatióne, a recantation or singing againe.

Ricapáre, to get, to finde or shift for againe.

Ricapére, to containe againe.

Ricapitáre, to haue or giue refuge or entertainment. Also to haue a safe deliuerie, or come to a place directed. Also to hap or light vpon by fortune.

Ricápito, entertainment, refuge, supply, shelter or couert for helpe. Also safe comming or deliuerie of letters or any things else.

Ricapituláre, to recapitulate, to rehearse a thing that was spoken before.

Ricapitulatióne, a recapitulation, a summarie or rehearsing of any thing.

Ricapricciáre, to re-affright till ones haire stare and stand an end.

Ricarcatúra, a recharge, a reburthening.

Ricárica, a recharge, a reburthen.

Ricaricáre, to recharge, to reburthen.

Ricascáre, as Ricadére.

Ricascáta, as Ricadía,

Ricattáre, to get, to finde or shift for againe. 



Ricaualcáre, to horse or ride againe.

Ricauáre, to dig, to hollow or pull out againe, or draw out from.

Riccacciaménti, rechasings. Also enchasings.

Riccacciáre, to rechase. Also to enchase.

Ricchézza, all manner of riches or wealth.

Ricciáre, to encline or bend againe.

Riccióni, Trunnions, as Orecchióni.

Ricciáre, to crispe, to frizle, to curle.

Ricciéra, di rísa et di ricciére tútto cantóssi.

Ríccio, crisped, frizled, curled, shaggie, hairie, bushie, rough. Also crispin or curled sipres. Also the prickly or vtmost huske of a Chesnut. Also vnshorne or shaggie Veluet. Also an Vrchin or Hedgehog.

Ríccio caníno, an Vrchin or Hedgehogge.

Ríccio di máre, a Sea Hedge-hog.

Ríccioli, some disease in a horse.

Ríccio maríno, a Sea Hedge-hog.

Ríccio porcíno, an Vrchin or Hedgehogge.

Ríccio sópra ríccio, the richest Veluet or cloth of gould or bodkin that is.

Ríccio spinóso, an Vrchin. Also a Porkupine.

Ricciuóli, a kind of disease about a horses legges.

Ricciúto, curled, crisped, frizled, shaggie, hairy, brizly, bushie. Vsed also for base, meane, abiect or poular.

Rícco, rich or welthy.

Rícco di metállo, rich or well fortified with mettall.

Riccóne, a wealthy man, a rich chuffe.

Riccóre, vsed for wealth or riches.

Ricente, fresh, new, recent, of late time.

Ricepúta, a receiuing, a receit.

Ricérca, a search, a researching, an inquiry. Also a feeling or groapeing.

Ricercáre, to search or inquire againe. Also to require or sue for.

Ricercáta, as Ricérca.

Ricercatína, an easie gentle searching, seekeing, fumbling, or feeling.

Ricernere, cerno, cernéi, cernúto, to discerne choose or distinguish a new.

Ricespitáre, to stumble againe.

Recetta, a receite, a receiuing, an accepting, a takeing.

Recettácolo, a receptacle, a refuge, a comfort, a place of security. Also a Ware-house or place to receiue and keepe things safely in. Vsed also for a Snuffe-dish. Vsed also for a Censer or Incense cup.

Ricettáre, to receiue againe, or to giue entertainment vnto againe. Also to lodge or harborough.

Ricettário, a booke of receipts.

Ricettársi in cása d' áltri, for a man to recouer himselfe and be receiued into another mans house.

Ricettióne, a reception, a retakeing.

Ricettíuo, receiuable, to be receiued.

Ricetto, receiued, or entertained. Also entertainement. Also as Ricettácolo.

Ricéuere, céuo, ceuéi, ceuúto, to receiue, to accept, to take. Also to containe and harborough, and as it were to imbrace and doe honour vnto.

Riceuiménto, as Riceuúta, a receiuing.

Riceuitóre, a receiuer, an accepter.

Riceuúta, a receiuing, a takeing.

Riceuúto, receiued, taken, accepted.

Richiamáre, to reclaime, to reuoake or call backe againe. Also to cry against or appeale vnto. Also to gainesay with a loud voice. Also to re-eckoe.

Richiamársi ad altrúi, to reclaime or appeale vnto others.

Richiamáta, as Richiamatióne.

Richiamatióne, a reclaiming, a reuoaking or calling backe againe. Also a crying against or appealing vnto. Also a gainesaying with a loud voice.

Richiamo, a reclamation, a reuokeing. Also an appeale or calling for iustice. Also a foulers pipe or call to call birds. Also a haukes lure.

Richiédere, chiédo, chiési, chiesto, or richiedúto, to require, to request, to aske or sue for.

Richie ditóre, a requirer, a requester, a suer or intreater for.

Richiedúto, required, requested, sued vnto.

Richieggere, as Richiédere.

Richiesta, a request, a suite, a requiring. Also all manner of giblets or entrailes of foule or beast that be good to eate.

Richiesto, requested, required, sued vnto

Richiúdere, as Rinchiúdere.

Ricídere, as Recídere.

Riciditúre, cuttings, shauings, parings, shreddings.

Ricinientáre, to ciment againe.

Ricíngere, cíngo, cínsi, cínto, as Riccinghiáre.

Ricinghiáre, to guird compasse or binde in againe.

Ricínio, as Recínio.

Ricíno, a vermine called a Tike which annoieth diuers sorts of beasts. Also an hearbe in Egypt called. Palma Christi, with a seede like a Tyke.

Ricínto, a round guirting or encompassing about. Also a Precinct.

Ricisare, to cut off, to abridge, to saw in sunder.

Riciso, as Recíso. Also precise.

Ricisúra, as Recisióne.

Riclamáre, to appeale, to reclaime. 

Riclamatióne, a reclaiming, an appealing vnto.

Ricoglienza, as Accoglienza.

Ricógliere, as Raccógliere.

Ricoglitére, a gatherer, a collector.

Ricoglitríce, a Midwife. Also a she gatherer or receiuer.

Ricognitióne, a recognition, a recognissance, a reuising, a calling to minde, a reuiewing. Also an acknowledgement.

Ricognitóre, as Riconoscitóre.

Ricognomináte, surnamed againe.

Ricolcáre, to couch or lie downe againe.

Ricólta, as Raccólta.

Ricólto, as Raccólto.

Ricomandáre, to command againe.

Ricombáttere, to recombat or fight againe.

Ricombattúto, recombatted, or foughten againe.

Ricominciáre, to begin againe.

Ricomparíre, rísco, ríto, to appeare againe.

Ricomparúta, an appearing againe.

Ricompensa, a recompence, a reward.

Ricompensábile, that may be recompensed.

Ricompensáre, to recompence, to reward.

Ricompenso, a recompence, a reward.

Ricómpera, a buying or purchasing againe.

Ricomperáre, to buy or purchese againe.

Ricomperatóre, a redeemer, a repurchaser.

Ricompiére, to recompence, to reward.

Ricompíre, to recomplish or end againe.

Ricompónere, to compose or frame againe.

Ricompórre, to recompose, or resettle.

Ricómpra, a repurchase or bying againe.

Ricompráre, to buy or purchase againe.

Ricomunicáre, to make common againe. Also to take the Communion againe.

Riconciáre, as Racconciáre.

Riconciliagióne, as Riconciliatióne.

Riconciliamónto, as Riconciliatióne.

Riconciliáre, to reconcile, to attone.

Riconciliatióne, a reconciliation, an attonement.

Ricondúrre, to reconduct or bring againe.

Ricondótto, reconducted, brought againe.

Riconfermáre, to confirme againe.

Riconfermatióne, a reconfirmation.

Riconfessáre, to reconfesse.

Riconfortáre, to recomfort.

Ricongiónto, reconioyned againe.

Ricongiúngere, to ioyne together againe.

Ricongiungiménto, a reconioyning againe. 



Ricongiuntióne, a reconiunction.

Ricongiuráre, to conspire againe.

Ricongiuratióne, a conspiring againe.

Riconiáre, to coine or stamp againe.

Riconóscere, nósco, nobbi, nosciúto, to know againe, to reacknowledge, to be thankefull. Also to view or surueigh and take perfect notice of.

Riconoscente, thankefull, reacknowledging, mindefull, recognising.

Riconoscenza, reacknowledgement, thankefulnesse, mindefulnesse. Also acquaintance. Also a view or surueigh of any thing.

Riconóscersi d'vn fállo, a man to acknowledge himselfe of a fault.

Riconosciménto, as Riconoscenza.

Riconoscitóre, an acknowledger, a thankefull or mindefull man. Also a viewer or surueigher.

Riconosciúto, knowne againe, acknowledged, beene thankefull, recompenced. Also viewed or surueighed.

Ricontáre, to recount or relate againe.

Ricontráre, to meete or encounter againe.

Ricóntro, a re-incounter, as Rincóntro.

Riconualére, to recouer health, or become healthy againe.

Riconualescenza, a health recouered againe.

Riconuertíre, tísco, títo, to reconuert.

Riconuertíta, a reconuersion.

Ricoperchiáre, to couer againe.

Ricoperta, a couering againe.

Ricoperto, couered againe.

Ricopiáre, to coppy ouer againe.

Ricopiatóre, a coppier out of any thing.

Ricopríre, cópro, copersi, coperto, to couer againe.

Ricopritóre, a recouerer. Also one that couereth againe.

Ricopuláre, to redoubble or coupple againe.

Ricorciáre, to shorten or abridge againe.

Ricordántia, remembrance, recording.

Ricordáre, to remember, to put in minde to call to minde, to record.

Ricórdatiegli?, doest thou remember?

Ricordatióne, as Ricordántia.

Ricordatóre, a remembrer, a recorder.

Ricordéuole, to be remembred. Also mindefull.

Ricórdo, a remembrance, a token to remember by. Also a document, a precept, a putting in minde. Also any publike record. Also memory or remembrance.

Ricórdomi, I remember my selfe.

Ricoreggere, to recorrect.

Ricórre, as Raccógliere.

Ricórre fiáto, to gather breath.

Ricorreggiménto, a recorrecting.

Ricorrente, as Recorrente.

Ricorrenza, as Recorrenza.

Ricórrere, córro, córsi, córso, to run againe or backe or to and fro. Also to run or haue recource vnto for helpe or refuge.

Ricorriménto, a running backe or vnto for refuge or helpe.

Ricórso, run backe or againe, had recource vnto for refuge or helpe. Also a recource or returning or running vnto.

Ricorsóio, a running or flowing ouer.

Ricoruáre, to bend, to stoope or make crooked againe.

Ricoruità, a bending, a stooping or making crooked againe.

Ricóruo, bent, crooked, stooped or bowed backe againe.

Ricosíre, as Ricuscíre.

Ricosteggiáre, to coast ouer or along againe.

Ricótta, a kinde of fresh cheese and Creame.

Ricótto, sodden, baked or rosted againe.

Ricótto, nealed or baked a new, ferro ricótto.

Ricouerábile, recouerable.

Ricoueránza, as Ricuperatióne.

Ricoueráre, as Ricuperáre.

Ricouerársi, for a man to recouer himselfe.

Ricoueratióne, as Ricuperatióne.

Ricoueratóre, a recouerer, a reobtayner.

Ricoueréuole, recouerable, to be recouered.

Ricóuero, a place of recouery or refuge, a redresse, a safty or shelter, a remedy. Also as Ricuperatióne.

Ricoverta, a couering, a recouering.

Ricouráre, as Ricuperáre.

Ricouréuole, recouerable.

Ricouríre, to couer againe.

Ricóuro, as Ricóuero.

Ricreanza, as Ricreatióne.

Ricreáre, to recreat, to solace, to sport. Also to make new or create againe.

Ricreatióne, recreation, solace, sport, pastime, pleasure. Also a creating againe.

Ricreatíuo, full of recreation and sport. Also that doth recreate or solace.

Ricredente, one beleeuing otherwise then he did. Also a recreant or miscreant, false of faith.

Recredenza, a beliefe changed from that it was, recreantnesse.

Ricrédere, crédo, credéi, credúto, to beleeue again or otherwise then before.

Ricredúto, as Ricredente.

Ricreménto, any superfluous dregges or drosse or skum of any thing.

Ricréscere, crésco, crébbi, cresciúto, to grow or spring or increase againe. 

Ricresciménto, a growing againe.

Ricrespáre, to curle, to crispe, to frizle, to pucker or wrimple againe.

Ricriaménto, as Ricriatióne.

Ricriáre, to recreate, to solace, to sport.

Ricriatióne, as Ricreatióne.

Ricriuelláre, to sift or searce againe.

Ricrostáre, to harden, to scurffe, to make or become crusty againe.

Rictáre, to grine, to gnar, to snarle as a dog. Also to yaune scornefully with the mouth.

Rícto, the grinning or gnarring of a dog. Also a scornefull yauning with the mouth.

Ricucíre, as Ricuscire.

Ricucíto, as Ricuscíto.

Riculáre, to recoile, to retreate, to retire.

Riculáta, a recoyle, a recoyling, a retreate.

Riculóso, that doeth recoyle or retreate.

Ricuócere, cuóco, cuocéi, cótto, to boyle, to rost, or backe againe.

Ricuperábile, recouerable, to be reobtained.

Ricuperándo, as Ricuperábile.

Ricuperáre, to recouer, to reobtaine, to reget, to rescue. Also to haue recource vnto.

Ricuperatióne, a recouerie, a reobtayning.

Ricuruáre, as Ricoruáre.

Ricuruità, a bending backe againe.

Ricúruo, as Ricóruo.

Ricúsa, a recausing, a refusal, a renouncing.

Ricusánte, a recusant, a refuser. Also refusing or renouncing.

Ricusáre, to recuse, to refuse, to renounce.

Ricusatióne, a refusing.

Ricuscíre, cúscio, cuscíj, cuscíto, to sew againe, to mend any seame.

Ricuséuole, that may be refused.

Ridamáre, to loue againe, to loue that loue vs, to reloue.

Ridáre, to giue againe.

Ridare la vólta, to giue a turne backe againe.

Ridarguíre, as Redarguíre.

Rídda, any kind of round Country dance as our Hay dance.

Riddáre, to dance round.

Rídere, ríd, rísi, ríso, to laugh, to smile.

Ridente, laughing, smiling, pleasant.

Ridétto, said, repeated, or recanted againe.

Ridéuole, as Ridícolo.

Ridiamáre, as Ridamáre.

Ridiciménto, a repetition or saying againe.

Ridícolo, ridiculous, foolish, to be laughed at or scorned. Also full of laugh­



ter. Also a laughing-stocke.

Ridicolóso, as Ridícolo.

Ridículo, as Ridícolo.

Ridiculóso, as Ridícolo.

Ridimandáre, to redemand, to reaske.

Ridipíngere, to paint againe.

Ridire, dico, díssi, détto, to say againe, to repeate. Also to recant or reuoake a saying.

Ridirizzare, as Ridrizzáre.

Ridiuídere, vído, vísi, víso, to redeuide.

Ridiuisióne, a redeuiding.

Ridolére, dólgo, dólsi, dolúto, to grieue, to ake or smart againe. Also to giue an odure, a sauour or a smell.

Ridoli, some part about a plough.

Ridolúto, grieued or smarted againe. Also complained of againe.

Ridomandáre, to redemand, to reaske.

Ridondáre, to redound or returne vnto.

Ridoppiáre, to redoubble.

Ridormíre, to sleepe againe.

Ridossáre., looke A ridósso.

Ridósso., looke Caualcáre a ridósso.

Ridottánza, a redoubting or fearing.

Ridottáre, to redoubt, to feare, to dread, to stand in awe of.

Ridottáto, redoubted, feared.

Ridottéuole, redoubtable, to be redoubted.

Ridótto, reduced, brought or led vnto or backe safe againe. Also redoubted. Also a home or retiring place. Also a gamíng house, an ordinary or tabling house or other place where good company doeth meete. Also a company, a crue or assembly of good fellowes met together.

Ridouentáre, to become againe.

Ridrizzáre, to make straight againe. Also to stand vp or stiffe againe.

Riduáre, to doubble or bring to two againe.

Ridúcere, as Ridúrre.

Riducíbile, that may be reduced.

Riduplicáre, to redouble or refold.

Riduplicatióne, a redoubling, a refoulding.

Ridúrre, dúco, dússi, dútto, or dótto, to reduce, to bring vnto or lead backe safe againe, to rebring.

Ridúrre a memória, to reduce or call to memorie.

Ridúrsi, for a man to retire, reduce or recouer himselfe.

Ridútto, as Ridótto.

Ridúrre a niénte, to bring to nothing.

Riédere, riédo, riedéi, riedúto, to returne or come backe againe.

Riedificáre, to re-edifie or build againe.

Riedificatióne, a re-edification, a rebuilding, a re-edifying.

Riedo, a returne or returning backe.

Riedúto, returned backe againe. 

Riella, a Carpenters square, squire or rule. Also a kind of Adze.

Riello, a little brooke or riuelet of waters.

Riempiménto, as Riempitúra.

Riempíre, písco, píto, to replenish, to repleat or fill againe. Also to farce.

Riempitúra, a filling, a replenishing. Also a farcing.

Rienfiáre, to swell or puffe vp againe.

Rientegráre, as Reintegráre.

Rientrare, to re-enter or come in againe.

Rientráta, a re-entrie, are-entrance.

Rienza, as Renza. Also a common whore, a stallion-rampe.

Riepilogáre, to recollect, to heape conclusion vpon conclusion.

Riérgere, érgo, érsi, érto, to re-erect.

Riesca, may sort, issue, prooue or come to passe.

Riescere, as Riuscíre.

Rifaciménto, a making againe. Also a restoring into former state and condition, a repairing.

Rifanciullánza, a new childhood. Also dotage.

Rifanciullíre, lísco, líto, to become a child againe, to dote or be a dotrell.

Rifáre, fáccio, féci, fátto, to doe or make againe, to repaire or make one whole againe, or to recouer himselfe after some losse or sicknesse. Also to set stake vpon stake or reuie at play, to put it to a double poste. Also to deale or shuffle the cardes againe.

Rifasciáre, to swathe againe.

Rifátto, renewed, done or made againe. Also made or become whole againe, or recouered after some losse or sicknesse. Also put to a double poste, set stake vpon stake or reuied at play.

Rífe, as Réfe, any kind of thrid.

Riferenza, a reference, a relation or respect vnto.

Riferíre, rísco, ríto, to referre vnto, to make relation of, to report, to expresse. Also to ascribe or apply vnto, to haue reference or respect vnto.

Riferíre grátie, to giue thankes.

Riferíto, referred vnto, reported, expressed or made relation of. Also ascribed or applied vnto, had reference or respect vnto.

Rifermáre., looke Fermáre.

Riferuere, feruo, feruéi, feruúto, to grow, become or make feruent againe.

Rifettióne, as Refettióne.

Riffiggere, fíggo, fissi, físso, to refix, to fix againe.

Riffísso, refixed, fixed againe.

Rifiatáre, to breath or take breath againe.

Rificcáre, to driue or thrust in againe. Also to vrge or insist vpon.

Rificiáre, as Reficiáre.

Rifidársi, to trust himselfe againe.

Rifigliáre, to bring forth more children, or to fillie againe.

Rifináre, to refine. Also to cease or giue ouer againe.

Rifioríre, rísco, ríto, to flourish againe.

Rifiutábile, refusable.

Rifiutáre, as Recusáre, to refute.

Rifiúto, a refusall. Also any thing that is cast off and may be spared, as Cauállo di rifiúto, a cast-horse or a spare horse.

Riflessióne, a reflexion, a reuerberation, a repercussion, a bending backe.

Riflessíuo, reflectiue, reuerberating, bowing or bending backe.

Riflesso, reflected, reuerberated. Also a reflexion. Also bended backe.

Riflettere, Fletto, Flessi, Flesso, to reflect, to reuerberate. Also to bow or bend backe.

Riflússo, a reflux or flowing of the Sea.

Rifocillaménto, as Refocillaménto.

Rifocilláre, as Refocilláre.

Rifondáre, to found or ground againe.

Rifóndere, fóndo, fondéi, fondúto, to found, to melt or cast againe, to dissolue.

Riforbíre, bísco, bíto, to refurbish, to frub or wipe ouer againe.

Rifórma, as Riformatióne.

Riformagióne, as Riformatióne.

Riformáre, to reforme, to redresse, to repaire, to fashion as it was before.

Riformatióne, a reformation, a repairing, a renewing of any thing to it's old state againe. Also a law or ordinance made by the people without the Senate.

Riformatóre, a reformer, a repairer, a corrector, a controuler.

Riforméuole, that may be reformed, repaired or corrected.

Riforníre, nísco, níto, to refurnish. Looke Forníre.

Rifortificáre, to fortifie againe.

Riforzáre, as Rinforzáre.

Riforzíno, whipcord, twine or merlin. Also a rope or halter of hempe.

Rifórzo, a re-enforcing or restrengthning.

Rifósso, a double ditch, dike or trench.

Rifragránte, sweet or fragrant.

Rifragrántia, a fragrancie or sweet sent.

Rifragráre, to yeeld a fragrant smell.

Rifrángere, frángo, fransi, fránto, to breake or splitter againe.

Rifránto, broken or splitted againe.

Rifrátta, a rebound. Also rebounded.

Rifrátto, broken or fracted againe.

Rifrenáre, as Raffrenáre, to refraine.

Rifrenáto, as Raffrenáto, refrained.

Rifrescáre, to refresh or coole againe.

Rifrescáta, a refreshing, a cooling. 



Rifrescatóio, as Rinfrescatóio.

Rifrigeráre, as Refrigeráre.

Rifrigeratíuo, as Refrigeratíuo.

Rifrigerio, as Refrigerio.

Rifriggere, fríggo, fríssi, frítto, to fry againe.

Rifrustáre, to search, to pry, to looke narrowly into. Also to tumble or rumble vp and downe. Also to beat, to bang, to swadle, or rib-baste with rod or cudgell. Also to checke with bitter words.

Rifrústo, a searching or narrow prying into. Also a tumbling or rumbling vp and downe. Also a beating or swadling, a cudgeling or smiting againe. Also a checke or taunt giuen in bitter words.

Rifúga, as Refúga.

Rifuggente, flying or running too & fro.

Rifuggíre, fúggo, fuggíto, to run away againe, to runne or fly vnto for helpe. Also to eschew, to auoide or flie from.

Rifuggíto, runne away againe, fled vnto for helpe, eschewed or fled from.

Rifúgio, refuge, helpe, succour, aide, protection, shelter. Also a place of helpe, rescue or safetie.

Rifúgo, as Refúgo.

Rifuladóri, something belonging to a Gunner or about great Ordinance.

Rifulgente, shining, orient, splendent, fulgent, glistring, blazing, flaring.

Rifulgenza, a shining, a splendence, a glistring, a bright-blazing.

Rifúlgere, fúlgo, fúlso, to shine, to glister, to flare, to blaze brightly.

Rifúlso, shined, glistred, glittred, flared, blazed bright, shone.

Rifusáre, to refuse. Also to put in confusion.

Rifusáti, as Refusáti.

Rifúso, a refusall, A rifúso, in refusing manner, carelesly.

Rifutáre, to confute, to conuince, to reiect or refell againe. Also to refuse.

Rifutatióne, a confutation, a conuincing. Also a refusall or denying.

Ríga, a line, a streake. Also a rule in a booke. Also a ruler.

Rigágno, as Rigágnolo.

Rigágnolo, a little streame, a brooke, a riuelet, a gutter or gullet of waters, drawen by arte into any fields or gardens to water them.

Riganello, as Rigágnolo. Also a kind of Rooke, Daw or Chough.

Rígano, as Rigágnolo.

Rígano, Organie or wilde Marioram.

Rigánte sudóre, trickling sweat.

Rigáre, to rule paper or bookes, to streake out, to marke with a line. Also to draw little streames, gutters or riuelets of water into fields to water grounds. 

Rigaruólo, as Rigagnolo. Also a waterpot to water Gardens with.

Rigatióne, a watring of fields.

Rigáto, a kind of striped stuffe much worne in dublets. Looke Rigáre.

Rigátta, a strife or contention or strugling for the maistrie. Also a play or striuing for any thing among children called musse.

Rigattáre, to striue, to contend or strugle for the maistrie, to wrangle or shift for, to play at musse. Also to pinch, to spare and scrape together by sauing, or by hooke and crooke. Also to cog and lye craftily. Also to sell by retaile as Hucksters and Brokers doe.

Rigattiére, a striuer or strugler for the maistrie, a plaier at musse. Also a wrangler or shifter, a pinch-pennie. Also a huckster, a retailer, a regrater, a broker, a fripper, a badger, such a one as at a cheape rate engrosseth commodities and then sells them very deare.

Rigattiniére, a maker of pouches or hawking bags, or of purse-lockes.

Rigattíno, a pouch, a hawking bagge or purse with a locke. Also a purse-locke.

Rigeláre, to freeze againe.

Rigeneráre, as Regeneráre.

Rigeneratióne, as Regeneratióne.

Rigermináre, to bud or burgeon againe.

Rigerminatióne, a budding againe.

Rigermogliánte, budding or burgeoning againe, reblossoming.

Rigermogliáre, to bud or burgeon againe

Rigettáglie, all things that are reiected, abhorred or cast off and refused, as sicknesse, pouertie, &c.

Rigettáre, to reiect, to refuse or cast off.

Rigettáto, reiected, cast off or refused.

Rigettióne, a reiecting or casting away.

Rigetto, a reiecting, a budding out.

Rigidaménte, seuerely, austerely, roughly, rigorously, sternely, sharpely.

Rigidézza, seueritie, roughnesse, austeritie, rigor, sturdinesse, surlinesse.

Rigidíre, dísco, díto, to grow or make seuere, rough, austere, rigorous, sturdie, surlie, stiffe. Also to become stiffe or num with cold.

Rigidità, as Rigidézza.

Rigidíto, growen or made seuere, rough, austere, rigorous or surlie. Also become starke, stiffe or num through cold.

Rígido, seuere, rough, surlie, sturdie, austere, rigorous, fierce, mercilesse. Also starke, stiffe or num through cold, clumzie.

Rigioíre, ísco, íto, to reioyce againe.

Rigióngere, as Raggióngere.

Rigiraménto, as Rigiráta.

Rigiráre, to turne round againe, to goe to winde or houer againe about. 

Rigiráta, a turning round againe.

Rigittáre, as Rigettáre.

Rigiúgnere, to ouertake againe.

Rigiuráre, to sweare againe.

Rightáre, to tucke vp a garment.

Riglíto, a tucking or tucke of a garment.

Rignándo, grinning, yarring, snarling. Also foaming at the mouth with anger.

Rignáre, to snarle, to grin, to iarre as a dog or curre. Also to neigh as a Horse. Also to foame at the mouth with anger, to fret and chafe closely. Also to laugh, to simper or smile aloud and apparantly with shewing the teeth. Also to grumble, to chafe, to scold or brawle at. Also to make mouthes, to wry or wrest the mouth in signe of anger.

Rigniménto, a snarling, a grinning, a yarring of a dog. Also a neighing of a horse. Also a foaming at the mouth. Also a loud laughter, or apparant smiling. Also a foolish simpring with shewing the teeth. Also a grumbling, a scolding or brawling at. Also a wresting of the mouth.

Rigníre, gnísco, gníto, as Rignáre.

Rígno, as Rigniménto.

Rígo, a rule, a ruler, or Carpenters squire, the name of an old common song.

Rigóglio, as Orgóglio.

Rigoglióso, as Orgoglióso. Also ranke as sometimes grasse is, or proud as mans flesh.

Rigogolétto, a little Rooke or Daw.

Rigógoli, a kind of trammell, ginne or springe to catch birds with.

Rigógolo, a Rooke, a Daw, or a Chough.

Rigoláre, to roule vpon trucks or sleds.

Rigolétto, a country skipping dance, horue-pipe, merrie-round. Also a gigge.

Rigólfo, a whirlepoole. Also the eddie of the water or Sea.

Rigolítia, the wood Licorice.

Rígolo, a little wheele vsed vnder sleds Gunners call it a trucke.

Rigolóne, a great trucke. Also as Rigolétto.

Rigolístico, as Regolístico.

Rigonfiaménto, a reswelling.

Rigonfiánte, reswelling.

Rigonfiáre, to swell againe.

Rigónfio, puffed vp or swolne againe.

Rigóre, rigor, surlinesse, seueritie, extremitie. Also a starknesse, a stiffenesse or numnesse with frost or cold. Also a violent cold which at the comming of a Tertian ague bring, quaking and shiuering.

Rigorgáre, to regurgle with boiling.

Rigorgógháre, idem.

Rigorítia, the wood Licorice. 



Rigorosità, as Rigóre, rigorousnesse.

Rigoróso, rigorous, surlie, seuere, sierce, vnmercifull, flint-hearted.

Rigouernáre, to ouersee or gouerne againe.

Rigradáre, to please or accept in good part againe.

Rigressáto, regressed or escheated vnto.

Riguadagnáre, to regaine.

Riguagliáre, as Raguagliáre. Also to settle.

Riguáglio, as Raguáglio. Also a setling of any thing.

Riguardaménto, as Riguárdo.

Riguardánte, regardant, beholding.

Riguardáre, to regard, to behold, to view, to marke, to beed. Also to respect.

Riguardáre con sicurtà, to behold assuredly, to heed with assurance.

Riguardatóre, a regarder, a beholder, a heeder. Also a respecter.

Riguardéuole, regardfull, respectfull, worthy of honour and esteeme.

Riguárdo, regard, heed, view, caution. Also respect or reference vnto.

Riguardóso, as Riguardéuole.

Riguidardonaménto, a recompensing.

Riguidardonáre, to reward againe.

Ríguo, a watrish or moist place. Also watred or that may easily be watred.

Rigurgitáre, to regorge.

Rigurgitatióne, a regorging.

Rihabitánza, a rehabitation.

Rihabitáre, to rehabite.

Rihabitatióne, a rehabitation.

Rihabituáre, to rehabituate.

Rihauére, hò, hébbi, hauúto, to recouer or haue againe.

Rihauérsi, to recouer himselfe either of sicknesse or any losse.

Rihauúto, recouered or had againe.

Rilasciánte, releasing, relinquishing. Also relaxing.

Rilasciánte medicína, a relaxing medicine, or medicine that openeth.

Rilasciáre, to release, to relinquish, to relaxe, to open, to discharge or quit againe. Also to haue a respite or release from.

Rilasciatióne, a relaxation. Also as Riláscio.

Rilasciatíuo, laxatiue or relaxatiue in operation.

Riláscio, a release, a relinquishing, a discharging, a quittance. Also a respit or relaxation.

Rilassaménto, as Riláscio.

Rilassáre, as Rilasciáre.

Rilásso, as Riláscio.

Rilauáre, to wash or laue againe.

Rileccáre, to licke againe, to lap as a Dog.

Rilegáre, to binde againe. Also to confine to a place, to exile and banish. 

Rilegatióne, a binding or tying fast againe. Also a confining to a place.

Rilegáto, bound againe. Also confined or banished to some one place.

Rileggere, leggo, lessi, letto, to reade ouer againe.

Rilentáre, as Rallentáre.

Rilento, slacke, slow.

Rilento, leasurely, consideratly. Also relentingly.

Riletto, reade ouer againe.

Rileuánte, auailefull, of importance, of worth, of consequence.

Rileuáre, to rise againe. Also to raise, to aduance, to lift vp or remooue againe. Also to auaile, to import, or be of consequence. Also to releeue, to comfort or to cure againe. Also to receiue or get by. Also to worke raised or embossed worke.

Rileuataménte, raisedly. Also highly and of importance. Looke Rileuáre.

Rileuáti, ridges betweene plowghed lands.

Rileuáto, risen againe. Also raised, aduanced, lifted or remooued away againe. Also recouered or vp againe from sickenesse or danger. Also notable, high, worthy, important or speciall. Also embossed or raised.

Rileuáto seruígio, an especiall or important good turne or seruice.

Rileuo, reliefe, ease, or easing of a man. Also raising or aduancement. Also an vprising or vptaking. Also import, worth or consequence. Also raised or imbossed worke. Also that which heires pay vnto the King called in our law the Reliefe or Liuery-paiment. Also the remainder, leauing, scrapes or odde ends of meat and drinke taken of the boorde, or of any thing else.

Rílibo, a flim-flam-tale, an idle discourse, a thing of no worth or effect.

Rilieuáre, as Rileuáre.

Rilieuo, as Rileuo.

Riligióne, as Religióne.

Riligióso, as Religióso.

Rílla, a short bat, cudgell, or trunchion. Also a mans yard or pricke.

Rilucente, relucent, bright-shining.

Rilucenza, a shining or relucency.

Rilúcere, lúco, lússi, luciúto, to shine or giue light, to glister bright.

Riluciúto, shined or giuen light.

Ríma, a Rime or Verse, a definance of a verse or meeter. Also a rift, a clift or chop in any thing, as in wood or stone where it is not close ioyned.

Rimagnente, remayning. Also a remainder.

Rimaldésca, a kind of Grape in Italy.

Rimaledíre, dísco, dito, to curse againe.

Rimaledittióne, a remalediction. 

Rimamária, as Alliária.

Rimandáre, to send againe. Also to countermand.

Rimandelláio, a picker of lockes.

Rimandelláre, to picke lockes.

Rimandelli, as Grimaldelli, pickelockes.

Rimándo, a countermand. Di rimándo, to spare and to be sent backe againe.

Rimanente, a remayning, a biding or dwelling. Also ceasing or giuing ouer. Also a remainder or remnant of any thing, a residue.

Rimanéro, mángo, mási, máso, or másto, to remaine, to abide, to dwell, to continue in a place. Also to stay or tary behind. Also to cease, to leaue of, to giue ouer, or rest from doing. Also to abstaine from.

Rimanére a déntisécchi, to take paines and yet to get nothing to feede on, or as we say when one comes late that all haue dined or supped, to kisse the Hares foote, or else to kisse the post.

Rimanére al vérde, to remaine or come to an end without profit, to haue consumed all, and come as a candle to burne in the socket.

Rimanére con tánto di náso, to haue the canuase in any suite, to be ashamed, and looke bashfully, as if one were loth to looke on his owne nose.

Rimanére in asciútto, as Rimanére in sécco.

Rimanére in ásso, to haue lost all, to be leaft with any one single penny.

Rimanére in piédi, to continue fast, to last constantly, to keepe ones footeing.

Rimanére in sécco, to be leaft on the dry sand, that is succorlesse, as a ship on the sands, or a fish without water.

Rimanére in sule sécche, idem. Also to be left bare, leane and dry, as one that hath had and is newly cured of the French-pox.

Rimanére smarríto, to be or to remaine as one amazed or affrighted.

Rimangiáre, to eate againe.

Rimánti con Dío, abide with God.

Rimarcábile, remarkable, notable.

Rimarcáre, to remarke or note againe.

Rimarchéuole, as Rimarcábile.

Rimáre, to write or speake rime, to rime.

Rimário, a booke of rimes. Also a pile made vp in proportion as billets or faggots, one answering to another.

Rimaritáre, to marry or wed againe.

Rimaságlie, any remainder, leauings, reliques, shreds, scraps or offall.

Rimáso, remained, dwelt, continued. Also left. Also staide or tarried behind. Also ceased from or giuen ouer. Also any remainder or leauing.



Rimasticáre, to chew or ruminat againe.

Rimásto, as Rimáso.

Rimasúgli, all maner of leauings, remainders, refuse, scraps, offall or fragments.

Rimatóre, a Rimer, a Rime-maker.

Rimátrica, a kind of venimous Serpent.

Rimbaldéra, as Mottózzo.

Rimbalzáre, to bound, to rebound backe.

Rimbálzo, the second bound of a ball. Also any bounding, hopping or skipping. Vsed also for a shift from one thing to another.

Rimbambíre, as Ribambíre.

Rimbarcaménto, a re-imbarking.

Rimbarcáre, to re-imbarke.

Rimbeccáre, to retorte backe word for word, to beate backe by direct opposition. Also to make or put on a bill or beake. Also to beake or bill. Also to feede at the bill or crame as they doe Capons. Also to make one a cuckold againe. Also to strike the ball at the first seruice. Also to nicke a chance at dice.

Rimbeccársela, to swallow a Gudgeen, or to beleeue that the Moone is made of greene cheese.

Rimbeccáta, a retorting or beating backe of any thing.

Rimbelliménto, a re-imbellishing.

Rimbellíre, lísco, líto, to re-imbellish.

Rimboccáre, to stop at the mouth or head. Also to twit or hit one in the teeth. Also to retort backe word for word.

Rimboccóne, groueling with the face downeward.

Rimbombánte, as Ribombánte.

Rimbombánza, as Ribómbo.

Rimbombáre, as Ribombáre.

Rimbómbo, as Ribómbo.

Rimborfáre, to re-emburse, to put into ones purce againe.

Rimboscáre, to grow to wood againe. Also to enter into a wood againe. Also to take couert againe as a Deere doth, to ta	ke shelter.

Rimbottáre, to put or conueigh into buts, pipes or hogsheads. Also to become a Toade.

Rimbottáto, intunned, conueighed or put vp in a Butt. Also by metaphor imprinted or laide vp close in ones memory. Also intoaded.

Rimbracciáre, to imbrace againe, to re-imbrace.

Rimbrencioli, snipes, iagges, pinkes, cuts, laces, or ornaments about garments. Also little holes.

Rimbrenciolóso, full of snips, iagges, cuts, pinkes, laces, fringes or danglings about garments. Also full of little holes.

Rimbrontoláre, as Brontoláre.

Rimbróntoli, as Bróntoli.

Rimbrottáre, as Brontoláre.

Rimbrótti, as Bróntoli, words of anger, of disdaine and grumbling.

Rimbróttola, a grumbling-woman.

Rimbróttoli, as Bróntoli.

Rimbucáre, to put or driue into a hole againe.

Rimburchiáre, as Rimorchiáre.

Rimbúrchio, as Rimórchio.

Ríme, all manner of rimes.

Rimeáre, to returne, to come againe, to goe backe, to haue passage againe.

Rimediábile, remediable, to be remedied.

Rimediáre, to remedy, to redresse.

Rimedio, a remedy, a redresse. Also a medicine. Also by metaphor aide or helpe.

Rimedíre, dísco, díto, to remedy, to redresse. Also to saue or get by sparing. Also vsed for to redeeme or ranseme for mony.

Rimeggiáre, to vime.

Rimembrami, I doe remember.

Rimembránza, remembrance, memorie.

Rimembráre, to remember.

Rimemoránza, remembrance, memorie.

Rimemoráre, to remember.

Rimemoréuole, memorable, mindfull.

Rimenaménto uezzóso, a wanton demeaning behauiour, stirring or wrigling.

Rimenáre, to lead or bring againe. Also to stirre and wrigle vp and downe. Also to worke or concorporate together.

Rimenáta, a leading or bringing againe. Also a tossing, a stirring or wrigling vp and downe. Also a working or incorporating together.

Rimendáre, to mend or dresse againe.

Riménio, a shaking, a clicketing, a giggie-goggie of a bed. Also as Rimenáta.

Rimeritáre, to remerit or deserue againe. Also to reward againe.

Riméscere, méscio, mescéi, mesciúto, as Rimescoláre.

Rimesciménto, as Rimescolaménto.

Rimescolaménto, a blending, a mingling or mixing together againe. Also a shaking or hudling, or ratling together, a hotch-potch. Also a fumbling vp and downe.

Rimescolánza, as Rimescolaménto.

Rimescoláre, to blend, to mesh, to mingle, to meddle or shuffle together againe. Also to shake, to huddle or rattle together. 

Riméssa, a remitting of any thing from one man or time to another, a putting off or deferring. Also a pardoning or forgiuing. Also the beginning of a new speech or action when one hath made a stay or a pause. Also remitted or forgiuen. Also demisse, remisse, base, abiect. Also patched or pieced together and set vnto againe.

Rimessaménte, remissely, basely, demissely, faintly, fearefully.

Rimessíbile, remissible, pardonable.

Rimessióne, remission, forgiuenesse. Also a remitting or adiourning.

Rimésso, remitted, forgiuen, pardoned, acquitted. Also put off or deferred. Also restored or replaced. Also committed or confined to any time or place Also sent backe againe. Also slacked or let downe the strings of an instrument. Also remisse, demisse, abiect, crauin, base, vile, timorous, faint-hearted, slow, dull, negligent or slacke. Also humble, meeke, milde, gentle, mortified, without pride.

Rimésta, as Rimescolaménto.

Rimestaménto, as Rimescolaménto.

Rimestánza, as Rimescolaménto.

Rimestáre, as Rimescoláre.

Rimesticáre, as Rimescoláre. Also to bang, to beat, to tug, to touze, to fumble vp and downe.

Rimesticatúra, as Rimescolaménto. Also a tugging, a touzing, a fumbling.

Riméttere, to remit, to pardon, to forgiue, to acquit. Also to put ouer to another, to defer, to prorogue, to refer. Also to commit or set or lay vp in some place Also to send backe againe. Also to slacken, or let loose. Also to bud or burgeon forth againe as yoong plants doe. Also to supply any want or defect. Also to refer or commit to ones charge and trust.

Rimínio, as Riménio.

Rimiránte, behoulding. Also a behoulder.

Rimiráre, to behould or view againe, to aime diligently at.

Rimiráta, a viewing or lookeing about.

Rimissióne, as Remissióne.

Rimissória, a remitting of a case in law.

Rimisuráre, to measure againe.

Rimmoláre, as Rimollíre.

Rimodernáre, to come to a moderne or new fashion againe.

Rimollíre, lisco, líto, to steepe in liquor. Also to remollifie, to resoften or asswage.

Rimondáre, to pare, to clense, to cleere, or draine againe.

Rimóndo, pared, clensed or cleered and drained 



againe.

Rimontáre, to remount, to get vp or ascend againe.

Rimorchiáre, as Remulcáre. Also to grumble at one and yet not be angry, with him. Also to quip, to tante or scoffe at with merry iests. Also to giue a wanton looke with intention to allure or entice.

Rimorchiáto, towed, haled, hulled, drawne or tug'd as a ship or barge with roapes and force of men. Also grumbled at, quipt or taunted in ieasting manner. Also giuen a wanton looke with allurements, and purpose to draw vnto ones selfe.

Rimórchio, as Remúlco, a grumbling at or quipping in ieasting manner, a scoffe, a tante, or wanton looke with alurements.

Rimórdere, mórdo, mordéi, mordúto, to bite, to snip, to pinch or nip againe. Also to checke, to rebuke, to scould at, to vex or grieue one that hath done so to you. Also to haue or feele a remorce or compunction in conscience for any thing done.

Rimordiménto, a biting or snipping againe. Also a remorce or compunction.

Rimordúto, bitten or snipt againe. Also checkt, rebuked or scolded at. Also felt or touched with a remorce or compunction of conscience.

Rimóre, as Romóre.

Rimoreggiáre, as Rumoreggiáre.

Rimoríre, muóro, moríj, mórto, to die againe.

Rimórso, as Rimordiménto.

Rimórto, dead and dead againe.

Rimóso, full of rimes, riming. Also full of chirkes, rifts, clefts or chaps.

Rimóssa, a pause or interuall of time. Also a remoouing or withdrawing.

Rimósso, remooued, put, laid, set or taken aside and away.

Rimostránza, a remonstrance or shewing vnto, or a declaring againe vnto.

Rimostráre, to remonstrate, to declare or shew vnto againe.

Rimotaménte, remotely, distantly, a farre off, solitarily, separately.

Rimotióne, a remoouing, a setting, a laying away againe.

Rimóto, remote, separate, solitarie, distant, farre off, out of the way, vncouth.

Rimóuere, móuo, móssi, mósso, to remooue, to withdraw, to set, put or take away from any time or place.

Rimpalmáre, to trim vp, to make smooth againe, to calke or trim a ship.

Rimpalmatúra, a trimming vp, a making smooth, a calking of a ship.

Rimpastáre, to paste, to knead, or concorporate together againe.

Rimpatriáto, placed or come againe into his country.

Rimpeduláre, to shake or shift off with some sleight or deuice. Also to piece, to patch or botch as a Souter doth old shooes or Botcher hosen.

Rimpennáre, to recouer, to store or haue feathers againe.

Rimpetagliáre, as Periclitáre, to hazard, to ieopard or endanger.

Rimpetáglio, hazard, danger, ieopardie, perill. Also hab or nab.

Rimpetto, ouer against, foreanenst, right ouer. Also in respect, in comparison.

Rimpiattáre, to squat, to lye or make as flat as a dish. Also to lurke close.

Rimpinzáre, to glut or gorge againe.

Rimpiumáre, to fledge, to store or fill with feathers or plumes.

Rimporpettársela, as Rimbeccársela.

Rimpregionáre, to emprison againe.

Rimpregnáre, to get with child againe.

Rimpregnatúra, a getting with child againe.

Rimpregnéuole, that may be gotten with child or bag'd againe.

Rimpresióne, a taint vpon a horses foot.

Rimprocciáre, as Rimproueráre.

Rimprocciéuole, as Rimprouerábile.

Rimpróccio, as Rimpróuero.

Rimproccióso, reprochfull, ignominious, full of shame and disgrace.

Rimprótto, as Rimpróuero.

Rimprouerábile, reprochable.

Rimproueráre, to reproch, to shame or disgrace one. Also to vpbraid, to twit or hit one in the teeth with any fault committed by him, or cast him in the teeth with any good turne done him.

Rimpróuero, reproch, shame, ignominie, disgrace. Also vpbrayding, twitting, hitting or casting in the teeth any fault committed or courtesie receiued.

Rimprouerio, as Rimpróuero.

Rimuggíre, gísco, gíto, as Rimugiáre.

Rimuggíto, belowed, lowed, resounded or answered againe with lowings. Also a belowing, a lowing or resounding againe.

Rimugiáre, to bellow, to low, to roare, to resound or answer with lowings.

Rimulcáre, as Remulcáre.

Rimúlco, as Remúlco.

Rimuneránza, as Rimuneratióne.

Rimuneráre, to guerdon, to recompence, to meede, to reward, to requite.

Rimuneratióne, a remuneration, a reward, a recompence, a guerdon, a meede.

Rimuneratore, a recompencer, a rewarder, a guerdoner.

Rimuneréuole, remunerable, that may be rewarded or recompenced.

Rimunire, nísco, níto, to remunite, to re-enforce, to refurnish.

Rimuníto, refurnished, re-inforced, reunited, restrengthned.

Rimuóuerc, as Rimóuere.

Rimuráre, to immure or wall vp againe

Rimurchiáre, as Rimorchiáre.

Rimúta, a remoouing or rechanging, an alteration.

Rimutaménto, a remoouing, a rechanging, an alteration.

Rimutánza, as Rimutaménto.

Rimutáto, changed or altered from what it was. Also remooued.

Rimutéuole, that may be remooued, altred or changed againe.

Rinalzaménto, a readuancement.

Rinalzáre, to raise againe, to readuance.

Rinascente, new-springing.

Rinascenza, as Rinascim énto.

Rinascére, násco, nácqui, náto, to be borne, to grow or spring againe.

Rinasciménto, a new birth a regeneration.

Rináscita, as Rinasciménto.

Rináto, re-borne, new-borne, re-generated, new sprung vp.

Rinauigáre, to saile or goe by sea againe.

Rincacciáre, to rechase, to rehunt, to put to rout or chase againe, to put backe, to driue away.

Rincagnáto, doggish, currish, curst, shrewd. Also flat-nozed, dog-muzled, illfauoured. Also crooked, wrested, bent.

Rincalcáre, to clinch backe. Also to blunt or abate the edge of any thing.

Rincalzaménto, as Rincálzo.

Rincalzáre, to re-enforce, to fortifie, to vnderprope, to vnderlay, to supply with forces, to banke about. Also to charge anew or set vpon againe, as it were at ones heeles. Also to restraine or keepe in subiection. Also to hose or shooe a new. Also as Incalzáre. Also to vndertilt a barel when it runs low.

Rincalzáta, a new or fresh and suddaine assault at ones heeles.

Rincálzo, a re-inforcement, a fortification, a supply of forces. Also a new or suddaine recharging. Also a bankeing about. Also a restraint. Also an vnderprop, an vnderlifting. Also a ioyce to vndertilt a barrell when it runnes low. Also as Incálzo.

Rincaráre, to endeare, to make or become deare againe.

Rincaríre, rísco, ríto, as Rincaráre



Rincartáre, to repaire or amend with paper or paste-bord. Also to shuffle the cardes, to packe or pricke the cardes, to play one carde vpon another. Also to put the cardes into the stocke againe. Also to write or commit to paper againe.

Rincastelláre, to trusse vp, to packe, to clinch, to riuet or set any thing well together.

Rincastelláto córpo, a bodie well trust, well framed and well compact.

Rincastráre, as Rincastelláre.

Rincatiáre, to smooth, to furbish, to frub or plaine any kind of mettall.

Rincanernáre, to re-enden, to re-encaue.

Rinchiáre, as Rignáre.

Rinchiatúra, as Rigniménto.

Rínchio, as Rigniménto.

Rinchiudere, chiúdo, chiúsi, chiúso, to re-enclose, to shut in, to recluse, to shut in or immure againe.

Rinchiudiménto, a re-enclosing, a locking in, a shutting vp againe. Also an emprisoning, an immuring.

Rinchiúso, re-enclosed, shut vp, lock't in, imprisoned, immured. Also a recluse or solitarie man.

Rincíngerc, cíngo, cinsi, cínto, to get with child againe.

Rincínta, a woman big with child againe.

Rincirconíre, nísco, níto, to turne or become sowre as wine or beare doth by thunder or hot weather.

Rincominciáre, to begin againe.

Rinconcentráre, to encircle or concentre againe.

Rincontráre, to re-encounter, to meete with or encounter againe, to but, to shocke or front againe. Also to compare or confront a thing together. Also to front or iumpe in opinion.

Rincóntro, a re-encounter, an encountring or meeting with by chance or otherwise, a butting, a shocking or fronting together againe. Also a comparing or confronting a thing together. Also a lumping in opinion. Also foreanenst or right ouer against in situation.

Rincoráre, to re-encourage, to animate, to hearten or embolden againe.

Rincórrere, to runne in againe. Also to come backe running. Also to incurre againe. Also to runne ouer a matter againe.

Rincréscere, crésco, crébbi, cresciúto, to bee tedious vnto, to thinke the time long and wearisome, and by consequence to grieue or wearie in minde. Also to encrease or grow more and more.

Rincrescéuole, tedious, wearisome, irkesome to the minde, noysome, fasheous.

Rincresciménto, tediousnesse, wearisomnesse, fasherie, irkesomnesse to the minde. Also an encreasing or growing againe.

Rincrescióso, as Rincrescéuole.

Rincresciúto, wearied with irkesomnesse of minde or thought the time tedious. Also encreased or growen againe.

Rincrespáre, to curle, to crispe, to frizle, to frounze. Also to pucker or wrimple.

Rincrespatúra, a curling, a crisping, a frizling, a frounzing, a wrimpling.

Rincriccáre, as Ranicchiáre. Also to laugh so heartily till one shuckle.

Rincricciáre, as Rincriccáre.

Rinculáre, to recoyle, to retreat, to giue backe, to retire.

Rinculáta, a recoyling, a retreating, a retiring, a giuing backe.

Rinculóso, that recoyleth.

Rindentráre, to inward or enter in againe, to put in againe.

Rinegáre, to renounce, to renegue, to deny, to forsweare, to abiure.

Rinegáto, denied, abiured, forsworne. Also a renegade, a foresworne man, or one that hath renounced his religion or country.

Rinettáre, to cleanse or make cleane and neate againe.

Rinfacciáre, to vpbraid, to twit or cast one in the teeth with any fault committed by him, or any curtesie and good turne done him.

Rinfacciménto, an vpbraiding, twitting or casting in ones teeth.

Rinfarciáre, to farce or fill or stuffe. Also to make whole and sound againe Also to satisfie or make amends, as we say to salue vp a matter.

Rinfermáre, to shut in or locke vp againe. Also to fall sicke againe.

Rinferráto, shut vp in irons againe.

Rinfiamáre, to re-enflame or set on fire againe.

Rinfocoláre, to excite, to egg-on, to set on fire againe.

Rinfoderáre, to sheath vp againe.

Rinfóndere, to infuse, to infound, to melt, to cast or powre into againe.

Rinforzaménto, a re-enforcement, a restrengthning, a refortifying.

Rinforzáre, to re-enforce, to fortifie or strengthen againe.

Rinforzáta, as Rinforzaménto.

Rinforzíno, whipcord, merlin or twine. Also a hempen halter.

Rinfórzo, a re-enforcement.

Rinfoscáre, to become or make duskie, mistie, thicke, foggie, gloomie or cloudie.

Rinfrancáre, to re-infranchise, to restore or set free againe. Also to re- incourage or reharten, or rouze again. Also to cherish with franknesse.

Rinfrancesáre, to make or become french againe, id est to haue the pox againe.

Rínfrancescáre, as Rinfrancesáre.

Rinfránto, broken. Looke Frángere.

Rinfrescaménto, a refreshing, a cooleing. Also an ease or recreation.

Rinfrescáre, to refresh, to coole againe. Also to ease or recreate.

Rinfrescáta, . , a cooling, a refreshing.

Rinfrescatíuo, that cooleth or refresheth.

Rinfrescatóio, a refreshing, a cooling or shady place. Also a lauer for pots, or vessel for pottes and glasses set by cupbords in Gentlemens houses.

Rinfronzíre, zísco, zíto, to bud or burgeon foorth new or greene blossomes or leaues.

Rinfuocáre, to reinflame or set on fire againe.

Rinfúsa., looke Alla rinfúsa.

Rinfusaménte, confusedly tumultuouslie.

Rinfúso, confused, disordered, tumultuous.

Ringagliardíre, as Ingagliardíre.

Ríngaluzzáre, to strout, to strut or cocker as a Turkie-cocke. Also to be blith, iolly, gallant or lusty.

Ringarauignare., looke Gauígna.

Ringáre, as Rengáre. Also to speake proudly as if one would make one afraid.

Ringarauignáre, to wheele or roule about as one doeth his eies being angrie.

Ringauagnáre, to recouer any losses.

Ringemináre, to doubble or ioyne vnto againe.

Ringeminatióne, a doubling or ioyning againe.

Ringentilíre, lisco, líto, to make or become gentle, milde or affable againe.

Rínghi, the snarlings, yarrings, grinnings of angry curs. Also the openings, the yaunings or gapings of the mouth.

Ringhiáre, as Rinchiáre. Also a blurting that Mules make before they kick, and winze, and by metaphore to forethreaten or forewarne what one will doe.

Ringhiéra, an Orators chaire or pulpit, or a seate of declamations.

Rínghio, as Rinchiatúra.

Ringhióso, snarling, yarring, barking.

Ringhiottíre, tísco, títo, to swallow againe.

Ringhíre, ghísco, ghíto, as Ringhiáre.

Ringiáre, as Ringhiáre.

Ringioueníre, nísco, níto, to make or become youthly or yongue againe.

Ringlomeráre., looke Glomeráre.



Ríngo, the singular of Ringhi. Also a violent shocke or suddaine assault.

Ringorgaménto d'ácque, a gurgling of waters.

Ringorgáre, to regurgle or swallow vp as a whirlepoole doth. Also to regurgle backe as a riuer being stopt.

Ringrandire, dísco, díto, to make or become great againe. Also to re-enlarge.

Ringratiaménti, thanks-giuings.

Ringratiáre, to giue thankes, to thanke.

Ringratiatória lettera, a letter of thankes.

Ringrauidánza, a getting with child againe.

Ringrauidáre, to get with child againe.

Ringrinzáto et defórme cóme mostáccio di cáne, withered, wrimpled or shrunken vp.

Ringrossare., looke Ingrossáre.

Ringuaináre, to sheath vp againe.

Ringurgáre, as Rigurgitáre.

Ringurgitáre, as Rigurgitáre.

Ringurgitatióne, as Rigurgitatióne.

Rinnestáre, to engraffe againe. Also by metaphore to ioyne or close together againe.

Rinocerónte, a great beast or monster called a Horne-nose, hauing a horne in his snout bending vpwards: and is a great enemie to the Elephant.

Rinománza, as Rinomea.

Rinomáre, to renoume, to name againe.

Rinóme, a renonme. Also a surname.

Rinomea, a renowme, a glorious name, same or reputation.

Rinómo, as Rinomea.

Rinóntia, as Renóntia.

Rinontiáre, as Renontiatióne.

Rinontiatióne, as Renontiatióne.

Rinotríre, trísco, tríto, to nourish againe

Rinottáre, to become night againe.

Rinouábile, that may be renewed.

Rinouále, a thing renewed or to be renewed.

Rinouaménto, a renewing.

Rinouáre, to renew or make new againe.

Rinouatióne, a renewing.

Rinouellaménto, as Rinouatióne.

Rinouelláre, as Rinouáre.

Rinouellatióne, a renewing.

Rinouéuole, as Rinouábile.

Rinquartáre, to bring or double to foure againe. Also to packe, to set or pricke the cardes in shuffling.

Rinsanáre, as Risanáre.

Rinsaníre, nísco, níto, to grow or returne into ones sences & vnderstanding againe. Also to dote or grow mad againe.

Rinsauíre, uísco, uíto, to make or grow wise againe.

Rinsegnáre, to teach againe.

Rinseluáre, as Rimboscáre.

Rinsensáre, as Risensáre.

Rinstiacquáre, as Risciacquáre.

Rinstoráre, as Ristoráre.

Rinstóro, as Ristóro.

Rinsuonáre negl'orécchij, to ring, sound or tingle in ones eares.

Rintanáre, to enden againe.

Rintegráre, as Reintegráre.

Rintegratióne, as Reintegratióne.

Rinteneríre, rísco, ríto, to mollifie or soften or make tender or calme againe.

Rinterzáre, to packe, to set or pricke the cardes in shuffling. Also to bring into three.

Rinterzáta cárta, a bun-carde. Also a carde prickt or packt for aduantage.

Rintínno, a coine in Góa.

Rintonáre, as Intonáre, to resound.

Rintónica, as Planipedia.

Rintoppáre, to stumble or trip againe, to stumble or fall vpon. Also to misplace or set things out of order againe. Also to patch or coble.

Rintóppo, a stumbling blocke or fall, a tripping, a stumbling vpon.

Rintracciáre, to entrace. Also to search or tracke out, or to sift out a matter.

Rintracciatóre, a tracer. Also a sifter out of secrets, a narrow searcher.

Rintralciáre, as Intralciáre.

Rintricáre, to intricate or intangle againe.

Rintronáre, as Intronáre.

Rintrosíre, as Ritrosíre.

Rintuonáre, as Intonáre.

Rintuzzáre, to make blunt, to abate the edge. Also to clinch a naile. Also to dull, to beat downe, to suppresse.

Rintúzzo, a making blunt, an abating of the edge, a clinching of a naile, a beating downe, a suppressing.

Rinualérsi, to recouer ones health again, to become sound againe.

Rinualúto, recouered his health, become sound or auailefull againe.

Rinueniménto, a finding againe. Also a comming to ones sences againe.

Riueníre, uéngo, uénni, uenúto, to finde againe. Also to come to ones sences againe.

Rinuentráre, to embowell or embellie againe.

Rinnerdiménto, a becomming yongue, fresh or greene againe.

Rinuerdíre, dísco, díto, to become or make greene, fresh or yongue againe.

Rinuergáre, to melt or bring into ingots againe as Goldsmithes doe mettals. Also to sift, to discouer or finde out againe.

Rinuersáre, as Riuersáre.

Rinuerséuole, that may be reuersed.

Rinuerso, as Rouerscio.

Rinuertíre, tísco, títo, to reuert. Also vsed anciently for to verifie.

Rinuerzíre, as Rinuerdíre.

Rinuescáre, to ensnare or entangle againe.

Rinuesciárdo, a tell-tale, a blab of his tongue whereby vnkindnesse may grow.

Rinuesciáre, as Riuersáre. Also to tell tales one from another, whereby dissention may grow between friends by misconstruction.

Rinuestíre, to re-enuest or cloth againe. Looke Inuestíre.

Rinuiaménto, a sending backe againe.

Rinuiáre, to send or set in the way againe.

Rinuigoríre, rísco, ríto, to make vigorous againe, to re-enforce.

Rinuiliáre, to vilifie, to embase, to bring low or make cheape againe.

Rinuilíre, lísco, líto, as Rinuiliáre.

Rinuitáre, to enuite or bid againe. Also to reuy or drop vies at gaming.

Rinuíto, a re-inuiting. Also a reuy or drop vie at any game.

Rinumeráre, to number againe.

Rinuntia, a renouncing, a refusall.

Rinuntiáre, to renounce, to refuse.

Rinuogliáre, to will againe, or haue a new longing, to put one into a new desire.

Rinuólgere, as Rinuoltáre.

Rinuolgiménto, a reuoluing, a reuolution.

Rinuoltáre, to reuolue. Also to enfolde or re-inwrap. Also to tumble, to tosse or turne ouer againe.

Rinuólta, reuolued. Also re-infolded or re-inwrapped. Also tumbled, tossed or turned ouer againe.

Rinuoltúra, a reuoluing, a reuolution.

Rinuóluere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, as Rinuoltáre.

Rinuolutióne, a reuolution, a reuoluing.

Río, a riuer, a floud, a streame, a currant, a channell, a gozell or gullet of water. Also wicked, guilty or culpable, as Reo.

Riobárbaro, the drugge called Rubarbe.

Riodiáre, to hate againe.

Rióne, a maine streete, a rode-way, a Watling-streete. Also a publike market-place. Also a Quarter, or as they say in London a Warde or Precinct of a City. Also a Marshall, a Prouost, a Seriant. Also a Iaylour.

Riordináre, to reordaine, to reorder, to redresse, to reforme, to settle againe.

Riótto, a riot, a braule, a strife, an vprore, a hurly-burly, an insurrection.

Riottáre, to riot, to brawle, to rage, to tumult, to cause some vprore.

Riottóso, riotous, raging, tumultuous, contentious, vnlawfull.

Rípa, a banke, a water banke, a brinke, a strond, or shore side of Sea or Riuer.



Ripalmeggiáre úna náue di pégola, to trim or repaire a ship with pitch.

Ripampináre, to rebud or reburgeon out a new as a Vine doth.

Riparábile, repairable, that may be repaired, warded or shunned.

Riparáre, to repaire, to restore, or bring to his first estate againe. Also to repaire or haue accesse vnto. Also to ward a blow.

Riparatióne, as Ripáro.

Riparella, some part about a cart.

Riparensi, souldiers that warded or garded the frontires of the Empire.

Riparlaménto, a new parly, a speaking againe, a new discoursing.

Riparláre, to speake or parly againe.

Ripáre, a repairing, a reparation, a restoring or making new againe. Also a rampter, a fort, a banke, a fence, a mound, a ward, a defence, a remedy, a shelter, a starting hole, a couert-barne, a help at a pinch.

Riparóni, shoares to vnder lay wheeles that they slide or slip not.

Ripartiménto, a deuiding, a parting or sharing againe. Also to depart againe. Also a compartment, a partition or diuision of roomes.

Ripartíre, párto, partito, to deuide, to pare, to shave or sunder againe.

Ripáscere, to feede againe.

Ripasciúte, fed againe.

Ripassaménto, as Ripassáta.

Ripassáre, to repasse, to passe ouer. Also to die or decease.

Ripassáta, a repassing. Also a disceasing or dying.

Ripasseggiáre, to walke often or againe.

Riparriáre, to set, place or come into his owne natiue country againe.

Ripatriatióne, a restoring on comming into ones natiue country againe.

Ripatteggiáre, to couenant, to condition or bargaine againe.

Ripellcre, pello, pelléi, pellúto, to repell, to put, to beate or thrust backe.

Ripélo, a checke or twich giuen with the bridle by a cunning rider in managing, in turning or making a horse to stop.

Ripensáre, to thinke or consider againe. Also to iudge or ponder againe. Also to recompence or guerdon.

Ripentagliáre, to hazard or put in danger vpon repentance.

Ripentáglio, a hazard vpon repentance, a ieopardie to be sorry.

Ripente, as Repente.

Ripentíno, as Repentíno.

Ripentíre, to repent, to rue or be sorry for a thing saide or done.

Ripentíto, penitent, repented, rued. 

Ripentúto, as Ripentíto.

Ripercóssa, as Ripercussióne.

Ripercósso, beaten, smitten or strucken againe. Also reflected or reuerberated and cast backe. Also rung or resounded backe againe.

Ripercotiménto, as Ripercussióne.

Ripercuótere, cuóto, cóssi, cósso, to smite, to beate or strike againe. Also to reflect, to beate or cast backe. Also to ring or resound againe.

Ripercussióne, a beating, a smiting or striking againe. Also a repercussion, a reflecting or reuerberation. Also a ringing or resounding backe.

Ripercusoíuo, beating or strikeing or driuing againe. Also reftectiue or repercussiue. Also resounding or ringing backe againe.

Ripertório, as Repertório.

Ripeseáre, to fish againe. Also to fumble or grope for, to bobe vp and downe or dragge for.

Ripestáre, to stampe or pun againe.

Ripétcre, as Repétere, to repeate.

Ripetéuole, that may be repeated.

Ripétio, repetition of speech. Also striuing in speech, a verball contention.

Ripetire, as Repétere.

Ripetitióne, as Repetitióne.

Ripetitóre, as Repetitóre.

Ripetio, a hurly-burly, a garboile, a dissention, a brawling noise, a tumult.

Ripetíto, as Ropetúre.

Ripezzare, as Rappezzáre.

Ripezzatóre, as Rappezzatóre.

Ripiángere, to weepe for againe.

Ripiantáre, to plant or set againe.

Ripicchiáre, to knocke againe.

Ripidézza, as Ripidità.

Ripidità, rockinesse, cragginesse.

Rípido, full of rockes, cliffes or crags.

Ripiegaménto, a re-infolding, a re-inwrapping. Also a bending againe.

Ripiegáre, to fould or wrap vp againe. Also to bend againe.

Ripiegatúra, a reinfolding, a reinwraping. Also a bending againe.

Ripieghéuole, that may be bowed, bent, or wrighled, or wound too and fro.

Ripiégo, a refolding vp againe. Vsed also for a shift or starting hole.

Ripienézza, repleatnesse, a filling vp.

Ripiéno, replenished, replente or filled vp. Also any filling or stuffing, a replenishing. Also a farcing or pudding in any other meale. Also the woofe of a web.

Ripigliaménto, a retaking. Looke Ripigliáre.

Ripigliáre, to retake, to take or catch againe. Also to rebegin any thing. Also to take at the bound. Also to bandie to and sro. Also to rebuke, to reprooue or to checke.

Ripíngere, as Rispíngere.

Ripínta, a thrust backe againe.

Ripínto, as Rispínto.

Ripítio, a reply in speech or action.

Ripitóre, a repeater or relater and rehearser of a matter. Vsed also for an Vsher of a Schoole.

Riplica, as Replica.

Riplicáre, as Replicáre, to reply.

Riplúere, to raine or showre againe.

Ripolire, lísco, líto, to polish againe.

Ripónere, as Ripórre.

Ripórre, póngo, pósi, pósto, to set, to put, to lay or place againe in his place. Also to lay vp or set aside safely or for another time.

Ripórta, a bringing backe againe.

Riportaménto, as Ripórto.

Riportáre, as Rapportáre, to refer.

Riportáre partite, to transport reckonings or accounts from one booke to another.

Riportársi, for a man to remit, to refer or conforme himselfe to others.

Riportatóre, as Rapportatóre.

Ripórto, a rebringing. Also a referring. Also a report on relation.

Riposánza, as Ripóso, a reposing.

Riposáre, to repose, to rest, to lie down.

Riposataménte, quietly, reposedly.

Riposáro, rested, reposed, quiet, setled.

Ripositório, as Ripostíglio.

Ripóso, rest, quiet, repose, ease.

Ripostiéro, one that laieth vp any thing in store, a Steward of a house.

Ripostíglio, a place where things are laid vp and kept, a Store-house to keepe things in, as a Buttery, a Lardery, a Pantry, a Cuboord, a Wardrobe, a Warehouse, any biding corner. Also a side table or presse.

Ripósto, laide vp, set by, placed to be reserued and kept. Also as Ripostíglio.

Ripregáre, to pray or intreate and beseech againe.

Riprendere, prendo, prési, préso, to take or receiue againe. Also to reprehend, to reprooue, to controule, to checke, to rebuke, to blame, to admonish. Also to begin againe ones speech.

Riprender fiáto, to take breath or courage againe.

Riprender l'ánimo, to take courage or heart againe.

Riprenditore, a reprehender, a reprouer, a controuler, a findefault.

Riprensíbile, reprehensible.

Riprensióne, reprehension, rebuke, reproouing, a controuling, a checking. Also a shrinking of sinnewes, a clumzinesse of limmes.

Riprensiuo, reprehensiue, to be reproo­



ued, checked or controuled.

Riprensóre, as Riprenditóre.

Riprésa, a reprouing, a reprehension. Also a takeing or receiuing againe. Also a reprisall. Also an answer in musike to begin when another leaues off.

Ripreságlia, all maner of reprisals, prises, pillage, luggage, booties, praies, bribes or any thing gotten by prize, by taking or by hooke and crooke. Also attachings, arrestings or catchings.

Ripresentáre, as Rappresentáre.

Ripresentatióne, as Rappresentatióne.

Ripresare, to reprize. Also to replieue, to arrest, to attach.

Ripréso, retaken, or accepted againe. Also begun againe. Also reproued, reprehended, controuled or rebuked. Also withered or shrunken vp. Also a qualme or new fit of sickenesse.

Ripressáre, to represse.

Ripressióne, repression.

Ripressóre, a repressor.

Riprestáre, to lend againe.

Riprezzáre, as Ribrezzáre. 

Riprézzo, as Ribrézzo.

Riprezzóso, chilling, shiuering, startling, humorous, fantasticall.

Ripriso, taken againe.

Riprobábile, reproueable.

Riprocciáre, to shame or reproach.

Ripróccio, shame or reproach.

Riprofondáre, to sinke againe, to replunge.

Riprodúrre, to produce againe.

Riproferíre, to proffer againe.

Riprométtere, to promise againe.

Riprouáre, to prooue or try againe. Also as Riprendere. Also to refuse.

Riprouatíone, Reprobation.

Riprouáto, reprooued. Also reprobate.

Ripruóua, a reproofe, a reprouing.

Riprouedére, to prouide againe.

Ripudiáre, as Repudiáre.

Ripúdio, as Repúdio.

Ripueráscere, to grow a childe againe.

Ripugnánte, as Repugnánte.

Ripugnánza, as Repugnántia.

Ripugnáre, as Repugnáre.

Ripuliménto, a repolishing.

Ripulíre, as Ripolíre.

Ripulitúra, a repolishing.

Ripulluláre, to bud or burgeon againe.

Ripúlsa, as Repúlsa.

Ripulsáre, as Repulsáre.

Ripulso, repulsed, repelled.

Ripúnto, repricked. Also restiched. Also wrought a like on both sides.

Ripurgaménto, a repurging. Also all manner of drosse.

Ripurgáre, to purge or cleanse againe.

Ripurgatióne, as Ripurgaménto.

Riputábile, that may be reputed.

Riputáre, to repute, to deeme, to esteeme, to hold opinion of. 

Riputársi a uergógna, to take it as shame. Looke Recáre.

Riputatióne, reputation, regard, esteeme, opinion. Also presumption or selfe-weening. But now lately vsed for a mans good name and honour.

Riputéuole, as Riputábile.

Riquadráre, to square or sute againe.

Riquadratúra, a squaring againe.

Riquilítia, the sweet wood Licorice.

Ririscósso, redeemed or ranzomed again.

Risa, smilings, laughters, leerings.

Risáda, as Risáta.

Rísa délla castágna, the bursting of a Chesnut.

Risagállo, a kind of ratsbane or poison.

Risagiménto, an establishing, a reconfirming or setling againe.

Risagíre, gísco, gíto, to establish, to reconfirme or settle againe.

Riláia, any laughing sport. Also a field of rice, or meate made of rice.

Risaiuóla, a laughter, a smiling, a leering.

Risaldáre, to solder or fasten againe.

Risaldatúra, a resoldring, a refastning.

Risalgáio, as Risagállo.

Risalire, lísco, líto, to ascend, mount, or get vp againe.

Risalíta, a reascending or getting vp againe.

Risaltáre, to leape, hop, or skip againe.

Risálto, one degree our another, a halfe-pace.

Risálua, safetie, métter in risálua.

Risaluáre, to put or lay vp in safetie or keeping.

Risalutáre, to resalute or greet againe.

Risalúto, a resaluting or greeting againe.

Risanábile, recurable, to be healed.

Risanaménto, a recuring or healing againe.

Risanáre, to recure or heale againe.

Risanatiónc, as Risanaménto.

Risanéuole, as Risanábile.

Risapére, to know or wot againe.

Risapúto, knowen or wotted againe.

Risarchiáre, to sarkle, to harrow or rake ouer againe.

Risarciéuole, that may be repaired, patched or pieced vp whole againe.

Risarciménto, a repairing, a patching or piecing vp new againe.

Risarcíre, císco, cíto, to repaire, to patch or piece vp whole againe.

Risaruólo, a smiler, a laugher, a leering or yarring fellow.

Risáta, a laughing, a merry iest. Also a kind of meat made of Rise.

Risbattiménto, a beating or shaking or clattring too and fro, and backe againe.

Rísca, as Résca.

Riscaldagióne, as Riscaldaménto.

Riscaldaménto, a heating againe, a chafing. Vsed also for prouoking. Also earnest scolding and brawling.

Riscaldáre, to heate or warme againe.

Riscaldáre alcúno, to heat or incense some bodie. Vsed also to perswade or importune one earnestly for a good turne.

Riscaldatíua medicína, a heating or warming medicine.

Riscaldatóio, a heating place, a warming-pan, a chafing-dish.

Riscalda uiuánde, a chafing-dish.

Riscáre, to hazard, to ieopard, to aduenture.

Riscattáre, to rescue, to ransome, to redeeme, to vngage, to vnpawne.

Riscattatióne, as Riscátto.

Riscátto, rescue, ransome, a redeeming. Also a harborough or place of refuge.

Rischiaráre, to clarifie, to purifie, to make cleare. Also to cleare vp ones voice, to hem or straine, to spit or cough.

Rischiaratella d'ácqua frésca. 

Rischiáre, to hazard, to ieopard, to aduenture.

Rischiaríre, as Rischiaráre.

Rischiaríto, cleared, purified, clarified.

Rischiéuole, as Riscóso.

Ríschio, as Rísco.

Rischióso, as Riscóso.

Risciacquáre, to wash, to rence or shake in water.

Risciacquatína, a rencing, a washing or shaking in water.

Risciacquatóre, a rencer, a washer or shaker in water.

Riscialacquáre, as Scialacquáre.

Rísco, hazard, ieopardie, danger, aduenture, hab or nab, perill.

Riscomunicáre, to excommunicate againe.

Riscontraménto, as Rincóntro.

Riscontráre, as Rincontráre.

Riscóntro, as Rincóntro.

Riscóso, hazardous, perillous, full of danger, ieopardous, aduentrous.

Riscóssa, as Riscattatióne.

Riscósso, redeemed, rescued, ranzomed. Also receiued money in payment. Also shaken or reshaken.

Riscósso délle biáde, the receiuing or gathering in of corne.

Riscrítto, a rescript, a transcript. Also written or coppied ouer againe.

Riscríuere, as Rescríuere.

Riscuótere, to redeeme, to rescue, to ransome. Also to receiue or gather in money. Also to shake againe. Also to rouze vp as from sleepe.

Riscuotiménto, as Riscátto.

Riscuotitóre, a redeemer, a rescuer, a ransomer. Also a receiuer or gatherer in of money.

Risecaménto, a cutting or sawing or 



mowing ouer againe.

Riseccánte parláre, a dry speech.

Riseccáre, to dry againe.

Risécco, dried againe, dried ouer.

Risedente, as Residente.

Risedenza, as Residenza.

Risedére, séggo, sedéi, sedúto, to reside, to abide, to remaine. Also to sit again.

Risedio, as Residenza.

Risedúto, resided, remained in a place. Also sitten againe.

Risegáre, to saw, clip, sheare, or cut plants, hearbes or trees.

Risegatióne, a resawing, a clipping, a cutting, a shearing of trees or grasse. Also a sawing in sunder againe. Also saw-dust.

Risegatúra, as Risegatióne.

Riseghinétta, as Seghinétta.

Riségna, as Raségna, as Reségna.

Risegnáre, to resigne. Also to retire to ones colours or rendezuous againe. Also to marke againe.

Risegnatióne, a resignation. Also a marking againe.

Risegnatóre, a resigner.

Risemináre, to resowe, to sowe againe.

Risensáre, to recouer ones wits, to come to ones sences againe as out of a trance.

Risentáre, to sit againe.

Risentiménto, a resentment, a feeling, a motion, a shew or effect of some wrong receiued or reuenge for it. Looke Risentírsi.

Risentíre, sénto, sentíto, to recouer feeling or sence againe, to heare, to feele or smell againe. Also to resent, to feele or shew a motion, an offer, a remembrance or effect of some wrong receiued or reuenge for it, to reuenge or at least to offer to be reuenged.

Risentírsi, to resent, to be reuenged, or at least to shew some desire or motion or effect of reuenge. Also to rouze or awaken from sleepe. Also to be or fall sicke. Also to be aware and perceiue againe.

Risentíta, as Risentiménto.

Risentitaménte, resentingly, feelingly, with a motion or action of reuenge.

Risentíto, recouered feeling or sence againe, heard, felt, or smelt againe. Also resented, felt, or shewen a remembrance, a feeling, a motion, an offer, or effect of some wrong receiued or reuenge for it. Also a huff-snuff, one that will soone take pepper in the nose, one that will remember euery small wrong and reuenge it if hee can.

Riserba, as Riserbánza, as Ripostíglio.

Riserbánza, a reseruation, a reseruing, a keeping or hoarding vp of some thing apart for another time.

Riserbáre, to reserue, to keepe, to lay vp, to keepe for time to come.

Riserbataménte, reseruedly, sparingly.

Riserbe, as Riserue.

Riserpere, serpo, serpéi, serpúto, to craule or creepe againe.

Riserpíre, písco, píto, idem.

Riserráre, to shut, to close or locke vp againe.

Riserratúra, a shutting in, an enclosure, or locking vp againe.

Riserua, as Riserbánza. Also as Ripostíglio. It hath also been vsed for an aduouson or grant of some liuing giuen before it be voide.

Riseruánza, as Riserbánza.

Riseruáta, sost, a reseruing or exception.

Riseruataménte, reseruedly.

Riseruatióne, as Riserbánza.

Riserue, reseruings, reseruations, keepings or hoardings vp for time to come, cubbords, shelues, tills, by-holes, buttries, lardries, pantries or such offices in a house.

Riseruíre, to serue or bestead one againe.

Riseruo, any remainder or leauing laid vp and kept for another time.

Risfossicáre, to grub or dig the ground vp-side downe.

Risgaráre, as Riscáre.

Risguardáre, as Riguardáre.

Risguárdo, as Riguárdo.

Risíbile, that can laugh, subiect to laugh to be laughed at. Also smiling.

Risibilità, laughingnesse, smilingnesse.

Risicáre, as Riscáre.

Risigáre, as Riscáre.

Rísigo, as Risco.

Rísima, twentie quiers or a reame of paper.

Risimétta, a quire of paper.

Risimigliánte, resembling or a like.

Risimigliánza, resemblance, likenesse.

Risimigliáre, to resemble, to be like vnto.

Risipíla, as Risipílla.

Risipílla, an inflammation full of heate and rednesse comming in mens legs. Some call it Saint Anthonies fire.

Risistente, as Resistente.

Risistentia, as Resistenza.

Risístere, as Resístere.

Rísma, a reame or twenty quires of paper. Also a knot, a crue or rout of good fellowes all a like.

Ríso, laughter. Also a smile, a leere or smiling or laughing. Also laughed, smiled or leered. Also the graine called Rice.

Risoláre, to sole. Also to floore, to seele, to planke or boord againe.

Risolleuáre, to raise or lift vp againe.

Risoltáre, as Risultáre.

Risólto, as Risúlta.

Risolúbile, that may be resolued. 

Risóluere, sóluo, soluéi, solúto, to resolue, to determine. Also to dissolue, to melt, to thaw or consume away. Also to loose, to vnbinde, to vndoe, to frustrate, to disappoint or make voide. Also to separate or put asunder. Also to absolue or quit of an ill act.

Risolutézza, as Risolutióne.

Risolutióne, a resolution, a determination. Also a melting, a dissoluing.

Risolutíuo, that may be resolued, or that doth resolue and determine. Also that doth or may be dissolued and suppled. Vsed also for a supling or dissoluing salue.

Risolúto, resolued, determined. Also resolute, wilfull, hardie or bold. Also dissolued, melted, thawed, vanished or consumed away. Also loose, vnbound, free. Also frustrate, disappointed or made voide. Also separated or put asunder. Also absolued and rid from snares.

Risolutório, that doth or may be resolued.

Risomigliánte, resembling, like vnto.

Risomigliánza, resemblance, likenesse.

Risomigliáre, to resemble or be like.

Risonánte, resounding, ecchoing againe.

Risonánza, a resounding, a rebounding noise.

Risonáre, to resound, to eccho, to ring againe.

Risopíno, as Risupíno.

Risoráre, as Riposáre. Also to settle, calcína uíua bene risoráta.

Risorbíre, bísco, bíto, to sip vp againe.

Risorettióne, a resurrection, an vprising.

Risorgente, rising vp againe.

Risórgere, sórgo, súrsi, súrto, to rise againe.

Risóro, as Ripóso.

Risórto, risen vp againe, per riacquistáre Ischiauonía, che era di risórto del súo reáme.

Risospingere, spíngo, spínsi, spínto, to thrust or push backe againe.

Risospingiménto, a thrusting or pushing backe againe.

Risoueníre, uéngo, uénni, uenúto, to remember or call to minde againe. Also to helpe or supply againe.

Risouenúto, remembred or called to minde againe. Also helped or supplied againe.

Risparagnáre, to spure, to saue, to thriue.

Risparágno, sparing, thrift, sauing.

Rispárgere, spárgo, spársi, spárso, to sprinkle againe. Also to scatter or disperse againe.

Rispargnáre, to spare, to saue, to thriue.

Rispárgno, sparing, sauing, thrift.

Risparmiáre, to spare, to saue, to thriue.

Risparmiatóre, a sparer, a sauer, a thriuer. 



Risparmiéuole, that may be spared.

Risparmio, sparing, sauing, thrift.

Risparmióso, full of sparing or thrift.

Rispárso, besprinckled or scattered againe.

Rispégnere, pégno, pénsi, pento, to put out or extinguish againe.

Rispendere, to spend and spend againe.

Rispento, put out or extinguished again.

Rispergere, spergo, spersi, sperso, to besprinkle againe.

Rispersióne, a resprinckling.

Risperso, resprinckled.

Rispettábile, regardefull, to be respected.

Rispettáre, to respect, to regard, to esteeme, to repute, to honour.

Rispettéuole, respectfull.

Rispetti, all things carried or laid vp against time, as we say to spare.

Rispettiuaménte, respectiuely.

Rispettíue, respectiuely.

Rispettíuo, as Rispettóso.

Rispetto, respect, regard, or esteeme, a consideration or reason that maketh one doe something. Also in regard, in respect, in comparison, or in consideration. Also a kinde of Country song or roundely.

Rispettóso, full of respect, regardfull.

Rispianáre, to explaine againe. Also to make plaine or smooth againe.

Rispianáto, a plaine ground. Also explaned or made plaine.

Rispiarmáre, as Risparagnáre.

Rispiarméuole, as Risparmióso.

Rispiarmézza, sparingnesse, thrift.

Rispiarmiatíco, sparing, thriuing.

Rispiarmatóre, a sparer, a thriuer.

Rispiarmiéuole, that may be spared.

Rispiármo, as Risparágno.

Rispiarmóso, as Risparmióso.

Rispígnere, as Rispíngere.

Rispíngere, spíngo, spinsi, spínto, to thrust backe, to push or driue backe againe.

Rispínta, a doubble thrust backe.

Rispínto, thrust, shooued, or pusht backe.

Rispiráglio, a breathing or venting hole.

Rispiráre, as Respiráre.

Rispiratióne, as Respiratióne.

Rispíro, as Respíro.

Risplendente, resplendent, bright-shining, glistring as the sunne.

Risplendenza, as Risplendézza.

Risplendere, splendo, splendéi, splendúto, to shine bright, to glister as the Sunne.

Risplendéuole, as Risplendente.

Risplendézza, bright-shining, splendent.

Rispondente, answering, respondent, correspondent. Also a surety, one that answereth or vndertaketh for another.

Rispondenza, an answering one to another. Also a correspondency or coherence together.

Rispóndere, spóndo, spósi, spóso, or spósto, to answer, to giue answer. Also to be correspondent or answerable vnto. Also to appeere or answer when one is called. Also to answer, to promise or vndertake as a surety for another. Also to be or stand front or right ouer against. Also to answer or make a report as doeth a piece shot off. Also to be proportionable vnto. Also to be seated toward, to answer or looke toward as a way, a window or situation.

Rispóndere alle póste, to answer what is promised and expected, namely in wanton womens expectation, when they are readier then men.

Rispondéuole, answerable, to be answered.

Rispondíbile, as Rispondéuole.

Risponditóre, an answerir, a surety.

Risponsióne, an answer, or answering.

Risponsíuo, answering, answerable.

Rispónso, an answer, an answering.

Rispóso, answered, giuen answer. Also beene coorrespondent or answerable vnto. Also appeared or answered hauing beene cited or called. Also answered, promised or vndertaken for another, as a baile or surety. Also paide or satisfied what one had promised. Also stood front or right ouer against. Also answered or made a report as a piece shot off.

Rispósta, an answer. Also an Oracle. Also the report of a piece shot off.

Rispósto, as Rispóso.

Risprangáre, to ioyne, to riuet or screw together, to mend or make whole againe.

Rispuondere, as Rispóndere.

Rispuósta, as Rispósta.

Risquadráre, to square, to sute, or fit well againe.

Risquittíre, tísco, títo, to giue or take respit or space of time.

Risqúitto, a respit or space of time. Also as Refrigério.

Ríssa, a iarre, a quarrell, a brawle, a brabling, a strife, a squaring, a contention.

Rissáre, to iarre, to quarrell, to brabble, to striue, to square, to contend, to rustle.

Risserraménto, a shutting vp againe.

Risserráre, to locke or shut in againe.

Risserratúra, a locking vp or shutting.

Rissóso, quarrellous, contentious, brabling, full of striffe, rustling.

Rissoffiáre, to blow againe. 

Ristabiliménto, a re-establishment.

Ristabilire, lisco, líto, to re-establish.

Ristagnaménto di sángue, a stanching of blood.

Ristagnáre, to stanch or stop blood.

Ristámpa, a reprint, a reprinting.

Ristáre, as Restáre.

Ristauráre, as Ristoráre.

Ristauratóre, as Ristoratóre.

Ristáuro, as Ristóro.

Risticciuóli, all manner of scraps, mammockes, or leauings, as we say broken meate.

Ristituíre, as Restituíre.

Ristituíto, as Restuíto.

Ristitutióne, as Restitutióne.

Ristoppáre, to restop, to stop againe.

Ristoppiáre, to gleane among stubble for eares of corne. Also to stop againe.

Ristoraménto, a restoring. Also restoritie.

Ristoráre, to restore, to repaire, to make whole againe. Also to comfort, to satisfie, to recompense.

Ristoratióne, restoration, restoring Also recomforting.

Ristoratíuo, restoratiue, comfortable.

Ristoratóre, a restorer, a comforter.

Ristoréuole, that may be restored.

Ristóro, a restoring, a comfort. Also a restoratiue. Also a restitution. Also a recompence or satisfaction.

Ristréngere, as Ristrígnere.

Ristrettaménte, restrainedly, hardly.

Ristrettíuo, restringent, restrictiue.

Ristrétto, restrained, strained or bound hard, fast bound, closse together, shut or lockt vp. Also recluse, narrow or straightned or pinched. Also shruged or crinched. Also a prisoner close or one in durance. Also couetous, niggard, pinching, close. Also seuere or hard. Also as Diftrétto. Also a brief, a compendium, a summe, an extract, an epitome.

Ristrígnere, to restraine, to straine hard, to bend, to enclose or shut vp, to immure, to imprison, to bar of liberty. Also to shrug or crinch ones shoulders.

Ristringáre le cálcie, to trusse, to point, to tie ones hose with points.

Ristríngere, as Ristrígnere.

Ristríngersi nélle spálle, to shrug or crinch in ones shoulders.

Ristringiménto, a restriction, a straightning. Also a shrugging or crinching.

Ristrinta-cotále, a womans narrow quaint.

Ristrittióne, as Ristringiménto.

Ristuccáre, to glut, to cloy, to gorge, to fill or make loathsome vnto ones stomacke. Also to dazle.

Ristúcco, glutted, cloied, gorged, weari­



ed, satisfied. Also dazled.

Risudaménto, a sweating againe.

Risudáre, to sweat againe.

Risuegliáre, to awaken from sleepe.

Risuegliaménto, an awaking from sleepe.

Risuegliáto, a wakened. Also vigilant.

Risuegliatóio, an awaker, an alarum.

Risuegliatóre, an awaker, an alarum.

Risuéglio, an alarum of any clocke.

Risugelláre, to scale vp againe.

Risúlta, a resulting, a rebounding.

Risultánza, a resulting.

Risultáre, to result, to rebound backe.

Risultatióne, a resultation.

Risuonánza, as Risonánza.

Risuonáre, as Risonáre.

Risuonéuole, that may resound.

Risuóno, a resound, a resounding.

Risupináre, to turne vpward with the face. Also to tumble vpside downe.

Risupíno, with the face vpward, along on the backe. Also effeminately giuen.

Risuresso, risen vp againe.

Risurettióne, a resurrection or vprising.

Riseretto, risen vp againe.

Risúrgere, súrgo, súrto, to rise vp againe.

Risuscitáre, to rise againe from death.

Risuscitatione, a rising vp from death.

Ritáde, hath heene vsed for Verità.

Ritágli, all maner of cuttings, shauings, parings or shreddings. Also vailes, od ends or giblets for Cookes or shreds for Taylors, A ritáglio, by retaile.

Ritagliáre, to cut againe. Also to cut, to iagge, to snit, to pinke as a garment. Also to sell by retaile, to retaile or regrate as Huckesters doe.

Ritagliatióne, as Ritágli.

Ritáglio, the Singular of Ritágli.

Ritagliúzzi, sinall or little Ritágli.

Ritamisáre, to sift againe or searce.

Ritardánza, a retarding, a delay, a foreslowing, a stay or hindrance.

Ritardáre, to retard, to delay, to forslow, to demur, to stay, to hinder.

Ritardatióne, as Ritardánza.

Ritardéuole, that may be retarded.

Ritardiménto, as Ritardánza.

Ritegnitóre, a retainer, a detainer.

Ritégno, a retaining, a detayning, a with-holding, a bridling. Also a respect, a forbearance.

Ritenente, retayning, detayning, withholding. Also squeamish.

Ritenére, tengo, ténni, tenúto, to retaine, to detaine, to with-hold. Also to keepe in remembrance. Also to hold one vp that he fall not.

Ritenér' in féde, to keepe in faith.

Riteniménto, as Ritégno.

Riteniménto d'orína, a stopping of a mans water.

Ritenitóre, as Ritentóre.

Ritentáre, to re-attempt, or re-assay.

Ritentióne, a retention, as Ritégno.

Ritentíua, retentiue or holding in. Also the retentiue part of the memory.

Ritentíuo, retentiue or holding in.

Riténto, retained, with-held, detayned. Also a re-attempt or re-assaying.

Ritentóre, a retayner, a detayner, a with-holder, a holder-backe.

Ritenúte, retaynings, with-holdings, fasthoulds, among Mariners they are ropes to stay the recoyle of pieces, called. Breechings. Also such trees or rockes to which cables are fastned in drawing or winding vp any Ordinance or Machine.

Ritenúto, retayned, detayned, withheld. Also wary, sparing and circumspect, moderate, and temperate.

Ritessere, tesso, tesséi, tessúto, to weaue, to worke together or enterweaue, againe.

Ritessiménto, an enterweauing or working together againe.

Ritessitúra, as Ritessiménto.

Rithimáre, to rime, to meeter, to versifie, to speake in number or harmony.

Rithímico, a riming, a versifying.

Ríthmi, rimes, verses, meeters. Also number, proportion or harmony in speaking.

Ríthmico, of or made in rime and meeter, or that speaketh in meeter and harmony.

Ríti, the Plurall of Ríto.

Ritíngere, tíngo, tínsi, tínto, to die againe.

Ritintiménto, as Ritintíno.

Ritintíno, a tingle, a ring or resounding shrilnesse of bels.

Ritintíre, tísco, títo, to tingle, to ring, to shrill or resound as a bell.

Ritintíto, tingled, shrilled, rung or resounded with an eccho as a bell.

Ritínto, died againe, twice coloured.

Ritiraménto, as Ritiráta.

Ritiráre, to retire, to recoile, to withdraw, to retreat backe.

Ritirársi, for one to retire or withdraw himselfe.

Ritiráta, a retreate, a retyring, a withdrawing, a recoyling.

Ritiratézza, retirednesse, a solitary retired place or vocation.

Ritmi, as Rithmi.

Ríto, a rite, a ceremony, a course or order, an approoued custome or manner of doing.

Ritoccáre, to touch or feele againe, to repeate or goe ouer a matter againe.

Ritógliere, tólgo, tólsi, tólto, to retake.

Ritólto, retaken, or taken againe 

Ritondáre, to round, to make round.

Ritondáto, made round, rounded. Also the round circle or compasse of any thing.

Ritondeggiáre, as Ritondáre.

Ritondétto, roundish, some what round.

Ritondézza, roundnesse, rotundity.

Ritondità, rotundity, roundnesse.

Ritóndo, round, like a Globe.

Ritórcere, tórco, tórsi, or torcéi, tórto, or torciúto, to retort, to bend or make crooked againe, to twine or wrest againe.

Ritorciménto, a retorting, a wreathing, a twining, a twisting.

Ritórica., Vsed for Retórica.

Ritornaménto, as Ritornáta.

Ritornáre, to returne or come home againe.

Ritornáre a bómba, to returne to his owne home or wits againe.

Ritornáre alle póme., looke Póme.

Ritornáre a memória, to bring or come to memory againe.

Ritornáta, a returne, a returning.

Rítornello, a twirle or turning about as of a pin or peg of a Lute.

Ritornéuole, returnable.

Ritórno, a returne, a returning.

Ritórta, a wreathing, a twisting.

Ritórte, wreath's, twist's or with's.

Ritortelli, a kinde of wreathed simnell bread or fritters.

Ritórto, retorted, wreathed, wrested or twisted againe.

Ritórto ferro, Vsed for an anker.

Ritórtola, as Ritórte.

Ritortoláre, as Ritórcere.

Ritortúra, as Ritorciménto.

Ritórzere, as Ritórcere.

Ritór, zola, as Ritórte.

Ritorzoláre, as Ritórcere.

Ritrahente, drawing from, withdrawing.

Ritrahiménto, a withdrawing from.

Ritrárre, trággo, trássi, trátto, to retract, to withdraw, to retire. Also to shrinke in. Also to draw, to pourtray, to limne.

Ritrársi, for a man to withdraw or retire himselfe.

Ritrátta, as Ritiráta.

Ritrattánza, a retracting, a retractation.

Ritrattáre, to treat or handle againe. Also to repeate or begin anew, to reuise, to peruse or looke ouer againe. Also to retract, to recant, or reuoke what hath been said or done.

Ritrattatióne, a retractation, a handling againe, a repeating anew. Also a reuising or ouerlooking againe. Also a recantation.

Ritrattióne de nerui, a retracting or shrinking of the sinnewes. 



Ritrátto, retracted, withdrawen, retired or shrunken in. Also drawen, limned or pourtraied. Also a picture, a pourtrait or thing drawen. Also any abstract or thing drawen out.

Ritrátto di múro, as Rastremaménto.

Ritrétta, a retreat, a retiring.

Ritrinciáre, to retrench, to cut off, to abridge.

Ritrogradáre, as Retrogradáre.

Ritrogradatióne, as Retrogradatióne.

Ritrosainénte, waywardly, akewardly, frowardly, skittishly.

Ritrosescaménte, as Ritrosaménte.

Ritrosétta, wayward, froward, akeward, peeuish, skittish, squeamish.

Ritrosía, as Ritrosità.

Ritrósi dell'ónde, the boistrous surges or billowes of the waues.

Ritrósi di uénto, boistrous gusts, stormie whoors, or tempestuous berries, gales or flawes of winde.

Ritrosíre sísco, síto, to grow, to make or become wayward, akeward, froward, peeuish, skittish, squeamish, nice or coy.

Ritrosità, waywardnesse, akewardnesse, frowardnesse, peeuishnesse, squeamishnesse, skittishnesse, nicenesse, coynesse.

Ritrosíto, made or become akeward, froward, wayward, peeuish, squeamish, nice or skittish.

Ritróso, as Ritrosétta. Also as Nássa. Also a weire or leape for fish.

Ritrótto, as Ritrosétta.

Ritrouaménto, a finding out, an inuention.

Ritrouáre, to finde out againe. Also to retreeue. Also to deuise or inuent.

Ritrouársi in sul fátto, to be, to meete, or finde vpon the fact or nicke.

Ritrouársi in un luógo, to be or meet or finde himselfe in a place.

Ritrouáta, as Ritrouaménto.

Ritruópico, that hath the Dropsie.

Ritruopisía, the Dropsie.

Ritruóuo, as Ridótto. Also a finding, a meeting place.

Rítta, the right hand. Also the high or common rode-way, a Watling-street.

Rittaménte, rightly, directly, streightly, outright. Also iustly, properly. Also stiffely or standingly. Also truly or euen as it should be.

Rittáre, as Rizzáre.

Rítto, right, vpright, iust, euen, direct, streight. Also stiff-standing.

Rittoppáre, as Rattaconáre.

Rituále, rituall, consisting of, or belonging to Rites or Ceremonies.

Rituffársi nel máre, to diue, to ducke or plunge into the Sea againe.

Rituráre, to stop close againe.

Riturbáre, to trouble or molest againe.

Ríua, as Rípa, a banke, a shore. 

Riualáre, to contend as riuales, to striue in competencie.

Riuále, a riuall, a corriuall, a competitor, a fellow-louer, a foe-fellow in loue. Also of or belonging to a riuer or bank of a riuer. Also a banke of defence for waters. Also one that haunts or dwels neere brookes or waters. Also one that hath his lands or grounds bordring vpon riuers or deuided by brookes. Also a kind of net that reacheth from one side of a riuer to the other called of Fishermen a Sheene-net.

Riualére, uáglio, uálsi, ualúto, to reualue. Also to come to valuation againe. Also to recouer or returne to health or wealth againe.

Riualétto, a riuelet, a brooke, a gullet.

Riuáli, the plurall of Riuále.

Riualità, the enuie that is between two or more persons that loue one same woman, riualitie, competencie.

Riuálso, as Riualúto.

Riualúta, a recouerie from sicknesse.

Riualúto, reualued. Also recouered to health or of any losse againe.

Riuangáre., looke Vangáre.

Riuedére, uéggo, uíddi, uedúto, or uísto, to reuiew, to oueruiew, to suruey, to see againe, to reuise.

Riuedérci, A riuedérci, fare yee well till we see or meet one another againe.

Riuediménto, a reuiewing, a surueying, an ouerseeing. Also foresight or heed.

Riueditóre, an ouerseer, a surueyer.

Riuedúta, a reuiew, a suruey, a reuise.

Riuedúto, reuiewed, ouerseene, surueighed, seene againe, reuised.

Riueláre, to reueale, to manifest, to disclose, to declare, to discouer.

Riuelatióne, a reuelation, a reuealing, a manifesting or declaring vnto.

Riuelatóre, a reuealer, a discloser.

Riueléuole, that may be reuealed.

Riuellere, uello, uelsi, uelto, to plucke vp by the rootes or plucke away by violence againe.

Riuellíno, as Rauellíno.

Riuencidíre, as Rauincidíre.

Riuendáglie, all manner of trash or fripperie ware that is to be sold againe.

Riuendaiuólo, a huckster, a retailer, a regrater, a fripper, a broker.

Riuéndere, uéndo, uendéi, uendúto, to retaile or sell againe.

Riuendería, a selling againe, a place where things be sold againe.

Riuendíbile, that may be sold againe.

Riuendígolo, as Riuendaiuólo.

Riuéndita, a retailing or selling againe.

Riuenditóre, as Riuendaiuólo.

Riuendrólo, as Riuendaiuólo.

Riuendúto, retailed, sold againe.

Riueníre, uéngo, uénni, uenúto, to come againe. 

Riueníre in sè, for a man to come to himselfe againe.

Riuenúta, a comming againe.

Riuenúto, returned, come againe.

Riuerberaménto, as Riuerberatióne.

Riuerberáre, to reuerberate, to reflect, to strike or beat backe againe.

Riuerberatióne, reuerberation, reflecting, repercussion, beating backe again.

Riuerberatíuo, that doth or may reuerberate, repercusse or reflect.

Riuerbero, as Riuerberatióne.

Riuerdeggiáre, to grow greene againe.

Riuerdíre, to grow greene againe.

Riuerditúra, a growing greene againe.

Riuerendo, reuerend, venerable, worshipfull, worthy of reuerence.

Riuerendíssimo, most reuerend, a title giuen to Bishops or Cardinals.

Riuerente, reuerent, he that doth reuerence or honour to another.

Riuerentia, reuerence, worship, honour. Also a reuerend feare. Also a courtesie or reuerence made to any bodie.

Riuerentiále, full of reuerence.

Riuerentiáre, to reuerence, to worship, to honour, to make curtzie vnto.

Riueríre, rísco, ríto, as Riuerentiáre.

Riueríto, reuerenced, honoured.

Riuersa., Looke Alla riuersa, arsiuersie, inside outward, contrary.

Riuersaménto, as Riuersióne.

Riuersáre, to reuerse, to ouerturne, to turne the inside outward, to topsieturuy.

Riuersáta, as Riuersióne.

Riuerscia, as Riuersa.

Riuersciáre, as Riuersáre.

Riuerscio, as Riuerso.

Riuerscióne, as Riuersóne.

Riuersicáre, as Riuersáre.

Riuersióne, a reuersion. Also a returning or comming backe or vnto again, a reuerting. Also an ouerthrowing or ouerwhelmed.

Riuerso, reuerted, reuersed, returned Also inside outward, contrary, arsieuersie, topsituruy. Also a reuerse, a backblow. Also ouerwhelmed. Also a powring downe. Also the reuerse or backe of any worke, coine or medaill.

Riuersóne, a reuerse, a backblow. Also a box or whirret one the cheeke giuen with the backe of the hand. Also arsiuersie or topsietury. Also one that liueth with his face vpright.

Riuertere, verto, versi, verso, as Riuoltáre, to reuert.

Riuesciáre, as Riuersáre.

Riuescio, as Riuerso.

Riuescióne, as Riuersóne.

Riuestíre, vesto, uestito, to reuest, to aray, to cloth, to attire or apparell againe. 



Riuestíto, reuested, arraied, clothed, altired or apparelled againe. Also a new vpstart Gentlman, one newly come to worship.

Riuétti, a kinde of Taylors worke in garnishing of apparell.

Riuiéra, a Riuer, a floud, a streame. Also a shore, a banke or strond of a Riuer.

Riuilicáre, as Rinueníre.

Riuíncere, vínco, vínsi, vínto, to vanquish, to ouercome or conquer and win againe.

Riuísita, a reuisiting, a reuiewing.

Riuisitáre, to reuisite, to reuiew.

Riuisóre, a reuisor, a reuiewer. Also a Surueigher, an Oueruiewer, an Ouerseer.

Riuíuere, víuo, víssi, viuúto, to recouer life againe, to reuiue, to reliue.

Riuiuific áre, to reuiue or quicken again.

Riumiliáre, to rehumble, to humble againe.

Ríuo, a Riuer, a Riuelet, a Floud, a Streame, a Brooke or Gullet of water with a gentle or narrow currant. Also a brinke or banke of a Riuer.

Riuocábile, reuokeable, to be reuoked.

Riuocáre, to reuoke or call backe againe.

Riuocatióne, a reuocation, a calling back. Also a recantation.

Riuóco, as Riuocatióne.

Riuoláre, to flie againe, to refly.

Riuolére, vóglio, vólsi, volúto, to will or desire againe.

Riuólgere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, as Rivoltáre.

Riuolgíbile, that may be reuolued, reuolted, or turned againe.

Riuolgiménto, a reuoluing, a reuolution, a turning and tossing vp and downe. Also a winding or crankling in and out. Also a cunning tricke or winding shift. Also a reuolt, a reuolting or rebellion.

Ríuolo, a little Riuelet, Gullet, Gutter, Brooke or streame of water.

Riuólta, a reuolt, a reuolution, a change, an ouerturning. Also a winding, a turning or crankling in and out.

Riuólta, a rebending, a vaulting, an incirckling, a reuolting, a reuolt. Also an ouerwhelming.

Riuoltaménto, as Riuolgiménto.

Riuoltáre, to reuolt, to reuolue, to returne backe, to ouerturne, to ouerwhelme. Also to tosse vp and downe. Also to roule and rumble againe. Also to tosse and reuolue in minde.

Riuoltelli, a kind of meate made of flesh or any thing else enfolded and rouled vp and so rosted as our Oleaues be.

Riuólto, reuolued, reuolted, turned backe or vp and downe, turned ouer or vpside downe. Also ouerturned, ouerwhelmed or ouerthrowen, tossed heere and there. Also rouled or rumbled againe. Also bent towards, addicted or enclined vnto. Also reuolued and pondred in minde.

Riuoltolaménto, a tossing, a tumbling or wallowing vp and downe.

Riuoltoláre, as Riuoltáre.

Riuoltoláto, tossed, retossed, rumbled or wallowed vp and downe.

Riuoltolóne, tumbling.

Riuoltóso, reuoultous, full of reuoluings, windings, turnings or cranklings. Also giuen to reuolting.

Riuoltúra, as Riuolgiménto.

Riuóluere, as Riuoltáre.

Riuolutióne, a reuolution, a reuoluing, a turning backe to the first place, a reuolution of celestiall bodies or spheares.

Riuomíre, mísco, míto, to cast or vomit againe.

Riuomitáre, as Riuomíre.

Riúngere, úngo, únsi, únto, to reannoint.

Riuscíbile, sortable, that may sort, proue, speed, or come to effect.

Riuscíre, ésco, vscíj, vscíto, to sort, to prooue, to speed, or come to passe and effect.

Riuscíta, an issue, a sorting, a successe, a speeding, a sorting or effect.

Riuscíto, sorted, prooued, sped, come to good passe, to successe or effect.

Riuscitóre d'ácque, a spout of waters, a common shore of waters, or a gutter.

Rizotómo, a kind of Ireos somewhat reddish.

Rízza, a withering, a wrimple. Also a puckering in any cloth. Also withered or wrimpled and stale.

Rizzagliétto, a small casting net.

Rizzáglio, a great fishing or fowling Net.

Rizzappáre, to digge, to sape or delue againe.

Rizzáre, to reare, to raise, to erect or set vp right. Also to make right or streight againe. Also to stand vp or stiffe. Also to lift vp

Rizzárla crésta, to rouze or lift vp the combe as a cocke doeth, that is, to take courage, to raise vp ones minde.

Rizzársi, to stand, rise or erect vp.

Rizzáta, a standing or rising vp stiffe.

Rízzo, as Rítto. Also as Ríccio.

Rizzúto, as Ricciúto.

Roáno, a Roane colour of a horse.

Rób, an hearbe called Blackewort. Also a medicine of the iuice thereof

Róba, as Róbba.

Robacchiáre, as Robbacchiáre.

Robáre, as Robbáre, or Rubbáre.

Robálto, a paire of winding staires. 

Róbba, a gowne, a robe, a mantle, any long garment. Also wealth, ware, stuffe, goods, cattell, moueables, geare, marchandise. Also trash or pelfe.

Robbacchiáre, to pilfer, to filch, to steale, to purloine, to embezle, to purloine, to rob, to commit larceny.

Robbaménto, any kind of filching, stealing, a pilfring, a robbing, a larceny, a purloining, an embezling.

Robbáre, to rob, to steale, to pilfre, to filch, to purloine, to embezle.

Robbatóre, a robber, a stealer, a thiefe, filcher, a pilfrer, a pirate.

Róbbe, the Plurall of Róbba.

Róbbia, an hearbe to die red withall, called Madder, Cliuers-madder or Goslin-weed. Also the hearbe Woodroofe. Also a certaine measure of corne containing about a bushell of ours.

Robbicciuóla, any kind of small, fine dainty or little Róbba.

Róbbo, a kinde of red wheat. Also as Róbbia. Also red or ruddy coloured. Also a bush, a bramble, a brier, a shrub.

Robbóne, a great long robe, mantle or gowne. Also a come of gold in Muscouy called a rubble or roble.

Robéculo, a Robin-red-breast.

Robertiána, Hearbe-robert.

Róbia, as Róbbia.

Robicílla, a Bull-finch or Red-taile.

Robicondità, rednesse, reddinesse, rubicondity.

Robicóndo, ruddy, firy, or branded red.

Robicóne, as Robicóndo.

Robigáglia, Gange-weeke.

Robíglia, a iacket, a mandillion, a horsemans cote or such other garment.

Robinétto, a little ruby. Also a spigot for a Rundlet. Also a cocke for a Conduite or Cesterne. Also a dildoe or pillicocke.

Robíno, a precious stone called a Ruby.

Robiólo, a kind of dainty cheese.

Robóne, as Robbóne.

Roboráre, to corroborate or strengthen.

Roboratióne, a corroboration or strengthning.

Róbore, an Oake. Vsed also for strength or force of body. Also courage, hardinesse or stoutnesse of minde.

Roboreo, made of Oake.

Roboróso, stiffe or hard as Oake.

Robríca, Red-oaker or Markeingstone.

Robúrno, of or belonging to Oake.

Robustézza, sturdinesse, toughnesse.

Robústo, sturdy, tough, strong.

Rócca, a rocke, a fort, a cittadell, a stronghould, a blocke-house, a sconce, a Castle, a Keepe, a Towre. Also any kind of rocke, cliffe or cragge by or in 



the sea. Also a grub or clod of earth or stone. Also a kind of vnprofitable earth in Cypres, that is neither stone nor earth, but both together and both bad, and good to no vse.

Rocca, a rocke or distaffe to spin.

Roccáu, a fish in Latine Alphesta.

Rócce, rockes, cragges, clifs.

Roccelle, little rockes, cragges, cliffes.

Rocchéllo, a rocket or bobbin to winde silke vpon. Also the wheele about which the cord of a clocke or of a iacke goeth, a cogwheele of a mill. Also any kind of rocket or squib of wilde fire.

Rocchétta, a little rocke or towre.

Rocchétti, rockets, or squibs of wilde-fire.

Rocchézza, roughnesse, ruggednesse.

Rócchi, cragges, cliffes, rockes, ruptures in any rockes or stones. Also round stones.

Rócchia, as Rócca.

Rócchio, as Rócca. Also any lumpe masse, cob, mammocke or lunchion piece.

Róccia, as Rócca.

Rocciétto, a Bishops or Priests rotchet.

Rócco, as Rócchio. Also as Rócca. Also a rooke to play at chesse with.

Rochello, a cogwheele of any Mill. Also as Rochétto.

Rochétta, as Ruchétta.

Rochétto, as Rocchello, or Rocciétto.

Róchi, a kinde of monstrous birde in India.

Róco, hoarce in speakeing.

Rocozéni, a kinde of wilde Haggard hawke.

Rodadáfano, as Rododáfne.

Rodaméle, a kind of drugge.

Rodánto, the flower of Roses.

Rodegáre, as Ródere.

Rodente, corroding, gnawing, fretting. Also a kind of red swelling inflamation.

Ródere, ródo, rósi, rodúto, to corrode, to gnaw, to fret. Also to nibble, to consume, to eat and weare away. Also to backebite, to detract or speake ill of.

Ródere dirábbia, to fret with rage or anger.

Ródere il básto, a man to gnaw his own burden, or fret at himselfe.

Ródere l'ósso, to gnaw or fret a bone.

Ródersile lábbra, to gnaw ones lips.

Ródia, the hearbe called Rosewore.

Rodibombárda, a bragard, a gnawer of bumbards, a deuourer of gunnes.

Rodiménto, a gnawing, a fretting.

Rodíno, Oyle of Roses.

Rodíte, a precious stone of a Rose-colour.

Roditóre, a gnawer, a fretter. 

Roditúra, a gnawing, a fretting.

Rododáfne, a tree in Candia which hath a leafe like the Lawrell or Bay-tree, and a flowre like a rose, and is so venemous that it poisoneth whatsoeuer it toucheth, seetheth or rosteth. Also the hearbe Oleander.

Rododendro, a tree that hath euer green leaues vpon it. Also the hearbe sabin.

Rodomontáda, a boast, a brag, a cracke or vaineglorious vanting.

Rodóra, an hearbe with a stalke full of ioynts and stalkes, and a leafe like a Netle, white in the middest, and in continuance commeth all like a rose.

Rodúto, gnawne, fretted, or nibled.

Roéti, paróla usáta dal Boteto. 

Róffia, duskishnesse, darkenesse, mistinesse, fogginesse, pitchinesse, density or thicknesse of vapours. Also dandrafe or scuruinesse or the scuruy.

Roffiana, a woman bawde.

Roffianaménti, bawdries, bawdy tricks. Also rufflings or ruffian trikes.

Roffianáre, to play the bawde or pander. Also to ruffle or play the ruffian.

Roffianeggiaménti, as Roffianaménti.

Roffianeggiáre, as Roffianáre.

Roffianésimo, the arte of bawdry.

Roffiáno, a bawde, a pander, a ring carier. Also a Ruffin, a swagrer, a swashbuckler.

Roffoláto, a kind of meat made of swines flesh and much pepper.

Rogále, of or belonging to Rógo.

Rogálefuóco, a bonefire, Looke Rógo.

Rogánte, as Rogente.

Rogáre, to entreate, to request, to desire, to craue, to beg, to pry.

Rogatióne, rogation, praying, a request, a demand. Also a law or ordinance.

Rogáto instrumento, any indenture made by an allowed or publike notarie.

Rogatóre, a requester, a beseecher, an intreater, a crauer, a demander.

Róge, filth of meate sticking betweene ones teeth.

Rogente, praying, entreating, requesting.

Rógge, a kinde of Peares in Italy.

Róggia, as Róbbia.

Róggio, red, ruddy. Also tauny red.

Roggióla, as Rogióla.

Roggióre, as Rossore, rednesse, ruddinesse.

Rogiáda, deawe. Also sprinkling.

Rogiadóso, deawy, sprinkling.

Rogiménto, a demand, a question, an asking.

Rogióla, a disease that yongue children haue called the red gums or meazles

Rogitatióne, an often crauing.

Rogíti, prouocutions, vrgings, egings on. 

Róglia, a kind of hard rugged stone to build roughworke.

Rógna, any kind of scab, itch, scurffe, tetter, or scabbednesse.

Rognáccia, filthy scab or sourfe.

Rognáre, as Rignáre.

Rognoláta, as Rognonáta.

Rognonále, of or belonging to the kidneis. Also a kind of ague or disease in a horse comming in the kidneis or Lungs.

Rognonáta, a kind of meat made of kidneis, some of our Cookes call it a Florentine.

Rognóne, the kidnie of any bodie.

Rognóni, the kidneis or reines of ones backe.

Rognósa frittáta, a kind of tanzie or collops and egges fried together.

Rognóso, scabbie, itchie, scuruie.

Rognúzza, small scabs or itching pimples.

Rógo, a great funerall fire wherin they were wont in old time to burne the dead bodies of men. Also vsed for a graue or last home.

Roína, as Ruína. Also a certaine toole that Chirurgions vse.

Roiténo, a kind of wine made of Pomegranates.

Roláre, as Rolláre.

Rolígine, as Rubígine.

Roliginíre, nísco, níto, as Rubiginíre.

Rolláre, to roule, to enroule, to file, to record, to put vpon a check-roule.

Róllo, a roule, a check-roule, a file or record of names or any thing.

Rollóne, water and bran sodden together. Also froth or foame.

Rómae Tóma, Prométtere róma & tóma, to promise Gods coape, or wonders, or as we say Seas and Mountaines.

Romagnándo, vsed for Rimanéndo, remaining.

Romagnuólo, a kind of course, homespun or sheepes-russet cloth, called friers cloth or shepheards clothing, like our course welch frize. Also a man borne in Romágna.

Romaiuólo, as Romagnuólo.

Romanía, a kind of Malmesie wine.

Romanzáre, to write or sing fabulous tales or faigned histories in rime.

Romanzatóre, a romant, a writer, a singer or speaker of fabulous tales or faigned stories in time.

Romanzi, romants, fabulous tales, faigned stories in rime of errand Knights. Vsed also for pratling Mountibanks, as Romanziére.

Romanziére, a pratling Mountibanke, a singer of fabulous poemes or ballads.

Romanzína, a kind of dance. Also a 



kind of tricke in dancing.

Romático, as Aromático.

Romatizzáre, as Aromatizzáre.

Rombáre, to make a report as some pieces doe being shot off. Also as Romboláre.

Rombazzáre, to make a rumbling, clattring or ratling noise.

Rombázzo, a whirlewinde. Also a filthy rumbling noise. Looke Rómbo.

Rombeggiáre, as Rombáre, as Romboláre.

Rombíce, the hearbe Sorrell or Souredocke.

Rómbo, a rumbling or roaring noise, the clang, sound or braying of a Trumpet, the dubbing of a Drum, a ratling of Thunder, the clattring or clashing of Armour, an ecchoing sound or any noise that makes the ground to shake. Also a gust of winde, a whizling blast. Also a point in the Mariners compasse, or space between which the windes blow. Also a violent whirling noice. Also a Burt or Turbot-fish. Also a spinning wheele or reele for yarne. Also a figure foure square losanged, like a quarrie of glasse with equall sides but not right angled, a mascle or losenge in Armorie. Also the report of a pice shot off.

Rombóide, any thing like Rómbo. Also a fish like a Turbot.

Rómbola, a sling.

Romboláre, to cast or hurle in a sling, to sling. Also to rumble, to roare, to rattle, to clang, to clash, to dub as on a Drum. Also to make a whorring or rumbling noice as a stone cast out of a sling.

Rombolatóre, a slinger.

Romboliére, a slinger.

Rombolóso, as Rombóso.

Rombóso, rumbling, full of noise. Looke Rómbo.

Rombotíno, a shrub called Oppiot or Poplar.

Romeággio, a roaming about. Also a pilgrimage for deuotions sake.

Romeáre, to roame or wander vp and downe as a Palmer or solitarie man for deuotion sake.

Romeo, as Romitággio, a roamer, a wandrer, a Palmer for deuotion sake.

Rométa, a Thorne backe, a Ray, a Skate.

Rómia, a kind of Scallop-fish.

Romiáre, as Romeáre.

Romíce, as Róbbia, as Rombíce.

Romigáre, to roame vp and downe as an Hermite or solitarie man. Also to hull vp and downe at Sea.

Romináre, as Rumináre.

Rominatóre, as Ruminatóre.

Romíre, mísco, míto, as Romoreggiáre.

Romíta, an Hermit or solitarie man.

Romitággio, an hermittage, a solitarie place, a desert or wildernesse.

Romitáio, as Romitággio.

Romitáno, of or belonging to a Hermite.

Romítico, solitarie or Hermite-like.

Romíto, an Hermite, a solitarie man.

Romíto dal sácco, a begging Hermite.

Romitóio, as Romitággio.

Romitório, as Romitággio.

Romóre, a rumor, a noise, a bruit, a rumbling, a hurlie-burlie. Also an vprore. Also a report.

Romoreggiánte, making a noise or rumor. Also tumultuous, blustring, rumbling, vnquiet, brawling.

Romoreggiáre, to rumor, to noise, to rumble, to blustre. Also to raise a noise an vprore or a tumult.

Romoreggiatóre, a noiser, a rumbler, a blustrer, a raiser of tumults, vprores, bruits or seditions.

Rompere, rómpo, rúppi, rótto, or rompúto, to breake, to batter, to teare, to split, to burst, to shiuer, to rend, to totter, to crush or craze in pieces or a sunder. Also to wracke. Also to put to rout, to ouerthrow or destroy, and defeat. Also to breake or be bankerout. Also to suffer shipwracke.

Rómpere esserciti, to breake or scatter armies, to put to rout.

Rómpere il cápo, as Rómperela testa.

Rómpere il digiúno, to breake ones fast.

Rómpere il ghiáccio, as Dáre il suóco álla bombárdo.

Rómpere in náue, to wracke, to suffer shipwracke.

Rómpere latesta a qualcúno, to breake some bodies head. Also to trouble or molest one with importunitie.

Rómpersi, to fall out or breake friendship.

Rompéuole, as Rompíbile.

Rompíbile, that may be breaken.

Rompicápo, as Rompicóllo, a breake-head.

Rompicóllo, a breake-necke place, a downefal, a headlong precipice, Arompicóllo, headlong, rashly, desperately, in danger of breaking ones necke. Also a desperate, rash or headlesse fellow.

Rompidente, an ignorant tooth-drawer. Also a toole that Masons vse.

Rompiménto, all manner of breakings.

Rompináre, as Rampináre.

Rompíno, as Rampíno.

Rompitáccio, ready to breake, brittle, fraile as glasse. Also burst or broken.

Rompitóio, a breaker or any thing to breake with all as a hammer, &c.

Rompitóre, any kind of breaker.

Rompótimo, a bush growing in France, within twentie foote whereof no corne being sowen will grow.

Romputo, broken, batired, torne, split, burst, shiuered, rent, tattred, rag'd, crusht or crazed in pieces or in sunder. Also put to rout, ouerthrowen, defeated or destroyed. Also broken or bankerout.

Ronáre, to till, or manure, or breake vp land.

Rónca, a hedge-bill, a browne-bill, a forest-bill, a welch-hooke, a boares-speare, a bramble-sieth. Also a kind of mountaine Partridge.

Roncagíno, a kind of colour that Painters vse to lay vpon wood.

Roncaménti, grubbings of clods or earth. Also snortings. Also gruntings. Also brayings as of Asses.

Roncáre, to grub, to dig or roote vp trees or earth. Also to cut as with a welchhooke or any crooked weapon. Also to snort in sleepe, to grunt as a Hog, or to bray as an Asse.

Roncatóre, a grubber, a digger or rooter vp. Also a shredder or lopper of trees. Also a snorter, a grunter, or brayer as an Asse.

Roncéra, a shell-fish called a Purple-fish.

Roncheggiaménti, as Roncaménti.

Roncheggiáre, as Roncáre.

Ronchétta, any kind of little Rónca. Also a Shooemakers knife or a certaine crooked knife that Vine-cutters vse. Also as Roncílio.

Ronchiaménti, as Roncaménti.

Ronchiáre, as Roncáre.

Ronchiatóre, as Roncatóre.

Ronchiétto, as Roncílio.

Roncheggiaménti, as Roncaménti.

Roncheggiáre, as Roncáre.

Rochiggióne, as Roncatóre.

Ronchióne, any kind of great Rónca. Also any great, craggie or rugged and knurrie rocke, cliffe, crag or stone.

Ronchiosità, ruggednesse, crabbednesse, snagnesse, knottinesse, knurrinesse, nodositie.

Ronchióso, rugged, crabbed, snaggie, knurrie, knobbie, craggie, rockie, stonie, rough, cliffie, or full of all ruggednesse as broken rockes. Also made as a Rónca. Also snorting. Also grunting. Also braying.

Ronchisuóno, that hath a hoarce sound or maketh a snorting noise.

Ronchizzáre, as Runchizzáre, as Roncáre.

Ronchizzóso, as Runchizzóso, as Ronchióso.

Roncigliáre, as Ronciliáre.

Roncíglio, as Roncilio.

Ronciglióne, as Roncílio, as Rampíno.

Ronciliáre, to shred or cut or weed out 



with a sickle, hedge-bill, forest-bill, welch-hooke or any such crooked knife. Also to catch or take with any booke, to grapple, to hooke.

Roncilio, any kind of crooked knife, sickle, weeding-hooke, hedge-bill, forest-bill, welch-hooke, graffing knife, shooemakers knife, vinerols knife. Vsed also for Rampíno.

Roncináre, as Vncináre, as Rampináre.

Roncíno, a nag, a prettie horse or tit.

Roncinótto, a good handsome well trust nag or hackney.

Roncíto, any kind of bush, shrub, hedge, brier, thorne or bramble whose tops haue been cut off.

Roncoláre, as Ronciliáre.

Róncolo, as Roncílio.

Roncóne, any kind of great Rónca.

Roncrátolo, a bird about the bignesse of a Goose that brayeth like an Asse.

Rónda, the round that souldiers or sentinels walke about Garison townes, or a companie of certaine souldiers and officers that goe visiting the sentinels or corps de guard at sundry houres of the night to see if they be vigilant and keepe good order.

Rondaníni, yongue Swallowes or Martinets.

Rondella, a Sea-swallow or Sea-bat. Also any kind of round Target.

Rondello, a round-towre, a roundlet.

Róndine, a Swallow. Vsed also for a Martinet. Also a Sea-bat or Seaswallow. Also a kind of fish. Vsed also for a Night-crow. Also a certaine toole that Chirurgions and Anatomists vse.

Rondinella, a yongue Swallow.

Rondiníni, yongue little Swallowes.

Róndo, as Rónda.

Róndola, as Rondella.

Rondóne, a Martlet or Swallow.

Rónfa, a game at cardes called Ruffe.

Ronfaménti, snortings. Also the tuffings of a Cat. Also ruffings at cardes.

Ronfáre, to snort or snartle in sleepe. Also to tuffe as a Cat. Also to ruffe or trumpe at cardes.

Ronfatóre, a snorter in his sleepe. Also a ruffer or trumper at cardes. Also a tuffer as a Cat.

Ronfea, a kind of darting weapon. Some take it for a kind of sling.

Ronfeggiaménti, as Romfaménti.

Ronfeggiáre, as Ronfáre.

Rónfo, the drone of a bagpipe.

Rónne, a letter or abreuiation signifying in Latine Rum, at the end of words.

Ronzáre, to humme or buzze as a Bee, to make a humming noise. Also as Ronfáre.

Ronzáta, a humming or buzzing noise. Vsed also for a suddaine charge giuen rashly or heedlesly.

Ronzeráre, as Ronzáre.

Ronzéro, wilde, vntamed, vnbroken, vnmanaged. Also rammish or haggard.

Ronzíno, a handsome prettie nag or tit.

Ronzóne, an illfauoured big nag or iade.

Ropegára, as Arpegára.

Ropegáre, as Arpegáre.

Roráre, to deaw, to drop, or besprinkle with deaw.

Roratióne, a blasting of Grapes before their full growth with ouermuch wet. Also a falling of deaw.

Rórido, deawie, moist.

Rorífero, deaw-bringing.

Rósa, any kind of Rose, Acquarósa, Rose-water. Also a rowell of a spurre. Also the name of a certaine blazing Starre. Vsed also for any naturall spot or moule vpon a mans or womans skin.

Rósa, gnawen or fretted, as Ródere.

Rósa biánca, any kind of white Rose.

Rosaceo, of or pertaining to Roses, or made of Roses. Also of the colour or smell of Roses. Also oyle of Roses.

Rósa damaschína, a Damaske-rose.

Rósa delmónte, the flower Pionie.

Rósa d'herríco, as Cóppa di Gióue.

Rósa di sisímbro, a kind of sweet smelling Rose.

Rósa incarnáta, a Carnation or Damaske-rose. Also a Carnation colour.

Rosáio, a Rose-brier. Also a garden, a plat or place where Roses grow. Also a Rosarie or Rosier.

Rosáio seluático, Eglantine or sweet Brier. Also the Caper-bush.

Rosamaríno, Rosemarie.

Rósa muschiáta, a Muske-rose.

Rósa oltramarína, the Holie-hocke flower.

Rosáre, to preserue with Roses or to make to smell of Roses.

Rosário, as Rosáio Also a rosarie or paire of beades.

Rosáro, as Rosáio.

Rósa róssa, a Red-rose.

Rosasécca, a dried Rose. Also the dryrose colour, that is the Murrey-colour.

Rosáta, rosed, made of Roses or smelling of Roses. Also a Rose-cake, A'cqua rosáta, Rosewater.

Rosáta radíce, the hearbe Rosewort.

Rosáto, made of Roses, smelt of Roses, preserued with Roses, Rosiate or of the colour of Roses, Rose-colour or Murrey, O'lio rosáto, oyle of Roses.

Róscide, wet or moist with deaw.

Roscignólo, a Nightingall.

Róscio, as Rósso.

Roscióre, as Rossóre, a Blush-colour.

Roscíre, scísco, scíto, as Rossíre, to blush 

Rosechiáre, as Ródere, to gnaw, to fret.

Róse cótte, Rose-cakes, baked or dried Roses.

Rosegaménto, a gnawing, a fretting, a corroding, a nibling.

Rosegáre, to gnaw, to fret, to corrode, to nible.

Rosegatúra, a gnawing, a corroding, a fretting, a nibling.

Roseggiáre., Looke Rósa, to roseate, to flower or bud as Roses.

Rosegóne, a gnawer, a fretter, a corroder, a nibler.

Roselli, Rose-leaues or dried Rose-cakes. Also the hips of Roses as Grattacúlo. Also rowels of spurres. Also a kind of daintie figs so called.

Rosellíne, yongue little Roses. Looke Dáre rosellíne.

Roseo, as Rosaceo. Also Roseate.

Roséto, a plot or bed of Roses.

Rosétta, a little Rose, a rowell of a spur, a square piece of iron with a hole in the middle to keepe the head of the iron bolt from the sides of the cariage of a piece.

Rosétte, little Roses. Also Rose purles or worke in bone-lace. Also rowles of spurres. Also a certaine disease in horses.

Rosétto, a kind of painting that women vse.

Rosicára, a Mouse, a Rat, a Nibler.

Rosicáre, as Rosegáre.

Rosicatúra, as Rosegatúra.

Rosigáre, as Rosegáre.

Rosigatióne, a guawing, a fretting, a corroding.

Rosigatíuo, fretting, gnawing, corroding.

Rosigatúra, as Rosegatúra.

Rosigóne, as Rosegóne.

Rosignoláre, to singe as a Nightingall.

Rosignolétti, yongue Nightingals.

Rosignólo, a Nightingall.

Rosína, a little Rose. Also a kinde of round dance as our hay.

Rosióne, as Rosigatióne.

Rosmaríno, Rosemary.

Rosmáro, a kind of fish. Also a Rosemary-tree.

Rósne, as Picílla.

Rosnétta, as Picílla.

Róso, as Rodúto, gnawne, nibled.

Rósola, a Smithes buttris.

Rosoláccio, wilde Poppy.

Rosoláre, to baste or drippe roaste-meate.

Rosolíno, a fish that liues both on land and in the water.

Rosóni, a kind of flaunes, custards, egpies or douces. Also the Spanish roses. Also a kind of feillage worke so called a­



mong Architects in fretted and carued workes.

Rospáre, to croake as a toade. Also as Ruspáre.

Rospatóre, as Ruspatóre.

Rospatúre, as Ruspatúre.

Rospíni, a kind of Muske Melons.

Rospíno, toadish, venimous.

Róspo, a venimous Toade.

Rospóne, a filthy great Toade.

Rospopésce, a Toade-fish.

Róssa, a Red-woman. Also a fan of feathers.

Rossárdo, a Ruddy or Reddish-man.

Rosseggiánte, ruddy, ruddish, blushing, enclining to red, Ruby-red, Cherry-lipt.

Rosseggiáre, to blush or be ruddy.

Rossettáre, to paint or make red.

Rossétto, ruddy, some what red. Also a blush-colour. Also a red man or woman. Also russet-colour. Also a fish called a Dace or Merlane.

Rossézza, rednesse, ruddinesse.

Rossíccio, ruddy, reddish, enclining to red.

Rossigno, as Rossíccio.

Rossignoláre, to sing as a Nightingall.

Rossignólo, a Nightingall.

Rossíno, as Rossíccio.

Rossíre, as Arrossíre, to blush.

Rósso, red, ruddy, rauny-red. Also a red man. Also gweles in armory.

Rósso d'vuóuo, the yolke of an egge.

Rófsola, any red pimple or swelling. Also a kibe or chilblane.

Rossoláre, to pimple or swell red as a kibe or chilblane.

Rossóre, as Rossézza, a blushing. Also vsed for bashfulnesse.

Rossúme, any rednesse or ruddinesse. Also the yolke of an egge.

Rósta, a broad-leauy branch or bough or great fanne to make wind withall or driue away flies in Sommer. Also a battledar to play at tennis with. Also a frying or dripping pan. Also an instrument or crane with pullies and wheeles to draw any thing out of Mines or Colepits vnder ground. Also a turning wheele or other impediment in the way, a stile ouer a hedge. a yate in any hedge or pale. Also a weire in a Riuer or any stop in the water.

Rostáre, to fan-winde, or with boughes to driue away flies. Also to hinder or stop vp the high-way, to forray the country. Looke Rósta.

Rostíre, stísco, stíto, to roste. Also to toste. Also to broile.

Rostíta, a toste of bread.

Rostíto, rosted, tosted, broyled. Also any kind of rosted meate. 

Rostizzána, a steake, a collop, a slice, an Olife or any such piece of meat rosted, broiled or fride.

Rostizzáre, to fry in steakes, to broile vpon the coles, to toste by the fire, to rost in haste. Also to scorch, to parch, to seare or singe.

Róstra, the place of Common Please in Rome wherein stood a Pulpit made and trimmed with stemm's and forefronts of ships, out of which they were wont to make their Oration, so that it may be taken for a Pulpit.

Rostráre, to bill, to neb, or beake.

Rostráta., looke Coróna rostráta.

Rostráta náue, a ship hauing hir stem shod or pointed with iron or Brasse.

Rostrato, that hath a bill, a beake, a snout or stomme pointed with iron or Brasse.

Róstro, the bill, the beake or neb of any bird or foule. Also the nose or snout of any beast or fish. Also the snout or stem of any ship. Also the tip, the point the end, the point or tongue of iron, Tinne, leade, brasse or horne at the end of any thing.

Rostrumgrúis, the hearbe Storkes-bill or Cranes-bill, whereof are diuers kindes.

Rosumáta, a kind of sauce so called.

Rosúra, a gnawing, a fretting; a corroding.

Róta, any kind of wheele. Also a grind-ingstone, a Millstone. Also any wheeling, turne or turning round. Also the turne or wheeling of a horse. Also the full spreading of a Peacockes taile. Also a round roule or rowling. Also a kinde of monstrous great fish. Also a kind of torture.

Róta del scarpóne, a play when one is blinded and strikes about him with an old shooe tied at the end of a line, and whom he hits must sit downe.

Rotále, of, like or belonging to a wheele.

Rotáre, to wheele or turne round. Also to make round. Also to turne or swinge about. Also to grind or mill. Also to set an edge vpon.

Rotário, a light armed souldier. Also a Wheele-wright.

Rotatióne, a wheeling about.

Rotáto, wheeled about, made round, swinged or hurled about. Also grinded or set an edge vpon. Also a pye-coloured horse.

Rotatóri, wheelers or grinders, but properly two Apophisis or processes bunching out in the vppermost necke of the thigh, whereof the vttermost being the greatest processe in the whole bodie is of some Anatomists called in Latin Nates: the innermost is lower and much lesse than the other, they seeme to be ordeined for the turning and wheeling about of the thigh.

Roteánza, a wheeling or twirling about round.

Roteáre, a wheele, to twirle or turne round as in a wheele.

Roteggiáre, as Roteáre.

Rotella, any kind of little wheele. Also a round target or buckler. Also any round roule or rouler. Also any round marke or spot as about a horse. Also a wheeling or twirling round. Also a trundle.

Rotelle, little wheeles or round purles in bone-lace. Also mollets pierced in Armorie. Also round spots or speckles as in Snakes skins or flea-bitings.

Rotellétta, any little Rotella.

Rotellíno, the name of a Goldsmiths toole.

Rotéuole, that may be wheeled or turned.

Rótola, any little wheele. Also a roule or round bundle of any thing. Also a kind of round bun or cracknell of bread. Also a round rumbling, Rótola del ginócchio, the whirle-bone ordained to couer the ioint of the knee, which otherwise had beene too open vnto harme: called the eye-bone, the pattie-bone or the shield-like-bone.

Rotoláre, to wheele, to turne or make round. Also to roule, to trundle, to winde or trosse vp any thing round. Also to tumble or wallow.

Rotoláta, a wheeling, a turning or a making round. Also a rouling, a trundling, a winding or trussing vp any thing round. Also a wallowing.

Rotolláre, as Rotoláre.

Rotolláta, as Rotoláta.

Rótolo, any kind of roule, bundle, fardle or round trusse. Also a rowle or bun of bread. Also a bottome or clue of thrid or yarne. Also a trundle. Also a rowle or check-rowle of names. Also a kind of weight in Venice, about a pound of ours, some say it is of 33. Ounces. Also a kind of measure of linnen cloth, as we say a bolte of Holland cloth.

Rotolóni, rundles or rowlers of wood. Also any round rowlings or wheelings.

Rotondáre, to round, to make or become round. Also to make full and perfect.

Rotondità, rotunditie, roundnesse.

Rotóndo, round, full, well compact.

Rótta, a rupture, a breach, a bracke, a fracture, a breaking. Also a rout, a discomfiture or ouerthrow of an armie.

Rótta d'un essercito, the ouerthrow, rout or discomfiture of an armie.

Rottáme, any kind of broken thing, as a shiuer, a splint, a shard or bat. Also 



any rubble, rubbish, fragment, scrap, mammocke, fracture or breaking.

Rottáre, to belch, to raspe, to breake winde vpward.

Rottatóre, a belcher, a rasper.

Róttauóce, a broken voice.

Rotteggiáre, as Rottáre.

Rotteggiatóre, a belcher, a rasper.

Rottelíno, as Rotellíno.

Rótti, belches, belchings, raspings.

Rottiére, a belcher, a rasper.

Rótto, broken. Also a man that hath a rupture or is broken or burst in the bellie or cods. Also a fraction in Arithmetike. Also a belch. Also a bracke, a gap, a breach, a hole.

Rótto di schiena, back-broken.

Rotto in máre, wrackt or cast away at Sea.

Rottóio, as Rottório.

Rottondáre, to round or make round.

Rottório, a corrosiue or plaister to breake any sore. Also a Nut-cracker.

Rottório cáustico adustíuo medicaménto. 

Rottúra, a rupture, a fraction, a breaking, a breach.

Rótula, as Rótola.

Rotuláre, as Rotoláre.

Rótulo, as Rótolo.

Róua, a kind of great weight. Also a kind of measure vsed in Italie.

Ronáio, a nipping cold Northren winde, Dáre de cálci a Rouáio, that is to say, to shake ones heeles in the winde, and in plaine English to be hanged.

Rouáno, a Roane-colour of a Horse.

Roueglia, the pulse called Eruile.

Roueia, a kind of peason or fitches.

Rouelláre, to murmure, to grumble, to grudge.

Rouello, a murmuring, a grumbling.

Rouentáre, to neale red hot, to glow.

Rouente, glowing red, fierie red or hot.

Róuere, the tree or wood Oake. Also wainescot. Also a kinde of torture among the Romanes, Cuór di róuere, a hard or marble heart.

Rouerétto, a groue or place set with or full of Oakes.

Roueríno, of, like or made of Oake, as strong as Oake. Also of, like or made of wanescot. Also opiniatiue, head-strong or fixt in some opinion.

Rouersa, as Riuersa.

Rouersáre, as Riuersáre.

Rouerscia, as Riuersa.

Rouersciáre, as Riuersáre.

Rouerscio, as Riuerso.

Rouerscióne, as Riuersóne.

Rouerso, as Riuerso.

Rouersóne, as Riuersóne.

Rouescia, the stuffe called Bayes to line garments with. Also as Riuersa.

Rouesciáre, as Riuer sáre.

Rouescína, as Rouescia, fine Bayes.

Rouescio, as Riuerso.

Rouescióne, as Riuersóne.

Rouétta, a Blacke-berriebush, a black Thorne or Bramble.

Rouiglia, the pulse called Eruile.

Rouigliaménto, a tossing, a rumbling.

Rouigliáre, to rowle, to tumble, to rumble or tosse or wallow ouer and ouer.

Rouiglióne, a kind of peason as our hastings or bowlings are. Also rowling, rumbling or tossing ouer. Also a round scab, scurfe or botch.

Rouína, ruine, spoile, waste, destruction, hauocke, wracke, desolation. Also extreame decay, death, miserie, losse or mischiefe.

Rouinaménto, as Rouína.

Rouináre, to ruine, to spoile, to wracke, to waste vtterly, to destroy.

Rouinatíccio, ruinous, ready to ruine.

Rouinatóre, a ruiner, a destroyer.

Rouinázzo, rubbish, rubble, rammell.

Rouinéuole, subiect to ruine or destruction.

Rouinóio, as Rouinóso.

Rouinóso, ruinous, full of ruine.

Rouistáre, to rumble or disorder or scatter any thing in seeking or tumbling about.

Rouístico, as Rigústro.

Róuo, as Rúbo.

Róuo caníno, as Rúbo canino.

Róuo ideo, as Rúbocaníno.

Róza, as Rózza.

Rózza, rude, rough, or barbarous.

Rózza, a iade or filthy bad horse. Also an ouer-ridden whore, or ramp-stallion whore.

Rozzácchia, as Rózza.

Rozzaménte, rudely, brutishly, roughly, vnciuilly, barbarously.

Rózza uetturína, an hired iade.

Rozzézza, rudenesse, roughnesse, rusticitie of manners or ciuilitie.

Rozzíno, as Roncíno.

Rozzità, as Rozzézza.

Rózzo, rude, rough, brutish, vnciuill, barbarous, rusticall, clownish. Also vnwrought, vnpolished, blunt, homelie, bungler-like. Also a bunch of Grapet dangling downe from the Vine. Also a bough or branch full of any fruit as of Plums or Cherries hanging on the tree.

Rózzo, a iade or filthy bad horse.

Rózzola, a cherning-fat. Also a cheese-presse or cheese-fat.

Rozzóne, a great filthy iade. Also a mans pillicocke or pricke.

Ruáre, to hurle, to fling violently. Also to ruine, to breake, or clatter in pieces.

Rúba, as Rubaríe, A rúba, by robbing and spoile. 

Rubacchiáre, as Robbacchiáre.

Ruba-cuóre, an alluring steale-heart-wench, a heart-robber.

Rubagióne, any theft, filching, pilfring, stealing, or robbing.

Ruba-l'ánima, as Ruba-cuóre.

Rubaldello, a crafty wily knaue.

Rubaldería, as Ribaldería.

Rubáldo, as Ribáldo.

Rubaldóne, as Ribaldóne.

Rubáre, as Robbáre, to steale, to rob.

Rubaríe, all manner of robberies, pilfrings, filchings, stealings or larcenies.

Rubatóre, a robber, a thiefe.

Rubbacchiáre, as Robbacchiáre.

Rubbaménti, as Rubaríe.

Rubbáre, as Robbáre.

Rubbatóre, a robber, a stealer.

Rúbbi, a kind of vermine, grub, worme, or gnawing Caterpiller.

Rúbbia, as Róbbia.

Rubbiáre, as Romináre.

Rúbbo, as Rubbóne.

Rubbóne, a coine in Muscouy called a ruble. Also a kinde of waight in Ormuz.

Robécchio, ruddy, red, sanguine colour.

Rubecula, a Robin-red-breast.

Rubesátto, made or become red.

Rubellagióne, as Rubellióne.

Rubelláre, as Ribelláre.

Rubellatióne, as Ribellióne.

Rubelle, as Ribelle.

Rubellióne, as Ribellióne. Also the rust of iron.

Rubellóso, as Ribellóso.

Rubente, red, ruddy, reddish.

Rubenza, blushing, ruddinesse.

Rubeo, as Rubente.

Ruberíe, as Rubaríe.

Ruberta, Hearbe Robert.

Rubescenza, a blushing red, shamefastnesse.

Rubescere, besco, bescéi, besciúto, to wax or begin to be red, ruddy, or blushing.

Rubesto, as Robústo, cruell and fierce of nature and manners.

Rubeta, a land or red toade.

Rubetário, a kinde of Hawkes called a Hen-harroer.

Rubete, certaine Frogges that liue in bushes and hedges.

Rubeto, a place full of bushes.

Rubétta, a birde called a Bunting.

Rubicánte, red, ruddy, inflamed through anger or much drinking.

Rubicíllo, a Bulfinch or Red-taile.

Rubicondità, as Robicondità.

Rubicóndo, as Robicóndo.

Rubicóne, as Robicóne.

Rubidézza, as Ruuidézza.

Rúbido, as Rúuido. Also a darke deepe 



or blackish red colour.

Rubificáre, to make red with any application vnto it.

Rubificatióne, a makeing red with any application.

Rubificatíuo, a plaister, or any application that maketh red.

Rubigáglia, certaine set feasts at what time corne was blasted, to keep it from blasting more.

Rubígine, as Rúggine. Also the blasting of trees or Canker-eating of fruites, Mildeaw.

Rubiginíre, as Rugginíre. Also to blast trees or Canker-eat fruites, to Mildeaw.

Rubiginóso, as Rugginóso. Also blasted or Canker-eaten.

Rubíglia, Eruile, as Rouíglia.

Rubinétto, as Robinétto.

Rubíno, as Robíno.

Rubinóso, full of red, Rudy-red.

Rubízzo, ruddy, reddish, full of red. Also sturdy, stubborne, Marbleminded.

Rúbo, any kind of bush, Bryer or Bramble, namely the Blacke-berry-bush. Also a kinde of great waight.

Rúbo caníno, the wilde Eglantine. Also the Caper-bush.

Rubóre, shamefastnesse, chaste-blushing.

Rubríca., Rudle, Vermilion, Red-leade, Red-oaker, Red-stone. Also Red-writing, a Title, a Chapter or Inscription of a booke of Law, so called because that commonly they are written in red Capitall letters.

Rubricáre, to marke with Rudle or Red-oaker as they doe sheepe.

Rubricóso, full of Rudle, Vermilion, Red-stone, Leade or Oaker.

Rúch, a monstrous great bird in India that will kill an Elephant.

Rúche, the deuouring wormes called Caterpillers or Cankers.

Ruchétta, the hearbe Rocket.

Rúcula, the hearbe rocket.

Rúde, a rod or wand that was anciently giuen to Gladiators or Sword-players when they were old in signe that they were set at liberty and discharged from labour. Also as Rózzo, rude, rusticall, clounish.

Rúdere, to bray as an Asse.

Rudézza, as Rudità.

Rudiménti, the first rudiments, principles or instructions of any Arte.

Rudità, rudenesse, ignorance.

Rúdo, rude, clounish.

Rúe, the letter R. taken for the end of any matter.

Ruello, a fish called in Latine Boopis.

Rúffa, any mosse or mouldinesse. Also a rifling, a musse, or scambling. Also a trull, a harlot, a gixie, a minx.

Ruffáre, to be or become mossie, mouldy, or musty. Also to belch or raspe or spaule. Also to rifle, to scamble or play at musse. Also to ruffle or make ruffe.

Ruffatóre, a belcher, a spauler, a rasper Also a rifler or a scambler.

Ruffézza, roughnesse, ruffnesse, rudenesse.

Rúffia, as Róffia.

Ruffiána, as Roffiána.

Ruffianaménti, as Roffianaménti.

Ruffianáre, as Roffianáre.

Ruffianaríe, as Roffianaménti.

Ruffianéccio, as Roffianésimo.

Ruffianeggiáre, as Roffianáre.

Ruffianello, a yongue bawde or Ruffian.

Ruffianésco, ruffianish, bawdish.

Ruffianésimo, as Roffianésimo.

Ruffianezzáre, as Ruffianáre.

Ruffianiccío, as Roffianésimo.

Ruffiáno, as Roffiáno.

Rúffo, a belching, a rasping, a breaking of winde vpward. Also a ruffian, a swagrer, or a ruffling roister. Also a minnion, a darling, a dilling. Also rude, ruffe or rough.

Rúffola, as Rúffa. Also dandraffe in any bodies head, or morphew in ones face.

Rúffola ráffola, by hooke or crooke, by shifting or scambling, by pinching and scraping. Also pell-mell, helter-skelter, higledie pigeldie.

Ruffoláre, as Ruffáre. Also to get or scrape together by hooke or crooke.

Ruffoláto, as Roffoláto.

Ruffolóso, full of dandraffe in the head or morphew in the face.

Rúfo, hath been vsed for Rósso.

Ruga, any caterpiller or cankre. Also a maine street, a long lane or caucie in any Towne. Also a withering, a crompling, a puckring or plaiting. Also a wrimple or crowes-foote in any bodies face through age or care. Also the bitter hearbe Rue or hearbe of Grace. Some take it for the hearbe Rocket.

Rugále, full of wrinkles.

Rugamáre, to frost-bite or winter-nip. Also to eat as with Caterpillers.

Rugamagióne, a frost-biting or winter-nipping, a deuouring with Caterpillers.

Rugáre, to eat with caterpillers or deuour with cankres. Also to pucker, to crumple or plaite. Also to wrinkle or wrimple. Also to grope or fumble vp and downe.

Rugatóre, a groper or a fumbler.

Ruggente, roaring or roignant as a Lion.

Rugghiáre, as Ruggiáre.

Rúgghio, così schiacciáto somíglia al rúgghio di cámpo di fióre. 

Ruggiáda, as Rugiáda, any deaw. 

Ruggiadáre, as Rugiadáre.

Ruggiadóso, as Rugiadóso.

Ruggiáre, to roare or royne as a Lyon. Also to bellow. Also to grunt. Also to howle or cry out.

Ruggiáto, rored or royned, bellowed, grunted, howled.

Ruggiatóre, a roarer, a royner, a bellower, a grunter, a howler.

Rúggine, Spanish-greene or Verd-de-greece. Also spleene, ill-will, rancor, or grudging in minde. Also rust, rustinesse, canker or filth in mettals. Also a russeting Apple.

Rugginézza, any rustinesse.

Rugginíre, nísco, níto, to rust, to bee rustie.

Rugginóso, rustie, full of rust.

Rugginúzza, small rust or rustinesse.

Rúggio, a measure of dry things containing about an English bushell.

Ruggíre, gísco, gíto, as Ruggiáre.

Ruggíto, as Rugiáto. Also the roaring or royning of a Lyon. Also a bellowing, a grunting, a braying or such hideous noise. Also a rumbling or croaking of the bellie when it is emptie.

Ruggitóre, as Ruggiatóre.

Rughétta, a little street, a narrow lane. Also a little wrimple.

Rúghi, brambles, briers, thornes.

Rugiáda, the deaw. Also a sprinkling.

Rugiadáre, to deaw, to bedeaw, to drop or trill downe as deaw. Also to wet, to sprinkle, to deaw bedable.

Rugiadóso, deawie, full of deaw.

Rúgidi, a kind of Peares in Italie.

Rugiménto, as Ruggito.

Rugióla, as Rogióla.

Rugiolóne, a double thumpe or blow vpon ones head, a double knocke.

Rugióne, as Rugiolóne.

Rugíre, as Ruggiáre.

Rugíto, as Ruggíto.

Rugníre, gnísco, gníto, to grunt as a Hog. Also to roare or royne as a Lyon.

Rugníto, as Ruggiáto, as Ruggíto.

Rúgo, as Rúbo, as Róuo.

Rúgolo, a round sticke that they vse to rowle silkes or cipres vpon. Also a pastrie mans rowler to rowle or make flat his paste.

Rugóso, full of cankers or caterpillers. Also rough, riueled or wrimpled and withered. Also full of wrimples, crumplings or puckerings.

Rugumáre, as Rumináre. Also to cry or bray out aloud.

Rugomóso, as Ruminóso.

Ruína, as Rouína.

Ruináccio, as Rouinázzo.

Ruináre, as Rouináre.

Ruinéuole, as Rouinéuole.

Ruinóso, as Rouinóso.

Ruíre, ísco, íto, as Ruáre.



Rulígine, as Rubígine.

Ruliginíre, as Rubiginíre.

Rúlla, a barrell-boord to make barrels of. Also the iron or Ploughmans staffe where with he cleanseth the culter.

Rúllo, a rowling piece of timber with holes at the end to rowle or remooue any great weight or other pieces of timber. Also a kind of high head-attire or dressing that women vse to weare in Italy. Also a kind of play in Italy like our play at trunkes or billiards. Also a Plough-staffe.

Rúma, the end, the gorge or hollow part of the throat. Also the dew-lap of any beast.

Rumáre, as Rumináre.

Rumbotíno, a kind of Poplar-tree.

Ruména, a Pape, a Dug, a Breast, a Teat.

Ruménto, an impostume that bursteth out in the flesh.

Rumíca, a Cuckow.

Rumíce, the hearbe Sorrell or Soure-docke.

Rumigáre, as Rumináre.

Rumigatióne, a chewing of the cud.

Rumigeratióne, a dispersing of rumores, a noising abroade.

Ruminále, that cheweth the cud. Also that may be considered and remembred.

Ruminália, sacrifices of those beasts that chew the cud.

Ruminaménto, a ruminating, a chewing of the cud. Also a pondring or considering.

Rumináre, to chew, to ruminate or chew the cud as Neates doe. Also to ponder, to consider or reuolue in minde with himselfe.

Ruminatióne, as Ruminaménto.

Ruminatóre, a chewer of the cud, a ruminator. Also a poindrer or considerer.

Ruminóso, chawing the cud. Also considerate and wary, pensiue, close.

Rumóre, as Romóre.

Rumoreggiánte, as Romoreggiánte.

Rumoreggiáre, as Romoreggiáre.

Rumpotíno, as Rompotíno.

Rúna, a kind of dart.

Runchizzáre, to snort, to snortle. Also to bray as an Asse.

Runchizzóso, snortling, snorting. Also braying as an Asse.

Ruóla, a Cookes rowling pin.

Ruoláre, as Ruolláre.

Ruolláre, to inroule.

Ruóllo, as Ruólo.

Ruólo, a Checke-role of names. Also a Plaiers part written for him to learne.

Ruóta, the Exchecquer house in Rome.

Ruóta, as Róta, a wheele. 

Ruotabattúto, round or wheele beaten.

Ruóta del pauóne. Looke Fare.

Ruóta di Níbbio, a wheeling round as commonly the Kite doeth make in flying.

Ruotáre, as Rotáre, to wheele.

Ruotáta, a round tricke in dancing.

Ruotella, as Rotella.

Ruotísta, an Exchequer man in Rome.

Ruótola, as Rótola.

Ruotoláre, as Rotoláre.

Ruótolo, as Rótolo.

Ruotolozerói, a weight. Looke Rótolo.

Rupáce, as Rupicápra.

Rúpe, a rocke, a crag, a cliffe, a cliue, a steepe, a craggy-stone, a high dounefall so broken and steepie that none can well climbe it.

Rupicápra, a Rocke or Wilde-goate.

Rúppe, he or she brake or did breake.

Rúppero, they brake or did breake.

Rúppono, they brake or did breake.

Rurále, rurall, rusticall, of or pertayning to the Country or Villages.

Ruralità, rurality, rusticality.

Ruratióne, Country businesse.

Rurestre, belonging to the Country.

Rurigeno, borne in the Country.

Rúo, the sumach or Rhus-tree.

Rúsa, a fallacy, a craft, a subtill deuise, an illusion. Also a Caterpiller.

Ruscáre, to get by shifts, by cosenage, by hooke or crooke and pilfring. Also to dust, or to bedust.

Ruscelláre, to glide along or runne as a little streame, Brooke or Riuelet.

Ruscellétto, a very little Brooke, Riuelet, gozell or gullet of running water.

Ruscellíno, as Ruscellétto.

Ruscello, a Brooke or Riuelet, a little running streame or riuer.

Rúschi, Thornes, Brambles, Firres, Briers, Brakes or Bushes.

Rusciguólo, a Nightingall.

Rúsco, the prickly shrube called Kneeholme, Butchers-broome or Petigree, whereof Chimny-sweepers, Plaistrers and Butchers make sprinckling brushes, sweepers or bezoms. Also a kind of corne called Ruske, as also the bread thereof. Vsed also for dust.

Ruscóso, dusty, full of dust. Also full of shrubs, brambles, thornes or briers.

Rúse, Canker-wormes, Caterpillers.

Rúso, any kind of dust.

Ruspáre, to scrape in or vp the durt as a Hen doth. Also to shift, to sneake or pry vp and downe for any thing by any wile.

Ruspatóre, a scraper, a scraping, shifting or sneaking companion.

Ruspatúra, any scraping together, a sneaking or shifting to get.

Ruspína, a scraping, a pinch-penny woman. 

Rússa, a snorting. Also a braying.

Russáre, to snort. Also to bray as an Asse. Also to rub or claw.

Russéi, a kind of Hearons.

Russignólo, a Nightingall.

Rússo, a snorting. Also a braying. Also hoarcenesse. Also a snorter.

Russóso, snortling, snorting, braying as an Asse. Also full of hoarcenesse.

Rústica, a Woodcocke-hen. Also a rude, rusticall or clownish woman.

Rusticáno, rusticall, rurall, clownish, loutish, swainish, Country-like.

Rusticare, to play the rustike hinde, swaine or clowne, to liue or professe a Country life.

Rusticatióne, an abiding in the Country, a Country life.

Rustichézza, rusticity, clounishnesse, rudenesse, simple plainenesse.

Rusticità, as Rustichézza.

Rústico, rusticall, clounish, vplandish, homely, loutish, churlish, rude.

Rústico, a swaine, a hinde, a Country-cloune, an vplandish man, a rude bodie.

Rusticóne, a filthy Rústico.

Rustícula, a Woodcocke.

Rustína, the Corne called Ruske.

Rúta, the hearbe of Grace or Rue.

Rutábulo, a haroow, a colerake.

Rúta murále, Wall-rue or white Maiden-haire.

Rutáre, to belch, to raspe.

Rúta saluática, great Saint Iohns wort.

Rutatóre, a belcher, a rasper.

Ruticílla, a bird called a Red-taile.

Rutilánte, as Rútilo.

Rutiláre, to shine or glister like Gold.

Rútilo, bright shining like Gold.

Ruttáre, to belch, to raspe.

Ruttarello, a little belch or belching.

Ruttatióne, a belching, a rasping.

Ruttatóre, a belcher, a rasper.

Rutteggiáre, to belch, to raspe.

Rútti, belchings, raspings.

Rúuia, as Ruuíglia.

Ruuidaménti, ruggedly, harshly, roughly, rudely, crabbedly, barbarously.

Ruuidézza, ruggednesse, harshnesse, crabbednesse, roughnesse, rudenesse.

Ruuidità, as Ruuidézza.

Rúnido, rugged, harsh, crabbed, rough, rude, barbarous, vnpolished.

Ruuíglia, the pulse called Eruile.

Ruuína, as Rouíua.

Ruuináccio, as Rouinázzo.

Ruuináre, as Rouináre.

Ruuinéuole, as Rouinéuole.

Ruuinóso, as Rouinóso.

Rúzza, any kind of wantonnesse or daliance. Also a flout of frump.

Ruzzaménto, a wantonizing, a dalliance. Also a flouting or frumping.

Ruzzánte, a merry or wanton mocking, 


scoffing, flouting, ieasting or frumping companion, a merry tickler vp and downe.

Ruzzáre, to wantonize, to dally with. Also merrily to ieast, to flout, to mocke, to frumpe or to tickle vp and downe. Vsed also to scrape vp and downe in the durt as hens or chickins doe to shift for meate.

Ruzzatóre, as Ruzzánte.

Ruzzella, a little pully.

Ruzzétto, a birde called a Wren.

Rúzzo, a suddaine toy or tickling ieast. Also an itching.

Rúzzo del cápo, a suddaine humor or toy or passion in the head.

Ruzzoláre, as Ruspáre, as Razzoláre. Also to tumble or iumble vp and downe.

Ruzzolétta, a little pully. 


S.
Sa', Hee or shee knoweth, wotteth or can. Also hir or hirs.

Saba, the sodden wine called Cuite. Also in Greeke secret misteries.

Sabacírio, a kind of strong drinke made of Barly.

Sabaóth, an attribute the Hebrewes gaue to God, Lord of Hostes, of Armes of Powers or of Vertues.

Sabathário, a keeper of the Saboth day.

Sabátio, he that first inuented, or that drinketh Sabacírio.

Sabatísmo, the celebration of the Saboth.

Sabatizzáre, to celebrate or keepe the Saboth day.

Sábato, the Saboth day, or day of rest, among the Iewes the seauenth day was solemnized in remembrance of the rest after God in six daies had made the whole world, it is now vsed for Saturday. Also for quiet, rest or cessation from labour, as we say holy day.

Sabato séra, Saturday euening.

Sabátta, as Sauátta, or Ciauátta.

Sabattáre, as Sabattáre or Ciauattare.

Sabattaríe, as Ciauattaríe.

Sabattáro, as Ciauattáro, a Cobler.

Sabattíno, a Cobler, a Souter.

Sábba, as Sába, Cuite wine.

Sábbia, any kind of grauell or sand.

Sabbionáccio, course grauel, stony sand.

Subbionára, a sand or grauell-pit. Also a sandy shelfe in the Sea.

Sabbionáre, to grauell, to sand.

Sabbióne, cource grauell, stony sand.

Sabbionóso, as Sabbioso.

Sabbióso, sandy, grauelly, gretty. 

Sabéth, a swouning or faintnesse.

Sabína, the hearbe Sauine, whereof be two kinds, the one hath leaues like the Tamariske or Briary, the other like the Cipresse-tree. Also as the weapon Saríssa.

Sabríno, a kind of venemous beast.

Sabulóso, sandy, grauelly, gretty.

Sabúrra, any ballast or lastage for ships.

Saburráre, to ballase or ballast any thing.

Sabúrro, a kind of graine in India, that is sowen, ripned and reaped in fortie daies.

Sáca, a kind of hard rugged stone to build.

Sacále, a kind of Amber bred with the heat of the Sunne in Egypt.

Sacalénola, any kind of hurling dart.

Sácca, a bag, a sacke, a pouch, a budget, a satchell, a pocket. Also a casting net.

Saccagnáre, to crumple, to bag, to pucker. Also to tug, to halse, to touze.

Saccardello, the dried fish called poore Iohn. Also a needie, begging wretch.

Saccáre, to put vp into a sacke, a bag, a pouch, a satchell, or to pocket vp.

Sáccaro, a hawke called a Saker. Also a kind of tree that yeeldeth Sugar. Vsed also for Sugar.

Saccáro, a sacke-maker.

Saccente, as Sapiente, warie, heedie.

Saccentería, as Sapienza, warinesse, heed, heedinesse.

Saccheggiaménto, any kind of sacking, ransacking, vtter-waste or robbing.

Saccheggiáre, to sacke, to ransacke, to rob, to destroy, to spoile of all.

Saccheggiatóre, a ransacker, a sacker, a robber, a destroyer.

Sacchéro, a fish in Latine Chanadella.

Sacchettíno, any kind of little sacke, bag, pouch or satchell. Also a Gunners cartrege.

Sacchéito, as Sacchettíno.

Sacciáre, as Satiáre, to glut or satiate.

Sacciente, as Sapiente.

Saccientería, as Sapientia.

Sácclo, I know, wot, wisse or can.

Sacciutézza, as Sapienza.

Sacciúto, as Sáuio. Also as Foramello.

Sácco, any kind of sacke, bag, pouch, budget, satchell or pocket. Also a packe of wooll. Also a sacke, a sacking, a spoile, a robbing, a ransacke or waste.

Saccóccia, a satchell, a poke, a pocket, a pouch, a budget, a little sacke or bag.

Saccocciáre, to satchell or pocket vp.

Sácco di lána, a packe or sacke of wooll.

Sácco di uento, a bag of winde. Also an idle boaster, a vaunting gull.

Saccofrágo, as Sarcofágo.

Sáccola, as Saccóccia. Also a sliding knot. 

Saccoláre, to pucker, to bag, to crumple.

Sáccolo, as Sácca, a pouch, a satchell.

Saccomanáre, to goe a bootie-haling or a freebooting, to liue by shifting and pillage.

Saccománno, a freebooter, a bootiehaler, a shifting or pilfring souldier or his seruant.

Saccománo, as Saccománno.

Saccométtere, métto, mísi, mésso, to put vnto the sacke, ransacking, spoile, pillage, ruine or destrustion.

Saccomóro, as Sicomóro.

Sacconáccio, as Saccóne.

Saccóncia, as Saccóccia.

Saccóne, any great bag, sacke or packe.

Saccónia, a Territorie.

Sácculo, as Sacchettino.

Sacello, an Oratorie or priuate Chappell.

Sacente, as Sapiente.

Sacentería, as Sapientia.

Sacentóne, a great wiseman, but in ill part.

Sacerdotále, of or pertaining to a Priest.

Sacerdóte, any kind of Priest.

Sacerdotéssa, a woman Priest.

Sacerdótio, the order or function of Priesthood or holy Ministerie. Also an Ecclesiasticall liuing. Also an impropriation or patronage of a Church-liuing.

Sácha, as Sácca.

Sachegliáre, as Scagliáre or Squamáre.

Sachéglie, as Scáglie, or Squáme.

Sacheglióso, as Scaglióso, or Squamóso.

Saciente, as Sapiente.

Sacientería, as Sapientia.

Sacódio, a stone like a Iacinth.

Sacóma, an euen counterpoise or likenesse of weights.

Sacondióne, as Sacóne.

Sacóne, a kind of Amethist stone.

Sácra, a consecration. Also sacred.

Sacrafístola, the pipe where through the marrow of the back-bone runneth.

Sácra herba, base or flat Veruein.

Sacramentále, sacramentall, misterious.

Sacramentáre, to receiue the holy Sacrament, to sweare or take a corporall oath.

Sacramentário, a Sacramentarie, a professor of the Sacraments or holy misteries, a distributer of the Sacraments.

Sacraménto, a Sacrament, that is a visible signe of some holy thing or diuine misterie vnseene with some promise annexed vnto it. Also a corporall oath or swearing.

Sacráre, to hallow, to consecrate, to dedicate vnto, to make immortall. Also to denounce as cursed and detestable. 



Sacrário, a Sacrarie, a Sextrie or Vestry where holy things are kept. Also a Church-yard. Also a priuate Chappell or Oratorie in a house.

Sácra spína, in latine Otropygium.

Sacratióne, a consecrating.

Sacráto, sacred, hallowed, consecrated for the seruice of God. Also any holy ground or Church-yard.

Sacrestáno, a Sexton or Vestrie-keeper.

Sacrestia, a Sextrie or Vestrie of a Church.

Sacreto, hath been vsed for Secreto.

Sacrífero, that beareth holy things.

Sacrificáre, to sacrifice, to offer sacrifice.

Sacrificatióne, sacrificing, consecrating.

Sacrificatóre, an offrer of Sacrifice.

Sacrificiále, belonging to Sacrifice.

Sacrifício, as Sacrifitio.

Sacrífico, vsed in, or seruing for Sacrifice.

Sacrifículo, a Sacrificer, a Masse-priest, a master of Sacrifices.

Sacrifítio, sacrifice, oblation, offring.

Sacrifúga, a Recusant, a refuser to come to holy exercises.

Sacrilegiáre, to commit sacriledge, to steale sacred things, to rob Churches or Church-goods. Also to commit any outragious or horrible act

Sacrilegio, sacriledge, robbing of Churches, stealing of sacred or Church-goods.

Sacrílego, a sacrilegious man, a robber of Churches, a cursed stealer of Church goods.

Sacríma, the first fruites of wine sacrificed to Bacchus.

Sácrio, a kind of Amber in Scythia.

Sacriscrínio, a holy Shrine or keeper of Princes or sacred letters and records.

Sacrista, as Sacrestáno.

Sacristáno, as Sacrestáno.

Sacristía, as Sacrestía.

Sácro, sacred, holy, consecrated, hallowed or dedicated vnto God. Also an holy misterie. Also a hawke called a Saker. Also a piece of artillerie called a Saker. Vsed also for cursed, horrible and detestable.

Sácrofuóco, a sore or swelling full of heat and rednesse called Saint Anthonies fire.

Sácro mórbo, the fowle euill, Saint Iohns euill, or the falling sicknesse.

Sácro ósso, as Osso sácro.

Sacrophágo, a kind of stone, as Sarcofágo.

Sacrosánto, most sacred or most holy, inuiolable.

Sadíno, a kind of siluer coine in Ormuz.

Saducei, the Saduces, which were certain Philosophers among the Hebrewes that held the bodie and minde to be mortall, hauing no other obseruation but the law, and hold it a great glorie to contradict the Doctors of their Philosophie, few of them are learned.

Saeppoláre, as Saettáre.

Saéppolo, a kind of bow or tiller to shoot long arrowes or bolts.

Saétta, any kind of arrow, shaft, dart or bolt. Also a thunderbolt. Also a lancet or fleame to let bloud with. Also a Starre called the Shaft-starre. Also a certaine sharpe-pointed hearbe growing in the water, called Arrow-head or Shafts-head.

Saétta-folgóre, a thunder-bolt.

Saettáme, as Saettúme.

Saettaménto, as Saettúme.

Saettáre, to shoot or hit with any kind of arrow, shaft, bolt or dart, to shaft, to darte, to bolt. Also to strike or hit with a thunder-bolt.

Saettário, as Saettáro.

Saettáro, a fletcher. Also an archer or shooter of arrowes. Also as Sagettário.

Setratóre, a shooter of shafts or arrowes, an archer, a bow-man.

Saettía, a kind of speedie Pinnace or Barge, called a light-horse-man.

Saettína, a little arrow. Also the needle of a Sun-dyall or of a Mariners compasse.

Saettipotente, mightie in shooting or darting. Also as Sagettário.

Saettóne, a great arrow. Also a prop, a stay, a shore, a braget or vnder-layer.

Saettúme, all manner of shot, arrowes, dartes or shafts to shoot withall.

Sáfico, a Saphike verse.

Saffiríno, a blew Saphire colour that Painters vse.

Saffiro, a Saphire-stone.

Sáffo, a Catchpole, a base Sargeant.

Saffranáre, to colour or drosse with Saffron.

Saffrano, any kind of Saffron.

Saffróne, a deepe red or Saffron-colour.

Safrugánio, as Soffragáno.

Sága, a wise-woman. Also a Witch.

Sagáce, heedie, vigilant, that perceiueth or foreseeth quickly, quick-sented.

Sagaceménte, heedily, vigilantly, wittilie, with quicknesse of wit and sharpnesse of sences.

Sagácia, as Sagacità.

Sagacità, sharpnesse of sences, quicknes of spirit and foresight.

Sagapéno, a gum comming of the hearbe Férula. Also as Férula.

Sagapéo, the Fenelgeant.

Ságda, a kind of greene precious stone found sticking vnto old ships which the Chaldees vse to make fast to their hands, it will draw wood vnto it.

Sagéna, a hose or bosome-net. 

Sagétta, as Saétta, an arrow.

Sagettáre, as Saettáre.

Sagettário, one of the twelue signes in the Zodiake called Sagittarius.

Sagettáro, as Sagettário.

Sagettatóre, as Saettatóre.

Sagettía, as Saettía.

Sagettúme, as Saettúme.

Saggétta, as Saétta.

Saggettáre, as Saettáre.

Saggettário, as Sagettário.

Saggézza, wisedome, sagenesse, vigilancie.

Saggiáre, to perceiue, finde or smell out a matter quickly. Also to assay, to try, or make triall and proofe of.

Saggiáta, an assay, a triall, a tasting.

Saggiatóre, an assayer, a taster, a tryer.

Saggína, any meat wherwith any thing is fatned or crammed as Mast or Akehornes for Hogs. Also any filling, stuffing or cramming full. Also any superfluous fatnesse gathered by ouermuch ease. Also the graine Turkie-hirse, Mill or Millet.

Sagginále, of, made of or belonging to Saggína. Also very fat or gloarie.

Saggináre, to fatten, to pamper, to cram, to franke or feed fat, to mew fowle.

Sagginário, a coope, a franke, a pen or stall or any place else where beasts or fowle and poultrie are famed, crammed, franked or mewed.

Sagginatióne, a cramming, a pampring or feeding fat, a mewing of fowle.

Sággio, wise, sage, prudent, graue, wittie, warie, or circumspect and heedie. Also an assay, a triall, a taste, an attempt or proffer to doe anything. Also a patterne or ensample of any thing. Also a little weight or measure six of which goe to an Ounce.

Saggítta, as Saétta, an arrow.

Saggittáre, as Saettáre.

Saggittário, as Sagettário.

Sagittúme, as Saettúme.

Sagína, as Saggína.

Sagináre, as Saggináre.

Saginatióne, as Sagginatióne.

Sagináto, as Segenáto.

Ságio, as Sáio, a long side coate.

Sagíre, gísco, gíto, per sagíre ibaróni edil paése di Púglia álla súa signoría.

Sagítta, as Saétta.

Sagittále, a suture or seame that runneth straight on the top on the head, distinguishing the right from the left side of a mans head, called also Retta sutúra, because it lyeth streight lengthwise on the head from Labdoide to Coronále.

Sagittáre, as Saettáre.

Sagittaría, the hearbe Arrow-head.

Sagittária árte, the arte of shooting. 



Sagittaríno, borne vnder Sagittarius.

Sagittário, as Sagettário.

Sagittatóre, as Saettatóre.

Sagittífero, arrowes-bearing.

Sagittipotente, mightie in shooting.

Sagittúme, as Saettúme.

Ságlià, a toole that Bricklayers vse.

Sagliente, saillant, mounting, ascending.

Ságliere, salgo, sálsi, sagliúto, as Salíre.

Ságlio, a long-skirted coate.

Sagliócca, a great club or mace.

Saglióccola, a little club or mace.

Saglióne, a great long-skirted coate.

Saglíto, as Salíto, ascended, mounted.

Sagliúto, ascended, mounted vp.

Sagmína, as Samníua.

Ságna, Phlebotomie or letting of bloud.

Sagnáre, to bleed or let bloud.

Ságo, a kind of bread made of the pith of a tree in the Muloccos. Also a kind of Horsemans coate or souldiers garment anciently vsed in Rome.

Sagógno, a Sagony or Sanguin Munkie.

Ságola, nélla manoella si fà úna ságola acciò éntri nélla códa dell' artegliería.

Sagóma, a Ruler or Squire to take the height or diameter of any thing.

Sagopénio, a kind of gum.

Ságra, as Sácra.

Sagramentále, as Sacramentále.

Sagramentáre, as Sacramentáre.

Sagramentário, as Sacramentário.

Sagraménto, as Sacraménto.

Sagráre, as Sacráre.

Sagráto, as Sacráto.

Sagrestáno, as Sacrestáno.

Sagrestía, as Sacrestía.

Sagretário, as Secretário.

Sagréto, as Secréto.

Sagrétta, a little Saker.

Sagrétta, a little helmet or caske.

Sagrificáre, as Sacrificáre.

Sagrifício, as Sacrificio.

Sagrilegiáre, as Sacrilegiáre.

Sagrilegio, as Sacrilegio.

Sagrílego, as Sacrilego.

Sagristáno, as Sacrestáno.

Sagristía, as Sacrestía.

Ságro, as Sácro.

Sagrosánto, most sacred, and most holy.

Sagù, a kind of rare fruite in India.

Sái, long skirted cotes. Also thou knowest.

Sáia, a womans kirtle or petiecot. Also a Turkish coine worth 20. souces in Venice.

Sái chè e? wot you what.

Saiétta, fine serge, say or rash.

Saiétto, a skirted coate or iacket.

Sáio, a long skirted cote or iacket.

Saióne, a very long side or skirted cote.

Saítica, a kind of ancient paper, or long coat.

Saiúppi, a kind of Sea-crab or Lobstar.

Sál, vsed for salt. Looke Sále.

S'al, for Se al, if to the.

Sála, a great Hall or dining Chamber.

Saláce, hot in lust, very letcherous, assault as a bitch, beastly luxurious.

Salacità, a lustfull or beastly instinct to letchery as the saultnesse of a bitch.

Salacónia, boasting ioyned with vanity and foolish pride.

Salacóne, a vaine proud boaster, as we say a proud heart and a beggers purse.

Sála di giustítia, a Guilde-hall, a court of Iustice, a Sessions-house.

Saladíno, a Saladine or souldane.

Salamándra, a beast in fashion like a Lyzard full of spots, which being in the fire doth quench it and is not burned, called a Salamande.

Salamándri, certaine firy spirites that liue and are nourished in the fire.

Salamándria, as Salamándra.

Salamalécchi, a Turkish salutation as Salimbácche.

Salámi, any kind of salt, pickled, powdred or bloted and smoake dried meats whether fish or flesh, as Bacon, Neatstongues, Sausages, Martlemassebeefe, &c. Red or Elote Herings, Saltfish, &c.

Salamístra, as Salmístra.

Salamóia, any kind of brine, pickle or liquor to powder in. Also brackishnesse.

Salamóra, as Salamóía.

Salamóre, as Salamóia.

Salamuóia, as Salamóia.

Salamuóra, as Salamóia.

Salánga, our Ladies hill.

Salangára, a kind of barke or boate.

Sal'ardente, Saltpeter, burning salt.

Saláre, to salt, to powder, to piekle, to souce, to lay in brine, to corne with salt.

Sala regále, a Kings-hall, a Royall-hall.

Salaría, a Wich or Salt-pit.

Salariáre, to wage, to stipend, to hire for wages, to giue pay or pension vnto.

Salário, salary, wages, stipend, pay or pension giuen to seruants. Also a salter or salte-maker. Also a seller of salt things.

Saláse, a kind of dainty meate.

Salassáre, to empty or let one blood.

Salassatóre, a letter or emptier of blood.

Salassétta, a Lancet or Fleame to let bloud.

Salásso, Flebotomy or letting of bloud. Also, Le límpide bottíglie in rinfrescatói piéne di salásso, & niéue.

Saláta, any kind of salade. 

Salatína, a litle dainty salade.

Saláto, salt, pickled, powdred, brackish.

Salatóia, any powdring-tub or pan.

Salatúccia, a poore meane salad.

Salatúra, any kinde of salting or pickeling.

Sálce, a Willow, an Osier, a Sallow, a Withy-tree. Also a flint or Pibblestone.

Salcétto, a place, a ground or thicket planted with Willowes or Osiers.

Sálci, Sallowes, Willowes, or Osiers.

Salciáre, to vnderset or prope Hops or Vines with Willowes or Osiers.

Salciatóre, an vndersetter of Vines or Hopes with Willowes or Sallowes.

Salcíccia, any kind of sausage. Also a kind of warlike engine.

Salcicciáro, a sausage-maker.

Salciccióne, any great sausage.

Salciétto, as Salcétto.

Sálcio, as Sálce.

Salcióso, full of Sallowes or Willowes.

Salcízza, any kind of sausage.

Salcizzáro, a sausage-maker.

Salcizzóne, any great sausage.

Saldaménte, steadfastly, solidly, firmlie.

Saldáre, to fixe steadfast, to firme, to fasten, to pitch hard, to confirme. Also to solder mettals. Also to stop or stanch blood. Also to close or heale vp any sore.

Saldáre cónti, to make reckonings euen.

Saldáre feríte, to cure or close vp woundes.

Saldáre il sángne, to stanch bloud.

Saldáre la génte, to confirme people.

Saldáre metálli, to solder mettals.

Saldáre partíte, to settle any match.

Saldarétta, as Saldatóio.

Saldatóio, a Goldsmithes borace box.

Saldatóre, a solderer of mettals.

Saldatúra, a setling, firming or fastning or steadfastnesse of any thing. Also a stanching of bloud, a soldring of mettals, a closing vp of any wound.

Saldézza, steadfastnesse, firmenesse.

Sáldi-sáldi, as we say hold-hold, or stay-stay, when we see men fighting.

Sáldo, steadfast, fast, firme, fixed.

Sále, any kind of salt or seasoning. Also the maine Sea or Ocean. Also wit, conceite, sharpnesse or inuention in words or speaking. Also hals.

Sále amoniáco, a kinde of medicinable salt.

Sále áscali, a kinde of salt.

Salebróso, harsh, crabbed to be vnderstood.

Sálc catíno, a kind of salt.

Sále di gemmo, a kind of salt.

Sále el émbroth, a kind of salt. 



Salegáre, to paue with stones.

Salegáto, paued. Also a pauement.

Salegatóre, a Pauier.

Saleggiáre, to paue. Also to be brackish.

Sale in bánco, a mountibanke.

Sale nático, a kind of salt.

Salente, sailant, climbing, ascending.

Salentíne, a kind of long Oliue.

Sále pietra, a kind of stony salt.

Salera, a table salt.

Sale rádico, a kind of salt.

Salerina, a little table salt.

Salerno, a kind of dainty wine.

Salétta, a little table-salt. Also a little hall or dining chamber.

Salettína, a trenchard-salt.

Salgemma, a kind of salt or miner all.

Saliáre, a Princely publike banquet.

Salicáre, to paue with stones. Also to plant or set about with Willowes.

Salicástro, a Willow-pole or stake. Also a wild Oliue-tree or Vine running vpon Willowes.

Salicáta, a pauement, a caucy.

Salicáto, paued. Also a pauement.

Salicatóre, a Pauier, a Caucy-maker.

Sálice, as Sálce.

Salicétto, as Salcétto.

Salicórnia, a salt hearbe called Seagrape, knotted or ioynted Kaly.

Saliféro, Salt-bearing.

Sáli-fórca, a Gallowes-mounter.

Saligáre, to paue with stones.

Saligástro, as Salicástro.

Saligáto, as Salicáto.

Salígia, a womans Vertugall as they weare now a daies.

Saligtáre, to paue with stones.

Saligiáto, paued. Also a pauement.

Sálij, certaine Priests among the ancient Romanes.

Salimbácche, as much to say God be with thee in Turkish.

Salimbécche, per portár l'ácqua con le salimbécche.

Saliménto, as Salíta, an ascending.

Salína, a saltwitch or pit, a table salt.

Salináro, a Salter, a Salt-maker.

Salinatóre, a Salter, a Salt-maker.

Salincerbio, a game in Italie so called.

Salinétta, a little or trenchard-salt.

Salintráre, to reduce vnto, or to compound with Saltpeter.

Salintráro, a Saltpeter-man or maker.

Sálio, a burnishing stone. It is good against sore or running eyes but touching them.

Salíre, salgo, sálsi, salíto, to ascend, to mount, to climbe or get vp.

Salisatóri, certaine Prophets or Soothsayers that iudged of the euent of things by the rising or swelling of mens limmes.

Saliscende, a great or chiefe paire of staires in a Gentlemans house that lead vp into the Hall. Also a footepace vnder a Princes cloth of state. Also a foote-pace of a chimney. Also a foote-step or threshold of a doore, or any ascent into any faire roome. Also an high gazing window. Also a trapdore. Also a barre, a stang or sparre to barre a doore. Also a raile or barre to stay Horses from running

Saliscendere, scendo, scési, scéso, to ascend vp a paire of staires that lead into a Hall or dining chamber, to ascend any foote-pace, to goe ouer a threshold or any steps. Also to raile in. Also to barre, to stang or sparre a doore.

Saliscéso, ascended vp a paire of staires, &c. Looke Saliscendere.

Salita, any ascent or mounting vp.

Salitóre, an ascender, a mounter vp.

Salitúra, a salting, a poudring.

Saliua, the spettle or moistnesse that commeth in a mans mouth. Also iuice.

Saliuáre, to gather humors or spettle in the mouth. Also to spet forth humors.

Saliuária, an oyle-stone or Barbers whetstone to whet his Razors.

Saliuáro, clammie like spettle.

Saliuatióne, a drawing of humors to the mouth and vttering them as spettle.

Saliuerá, is properly among Riders the plate whereat the plaiers that hang in the midst of a port are fastned.

Saliúnca, the Nard Celtike.

Saliuóso, full of spettle or moistnesse in the month, or tasting of spettle.

Sálle, for Le sà, he or she knowes them.

Sállo, for Lo sà, he or shee knowes it.

Sállo Dío, God he knowes it, God wot, God he wots.

Sállosi, for Se lo sà, he knowes it to himselfe.

Sálma, a soame, a lode, a burthen, a fraught. Also a mans bodie, weight or carcase. Also a kind of weight.

Salmácia, a prey or spoile gotten without labour.

Salmándra, a Salamander.

Salmáre, to load, to burthen, to fraught, to charge, to lay heauie load on.

Salmaríno, a Salmon-peale or Trout.

Salmástro, saltish, brackish, brinish.

Salmatóre, a loader, a burthener, a fraughter.

Salmeggiáre, to sing, to speake, to write or compose Psalmes.

Salmería, all manner of cariage, lading, luggage or burdens, namely such as Sumpters carie. Also Sumpters or Pack-horses.

Salmiére, as Salmatóre.

Salinista, a Psalmist, a composer or singer of Psalmes. Also a Psalter.

Salmístra, a pratling hipocriticall dame, a wit-presuming woman, one that will teach and direct others with her wit and learning.

Salmítro, as Salnitro.

Sálmo, a Psalme, or song of thanksgiuing and praises to God.

Salmodía, a singing together of Psalmes or playing together on instruments.

Salmodiáre, to sing Psalmes together.

Salmográso, a writer of Psalmes.

Salmóia, as Salamóia.

Salmóne, a Salmon-fish.

Salmonétto, a little Salmon or Salmon-peale.

Salmonía, as Salmería.

Salmóra, as Salamóia.

Salnítro, Nitre. Also Saltpeter whereof Gun-powder is made.

Salnitróso, brackish, full or tasting of Nitre and Salpeter.

Sálo, a Linnet-bird. Some take it for a kind of Partridge.

Salóide, a hard substance or bodie, formed like a bridge with three arches that vpholds the ventricle or hollow of the braine.

Salóna, a great hall or dining chamber, Also a kind of great weight.

Salótto, a handsome dining chamber.

Sálpa, Stock-fish or Poore Iohn.

Salpamentáre, haueua mólti pauóni Salpamentáti. 

Salpáre, to weigh or heaue ancors.

Salpatóre, a weigher or heauer of ancors.

Sálpe, as Sálpa.

Salpégo, as Salpíga.

Salpetróso, full or tasting or Saltpeter.

Salpíga, a kinde of wild beast that poisons and kils with hir looke.

Salpóne, Stocke-fish or poore Iohn.

Salprática, a Saltpeter-house or maker.

Salpúga, a kinde of venemous Pissemire.

Salsi, as Sállosi.

Sálsa, any kind of sauce or seasoning of meate. Also salted, powdred, pickled. Also brinish or brackish. Also vsed for a gash, a cut, a slash.

Sálsa biánca, as Sauóre, white sauce.

Salságine, brackishnesse, saltnesse. Vsed also for sulpher or brimstone.

Sálsa in mortáio, Greene-sauce or Mortar-sauce.

Salsáme, as Saláme. Also as Salamóia.

Salsamentário, a seller of salt-fish.

Salsaménto, any kind of salting or pickling. Also all manner of salt meate or fish.

Salsaparíglia, the hearbe Saxifrage.

Salsáre, as Saláre. Also to sauce or season.

Sálsa vérde, any Greene sauce.

Salse dine, saltnesse, brackishnesse.

Salsézza, saltnesse, brackishnesse. 



Salsíccia, any kind of sausage.

Salsicciáro, a sausage maker or seller.

Salsicciére, as Salsicciáro.

Salsiccióne, any great sausage.

Salsicortíce, a Mast-bearing-tree.

Salsiera, a salt for a boord.

Salsígine, as Salsilágine.

Salsilágine, saltnesse, brackishnesse. Also brine or pickle. Also a salt quality in all things.

Salsità, as Salsilágine.

Salsíuo, saltish, brinish, brackish.

Salsízza, any kind of sausage.

Salsizzáro, a sausage-maker or seller.

Salsizzóne, any kind of great sausage.

Sálso, salted, powdred, pickled. Also saltish, brinish or brackish. Also vsed for the maine sea or all brackish water. Also witty or sharpe-conceited.

Salsúgine, as Salsilágine.

Salsuginóso, full of saltishnesse.

Salsúme, as Salsilágine.

Salsúre, as Salsilágine.

Saltabecoáre, as Saltelláre.

Saltabécco, as Saltétto.

Saltabelláre, as Saltelláre.

Saltabello, a kind of hopping or skipping dance.

Sálta fossáti, a leaper of ditches.

Sálta in bánco, a Mountibanke.

Sálta la spíga, a plaie in Italie so called.

Saltamartíno, a Munkie taught to hop, leape, skip, tumble, or any other nimble feats. Also a foolish gull, that one may make to doe any thing.

Saltambárco, a Mariners or Gallislaues cource garment or frocke. Also a Shepheards cloake or frocke. Also a Horsemans coate or souldiers mandillion.

Saltánte, leaping, hopping, skipping, tumbling, iumping. Also saltant or trippant in armory. Also quick siluer according to the phrase of Alchimists.

Saltáre, to leape, to hop, to skip, to trip, to iumpe, to spring, to prance, to bound to salt, to vault, to dance. Also to pant as the pulse doeth. Also to ride, to sault or leape one vpon another as males doe one the females in the act of generation.

Saltarelle, Grasse-hoppers.

Saltarelli, the iackes of Virginals.

Saltarello, any little leape. Locke Sálto.

Saltaríno, a tumbler, a leaper, a dancer.

Saltatióne, any kind of leaping.

Saltatóre, a leaper, a tumbler, a dancer.

Saltatória, the arte of leaping.

Saltatório, belonging to leaping.

Salteggiáre, as Salticchiáre.

Salteggiatore, as Salticchiatóre.

Saltellánte, as Saltánte.

Saltelláre, as Salticchiáre.

Saltellatóre, as Salticchiatóre.

Saltello, as Saltícchio.

Saltellóne, hoppingly, skippingly.

Salterelli, running squibs.

Salterello, as Saltícchio.

Salterio, an instrument of musike like a harpe with ten strings, but more pleasant, called a Shalme or Psaltery, to play holy hymnes vpon and to sing vnto. Also a Psalter or Psalme book. Also a vaile that Nunnes weare ouer their heads.

Saltero, as Salterio. Also a kinde of hooke, claspe or crooke.

Saltétto, as Saltícchio.

Sálti aggroppáti., looke vn pásso & sálta.

Salticchiáre, to hop, to skip, to friske, to iumpe, to leape, to tumble, to sault.

Salticchiatóre, a hopper, a frisker, a skipper, a iumper, a tumbler.

Saltícchio, a hop, a skip, a friske, a leap, a iump, a tumbling cast, a sault.

Saltipéli, a kind of worme or vermine.

Sálto, any kind of leape, hop, friske, skip, iumpe, sault, trip, prance or bound. Also a laund in a Parke. Also a groue, a purly, a thicket or shady place ioyning to a Parke-pale. Also a shaking or suddaine shiuering. Vsed also for the sault of a bitch or rut of a Deere.

Sálto aggroppáto., looke un pásso e sálta.

Sálto mortále, the somber-sault, the deadly leape, or as some of our Vaulters call it, the whole Pomado.

Saltúzzo, the name of a Goldsmithes toole.

Sálua, a sauing, a preseruing, a keeping in safety. Also an exception. Also a tire of ordinance. Also a voly of shot.

Saluabicchiéri, a case, a chest or seller to keepe glasses in.

Saluábile, that may be saued.

Saluadanáio, a mony keeper. Also a chest or counter to keepe mony in.

Sálua d'artegliería, a volly of Ordinance.

Saluafiáschi, a case, a chest or seller to keepe bottles in.

Saluaggíne, as Saluaticcína.

Saluággio, as Seluággio.

Saluaggiúme, as Saluaticcína.

Saluaguardia, a safegard. Also vsed for Saluaróbba.

Sálua la grátia, sauing your grace.

Sálua la honestà, honesty reserued.

Sálua la signoria vóstra, sauing, saue, or excepted your worship or Lordship.

Saluaménte, safely, sauingly, surely.

Saluaménto, sauing, safety, safegard. 

Saluáre, to saue, to secure, to safegard, to keepe, to preserue in safety. Also to spare or except.

Saluaróbba, a Garde-robe, a Wardrobe, any place or thing to keepe other things safely in, as a cubboord, a presse, a buttry, a lardry, a pastry, a pantry.

Saluatella, a veine which being a branch springing out of Cephálica in the out side of the cubite, at length stretcheth aboue the wrist and extreame part of the hand betweene the little and the ring finger.

Saluaticáre, to make or become sauage, wilde, vntamed, strange, or rustike.

Saluaticcína, any kinde of venizon or wilde game gotten by hunting, fouleling, or hawking, all manner of wilde meate.

Saluatichétto, somewhat wilde, sauage, or rude. Also peeuish, fond or strange.

Saluatichézza, wildnesse, sauagenesse, Also rudenesse, strangenesse.

Saluático, sauage, wild, vntamed, strang, rude. Also as Seluággio.

Saluaticúme, all manner of wildnesse or sauagenesse.

Saluatióne, saluation. Also safety.

Saluatíuo, saluatiue or sauing.

Saluatóre, a Sauiour.

Saluatúra délla saétta, the notch or nocke of an arrow.

Salúbre, healthfull, wholesome, comfortable, sound, good, profitable.

Salubrità, healthfulnesse, wholesomenesse.

Sálue, vsed for All-haile, God saue you, or God blesse and speed you.

Saluézza, safety, safegard, assurance. Also as Salúte.

Sáluia, the hearbe Sauage or Sage.

Sáluia romána, Alecost or Costmary.

Saluiáta, a kinde of sauce made of Sage.

Saluiétta, a napkin or drinking cloth.

Salúmi, all manner of salt-meates.

Sáluo, safe, secure, in safty. Also except, sauing or the truth reserued. Also a sauing or exception.

Sáluo chè, sauing that, except that.

Sáluo chì, except who.

Sáluo condótto, a safe-conduct, a passeport.

Sáluo il véro, sauing the truth.

Sáluo la grátia, sauing your grace.

Sáluo l'honóre, sauing your honour.

Sáluo se, except if, sauing that.

Salusándria, Gardine Nigella.

Salutáre, to salute, to greet, to alhaile, to bid good morrow or god speed. Also to send commendations vnto. Also wholesome, healthy or healthfull.

Salutáre herba, Rosmary.

Salutatióne, a salutation, a greeting, a saluting, as Salúto.



Salutatório, a saluting place, a place where men stand to salute the Prince.

Salúte, safety, saluation, sauing health, well-fare, health or good estate.

Salutéuole, as Salúbre.

Saluteuolménte, safely, healthfully.

Salutífero, saluation or health-bringing.

Salúto, a salutation, a greeting, an allhaile, a bidding god speed or good morrow.

Saluum me fac, vsed in common speech for ready mony or mony in hand, but properly for safety or security, supposing that who hath mony wants nothing.

Sálza-paríglia, the hearbe Saxifrage.

Samára, the seede or graine of Elme-trees.

Sambúca, a kind of Horne-pipe or Dulcimer. Also an engine of war to batter wales.

Sambucáto, an Elder-tree colour or greene.

Sambucáro, an Elder-tree.

Sambuceo, of an Elder-tree.

Sambucína, a Plaier on a Sambúca.

Sambúco, an Elder-tree or wood. Also an Elder-pipe.

Sambúgo, as Sambúco.

Sambúrchio, a kinde of pudding with hearbes.

Sambúsa, a kind of saile in a ship.

Sambúzzio, as Sambúrchio.

Sámia, a kind of ointment.

Samína, as Sammína.

Sámio, a polishing stone. Also made of earth. Also an earthen pot.

Samíto, a kinde of sleaue or Filosello stuffe.

Sammartína, a Red-toade or Land-toade.

Sammína, the hearbe Verueine. Also Grasse pluct vp with earth that Ambassadors of Rome vsed to carry about them.

Sámolo, Marrish-whorts or Fenne-berries.

Sampiéro, a kind of figge.

Sampógna, a Low-bell or bell banged about sheepes or Goates neckes. Also any kind of Oaten-pipe. Vsed also for a bag-pipe.

Sampognátta, as Sampógna.

Samsóne, as Sansóne.

Samsúca, the hearbe Marioram.

Samsucíno, an Oyle made of Marioram.

Sámuel, a name signifying desired by the grace of God.

Sámulo, as Solágine, or Conchíni.

Sán, as Sáno. Also as Sánto, but onely vsed before consonants.

Sanábile, curable, that may be healed. 

Sanaménte, healthfully, soundly. Also safely, wisely or consideratly.

Sanaménto, a healing or a curing.

Sanamúnda, Hearbe-benet, Sanamund or Auens.

Sanáre, to cure, to heale, to make sound.

Sanatióne, healing, curing.

Sanáto, healed, cured, made sound.

Sanáto, vsed anciently for Senáto.

Sanatóre, vsed anciently for Senatóre.

Sancelio, a kind of pudding.

Sancíre, císco, cíto, to ordaine, to decree, to establish or ratifie by law, to forbid by ordinance, or vpon paine of some penalty.

Sancíto, ordained, decreed, confirmed, established or ratified by law. Also forbidden by ordinance or vpon paine of some penalty.

San crésci, as San crésci in máno.

San crésci in máno, vsed for a mans pricke, because it riseth in ones hand.

San crésci in uálle, vsed for a mans pricke because it growes in a hollow caue.

Sandádo, any kind of sandale or Sarcenet. Also a kind of tree.

Sandalétti, little sandals, labels or pendents of Taffatie-sarcenet.

Sandálide, a kind of Date-tree.

Sandálidi, a kind of excellent Dates whereof wine is made.

Sandálio, a pantofle or slipper.

Sandálo, a kind of Gourt or Formentie corne in Italie. Also a kind of medicinable tree or wood in India, which some take to be the Date or Palme. Looke Pezzola. Also as Sandádo.

Sandarácca, a bright-red colour that Painters vse called Sandarach, Redarsinike or Patisred: found in mines of Gold or Siluer, there is another kind of it made of Ceruse burned. Also a kind of burning stone. Also a kind of gum. Also a kind of honiesuckle hauing a taste of honie and wax together.

Sandaráce, as Eritháce.

Sandaresóne, as Sandasíro.

Sandárlo cedríno, a kind of gum or perfume.

Sandasíro, a precious stone like a Rubie hauing golden drops in it, like fire sparkes.

Sandástrico, as Sandasíro. Also a kind of Christall.

Sandástro, as Sandasíro.

Sandíce, a kind of stone or colour made of Ceruse and red Oakre burned together called Sandix-minerall. Some call it Patis red or red Arsinike.

Sandíno, as Sandíce. Also a kind of coine in Ormuz.

Sandisir, a nick-name of disgrace, as one would say Sir loggarhead. 

Sándolo, a kind of little boate or scallop. Also a kind of purple clout wherewith Cookes colour some meates.

Sandóne, a Mill built in a boate that goes with the streame of a Riuer.

Sandóni, old, decayed, vnseruiceable Ships.

Sandónico, a kind of hearbe very venimous for beasts and killeth them.

Sandráccio, a foolish grosse-pated gull.

Sanea, puósero nel régno in più luóghi la sanea délla marina facendo dánno. 

Sangállo, buckram-cloth.

Sangenóne, a kind of Opale-stone.

Sanghiozzáre, as Singhiozzáre.

Sanghiózzo, as Singhiózzo.

Sanghiózzo, the office of a Sangiácco.

Sangiácco, a Generall of Cauallerie among the Turkes, it is the next dignitie to a Bascia.

Sangimagnáno, a kind of daintie wine in Italie.

San giouánni bócca d'óro, taken for a mans or womans priuities.

Sangráre, to let bloud.

Sangráre la fóssa, to let the water out of a ditch.

Sangredále, s'io hauéssi in máno il sangredále.

Sangù, the hearbe Sanikle.

Sanguáccio, filthy gore bloud.

Sanguále, a kind of Ospraie or Eagle or the chicks of them.

Sángue, any kind of bloud. Also life, vigor, force or strength. Also a blood, a stocke, a kindred, or lineall descent. Also death, slaughter or murther.

Sángue di drágo, Cinnaber, Dragonsbloud.

Sanguéttola, a Horse-leach, a Bloudsucker.

Sanguícolo, a blouding, or pudding made of bloud.

Sanguífero, bloud-bearing or bringing.

Sanguificáre, to sanguifie or turne to bloud.

Sanguificatióne, comming to bloud.

Sanguífluo, bloud-flowing.

Sanguígne, a kind of red peaches or apples.

Sanguígno, sanguine, bloudy, red, bloud-shotten, full of bloud. Also bloudy-cruell.

Sanguína, the Sanguine-shrub, or Bloud shrub.

Sanguináccio, goare-bloud, filthy clods of bloud. Also a pudding made of bloud.

Sanguinále, of or belonging to bloud.

Sanguinánte, as Sanguinóso.

Sanguináre, to bleed, to bloud. Also to staine or sprinkle with bloud.

Sanguinária, Bloodwort, Knotgrasse. Also bloudie or full of bloud. 



Sanguinário, bloudie, bloudie-minded, bloud-thirstie.

Sanguinella, as Sanguinária.

Sanguinello, as Corniólo.

Sanguinéo, as Sanguígno.

Sanguineruólo, a Barble-fish.

Sanguinità, consanguinitie, alliance in bloud.

Sanguíno, the Dog-berrie tree.

Sanguinolente, bloudie, bloud-thirstie.

Sanguinóso, bloudy, full of bloud. Also sanguine, red, high-coloured. Also goarie, bloud-thirstie.

Sanguisórba, Burnet or Pimpernell.

Sanguisúga, a Horse-leach, a Bloudsucker.

Sanícula, hearbe Sanicle, Pratling-parnell, or Beares-eare.

Sánic, bloudy matter squized out of sores. Also putrefaction or poison.

Sánio, a kind of marble stone.

Sanióso, full of corrupt bloudy matter.

Sanità, health, soundnesse, good state or stay of bodie, wit or memorie.

Sanítro, as Salnítro.

Sanitúdine, as Sanità.

Sannáre, to take, to snip, to catch or seaze on with tuskes.

Sanne, the tuskes of a Boare or other wilde beast. Also he knowes of it.

Sannícola, as Sanícula.

Sánno, they know, wot or can.

Sannúto, tusked as a Boare, the name of a Diuell in Dánte. Also offence to ones neighbour.

Sáno, healthy, sound in health. Also wholesome. Also soundly aduised.

Sáno e di buóna uóglia, safe and sound, healthie and merrie, blithe and well disposed.

Sáno e gagliárdo, sound and lustie, healthie and strong, in good plight.

Sáno e sáluo, safe and sound.

Sanquále, a kind of Eagle called an Ospray or Breake-bone.

Sánsa, as Zára, a play at dice called Hazard or Grésco.

Sansóne, a name signifying sturdie, strong and robust.

Sansúga, a Bloud-sucker, a Horse-leach.

Santà, vsed as Sanità, health.

Sánta-Anfrosína, a puritane woman, a Saint-seeming sister, a dissembling wench.

Santáde, vsed anciently for Sanità.

Sántalo, an Aloes-tree. Also a kind of stone called a Sanders.

Santamaría, a kind of bird.

Santaménte, holily, Saint-like.

Santa-Nafissa, the name of a woman faigned to be the Aduocate and Saint of all whores, harlots or bawdes.

Santarello, as Santóccio.

Santa-santóro, a place in Salomons temple so called. 

Sant' E'rmo, taken for faire weather for Mariners, or a presaging of faire weather.

Santerna, artificiall Borax to solder mettals.

Sánti, Saints, Holy-men, Hallowes.

Santificáre, to sanctifie, to hallow.

Santificatióne, sanctification, hallowing.

Santificatóre, a sanctifier, a hallower.

Santimónia, sanctitie, holinesse.

Santimónio, the profession of sanctitie or of holinesse.

Santióne, a law or decree established, an ordinance made with a penaltie.

Santità, sanctitie, holinesse, holidome.

Sánto, holy, Saint-like, sacred. Also deuout, pure, inuiolable, spotlesse. Also a Saint, a holy man, a religious man. Also safe against iniurie.

Santóccio, a little Saint-like man, a holy-seeming puritane. Also a God-father.

Sántola, a God-mother.

Santolína, Field-cipres, Lauander-cotton. Also a sillie Saint-like woman.

Sántolo, a God-father.

Santónico, a kind or Worme wood.

Santoréccia, a kind of hearbe.

Sánto régio, winter or garden Sauerie.

Santuário, a Sanctuarie, a Church, a Chappell, a holy priueledged place.

Santúccio, as Santóccio.

Santúzza, a sillie Saint-like woman.

Sanúro, a fish called in Latin Alphesta.

Sánza, sanse, without, besides.

Sánza chè, besides that, without that.

Sanzalággio, as Sensalággio.

Sanzaláre, as Sensaláre.

Sanzále, as Sensále.

Sanzaría, the office or trade of a Broker.

Sanzáro, a Broker. Also a Pursiuant.

Saórna, any ballast for Ships. Also a common sinke. Also the pumpe in a Ship.

Saornáre, to ballast a Ship. Also to scoure a sinke. Also to pumpe a Ship.

Sápa, Cuit or sodden wine. Also a kind of galantine or venizon sauce.

Sapadóre, a silliebub made of wine or vertiuice and milke.

Sápe, a kind of venemous Serpent called a Horne-fretter.

Sapérci essere, for a man to know how to keepe his ranke.

Saperda, a kind of shell-fish yeelding a very stinking sauour.

Sapére, sò, seppi, sapúto, to know by the minde, to wot, to wisse, to ken, to vnderstand and perceiue well. Also to taste of, to smacke of, to smell of.

Sapére, knowledge by the minde, wit, heed, skill or remembrance.

Sapére a ménte, to know by heart or rote. 

Sapére béne, to know or wot well.

Sapére di buóno, to smell or taste of good.

Sapére di cattíuo, to taste or smell ill.

Sapére di guerra, to arte or knowledge warre.

Sapére di legníno, to taste or smell of the caske or wood.

Sapére di múschio, to smell of muske.

Sapér grádo, to ken or acknowledge thankes.

Sapér mále, to know ill. Also to taste or smell ill. Also to grieue or feele sorrow for.

Sapér meglio, to know better. Also to take in better part.

Sapér peggio, to know worse. Also to take in worse part.

Sapésmo, specie d'argoménto. 

Sapéuole, that may be knowen. Also that wotteth, knoweth, or hath knowledge of.

Saphéna, a veine running aboue the inner ankle and vpon the foote toward the toes, namely the great toe where it is diuersly bestowed.

Sáphici, verses called Saphike verses.

Sapiente, sapient, wise, sage, prudent, much knowing, skilfull, discreet.

Sapienteménte, wisely, prudently.

Sapienza, sapience, wisedome, prudence, sagenesse, knowledge of many things.

Sapientipotente, mightie in wisedome.

Sapínio, as Sapíno.

Sapíno, the Firre-tree of some called the Horne-beame tree or gentle Firre-tree. Also a kind of pale-coloured Amethist stone.

Sápio, the pitch of the Firre-tree.

Saponáccio, filthy sope, sudge or sopie water.

Saponále, the hearbe Saponária.

Saponáre, to sope, to lather, to wash in sope.

Saponária, the hearbe Sopewort, Struttie, Crowsope or wilde Rose-campion. Also a Sope-house.

Saponáro, a Soper, a Sope-maker.

Saponáta, a soping, a lathring, a washing in sope. Also sope-sudge. Also a flim-flam tale.

Sapóne, any kind of sope to wash with.

Saponétti, sope-balles, washing-balles.

Saporággine, sauorinesse, smackishnesse.

Sapóre, a sauour, a relish, a smacke. Also an inward feeling. Also a sent, a smell, a sauour. Also any sauce to giue meate a good taste.

Saporétti, fine or daintie sauces.

Sapóri, as Saporétti.

Saporífero, sauour-bringing, sauorous.

Saporíre, rísco, ríto, to sauour, to relish, to smacke or taste, to season or giue a taste vnto. 



Saporitaménte, sauourly, smackingly.

Saporitella, a word of kindnesse, as my honysop, my sweetest doue, as Tortolína saporitella, my sweet turtledoue.

Saporíto, sauoured, relished, smacked, seasoned or giuen a taste vnto. Also sauourie, relishing or tasting well.

Saporosità, sauournesse, relish.

Saporóso, sauourie, relishing, well tasting.

Sáppia, that I, he or she may know.

Sápro, a kind of potion for the Collike.

Sapróne, a kind of rotten cheese.

Saprosíne melóse, sweet daintie morsels.

Sapúta, a witting, a kenning, a knowledge, notice, information.

Sapúto, knowen by the minde, wotted, wist or kend. Also tasted or smelt of. Also a wise, skilfull or wittie and much-knowing man.

Sarà, he, she, or it shall be.

Saráca, a Sprat, or as some say a Pilchard.

Saracella, a kind of fowle or bird.

Saracéna, Goates-rue or Italian-sitch, or as some call it Saracens hearbe.

Saracinésca, a purcullis ouer a gate. Also a trap-dore. Also a blacke Storke.

Saracinésco, Saracine-like, blacke, barbarous.

Saracíno, a Saracen, a blacke-man, a Sarcen.

Sarafíno, a coine in India worth about a Spanish Ducket.

Saraménto, as Sacraménto.

Saraò, la bella maschera & saraò chè si féce in uagliadólid. 

Sárba, Stocke-fish, some say poore Iohn.

Sarcèlla, a kind of fowle or bird.

Sarchéro, a weeding hooke. Also a weeder.

Sárchia, a weeding hooke or sickle. Vsed also for an iron-rake, a farole.

Sarchiagióne, a sarkling or weeding out of rootes or weedes.

Sarchiáre, to weede out with a sickle. Also to rake. Also to pare, to bare, to sarcle the rootes of trees from earth or weedes.

Sarchiatóre, a weeder, a sarcler, a raker.

Sarchiatúra, a sarcling, a weeding, a raking.

Sarchiello, a sarcle, a sickle, a weeding-hooke. Vsed also for a rake.

Sárchio, as Sarchiello.

Sarciménto, a seaming or patching.

Sárcina, a burden, a loade, a packe, a cariage, or bag and baggage.

Sarcináre, as Sarcíre.

Sarcinatóre, a patcher, a botcher.

Sarcióne, a kind of precious stone. Also a fault, flaw or scar in some Emeralds so called.

Sarcíre, to repaire, to patch, to piece, to make whole againe. Also to recompence, or make a mends for what is donne amisse, to pay dammages or losses.

Sarcocólla, a gum like incense of a thorny plant in Persia.

Sarcofágo, a stone that the Egyptians wore wont to make tombes of, which in forty dates will consume a body all to ashes, sauing the teeth Vsed also for a graue or sepulcher.

Sarcoláre, as Sarchiáre.

Sarcóma, a bunch of flesh in ones nose.

Sárculo, as Sarchiello.

Sárda, as Sardella.

Sardacháte, a kind of Agate-stone.

Sardanella, as Sardella.

Sardaserióne, as Sandasíro.

Sardástro, as Sandastríco.

Sardella, a fish like a Pilchard or Sprat called a Sardell or Sardin, eaten pickled as Anchouas. Also an Onix or Corneoll-stone much vsed in seales.

Sardésco, a horse of Sardinia. Also a kind of salt hard cheese.

Sárdia, Ciues, Scalions, Cibols, or Onions.

Sardína, as Sardella.

Sárdio, an Onix or Corneoll stone.

Sardóa, as Sardóna.

Sardóna, an hearbe like smallage which being bitten causeth great laughing and grinning, whereupon followeth death.

Sardóne, as Sardella.

Sardónia, the hearbe Crowfoote.

Sardónica, as Sardóna.

Sardónico, a kind of stone.

Sardónico ríso, a laughing or grinning without cause, the end where of is sorrowfull or tragicall.

Sardónio, a stone in the vpper end like a mans naile, and vnder of the colour of the fish Sardella, called a Sardonix.

Sarebbe mái? may or might it be?

Sarebbe mercè, as we say in English, it were a good deed.

Sárga, a cord, a cable, a halter.

Sargálla, a kind of bane or Rats-bane.

Sargáno, coperta di sargáni & di dráppi. 

Sárge, serges. Also curtines for beds.

Sargentíno, a Gunners Lint-stocke.

Sárghe, cordage for a ship.

Sárgia, the stusse serge or say.

Sargiáre, to hang, to dresse or couer with Sarge.

Sargiero, a weuer of Serges or Saies.

Sargiétta, fine serge or say. Also a curtaine.

Sárgo, a piece called a saker. Also a kind of fish in Egypt.

Sargóni, a kind of Vermine or worme. Vsed also for sharp bristles or stings.

Sári, an hearbe growing in waters hauing a hard roote necessary for Smiths.

Sarióne, a kind of Salmon-trout.

Saríssa, a Iauelin, a Speare or long staffe with a pike at the end.

Sarménti, as Serménti.

Sarmentína, as Sermentína.

Sarmentóso, as Sermentóso.

Sáro, a shrub with leaues like to Papyre-reede.

Sarò, I shall be.

Sárpa, a Vine when it is cut or shred. Also a toole to plucke out teeth with.

Sarpamentáti cephali ed altri pésci., 

Sarpáre, to prune or shred Vines or other trees. Also to pull, to pluck, to tugge or drag out. Also to cleanse from durt or earth.

Sarpáre l'áncore, to weigh the ancors of a ship.

Sarpatóre, a pruner or shredder of Vines. Also a puller, a plucker, a dragger.

Sarrainésca, as Saracinésca.

Sarráco, a kind of cart for burthens.

Sárta, a woman Taylour.

Sartagíno, a kinde of earthen panne or pot.

Sartágna, as Currúcula.

Sárte, tacklings, cordage or shrouds of a ship.

Sartella, a kind of wilde Ducke or Mallard.

Sartiáme d'úna náue, the shrouds of a Ship.

Sártie, as Sartiáme.

Sárto, a man-tailour. Also pieced, botched or patched.

Sartóre, a man-tailour. Also a botcher or mender of garments.

Sartoría, a Tailors trade, shop or street.

Sartoríno, a prettie dapper Tailour.

Sartúra, a raking or harrowing.

Sárza, the stuffe Sarge or Saye.

Sasonáre, to season, as Stagionáre.

Sasóne, season, as Stagióne.

Sasonéuole, seasonable, as Stagionéuole.

Sassafrága, as Sassifrága.

Sassáre, to stone, to hit with stones.

Sassaría, a quarrie of stones.

Sassata, a blow with a stone, a stones cast.

Sassaiuóla, as Sassaría. Also as Sassáta.

Sassatelli, small stones, litle pible stones.

Sassatile, stonie, grettie, of the nature of stone. Also liuing or breeding among stones or grauell. Also all manner of Stone-fish, Sassátile pésce, Stone-fish.

Sasseità, stonishnesse, qualitie or nature 



of a stone.

Sásselo, a bird so called. Also he knowes it to himselfe.

Sassétto, any little stone.

Sássi, all manner of stones. Also it is knowen. Also he knowes or wots to himselfe.

Sassífero, stone-bringing.

Sassificáre, to petrifie or grow to stone.

Sassífico, stone-making, petrifying.

Sassifrága, an hearbe growing in stonie-places, very good against the stone called Breake-stone or Saxifrage. Some take it for Goates-beard, Star of Ierusalem, Iosephs-flower or Noonetide.

Sassifrágo, a breake-stone or stone-breaker.

Sassifríca, as Sassifrága.

Sassinaménto, as Assassinaménto.

Sassináre, as Assassináre.

Sassíno, as Aslassíno. Also a litle stone.

Sassitáno, a kind of Needle-fish like a Snake.

Sásso, any kind of rugged stone. Also a stone rocke, crag or cliffe. Also a kind of torment vsed anciently in Rome, mentioned by Tacitus.

Sassolíni, any little or pible stone.

Sassoso, stonie, rugged, flintie, grettie, full of stones or rockes, growing in stonie places.

Sásso uíuo, a naturall hard stone.

Sátana, as Satanásso.

Satanásso, Sathan, a tempter, a seducer, an aduersarie, an enemie to God.

Satanichíssimo, most diuelish.

Satellito, one retained to guard a mans person, a Satelite, an Halbardier or Yeman of a Princes guard. Also an Attacher, a Sergeant, a Catchpole.

Sáti, a kind of garden Lectuce.

Satiábile, satiable, that may be satisfied. Also loathsome, wearisome or queasie.

Satiabilità, as Satietà.

Satiaménto, as Satierà.

Satiáre, to satiate, to glut, to gorge, to satisfie.

Satiatiuo, satiatiue, filling, glutting.

Satiatúra, a glutting, a gorging, a satiating.

Satietà, satietie, cloying, glutting, fulnesse. Also tediousnesse or loathsomnesse.

Satiéuole, as Satiábile, and by metaphor, tedious, fasheous, yrkesome and wearisome.

Satieuolménte, cloyingly, gluttingly.

Satieuolézza, as Satietà.

Satíno cagnolétto; a litle prettie, smooth or well fed playing Dog.

Sátio, satiate, glutted, gorged, full-fed, cloied, or satisfied and wearie of.

Sátira, a Satire, an inuectiue rebuking euils, and regarding no person.

Satireggiáre, to write or speake Satires, to inueigh sharpely against abuses.

Satirésco, Satiricall, inueighing sharply.

Satiriási, as Priapísmo.

Satiriásmo, as Priapísmo.

Satírico, satiricall, sharpe in speeches and with reproch.

Satirio, as Satirióne.

Satirióne, the hearbe Ragwort or Satirion.

Satirísi, as Priapísmo.

Sátiro, a Satire, halfe a man and halfe a Goate. Also as Satirióne.

Sátis, as in Latin, but vsed in Italian before other words as in Satisfáre.

Satisfáre, to satisfie, to content, to please, to make satisfaction.

Satisfattióne, satisfaction, pleasing.

Satisfátto, satisfied, pleased, contented.

Satollánza, as Satietà.

Satolláre, as Satiáre.

Satóllo, as Sátio.

Satóre, a father, a begetter, a creator, a maker. Also a planter or setter.

Sátoro, as Sátio, as Satóllo.

Satrapería, a gouernment or office of a Sátrapo. Also the order, staie or profession of a Sátrapo.

Satrapía, a Prouince, a Country, a Lieutenantship. Also the office of a Sátrapo.

Sátrápico, belonging to a Sátrapo.

Sátrapo, a Gouernour, a president, a Captaine or chiefe Ruler of a Prouince or Country vnder another, a Chiefetaine, a Chiefe-ruler or Peere of a Realme, but rather now taken in bad then in good part.

Satríno, the stuffe called Sattin. Also as Satíno cagnolétto.

Saturábile, as Satiábile.

Saturáre, as Satiáre.

Saturatióne, filling, or glutting.

Saturegia, as Satureia.

Satureia, the hearbe Winter Sauory.

Saturità, as Satietà.

Saturnále, as Saturníno.

Saturnáli, a feast in Rome three monthes after Compitáli, celebrated with games.

Saturníno, Saturnall, Saturnine, of the nature of Saturne, that is sterne, sad or melancholike. Also the Saturnall feast or games.

Satúrno, as much to say, a perfect sower of man kinde or founder of kingdomes, the planet Saturne. Also Lead among Alchimists.

Sáturo, as Sátio, satiate, full fed.

Sauámo., Vsed for Erauámo, we were.

Sauáte., Vsed for Erauáte, you were.

Sauátta, any old, ouer-worne shooe.

Sauattáre, to cobble or mend old shooes. 

Sauattáro, a Cobler, a Souter of old shooes.

Sauattíno, a Cobler, a Souter of old shooes.

Sauére, as Sapére.

Sauì?, wot you? paróla Venetiána.

Sauía, euen now, at this instant, now, now.

Sauiaménte, sagely, wisely, prudently.

Sauiaróne, a great wise man.

Sauieggiáre, to play the wise man.

Sauiézza, as Sapienza, wisdome.

Sauína, as Sabína, the hearbe Sauine.

Sauinella, as Sauína, as Sabína.

Sauíno, a duskie stone, which hauing any stone put vnto it, waxeth bright.

Sáuio, as Sapiente, wise.

Sauiolíno, a nice, selfe-conceited wiseman.

Sauiólo, as Sauiolíno, pretty wise.

Sauiótto, pretty and wise.

Sauíssimo, most wise or prudent.

Sauiúzzo, a silly or meanely wise man.

Sauonáccio, filthy stinking soape.

Sauonáre, to sope or wash with sope.

Sauonáro, a Soper, a Sope-maker.

Sauonáta, as Saponáta, a sopeing.

Sauóne, any kind of sope.

Sauonea, a kind of conserue or preserue.

Sauonétti, sope or washing-bales.

Sauóra, ballast or lastage for ships.

Sauoráre, to ballast or ballais a ship.

Sauore, as Sapóre.

Sauoréggia, the hearbe Winter-sauory.

Sauoreggiáre, as Saporire.

Sauorella, Winter or Garden-sauory.

Sauorétti, as Saporétti.

Sauorino puttáno, yongue Winter-sauory.

Sauoríre, as Saporíre.

Sauoríto, as Saporíto.

Sauórna, as Sauóra, or stonie grauell.

Sauoróso, as Saporóso.

Sáura, as Stellióne, a greene Lyzard.

Saurétto, a prettie Sorrell nag.

Saurióne, a kind of Mustard-seed.

Sauríta, a stone found in a greene Lizards bellie.

Sáuro, the Sorrell colour of a Horse. Also a greene Lyzard.

Sáuro affocáto, a bright Sorrell colour.

Sáuro metallíno, between a Roane and a Sorrell.

Sáuro scúro, a darke Sorrell.

Sáuso, a Hound, a Spaniell.

Sbaccielláre, to vnhuske or vnshale out of the cods as Peason or Beanes.

Sbáceo., Looke A sbácco, Gods plentie, enough and to spare, hold-bellie-hold.

Sbadacchiaménto, a yauning or gaping. Also a gagging of ones mouth.

Sbadacchiare, to yaune or gape for want of sleepe. Also to gag ones mouth.

Sbadagliáre, as Sbadacchiáre.



Sbadáglio, a gag for ones mouth.

Sbadáre, as Sbadacchiáre.

Sbadataménte, carelesly as at random.

Sbadigliacciáre, as Sbadacchíáre.

Sbadighaménto, as Sbadacchiaménto.

Sbadigliáre, as Sbadacchiáre.

Sbadiglióso, drouzie, gaping, yauning.

Sbagiaffáre, to chat, to prattle, to babble or tattle idly and with vaine-glorie.

Sbagiaffóne, a vaine-glorious pratler, babler, prater, a boasting tatler or cogger.

Sbágio, con quel cápo di linea si truóua la mezzaría délla bócca per uía d'un sbágio, calándo il perpendícolo. 

Sbagliaffóne, as Sbagiaffóne.

Sbaiaffáre, as Sbagiaffáre.

Sbaiaffóne, as Sbagiaffóne.

Sbalancáre, as Spalancáre.

Sbálcio, a kind of honorable habite or attire that the Ladies of Venice were wont to weare on their heads.

Sbaldánza, vnboldnesse, vnhardinesse.

Sbaldanzíre, zíscozíto, to disbolden, to grow or make vnbold, to become vnhardie.

Sbalestráre, to shoot off a Crosse-bow. Also to lye for the whetstone, to thunder out lies.

Sbaligiáre, as Sualigiáre.

Sbalíre, lísco, lito, as Sbasíre.

Sballáre, to vnpacke, to open packes.

Sbalordággine, as Balordággine.

Sbalordíre, as Disballordíre.

Sbalordíto, giddie in the head, distracted out of his sences.

Sbalzáre, to leape forth, to skip or skud away, to hop or prance. Also to rebound as a ball. Also to bound as a Horse. Also to burst, to streame or gush out.

Sbálzo, a leaping or hopping, a skip, a prancing, a bound or rebound of a ball, a bound of a Horse. Also a skudding away in haste. Also a suddaine gushing out or streaming forth. Also a precipice, an abisse, a downefall, a steepie rocke, crag or cliffe. Also as Sbálcio.

Sbamfoláre, to exhale, to breath or vent forth.

Sbamfoláta, an exhaling, a venting or breathing forth.

Sbanaceráre, as Sbadacchiáre.

Sbancáre, to vnbench, to remooue or vnhorse from ones seat or standing.

Sbandaménto, a disbanding or scattering.

Sbandáre, to disbandie, to vnbarre, to vnside, to scatter, to open wide asunder.

Sbandataménte, scattringly, in disbanded manner, confusedly, in forlorne manner. 

Sbandeggiaménto, a banishing, a banishment, a proclamation. Also a disbanding.

Sbandeggiáre, to banish, to publish by proclamation. Also to disbandie.

Sbandeggiatóre, a banisher, a publike cryer, a proclaimer. Also a disbander.

Sbandigióne, a banishment or proclaiming.

Sbandíre, dísco, díto, as Sbandeggiáre.

Sbandíto, banished, exiled, proclaimed.

Sbanditóre, a banisher, a proclaimer.

Sbaracchiáre, as Sbaragliáre.

Sbarácchio, as Sbaráglio.

Sbaragiáre, as Sbaragliáre.

Sbaragliaménto, as Sbaráglio.

Sbaragliáre, to vnbarre, to put to rout, to scatter, to subuert, to disorder, to destroy, to disbandie, to breake an armie, to put to confusion.

Sbaraglíno, a game at tables called Lurch.

Sbaráglio, rout, vnbarring, scattring, confission, hauocke, spoile. Looke A sbaráglio.

Sbarattaménto, as Sbaráglio.

Sbarattáre, as Sbaragliáre.

Sbarbagliáre, as Sbaragliáre. Also to vndazle.

Sbarbaráre, to plucke vp any hearbe, shrub or plant by the roote.

Sbarbáre, to vnbeard, to cut ones beard.

Sbarbatello, a beardlesse boy, a yongue lad.

Sbarbáto, beardlesse, vnbearded.

Sbarbazzáre, to vnbridle, to vncurbe.

Sbarbazzáto, a horse that hath no curbe, vncurbed.

Sbarbicáre, as Sbarbáre, as Sbarbaráre.

Sbarb eráre, as Sbagiaffáre.

Sbarbieróne, as Sbagiaffóne.

Sbarbocciáta, a thumpe, a rap, a clap, a bang.

Sbarbóne, a shaggie swaggrer or ruffian.

Sbarbozzáre, to vncurbe, to vnbridle.

Sbarcaménto, an vnshiping, a disbarking.

Sbarcáre, to vnship, to disbarke, to land.

Sbarcáta, a disbarking, an vnshipping.

Sbárco, a disbarking, a wharfe or landing or vnlading place for ships.

Sbardelláre, as Sbaragliáre. Also to speake rashly or vnaduisedly all one knowes. Also to glote or stare with ones eles.

Sbardellataménte, carelesly, without respect or aduisednesse, confusedly, rashly.

Sbardelláto, carelesse, respectlesse, or rash in fond and vnaduised speeches.

Sbarilláre, to vnbarrell.

Sbarleffáre, to gash, to slash, to marke or cut ouer the face, to skar. Also to make moes or mouthes at in mockerie.

Sbarleffáto, skarred, gashed or cut ouer the face. Also made mouthes at.

Sbarleffo, a skarre, a gash or marke ouer the face. Also a mouthing in mockerie.

Sbarósole, a kind of night-bird.

Sbárra, a barre, a barring, a let, a hindrance. Also a gate in or a stile ouer a hedge, an enchaining. Also a barrier. Also a turne-pike, an inclosure of poles or stakes, a Palisado. Also any batilements vpon walles. Also a barre in armory. Also a Beare to carry dead corps vpon. Also a cragge of a Hill.

Sbarragliáre, as Sbaragliáre.

Sbarraglíno, as Sbaraglíno.

Sarráglio, as Sbaráglio.

Sbarráre, to vnbar, to open wide, to riue in sunder. Also to bar, to embar or to baricado. Also to split a piece of Ordinance. Also to barry a coate of armes.

Sbarráre artegliéria, to shoot of Ordinance.

Sbarráto, barred in armory. Look Sbarráre.

Sbarrattáre, as Sbarattáre.

Sbarrattataménte, scatteringly, confusedly, in route or disordered manner.

Sbarratúra d'árme, a barre in armorie.

Sbárro, a barre, an enbarring, a resistance.

Sbasíre, sísco, síto, to swoune, to be ready to yeeld vp the Ghost.

Sbassáre, to abase, to abate, to suppresse, to cast downe, to bring low.

Sbásso, an abating or defalking of any thing.

Sbastáre, to vnpad or vnsaddle a Cariers horse. Also to pare or shaue downe.

Sbattacchiáre, to beate or clap downe. Also to take the clapper out of a bell.

Sbáttere, bátto, battéi, battúto, to beate down, to trample, to smite, to strike, to ouerwhelme. Also to affright or confound. Also to tosse, to shake, to turmoile. Also to thrash. Also to weatherbeate or shake. Also to abate, to defalke or diminish from.

Sbattezzáre, to vnchristen, to vnbaptize. Also to forsake or forget ones proper name.

Sbattiménto, a beating, a trampling, a shaking, a tossing, a turmoyling. Also an abatement or abating.

Sbattitúra, as Sbattiménto. Also a bursting of a horses hoofe.

Sbattúto, beaten downe, trampled, ouerwhelmed, affrighted, confounded. Also tossed, shaken, turmoiled, weatherbeaten. Also thrashed. 



Sbauagliáre, as Sbadigliáre. Also to driuell or slauer at the mouth.

Sbauáre, to driuell or slauer at the mouth.

Sbauigliáre, as Sbauagliáre.

Sbauiglióso, as Sbadiglióso, slauery, driuely.

Sbazzigánte, fondly skipping, peeuishly wantoning, frowardly gadding or ieasting.

Sbeffaménto, a mocking, a flouting.

Sbeffáre, to mocke, to flout, to scoffe.

Sbeffeggiáre, as Sbeffáre.

Sbeffeggiatóre, a mocker, a flouter, a scoffer.

Sbelaménto, a bleating.

Sbeláre, to bleate as a sheepe.

Sbellettaménto, any painting or bedawbing of womens faces.

Sbellettáre, to bedawbe with painting as women doe their faces. Also to wash or rub away painting.

Sbellétto, womens painting.

Sbembráre, as Smembáre, as Sbranáre.

Sbendáre, to vnmaske, to disuaile.

Sberettáre, to vn-cap, to put off cap or hat.

Sberettáte, cappings, hattings. Also greetings.

Sbergáre, to arme with Vsbergo.

Sbergo, as Vsbergo.

Sberleffáre, as Sbarleffáre.

Sberleffo, as Sbarleffo.

Sberlingáccia, as Berghinella.

Sberlingacciáre, as Berghinelláre.

Sbernia, a kind of friers poore garment or frocke, an Irish rug or mantle.

Sberrettáre, as Sberettáre.

Sbestiáre, to disbeast, to vnbeast.

Sbeuacchiáre, as Beuacchiáre.

Sbeuazzaménto, a quaffing, a tosspotting.

Sbeuazzáre, as Benacchiáre.

Sbeuecchiáre, as Beuacchiáre.

Sbeuecchiatóre, as Beuacchiatóre.

Sbiácca, as Biácca.

Sbiaccaménto, as Biaccaménto.

Sbiaccáre, as Biaccáre.

Sbiadáre, to depriue of prouander or corne. Also to make pale wan or sallow.

Sbiadáto, vnprouendred, vnfed with corne. Also pale, wan or sallow. Also a kind of Azure or bright, Skie-washed colour.

Sbiágio, a byase, a slope, bending wise.

Sbiancáre, to diswhiten. Also to make white or whitish. Also to bedawbe with white.

Sbiancáto, diswhitned. Also whitned or made whitish, whitish, bedawbed with white.

Sbiancheggiáre, as Sbiancáre.

Sbiáncido, whitish, pale, wan, leaden-coloured. Also a pale Straw-colour.

Sbiauáre, as Sbiadáre.

Sbiauáto, as Sbiadáto, as Sbiáncido.

Sbiáno, as Sbiáncido.

Sbiettáre, to slide, to glide, to glib.

Sbigottiménto, amazement, astonishment.

Sbigottire, tísco, títo, to amaze, to astonish.

Sbigottíto, amazed, astonished, affrighted.

Sbilerciáre, to looke a sconse or frowningly vpon.

Sbilercio, squint-looking or asconse.

Sbirbaménto, as Scaltriménto.

Sbirbáto, as Scaltríto.

Sbirráglia, as Sbirrería.

Sbirraria, as Sbirrería.

Sbirrería, the crue, order, company or office of base Serieants or Catchpoles.

Sbírri a cauállo, Marshals, Satelites, Serieants or Catchpoles on Horsebacke.

Sbírro, a Catchpole, a Varlet, a base Serieant or officer to arrest men.

Sbisáo, gashed, slashed, marked with some gash or wound or skar ouer the face.

Sbisciáre, as Sbrisciáre.

Sbíscio, as Sbríscio.

Sbizzaríre, rísco, ríto, to make or become from mad and fantastike wise and setled againe, to obtain ones longing by doing some humorous prancke.

Sbizzarírsi, as Sbizzaríre.

Sblisciáre, to slip, to glide or slide vpon Ice.

Sblizzigáre, as Sblisciáre.

Sboccággine, open mouthing, shamelesnesse or impudency in speaking. Also a mouthing and disboguing or falling into the sea of a Riuer.

Sboccamento, as Sboccatúra.

Sboccáre, to disbogue, to mouth or fall into the sea as a Riuer doeth.

Sboccáto, open mouthed, shamelesse or impudent in vttering or speaking all he knowes. Also a horse that is false or ouerhard mouthed. Also mouthed into the sea.

Sboccatóio, as Sboccatúra.

Sboccatúra, a mouthing out or falling into the sea of a Riuer.

Sbocconcelláre, to mince or morcell small.

Sbóglio, a walme in scalding water.

Sboglire, to parboile in scalding water.

Sbolgettáre, to vnbudget. Also to pull out of ones pocket.

Sbolláre, to vnseale, to vnbrand.

Sbollátsi, to haue platsters pulled off from sores.

Sbolzonáro,  to shut away. Also to conueigh from by stealth and pilfering.

Sbolzonáto, a blow or thumpe with a bolt.

Sbombardaménto, a shooting off or a peale and roaring of Ordinance and Gunnes.

Sbombardáre, to bumbard, to shoot of peales of Gunnes and Ordinance.

Sboráre, to burst or vent out with violent breathing as water or fire doeth being closely pend in. Also to wreake, to vent, to vtter or disburthen ones griefe, passion or anger. Also to vomit, to disgorge or vtter in dispightfull manner what soeuer one knoweth.

Sborfáte, to huffe, to snuffe, to puffe with a kind of snorting as on doeth in the water. Also to tuffe as a Cat. Also to blow and chafe and fret with anger.

Sborránza, a venting, a wreaking or bursting foorth with violence. Looke Sboráre.

Sborráre, as Sboráre. Also to tucke or full clothes in a mill.

Sborratóre, a Cloth-fuller or Tucker. Also that part of a Mill whence the Meale being grinded falleth out. Also any venting or breaking foorth. Also a sluse to stop the water or at pleasure let it goe out.

Sborsaménto, a disbursing, a laying out of ones purse.

Sborsáre, to disburse or lay out of ones owne purse.

Sborsatióne, a disbursing, a laying out.

Sbórso, as Sborsaménto.

Sboscáre, to vnwood, to lope, to cut downe or fell wood, trees or branches, to diswood. Also to driue out of a wood, to rouze a deare.

Sboscatóre, a Wood-seller or cutter.

Sbottáre, to empty any kind of buts or barels. Also to vnswell or vnroade.

Sbottonáre, to vnbutton, to disbutton.

Sbottoneggiáre, as Bottoneggiáre.

Sbotúscia, a word vsed of Dóni in his Mármi, folio. 147.

Sbozzáre, to bungle or slubber vp any worke.

Sbozzáre, bodges or bunger-like workes.

Sbracáreózzi, to vnbreech. Also to vnstocke any piece of ordinance.

Sbracáta, Alla sbracáta, shamelesly as it were bare-arst with breeches down.

Sbracataménte, as Alla sbracáta.

Sbracáto, vnbreeched, breechlesse, open-tailed, bare-arst, shamelesse.

Sbracciáre, to vnbrace, to open wide.

Sbracciársi, to vnbrace ones selfe.

Sbracciáta, a kind of sleeuelesse garment. Also open or without armes.

Sbraceríe, vnbracings. Also vnthriftie, 



lauish or riotous spendings.

Sbraciáre, to stirre a fire that is raked vp Also to spend or waste lauishly, to swagger or as we say to cut it out of the whole cloth, to vaunt, to cracke, to boast shamelesly. Also to vnbrace or set wide open.

Sbraciáre denári, to spend lauishly, to waste money prodigally as if it were coles.

Sbragiáre, as Sbraciáre. Also to stalke it or goe stately as one tip-toes.

Sbragliáre, to raile aloud, to scold, to brawle, to chide or exclaime vpon.

Sbraiáre, to bray as an Asse. Also to prattle with bragging indiscretion.

Sbramáre, to haue ones longing, to fill ones desires, to giue one his wishes.

Sbranáre, to dismember, to teare in pieces, to mangle, to cut into mammockes.

Sbrancaménto, a pulling, a drawing or tearing from out clawes or clinches.

Sbrancare, to rid, to free, to vntangle or free from clawes, to vnclinch.

Sbrasciáre, as Sbraciáre.

Sbrasgiáre, as Sbraciáre.

Sbrastiáre, as Sbragliáre.

Sbrattáre, to cleanse, to make cleane.

Sbrauáre, to braue, to swagger.

Sbráuo, a brauer, a swagrer, a hackester.

Sbráuo, a swash-buckler, a braue swagrer.

Sbrazzáre, as Sbracciáre, as Sbraciáre.

Sbriccáre, to play the Sbrícchi.

Sbriccaría, swashing or swagring tricks, all manner of riot or villanie. Also the crue or profession of Sbrícchi.

Sbrícchi, swash-bucklers, the damned crue, ruffianly-swagrers, riotous villaines.

Sbricciáre, to slide, to slip or glide as vpon ice.

Sbriccioláre, to crumble or moulder in small pieces. Also as Sbricciáre.

Sbriccóne, a great swagrer, one of the damned crue, a riotous ruffian.

Sbrigaménto, a ridding, a freeing, or deliuerie from troubles or entanglings.

Sbrigáre, to disintangle, to free or rid from out any trouble or entanglings.

Sbrígli, nine-pins, keeles or scales.

Sbrigliáre, to vnbridle, to vnsnaffle.

Sbrigliáta, a plucke, a twitch or checke giuen with the bridle vnto a Horse by the Rider.

Sbrignáre, to creepe or sneake vp and downe lurkingly or secretly.

Sbrisáre, as Sbrisciáre.

Sbrisciáre, to goe winding, a side, or a slope as a Snake doth, to creepe or craule on the ground. Also to slide, to glide, to glib or slip as vpon ice. Also to tucke or full clothes.

Sbrisciatóre, a creaper, a crauler. Also a slider or glider. Also a Cloth-fuller.

Sbríscio, oblique, crooked, a slope, winding in and out as a Snake. Also a crauling or creeping.

Sbriscióso, slipperie, sliding, gliding.

Sbrisóso, as Sbriscióso.

Sbrissáre, as Sbrisciáre.

Sbrísso, as Sbríscio.

Sbroccáre, to loosen as one doth a naile or stud. Also to peepe out as a studshead.

Sbrócco, a stub, a rafter, a single quarter of timber.

Sbroffáre, as Sborfáre. Also to dash, to sprinkle. Also to squirt with water.

Sbrogliáre, to disimbroile, to disintangle, to vnsnare, to rid from troubles.

Sbrógne, pígha un pezzo disbrógne grósso mezzo pálmo.

Sbróia, a scalding with hote water.

Sbroiáre, to seald with hote water.

Sbroiáta, as Sbróia.

Sbruccáre, to picke cleane.

Sbruccioláre nell'orécchio, to buzze in ones eares.

Sbrúffa, a hussing, a snuffing, a puffing. Also a sprinkling, a dashing. Also a tuffing of a Cat. Also a blowing and chafing. Also a gust of winde.

Sbruffáre, as Sbroffáre, as Sborfáre.

Sbruffoláre, as Sbroffáre.

Sbucáre, to boare or make full of holes. Also to vnhole. Also to peepe as out of a hole. Also to vnden or rouze a Deare, to start a Hare, to spring a Partridge, &c.

Sbucciáre, as Sbucáre. Also to pill or plucke bare and cleane. Also to pare, to shaue, to vnbarke or vnrinde trees. Also to rid out of a place.

Sbucináre, as Bucináro.

Sbudelláre, to vnbowell, to panch, to vngut.

Sbudellataménte, as wee say with heart and liuer, or withall the guts.

Sbuffánte, huffing, puffing, snuffing, blowing, breathing, tuffing as a Cat.

Sbuffáre, as Sbroffáre, as Sborfáre.

Sbuffoneggiáre, as Buffoneggiáre.

Sbuffoso, puffing and chafing with anger.

Sbusáre, as Sbucáre, to make hollow.

Sbúso, hollow, concaue, voide, full of holes.

Sbuttafattóre, a foolish factor, a drudge, a pick-thanke knaue, a petiefogger.

Scábbia, any scab, manginesse, itch, tetter, scuruie or scurfe.

Scabbiósa, scabious or scuruie-grasse.

Scabbióso, scabbie, scabbed, mangie, scuruie, itchie. Also rugged or rough.

Scabello, any kind of stoole.

Scabello d'appóggio, a leaning stoole, any stoole with a backe.

Scábie, as Scábbia. Also a tickling enticement to pleasure.

Scabinella, scabious or scuruie-grasse.

Scabiósa, scabious, scuruie-grasse.

Scabióso, as Scabbióso.

Scabrítia, as Scabrosità.

Scábro, ragged, rough, stonie, harsh, grettie. Also a kind of flie breeding of any carrion, namely of a Horse.

Scabrosità, roughnesse, ruggednesse, harshnesse, grettinesse, stonishnesse.

Scabróso, as Scábro.

Scacaccazzáre, to beshite, to becacke, to beray, to blurt, to blot, to defile.

Scacarnícolo, a cheater, a shifter, a conniecatcher, a flie cozener.

Scacazzáre, as Scacaccazzáre.

Scacazzatúre, beshitings, shitten trickes. Also blurs, blots, dashings.

Scaccário, a checker-bord. Also a Princes Exchecquer.

Scaccáto, checkie, gobonit, or counter componie in Armorie.

Scaccheggiáre, to play at Chesse. Also to checkie, to gobonie or counter-compony any coate of armes.

Scaccheggiáto, as Scacáto.

Scácchi, chesse men to play at chesse with. Also checkie, gobony or countercompony in armory.

Scácchi acúti, Lozens or fuzels in armory.

Scacchiére, as Scaccário.

Scáccia, the mouth or seach of a bit.

Sacciaménto, a chasing or driuing away.

Scacciapensiére, a kind of Bag-pipe or such Country musicall instrument.

Scacciáre, to chase, to hunt or driue away. Also to expell.

Scacciáta, as Scacciaménto.

Scacciatóre, a chaser, a hunter or driuer away.

Scácco, a Chesse-boord. Also a Checke. Also a childes rattle.

Scácco dáma, a Checke with a Queene.

Scácco di cauállo, a Checke with a Knight.

Scácco di pedína, a Check with a Paun.

Scácco di Rè, a Checke with a King.

Scácco mátto, a Mate, Checke-mate.

Scácco rócco, checke with a Rooke.

Scácco tauola, a blind-mate.

Scadenacciáre, to vnboult.

Scadente, falling, declining.

Scadére, cádo, cáddi, cadúto, to fall from or vnto, to escheat. Also to chance or befall.

Scadorággine, as Scadóre.

Scadoráre, to itch, to tetter, to mange.

Scadóre, as Pruríto, an itch, a manginesse.

Scadoróso, itchie, full of itch or mange.

Scadúta, a falling from or vnto. Also an escheting. Also a befalling.

Scaduto, fallen from or vnto, escheated, 



befalne. Also drooped or faded.

Scáfa, a raft of timber or a flote of trees as Záttera. Also a Skiffe, a Cockeboate or scallop. Also yongue Beanes or Beanes to the cods. Also the cods or huskes of Beanes. Also the inner compasse or roundnesse of the eare. Also a shelfe, a boord or racke in a seller to set barrels or tubs vpon. Also a dresser boord or shelfe in a kitching. Also the railes or lettases before a Bakers stall or any other shop. Also a kind of torture or strait prison.

Scafárca, a bucket, a paile or pitcher to draw water with.

Scafáre, as Scaffáre.

Scafáro, a boate-man, a sculler.

Scáffa, as Scáfa.

Scaffáre, to shale or vnbuske peason or beanes. Also to raile or lettase in. Looke Scáa, but properly to stand or fix fast without moouing when one hath leaped.

Scaffétta, a kind of ladle that Gunners vse to charge their pieces when they charge them with cartreges. Also a skide or a sled.

Scággia, as Scaglia, a splinter or shiuer.

Scaggiále, a Fisher-mans frocke, a shepheards vpper garment for the raine, a Marrines rugge-gowne. Also a womans forepart of a kirtle. Also a safegard or an apron. Vsed also for a broad silken girdle.

Scaggiáre, to splint, or splinter, or split.

Scaggiatúra, a splitting, a splinting.

Scaggionáre, to free from any occasion or imputation.

Scáglia, a certaine deuise, gin or sliding net to catch birds. Also a kind of burling sling. Also the scales of any fish. Also any splinter or shiuer namely of stones. Also a kind of worme breeding in horses.

Scáglia boccále, a quaffer, a tosse-pot. Also a bottle made of brittle stuffe and subiect to breaking.

Scagliáre, to scale or vnscale fishes. Also to splint or shiuer Also to hurle or fling with violence as out of a sling. Also to worke with scales.

Scagliatóre, a flinger, a hurler, &c.

Scagliétta, any little  Scáglia.

Scáglio, any splinter or shiuer. Also a hurle or slinging. Also the arme pits or arme boles of a man.

Scaglióni, steps or greeses of staires or ladders. Also the teeth of a horse called the tusses or tuskes.

Scaglióso, scaly, full of scales as some fishes are. Also ful of splints or shiuers.

Scagnárda, as Scanfárda.

Scagnáre, to frame as a stoole, to vnstoole, to vnseate.

Scagnello, any little stoole, a low stoole, a foote-stoole. Also any little support. Also the bridge of a Lute or any such corded instrument. Also a little skid.

Scágno, any kinde of stoole. Also a skide.

Scágno da destro, a close-stoole.

Scáia, as Scáglia.

Scaióla, a kind of stone, lome, or mortar.

Scaióni, as Scagliórli.

Scaióso, as  Saglióso.

Scála, any kind of scale, ladder or paire of staires, or way to ascend by steps or greeses. Also a word much vsed of Mariners, as Fárescále, to touch, to land or come to any shore. Also to ride at anchor in any setled place. Scála is also any good landing place.

Scála a bíscia, a winding paire of staires.

Scála a chióccioli, a winding paire of staires.

Scála alumáche, a winding paire of staires.

Scála ápij, a narrow vpright staires.

Scalábile, that may be scaled.

Scalabríno, a Carbine.

Scalabróne, a Hornet, a Beetle, a Bull-flie.

Scálaceli, White-wort or Salmons-sale.

Scaláda, as Scaláta.

Scála da náne, a ship-lader.

Scáli di córda, a ladder of cords.

Scála di fúne, idem.

Scalappiáie, to vnsnare, to disintangle. Also to shift away from out any bonds to slip ones necke out of the halter, to get or let loose as out of prison.

Scaláppio, any kind of entangling bond or snare. Also vsed for a Mouse-trap.

Scaláre, to scale or ascend and get vp by any staires or ladder.

Scaláta, a scalado or scaling giuen to any towne or wall.

Scalbáre, paréua una zólla scalbáta.

Scalcagnáre, to vnheele, to vnshooe, to vnbreech. Also to vnstocke or dismount any piece of Ordinance. Also to loosen or vnfasten any thing namely ones teeth. Also to vrge, to vex or bring one out of frame and patience.

Scalciacáne, a base rascall, an abiect drudge good but to vnshooe dogs.

Scalciadenti, a toole that Toothdrawers vse to loosen and pull out teeth with.

Scalciáre, to vnhose, to vnshooe, to vnbreech. Also as Scalcagnáre.

Scalciáto, vnshod, vnhosed, vnbreeched. Looke Scalcagnáre.

Scalciatóre, a puller off of ones hosen or shooes. Looke Scalcagnáre.

Scalciatúra, an vnshooing, an vnhoosting, an vnbreeching. Looke Scalcagnáre.

Scalcieggiáre, to kicke, to winze, or strike with ones feete or heeles.

Scálcio, vnshod, barefooted, bareleged.

Scalcitráre, as Scalcieggiáre.

Scálco, a sewer of a Noblemans house.

Scálda bánco, one that keepes a seate warme, but ironically spoken of idle lectures that possesse a pew in the Schooles or Pulpet in Churches and baffle out they know not what. Also a hot-headed puritane.

Scaldággio, all maner of warmth or fewell to burne and warme with.

Scaldaletto, a warming-pan, a warme bed.

Scaldáme, as Scaldágio.

Scaldapiè, a pot to keepe cinders in that women vse to set vnder their feet or any thing to warme the feet with.

Scaldáre, to heate, to warme. Also to make hot, to chafe. Also to scald, to scorch.

Scaldatóio, any thing or roome that heateth or warmeth. Also a chafing-dish. Also a warming pan.

Scaldatúra, a heating, a warming, a chafing.

Scaldauiuánde, a Chafing-dish.

Scaldétto, a Chafing-dish.

Scále, taken in Venice for the highest Court of the chiefe Senators.

Scaléa, as Scala.

Scaléno, a quadrangle with points reuersed.

Scalentia, the squinancy in the throate.

Scalenzíni di lárese, something in a ship.

Scalétta, an instrument Gunners vse to take leuell by. Also any little paire of staires or ladder. Also a kind of crusty simnell or Biscuit bread.

Scaléuole, that may be scaled.

Scálfa, a Scalop-boate, a Skiffe.

Scalfarótto, a shepheards or Mariners weed or frocke with a hood. Also gameshes. Also bootes of felt, rug or straw and mats that students vse in their studies for to keepe their legges warme.

Scalfatúra. 

Scalfire, fisco, fito, to cut in sunder. Also to thrust in. Also to wound lightly.

Scalfítto, cut in sunder, thrust in, wounded or hurt lightly.

Scafittúra, a light hurt or wound.

Scalináta, a degree of steps or ascent of degrees before a Church or going vp into the Quire or Chancill, or of any pallace.

Scalíni, steps or greeses of staires or ladders.

Scallentia, the squinancy in the throate. 



Scalmacciáre, to be in a soultry faint and moist heate.

Scalmácoio, a soultry, faint and moist heate.

Scalmána, a scorching heate, draught or drinesse. Also the disease called the Callienture.

Scalmanáto, burnt with thirst, scorched with drought, hauing the Callienture.

Scalmáre, to make leane or take downe the flesh. Also to hide-bind.

Scalmáto, made leane. Also a certaine disease in a horse, called hide-bound.

Scalmatória, as Scalmatúra.

Scalmatúra, a making leane, a takeing downe ones flesh. Also a hidebinding.

Scálmo, as Scátmo. Also as Schelmo.

Scalógna, scalions, cibols, yongue ciues.

Scalóni, great steps or greeses of staires. Also piles in Armorie.

Scalóppia, a deuise or gin to catch birds.

Scaloppiáre, to catch birds with some gin. Also as Sciógliere.

Scalpédria, figured for follie it selfe, or for a foolish woman.

Scalpeggiáre, as Scalpestáre.

Scalpelláre, as Scarpelláre.

Scalpellíno, as Scarpellíno.

Scalpello, as Scarpello, a cizell.

Scalpestáre, to trample vnder foote. Also to make a trampling noise.

Scalpestáto, trampled vnder foote. Also riotous, debaushed or lauish.

Scalpéstio, any trampling noise or treading vnder feete. Also a riotous hurliburlie.

Scalpestráre, as Scalpestáre.

Scalpicciáre, as Scalpestáre.

Scalpíccio, as Scalpéstio.

Scalpíni, as Scarpini, sockes or pumpes.

Scalpíre, as Scolpíre.

Scalpitaménto, as Scalpéstio.

Scalpitáre, as Scalpestáre.

Scalpítio, any trampling noise.

Scalpitráre, as Scalpestáre.

Scálpo délla testa, the scalpe of ones head.

Scalpóre, wonderment, amazement.

Scalpurígine, an itching or galling.

Scalteriménto, as Scaltrézza.

Scalterità, as Scaltrézza.

Scalteríto, as Scaltríto.

Scaltrézza, teaching, enskilling. Also craftie warinesse, wilie craft, subtletie of wit.

Scaltriménto, as Scaltrézza.

Scaltríre, trísco, tríto, to admonish, to instruct, to teach, to enskill. Also to make or become craftie, wylie, slie or subtle.

Scaltrità, as Scaltrézza.

Scaltríto, admonished, instructed, taught, enskilled. Also craftie, wylie, subtle, slye, caute.

Scáltro, as Scaltríto.

Scaluáre, to vnbalde.

Scalúna, scalions, cibols, yongue ciues.

Scáluo, vnbalde.

Scalzacáni, as Scalciacáni.

Scalzadenti, as Scalcia denti.

Scalzáre, as Scalciáre.

Scalzáre gl'árbori, to bare the rootes of trees.

Scalzatúra, as Scalciatúra.

Scálzo, as Scalcio, bare-footed, vnshod.

Scamaidáre, to carde, to picke or winde wooll.

Scamaidatóre, a wooll-winder or carder.

Scamattáre, as Scamatáre.

Scamannáto, a gull, a sot, a noddie, a patch, a ninnie, made a foole.

Scamardáre, to make ridges in the ground.

Scamatáre, to beat clothes, as Camatáre.

Scambiam énto, a changing, a trucking.

Scambiánte ormesíno, changeable Taffetie.

Scambiáre, to change, to trucke, to barter.

Scambiatóre, a changer, a trucker.

Scambiettáre, to barter, to trucke or change ware for ware. Also to friske, to skip or leape nimbly. Also to wrigle or stirre too and fro, or vp and downe.

Scambiétti, bartrings, truckings, coarcings or changings of ware for ware. Also friskes, leapings or nimble skippings, tumbling trickes or changings in dancing and tumblings. Also wriglings and stirrings vp and downe. Also mammockes, scraps or broken pieces of meat. Also cibols or yongue ciues.

Scambiéuole, mutuall, by exchange, enterchangeable.

Scambienolézza, mutualitie, enterchangeablenesse.

Scambieuolménte, mutually, enterchangeably.

Scámbio, a change, an exchange. Also liew, place or stead.

Scambúgio, any by-roome or corner.

Scamináto, straied or wandred out of the way.

Scamisciáta., looke Alla scamisciáta.

Scammonea, Scammonie or Diagridion, the iuice whereof is much vsed in medicines to purge choller.

Scamonea, as Scammonea.

Scamoníto, a wine of Scamonie.

Scampaménto, an escaping, as Scámpo.

Scampána, hath been abusiuely vsed for patience or forbearance.

Scampanaménto, a ringing or iangling of bells. 

Scapanáre, to ring, to tolle or iangle bels disorderly and out of tune.

Scampanáte, ringings, knells, tollings, peales or ianglings of bells.

Scampáre, to escape, to scape, to shift away, to saue or deliuer from trouble or danger.

Scampatúra, a scaping, an escaping.

Scámpo, a scape, an escape, a shifting away, a deliuerance from any danger.

Scamuffáre, to droope or hang downe the head, to sneake away as one amazed.

Scamúffo, a drooping, a languishing, a hanging downe the head, a sneaking away.

Scanale, a kind of fish.

Scancellaménto, a cancelling, a blotting out, an abolishing.

Scancelláre, as Scansare. Also to cancell, to blot out, to abolish. Also to expiate.

Scancellatúra, as Sgórbij. Also cancellings or blottings out.

Scancelléuole, that may be cancelled, made voide or blotted out.

Scancello, as Cancello.

Scancía, as Scantía.

Scanciaría, a ranke or row of shelues.

Scandagliáre, to sound or fadome the depth of a water with a plummet and line.

Scandagliatóre, a sounder or fadomer of the Sea with a line and plummet.

Scandáglio, a line with a plummet at the end to sound, to leuell or fadome the Sea.

Scandaleggiáre, as Scandalizzáre.

Scandalezzáre, as Scandalizzáre.

Scandálide, a kind of Dates.

Scandalizzáre, to scandalize, to offend in conscience, or giue occasion to mislike.

Scándalo, scandall, offence, or occasion of sinne giuen by another, a deed of ill example.

Scandalóso, scandalous, offensiue.

Scandentia, the squinancie in the throat.

Scándere, scándo, scandéi, scandúto, to climbe, to mount, to ascend. Also to scan a verse.

Scandescentia, a squinancie in the throat. Also a blushing for shame.

Scándiáne, a kind of Apples.

Scándice, Wilde-cheruill, Venus-combe Sheapheards-needle.

Scandigliáre, as Scandagliáre.

Scandiglio, as Scandáglio.

Scandoláca, a weed that windeth about corne.

Scandoláro, a Mariners Sea-chest.

Scándole, lathes or shindles vsed as tiles or slates to couer houses. Also inch-bordes.

Scandolizzáre, as Scandalizzáre.



Scándolo, as Scándalo.

Scandolóso, as Scandalóso.

Scandúto, mounted, climbed or ascended vp.

Scanello, a deske to write vpon.

Scanfárda, a common strumpet, an ouerridden whore, a stallion-rampe.

Scánge, changeable-coloured or mothe.

Scannacuóre, a stab-heart, a cutthroat.

Scánna-battésimo, a gracelesse fellow, one that would kill Baptisme and murther the grace of God.

Scannagállo, an officer, a purueyer or prouider for victuals in a ship.

Scannáglio, a shambles, a slanghterhouse, a butcherie.

Scannáre, to murther or cut ones throat. Also to strangle or choke.

Scannatóre, a murtherer, a strangler, a cutter of throates.

Scánne, vsed for Zánne, a Bores tuskes.

Scannelláre, to vomit or spue out. Also to gush or spin as out of a gutter. Also to chamfre.

Scannelláto, chamfred.

Scannello, any little or foote-stoole.

Scannétto, any little or foote-stoole.

Scánno, any kind of stoole or seat. Also a Dominion or State-throne.

Scannonizzáre, to degrade hauing once been cannonized.

Scansáre, to goe sidelin, a slope or a skew, to balke by. Also to stagger or goe reeling by or from. Also to slip aside. Also to escape or auoide a blow. Also to ouerturne, to subuert or remooue any thing away. Also to cancell, to blur or blot out.

Scansatúra, a going a slope or sideling, a balking-by. Also a reeling or staggering. Also a slipping a side. Also an escape or auoiding. Also a subuerting or ouerturning. Also a blurring or blotting out.

Scansióne, a cadence in a verse.

Scánso, as Scansatúra.

Scantía, any kind of shelfe or cubbord.

Scantiáno, a kind of Apples.

Scantiaría, a ranke or row of shelues.

Scantiétta, any little shelfe or cubbord.

Scantonáre, to vncorner. Also to giue one the slip and shake a man off, as it were at the corner of a street. Also as Scansáre.

Scantonársi, to retire or withdraw himselfe from one corner to another, er else to slinke away secretly or by stealth.

Scantonáta, without a corner, vncornered. Also a slip at a corner or secret slinking away.

Scantoniere, a cosener, a cunniecatcher, one that giues another the slip, and leaues him a corner for payment, a flincher, a slinker away.

Scantucciáre, as Scantonáre.

Scanzáre, as Scansáre.

Scanzáre délla uía, to balke the way.

Scanzaría, a ranke or row of shelues.

Scanzía, any shelfe or cubbord.

Scapegliáre, as Scapigliáre.

Scapélio, the space between the backe and the shoulders.

Scapelláre, to vnhat, to vnhood.

Scapello, a lancet or fleame to let bloud.

Scaperúccia, a hood or cowle. Also a budget, a pouch or scrip.

Scapéstra, a crue, a rout or troupe of head-long riotous people.

Scapestrággine, a loosenesse or licentiousnesse as of a halter-sacke or madman.

Scapestráre, to vnhalter. Also to free or disintangle.

Scapestráta, alla scapestráta, headlong, madly, furiously, riotously.

Scapestrataménte, as Scapestráta.

Scapestráto, vnhaltred, loose, disintangled. Also rash, dissolute, hairebraind.

Scapezzáro, to vntop, to vnhead, to shred or lop trees on the top.

Scapezzóne, a whirret, a clap or cuffe giuen on the face with ones hand.

Scapigliáre, to disheuell, to vncombe, to vntie or vndresse ones haires or head.

Scapigliáta, disheueled, vncombed, vndrest about the head, touzed.

Scapílio, the space between the shoulders.

Scapinéuole, of or pertaining to sockes, pumpes or scarpines.

Scapíni, a kind of Needle or Serpent-fish. Also linnen sockes. Also pumpes or scarpines.

Scapistrággine, as Scapestrággine.

Scapistráre, as Scapestráre.

Scapitáre, to consume a mans stocke or wealth, not to thriue, to loose by the bargaine. Also to cut off a debt. Also to come out of debt. Also to behead.

Scapitáre un debito, to cut off a debt.

Scápito, a cutting off of a debt. Also dammage or losse.

Scapizzáre, as Scapucciáre.

Scapo, the shanke, shaft, or bodie of a candlesticke, or any thing else. Also the stem, or stalke of any floure or hearbe. Also a Paper-mill or presse.

Scapócchio del Diáuolo, cosi detto per l'eccessíuo romóre che vifà.

Scápola, as Scápula.

Scapolare, a Priors hood, or Monks cowle as Ephod. Also a childs bib. Also to escape, to make an escape, to breake prison, to free from bondage or emprisonment. Also to hop or skip, and skud away.

Scápoli, souldiers that ouerlooke gallie-slaues. Also free, loose, or scotfree. 

Scápolo, an escape. Also hagard, wilde, rammish, or vnreclaimed. Also a horse that will not easily be taken, but will scape and slip away.

Scappáre, to scape, to escape, to auoid or flie from any danger.

Scappáta, a scape, an escape.

Scapezzáre, to turne a horse round when first he is taught to trot round being held by a long rope. Also to roughhew any timber or stone.

Scappíno, the vpper leather of a paire of shooes. Also the clock of a paire of stockings or hosen. Vsed also for a socke, a pump, or a scarpine.

Scáppo, seadge, or sheare-grasse. Also a long fishing-rod or pole. Also as Scámpo.

Scáppola, an escape. Also as Seápula.

Scappoláre, as Scapoláre.

Scapricciáre, to free from suddaine humors, to rid from humorous toyes.

Scapucciáre, to stumble, to trip, to slip, or fall vpon any impediment.

Scapúccio, a slip, a stumbling, or tripping blocke.

Scapuccióne, as Scapuzzóne.

Scapula, the shoulder blade. Also the hinder part of the shoulders.

Scapuláre, as Scapoláre.

Scapuzzáre, as Scapucciáre.

Scapúzzo, as Scapúccio.

Scapuzzóne, a stumbling fall or blocke. Also a stumbler, a stumbling horse. Also a horse that will runne away. Also a clap or whirret giuen with ones hand.

Scarabeo, as Scarafággio.

Scarabilláre, to squeake as a Bag-pipe, to make any squeaking noise.

Scarabócchi, foolish or rash words spoken at randon and without heed.

Scarabótto, as Scarafággio.

Scaracchiáre, as Sgaráre.

Scarafággio, a Hornet, a Scarabeflie, an oxeflie, a beetleflie.

Scarágolo, a kind of Sea-Snaile.

Scaramelláre, to iugle or play tricks of legier de maine.

Scaramelle, ingling tricks, or legier de maine tricks.

Scaramúccia, a skirmish, a fight.

Scaramucciáre, to skirmish.

Scaramúzza, a skirmish.

Scaramuzzáre, to skirmish.

Scaramurcióne, one that haukes and spaules in his coughing.

Scarancía, a squinance in the throte.

Scaranciáto, that hath the squinancie.

Scaráne, low womens or footestooles.

Scarauáccio, as Scarafággio.

Scarauággio, as Scarafággio.

Scarauentáre, to hurle, to sling, to throw, or cast with violence.

Scarbonchiáre, to besmeare with a cole. 



Also to snuff out a candle.

Scarbottáre, to scatter, to throw, to fling or hurle downe or away.

Scárca l'asino, a kind of game at tables with dice and bearing of all the men.

Scarcáre, as Scaricáre, to discharge.

Scarcáta, as Scaricáta, a discharge.

Scarcatóre, a discharger, an vnloder.

Scárco, as Scárico. Also a ruinous fall.

Scárda, a verie skalie fish which some take to be the Shad. Others the guilthead, and others the Breame. Also the skale or shell of any fish. Also any kind of cardes or teazels to carde wooll with.

Scardafóne, as Scarafággio.

Scardaláne, a carder of wooll.

Scardáre, as Scardassáre.

Scardássa lána, a carder of wooll.

Scardassáre, to carde, to tease or dresse wooll. Also to skale fishes. Also to beate, to touze, to tug, or rib-baste with a cudgell. Also to raile at, to backbite, or detract from one behinde his backe.

Scardassáre il pélo, to bang, to beate, to swadle, or rib-baste one throughly.

Scardássi, Cardes, or teazels to tease wooll.

Scardassiere, a carder or teaser of wooll.

Scardassíno, as Scardassiere. Also a backbiter, or detracter behinde ones backe.

Scardásso, a paire of cards to card wooll. Also a hassell for flaxe.

Scardatóre, as Scardassiere.

Scardatúra, a discarding. Also a carding of wooll.

Scardázzo, a kind of great teazell.

Scardíglio, a cozening and cheating, trick. Also a cheating cozening companion.

Scárdola, as Scárda.

Scardóne, as Scárda.

Scárdoua, as Scárda. Also a kinde of venemous Waspe, or Scarab-flie.

Scareggiáre, to vnlode, to disburthen, to discharge.

Scarfáccij, foolish, dogrell-rimers.

Scarfággio, as Scarafággio.

Scargagliáre, as Sgargaliáre.

Scária, vsed for a precinct, or iurisdictions, or Wapentake of a countrie.

Scaricaménto, a disburthning, an vnloding.

Scaricáre, to discharge, to vnlode, to disburthen.

Scaricáta, as Scaricaménto.

Scárico, discharged, vnloden, disburthened, quit, free. Also a discharge.

Scarificáre, to scarifie, to lance or pounce the skinne. Also to open by incision.

Scarificatióne, a scarifying, a lancing, an incision, a pouncing of the skinne.

Scariobállo, a cogge in a mill-wheele. 

Scarióla, broade-leafe, or gardin-endiue.

Scaríte, a stone named of the fish Scauro, and of it's colour.

Scarlatézza, rednesse, scarletnesse.

Scarlatíno, scarlet, or stammell colour.

Scarláto, scarlet red, scarlet cloth.

Scarlátto, as Scarláto.

Scarmáre, to make or become leane and meagre, to take downe ones flesh.

Scarmigliáre, to tease or card wooll, to picke wooll or silke, to hassell hemp or flax. Also to touze, to tug, to lug, to plucke, to ruffle ones haires, to disheuell.

Scarmigliáto, teased or carded wooll or silke, hasseld as flax or hemp. Also disheueled, touzed, tugd, lugd, pluckt, ruffled, or puld by the haire.

Scármo, leane, meagre, out of flesh, bare, spinie, lanke, low as a hawke. Also the Stock-fish, or as some say poore Iohn.

Scarnaménto, as Scarnatúra.

Scarnáre, to vnflesh, to pare the flesh from the bones, to scarifie the flesh. Also to shaue or pare rawe hides.

Scarnáto, vnflesht, pared the flesh from the bones. Also scarifide. Also as Scármo. Also flesh-colour.

Scarnatúra, any vnfreshing. Also the scarifying of trees.

Scarnificáre, to vnflesh, or pare the flesh from the bones.

Scárno, as Scármo.

Scarnuzzo, a paper-coffine as Grocers vse to make to put spices in, a cartage so called of gunners.

Scáro, a fish that deuoures all the fry of fishes that he can come vnto, and cheweth like a beast. Some take it for the Guilthead, or Goldenie.

Scarognáto, discarioned. Also gorged, or glutted with carion.

Scárpa, amongst souldiers is called a Scarp, that is, the slopenesse of the wall, for, all fortifications are built slope, the better to sustaine the earth from falling, but properly any kind of shooe. Also a kind of fish called also Scáro. Also a purse of monie in the roagues language, or pedlers french.

Scarpáccia, any filthy old shooe.

Scarpáre, to shooe, to put on shooes.

Scarparía, a street or other place where shooes are made and sould, a shooestreet.

Scarpatóre, a Shoomaker, a Cordwainer.

Scarpelláre, to cizell, to worke, to cut, to carue or graue with a cizell. Also to scarifie.

Scarpellatóre, a grauer, a caruer or worker with cizels. Vsed for a Carpenter.

Scarpellétto, as Scarpellíno.

Scarpellináccio, a bungler or botcher-like Caruer or Grauer with cizels.

Scarpellíno, any little cizels, a penknife or caruing toole, or Grauer. Also a little googe. Also vsed for a Ioyner or Carpenter. Also a caruer or grauer.

Scarpello, any kinde of cizell, any cutting, grauing or caruing toole. Also a googe. Also a Barbers lancet or fleam to let blood. Also a Chirurgions toole to take away and pare corrupt flesh from the bones. Also a kind of rauenous foule or cormorant.

Scarpéna, a kind of fish.

Scarpetáro, a shooe-maker, a Pumpmaker.

Scarpétta, a Pumpe, a Scarpine, a little shooe.

Scarpettóni, high shooes or startops.

Scarpézzo, a Crismas game.

Scarpigliáre, as Scarmigliáre.

Scarpináre, to tug for, or pull vp by the roote, to snatch or plucke by violence.

Scarpíni, Scarpines, Pumps, or Sockes.

Scarpióne, as Scorpióne.

Scarpíre, as Scarpináre, as Carpire.

Scarpisatóre, a snatcher, a pilferer, a hooker.

Scarpóne, any great shooe. Also a brawling, a squaring, a hurliburly.

Scarpóni, as Scarpettóni.

Scarriera, a place where all knauery and shifts of false dealing is vsed.

Scarsaménte, scarsely, sparingly, nigardly, scantly, couetously, hardly.

Scarsapépe, an hearbe vsed instead of Pepper among the poore to dresse meate.

Scarsáre, to scant, to scarce, to spare.

Scarseggiáre, as Scarsáre.

Scarsella, a pocket, a pouch, a bagge, a satchell, a hawking-bagge, a budget, a poke.

Scarselláio, a pouch or pocket-maker.

Scarselláre, to pouch or pocket vp.

Scarsellóni, bases or tases for horsemen.

Scarsétto, somewhat scarse or scantie.

Scarsézza, scarcity, scantnesse, nigardnesse.

Scarsità, as Scarsézza.

Scárso, scarse, scant, sparing, nigard, miserable. Also a snudge, a pinchpeny.

Scartabelláre, to scrible or tosse bookes and papers ouer and ouer.

Scartabello, any scroule or waste paper. Also an od corner to cast writings in.

Scartacciáre, as Scardassáre.

Scartaccíno, as Scardassíno.

Scartáccio, as Scardásso.

Scartafacciáre, as Scartabelláre.

Scartafáccio, as Scartabello.

Scartaggiáre, as Scardassáre.

Scartaggiáro, as Scardassiere.



Scartapello, as Scartabello.

Scartáre, to discarde at cardes.

Scartáte, the discarded cards.

Scarteggiáre, as Scartáre, as Scardassáre.

Scarteggíno, as Scardassíno.

Scartóccio, a coffin of Paper for spice. Also a musket charge called a Cartredge.

Scartózzo, as Scartóccio.

Scartúzzo, a kind of dressing of egges so called.

Scaruáre, as Scarmigliáre, as Scardassáre.

Scaruatore, as Scardatóre.

Scaruóla, an hearbe.

Scarupáre, to ruine or breake downe any wall or building in pieces.

Scárza, a kind of Ray or Skate fish.

Scarzeríno, a bird in Latine Serinus.

Scasciáre, to squease or crush flat.

Scasciáto, squeased, crushed flat.

Scáscio, as Scasciáto.

Scassár, a kind of witchcraft.

Scassáre, to vnchest. Also to breake in pieces, to burst open, to put out of frame.

Scassáre il terreno, to dig, to delue, to grub vp the ground.

Scassár'i denti, to loosen or vnfasten ones teeth.

Scassáre vn pezzo, to vnstocke, to vnbracke or dismount a piece.

Scassatúra, an vnchesting. Also a squesing or crushing flat. Also a grubling vp.

Scassiáre, to breake, to squease, to crush, or make as flat as a cake.

Scassiatúra, as Scassatúra.

Scassináre., looke Scassináto.

Scassináto, brused, squeased or crushed flat. Also driuen from his hould.

Scásso, as Cásso. Also as Scassináto.

Scastráre, to vnlib, to vngueld. Also to vnfasten.

Scastroníto, leaft of being a sheepe. Vsed also for guelded or lib'd.

Scatafáscio, as A scatafáscio, pell mell, confusedly, in hudling manner, rashly, at randon.

Scatapócchio. 

Scatelláre, as Sgaráre.

Scatenáre, to vnchaine, to vnshackle.

Scatenáta, Alla scatenáta, madly, wilfully, riotously, as a mad man vnchained.

Scatízza, a common scould.

Scatocello, as Scáto del cielo.

Scáto del cielo, great Peny-wort, Walpeny-wort, Penywort of the water, Venus-nauill or Sheepe-killing Peniwort.

Scátola, any kinde of flat-box, such as Apothecaries vse for Comfets or drugs. 

Scátola, plainely or a loud that all may heere and see.

Scatolétte, little, flat or round boxes.

Scatoliére, a box-maker.

Scatoline, little flat round boxes.

Scatta, a string or scarfe tied to a hunters horne.

Scattáre, as Riscattáre, to rescue.

Scaturígine d'ácqua, a dubbing, a source or rising spring of water purling out.

Scaturíre, rísco, ríto, to boubble, to source, to purle or gush as water out of a spring. Vsed also for to burst forth into teares.

Scaualcáre, to vnhorse, to a light from horse, to dismount, to dismount a piece.

Scandcatúra, an vnhorseing, an a lighting from horse, a dismounting.

Scaualláre, as Scaualcáre.

Scauardíno, a fish called a Bleake.

Scauáre, to dig vp from hollow or deepe, to make hollow, to boare through.

Scauernáre, to vnden, to discauerne.

Sauezzacóllo, a breake-necke, a rash mad man, a halter-sacke. Also A scauezzacóllo, rashly, furiously, madly, in headlong or breake-necke manner.

Scauezzadúre, a kind of salt fish.

Scauezzáre, to free or rid from any halter or bead-straine. Also to breake, to riue, to shiuer or split in sunder.

Scauigliáre, as Scapigliáre.

Scáuolo, a kind of Wigen or Teale.

Scáuro, one that hath his anckles bunching and standing out. Also as Scáro.

Scazza del' árbore d'una naue. 

Scazzambrello, a Hobgoblin, a sprite of the Battery, a Robin good fellow.

Scazzáre, to vnpintle.

Scazzáto, a iump, a thrust, a thumpe or push giuen a woman with a Cázzo.

Scazzelláre, to dildoe, to play or dandle with. Also to pricke, to prouoake or egge on.

Scazzoláre, to dally, to play or dandle with ones hands.

Scazzónto, a kind of dogrell rime.

Scazzótto, a Millers-thum, a Bull-fish or Gull.

Scazzúto, nigardly, sparing, nearehanded. Also pur-blind. Also prickles.

Sceda, ostentation, vaine-glorie or foolishnesse in taking. Also as Modello.

Scede, as Sceda.

Scedente, foolish and vaine-glorious.

Sceggiále, as Scaggiále.

Sceglibile, chusable, to be chosen.

Scegliere, scelgo, scelsi, scelto, or scegliúto, to chuse, to cull, to elect, to picke out.

Sceglitóre, a chuser, an elector, a culler. 

Scegliúto, chosen, pickt out, culled.

Scelerággine, any tretcherie, wickednesse, villanie, lewdnesse, vngodlinesse or vnlawfull act.

Sceleránza, as Scelerággine.

Sceleratezza, as Scelerággine.

Sceleráto, tretcherous, wicked, villanous, lewd, vngodly, cursed, vnnaturall.

Scelerità, as Scelerággine.

Sceleróso, as Sceleráto.

Scelesáre, to paue a street.

Scelesáta, a street pauement or caucie.

Scelesatóre, a Pauier.

Sceleste, as Sceleráto.

Sceletirbéno, a disease called the Scorbute or Shorbucke.

Scelmo, as Schelmo.

Scelo, wicked, naught, mischieuous, vngracious.

Scelta, a choise, an election, a culling.

Sceltézza, a choise or chusing.

Scelto, chosen, elect, selected, culled.

Scéma, a kind of figure in speech.

Scemaménto, a diminishing, an abating. Also a decreasing or waning.

Scemáre, to diminish, to abate, to lessen, to defalke. Also to decrease or wane as the Moone.

Sceméuole, diminishable.

Scemíta, the seuenth yeere of rest or relaxation among the Hebrewes.

Scémo, diminished, abated, decreased, waned. Also the wane or decrease of of the Moone. Also want, lacke or diminution. Also a simple foole or idiot whose wit is waned or decreased.

Scemoníto, as Scimoníto.

Scempiáre, to excruciate, to afflict, to torture, to torment, to vex, to molest.

Scempietà, as Semplicità, Simplicità.

Scempiézza, as Semplicità.

Scempio, torture, torment, affliction, molestation, vexation, reuengement.

Scempio, single, plaine, nothing double, without welt or guard.

Scempio, simple, foolish, harmelesse, shallow-headed, poore of vnderstanding.

Scéna, a stage or scaffold in a theater or play-house. But properly the forepart of a Theater where Plaiers make them ready, being trimmed with hangings, from out which they enter vpon the stage. Vsed also for any place where one doth shew and set forth himselfe to the world or to view. Also any one scene or entrance of a Comedie or Tragedie. Vsed also for a Comedie or Tragedie.

Scendere, scendo, scési, scéso, to descend or goe downe.

Scénico, of or pertaining to a stage or to a scene, or to a Comedie or to a Tragedie. 



Scennere, vsed anciently for Scernere.

Scéno, an Egiptian measure of threescore furlongs, which is seauen miles and a halfe.

Scenografía, a description of scaffolds, stages, scenes, pauilions or play-houses.

Scenophegía, the feast of the Tabernacles.

Scensa, the Ascension day. Also as Scésa.

Scépa, a Cuttle-fish.

Sceptro, as Scettro. Also as Aspalátho.

Scergáre, to frigle, to wrigle, to claw, to rub.

Scergatúra, a frigling, a wrigling, a clawing.

Scergere, scergo, scergéi, scergiúto, to snatch or take away in haste.

Scernere, scerno, scernéi, scernúto, to discerne, to perceiue, to ken and distinguish.

Scernita, a discerning, a perceiuing, a kenning, a distinguishing.

Scernitóre, a discerner, a perceiuer, a distinguisher, a kenner a farre off.

Scernúto, discerned, perceiued, kenned and distinguished a farre off.

Scerpellíno, a disease about the eyes.

Scerpellóni, foolish vnfitting phrases.

Scerre, as Scegliere, to chuse.

Sceruelláre, to vnbraine. Also to driue or make one to goe out of his wits.

Scésa, a descent, a comming downe, a declining. Also a running catarre or rheume.

Scésa di catárro, the falling or flux of a rheume or catarre.

Scéso, descended, come downe, alighted.

Scetra, a target of leather without wood.

Scetrífero, as Scetrígero.

Scetrígero, a Scepter-bearer, a Macebearer, a Sergeant at armes.

Scetro, a Kings scepter, a Sergeants mace. Also a Kingdome or Scepter-rule.

Scettiána, a kind of very round Apple.

Scettrífero, Scepter-bearing, a King.

Scettro, as Scetro.

Sceueráre, as Sceuráre.

Sceuità, vnluckinesse.

Scéuo, not right, leaft-handed. Also vnluckie.

Scéuola, wanting the right hand. Also the hearbe Toadpipes or Shaue-grasse.

Sceuráre, to seuer, to sunder, to separate.

Scéuro, seuered, sundred, separated.

Schéda, a sheete or leafe of paper, a skin of vellam or parchment. Also any scedule or scroule of writing.

Schédia, a bridge made in haste for a time. Also as Záttera. Also a kind of speare.

Schédio, as Schédia.

Schedióne, a great spit or broch. 

Schéggia, any shiver or splinter. Also a chap, a flaw or honiecombe in any mettall. Also a slate or flat stone. Vsed also for Assicelle.

Scheggiále, as Scaggiále.

Scheggiáre, to splint, to splinter, to shiuer. Also to chap or flaw.

Schéggie, splints, shiuers, broken pieces.

Scheggiétte, little splinters or shiuers.

Scheggioni, great shiuers or splinters.

Scheggióso, broken, shiuered, splintie, craggie, full of flawes.

Schelentia, the squinancie in the throat.

Scheletóne, a dried Anatomie of man or woman.

Schelíno, as Schelmo.

Schelma, as Schelmo.

Schelmo, a peg or piece of wood in any whirrie or boate called of our Watermen a thoule-pin, whereat they stay their Oares when they row.

Schéma, an ornament or figure in speech.

Schembáre, as Sgembáre.

Schembo, as Sgembo.

Schembóso, as Sgembóso.

Schêna, as Schiéna. Also a measure to measure land in Arabia containing fiue miles.

Schenáte, a kind of fish.

Scheniéra, a piece of armour for the backe, a backe-piece.

Schenúto, well or strongly backt or ridged.

Schenofilánda, a play called with vs, My hen hath laid.

Scheranello, a yongue or little Scheráno.

Scheráno, a murtherer, a robber, a highway theefe, a bloudie-minded swagrer. Also as Sgherro.

Scherdáre, to ruffianise or ruffian.

Scherdázzo, a filthy swagrer or ruffian.

Scherdo, a ruffian, a swagrer, as Sgherro.

Schericáto, vsed for a Priest without a Benefice. Also vnshauen.

Scheriuóle, Skiret-rootes.

Schérma, fencing, or the arte of fencing.

Schermáglia, as Schérma. Also a skirmish.

Schermággio, fencing or fighting.

Schermáglio, a fence or screene for the fire.

Schermáre, as Schermíre.

Schermatóre, as Schermitóre.

Schermire, mísco, míto, to fence, to skirmish, to ward or defend a blow.

Schermitóre, a fencer, a skirmisher, a master of fence. Also a parter of a fray.

Schérmo, fence, defence. Also shelter, shield, refuge, protection.

Schermuggiáre, to skirmish.

Schermúggio, a skirmishing. 

Scherna, as Scherno.

Schernáre, as Scherníre.

Schernéuole, scornefull, to be scorned.

Scherneuolménte, scornefully.

Scherniménto, a scorning, a flouting.

Scherníre, nisco, níto, to scorne, to flout, to mocke, to despise, to deride.

Schernitóre, a scorner, a flouter.

Scherno, a scorne, a mocke, a flout, a derision.

Scheruóle, Skiret-rootes.

Scherzaménto, iestings, a daliance, a toying.

Scherzáre, to iest, to toy, to dallie with.

Scherzatóre, a iester, a dallier with.

Scherzo, a iest, a toying, a dalliance.

Scherzóso., Looke Scherzo, full of iesting or dalliance.

Schési, a figure wherein many wordes are budled vp together.

Schiacchéro, as Scacchiére.

Schiáccia, a squatting place. Also a cake.

Schiacciáre, to crush, to squease on make as flat as a cake. Also to squat. Also to dash or bedash with durt. Also to blur or blurt, as Schiccheráre. Also to beslauer.

Schiacciáta, any kind of broad or flat cake or wafer.

Schiacciatella, as Schiacciatína.

Schiacciatína, any little or thin cake or wafer. Also the hoste or popes holybread.

Schiacciáto, crushed, squeased or made flat as a cake. Also dashed or blurted. Náso schiacciáto, a flat nose.

Schiaffeggiáre, to cuffe, to buffet or giue a whirret or box on the cheeke with ones hand, to clap on the cheeke.

Schiáffo, a cuff, a buffet, a box, a whirret or clap with a hand on the cheeke.

Schiamáre, to exclaime, to call or cry out. Also to cackle or clucke as a Hen.

Schiamazzáre, to make a cackling, a rumbling, a confused or scolding noise, to keepe a hurliburlie.

Schiamázzi, quélle fáue con chè sifà strépito nell'uccelláre. 

Schiamázzio, as Schiamázzo.

Schiamázzo, any rubling, cackling, rumorous, babling or scolding noise, a hurlieburlie.

Schiámo, as Schiamázzo. Also an exclaiming.

Schiancería, a cupbord-cloth to set plate or glasses vpon.

Schiantáre, to riue, to cleaue, to rap, to splint or rend in sunder, to open wide.

Schiantatúra, a riuing, a cleauing, a splinting, a chapping or rending open and in sunder.

Schiantéuole, that will or may be cleft, 



burst, chopt, riuen or shiuered in sunder.

Schiantoncella, a pretty lasse, a wanton wench, a guirle full of dalliance.

Schiántolo, a splint, a shiuer, a shiue, a scantlin, any little piece.

Schiánze, wens or vlcers gathered in manner of hony combes. Also the scurf, scalds or scabs that comes in childrens heads.

Schiánzo, a scantling, a little piece.

Schiappalégne, a Wood-cleauer or Feller.

Schiappáre, as Schiantare, to burst open.

Schiappatúra, as Schiantatúra.

Schiáppe, splints, chips or shiuers of wood.

Schiappéuole, as Schiantéuole.

Schiára, a Carpenters plaine.

Schiaráre, to clarifie, to cleare. Also to declare, to lay open or make cleere.

Schiarázza, a kinds of flat-bottomed ship.

Schiaréa, the hearbe Clary.

Schiaríre, rísco, ríto, as Schiaráre.

Schiárpa, a scarfe or a baudrike.

Schiarpáre, to scarf, to inscarfe, to baudrike.

Schiárro, a squirell.

Schiásso, a thumpe, a blow, a whirret.

Schiátta, a race, a stocke, a blood of a family, a generation, a pedigree.

Schiattále, as Schiátta.

Schiattéuole frómba, a darte-flying or hurling-sling.

Schiatrinare, to sully, to defile, to polute.

Schiattíscere, tísco, attéi, attúto, to barke, to bay, to baule or yar as a dogge.

Schiattoncella, a slie, a crafty or close wench.

Schiáua, a woman slaue. Also as úna.

Schiauáre, to vnlocke, to pull out the key.

Schiauézza, as Schiauitù.

Schiauína, a sea-mans rugge, a slaues-frocke, a Palmers-weed. Also a rough bed-couerlet.

Schiauíno, a chiefe ruler among Citizens or Townesmen, a Sherife.

Schiau tù, slauery, bondage, thraledome.

Schiauitúdine, as Schiauitù.

Schiáuo, a slaue, a thrall, a bondman, a gallyslaue, a forsat.

Schiauóne, a slauonian, but taken for a great slaue or bondman.

Schiázza, as Schiátta.

Schiazzáre, as Schiacciáre, as Schizzáre.

Schiázzi, as Schízzi.

Schíba, a kind of boies play in Italy.

Schicchera cárte, a blotter, a blurrer, a foolish scribler or dogrell Poet.

Schiccheráre, to beslime, or slauer as a snaile doth when shee creepeth. Also to blur, to blot or scribble as children doe their writing bookes.

Schíccheri, blurs, blots, dashes of bookes. Also the slauers or slimings of snailes.

Schiccheróne, as Schicchera-cárte.

Schicchifignáto, vóiséte la pórta, ma non la véra pórta, ciò e un schicchifignáto cosi fátto. 

Schicchizzáre, as Schiccheráre.

Schicciáre, as Schiacciáre.

Schidióne, any kind of spit or broach.

Schidonáre, to spit or broach.

Schidonáta, a spitfull or broachfull.

Schidóne, any kind of spit or broach.

Schieggie, ridges of high hils.

Schieggio, as Scheggio. Also as Scheglio.

Schieggiúzzo, a little chip, shiuer or splint.

Schiembácci, brothels, stewes, bawdy houses.

Schiembécci, as Schiembácci.

Schiéna, the backe, the chine or ridg bone of any body. Also the ridge or backe of any thing. Also the backe of a knife or any other weapon.

Schiéna di vitello, a loyne of Veale or the chine piece.

Schienále, of or belonging to the backe, chine or ridge-bone. Also a backe armour.

Schienáre., Looke Schiéna, to ridge, to backe.

Schienóso., Looke Schiéna, backe or ridge-boned.

Schienúto, ridged or strongly backt.

Schiéra, a troupe, a squadron, a ranke or a band of men, a cornet of horsemen. Also any orderly multitude. Also a row or ranke namely of trees.

Schieráno, miciliále, od assassino, o ládro, a highway thiefe, a murtherer, a bloudy swaggerer.

Schieráre, to entroope, to ensquadron, to marshall or set in troopes and arraie.

Schieráto, entrooped, ensquadroned, marshalled in troopes or array.

Schiericato, vnshauen. Also on that hath forsaken his conuent or friers order.

Schiettaménte, purely, singly, plainelie.

Schietteggiáre, to crackle as salt being put in the fire.

Schiettézza, purity, singlenesse, plainenesse, neatnesse, slightnesse, simplicity.

Schietto, neate, pure, single, plaine, without welt or gard, slight, vnspotted.

Schifagióne, as Schifézza.

Schifanóia, one that shunneth trouble or annoy.

Schifáre, to shun, to eschew, to auoide. Also to disdaine, to abhor or loath.

Schifáto, an auoiding, a shunning, an eschewing. Also a loathing, an abhorring.

Schiféuole, auoidable, to be shunned. Also lothsome, and to be abhorred, nasty, queasie.

Schifézza, nastinesse, queasinesse. Also quaintnesse, frowardnesse, or lothesomnesse.

Schiffa, chi giostrándo colpirà, rompendo nélla schiffa, guadagnerà un cólpo.

Schiffétto, a little Cocke-boate, Skiffe, Scallop or Whirry.

Schíffo, a Skiffe, a Cocke-boate, a Skallop.

Schifiltà, as Schifézza.

Schífo, coy, quaint, nice, fond, peeuish, puling, or froward. Also queasie, nastie, lothsome, odious, to be shunned, eschewed or auoided, disdainefull.

Schílco, a waight of foure ounces among the Iewes.

Schílle, a kind of Sea-crab, or Lobstar.

Schíma, skum, foame, froth.

Schimáte, to skum, to foame, to froth.

Schimatóio, a skummmer.

Schimbécci, lúi véde a Schimbécchi. 

Schimbóccio, as Schimbíccio.

Schimbiccheráre, as Schiccheráre.

Schimbíccio, a crankling or crooked winding in and out. Sedere a Schimbíccio, to sit crooked vpon ones legs as women doe.

Schimóso, skummie, frothie, fomie.

Schinále, a kind of Ling, or other saltfish.

Schínchi, the shanks or shinne bones, or smalles and spindles of ones legs.

Schinchimúrra, a skummering of a dog. Also a filthie great stinking turd.

Schinciáre, to stagger, or goe reeling as a drunken man.

Schíncio, Andár' a Schíncio, to stagger or reele as a drunken man.

Schinelle, as Schínchi. Also a disease in a Horse called the Splint.

Schiniéri, greaues or shank-pieces. Also gamashes.

Schíno, a Mastike-tree.

Schiodáre, to vnnaile, to make loose. Also as Suertáre.

Schionáto, backe, ridged. Also hauing a backe to leane vpon.

Schioppáre, to burst, to cracke, to snap, to pop as doeth a gun. Also to burst forth.

Schioppáta, a bursting out, a pop, a snap, a cracke as of a Dag or Pistoll.

Schioppeggiáre, as Schiopettáre.

Schioppettáre, as Schioppáre. Also to shoote of or at with any hand-gun. 



Schioppettaría, all manner of shot or hand-guns. Also shot-souldiers.

Schioppettáta, a blow or shot with any kind of hand-gun, or pistoll.

Schioppettíni, little dags, pocket-dags, or pot-guns. Also a kind of Augustine friers.

Schioppétto, any kind of hand-gun, pistoll, pocket-dag, or pot-gun.

Schióppo, any kinde of snap, cracke, crackling, or bursting noise. Also a sound or puffe made with the puffing of ones checkes. Also any kind of dag, pistoll, pot-gun, hand-gun, snaphance, or harquebut. Also a crackling squib.

Schiostóne, a kind of milke that Phisicions vse to make.

Sch ostráre, to vncloister.

Schirancía, the Squinancie,

Schiráso, a kind of Pinnace, Barge, or Boate.

Schiráttolo, a Squirell.

Schirázzo, as Schiráso.

Schiriuólo, a Squirell.

Schiróne, a bird called a Fieldfare.

Schirro, a hard swelling, and almost sencelesse.

Schísta, the clouen Onion. Also a kind of Egge that is all yolke and no white.

Schistone, a kind of stone of a saffron colour that gold refiners vse in refining of gold. Some take it for a kind of Alume, called Alum de Plúme, thicke, hard, and massiue. Also the red bloodstone.

Schitáno, as Schistóne.

Schiuáre, as Schifáre.

Schiúdere, schiúdo, schiúsi, schiúso, to exclude, to shut, or lockout.

Schiuétto, somewhat nice, coy, or quaint.

Schiuéuole, as Schiféuole.

Schiuézza, as Schifézza.

Schiúma, skum, foame, froth.

Schiumaccia, filthie skum, or froth.

Schiúma d'argento, litharge of siluer.

Schiumánte, foaming, frothing.

Schiumáre, to skum, to foame, to froth.

Schiumatóio, a skimmer, a skummer.

Schiumóso, foamie, frothie, skummie.

Schíuo, as Schíso.

Schiusióne, an exclusion, or shutting out.

Schiusíuo, exclusiue, to be shut out.

Schiúso, open, vnshut, vnlockt, vnsclused, excluded.

Schizzáre, to squirt as out of siringe. Also to spin, to streame, to sprinkle, to spurt or gush forth violently as blood out of a veine, to spout as out of a Conduit-cock. Also to crush, to burst, or squease out as matter out of a sore, to siringe, or iniect with a siringe. Also to pump water. Also to dash or dable with durt or mire. Also to blur with inke. Also to mute as a Hawke doeth. Also to skummer as a dog. Also to purle or buble as water doeth. Also to hop, to friske, to skip, or spurt. Also to crush or kernell small as touch-pouder. Also to draw the first rough draught, or engrosement of any worke or writing.

Schizzata, a squirting, a spurting, a gushing, a spinning foorth. Also a crushing or squeasing, a dashing with durt, a pumping of water, a blurring, a mute of a Hawke, a skummering of a dogge. Looke Schizzáre.

Schízzatóio, a squirt, a siringe. Also a spurt, or spout-pot. Also a great squirt to quench fire with, or fill and puff vp a ballone. Also a Vintners forcehead. Also a pump. Looke Schizzáre.

Schizzatóre, a squirter, a spouter, a spurter, a pumper, &c. Looke Schizzáre.

Schizzéro, as Schízzo.

Schizzináro, as Schizzinóso.

Schizzinóso, peeuish, selfweening, toyish, light-headed, skittish, froward.

Schízzo, a squirt, or squirting of any thing, a spurt or spurting, a purling, a bubling, a gushing forth, a blurt or blot of inke, a spot or dashing with durt or mire, a mute of a Hawke, a skummering of a dog, a water-pump, a squeasing or trushing of any sore. Also the first rough draught of any worke or writing. Also a friske, a hop, a skip or bounding leape. Looke Schizzáre.

Schízzole, kernels, graines, or cornes of gunpowder.

Schizzótto, a little spout of water rising out of the ground.

Schólia, as Scólia.

Schrembáre, as Sghembáre.

Schrembo, as Sgembo.

Scía, the place or bone or hip where the Sciatica commeth.

Sciabíca, a sweepe-net, a draw-net, a drag-net.

Sciabire, bisco, bíto, to become wanne, pale, dead coloured.

Sciabórdo, gullish, foolish, fond.

Sciaccáre, as Schiancáre.

Sciaccheráre, as Ciaccheráre.

Sciaccherelle, as Ciaccherelle.

Sciáco, a land Cocodrill.

Sciacquáre, to wash, to rence, to dable, or shake in the water as a glasse.

Sciacquatóio, a washing, a rencing place or vessell.

Sciacquatóre, a washer, a rencer. Also where dish-wash is kept in a kitchin.

Sciacquatúra, a washing, a rencing. Also wash for swine.

Sciadére, as Scipáre.

Sciagrafia, a description of a whole frame, a platforme of euery part of a building.

Sciagúra, a mischiefe, a misfortune, an ill lucke, a mishap, a mischance.

Sciagurággine, as Sciagúra, but properly the effect of a mischiefe.

Sciaguráto, mischieuous, vnluckie, vngracious. Also villanous or knauish.

Sciagurézza, as Sciagurággine.

Scialacquággine, wast full consuming, lauish prodigalitie, vnthriftie spending.

Scialacquaménto, as Scialacquággine.

Scialacquáre, to waste prodigally, to spend riotously as if it were water.

Scialacquáta di paróle, a huddle of foolish words, lauishly and fondly spoken.

Scialacquatóre, a waste-good, a spendthrift, a prodigall spender, an vnthrift.

Scialácquio, as Scialacquággine.

Scialassáre, to bleed or let bloud.

Scialbáre, to whiten or make pale.

Sciálbo, pale, wan, sallow-coloured.

Scialmatóre, in latine Psylus.

Sciamachía, a shadow or image of contention, a counterfeit fighting.

Sciamannáta, Alla sciamannáta, topsie-turuie, pell-mell, helter-skelter.

Sciamáre, to swarme together as Bees.

Sciamárro, an axe, a hatchet, a battleaxe.

Sciamíto, a kind of sleeue or filosello-silke. Also a thin kind of stuffe like Burato halfe silke and halfe wooll called Tamin.

Sciámo, a swarme of Bees.

Sciampiáre, to enlarge, to amplifie.

Sciamunnito, tastelesse, vnsauorie, walowish or waterish in taste.

Sciancare, to lame, to maime, to vnhip. Also to halt, to goe lame, to stagger, to limpe.

Sciancáto, as Sciánco.

Sciánco, hiplesse, broken hipt, lame, limping, criple, lame-legd, hought.

Sciánza, as Sciática.

Sciapitézza, vnsauorinesse, wallowishnesse in taste.

Sciapíto, as Sciamuníto.

Sciáppo, as Sciamuníto.

Sciáre, to know by science, to wot, to ken. Also to cry all with one voice or consent as Mariners doe when they heaue anchors or hoise sailes. Also to cut or furrow the sea or water with a ship.

Sciaria, the hearbe Clarie or Cleere-eye.

Sciaroppáta, any kind of wet sucket or preserue. Also a siroping.

Sciatpellóne, as Farfallóne. Also an vnluckie tale. Also a grosse lye, as wee say a gudgeon or lying for the whetstone.

Sciárra, a brawle, a iar, a fray, a buz­



ling, a contention, a strife. Also a scattering, a scambling.

Sciarramento, as Sciárra.

Sciarráre, to scatter, to put to rout or defeat as an armie of men. Also to brawle, to iarre, to striue, to buzzle.

Sciarráta, as Sciárra.

Sciarréro, a brawler, a contentious or buzling fellow. Also a scambler.

Sciarróso, full of scattering or scambling. Also quarrellous and brabling.

Sciáte, an instrument vsed in choosing the situation of Citties.

Sciática, a grieuous disease called the Sciatica or Hip-gout.

Sciático, one that hath the Sciatica or Hip-gout.

Sciaticóso, as Sciático.

Sciauógo, et per potér fáre sciauóga, et lestaménte ritirársi, &c. 

Sciaúra, as Sciagúra, a mischiefe.

Sciauráto,  as Sciaguráto.

Scíbile, that may be knowen.

Scibilità, knowingnesse, effect of knowledge.

Scibilménte, wittingly, with knowledge.

Scidére, scído, scísi, scíso, to disioine, to deuide with cutting.

Sciede, mockes, floutes, frumps. Also illusions. Also self-conceites or follies.

Sciegliere, as Scegliere.

Scielinguáre, as Scilinguáre.

Scielta, as Scelta, a choise.

Scielto, as Scelto, chosen.

Sciemáre, as Scemáre, to diminish

Sciemáto, as Scemáto, diminished.

Sciemità, diminution, emptinesse.

Sciémo, as Scémo.

Sciempiáre, as Scempiáre.

Sciempiézza, as Scempiézza, simplicitie.

Sciémpio, single, not double.

Sciéna, as Schiéna. Also a certaine fish that hath a stone in his head.

Sciente, knowing, witting. Also one that is full of sciences, skill or knowledge.

Scienreménte, wittingly, with knowledge, of purpose. Also skilfully.

Scientia, science, knowledge, skill, vnderstanding, learning.

Scientiále, scientiall, of, full, or pertaining to skill or knowledge.

Scientiáre, to teach or instruct in the sciences, skill or knowledge.

Scientiáto, scienced, skilfull, full of sciences, learning or knowledge.

Scientifico, as Scientiáto.

Scientióso, as Scientiáto.

Scienza, as Scientia.

Sciepáre, to hedge in, to set hedges.

Scierpellóne, as Sciarpellóne.

Scierre, as Scegliere.

Sciferáre, to decipher, to vncipher. 

Scificáre, as Schifáre.

Scifoláre, as Zuffoláre.

Scífolo, as Zúffolo.

Scíglia, the roote of the white Lillie.

Scignére, to vngird, to vnlace.

Scilecca, Dío uóglia che non si fácci úna scilecca al Pápa. 

Scilinguáre, to lispe in speech. Also to stutter, to stammer, to maffle or falter in speech.

Scilinguágno, as Scilinguágnolo.

Scilinguágnolo, the string vnder the tongue, which if it be not cut in yong children, wil hinder their speech when they come to speake.

Scilinguáto, stutted, stammered, maffled. Also one that is tongue-tied. Also a stutter, a lisper, a stammerer, a mafler.

Scilíua, as Salíua.

Sciluatióne, as Saliuatióne.

Sciliuóso, as Saliuóso.

Scílla, the Squílla or Sea-onion. Also a kind of Sea-shrimpe or Praune. Also a dangerous gulfe in the Sicilian Sea.

Scillíno, as Scillíte.

Scillíte, a kind of Vineger wherin Squilla is steeped vsed in Phisike.

Scilócco, the South-east winde.

Scilóma, as Andiriuiéni.

Sciloppáre, to sirop, to put in sirope, to drinke or minister sirops, to make sirrop. Also to scald with scalding water. Also to gall or flea off the skin. Vsed also to prepare a man for Phisike two or three daies with sirrops and other preparatiues.

Sciloppiáre, as Sciloppáre.

Scilóppo, any kind of sirrop.

Scíma, the cricke in a Horse.

Scimalár, a kind of Witchcraft.

Scimáre, to sheare, to shred, to pare or cut off the top of any thing, to sheare cloth.

Scimatóre, a cloth-shearer.

Scimatúra, shearing of cloth.

Scímia, a Munkie or Ape.

Scimiarella, as Scimiétta.

Scimiétta, a little Ape or Munkie.

Sciminésco, apish, munkish, foolish.

Scimionáte, apish toies, munkish trickes.

Scimióne, a great Ape or Munkie.

Scimiótto, a handsome Ape or Munkie.

Scimitára, a Simitar or Turkish sword.

Scimitárra, a Simitar or Persian sword.

Scímmia, as Scímia.

Scimoniére, a foolish Apish fellow.

Scimpódio, a low couch-bed.

Scimoníto, apish, munkish. Also a foole, a gull.

Scimuníto, as Scimoníto.

Scínco, a Serpent breeding in Nilus streames, called a Skinke or Land-crocodill, somewhat like to a Crocodill, but much lesse, whose flesh is an excellent antidote or counterpoison.

Scíndere, seíndo, scísi, sciso, to cut off or in sunder.

Scineo, as Scínco.

Scíngere scíngo, scínsi, scínto, to vnguird.

Scintílla, a sparke or sparkle of fire. Also a spangle. Also a twinckling.

Scintillánte, sparkling. Also twinkling. Also spangling. Also sprinkling as wine leaping in a cup.

Scintilláre, to sparkle. Also to twinckle. Also to spangle. Also to sprinkle.

Scintillatióne, sparkling or dazeling of the eies.

Scintillétta, a little sparkle or spangle.

Scinto, vngirt, vngirded.

Scioccággine, as Sciocchézza.

Scioccarelággine, as Sciocchézza.

Scioccheggiáre, to play the foole.

Scioccheria, foolery, dotage, folly.

Sciocchézza, folly, fondnesse, foolishnesse.

Sciócco, a foole, an idiot, a noddy, a gull.

Sciócco, foolish, fond, gullish, simple.

Scioccóne, a gullish, grose-headed fellow, a great foole.

Sciógliere, sciólgo, sciólsi, sciólto, to let loose, to vnty, to loosen, to dissolue, to vnbind. Also to absolue, to quit, to discharge. Also to vnsnare or vntangle.

Scióglier vóti, to pay vowes.

Sciogliménto, a loosing, a dissoluing.

Sciographía, as Sciagraphía.

Scióia, a crie or call that women call their hens and chickins by or driue them away.

Scioiáre, to cry shooe shooe, as women do to their hens.

Sciolláre, to splint, to shiuer, to flaw, to loosen. Also to spoile, to mar, to waste.

Scióllo, split, shiuered, flawed, loose. Also spoiled, marred, wasted or ruined.

Sciólo, a stupide gull, a blockish noddie.

Scioloppáre, as Sciloppáre.

Sciólte paróle, loose or free words.

Scioltézza, loosenesse, liberty, freedome. Also nimblenesse, quicke agility.

Sciólto, loose, free, at liberty, vntide, vntangled, vnsnared. Also quit, absolued or discharged. Also quick, nimble and full of agility. Also a kind of verse among the Italians, a loose verse a blancke verse.

Scioltúra, as Scioltézza.

Scióluere, scióluo, scioluéi, scioluúto, to breake ones fast in the morning. 



Sciománte, a soothsayer by shadowes.

Sciomantía, diuination by shadowes.

Scióni, Whirle-pooles in the sea.

Scionománte, as Sciománte.

Scionomantía, as Sciomantía.

Sciopédi, certaine people that lying along shadow themselues with their feet.

Scioperággine, lazinesse, idlenesse, lithernesse, retchlesnesse, loitring.

Scioperáte, to loiter, to be idle, lazie, lither and carelesse to doe any thing.

Scioperatággine, as Scioperággine.

Scioperáto, idle, lazi, lither, doing nothing, vnoccupide, retchles.

Scioperío, as Scioperággine.

Scioperóne, an idle, lazie, lither, retchlesse, slothfull or loitring companion.

Scioperóso, as Scioperáto.

Sciopíno, a pinch, a plunge, a danger, a hazard, an exigent.

Scioráre, as Sciorináre.

Sciorináre, to spred or hange or shake out clothes in the aire or winde, to aire clothes, to coole in the winde. Also to pisse or make water with a noise as women doe. Also to spout, to spirt, to gush, to purle, to bubble or streame foorth as blood or water. Also to burst foorth in laughter. Also to soare in the wind as a Hauke or Kite doth. Also to rid or free from danger or trouble. Also to manage or handle in sporting manner.

Sciórre, as Sciógliere.

Sciórrere, sciórro, sciórsi, sciorrúto, to sweepe with a broome, to brush with a brush.

Sciórro, a Squirell.

Sciosciáre, to blow with bellowes.

Sciosciatóre, a blower, a paire of bellowes.

Sciot ério, a sun-diall, or any instrument to cast a shadow.

Scióuere, scióuo, sciouéi, sciouúto, to harrow or breake vp the ground after it is marled or dunged, to let it lie fallow.

Sciouúto, harrowed or broken vp the ground after it is marled or dunged.

Scipa, a sheepe. Also a simple gull, a harmelesse noddy, an idiot, a foole.

Scipáre, to play the sheepe, the gull or noddy. Also to wast and dissipate.

Scípho, a certaine vessell to drinke with.

Scipidézza, wallowishnesse in taste.

Scipignáte, stripes, blowes, thumps.

Scipire, písco, píto, to ripen till it be mellow or rotten, and to become tastelesse or wallowish. Also as Scialacquáre.

Scippare, to make shift for.

Scipula, a kind of wine or grape.

Scitázzo, a kind of ship or boate.

Scírico, a colour mixt with ruddle and sinoper, a blunket or light watchet.

Scirignáte, stripes, blowes, thumpes.

Scírio, a kind of stone which being whol swimmeth vpon the water, and broken sinketh downe.

Scíto, as Scírro.

Scirócco, the Southeast winde.

Sciróne, a wind blowing only at Athens Westward.

Sciropárc, as Sciloppáre.

Sciroppáto, all manner of wet suckets.

Sciróppo, any kind of Sirop.

Scírpi, captious or subtill sentences.

Scirpulo, a kind of cuite, or sweete wine.

Scírro, a hard swelling without paine, growne in the flesh within the skinne, caused through choller, or thicke colde and clammie fleagme.

Scirróma, hardnesse in any part of the body, namely in the Liuer or Spleene.

Scirrósi, a disease in the eyes hauing flesh growne in or about them somewhat blew.

Sciruppáre, as Sciloppáre.

Scischiáre, to blow with bellowes.

Scischiatóre, a blower, a paire of bellowes.

Scísma, Schisme, diuision or dissention in or about religion and Church-matters.

Scismático, Schismaticall or dissentious in matters of the Church or religion.

Scissióne, a sundring, a cutting in sunder, a cision. Also a diuision, or separation.

Scísso, deuided, cut in sunder, separated. Also spoiled, broken, or cut in pieces.

Scissúra, a cision, a slitting or cutting in sunder. Also ruine, spoile, or hauoke.

Scitála, a kind of secret cifer vsed among the Spartans. Also a kind of song among the Grecians. Also a kind os darting weapon with wildfire in it. Also as Scitále.

Scitálca, as Scitála, or Scitále.

Scitále, a Serpent, which being very slow in creeping, stayeth those he meeteth with the strange, and maruellous varietie of the specks, and maruellous glistring colours of his backe, whom otherwise hee can not ouertake and bite, whose biting is deadly, called a Hardie-shrew. Some take it for the Shrew-mouse.

Scitaménto, a pleasantnesse, or any wittie inuention to adorne ones talke.

Scitáre, to decree, to ordaine or statute. Also to adorne ones talke with any wittie inuention. Also to aske or demand things secret and vnknowne. Also to dispaire, or fall into desperation.

Scithi, certaine stones which Poets saine to be in Apollos diademe. 

Scítica, an hearbe.

Scíto, an ordinance, a statute, a decree. Also a wittie saying, or quaint inuention, or golden sentence to adorne ones talke. Also gay, trim, fine iolly, faire, goodly and handsome. Also wittie, skilfull, quaint, and nimble.

Sciussáre, to plucke by the snout.

Sciugággine, drinesse, drought, dry-wiping.

Sciugamáno, a hand to well or wiper.

Sciugáre, to dry, to wipe or rub dry.

Sciugarína cárta, sucking or blotting paper.

Sciugatóio, a wiper, a hand-towell.

Sciugauíso, a face or head-wiper.

Sciúgo, a chariot with six horses.

Sciuguláre, as Sciugáre.

Sciugulatóio, as Sciugatóio, a sleekestone.

Sciumázzo, as Schiamázzo.

Sciúrro, a Squirrell.

Sciuttaménte, dryly.

Sciuttáre, as Sciugáre.

Sciútto, dry, dried, wiped dry.

Scizzíno, a kind of wine anciently vsed in Greece.

Sclamáre, to exclaime or cry out, to shout, to call vnto.

Sclamatióne, an exclamation or outcrying, a shouting.

Sclaréa, the hearbe Clarie.

Sclerocéfalo, a kinde of vermine or worme.

Scliníte, a precious stone which vpon white shineth yellow, and hath the image of the Moone in it, which encreaseth and waneth as the Moone in the firmament.

Sclirótico, a thicke and hard pannicle about the eyes.

Sclopendra, as Scolopendra.

Sclúsa, a water-sluce, a flud-gate.

Sclusióne, an exclusion, a shutting out.

Sclúso, exclused, shut out.

Scoázze, all manner of filthy sweepings.

Scóbbia, a kind of Carpenters toole.

Scocátolo, a Squirrell.

Scócca, a clacke, a snap, a pop, a clicke.

Scoccáre, to clacke, to clap, to snap, to pop, to clicke, as an arrow out of a Crosse-bow.

Scoccáre délle hóre, the striking of the clocke.

Scócchi, certaine souldiers, or rather wilde outlawes vpon the mountaines of Sclauonia continually warring vpon the Turkes.

Scocchiumáre, úna bótte, to bung a But.

Scocciáre, to shake off, to launch forth a ship from the stocke and out of a docke.

Scoccobrináre, to play the mimike gester or buffone, as an Ape or Munkie. 



Scoccobrineggiáre, as Scoccobrináre.

Scoccobrino, a mimike iester, a buffone that imitates as an Ape or Munkie.

Scoccoláto, huge, boundlesse, immense, vaste, vnmeasurable-great.

Scoccoueggiáre, as Galeffáre.

Scodáto, without a tale, curtald.

Scodella, any kind of dish or potanger.

Scodelláio, a dish-maker.

Scodelláre, to dish, to put into dishes.

Scodellíno, a little dish, saucer or potanger.

Scodoláto, without a taile, or shakon the tale.

Scoffiáre, hath been vsed for Scoppiáre.

Scoffione, as Scúffia.

Scoffóni, gamashes or vpper stockings.

Scófole, as Scrófole.

Scóggia, per essere girábile bisogna che pássi per due scóggie. 

Scóglia, vsed for Scórza.

Scogliáre, as Scorzáre. Also to cut off or depriue of ones priuie members.

Scóglio, a rocke or shelfe in the Sea.

Scóglio di serpe, the skin that a Snake casts off.

Scoglionáre, to cut off ones priuie members. Also to geld, to lib or splay.

Scoglionáto, without priuy members. Also gelded, lib'd or splaide.

Scoglióso, full of rockes or shelues, rockie.

Scoiátolo, a Squirrell.

Scóio, as Scóglio. Also an apron. Also a shiuering, a quiuering or shaking.

Scoiuólo, a Squirrell.

Scóla, a Schoole. Also a Colledge or place where any thing or learning is taught. Also the sect or opinion of any sect of Philosophers. Also a lesson or disputation between the master and the scholler.

Scoladúra, any dropping, trilling or dripping. Also a running out or a leake in a ship. Also the running of the reines. Also any running issue or sore. Also any downe-hanging and dropping ise-sickles. Also any leaden pipe or gutter to conueigh water from off houses tops. Also a sinke. Also the skirt of bases, taces or any long garment. Also any thing strained through a collander.

Scolagióne, as Scoladúra.

Scoláio, as Scoláre.

Scolaménto, as Scoladúra.

Scoláre, a scholler, a learner, a disciple.

Scoláre, to drop, to trill, to trickle downe, to drip. Also to leake as a ship doth. Also to straine through a collander. Also to shed ones seede, or runne as from a sore. Also to melt or thaw. Also to vnglue

Scolarésco, as Scolástico.

Scolasterio, a Schoole or Schoole-house. 

Scolástico, scholastike, scholasticall, scholler-like. Also of or belonging to a schoole, to a scholler or to schollership.

Scolatióne, as Scoladura.

Scolatióne di ócchij, the running of the eyes.

Scolatióne di réni, the running of the reines.

Scolatóio, a gutter, a sinke, or any conueyance of water. Also a collander or strainer.

Scolatóio d'una città, a common sinke, gutter or shore of a Cittie.

Scoláto piómbo, moulten leade.

Scolatúra, as Scolatióne.

Scolécia, a kind of verdegreace, or rust of brasse in manner of a worme.

Scolécio, as Scitále.

Scolatura, as Scoladúra.

Scolecióne, a kind of Scarlet-graine that quickly turnes to a grub or maggot.

Scolétio, as Scitále.

Scólia, a scholie, that is, a close, a short or compendious exposition.

Scoliantidátilo, a foote of a verse consisting of six sillables.

Scoliáre, to expound closely, shortly and compendiously.

Scoliárca, a Schoolemaster.

Scoliatóre, an expounder of any thing closely and compendiously.

Scolimóne, a kind of Sowthistle or Artichocke.

Scólio, as Scólia.

Scólio coreo, as Scoliantidátilo.

Scolláre, to vnnecke. Also to vnglue, to bare ones necke.

Scolláto, vnneckid. Also vnglued. Also without any thing about his necke.

Scollatúra, the hole of any garment to put ones head or necke through, as a smocke.

Scólo di látte, butter-milke, whig or whay.

Scolopendra, an earewig, a long earecrooper. Also Stoneferne, Spleene wort, Milt waste, Scaleferne, Fingerferne Ceterach or Stonewort.

Scolependro, a fish like a land Earewig, that casteth out his bowels vntill the hooke wherewith he is taken be out, and then sucketh them in againe.

Scolopomacherio, an instrument called a Gammot or Incisian-knife which Chirurgions vse to cut out the rootes of vlcers and sores.

Scoloraménto, a discolouring.

Scoloráre, to discolour, to wax pale.

Scolorársi, to become wan or pale.

Scoloríre, rísco, ríto, as Scoloráre.

Scolpáre, to acquit or cleare from blame.

Scolpéuole, vnguiltie, blamelesse, faultlesse. 

Scolpíre, písco, pito, to carue, to engraue.

Scolta, a scout, a sentinell, a listning.

Scoltóre, a Caruer, a Grauer, a Sculpter.

Scoltúra, Sculpture, Caruing, Engrauing.

Scolturésca arte, the Arte of Ingraueing.

Scomagnáre, to incircle, or compasse in.

Scombauáre, to be-slauer, to be-driuell.

Scomberello, as Haustório.

Scombiccheráre, as Schiccheráre.

Scombicchiáre, as Schiccheráre.

Scombigliáre, as Scompigliáre.

Scombiglio, as Scompíglio.

Scombraía, an Iland in Spaine so called of the many Mackrell-fishes taken about it.

Scómbro, a Mackrell-fish.

Scombugliáre, as Scompigliáre.

Scombúglio, as Scompíglio.

Scomigliáre, to vncouer, to vnhill.

Scomíglio, an vncouering, an vnhilling.

Scómma, a sentence spoken in mirth, that soundeth otherwise then is ment by the speaker.

Scomméssa, a bet, a lay, a wager.

Scomméttere, métto, mísi, mésso, to disorder, to misplace, to remooue from place to place. Also to inioyne or commit to ones charge. Also to bet or lay a wager. Also to forfeit or confiscate. Also to prouoake or set one and bring to contention. Also to offend or trespasse. Also to disioynt or make loose.

Scommésso, disordered, misplaced. Also betted or laid a wager. Also loose or disioynted.

Scommetritóre, a disorderer, a misplacer. Also a better or laier of wagers.

Scommiatáre, as Accommiatáre.

Scomodáre, as Incomodáre.

Scomodità, as Incomodità.

Scómodo, as Incómodo.

Scomóuere, muóuo, móssi, mósso, to dismooue, to disorder, to misplace, to disioynt.

Scomósso, dismooued, disordered, disioynted, misplaced, out of ioynt.

Scomouiménto, a mouing out of place. Also a commotion or hurly burly.

Scomouitóre, a stirrer of commotions, a turbulent stirrer of sedition.

Scomouizióne, as Scomouiménto.

Sconipagnaménto, an vncoupling, a disaccompaning, a sundring, a separating.

Scompagnáre, to diuorce, to part company, to vncouple, to seuer, to part in sunder.

Scompagnáto, alone, disaccompanied, 


without company, vncoupled, diuorced.

Scompagnatúra, as Scompagnaménto.

Scomparíre, rísco, ríto, to vanish out of sight.

Scompartiménto, as Compartiménto.

Scompartíre, tísco, títo, to deuide, to part a sunder, to share. Also to compart in armory.

Scompigliáre, to put to confusion, rout, disorder or tumultuous vprore.

Scampigliataménte, confusedly, pellmell.

Scompíglio, hurly-burly, pell-mell, confusion, vprore, tumult, disorder, discord.

Scompisciaménto, a bepissing.

Scompisciáre, to bepisse.

Scomputáre, to disreckon.

Scompúto, a discomputation.

Scomunáre, to discommune.

Scomúnica, an excommunication.

Scomunicagióne, an excommunication.

Scomunicáre, to excommunicate.

Scomunicatióne, an excommunication.

Scomúzzolo, as Sboccáta, as Boccáta.

Sconcacáre, to beshite, to becacke.

Sconcertáto, vntuned, out of tune. Also confused, formelesse, disordered.

Sconchiúso, vnconcluded, vncertaine.

Sconciaménte, vnhandsomly, vnorderly, confusedly, disorderly. Also vntimely or abortiuely as when a woman is deliuered before hir time. Also hugelie, greatly, beyond measure. Also incommodiously.

Sconciáre, to disorder, to bring out of frame, to make vnhandsome, to marre. Also to miscarry as a woman when she is brought to bed before hir time. Also to misplace or bring any part out of ioynt. Also to trouble, to molest, or incommode and to disturbe.

Sconciataménte, as Sconciaménte.

Sconciatúra, a mischance or abortiue deliuery afore due time.

Scóncio, miscaried, comming vntimely or abortiuely. Also disordered, vnhandsome or out of frame, ill handled, vndrest, illfauoured, or out of ioynt and order. Also vgly-great, absurd and lubbard-like. Also a mishap or ill lucke, a trouble, a tediousnesse, a molestation, a disturbance, a disordering.

Sconcobríno., looke Báttole.

Sconcordánza, a discord, a discordance.

Sconcordáre, to disacord, to disagree.

Sconcórdia, as Discórdia.

Scondaruóle, a play called hood-man-blind or fox in the hole or king by your leaue.

Scondiscésa, as Rúpe, or Rípa.

Sconferráre, as Sferráre.

Sconfelssáre, to deny what one hath said.

Sconficcáre, to break vp or open by force, to commit burglary.

Sconfidánza, distrust, mistrust.

Sconfidáre, to distrust, to mistrust.

Sconfidáto, distrusted, distrustfull.

Sconfidente, disconfident, mistrustfull.

Sconfidenza, dissidence, distrust.

Sconfiggere, figgo, físsi, fitto, to discomfite, to defeate, to vanquish, to euerthrow or to confound in fight. Also to breake in pieces.

Sconfítta, a discomfiture, a defeature, an ouerthrow in fight.

Sconfítto, discomfited, defeated, put to flight or rout, ouerthrowen in fight.

Sconfóndere, fóndo, fondei, fondúto, to confound, to put to confusion.

Sconfondiménto, a confounding, a putting to confusion.

Sconfondúto, confounded, put to confusion and disorder.

Sconfortáre, to discomfort, to disswade.

Sconfórto, a discomfort, a disswasion.

Scongiúra, a coniuration, a conspiracie.

Scongiuráre, to coniure, to conspire.

Scongiuratóre, a coniurer, a conspirer.

Scongiúrò,  a coniuring, an vrgeing vnto.

Sconoscente, vnacknowledging, vnthankefull.

Sconoscenza, vnacknowledgement, ingratitude, vnthankefulnesse.

Sconóscere, nósco, nóbbi, nosciúto, to disacknowledge, to forget and be vnthankefull.

Sconoscíbile, that cannot or may not be knowen or acknowledged.

Sconoscitóre, a disacknowledger.

Sconosciúto, disacknowledged, become vnthankefull. Also vnknowne or vncouth.

Sconquassáre, as Conquassáre.

Sconquásso, a rumbling, a tossing, a hurly-burly.

Sconquazzáre, as Conquassáre. Also as Squaccaráre.

Sconscientiáto, consciencelesse.

Sconsecráto, vnconsecrated, vnhallowed

Sconsertáre, as Sconcertáre.

Sconsiderággine, inconsideration.

Sconsideratióne, inconsideration.

Sconsideráto, inconsiderate, indiscreet.

Sconsigliáre, to discounsell, to disswade.

Sconsoláre, to discomfort. 

Sconsolatióne, discomfort, disconsolation.

Sconsoláto, discomforted, comfortlesse.

Scontáre, to abate, or defalke in reckonings.

Scontentáre, to discontent, to displease.

Scontentézza, discontentment.

Sconténto, discontentment. Also discontent.

Scónto, an abatement in reckoning.

Scontórcere, tórco, sórsi, tórto, to shrug, to crinch, to writhe, to wriggle or turne about.

Scontorciménto, a shrugging, a crinching, a writhing, a wrigling or turning about.

Scontórto, shrug'd, crinched, wreathed, wrigled or made crooked.

Scontrafátto, vglie, disfigured, deformed, mangled, defaced. Also counterfeit.

Scontráre, to encounter, to shoke, to but, or meete with or vpon.

Scontrázzo, a suddaine encounter, a suddaine skirmish or bickering.

Scóntro, an encounter, a shocke, a buting vpon or meeting with.

Sconturbáre, to disturbe, to molest, to vex or trouble.

Sconuenenza, as Sconuenenolézza.

Sconuenéuole, vnconuenient, vnmeete, vnseemely, vncomely, vnfit.

Sconueneuolézza, vnseemelinesse, inconuenience, vncomlinesse, vnfitnesse.

Sconueneuolménte, vnconueniently, vndecently, vncomely.

Sconueniente, an inconuenience. Also as Sconuenéuole.

Sconueníre, véngo, vénni, venúto, to misbeseeme, to be vncomely or vnmeete.

Sconuenúto, misbeseemed, vnbecome.

Sconuersáre, to disconuerse, to vnfrequent.

Sconuersatióne, an vnfrequenting.

Sconuiéne, it is vnconuenient.

Sconuólgere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, to ouerturne, to tumble, to tosse or ouerwhelme. Also to haue a crampe or conuulsion.

Sconuolgiménto, an ouerturning, an ouerwhelming, a tumbling or tossing ouer. Also a crampe or conuulsion.

Sconuólto, ouerturned, ouerwhelmed, tumbled or tossed ouer. Also spasmatike, subiect to the crampe or hauing a conuulsion.

Sconuoltúra, as Sconuolgiménto.

Scónza, ouersoure leauen for bread.

Scópa, a broome, a besome. Also a brush. Also a branch with leaues vpon it.

Scópabordelli, a drudge or sweeper of 


bawdy houses.

Scopachiése, a sweepe-church. Also a dissembling puritane.

Scopamóndo, dónna scopamóndo, a woman that is euer gadding about.

Scopaprigióne, a sweepe-prison. Also one that is seldome out of prison.

Scopáre, to sweepe, to beesome. Also to brush. Also to whip, to scourge or beate with a rod or broome. Also to vnden, to vn-kennell or beate out of a corner.

Scoparégia, a kind of bramble or shrube to make broomes or brushes of. Also a flower or hearbe which some take for the yellow Yarrow.

Scopáre il cannóne, to spunge a piece, to scoure a Cannon.

Scopáro, a broome or brush-maker.

Scoparóla, a brush or little broome. Also a Gunners spunger.

Scopatóre, a sweeper. Also a Scauenger. Also a whipper or a scourger.

Scopazzára, a place where all filth and sweepings are cast.

Scopázze, all manner of sweepings and filth. Also rubbish or rubble.

Scopázzo, as Scopazzara.

Scopelláre, as Scarpelláre.

Scopellíno, a little cizell or pouncer.

Scopello, a cizell of any kind.

Scoperchiáre, to discouer, to vncouer.

Scoperchiatúra, an vncouering.

Scoperna, a kind of meate in Italy.

Scoperta, a discouery. Also discouered.

Scoperta, in open view, manifestly, apparantly, openly. Also a discouery.

Scoperto, discouered, vncouered. Also disclosed, laide open, reuealed.

Scopétta, a brush. Also a Gunners spunge.

Scopettáre, to brush. Also to sweepe.

Scopettáro, a Brush-maker.

Scopettiére, a Brush-maker.

Scópo, a scope, a purpose or intent, the end or marke whereat ones purpose is directed or aimed. Also a kind of tree. Also a bird.

Scópola, any kind of brush or beesome.

Scopoladóre, a Smithes quenching-brush.

Scopoláre, to sweepe. Also to brush.

Scópolo, as Scópulo.

Scopolóso, as Scopulóso.

Scóppa, a Weezle. Also a Stote.

Scoppáre, to vntile, to vnslate, or vncouer a house. Also to knocke out ones braines or on the head, as a Butcher doeth an Oxe or Calfe.

Scoppétta, a brush, a little broome.

Scoppertáre, to sweepe, or to brush.

Scoppettáro, a brush-maker.

Scoppettáta, a blow or hit with a brush.

Scoppettiére, a brush or broome-maker. 

Scoppettína, a little brush.

Scoppiáte, to vncouple. Also as Schioppáre.

Scoppiare délla rísa, to burst with laughing.

Scoppiatúra, a bursting, a cracking.

Scoppiettáre, as Schioppettáre.

Scoppiétto, as Schioppétto.

Scoppiéuole, that may burst or cracke.

Scóppio, as Schióppo.

Scoppióne, any great gunne or Musket. Also a great cracke or bursting out.

Scopríre, cópro, copersi, coperto, to discouer, to disclose, to vncouer, to vnhill.

Scopritóre, a discouerer.

Scópule, two broad bones comming from the necke to the shoulders on both sides called the shoulder-blades.

Scópulo, a high steepie rocke. Also a Sea-marke. Also a high bunch, knob, or knur.

Scopulosità, aboundance of rocks. Also knobbinesse, bunchinesse, knurrinesse.

Scopulóso, full of high rocks, shelfs or crags and dangers in the sea, rockie.

Scoraggiáre, to discourage, to disharten.

Scoraggióso, discourageous, heartlesse.

Scoráre, to discourage, to disharten.

Scorbacchiáre, as Sgaráre.

Scorbiáre, as Sgorbiáre.

Scorbiaménti, as Sgorbiaménti.

Scórbio, as Sgórbio. Also a cancelling of any writing.

Scorbúto, a disease called the Scuruie. Also scuruie.

Scorcia-píni, a kind of Lighter, Barke, or Barge.

Scorciáre, to shorten, to curtall, to abridge.

Scorciatúra, a shortning, a curtalling.

Scórcio., looke In Scórcio.

Scórcio, craftie, wilie. Also the end, the head, or vtmost of any thing. Also a shortning.

Scorconáre, as Scrocconáre.

Scorcóne, as Scroccóné.

Scordánza, obliuion. Also discordance.

Scórdami, I doe forget.

Scordáre, to disaccord. Also to forget.

Scordásto, a kind of tree that yeeldeth very good gum.

Scordáto, vncorded, vnstrung. Also forgotten.

Scordéuole, forgetfull, to be forgotten.

Scórdio, Scordion, or water germander.

Scórdo, vsed for Diseórdia.

Scordóto, as Scórdio.

Scoréggia, a scourge, a whip.

Scoreggiáre, to whip, to scourge.

Scoreggiáta, a whip, or a sourge. Also a blow or stripe with a scourge.

Scorfanello, as Scorpéna.

Scórfano, as Scorpéna.

Scorfóglio, the rind of a Pomegranate. 

Scórgere, Scórgo, Scorgéi, Scorgiúto, or Scórto, to perceiue, to ken a farre off, to discerne, or be aware of. Also to guide, to leade, or direct vnto, to conuey, to conduct.

Scorgiménto, perceiuing, warinesse. Also a guiding, a leading, or directing vnto.

Scorgitóre, a perceiuer. Also a guider, a leader, or directer vnto.

Scorgiúto, perceiued, bin aware. Also guided, led, or directed vnto.

Scoría, drosse, dregs, scum or froth of any mettall tried by fire.

Scoriáda, as Scoreggiáta.

Scoriáre, to scum any mettall being molten. Also to whip or scourge.

Scoriáta, as Scória. Also as Scoreggiáta.

Scorláre, to shake or tosse violently.

Scorlatúra, a shaking, a tossing.

Scorhére, a melting ladle.

Scórlo, a shaking, a tossing, a tugging.

Scornacchiáre, as Sgaráre.

Scornáre, to vnhorne, to dishorne. Also to scorne, to abhorre, to mocke, to vilifie, to shame.

Scornéuole, scornefull, to be scorned.

Scórno, a scorne, a mocke, a flout. Also shame or dishonor.

Scoródo, Garlike. Also as Scórdio.

Scorodopráso, an hearbe like a Leeke or Scalion, and of that qualitie.

Scoróma, a disease in the head when all things seeme to be round.

Scorpacciáre, to vnbodie. Also to glut ones gorge, or make his bellie his god.

Scorpacciáta, a good full feeding, a panch full glutted, a bellie full.

Scorpáre, as Scorpacciáre.

Scorpéna, a kind of fish so called about Marseilles in France.

Scorpióne, a venemous worme called a Scorpion, hauing seauen feete, and striketh with his taile, euer seeking occasion to strike. Also one of the twelue Signes in the Zodiake. Also an instrument of warre like a Scorpion that shooteth small arrowes or quarels. Also the name of a toole that tooth-drawers vse to pull out teeth with. Also a kind of Sea-fish or Lobstar. Also the hearbe Aconite, or Libardsbane, hauing seeds like a Scorpions taile very forcible against the sting of Scorpions. Also a kind of whip with plummets of leade at the ends of the cords to whip slaues & offenders with.

Scorpióne hetba, Turnesole or Wartwort.

Scorpiónide, Scorpion-wort, or grasse.

Scorpioníno, torne vnder the Signe Scorpio, and of a Scorpions nature.

Scorpiuróne, as the hearbe Scorpióne.

Scorporáre, to discorporate. 



Scorraría, as Scorrería.

Scorreggiáre, as Scoreggiáre.

Scorreggiáta, as Scoreggiáta.

Scorreggere, reggo, ressi, retto, to marre, to disorder, to vncorrect.

Scorrente, running, or gadding to and fro.

Scorrenza di córpo, a laske, a running flux, a loosenesse in the bodie.

Scórrere, córro, córsi, córso, to runne ouer, to runne heere and there, to gad or wander to and fro. Also to peruse ouer slightly. Also to slide or glide vpon the Ise.

Scorrería, a running out, or to and fre. Also an outrode, or excursion.

Scorrettióne, a marring, an incorrection.

Scorretto, vncorrected, vnpolished, rough.

Scorrettóre, a disordrer, a spoiler, a marrer.

Scorribánda, a gadding-walke, a running from side to side, or heere and there.

Scorridóre, as Corridóre. Also a runner or gadder to and fro. Also an outrunner in an armie.

Scorriménto, a running, a gadding to and fro.

Scorritóre, as Scorridóre.

Scorrómpere, rómpo, rúppi, rótto, to breake forth or with. Also to corrupt.

Scorrótto, corrupted, polluted, defiled.

Scorrubbiáre, to despaire with chafing, to fret, to curse, to ban, or chafe aloud as a mad man.

Scorrubbióso, full of dispaire with chafing and scolding.

Scorrucciáre, to become or make angrie, wroth, raging, or chafing.

Scorrucciáto, angred, chafed, raged, or chafed with ire and wroth.

Scorrúccio, anger, ire, wrath.

Scorrucciósi hábiti, mourning clothes.

Scorruccióso, full of anger, wrath or ire.

Scórsa, a running. Also as Scorrería.

Scórso, a course, passing or running of times.

Scórso, runne or gadded ouer. Also perused or runne ouer.

Scórta, a guide, a connoy, a conduct, a leading, a direction.

Scortaménte, wistie, warily, charily, heedily.

Scortáre, to shorten, to curtall.

Scortatóre, a shortner, a curtaler.

Scortatóre máschio, a whore-keeper.

Scortatúra, a shortning, a curtalling.

Scortecciáre, to pare off the rinde or barke, to vnrinde, to vnbarke.

Scortegianáto, vncourtiered, left off the habite of a Courtier. Also vncourted. 

Scortése, discourteous, vnciuill.

Scortesía, discourtesie, an vnkindnesse.

Scorticaménto, a fleaing of the skin.

Scorticaporcelli, a fleaer of Hogs.

Scorticáre, to flea, to rub or gall the skin off.

Scorticáto, fleaed, or rubbed off the skin.

Scorticatóio, a deuise that women vse to rub and make their skin smooth.

Scorticatóre, a fleaer of the skin off.

Scorticatúra, a fleaing, a galling of the skin.

Scorticatúra d'ócchij, vlcers of the eyes.

Scortigianáre, to forsake or renounce to be a courtier or cortizan.

Scortináre, to discortine, to cleare, to vnuaile.

Scortíssimo, most vnwarie.

Scórto, perceiued or been aware. Also guided, conuoyed, conducted or directed vnto. Also warie, wilie, craftie, perceiuing and discerning. Vsed also for the hide or skin of a beast.

Scortóma, as Scoróma.

Scórza, a barke or rinde of a tree. Also an egge-shell. Also the huske, the shell, the out-skin, the pill or shale of any thing. Also a pilling, a paring or outside of any fruit. Also the exteriour part or mortall vaile of mankind. Also any outward garment or couer. Vsed also for a base ale-house, tipling-house or pot-house.

Scórza disan Piétro, a cloake in pedlers french or rogues language.

Scorzadúra, vsed for harnish.

Scorzáre, to pare, to shaue or pill the rinde, skin, shell, huske, barke or rinde of any thing, as fruit or tree. Also to flea off the skin. Also to bereaue of life.

Scorzatúra, a paring or pilling of any thing.

Scorzétta, a thin or little Scórza.

Scórzo, as Scorzóne, Also as Scórza.

Scórzo di serpe, the skin of a Snake.

Scorzóne, a kind of very venemous Serpent or Snake with a square head.

Scorzonéra, an hearbe good against poison, called in latine Hiperbaton.

Scorzóso., Looke Scórza, thicke of rinde, full of barke, rugged or tough skinned.

Scoságna, a hiding or lurking hole, in hugger-mugger or lurking manner.

Scoscendere, scendo, scési, scéso, to rumble or tumble or come downe some steepie hill.

Scoscesaménte, ruggedly, rockily, steepily, in tumbling manner downe a hill.

Scoscési, rockes, steepes, crags, clifs, downefalls, precipices, ruinous falles. 

Soscéso, rumbled or tumbled downe some hill. Also rockie, steepie, craggie, rugged.

Scosciáre, to tumble or rumble downe ruinously as waters. Also to vnthigh.

Scoscientiáto, without a conscience, inhumane, flint-minded.

Scóscio, a ruinous downefall of waters. Also as Scoscéso.

Scóssa, a shaking, a tottring, a tumbling, a rumbling, a trembling.

Scossadóre, something belonging to a Gunner or Bombardier.

Scossále, a womans apron.

Scossalétto, a little apron.

Scossalíno, a little apron.

Scossáre, to shake, to tosse, to totter. Also to brandish in the aire.

Scossatóio, a sieue, a searce, a crib, a winnow.

Scósso, shaken, tossed, totred, rumbled.

Scostáre, to remooue or goe farre off.

Scostársi, to eslonge or gee farre off.

Scostáto, distanced, distant. Also riblesse or without ribs.

Scóstio, a suddaine and farre remoouing.

Scostumáre, to disaccustome, to vnure.

Scostumáto, disaccustomed, vnwont.

Scostumáto, vnmannerly, vntaught, rude.

Scotáno, Brasell-wood or Fernanbucke.

Scotella, as Scodella, any kind of dish.

Scotellíno, a little dish or saucer.

Scotenáre, to flea or vnskin any part of the head, to pare the flesh from the bone.

Scótere, as Scuótere.

Scothónia, a dimnesse with an inflammation in the eyes.

Scotidianáto, rid of a quotidian ague.

Scótie, a kind of fruit in Italie.

Scotiménto, any kind of shaking.

Scotíno, a Booke containing obscure misteries.

Scotísta, a follower of Scotus, as we say a Dunce.

Scotitóre, a shaker, a touzer.

Scotoláre, as Scuótere, to shake.

Scotóma, as Scoróma.

Scotonáto, bare, without nap or cotten.

Scótta, a Chough, a Rooke or a Daw.

Scótta, the name of a rope in a ship.

Scottáre, to scald or parch with heat.

Scottatúra, a scalding or parching.

Scotteggiáre, to flutter as a bird before it flie. Also to eat and pay no shot.

Scótto, a shot, a reckoning or payment for meat and drinke. Also a kind of course woollen stuffe as welch freeze.

Scóua, a broome or besome.

Scouacciáre, to vnden, to vnnest, to vnroost.

Scouáre, to sweepe, as Scopáre.



Scouáro, a broome-maker.

Scouatóre, a sweeper. Also a brusher.

Scouazzára, as Scopazzára.

Scouázze, all manner of sweepings.

Scouázzo, as Scopazzára.

Scouerchiáre, to discouer, to vncouer.

Scouerta, a discouerie, as Scoperta.

Scouerto, discouered, as Scoperto.

Scouétta, a little broome. Also a brush.

Scouettáre, to brush. Also to sweepe.

Scouíglie, all manner of filthy sweepings. Also any trash or kitchin-stuffe.

Scouino, as Scóuolo.

Scóuola, a brush. Also a Gunners spurger.

Scouoláre, to brush. Also to spurge.

Scouoliére, a swabber in a ship.

Scóuolo, a spunge among Gunners, a map among Wherrie-men, a swab among Mariners, a maulkin among Bakers, a wispe among Skullions, a brush among Plaisterers.

Scouóne, as Scóuolo.

Scouríre, as Scopríre, to discouer.

Scozzáre, to scatter, or separate in sunder.

Scozzáre, to breake a colt. Also to coarce or trucke horses with a horse-coarcer.

Scozzonáto, broken a colt, coarced or trucked with a horse-coarcer. Also a craftie horse-coarcer. Also a craftie knaue one broken and inured to all knauerie.

Scránna, any low stoole, a close-stoole.

Scramáre, as Sclamáre.

Scramatióne, as Sclamatióne.

Screáre, to straine ones throate, to spit, to fetch vp fleagme from the stomacke.

Scredente, vnbeleeuing, a miscreant.

Scredenza, vnbeliefe.

Scrédere, to vnbeleeue.

Scremíre, as Schermíre.

Scremitóre, as Schemitóre.

Screpio, féce uno screpio & sceleráto peccáto & tradiménto.

Scretiáti pánni, iaged, cut, snipt. Also torne, raged or tattered cloathes. Also motly or party-coloured clothes.

Scrétio, anger, chafing, fretting.

Scriátrola, a Squirrell.

Scríba, a scribe, a scriuener, a writer. Also a Clarke, a Secretary or a notarie.

Scribattáre, as Scriuacchiáre.

Scricciáre, as Scriccioláre.

Scríccio, a screeching or screaking.

Scriccioláre, to screcke, to screake, to chirpe.

Scrícciola, a Skreech-owle. Also a Wren.

Scrignáre, to vnshrine, to vncheast. Also to make bunchy or knobby.

Scrignáta, a blow or whirret on the nose. 

Scrignétto, a little shrine, chest, coffin, or deske. Also a casket or cabinet full of boxes. Also a womans worke-deske or cushinet with locke and key. Also a little bunch or knob vpon ones backe.

Scrígno, a shrine, a cheast, a coffin, a trunke, a standard, a deske, a casket, a cabinet, or forcer. Also a bunch, a crooke or knob vpon ones backe, such as Camels haue. Also crooked, lame, halting or limping.

Scrígnolo, as Scrignétto.

Scrignúto, croopt, bunch-backt as a Camell.

Scrignúto náso, a flat or Camosite nose.

Scríma, the Arte of fence or fencing.

Scrimáglia, as Scríma.

Scrimáre, to fence. Also to skirmish.

Scrimaruólo, a Fencer, a Master of fence.

Scrimatóre, as Scrimaruólo.

Scrímia, as Scríma.

Scrimiáre, as Scrimáre.

Scrimiatóre, as Scrimaruólo.

Scriminále, a bodkin or wire that women vse to deuide or shed their haires when they dresse their heads. Also the seares or nares of a Hawke.

Scriminatúra, the deuiding or shedding of a womans haire of hir head.

Scrimíre, mísco, míto, to fence, to skirmish.

Scrimitóre, a fencer, a skirmisher.

Scrináre, to dresse curiously and smoothly as women doe their haires.

Scriptólo, as Scríttulo.

Scristianáre, to forsake or renounce christianity or christendome.

Scritiáre, to motly or die of seuerall and diuers colours.

Scritiáto, motlied, pie-coloured, of diuers colours.

Scrítio, a breach, a rupture, a bursting. Also a brawle, a squaring, a hurlyburlie.

Scrítta, a writ, a writing, a manuscript, a schedule, a bill of ones hand.

Scrittarello, as Scrítta.

Scrittaríno, as Scrítta.

Scrittíbile, that may be described.

Scrittíle, as Scrittíbile.

Scrittióne, a writing or scription.

Scrítto, written. Also as Scrítta. Also ascribed or imputed vnto.

Scrittóio, a Counting-house, a writing deske. Also a standish or pen and inkehorne.

Scrittoráccio, a foolish or absurd writer, a ballad-maker, a pamphleter.

Scrittóre, a writer, a scribe, a scriuener. Also a writer of bookes.

Scrittoría, the Arte of writing. Also a Scriueners-shop or writing-house.

Scrittório, as Scritróio.

Scrittorista, as Scritturísta.

Scríttulo, the third part of a dram, that is 24. graines in weight.

Scrittúra, the Scripture or Holy-writ. Also any kind of writting, writ, indenture, euidence, scedule, note, bill or handwriting. Also the stile or maner of any Authors writing.

Scritturággine, learning in Scriptures, Scripture-ship.

Scritturále, of or pertayning as also according to the Scriptures.

Scritturáta persona, a man learned in the Scriptures.

Scrittúre, Records, Euidences, Writings.

Scritturísta, a Professor, a Reader, or a learned man in the Scriptures.

Scriuacchiáre, to scrible or write ill.

Scriuanía, the office of a Scriuener, Clarke, Secretary or publike Notarie.

Scriuáno, a Scribe, a Scriuener, a Notary, a Clarke, a Secretary, Chancellour.

Scríuere, scríuo, scríssi, scrítto, to write.

Scríuere soldáti, to muster or inroule souldiers.

Scriuíbile, that may be written.

Scrizzótto, any kind of squirt to spout or squirt withall, as Gonfiatóio. Also a Cane or Reede that Cookes vse to blow the pudding guts before they fill them. Also a funnell or fill-boule to fill puddings with.

Scróba, a kind of hird that digs a hole vnder the ground to lay hir egges in.

Scróccail fúso., Looke Fúso, a spindled Riuer.

Scroccánte, a tall trencher-man, a good feeder, but properly a smell-feast, or saucy shamelesse shifter for his victuals at other mens tables.

Scroccáre, to smell a feast, to feed hungerly, to shift shamelesly for victuals at other mens tables. Also to snap or strike suddainly as the clocke doth. Looke Scroccánte.

Scroccatóre, as Scroccánte.

Scrocchétto, a litle Scrócco.

Scrócco, a snap, a clicke, a pop. Also the snaphance of a Caliuer. Also as we say a wilie shift namely for bellie-cheere. Also a robbing of Peter to pay Paul, Mangiáre a scrócco, to feede shiftingly or shamelesly at other mens charge or tables.

Scroccoláre, as Scroccáre, to clicke or knacke at the ioints as some mens fingers doe.

Scrocconánte, as Scroccánte.

Scrocconáre, as Scroccáre.

Scroccóne, as Scroccánte. Also a fellow that loues to heare none speake but himselfe. 



Scrófa, a Pig or farrowing-sow. Also as Bancáccia.

Scrófano, or Scrofanello, a yongue sow-pig.

Scrofétta, a yongue farrowing Sow.

Scróffa, a pig-sow, a farrowing Sow.

Scrófola, as Scróffa. Also as Mádre uíte.

Scrofoláre, to farrow as a Sow. Also to scrow.

Scrofolária, the blind-nettle, or as some say water-bettonie.

Scrófole, a disease in the necke, or a swelling called the Kings-euill.

Scrofolóso, full of the Kings-euill.

Scrofulária, Blind-nettle, Figwort or Water-bettonie.

Scrófule, as Scrófole.

Scrollaménto, any kind of shaking.

Scrolláre, to shake, to wag or tosse.

Scrollatúra, a shaking, a wagging, a tossing.

Scrollénole, that may be shaken or wagged.

Scróllo, as Scrollatúra, a shaking.

Scrópolo, as Scrúpolo.

Scropolóso, as Scrupolóso.

Scróso, Vsed in mockerie for Scrupolóso.

Scrostáre, to vncrust, to pare of the crust or rinde of any thing or tree.

Scrostáta, a kind of paste-meate.

Scróto, the outward skin of the cods wherein are the stones of a man.

Scróuola, as Scrófola.

Scrouoláre, as Scrofoláre.

Scróuole, as Scrófole.

Scrouolóso, as Scrofolóso.

Scruentítia, a squinancie in the throat.

Scrúfoli, a kind of paste-meat.

Scrunáta, a needle without an eye.

Scrupedo, one that goeth hardly or with paine.

Scrúpolo, a scruple or spicednesse of conscience, a difficultie, a care or nicenesse vpon strict points. Also a little poise or weight called a scruple, which is twentie graines of corne, or the third part of a dragme. Also a measure of ground, containing an hundred foote square. Also an ancient coine in Rome, that was worth twentie Sextertij. Also any little sharpe rugged stone.

Scrupolosità, curiousnesse, nicenesse, doubt, anxietie or scrupulositie of conscience.

Scrupolóso, scrupulous, nice, coy, doubtfull or curious in trifles or of conscience. Also grettie, rugged or full of little sharpe or grauell stones.

Scrupóso, full of sharpe or grauell stones.

Scrutábile, searchable, to be searched into.

Scrutatióne, a search or searching out.

Scrutatóre, a scrutator, a searcher into.

Scrutéuole, as Scrutábile.

Scrutignáre, as Scrutináre.

Scrutignatóre, as Scrutatóre.

Scrutináre, to scrutinie, to search and enquire diligently or by scrutine, to trace out.

Scrutínio, a scrutinie, a searching out.

Scuarcóia, grizly, gastly, horride, vglie and horrible to looke vpon. Also a thing worne out and defaced with age and by time.

Scuccheráre, to burst forth in laughing.

Scuccióne, an escutcheon of Armes.

Scucíto, as Scuscíto.

Scudáia, a Tortoise with a hard shell.

Scudáio, a shield or buckler-maker.

Scudáre, to shield with a Target.

Scudeliéra bíscia, a Tortoise.

Scudázzoli, shields or coates of armes.

Scudella, a dish. Also a potanger.

Scudelláio, a maker of dishes.

Scudelláre, to dish or put into dishes.

Scudellíno, a little dish or salcer.

Scudellóne, a great dish.

Scudétto, a little shield or target.

Scudicciuólo, a little scutche on, a little shield. Also a lozenge in Armorie.

Scudiére, a Squire, an Esquire, a waiter, a Noblemans page or shield-bearer, a quirie of a stable, a Princes master of his horse, or a Noblemans Gentleman of his horse.

Scudífero, shield-bearing.

Scudisciále, as Scudíscio.

Scudisciáre, to whip with a leather thong or strap, to scourge.

Scudíscio, a thong or strap of leather, a whip, a scourge.

Scudiscíre, scísco, scíto, to rip or seame-rent.

Scúdo, a shield, a target, a buckler. Also a scutcheon of Armes. Also a defence, a shelter, a shroud or protection, a couertbarne. Also a cogwheele of a Mill. Also a crowne of gold.

Scúdo del sóle, a crowne soll, a french crowne.

Scudóne, a great Scúdo.

Scúffia, a quoife, a beguin, a caule or kercheife. Also a case made of wine in forme of a bag, sacke, caule or quoife, wherein Gunners put haile-shot to shoot out of mortar-pieces. Also a netbag or net-satchell.

Scuffiáre, to quoife, to put on a quoife, a cawle or a beguin. Also to deuour greedily.

Scuffíne, a Goldsmiths toole or file.

Scuffióne, a great Scúffia. Also a greedie deuourer.

Scuffiótto, as Scuffióne. Also one that weareth continually a night-cap. Taken also for a dissembling hipocrisie.

Sculacciáre, to clap on the buttockes.

Sculacciáre, claps on the buttockes.

Sculattáre, as Sculacciáre.

Sculattáre, as Sculacciáre.

Sculpíre, as Scolpíre.

Scultáre, as Scolpíre.

Scultíle, that may be grauen.

Scúlto, grauen or carued.

Scultóre, a Sculptor, a Grauer, a Caruer.

Scultúra, as Scoltúra, sculpture.

Scuoiáre, to vnskin, to vnhide, to flea.

Scuóla, as Scóla, a Schoole.

Scuoláre, as Scoláre, a Scholler.

Scuótere, scuóto, scóssi, scósso, to shake, to tosse, to tumble, to clatter.

Scuótere il peliccíno, to shake a womans garment, that is to iumble her well.

Scuótere il pelliccióne, to vtter all, to  tell all one knowes, to shake out all, to emptie the bag euen to the little eares or close corners.

Scuótere il pésco, to shake the Peach-tree well, that is to commit letcherie namely with boyes.

Scuotiménto, a shaking, a tossing.

Scuotitóre, a shaker, a tosser.

Scuraccíno, a dish or scouring-cloth.

Scuráccio, a scouring cloth, a dish-clout.

Scuradenti, a rubber for the teeth.

Scúralo, a Squrrell.

Scurápola, a Daw, a Chough, a Rooke.

Scuráre, to scoure or rub cleane, to frub or burnish harnesse. Also as Oscuráre.

Scuratióne, darknesse, obscuritie.

Scuratóre, a scourer, a frubber, a rubber.

Scúrcio, a word common to Architects.

Scúre, an axe, an adze, a batchet.

Scurechétto., 

Scuriáda, as Scoriáta.

Scuriáre, as Scoriáre.

Scuriáta, as Scoriáta.

Scuriáto, a Squirrell. Also scourged.

Scuriátolo, a Squirrell.

Scuricíno, as Scuríno.

Scuríno, a little hatchet.

Scurisciáre, to switch or beat gently with a wand or rod.

Scuríscio, a switch, a gentle rod or birchen wand that Horse-men vse. Also by metaphor a yongue boy that deserueth to haue a rod or to be beaten.

Scuriscióso, darkish, obscure, darke.

Scurità, obscuritie, darknesse, night.

Scúto, obscure, darke, duskie. Also of a darke or sad colour. Also darknesse.

Scúrolo, a tabernacle or place in a Church to put and keep holy reliques in

Scurríle, scurrill, vncleane, full of scurrilitie, railing, scoffing or saucie.

Scurrilità, scurilitie, immodest iesting, railing or scoffing.

Scúrro, a scoffer or saucie iester.

Scúrzo. 

Scúsa, an excuse, a clearing or iustifying from a fault.



Scusábile, excusable, to be execused.

Scusáre, to excuse, to cleare, or iustifie from some fault. Also to supplie the defect of another, to serue for, or stand in stead.

Scusatióne, an excusing.

Scuséuole, as Scusábile.

Scuscíre, scisco, scíto, to rip, or seame-rent.

Scuscíto, ript, seame-rent, vnsewen.

Scuscitúra, a ripping, a seame-rent.

Scusíre, as Scuscíre.

Scusitúra, as Scuscitúra.

Scussáre, to shake, to tosse.

Scutále, the shield of the mouth of the stomacke. Also the middle or leather of a sling wherein the stone is put to be flung or hurled.

Scútica, a whip, a scourge. Also the print of whipping-blowes.

Scuticáre, to whip, to scourge. Also to giue marks or prints of whipping.

Scuticáta, a whipping, a scourging. Also a stripe or print of a whipping.

Scútice, a ripping, a seame-rent.

Sdebitáre, to come out of debt, to vndebt. Also to free or quit one of any dutie.

Sdegnaiuólo, a nice humorous fellow, that for a straw will take pepper in the nose.

Sdegnáre, to disdaine, to scorne. Also to vexe, to be or make angrie.

Sdegnársi, to be or grow angrie, to be offended with.

Sdegnáto, disdained, scorned. Also angrie, vexed, filled with disdaine.

Sdégno, disdaine, contempt, scorne. Also anger, wrath, ire, hate.

Sdegnosétto, some what disdainefull.

Sdegnóso, disdainefull, angrie, wroth.

Sdenaiáto, penilesse, without monie.

Sdentáto, toothlesse, without teeth.

Sdicéuole, vnseemely, not to be spoken.

Sdigiunáre, to breake ones fast.

Sdilinguíre, guisco, guíto, to languish, or pine away.

Sdilocciáto, vndrest, vutrussed.

Sdimenticággine, forgetfulnesse.

Sdimenticánza, forgetfulnesse.

Sdimenticáre, to forget.

Sdimentichéuole, forgetfull, obliuious.

Sdilinguáto, vnsauorie, tastelesse.

Sdogáto, a barrell, whose side boords be out.

Sdogliársi, to be freed from paine or aches.

Sdogliatíuo, that doeth remoue aches.

Sdonnino, a kind of colour of a horse.

Sdoppiáre, to vndouble, to vnfold.

Sdoráre, to vnguild.

Sdoráto, vnguilt.

Sdossáre, to vnbacke, to vnhip.

Sdossáto, vnbacke. Also broken backt. 

Sdraù, vsed for Esdraù. Looke Esdraù.

Sdrauizze, prettie cunning slie tricks.

Sdrizzáto, bent, crooked, vnstiffned.

Sdrúcciolo, as Sdrúsciolo.

Sdruccitúra, a slipping, or sliding.

Sdrúccire, císco, cíto, as Sdruscíre.

Sdrúscio, as Sdrúsciolo, as Sdruscíto.

Sdrúsciola, as Sdrusolina.

Sdrucciolánte, as Sdrúsciolo.

Sdruccioláre, to slide or glide vpon ise, to slip any kind of way.

Sdrusciolánte, as Sdrúsciolo.

Sdruscioláre, to slide or glide vpon ise.

Sdrusciolatíuo, as Sdrúsciolo.

Sdruscioléuole, that may slide, glide, or slip.

Sdrusciolína, as Sdrusolína.

Sdrúsciolo, slipperie, gliding, sliding, glib as ise. Also a slip, a glide, or a slide. Also a slipperie place. Also a kind of smooth running blanke verse.

Sdrusciolóso, as Sdrúsciolo.

Sdruscíre, scísco, scíto, to split, to riue, to shiuer as a ship vpon rocks or in a wracke. Also to rip or seame-rent. Also to rend in pieces. Also as Sdruccioláre.

Sdruscíto, split, or shiuered as a ship on rocks, or in a wracke. Also ript, or seame-rent. Also rend in pieces. Also slided or glided as vpon ise.

Sdruscitúra, a splitting, a riuing, or shiuering as of a ship vpon rocks. Also a leake in a ship. Also a sliding or gliding as vpon ise.

Sdrusolína, a prettie trull, a handsome wench, a slie whore, a quaint wench, vsed for a nickname for a woman that is light, or slipperie in the heeles.

Sdrusíre, as Sdruscíre.

Sducáre, to vnduke.

Sè, an aduerbe of doubting, if, if that, if so be, whither if.

Sè, vsed for six, vsed also for Séi, thou art.

Sè, a pronoune primitiue or deriuatiue, both of the masculine and feminine gender of the singular and plurall number of the datiue and accusatiue cases, him, himselfe, hir, or hirselfe, them, or themselues, to him, or to himselfe, to hir, or to hirselfe, to them, or to himselfe, to hir, or to hirselfe, to them, or to themselues.

Sèalcún álrro, if any other.

Sè áltro, if ought else.

Sèauenísse, if it should happen.

Sebellíni, sabell skinnes, or furres.

Sebéne, albeit, although, howbeit.

Sebén fósse, albeit it were.

Sebesténa, a kind of little plum or damzen.

Séca, any kind of sawe, as Séga.

Secábile, that may be sawen.

Secále, the graine Rie.

Secáre, to sawe, as Segáre.

Sécca, a shelfe, a shallow, a flat, or quick sand in the water.

Seccábile, that may be dride.

Seccacápo, a busie importunate fellow that tires one with talking.

Seccággine, drought, drinesse, barrennesse. Also importunitie or tediousnesse with words or idle talke. Also as Sécca.

Seccágna, as Sécca.

Seccaménto, as Seccággine.

Seccaráccio, a saplesse fellow, a drie-fellow, one that hath no mettle in him.

Seccáre, to dry vp, to make dry. Also to tire or wearie one with talke, as if one did dry vp all his patience.

Seccaréccio, dry, barren, saplesse, parched, scorched, dry as chalke. Also tediousnesse, and importunitie with talke.

Seccatelli, drie fagots or bauins.

Seccaríccio, as Seccaréccio.

Seccatríce, a woman that with much talking will weary a man.

Seccheríccio, as Seccaréccio.

Secchézza, as Seccággine.

Sécchia, any kind of bucket or paile.

Secchiáro, a bucket or paile maker.

Secchiella, a little bucket, paile or pitcher.

Sécchio, a bucket, a paile, a pitcher.

Secchionáro, a bucket-maker.

Secchióne, a great bucket or paile.

Secchità, as Seccággine, as Siccità.

Séccie, stubble or haume when corne is reaped.

Sécco, dry, saplesse, burnt, barren, without moisture, scorched, withered. Also importunate or tedious in talking. Also barren of wit of shallow of inuention. Also as Sécca. Looke Rimanére in sécco.

Seccúme, all manner of dry things. Also any dry rotten thing without moistnesse in it.

Seccúra, as Seccággine.

Secedere, cedo, or cessi, cedúto, or cesso to goe a part, backe or from company. Also to cease from labour.

Secernere, cerno, cernéi, cernúto, to cull out or chouse from among others. Also to separate or put a sunder.

Secéspita, a cutting knife or hatchet that Painims were anciently wont to cut their sacrifices with.

Secessióne, a departing or separating of ones selfe from other.

Secesso, a departing into seme solitary place, a solitary abod. Also a vacation or ceasing from labour or businesse.

Seclúdere, clúdo, clúsi, clúso, to seclude or shut a part from others.

Seclusióne, a secluding from others.

Seclúso, secluded from others. 



Seclusório, a secluding place.

Séco, with him. Also among or between him or them, in company with.

Secodágnolo, a wad or wispe of Hay or straw.

Secoláre, of or belonging to the space of an hundred yeeres. Also a Lay-man, a temporall or Secular-man. Also to perpetuate or make eternall.

Secolarésco, worldly, following the temporall or secular times. Vsed also for a man that followes the pleasures of the world, a worldling.

Secolarità, worldlinesse.

Secolo, an age or space of time contayning a hundred yeeres, some say a thousand. Also vsed for the world or liuing after the worldly fashion.

Secomedésimo, with or betweene himselfe.

Secónda, a seconding, a following. Also a soothing vp. Also as Secondína.

Secónda, following the naturall course or inclination of the streame.

Secondaménte, secondly, secondarily.

Secondaménte chè, as Secóndo che.

Secondáno, belonging to any second.

Secondáre, to second or to follow next, to follow course. Also to sooth vp, to follow anothers minde, to apply ones minde to anothers, to please ones humour.

Secondárij, souldiers of the second band or legion.

Secondariaménte, secondarily.

Secondário, a secondary, a second. Also a second kind of Cheate or Bordes-end bread.

Secondatióne, a seconding.

Secondína, the secondine, the afterbirth or bagge wherein a child lieth in the mothers womb. Also the second string of any musicall instrument. Also a Chirurgions instrument to cut out little bones. Looke also vuea.

Secóndo, the second, the next after, the next to the first. Also according, or concerning. Also after a mans desire or inclination, agreeable, seasonable. Also prosperous, fauourable, quiet, calme, luckie. Also after as, euen as, there after, as for.

Secóndo chè, according as, thereafter.

Secondogenito, the second borne.

Secóndoil più, according to the most.

Secóndoil tempo, according to the time.

Secóndoi più, according to the most.

Secóndomè, as for mee, according to mee.

Secondoragióne, according to reason.

Secórdia, negligence, sloth, lazinesse.

Secordióso, lither, lazie, slothfull. 

Secórdo, shoutfull, witlesse, heartlesse.

Séco stésso, with himselfe.

Secrestáno, as Sagrestáno.

Secrestáre, as Sequestráre.

Secrestia, as Sagrestía.

Secréta, a thin steele cap or close skull worne vnder a hat. Also the name of a place in Venice where all their secret Records or ancient euidences are kept as in Westminster-hall.

Secretaménte, secretly.

Secretário, a secretary, a secret-keeper.

Secretézza, secrecy, secretnesse.

Secreto, secret, close, hidden, priuy, alone, vnknowen, misticall. Also a secret or a priuity.

Sectióne, as Settióne.

Secubáre, to lie alone or a part.

Seculáre, as Secoláre.

Secularità, worldlinesse.

Seculo, as Secolo.

Secuplapárte, the sixth part. Also six-fould.

Securánza, as Sicuránza.

Securáre, as Sicuráre, to assure.

Secúre, an ax, an adze, a batchet.

Securidáca, the hearbe Axuitch or Ax-fitch, or as some say Henbane.

Securítà, as Sicuránza, security.

Secúro, as Sicúro, sure, assured.

Securtà, as Sicurtà, security.

Secutióne, execution, accomplishing.

Secutóre, an executor.

Séd, vsed among Poets for Sè, if.

Sedacciáre, as Setacciáre.

Sedáccio, as Setáccio.

Sedáre, to asswage, to qualifie, to appease, to pacifie, to order, to stint.

Sedatióne, an asswaging, a qualifying, an appeasing, a mitigation.

Sedatíua medicína, a medicine that doth presently ease and cure a patient.

Sedáto, asswaged, qualified, mitigated, appeased, temperate and sober.

Sedatóre, an asswager, a mitigator, a pacifier, a qualifier, an appeaser.

Sedatúra, as Sedatióne.

Sedazzáre, as Setacciáre.

Sedázzo, as Setáccio.

Séde, a situation. Also any kind of seat, chaire, stoole, bench or sitting place. Also a place to abide or dwell in, a mansion house or resting place. Also vsed for the Popes Sea or Court.

Sédeci, the number of sixteene.

Sedécimo, the sixteenth in order.

Sedello, a flat pan. Also a pot, a pitcher or possenet. Also a bucket or paile.

Sedente, sitting. Also seyant in Armorie.

Sedére, séggo, sedéi, sedúto, or síso to sit or sit downe. Also to seat or situate. Also a seat or sitting place. Also a mans bum or arse. But properly all that part of the bodie whereon he sitteth.

Sedére in quárto, to sit equall or square vnto.

Sedétto, a graffe, a syen, a plant or set.

Séde uacánte, a vacant Sea.

Sedia, any kind of seat or chaire. Vsed also for the site, situation or seat of a place.

Sedia regále, a royall seat, chaire, tribunall or throne. Also a chiefe seat of Iustice, as wee would say the Kings bench.

Sedia schionáta, a leaning chaire, a chaire or seat with a backe.

Sedíbile, that may sit, or be sitten with or vpon.

Sedicésimo, the sixteenth in order.

Sédici, the number of sixteene.

Sedígito, six-fingred on one hand.

Sedíle, any manner of seat. Also an eminent seat or sitting place.

Sedíme, some part about a bell.

Sediménto, a sitting. Also a seating.

Se Dío m'aiúti, euen as God may helpe me.

Seditióne, a sedition, a mutinie, a breach or variance between people, a rebellion.

Seditióso, seditious, mutinous, rebellious, factious, full of strife and sedition.

Seditóio, any seat or sitting place.

Sédo, Prick-madame or Euer-greens.

Sédola, the name of a disease that commeth in horses feete.

Sedónia, a kind of roote vsed in Salades

Sedrársi, to fall into a sudden swoune or deadly trance.

Sedulità, care and great diligence, earnest painefulnesse.

Sédulo, carefull, diligent, painefull, earnest. Also a kind of cart or tumbrell.

Sedumágno, Houseleeke or Sengreene.

Sedúme, as Sedumágno.

Sedúrre, dúco, dússi, dútto, to seduce, to mislead, to debaush, to deceiue.

Sedúto, as Sedáto. Also sitten.

Seduttíle, that may be seduced, misled or deceiued.

Seduttióne, a seducing, a misleading, a leading aside or apart.

Sedútto, seduced, misled, debaushed.

Seduttóre, a seducer, a misleader.

Sefiród, a kind of practike Cábala, or Cabalisticall practise.

Sefórse, if peraduenture, if perhaps.

Séga, any kind of sawe to sawe with all. Also a syeth or sickle. Also the Sawfish.

Segáce, as Sagáce.

Segacità, as Sagacità.

Ségala, the graine Rie or Wintercorne.

Segantíni, a kind of choise fig. 



Segáre, to sawe. Also to part, to cut or deuide through the middle. Also to cut or furrow through the Sea. Vsed also for to reape corne, to mow hay or cut grasse.

Segaríno, a Sawier. Also a little sawe.

Segáre le uéne, to cut veines.

Segatóre, a sawyer, a mower, a cutter.

Segatúra, a sawing. Also sawe-dust.

Segázzo, lag, or last following others.

Segéna, a kind of net, or net-bag.

Segenáto sópra néro, a kind of blacke full of siluer heires.

Segesta, the goddesse of haruest, or corne-fields.

Segéta, a little sawe, sythe, or sickle.

Segetále, sword-grasse.

Seggiáio, a chaire-maker.

Seggiáre, to marke or brand with some marke. Also to sit or seate in a chaire.

Seggiérta, a kind of chaire vsed in Italy to cary men and women vp and downe in.

Séggio, any kinde of seate or sitting-place. Also a close stoole. Also a tribunall or seate of iustice. Vsed also for the heauens, or Gods throne. Also I sit downe. Vsed also for the compasse about the trill or fundament.

Séggiola, a little low chaire or stoole.

Seghétta, a little sawe, sythe, or sickle.

Seghinétta, that arched or enmantled stone-worke that is ouer great windowes, namely, in the front of any faire house.

Segià, except, vnlesse.

Segiamái, if euer, if at any time.

Segiorási, an inflammation in the head.

Segménto, a piece cut off from some thing.

Segmíne, an hearbe.

Segnácolo, a marke, a signe, a token. Also a seale, a signet. Also a branding iron.

Segnaláre, to marke, to signe, to note. Also to seale or brand. Also to betoken. Also to make notable, notorious, famous, or renoumed.

Segnalataménte, notably, singularly, famously, notoriously.

Segnaláto, marked, signed, sealed, branded. Also famous, renoumed, notorious.

Segnále, a signall, a marke, a token, a signe, a signet, a seale. Also a meare-stone.

Segnalúzzo, any little Segnale.

Segnáre, to marke, to signe, to seale, to note, to brand, to skarre. Also to stamp or coine. Also to make or put on a signe. Also to make the signe of the holie crosse. To crosse one at the houre of death. Also to betoken or signifie. Vsed also for to let blood, or bleed.

Segnataménte, by signes, marks, or tokens. Also namely, specially, chiefly.

Segnáto, signed. Also crossed at the point of death. Looke Segnáre.

Segnétto, a Seale, or signet. Also any little marke, signe, or token.

Ségni, marks, signes, or tokens.

Ségni celesti, the twelue signes in the Zodiake.

Segnífero, signes-bearing.

Segnità, as Segnítie.

Segnítie, lithernesse, slownesse, lazinesse, negligence. Also barrennesse.

Ségno, a signe, a marke, a token, a skarre, a Signe that hangeth at mens dores. Also a land-marke, or meare-stone. Also a token or signall of things to come. Also a signe of starres. Also a goale, a but, a marke, a blanke or aime to shoote or aime at. Also a banner, a streamer, or a flag. Also a pawne or a pledge. Also a mans water for the Phisicions to cast or iudge by.

Segnúzzo, any little Ségno.

Ségno acquatíle, the Signe Cancer.

Ségo, any kind of tallow for candies. Also vsed for Ségno, I follow.

Sególlo, a wine of earth in mines declaring that gold may be found there.

Sególo, tallowie, fattie, greasie.

Segregáre, to seuer, to separate, to lay a part, to put from out of.

Segregatióne, a separating, or laying a part, a sundring.

Segrestáno, as Sagrestáno.

Segrestía, as Sagrestía.

Segretaménte, secretly, priuily.

Segretaría, the office or place where Secretaries dwell and write. Also the dutie or office of a Secretarie.

Segretário, a Secretarie, a secret-keeper.

Segretézza, secrecie, secretnesse.

Segretiére, as Segretário.

Segreto, as Secreto, secret, priuie.

Seguáce, a follower, an attendant, a retainer. Also following, ensuing, pliant, that followeth easie. Hédera seguáce, Iuy growing and spreading it selfe on wals, following the thing it takes hould of.

Seguacità, a following.

Seguela, as Sequela.

Seguente, following, ensuing, suiuant, succeeding, that followeth after.

Seguentemente, consequently, succeedingly, ensuingly, in order afters

Seguente pezzo, as Pezzo seguente.

Seguenza, a sequence, a consequence, a following. Also a game at cardes so called.

Segúgo, a spaniell or setting dogge.

Seguíre, séguo, seguíto, to follow, to ensue, to succeed, to pursue, to goe after. Also to happen, or come to passe.

Seguitáre, as Seguíre.

Seguitióne, as Secutióne, execution. 

Seguíto, followed, ensued, suceeded, pursued, gone after. Also befalne or come to passe.

Séguito, a traine of followers, retainers, attendants, waiters, friends or company.

Segúllo, a veine of earth that first giueth notice that there is gold in it.

Segurtà, as Sicuránza, security.

Segúsi, Cáni segúsi, such dogges as runne with their nose vpon the sent.

Sei, the number of six.

Sei, thou art, of E'ssere.

Séia, the Goddesse of sowing Corne.

Seicento, six hundred. Vsed also for the finite number of all the diuels in hell.

Se Iddío ti día, as God giue thee.

Seidígito, sixfingred, that hath sixe fingers or toes.

Séi in ásso & ásso, the finest kind of gunpowder.

Seiroási, a kind of inflammation in the head.

Sél, if the. Also it to himselfe. Also if it.

Seláchi, all fishes that haue no bones but gristles.

Selágine, the rosinous and gummy hearb called Hedge-hysop much vsed of the Druides for all eiesores.

Selápsia, an Apothecarie. Also an Apothecaries shop.

Selático, a kind of oyle of Lillies.

Selbastrella, as Serbastrella.

Selce, any flint or hard pible stone.

Selciáre, to paue with flint stones.

Selciáta, a pauement or caucey of flint.

Selciáto, paued. Also a pauement.

Selciatóre, a Pauier with flint stones.

Sele duóle, if it grieue her.

Seleniáco, lunatike, frantike.

Seleníte, a precious stone wherein is a round white, which decreaseth and increaseth as the Moone doth.

Selenítio, a kind of crisped Iuie.

Séleno, an hearbe in forme like Parslely, and taste like Angelica much vsed now in Italie.

Selenúsio, a kind of excellent corne or graine in Greece.

Sele prése, he or shee tooke them.

Selercide, a bird that is euer an enemie to Locust, and deuoureth them.

Selettióne, a selecting or chusing out from others.

Seletto, selected or chosen out from others.

Sélfo, a warte in a horse called an Auburie.

Selgítico, a kind of medicinable oyle made of hearbes.

Selicáre, to paue with flint stones.

Selicáto, paued. Also a pauement.

Sélice, any flint or hard pible stone. 



Selináda, a kind of crisped Colewort resembling Parseley.

Selinásia, a kind of Terra sigilláta.

Sélino, as Séleno.

Selinóide, as Selináda.

Sélio, the hearbe Leylane.

Sella, any kind of sadle or pad. Also a seat or sitting place. Also a close-stoole.

Selláccia, any filthy great sadle.

Sellaginétta, a sadle for a Spanish Gennet.

Selláio, a Sadler or Pad-maker.

Sellarása, a kind of plaine saddle.

Selláre, to saddle.

Selláro, a Sadler or Pad-maker.

Sellécchia, the cods, the huskes or shales of any pulse as of beanes or peason.

Selleggláre, to sadle, to be euer in the sadle.

Sellétta, any little sadle. Also any kind of little seat or stoole. Also a closestoole.

Sellóne, an arming or pad-sadle.

Sélua, a forest or wood full of great trees.

Seluaggína, any venison or wilde game.

Seluággio, sauage, wilde, vplandish, rurall, siluane, of the woods, field or country. Also cruell, wilde, vntamed, rusticall, vnsociable, fantasticall. Also a sauadge or wilde-man.

Seluaggiúme, venison or wilde game.

Seluaréccio, as Seluággio.

Seluastrella, Ragwort or Dogstones.

Seluaticcína, venison or wilde game.

Seluatícia, sauagenesse, wildnesse.

Seluático, as Seluággio.

Seluestrella, Ragwort or Dogstones.

Seluestro, as Seluággie.

Seluiétta, any napkin or drinking cloth.

Seluóso, woodie, desert, full of forests.

Sélze, any flint or hard pible stone.

Sém, as Sémo, we are, webe.

Semái, if euer, if at any time.

Semammephorásso, sómmo sacerdóte à cúi sólo elécito portáre il semámmepho rásso. 

Sémbiánte, seeming, appearing, resembling. Also a semblance or appearance.

Sembiánza, a semblance, a seeming.

Sembiáre, to seeme, to resemble, to appeare.

Sembiéuole, semblant, seeming, appearing.

Semblaménto, an assembling, a resembling.

Sembláre, to assemble. Also to resemble.

Semblea, an assembly, a congregation.

Sémbola, as Sémola.

Semboláto, as Semoláto.

Sembolelli, a kind of simnell-bread.

Sembolóso, as Semolóso.

Sembracéna, the fifth kind of wilde Mirrhe. 

Sembránza, semblance, likenesse, seeming.

Sembráre, as Sembiáre.

Séme, any kind of seed, off-spring or beginning of encrease, seed-corne, the kirnell of any sruit. Also kind or generation, or that whereby a thing is nourished and maintained.

Semedésimo, himselfe.

Séme genitále, mans-seed.

Seménta, any kind of seed.

Sementáre, as Semináre.

Sementatióne, a seeding.

Sementella, any kind of small seed. Vsed also in particular for Worme-seed. Also fine or small touch-powder. Also very small haile-shot.

Sementína, as Sementella.

Sementíne, a kind of Fig or Cherrie.

Sementíne, a kind of greening Peare.

Sementíuo, that may be sowen, or may beare seed.

Seménza, any kind of seed.

Semenzáio, a nurcerie or spring-garden of hearbes or trees or plants or seedes.

Semenzáre, as Semenzíre.

Semenzéna, as Sementína.

Semenzíre, zísco, zíto to seed or grow to seed.

Semére, as Semináre.

Semestre, of six monthes Also that groweth in six months.

Sémi, all manner of seeds. Also a word much vsed in composition and before other words for halfe or demy.

Semiánimo, but halfe-minded. Also halfe dead.

Semiánno, halfe a yeere.

Semiaperto, halfe open.

Semiarmáto, halfe armed.

Semibarbáto, halfe bearded.

Semibestia, halfe a beast, a demybeast.

Semibestiále, halfe-beastly.

Semibóue, halfe an Ox.

Semibréue, a semy briefe in Musike.

Semibuóno, halfe or demy good.

Semicadáuero, halfe a carcase.

Semicápro, halfe a Goate, demy Goated.

Semicerchiáre, to circle halfe about.

Semicérchio, a demy or halfe circle.

Semicieco, halfe-blind.

Semicínto, halfe-girt, a halfe-kirtle.

Semicircoláre, halfe circled or circular.

Semicírcolo, a demy or halfe circle.

Semicirconferenza, a halfe circumference.

Semichóro, a demie-chorus.

Semicórde, a coward, halfe-hearted,

Semicórdia, cowardise.

Semicótto, halfe boiled, baked or rosted.

Semicróme, a semiecrotchet in Musike. 

Semicrúdo, halfe raw.

Semicúbito, halfe a cubite.

Semidei, demie-gods, halfe-gods.

Semidente cauallíno, a kind of hearbe.

Semidiámetro, a halfe diameter, a line drawen from the centre to the circumference.

Semidimetiénte, the halfe diameter of a figure.

Semiditóno, a halfe tune in Musike.

Semidótto, halfe or meanely-learned.

Semifátto, halfe made, halfe done.

Semifóras, Caráttero diabólico. 

Semifórme, halfe-formed, vnperfect.

Semigiórno, halfe-day.

Semigráne, halfe heauie, halfe a sleepe.

Semihóra, halfe an houre.

Semihumáno, halfe humane.

Semihuómo, halfe a man, a demie man.

Semilácero, halfe rent or torne.

Semilíbero, halfe-free.

Semilúce, halfe a light, a demie-light.

Semilúna, mid-moone, halfe-moone.

Semimaríno, belonging partly to the Sea and partly to the land.

Semimínima, a semiminime in Musike, that is, halfe a crotchet.

Semimórto, halfe-dead, demie-dead.

Semimórte, a demie or halfe-death.

Seminábile, that may be sowen.

Seminagióne, sowing or sowing-time, seeding or seeding-time.

Seminále, of or pertaining to seede or sowing. Also Knotgrasse or Swinegrasse.

Semináli uási, the seed or seminarie vessels.

Semináre, to sow any seed. Also to disperce or scatter abroad. Also to charge as a field in Armorie.

Seminário, the first beginning, offspring or chiefe cause of any good or euill. Also a seminarie, a seed-plot, a nurcerie or spring-garden.

Seminatióne, the arte of sowing. Also a generation or breeding by seed.

Semináto, sowen, seeded, scattred, dispersed. Also seme in Armorie or charged as a coate of Armes. Also any ground that is sowen. Also but halfe borne.

Seminatóre, a sower of seedes, an ingendrer, a disperser, a scatterer.

Seminatúra, as Seminatióne.

Seminenta, as Sementella.

Seminéuole, that may be sowen.

Semínio, any gaine or profit comming of seed or sowing.

Seminíro, a kind of tune in Musike.

Semíno, as Baróne.

Seminótte, halfe night.

Seminúdo, halfe naked, demie naked.

Semióbolo, a farthing.

Semiouále, halfe ouall.

Semipedále, halfe a soote in quantitie. 



Semipéde, halfe a foote or footed.

Semiperfetto, halfe perfect or finished.

Semipiena, the Mooue being seuen daies old.

Semipieno, halfe full, demie full.

Semipoeta, a demie-poet.

Semipoetico, halfe poeticall.

Semiprobábile, halfe probable.

Semiprobabilità, halfe probabilitie.

Semiráso, halfe shauen, halfe sattin.

Semirústico, halfe rustike.

Semíre, as Semenzíre.

Semisepólto, halfe buried.

Semisónno, a halfe-sleepe, a demie nap.

Semissále, vsurie of six in the hundred.

Semísso, a fellow of no estimation.

Semistánte, a word of derision for a braue fellow, as good as George a greene.

Semisupíno, halfe vpright with the face vpward.

Sémita, a path, a foote-path, an allie, a troden way, a narrow way in sowen fields.

Semitáre, to deuide into waies or paths. Also to path.

Semitertiána, a shaking ague, halfe a tertian, so called because the greatest part of the fits thereof is spent in shiuering, namely on that day that the tertian and quotidian meet together.

Semitóno, a demie tune or halfe note in Musike.

Semitríto, halfe bruised, punned or brayed.

Semituóno, as Semitóno.

Semiuíro, halfe a man, an Eunuch, an vnperfect man, one that is guelded.

Semiuíta, a halfe life, a demie life.

Semiuíuere, to liue but halfe.

Semiuíuo, halfe aliue, between life and death.

Semiuocále, a demie vowell, six consonants are so called because they haue halfe the sound of vowels, F.L.M.N. R. S.

Sémma, powder or dust growen from brasse melted. Also golden sand.

Semmána, as Settimána, a weeke, a seauen-night.

Semnióne, an hearbe.

Semò, if now, if at this time.

Semód, a kind of Cabalisticall speculation.

Sémola, bran or grets of corne.

Semoláto, course, vnbolted or brannie bread.

Semolella, sine bran. Also a kind of pudding made of course meale.

Semolóso, brannie, course, full of bran.

Sempietà, as Semplicità.

Sémpio, as Sémplice. Also as Scémpio.

Sempiternáre, to make eternall.

Sempiternità, eternitie, sempiternitie. 

Sempiterno, sempiternall, euerlasting, perpetuall, immortall, endlesse, aye-during.

Sémplice, simple, single, slight, not double, sincere, pure, plaine, vnmixt, not curious, without welt or garde. Also harmelesse, homelie, meane, simple-witted, shallow-headed.

Sempliceménte, simply, singly, sincerely, homely, vnfaignedly, in good faith.

Semplicétto, somewhat simple, single, sincere, harmelesse. Also somewhat foolish.

Sempliciótto, as Semplicétto.

Semplicità, simplicitie, sinceritie, singlenesse, homelinesse. Also idiotisme.

Semprána, as Sempreuíua.

Sempráno, perpetuall, euer-during.

Sempráre, to make perpetuall.

Sempre, euer, aye, euer and euer.

Semprechè, as all times that.

Semprelenítà, accustomed gentlenesse, continuall mildnesse.

Sempremái, euer and euer, for euer.

Sempreuíua, Houseleeke, Euer-greene.

Sén, as Séno. Also as Senè.

Séna, the hearbe or spurge Senie, much vsed in Phisike.

Senácolo, a Senate, or Counsell-house.

Senápe, the hearbe Senuie. Also pepper in the nose, teene, madnesse, rashnesse, or rage.

Senapísmo, as Sinapísmo.

Senápra, as Senápe.

Senário, of or pertaining to the number of six. Also that consisteth of six.

Senáto, the Senate or Parliament house.

Senatóre, a Senator, a chiefe Counseller or Magistrate, an Alderman.

Senatóri di piédi, Senators of the meanest ranke or qualitie that hath no meanes of their owne, and went a foote to the Senate-house, and yet were chosen to that place for their vertues and merits.

Senatório, of or pertaining to a Senate.

Senatusconsúlto, a decree, an act, or ordinance made by the whole Senate.

Senáuro, as Sénape. Also an old man.

Séne, old, eld, aged. Also an old man.

Senè, himselfe, thence, or thereof, or of it. Also themselues thence, there of, or of it.

Seneccióne, the weede Groneswell, or Groundiwell.

Senépe, as Senápe. 

Senescente, waxing old, growing in age, decreasing, drawing to the wane.

Senescialláto, the office and iurisdiction of a Seneshall, a Seneshalsie.

Senesciállo, a Seneshall, a Marshall, a Shirif, a Bailife, a Portreeue.

Senestra, as Sinístra.

Senestraménte, as Sinistraménte.

Senestrare, as Sinistráre.

Senestro, as Sinístro.

Senétio, the hearbe Senuie.

Senettù, old-age, agednesse.

Senettúte, as Senettù.

Se ne và, he or she goeth hence.

Se ne viéne, he or she commeth.

Senezóne, as Seneccióne.

Seníce, a kind of disease in a man.

Seníle, aged-like, of or belonging to age.

Senilità, agednesse, old age.

Sénio, the last of mans foure ages.

Senióre, elder, more aged.

Senióre, a Senior, a predecessor.

Senità, age, eldnesse, agednesse.

Seníre, nísco, níto, to become aged or old.

Seníte, a kind of precious stone.

Sénno, wit, reason, sence, knowledge, discretion, iudgement. Also good sooth or earnestnesse, as Da Sénno, in good earnestnesse, or in good sooth.

Sennúto, wittie, full of wit, reason, sence, vnderstanding, or knowledge.

Séno, a bosome, a lap. Also a plait or fold in a garment. Also a lap, or apron. Also a net, or the hollownesse and enfoulding of a net. Also the bending, the hole or hollownesse of the eyes. Also the hole or hollow of a stalke whereat the branches doe sprout and shoote. Also a twinding, or round circle in haire. Also the minde or inwardest and priuy part of a mans bosome, heart or affections. Also a crinkle or crankle of or in any thing. Also a creeke a bosome, an angle, a hauen, a gulfe or arme of the sea or any riuer, or the turning and hollownesse of a water-banke. Also the hole or foule hollow of a sore or impostumation. Also in Mathematikes, if from the ends of any arch there be drawne two straight lines meeting, if one of them be a piece of the Diameter, and the other perpendicular to the former, the said right lines haue the name of Séno.

Senò, if not, but that, were it not.

Senòchè, as Senonchè.

Senon, but, but only, sauing, except, if not, but that, but only that.

Senon chè, but that, but only that, if not that, also but or only excepted.

Senoncóme, no other wise, but euen as.

Se non e chè, if it be not that.

Se non era, if it was not.

Senon fósse, if it were not.

Senon fósse chè, if it were not that.

Senónne, as Senón.

Senon fósse già, except it were that.

Senonne chè, as Senonchè.

Senon in quánto, but forasmuch.

Senon quánto, but or saue only so much.

Senonsè, as Senonchè.



Senonsolaménte, as Senónsolo.

Senónsolo, only except, sane only.

Senópia, common Bolearmin or sinopis. also as Senápe.

Sénsa, ascention daie.

Sensággine, sencenesse, sensibility.

Sensalággio, brokagemmy.

Sensaláre, to play the broker, to bargaine, to buy and sell by brokers.

Sensále, a broker, a dealer betweene party and party about bargaines.

Sensalaría, brokage. Also the arte, the profession or company of brokers.

Sensaría, brokeage, as Sensalaría.

Sensáro, as Sensále.

Sensataménte, sensibly, feelingly.

Sensatióne, the operation of any one sence, sensation, feelingnesse.

Sensatíssimò, most sensible.

Sensáto, as Sennúto, as Seneíbile.

Sénsi, the fiue senses of a man.

Sensibile, sensible, feeling, that may be felt or perceiued by any of the sences.

Sensibilità, sensibility, sensiblenesse.

Sensificáre, to sensifie, to viuifie, to giue sence vnto.

Sensitíuo, sensitiue, hauing sence.

Sensiuaménte, sensibly, feelingly.

Sensíuo, sensible, sensitiue.

Sénso, the sence of man. Also the sence or meaning of any thing. Also wit, reason, feeling sence, conceit, iudgement, perceiuing. Also what is known by sence.

Sensório, any sensible part.

Sensualáccio, a man giuen to all sensuality, carnall pleasure, or worldlie lust.

Sensuále, sensuall, licentious, pleasing his sences, giuen to gormandizing.

Sensualità, sensuality, licentiousnesse, pleasing and obaying of sences.

Sensualménte, sensually, licentiously.

Sentacchiáre, to cowre, squat or sit downe flat as a Goose or Ducke doth.

Sentácchio, all manner of squatting or cowring downe close. Vsed also for one that is quicke of hearing.

Sentacchióne, an idle sluggish or lazie fellow that is euer cowring or sitting.

Sentacchióne cáne, a setting dog.

Sentáre, to sit downe, as Sedére.

Sentáta, a sitting downe. Also a Sessions

Sentente, hearing, smelling, feeling, senting.

Sententia, a sentence, a verdict, an award, a decree. Also an opinion, a meaning, an aduice. Also a wittie or sententious saying.

Sententiáre, to sentence, to adiudge, to award, to condemne or giue iudgement.

Sententiáta, sentenced, adiudged, awarded, condemned, cast, giuen iudgement. 

Sententiére, a Iudge, a sentence-giuer.

Sententióso, sententious, full of sentences.

Sentenza, as Sententia.

Senticéta, a place full of Briers.

Sentiente, sensitiue, feeling.

Sentiéro, a path, a tracke, a caucie, a way.

Sentieruólo, a narrow path or tracke.

Sentilia, as Scintílla.

Sentillánte, as Scintillánte.

Sentilláre, as Scintilláre.

Sentillóso, as Scintillóso.

Sentiménto, sence, feeling. Also opinion, conceit. Also a taste, a smelling or suspicion. Also spirit, wit or vnderstanding. Also a consenting vnto.

Sentína, a sinke, a common shore. Also a pumpe in a ship. Also a iakes or priuie, or any conueyance of filth. Also a heape of any filth. Also a place where rascals and whores meet, a sinke of sinne, a place of iniquitie. Also a packe or heape of lewd villaines or mischiefes.

Sentináre, to pumpe in a ship. Looke Sentína.

Sentinella, a sentinell, a scout, a watch, a souldiers set at a station to watch.

Sentiniére, a swabber in a ship, or a scauinger, or that hath care of sinkes.

Sentíre sénto, sentíto, to feele, to heare, to smell, to taste, to perceiue, to conceit. Vsed also to approoue, to allow, or yeeld consent vnto.

Sentíre a náso, to sent or smell out.

Sentíre da uiéto, to stinke or smell reazie.

Sentíre di scémo, to haue a taste of gullishnesse, to sauour of follie.

Sentíre grátia, to conne thankes.

Sentíre martello, to feele a ielousie or anxietie of any thing.

Sentírsi, for a man to awaken or rouze himselfe, to shew a feeling.

Sentiruólo, any little way or path.

Sentíta, a warie, slie, fine-conceited or apt to vnderstand-woman. Also warinesse, foresight, or quicke wilinesse, vnderstanding, discretion.

Sentíto, felt, smelt, heard, tasted, vnderstood, perceiued. Also as Sentíta.

Sentóre, any sent, smell, or sauour. Also an inkling of a matter, a signe or suspition.

Sénza, sans, without, besides.

Sénza chè, without that, besides that.

Sénza dimóra, without delay.

Sénza dúbbio, without doubt, doubtlesse.

Sénza fállo, without faile.

Sénza il chè, without which.

Sénza indúgio, without delay.

Senzále, as Sensále, a Broker.

Sénza misúra, without measure. 

Sénza módo, without meanes.

Sénza número, without number.

Sénza pári, without match.

Sénza più, without more.

Sénza prò, without good.

Sénza propósito, without purpose.

Sénza ragióne, without reason.

Senzaría, as Sensaría.

Sénza riseruo, without reseruation.

Sénza sále, saltlesse, witlesse.

Sénza sapúta, without knowledge.

Sénza tempo, without time, as much to say euere

Sepa, a kind of venemous serpent called a Hornefretter. Also a Cuttle-fish or Cuttle-bone, whose bloud is as blacke as Inke, and therefore Sepa is taken for Inke.

Sepaiuóla, a bird frequenting hedges.

Separábile, separable, that may be deuided or parted in sunder.

Separabilità, separablenesse.

Separáre, to separate, to deuide, to sunder, to seuer, to part, to disioyne, to diuorce.

Separataménte, seuerally.

Separatióne, a separation, a seuering, a diuision, a diuorce, a putting asunder.

Separatíuo, that doth separate.

Sépe, a hedge, a quick-set-hedge, a sence or closure about grounds.

Sepedi, Pissemires, Emmets.

Sepedio, a refuge.

Sepellíbile, buriable, that may be buried.

Sepellíre, lísco, líto, to burie, to entombe, to enterre, to lay in the earth or graue.

Sepellíto, as Sepólto.

Sepellitóre, a burier of the dead.

Sépero, a berrie of the Bay-tree.

Sephísma, a law, a statute.

Sepi, as Sepa.

Sepia, as Sepa.

Sepiétta, a little Sepa.

Seplásio, a sweet ointment.

Sepolcrále, belonging to a tombe.

Sepólcro, a tombe, a graue, a sepulcher. Vsed also for a Church-yard. Also often taken for Christes sepulcher or the holy land.

Sepólto, buried, laid in his graue, interred, entombed, laid vnder ground.

Sepoltúra, as Sepólcro.

Sepónere, póngo, pósi, pósto, to place or lay or set asunder.

Sepórre, as Sepónere.

Sepositióne, a putting asunder, a setting aside.

Sepóso, fattie, full of tallow or seame.

Seppa, as Sepa.

Seppe, he knew, of Sapére.

Seppero, they knew, of Sapére.

Seppi, I knew, of Sapére.



Seppia, as Sepa.

Seps, as Sepa. Also a venemous worme or Horne-worme.

Septico, a medicament that cleanseth and scoureth.

Septio, as Settio.

Septo, a sluce, a flud-gate, a watergap.

Sepulcrále búca, a burying den, a graue for the dead, a sepulcher.

Sepúr, as Sepúre.

Sepúre, if yet, if so be that, if that.

Sequela, a sequell, a consequence, a following. Also as Seguito.

Sequenza, as Seguenza, a sequence.

Sequestráre, to sequester, to put apart. Also to attach, to arrest, to stay and stop. Also to arbitrate, or put into ones hands as indifferent.

Sequestratióne, a sequestration, a putting apart. Also an attachment, an arrest, an action, a sute. Also an arbitration or arbitrement.

Sequestratóre, a sequestrator, an attacher, an vnder-iudge, an arbitrater.

Sequestre, an arbitrator, indifferent to both parties, a reconciler of parties.

Sequestro, as Sequestratióne.

Sér, Sir, as Sére.

Séra, eue or euening, the last part of the day, Bóna séra, good euening.

Serà, he, shee or it shalbe.

Séra al tárdi, late in the euening.

Séra délla uíta, the houre of a mans life, the Sunne-set of mans age.

Séra emattína, euening and morning.

Serafágio, as Seráfo.

Seráffo, a Zaphir-stone.

Serafino, as Seraphíno, as Seráso.

Seráfo, a coine worth foure shillings of ours in Ormuz. Also a kind of Serpent that the Egyptians worshipped as a God.

Seráphico, burning in loue and charitie.

Seraphíno, heating, incensiue, burning on fire, fierie, feruent, a Seraphin, an Angell.

Serápia, Dogstones or Ragwort.

Serápíca, Dogstones or Ragwort. Also a kind of Hornet or Brizze.

Serapíno, a kind of gum or drug.

Serbábile, that may be kept or reserued, durable, lasting.

Serbanía, any place to keepe things in.

Serbánza, a keeping or reseruing.

Serbáre, to keepe, to reserue, to preserue. Also to obserue, to hold or maintaine, as Seruáre.

Serbastrella, Ragwort or Dogstones.

Serbatíccio, any fruit or other thing that will last and keepe long.

Serbatóio, a cubbord, a lardrie, a pantrie, a buttrie, a keepe, a place to keepe or preserue any thing in, a Parke, a Padocke. Also a fish-pond. 

Ser-bello, Sir goodly or spruce.

Serbéuole, as Serbábile.

Serbo, a reseruing or keeping in store.

Sercontrapóni, as Foramello, a snappish finde-fault with all men.

Sére, Sir, a title giuen to Lords, Masters, Doctors, Priests or Notaries.

Serena, a Siren, as Siréna.

Serenáre, to make or become cleare, faire and lightsome, to cleare vp. Also to looke cheerefully. Also to calme, to appease or quiet.

Serenáta, a fit of mirth or hunt is vp plaide in a morning or euening in the street. Vsed also for night discourses or sports.

Serenézza, as Serenità.

Sereníssimo, most cleere, excellently beawtifull or calme. Also a title onely giuen to Kings and great Princes, as we say most soueraigne, most glorious, most famous, most excellent and farre renowned.

Serenità, brightnesse, cleerenesse. Also cheerefulnesse. Also fairenesse, calmenes or quietnesse. Also faire and cleere weather. Also a title giuen to Kings or chiefe Dukes, as we say souerainty, highnesse, grace or maiesty.

Seréno, bright, cleere. Also faire, calme, quiet, cheerefull, merry, peacefull. Also cleere and faire weather or without clouds and raine. Also vsed for clarified whay or wig.

Serfedócco, a silly gull, a ninny foole, as we say Sir Patch, or Sir Coxecombe.

Sergente, a Sergeant, a Catchpole, a Bedle or such officer commanded by a superiour magistrate, vsed also for a groome, a squire or other such seruant.

Sergente maggióre, a Seriant maior of a campe or band.

Sergentíno, a Captaines leading staffe.

Sergiáne, a kind of little Oliues in Italie.

Sergie, as Sergiáne.

Sergiólo, a Yeoman, Seriant or Catchpole.

Sergo, a fish called a Sargot.

Sergozzonáre, to wherret or thump one with fists.

Sergozzonáre, a blow, a bang, a whirret, a stroake or thump giuen vpon the necke with ones fist or knuckles.

Ser'huómo, Sir man.

Séri, a kind of garden Endiue. Also the name of the place whence silke came first.

Séria, an earnest, graue or serious word.

Serica, fine silke serge or say or rash.

Sericário, a Silke-man.

Sericáte, a kind of sweet gum or drug vsed in perfumes.

Serico, of silke, silken, made of or like silk.

Série, an order, a succession, a row, a bedrole. Also a race a discent or pedigree.

Serifálco, a kind of shot or bumbard.

Seríffo, a title giuen to Princes in Barbary, as much to say as King.

Serífia, a kind of red Toade or Frog.

Serífio, sea Wormewood.

Seríno, a bird called a Siskin.

Sério, as Serióso.

Seriosità, seriousnesse, earnestnesse.

Serióso, serious, earnest, in sooth, graue, of consequence, without mocking.

Sermargóllo, an old doting wizard or wise man. Also a ser meacocke, a gull, a ninny hammer. Also a play among children in Italy with Beanes or Nuts.

Sermenti, buds, sprigs, sprouts or young branches of vines. Also flagges, segs or reedes growing by the waters side. Also the little bushy stalkes whereon the Grapes grow on clusters.

Sermentína, vsed for wine as comming of Sermenti, Grape-liquor. Also the Saracins hearb. Also any fraile made of twigs or sprigs.

Sermentóso, full of Sermenti.

Sermo, as Sermóne.

Sermocináre, as Sermonáre.

Sermocínio, as Sermóne.

Sermolína, wilde Betony, some say wild Marioram. Also a womans quaint.

Sermollíno, wilde time, creeping Time.

Sermonáre, to speake, to reason, to discourse, to sermon or Preach.

Sermoncello, any short speech or sermon or oration.

Sermoncíno, as Sermoncello.

Sermóne, the speech, communication or language of mankind. Also a sermon, a preaching, an oration, a discourse. Vsed also for a Salmon-fish.

Sermoneggiáre, as Sermonáre.

Sermoneggiatóre, as Sermoniere.

Sermoniere, a speaker, a discourser, a sermoner, a preacher. Also a frequenter of sermons and preachers.

Séro., Vsed for late or lateward.

Sérole, as Serrole.

Serócchia, as Sirócchia.

Serósi humóri, as Serosità.

Serosità, the thinner part of blood flotting on it as whay, whaishnesse.

Serotína., Vsed for the euening star.

Serotíno, weake or faint by birth and nature, as born late in the decay of nature. Also late, lag, lateward, in the euening, after sunne set. Also a last fruite.

Serpa, the name of a wheele or spring in a Clocke or Watch. 



Serpáre, as Serpere, or Serpeggiáre.

Serpe, any kind of Serpent or venemous creeping beast or crawling vermine that creepes vpon his belly and not one his feete, as snakes or adders. Also a kind of Limbecke called a Serpentine or doubble ss.

Serpédine, a rednesse or inflamation in the skin with pushes or pimples.

Serpédo, as Serpédine.

Serpéga, as Serpédine.

Serpeggiáre, as Serpere. Also to goe or turne winding and crankling in and out as some Riuers doe. Also when a horse doth gallop writhing like a Snake.

Serpentáre, as Serpere, as Subilláre.

Serpentária, Vipers-grasse. Also Dragon-wort. Also Mony-wort or hearbe Two-penny.

Serpentária maggióre, Dragon-wort or Serpentine the greater.

Serpentário, séno celeste. 

Serpentáuro, a kind of Serpent and Bull together, halfe the one and halfe the other.

Serpente, any kind of Serpent, as Serpe. Also creeping, proceeding forward, and spreading abroad by little and little.

Serpente austrále, ségno celeste. 

Serpentella, as Serpentária.

Serpentello, any little Serpent.

Serpenti cecílij, all manner of blinde wormes.

Serpentína, an iron at the end of a Gunners Linstocke called a cocke or serpentine. Also a kind of bumbard or artillery called a Serpentine or a Saker. Also a kind of winding limbecke called a Serpentine or doubble ss. Also a kind of ring worme or fashions in a horse or such creeping disease. Also as Serpentária.

Serpentíno, Serpentine, Viperous, like or of the nature of a Serpent. Also creeping or crawling and cranckling in and out. Also a kinde of arrow head made like an Adders tongue. Also a kind of winding instrument or toole that Anatomists and Grauers vse. Also a kinde of very hard stone or Marble.

Serperástro, a mischieuous man, as it were of a Serpents brood or quality.

Serpere, serpo, serpéi, serpúto, to creepe, to craule or slide vpon the belly without feete, or along the ground as a Serpent or Worme. Also to turne, to wrigle and crankle in and out as a Snake or as some Riuers doe. Also to spread abroad by little and little as hearbes doe growing closely by the ground.

Serpettipmále, a kind of venemous Serpent.

Serpi, certaine binders or Capsquires belonging to Carts or wheeles.

Serpicella, a kind of crossing of bookes or reckonings so called among Marchants.

Serpicoláto, turning, winding, writhing or crankling in and out as a Serpent.

Serpillo, wild Thime, creeping Thime, or our Ladies-bedstraw. Also wild Bettony.

Serpíre, písco, píto, as Serpere.

Serpolína, as Serpíllo. Also a pretty lasse, a handsome wench, a nimble guirle, a bonny trull. Also a womans prety quaint.

Serpóllo, as Serpíllo.

Serpúto, crept, crawled, of Serpere.

Serqua, a dozen, namely of egges, or as we say a Bakers dozen, that is thirteene to the dozen, Serqua d'uuóua, the word is onely vsed in Florence.

Serra, any secluse or shut-vp-place as a Cloister, an enclosure. Also a locke.

Serragliáre, to shut in or close round.

Serraglíno, a Locke-smith.

Serráglio, vsed for the great Turkes chief Court or houshold. Also a seraile, an enclosure, a close a secluse, a Cloyster, a Parke, a Padocke, any place shut or closed in. Vsed also for that sport in Spaine, which they call, Giuóco di cánne or tornei.

Serráme, a lock or any thing that belongs to locking or shutting. Also as Serráglio.

Serraménti di góla, stuffings in the throate.

Serráno, a griping, a pinching, a clasping companion.

Serráre, to shut, to locke, to enclose, to cloister vp, to immure, to raile in.

Serraserra, a kind of march sounded in times of battles or skirmishes or suddaine assaults, as you would say, stick close.

Serráta, a locking, a shutting, an enclosing, but properly when the souldiers in squadron doe ioyne close and sticke together ther by to become more strong against any shocke. Also the hearbe Germander.

Serrátile, that may beshut and lockt.

Serrátula, the hearbe Hebettony.

Serratúra, any kinde of locke or lockeing.

Serratúra di góla, the squinancy or swelling of kernels in the necke.

Serre di sássi, rockes, cragges, clifes, sliues or rugged stones.

Serrétte, sharpe points or buttons to make the curbe of the bit extreame hard.

Serrauóla, a spring or fountaine closed in or hedged about, that the cattell shall not marre it.

Serrole, a kinde of Wilde-ducke or Mallard.

Ser sacciúto, a selfe-weaning sellow.

Sersparécchia, a mar-all, a spoile-all, a busie-headed fellow.

Serta, a Chaplet, a coronet, a wreath, a Circlet, a Garland, a tuzzie-muzzie or sweet posie of flowers.

Sertále, Sir what you call him, Sir such a one.

Serticella, as Serta.

Sertico, the sweete smelling hearbe Melilot. Also made Chaplet or Wreathwise.

Sertola, as Sertico.

Sertula, as Sertico.

Sertútte sálle, a selfe-weaning fellow, one that thinkes he knowes all things.

Serua, a maide or woman seruant.

Seruábile, that may be kept.

Seruáculo, as Ripostíglio.

Seruággio, seruice, seruitude, subiection, bondage, thraldome, slauery.

Seruándo, that is to be saued or preserued.

Seruáre, as Serbáre.

Seruár féde, to keepe ones word.

Seruár proméssa, to keepe promise.

Seruatióne, a keeping, a sauing place.

Seruatóio, as Serbatóio.

Seruatóre, a Sauiour, a preseruer.

Seruente, seruing or sitting any thing. Also a man or woman seruant.

Seruia, a Nosegay of flowres, as Serta.

Serniále, as Seruigliále.

Seruíbile, that may serue.

Seruidoráme, base minded, faint-hearted, fit onely to serue and not to command.

Seruidóre, as Seruitóre.

Seruiétta, a napkin or drinkeing-cloath.

Seruigiále, seruiceable, fit for seruice or to serue. Also any Groome or household seruant. Also a glister.

Seruigiétto, any little seruice, a good turne. Also an errand or businesse.

Seruígio, any seruice or good turne. Also an errand or businesse.

Seruíle, seruile, slauish, base, of or belonging to seruice or to a seruant.

Seruilità, seruility, seruitude, drudgery, thraldome, bondage, slauery.

Seruílla, Skirwort or Skirret-rootes.

Seruiménto, attendance, seruice or retinue of fellowes. Also any kind of seruing.

Servinciguerra, Sir vanquish warre, a fearefull bugge-beare, a bragadócchio. 



Seruíre, seruo, seruíto, to serue, to attend, to waite vpon, to doe seruice vnto. Also to sit ones turne or businesse. Also to vse or imploy in or for any purpose. A chè vi seruíte di quésto? for or to what purpose doe you vse this?

Seruíre all'occasióne, to serue and fit any occasion.

Seruíre di cóppa, to serue a Prince as his cup-bearer.

Seruírsi, to make vse of, to vse, to employ, or serue ones turne with any thing.

Seruitiále, as Seruigiále.

Seruitiétto, as Serugiétto.

Seruítio, as Seruígio.

Seruíto, serued, attended, waited one, done seruice vnto. Essére seruíto, to be pleased or contented.

Seruitóre, a chamber piece put into a great mortary piece and so shot off.

Seruitóre, a seruitor, a seruant, a seruing-man, an attendant, a waiter, a a thral, it is also vsed for a close-stoole or the pan of a close-stoole.

Seruitóre di coltello, a Caruer.

Seruitóre di cóppa, a Cup-bearer.

Seruitóre di piátto, a Sewer.

Seruítosi, made vse of, serued ones turne with. Also beene pleased with.

Seruitríce, a maide or woman seruant.

Seruitù, seruitude, seruice, thraldome.

Seruitúdine, as Seruitù.

Seruo, any kind of man seruant, a slaue, a drudge, a bondman, one that oweth seruice.

Sésama, as Sesamíno.

Sesaméle, a kind of simnell bread made with hony and spice.

Sesamíni, O'ssi sesamíni, certaine little round bones vnder the ioints of the fingers and toes, created of nature as well to fulfill the voide places left to those ioynts where they grow, as also, in the hands to strengthen them to the apprehending & holding of any thing and in the feete to the equall passing on the ground.

Sesamíno, a white grain in India wherof they make oyle, called Sesame.

Sesamóide, an hearbe that purgeth melancholy. Also as Sesamíno.

Sescúpla, an engine in sea fights vsed to breake and split ships or galies.

Sescúplo, sixfould, six times as much, the whole and the halfe part.

Sescúpula, a kind of small ship. Also as Sescúpla.

Sésile, the hearbe Siler-mountaine.

Sesíno, the sixth part of any weight. Also a small coine in Italie.

Sésmapárte, the sixth part. 

Sespsè, a Serpent so called.

Sesquialtéro, halfe so much againe, a proportion of one and a halfe.

Sesquihóra, an houre and a halfe.

Sesquilíbra, a pound and a halfe.

Sesquiménse, a moneth and a halfe.

Sesquíno, il uó stro buón sesquíno u'allontána da Róma. 

Sesquiottáuo, eight and a halfe.

Sesquipedále, a measure of a foote and a halfe.

Sesquíplice, halfe so much againe.

Sesquiterza, as much as another, and a third part more.

Sessa, as Mússolo.

Sessagenário, of threescore yeeres.

Sessagésimo, the sixtieth in order. Also any sixtieth part.

Sessámo, a kind of shrub that heareth a cod.

Sessangoláre, six-cornered, six-angled.

Sessángolo, a forme of six angles.

Sessánta, the number sixtie.

Sessaténa, as Sessantína.

Sessantésimo, the sixtieth in order.

Sessantína, one three score. Also an old trot or beldame, a woman past threescore yeeres. Also a kind of finest Lawne or Cambricke. Also fine Tiffanie.

Sessàntiplicáre, to sixtiefold.

Sessile, that may sit, easie to sit on.

Sessílo, as Síléro.

Sessióne, a sessions, a section, a sitting, an assise. Also a meeting place.

Sesso, a sex, a kind of man or woman. Vsed also for the trill, bum, arse or sitting place.

Sessola, a kind of great basket to carie hay, straw or stubble in.

Sesta, a paire of compasses, A sesta, by compasse, by leuell, line and measure. Also in order, in due forme, sutably, according to a mans minde. Looke Dáre sesta.

Sestále, as A sesta. Looke Sesta.

Sestánte, as Sestário.

Sesrário, a measure whereby all other may be made (after Budeus) and certaine triall by weight and measure, it is a pinte and a halfe of our measure, or eighteene of our Ounces.

Sesterno, the sixth in number.

Sestertio, a kind of coine among the Romanes whereof a thousand made iust fiue pound sterling. Also a certaine vaile or loose garment that men vsed to cast about them like a sheete, so wouen that euery third third was bigger than the other two.

Sestésso, himselfe.

Sestile, the moneth of August.

Sestiéro, a warde, a precinct, a quarter or street in any Citie or Towne. Also as Sestário.

Sestína, a stance of verses or of a song containing six lines. Also a kind of song of six stances riming together six times to one word.

Sestiplicáre, to sixth-fold.

Sesto, the sixth in order or number. Also a compasse or paire of compasses. Also order, forme, due biasse, method, plight, fadging or handsome fashion. Also a warde or precinct in a Citie containing so many Parishes.

Sestogénito, the sixth-begotten or borne.

Sestóra, the plurall of Sesto.

Sestula, the sixth part of an Ounce. Also a kind of measure of land.

Sestúplo, six-fold, six-double.

Séta, any kind of silke. Also a disease in a horse called a Quitterbone.

Séta agucchiáta, silke-knitted, as silke-stockings are.

Séta cauallína, Louage or Alisander hearbe.

Setacciáre, to sift, to searce, to straine.

Setáccio, a sieue, a searce. Also a strainer made of the haires of a horses taile.

Setaiuólo, a Silke-man or Marchant.

Setália, shaggie, brizlie, bushie, hairie. Also a gloomie, cloudie or duskie place. Boccace doth vse it for a womans hairie or brizlie valley or quaint, when he saith uálle setália. Looke Gólfo.

Setánia, as Setanióne.

Setánie, a kind of big, round, and smooth Medlars.

Setaníno, thin or slight veluet called Refusados.

Setánio, march or summer-wheat.

Setanióne, a kind of Cibes, Cibols, Scalions or Onions.

Satázza, as Setáccio.

Setazzáre, as Setacciáre.

Sére, thirst, thirstinesse, desire to drinke, drought. Also greedinesse or great appetite of any thing. Also all manner of silkes. Also thou art of E'ssere.

Setífero, thirst-bringing.

Setíno, a kind of wine to quench thirst. Also silke on or made of silke. Also a kind of thin fine stuffe like tamie, cipres or burato.

Sétola, any kind of brizzle namely of a Hog such as Shooemakers vse, and as they make brushes of. Also a headbrush, a beard-brush or a combe-brush. Also a disease in a horse called a quitterbone.

Setoláre, to brizzle. Also to brush.

Sétole, brizzles. Also brushes.

Setolína, a little beard or combe-brush.

Setolóso, brizlie, shaggie, rugged, hairie, grizly, rough, brushie.

Setolúto, as Setolóso.

Setóso, thirstie, dry, full of drought, greedie, rauenous. Also as Setolóso.



Setta, a sect, a faction or companie of one opinion. Also ones doctrine or manner of life. Also a diuers consent in sundry wilfull opinions.

Settangoláre, seuen-cornered.

Settángolo, seuen-cornered.

Settánta, the number of seauentie.

Settanténa, a number of seauentie.

Settantenário, of seauentie yeeres.

Settantiplicáre, to seauentie-fold.

Settáre, to desect, to deuide with a knife.

Settário, a sectarie, a follower of a sect, a factious man. Also a seauenth.

Settatóre, as Settário.

Sette, the number of seauen, a seauen.

Settegenário, of seauen tie yeeres.

Setteggiáre, to make a sect or faction, to side or bandie together.

Settembre, the moneth of September.

Settenário, containing seauen, of or belonging to seauen.

Settenio, of seauen yeeres space.

Settenne, of seauen yeeres space.

Settentrionále, northren, septentrionall, of or belonging to the North.

Settentrióne, the north part of the world. Also the north coast or pole. Also the Northren-winde. Also the seauen starres of Charles-waine.

Settepedále, seauen foote long, of or belonging to seauen foote.

Setteplíco, seauen-fold, seauen-double. Also running seauen waies.

Settezzóni, pónti, colisei, acquedótti, & settezzóni, a kind of proud fabrike.

Settiángolo, seauen-cornered.

Settíbile animále, desectible creatures, that is or may easily bee cut or desected.

Settico, putrefactiue or corosiue, that rotteth as matter in a sore.

Settifário, of seauen fashions or seauen diuers waies.

Settifóglio, Setfolie, Tormentill, Ashweed, wilde Imperatorie on hearbe Gerard.

Settifórme, of seauen formes or fashions.

Settile, as Settíbile.

Settimána, a weeke, the space of seauen daies or mornings.

Settimanáro, a weeke or weekely workeman.

Settimána Sánta, the weeke before Easter.

Settimo, the seauenth in order.

Settio, the seauenth in order.

Settióne, a section, a cutting, a desection, a deuiding, a parting. Also the forfeit or confiscation of ones goods in penaltie.

Settipéde, hauing seauen feete.

Settiplicáre, to seauen-fold or double. 

Settiremigaléra, a gallie of seauen oares of a side.

Settíuo, as Settíbile.

Settíuo pórro, the cut Leeke or Pornet.

Setto, disected, diuided, cut in sunder.

Settóre, a desector, a cutter, a deuider. Also a certaine Mathematicall instrument. Also one that by false complaints seeketh to make others forfeit their goods.

Setto transuerso, the midriffe.

Settro, a Kings scepter or mace.

Settuagenále, as Settuagenário.

Settuagenário, of seauentie yeeres.

Settuagésimo, the seauentieth.

Settuóso, darke or obscure.

Settúra, as Settióne.

Seudisodómo, as Pseudisodómo.

Seudo, as Pseudo.

Seudographía, as Pseudographía.

Seudólogo, as Pseudólogo.

Seudomártire, as Pseudomártire.

Seudoméno, as Pseudoméno.

Seudónimo, as Pseudónimo.

Seudopropheta, as Pseudopropheta.

Seueraménte, seuerely, rigorously.

Seueráre, to persist seuerely.

Seuerézza, as Seuerità.

Seuerità, seueritie, rigor, austeritie.

Seuéro, seuere, rigorous, austere, sterne.

Seuífero, tallow-bearing.

Seuítia, rage, fiercenesse, furie, tirannie.

Seuitúdine, as Seuítia.

Séuo, fierce, raging, furious, moodie.

Séuo, tallow, fat, grease to make candles.

Seuóso, tallowie, greasie, full of tallow.

Seurióne, a kind of mustard-seed.

Séuro, seuered, sundred, separated.

Sezzáia, at last, the last, lag or latest.

Sezzáio, last, lag, or hindmost of all.

Sezzáno, as Sezzáio.

Sezzento, as Séi cento, seauen hundred.

Sezzióne, as Sessióne.

Sézzo, last, lag, hindmost of all.

Sfabricáre, to vnbuild, to ruine, to vnframe, to disorder.

Sfacchinársi, to forsake or leaue off to be a porter or base knaue, that is, to become from a iack to a gentleman.

Sfacciáre, to deface, to marre, to spoile.

Sfacciatággine, impudencie, shamelesnesse, boldnesse, saucinesse, malapertnesse.

Sfacciataménte, impudently, shamelesly.

Sfacciatézza, as Sfacciatággine.

Sfacciatíssimo, most impudent.

Sfacciáto, impudent, shamelesse, blushlesse.

Sfacciatúra, as Sfacciatággine.

Sfacciménto, a defacing, a defeasance.

Sfaccitúdine, as Sfacciatággine.

Sfáce, doth quench or vndoe.

Sfacelo, a disease when any part by inflammation is mortified. Also the hearbe called wilde Sauge.

Sfacendáto, vnbusied, lazie, idle.

Sfagianáre, to reuell or wantonize, to riot in good cheere and eating of Phesants.

Sfagianáto, wantonized, reuelled.

Sfagitide, two great veines appearing on each side of the throat, which nourish all the parts of the head and necke.

Sfagottáre, to vnfagot, to vnbundle, to vntrusse.

Sfagumáto, a gull, one that will easily be cousened or fetcht ouer the coles.

Sfaldáre, to vnfold, to vnpleit.

Sfallire, lísco líto, to misse, to faile. Also to breake or be bankerout.

Sfalcáre, to disioint any limme.

Sfalcatúra, is properly when the shoulder of a Horse or any other limme is bent or disiointed, or by violence forced from the right place.

Sfamáre, to glut, to gorge, to cloy, to fill or quench ones bunger and desire.

Sfamáto, glutted, gorged, vnhungred.

Sfamatúra, a glutting, a quenching of hunger.

Sfangáre, to cleanse from durt or mire.

Sfardelláre, to vntrusse, to rifle, to strip.

Sfáre, as Disfáre, to vndoe, to quench.

Sfasciáre, to vnswath, to vnbandle.

Sfascináre, to vncharme, to vnwitch.

Sfascinatióne, an vncharming.

Sfasciúme, birds dung, filth or ordure. Also disordered, open, vnswathed, vncompassed.

Sfatáre, to extenuate, to diminish, or empaire in esteeme or reputation.

Sfatáta, vnfayried, roynish, ill-fauoured.

Sfátto, as Disfátto, vndone.

Sfauáta, a meat made of beanes. Also a flim-flam idle tale or discourse.

Sfauelláre, to gaine-say, to vnsay, to vnspeake.

Sfauílla, as Fauílla, a sparkle.

Sfauillánte, sparking, spangling.

Sfauilláre, to sparkle, to spangle.

Sfauóre, disfauour.

Sfauoréuole, vnfauourable.

Sfebbráto, rid of an ague or feuer.

Sfebbricitáto, disagued, vnfeuered.

Sfeducciáto, faithlesse, tretcherous.

Sfegatáto, vnliuered, or white-liuered.

Sfemináre, to leaue off effeminacie.

Sfemináto, diswoman'd, diseffeminated.

Sfendere, sfendo, sfendéi, sfésso, sfendúto, to vncleaue, to cleaue, to splint, to chap, to riue, to shiuer, to split, to slit, to flaw.

Sfendiménto, a chap, a chinke, a cleft, a 



cleauing, a crannie, a gap, a riuing, a slit, a flaw.

Sfenditúra, as Sfendiménto.

Sfendúto, cleft, chapt, chinkt, split, splinted, riuen, flawed, slitted, shiuered.

Sfera, a spheare, a globe, a bowle, a rundle, a figure in all parts equally round.

Sferále, as Sfereále.

Sfereále, round, sphericall, globe-like.

Sfercbráre, to teare, to rend or breake in pieces.

Sfericaménte, roundly, spherically.

Sfericáre, to frame round like a spheare.

Sférico, sphericall, round like a Globe.

Sferína, a kind of little round Ladiebird of diuers fine colours.

Sferra, an old cast sute of apparell, or any thing cast by and left off.

Sferracauálli, as Etiópide.

Sferraménto, a loosing from out irons or bonds. Also the vnshooing of a Horse.

Sferráre, to vniron, to Free or deliuer from out irons or bondes. Also to vnshooe a Horse.

Sferratura, the vnshooing of a horse.

Sferro, an iron bard strong chest.

Sferza, a whip, a scourge, a red, a flaile.

Sferza del sóle, vsed for the burning beames of the sunne.

Sferzáre, to whip, to scourge, to flaile, to lash, to yerke.

Sferzata, a whipping, a scourging, a lashing, a yerking.

Sfesso, as Sfendúto, cleft, riuen. Also a slit or a cleft, a flaw.

Sfessúra, a slit, a cleft, as Sfendiménto.

Sfettonáre, is by Grisoni taken for the opening or cutting of the frush of a horse away to cure the disease called Formella or Fetóne.

Sfiancáre, to vnflanke, to vnhip, to vnhanch. Also to make leane or lanke.

Sfianchíre, chisco, chíto, as Sfiancáre.

Sfiatáre, to breath or vent out.

Sfiatatóio, a vent or breathing hole.

Sfibbiáre, to vnbuckle, to vnlace.

Sfibbiatúra, an vnbuckling, an vnlaceing.

Sficcáre, to loosen, to vnfasten.

Sfida, a challenge, a defiance, a cartell.

Sfidáre, to distrust, to defie, to challenge.

Sfidáto, challenged, defied, distrusted. Also one that beleeueth no man.

Sfidatóre, a challenger, a defier.

Sfiducciáto, a hollow-harted, doubble-tongued, false cheating companion, trustlesse.

Sfiguráre, to disfigure, to deface.

Sfiguráto, disfigured, defaced. 

Sfilacciáre, to vntwist. Also to rauell out.

Sfiláccij, vntwistings, rauelings, lint for Chirurgions. Also sleaue silke.

Sfiláccio, Okame of vntwisted ropes.

Sfiláre, to vnthrid, to rauell. Also to put of ranke, order, files or ioint.

Sfiláta, out of file, out of ranke or order, dispersedly. Also vnthridded.

Sfiláti, such as shed their sperme or haue the running of the raines and are weake in venerian affaires.

Sfiláto púnto, a kind of sewing stich.

Sfilatúra, any kinde of raueling out in thrids. Also a certaine disease in a horse. Looke Isfilatúra.

Sfilázza, as Sfiláccij.

Sfilzáre, to vnthrid, to rauell, the contrary of Infilzáre.

Sfínga, a Sphinx with face and voice like a woman, and hands and feet like a Lion.

Sfínge, Apes very hairy, that haue long teats and are easily taught to forget their wildnesse, Marmosets.

Sfiniménto, a swouning, an apoplexy, a fainting, a qualme ouer the heart.

Sfiníre, nísco, níto, to swoune, to faint or fall into a trance. Also to finish.

Sfintro, the round compassing muscle of the strait gut ordained to preuent vntimely excretion.

Sfioreggiáre, to flower, to flourish, to sprout, to blossome, to bloome out.

Sfioreggiáto, vnblessomed, disflowred.

Sfioríre, rísco, rísco, to disflower, to vnblossome. Also to deflower.

Sfiréna, a kind of long fish.

Sfocáre, as Sfogáre.

Sfoderáre, to vn-sheathe, to vn-scabbard.

Sfodráre, as Sfoderáre.

Sfogaménto, a venting, a wreaking, an easing or puffing of ones rage or anger.

Sfogáre, to vent, to wreake or burst foorth as fire doth being closely raked vp.

Sfogáre la rábbia, to wreake, to vent or burst foorth ones rage or anger.

Sfogataménte, ragingly in venting manner as fire out of Cinders.

Sfogáto, vented, wreaked, raged foorth ones griefe, rage or anger.

Sfoggiaménto, a flanting, a reuelling, a rioting, a lauishing but of all fashions.

Sfoggiánte, exceeding all fashions, riotous, lauishing.

Sfoggiáre, to lauish, to riot, to reuell, to flant it beyond all fashion and excesse.

Sfoggiataménte, riotously, lauishly, flantingly, beyond all order and fashion.

Sfoggiáto, lauished, rioted, ruelled or flanted beyond all order and fashion. Also fashionlesse, vnhandsome, big, huge, and great out of all fashion.

Sfoggiatóre, a riotous, vnthrifty carelesse spender and out of all fashion.

Sfóggio, any kind of excesse, namely in apparrell, beyond all fashion.

Sfoghéuole, that may be vented, wreaked or burst foorth as fire doth.

Sfóglia, any kind of thin puffe paste.

Sfogliággi, as Sfogliámi.

Sfogliámi, any kind of leafe or branch worke.

Sfogliáre, to pull of the leaues of any tree or branch.

Sfogliáta, as Sfóglia.

Sfogliatelli, a kinde of thin paste-meate.

Sfogliatóre, looke Sfogliáre.

Sfóglio, a flat fish called a Sole.

Sfógo, as Sfogaménto, or Spiráglio.

Sfóia, a Sole-fish.

Sfoiággine., looke Fóia.

Sfoiáta, a Sole-fish.

Sfoiáto, glutted, cloid, cooled or tamed with lust or letchery.

Sfolgoránte, bursting foorth. Also lauish riotous or profuse in spending.

Sfolgoráre, to burst foorth as Fólgore, to lauish profusely.

Sfondaménto, as Sfóndo.

Sfondáre, to breake out the bottome, to sinke or split a ship.

Sfondáta, an ouer-ridden bottomlesse whore, a stillion rampish strumpet.

Sfondáto, bottomlesse, a hollow place. Also a broken high-way, as when one sinketh in the mud.

Sfondillo, an hearbe whose iuice makes haire to curle, called the holly Ghostes roote. Also a kind of great Oister.

Sfondoláre, as Sfrondáre. Also to break out the bottome, as Sfondáre.

Sfóndo, a sinking or breakeing out of the bottome of any thing.

Sfondoláto, disbranched, bottome-broken.

Sfondráre, to founder a horse.

Sfondráta puttána, a foundred whore.

Sfondráto, a foundred horse.

Sfóngio, a kinde of light spungeous stone.

Sforacchiáre, to boare thorow, to boare with many holes.

Sforamáre, to boare, to pricke or pierce thorow.

Sforáre, as Sforacchiáre.

Sforáto, boared, pricked, or pierced full of holes, thorow-boared, thorow-pierced. Also a disease in a horse called the lax.

Sforcináto, vnforked, vnhooked.

Sforgiáre, as Sfoggiáre.



Sforicchiare, as Sforacchiáre. Also to vnden, to vnroost, to start, to rouze or fetch out of any hole. Also to tickle out.

Sformáre, to deforme, to misshape, to deface, to disfigure.

Sfornáre il páne, to draw bread out of the Ouen.

Sformataménte, beyond all forme, measure or proportion.

Sformáto, deformed, misshapen, illfauoured, vgly.

Sforníre, nísco, níto, to disfurnish.

Sfóro, a hole thorow.

Sfortunáto, vnfortunate, vnhappy.

Sforzaménto, an inforcement, a constraining, a compelling. Also a rauishment.

Sforzáre, to force, to constraine, to compell, to inforce, to rauish.

Sforzársi, for a man to indeuour himselfe or apply his forces about any thing.

Sforzataménte, forcedly, by compulsion.

Sforzáti, gally-slaues perforce.

Sforzatóre, a forcer, a rauisher.

Sforzíno, twist, twine, marlin or fine packe-thrid or whip-cord.

Sfórzo, force, compulsion, constraint. Also vtmost ability, endeuour, power, or possibility. Vsed also for a Princes army or strength or meanes and men.

Sfracassáre, as Fracassáre.

Sfracásso, as, Fracásso.

Sfracellaménto, a crushing or dashing in pieces.

Sfracelláre, to dash or breake or crush in pieces.

Sfracidáre, as Fracidíre.

Sfracidíre, dísco, díto, as Fracidíre.

Sfráge, a greene-stone not transparent good to make seales. Also a kind of Vermillion.

Sfranciosáto, vnfrenchified, cured of the french-pox.

Sfrangelláre, as Fracassáre.

Sfrángere, sfrángo, sfránto, as Frángere.

Sfrangiáre, to vnfringe, to disadorne.

Sfránto, as Fránto.

Sfrantumáre, to breake or moulder to dust or small pieces and mammockes.

Sfrascáre, to vnbranch, to vnsprig.

Sfratáto, vn-fryred, forsaken ones order.

Sfrattáre, to vnbush, to vnden, to vnbrake, to fetch out of some bush, to run away skudding as a hare out of a bush.

Sfrátto, an vtmost spoile, wracke, ruine or desolation.

Sfrazelláre, as Sfracelláre.

Sfreddaménto, a cooling, a takeing colde. 

Sfreddáre, to coole, to take colde.

Sfreddiménto, as Sfreddaménto.

Sfreddíre, sfreddísco, sfreddíto, as Sfreddáre.

Sfreddúra, as Sfreddaménto.

Sfregiáre, to vngarnish, to disadorne. Also as Fregiáre.

Sfregiáto, as Fregiáto, vngarnished.

Sfregio, as Fregio.

Sfregoláre, to crumble, to crum, to vngraine.

Sfrenáre, to vnbridle, to vnsnaffle.

Sfrenataménte, vnbridledly, wildly, loosely, furiously, vntamedly.

Sfrenáta vóglia, vnbridled lust.

Sfrenatézza, vnbridlednesse, wildenesse.

Sfrisáre, as Fregiáre, to gash, to skar.

Sfríso, as Fregio, a gash, a skar.

Sfrinfríto, as Sghiribizzáto.

Sfrogiáto, a nose without nostrils.

Sfrondáre, to vnbranch, to vnblossome, to pull off the leaues, to make leauelesse.

Sfrontáto, an impudent, shamelesse, brazen-faced vnblushing companion.

Sfrontáre, to affront with some shamelesse tricke.

Sfrontataménte, impudently.

Sfronzúto, disbranched, vnblossommed.

Sfrosáre, to prowle, to powle and pill by hooke or crooke, to breake good orders.

Sfrosatóre, a prowler, a powler, a breaker of good lawes and orders.

Sfuggiásca., Looke Alla Sfuggiásca. Looke Sfuggicáre.

Sfuggiásco, a runnegate, a rogue, a fleeting or slippery companion.

Sfuggicánte, fleeting, slippery, gliding. Looke Sfuggicáre.

Sfuggicáre, to put to flight. Also to stray or straggle. Also to sneake or slinke away. Also to shun and auoid, to flie and run from. Also to slip, to slide, to fleet and glide, to stumble, to trip.

Sfuggiménto, as Sfuggíto.

Sfuggíre, sfúggo, sfuggíto, to run to and fro, to auoide and shun or fly from.

Sfuggíta, a fleeting, a flying or running away. Looke Alla sfuggíta.

Sfulignáre, to wipe away sut or to sweepe a chimny.

Sfumánte, fuming, steaming, smoakeing, venting forth, reekant.

Sfumáre, to fume, to reeke, to steame, to euaporate, to smoake. Also to dry in the smoake, to blote hearings.

Sfuriáre, to rage or be furious.

Sfusáre, to exceed in riot or lauishnesse, to vnspindle, to vnshaft.

Sfúso, excesse, lauishnesse, profusenesse. Also as Profúso.

Sfustáre, to vnshanke, to vnstalke, to vnstaffe, to vnstem.

Sgabelláre, to rid or free from tithes, toles or paying of custome.

Sgaccioláre, to slaber or poure forth, to run at the nose.

Sgagliardáre, to vnstrengthen, to enfeeble.

Sgagliardíre, dísco, díto, as Sgagliardáre.

Sgaglioffáre, to forsake all knauish trickes. Also to vnpouch or vnpocket.

Sgagnolíre, lísco, líto, to yelpe, to barke or bawle as a dog.

Sgáio, a birde called a Huhole.

Sgalfaróne, a kinde of broad brimed hat.

Sgallináre i pollái, to rob roostes, to steale poultry from out their nests or roostes.

Sgamaitáre, to tucke or full wollen clothes in a Fulling or Tucking-mill.

Sgamaíti, tooles that Wolwinders vse.

Sgambáre, to vnlegge. Also as Sgambettáre.

Sgambettáre, to shake the legges, to play gambels, to skip, to hop, to leape, to friske.

Sgambettáte, gambols, skippings.

Sgámbo, stumpleg'd, vnhandsome, roynish, crooked, vnproper.

Sgangáre, to mince, to shred or slice into mammockes or small pieces.

Sgangheraménti, disorderly placings or halings of any thing.

Sgangheráre, to pull off from the hinges, to set wide or disorderly open.

Sgangherataménte, widely, disorderly, loosely without forme or order.

Sgangherát, wide open, loose, disordered as a doore from off the hinges.

Sgangheritúdine, open-widnesse, disordered confusion.

Sgangotáda, a tripping, a stumbling, a trip.

Sgannáre, as Disingannáre.

Sgannazzaménti, fopperies, fooleries.

Sgaráre, to striue and contend, to outchide, to outscold and brawle, till one make his enemy yeeld and giue ouer, to quell and vanquish by treatchery.

Sgaráto, contended, outscolded, quelled. Also treatcherous, miscreant, faithlesse.

Sgarbataménte, vnhandsomly, bunglerlike, without garbe, grace or forme.

Sgarbatézza, vnhandsomenesse, illfauoured, slouenlinesse, gracelesnesse.

Sgarbáto, vnhand some, without garbe, vnproper, fashionlesse, gracelesse.

Sgarbugliáre, to disgarboile, to disintangle, to free from ensnarings. 



Sgarfináre, to filch and steale by hooke, by crooke and scraping.

Sgargagliáre, to gurgle, to gargarise. Also to blab and prattle carelesly.

Sgargareggiáre, as Sgargagliáre.

Sgargarizzáre, as Sgargagliáre.

Sgargarizzo, a gargarise, a gurgling.

Sgarríre, as Garrire, to chide, to scold.

Sgárzo,  a kind of tree.

Sgarzonáre, to become from a boy to a man, to vnboy, to vnlackie.

Sgattigliáre, to mew as a Cat. Also to clinch or snatch as a Cat doth a Mouse.

Sgauonáre, to mew or catterwall or goe a caterwalling as a Cat.

Sgembáre, to slide or goe aside from.

Sgembo., looke A sgembo.

Sgherracciáre, to swagger.

Sgherráccio, a filthy swaggerer.

Sgherráre, to swagger. Looke Sgherro.

Sgherráta, a swaggering. Looke Sgherro.

Sgherrería, any swaggering.

Sgherrettáre, to hough, or cut off vnder the knee. Also to cut off by the legges.

Sgherro, a swagrer, a swash-buckler, a cutter, a slasher, a hougher. Also a base rascall, a catchpole. Also a great boaster, or blab of idle wordes.

Sghibáre, as Sbrisciáre.

Sghíbo, as Sbríscio.

Sghignazzaménti, foolish leerings, simprings or smilings.

Sghignazzáre, grinningly to fleere. Also foolishly to smile and simper.

Sghinazzáre, as Sghignazzáre.

Sghiribizzáto, freed or deliuered from fond humors, toyes or suddaine passions.

Sglanáre, to gleane. Also to vnshale or vnhuske. Also to vnbarke or vnrinde trees. Also to pare, to flea, to pill any fruit. Also to gall the skin off.

Sglomeraménto, an vnreeling of thrid.

Sglomeráre, as Sgomináre.

Sgocciáre, as Sgoccioláre.

Sgoccioláre, to drop, to trill, to drizle.

Sgoleggiáre, to gluttonise, to gourmandize.

Sgolizzáre, as Sgoleggiáre.

Sgoluppáre, as Sgomináre.

Sgombráre, to emptie, to auoide, to cleare or rid from a place, to disincumber.

Sgómbro, a fish called a Mackrell.

Sgomentáre, to astonie, to affright, to amaze, to dant, to mate, to terrifie.

Sgoménto, astonishment, fright, terror, danting, amazement.

Sgomináre, to vntwind, to disintangle, to vnfold or vnreele yarne, to vnclue. 

Sgommáre, to vngum, to vnglue, to vnsize. Also to vnplaister.

Sgonfiáre, to vnswell, to alay any swelling.

Sgonfiáto, vnswollen, vnpuft.

Sgonfiétto, as Sgonfiatóio.

Sgonfio, vnswollen, vnpuft.

Sgorbáre, to blur, to blot or dash with inke. Also to scratch, to teare, to scrape or gall the skin off. Also to scratch out any dash or blot of inke.

Sgórbia, a toole that Grauers vse.

Sgorbiáre, as Sgorbáre.

Sgorbiáte, as Sgórbij.

Sgórbij, blurs, blots, or dashings of inke.

Sgórbio, a seratch, a gall, a marke, a skar or print of any hurt in the skin.

Sgorgaménto, a gurgling or gushing forth.

Sgorgáre, to gurgle, to purle, to bubble or gush forth as water out of a spring.

Sgórgo, a gurgling, a welling forth.

Sgorgoláre, as Sgorgáre.

Sgoruiétta, a Carpenters ruler or squire.

Sgottáre, as Sgoccioláre. Also to disgout.

Sgozzáre, to wring off ones necke.

Sgraffáre, to scratch, to scrape, to claw.

Sgraffiáre, to scratch, to scrape, to claw.

Sgraffiáta, as Sgraffiatúra.

Sgraffiatúra, a scratching, a clawing, a scraping, a scratch.

Sgraffignáre, as Sgraffiáre.

Sgraffignóne, a hooking, a scraping, a hording wretch.

Sgráffo, a toole that Goldsmithes vse.

Sgraffóni, scratches, scratchings.

Sgramaticáre, to vngrammer, to forget ones Grammar. Also ignorantly to talke or dispute of Grammar, as a foolish Pedant.

Sgrámfo, a Cramp-fish, which hath the nature to make the hands of those that touch it, or but the lyne whereat he hangeth to be astonished, though it be but with a long pole. Also the crampe.

Sgranare, to vngraine, to vncorne. Also to picke or shale peason.

Sgranchiáre, to scratch or bite as a Creuise.

Sgrandíre, dísco, díto, to disgreaten, to make or become lesse.

Sgrásio, a kind of Goldsmithes worke vsed in claines or bracelets.

Sgrassáre, to vnfatten, to make leane.

Sgrátia, a disgrace, as Disgrátia.

Sgratiáre, to disgrace, to disable.

Sgratiáto, disgraced, gracelesse, disabled.

Sgráto, vngratefull, vnacceptable.

Sgrattáre, to scratch, to scrape, to gnaw.

Sgrauaménto, a disaggrauating, an easing.

Sgrauáre, to disaggrauate, to disburthen.

Sgrauidánza, a deliuerie of a child.

Sgtauidáre, to be brought a bed. 

Sgráuio, an easing, a disburthening.

Sgretoláre, to crumble, to moulder or mince in powder or small pieces. Also to breake, to shred or teare into shiuers or pieces. Also to melt, to thaw, to consume.

Sgriccioláre, to cry or screech as an Owle.

Sgríccioli, Owles, screech-Owles.

Sgridáre, to cry out, to chide, to scold at, to brawle, to shent, to rate as wee doe dogs.

Sgrído, a crying out, a chiding, a brawling, a scolding, a rating.

Sgridóre, as Sgrído.

Sgriffáre, to scratch, to claw, to gripe or scrape with ones pawes or clinches.

Sgrignáre, to grin out with loud laughing. Also to snarle. Also to gnash.

Sgrignúto, crompt-back't, crook't-shouldred. Also a grinner or gnasher of his teeth.

Sgrilláre, to make a noise as a Cricket. Also to be merrie and play cricket-awicket.

Sgrinzáre, to wrimple, to wither, to pucker, to shrinke vp. Also to skip, to friske.

Sgrómbri, the fishes called Mackrels.

Sgroppáre, to vntie, to vnknot, to vnknit. Also to discrupper, to vndocke.

Sgrossáre, to vnbig, to cut, make or become little from gresse. Also to vnswell or lessen.

Sgrugnáre, to beat, to hit or marke one ouer the snout or face, to vnsnout.

Sgrugnáta, a whirret, a box, a thumpe, a hit, a gash, or marke ouer the snout.

Sgrúgnolo, as Sgrugnáta.

Sgrugnóne, as Sgrugnáta.

Sguáglio, inequalitie, od's, difference. Also disparagement.

Sguaiáta, a common whore that hath long lined in a brothell-house.

Sguaiáto, a foolish, filthy, lubardly fellow. Also rid from woes and vexations.

Sguaináre, to vnsheath, to vnscabbard.

Sgualdrína, a strumpet, a harlot, a scoundrell.

Sgualembráto, a sidelin right-hand blow.

Sgualembro, as Squalembráto.

Sguanciáta, as Guanciáta, as Sgrugnáta.

Sguardaménto, a looking or beholding.

Sguardáre, as Guardáre, to looke, to view.

Sguardarúra, as Sguardaménto.

Sguárdo, a looke, a view, a beholding.

Sguáttaro, as Guáttaro, a Scullion.

Sguazzabúglio, as Guazzabúglio.

Sguazzacóda, a Wag-taile.

Sguazzáre, as Guazzáre.

Sguázzo, as Guázzo.



Sgúbia, a googe.

Sguerciatúra, a squinting, a squint looke.

Sguerniménto, a disfurnishing.

Sguernire, to vngarnish, to disfurnish.

Sguernito, vnfurnished, vngarnished.

Sguerráre, as Sgherráre.

Sguerráta, as Sgherráta.

Sguerro, as Sgherro, a swagrer.

Sguerzo, squint-eyde, crooked-looking.

Sguinzagliáre, to vncouple, to vnslip, to let goe as Spaniels.

Sguinzagliáto, loose, free, vncoupled and ranging abroad as Spaniels.

Sguinzáglio, as Guizáglio, dogs couples.

Sguizzáre, to glide as fish in the water, to slide as vpon ise. Also to spurt or squirt.

Sguizzatóio, a squirt, a spurt, a siringe.

Sguízzo, a gliding, a sliding, a slipperinesse. Also a squirt or spurt. Also childish sport.

Sguizzóso, slipperie, glib as ice.

Sguráre, to scoure cleane.

Sgúrbia, a toole that Shoemakers vse.

Sguscialumáche, a shaler or picker of Snailes, an idle fellow, a simple gull.

Sgusciáre, to vnshale, to vnbuske, to picke.

Sguscioláre, as Sgusciáre.

Sgustáre, to distaste, to dislike. Also to giue or take cause of distaste or vnkindnesse.

Sgústo, distaste, dislike, vnkindnesse.

Sgustóso, distastefull, vnsauourie.

Sguzzáre, to blunt, to abate the edge.

Si, an Aduerbe of quantitie vsed relatiuely or comparatiuely in place of Tánto or Quánto, As much, As well, So well, So much, hauing euer relation to Cóme or quanto, as thus, Si Lúi cóme un'áltro, or else, Si bene per il mío quánto per il uóstro intereste.

Sì, an Aduerbe of swearing or affirmation, yea, yes, yeamary, Signor sì, yea Sir.

Sì, an Aduerbe of similitude or comparison, so thus, so as, so well, as well, as much, euen as.

Si, if it be ioyned vnto the third person of any verbe be it singular or plurall, or to any Infinitiue either before or after, and that it haue relation to things dead, and not to persons, and that only things and not persons be ment or spoken of, then makes it euer the verbe Passiue, and we expresse it with, It is, Be it, Are, Men, They, The world, or To be, namely with Infinitiues, as Si dice, It is said, men say, they say, the world reports, &c. And so of all other tenses of all verbes, Si dicéua, it was said, Si dísse, it was said. 

Si dirà, it wilbe said, Si dica, be it said, Si dicésse, it should he said, Si di rebbe, it would be said, Dírsi, to be said, and so Dícesi, Dicéuasi, Díssesi, Dicéssesi, Direbbesi, and so of all other verbes, but if the verbe haue relation vnto or speake of any person, then is the verbe Actiue, and Si, is a Pronoune primitiue both of the singular and plurall number, and of the Datiue or Accusatiue cases, both masculine and feminine, to him or her selfe, to themselues, him, or her, himselfe or her selfe. Also one another, except with verbes of priuation, where it is of the Ablatiue case, as before hath been touched.

Sì, hath been vsed for vntill that, as for example, Non si riténne di córrere si fù a cása di lei.

Si, yet or neuerthelesse, Se áltro non mi uifacésse uolér béne, sì ui uò béne perchè.

Si, vsed sometimes for an ornament, cóme, Audò & si gli aperse. Looke for this Particle, Si, in my rules, where you shall finde it set downe and declared more at large.

Sía, be he or she, be it, it be, shalbe.

Sía chè, be it that.

Sía chi si uóglia, be it or be he whatsoeuer.

Síaci, be there, let there be. Also be to vs.

Sía cóme si uóglia, be it as it will, be it how soeuer.

Sía con Dío, be he with God.

Sía doue si uóglia, be he where he will, be it where it list, be he wheresoeuer.

Siágri, the best kind of Dates.

Sía in uói, be it in you.

Siancóra, as also, as well as, as likewise.

Siáre, to make an Oxe or Horse to stay or goe backe with the Carters voice, as our Clownes vse to say, hait, whoa, haye, &c. Also as Sciáre.

Siázza, some part of a ship.

Sibári, delicate, want on or effeminate lining.

Sibarítico, giuen to liue wantonly or effeminately.

Sibbiáre, to hisse, to hizze, to whistle. Also to blow as the winde doth.

Síbbio, a whistle or a pipe. Also a hissing or whistling with the mouth by keeping the teeth close together. Also the blowing of the winde.

Síbbiolo, any kind of whistle or pipe.

Sibbilla, a Sibill or Prophetesse.

Sibéne, yea well, as well, so well.

Sibetto, a Siuet-cat.

Sibiláre, as Sibbiáre.

Sibílla, as Sibbílla.

Sibilláre, as Sibbiáre.

Sibíllo, as Síbbio, as Síbbiolo.

Síca, a stilletto or pocket dagger.

Sícaminóne, a kind of Mulberrie.

Sicamóro, a Sicamor or Mulberrie-figtree.

Sicáno, lag, last, hindmost.

Sicário, one that goeth with a pocket-dagger or stilletto to kill, a priuie murtherer, a stabber.

Siccáno, a kind of Elme-tree.

Siccáre, to proceed or issue out of. Also as Seccáre.

Siccità, drought, drynesse, lacke of moisture.

Siccitúdine, as Siccità.

Sícco, as Sécco, dry, without moisture.

Siccóculo, that hath dry eyes.

Sicelióne, the hearbe Fleawort.

Sicéna, a kind of rozing of a stinking smell.

Sicéne, as Péplo, a kind of Isula.

Sícera, all manner of drinke that hath the power to make one drunke, and so the word importeth. Also an artificiall most strong kind of drinke.

Si certo, certes, yea certes, yea truly.

Si chè, so that, so as.

Sichétto, a little stilette or pocket-dagger.

Siciliána, the water-chaine of a bit.

Sicílico, a measure of ground twentie foote broad and thirtie long. Also a weight about a quarter of an Ounce.

Sicilíre, lísco, líto, to cut downe tuffes or manes of grasse that Mowers haue ouerslipt.

Sicimína, a kind of tree or shrub bearing very faire Berries.

Sicinnína, as Sicimína.

Sicíte, a stone named of a Fig, and of that colour.

Síclo, a coine or weight called a Shekle, worth foure of our grotes.

Sicofánte, as Sicophánte.

Sicofantía, as Sicophantía.

Sicománte, as Psicománte.

Sicomantía, as Psicomantía.

Sicóme, as, euen as, so as, like, like as.

Sicomóro, as Sicamóro.

Sicóne, hath been vsed for a Fig. Also for a Fig-tree.

Sicophánte, a sicophant, a parasite, a bearer of false tales, a false accuser, a deceiuer.

Sicophantía, sicophanty, false dealing, Also a false accusation.

Sicósi, a disease in the trill or fundament making a wart like a figge, called in Latin Ficus marisca, some take them for little wartles about the eies.

Sicula, as Síca.

Siculário, as Sicário.

Sicúmera. 

Sicuraménte, securely, surely, sickerly, assuredly, certainly. Also safely. 



Sicuránza, assurance, assurednesse, security, certainty, warrantise, caution. Also safety, confidence, faith, troath, trust, affiance. Also a baile, a pledge, a surety or a warrant.

Sicuráre, to secure, to assure, to warrant. Also to pledge, to baile or caution.

Sicurézza, as Sicuránza.

Sicurità, as Sicuránza.

Sicúro, sure, secure, assured, certaine, sicker. Also safe, fast, out of danger, in safety. Also carlesnesse, negligence, Also bould, daring and fearelesse.


Sicurtà, as Sicuránza.

Siderále, as Sidereo.

Sideráre, as Assideráre. Also to blast. Looke Assideratióne, and Sideratióne. Also to Planet-strike.

Sideratióne, as Assideratióne, a benumming or clumzinesse when one by cold or other accident is suddainly depriued of the vse of his limmes and of all sence. Also a totall putrefaction and destruction of any member so taken. Also a blasting in trees through great heate and drought. Also a Planet-striking.

Sideráto, Planet-strooken.

Sidére, to rest, to repose. Lat.

Sídere, the starres or celestiall signes that haue the course of the yeere in regiment.

Sidereo, of or like the starres, starry, bright, shining, twinkling, heauenly, sunny, of the sunne, wonderfull.

Siderióne, an hearbe with a thin stalke foure fingers high, a red flower and leaues like Coriander, growing in waterish places and cureth all cuts and gashes.

Sideríte, the hearbe Stone-sage, Wallsage or Parietario that Partridges loue to feede vpon. Also a precious stone that hath the power to cause variance betwixt men that haue it about them. Also vsed for the Magnet or Loade-stone.

Sideríte Achillea, the hearbe Millefoly or Yarrow.

Sideríte Heraclea, the hearbe Robert.

Sídero, the skie or firmament of the Starres.

Sideropecílo, as Sideríte, so called for the sundry spots therein.

Sideróso, one that is Planet-stroken.

Si díce, it is said, it is reported.

Si dicésse, it should or might be said.

Si dicéua, it was said or reported.

Sidicíne, a kinde of dainty Oliues in Italy.

Si dirà, it will be said or reported.

Si direbbe, it would be said or reported.

Si dísse, it was said or reported. 

Sído, a starre or rather a signe in heauen consisting of many starres.

Sidrácia, a kinde of paine in the head. Also as Psidrasía.

Síe., Vsed of Dante for Si, yea, yes. Also so, thus, or in such sort. Also as Sía.

Sìe, it is. Also him or hirselfe is.

Siega, a saw.

Siegáre, to saw.

Siegatóre, a sawyer.

Siegatúra, a sawing or saw dust.

Siele, whay or wig, or butter-milke.

Sielóso, whayish, full of wig.

Sienità, a kinde of Marble-stone about Thebes, heeretofore in great request.

Siepa, a hedge, a quickeset-hedge, a mound, a fence, a trench or closure of grounds.

Siepáre, to hedge in or about.

Siepe, as Siepa. Also a kind of stone.

Siero, as Siele, whay or wig.

Sieróso, as Sielóso.

Si e tánto, so, and so much.

Si etiándio, as also, as well, so also.

Sieue, as Siepa.

Siéuo, as Séuo, any kind of tallow.

Si fa ne., Vsed of Dánte for Se ne fa, makes himselfe of it, or is made of it.

Si fatta maniere, such manner or fashion.

Sifattaménte, so, in such sort or manner.

Sifátto, such, so, so made, thus, like as.

Sifiníte, as Galatíde.

Sigaríce, a kind of fish.

Sigéna, a kind of fish.

Siggello, a pouncer that Goldsmithes vse.

Siggilláre, to seale, to firme, to signe, to brand.

Siggilláro, a sealer, or grauer of seales.

Siggilláta, a kind of earth good against poison, found in Lemnos. Also sealed.

Siggillatióne, a sealing.

Siggillatóre, a sealer.

Siggillatúra, a sealer, a signature.

Siggíllo, a seale, a signet, a branding Iron.

Siggíllo di Salomóne, an hearbe called Salomons seale.

Sigilláre, as Siggilláre, to seale.

Sigillatióne, a sealing.

Sigillatóre, a sealer.

Sigillatúra, as Siggillatúra.

Sigíllo, as Siggíllo, a seale, a signet.

Sigímno, a kind of shield or target.

Síglo, a Persian Coyne worth seauen pence.

Signácolo, as Segnácolo.

Signaláre, as Segnaláre.

Signaláto, as Segnaláto.

Signále, as Segnále.

Signatúra, as Segnatúra.

Signifero, signe-bearing. Also an ensigne or standard-bearer. Also the Zodiake or circle wherein the twelue signes are.

Significánte, significant, signifying, meaning, plainely declaring.

Significánza, as Significatione.

Significáre, to signifie, to notifie, to betoken, to giue knowledge by some signe.

Significatióne, a signification, a notifying or declaring by some signe.

Significatíuo, that doth signifie.

Significáto, signified. Also a signification.

Signína, a kind of parget or cement made of potsheards broken to powden.

Signíne, a kind of daintie Peare.

Signíno, a kind of wine.

Signóra, a Ladie, a Dame, a Mistris.

Signorággio, as Signoréggio.

Signóre, a Lord, a Sir, a Master, a Ruler, an Owner, a Possessor, a great man.

Signóre a bacchétta, an officer or commander with a white staffe or rod in his hand.

Signoreggiáre, to sway, to rule, to gouerne or command as a Lord and Master.

Signoréggio, Lordship, Dominion, Iurisdiction, chiefe power or soueraigntie.

Signoréuole, as Signoríle.

Signoría, Signorie, Lordship, Mastership, worship, herie. Also Ladieship or Mistriship. Also sway, rule, gouernment, power, magistracie, command or dominion. Also a State, a Signorie, a Dominion or Common-wealth. Also a Mannor, a Lordship or possession of lands.

Signoríle, Lord-like, Princely, Stately.

Signorilménte, Princely, Lord-like.

Signoríssimo, most Noble or Lordly.

Signór mío sì, yea my Lord or my Sir.

Signormò, for Signór mío, my Lord.

Signorótto, as they say in Scotland, a Lard or pettie-Lord.

Signorsò, for Signór súo, his Lord.

Signortò, for Signór túo, thy Lord.

Signozzáre, as Singhiozzáre.

Signózzi, as Singhiozzi.

Signúzzo, as Singhiózzo.

Siguráre, as Sicuráre, to assure.

Sigúro, as Sicúro, sure, assured.

Sigurtà, as Sicurtà, suretie.

Si'l, for Se il, if the, if it, if him.

Síla, as Síle.

Sílaba, a sillable of any word.

Silabizzáre, to sillabize, to pronounce euery sillable distinctly.

Silaceo, of a yellowish colour.

Silágine, the hearbe Crowfoote.

Siláo, as Síle, an hearbe. 



Silaráno, a disease in a Hawke.

Sílari, a kind of Oke that neuer sheds his leaues.

Sílcro, a kind of roote. Also Osier or small Withie-spere.

Síle, an hearbe called Sicelis, with the roote or seed whereof they of Greece were wont to season that wine which they drunke before noone. Also a kind of yellow earth which being burnt maketh Vermillion or red colour for Painters.

Sileníte, a stone of very many colours.

Silente, silent, whosht, still, calme. Vsed also for the first day of the new Moone.

Silente lúna, the very moment that the Moone changeth.

Silentiále, that may be silenced.

Silentiáre, to silence, to put to silence, to still, to peace, to whosht. Also to keepe silence, to say nothing, to hold ones peace.

Silentiário, a Gentleman-vsher that seeeth good rule and quietnesse kept.

Silentio, silence, stilnesse, quietnesse.

Silére, as Silentiáre.

Silero, a kind of small withie.

Síli, as Sile.

Silicáre, to paue with flint stones.

Silicáto, a pauement. Also paued with flint stones.

Silicatóre, a Pauier with flint stones.

Silicerno, a stooping old man.

Silícia, a kind of Fenigreeke.

Silígine, winter-wheat. Also Rie or Polwheat.

Silígo, raw, sleaue or vntwisted silke.

Sílio, Spert, Osier, or small Willow-tree. Also wicker.

Silíqua, Camock-whin, or Restharrow. Some take it for Fenigreeke. Others for the fruit of the Carobe-tree, or the huske or cod of any thing, as of beanes or pease. It is also a certaine measure of liquid things in Italie. Vsed also for Capers.

Siliquástro, the hearbe Pepperwort or Pepper of India, it hath a leafe like Alecost.

Síllaba, a sillable of a word.

Sillabáre, as Silabizzáre.

Sillabétta, a short sillable.

Sillábico, pertaining to sillables.

Sillepsi, maniera di costruttióne. 

Síllibo, an hearbe like to white Cameleon.

Síllio, as Psíllio.

Sillogísmo, as Silogísino.

Sillogístico, belonging to disputation.

Sílo, he that hath a nose crooked vpward, a flat or chamoy-nosed fellow. Also he that hath a scouling looke, lowring visage or hanging eye-browes. It hath also beene vsed for the whole world or vniuerse.

Silócco, as Sirócco.

Silogísmo, a Sillogisme: that is, a perfect argument of three parts inferring a necessarie conclusion.

Silogisticaménte, sillogistically.

Silogizzáre, to sillogize, to argue, to dispute by way of true Arguments.

Silóne, hooked or Camois-nosed vpward.

Silóngo, as long. Also so long.

Silópo, a syrop, a potion, a drench.

Silphióne, Laser-wort. Some say it is an hearbe yeelding the gum Benaimin.

Sílua, a wood, a forrest, a chase.

Siluána fiéra, a wilde beast.

Siluáno, siluane, wild, rustike, borne in the woods, for pertaining to the woods, like a Swaine, wooddie or forest-like. Also a Forstreer, a Wood-man or a Forrest-man. Also a wilde or sauadge-man liuing in woods or deserts.

Siluático, as Seluággio.

Siluestre, as Seluággio.

Siluestría, as Seluatichézza.

Síluia, a Robin-red-breast.

Siluóso, as Seluóso.

Silúro, a fish called the Riue-wall.

Simblea, an assembly, a meeting.

Simboieità, simpathie or agreement in nature and qualitie.

Simbolicaménte, mistically, darkelie.

Simbolizzánte, simbolizing, simpathising, agreeing in nature and qualitie.

Simbolizzáre, to simbolize, to simpathize or agree in quality and disposition.

Símbolo, an vniformal consent of sundry opinions. Also the Creed of the twelue Apostles. Also a secret or priuy note signifying some mistery, a short and intricate sentence or riddle contayning some mystery. Also a signe a note or token, giuen vpon couenants or to know one by. Also a coine in Greece.

Simbología, as Simboleità.

Simeónia, wilde Mallowes.

Simetría, as Simmetría.

Símia, an Ape, a Munkie, a Babuine. Also hee that counterfeiteth another.

Simiána, a kinde of dainty plumbe in Italie.

Simiária, an Apes den or lurking hole. Also any Apish tricke or condition.

Simiétta, a little Ape or Munkie.

Simigliánte, semblable, like, resembling.

Simiglianteménte, semblably, likewise.

Simigliánza, resemblance, similitude.

Simigliáre, to resemble, to seeme or be like.

Simigliéuole, as Simigliánte.

Similáce, Binde-weed or Withy-hind. Also simnell bread.

Similacíne, as Similáce.

Similágine, a kinde of corne or meale which is neither pure flower nor meere meale.

Similáre, similare, resembling, like.

Símile, like, semblable, resembling, such, equall, match. Also likewise.

Simíllimo, most like or resembling.

Similíssimo, as Simíllimo.

Similità, as Similitúdine.

Similitudinário, hauing the resemblance or likenesse of a thing.

Similitúdine, similitude, likenesse, resemblance. Also a similitude.

Similménte, semblably, likewise.

Simiótica, giudiciále medicína.

Simiótto, a pretty Ape, a little Munkie.

Simmachía, aide in war, the ioyning of many against one.

Simmáco, he that helpeth in war.

Simmetría, due proportion of each part to other in respect of the whole.

Simmísta, a secretary of state or priuy Counseller.

Simmoniáno, a kind of Clauer or Threeleaued grasse.

Símo, flat-nosed, camoiset, hauing a flat nose, or being without nostrils. Also a kind of fish.

Simolácro, an image, a shape, a figure, a statue, a picture, a pourtraict, a patterne, a likenesse, a resemblance, the true proportion or shadow of any thing.

Simoláre, as Simuláre.

Simolatióne, as Simulatióne.

Simolatóre, as Simulatóre.

Simoneggiáre, to commit simony about Church matters.

Simonía, simony, buying, selling or bribing of spirituall liuings.

Simoniáco, an offender in simony.

Simoniáno, Treacle-clauer.

Simonidei, a kind of verses so called because Simonides inuented them.

Simonióso, full of or tainted with simony, of or belonging to simony.

Simonizzáre, as Simoneggiáre.

Simpathía, a naturall passion of one to the other, a simpathy or naturall combination of things naturall in the operation of the powers, nature, quality and disposition, as water in coldnesse doth participate with the earth, and in moisture with the aire.

Simpatizzáre, to simpathize or agree in nature, quality and disposition.

Simphiróne, the hearbe Elecampane.

Simphísi, a ioyning together of the bones without moouing.

Simphitóne, the hearbe Alo, Confrey, or 



Wall-wort of the rocke.

Simphíto, as Simphitóne.

Simphonési, a collision of vowels.

Simphonía, an accord or consent in time, tune and harmony. Also a tunable singing without iarring. Also a kinde of musicall instrument. Also the hearb Henbane.

Simphoníaca, the hearbe called Henbane.

Simphoníaco, of or belonging to accord and consent in time, tune and harmony.

Simphonísta, a Querister. Also a tuner of songs.

Simphónio, a Quire of singers.

Simphísi, a ioyning together of bones without mouing.

Símplice, as Sémplice, simple.

Simplicísta, a Simpler, an Hearbalist.

Simplicità, as Semplicità.

Simplificáre, to simplifie.

Simplóni, such as eate and drinke together, fellow-feeders.

Simpóne, a cup of earth vsed in Sacrifices.

Simpósio, a banquet or a feast, or a mery drinking together.

Simpósito, as Simpósio.

Simpsálma, concord in singing.

Simptóma, a passion, an accident or affect incident vnto or following any sicknesse. Also a sensible griefe ioyned vnto any sicknesse, as the head ach with an ague.

Símpulo, a certaine badge or ensigne belonging to a proper Bishopricke.

Simulácro, as Simolácro.

Simuláre, to dissemble, to faine, to counterfeite, to play the hypocrite, to say one thing and meane another, to pretend or make as though a thing were not. Also to resemble or be like.

Simulataménte, dissemblingly.

Simulatióne, simulation, dissembling, faining, colour, pretence, hypocrisie.

Simulatóre, a dissembler, an hypocrite, a fainer, a pretender of that which is not.

Simultà, breach of loue with a dissembling, dissimulation. Also grudge or priuy displeasure ioyned with close hatred.

Sin', as Síno, vntill, vntill that.

Sináca, a kinde of ague or feuer whose heat beginneth in the bloud of the heart.

Sinádico, a kind of graie Marble.

Sinadónte, as Sinodónto.

Sinagóga, a Synagogue, an assembly or a congregation.

Sinágro, a kind of broad flat fish.

Sinaleffe, a collision of a vowell. 

Sinánca, the squince or squincy sickenesse.

Sinánche, as Sinánca.

Sinanchía, as Sinánca.

Sinápe, Senuy or Mustard-seede. Also Mustard.

Sinapísmo, a practise by plaister of Mustard-seede, to reuiue a place that is mortified and to draw fresh humours vnto it.

Sinarési, a coarticulation with obscure moouing, as in the bone Talus with the boate-like bone: Cyboides with the heele-boone, and the wrist-bones among themselues. Also a contraction of two in one.

Sinássi, a godly assembly in singing of Psalmes.

Sincecáre, to cleare or make plaine and sincere. Also to rectifie or make vpright.

Sinceritá, sincerity, integrity, true meaning, purity, vprightnesse, honesty.

Sincéro, sincere, vnfained, vpright, true meaning, without dissimulation, honest, vnmixt, intire, simply pure.

Sinchiozzáre, as Singhiozzáre.

Sinchiózzi, as Singhiózzi.

Sincierità, as Sincerità.

Sinciéro, as Sincéro.

Sincipúto, the forepart or vpper part of the head forward nigh to the coronall suture, which in late borne children is so soft and tender that vnder it the construction and dilatation of the braine called Sistula and Diastole is plainely perceiued: the bones of Sincipúto close the suture called Sagittále between Labdóide and Coronále.

Sincodrósi, an vnion of the bones made by a Cartilage, as is seene in O'sso púbe, the breast-bone and I'lio when it is knit to O'sso sácro.

Sincopáre, to sincopate, to cut off, to cut away or to diminish.

Sincopatióne, a sincopation, a cutting off or away, a diminishing from.

Síncope, as Sincopatióne. Also a faintnesse of the heart, a swouning or dead trance.

Sincorési, a ministring or bestowing.

Sincrísi, a comparison of persons or things contrarie.

Sincrísma, a thin spredding ointment.

Síndaco, as Síndico.

Sindeo, a kind of fish.

Sinderési, in Latin Synderesis.

Sindesmósi, a composition of bones by a ligament, as appeareth in the ioints.

Sindicáre, to conuince, to detect, to araigne, to iudge, to try by law.

Sindicáto, conuinced, detected, araigned, iudged or tried by law. Also a chiefe Court of Magistrates, a generall Sessions. Also vsed for Síndico.

Sindicatóre, as Sindico.

Sindicatúra, a conuincing, an araignment or triall by law, a iudgement.

Síndico, a Magistrate, a Iudge, a Iusticer. Also an Aduocate for the Common-wealth, one that hath a charge or commission to deale in affaires of the Common-wealth, a Commissioner, a Comissarie.

Sin di quà, euen from hence.

Sindóne, fine linnen, or lawne or cambricke.

Sine cósto, without cost.

Sinedócche, a figure in speech when part is vnderstood by the whole, or the whole by a part.

Sinedreo, a Counseller.

Sínera, a fish that swimmeth through all stormes and tempests.

Sineressi, a contraction of two in one.

Sinéri, a digger or worker about mines or minerals.

Sinfonía, as Simphonía.

Singhiozzáre, to throb, to sob, to blubber, to yex, to hichcocke. Also to grone or gaspe. Also to clucke as a Hen doth.

Singíózzi, throbs, sobs, blubbrings, yexings, hichcocks. Also groanes or gaspes.

Singíbero, the spice Ginger.

Singoláre, singular, one, one alone. Also peerelesse, excellent, surpassing others.

Singolarità, singularitie, excellencie, proper interesse. Also singlenesse.

Singolarizzáre, to single any thing indiuidually from others.

Singoltáre, as Singhiozzáre.

Singólti, as Singhiózzi.

Singoltíre, tísco, títo, as Singhiozzáre.

Singozzáre, as Singhiozzáre.

Singózzi, as Singhiózzi.

Singrápha, a bill or scedule written.

Singuláre, as Singoláre.

Singularità, as Singolarità.

Sínguli, singulars, particulars.

Síngulo, single, alone, singular.

Singultáre, as Singhiozzáre.

Singúlti, as Singhiózzi.

Singultióne, yexing or sobbing.

Singultíre, as Singhiozzáre.

Siniscálco, a Seneshall, a Marshall. Also a Steward or Comptroller. Also a Sewer of a Noble-mans house. Also a Master of houshold.

Sinisteritàterità, as Sinistrézza.

Sinístra, the leaft-hand or side of any bodie. Also a crosse chance.

Sinistrále, of or belonging to the leaft-hand or side. Also a leaft-handed man.

Sinistraménte, sinisterly, against the haire, crossely, contrarie to expectation. 



Sinistráre, to goe on the leaft-hand, to slip aside, to miscarie by ill chance.

Sinistrézza, sinisternesse, crosse-lucke, contrarietie, thwart fortune.

Sinístro, a leaft-handed man. Also of or belonging to the leaft-hand. Also on the leaft-hand or side. Also sinister, contrarie, thwart, against desire or expectation, vnprosperous. Also an ill lucke or sinister chance, a crosse-fortune. Also a blow or whirret on the eare giuen with the leaft-hand or with the backe of the hand.

Sinistrórso, toward the leaft side.

Sinnephiténe, a kind of stone white as milke.

Síno, vntill, euen vnto, euen till, so farre as. Also euen from.

Síno a che, vntill that, vntill when.

Síno a che témpo? vntill what time.

Síno álla bócca, euen vnto the mouth.

Síno a quánto? how long? vntill when?

Síno a qui, hitherto, euen vntill this place.

Síno atánto, vntill that, till such time.

Sinochítide, a stone by vertue whereof spirits once raised may be kept aboue still.

Sinodále, of or belonging to an assembly of men or generall counsell.

Sinódia, a meeting together at a Councell. Also an excommunication.

Sinódico, pertaining to an assembly, sinodicall.

Sínodo, a generall Councell, a Sinod, a generall assembly of men. Also a kind of fish with a precious stone in his head.

Sinodónte, a kind of fish in whose head is found a precious stone.

Sinodóntide, a stone found in a fishes head called Sinodonte.

Sinónia, a white gluish matter lying in the ioints of mans bodie like the white of an egge, wherein if any grauell chance to grow the gout is caused.

Sinónimo, a sinonimie, or word of one signification.

Sinóphia, as Sinónia.

Sinópico, of or belonging to Sinópio.

Sinópide, as Sinópio. Vsed also for Terra sigilláta.

Sinópio, sinoper, sinopis, ruddle, redding, red lead or red okre.

Sinphonía, as Simphonía.

Sin quì, hither vnto.

Sintágma, a Treatise or Ordinance.

Sintássi, construction. Also order, of construction. Also a volume of diuer workes.

Sinterési, the pure part of a conscience.

Sinterice, a consumption wherewith a man pineth away.

Síntesi, a figure when a Noune collectiue is ioyned with a verbe plurall. 

Sintessi, a weaknesse or consumption wherewith first the flesh pineth away, and then the faster parts.

Sinteóttico, one that is weake and brought low, or one that taketh no food.

Sinthéma, an intricate sentence or riddle. Also a watch-word giuen to souldiers when they should fight.

Sintílla, as Scintílla.

Sínthesi, as Síntesi.

Sintilláre, as Scintilláre.

Sintóma, as Simptóma.

Sintomáto, troubled with Simptóma.

Sintomía, a figure in speech or writing wherein are vsed diuers sinonomies and many Epithets all signifying but one same thing.

Sintonomía, a cutting away.

Sinuáre, to bowe or bend, to crankle in and out as some Riuers doe, to turne and winde as a Snake. Also to make hollow bosomes or furrowes. Also to embosome.

Sinuatiónc, a crankling or bending.

Sinuáto, crankled in and out, wound or turn'd as a Snake, full of hollow bosomes. Also embosomed.

Sinuosità, crankling in and out. Also a bosomenesse, or making creekes and bosomes.

Sinuóso, that hath or is full of bosomes, creekes, cranklings, turnings and windings.

Sinúta, a kind of hearbe which being but tasted makes one drunke.

Sí, o, Sióne, a kind of Lawer or Watercresses.

Sión, Sióne, a kind of cane, pipe or gutter to draw water through in water workes.

Sípa, as Scípa. Also vsed by Dánte for Sía, be he or it. Also as Fía.

Sipário, a curtaine or vaile drawen when the Plaiers come vpon the stage.

Si per, as, as well, as well because, as likewise, as also.

Si perchè, as well, as well because, as that, as also, as because.

Si per quánto, yea as, for as, yea for so much.

Siphára, the Adders dry skin that he casteth.

Siphíle, the French-pox.

Síphio, a kind of very soft stone, which heated in oyle becommeth very hard.

Siphíta, a kind of disease called Saint Vitus his dance.

Síphnia, as Síphio.

Sipidézza, relish or sauourinesse in taste.

Sipidità, as Sipidézza.

Sípido, sauoury in taste, well relishing.

Sipíno, as Síphio.

Sipólcro, as Sepolcro.

Síppa, a great bone-fire or blaze.

Si può díre, it may be said.

Si púre, yes indeed, yes neuerthelesse.

Si quánto, as well or as much because.

Síra, a Sirian Lady. Also the feminine of Síre.

Sirási, a disease in children preceeding of an inflamation in the braine. Also a fault in trees when by ouermuch heate they be starued and burnt.

Sirbóti, a kinde of people in Ethiopia eight cubits long.

Sírcula, a kind of wine or grape.

Síre, a title giuen onely to Kings, Sir.

Siréna, a Syren, a Mermaide. Also a very venimous Serpent in Arabia, so swift in running that he seemeth to flie.

Siréne, yongue Drones or Spurious Beese.

Sireóne, an hearbe, some take it for Tondíle.

Síri, caues or vaults vnder ground to keepe Corne in.

Síria, the Canícula or Dog star, of which the Canicular or Dogdaies are called.

Siriáca, a kind of wine or grape.

Siriáco, as Sericáto. Also a Sirócco.

Siriáno, a kind of beast that may be riden as a horse.

Siriási, as Sirási.

Siriasíno, as Sirási.

Sírico, a kind of Marble. Also a Sinoper or Ruddle colour.

Sirínga, a Cane or Reed. Also a pipe made of a Cane. Also a siring or squirt.

Siringáre, to siring or squirt. Also to play vpon a pipe of a Cane.

Siríngia, a kind of Reed or Cane all full of holes within.

Siringíta, a stone hollow like a Cane or Pipe.

Sírio, a iuice or Oyle extracted from Lillies. Also vsed for Síria.

Siríte, a kind of wine made of Dates and Figges.

Siríte, a stone found in a Woolfes bladder.

Sirítti, a kind of people without noses, hauing in place of noses two little holes to breath at, and crawling on two limmer legges.

Síro, a caue in the ground to keepe corne in.

Sirócchia, a Sister.

Sirocchiánza, Sister-hood.

Sirocchiáre, to play the sister.

Sirocchieuolménte, sister-like.

Sirócco, the South East wind.

Siróccoleuánte, South east and by east.

Siropicóne, a kind of Terra sigilláta.

Siropáto, sirroped, in sirrop.

Siroppáta, a composition as a sirrop. Al­



so any kind of wet sucket.

Siróppo, a sirrop, a potion, a drench.

Sírte, shelues or quicke-sands in the water made by the drift of sand and grauell.

Sirtíto, a kind of carbuncle or ruble with little stars shining in it.

Sirulúgo, a kind of beast in Sardinia.

Siruólo, a kind of wine so called.

Sísa, sise or glue that painters vse.

Sisach, some part about a mans stomacke.

Sisamíni, the litle bones about the ioynts of hand and feete.

Sísamo, a white graine, corne or pulse in India, whereof oyle is made, some take it for Palma Christi.

Sisára, Heath, Ling or Broome. Also the Skiret-roote.

Sisáre, to size, to glew or stiffen.

Siscálco, as Siniscálco.

Sischiáre, to hisse. Also to whistle.

Síschio, a hissing. Also a whistle.

Sisellio, as Sile the hearbe.

Sisembro, as Sisímbro.

Sísero, the white Carrot-roote.

Sisígia, coniunction or coupling. Also the coniunction of the Moone with the Sunne. Also the new Moone.

Sisímbro, Water-mint, Horse-mint, or Balamint, taken also for Water-cresses.

Sisinchióne, a kinde of Onion or Bulbus plant.

Sisóne, a small seede in Siria like Parslie.

Sissarcósi, a coniunction of bones by the apposition of the flesh comming vpon them, as is seene betweene the teeth and the iawes, as also in those ioynts which the muscles doe enuiron.

Sissietieride, as Protomedia.

Sissírio, a publike feast among the Lacedemonians.

Sísto, an open gallery or terrace. Also any open walking place.

Sístola, the motion or panting of the heart and arteries. Also the shortning of a vowell that is long.

Sístro, a kinde of musicall instrument of brasse like a horne or cornet, a brazen or iron Timbrell.

Sitabónda, thirsty, greedy, coueting.

Sitále, a kind of Serpent.

Sitánio, bread made of three Monthes corne. Also Wheate that groweth in three Monthes.

Sitánto, as well or as much because.

Sitarchía, the office of prouiding Corne and Victuals.

Sitárco, a prouider of Corne and victuals.

Sitibóndo, as Sitabóndo.

Sitiente, as Sitabóndo.

Sitíre, tísco, títo, to thurst, to be thursty, to couet or long after earnestly.

Síto, a site, a situation, a seating or standing of any place.

Sitocomía, as Sitarchía.

Si tósto cóme, so soone as.

Sítta, a bird called a Nut-lobber.

Sittáce, a kind of Perot or Popiniay.

Sittímo, a kinde of excellent Ceder vsed in offerings of old.

Situalménte, seatedly, residently.

Situáre, to seat, to site, to situate, to found or lay the standing of any place.

Situatióne, as Síto, a situation.

Sitúra, thirst, thirstinesse, drought.

Sì ueraménte, yea verily, yea truly.

Si uuóle, it is required, it is requisite.

Slacciáre, to vnlace, to vnsnare, to vntie.

Slanciáre, as Lanciáre.

Slanciársi, for a man to fling himselfe.

Slancáto, broken-hipt, backe-broken.

Slándra, a common, filthy whore.

Slargáre, to inlarge, to spread, to extend in breadth, to free, to stretch out.

Slattáre, to weane from sucking. Also to vnmilke.

Slauacciáre, to wash, to rence, to dabble or shake vp and downe in the water.

Slauáto, vnwashed. Also a wash-colour. Also a bright dun colour of a horse.

Sleále, disloyall, false, faithlesse.

Slealtà, disloyalty, falshood, vntruth.

Sleánza, as Slealtà.

Sleccadente, a licktooth, or liquerish fellow.

Slegáre, to vnbind, to vnty, to loosen.

Slíscia, a sled. Also a slid or a gliding.

Slisciáre, to slid or glide. Also to draw vpon a sled or conueigh vpon truckes.

Slíscio, as Slíscia.

Slíssa, as Slíscia.

Slissáre, as Slisciáre.

Sliuidíto, linke, flappy, withered and faded in colour and feeling.

Slizzigáre, to slide, to slip or glide.

Slocáre, as Slogáre.

Slocatúra, a displacing or vnioynting.

Slodáre, to dispraise, to discommend.

Slóffa, a fisle, a fiste, a close-fart.

Sloffáre, to fizle, to fiste.

Sloffeggiáre, to fizle, to fiste.

Slogáre, to displace, to put out of ioint.

Sloggiáre, to dislodge, to disharborough.

Slombare, to cut or carue vp the carcase of any thing, to dismember, to mangle. Also to infeeble or weaken.

Slongáre, to lengthen, to stretch out in length. Also to prolong or prorogue.

Slontanáre, as Alontanáre.

Slordáre, to cleanse from any filth.

Smaccáre, to bruise, to crush, to squease or make flat. Also to trample vnder ones feete. Also as Sgaráre. Also as Smagáre. Also to put to shame.

Smacchiáre, to vnspot, to vnstaine. Also to rouze, to driue or spring as a Deare, or to start a Hare from out his shelter, holde, bushes or brakes.

Smácco, an affront, a false imputation, a wrong charge to ones name. Also a checke or taunt in word or deed. Also a crushing, a bruising or trampling flat.

Smacelláre, vsed for Macelláre.

Smacráre, to make fat, to vnleane.

Smagáre, as Dismagáre, to trouble, to vex or distract one out of his wits. Also to charme, to bewitch or forspeake. Also to quell or put to flight. Also to transforme or misshape. Also to shiuer or riue in sunder.

Smagáto, distracted from his naturall being. Looke Smagáre.

Smagliáre, to vnmaile, to disharnish, to disarme. Also to breake open with violence as one would doe and teare a shirt of maile. Vsed also for to possesse without controule or enioy with delight. Also to dismay, to put to rout and scattred confusion.

Smagonáre, to dismay, to affright, to astonie.

Smagráre, to make or grow leane, to extenuate, to take downe ones flesh.

Smagríre, grísco, gríto, as Smagráre.

Smágro, leane, meagre, poore in flesh.

Smaltáre, to ennamell. Also to couer ouer or to parget with lome or morter. Also to mute as a Hawke, or dung and scummer as a beast.

Smaltáto, the mute of a Hawke, the dung of any little beast. Looke Smaltáre.

Smaltíre, tísco, títo, to disgest, to brooke. Also to put ouer ones meat. Also the tewell of a Hawke.

Smaltitúra, a disgesting, a brooking.

Smálto, a mell that Goldsmithes vse. Also parget, loame or morter. Also a floore or seeling pargeted. Also vsed for any hard matter.

Smálza, vsed in Lumbardie for butter.

Smalzáre, to butter or dresse with butter.

Smálzo, butter.

Smammíre, as Suaníre.

Smammíto, as Suaníto.

Smammoláta, a wench that hath lost her maiden-head.

Smanceríe, any kind of fine apparell, rayments or ornaments about women, vsed rather for pleasure and shew, then any need or warmth. Also any facing or trimming to make vp apparell besides the outside, all manner of new-fangles.

Smanciera, a woman deuising daily 



new-fangled fashions in her clothes, one that loues to goe gay, and wasteth much in apparell.

Smandáre, to take more then one ought vpon him in commanding.

Smandráre, to let out of the fold or pen, to vnherd, to scatter cattle.

Smánia, rage, rashnesse, madnesse, furious chafing, angry fretting, raging passion, braine-sicknesse rising of too much abundance of bloud in the head, whereof follow such raging passions.

Smaniánte, as Smanióso.

Smaniáre, to be or become raging, brainsicke, furious, chafing or passionate.

Smanicáre, to vnsleeue. Also to vnhaft, to vnhandle, to vnhilt.

Smaníglie, arme-bracelets.

Smanióso, of Smánia, ragingly passionate.

Smantelláre, to dismantle, to vncloke, to slrip. Also to raze or beat downe walles.

Smantelláre le múra, to raze or batter and beat downe the wals of a City.

Smarágdo, an Emerauld stone.

Smarauigliársi, to wonder and maruell.

Smargináre, to vnmargine or take away the side of any thing. Also to take away the scars of a cut or wound.

Smarídi, a kind of Menow or little fish, some taks it for a shell-fish.

Smarráre, to pare or shaue cleane as a Tanner doth raw hides.

Smarrigióne, as Smarriménto.

Smarriménto, astonishment, amazement. Also a straying or stragling.

Smarríre, rísco, ríto, to erre, to stray, to straggle or wander out of the way. Also to droope or faint for feare. Also to affright, to amaze, to astonish.

Smarríto, erred, straied, stragled or wandered out of the way. Also lost, mist or miscaried. Also drooped or fainted for feare. Also affrighted, amazed, astonished.

Smartelláre, to batter, to beate or forge with a hammer.

Smartelláto, forged with a hammer. Also freed from ielousie or passions of loue.

Smascaráre, to vnmaske, to vnuizard. Also to discouer and reueale.

Smascelláre, to vniaw, to vncheeke, to burst ones chaps or cheekes.

Smascelláre délle rísa, to burst foorth with laughing till ones cheekes ake.

Smascheráre, as Smascaráre.

Smassáre, to bruse or squease flat.

Smattáre, as Smatteggiáre.

Smatteggiáre, to play the foole or madman, to burst out into folly.

Smattonáte, to vnbricke. Also to vnpaue. 

Smégma, an abstersiue substance. Also a washing ball.

Smegmáto, a certaine plaister that Phisitians vse to take away spots of the face, some vse it as a kind of vnguent, sope or wash-ball.

Smembraménto, a dismembring.

Smembráre, to dismember, to disioyne limme from limme. Also to carue or breake vp.

Smembréuole, that may be dismembered.

Smemorággine, obliuion, forgetfullnesse.

Smemoraménto, obliuion, forgetting.

Smemoránza, obliuion, forgetfullnesse.

Smemoráre, to forget, not to remember.

Smemoratággine, as Smemoránza.

Smemoráto, forgetfull, vnmindefull.

Smemoráto, forgotten, not remembred.

Smemoréuole, forgetfull, obliuious.

Smémore, forgetfull, obliuious.

Smenoueniménto, a fainting or swouning.

Smenoueníre, véngo, vénni, venúto, to faint or swoune.

Smenticággine, obliuion, forgetfullnesse.

Smenticánza, obliuion, forgetfullnesse.

Smenticáre, to forget, not to remember.

Smentichéuole, forgetfull, obliuious.

Smenticóso, forgetfull, obliuious.

Smentíre, sménto, smentíto, to bely, to confute, to reuert, to make one say tongue thou liest.

Smentíta, a confutation of a lie.

Smeraldáre, to set with Emeraulds.

Smeraldíno, a little Emerauld. Also an Emerauld or Sea-grasse-greene.

Smeráldo, an Emerauld stone.

Smerdaménto, a beshiting, a beraying.

Smerdáre, to beshite, to beray, to beturde.

Smerdoláre, as Smerdáre.

Smergáre, as Smergoláre.

Smergo, a diuer, a didapper, an Arsefoote.

Smergoláre, to diue or ducke in the water.

Smergolo, as Smergo.

Smerigliáta, a blow or shot of a Smeríglio.

Smeríglio, a kind of long winged Hawk called a Marlin, some take it for a Sparrow-hawke, and others for a Ringtaile. Also a kind of hard stone that will cut glasse called an Emerod stone, Glasiers vse it to cut glasse, Armourers and Frubbers vse it to scoure with. Also a kind of small Ordinance or shot like a Basse or Rabinet.

Smerláre le múrá, to deface or pull downe the battlements of any wall.

Smerlo, as Smeríglio. Also Smergo.

Smetriáre, as Smitriáre.

Smezzáto, deuided or parted asunder.

Smiagoláre, to meaw like a Cat. Also to mumble or chew as a toothlesse woman.

Smidolláto, vnmarrowed, cleansed from the pith.

Smiláce, Rope-weed or Weed-bind.

Smílza, the milt or spleene of any bodie.

Smilzáre, to vnmilt, or vnspleene a man.

Smílzo, without milt or spleene. Also spiny, leane, lanke. Also withered or drooped.

Sminucciáre, as Sminuzzáre.

Sminuíre, ísco, íto, to diminish, to lessen.

Sminuitíuo, as Diminutíuo.

Sminuzzáre, to mince, to crum, to moulder, to shred or cut into small pieces.

Sminuzzataménte, mincingly, in small pieces, crumblingly. Also distinctlie.

Sminúzzoli, shreds, mincings, crumblings, crums, small pieces, mammockes.

Smiracoláre, to wonder, to admire or maruell at. Also to doe wonders.

Smiríce, a hard stone. Looke Smeríglio

Smiríglio, as Smeríglio.

Smírnio, a hard stone. Looke Smeríglio. Also Louage or Parsoly of Macedonia. Also Alizanders hearbe.

Smírno, a hard stone. Looke Smeríglio.

Smíro, a kind of Serpent fish.

Smirrhízza, a weed like to Hemlocke.

Smírro, a hard stone. Looke Smeríglio.

Smisuránza, vnmeasurablenesse, hugenesse.

Smisurataménte, vnmeasurably, beyond all measure, excessiuely.

Smisuráto, vnmeasurable, boundelesse.

Smisuréuole, vnmeasurable.

Smitriáre, to vnmiter, to vnbishop.

Smoccáre, to snuffe or blow ones nose. Also to snuffe or top a candle.

Smoccatóio, a mucketer. Also a paire of snuffers.

Smoccoláre, to snuffe. Also to snot.

Smoccolatóio, a snuffer.

Smóccolo, a snuffe or candles end.

Smoccolóso, snuffie, snotty, sniuelly.

Smoderataménte, immoderately.

Smoderáto, immoderate, intemperate.

Smóglia, a washing or bucking tub. 



Smogliáre, to lay cloathes in water.

Smogliáto, without a wife, vnwiued.

Smógnere, smóngo, smónsi, smongiúto , or smónto, to milch, to sucke or draw drie.

Smólto, as Smongiúto. Also slacke or vntwisted.

Smonacáto, vnmunked, vnnunned, hauing cast of the orders of religion.

Smóngere, as Smógnere.

Smongiúto, milched, suckt or drawne drie.

Smontáre, to dismount, to descend. Also to sappíant. Also to goe a land from a ship.

Smontáre da cavállo, to alight from horse.

Smontáre di bárca, to land from a ship.

Smontáre l'artegliaría, to dismount or vnbracke artillery.

Smontáre le scále, to descend the staires.

Smontáta, a dismounting, a descending, an alighting. Also a landing or landing place. Also a blocke to alight from horse-backe.

Smónto, as Smongiúto.

Smorbáre, to cleanse or rid from any contagion or infectious disease.

Smórdere, smórdo, smordéi, smordúto, to vnbridle, to vnsnaffle, to vncurbe. Also to vntangle or vntwine. Also to bite or nibble in sunder. Also to rid from trouble. Also to let goe with ones teeth.

Smordúto, vnbridled, vnsnaffled. Also vnbitten. Also bitten or nibled in sunder. Also let goe with ones teeth.

Smórfia, a blurting, a mumping, a mocking or push with ones mouth.

Smorfíre, fisco, fíto, to make grimasses or mouthes at one, to blurt at with ones mouth. Also to parboile any meate. Also to deuoure greedily.

Smoríre, to faint or swoune.

Smorsáre, as Smórdere.

Smortaccíno, palish or sallow-coloured.

Smortarello, as Smortaccíno.

Smórto, pale, wan, sallow-coloured, deadly, gastly, grizely, deade-lookeing.

Smorzáre, to extinguish or quench.

Smorzáre il víuo d'vn pezzo d'artegliaría, to shoot a piece by an euen dispart and hit the marke leuell.

Smorzáto, quenched, extinguished.

Smórzo, quenched, extinguished.

Smóssa, a moouing, a stirring. Also a putting out of ioynt, a dislocation.

Smósso, moued, remooued, stirred. Also dislocated or put out of ioynt.

Smóuere, smóuo, smóssi, smósso, to remooue, to stirre. Also to dislocate out of ioynt.

Smouiménto, as Smóssa.

Smonitúra, as Smóssa.

Smozzáre, as Smozzicáre.

Smozzicáre, to snuffe or top as a candle, to cut of any part, to mangle, to maime or blunt off any thing in pieces. Also to snot ones nose.

Smozzicatúra, a snuffing. Also a mangling and breaking in pieces.

Smucciáre, to glid, to slide or slip.

Smuccíre, as Smucciáre.

Smúgnere, as Smógnere.

Smúngere, as Smógnere.

Smúnto, as Smongiúto.

Smuóuere, as Smóuere.

Smuráre, to vnwall, to pull downe wals.

Smussáre, to blunt, to abate the edge.

Smussézza, bluntnesse.

Smússo, blunt, without edge. Also a certaine toole that Goldsmithes vse.

Snamotaménto, a disinamouring or falling out in loue.

Snamoráre, to disinamour, to fall in dislike.

Snamorátosi, disinamoured, fallen in dislike.

Snasáto, vnnosed, without a nose.

Snellaménte, nimbly, light-footed, fleetly, speedily, quicke in motion.

Snello, swift, nimble, fleete, lightfooted.

Sneruáre, to vnsinew, to weaken ones bodie. Also to hough a horse or any beast.

Snidáre, to vn-nest, to rouze, to vnden, to vnroost. Also to displace.

Snoccioláre, to shale or cracke nuts. Also to loosen or finde out a doubt. Also to vntangle or picke out.

Snoccioláto, shaled or crackt nuts. Also vntangled or found out a doubt.

Snodáre, to vnknot. Also to vnioynt.

Snodatúra, an vnknotting. Also the knitting of any ioynt.

Snudáre, to make bare or naked.

Sò, vsed for Súo, his, hirs, or his owne.

Sò, I wot, I wisse, I know, I ken.

Sò, vsed in composition for vnder, as Sossópra, for Sottosopra, vnder ouer, &c.

Soáue, sweet or pleasant in taste, smelling or hearing, delicious, soote. Also soft or smooth in touching. Also curteous and milde in behauiour. Vsed also aduerbially, sweetly, gently, softly, smoothlie.

Soaucménte, sweetly, softly, gently.

Soauidíco, one that speaketh pleasantly or vseth a sweet manner of speech.

Soauiloquente, as Soauidíco.

Soauiloquenza, sweet or pleasant speech.

Soauilóquio, as Soauiloquenza.

Soanità, sweetnesse, sootenesse, deliciousnesse, pleasance. Also softnesse, smoothnesse.

Soauitúdine, as Soauità.

Soázza, as Corníce.

Sobáttere, to surbaite as a horse doth.

Sobattitúra, a surbaiting.

Sobattúto, surbaited.

Sobbarcáre, to drench, to plunge, to dine.

Sobbergo, as Sobbórgo.

Sobbollire, to boile vnder. Also to supple, to mollifie, to soften.

Sobbollito, boiled vnder. Also a kind of wine called Cuite. Also suppled.

Sobbórghi, out streetes, suburbs, or boroughs of a City without the wales.

Sóbero, the light wood called Corke. Also a Corke-tree.

Sobissáre, as Precipitáre.

Soblimáre, as Sublimáre.

Soblimáto, as Sublimáto.

Soblime, as Sublíme.

Soblimità, as Sublimità.

Sobogíre, gísco, gíto, to suple, to mollifie, to soften.

Sóbole, of spring, generation, issue, succession.

Sobolíre, lísco, líto, to increase in ofspring, issue, lineage or succession.

Sobornáre, as Subornáre.

Sobornatióne, as Subornatióne.

Sobrietà, sobriety, sobernesse, temperance.

Sobríno, a sisters child. Also a germane cousen. Also a kinsman.

Sóbrio, sober, not drunke, temperate. Also well aduised or well in his wits.

Sobugliáre, to tumble or tosse confusedly ouer and ouer, to confound tumultuously.

Sobúglio, any tumultuous confusion or hurly burly.

Socamélo, the base or foundament of any stone worke.

Soccággio, a kind of tenure or seruice for lands holden, called soccage.

Soccáto, that weareth sockes, startops or bagging shooes.

Sócchi, a kind of wollen socke, startop or bagging shooe vsed in old times.

Socchiúdere, to shut or locke vnder.

Socchiúso, shut or locked vnder.

Sócci, vsed for Cisóno, there are.

Soccidézza, as Succidúme.

Sóccido, as Súccido.

Soccíngere, to vnder-guirt or guird.

Soccíno, as Succíno.

Soccínto, as Succínto.

Sóccio, vsed anciently for Società.

Soccoláre, to goe stalking or on stilts.

Sóccoli, startops, pattins. Also stilts.

Soccómbere, cómbo, combéi, combúto, not to be able to sustaine, to faint or fall downe vnder a burden, to 



faile for feeblenesse.

Soccórde, base-minded, faint-hearted.

Soccórdia, faint-hartednesse, sluggishnesse, dastardlinesse.

Soccórrere, córro, córsi, córso, to succour, to assist, to helpe. Also to runne vnder.

Soccórso, succoured, helped, assisted. Also vnder-runne. Also any succour, helpe, aide or assistance.

Sócera, a wiues or husbands mother.

Sócero, a wiues or husbands father.

Sociábile, as Sotiábile, sociable.

Sociabilità, as Sotiabilità.

Sociále, as Sotiále.

Socialità, as Sotialità.

Sociáre, as Sotiáre, to associate.

Sócida, partnership in dealings or trading.

Socidézza, as Succidúme.

Sócido, as Súccido.

Società, as Sotietà, societie.

Sócio, as Sótio, a companion, a fellow.

Socórde, lither, lazie, negligent.

Socórdia, lithernesse, lazinesse, sluggishnesse.

Socrótio, a kind of drug.

Sóda, a kind of Ferne-ashes whereof they make glasses. Also a disease or giddinesse in a Hawkes head.

Sodále, a companion or fellow namely at meat and pastime. Also of one societie or fraternitie.

Sodalità, societie, fellowship or brotherhood namely at meat and sport.

Sodalítio, societie, fellowship or companie, namely at bed and bord.

Sodáre, to make stiffe, fast, tough or solide. Also to settle or establish. Also to baile, to pledge or answer for.

Sodatóre, a pledge, a baile, a suretie, a maineprise, a warrant, an establisher.

Soddiácono, a Subdeacon, a Subdeane.

Soddiuídere, to subdeuide.

Soddiuisióne, a subdiuision.

Sodézza, stiffenesse, solidenesse, toughnesse.

Sódis, in compositions vsed as Sátis, as Sodisfáre.

Sodisfaciménto, a satisfying, a contenting.

Sodisfáre, to satisfie, to please, to content, to appay.

Sodisfattióne, satisfaction or pleasing.

Sodisfátto, satisfied, pleased, contented, well appaied.

Sodisfattório, that hath vertue to satisfie, or to please and content.

Sódo, solide, tough, fast, hard, stiffe. Also a strong shore or vpholder of stone or timber. Vsed for the essentiall bodie or substance of any thing.

Sódoángolo, a full or perfect angle.

Sódo al macchióne, stiffe, resolute, vndaunted, that will stirre for knocking.

Sodomeo, a Sodomite, a Buggerer.

Sodomía, the vnnaturall sinne of Sodomie.

Sodomíta, a Sodomite, a Buggerer.

Sodomitáre, to commit Sodomie.

Sodomitaríe, Sodomiticall trickes.

Sodomítico, Sodomiticall.

Sodóna, a kind of hearbe or drug.

Sodótto, seduced, misled, debaushed.

Soduciménto, a seducing, as Seduttióne.

Sodúrre, as Sedúrre.

Soduttióne, as Seduttióne.

Soduttóre, as Seduttóre.

Soétte, the little Flounder-fishes.

Sofferente, suffering, bearing.

Sofferenza, sufferance, tolleration.

Sofferéuole, sufferable, to bee borne with.

Sofferíre, rísco, ferst, ferto, to suffer, to endure, to beare, to tollerate.

Sofferto, suffered, endured, tollerated.

Soffiaménto, as Sóffio.

Soffiánte, blowing, fizling, puffing. Also panting or breathing.

Soffiáre, to blow, to puffe, to fizzle, to breath, to pant.

Soffiatóio, vsed abusiuely for a Gun.

Soffiatóre, a blower, a puffer, a fizler.

Soffiatúra, as Sóffio.

Sofficcáre, to thrust vnder.

Sóffice, pliable, limber, yeelding.

Sofficiente, sufficient, able enough, apt.

Sofficienteménte, sufficiently enough.

Sofficienza, sufficiencie, abilitie.

Soffiétto, a paire of bellowes. Also a little blast, puff, fizle or blowing. Also a buffet, a box or whirret on the cheeke, a kirrimirie-buff. Also a budget or wallet.

Sóffio, a blast, a puff, a blowing, a breath. Also a gale, a gust or flaw of winde. Also a kind of boyes play in Italie like to our blow-point.

Soffióna, a spend-breath, a woman full of vaine wordes.

Soffióne, a great paire of bellowes. Also a great blast, puff or fizle. Also a great blast, gust, gale or berie of winde. Also a shooting trunke. Also a caliuer, a musket, a long fouling piece or petronell. Also a long squib of wilde fire.

Soffisteríe, sophistries, sophistications.

Soffíta, a garret, a loft or roome on the top of a house with a crosse beame in it.

Soffitáre, to build bending or vaultwise like the roofe of a garret.

Soffitto, prest or fixed vnder.

Soffitúto, roofed or vaulted as a garret.

Soffocáre, to suffocate, to smother, to strangle, to choke or stop ones breath.

Soffocatióne, suffocation, stiffling, smoothering, choking ones breath, strangling.

Soffogáre, as Soffocáre.

Soffogatióne, as Soffocatióne.

Soffolcere, as Soffolcíre.

Soffolcíre, císco, cíto, to place or settle, to sustaine, to boulster, to maintaine, to assist, to beare or hold vp, to vphold, to vnderlay, to vnderprop.

Soffólgere, fólgo, fólsi, fólto, as Soffolcíre.

Soffolto, placed, setled, sustained, boulstred, vpheld, vnderlaid, borne vp.

Soffomentatióne, a fomentation.

Soffondáto, vnderlaid, as the foundation or bottome-worke of any thing.

Soffóndere, fóndo, fondéi, fondúto, or fúso, to cast or powre downe liquor on a thing. Also to melt vnder. Also to spread or cast abroad. Also to confound.

Soffondúto, cast or powred downe liquer on any thing. Also melted vnder. Also confounded vnder.

Soffósso, an vnder-ditch, trench or dike.

Soffragáno, a Suffragane or a Bishops vicegerent.

Soffragáre, to giue ones voice, suffrage or word and fauour in any election.

Soffragatióne, a giuing of ones voice or suffrage in any election. Also a declaration of consent, voice and fauour.

Soffragatóre, a supporter, a maintainer, an abetter, one that in any election helpeth with his word and suffrage.

Soffragatório, of or belonging to an election by voices and suffrages.

Soffraginóso, as Suffraginóso, any beast or horse that is diseased in the houghes or pasterns, that hath or is full of the scratches or spauens.

Soffrágio, a suffrage, a voice, a consent or good word about any election. Also a wracke at Sea.

Soffrágo, the ioint of the hinder leg of any beast called the hough. Also the pasterne of a horse. Also one whose thighes are broken.

Soffránta, the hinder part of the thigh. Also as Soffrátta.

Soffrátta, a subfraction, a routing, a defeature, a ruine, a destruction. Also a ruthe or fellow sufferance.

Soffregaménto, as Soffregatióne.

Soffregáre, to rub together till it be raw, galled or the skin off, to entrerub.

Soffregatióne, a meriegall, a raw place the skin being rubbed off, an entrerubbing.

Soffrenáre, to checke a Horse or giue him a correction with the bit or with one reine of the bit. Also to curbe vnder.

Soffrenáta, a checke, a twitch or iob giuen to a horse with the bit or reines.

Soffrenatióne, a binding or fast-ioyning 



together of stones in a wall with iron or leade.

Soffrenza, sufferance, forbearance.

Soffríbile, sufferable, tollerable.

Soffríggere, fríggo, friggéi, frítto, to fry in a frying pan. Also to broile.

Soffriménto, sufferance, tolleration.

Soffríre, to suffer, to endure, to tollerate.

Soffrítto, fried in a frying pan. Also boiled. Also any fried or boiled meat.

Soffrútice, all manner of vnder shrubs.

Soffumicáre, as Suffumicáre.

Soffumicatióne, as Suffunicatióne.

Soffumigáre, as Suffumicáre.

Soffumigatióne, as Suffumicatióne.

Soffumígij, as Suffumicatióne.

Soffusióne, as Suffusióne.

Soffúso, as Soffonduto.

Sofismo, as Sophísmo.

Sofista, as Sophísta.

Sofisticáre, as Sophisticáre.

Sofisticarie, as Sophisticaríe.

Sóga, a cable, a rope, a corde. Also a horne-string or scarfe fastned to a Hunters horne.

Soggeríre, as Suggeríre.

Soggestióne, as Suggestióne.

Soggettióne, subiection, thraldome.

Soggettíre, tísco, títo, or getto, to make subiect, to enthrall, to bring vnder.

Soggettíto, made subiect, subiected.

Soggettíuo, subiectiue, to be subiected.

Soggetto, a subiect, a vassall, a thrall. Also a ground or subiect of any matter to write or speake of. Also in subiection. Also enclined vnto naturally, put or lying vnder.

Soggiacente, lying vnder.

Soggiacere, to lye vnder, to vnderlay.

Soggiaciúto, laine vnder, vnderlaid.

Soggieláto, vnder-frozen. Also blurred.

Soggiogáre, to yoke, to subdue, to tame, to bring vnder, to vanquish.

Soggióngere, as Soggiúngere.

Soggiontióne, as Soggiuntióne.

Soggiónto, as Soggiúnto.

Soggiornánza, a soiourning, an abiding place, a dwelling, an
abode.

Soggiornáre, to soiourne, to abide, to wonne, to dwell, to continue daily.

Soggiornatóre, a soiourner, a remainer.

Soggiórno, a mansion, a habitation, a soiourning place. Also a deferring of time.

Soggiúgnere, as Soggiúngere.

Soggiúngere, giúngo, giúnsi, giúnto, to adde vnder, to ioine vnto. Also to reply, to say more or adde in speech.

Soggiungiménto, an adding vnder, a ioyning vnto. Also a reply or addition of speech.

Soggiuntióne, a subiunction, an adding vnder, or ioyning vnto.

Soggiuntíuo, the subiunctiue, ioyning or adding moode of a verbe. 

Soggiúnto, added vnder or ioyned vnto. Also replied, said or answered moreouer.

Sóggola, some part or piece of a yoke for Oxen.

Soghignárc, to smile, to leere, to simper.

Soghigno, a smile, a leering, a simpring.

Sóglia, a threshold or hanse of a doore. Also the transome or lintle ouer a dore. Also a house or habitation it selfe. Also a Kings chamber or throne. Also a Sole-fish.

Sogliárda, a filthy slut, a drigle-dragle, a pisse-kitchin, a flurting drudge.

Sogliárdo, a slouenlie, filthy, foule, sluttish or hoggish fellow. Also sluttish, filthy, hoggish. Also a mocker, a flouter, a scoffer, a frumper.

Sogliáre, to sullie, to defile, to pollute, to foule. Also to mocke, to flout, to scoffe, to quip, to frumpe. Also to flatter or cog with. Also as Sóglia.

Sogliáre, to passe or goe ouer a threshold of a dore.

Sóglio, an Imperiall seat, a seat of Maiestie, a Royall throne made of whole stuffe without any piece. Also a transome, a lintell, a sill, a threshold or hanse of a doore or entrance. Also a step or greece of a staires or ladder. Also of Solére, I am wont or accustomed.

Sógna, tallow, seame, fat, greasie, larde.

Sognábile, that may be dreamed.

Sognáre, to dreame or raue in a sleepe. Also to stand doubtfull or irresolute, to wauer in minde.

Sognatóre, a dreamer or rauer in sleepe.

Sognénole, that may be dreamed.

Sógniolo, a kind of Creuice or Crab-fish.

Sógno, a dreame, a vision or rauing in ones sleepe, a vanitie not likely to be true.

Sognóso, dreaming, full of dreames, rauing, that dreameth much or often.

Sogozzóne, as Sorgozzóne.

Sóia, a mocke, a flout, a frumpe, a scoffe, a quip, a cogging, a foisting, a iest.

Soiaménto, as Soláio. Also a pauement.

Soiárdo, as Sogliárdo.

Soiáre, as Sogliáre.

Soiáta, as Sóia, a flout, a frumpe.

Soiatóre, as Sogliárdo.

Sol, a note in Musike, as Sóle, as Sólo.

Sóla, the sole of a shooe or foote. Also a Sole-fish.

Solábile, that may be comforted.

Sólach, a beast in Tartarie like a sheepe with a precious horne, which at the sound of a Drum will dance round till he fall downe and so is taken.

Solágna, a pauement.

Soláio, the lowest part of a house or frame, a sollar, a seeling or floore or loft. Also a Canopie caried ouer the hoste when they goe in procession, called in Latine Pérculum. Also a Sunne-dyall.

Soláme, comfort, solace, consolation.

Solaménte, onely, alone, but onely.

Solaménte chè, onely that, but onely that.

Solána, a Sunnie place. Also a broad hat or shelter to defend one from the Sunne.

Solánde, a kind of great Duckes.

Soláne, a kind of Oysters.

Soláno, Banewort, Night-shade, Morclue or Deaths-hearbe or Deadlybane.

Soláre, Sunnie, of or belonging to the Sunne. Also a Sunne-dyall. Also the sole of a paire of shooes. Also Aerba soláre, the hearbe Turuesoll or Wartwort.

Solárirággi, the beames or rayes of the Sunne.

Soláro, as Soláio.

Solarétto, any little Soláio.

Solátio, that part of a hill open and exposed to the East and Sunne-rising.

Solatióne, the time or space of a day or between Sunne-rising and Sunne-setting. Also vsed for Consolation or easing-comfort.

Soláto, as Solátro. Also soled.

Solátro, Broomerape, Chokeweed or wilde Fetches.

Solazzáre, to solace, to sport, to blithe.

Solazzéuole, sportfull, blithe, full of solace.

Solázzo, solace, sport, glee, pastime.

Solazzóso, as Solazzéuole.

Solbastrella, Burnet or Pimpirnell.

Solcábile, that may be furrowed.

Solcáre, to furrow or make furrowes. Also to furrow or cut the waues or Sea. Also to plough or grub vp the ground.

Solcár' il máre, to cut or furrow the Sea.

Solcáro, furrowed or made in furrowes. Also tilled or ploughed vp. Also cut or furrowed the Sea with the keele of a ship. Also the slough of a cartwheele.

Solcatóre, a furrower, a maker of furrowes. Also a sea-man or cutter of the Sea.

Sol chè, as Sólochè.

Solchéuole, that may be furrowed.

Sólchi, the Plurall of Sólco.

Sólci, a kind of made dish good to eat.

Solcio, a kind of fish, as Pólpo.

Sólco, a furrow, a range or trench like a furrow or ditch to plant Vines in. Also a gullet. or gozell of water. Also a streake or wrimple in any thing.

Soldána, Seaselefoote, Scuruy-weed, 



Dogs-caule, Sea-bels, Sea-coles or Sea-withbinde.

Soldanático, souldiership, the office or dignity of souldier.

Soldanáto, the office, place or dignity of a Soldane or chiefe Ruler.

Soldanella, as Soldána.

Soldáno, a Soldane or chiefe Ruler.

Soldáre, to presse souldiers into pay.

Soldatésco, souldierlike.

Soldáto, prest with pay to serue in wars. Also a souldier or man in pay.

Sóldo, a coine called a sould or shilling. Also a souldiers pay.

Sóle, the Sunne, the Planet Sol, the eye of heauen. Also gold as Alchimists call it.

Soleám, a kind of Grashopper.

Soleáno, a kind of bird.

Solecchiáre, venir nótte, tramontár del sóle, the time of Sun-set.

Solécchio, a little Sunne, a glimps or glimmering of the Sunne about Sunset. Also a Canapy or shade against the Sunne.

Solecísmo, a solecisme, an incongruitie.

Solécita, as Solecitatióne.

Solecitaménte, diligently, carefully, with solicitation, speedily, vigilantlie.

Solecitáre, to solicite, to hie, to follow, to hasten, to pursue, to make carefull, to follow and vrge instantly or be carefull and earnest with one. Also to tickle.

Solecitatióne, a sollicitation, a pursuite, a hasting or mouing to doe a thing.

Solecitatóre, a sollicitor, a pursiuant, an vrger or enticer to doe a thing.

Solécito, diligent, sollicitous, speedy, carefull, busie, full of carke and care.

Solecitúdine, diligence, sollicitude, pursuite, carke and care, anguish of minde.

Solecóphano, what soeuer hath a shew of solecisme or may be excused.

Sóle d' I'ndia, as Cóppa di Gióue.

Soleggiáre, to sunne. Also to floore or range in order to spred vpon a floore. Also to seele.

Soléne, a kinde of Muscle-fish which boyled yealdeth a comfortable liquor.

Solenizzáre, to solemnize or celebrate ordinarily at sometimes.

Solenizzatióne, a solemnity, a solemnization or celebration.

Solenne, solemne, annually publike, yeerely celebrated. Vsed to be done at times. Also famous, renoumed, noteable.

Solenneggiáre, as Solenizzáre.

Solenneménte, solemnely.

Solennità, a solemnity, a celebration. Also ceremony, feastiuall pompe or honour. 

Soléno, a kind of shell-fish.

Solére, sóglio, sólsi, solúto, to be wont or accustomed, to vse, to accustome.

Solerte, diligent, wary, heedy, vigilant, witty, crafty, subtle, cunning.

Solertia, diligence, vigilancy, quickenesse of wit, sharpnesse of perceiuing, subtlely in practising of good or euill, skill, cunning, wittinesse.

Soletário, vsed for Solitário.

Soleticáre, to tickle.

Soleticatióne, a tickling.

Solético, ticklish.

Solétta, a little sole, a shooe-sole.

Solétto, solitary, all alone.

Sólfa, a note in musike, pricke song.

Solfanarío,  a sulpher mine or brimstone-pit.

Solfanelli, matches of brimstones to kindle candles or fire with.

Solfáre, as Solfeggiáre.

Solfareità, the sulfrous quality of brimstone.

Solfaría, a place or Mine of brimstone.

Solfaríni, as Solfanelli.

Sólfaro, a sulfurer or brimstone-maker.

Solfeggiáre, to sol-fa, or sing prikesong.

Sólfo, sulfer or brimstone.

Solfocitríno, a kind of sulphure.

Solforáre, to sulfer, to insulfer.

Solforeo, of the quality of brimstone.

Solforíni, as Solfanelli.

Solforóso, sulfurous, full of brimstone.

Sólfro, sulfer or brimstone.

Solíca, a flint-stone, a fire-stone.

Solícchio, a canapy or cloth of state.

Solicciuólo, as Solécchio.

Solicúria, curiousnesse in euery thing.

Solidágine, Wale-wort or Comfry.

Solidáre, to consolidate, to make firme, solide, tough, massiue, fast, stiffe, strong or hard. Also to heale vp a wound. Also to solder mettals.

Solidatióne, a making solide.

Solidézza, as Solidità.

Sólidi piédi, whole-footed, without toes.

Solidità, solidity, firmenesse, toughnesse.

Sólido, solide, firme, tough, massiue, fast, sound, whole, pithy, not hollow, continuall.

Solifero, Sunne-bringing or Sunnebearing, the Zodiake.

Solifúga, one that flieth the Sunne, a Sunne-shunner.

Soligéno, begotten or bred by the Sun.

Solilóquio, talke alone or to a mans selfe.

Solimáto, sublimate, mercury, quickesiluer.

Solíngo, solitary, all alone, wandring alone. 

Sólio, as Sóglio, Looke Pezzo.

Solipága, as Solipúngia.

Solipéde, whole footed.

Solipúngia, a kind of venemous pisse-mire that stingeth sore in the Sun.

Solisgemma, the Sunne-stone, yeelding raies round about as the Sunne.

Solistímo, a kind of dansing or diuination among the Augures taken of the falling of the bread to the ground which was giuen to chickins.

Solità, as Solitúdine.

Solitaménte, wontedly, customarily.

Solitáne, a kinde of Winkle or Cocklefish.

Solitarietà, solitarinesse.

Solitário, solitary, all alone.

Solitário pássero, a birde bigger and blacker then a sparrow, going alone one the tops of houses, and singing sweetly.

Solitíssimo, most wonted or accustomed.

Sólito, accustomed, wonted, vsed.

Solitúdine, solitude, solitarinesse, a liueing alone, an Hermitage or Desert where no man haunteth or dwelleth.

Soliuagánza, a wandering alone.

Soliuágo, wandering alone, going solitary and shunning company.

Sólla, a flaw or hony-combe or hollow in any piece or iron worke.

Sóllanéue, soft or pliable snow, thawing or halfe melted snow.

Solláre, to empty or make hollow. Also to flaw as somtimes iron is, to Hunnycombe.

Solláro, a sollar, a granary.

Sollazzáre, as Solazzáre.

Sollazzéuole, as Solazzéuole.

Sollázzo, as Solázzo.

Sollecísino, as Solecismo.

Sollecitaménte, as Solecitaménte.

Sollecitáre, as Solecitáre.

Sollécito, as Solécito.

Sollecitúdine, as Solecitúdine.

Sollenda, a kinde of Wilde-ducke or Moore-hen. Also a kind of long Shelfish.

Sollenne, as Solenne.

Sollennità, as Solennità.

Sollennizzáre, as Solenizzáre.

Solleticáre, to tickle.

Sollético, ticklish.

Solleua, an vnder-leauer, so called of Carpenters. Also a crow.

Solleuaménto, a raising or stirring vp, an insurrection. Also an easing. Looke Solleuáre.

Solleuáre, to raise vp, to reare, to eleuat, to lift or hould vp. Also to helpe, to ease, to succour or hold vp. Also to raise or stirre vp to any commotion or insurrection.

Solleuatióne, as Solleuaménto.



Solleuo, as Sollieuo.

Sollicitáre, as Solecitáre.

Sollicitatióne, as Solecitatióne.

Sollicitatóre, as Solecitatóre.

Sollícito, as Solécito.

Sollicitúdine, as Solecitúdine.

Sollieuo, a redresse, a sustenance, a helpe, a reliefe.

Sollióno, a beere or coffine for dead bodies. Also a kind of vessell.

Sóllo, soft, smooth or limmer in feeling. Also as Suóllo. Also as Io lo sò, I wot or know it. Also emptied, hollow, flawed, honny-comb'd.

Sollucheraménto, a pleasant remembrance of things past with pleasure.

Sollucheráre, to remember with pleasure things past.

Sólo, alone, onely, sole, seuerall. Also sauing or except.

Sólo chè, onely that, so that, but that.

Solocísmo, solecisme, incongruity.

Solocizzáre, to speake false Latin.

Solóe, as Psolóe.

Sólo solétto, all alone.

Solosolíssimo, most a lone, all alone.

Sólo sólo, idem.

Sólpo, as Pólpo.

Solpúgna, as Solipúngia.

Solsequio, following or turning with the Sunne. Also a Mary-golde or Turne-soll.

Solstiále, as Solstitiále.

Solstitiále, of or belonging to the time or instant when the Sun is at the highest or lowest in either of the Tropikes, solstitiall. Also vsed for that which continueth but a little while.

Solstitiále mórbo, any sicknesse that killeth in one day or any short space.

Solstítio, the Sunne-stead or stay of the Sunne, when he can neither goe higher nor lower, which in Winter is the eight Calends of Ianuarie, and in Summer the eight Calends of Iuly, at which time the daies be at the shortest and longest.

Soltaníno, a coine in Turky.

Soltánto, onely so much.

Sólto, as Solúto.

Solúbile, soluble or loose, that may be loosed or dissolued.

Sóluere, sóluo, soluéi, sólto, soluúto, or solúto, to solue, to loose, to dissolue, to resolue. Also to free, to quit, to discharge, to release, to dispence, to pay, to absolue, to acquit. Also to found or melt.

Sóluer' il digiúno, to breake ones fast.

Sóluer vóti, to pay vowes.

Soluigióne, absolution giuen by a Priest.

Solutaménte, loosely, dissolutely. Also absolutely, or resolutely.

Solútile, that may or will be loosed, dissolued, absolued or resolued.

Solutióne, solution, loosing, resolution, dissolution, absolution, a releasing.

Solutíuo, soluble, that may be dissolued.

Solúto, solued, dissolued, resolued, absolued, loosed, acquit, discharged, released, &c. Also melted or founded.

Solutóre, one that paieth.

Sóma, any kind of load, burthen, fraught or charge that any beast doth beare. Vsed also for mans bodie or mortall vaile.

Somácco, a wood to dye blacke with, Dyers-sumach or Leather-sumache.

Somáco, as Somácco.

Somáio, as Somáro.

Somáre, to load or burthen a Horse.

Somáro, a Sumpter-man or horse. Also a Cariers horse or any pack-horse. Also a piece of timber called a Summer.

Somáta, as Sommáta.

Sóma terréna, mans earthly bodie.

Sombúglio, confusion, tumult, hurlie-burlie, dissention, an vprore.

Someggiáre, as Somáre.

Someggíno, a Sumpter-man or horse. Also a carier or driuer of pack-horses.

Somessióne, submission, submissiuenesse.

Somésso, as Sommésso. Also as Somméssa.

Somiére, as Someggíno.

Somigliánte, as Simigliánte.

Somiglianteménte, semblably.

Somigliánza, as Simigliánza.

Somigliére, a Butler, a Buttrie-keeper.

Somigliére di córpo, a Princes Yeoman of the mouth for his drinke or bread.

Somigliáre, as Simigliáre.

Somigliéuole, as Simigliéuole.

Somína, a summe or multitude of any thing.

Sómma, a summe of any thing, the end of an accompt, the whole, the principall or totall summe. Also an end, a conclusion, a consummation, a perfection, an issue, or accomplishing of any thing. Also the height, the top or fulnesse of any thing, the principall or chiefe point of a matter, a collection of things or words.

Sommaménte, greatly, in great summe or quantitie. Also exceedingly, passingly, so much as is possible.

Sommáre, to summe or cast vp any accompts, to bring to a finall conclusion.

Sommaría, the name of a chiefe office or Magistrate in Naples.

Sommariaménte, summarily, totally, altogether, in conclusion, by the highest parts.

Sommariáre, as Sommáre.

Sommário, a Summarie, a chiefe or principall aboue others. Also an Epitomie.

Sommáta, a kind of poudred or broiled meat made of the seame or fat of a Sow that neuer farrowed.

Sommáti, Peeres of a Realme, great personages or chiefe men of dignitie in a State.

Sommáto, Empire, Soueraigntie, chiefe rule, sway or dignitie.

Sómmene, as Me ne sóno, I am to my selfe thereof or thence.

Sommergere, mergo, mersi, merso, to diue, to ducke, to plunge, to sinke or drowen in water.

Sommergiménto, as Sommersióne.

Sommersióne, a drowning, a plunging, a ducking or sinking vnder water.

Sommerso, drowned, diued, ducked, plunged, sunke or ouerwhelmed vnder water.

Somméssa, the measure of a spanne or hand-breadth, Our Drapers of London call it a hand-shaft or shafts-man. Also an vnder garment.

Sommessaménte, submissiuely, humbly, lowly, mildely, basely, abiectly.

Sommessióne, submission, submissiuenesse, demissenesse, abiectnesse, lowlinesse, faintnesse, humilitie, obedience, awefulnesse.

Sommésso, submitted, subdued, brought vnder or in subiection. Also submisse, submissiue, humble, demisse, abiect, base-minded, lowely, milde, meeke. Also low or base in voice. Also a heape, a lumpe or masse of any thing close compact together. Vsed also for Somméssa.

Sommettére, métto, mísi, mésso, to submit, to subiect, to subdue, to bring or put vnder.

Somméuole, that may be summed together.

Somministráre, to minister vnto, to supply, to finde or deliuer what is asked. Also to doe seruice vnto or vnder.

Somministratióne, a subministration, a supply, an vnder-seruice or helpe at a pinch.

Somministratóre, an vnder-seruant, one that ministreth & supplieth what is wanting.

Sommissimaménte, submissiuely, abiectly.

Sommíssimo, most chiefe aboue others.

Sommissióne, as Sommessióne.

Sommissíuo, submissiue, humble, demisse

Sommísta, a summer, a caster of accompts. Also a Summísta.

Sommità, the vtmost top or tip or height of any thing.

Sómmo, highest, vtmost, so much as more cannot be, chiefest, aboue all, soueraigne, beyond compare. Also the top or height of any thing. Also a kind of great weight in Italie. Also a kind of coine. 



Sómmo béne, the chiefest good or highest felicitie of man.

Sommoltiplicáre, to multiply vnto the highest that may be.

Sommoltíplice, full of highest multiplication.

Sommosciente, high, chiefe, or all knowing.

Sommóssa, an vprore or sedition, A sommóssa, at the instigation or stirring vp.

Sommósso, stirred vp from vnder, remooued, laid aside, or taken from vnder. Vsed also for moouing or perswasion vnto, in stance or incitation.

Sommotióne, an vprore, a sedition, a commotion or stirring vp.

Sommóuere, móuo, móssi, mósso, to stirre vp or remooue from vnder, to lay aside, to take away or from vnder, to remooue farre off, to driue out of place. Also to perswade, to induce or encite vnto.

Sommotonánte, high, or chiefe thundring.

Sommouedente, high, chiefe or all seeing.

Sommouitóre, a stirrer vp or remoouer from vnder. Looke Sommóuere.

Sommozzáre, as Sommergere, but properly when a horse doth thrust downe his head at the stop or in any other action of riding.

Sómpho, a kind of wild gourd, hollow and emptie growing among rockes.

Sonábile, that may be rung, sounded or plaied vpon, that soundeth or ringeth shrill.

Sonacchiáre, to slumber or be drouzie.

Sonacchióne, a sluggard, a heauie, a drouzie or lumpish fellow, a slug-abed.

Sonacchióso, drouzie, slumbry, sleepie, sluggish, lumpish, heauie and dull.

Sonágli, little Hawkes bells, or such as Morice-dancers vse. Vsed also for a mans stones. Also bubbles in the water.

Sonáglia, a Serpent in India which going maketh a iangling as if it were of bells.

Sonagliáre, to iangle as little bells. Also to bubble.

Sonagliéra, a set of bells as Morice-dancers vse. Vsed also for a mans cods.

Sonagliétti, little bells for Hawkes, or about Dogs necks. Also childrens rattles.

Sonáglio, a Hawkes bell. Also a childes rattle. Also a bubble in the water.

Sonánte, ringing or sounding.

Sonánza, a sound, a resounding, a ringing.

Sonáre, to sound, to resound, to make a noise, to rustle, to ring bells, to strike vp a drum, to winde a borne, to sound a trumpet, to play on instruments.

Sonáre a capítolo, to ring in for all the people to meet together.

Sonáre a festa, to ring for an holy-day.

Sonare a martello, to ring the bells backward in time of danger.

Sonáre a raccólta, to sound a retreat.

Sonáre colbastóne, to ribbaste or bang and swadle with a cudgell.

Sonáre di córno, to blow or winde a horne or bugle.

Sonáre di laúto, to play vpon a Lute.

Sonáré d'instruménto, to play on instruments.

Sonáre di tambúro, to sound or dub a Drum.

Sonáre il córno, to winde a horne, to blow a horne or bugle.

Sonáre la trombétta, to sound a Trumpet.

Sonáre le campáne, to ring the bells.

Sonáre raccólta, to sound a retreat.

Sonáta, a sounding, a ringing.

Sonatiuo, that soundeth or may sound.

Sonáto, sounded, resounded, rung.

Sonatóre, a sounder, a plaier on instruments, a minstrell, a fidler, a musicion.

Sóncene, for Ce ne sóno, they are, of them, there are some.

Sonchíte, a kind of Hawkeweede.

Sóni, there are. Also are there?

Sónco, the weed Sowthistle.

Sonettáre, to compose or sing Sonnets.

Sonettiere, a composer or singer of Sonnets.

Sonétto, a Sonnet, a Canzonet, a Song.

Sonettúccio, poore sillie Sonnets.

Sonéuole, that yeeldeth or may sound.

Sonfóni, a kind of wilde gourde.

Sóngia, sewet, seame, lard or grease of Hogs.

Songiáre, to tallow, to grease or larde.

Songioso, fattie, greasie, tallowish.

Soniólo, vsed for a low-bell.

Sonitáre, to sound, to rustle, to bluster, to make a rearing sound.

Sónito, a sound, a rustling, a roaring noise, a blustring, a clattring, a clash.

Sonnacchiáre, to slumber or be drouzie.

Sonnacchiosità, as Sonnolenza.

Sonnacchióso, as Sonacchióso.

Sónne, for Io ne sò, I wot thereof.

Sonneggiáre, as Sonnacchiáre.

Sonnegliáre, as Sonnacchiáre.

Sonneglienza, as Sonnolenza.

Sonneglióso, as Sonnacchióso.

Sonniferáre, as Sonnacchiáre.

Sonnífero, sleepe-bringing or causing.

Sonnificáre, as Sonnacchiáre.

Sonnifúga, sleepe-driuing or flying.

Sónno, sleepe, slumber, a nap of sleepe. Vsed also for night, rest, quietnesse or calmenesse. Also for Sóno, they are.

Sonnocchióso, as Sonacchióso.

Sonnolente, as Sonnacchióso.

Sonnolenza, slumber, sleepe, drouzinesse.

Sonnóso, sleepie, full of sleepe.

Sóno, as Suóno.

Sóno, I am. Also they are, of the verbe E'ssere.

Sóno andáto, I haue gone.

Sonocchiáre, as Sonacchiáre.

Sonocchióso, as Sonacchioso.

Sónomólt'ánni, many yeeres are.

Sonopiù dì, many daies are.

Sonorità, shrilnesse, cleare resounding.

Sonóro, shrill, loud, cleare resounding.

Sonphóni, as Sonfóni.

Sónsi, for Si sóno, or Sonosi.

Sontico, noisome, hurtfull. Also a kind of rot or infection among cattle.

Sóntico mórbo, a continuall and extreame sicknesse hanging long on a man, ending within no certaine time.

Sontuosità, sumptuousnesse, statelinesse, costlinesse, prodigalitie, profusenesse.

Sóntuóso, sumptuous, stately, costly, profuse, or prodigall spending.

Sónui, for Visóno, there are.

Sopálco, an vnder-loft, or sellar, or seeling. Also an vnder-stage.

Sopánno, closely, vnder ones clothes. Also vnder-hand, or vnder-boord.

Sopáno, as Sopánno.

Soperchiare, to vanquish or ouercome with superfluitie, to outgoe, to exceede. Also to insult vpon, to abuse or offer wrong with odds or aduantage, as to take one pissing against a wall, or being armed and well accompanied to set vpon one that is alone and vnarmed.

Soperchiaría, an affront, an insult, a superchierie, or wrong offred with ods and aduantage. Looke Soperchiáre.

Soperchiatóre, one that affronteth, insulteth vpon, or wrongeth a man vpon odds and aduantage.

Soperchiatúra, as Soperchiaría.

Soperchiería, as Sopercharía.

Soperchiéuole, superfluous. Also that may be exceeded and insulted vpon. Also iniurious and outragious, or offring wrong vpon ods and aduantage. Also that may be wronged, insulted, or set vpon with odds and aduantage.

Soperchio, superfluous, ouermuch, more than needes.

Soperchieuolménte, superfluously. Also insultingly, and with Superchiería.

Soperchióso, as Superchieuole.

Soperstitióne, as Superstitióne.

Soperstitióso, as Superstitióso.

Sophéna, a great veine in the foote.

Sophía, wisedome or sapience. Also flaxwort, or laske-wort, or stixweede.

Sophísma, a fallacie in disputation, a true seeming argument or sillogisme, a cauill or sophistication, a sentence seeming true, but false in deede. 



Sophismatizzáre, to entrap by fallacies or seeming arguments.

Sophísta, a sophister, or subile disputer, a professor of Philosophie for lucre and vaine-glorie, a deceiuer vnder an eloquent or craftie speaking.

Sophisticáre, to sophistuate, to argue subtlie, to adulterate, to deceiue.

Sophisticaríe, sophistications, sophistries, deceitfull or fallacious speeches.

Sophisticatióne, a sophistication, an adulterating, a counterfeiling.

Sophístico, sophisticall, fallacious, deceitfull, adulterating.

Sophóffo, wise, prudent, sage.

Sophróne, a temperate person.

Sophronistén, the two teeth which grow last when a man is about twentie yeares ould, big-teeth.

Sophronísti, certaine Magistrates among the Athenians.

Sphrosína, vertue or temperance, brideling of carnall appetites and lust.

Sópi, a kind of great cuttlefish. Also night-birds.

Sopíre, pisco, píto, to still, to whosht, to appease, to set at rest, or bring a sleepe.

Sopíto, appeased, stilled, whosht, set at rest, brought or lulled a sleepe.

Soporáre, to induce or bring a sleepe.

Sopóre, a dead swoune in all sences, a deepe sleepe. Also the drouzie sicknesse.

Soporíferabeuánda, a sleepie procuring, or deading potion or drinke.

Sopozzáre, to duck or diue vnder water. Also to vnderwell. Also as Sommergere.

Sóppa, any kind of sop, brewesse, or toste in drinke. Also broth with sippets in it.

Soppalcáre, to vnder-roofe, to vnderloft.

Soppálco, as Sopálco, an vnder-loft or roofe.

Soppánno, as Sopánno, nakedly.

Soppáre, to sop, to steepe, or lay in sops.

Soppediáno, as Soppidiáno.

Soppediménto, as Suphménto.

Soppchire, as Sepelíre, to burte.

Sopperiménto, as Suppliménto.

Sopperíre, rísco, rito, as Suplíre.

Soppento, as Suplíto.

Soppestáre, to bruze as grosse pepper.

Soppésto, halfe-bruzed, or punned.

Soppiantáre, to vnderplant, or vnderset a thing bending to the ground, as trees, vines, or hops. Also to supplant.

Soppiáre, as Soffiáre.

Soppiatóne, a huff-snuff, a puffing fellow, a puffer, a huffer, a snuffer, a blower, a purcie or broken-winded iade. Also a close, slie, secret, sneaking or lurking companion. Also a clap, a cuff or whirret on the eare with the flat of the hand or any thing else.

Soppiattáre, to squat, to lurke, to lord, or lye downe close and as flat as a dish.

Soppiátto, squatting, close, slye, lurking, secret, as to were vnder a dish.

Soppidiáno, a settle by a beds side. Also a presse for clothes close to a wall. Vsid also for a trunke, coffine, or chest for clothes.

Sópplica, as Súplica.

Sopplicánte, as Suplicánte.

Sopplicáre, as Suplicáre.

Sopplicatione, as Suphcatióne.

Sopplichéuole, as Suphcheuole.

Soppliménto, as Suplimento.

Sopplire, as Suplire.

Sopplita, a supplie, a help at a pinch.

Soppólto, buried vnder ground.

Sopp Itúra, a sepulture, a buriall.

Soppónere, as Sottopórre.

Soppórre, as Sorropórre. Also to suppose, to imagine, or bethinke.

Sopportábile, tollerable, supportable.

Sopportánza, as Sopporcatióne.

Sopportáre, to support, to vnder beare, to tollerate, to beare and indure.

Sopportatióne, tolleration, vnderbearing, suffrance, supportation.

Sopportéuole, that may be borne or suffred.

Soppórtico, an vnderporch, a houell, a shed.

Soppósta, an vnderputting or setting. Also an vndergarment. Also a pessarie or suppositorie. Also a poultise or plaister for a horse.

Soppósto, as Sottopósto. Also supposed.

Soppozzáre, as Sopozzáre.

Sopprendere, as Sopraprendere.

Soppréso, surprised, ouertaken.

Soppressa, prest vnder. Also an vnderpresse. Also a presse for clothes. Also a cheese-presse. Also a Pillorie. Also a ducking stoole.

Soppresláda, a kind of pressed meate.

Soppressáre, to suppresse, to keepe downe or vnder, to presse downe. Also to keep secret or in silence. Also to stifle, to smother, or suffocate. Also to presse clothes.

Soppressione, a suppression, a suppressing, a keeping downe, a pressing vnder.

Soppressióne nottúrna, the night-mare.

Soppresso, suppressed, kept downe or vnder, pressed downe. Also kept secret or in silence. Also stifled, smothred, suffocated. Also vnderprinted.

Soppressóre, a suppressor.

Sopprímere, prímo, priméi, primúto, as Soppressáre.

Soppríso, as Soppresso, compressed or suppressed. Also condensed or crudded.

Sópra, aboue, ouer, on, vp, vpon, aloft, on high, sur or supar in composition of other words. Also ouer and aboue. Also moreouer and besides. Also as Soura.

Soprabenda, an vpper scarfe.

Soprabendare, to scarfe ouer.

Soprabéuere, to ouerdrinke.

Soprabondánre, superabundant, ouerplentifull.

Soprabondánza, superabundance, ouerplentie.

Soprabondáre, to superqbound, to ouerexceede, to leaue ouerplus.

Soprabondéuole, as Soprabondánte.

Sopracápi, reaching fetches, tricks beyond the Moone, farfetcht deuises.

Sopracápo, a chiefe officer, one thiefe aboue the rest, any thing ouer the head.

Sopracaricáre, to surcharge, to ouerburden.

Sopracárico, surcharged. Also a surcharge.

Sopracastáldo, a chiefe bailiefe or Ouerseer. Also a certaine Maiestrate in Venice.

Sopraccedenza, an ouer-exceeding.

Sopraccedcre, to ouer-exceed.

Sopraccelente, super-excellent.

Sopraceleste, super-celestiall, more then heauenly.

Sopracennáto, aboue touched mentioned or glanced at.

Sopra che, whereupon, vpon which.

Sopracíbo, any meat besides ordinary meat and drinke, aboue food.

Sopracielo, a canapy, a cloth of state. Also a testern for a bed. Also an vpper roofe or seeling. Also a kind of fish.

Sopracíglio, the eie-browes of any creature. Also a window in the roofe of a house.

Sopracíglio D'vn mónte, the knop of a hill.

Sopracínghia, a surcingle or long guirt.

Sepracinghiáre, to sursingle, to ouer-guirt.

Sopracígna, as Sopracínghia.

Sopracígnere, as Sopracinghiáre.

Sopracinto, sursingled, ouer-guirt.

Sopracómito, a master. Also a masters mate or boatson of a ship.

Sopracórrere, córro, córsi, córso, to ouerrun.

Sopradátio, the name of a Magistrate in Venice ouer Custome and Custome-houses.

Sopradétto, aboue said, aboue named, foresaid, forealleaged.

Sopra di chè, whereupon.

Sopradíre, to aboue-say, to aboue mention, to say more ouer, to adde in words or speech.

Sopradonáre, to ouer giue, to giue ouer and aboue the price. 



Sopradossáre, to surcharge, to ouerloade, to lay on more then one is able to beare.

Sopradóte, an increase giuen aboue any dowry promised.

Sopradúrre, dúco, dússi, dútto, to bring more ouer and aboue what is brought.

Sopraessaltáre, to ouer-exalt.

Sopraessaltatióne, super-exaltation.

Sopraessere, soprasóno, fúi, státo, to be ouer or vpon. Also to be superfluous or more then enough. Also to remaine and suruiue others.

Sópra ésso nói, aboue vs.

Soprafabricáre, to ouer build, to build, or frame ouer and vpon.

Soprafáre, to ouer doe, to exceed. Also to insult vpon or ouercome with wrong.

Soprafátto, ouerdone, exceeded, ouercome. Also insulted vpon.

Soprafódro, an vpper or false scabberd.

Soprafusióne, as Embrocatióne.

Sopragettáre, to ouercast or throw.

Sopragítto, any ouer cast worke.

Sopragiudicáre, to ouer iudge or doome, to giue sentence aboue others.

Sopragiudítio, an ouer iudgement.

Sopragiúgnere, as Sopragiúngere.

Sopragiúngere, giúngo, giúnsi, giúnto, to ouertake by the way, to goe beyond one, to come ouer one. Also to arriue or come to any place on a sudden. Also to adde or reply or answer more ouer. Also to adde more ouer.

Sopragiúnta, an ouer taking by the way, a going ouer or beyond one. Also an addition or vantage ouer and besides any bargaine.

Sopragiúnto, ouertaken on the way, gone beyond one. Also come vpon or arriued to a place by chance. Also added more ouer. Also replied and answered more ouer.

Soprahumáno, aboue or more then humane, supernaturall.

Sopraguardiáno, a chiefe Ouerseer.

Sopra il pregio, aboue the price.

Soppraindúrre, dúco, dússi, dútto, to super-induce.

Soprainségna, an vpward or outward signe, token, ensigne or garment. Also a superscription.

Sopraintendente, a super intendent, an ouerseer, a surueigher, a Controuler.

Sopraintendenza, superintendency, ouerseeing, surueighing.

Sopraintéso, aboue vnderstood, ouer vnderstood.

Sopr'l, for Sóprail, vpon or ouer the.

Sopraletto, a testerne of a bed, a canapy or any thing ouer a bed.

Sopraligáre, to bind ouer or vpon. 

Sopralimináre, a transeme, a lintell, a hanse, a sill or threshold of a doore or entrance.

Soprálto, highest, or high aboue others. Also a chiefe treble in musike.

Sopramangiáre, to ouer-eat.

Sopramáno, ouer hand, aboue hand. Also a blow giuen aboue hand.

Sopramassáro, an ouerseer in a Noblemans house, a Bailife in houshold.

Sopramercáto, aduantage giuen in buying and selling aboue the bargaine.

Sopraméssa, any vpper garment.

Sopramésso, ouerlaid, put or set vpon.

Sopraméttere, métto, mísi, mésso, to ouerlay, to put or set vpon.

Sopraminente, ouer-eminent.

Sopraminenza, ouer-eminencie.

Sopramódo, aboue meane or measure.

Sopramontáre, to surmount.

Sopramúro, an vpper wall.

Soprána, any vpper garment, sauegard or kirtle. Also the treble string of any instrument.

Sopranascenza, an ouer-birth.

Sopranáscere, to be borne ouer.

Sopranasciménto, an ouer-birth.

Sopranatáre, to ouer-swim, to swim ouer.

Sopranáto, ouer-borne or growen.

Sopranaturále, supernaturall.

Soprandáre, uádo, andái, andáto, to ouergoe, to out-goe, to goe ouer or beyond.

Sopranità, soueraigntie, supremacie, dominion, superioritie.

Soprannáto, ouer-yeared, out-worne with yeeres.

Sopráno, soueraigne, supreame, chiefe. Also the treble voice or string.

Sopranomáre, to surname, to nickname.

Sopranóme, a surname, a by or nickname.

Sopranominánza, a surnaming.

Sopranomináre, to surname.

Sopranominatióne, a surnaming.

Sopranomináto, surnamed.

Sopranumeráre, to ouer-tell or number.

Sopranumerário, any thing aboue number.

Sopranuotáre, to ouer-swim.

Sópra ógna cósa, aboue all things.

Soprapagaménto, an ouer-payment.

Soprapagáre, to ouer-pay.

Soprapagáto, ouer-paid, surpaid.

Soprapartitóri, the chiefe feathers of a Hawke or Faulcon.

Soprapásto, any last dish or seruice, as cheese and fruit or any desert.

Soprapendente, hanging ouer.

Soprapendere, to hang ouer or vpon.

Soprapéso, hanged ouer. Also ouerweight, or more than weight or measure. 

Soprapigliáre, as Sopraprendere.

Soprapiù, moreouer. Also an ouerplus.

Sopraponiménto, a laying, a putting or setting ouer or aboue.

Soprapónti, broad plankes to couer or make bridges. Also a kind of stitch so called of Seamsters.

Soprapórre, póngo, pósi, pósto, to lay, set or put ouer, vpon or aboue, to ouerlay.

Soprapósta, as Sourapósta.

Soprapósto, laid, set, or put ouer, vpon or aboue, ouer-laid.

Soprapregiáre, to ouer-prize or value.

Sopraprendere, to surprize, to ouertake.

Sopraprendiménto, an ouertaking, a surprising.

Soprapréso, surprised, ouertaken.

Sopraraccontáto, aboue-said or recounted.

Sopráre, as Superáre, to ouercome.

Soprareggere, to ouer-rule, to ouersway.

Sopráto, ouercome, as Superáto.

Sopraretto, ouer-ruled, ouer-swaied.

Sopraríccio, pile vpon pile, the richest Veluet or cloth of Tissue that is.

Soprariuáre, to arriue in the nicke. Also to ouertake.

Soprárma, an vpper Armour.

Soprarmáre, to arme ouer or vpon.

Soprarogáre, as Superarogáre.

Soprarogatióne, as Superarogatióne.

Soprasagliente, assaulting aboue or ouer others.

Soprasalíre, to surmount, or ouer-ascend.

Soprasalíto, surmounted, ouer-ascended.

Soprasaltáre, to ouerleape.

Soprasálto, an ouer-leape. Also a sursault.

Soprasapére, to ouer-know, to know more then needs, to be ouer-wise.

Soprasapientia, ouer-wisedome.

Soprasbergo, as Soprausbergo.

Soprascrítta, a superscription.

Soprascrittióne, a superscription.

Soprascrítto, aboue-written, written ouer.

Soprascríuere, to write ouer or vpon.

Sópra sè, vpon himselfe, musingly.

Soprasedenza, a supersedies, a sitting vpon, a delay, or demurre in Law.

Soprasedére, to sit vpon, ouer or aboue, to supersede. Also to stay, to muse or demurre vpon. Also to leaue off, to cease, to ommit or leaue off to doe a thing.

Soprasédie, as Soprasedenza.

Soprasedúto, sitten vpon, ouer or aboue. Also staied, mused or demurred vpon. Also teased or left off to doe a thing.

Sopraségna, as Sopra inségna.



Soprasegnále, as Soprainségna.

Soprasegnáre, to marke ouer.

Soprasella, a false couer of a sadle, a sursadle, any loading about the sadle.

Soprasello, an ouerlading of ones heart.

Sópra se stáre, a man to stand doubtfull or musing with himselfe.

Soprasóma, a surcharge, an ouer-burden.

Soprasostantióle, supersubstantiall.

Soprasostantialità, supersubstantiality.

Sopraspálle, a hood ouer ones shoulders.

Sopraspóglia, any vpper spoile.

Soprastánte, a superintendent, a chiefe ouerseer, a surueyer, a controule.

Soprastánte, eminent, apparant, as it were hanging ouer ones head.

Soprastánte dell'auéna, an Auener of a Noble-mans seuerie or stable.

Soprastánte del piátto, a Sewer or ouer-seer of messes or meat in a Noblemans house.

Soprastánre di cámera, a Gentleman-vsher of a Priuie-chamber.

Soprastánza, an vpper-lodging. Also eminencie ouer ones head, a superintendencie.

Soprastáre, to stand vpon, ouer or aboue. Also to exceede, to excell, to surpasse. Also to be eminent as it were hanging ouer ones head. Also as Soprasodére.

Soprastimáre, to ouer-value or esteeme.

Soprastráre, to couer or ouercast with parget. Also to fret any roofe or seeling.

Sopratenente, holding ouer. Also an ouer-holder.

Sopratenére, tengo, tenni, tenúto, to hold ouer or vpon. Also to hold of or in delay, to keepe in doubt or in suspence.

Sópra-teniménto, as Sopra-tiéni.

Sopratenitóre, an ouer-holder, a keeper in delay or suspence.

Sópra terra, aboue land, vpon earth.

Sopratiéni, sost, a delay, a demurre, a stay, a putting off of time. Also a holding ouer.

Sopratitoláre, to surname, to surtitle.

Sopratócco, aboue-touched, aboue mentioned.

Sópra tútti, aboue all.

Sopratútto, aboue all, chiefly, especially.

Soprauagáre, to wander more then needeth, to extend or grow abrode superfluously, and in trees or vines to haue greater boughes then needeth.

Soprauanzáre, to superaduance. Also to leaue ouerplus, to haue to spare.

Sopranánzo, any ouerplus.

Soprauàso, an vpper vessell, or vpper cace.

Soprauedére, to ouersee, to ouerlooke, to oueruiew, to ouerpeere, to see ouer.

Soprauediménto, ouerseeing, viewing, looking or peering, ouersight, or surueighing.

Sopraued tóre, an ouerseer, viewer, or looker, a suruaier, a controuler.

Soprauedúto, ouerseene, viewed, or looked, suruaid. Also warie and circumspect.

Soprauegnente, comming vpon or ouer. Also at hand or eminent, or succeeding neere.

Sopraueniménto, a comming to passe, or arriuing at hand vnlooked for.

Sopraueníre, vengo, venni, venúto, as Sopragiúngere. Also to ouercome. Also to come vpon or ouer on a suddaine, or vnlooked for.

Soprauento, a Mariners phrase, that is, to haue the wind and weather of one, to haue one vnder the lee.

Soprauenúra, as Sopraueniménto.

Soprauenúto, as Sopragiúnto, ouercome. Looke Sopraueníre.

Sopraueste, any kinde of vpper garment.

Soprauestíre, to cloth ouer.

Soprauestíco, ouerclad, as Sopraueste.

Soprauì, thereupon, ouerthere.

Soprauía, an vpper way. Also aboue hand. Also besides or ouer and aboue.

Soprauíuere, to suruiue, to ouerliue.

Soprauíuo, the hearbe Euergreene.

Soprauoláre, to ouerflie, to flie ouer.

Soprauolére, to ouer-will, to will more then one should.

Soprauóluere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, to roule, to reuolue, or turne ouer and ouer.

Soprausánza, as Sopraúso.

Soprausáre, to oueruse. Also to misuse, or abuse.

Sopraúso, aboue vse, beyond custome.

Sópre, as Sópra, ouer, vpon, aboue.

Sopremaménte, supremely, chiefly.

Sopreminente, ouereminent.

Sopreminenza, ouer eminencie.

Sopresciáre, as Soppressáre.

Sopressa, rinnet to crud milke withall.

Sopressáre, to presse vnder, to suppresse.

Sopressáto, a kind of drye meate.

Sopressióne, as Soppressióne.

Sopresso, as Soppresso, suppressed. Also as Sopraésso, vpon himselfe, or it.

Soprímere, as Soppressáre.

Soprósso, a knuckle bone, a bone further out then the flesh. Also a disease in a Horse called a ring-bone.

Soprossúto, ouer-boned, whose bones grow ouer his flesh.

Soprúsi, as Bischénchi.

Sor, in composition vsed for Sópra, as we say Sur, as Sormontáre, to surmount.

Sóra, as Suóra, a Sister.

Soracchiáre, to play the Sister. Also to straine for to spit or spaule.

Soráglio, a marke of the feathers vpon the breast, whereby a long winged Hawks is knowne from a shortwinged.

Soráre, to soare in the ayre, or houer as a Hawke. Also to exhale or breathe out. Also to make hollow or voide. Also to play the mocking foole. Also as Soiáre.

Sórba, vale percóssa, o bastonáta.

Sorbelle, the fruite Saruice-berie.

Sorbétto, a kind of drinke vsed in Turkie made of water and iuice of Limonds, Sugar, Amber, and Muske, very costly and delicats. Also any kind of thin supping broth.

Sórbibruódo, a swiller or sipper of broth, a greasie slouenlie feeder.

Sorbíle, that may be sipped vp as an egge.

Sorbilláre, to sip vp as an egge.

Sorbíllomgraphtóne, a nickname for a filthy great slouen.

Sorbína, a kind of Plum graffed vpon a Seruice-tree.

Sorbíre, bísco, bíto, to soope or sip vp any thing as an egge or broth. Also to receiue in or swallow vp.

Sorbíta, a sooping or sipping vp.

Sorbitello, a little sip or sooping draught.

Sorbítico, soure, sharpe, or tarte in taste.

Sorbitióne, a sooping or sipping vp.

Sorbíto, sipped, sooped or swallowed vp.

Sorbitóre, a sipper, a sooper, a swallower.

Sórbo, a soope, a sip or draught of drinke or pottage. Also a Seruice-tree. Also soure or sharpe in taste as any vnripe fruit is.

Sórbola, a Seruice or Seruice-berry.

Sórca, a great shee Rat or Mouse.

Sórce, a Mouse. Also a kind of fish.

Sorcéra, a Mouse-trap.

Sorcéro, a Mouse or Rat-catcher.

Sorcétto, a little Mouse.

Sorciéra, a Mouse-trap.

Sorciéro, a Mouse or Rat-catcher.

Soroiétto, a little Mouse.

Sorcígno, a Mouse dun colour of a horse.

Sórcio, a Mouse or Rat. Also a kind of fish.

Sorcióne, a great Mouse or Rat.

Sórco, a Mouse or Rat. Also the eddy of a streame, a whirle-poole. Also a bubling of the water.

Sorcótta, any vpper coate, frocke or cassocke.

Sordággine, thicknesse of hearing, deafnesse.

Sordaggióne, as Sordággine.

Sordaménte, deafly, silently.

Sordástro, somewhat thicke of hearing. 



Sordetà, deafenesse or thicknesse of hearing.

Sordétto, somewhat deafe of hearing.

Sordidaménte, filthily, sluttishly, vncleanly. Looke Sotdità.

Sordidáre, as Sordidíre.

Sordidézza, as Sordità.

Sordídíre, dísco, díco, to become or make filthy, foule, sluttish or vncleane.

Sórdido, absurd, foule, filth, vncleane, slouenly, beraied, corrupt, beastly, sluttish, vile, vnhonest. Also a niggard, a mizer, a pinch-penny, a chuffe.

Sordiménto, a deafnesse in hearing.

Sordína, a surdine to put in a trumpet to make it sound low.

Sordíre, to make or become deafe, as Assordíre.

Sordità, absurdnesse, filthinesse, slutishnesse, vncleannesse, slouenlinesse, beastlinesse, corruption. Also the sweepings of houses, sinkes or chanels. Also the sinke of a City, the scum of the earth. Also the dregs of people, and vile sort of men and women. Also auarice, niggardlinesse. Also corruption by bribes. Also deafnesse or thicknesse of hearing.

Sordíto, deafned or made deafe.

Sórdo, deafe, that cannot heare, thicke of hearing.

Sorella, a sister. Also a Nun.

Sorellánza, sister-hood.

Sorelleggiáre, to act the quality of a sister.

Sorelléuole, sisterly, like a sister.

Sorellína, a little sister or Nun.

Sorellíssima, a most sister.

Sorellità, sister-hood.

Sórge, a Mouse or Rat. Also hee riseth.

Sorgente, rising vp, growing vp.

Sorgéra, a Mouse-trap.

Sórgere, sórgo, sórsi, sorgiúto, or sórto, to arise, to rise vp, to grow or spring vp. Also to surge, to purle, to bubble or spring vp as water doeth. Also to mount vp or billow as the surges of the sea. Also to ride at anchor as a ship, as Súrgere.

Sorgétto, a little Movse or Rat.

Sorgéuole, surging, mounting, or rising vp.

Sorgiéra, a Mouse-trap.

Sórgij, all maner of Mise or Rats.

Sorgiménto, arising, a mounting or sourging vp.

Sórgio, a Mouse or Rat.

Sorgióne, a great Mouse or Rat.

Sorgióngere, to arriue or come vpon suddainly or vnlooked for.

Sorgiónta, a suddaine arriuall or comming to passe.

Sorgiónto, arriued or come vpon, as it were vnexpected.

Sorgitóre, a riser. Also a rising of an hil, a promontory, an high ascent, as Surgitóre.

Sorgitório, as Surgitório, an anckring or riding place for ships.

Sorgíuo, as Sortíuo. Also a surge, a bubble, or purling of a spring or fountaine.

Sorgiúto, surged, risen, growne or sprung vp. Also purled or bubled vp as water out of a spring. Also ridden at ancher as a ship.

Sórgo, a Mouse. Also the graine Mill, Millet or Turkie hirse.

Sorgozzáre, to thump or whirret with ones fistes.

Sóriózzo, as Sorgozzóne.

Sorgozzóne, a thump, a clap, a whirret, a cuffe, or punch giuen with ones fist, supposed to be giuen vnder ones chin or vnder the eare.

Sóri, duskish or ash-colour Copperesse. Also a Veine or Minerall. Also a kind of fish.

Soriáno, a Mouse or Rat-catcher.

Soriánti, sworne breathren.

Soricária, the hearbe Mouse-eare.

Soriceo, pertayning to a Mouse or Rat.

Soriculáta veste, a garment of many colours or changeable silke.

Sorígo, a Mouse or Rat.

Soríssa, a shee Mouse or Rat.

Sorísso, a hee Mouse or Rat.

Soríre, a kinde of subtle argument that proceedeth by diuers probations, and after many arguments is at last concluded of the first and last.

Sormontánte, surmounting, excelling.

Sormontánza, a surmounting, an excelling.

Sormontáre, to surmount, to excell.

Sormontéuole, that may be surmounted or excelled.

Sornaccáre, to throbe, to sob or grone.

Sornacchiáre, to spaule, to spet or spue with straining.

Sornácchio, a spauling or spetting.

Sornacchióso, full of spauling and spetting.

Sornácco, a throb, a sob.

Sornomáre, to surname, to nickename.

Sornóme, a surname, a nicke name.

Sornuotáre, to ouerswim.

Sóro, the first downe or haire that appeares in a yongue mans face. Also a yongue lad that begins to haue haires on his chin. Also a foolish gull, a shallowpate, a Dottrell. Also a kind of tree like a Chessenut-tree. Also a Sorehawke.

Sorócchia, a Sister. Also a Nun.

Soróre, a Sister. Also a Nun.

Sororicída, a Sister-slaier. 

Sororicídio, a slaughter of a Sister.

Sororità, Sister-hood.

Sorpassáre, to surpasse, to excell.

Sorpiù, a surplus. Also moreouer.

Sorprendere, as Sopraprendere.

Sorprendiménto, a surprising.

Sorprésa, a surprise, a surprisall.

Sorpréso, surprised, as Soprapréso.

Sórra, a fish like flesh called Tunny. Also a kind of meat made of it.

Sorraticciaménte, craftily, vnderhand, by stealth, lurkingly.

Sorratíccio, as Sorraticciaménte.

Sorrento, a kind of Veale so called in Italie.

Sorrídere, rído, rísi, ríso, to smile, to leere, to simper, to laugh priuily.

Sorridiménto, a smiling, a leering, a simpring, a priuie laughing.

Sorrípere, rípo, ripéi, ripúto, to deceiue or cozin by some subtle wile or deceit.

Sorripiménto, a cozening or deceiuing by some craftie wile.

Sorríso, smiled, leered, simpred. Also a smile, a leering or priuie laughing.

Sorrogáre, to place or institute in the place of another.

Sorrogatióne, a placing in the place of another.

Sorsáta, as Sórso.

Sorseggiáre, to sip by small draughts.

Sórso, a draught, a soope, a sip, a whiff, or sipping draught.

Sórte, chance, hap, fate, lot, fortune, lucke, destinie, hazard, casualitie. Also the state, kind, qualitie, function, calling or condition of any man. Also a portion, lot or share of any thing or in an inheritance. Also an oracle or the roule wherein the answers of Idols were written.

Sortécchio, as Sortilegio.

Sorteggiáre, to chance, to cast or draw lots, to put it to fortune as lotteries are.

Sortéuole, sortable, that may sort or come to passe, chanceable.

Sortíbile, as Sortéuole.

Sortilegio, a diuination by lots or cuts.

Sortílego, a fortune-teller by lots.

Sortiménto, a casting of chance or lots, a chanting, an allotting, a sorting. Also a proouing, an issue or comming to passe or effect. Also a sallie or issuing out.

Sortíre, tísco, títo, to cast or chance by lots, to allot, to sort, to prooue or come to effect. Also to issue or come out.

Sortíta, as Sortiménto. Also an outrode, a sallie, an excursion, an euent.

Sortitaménte, by lots, hap, chance, fortune, lucke or hazard.

Sortitióne, as Sortíta, or Sortiménto.



Sortíto, sorted, allotted, chanced, cast lots, hapned. Also issued or come forth.

Sortitóio, a toole that Goldsmiths vse.

Sortíuo, out-going, out-gushing, out-running, out-flowing as a spring of water. Also that may sort or come to passe by lot, fortune, hap or chance.

Sórto, as Sorgiúto, as Súrto.

Sorueníre, as Sopragiúngere.

Soruenúto, as Sopragiúnto.

Soruoláre, to ouer-flie, to flie ouer.

Soruólo, a surflight, an ouer-flight.

Sórze, a Mouse or a Rat.

Sorzéra, a Mouse-trap.

Sosaméle, a kind of sugar simnell-bread.

Sosamína, a kind of oyle of Lillies.

Soscrítta, as Soscrittióne.

Soscrittióne, a subscription, an vnderwriting.

Soscrítto, subscribed, vnder-written.

Soscrittúra, as Soscrittióne.

Soscríuere, to subscribe, to write vnder.

Soserzáre, to sport, to play, to game, to pastime.

Soserzo, sport, recreation, pastime, play, gaming.

Sosína, a Sloe, a Skeg, a Bulleis.

Sosináro, a Sloe, a Skeg or Bulleis-tree.

Sosíno, as Sosináro.

Sosistente, subsisting.

Sosistenza, as Subsistenza.

Sosístere, as Subsístere.

Sóso, vsed of Dánte for Súso, vp.

Sospecciáre, as Sospettáre.

Sospcccióne, as Sospettióne.

Sospeccióso, as Sospettóso.

Sospendere, pendo, pendéi, péso, to hang vp or vnder. Also to suspend, to delay, to hang in doubt, to keepe in suspence.

Sospendéuole, that may be suspended. Also that may be hanged vp.

Sospendio, as Sospésa.

Sospensióne, as Sospésa.

Sospésa, a hanging vp or vnder. Also a suspence, a suspending or entermission of time, of doubt or delay.

Sospéso, hanged vp or vnder. Also suspended, delaied or kept in doubt.

Sospetióne, as Sospettatióne.

Sospettáre, to suspect, to mistrust, to doubt or misdemme, to coniecture. Also to looke or behold aboue. Also to looke downe or see beneath.

Sospettatióne, suspition, suspecting, suspect, mistrust, doubt, diffidence, feare.

Sospettéuole, suspectable, that may be suspected or mistrusted.

Sospettióne, as Sospettatióne.

Sospettíuo, to be feared or suspected.

Sospetto, as Sospettatióne. Also vsed for admiration or looking vp ward.

Sospettóso, suspicious, diffident, mistrustfull, full of suspition. 

Sospicáre, as Sospettáre.

Sospiciáre, as Sospettáre.

Sospicióso, as Sospettóso.

Sospicóso, as Sospettóso.

Sospignere, as Sospíngere.

Sospíngere, píngo, pínsi, pínto, to thrust on or push vnder, to vrge on, to enforce or compell vnto.

Sospingiménto, a thrusting on, a pushing or vrging forward, a compelling.

Sospínta, a push, a thrust, a forcing, an vrging or compelling.

Sospínto, thrust on, pushed forward, vrged vnto, compelled or induced.

Sospirándo, sighfull, to be sighed for. Also sighing for, or gasping.

Sospiráre, to sigh, to sob, to gasp, to draw a wearie breath.

Sospiréuole, sighfull, full of sighes.

Sospírio, panting of the heart, or shortnesse of breath.

Sospirióso, as Suspirióso.

Sospíro, a sigh, a sob, a gasp, a throb.

Sospiróso, sighfull, full of sighs, sobbing, gasping, drawing a wearie breath, short-winded, purcie, much-blowing.

Sospíta, she that giueth health.

Sospitále, that is cause of health, that driueth from danger.

Sospittióne, suspect, suspition, mistrust.

Sosseguente, subsequent, immediately following.

Sosseguenza, subsequence.

Sosseguíre, séguo, seguíto, to follow next.

Sossidiáre, as Sussidiáre.

Sossidiário, as Sussidiárij.

Sossídio, as Sussídio.

Sossiegáre, to stand vpon nice points of grauitie and ceremonies.

Sossiégo, ceremonious complements, nice obseruances, nice points of honour, or points of respect and behauiour, grauitie in manners.

Sossiegóso, full of ceremonious complements and grauitie.

Sossistente, subsisting, subsistent.

Sossistentia, as Subsistentia.

Sossístere, as Subsístere.

Sossópra, as Sottosópra.

Sósta, quiet, leasure, ease, or ceasing from labour. Also delay, lingring of time and loitring. Also the name of a saile in a ship.

Sostántia, substance or matter. Vsed also for riches, goods, wealth, or geare.

Sostantiále, substantiall, materiall.

Sostantialità, substantialitie.

Sostantiatióne, substantiation.

Sostantiéuole, substantiall.

Sostantísico, substance, working.

Sostantióso, substantiall, full of substance.

Sostantíuo, substanting, standing of it selfe. 

Sostáre, to stand vp or vnder, to sustaine, to subsist. Also to trifle away the time. Also to ease or cease from labour.

Sostáro, a sustainer of labour.

Sostégni, supporters in armorie.

Sostégno, a prop, a supporter, an vpholding, a stay, a tennon, a base, a shoare, a sustenance, or sustaining. Also help, fauour, or protection.

Sostenenza, sustaining, suffrance, vpholding, supporting.

Sostenére, tengo, tenni, tenúto, to sustaine, to vphold, to beare vp, to vnderprop, to support, to hold vp, to shoaue vp. Also to fauour, to backe, to countenance, to abet, to maintaine. Also to comfort or feede. Also to endure, to suffer, to beare or forbeare with patience. Also to support in armorie. Also to represent or beare the person of another. Also to imprison, or lay vp in hold.

Sosteniménto, an vpholding, an vnderpropping, a supporting, a shoauing vp. Looke Sostenére. Also sustentation, or sustenance and sustaining. Also help, fauour, or protection.

Sostenitóre, a sustainer, an vpholder, a maintainer. Looke Sostenére.

Sostenérsi, for a man to keepe, to abstaine or hold himselfe from doing.

Sostentácolo, that sustaineth or beareth vp. Looke Sostenére.

Sostentaménto, as Sosteniménto.

Sostentáre, as Sostenére.

Sostenratióne, as Sosteniménto.

Sostentatóre, as Sostenitóre.

Sosténto, as Sosteniménto.

Sostenúto., Looke Sostenére, vpheld.

Sosternáre, to subdue, to make all things inferior or subiect vnto. Also to strew, to lay or put vnder, or in the bottome. Also to yeeld or abandon himselft vnder or vnto.

Sostíllio, the dropping of raine from penthouses. Also a ryme or falling or drizling mist. Also the strangurie, which is, when one pisseth by drops, and with great paine.

Sostíllo, as Sostíllio.

Sostinenza, fast-standing, or constant abiding.

Sostituíre, ísco, íto, to substitute, to depute or delegate in ones place.

Sostituíto, substituted, appointed, or delegated for another. Also a substitute, a deputie, a delegate, a lieutenant.

Sostitutióne, a substitution, a delegation, a deputation in place of another.

Sostitúto, as Sostituíto.

Sostrárre, to substract, or draw from vnder.

Sostrattióne, a substraction.

Sostrátto, substracted. 



Sóstro, a reward giuen to him that doth one good. Also a Phisitians fee.

Sóta, vsed for sufferance or forberance.

Sotadéi, a kind of verses so called.

Sotéria, saluation or sauing health.

Sotéro, a sauiour, a health-bringer.

Sotiábile, sociable, that a man may keepe company or fellowship with.

Sotiabilità, as Sotialità.

Sotiále, sociall, of or belonging vnto society or fellowship.

Sotialità, fellowship, society.

Sotiáre, to associate, to accompany, to confederate in fellowship and society.

Sótrde, societies or confederacies.

Sotierà, society, fellowship.

Sotiéuole, as Sotiábile.

Sótio, a companion, a fellow, a mate, a complice, a partner, a confederate.

Sott'ácqua, vnder water. Also out of sight, secretly, in huger mugger.

Sottacquéo, of vnder water, that lieth breedeth or liueth vnder water.

Sottalpíno, of or vnder the Alpes.

Sottána, any vnder-garment as a wastcoate or a womans peticote. Also the string next to the meane string of an instrument.

Sottandáre, to goe vnder, to vndergoe.

Sottanella, any little vnder-garment, or thin peticote.

Sottaráre, to till or eare vnder ground.

Sottasc ltáre, to listen or harken vnder.

Sottécchij, as Sotto ócchij.

Sottegolanéo, a close and well ranmed pauement.

Sottendere, to extend vnder. Also to vnderbend.

Sottentráre, to enter, or goe vnder.

Sotteráneo, of vnder ground, that lieth, breedeth or liueth vnder ground.

Sotterfuggíre, fúggo, fuggíj, fuggíto, to auoide slily vnder hand, to escape away priuily, to winde ones necke out of the halter, to eschew from vnder.

Sotterfúgio, a subterfuge, a slie escape or auoiding of danger priuily.

Sotterra, vnder ground, vnder earth.

Sotterraménto, an enterring, a buriall.

Sotterráre, to enterre, to burry vnder earth.

Sotterratóre, a burier of the dead.

Sottésso, Sótto ésso, vnder him or it.

Sótti, for Tisò, I came to thee.

Sottigliáme, any manner of subilety or finenesse. Also small trifles, shreds or odde ends.

Sottigliáre, to make fine, thin, small, sharpe, keene, little or slender. Also to subtilize. Also to argue subtilely.

Sottigliézza, subtility, subtilnesse, finenesse, smalnesse, littlenesse, sharpenesse, slendernesse. Also slinesse or quicknesse of wit or aire.

Sottigliúmi, as Sottigliáme.

Sottile, subtill, subtle, fine, small, little, thin, slender, keene, sharpe. Also slie, wily, crafly, witty.

Sottíle dottóre, a crafty, a slie, a subtle Fox or Doctor.

Sottíle scamonéa, a skind of Seamonea.

Sottilíre, lísco, líto, as Sottigliáre.

Sottilità, as Sottigliézza.

Sottilizzáre, as Sottigliáre.

Sottilménte, subtilly, thinly, slenderly, mincingly. Also craftily or witily.

Sótto, vnder, vnderneath, beneath.

Sottoandáre, to vndergoe.

Sottoandáta, an vndergoing.

Sottoascóndere, to hide vnder.

Sottoascóso, hidden vnder.

Sotto cámera, an vnder-chamber.

Sottocameriére, an vnder-chamberlaine.

Sottocaricáre, to vnder-charge.

Sotto cárica, an vnder-charge.

Sottócchi, leering vnder the eies, prying vnder hand, vnder ones eies.

Sottoceleste, vnder-heauenly.

Sottocenturione, an vnder-captaine, a Lieutenant ouer a hundred.

Sottocielo, an vnder-roose or testerne. Also vnder heauen.

Sottocíngere, to vnder-guirt or single.

Sottocínghia, an vnder-guirt or single.

Sottocínto, vnder-guirt or cingled.

Sottocóda, a horses crupper.

Sotto colóre, vnder-colour.

Sottocómito, a Boteswaine in a ship.

Sottocoperta, an vnder couerlet.

Sottocuóco, an vnder or yeoman cooke.

Sottocuratióne, the charge or care of any thing vnder another.

Sottocuratóre, he that hath the care or charge of any thing vnder another.

Sottocustóde, an vnder keeper.

Sottocutanéo, any thing that is or lieth betweene the skin and the flesh.

Sottodelegáre, to vnder appoint, depute or delegate.

Sottodiácono, a Subdeane, a Subdeacon.

Sottodistendere, to spread vnder.

Sottodistintióne, a subdistinction.

Sottodiuídere, to subdiuide.

Sottodiuisióne, a subdiuision.

Sottoentráre, to subenter, to enter vnder.

Sottofíbulo, an vnder tache, claspe or buckle. Also a white, long and fouresquare ornament that vestall virgins were wont to weare on their heads.

Sott figúra, vnder colour.

Sottofuggíre, to fly, to escape or steale secretly from vnder.

Sottogiacére, to lie or be vnder. Also to be subiect vnto. Also to be situate at the foote.

Sottogiaciúto, laid or beene vnder, beene subiect vnto, situated as the foote.

Sottogiúgnere, to ad-vnder. Also to arriue or come vnder.

Sottogiúnto, vnder added. Also arriued or by chance come vnder.

Sottogiuraménto, vnder an oath.

Sottogola, a childs bib. Also a throate band or head-stall. Also a curbe.

Sottoguardáre, to garde vnder, to keepe vnder, to looke vnder.

Sottogárdia, vnder guard, keeping or custody.

Sottoguáttaro, an vnder scullion or Turne-spit of a kitching.

Sottohastáre, to sell any thing vnder a long pole or iauelin set vp as a marke in the open field, as they were went to doe in time of warre.

Sótto il sóle, vnder the sunne.

Sótto ingánno, vnder deceit.

Sótto inteligenze, the inferior intelligences.

Sottointendere, to meane, to intend or vnderstand vnder-hand.

Sottointéso, ment, vnderstood or intended vnder-hand.

Sottolegáre, to tie or bind vnder.

Sottolínguio, the weezle of the throate.

Sottolúcere, to shine vnder, to giue a little vnder light.

Sottolunáre, of, being, or liuing vnder the Moone, of vnder heauen, sublunare.

Sottolunétte, a Goldsmithes-toole.

Sottomaéstro, an Vsher or vnder master.

Sottománo, vnder hand, in huggermugger. Also a blow giuen vnder hand. Also a bribe closly giuen.

Sottománto, an vnder-cloake, a Cassocke.

Sottométtere, to submit, to subdue, to put, place, set, lay or bring vnder.

Sottomésso, submitted, subdued, put, placed, set, laid or brought vnder.

Sottomoníre, monísco, moníto, to warn priuily vnder hand.

Sottomórdere, to bite priuily or vnder.

Sottomóuere, as Sommóuere.

Sottonascenza, an vnder birth.

Sottonáscere, to be born vnder, to grow, to spring, to bud or bloome vnder.

Sottonasciménto, as Sottonascenza.

Sottonáto, borne or growne vnder.

Sottonodare, to vnder knit or knot.

Sottonóme, vnder the name.

Sottonotáre, to subscribe or note vnder.

Sottonumeráre, to vndertell or number. 



Sotto ócchio, vnder the eie.

Sotto officiále, an vnder officer.

Sotto ómbra, vnder shadow.

Sotto ordíre, dísco, díto, to waue vnder.

Sotto ordináre, to ordaine or appoint vnder.

Sotto páce, vnder permission.

Sotto ornáre, to adorne vnderneath.

Sotto pánni, vnder clothes.

Sottopatróne, a Masters Mate in a Ship.

Sottopárti, vnder conditions.

Sottopéna, vnder paine, but we say vpon paine.

Sottopiantáre, to vnder plant, prop or set.

Sottopónere, as Sottométtere.

Sottopórre, as Sottométtere.

Sottopórtico, an vnder porch.

Sottopósto, as Sottomésso.

Sottopregiáre, to vnder prize or value.

Sottopretesto, vnder colour or pretence.

Sottoprióre, a Subprior.

Sótto quésto, vnder this condition.

Sottordináto, subordinate.

Sottorídere, to vnder smile or laugh.

Sottoríso, an vnder smile or laughing.

Sottosapére, to vnder know.

Sottoscáglio, a mans arme pits or holes.

Sottoscrittióne, a subscription, an vnder signing or writing.

Sotto scrítto, subscribed, vnder signed, vnder written.

Sotto scríuere, to subscribe, to vnder write or signe vnder.

Sotto scúsa, vnder excuse.

Sottosedie, vnder seates or benches.

Sottosegnáre, to vnder-marke or note.

Sottosegnináre, to sow or scatter vnder.

Sottosegnatúra, an vnder-noting.

Sottosentíre, to vnder-heare or feele, to haue some inkling of a matter.

Sottoseruíre, to serue vnder.

Sotto sicurtà, vnder securitie.

Sottosópra, vpside downe, topsie-turuie, arsie-versie, pell-mell, confusedly.

Sottosopramésso, turned or put topsie-turuie, confounded vpside downe.

Sottosopraméttere, to turne or put topsie-turuie, to confound vpside downe.

Sótto sperie, vnder colour or kind.

Sottostánte, an vnderling. Also liuing, being, standing or abiding vnder.

Sottostánza, an vnder-lodging.

Sottostáre, to liue, to abide, or be vnder.

Sottostimáre, to vnder-value or esteeme.

Sottostríngere, to guird, to tye, to trusse or binde vnder.

Sottotagliáre, to vnder-cut or hew.

Sottotázza, an vnder-cup of essay.

Sottoterra, as Sotterra.

Sottoterráre, as Sotterráre.

Sottotessere, to weaue vnder.

Sotto títolo, vnder title.

Sottotrattáto, vnder treatie.

Sottordíre, to vnderheare.

Sottouedére, to see or view vnder.

Sotto uélo, vnder shadow.

Sottoueníre, to come vnder.

Sottouento, vnder the winde or lee.

Sottouía, vnder hand, vnder way.

Sottouóce, vnder voice.

Sottrággere, to withdraw, free, or deliuer from vnder, to substract.

Sotrárre, as Sottrággere.

Sottrattióne, a substraction. Also a priuation or drawing from vnder.

Sottrátto, substracted, withdrawen, freed or deliuered from vnder. Also any slie tricke, fraudulent guile, secret deceit or wilie beguilie.

Souágge, a Gold smiths toole.

Souátta, a strap or leather of a whip, our boyes call it mettall. Also an old shooe.

Souátto, a strap or thong of leather.

Souázza, as Corníce.

Soúde, in mockerie vsed for Nózze.

Souégno, as Soueniménto.

Souenenza, as Soueniménto.

Souenéuole, that may be helped.

Soueniménto, supply, helpe, assistance, sustenance, reliefe.

Soueníre, to aide, to assist or supply ones wants. Also to remember.

Souente, often, oftentimes, many times.

Souentihóre, many times or houres.

Souentióne, as Soueniménto.

Souento, any throng, croud or multitude.

Souentóre, a helper, an aider.

Souenúto, ayded, helped or supplied ones wants, assisted. Also remembred.

Souerchiánza, excessiuenesse, superfluitie.

Souerchiáre, as Soperchiáre.

Souerchiaría, as Soperchiaría.

Souerchiénole, as Soperchio.

Souerchio, as Soperchio.

Souerchióso, as Soperchio.

Souerézza, soueraigntie, sopranitie.

Soueríno, the wood Corke or of Corke.

Sóuero, the tree or wood called Corke.

Souersióne, as Souuersióne.

Souertire, as Souuertíre.

Souesciáre, as Souuertíre.

Souíge, a kind of little hird.

Soura, as Sópra. Looke Sópra, well.

Souracómito, as Sopracómito.

Souracuóco, a master or chiefe-Cooke.

Sourafódro, a false vpper scabbard.

Sóura'l, vpon or ouer thee.

Souramódo, aboue meane or measure.

Souranità, as Sopranità.

Souráno, as Sopráno, soueraigne.

Souranzáre, as Soprauanzáre.

Souránzo, as Soprauánzo, sost, ouerplus. 

Sourapósta, any putting ouer, any vpper garment, but properly among cunning Horsemen Soprapóste are burts vpon the cronet of a Horses foote or hoofes with setting one foote vpon another. Also an ouerlaying. Also a double poste or double stake at any play or game.

Sourascrítta, a superscription.

Sourastánte, as Soprastante.

Sourastánza, as Soprastánza.

Sourastáre, as Soprastáre.

Sourauanzare, as Soprabondáre.

Sourésso, as Sopra ésso, aboue it or ouer him.

Sourétti, high slippers, pantofles, mules or choppinos with soles of Corke.

Souueniménto, as Souuentióne.

Souueníre, as Souenire.

Souuentióne, a supply, a reliefe, a helping, an assistance. Also a remembring.

Souuergiménto, as Souuersióne.

Souuersióne, a subuersion, an ouerwhelming or turning vpside downe, a destraction.

Souuertenza, subuersion.

Souuertere, as Souuertíre.

Souuertíbile, that may be subuerted.

Souuertíre, to subuert, to ouerthrow or ouerwhelme, to turne topsie-turuie.

Souuertíto, subuerted, ouerwhelmed and turned topsie-turuie.

Souuertíuo, that may be subuerted.

Souuertitóre, a subuerter.

Sóuui, for Vi sò, I know or can to you.

Soutiólgere, to turne vpside downe.

Souuolgimento, as Souuersióne.

Souuólto, as Souuertíto.

Sozzáre, to sullie, to defile, to pollute.

Sozzézza,  foulenesse, filth, pollution.

Sózzo, foule, filthy, ill-fauoured, sluttish.

Sozzópra, as Sottosópra, topsie-turuie.

Sozzúra, ill-fauourednesse, as Sozzézza.

Spaccáre, to riue or burst and cut in sunder and open, Also to cleaue, to chap, to split, to flaw, to nocke or dent.

Spaccatúra, a riuing, a cleauing or bursting open and in sunder. Also a chap, a gap, a flaw, a split, a dent. Also the nocke of an Arrow.

Spacchiáre, as Spaccáre.

Spacchíno, a cleauer or chopping knife.

Spacciáre, to dispatch, to hasten, to speed, to rid away any worke.

Spacciáre il terréno, to scud away, to make away by running.

Spacciataménte, dispatchedly, out of hand, with riddance or much speed.

Spacciatíuo, quicke, that may be dispatched or rid away.

Spacciáto, dispatched, as we say dead or 



giuen ouer. Vsed also for a mad-man.

Spáccio, a dispatch, a hastning, a riddance. Also a pleeke or packet of letters.

Spáda, a sword, a rapier, a glaiue, a blade. Also a Crosse-crosled fitchie in Armorie.

Spáda a dúe máni, a two-handed sword.

Spadaccíno, a cutter, a hackster, a brauo, a swagrer, a swash-buckler, a fencer.

Spadáio, a Cutler, a Frubber.

Spadapésce, a Sword-fish.

Spadarí, a Cutlers trade or shop.

Spadáro, a Cutler, a frubber of swords.

Spadarumána, a marke some horses haue about the head or necke called the Feather.

Spadaruólo, a Cutler, or frubber of swords.

Spadétta, a little sword or rapier.

Spadétto, the imped feathers of a hawke.

Spádice, as Spádico.

Spádico, a scarlet or stammell colour. Also a bright bay-colour of a horse. Also a kind of musicall instrument. Also a date-tree branch, with fruite on it.

Spadína, a little sword or rapier.

Spádola, a hatchell to breake flaxe or hempe.

Spádola, a flat slice, or spatle.

Spadoláre, to breake flaxe or hempe vpon a hatchell.

Spadolétta, a little spatle or slice.

Spadóne, a long or two-hand sword. Also guelded, libd, or splaid.

Spadóni, all fruites that haue no kernels, as one would say guelded.

Spadónio, one vnable for generation. Also the guelded lawrell. Also the guelded apple.

Spaduláre, Spádula et dà l'uscíta all'ácqua chè condúce al máre.

Spádule, bisógna chè il cáne hábbia le spádule vicíne álle spálle.

Spága, a kind of rozin or pitch in Asia.

Spagáre, to disapay, to discontent.

Spaghétto, whip-cord, merline, twine-thrid, or small packthrid.

Spagliera, as Spalliera.

Spagnoláta, a Spanish brauado.

Spagnoleggiáre, to play the Spaniard.

Spagnuolísmo, proprietie of a Spaniard.

Spái, certaine souldiers among the Turks differing from the Ianizzers.

Spágo, any kind of packthrid, twisted cord, whipcord, twine, or merline.

Spágo sforzáto, as Sforzíno.

Spaiárda, a bird called a Yellow-hammer, or Yowlring.

Spalágio, a kind of venemous flye.

Spaláncare, to set wide open.

Spálco, an open gallerie, terrace, leades, stage, or floore.

Spáldi, as Spálti.

Spáldo, an out-butting wall, or bay window. Also a flat floore or pauement. Also the eues or penteise of a house. Also as Spálto.

Spalettáre il gráno, to stirre vp and downe with a shouel as corne.

Spálla, the shoulder of any creature.

Spallácci, the pouldrons or shoulde-rpieces. Also the gallings of the shoulders of a horse.

Spalláre, to vnshoulder, to put ones shoulder out of ioint. Also to shoulder, to backe.

Spalláta, a shoulder-pitching. Also a iob or thrust with ones shoulder.

Spalláto, shoulder-pitched, or out of ioint, called also a dislocation.

Spallatúra, as Spalláta.

Spallázzi, as Spalláccij.

Spalleggiáre, to shoulder, to backe, to support, or hould one vp.

Spalliera, a pouldron, or shoulder-piece. Also any backe or shouldring. Also any bangings or wainescot worke to leane the shoulders against. Vsed also for any Roses, trees, vines, floures, or Rosemary set and growing vp alongst and against any wall. Also any furniture spread on the ground, beds, tables, or walles, as carpets, hangings, couerlets, or tapistrie for a chamber. Also a sparuice for a large bed. Also a stuffe made for hangings called Darnix.

Spallóne, a great brode shoulder.

Spallúto, big, welt, or brode shouldred.

Spalmáre, to calke, trim, or rig a Ship.

Spalmatúra, the calking, trimming, or rigging of a Ship.

Spálti, the out shouldrings of any fortification.

Spálto, as Spáldo. Also a Mannor-house, Place, or Lordship, with the demaines about it.

Spampanáre, to disbranch, to disburgeon, as Spampináre. Also to brag with idle words, or make much adoe about nothing.

Spampanáta, a vanting, a bragging, a great boast, and small roste.

Spampanatióne, a disburgeoning or disbranching of any superfluous branches.

Spampináre, to disburgeon or pull off superfluous leaues or branches of a vine.

Spándere, spándo, spánsi, spánso, or spandûto, to shed, to skinke, to poure foorth. Also to waste and consume prodigally. Also to spread, to ayre or bleach abroad.

Spandúto, shed, skinked, poured forth. Also wasted and consumed. Also spred, ayred or bleached.

Spaniáto, districáto dálla panía o uíschio. 

Spánna, a span or hands-breadth.

Spannaceráre, to gape or yaune wide and aloud for want of sleepe.

Spannáre, to span or measure by spans.

Spáno, smooth, soft, sleeke.

Spánso, as Spandúto.

Spantáre, as Spauentáre. Also to cause or breed wonderment and amazement. Looke Spánto.

Spantegáre, as Spantáre.

Spánto, as Spauento. Also a flat drinking glasse. Also wonderment or amazement. Also wondrous strange. Also lauish, riotous or prodigall wasting and spending.

Spantóso, as Spauentóso, causing wonderment or amazement.

Spánzola, fúnghi fréschi et spánzole.

Spaparáto, open-breasted.

Spára, a wad of clouts or wispe of straw as Milke-maides vse on their heads.

Spáraci, as Spáragi.

Sparacína, a stalke of Sparagus.

Sparadráppo, a kind of salue or oyntment that stickes very hard.

Sparagágno, a certaine disease in Horses feete.

Spáragi, the hearbe Sparagus.

Sparagnáre, to spare, to saue or pinch for gaine or thrift.

Sparagnatóre, a sparer, a sauer.

Spatagnéuole, that maybe spared.

Sparágno, sparing, sauing, pinching.

Sparagnóso, sparing or sparefull.

Sparánga, a sprang, or stang or such woodden barre to barre dores.

Sparapetto, a parapet, a warde-breast, a breast-plate. Also a sudden qualme ouer the stomacke.

Sparáre, to disadorne, to vngarnish, to make vnready. Also to open, to panch, to disbowell or rip open and pull out the garbish or guts and bowels of any creature. Also to deuide, to sunder, to vnpaire or vncouple. Also to rid or take away any preparation, to take away the table. Also to pop off, to snap off, to shootoff or discharge any artillerie.

Sparáre arteglieria, to shoot off or discharge any ordinance or artillerie.

Spararía, a volie of shot or discharging of ordinance.

Sparáro, the sparuise of a bed.

Sparáta, as Spararía.

Sparáto, vngarnished, disadorned, made vnreadie. Also panched, disbowelled, or ript open any creature. Also deuided, vnpaired or vncoupled. Also taken away any preparation. Also shot off or discharged any piece.

Sparauágno, as Spauáno.

Sparauiere, any kind of Hawke.

Sparbiere, any kind of Hawke.

Sparcína, the name of a rope in a ship. 



Sparecchiáre, to vnprepare, to vngarnish, to make vnready.

Sparentáto, without parents or kindred.

Sparería, as Spararía.

Spáresi, as Spáragi. Also a sparuise for a bed.

Spargadóllo, a kind of little bird.

Spargánio, Sedge or Swordgrasse. Some take it for the Burre-reede.

Sparganióne, as Spargánio.

Spárgere, spárgo, spársi, spárto, to shed, to scatter, to strew, to disperse, to spread, to sprinkle, to sowe, to cast heere and there. Also to publish abroad.

Spargési, a swelling in some womens breasts after their deliuerie of childe.

Spargiménto, a shedding, a scattring, a strewing, a dispersing, a spredding &c.

Spargitóre, a shedder, a scatterer.

Spárgo, as Spáragi.

Spargoìáre, to sprinkle as they doe holy-water. Also as Spárgcre.

Spárgolo, a sprinkling-brush, or holywater sprinkle.

Spargonióne, as Spáragi.

Sparíre, rísco, ríto, to vanish out of sight.

Sparitióne, a vanishing out of sight.

Sparláre, to mis-speake, to raile at, to detract or speake ill of another,

Sparlatóre, a railer, a detracter, or misspeaker of others.

Spárlo, a Fish called a Purple-fish.

Sparmiáre, as Sparagnáre.

Sparmióne, a sparing miserable pinch-pennie.

Sparnazzáre, to vilifie, to contemne, to despise or scorne. Also to flutter with the wings, to striue or slie. Also to scatter abroad or waste riotously.

Sparnazzatóre, a spend-thrift, a waste-good, a riotous spender, a prodigall waster.

Spáro, a kind of Sea-fish so called in Rome. Also a kind of crooked darte among the Moores. Also odde or vneven in number.

Sparpagliáre, to confound, to disorder, to bring out of frame, to scatter it selfe and breake through violently as haileshot doth. Also to disheuell or touze a womans haire.

Sparsam énte, scatteringly, dispersedly.

Sparsióne, a shedding, a scattering.

Spárso, shed, scattered, strewed, dispersed, spread, sprinkled, cast heere and there. Also Semie in Armorie.

Spartaménte, scatteringly, dispersedly.

Spartaparéglia, the roote of Rough-binde, vsed much in Phisike.

Spartáre, as Spartíre.

Spartáto, seuer all from others, apart.

Spartatúra d'árme, a deuiding of armes. 

Spartenza, a diuidence, a sharing, a partition.

Spartháno, a kind of precious stone.

Spártico, Mastike or Sweet-gumme.

Spartigióne, as Spartiménto.

Spartiménto, a partition, a sundring, a compartment in any building.

Spartíre, tísco, títo, to separate, to part, to deuide, to sunder, to seuer.

Spartitaménte, seuerally, particularly, scatteringly, disorderly.

Spárto, a kind of graine or corne called Sparte. Also a kind of broome wherewith they make cables for ships, or to tie their vines in India. Also as Spárso.

Spárto di siéle, that hath the yellow Iaundise.

Spartopólia, a blacke stone shewing gristly veines in it.

Spartúra, a kneading-tub. Also a spoke-shaue, a bing or maund for bread, but properly a basket to take away in from the table.

Sparuieráre, to make or become swift, speedie or fleeting as a Hawke. Also to hawke. Also to sparuise a bed or chamber.

Sparuieráto, pearched. Also peart or nimble and light as a Hawke.

Sparuiére, any kind of Hawke. Also a Purple-fish. Also a sparuise for a bed.

Spárulo, a Purple-fish.

Sparutézza, vglinesse, deformitie, vnhandsomnesse, ill-fauourednesse, vnsightlinesse.

Sparúto, vglie, deformed, vnhandsome, vnsightly, ill-fauoured, disfigured.

Spáse, a long and narrow fish called in Latine Tænia.

Spasimáre, to fall into a swoune or dead trance by a conuulsion or want of bloud.

Spasimátici, as Spasmátici.

Spasimatíssima uóglia, a most earnest desire, or deadly longing for any thing.

Spasiméuole, dreadfull, horrible, frightfull, able to strike a man into a swoune.

Spásimo, a crampe, a conuulsion, a shrinking vp of the sinnewes proceeding either of too much fulnesse or ouermuch emptinesse. Also a swouning.

Spásimo cínico, a kind of crampe when the nostrills are drawen aury like a Dogs mouth when he snarleth.

Spasimóso, full of cramps or conuulsions. Also subiect to swouning.

Spasmáre, as Spasimáre.

Spasmátici, such as are troubled with or plucked by spasmes.

Spásmo, as Spásimo. Also a kind of dart vsed in warre.

Spassamartello, a fellow that will talke with a winch for fashion sake, to forget some other loue, or to passe the time away in louing talke.

Spassáre, to sport, to solace, or passe away the time in pastime.

Spassatémpo, any kind of pastime. Also as Spásso.

Spasseggiáre, to walke for sport, pastime, solace or recreation.

Spasseggiáta, a walking for pastime.

Spasseggiatóio, an Ally, an open Gallorie or pleasant walking place.

Spass'éuole, gamesome, sportfull, full of pastime or solace and recreation.

Spassionáto, vnpassionated, sans passion.

Spásso, pastime, solace, recreation.

Spastáre, to vnpaste.

Spástico, one that hath the crampe or conuulsion of sinnewes. Also one that is somewhat broken or burst with a rupture.

Spastináre, to prune Vines or digge the rootes of them bare.

Spáta, a tree like a Date or Palme-tree. Also a branch of a Date-tree. Vsed also for Spáda.

Spatágio, a kind of sea Hedge-hog.

Spatário, a Sword-bearer to a Prince.

Spatella, a flat scummer, a broad slice to turne meate in a frying-pan. Also a Mazons trowell. Also an Apothecaries spattle or Chirurgions slice.

Spátha, as Spáta.

Spátho, a tree that yealdeth a very good perfume.

Spatiáre, to make spacious. Also to walke, to trauell or wander abroade.

Spático, vexed with an euill spirit.

Spatimánte, a kind of Soothsaier by spirits.

Spatimántía, a kinde of diuination by spirits.

Spátio, space, spaciousnesse, largenesse, roome or distance of place. Also leasure, while or space of time, age, length, delay or coutinuance of time. Also a way, a voyage, a iourney, a walke, a course in walking. Also the length of a place. Also the measure or quantity in a foote of a verse or meeter.

Spatiosità, spaciousnesse. Looke Spátio.

Spatióso, spacious, ample, wide, large, broad, full of roome or space.

Spátola, as Spatella. Also a shoulder-blade. Also as Riáuolo.

Spatriáre, to leaue or goe out of ones natiue Country, or driue from ones Countrie.

Spátula, as Spátola.

Spatulimánte, a Soothsayer by looking on markes vpon shoulders.

Spatulimantía, a kind of diuination by markes vpon beastes or mens shoulders. 



Spauáldo, a fond, selfe-conceited, fantasticall, humorous or pouting fellow.

Spauanella, a kind of spauin, crampe or conuulsion in horses.

Spauáno, a spauin. Also a cramp or stifnesse of sinnewes in horses.

Spauentácchio, a bug-beare, a skarecrow. Also a terrible huffe-snuffe, a swaggering swash-buckler.

Spauentáglio, as Spauentácchio.

Spauentaménto, as Spauento.

Spauentáre, to affright, to astonish, to terrifie, to possesse with feare and horror, to skarre.

Spauentéuole, terrible, frightfull, dreadfull, astonishing.

Spauento, terror, fright, horror, feare, astonishment, amazement, skar.

Spauentóso, as Spauentéuole.

Spaurácchio, as Spauentácchio.

Spaurire, rísco, ríco, as Spauentáre.

Spauróso, as Spauentéuole.

Spazzacamíno, a Chimny-sweeper.

Spazzacouerta, a great hide to couer cartes, in Court we call them beare-hides.

Spazzafórno, a Bakers maulkin or scouel to sweepe the Ouen with.

Spazzáre, to sweepe away. Also to spunge a piece.

Spazzatóio, a Chimny sweepers broome or rake. Also a Gunners spunge. Also a brushing place or table.

Spazzatóre, a sweeper, a scauenger.

Spazzatúre, all manner of sweepings, or any kind of filth to be swept away.

Spázzo, a voide, a desert, an vncouth or vnfrequented place. Also a floore or plaine flat seeling. Also a corner where all filth and sweepings are cast, a dunghill. Also a sluts-corner. Also as Spáccio.

Specchiáro, a Looking-glasse-maker.

Specchiársi, for one to looke or view himselfe as in a Looking-glasse.

Specchiatúra, a viewing or seeing as it were in a glasse.

Specchiera, a Mirror or Looking-glasse Also a cace for a Looking-glasse.

Specchiétto, a little Looking-glasse. Also a Liste or Roll, a Catalogue or Checkroll, of their names that are of any publike magistracy. Also a Register-booke of all their waighty dispatches wherein, as in a glasse, may be seene the state of a City or Land.

Specchio, a Mirror, a Looking-glasse. Vsed also for a patterne of Vertue or Vice.

Speciále, speciall, peculiar, proper, particular. Also namely, in especiall, chiefely, in particular. Also of or belonging to spices or drugges. Also a Groser, an Apothecary or such as sell spices and drugges.

Spccialità, a specialty, a particularitie.

Spccialménte, specially, particularlie.

Speciáre, to spice or dresse with spice.

Speciaria, a Spicery. Also a Grosers or Apothecaries shop or Ware-house.

Speciáro, a Grocer, a Spice-seller, an Apothecary, a druggist.

Speciáto, spiced, drest with spices.

Specie, a spice, a species, a kind, a brood, a generation, a quality or naturality. Also a figure, an image, a forme or shape, a semblance. Also any kind of spice or spicery. Also a colour, a pretence or excuse for any thing.

Speciería, as Speciaría.

Specificaménte, specially, particularlie.

Specificáre, to specifie, to particularize.

Specificataménte, especially, particularly.

Specificatióne, specification.

Specífico, speciall, particular.

Specíllo, a Chirurgions probe to search wounds. Also vsed for spectacles.

Speciosità, gracefull-comelinesse, comly-apparance.

Specióso, beautifull, goodlie to see, faire in shew or apperance, worthy of regard.

Speco, a den, a caue, a caberne, a dungeon, a grot, a deepe hole, a lurking-hole.

Specula, a Watch-tower, a Loure or Lanthorne on the top of a house, a window at the head of a ship.

Speculábile, that may be speculated or spide into.

Speculáre, to speculate, to espie into, to contemplate, to obserue or consider diligently. Also to see afarre off, or watch from an high tower. Also a glasse or talke-stone. Also a Lookeing-glasse-maker.

Speculária árte, the arte of speculation.

Speculária piétra, Muscouy-glasse.

Speculatióne, speculation, contemplation. Also watching or espying.

Speculatíuo, speculatiue, contemplatiue, treating of God and separated substances.

Speculatóre, a speculator, a contemplater, an obseruer, a watcher, a scoutwatch.

Speculo, a Mirror, a Loking-glasse. Also a toole that Chirurgions vse.

Spedále, an Hospitall, a Spittle-house.

Spedaliere, a Spitler, or Hospitall keeper.

Spedalíngo, a Spitler, a keeper or hanter of spitles.

Spedáre, to surbate, to gall or wast ones feet with going.

Spedáre, to spit or broach meate one a spit.

Spedáto, surbated or galled in ones feete with going.

Spedétto, a little spit or broach.

Spediera, a range or racke for spits.

Spedíre, dísco, díto, as Spacciáre.

Speditaménte, quickly, with expedition.

Speditióne, expedition, quicke dispatch.

Spedíto, as Spacciáto, dispatched, rid away. Also prompt, nimble, quicke, slie ready and full of agility.

Spédo, any spit or broach. Also a Iauelin, a Partizan, a Bores speare, a Gleaue.

Spedonáre, to spit or broach with a spit, a partisan or Bores-speare.

Spedonáta, a spit or broach full. Also a blow with a spit or partizan.

Spedóne, as Spédo.

Spegazzáre, to dash, to blur or blot any booke or writing with inke.

Spegazzóni, blots, blurs or dashes of inke.

Spegliársi, as Specchiársi.

Speglio, as Specchio.

Spegnáre, to vnpaune, to vngage.

Spegnere, spengo, spensi, spento, to quench, to extinguish, to put out.

Spelagáre, to spread or become all as a Sea. Also to flote vp and downe the Sea.

Speláre, to pill, to pull or plucke of the haire, wooll, skin or feathers of any thing. Also to make or weare thridbare. Also as Trapeláre.

Spelaruóla, as Pelaruóla.

Spelatello, a beardlesse boy.

Speláto, pilled, pulled or pluckt off the haire, wooll, skin or feathers of any thing. Also worne thrid-bare. Also a bare fellow.

Spelatóio, any kind of rubbing brush.

Spelazzíno, a poore, bare, thrid-bare abiect fellow.

Spelénca, as Spelónca, as Speco.

Spelláre, as Spellicciáre.

Spellicciáre, to vnskin, to vnfur, to pull off the skin. Also to tugge or touze.

Spellicciáta, an vnskinning, an vnfurring. Also a tugging, a touzing.

Spellicciatúra, as Spellicciáta.

Spelliccióso, a kind of hairy hearbe.

Spelónca, as Speco.

Spelorciería, as Spilorciería.

Spelórcio, as Spilórcio.

Spelta, a graine called Spelt or Zea.

Spelucáre, as Snoccioláre.

Spelúco, a heape, a hoary masse.

Speluiére, a Cornish chough with red feete.

Spelúnca, as Speco.



Spéme, hope, trust, affiance.

Spemóso, hopefull, full of hope.

Spendacchiaménto, any lauish or riotous wasting in expences.

Spendacchiáre, to spend lauishly, to wast in riotous expences.

Spendere, spendo, spési, péso, or spendúto, to spend, to dispend, to waste or consume, to lay out mony. Also to vnhang.

Spenderécchio, a waste-good, an vnthrifty spender.

Spendifarína, a prodigall wast-good or idle spend thrift.

Spendío, expense. Also allowance to spend. Vsed also for Spendacchiaménto.

Spendióso, full of charges or expences.

Spenditóre, a spender. Also a Steward, a Treasurer, a Purcer, a Clarke of a Kitching, a Cather of a Noblemans house. Also a waster or consumer.

Spendola, a certaine wheele in a Clocke.

Spendoláre, to hang downe dangling, to dangle, to let downe by a rope, to swing in a halter. Also to slide downe.

Spendolóne, dangling downe, dingle-dangle.

Spendúto, spent. Also vnhanged.

Spéne, hope, trust or affiance.

Spéngere, as Spíngere, or Spegnére.

Spennacchiáre, to vnfeather, to vnfledge, to vnplume, to pull bare. Also to stretch out the wings as a Hawke doth when she takes hir flight.

Spennacchiáto, vále, confúso cóme sénza pénne. , looke Spennacchiáre.

Spennacchíno, a Carpenters toole.

Spénnala., looke Língula.

Spennáre, as Spennacchiáre.

Spennáto, as Spennacchiato.

Spennócchia, a disease in a horses foote.

Spénnola, the languet of a paire of ballances.

Spennúto, vnfeathered, vnplumed

Spensaríe, all manner of necessary expences.

Spensero, as Spendiróre.

Spénsero, they quenched.

Spensierággine, carlesnesse, retchlesnesse.

Spensieratággine, idem.

Spensierataménte, carelesly.

Spensieráto, carelesse, retchlesse, thoughtlesse. Also an idle gazer or loiterer vp and downe, a haire-brain'd fellow.

Spensoláre, as Spendoláre.

Spensolóne, as Spendolóne.

Spentácchio, an Vrchin or Hedge-hog. Also as Spauentácchio.

Spéntico, Hasty-bread, because it is made in hasts.

Spénto, quenched, extinguished, put out.

Spenzoláre, as Spendoláre.

Spenzoláre, as Spendolóne.

Spéra, he hopeth. Also a sphere. Also an anker as the hope of a ship.

Sperábile, that may be hoped for.

Sperándo, as Sperábile.

Speránza, hope, trust or affiance.

Speranzále, hopefull, full of hope.

Speranzérta, a little hope.

Speranzéuole, full of hope, to be hoped.

Speranzina, a little hope.

Speráre, to hope, to trust vnto. Also to expect or looke for. Also to looke into the Spheare or in the aire.

Sperdere, as Disperdere. Also to loose or stray. Also to poach egges.

Sperdiménto, as Disperdiménto.

Sperditúra, as Disperdiménto.

Sperdute vuóua, poached egges.

Sperdúto, as Disperso. Also miscaried.

Sperérta, vsed as Bólgía by Dante.

Speréuole, that may be hoped.

Sperga, as Mergóne.

Spergere, as Spárgere.

Spergiuraménto, a forswearing.

Spergiuráre, to forsweare, to periure.

Spergiúro, a periury, a periured man.

Spergola, an hearbe which for the property it hath to fatten cattell is called Franke or Surrey or Spurry.

Spergola odoráta, the hearbe woodrowell.

Spergoláre, to sprinkle as holy-water.

Spergolo, a holy water sprinkle.

Spergula, as Spergola.

Spericáto, vnpearched, out of order.

Sperientia, experience, practise, triall.

Speríle, the fleshie part without bones beneath the midle part of a Sow.

Sperimentalménte, by experience.

Spermentáre, to experience, to put in practise.

Speriménto, an experiment, a triall.

Sperma, the males or mans naturall seed where of things be ingendred. Also the spaune of fishes. Also the floure of salt. Also Quick-siluer according to the phrase of Alchimists.

Spermacéti, the floure of the Sea, Spermaceti, or whitish Amber, seede of Whales.

Spermático, spermaticall, of or pertaining to engendring seede.

Spermentáre, as Sperimentáre.

Sperménto, as Speriménto.

Spermólogo, as Frugiléga. Also a vaine tailer, or idle babler.

Spernáce, that contemneth, or despiseth.

Spernazzaménto, any scorning.

Spernazzáre, to scorne, or contemne.

Spernere, Sperno, Spernéi, Spernúto, to contemne, to despise, to disdaine, to make no accoumpt of.

Spernózza, a kind of rugged Sea-crab.

Spernozzaménto di paróle, a hudle or hodgepotch of foolish and idle words.

Speróla, a little Globe or Spheare.

Speronáglia, kibes, or chillblanes.

Speronáre, to spurre, or pricke forwards.

Speronáro, a Spurrier, a spur-maker.

Speronáta, a pricke with a spurre.

Speróne, a spurre or pricke to make a horse goe. Also the beake, snout, nose, or stem of a Ship. Also an out-butting or shouldring in any fortification. Also the hearbe or floure Monkshood, Larks-spurre, Larks-heele, or clawe.

Speronella, a brazen toole with a spoone at one end and a rowell at the other, which Cookes call a iagging-iron. Also Goose-grasse, Goose-share, or Clauer-grasse.

Speróni, buttreses among Masons, bragets among Carpenters.

Sperónzola, a bird in whose nest the Cuckow laies her egges, which hatcheth them as her owne.

Sperperaménto, a routing, a defeating Also as Scompíglio.

Sperperáre, as Scompigliáre, to hauocke, or put to rout.

Sperpetuáre, to vnperpetuate.

Sperse, dispersed, forelorne, scattered. Also Vuóua sperse, poached egges.

Sperto, dispersed, forelorne, scattred.

Spertaménte, expertly, by triall.

Sperticáre, to vnpearch, to pul off from a pearch. Also to vnbranch.

Sperticáto, vnpearched. Also huge and great. Also vnbranched.

Sperto, expert, skilfull, tride.

Spertolo, a hooking, a sneaking, or far-reaching companion.

Spérule, little Spheares or Globes. Also vsed of Dante for Soules.

Spésa, expence, charge, cost, spending.

Spesacchiáre, as Spesáre.

Spesáre, to defraie ones charges, to spend for and find one all necessaries.

Spesaríe, expences, defrayings.

Spéso, spent, laid out, wasted, consumed.

Spesolársi, for a horse to aduance or raise himselfe from the ground, attending the riders will and direction.

Spessaménte, thickly. Also oftentimes.

Spessáre, as Spessíre.

Spesseggiáre, to hasten, to dispatch or 



frequent often or thicke and threefold.

Spésse vólte, often times, many times.

Spessézza, thicknes, spissenesse, densitie.

Spessire, sísco, síto, to thicken, to enspisse, to condense.

Spessità, thicknes, spissenesse, densitie.

Spessitúdine, thicknesse, spissenesse.

Spésso, spisse, thicke, massiue, firme and hard. Also standing thicke and close together. Also often and many times.

Spésso spésso, very very thicke. Also most most often.

Spestiáre, to vnboult a dore.

Spetiále, as Speciale.

Spetialissimaménte, most especially.

Spetialità, as Specialítà.

Spetialménte, especially, namely.

Spetiáre, as Speciáre, to spice.

Spetiaría, as Speciaría.

Spetiáro, as Speciáro.

Spetiáto, spiced, drest with spices.

Spetie, as Specie.

Spetieltà, as Specialità.

Spetieria, as Speciaría.

Spetíle, the fleshie part without bones beneath the midle of a Sowe.

Spetióso, as Specióso.

Speto, a toyle, a net or hay to hunt foule or connies with. Also a spit or broch.

Spetonáre, as Spedonáre.

Spetonáta, as Spedonáta.

Spetóne, as Spédo, or Spedóne.

Spetráre, to vnstone, to soften, to mollifie.

Spettábile, worthie to be regarded, viewed, or respected, notable, wellfauoured, of goodly fauour or personage.

Spettabilità, worthinesse, or gracefulnesse to be regarded.

Spettácolo, a spectacle, a sight, a shew, a thing to be seene, a gazing-stocke.

Spettafíco, a kind of venemous Serpent.

Spettánte, behoulding, or gazing vpon. Also attending, staying, or expecting. Also belonging, or appertaining vnto.

Spettare, to stay, to expect, to attend or tarie for. Also to behould, to view, or looke vpon. Also to belong or appertaine vnto.

Spettatíua, an expectation, or expecting.

Spettatióne, viewing, or expectation.

Spettatóre, a spectator, a behoulder, a looker on, or for, a viewer.

Spettezzaménti, despisings, contemnings.

Spettezzáre, to despise, to contemne, to scorne.

Spetto, a iauelin, a bore-speare, a forest-bill. Also a Pike, a Luce, or Pickrell-fish.

Spettoráre, to vnbrest. Also to rid out of the breast by coughing. 

Spettro, a vision, a phantasie, a ghoste or image seene or imagined to be seene.

Spezzábile, fraile, brittle, that will or may be broken in pieces.

Spezzacóllo, a halter-wag, a breake-necke.

Spezzámi, all manner of broken pieces, fragments, shiuers, bats, shards, splints.

Spezzaménti., Vsed for Pioners in a Camp.

Spezzáre, to breake, to split, to riue, to shiuer, to rend or make in pieces.

Spezzáta láncia, a Lance-spezzado, a demie-lance, a light-horse-man.

Spezzataménte, piecemeale, brokenly.

Spezzáte árme, broken armes.

Spezzatúra, a breaking in pieces.

Spezzazócchi, a wood or log-cleauer.

Sphacelo, as Sfacelo.

Spháco, a kind of sweete mosse called Aromaticum.

Sphagíride, as Ssagíride, two great veines appearing on each side of the throte, and nourishing all the parts of the head and necke.

Sphágno, as Spháco.

Sphángo, as Spháco.

Sphenóide., looke O'sso.

Sphera, as Sfera, a Globe, a Spheare.

Spherále, as Spherico.

Sphereále, as Spherico.

Spherétta, a little Globe or Spheare.

Spherico, as Sferico, round, sphericall.

Spherománte, a deuiner by looking in the Spheare.

Spheromantía, diuination by the Spheares.

Sphínge, as Sfínge.

Sphíntro, as Sfintro.

Shiréno, a great fish with a snout like a sharp spit.

Sphithaméi, certain Pigmeis or Dwarfs but three spans long.

Sphondillio, as Sfondillio.

Sphráge, as Sfráge.

Sphragíde, as Terra sigilláta. Also a kind of stone like the Iasper-stone.

Spía, a spie, an espiall, an eawes-dropper, a scout.

Spiacente, vnpleasant, displeasing.

Spiacenza, any displeasing.

Spiacére, to displease, to dislike.

Spiacére, displeasure, dislike.

Spiacéuole, vnpleasant, displeasing.

Spiaceuolézza, displeasing, vnpleasantnesse.

Spiaciménto, a disliking, a displeasing.

Spiaciúto, displeased, disliked.

Spiággia, a flat shore or strond of the Sea.

Spiaggiáre, to coast along a flat shore.

Spianábile, that may be explaned. Looke Spianáte.

Spianacciáta, a razing, a making plaine.

Spianaménto, a razing, an explaining. 

Spianamónti, a name for a braggard, a Razemountaines.

Spianáre, to make plaine, to leuell. Also to explaine, to expound, to declare, to lay open. Also to raze or ruine any building flat to the ground.

Spianáta, a making plaine or leuell. Also an explaining or expounding. Also a razing or laying flat to the ground. Also a plaine path or broad way. Also a flat or platforme.

Spianatóio, a rowler that Cookes vse to spread paste.

Spianatóri, explainers. Also Pioners.

Spiantáre, to vnplant, to displant.

Spiáre, to espie, to spie, to peere, to watch or scout with diligence, to looke into.

Spiastricciáre, to plaister, to dawbe, to lome, to parget. Also to glue.

Spiatóre, a spier, or scout in a campe.

Spiattelláre, to set out in full dishes, to display or set to view as Cookes doe their meat vpon stalles. Also to make plaine and flat as a dish. Also as Suertáre.

Spíca, any eare of corne. Also a cloue of Garlike. Also a bright Starre on the leaft hand of Virgo called the Eare of corne.

Spic áce, as Perspicáce.

Spíca celtica, the mosse Wolues-claw.

Spicácia, as Perspicácia.

Spíca in látte, a tender, yongue and vnripe eare of corne. Vsed also for a sillie-wanton, a mothers-darling, a milke-sop.

Spicanárdo, Spikenard, Lauander-spike.

Spicarda, as Spigolístra.

Spicardínoing égno, a foolish, nice, loose gadding, skipping or gleaning wit.

Spicáre, to grow or shoot in eares as corne doth. Also to gleane for eares of corne.

Spicaruóla, as Spicárda, as Spigolístra.

Spicaruólo, a gleaner of eares of corne.

Spicáto, eared or growen to eares as corne. Also an excellent oyntment vsed in Rome among women, which some take for oyle of Spikenard.

Spicasánti, a Saint-seeming Puritane, an hipocriticall man or woman.

Spiccáre, to plucke from or off, to vnfasten, to vnhang or separate from. Also to skip or leape off.

Spiccataménte, distinctly and apart.

Spiccáre paróle, distinct or loose words.

Spicchiáre, to bud, to burgeon or sprout forth as flowers doe, to peepe out as the Sunne-beames doe. Also to spin, to gush, to purle, to bubble, to spirt or squirt out as bloud out of a veine or water out of a fountaine, or wine out of a spigot-hole. Also to cull or nicely to choose out. Also to spread abroad. Also to scape, to sneake or flinch se­



cretly out of sight.

Spicchiáto., looke Spicchiáre

Spícchio, a bud, a burgeon, a sprout. Also a peeping out. Also a gushing, a perling or spinning out. Looke Spicchiáre.

Spícchio d'áglio, a cloue of Garlike.

Spícchio del sóle, a glimps or peeping out of the Sunne-beames.

Spicchióne, as Spícchio.

Spicchiúto, as Spicchiáto. Looke Spicchiáre.

Spicciafáme, one that will quench his hunger with any thing.

Spicciáre, as Spicchiáre.

Spicciasanti, as Picchiapetto.

Spiccicáre, to vnfasten, to loosen.

Spiccicáto, vnfastned, loosed.

Spíccio, as Spícchio.

Spiccioláre, to make lesse or little, to cut in small pieces, to diminish. Also to pare or clip, and thereof they say Monéta spiccioláta, clipped money. Also to scatter or disperse seuerally abroad. Also to picke heere and there, to gleane.

Spícciolo, as Spícchio. Looke Spiccioláre.

Spicilegio, gleaning or gathering of eares of corne.

Spíco, as Spíca. Also as Spígo.

Spícod'áglio, a cloue of Garlike.

Spícolo, as Spícchio.

Spiconárdo, Spikenard, Lauander-spike.

Spicóso, full of eares of corne.

Spicuità, as Perspicuità.

Spículo, an arrow-bead.

Spícuo, as Perspícuo.

Spidíre, disco, díto, as Spedíre, to giue ouer to death.

Spiditióne, as Speditióne.

Spidíto, dispatched, giuen ouer.

Spidocchiáre, to louse, to vnlouse.

Spidocchióne, a lousie companion.

Spiedáre, to spit or broach, as Spedonáre.

Spiédo, as Spédo, a spit or broach.

Spiedonáre, as Spedonáre, to spit or broach.

Spiedóne, as Spédo, a great broach.

Spiegaménto, as Spiegatúra.

Spiegáre, to display, to vnfold, to spread abroad. Also to explaine or expound.

Spiegaraménte, openly, displaiedly.

Spiegatóre, a displayer, an vnfolder.

Spiegatúra, a displaying, an vnfolding.

Spiegazzáre, as Spegazzáre.

Spieghéuole, that may be displaied.

Spienáto, emptied, vnfilled.

Spienáre, to emptie, to vnfill.

Spiénza, the spleene of any creature.

Spiería, spierie, espying.

Spietà, crueltie, inexorablenesse, fiercenesse. Also impietie or vngodlinesse.

Spietánza, as Spietà, vnmercifulnesse. 

Spietataménte, without pitty or mercy. Also impiously or vngodly.

Spietáto, pittielesse, ruthlesse, vnmercifull, cruell, fell. Also impious or vngodly.

Spiéuole, that may be expied.

Spíga, as Spíca.

Spigáre, as Spicáre.

Spigáro, a Cakrell-fish.

Spigaruólo, a gleaner of eares of corne.

Spíghe d'úna ruóta, the spokes of a wheele.

Spighétta, portáua úna spighétta spéssa con piúme biánche & nére. 

Spighétti, a kind of stitch, purle or worke among seamsters like eares of corne.

Spígnere, as Spíngere.

Spígo, the hearbe Spike or Spikenard. Also the little iron pipe of a caske or helmet wherein the plume of feathers is set and fastned. Also a spigot.

Spígola, a fish called a Bace or base.

Spigoláre, to gleane or lease for eares of corne. Also to play the dissembling hypocrite.

Spígoli délla táuola, crums, scraps, leauings or broken peaces of meate, leaft at a table.

Spigolístra, a gleaner or leaser of corne. Also a nice, strict, hypocriticall woman, a Saint-seeming Puritan, a collecter of all mens faults but of his owne.

Spigolistrarie, gleanings or leasings of corne. Also nice, strict, prying hipocriticall trickes.

Spígolo, any gleaning or leasing. Also any sharpe pricke or sting. Also as Spícchio.

Spigonárdo, Spikenard, Lauander-spike.

Spigóso, full of eares of corne.

Spilacchéro, a pinching griping couetous wretch.

Spilétto, as Spillétto.

Spilláre, to pin, to tacke, to claspe or hooke, to spill. Also to sneake or finde out with diligent search. Also as Spicchiáre. Also to breach as wine with a spigot.

Spillaruólo, a sneaking, prying or searching fellow.

Spillettáre, as Spilláre, to pricke or stab.

Spillétto, a spill, a small pin. Also a sting or pricke. Also a little bodkin or Poinado. Also a small haire. Also a brizle. Also a spiget, a force-head or little gimblet. Also a kind of play in Italie.

Spíllo, a pinne, a pricke, a sting, a pricking-thorne, a spill. Also a needle. Also a bodkin. Also a sharp poinado. Also a hooke, a tacke, a tache, a clasp. Also a spigot, a gimblet, or forcehead, as Vintners vse.

Spillúzzico, as Spízzico.

Spilorciáre, to grudge, to snudge, to dodge or play the slouenlie niggard or pinch-pennie.

Spilorciaríe, grudging, suudging, dodging, base, slouenly, and niggardly tricks.

Spilórcio, a chuffe, a snudge, a niggard, a lozell, a borell, a filthie, pinching, spaning, slouenlie base-minded companion, or couetous pinch-pennie wretch.

Spilúnca, as Spéco, a denne, a caue.

Spiluzzicáre, to picke or pinch heere and there by little and little.

Spimacchiáto letto, a fetherbed driuen.

Spína, a pricke, a prickle, a sting, a bramble, a brier, a thorne, the sting of a Bet. Also a bristle of a Hedgehog. Also any sharp fish-bone. Also a spigot, a gimblet, a forcehead, or tap to broch a barell with and draw drinke with all. Also a cocke or robinet of a cesterne or conduit. Also the ridge or chine-bone of any body. Also the streeke or line that runnes along a horses backe. Also the withers of a horse. Also a fesse or bend engrailed in armorie. Also a mollet or starne in armorie. Vuaspína, Goose-beries, so called, because they grow vpon thornes or prickles.

Spína acúta, the white, or hawthorne.

Spína álba, as Spína biánca.

Spina appendice, the long climbing thorne or Brier.

Spina arábica, the Arabian thorne.

Spina biánca, the White thorne, the White-bryer or Hawthorne. Also the White or our Ladies thistle or Bedegnar.

Spinácchia, the good hearbe Spinage.

Spinacciáre, to hatchell flaxe or hempe.

Spináccio, a hatchell for Hempe or flax. Also the tap-hole or bung-hole of a barrell.

Spína ceruína, the wilde Harthorne or thorne.

Spináci, the good hearbe Spinage.

Spina da púrgo, the Fullers thorne or Thistle.

Spína del dósso, the backe or ridgebone.

Spína d'un cauállo, the withers of a Horse.

Spína di ceruo, Waye or Buck-thorne.

Spína di mezzo, the very pith of the backe.

Spína di pésce, the chine-bone of a Fish.

Spína Egíptia, the Egyptian thorne called Acacia.

Spinále medólla, the pith or marrow that runnes along the back-bone. 



Spína peregrína, Ball or Globe-thistle.

Spína pésce, a kind of tacke, tache, claspe or tenter-hooke.

Spináre, to pricke with any thorne. Also to pierce or set any vessell of drinke abroach. Also to engraile in Armorie.

Spína régia, the wilde Thistle, the wilde Artichocke, or our Ladies-thistle.

Spináro, a bush of briers, brambles or thornes.

Spinaruólo, a Sharpling or Shaftlin-fish.

Spína sácra, the sharpe end of O'sso sácro, the rumpe.

Spináto, broched or set abroach. Also engrailed in Armorie. Also a kind of striped worke in silke or canuase-cloth.

Spína uolgáre, the common Thorne or Brier.

Spinella, a splint in a Horses leg. Also a spigot to draw wine with, a gimblet.

Spinelláre, as Spináre.

Spineo, prickly, thornie, bramblie.

Spinéola, a kind of white Rose.

Spinéolo, a Sloe, a Skeg or Bulleis-plum.

Spinepuccie, a kind of White or Hawthorne.

Spinétta, a kind of little Spína. Also the Eglantine or Sweet-brier. Also a little spigot or gimblet. Also a paire of Virginalles.

Spinetteggiáre, to play vpon Virginalls.

Spinétto, a thicket of Brambles or Briers.

Spinerúte, a kind of White or Hawthorne.

Spingárda, a kind of great gunne, bumbard, mortar, or chamber-piece.

Spingerda, as Spingárda.

Spíngere, spíngo, spínsi, spínto, to thrust, to push, to shooue, to shoulder, to driue or punch forward. Also to vrge, to instigate, to presse or egg on.

Spinífero, Thornes-bearing.

Spíno, a Sloe-tree, a Black-thorne, a Snag-tree. Also any kind of sharpe pricke or thorne, brier or bramble. Also such prickes as poore men put in shooes. Also a Ligurie or Siskin-bird. Also the hearbe Ligurie.

Spíno ceruíno, as Spíno merlo.

Spínola, any little sharpe Therne. Also a sharpe bone of any fish. Also a pinne that fastneth a hat or cap vnder the chin. Also a fish called in Latine Spigola.

Spíno merlo, Buck-thorne, Way-thorne, or Laxatiueram.

Spinóse, a kind of Peares in Italie.

Spinóso, thornie, pricklie, crabbed, full of thornes, briers or brambles. Also difficult or full of difficultie. Also any fish full of prickles or bones. Also a Porcupine. Also an Vrchin or Hedgehog.

Spínozerlino, as Spíno merlo.

Spinta, a thrust, a push, a iustling, a punch, a shoouing forward.

Spínto, thrust on, pusht, iustled, punched, shooued or driuen forward or downe.

Spíntrie, places where were practised, or men which deuised all maner of beastly and vnnaturall or monstrous lust and letcherie not to be spoken of.

Spinturníce, a kind of Night-birds or Skreech-owles, wont to come to the Altar and carrie away a burning cole as a token and presage of ill lucke or burning to the house where it alighted.

Spínula, as Spínola.

Spinzágo, a fowle called a Curlue.

Spinzauríno, the name of a bright colour that Painters vse.

Spiombáre, to vnleade.

Spionággine, the arte or qualitle of spying or prying.

Spionáre, to play the craftie spie, to pry into, to sneake secretly.

Spióne, as Spía, a spie, a scout.

Spionía, as Spionággine. Also a kind of wine or grape.

Spióuere, to shoure or raine violentlie.

Spíppola. 

Spíra, the imperfection in timber when the graine and the knots grow into round bals. Also a spheare, a circulation, a rundle on turning round. Also any pillar, or the little pillars of a clocke or any ioyners worke. Also a spire of a steeple, or the spire of a vice or screw. Also a quadrant or square of a pillar below which may serue to sit vpon. Also the round making vp of a rope or cable, properly called the coyling of a cable. Also a cracknell, a cake or simnell made like a trendle or writhen like a rope. Also a certaine attire of Pearle that women vse to weare on their heads made Coronetwise, called a Corronet or Chaplet.

Spirábile, that can or may breath. Also liuely, that where with we liue and breath.

Spirácolo, as Spiráglio.

Spiragliáre, védi, Spiráglio.

Spiráglij dell' ánima, the lungs or lights.

Spiráglio, a vent or breathing place, any hole or chinke thorow which breath, aire, smoake or wind doth or may passe and breath. Also a caue that breatheth foorth any strong aire or sent, a dampe-hole. Also the nostrils. Also vsed for any loope-hole or spike-hole in any Tower or prison. Vsed also for a chimny, or the tunnel of a chimny, or loouer of a house.

Spiráme, as Spiráglio.

Spiramánto, panting for breath. Also as Spiráglio.

Spiránte, blowing, liuing, breathing. Also that casteth out breath or sauour.

Spiráre, to liue and draw breath, to pant, to sigh, to blow as wind doth, to vent or breath forth. Also to cast a sauour or smell. Also to expire or yeeld vp the last gaspe. Also to inspire. Also to aspire or endeuour to obtaine.

Spiratióne, spiration, inspiration, respiration, expiration, in-breathing, &c.

Spiráto, as Spiráglio, but properly the participle of Spiráre.

Spíre, certaine Mathematicall lines.

Spireóne, a kind of hearbe or flower.

Spirillo, a Goates-beard.

Spiritále, spiritall, the vitall or breathing parts or pertayning to them. Also as Spirituále. Also a kinde of engine.

Spiritaménto, a haunting of spirits.

Spiritáto, possessed with some euill spirit, out of his wits, mad, raging, furious.

Spiritelli, hobgoblins, spirits of the buttrie. Also Night-bats or Rearmise.

Spiritello, a little spirit.

Spírito, spirit, winde, breath, life, aire, the soule, the spirit, the life, the heart or ghost of man or any creature. Also a spirit or ghost. Also a sigh or gaspe. Also the heate, courage or stomacke of a man.

Spiritócco, a busie, a dissembling, an hipocriticall, saint-seeming, pick-thanke sellow.

Spírito sánto, the holy Ghost.

Spiritóso, liuely, full of spirit, life and heat and breathing. Also strong as Acquauitie is.

Spirituále, spirituall, ghostly. Also liuely or that breatheth. Also the holy Ghost's roote.

Spiritualità, spiritualitie, ghostlinesse.

Spíro, vsed for Spírito. Also breath or humane speech, the Scottish word spering is thence taken.

Spíro eterno, the holy Ghost or Spirit.

Spirtále fémina, a Witch, a Sorceresse, a Hag.

Spírto, as Spírito.

Spirtócco, as Spiritócco.

Spírula, any kind of little Spira.

Spitáma, a Greeke measure of twelue inches.

Spitiále, as Speciale.

Spíto, a spit, a broach, as Spédo.

Spittacciáto, plebeo, mendíco, balórdo et spittacciáto.



Spiumacciáre, to vnfeather, to vnplume. Also to shake a feather-bed well.

Spiumáccio, a mattresse, a flock-bed. Vsed also for a boulster for a bed.

Spiumáre, as Spiumacciáre.

Spizzáre, as Spicciáre. Also to point or make sharpe.

Spizzézza, sharpnesse, keenenesse.

Spizzicáre, as Pizzicáre. Also to tril, to drizle or drope smally. Also to mince small.

Spizzichíno, a little dropkin, a little scantling. Also a muching pinch pennie.

Spízzico, a whit, a lot, a small deale.

Spizzicóre, as Pizzicóre.

Spízzo, as Spíccio. Also sharp pointed.

Splebeiáre, to become from a base iacke to be a Gentleman.

Spléco, a kinde of meat in Italy.

Spléna, the spleene or melt of any bodie.

Splendente, shining, splendent, bright, glistring. Also of great fame and renoume.

Splendenza, as Splendóre.

Splendere, splendo, splendéi, splendúto, to shine, to glister, to be bright and beautyfull. Also to haue a good grace or become well. Also to be renoumed.

Splendidaménte, shiningly, brightly, gorgeously, gloriously, sumptuously. Also bountifully, liberally, nobly, honorably, richly, brauely, worthilie.

Splendidézza, splendor, brightnesse, shining. Also magnificently, gloriousnesse, bounty, liberality, sumptuousnesse.

Splendido, splendent, bright shining, glittring, glaring. Also magnificent, glorious, excellent, bountifull, liberall, sumptuous, famous, cleare, noble. Also one that hath his house & al things about him gorgeously decked with abundance of al things goodly, gay and beautyfull.

Splendóre, splendor, brightnesse, shining, clearenesse, light, glimps, glitter. Also glory, beauty, elegancy, honour, renowme, bounty. Also the glasse, the vernish or shining of a colour.

Splenetico, that is sicke of the spleene or that hath a great spleene.

Splenio, the hearbe Spleene wort or Miltwast. Also a long plaister made like a swath for one that is sicke of the spleene.

Splicábile, as Esplicábile.

Splicáre, as Esplicáre.

Splicatióne, as Esplicatióne.

Sploratóre, as Esploratore, a scout.

Splucabóue, a bird so called.

Spodestáre, to remoue or degrad from office, power or dignity.

Spodestàto, depriued of power. Also furious and vnbridled.

Spódio, as Spódo.

Spódo, a kind of rugged stone, drosse or Cinders found in bras furnaces vsed in medicines for eies.

Spoetáto, dispoeted, degraded from a Poet.

Spóglia, a spoiling, a robbing, a stripping. Also a raiment, a clothing or weede. Also a mans mortall vaile or bodie. Also the skinne that any Serpent or Snake leaues off. Also a coffin of paste made for a Pie, a Tarte, or a Custard. Also any pillage, praie, bootie, prize, reprisall or spoile taken from an enemie. Also the outward skinne of any thing.

Spogliaménto, a spoiling or stripping.

Spogliáre, to spoile, to disaray, to vnrobe, to vnskinne, to vnfurnish, to bereaue, to depriue of, to strip, to rob, to steale from, to rifte, to ransake. Also to pull off ones clothes.

Spogliáro, a place where men and women strip themselues before they goe into a bathe or to bed. Also a place where common spoiles are kept. Also a place where men be spoiled, stripped, or rifled

Spogliáto, spoiled, disaraid, vnrobed, vnfurnished, bereaued. Looke Spogliáre.

Spogliatóre, a spoiler, a stripper, a robber, a pirate, a ransaker, a theefe.

Spogliatúra, a spoiling, a stripping.

Spóglie grásse, as Opíme spóglie.

Spóglie opíme, as Opíme spóglie.

Spóglio, a dispoiling, as Spóglia.

Spógna, any kind or spunge. Also a fish called a Lump, or Spunge-fish.

Spognáre, to spunge, or wipe with a spunge.

Spóla, a weauers spooling-wheele or quill-turne. Also a weauers shuttle. Also a kind of Skiffe, or Cock-bote.

Spoladóra, a weauers warpe.

Spoláre, to weaue with a shuttle.

Spolétta, a long shell-fish, like a shuttle.

Spolpáre, to take away the braune or flesh from the bones.

Spoltráre, from a colt to become a horse. Also to rise from out a bed or sluggishnesse, to shake off sloth or cowardize, and become valiant.

Spoltríre, trísco, tríto, as Spoltráre.

Spolitroníre, nísco, níto, védi Poltróne.

Spoluerársi, to bathe as a Hawke doeth.

Spoluereggiáre, as Spoluerizzáre.

Spoluerícchio, a rough draught or imperfect writing.

Spolueríno, a dust or sand-box. Also a fine searce or sieue.

Spoluerizzáre, to reduce to powder or dust. Also to dust or cast dust vpon, to bepowder. Also to speckle as powdred Ermines be. Also vsed for to sift or vnfold a doubtfull matter.

Sponcióni, the principall feathers or sarcels of a Hawke.

Spónda, a shore or banke-side of any thing. Also the side of a bedstead.

Spondáici uersi, a kind of verses so called.

Spondáre, to coast or saile and goe along the side, shore or bank-side.

Spondaruólo, a Carpenters toole.

Spondente, promising, signifying.

Spondéo piéde, a foote of a verse consisting of two long sillables in the last word, so called of drawing the voice in singing at Deuine seruice.

Spóndili, any small bones, namely the spondils, the knuckles or turning ioints of the back-bone or chine. Also spindle wherues. Also a kind of Serpents. Also a kind of great Oyster like an Asses-hoofe.

Spondílio, Cow-parsnep or Madnepe.

Spóndio, as Spódo or Spódio.

Spóndolo, the singular of Spóndili.

Spondóso, full of bankes, sides or shores.

Spónere, spóngo, spósi, spósto, to expose, to lay forth. Also to expound or interpret.

Spónga, as Spógna, a Spunge.

Spongadúra, a spunging. Also in pieces, it is called a honnie-combe.

Spongáre, to wipe with a spunge.

Sponghettiére, a Lumpe or Spung-fish.

Spóngia, as Spógna, a spunge.

Spongiáre, to wipe with a spunge.

Spongióso, as Spongóso.

Spongioterra, a Lumpe or Spunge-fish.

Spongíte, a spungie light-stone found in a Spunge.

Spongóso, spungie, puffie, light or full of small holes or eyes like a Spunge.

Sponságlie, as Sposáglie, espousals.

Sponsále, of or pertaining to espousals or mariage. Also the time of bethrothing.

Sponsalítio, a mariage, an espousall, a wedding. Also a token or time of contracting of a mariage or betrothing.

Sponsáre, to espouse or wed.

Spontále, voluntarie, of free-will.

Spontaneaménte, willingly, without compulsion, of free will or of it's owne sake.

Spontáneo, willingly, naturally, voluntarie, of his owne free-will and choise.

Spontáre, to abate the edge or point of any thing or weapon, to blunt, to vnpoint. Also to amate or dant or take downe the edge. Also to bud or peepe out, as the light, the morning, or raies 



of the Sunne doe.

Spontáre le ónghie, to pare ones nailes.

Spontatúra, an abating of any point or edge, a blunting. Also a budding or peeping forth.

Spontonáre, to hit or beat with any staffe, to foine, to pricke or thrust at. Also to pricke, to vrge or prouoke on.

Spontonáta, a foine, a pricke, a thrust with any staffe or sharpe weapon. Also a pricking or prouoking on.

Spontóne, a forest-bill, a bores-speare, a iauelin, a partizan. Also a small long instrument of iron sharpe at the end to thrust through any thing to prooue if any thing be hidden therein. Also a bodkin. Also the pricke, needle or sting of any Serpent or Waspe.

Spónzole, a kind of Mushroms or Todestooles.

Spopoláto, vnpeopled, disinhabited. Also spread abroad to all people.

Sporcaménte, filthily, fouly, vncleanely, sluttishly, durtily, impurely.

Sporcáre, to foule, to defile, to beray, to pollute, to durtie, to make impure.

Sporcaría, as Sporchézza.

Sporchézza, filth, foulenesse, impuritie, pollution, loathsomnesse, filthinesse.

Sporcidíco, that speaketh any filthy, dishonest, vncleane or bawdie talke.

Sporcífico, that maketh vncleane, that polluteth or defileth.

Sporcítia, as Sporchézza.

Spórco, foule, filthy, vncleane, impure.

Sporcúra, as Sporchézza.

Spórgere, as Pórgere, to reach out.

Sporgiúto, as Porgiúto, reached out.

Spórre, as Spónere, to expound.

Spórta, any kind of basket, hampier or panier or flasket. Also a kind of great weight.

Sportaiuólo, a Porter of burdens in a basket.

Sportáre, to export, to carie forth.

Sportáro, a basket-maker.

Sportáta, an exporting or carying out.

Sportatióne, exportation or carying forth.

Sporteglióne, a Night-bat or Reare-mouse.

Sportella, a hand-basket, any little basket, panier or flasket. Also a small banquet or drinking that the rich Romans made to them that at extraordinarie houres came to visite and salute them.

Sportellína, any little Sportella.

Sportello, a little out-ietting porch or window. Also a wicket or posterne dore.

Spórti, out-ietting porches of houses.

Sportiglióne, a Night-bat or Reare-mouse. 

Spórto, as Porgiúto, reached out. Also an out-ietting or out-butting part of any house. Also any out-porch or bay-window. Also the eawes or penteis of a house.

Sportoglióne, a Night-bat or Reare-mouse.

Spórtola, as Spórtula.

Sportoncella, as Sportella.

Sportóne, any great basket or hampier.

Spórtula, any little basket, panier, flasket, or hamper, but it was anciently taken for monie or meate distributed by Princes to the people as an almes, and also for the plaintifs and defendants monie paid ordinarilie by both for iudgement in law, that is, a counsellers or seriants fee, but it is now taken in Venice and Rome for a certaine fee which euerie man that hath anie sute in law paieth to the Pope or Saint Peter, if he by law obtaine his sute. They call it in Venice, il Carátto di San Márco, for euerie man paieth so much the hundred. There is an office in England, called the Hamper.

Sporzána, a kind of little bird.

Spósa, a spouse, a bride, a new wedded wife.

Sposáglie, a contract, an espousall, a betrothing or affiancing of a man or woman before full marriage. Also any gift or loue-token which a wooer or suter giueth to his affianced wife as a pledge of his vnfained good will.

Sposále, as Sponsale.

Sposalítio, as Sponsalítio.

Sposáre, to espouse, to wed, to marry.

Spolarésco, of or belonging to a wedding.

Sposaríe, bridings, bride-trickes, pulings.

Sposéuole, espousable, mariagable.

Spositióne, an exposition, an expounding.

Spositóre, an expositor, an expounder.

Spóso, a bride-groome, a new married man.

Spossataménte, beyond all power.

Spossáto, depriued of power or force.

Spossente, powerlesse, strength or forcelesse.

Spósto, exposed, laide foorth, expounded.

Spoueríre, rísco, ríto, to dispouerish.

Spozzáre, to vnwell, to draw from out a well.

Spránga, a sprang, a stang, a barne or Crosse-beame of a dore. Also any flat slate, plate or blade of mettall. Also a mouing, a wailing or lamenting.

Sprangáre, to sprang, to stang, to barne or bolt a dore. Also to waile, to moane or lament. Also to burle, to throw or fling away with violence.

Sprangáta., looke Sprangáre.

Sprazzáre, to pudle. Also to dash or besprinkle. Also to shoure downe violently. Also to rage or rore and surge with fury as the Sea doth being stormie.

Sprázzo, the fury, rage, fretting, roarering or working of the Sea or any water. Also any puddle. Also a dashing or sprinkling. Also a violent shouring downe. Also a heape of filth, of durt or kennell rakings.

Sprecaménto, a powring out. Also a wastfull or riotous and lauish consuming.

Sprecáre, to powre out. Also to consume. or wast riotously or lauishly.

Spregaménto, as Sprecaménto.

Spregáre, as Sprecáre.

Spregatóre, a riotous or wastefull spender, a spend thrift.

Spregiáre, to despise, to disgrace, to disparage, to dispraise, to contemne, to vilifie.

Spregio, contempt, scorne, dispraise.

Spregionáre, to free or deliuer out of prison.

Spregnáre, to be deliuered of child or of any wombe deliuery.

Spremere, to wring wet clothes. Also to crush, to presse, to squease or wring out. Also to expresse.

Spremúto, wrung, crushed, squeased or pressed out.

Spressaménte, expresly, of purpose.

Spressióne, expression.

Spretáre, to vnpriest, to dispriest.

Spreto, despised, naught set by.

Sprezzabile, despisable, contemptible.

Sprezzáre, as Spregiáre.

Sprezza sagraménto, an Atheist, a scorner of the holy sacraments.

Sprezzatóre, a despiser, a contemner.

Sprezzatúra, a contemning, a despising.

Sprezzéuole, despisable, that may be contemned or scorned.

Sprezzo, as Spregio, contempt.

Sprigionáre, as Spregionáre.

Sprimacciáre, as Spiumacciáre.

Sprimantía, the squinancy in the throate.

Sprímere, as Spremere.

Springáre, to yarke, to kicke, to winze.

Spríngere, as Springáre.

Sprínto, yarked, winzed, kicked, spurned.

Sprízza, any inckling of a matter.

Sprizzáre, as Spruzzáre.

Sprofittáre, to disprofit, to loose by the bargaine, not to thriue.

Sprofitto, disprofit, losse. 



Sprofondáre, to breake out the bottome of any thing. Also to sinke to the bottome.

Sprolongáre, as Prolongáre.

Spromésso, vnpromised, broken promise.

Sprométtere, métto, mísi, mésso, to vnpromise, to breake promise.

Spronáio, a Spurrier, a maker of spurs.

Spronáre, to spur, as Speronáre.

Spronáta, a pricke with a spur.

Spróne, a sour, as Speróne.

Spronella, a mullet in armory, as Ispronella.

Spróni al fiánco, vsed by Petrarke for the prick of conscience. Also for prouocation. Also for ielousie.

Sproportionále, without proportion.

Sproportionalità, disproportion.

Sproportionáre, to disproportion.

Sproportióne, disproportion.

Sproportionéuole, disproportionable.

Spropósito, against purpose, to no purpose.

Sprouáto, tried to the vttermost.

Sprouedére, véggo, víddi, 
vísto, or vedúto, to disprouid, to vnfurnish.

Sprouedúta, Alla sprouedúta, extempore, vnprouided for, without warning.

Sprouedutaménte, vnprouidedly, vnawares. Also extempore.

Sprouedúto, disprouided, vnfurnished.

Sprouiero, a sparuise for a bed.

Sprouísta, as Sprouedúta.

Sprouísto, as Sprouedúto.

Spruzzáglia, any sprinckling, deawdrops.

Spruzzaménto, as Sprúzzo.

Spruzzáre, to asperge, to sprinkle, to spirt. Also to dash with drops.

Sprúzzo, an asperging, a sprinkling, a spirting, a dashing with drops.

Sprúzzolo, a holy water sprinkle.

Spuázzo, as Sputáccio.

Spudáre, as Sputáre.

Spudásto, a louer of vnnaturall sinne.

Spúdo, as Spúto.

Spuginóso, spungeous, spungie.

Spúgna, as Spógna, a spunge.

Spugnáre, as Espugnáre.

Spugnosità, spunginesse, hollownesse.

Spugnóso, as Spongóso, spungie.

Spuláre, to filch or pilfer cunningly.

Spulezzáre, to vn-flea, to pike fleaes. Also to mince small. Also to flinch, to run or sneake away with speed.

Spúlso, expelled, expulsed, cast out.

Spultríce, expulsiue, expelling.

Spulzelláre, to defloure, to disuirgine.

Spulzelláta, defloured, disuirgined.

Spúma, foame, froth or scum.

Spumanítri, salpeter. 

Spumánte, frothy, foaming, full of foame.

Spumáre, to foame, to froath, to scum.

Spumeggiáre, as Spumáre.

Spumeo, foamy, frothy, scummy. Also of the colour or resembling foame.

Spumífero, foame-bearing.

Spumóso, full of foame, froth or scum.

Spúnga, any kind of spunge.

Spungosità, spunginesse.

Spungóso, spungie, spungious.

Spuntále, a bodkin, a sting, a pricke.

Spuntáro, as Spontáre.

Spuntatúra, as Spontatúra.

Spuntelláre, the contrary of Puntelláre

Spúnto, abated of his edge or point, blunted, pointlesse.

Spuntonáro, as Spontonáre.

Spuntonáta, as Spontonáta.

Spuntóne, as Spontóne.

Spuóla, as Spóla.

Spuoladóra, as Spoladóra.

Spuoláre, as Spoláre.

Spupilláre, to dispupill, to come out of a pupils or wardes state, to come out of nonage.

Spuráre, to purifie, to purge, to cleanse.

Spúrchia, corrupt or goare-bloud, a disease in a Horse of corrupt bloud.

Spurgáre, to purge or clarifie. Also to hem or cleare the voice, to straine to spet.

Spurgatióne, a purging or fetching vp of rotten fleagme.

Spúrghi, clots of fleagme fetcht vp with strainings, spaulings, spettings.

Spuriággine, bastardie.

Spuriáre, to bastardize, to adulterate.

Spuríno, as Spúrio.

Spúrio, a bastard, a base borne. Also adulterate or counterfelt.

Spurióso, bastardly, basely borne.

Spúro, as Spúrio.

Sputacchiáre, as Sputacciáre.

Sputácchio, as Sputáccio.

Sputacciáre, to bespaw, to bespit.

Sputáccio, spettle or slauering at the mouth.

Spúta in cróce, a damned. Atheist, that will not sticke to spit at the Crosse of Christ.

Spúta-páne, a kind of fish so called. Also a spit-bread, one that is ouerfed.

Spúta-paternóstri, a dissembling Puritane a spitter of beades.

Sputáre, to spet or voide fleagme at the mouth.

Spúta-perle, a spit-pearle, a finicall talkatiue fellow.

Sputasententie, an affected man in his speech, a nice fellow that speakes and spets sentenccs.

Sputatóndo, a nice finde-fault, one that markes whether men spet in order or no. 

Sputatóre, a spetting or spauling fellow.

Sputázzo, as Sputáccio.

Spúto, the spettle of a mans mouth.

Spúzza, any filthy, stinke, stench, sent or sauour. Also it stinkes.

Spuzzáre, to stinke or yeeld an ill sent.

Spuzzétta, a nice, coy or puling dame.

Spúzzo, any kind of filthy stinke or stench.

Spuzzolente, stinking, full of stench.

Spuzzóre, as Spúzzo.

Squaccaráre, to squatter, to squirt or lash it out behind after a purgation, to squitter.

Squácchera, a squattring soft turde, a squittring.

Squaccherácqua, a squattring turde as thin as water, a squittring.

Squaccheráre, as Squaccaráre.

Squaccheráto, plashie, waterish, squattred.

Squacciáre, to squash, to ruine, to hauocke.

Squáccio, a squashing, a hauocke, a ruine.

Squácquara, as Squaccherácqua,

Squacquaráre, as Squaccaráre.

Squacquarata, a squattring, a squirting, a dashing. Also a foolish chat or flim-flam tale.

Squadernáre, to tosse, to tumble or ouerturne bookes or quires of paper. Also to display, to vnfold, to disclose or lay open, to blazen. Also to tell a glorious tale.

Squádra, a square, a squire or Carpenters rule. Also a squadron, a troupe or band of men, but properly a part of a companie of souldiers of twentie or fiue and twentie whose chiefe is a Corporall.

Squádra móndi, a squarer out of worlds, an Astrologer.

Squadránte, as Quadránte, a quadrant.

Squadráre, to square, to rule, to squire, to cut or hew out. Also to make foure square. Also to quarter in pieces. Also to reduce into squadrons. Also to marke, to heede, to note or watch. Also to fadge, to square, to become, to fit, to beseeme or sute well together.

Squadráre un pezzo, to set a piece leuell.

Squadríglia, a little troupe, rout, crew or band of men, a beuie of women.

Squádro, vsed for a squire or ruler.

Squádro di máre, a Skate-fish.

Squadronáre, to squadron, to marshall or set men in troupes or squadrons.

Squadróne, a squadron, a troupe or band of souldiers reduced in array and marshalled in order to stand, to march, to charge or fight.

Squáglia, a scale of any fish or Serpent. 



Also a plate of brasse or other mettall.

Squagliáre, to scale fishes or Serpents. Also to soften or vncrud milke. Also to powre or shed forth, or to melt, sound or cast any mettall.

Squagliatúra, an vncrudding. Also a melting, a founding or casting of mettalls.

Squáglio, an vncrudding. Also as Squatína.

Squaglióso, scalie, full of hard scales.

Squáia, as Squatína.

Squáina, as Squatína.

Squaiuóla, a little Skate-fish called Ladies.

Squála, a kind of bird. Also a kind of soft squashing Hazle-nut.

Squalidézza, grizlinesse, gastlinesse, vglinesse, deformitie of any thing for lacke of trimming. Also the ruthfull estate of those that be araigned or condemned, or otherwise in great heauinesse who shew an heauie countenance.

Squalidíre, dísco, dito, to become, to make or looke grizly, gastly, vglie, grim or loathsome.

Squalidità, as Squalidézza.

Squálido, squallid, grizlie, grim-looking, gastlie, vglie, loathsome, causing horror.

Squálo, a fish called a Pollard or Chieuen. Some take it for the fish Squatína.

Squallóre, as Squalidézza.

Squáma, the scale of any fish or Serpent. Also any little piece of plate in any Armour. Also the drosse, offall or scum or leade or other mettall melted.

Squáme degl'ócchij, filmes or scales that grow in the eyes.

Squameo, scalie, full of scales.

Squamígero, scales-bearing.

Squamína di pésce, scales of fishes.

Squammei, the seames, sutures or ioynings together of the scull that lye about the eares on both sides like seales.

Squamóso, scalie or full of scales, rough and sharpe. Also full of drosse and scum.

Squára, some part of a ship.

Squaraguaíte, close scouts, or watehfull sentinells.

Squarcella, a custard, an egge-pie, a flawne or a doucet. Also a cheesecake.

Squarciabócca, a hard bit for a Colt.

Squarcia-cáne, a nickname, a dog-flear.

Squarciacantóne, a nickname, a hewcorner, a swash-buckler, a swaggrer.

Squarciacéci, a rag-tearer.

Squarciaménti, tearings, rendings. 

Squarciapíno, a kind of Pinnace or Fli-boate.

Squarciáre, to rend, to teare or rag.

Squarciatóre, a murthering shot, or rending Arrow. Also a tearer.

Squarciatúra, a rending or tearing in pieces.

Squarciauólpe, a kind of tearing shot or arrow.

Squarcína, a short sword, hanger, curtleax, daggar or poinado. Also a priuie Pistoll or short pocket-dag. Also a tearing or murthering chaine-shot or haile-shot.

Squáreio, rent, torns, rag'd, tattered. Also a day shop-booke, or booke of slate-stones.

Squarcióne, a great ragge. Also a miserlie, fleering, barely clothed companion.

Squarína, as Squatína.

Squaróso, rough or sharpe like a Skatefish, or hauing filthinesse sticking vpon it.

Squárra, a measuring squire or ruler. Also scuruinesse or roughnesse of the skin.

Squarrétta snodáta, a ioynted squire or Ruler.

Squárro, as Squatína.

Squarscína, as Squarcína.

Squartacantóni, as Squarciacantóni.

Squartanáto, rid of a quartane ague.

Squartaménti, hackings, quarterings.

Squartáre, to quarter, to cut in quarters.

Squartatóre, a hacker, a quarterer.

Squarzína, as Squarcína.

Squár, zo. Looke A squárzo.

Squási, as Quási. Also vsed for nicenesse or squeamishnesse.

Squasimódo, in a manner, as it were, as a man would say. Also a simple gull, one that is almost a man, a noddie.

Squassacóda, a Wag-taile.

Squassaláre, as Squassáre.

Squassapennácchio, a tisty-tosty, a wag-feather, a tosse-plume, a swash-buckler.

Squassáre, to shake, to tosse or wag.

Squassáta, a shaking, a tossing, a waging.

Squassatúra, as Squassáta.

Squassoláta, as Squassáta.

Squatína, the fish Maide, Ray, Skate or Thornbacke.

Squáto, as Rhína.

Squatráre, as Squadráre. Also to cut, to hew or slice in pieces.

Squátro, as Squádro.

Squéro, as Squerro.

Squerníre, as Sguarníre.

Squerro, a docke to build a ship in, and from whence ships may be lanched into the sea.

Squietáre, to disquiet, to disturbe, to trouble.

Squietúdine, vnquietnesse, vnrest, trouble.

Squilítico acéto, Vinegar made of Squilla.

Squílla, a sea Onion called Squílla. Also a sakring-bell, a sance-bell, a little-bell. Also a shrill sounding thing. Also a Shrimpe or Prawne-fish.

Squillánte, shrill-resounding or ringing.

Squillantía, the squince or squinancy.

Squilláre, to ring, sound or speake shrill, to squeake. Also as Spilláre.

Squillétto, a Gimlet or Spigot for wine.

Squinánte, the hearbe Squinanth, Camels-meate or Sweet-rush.

Squinantía, the Squince or Squinancie.

Squinternáre, as Squadernáre.

Squiózzola, as Spolétta.

Squisitézza, exquisitnesse, exactnesse.

Squisíto, exquisite, exact.

Squitáto, disquieted, sluggish, lazie.

Squittináre, as Serutináre.

Squittínio, as Scrutinio. Also a ioyning or coupling together.

Squittinóso, full of ioynts or couplings.

Squittíre, tísco, títo, to skip, to skud away heere and there, or nimbly and quickly. Also to squeake or cry as a Parret.

Squiuézza, as Schifézza.

Squíuo, as Schífo, or Schíuo.

Squizzáre, as Sguizzáre, or Schizzáre.

Squizzarello, a small Cundite-pipe.

Squízzaro, a Swizzer or Heluetian.

Squizzaiuólo, as Schizzaruólo.

Squízzo, as Schízzo.

Squóglio, as scóglio. Also an infolding, as of an Onion.

Sradicáre, to grub or pull vp by the root.

Sramponáto, a flat-worne horse-shooe.

Sredáre, to disinherite.

Sregoláre, to bring out of rule or order.

Sregoláto, disordered, out of rule, irregular.

Srenáto, weake or hurt or broken in the raines.

St, a word commanding silence, whosht.

Stà, vsed as Quésta, this, this same, namely before Máne, Mattína, Nótte and Séra.

Stà, of Stáre, he or it stands, abideth, remaineth or lieth, Stábene, be is or doth well.

Stà a tè, it stands or lieth in thee.

Stabbiáre, to polish, to sleeke or make bright. Also to stable or put into a manger. 



Stábbio, a stable. Also a Hayloft. Also an Ox-stall, a manger or a racke.

Stabéne, it is well, it is fit, it is seemely, it fiteth or becommeth.

Stábile, stable, firme, permanent, steadfast, fixed, immooueable, durable. Also any lands or immoueable goods.

Stábili, lands, firme or immoueable goods a mans patrimony or inheritance.

Stabiliménto, any establishing, setling or confirming.

Stabilire, lísco, líto, to establish, to confirme, to settle, to fix, to make fast or firme.

Stabilità, firmenesse, stedfastnesse, constancy.

Stáboli, certaine bones in the hinder part of ones logs.

Stabulário, a stable-keeper, an hostler. Also an Inne-houlder.

Stábulo, a stable, a shelter or houell for cattell.

Stácca, as Stáccia. Also a great headded naile or stud. Also a stacke, a pole or pearch.

Staccáre, to vnfasten, to disioyne, to plucke away from, to vntach.

Stacchétte, little round-beadded Maddles or Studs.

Stácchi, Wilde-sauge, or Field-sauge.

Stacchiótto, close, whoshe, squat, sneaking or lurking secretly.

Stácci, for Cistà, there standeth.

Stáccia, a ruler or Carpenters squire. Also a lath of wood. Also a little pile or stacke of wood. Also any flat thing as a Pie-plate. Also any thin cake or tarte.

Stacciáre, to measure with a Ruler or Squire. Also to sift, to searce or bolte meale.

Stacciáta, a Cake or Tart of sifted-meale.

Stacciatúra, any kind of sifting or searcing.

Stáccio, a siue, a searce.

Stácciola, a little ruler or squire.

Staccionáta, an ouer-ridden or foiled iade or horse or whore.

Stacciquéto, a clap, a whirret or blow on the eare or check to make one quiet.

Stacconeggiáre, as Tacconeggiare.

Stáchia, as Stáchide.

Stáchide, Field-sauge, Sauge of the mountaine.

Stà con Dío, abide with God.

Stacténo, a kind of liquor distilling from the Mirrh-tree.

Stácula, a kind of wine or grape.

Stadeo, some part belonging to a cart.

Stadera, a paire of great waighing scales.

Stadiále, a measure of ground of 125. paces or 625 foote.

Stadicáre, to hostage or become a bodilie pledge for another.

Stádico, an hostage or pledge. Also a chiefe iusticer or principall officer ouer prisoners.

Stadiera, as Stadera.

Stádio, a measure of ground where of be three sorts, one of Italie contayning 125. paces, eight of which make an English-mile, the second Olimpicum, which is 120. paces, the third Pirrhicum, which is 200. paces, we call it a furlong. Also a running race or place where running is exercised as well of men as of horses.

Stáffa, a stirrop of a sadle. Also the bootes of a Coach. Also a musicall instrument as Crótalo.

Staffáre, to set feete in the stirop, to be euer riding.

Stáffe di ferro, as Bríde di ferro.

Staffeggiáre, to be euer riding, to haue euer the feete in the stirrop. Also to loose the stirrop in riding.

Staffétta, a running Post, a Currier, A staffétta, posting, in post-haste, euer riding Saffétta, hath also beene vsed for the instrument called Crótalo.

Staffetteggiáre, as Staffeggiáre.

Staffiere, a foot-man, a lacquey, a horsboy that runnes by a mans stirrop.

Staffiláre, to scourge, to whip or yearke with a strap or stirrop-leather.

Staffiláte, stripes, yerkes or lashes with straps or stirrop-leathers.

Staffilatória spáda, a whip, a scourge, a red.

Staffile, a strap or stirrop-leather. Also any whip or scourge. Also as Staphíle.

Staffíro, as Stafifágria.

Staffíta, as Staffile.

Stafisagria, the weed Staues-acre.

Stafóide, as Staphóide.

Stágge, squires, rulers, lathes. Also a kind of fowling-net, gin or spring.

Stággia, a ruler or squire to leauell or measure by.

Staggiáre, as Staticáre, to pledge or be hostage for, to leuell by a ruler.

Stággio, as Stático. Also as Stággia.

Staggíre, gísco, gíto, to sesse or rate one at any payment. Also to heape or rake vp in cockes and then spread abroade againe as they doe Hay or Barly.

Stagionáre, to season or dresse-meates.

Stagioncella, a small season or while.

Stagióne, a season or time of the yeere.

Stáglia, nel veleggiáre in quei mári úsano la stáglia.

Stagliáre, to iagge or cut or slash in pieces. Also to faltar or maffle in speech.

Stagliáta., looke Alla stagliáta.

Stagliáto, vále sénza órdine o fuór di vía. Also faltered or maffled in speech.

Stagnadella, a baking-pan.

Stagnále, that liueth, dwelleth or is seated neare or in any standing-poole, water, Pond, Fennes, Meares or Lake.

Stagnaménto, a stanching as of blood.

Stagnáre, to stay, to stop or stanch running of blood or any leaking. Also to steele, to glase or tinne any pot or vessed. Also to stand still as a poole, or to grow to a standing poole.

Stagnaría, a stannary. Also the trade of Peawterers. Also a Peawterers-shop.

Stagnaríno, a Peawterer, a Stannier, or seller of Tinne. Also a Tinkard.

Stagnáro, as Stagnaríno.

Stagnáta, any pot or vessell of Peawter.

Stagnéuole, stanchable, that may be stanched.

Stagnífero, Tin-bearing.

Stágno, the mettall we call Tinne or Peawter. Also stanch or stanched. Also a stagne, a standing water Lake or Poole, a Fish-pond or Poole a waterish Meere.

Stagnóso, Tinny, full of Tin.

Stagnuólo, a kind of foile made of Tin that they put ouer iron plates. Also a kind of wrought day that Founders vse to stop and make moldes with.

Stagóna, the first incense falling from the tree.

Stà in páce, fare well, abide in peace.

Stáia, the Plurall of Stáro, bushels.

Stáio, a measure like our bushell.

Staióra, bushels.

Staiuóla, a certaine measure of land of 160. foote of ours.

Stalágmio, an eare-iewell.

Stalágmia, a kind of pure and cleare vitriell.

Stalágmo, a Shooe-makers-blacke.

Stalentágine. 

Stálla, the generall name of a place where cattle is housed or abideth. Also a residence, a dwelling or abode in generall. Also any kind of stable or quierie for horses, an Ostollery or place for sodder, an Ox-stall, a sheepe-stall, fold or pen.

Stallággto, stabling, stalling, or housing for cattell. Also stabling roome. Also the rent paied for a stable.

Stalláre, to stable, horses. Also to stall, to pen, to fold or empound cattell. Also to stale or pisse as a horse.

Stalláro, a stabler or stable-keeper.

Stallático, as Stallággia.

Stalléro, as Stalláro.

Stallétta, any little Stálla.

Stalliere, a stabler, a stableman.

Stalliero, as Stalliere.



Stallíre, lísco, líto, to hale or tow a ship.

Stállo, any stable, stall, houell, shelter, shrouding or lodging, namely for Cattell.

Stallóne, a Stallion horse to couer Mares. Also any great stable.

Stallonéggio, the hire giuen for couering of Mares.

Stamaiuólo, a maker, a dresser or seller of Stamels. Also a wooll-winder. Also a Draper.

Stamáne, this present morning.

Stamattína, this present morning.

Stambécchi, the hee Chamoy, a beast gotten betweene a hee Goate and a Hind, dárdi, árchi, spuntóni et stambécchi.

Stambecchíno, tánti stambecchíni et dárdi.

Stambernícco, sè fósse béne Atlánte ó stambernícco.

Stambúcchi, as Stambécchi.

Stáme, any kinde of spinning, yarne, whoofe or stamine for any web and to be wouen. Also any spinning stuff, or that is in the Loome to be wouen. Also a kind of cloth as our Penystone or Stammell is.

Stamégna, a Colander or a strayner.

Stamegnáre, to straine through a colander.

Stamétto, the stuffe we call Flannell.

Stamígna, as Stamégna.

Staminára, as Stamégna.

Stamíne, the vpright ribs or pieces of timber of the inside of a ship, of our Shipwrights called foot-stocks or foot-sticks

Stámpa, a stamp, a print, an impression, a marke, a presse.

Stampanáre, to make a vaine, and idle, and bragging shew or apearance, but a good ancient author hath vsed Stampanáre, for to stab, to murther or thrust one thorow with some sharpe weapon.

Stampanáta, an idle, a vaine-glorious and bragging shew or apparance. Also a stabbing, a murthering or thrusting through with some sharpe weapon.

Stampáre, to stampe, to print, to presse.

Stamparía, a Print or Printing-house.

Stampatóre, a Printer, a Stamper.

Stampáccia, any filthy print or printing or stamping.

Stampella, a kind of religious garment.

Stampelláre, to stalke or goe on stilts.

Stampelle, stalkes or stilts.

Stampería, a Print or Printing-house.

Stampináta, a fit of mirth or fidling. Also a kind of country dancing, singing or fidling anciently vsed in Italie.

Stampíta, as Stampináta. Also wearinesse. 

Stampíto, vsed for Stampáto.

Stancábile, weariable, that may be wearied.

Stancacauállo, Hedge-hysop or Gratia dei, which when Horses haue eaten they wax leane and languish vpon it.

Stancamáno, the leaft-hand.

Stancamólo, sottilità & ingánno di cautéla in dánno altrúi.

Stancáre, to wearie, to tire, to saint.

Stancheggiáre, as Stancáre.

Stanchétta, as Stanghétta.

Stanchéuole, as Stancábile.

Stanchézza, wearinesse, tiring, faintnesse.

Stánco, stanke, wearie, tired, faint.

Stándo, standing. Also as Stánte.

Stándo uéro, being true.

Stanella, a poore Shepherds frocke.

Stanfella, a Colte of an Asse & a Horse.

Stánga, a stang, a sprang, a barre or perch to barre a dore with. Also a cole-staffe. Also a Hawkes perch. Also a wooden eauer or hand-spike.

Stangáre, to stang, to sprang or barre a dore. Also to perch.

Stangheggiáre, as Stangáre. Also to set the dice or tirannize ouer one.

Stangata, a blow giuen with a Stánga. Also a Stánga full of any thing.

Stanghétta, a little barre, stang, sprang, perch, colestaffe, handspike or woodden leauer. Also the eye of the branch vpward from the place of the waterchaine.

Stangóne, a great Stanga.

Stannaría, a Stannerie, a Tinne-mine, a place where Tinne is made.

Stannário, a Pewterer, a Tinner.

Stanótte, this present night.

Stánte, standing or being. Also a while or space of time, Acqua stánte, a standing or still water.

Stánte chè, since that, whilest that.

Stántia, a residence, a standing or abiding place, an abode, a lodging, a chamber. Vsed also for instance or earnestnesse.

Stantiaménto, as Stántia.

Stantiáre, to reside, to dwell, to lodge, to wonne, to abide, to chamber, to station. Also to fix, to establish. Also to surcease. Also to instance with importunitie.

Stánti árme, vpright armes.

Stantiétta, a little Stántia.

Stantío, stale, tainted, vnsweet, flie-bitten meat, ouer mortified.

Stantióso, full of lodgings or chambers.

Stantíuo, as Stantío.

Stánza, as Stántia, but properly a stanzo or stance or staue of eight or six verses. Vsed also for Instánza, instance, earnestnesse, importunitie.

Stanziále, firme, setled, remaining. 

Stanziáre, as Stantiáre.

Staphánide, a kind of wine or Grape.

Staphile, Stauesacre, Staphesacre or Licebane. Also the úuula when it waxeth blacke and blew like a grape at the vimost end.

Staphilína, a kind of wilde Parsnep-roote.

Staphilodéndro, the wilde Fistike, Bladder-nut-tree, or Anthonie-nut-tree.

Staphóide, the third bone of the foote called of O'sso nauifórme, which is next to the ankle in the inside of the foote, called in English the ship-like bone, or boat-like bone.

Stapulário, a Stapler, one of the Staple.

Starbiliáre, as Strabiliáre.

Stárci, to abide or dwell there.

Stáre, stò, stéi, or stétti, státo, to stand, to stay. Also to dwell, to abide or remaine. Also to lye, to be, to doe, to relie, to endure, to consist. Also to be fit, to be conuenient, to become, to be seemely, &c. Looke the vnder written phrases, as also Fáre stáre.

Stáre a báda, to stand at a bay.

Stáre a bómba., looke A bómba.

Stáre a bóttéga, to looke to the maine chance, to follow ones shop, trade or businesse.

Stáre a cása, to continue in his wits, to abide at home.

Stáre a crepacuóre, to liue at heartsease, to wallow in pleasure.

Stáre ad alcúno, to stand or fit or be any mans turne.

Stáre a diságio, to stand, to abide or lye vneasily or incommodiously.

Stáre a fáre, to stand, to doe or make, to be a doing.

Stáre a flússo, to goe for a flush at cardes.

Stárea frónte, to with or gaine-stand, to resist.

Stáre a giacére, to stand or be lying.

Stáre al détto, to stand to a mans word or saying.

Stáre all'erta, to looke well about, to haue a quicke eye, to lye in waite, to be warie, heedie, vigilant or circumspect, to be ready for all aduantages.

Stáre al giudítio, to stand to the iudgement.

Stáre álla guárdia, to stand and watch, to keepe sentinell, to be watching.

Stáre álla légge, to stand to the law.

Stáre álla uelétta, to stand scouting, to watch narrowly, to stand sentinell.

Stáre allégro, to liue and be merrie.

Stáre álle póste, to stand and waite in some set place or station ready at command.

Stáre al mónde, to liue or dwell in the world. 



Stáre al paragóne, to stand to the triall as Gold to the touch.

Stáre al sóldo, to be or liue in pay as souldiers and Captaines doe.

Stáre a martello, to stand to the triall or hammer as Gold doth. Also to be in anxietie, doubt, feare or perplexitie.

Stáre a óglio sánto, to be ready for the last vnction or to yeeld vp the ghost.

Stáre a pancióllc, to liue at hearts-ease, or wallow in good cheere.

Stáre a pátti, to stand to any bargaine or couenant.

Stáre a perícolo, to liue or stand in danger or perill.

Stáre a petto, to stand ouer against or in comparison.

Stáre a pigióne, to dwell in a house that is rented and not a mans owne, by metaphor vsed for one that is crazed and sicke and ready to die.

Stáre a póllo pésto, to be very sicke, to be at the point of death, to be able to eat nothing but cullises.

Stáre appoggiáto, to stand leaning, to leane or rest vpon.

Stáre appresso, to stand by. Also to dwell or abide neere vnto.

Stáre a schimbécchi, to liue and still frequent in bawdie houses.

Stáre a sedére, to sit still or be sitting.

Stáre a ségno, to stand to the marke, for a man to keepe his wits about him.

Stáre a senténza, to stand to sentence or iudgement.

Stáre a speránza, to liue or waite in hope.

Stáre aspettándo, to stand waiting or tarying.

Stáre a sténto, to liue in paine, languor or carking paine,

Stáre attórno, to stand, to dwell, to be, or continue about.

Stáre a nedére, to stand and see, to marke.

Stáre béne, to stand well, to be well, to fare well, to lye well. Also to be wealthy or rich. Also to be fit, comely, conuenient or seemely. Also to become well vpon, to sute well with.

Stáre béne a cása, to looke well home, to be a good husband. Also to be able to liue.

Stáre buóna pezza, to stay a good while, to tarie a long time.

Stáre cáldo, to be or lye hote or warme.

Stáre chéto, to be quiet, to stand still, to be whosht.

Stáre con áltri, to stand or dwell with others.

Stáre di buón'ánimo, to be merry, to haue a good heart, not to be dismaied.

Stáre di buóna uóglia, to be merry, to continue cheerefull, to be iollie.

Stáre di mála uóglia, to be sad, to stand pensiue, to be melancholike.

Stáre di mezzo, to be neutrall, to stand between, to be or stand in the midst.

Stáre di sópra, to haue the vpper hand, to ouersway, to dwell or lye aboue or ouer.

Stáre fermo, to stand fast, firme, constant or vnmoueable.

Stáre fórte, idem.

Stáre frésco, to be or stand fresh, that is to be in an ill or bad taking.

Stáre il fátto, the matter to stand, consist or lye vpon.

Stáre in aguáto, to lye in waite.

Stáre inamoráto, to be or liue in loue.

Stáre inánzi, to stand before or forward.

Stáre in árme, to be vp or stand in armes.

Stáre in badiále, to be, lye, sit or liue at all ease or carelesly as an Abbot.

Stáre in bistánte, to stand wauering or in doubt.

Stáre in cása, to bee at home, to keepe home, to dwell with or at home.

Stáre in ceruello, to keepe ones wits, to be circumspect and looke well about.

Stáre in conuersatióne, to liue in companie, or be in conuersation.

Stáre in dozzéna, to be in commons, to borde, to be at liuerie, to eat & drinke with others.

Stáre in dúbbio, to stand in doubt.

Stáre in letto, to lye in bed, to lye a bed.

Stáre in mezzo, as Stáre di mezzo.

Stáre in orécchio, to listen attentiuely.

Stáre in páce, to liue or remaine in peace, to be quiet or lye at ease.

Stáre in panciólle, as Stáre in badiále.

Stáre in pendente, to stand in doubt, to be in suspence, to hang downeward.

Stáre in pensiéro, to be thinking, to muse, to thinke or consider well.

Stáre in piédi, to stand vp or on foote.

Stáre in pósta, to stand heedily waiting, to stand vpon some purpose.

Stáre in ríschio, to be in hazard or ieopardie, to liue in danger.

Stáre insiéme, to stand, to be or dwell together or in companie.

Stáre in sospetto, to stand suspicious, to liue in doubt, feare or suspect.

Stáre in speránza, to liue or be in hope.

Stáre in sul pontíglio, to stand vpon nice points or strict punctos of honour.

Stáre in uílla, to dwell in the country or out of the Citie.

Stáre in uíta, to liue, to be liuing.

Stáre in zúrlo, to stand roundly or close together. Also to stand as it were distracted, or musing still till ones teeth run a water.

Stáre lontáno, to stand or dwell far off.

Stáre maggiése, to lye fallow, to lie idle.

Stáre mále, to be ill, to dwell or stand ill. Also to be sicke or ill at ease. Also to become ill, to be vnfit, to be vncomely and vnconuenient.

Stáre per, to stand for. Also to be about or ready to doe any thing.

Stáre per moríre, to be about or ready to dye.

Stáre sáldo, to stand fast, firme or stiff.

Stáre sáno, to stand sound, to be or liue in good health.

Stáre sopra, to be vpon, to stand or dwell ouer. Also to muze or stand in doubt.

Stáre sópra disè, to muze or be doubtfull of himselfe. Also to stand vpon himselfe. Also to stand vpon termes, and presume of himselfe.

Stáre sótto, to stand, to be, to lye, or dwell vnder. Also to be subiect vnto.

Stáre sù, to stand vpon.

Stáre su l'auíso, to be readie vpon warning.

Stáre sul dúro, to be obstinate or obdurate.

Stáre sul ritróso, to stand wayward, to continue peeuish, to stand vpon nicenesse.

Stáre tra il si & il nò, to be doubtfull, to stand in suspence betweene yea and nay.

Stáre vicíno, to be, to stand, or dwell neere.

Stáre vigilánte, to be vigilant, warie, circumspect, or take heed.

Stárna, a Partridge.

Starnazzáre, to bait as a Hawke, to flutter, or beate the wings.

Starnóni, old Partriges, old Stagers.

Starnótto, a good big Partrige.

Starnutaménti, sneezings.

Starnutáre, to sneeze.

Starnutíre, tísco, títo, to sneeze.

Starnutatióne, a sneeze, or sneezing.

Starnúto, a sneeze, a sneezing.

Stáro, as Stáio, a bushell.

Stárza, il cúculo si óde cantáre dálla stárza.

Staséra, this present euening.

Stásimo, the full subiect of the Chorus his speech. Lat.

Stássene, for Se ne stà, he himselfe stands, lyeth, or dwelleth.

Statarécci, sommerly, things that onely be or come in Summer, Summer fruites.

Statária battáglia, a firme, a setled, or standing battell.

Statárie, summer or shadie places.

Státe, the Summer season. Vsed also for haruest time, or haruest it selfe.

Státe con Dío, abide with God, adiew, farewell.

Státe di san Martíno, the Halcion daies.

Staténo, a kind of small summer wine.

Statera, as Stadera. Also a greeke coine.

Státhmo, an ancient greeke measure. 



Staticáre, to pledge, or be hostage for.

Statíce, an hearbe growing vpon seauen stems or stalks.

Stático, an hostage, a pledge, a suretie for another, a deputie or substitute for another.

Statiera, as Stadera.

Státio da náue, as Squerro, as Statióne.

Stationále, that abideth or standeth fast, or that euer keepes one stacion.

Stationário, a man that hath his appointed station, standing, ward, or place.

Statióne, a station, or standing-place. Also a place of resort where matters are decided. Also a roade, a bay, or station for Ships, as Chattam.

Statísta, a States-man, a Statist.

Státo, the state, the condition, the being, or the qualitie of any thing, a state of minde or life, an accustomed trade or being, a mans state or wealth. Also a state, an estate, a dominion, a seignorie, a Lordship.

Státo, the Participle of Stáre, stood, dwelt, lyen, abided, remained, &c. Looke Stáre well among my rules.

Státo, the Participle of E'ssere, bin. Looke E'ssere among my rules.

Státoa, as Státua.

Statóre, a Purseuant, a Seriant, or a messenger.

Státoua, as Státua.

Státtene, stand or abide from it.

Státua, a statue, an image, or similitude of mettall, yuorie, wood, or stone.

Statuáre, to statue, to image. Also to settle fast.

Statuária, the arte or trade of making, casting, or caruing of statues or images.

Statuário, an imager or founder of brasse, a maker or caruer of statues. Also a roode-loft, or place for statues or images to stand in.

Statuáro, as Statuário.

Statuíre, ísco, íto, to decree, to institute. Also to assigne, to appoint, or prefix.

Statuíto, decreed, instituted. Also assigned, appointed, or prefixed.

Statumína, morter composed of lime and rubble together like parget. Also a fork, a stake, a stay, a shoare, a prop or pole to vnderprop any thing.

Statumináre, to mingle and temper lime and rubble together, to parget. Also to vnder-set, or vnderprop any thing, namely vines with forkes.

Statúra, stature, height, greatnesse, bignesse, or proportion of any bodie.

Statúto, a statute, a decree, an ordinance, a law, a thing certainely determined.

Statúto di ragióne, a law of iudgement.

Stázzo, a station, a standing-place. 

Stazzonáre, to station, to stand. Also to dwell in some setled habitation. Also to mooue or solicite vnto. Also to make or be warie and circumspect.

Stazzóne, a station, a stand, an habitation, a standing-place. Also a Porter.

Stè, as Quéste, but not often vsed, theis.

Stéa, vsed of Dánte for Stia, let him be, stand, lye, or dwell.

Stearíte, a kind of precious stone like vnto tallow or grease.

Steatóma, a kind of impostume, wherein matter like fat or tallow is contained.

Stébe, a kind of Knapweede, or Marfellon.

Stécade, Sticcados, or Cottonweede.

Stécca, a locket of a dagger, a piece of wood or toole that Shoemakers vse. Also any flat lath or splinter. Also a Carpenters squire, or ruler.

Steccadénti, a tooth-picke.

Steccáre, to entrench. Looke Steccáto, to enstake, to palisado.

Steccáto, a trench or fence about a camp, any place railed in with stakes, railes, boords, or poles, a lists or place to fight in. Also a combate.

Stecchétte, thin laths or shindles laid about broken legs or armes.

Stecchíre, chísco, chíto, to grow dry, hard, or barren, or saplesse, as a drie sticke.

Stecchíto, dry, barren, saplesse as a sticke, or hard as skecks.

Stécco, a little sticke, wand, batton, cudgell, riding-rod, or butchers pricke.

Stéccone gli ócchij, as we say a thorne or sticke in ones eyes, that is, some let or impediment.

Stefano, hath bin vsed in iest for a mans bellie, panch, gut, crauer, or mawe. Also a garland, a chaplet, or coronet.

Stéga, a cabbin of a Ship.

Stégge, brambles, briers, thornes, brakes.

Stégna, an ague proceeding of constriction of pores.

Stéi, flocks or hurds of course silke. Also of Stáre, I stood or dwelt.

Stela, a little piller raised vp an end vppon a graue or sepulcre. Also a crosse, or other like monument set vp as a marke by the high waie.

Stelíno, a kind of Mistleto.

Stelipháro, a kind of great Plantaine.

Stélla, a starre, or any of the celestiall bodies that giue light vnto the world. Also an Aster, a Planet. Also a destinie, or fate. Also a Starre-fish, or fiue foote.

Stella, any chip or spelt, such as Carpenters make in hewing of timber.

Stélla chiomáta, a blazing-starre. 

Stélla fissa, any fixed or vnmoouing starre.

Stelláto gíro, the starrie skie or firmament.

Stélla herba, Crowfoote, Plantaine, Buckhorne, or hearbe Iuie. Some take it for Starwort, Codwort, or Sharewort. Some take it for Swinecresses. I find it also for Woodroofe, Woodrow, or Woodrowell.

Stéllamarína, a Star-fish, or Fiuefoote.

Stellánte, shining, twinkling, spangling, glistring, or blazing like a starre.

Stellánti gíri, the starrie skies.

Stélla poláre, the North-starre.

Stelláre, to starre, to blaze, to glister, to spangle, to twinkle or shine as a starre. Also as Stélla herba. Also to blast or planet-strike.

Stélla regia, the starre-royall.

Stellária, a medicinable earth found in Samos, marked like a starre. Also as Stélla herba.

Stellatióne, a starring. Also a blasting, or planet-striking.

Sellato, starrie, starried, full, replenished or garnished with starres. Also full of eyes, marked, or full of specks or spangles like starres.

Stelle, the little wheeles of a watch or clocke.

Stélle, Starres.

Stelleggiáre, to starre, to glitter like starres.

Stelleo, starrie, or like starres.

Stellétta, any little starre. Also the rowell of a spurre. Also a toole that Printers vse. Also a mullet in armorie.

Stellétti, a kind of Simnell-bread.

Stellífero, starres-bearing, or bringing.

Stellificáre, to stellifie. Also to extoll to the skies, to enstarre.

Stellígero, as Stellífero.

Stellíno, a kind of fine bird.

Stellionáto, a cozening, a cheating, a conie-catching. Also a counterfeting of marchandise. Also a deceit in dissembling a thing to take profit of another vniustly.

Stellióne, a beast like a Lizard with spots in his necke like starres called a stellion. Also a kind of fish called a Starre-fish, or Fiue-foote. Also as Stela.

Stellóne, any great pole, staffe, stick, rod, roode, pearch, or stake of wood.

Stellóso, starrie, full of starres.

Stélo, a stalke or stem of anything that groweth. Also as Stíle.

Stembécco, vsed as Stambécco.

Stemma, any stem or branching stalke. Also the stocke, the race or blood of a house or familie. Also a garland or 



chaplet of floures.

Stempaníni, such as cut out monie in plates before it be coined.

Stempella, as Tempella.

Stempelláre, to fumble, to twangle, or play foolishly vpon any instrument. Also as Tempelláre.

Stemperaménto, a distempering.

Stemperánza, a distemperance.

Stemperáre, to distemper, to disorder.

Stemperáto, distempred, intemperate.

Stemperáto ferro, soft iron.

Stempráre, as Stemperáre.

Stendále, a banner, a streamer.

Stendáli, streakes or raies as the Sunne maketh.

Stendardiero, a Standard-bearer.

Stendárdo, a Standard, a Chiefebanner.

Stendáre, to remooue the tents of a camp, to vntent.

Stendere, stendo, stési, stendúto, or stéso, to extend, to display, to spread or stretch out.

Stendere l'árco, to vnbend a bow.

Stendíbile, that may be extended.

Stendúto, extended, displaied, vnfoulded, spred or stretched out.

Stenebráre, to vndarken, to cleare vp, to make cleare or light.

Stenothoráce, that is narrow or strait-brested.

Stensióne, extension.

Stensíno, extensiue.

Stentáli, the listes or selueges of cloath that are set on tenters.

Stentáre, to pine, to suffer, to languish, to toile, to moile in paine with body and minde, to die or endure any calamity, to weare out ones life in miserie.

Stentaríecio, any thing long kept till it be ouer stale.

Stentataménte, piningly, languishinglie, carkingly, toylingly, with much a doe.

Stentatíssimo, most painefull, most languishing, most carking, very hardlie.

Stentíni, the intestines or smallest guts in any body.

Stentíta, tainted, ouermortified, stale, or flie-bitten meat.

Sténto, carke, care, pining, suffrance, languishment or toile of body and minde, miserable calamity, wretched misery.

Stentóre, as Sténto. Also a toiling, a pining or languishing man.

Stentoso, full of carke, toile, pining, sufferance or languishment of body and minde.

Stenuáre, to extenuate, to minish, to appaire, to make leane or slender.

Stenuatióne, extenuation, emptinesse, leanenesse, an appayring, a diminishing.

Stephalóne, Horse-tongue Lawrell.

Stephanoméle, any hearbe seruing for garlands.

Sterco, any kind of ordure or turd. Also dung, mucke, durt or compasse.

Stercolíno, a mucke or dunghill.

Stercoráre, to dung, to mucke, to compasse, to beray with ordure.

Stercorário, of or belonging to mucke, ordure, dung, durt or turdes.

Stercoráto, dunged, muckt, compassed, ordured, beraide with turds.

Stercoreo, of dung or mucke, growing in mucke or dunghils, stinking of dung.

Stercoróso, muckie, dunghy, durty, full of or growing in mucke or dung.

Stercóso, as Stercoróso.

Sterculíno, a muckhill, a dunghill.

Sterelítida, as Steresítide.

Stereopáti gambóni, great, monstrous, huge or filthy legges.

Steresi, priuation.

Steresítide, a kind of solide and massie litharge.

Stergethróne, Sengreene, Housleeke, Prickemadame, or Euergreene.

Stéria, an order or appointment. Vsed also for an vnexpected chance.

Stérile, sterill, barren, fruitlesse, that cannot ingender, without generation.

Sterilíre lísco, líto, to be, to make or become sterill, barren or fruitlesse.

Sterilità, sterility, vnfruitfullnesse, barrennesse.

Sterlúcco, a gull, a foole, a sot, a dulpate.

Stermináre, to destroy, to ruine, to exterminate, to hauocke.

Sterminataménte, vastly, boundlesly, infinitely, vnlimitedly.

Sterminatióne, as Sterminio.

Stermináto, boundlesse, sanslimites, vaste, infinite. Also destroyed or ruined.

Sterminatóre, a rooter out, an extirper, a destroyer.

Stermínio, an extirpation, ruine, destruction or hauocke.

Sternáce, that plungeth or casteth.

Sternere, sterno, sternéi, sternúto, to extend. Also to make plaine, to lay flat along, to spread along, to lay open. Also to abate or make calme. Also to lie downe or along as in ones bed. Also as Larbasóne.

Sterníre, nísco, níto, to sneese. Also to cull, to chouse or picke out. Also to strew as with rushes.

Sternitatióne, the brightnesse of the Sun or any shining thing.

Sternóne, that part of the breast where the ribs meete and ioyne together.

Sternumenrária, Sneesing-wort. 

Sternutáre, to sneese often.

Sternutatióne, sneesing.

Sternutíre, tísco, títo, to sneese.

Sternúto, extended, laied plaine, flat, open or along. Also abated or made calme. Also sneesed. Also a sneese or a sneesing.

Sterometría, a measuring of length, breadth, and deapth.

Sterpaménto, an extirpation or rooteing out.

Sterpáre, as Sterpere.

Sterpere, sterpo, sterpéi, sterpúto, to to extirp, to roote out, to plucke vp by the rootes.

Sterpo, a roote, a stump or snag of a tree.

Sterpóne, a great roote, stumpe or snag.

Sterposo, full or stumps, rootes or snags.

Sterpsiceróte, a kind of wilde beast.

Sterpúto, extirped, plucked vp by the rootes.

Sterquilínio, a muckhill, a dunghill, a mixen. Also a base or stinking knaue.

Sterrogónia, a kind of gum or Frankicence called also Olíbanum.

Sterzanáto, rid of a tertian ague.

Sterze, cioè gámbe & calcágna.

Stesaménte, at large, spreddingly.

Stéso, as Stendúto, extended.

Stessaménte, as Medesimaménte, selfely.

Stessere, tesso, tesséi, tessúto, to vnweaue, to rauell out.

Stessíssimo, the very very selfesame.

Stessità, selfenesse, samenesse.

Stésso, selfesame, as Medésimo.

Stétho, the Anathomists call it the region of the breast.

Stéto, as Stétho.

Stía, as Stípa. Also let him stand, be, remaine or dwell. Looke Stáre. Also a sty, a den or lurking hole for beasts.

Stiáccia, as Stiacciáta.

Stiacciáre, to sift or searce through. Also to make, crush or beate as flat as a cake.

Stiacciáta, any crushing flat. Also a cake, a tarte or any flat thing.

Stiacciatíne, little thin cakes, wafers on pancakes.

Stiamázzo, as Schiamázzo.

Stianciáre, to baulke, to bend, to stoope. Also to goe sideling or bending.

Stiancío, stale, tainted, old or vnsweet meate or any thing else.

Stiáncio, sidline, sloping or bending. Dáre di stiáncio, to hit or strike sidlin.

Stiantáre, to riue, to cleaue, to rap, to rent, to burst, to splint or shiuer in sunder.

Stiantatíuo, that may be riuen, burst, split or cleaft a sunder. 



Stiantatúra, a riuing, a cleaft, a bursting or rapping a sunder, a shiue of wood.

Stiantío, as Stiancío.

Stiánze, kibes or chill-blanes.

Stiáre, to coope or pen vp as poultry. Also to cram foule in a coope, as Stipáre.

Stiatatíuo, tough, hard, firme, fast.

Stiátta, as Schiátta.

Stiau túdine, slauery, thraldome, bondage.

Stiáuo, a staue, a bond-man, a thrall.

Stíbio, a whit stone found in siluer Mines good for the eies, called stibium or antimonium. Vsed also for a kinde of stuff that women vse to make their browes smooth with.

Sticádo, Cassidony or Lauander-gentle.

Sticchinicchio, an idle, lazie, lither, sluggish or lubbardly fellow.

Sticciáto, crushed or squeased flat.

Stidionáre, to spit or broach meat.

Stidionáta, as Spedonáta.

Stidióne, as Spédo, a spit, a broach.

Stiéna, as Schiéna.

Stienáre, as Schienáre.

Stienóso, as Schienóso.

Stienúto, as Schienúto.

Stiettézza, as Schiettézza.

Stietto, as Schietto.

Stifello, a kind of pipe or recorder.

Stigáre, to instigate, to pricke forward.

Stigatióne, an instigation, a prouocation.

Stígi, vsed for stix or hell.

Stígi bássi, vsed for hell or the pit of hell.

Stígio, stigian, hellish, infernall.

Stígina, as Stímma.

Stigmáre, to brand with a hot iron.

Stigmáte, as Stimmáte.

Stigmático, as Stimmático.

Stigmáto, branded with a hot iron.

Stilágrio, a filching or pilfring companion.

Stilbóne, an attribute giuen to Mercurie.

Stíle, a stile, a phrase, a manner or forme in speaking or writing or penning. Also vse, fashion, habit, vre, guise, forme wont, order or rule. Also a marking stone, or a Painters pensill. Also a writing pin of a paire of writing tables. Also a Chirurgions probe or searching needle. Also any thing like a piller or a piller made sharpe toward the top. Also a Gunners pricker or priming iron. Also the Gnomon of a dyall. Also an axle-tree. Also a goade.

Stilettáre, to hit, to strike or stab with a sharpe poniard or stillétto.

Stilétto, a little sharpe poinard or Italian stilétto. Also any little stile.

Stilibáta, a Shooemakers strap that he holdeth fast his last withall.

Stilibáte bráccia, huge, braunie, tough, vnwealdie monstrous armes.

Stílla, a drop, a trill or distilling of any thing.

Stillaménti, distillations, trillings.

Stillánte, distilling, trilling, the dropping of rostemeate being basted.

Stilláre, to distill, to drop, to trill.

Stillário, a gutter. Also a penthouse. Also a stillatorie. Also a Distiller.

Stillatíccia, a kind of liquid pitch or rozing.

Stillatióne, a distillation, a trilling.

Stilláto, a cullis. Also distilled. Also any trilling, dropping or distillation.

Stillatóio, a stillatorie, a still, a limbecke. Also a distilling house.

Stillatóre, a distiller of waters, a dropper.

Stillécchio, an ice-sickle, a flake of ice.

Stillettáre, as Stilettáre.

Stillétto, as Stilétto.

Stillicídio, a little gutter. Also the dropping of the eawes of any house.

Stillicídio degl'ócchi, the dropping, distillation or running of sore eyes.

Stillicídio del cerebro, the distillation or runnings comming from the head.

Stillicídio dell'orína, the Strangurie.

Stillicídio del naso, the dropping, running or distillation comming from the nose.

Stillo, Stílo, as Stíle, as Stilétto.

Stilóidi, certaine small processes in bones like the fashion of a small bodkin.

Stílta, a kind of sled or skid where upon in cold countries men are drawen with Horses vpon the ice.

Stíma, esteeme, estimation, valuation, accompt, regard or reputation.

Stimábile, that may be esteemed, estimable, valuable.

Stimáre, to esteeme, to value. Also to iudge or suppose. Also to regard or repute.

Stimáta, a much-esteeming of.

Stimatióne, estimation, as Stíma.

Stimatíua, the estimatiue part of man, or estimation.

Stimatíuo, to be esteemed or valued, to be regarded or reputed.

Stiméuole, as Stimábile.

Stimiéra, a fence, a shroud, a shelter, a couert, a defence.

Stimíte, as Stimmáte, or Stigmáte.

Stímma, the grosse dregs or thicke substance remaining after squeasing or crushing or straining of any hearbes to make ointments of.

Stimmáta, all manner of oyle or oyntments composed of the iuice of simples.

Stimmáte, vsed for the fiue wounds or markes of our Sauiour being crucified, but properly the markes or prints of hot or branding irons. Vsed also for infamie, detection or reproch.

Stimmático, that is branded or marked with an hot iron, that beareth a mark of shame. Also a notorious rogue, or infamous detected fellow.

Stimmíte, as Carbastóne.

Stimmóso, as Stimmático.

Stimoláte, to pricke, to spurre, to vrge, to encite, to prouoke or stirre forward.

Stimolatióne, a stimulation, a pricking, a stinging or spurring on.

Stimolatóre, a prouoker, an enciter, a pricker or stirrer forward.

Stimolo, a pricke, a goade, a sting, a spurre. Also any thing that pricketh, stirreth or enciteth forward. Also an enticement an instigation, a prouocation, or seruent moouing vnto, an earnest importunitie or tediousnesse.

Stimolóso, full of pricking, stinging, spurring or prouocations.

Stimuláre, as Stimoláre.

Stimulatióne, as Stimolatióne.

Stimulatóre, as Stimolatóre.

Stimulo, as Stímolo.

Stimulóso, as Stimolóso.

Stináre, to cut off by the legs, to hough.

Stínca, the ridge of a hill.

Stincácci, filthy shankes.

Stincaiuólo, one that is prisoner in the stinch in Florence, as we say a Newgate bird, a Whittinton scholler.

Stincáta, a rap or blow ouer the shinnes.

Stínche, the name of a prison in Florence. Also brushes made of Butchers-broome.

Stínchi, the shinnes, shankes or small of ones legs. Also a kind of fish.

Stinchído, shrunken or withered lims.

Stinchieri, greues or shinne pieces.

Stinciéri, as Stinchiéri.

Stínco, a fish that is like a Crocodill. Also the ridge of a hill.

Stingáre, Stínghe. 

Stínguere, as Estínguere, to extinguish.

Stiniérì, as Stinchiéri.

Stinphálidi, greedie, rauenous men.

Stínto, as Estínto. Also as Instínto.

Stioppería, as Schioppetteria.

Stioppettáre, as Schioppettáre.

Stioppettiére, as Schioppettiére.

Stioppétto, as Schioppétto.

Stióppo, as Schióppo.

Stípa, a range, a strowing or ranging in piles as marchandise in ships. Also any manner of stowage. Also a hedge, a fence or mounde. Also a hedgewood or pile of wood. Also any kind of dry fewell to make a suddaine fire with, Brushwood. Also the plough-handle. Also a pen, a cub or coope to keep poultry in. Also a kind of low shrub, 



broome or tree. Also swill, draugh, or dishwash giuen to swine or hogs.

Stípa di légne, a pile or heape of wood.

Stipáre, to range or stow or presse downe hard as packes are in a ship. Also to ram into very close, to hedge in, to fence, to mound, to raile in, to empaile, to compasse or enuiron close with a guard. Also to pile or heape vp wood. Also to pen or coope in, to empound. Also to stop chinkes or clefts. Also to vphold, to backe or boulster vp.

Stipatióne, a stowing close, a pressing downe, a ramming in. Also a hedging in, or a railing in, as enuironing or garding about. Also a bolstring or holding vp on euerie side. Also an empounding, a penning or cooping in. Also a heaping or piling vp of wood.

Stipáto, stowed, ranged or well fraughted, rammed in close. Also hedged about. Also enuironed about with men to bee defended as Princes are with a guard. Also close piled or heaped vp, well backt or boulstred, vpheld. Also penned or cooped vp. Also close stopt.

Stipatóre, a packer vp or stower of packes and marchandise in ships. Also a Kings guard that is euer about him. Looke Stipáre.

Stípe, a kind of money anciently vsed in Rome. Also the stem or stalke of any plant.

Stipendiále, of or belonging to stipends, pensions, wages or hire.

Stipendiáre, to wage, to pension, to stipend, to hire or giue pay vnto.

Stipendiário, a hireling, one that taketh wages, a stipendiarie, a pensionarie.

Stipendio, a stipend, a pension, a salarie, a hire, a pay, a wages.

Stipendióso, that doth or hath often receiued wages, full of wages.

Stípia, stuble, chaffe, haume, straw, litter, thatch, holme left in the field after it is reaped. Also the huske that closeth in the straw.

Stipidíto, vsed anciently for Stúpido.

Stipite, a stumpe, a snag or stocke of any tree. Also a log or blocke. Also a bat or cudgell.

Stípiti, the side-postes of a dore, the vpright sides or vpholders of a chimney. Also stakes, piles or logs set in the ground. Also certain woodden shooes to slide vpon the ice withall, sharpe and crooked at the end.

Stipo, an Armorie. Also an Ambrie.

Stípola, as Stípia.

Stipoláre, to make a couenant, to confirme a bargaine, to require afore by couenant, to promise effectually, to require or seeke for by course and order of law. 

Stipolatióne, a stipulation, a bargaine, a couenant, a confirmation of couenants by order and course of law, an obligation to pay or performe a thing required.

Stipolatóre, he that bindeth another by requiring, he of whom a thing is required.

Stíppola, a puffe, a windegall, a fyste or such windie substance like a Mushrom.

Stiptichézza, stoppingnesse, stiptikenesse, hand-binding in the bodie.

Stíptico, that stoppeth or dryeth.

Stípula, the spindling vp point-wise of any thing namely of corne. Also as Stípia.

Stipuláre, as Stipoláre.

Stipulatióne, as Stipolatióne.

Stiracchiaménti, pullings, halings, stretchings, wrestings, wire-drawings.

Stiracchiáre, to pull, to hale, to stretch, to wrest, to wiredraw, to shrinke in or vp.

Stiráce, as Storáce.

Stiráre, as Stiracchiáre.

Stiratúra, as Stiracchiaménto.

Stiricídio, dropping of ice-sickles.

Stirillo, the beard of a Goate.

Stírlico, as Stíbio.

Stirpaménto, as Stirpatióne.

Stirp áre, to extirpe, to root out, to grub or plucke vp by the rootes.

Stirpatióne, extirpation, rooting out.

Stírpe, the root, the stem, the stocke or maine stalke of any plant, tree or hearbe. Also a race, a stocke, a progenie, an off-spring, a bloud, a kin, a pedigree or generation of a house.

Stirpéuole, that may be grubbed or rooted out.

Stísti, stigian, hellish, or hell it selfe.

Stiticaménte, stiptickly, costiuely, harshly, restrictiuely, stoppingly. Also nicely, wrestedly, scrupulously, with affectation.

Stitichézza, stipticknesse, costiuenesse, harshnesse, restriction, stoppingnesse. Also strictnesse, nicenesse, foolish affectation, too much precisenesse.

Stítico, stipticke, costiue, harsh, astringent, restrictiue, hard bound. Also that stoppeth or bindeth. Also nice, scrupulous, or fondly affected.

Stiticózzi, tistie-tostie Dutch-men, swearing muffs, lustie Dasticotz.

Stíua, as Stípa. Looke Trouáre
. Also a coope or pen for poultry.

Stiualáio, a maker of bootes.

Stiualáre, to boote, to pull on bootes.

Stiualétti, thin bootes or buskins.

Stiuále, all manner of bootes.

Stiuáre, as Stipáre.

Siuatóre, of Gunners and Pauiers it is called a Rammer. 

Stiuiéri, short buskins.

Stízza, suddaine rage, fretting anger, furious choller, wrathfull impatience.

Stizzare, to make or become suddainely wrathfull, frettingly furious, to fret with anger. Also to stirre vp and prouoke as a man doth fire-brands to burne.

Stizzársi., to be suddainly angry, fretting, outragious, wrathfull or chollerike.

Stizzataménte, ragingly, frettingly, angerly, waiwardly.

Stizzáto, angry, vext, fretted with rage.

Stizzatóio, a paire of snuffers. Also a fire-forke.

Stizzíre, zísco, zíto, as Stizzáre.

Stizzo, a fire-brand.

Stizzoláre, to stirre vp the fire, or firebrands with a forke to make them burne.

Stízzolo, a fire-brand.

Stizzonáre, as Stizzoláre.

Stizzóne, a fire-brand.

Stizzosaménte, as Stizzataménte.

Stizzóso, soone vexed, subiect to rage, wrath, furie and fretting anger, teastie.

Stò, vsed sometimes for Quésto, this. Also I stand, lye or dwell, of Stáre.

Stoccáta, a thrust, a stoccado, a foyne.

Stoccheggiáre, to strike or hit with a short or arming-sword. Also to foine or thrust at, or giue a stoccado. Also for a man to spend his maine stocke, to grow vnthriftie, to take vp commodities, to rob Peter and pay Paul, to liue by the losse.

Stócchi, Fáre stócchi, to make a new stocke, to runne in debt, to take vp comodities.

Stócco, a short or arming-sword, a tuck. Also a short bat or truncheon. Also as Stírpe, a stocke or bloud of a house, name or familie.

Stocrofísso, vsed in mockerie for Stockfish.

Stoebéna, as Phleóne.

Stóffo, a ground, a foundation, a stocke, a subiect or stuffe to worke vpon.

Stógliere, as Stórre,

Stóia, any kind of mat or hassocke of rushes, straw, sags or bents. Also any thing spred on the ground. Also a wisp or dish-clout.

Stoiáre, to mat or furnish and lay with mats. Also to spred on the ground. Also to wipe.

Stoiáro, a matter, a mat-maker, a wiper.

Stoiatóio, a wiper or a dish-clout, a wispe.

Stoicaménte, stoically, seuerely, strictlie.

Stóico, a stoike, a seuere Philosopher. 



Stóla, a long vesture a rob of honoure or dignity, a religious garment, a stole, or tippet, or hood as Doctors or freemen of London weare vpon their shoulders.

Stoláre, to enrobe with a Stóla.

Stólca, a wild Phesant hen.

Stólga, a wild Phesant hen.

Stolidézza, foolishnesse, stolidity, doltishnesse, dulnesse, vnaduisednesse.

Stolidità, as Stolidézza.

Stólido, foolish, stolide, block-headed, dull, doltish, vnaduised.

Stolóni, vnprofitable water-shootes that come from the root, but neuer to any good.

Stolteggiáre, to play the Stólto.

Stoltézza, as Stoltítia.

Soltiloquenza, foolish talke or speech.

Stoltilóquio, a foolish speech or talke.

Stoltítia, foolishnesse, folly, fondnesse, doting, sottishnesse, dulnesse of the minde.

Stólto, foolish, fond, sottish, vnwise.

Stólto, a foole, a sot, a gull, an idiot.

Stólto, diuerted, remooued, taken from.

Stólza, a wild Phesant hen.

Stomacáce, a ranknesse of the gums so that the teeth fall out, or sorenesse in the mouth called the shorbuck or scorbutt.

Stomacággine, a lothsomnesse, a hatefulnesse from the stomacke. Also a stomaking a glutting or cloying of the stomacke. Also anger or indignation.

Stomacále, that is restoratiue and comforteth the stomacke.

Stomacáre, to stomacke, to hate, to loath or goe against a mans stomacke. Also to glut or cloy ones stomacke. Also to haue indignation against.

Stomacéno, as Stomacáce.

Stomachéuole, lothsome, odious, against a mans stomacke. Also that is ill for the stomacke. Also sicke in the stomacke. Also full of stomacke or indignation. Also that is good for the stomacke.

Stomacíno, any kind of stomacher.

Stómaco, the pipe whereby the meat goeth downe into the ventricle, it is also vsed (but improperly) for Ventrícolo, and is called the stomacke. Also vsed for apetite, stomacke or desire of a thing. Also digestion. Also indignation or anger. Also abhorring of anything that liketh not.

Stomacosità, indignation, anger.

Stomacóso, as Stomachéuole.

Stomacúzzo, a queasie weake stomacke.

Stomána, a weeke. Also this weeke.

Stomaticale, that is appropriated for diseases incident to the mouth. 

Stomaticále flússo, as Cæliáca pássio.

Stomático, a composition of cordiall things for strengthning of the stomacke, good for the stomake. Also one that hath a weake stomacke, and can keepe nothing he taketh. Also that hath the nature or strength to open. Also that hath or is subiect to haue a sore or swelling in the mouth.

Stomomáte, scales of steele very thin.

Stónne, for Io ne stò, I thence stand.

Stopiáre, as Stroppiáre.

Stóppa, hurds or tow, or okum of hempe, or the course part of flax.

Stoppácci, hurds or okum of tow or hemp. Also any manner of stopples or stoppings.

Stoppáccio, as Stoppióne. Also Okum vsed in ships, hurds of tow or hemp.

Stoppáre, to stop with hurds or Okum, namely any chinke, hole or leake.

Stoppáta, a stopple, a stopping, a bung.

Stoppéusle, that may be stopped.

Stóppia, as Stípia.

Stoppiáre, as Stoppáre. Also to stubble.

Stoppináto, at an end, neere done, almost finished or consumed as a candle in the socket. Also stufft, stopt, costiue, hard bound, stipticke.

Stoppíno, the weeke, the cotton or snuffe of a candle. Also match-cord rouled in gun-powder to fire any fire-workes. Also the socket of a candlesticke. Also a little stopple.

Stóppio, as Stípia.

Stoppióne, a stopple, a wad, a wispe, a swab, a maukin. Also as Stípia.

Stoppióso, full of stubble or haulme.

Stóppole, all manner of stubble.

Stóppolo, a stopple. Also a bung.

Stoppóne, as Stoppióne.

Stóra, as Stóia.

Storáce, a gum or incense called Storax.

Storáce calamíta, the best kind of Storax.

Storáce líquida, liquid Storax.

Storacíni, little perfumes made of Storax.

Storáre, as Stoiáre.

Stórcere, stórco, storcéi, storciúto, or stórto, to wrest, to wrench, to writhe, to straine or make crooked. Also to extort. Looke Tórcere.

Stórcersi le mémbra, to straine or wrench ones limmes out of ioint.

Storciéuole, that may be wrested.

Storciénto, a wresting. Also extorsion.

Storciúto, wrested, writhed, wrenched, made crooked. Also extorted.

Storcoláre, to presse or squease as they do? Grapes to make wine.

Stórcolo, a wine-presse, or any presse.

Stordigióne, as Stordiménto.

Stordiménto, giddinesse, dizzinesse or stagring of the head.

Stordire, dísco, díto, to become or make giddie, dizzie, or staggering in the head.

Stordíto, giddied, dizzied, or staggered in the head. Also astonished.

Stória, a storie, a historie, a narration. Also a kind of musicall instrument.

Storialménte, historically.

Storiáre, to storie, to worke or set forth storie-wise. Also to expect with a longing desire, to be wearie with expecting.

Stórico, historicall. Also an Historian or writer of stories.

Storióne, a Fish called Sturgeon.

Stormáre, to storme, to make a noise, a rumor, a rumble, or an vprore.

Storménto, any kind of instrument either musicall or mechanicall. Also any writing or indenture.

Stormínio, ruine, vtter destruction, hauocke, confusion, vtter razing out.

Stormíre, mísco, míto, as Stormáre.

Stórmo, a storme, a noise, a rumor, an vprore. Also any crew, rout or troupe.

Stormóso, stormie, rumorous.

Stornáre, to turne from or backe, to remooue or diuert from ones purpose.

Stornázzo, a Menow-fish.

Stornauelle, as Zúrlo.

Stornello, a Stare or Starlin. Also a horse of the colour of such a bird which is a kind of dun or sand-colour.

Storniaménto, as Stordiménto.

Storníre, nísco, níto, as Stordíre.

Storníto, as Stordíto, astonished.

Stórno, a Stare or Starlin-bird. Also as Stordiménto.

Stóro, a Stare or Starlin-bird.

Storpiáre, to maime or make lame.

Storpiáto, maimed, lamed, made criple.

Storpiatúra, a maime, a laming, a halting.

Stórpio, a maimed, a criple or lame-man. Also a let, a maime or hindrance. Also a wresting or wrenching of any thing. Also maimed.

Stórre, stólgo, stólsi, stólto, to take or remooue a way from, to diuert from.

Storsionáro, an Extortioner.

Storsióni, extortions, wrongs. Also wringings, frettings or gnawings of the guts.

Stórta, any kind of withe or wreath. Also a wrench or wrest that loyners vse. Also a wrench or cricke in man or horse. Also a toole to pull out teeth. Also a winding still, limbecke or Serpentine called a double S S. Also a sack-but or such other crooked musicall instrument. Also a coyle of cable.

Stórta generatióne, a crooked generation. 



Stortaménte, crookedly, bendingly, wrongfully.

Stortáre, as Stórcere.

Stórti, a kind of winding simnell bread.

Stórto, as Storciúto, crooked.

Stortocóllo, a wry-neck, as Cóllo tórto.

Stórtola, as Stórta.

Stortúra, a wrench or cricke in a Horse.

Storuóle, as Stouíglie.

Storzáre, as Strozzáre.

Stouigliáio, one that lookes to all manner of kitchin vessels and pots.

Stouíglie, all manner of kitchin implements or stuffe as pots and pans, &c.

Stozzáre, to stamp, to punch.

Stozzatóre, a stamper, a puncher.

Stózzo, a stamp, a punch.

Strà, stra', strái, as Strali, of Strále.

Strà, a word much vsed in composition of other words for Extra or Oltra.

Strabalzáre, to tumble or rumble downe in furie as it were from rocke to rocke. Also to bound or rebound, to hop or skip as a ball doth.

Strabálzo, a tumbling or rumbling downe. Also a bounding, a skipping, a hopping.

Strabigliaménto, as Strabilio.

Strabigliáre, to gaze or gape at with wonderment or amazement.

Strabiliáre, as Strabigliáre.

Strabílio, a gazing or gaping at with wonderment or amazement.

Strabísmo, a squintnesse of the eyes.

Strábo, one that is gogle-eyde.

Strabeccaménto, as Strabócco.

Straboccánte, ready to fall downe. Also headlong, rash, fond-hardie, or vnaduised.

Straboccáre, to fall downe, to stumble, to trip. Also to powre out of the mouth.

Straboccáto, riotous, prodigall, carelesse either in word or deed.

Strabocchéuole, as Straboccánte.

Strabócco, a stumbling, a headlong fall. Also rashnesse or vnaduisednesse.

Strabóne, as Strábo.

Strabuzzáre, to stare or glote with ones eies.

Strabuzzóso, úno che tiéne gl'ócchij bássi cóme per uergógna.

Stracacciáto, a kind of tumpe or leape.

Stracantáre, to sing and sing againe.

Stracaricáre, to ouercharge or lade.

Stracáro, beyond measure deare.

Strácca, vsed anciently for wearinesse. Also that wearieth.

Strácca gelosíe, one that is euer prying or looking through lattice-windowes.

Straccálc, a staffe like a Musket-rest, that Porters vse to stay and rest their burthens vpon when they are wearie. Also a certaine rowle of linnen that some old women vse to weare about their neckes. 

Straccaménto, any wearying or tiring.

Straccaspiédi, a lick-spit, a gourmand, a louer of roste-meat, a glutton.

Straccáre, to wearie, to tire.

Stracchézza, wearinesse, tirednesse.

Stracciábile, that may be rend or torne.

Stracciabráche, Butchers-brooms, Kneeholme or Petigree-shrub.

Stracciafóglia, a waste-paper or bookes.

Stracciaiuólo, one that sells, seekes or cryes rags about the streetes to make paper with. Also a fripper or broker that sells old clothes or rags. Also a botcher, a patcher or mender of old clothes.

Stracciaménto, any tearing or rending, any mangling or diuiding by force.

Stracciáre, to rend, to teare, to rag, to tatter, to breake or whinder in pieces.

Stracciaría, a fripperie or place where old rags and clothes are to be sold.

Stracciáro, as Stracciaiuólo.

Stracciaruóla, a woman that rakes in the streete for rags to make paper with.

Stracciaruólo, as Stracciaiuólo.

Stracciáto, torne, tattred, rag'd. Also a poore rag'd patch-coat begger.

Stráccij, all manner of rags or tatters.

Straccióne, any filthy great rag. Also a rag'd rogue or begger.

Straccióso, ragged, tattred, torne, beggerlie, full of patches and rags or clouts.

Strácco, wearie, stanke, tired, faint.

Straccotánza, as Trascurággine.

Straciáre, as Stratiáre.

Strácio, as Strátio.

Stracolláre, to hazard ones necke about any attempt.

Stracólli, leapings, skippings with danger. Also mischiefes or knauish trickes.

Stracóllo, a tumbling downe in breake-necke manner.

Stracontentáre, to content more then enough.

Straconténto, more then content.

Stracorággine, as Trascurággine.

Stracórrere, to ouer-run, to run beyond, to run or course ouer and ouer.

Stracorritóre, an ouer-runner, an outrunner. Also an ouer-viewer or seer.

Stracórsa, an out-running, a running or questing heere and there.

Stracórso, out-run, ouer-run, coursed or run ouer and ouer.

Stracotánza, as Trascurággine.

Stracotáre, as Trascuráre.

Stracotáto, carelesse, ouer-weening.

Stracrédere, crédo, credéi, credúto, to belieue beyond or more then belieue.

Stracurággine, as Trascurággine.

Stracuránza, as Trascurággine.

Stracuráre, to neglect or set at naught. Also presumptuously to ouerweene.

Stracuratággine, as Trascurággine.

Stracuratarnénte, carelesly, negligently.

Stracuratézza, as Trascurággine.

Stracuráto, as Trascuráto.

Stráda, any street or high-way.

Stráda coperta, a close walke or passage made on the top of a counter-scarpe in which the besieged may couer themselues from the enemies.

Stráda maéstra, a chiefe street or highway.

Stradáre, to keepe the high-way. Also to rob by the high-way.

Stradaruólo, as Stradiótto.

Stradébita hóra, an vndue, an vnlawfull or vnseasonable houre.

Stradella, a little street, lane or path.

Stradesideráre, to more then desire.

Stradétta, as Stradella.

Stradicciuóla, as Stradella.

Strádico, a kind of officer, Marshall or Constable ouer high-waies.

Stradiótto, a wandrer, a stragler, a gadder, an earth-planet, a traueller, a high-way keeper, one of Saint Nicholas his Clerkes. Also a kind of souldiers that the Venetians vse, like our Carbines, Freebooters or bootie-halers.

Stráere, as Stárre, to extract.

Strafalciáre, as Sbalestráre.

Strafalcióne, as Sciarpellóne.

Strafalsáre, to thwart, to crosse or countercrosse any thing.

Strafáre, to ouer-doe, to doe beyond.

Strafináccio, some piece belonging to a wheele spinning silke. Also a certaine hammer.

Strafizzáre, as Strauizzáre.

Strafízzo, as Strauízzo, or Gozzouíglia.

Strafocancióne, a nickename for a slouenly, gentlike lubbard.

Strafóggia, a fashion fashionlesse or out of fashion.

Strafoggiáre, as Sfoggiáre.

Strafoggiáto, as Sfoggiáto.

Straforato, perforated or boared through. Also a disease in a horse.

Strafóro, perforation or any kind of hollow or through bored worke.

Strafuggíre, fúggo, fuggíj, fuggíto, to flie out or through or beyond.

Strafusaría, the weed Staphes-acre.

Stráge, slaughter, murther, mortality or fall of people, a discomfiture or multitude of men slaine. Also a felling or cutting downe to the ground.

Stragiáre, to slaughter, to murther, to kill.

Stragináre, to knead or worke paste, dough, or any plaister rowling it vp and downe.

Strágio, as Strascíno.

Stragiuditiále, besides or beyond law and iudgement. 



Stragualciáre, to looke ouer or vpon with scorne and contempt.

Straguardáre, to looke through, beyond or ouer.

Strahóra, beyond season out of due time.

Straintendere, to vnderstand throughlie or beyond. Also to misunderstand.

Straintéso, beyond or misunderstood.

Straláre, to flie, to shelue, or goe a side, a slope or a wry.

Stralciaménti, vntanglings, vnbindings.

Stralciáre, to disintangle, to vnbind.

Strále, any kind of arrow, shaft, dart or quarry.

Straloccáre, to gape, to gaze or loyter idly about.

Stralócco, an idle gaper about.

Stralosciáre, to stir, to mooue or wagge from place to place. Also to gogle ones eies.

Stralúce, a through-light.

Stralucente, through-shining.

Stralúcere, to shine through or beyond.

Stralunaménti d' ócchij, a gloting or staring of ones eyes. Also a clouting or pouting.

Stralunáre, to stare or glote with ones eies. Also to looke squinteide. Also to turne vp the white of the eies. Also to lout, to pout, to lowre.

Stramacchiáre, as Stramazzáre.

Stramácchio, as Stramázzo.

Stramacciàre, as Stramazzáre.

Stramáccio, as Stramázzo.

Stramanciería, as Strauagánza.

Stramanciáre, as Strauagáre.

Stramáre, to litter or fodder cattell.

Stramátto, more then mad or foolish.

Stramazzáre, to more then kill, murther or slaughter. Also to fall or stumble as in a swoune.

Stramázzi, such bundles of old ropes or mats that Gunners in ships place at the tailes of their carriages of pieces to stay their recoyles.

Stramázzo, a wad, a wispe, a mauking, a swab. Also slaughter, hauocke or murther. Also a matteresse or strawbed. Also a Hound or Dog-fish.

Stramazzóne, a downe-right blow. Also a rap, a cuffe or wherret on the cheeke.

Strambasciáto, out of breath, ouertired, sweltring with sweat and wearinesse, embost as a Deare.

Strámbe, a kinde of strong rushes or bents. Also with's made of rushes or bents. Also frailes made of them such as figges and Reisins come in.

Strambelláta, an vnhandsome, flaring, desheueled or touzed woman.

Strambelli, as Strambótti.

Strámbo, squint, bleered or goggle-eyed. Also peruerse, peeuish or froward.

Strambóccolo, a kind of base, railing or filthy composition.

Strambottáre, to sing rounds, catches, gigges, or three mens songs.

Strambótti, Country gigges, rounds, catches, virelaies or three mens songs.

Strabottiére, a maker or singer of Strambótti.

Strambottíno, any little Strambótto.

Strambúcco, a counterpoising beame in any frame, standing or lying a crosse.

Stramáno, out of hand. Also out of the rode way, in some remote place.

Stráme, litter, straw, stubble, chaffe, haulme or fodder for cattell.

Strameggiáre, to litter or fodder cattell.

Stramenta, a Pailet, a Straw-bed, or Cheffoy-couch.

Stramento, all manner of straw put into beds or Pailets.

Stramónia, a kinde of thizle or teazle called a thorne apple.

Stramortiménto, a fainting, in a swoune.

Stramortíre, tísco, títo, to faint in a swoune.

Stramótti, as Strambótti.

Stampoláre, to goe or stalke on stilts, scatches or crouchets.

Strámpoli, stilts, scatches or crouchets.

Stranaménte, strangely, frembdly.

Stranáre, as Stratiáre, to estrange.

Straneggiáre, to estrange, to play the stranger, to vse a man strangely.

Stranézza, strangenesse, frembdnesse.

Strángio, a kinde of graine or corne in Greece.

Strangogiáre, to swallow or glut downe.

Strangoglióni, strangling or choaking morsels. Also the strangullion, the strangury or choaking in the throate.

Strangoiáre, to swallow or glut downe.

Strangolagióne di matríce, as Prefocatióne.

Strangolaménto, a strangling, a choaking, a stifling, a throtling.

Strangoláre, to strangle, to choake, to stifle, to throttle.

Strangoláti, a kind of stitch so called among Seamesters.

Strangolatióne, as Strangolaménto.

Strangosciáre, to throttle in the throat.

Stranguggiámento, rauenous gourmandising, greedy gluttony.

Stranguggiáre, to swallow downe as a glutton or gourmand, to gourmadize.

Stranguliáre, as Strangulláre.

Strangulláre, to spend lauishly.

Strangullióni, as Strangoglióni.

Strangúria, the strangury or making water with paine and by drop-meales.

Strangusciáre, as Strangoláre.

Straniaménte, strangely. Looke Stráno.

Straniánza, as Stranézza.

Straniáre, to estrange, to alienate, to make strange. Also to stray out or misse the way.

Straniéro, a stranger, an allian, a forrenner.

Straniézza, as Stranézza.

Stránio, as Stráno.

Straniólo, a strange selfe-conceited-man.

Stranire, nísco, níto, to estrange or to vse strangely.

Stráno, strange, vnwonted, new, seldome seene, wonderfull. Also an alian, a forrainer, a fremd, or a stranger. Also diuers, vnknowne. Also vnconuenient, vnproportioned, without all fashion. Also peeuish, fretfull, angry, fantasticall, hard to be pleased.

Stranutáre, to sneese.

Stranúto, a sneesing, a sneese.

Straordinário, extraordinary, vnwont.

Strapagáre, to ouer pay, to pay beyond.

Straparláre, to ouer or misspeake.

Straparlatóre, an ouer or misspeaker.

Strapassáre, to passe or glide thorow.

Strapiè., looke A strapiè.

Strapióuere, to ouer shoure or raine.

Strapocíno, a kind of little bird.

Strapontáre, to counterpoint or quilt.

Strapontíno, a quilt or counterpoint.

Strapotente, more then mighty or powerfull.

Strapotére, to be ouer powerfull.

Strappáre, to snatch or pull away by force.

Stráppasánti, a snatch-saint, an vnboly yet holy-seeming Puritan or Iesuite.

Strappatúra, a snatching away or from.

Strappazzáre, to hurry, to misuse, to oppresse, to put to all drudgery.

Strappazzatóre, a tormenter. Also an executioner.

Strappázzo, hurring, ill vsing, drudgerie.

Strapregáre, to ouer intreate.

Strapsiceróte, a kinde of Roe-bucke in Affrica or a wild Goate.

Straricchíre, to grow or make exceeding rich.

Straripáre, as Precipitáre.

Straripéuole, as Precipitóso.

Strárre, to extract, to draw out.

Strarupáre, as Precipitáre.

Strasandáre, to goe out, to wend beyond.

Strasandáta, an out-going, a wending beyond.

Strasánio, ouer or beyond wise. 



Strascicáre, as Strascináre.

Stráscico, as Strascino.

Strascináre, to drag, to hale or traile along the ground.

Strascinatóre, a trayler along the ground.

Strascíno, the traile or traine of a Princes or Ladies garment.

Stráscio, as Strascíno.

Strascíro, a drag to catch fish.

Strasentíre, to ouer heare, to heare more and beyond.

Strasognáre, to ouer dote, dreame or raue.

Strasordinário, extraordinary, vnwont.

Strassicáre, as Strascináre.

Strássico, as Strascíno.

Strassináre, as Strascináre.

Stráta, as Stráda. Also a plaine or flat spreading on the ground.

Stratagema, a stratagem, a policy, a wile or witty shift in war.

Stratagliáre, to cut, to iag or snip thorow.

Stratágli, through cuts or iagges.

Strathióne, Sope-wort or Fullers-weed.

Stratiáre, to torture, to racke, to torment, to misuse, to stratiate.

Strátio, torture, torment, rough handling, ill vsage.

Stratióte, Water-millfolly, which liueth without roote and swimmeth onely aboue the water, called also the souldiers hearbe.

Stratiótico, war like. Also of or belonging to war.

Stratiótto, as Stadiótto, as Guastatóre.

Strattióne, an extraction.

Strátto, extracted, abstracted, drawne out.

Strauaccáre, to commit or wallow in beastlinesse as a Cow, or beyond a Cow.

Strauaccaríe, all manner of beastly filthinesse or letcheries.

Strauagánte, extrauagant, new-fangled, fantasticall, out of common course.

Strauagánza, extrauagancie, fantasticalnesse, newfanglenesse, strangenesse.

Strauagáre, to wander, to gad, to goe, to gad or stray beyond or out of the way.

Strauaghézza, as Strauáganza.

Strauagliáre, to free or be deliuered from trauell or trouble. Also to ouertrauell.

Strauedére, véggo, víddi, vedúto, to ouersee, to see through or beyond.

Strauedúto, ouer seene, seene or looked, through or beyond.

Strauénti, by or quarter windes.

Strauestíre, vesto, vestíto, to disguise, or shift in clothes or apparell.

Strauestíto, disguised in clothes.

Strauiaménto, a going, or straying out of the way, or beyond.

Strauiáre, to goe, to wander or stray out of the way, or beyond.

Strauináre, to leake through.

Strauíncere, vínco, vínsi, vínto, to ouer-ouer-come, to more then ouer-come.

Strauizzáre, as Gozzouigliáre, to riot in good cheare, to gluttonize, or to make ones bellie his god.

Strauizzería, all manner of gluttonie or bellie-cheere, as Gozzouíglia.

Strauízzi, as Strauizzería.

Strauoláre, to flye, to flutter, or hoouer vp and downe, ouer, or beyond.

Strauolére, to will or desire beyond measure.

Strauólgere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, as Strauoltáre.

Strauolgiménto, any tossing or tumbling, or turning ouer.

Strauólta, as Strauolgiménto.

Strauoltárc, to turne, to tosse or tumble ouer and ouer, or beyond.

Strauólto, turned, tossed, or tumbled ouer and ouer. Also squint-eyd.

Strauoltoláre, as Strauoltáre.

Strauoltúra, as Strauolgiménto.

Strazzáre, as Stracciáre.

Strazzaríglia, as Spinaruóla.

Strázzi, as Stráccij, rags, totters.

Strazzóso, as Straccióso.

Strébbia, a scouring. Also a scolding, a pratling. Also a wasting vnthriftily.

Strebbiaménti, wastefull or riotous spendings. Also pratlings, and scoldings.

Strebbiáre, to scoure. Also to waste or spend riotously. Also to scold and prattle. Also as Trebbiáre.

Strebbiatóre, a scourer. Also a wastefull spender. Also a scolding pratler. Also as Trebbiatóre.

Strebbiatúra, a scouring. Also a scolding or pratling. Also a riotous spending.

Strebiáre, as Strebbiáre. Also to fumble or grope for. Also to tickle.

Strécole, claps, cuffs, buffets, boxes, raps, or whirrets giuen on the cheeke.

Stréga, a witch, a sorceresse. Also a hag or fairie, such as our fore-elders thought to change the fauour of children.

Stregáccia, a filthie old witch or hag.

Stregaménto, witching, or witchcraft.

Stregáre, to bewitch, to forespeake.

Stregaría, witching, or witchcraft.

Strégghia, a currie-combe, a horsecombe.

Stregghiáre, to currie with a horsecombe. 

Stréggia, as Strégghia. Also a hurdle or sled.

Streggiáre, as Stregghiáre. Also to hurdle.

Streghería, witchcraft, sorcerie.

Stréglia, as Strégghia, as Stréggia.

Stregliáre, as Stregghiáre. Also to hurdle.

Strégna, as Stréga, a witch.

Stregnáre, as Stregáre, to bewitch.

Stregnaríe, as Stregaríe, witchcrafts.

Strégnere, as Stríngere.

Stregoláre, to stroke or smooth with ones hand.

Stregonáre, as Stregáre, to bewitch.

Stregóne, an old filthie witch, or hag.

Stregózzo, a witching, or witchcraft.

Stremaménte, extreamely.

Stremáre, to bring to extremitie. Also to draw or set out to the vtmost. Also to force or constraine.

Stréma vntióne, the last vnction, one of the Papists Sacraments.

Stremíre, mísco, míto, to affright. Also to bring to extremitie or compulsion.

Stremità, extremitie, the vtmost point, top, bound, or end of any thing.

Strémo, extreame, vtmost, lag, last, furthermost, highest. Also as Stremità.

Strempelláre, as Stempelláre.

Stréna, a present or gift giuen to an aduocate. Also a new-yeares gift.

Strenáre, as Strennáre.

Strensiótti, any strange tricks.

Strénga, a point to trusse hosen with.

Strengáro, a pointer, or point-maker.

Strengáta, a yarke or strip with a point.

Stréngere, as Stríngere.

Strengiturína, an easie pinch, guird, wrench, twinging, or embracing.

Strénna, a new-yeares gift, as Stréna.

Strennáre, to present with new-yeares gifts, or any gifts.

Strenuaménte, stoutly, vndantedly, valiantly, boldly, couragiously, manfully.

Strenuità, stoutnesse, vndantednesse, valiancie, boldnesse, courage, manhood.

Strénuo, stout, vndanted, valiant, bold, hardie, couragious, doughtie, strong.

Strenuosità, as Strenuità.

Strénzo, a fish so called.

Strepíre, písco, píto, to voice as a duck. Also as Strepitáre.

Strepitáre, to rustle, to creake, to rumble, to cracke, or make a great noise.

Strepitéuole, as Strepitóso.

Strepïto, a great noise, a rumor, a rumbling, a rustling, a creaking.

Strepitóso, rumbling, rumorous, rustling, creaking, full of loud noise.

Streppáre, as Strappáre.



Streppatúra, a snatching from with violence.

Streptóna, a kind of wine or grape.

Strétta, a gird, a pinch, a wrench, a twinge, a gripe, a clinch. Also a suddaine feare. Also a narrow lane or streete. Also a narrow allie or close walke. Also a Dace or as some thinke a Mullet-fish. Vsed also for any necessitie, hard pinch, distresse, needie plunge, peck of troubles. Also a throng, a croud, or presse of people. Also as Strétto, the Participle.

Strétta lísta, a bandlet in armorie.

Strettaménte, straightly, strictly, narrowly, pinchingly, girdingly.

Stretteggiáre, to streighten, to pinch.

Strettézza, straitnesse, strictnesse, narrownesse.

Strettíne, easie pinches, girds, twinges.

Strettíuo, restrictiue, astringent.

Strétto, straight, narrow, strickt, close. Also made narrow, straitned, shrunke vp, griped, girded, pinched, wrenched, twinged, clinched, clasped, fast bound. Also vrged, forced, or constrained. Also a close, a sparing, a pinching, a griping, or strait-banded man. Also restrained or bard of libertie, kept close as a prisoner, hard bound, laid vp fast.

Strétto, a strait, a narrow or close passage, a narrow Sea. Also a gulfe.

Strettóia, a presse to presse linnen, napkins, bookes, cheese, letters, caps, or any thing else, a paper-mill, or presse. Also a wrest to wrench with.

Strettório, a healing, a closing, or restringent plaister. Also as Strettóia.

Strettúra, as Strettézza, as Strétta. Also a narrow hole, a close chinke, a cranish.

Stría, as Stréga. Also a screech-owle, or such vnluckie bird. Also as Stríe.

Striáccio, a foolish or busie gadding about, as witches and hags doe in the night.

Striare, to bewitch. Also to screech as an owle. Also to make rabbates, chanels, furrowes, or chamfers in any timber or stone-works.

Striáto, bewitched. Also screeched. Also chamfred, chaneled, or wrought inward with a winding.

Striatura, a bewitching. Also a screeching. Also a chamfuring, a chaneling, or furrow in stone or timber.

Striázzo., looke Andáre in Striázzo.

Striblígine, a fault in speaking or writing called a solæcisme, or incongruitie.

Stríbuíre, ísco, íto, as Distribuíre.

Stributióne, as Distributióne.

Stríca, as Strícca.

Stricáre, to streake. Also to sleeke smooth. Also to disintricate or disintangle. Also to aggrauate or presse downe.

Stricatóio, a sleeke-stone. Also a currie-combe, a horse-combe.

Strícca, a thin line, a long streake. Also any thin narrow plate of mettall.

Striccáre, to sleeke or line. Also to sleeke.

Stricciétta, a little Stricca.

Stríchne, Night-shade, Bane-wort, Deaths-hearbe, or Petie-morell.

Strída, skreekes, shreekes, pitifull cryes.

Strídáre, to crie or proclaime aloud.

Strídere, strído, stridéi, stridúto, to skreeke, to squeake, or crie out pitifully, to creake, to crash, or shreeke as any vnlucking night-bird, to crie as a Raile, to creake or squeake as a dore or cart-wheele, to make any whistling noise. Also to gnash the teeth.

Strído, a skreeking, a squeaking, a creaking, a gnashing, any piteous crye.

Stridolóso, streekie, full of Stridóre.

Stridóre, any kind of skreeking, creaking, or squeaking. Also a crashing or gnashing of the teeth, a creaking of a dore or cart-wheele, a whistling of the winde, a rustling noise. Looke Strídere.

Strídula, any squeaking, creaking, or shrill thing.

Striduláre, to squeake, as Strídere.

Strídulo, that maketh a squeaking, creaking, squeaking, or shrill noise.

Stridulóso, full of creaking, squeaking, or shrilnesse.

Stridúto, skreeked, squeaked, creaked. Also crashed or gnashed, &c. Looke Strídere.

Stríe, those parts in chamfured or furrowed pillars which stand out and swell as it were higher then the furrowes or gutters, called the ridges. Some take them for furrowes, rabbats, or champhres in carued works.

Striéno, an hearbe called the wintercherie.

Stríga, as Stréga. Also as Strégghia.

Strigáre, to bewitch. Also to disintangle.

Strigaríe, bewitchings, witchcrafts.

Strígi, as Stréga.

Strigibárbi, a kind of Barble fish.

Strigiláre, as Stregliáre, to currie-comb.

Strigíle, a currie-combe, a horse-combe.

Strígili, small streakes. Also small pieces of gold that is naturall. Also as Otenchíte.

Strígio, a fish like a Dace. Also a kind of Spanish garment.

Stríge, a Skreech-owle, which (as they of old time say) sucked out the bloud of Infants lying in their cradles. Also as Stríe. Also as Strígio.

Stríglia, a currie-combe, a horse-combe.

Strigliacauálli, an hostler, a horse-boy, one that keepes and rubs horses heeles.

Strigliáre, to currie-combe horses.

Strigmáto, oyle or fatnesse scraped off from any thing.

Strígnere, as Stríngere.

Strigoláre, to skreeke, to squeake.

Strígoli, as Strígili. Also all manner of small guts or chitterlins.

Strigonáre, to bewitch, to play the witch.

Strigóne, as Stregóne. Also as Strígio.

Strigóso, leane, lanke, spinie, meagre. Also a leane-forage, a starueling, one that is nothing but skin and bone.

Strillaménti, yellings, screechings, squeakings with the voice.

Strilláre, to yell and cry out aloud, to squeake wailingly. Also to mew as a Cat.

Strilláto, as Strígio, a fish like a Dace.

Stríllo, a yelling a loud, a squeaking wailingly. Also the mewing of a Cat.

Strináre, to burne or parch hastily.

Strínco, a kind of Lamprey or Eelepout.

Strínga, any point with a tag.

Stringáio, a Pointer or Point-maker.

Stringáre, to point, or trusse with points. Also to mince or wire-draw a thing. Also to stand vpon strict points. Also to bang or ribbaste one.

Stringáta, a lash or stripe with a point.

Stringáto, pointed or trussed with points. Also concised, wrested or wire-drawen. Also handsome, neat, spruce, smug, finically drest vp. Also rib-basted or well bang'd and swadled.

Stringatúzzo, a finicall, neat, spruce, smug, nice, selfe-conceited fellow.

Stringente, griping, restringent.

Stríngere, stríngo, strínsi, strétto, to binde, to wrinch, to guird in, to claspe, to clinch, to pinch, to straiten, to wring in. Also to vrge, to force or constraine vnto.

Stríngere idénti, to gnash the teeth.

Strínger le lábbia, to bite the lips.

Stríngersi nélle spálle, to shrug, to crinch or shrinke in ones shoulders.

Stringhétte, little points with tags or laces.

Stringitúre, pinchings, gripings, wrinchings.

Stringoláre, to string, to point, to lace.

Strínno, as Stríchne, Nightshade.

Strínza, vsed abusiuely for Strínga.

Strínzo, a Witch, a Sorcerer.

Strióne, a Comedie-plaier. Also a Witch.

Striózza, a shee-witch or hag.

Striózza, a hee-witch or Sorcerer.

Stríscia, a streake or line drawen out in length. Also a list or seluage of cloth.

Stríscia di paróle, a rabble or huddle of words.

Strisciáre, to streake or draw out in 



lines or streakes. Also to sleeke or make smooth. Also to slide or glide vpon ice. Also to drag, to traile, to creepe or craule along the ground. Also to currie, to rub, or smooth a horse. Also to make a trampling noise with ones feet as Canarie dancers vse. Also to lay a counterfeit colour on any thing or paint as women doe their faces.

Strisciatúra, a streaking out in lines, a sleeking or making smooth. Also a sliding or gliding vpon ice. Also a dragging or trailing along the ground. Also a currying or dressing of a Horse. Also a trampling noise with ones feet. Also a painting laid on a womans face.

Stríscio, as Strisciatúra. Also a kind of painting that women vse or sleeking.

Striscioláre, as Strisciáre.

Stritoláre, to squeake as a cart-wheele or a dore. Also to crumble or moulder and breake into crums or small pieces.

Strítoli, tearings, iags, rags, clouts.

Stritúro, the filme, rinde or barke of a tree.

Striuiére, a blond or lime-hound, a setting dog.

Stróbilo, a wilde Pine-tree.

Strobóne, a plant that yeeldeth Ladanum.

Strófa, a wilie deceit or subtletie in arguing, a whirling or turning.

Stroffióne, as Strofináccio.

Strofináccio, a wispe or dish-clout, a maulkin to cleanse an ouen with. Also a spunging or Gunners scouring sticke. Also a rubbing clout.

Strofinácciolo, as Strofináccio.

Strofináre, to rub ouer slightly with some piece of cloth. Also to rub or claw vp and downe. Also to galle off the skin and fret away.

Strófio, a kind of chaplet or garland of flowers that Priests were wont to weare.

Strófo, a gnawing or fretting in the bowels.

Strolábio, an Astrolobe.

Strologáre, to professe Astrologie, to play the Astrologer.

Strología, the Science called Astrologie.

Strólogo, an Astrologer.

Strombazzáre, to hout, to hisse at, to flurt at or iest at in reproch.

Strombazzáta, a houting, a shooting, a hissing, a flurting, or any noise made with voice or action in shame, spile or reproch of any.

Strombettáre, to sound as in a Trumpet, but foolishly.

Strombettáta, a foolish trumpeting.

Strombíte, a stone in shape like a Strómbo.

Strómbo, a kind of Sea shdl-fish, pointed like a Turbut, that hath a leader whom the whole shole doth follow as their King.

Strómbolo, à guísa di strómbolo bóglie et ribóglie néllo stómaco.

Stromentále, instrumentall, that serneth as a meane or instrument.

Stromenti bellici, all manner of meanes or instruments of warre.

Stromento, any kind of toole or instrument mechanicall or musicall. Also an indenture, a writting, a bond or record in writing.

Stromento di fiáto, a winde instrument.

Stronáre, to disthrone, to disinthrone.

Stroncáre, to cut off, curtall or abridge.

Stroncáta, a cutting off.

Stróncio, a turde.

Strónco, cut off, abridg'd, curtald.

Strongiléno, a kind of weake Allume.

Stronomía, the Science of Astronomie.

Strónomo, an Astronomer.

Stronzáre monéta, to clip money.

Stronzatóre di monéta, a money-clipper.

Strónzo, a turde.

Strónzolo, a little turde.

Strópha, a wilte deceit or subtletie in arguing.

Strophíla, a garland, a chaplet, a wreath or coronet of flowers.

Strophióla, a womans gorget or stomacher of flower-worke.

Stróppa, a twig, a withe or Osier to binde fagots, vines or hops with. Also the binding whereby a sword or buckler hangeth.

Stroppáglio, a wad, a wispe or stopple of any thing, namely a Gunners spunger.

Stroppáre, to binde with withes. Also to stop vp. Also to stuffe full.

Stroppáta, a stopping. Also a blow with a withe. Also a withe full.

Stroppelli, stopples as of bottles, Gunners spunges, barrell bungs. Also stuffings.

Stroppiáre, as Storpiáre, to lame.

Stroppiataménte, lamely, maimedly.

Stroppiáto, maimed, lamed, halting.

Stroppicciaménto, as Stroppíccio.

Stroppicciáre, to rub, to claw, to vse frication. Also to trample with ones feet.

Stroppíccio, a rubbing, a clawing, a frication. Also a trampling noise with ones feet.

Stroppícciola, a rubber, a wispe or any thing to rub with all.

Stróppio, as Stórpio. Also an inconueence, a crosse-chance.

Strosciáre, to fall furiously and clatter withall as haile and raine falling vpon tiles.

Stróscio, a violent clattring or crushing noise, a trampling noise. Also ruine, spoile or destruction. Also a dog-kennell, a hogs-stie.

Strózza, the gullet, vzell, throat or winde-pipe of any creature.

Strózzaménto, a strangling or wringing off of ones necke.

Strozzáre, to strangle or wring off ones necke, to murther any beast, to kill or crush to death, to wring asunder, to plucke in pieces.

Strozziére, a killer of wilde beastes, a murtherer or wringer off of neckes.

Strózzolo, the vzell pipe or threat.

Strózzole, a disease comming in the throat of some called the Kings-euill.

Strozzolóso, that hath that disease.

Struccáre, to wring, to wrench or presse clothes, to squease or crush out the water of any thing. Also to stringe silke.

Struccáta, the Grapes or any thing else out of which the iuice is prest or wrung.

Struccatóio, any thing or presse to wring, to crush, to wrinch or presse withall.

Strucciáre, as Struccáre.

Strúccio, the bird called an Estridge.

Strúcciola, as Sdrúsciola.

Strúe, a pile of wood, a wood stacke. Also a heape of many thing stogether.

Strúffa, a cheating or cunny-catching tricke, a cozinge.

Struffáre, to deceiue, to cheat, to cunnicatch, to commit all manner of knauery, leaudnesse or villany.

Struffióne, a maulkin to wipe an Ouen, a dish-clout, a shooe-clout, a wispe.

Strúffo, any manner of cozening tricke, guile, cheating or cunnicatching. Also one giuen to all knauery or cheating or leaudnesse. Also as Struffióne.

Strúffoli, a kind of tarte, custard, eggpy, doucet or flaune.

Struffóso, deceitfull, guilofull.

Strufináccio, as Struffióne.

Strúggere, strúggo, strússi, strútto, to destroy, to ruine, to consume. Also to melt or thaw. Also to weare away and faint. Also to array, to build, to compact, to frame or set in order.

Struggiménto, a destroying, a consuming, a wearing away. Also a melting or thawing.

Strugia, a sted, a skid or trucke with low wheeles.

Struíre, ísco, íto, to build, to compact, to contriue, to frame, to fashion, to set in order, to make construction. Also to instruct.

Strúma, a wen or swelling in the necke or arme-pits, wherin be as it were hard kernels closed in the skin. Some haue also taken it to be the Kings euill. 



vsed also for a bunch in the backe.

Strumático, that hath a Strúma.

Strumea, some take it for the hearbe Crowfoot which they say cureth the Kings euill, others take it for a kind of hearbe that beggers vse to make their flesh raw.

Strumentále, as Stromentále.

Strumento, as Stromento.

Strúmo, a plaister made of Strumea.

Strumóso, as Strumático. Vsed also for one that hath a great throate.

Strupiáre, as Stupráre.

Strupiatóre, as Stupratóre.

Strúpo, proud, haughty, disdainefull, without reason. Also a Stúpro.

Strusciáre, as Strutiáre.

Strúscio, as Strútio.

Strutea, a kind of Peare-quince. Also a kind of Quinces.

Struthopódi, a kinde of people hauing feet like sparrowes.

Strutiáre, to excruciat, to vex, to tug, to hauocke.

Strútio, a vening or excruciating. Also a bird called an Estridge or Ostrich.

Strutióne, Sope-weed, Sope-wort or Fullers-hearbe.

Struttíbile, that may be melted, thawed, consumed or destroied. Also made of diuers pieces or diuers things.

Struttióne, vsed for destruction, as Struttúra.

Strútto, destroied, consumed. Also melted or thawid. Also built, compact, or framed. Also instructed. Also construction or building. Also sewet or tried butter.

Struttóre, a builder, a framer, a Mason, a Carpenter. Also a melter or founder.

Struttúra, composition, structure, framing, compacting together as a building.

Strúzza, a kind of bunting with hounds.

Struzzicáre, to make cleane, to trim vp finely. Also as Stuzzicáre.

Struzziére, an Estridge-keeper.

Strúzzo, an Estridge or Ostrage.

Struzzóso, a yongue Estridge.

Stù, vsed for Se tù, if thou.

Stua, as Stúfa.

Stuáre, as Stufáre.

Stuccáre, to parget, to daube or worke with Stúcco, lome or morter. Also to stanch or stop. Also to drie, to stiffen or to harden. Also to glut, to gorge, to cloy, to satiate.

Stuccatóre, a worker in Stúcco, or of images.

Stúcce, a kinde of file that Goldsmithes vse.

Stucchéuole, tedious, wearisome, importunate. Also wallowish in taste.

Stucchézza, satiety, fulnesse, glutting. 

Stúcchio, an estwefe, a pocket sace with Cizers, Penkniues, &c.

Stucciétto, as Stúcchio.

Stúccio, as Stúcchio.

Stúcco, a kinde of pargeting stuffe much vsed in Italy to build statue or imagery worke, composed of paper, sand and lime with other mixtures, the imagery worke in the inner court at Nonesuch in England is made of such. Also glutted, satiate, gorged, cloied. Also stanched or stopt. Also stifned or hardned.

Studente, as Studiánte.

Studiánte, a student, one that studieth.

Studiantúzzo, a simple student.

Studiáre, to studdy, to endeuour or apply the minde, to giue ones minde vnto.

Studiáre il piéde, to heede one foote, to run away.

Studiétto, a little Studdy, Cabbanet or Closet.

Stúdio, an earnest bending of the minde to a thing, affection to doe good or euill, study, endeuour, diligence, industry, laborious desire, mentall exercise.

Stúdio, a priuate study, cabinet, closet or any place to study in. Also an vniuersity where studies are profest. Also a Colledge where Students are. Also a standing deske in a schoole for great bookes.

Studiólo, as Studiétto.

Studiosaménte, studiously, with diligence and affection, desirously, carefully. Also aduisedly, of set purpose, for the nonce, expresly.

Studiosità, studiousnesse.

Studióso, studious, diligent, earnest, carefull, musing, desirous of learning.

Stúfa, a stoue, a hot-house.

Stufaiuólo, a stoue or hothouse keeper.

Stufáre, to stoue close. Also to bath in a hot-house or stoue.

Stufaruólo, as Stufaiuólo.

Stufátto, Vsed for Stupefátto.

Stufello, a pipe, a fluite, a recorder.

Stufétta, a little stoue or hot-house.

Stuffare, to glut, to cloy, to satiate. Also as Stufáre.

Stuffáta, a pot of stewed meate.

Stufféuole, as Stucchéuole.

Stúffo, gorged, glutted, cloid, satiate.

Stúfo, the headinesse or fumosity of wine or any thing else.

Stuiello, a tent to tent a sore with.

Stúmia, scum, fome, froth.

Stumiáre, to scum, to fome, to froth.

Stumióso, scummy, foamy, frothy.

Stuóta, as Stóia, any mat.

Stuoiáre, as Stoiáre, to mat.

Stuoráro, a Matter, a Mat-maker. 

Stuóla, as Stóla.

Stuoláre, as Stoláre.

Stuólo, a troope, a band, a squadron, a rout or company of men. Also a knot or crew of good fellowes, a beauy of Ladies, a flocke of faire women. Also a shoale of fishes, a flight of birdes, a swarme of Bees, &c.

Stuóra, as Stóia, a Mat.

Stuoráre, as Stoiáre, to mat.

Stuoráro, as Stoiáro,

Stupefáre, fáccio, féci, fátto, to astonish or dismay, to become abashed, to driue into a dumpe, to be past all sence, to wonder and gaze at with admiration. Also to be amazed or astonished. Also to stupifie.

Stupefattióne, stupefaction, amazement astonishment, wonderment.

Stupefatto, astonished, dismaied, a bashed, in a dump, past all sence, &c. stupified. Looke Stupefáre.

Stupendo, admirable, wonderous, maruellous, working admiration.

Stupidézza, as Stupidità.

Stupidíre, dísco, díto, as Stupefáre.

Stupidità, stupidity, dulnesse, vnsensiblenesse, suddaine priuation of sences, amazement, wonderment, astonishment, a benumming of the minde.

Stúpido, stupide, sencelesse, blockish, dull and benummed in sences. Also fearefull, abashed, amazed, astonished, dismaied, foolish.

Stupíre, písco, píto, to wonder at with admiration.

Stupíto, wondered at with admiration.

Stuporatióne, as Stupidità.

Stupóre, wonderment, amazement, suddaine lacke of sence or feeling.

Stuporóso, full of wonderment.

Stupráre, to rape, to rauish or deflower a virgin. Also to commit rape or adulterie.

Stupratióne, a rauishing.

Stupratóre, a rauisher or deflowrer of women. Also an adulterer.

Stúpro, rape, rauishment, deflowring of women, adultery, whoredome.

Stupróso, adulterous, full of or giuen to whoredome, adultery or rauishment.

Sturáre, to vnstop, to open, to vent.

Sturbaménto, a disturbance, a troubling.

Sturbáre, to disturbe, to trouble, to molest.

Sturbatióne, as Sturbaménto.

Stúrbo, trouble, disturbance, vexation.

Sturióne, the fish called Sturgion.

Sturmento. Vsed for Stromento.

Stúrno, as Stórno.



Stúrzo, an Estriàge bird.

Stutáre, to doe out, to quench forth.

Stúua, as Stúfa.

Stuuaiuólo, as Stufaiuólo.

Stuccáre, as Stufáre.

Stúzzicadenti, a tooth-picke.

Stuzzicaménti, prouocations, allurements, ticklings, enticements, dalliances.

Stúzzicaorécchi, an Eare-picker.

Stuzzicáre, to prouoke, to entice, to allure, to tickle vnto, to egge or pricke on to fumble, to grope, to play or dally withall wantonly.

Stuzzicatóre, a prouoker, an enticer, a tickler, an egger or pricker on. Also a fumbler or a groper.

Stúzzico, a prouocation, an allurement, a tickling, a pricking or setting on.

Sù, vp, vpward. Also on ouer or vpon. Also an aduerbe of encouragement vp and away, forward, on, goe to.

Súa, hirs, hir owne. Also his or his owne, for note that the Italians make euer the six Pronounes possessiues to agree with the thing spoken of and not the person.

Suáda, the Goddesse of Eloquence or delectable speech.

Suadáta, open, vnkept, free for all men.

Suadela, perswasion, faire speech.

Suadére, suádo, suási, suáso, to perswade or aduise vnto with faire words, to induce, to moue or exhort one to be of our opinion.

Suadíbile, that may be perswaded.

Suádo, perswaded with faire words.

Suagáre, to stray, to roaue or wander a side.

Suaghíte, ghísco, ghíto, the contrary of Inuaghíre, to fall out of liking with.

Suagolonáre, to gad to lotter or roaue vp and downe.

Suagolóne, an idle gadder, a loitering companion.

Sualiáta, garishly deckt, gallantly trimmed.

Sualigiaménto, a robbing, an vncasing, a stripping or rifling of one.

Sualigiáre, to rob, to strip, to fripe, to rifle or vncase one by the high-way.

Sualisciáre, as Sualigiáre.

Sualláre, to vnually, to come or fetch or driue out of a vally.

Sualternico, a kind of Amber.

Suampáre, as Vampáre, to flash.

Suangelizzáre, as Euangelizzáre.

Suaniménto, a swouning. Also a vanishing out of sight.

Suaníre, nisco, níto, to vanish out of sight. Also to fade away. Also to droop or faint.

Suaníto, vanished out of sight, faded away, drooped or fainted. Also wine or any drinke that is flat or dead, and that hath lost his strength.

Suantaggiáre, to disuantage.

Suantággio, disaduantage, oddes.

Suantaggióso, disuantageous.

Suaporaménto, a breathing forth.

Suaporáre, to euaporate or breath forth.

Suariánza, variation, diuersity.

Suariáre, to vary, as Zauariáre.

Suariataménte, variously.

Suariáto, varied. Also motly coloured.

Suário, of or belonging to swine.

Suarióne, a varier, as Rauarióne.

Suáro, a fish called in Latin Lacertuo.

Suasibile, that may be perswaded.

Suasióne, perswasion, exhortation.

Suáso, perswaded or induced vnto with faire words. Also a kinde of whitish pale colour that painters vse, some take it for a kind of sad gray.

Suasóre, a perswader with faire words.

Suasório, of or belonging to perswasion.

Suasório, perswasiue, alluring vnto.

Suáue, as Soáue, sweet, pleasant.

Suauità, sweetnesse, as Soauità.

Suázzo, a fish called a Turbut.

Sub., Vsed of Dante for Sótto, vnder, and much vsed in composed words.

Subagiráre, to wind vnder.

Subagitatióne, an vnder agitation or solliciting.

Subaltetnáre, to succeed in order or by turne.

Subalternatióne, a succeeding in due order or by turne, subalternation.

Subalterno, subalternall, succeeding in due order and by turne.

Subáre, to grunt as the sow doth for the boare to haue him doe his kind.

Subatióne, the appetite or stirring to generation in swine, the grunting of the sow for the boare.

Subáto, as Subatióne.

Subátto, subdued or forced.

Subattrice, a lustfull sow or woman.

Subbarcáre, to bow vnder as a bow, to vnder arch, to vnder vault.

Subbentráre, to enter or come in vnder.

Súbbia, a Shooemakers awle.

Subbiáre, to pricke with an awle. Also to whistle.

Súbbio, a whistle. Also a Weauers yarne-beame. Also axle-tree.

Subbioláre, to rowle vpon a yarne-beame.

Súbbiolo, a little whistle. Also a little yarne-beame.

Subbísso, as it were Sottoabísso, a bottomlesse pit or gulfe, a dungeon of hell.

Subbolíre, as Sobbolíre.

Subceleste, of vnder heauen. 

Subdiuídere, vído, vísi, víso, to subdeuide.

Subdiuisióne, a subdiuision.

Subdólo, full of deceit, craft or wiles.

Subdólóso, as Subdólo.

Súbe, a kind of vnluckie Skreech-owle which is saide to breake all the Eagles egges he can come vnto.

Subentráre, to enter or come in vnder.

Súbero, the tree or wood Corke.

Súber, a kind of disease in a horse.

Subgiontióne, a subiunction.

Súbia, a Shoomakers awle.

Subiáre, to pricke with an awle.

Subiettiuaménte, subiectiuely.

Subietto, subiect. Also a subiect.

Subilláre, by meere importunity and earnestnesse, and as it were against ones will to entreate and obtaine a suite of a man.

Subintellígere, to meane or vnderstand.

Subintendore, to meane or vnderstand.

Súbio, as Súbbio.

Subíre, bísco, bíto, to grant as the sow doth for the bore to doe his kinde to long or lust for most beastly.

Subissáre, as Precipitáre.

Subitaménte, suddenly, one a sudden.

Subitána, suddaine, Mórte subitána.

Subitáneo, suddaine, vnthought vpon.

Subitézza, suddainenesse, hastinesse, speed.

Súbito, suddaine, suddenly, vnlooked for.

Súbito che, so soone as, presently vpon.

Súbito cóme, idem.

Subitóso, suddaine, hasty, full of speed.

Sublimáre, to raise, to extoll, to aduance, to set on high. Also to sublimate.

Sublimatióne, sublimation, subliming, lifting vp.

Sublimáto, high raised, extolled, sublimed, sublimated, that is aboue vs.

Sublimáto, sublimate, as Solimáto.

Sublíme, sublime, high and aloft, extolled, aboue vs lofty. Also the vpper post of a doore. Also the mantle of a chimny.

Sublimità, sublimity, highnesse, the top or tip of any thing, height, loftinesse.

Sublínguio, the wezell of the throate.

Sublitióne, the ground colour whereon other coloures are laid, Painters call it grasing.

Sublunáre, whatsoeuer is, breedeth or liueth vnder the Moone.

Subluogare, to lay, to place or set vnderneath. Also to dispose vnder hand. 



Sublúuie, any filth or ordure. Also a disease in Cattell betweene the clawes.

Subodoráre, to smell vnder hand, to haue an inkling or notice of any thing.

Subóido, moist, humide, wettish.

Súbole, as Sóbole.

Subordinánza, a subordination.

Subordináre, to subordinate.

Subordinatióne, subordination.

Subornaménto, as Subornatióne.

Subornáre, to suborne, to debauch, to intice, to misleade to euill or to beare false witnesse, to instruct and send one priutly to doe or say any thing to the end to deceiue.

Subornatióne, subornation, misleading, enticing or debauching vnto some euill.

Subornatóre, a suborner, or misleader, an inticer or debaucher vnto euill.

Subrogáre, as Surrogáre.

Subrogatióne, as Surrogatióne.

Substantíuo, that may stand of it selfe, a Substantiue.

Subsedére, séggo, sedéi, sedúto, to vnder sit.

Subsistente, subsisting.

Subsistentia, a subsistance or groundworke of any thing, an abiding.

Subsístere, sísto, sistéi, sistúto, to subsist, to abide still, not to recoyle or giue place. Also to resist or withstand. Also to substitute.

Subsistúto, subsisted. Also substituted or appointed. Also a substitute.

Subsoláno, the East or Easterly wind.

Subterfúgio, as Sotterfúgio.

Subucáre, to lurke or sneake in a corner.

Subuentióne, helpe, supply, succour.

Subuersióne, as Souuersióne.

Subugliáre, as Sobugliáre.

Subúglio, as Sobúglio.

Subulóne, a Deare called a Spitter. Also a yongue foole.

Suburbanità, neighbour-hood of them that dwell in a City.

Suburbáno, Lat. neere vnto or belonging to a Citty.

Sù carpíre, to snatch vp.

Succedána, any drug that may be vsed for default of another, Apothecaries call it quid pro quo.

Succedáneo, that succeedeth or commeth in place of another.

Succédere, cédo, cessi, cesso, or cedúto, to succeed, to follow, to haue good successe, to prosper and come to passe, to ensue in the place of another.

Succedúto, succeeded, followed. Also come in the place of another, ensued. 

Succeneríto, baked vnder the ashes.

Successibili béni, goods that come by succession, successible goods.

Successióne, succession, a succeeding, a comming in place of another.

Successiuaménte, successiuely.

Successiuo, successiue, succeeding.

Successo, succeeded. Also a successe or comming to passe.

Successóre, a successor, a succeeder, one that commeth in place of another.

Succhia cápra, a birde which is said to sucke a Goates vdder, some call it a winde-sucker.

Succhiáre, to sucke. Also to like or smacke.

Succhiasángue, a Horse-leech, a Bloud-sucker.

Succhiaspína, a louer of wine, a licke or sucke spigot.

Succhiatóre, a sucker, a sucklin.

Succhiauígna, as Succhiaspina.

Succhielláre, to spigot or boare thorow.

Succhiello, an auger, a piercer, a wimblet, a gimblet, a boarer, a forcehead. Also a spigot. Also a little pipe or flut. Also a bird windfucker.

Súcchio, the iuice of any thing, the sap or moistnesse of trees or any thing else. Also moistnesse or waterishnesse. Also sucking or smacking till a print remaine, Veníre in Súcchio, to haue ones teeth run a water with longing earnestly for any thing.

Succhióse lábbia, sucking-plumbe lips.

Súcci, mipáre ródere bombétti & súcci.

Succiaménto, any sucking or smacking.

Succiáre, as Succhiáre, to sucke.

Succiatóre, a sucker. Also some part of a pump.

Súccida, vnwashed or new shorne-wooll.

Succídere, cído, císi, císo, to cut vnder.

Succidézza, as Succidúme.

Succidíre, dísco, díto, to foule, to sully or defile with grease or sweat.

Súccido, filthy, foule, sluttish, slullied, greasie, sweaty, vnwashed.

Succidúme, all manner of filth, filthinesse, sluttishnesse, or sweaty grease.

Succináre, to make a low or soft noise. Also to sing a base or drone tenor.

Succínco, of or belonging to Amber.

Succingente, vnder-guirding.

Succíngere, to vnderguirt or cingle. Also to enuiron, to compasse or fence about.

Succíno, gum or rozin of sweet-trees, namely of the Pine-tree, which by reason of the clearenesse thereof was in old times called glasse, The first and best kind is yellow and bright Amber, the next is white and duskish called, bastard-Amber. Also of or belonging to Amber. Also a kind of Plum or Damzen-tree. Also as Lincúrio.

Succintaménte, succinctly, briefly.

Succínto, succinct, compendious, short, materiall, pithie. Also trussed vp or vnder-guirt. Also enuironed.

Súccio, a sucke, a sacking, a smacke. Also quickly, in a moment, instantly.

Súcciola, a sucking. Also a sucking babie.

Succioláre, to sucke. Also to smacke.

Súcciole, greene Chesnuts sodden in water.

Succipiéno, so full that it may be suckt.

Succíre, císco, cíto, to sucke, to smacke.

Succísa, the hearbe Diuels-bit.

Succíso, cut, sliced, gasht or hewed vnder.

Súcco, the iuice, the sap or moistnesse of any thing. Vsed also for vigor or strength. Also a kind of iron instrument to picke lockes with.

Succobrináre, to play the Ape or Munkie and imitate any gesture.

Succobríno, a mimike gesturer, that counterfeites all gestures as a Munkie.

Succombere, as Soccómbere.

Succóso, moist, full of iuice or sap.

Succúba, a whore lying with another womans husband.

Súccubi, as Succúmbij.

Succúmbij, certaine spirits that take the shape of women vpon them, and so haue the companie of men.

Succussário, a slow, dull, heauie-going iade.

Succussóni, slow, dull or heauie iades.

Sucína, a kind of Plum or Damzen.

Sucíno, a kind of Plum or Damzen-tree.

Súco, as Súcco, iuice or sap.

Sucóso, full of iuice or sap, moist.

Sucúbij, as Succúmbij.

Súcula, the middle poste of any winding crane or wind-mill to draw vp weights.

Súcule, the seauen Starres appearing in Iune called the Hiades.

Sud, the South-winde.

Sudáccio, filthy stinking sweet.

Sù dal cielo, vp from heauen.

Sudaménto, any kind of sweating.

Sudámini, red angry pimples.

Sudánte, sweating, dropping with.

Sudarcáto, a sicknesse called the Iaundise.

Sudár di méle et látte, to sweat or flow with milke and honnie.

Sudáre, to sweat, to drop with.

Sudário, a wiper, a towell, a rubber, a handkercher to wipe the sweat away. 



Sudatíccio, sweatie, enclined to sweat.

Sudatióne, any sweating.

Sudatório, a hot-house or sweating place.

Sudatório bágno, a hot or sweating bathe.

Suddiacóno, a Subdeacon, a Subdeane.

Suddíccio, slouenlinesse, filthinesse.

Suddiccióne, a filthy, sluttish, slouenly fellow.

Suddiccíre, císco, cíto, as Sudiccíre.

Súddito, a subiect, a vassall, an vnderling.

Sudest, the South-east winde.

Sudétto, aboue said, or forenamed.

Súdi, a kind of excellent good Fish.

Sudiccíre, as Succidíre.

Súdice, as Súccido.

Sudiciménto, seducement.

Sudiciótta, a filthy foule slut.

Sudiciúme, as Succidúme.

Súdo, a great fish as Sphiréno. Also the cleare firmament, or faire and dry weather after wet and raine.

Sudóre, sweat. Also labour or trauell.

Súe, hirs, his, or theirs. Also as Sù.

Suecchiáre, to grow, to become from old yongue againe.

Suecchiáto, become yongue againe, refreshed with youth or vigor.

Suefáre, to bring in vse or custome.

Suefattióne, vse, vre, custome.

Suefátto, accustomed, enured, wont.

Suegghiáre, as Suegliáre.

Suegghiaruólo, as Suegliaruólo.

Suegghiáto, as Suegliáto.

Suegghiatóio, as Suegliaruólo.

Sueggiáre, as Suegliáre.

Suéglia, a kind of racke or torture in Florence. Also a hautboy or such winde instrument.

Suegliáre, to awaken, to wake, to watch.

Suegliaruólo, a waker, alarum in a clocke.

Suegliáto, awakned, waked, watcht.

Suegliáto, watchfull, vigilant.

Suegliatóio, as Suegliaruólo.

Suegliatóre, as Suegliaruólo.

Suegliere, sueglo, suelsi, suelto, as Suellere.

Sueglióne, a hautboy or loud instrument. Also the drone of a bagpipe.

Sueláre, to vnuaile, to vncouer, to disclose.

Suelenáre, as Sueleníre.

Sueleníre, nísco, níto, to vnpoison, to vnrankle.

Suelgere, as Suellere.

Suellere, suelgo, suelsi, suelto, to extirp, to grub or root out, to pull vp by the rootes.

Suelta, a plucking or rooting out.

Suelto, a place from out which all things are pulled. Also loose of the root, extirped, grubbed vp or rooted out. 

Suelutáre, to make bare, to vnueluet.

Suembráre, as Smembráre.

Suemoráre, as Smemoráre.

Suenáre, to cut the veines of ones throat.

Suenáta bríglia, a bit with an open mouth as ports or vpsets.

Suenatóre, a murtherer, a killer, a butcher.

Suenatúra, Riders call it open mouthes, as a Catsfoote or other port or vpset.

Suenéuole, vncomely, vnseemely.

Sueniménto, a swouning or fainting.

Sueníre, to faint or swoune.

Suentare, to euaporate, to blow or vent out, to let the winde, breath, spirit, force or wit of any man or thing goe out. Also to ayre in the winde.

Suentáta, an idle, a gadding or humorous toy, fancie or conceit.

Suentáto, euaporated, vented or breathed out. Also ayred in the winde. Also a light-headed fellow.

Suentoláre, to waue in the ayre or wind. Also as Suentáre.

Suéntolo, any fan to make winde with.

Suentráglia, the guts, offall, garbish, panch or entrailes of any creature.

Suentráre, to vnpanch, to vnbowell.

Suentúra, a misfortune or mischance.

Suenturáto, vnfortunate, vnluckie.

Suenturóso, vnfortunate, vnhappie.

Suenúto, fainted or fallen into a swoune.

Suerginaménto, a rape, a deflouring.

Suergináre, to defloure, to rauish.

Suergináta, a rauished or defloured wench.

Suergógna, shame, reproch, impudencie.

Suergognáre, to shame, to reproch.

Suergognáto, shamed, shamelesse, impudent.

Suernánte, wintring, passing the winter.

Suernáre, to wax Sommer. Also to winter or to passe the winter. Also vsed of Dánte for the chirping of birds, because winter is done, to vnwinter.

Suerre, as Suellere.

Suertáre, to tell or vtter whatsoeuer one knowes, to be Tom-tell-troth.

Suerza, a splinter or a shiuer.

Suerzáre, to splinter, to shiuer.

Suerzáto, burst, cleft, cloued, riuen.

Suestíre, suesto, suestíj, suestíto, to disaray, to disattire, to vncloth, to strip naked.

Suestíto, disaraied, disrobed, vnclothed, disattired, stript naked, vnclad.

Suéta, a fish called in Latine Nasus.

Suetíno, a kind of yellow precious stone.

Sueto, accustomed, wont, enured.

Suettáre, to cut off or lop off the top of any flower or plant.

Suetúdine, wont, custome, vre.

Suezzáto, disaccustomed, vnwonted.

Suffarcináre, to stuffe full, or fill vp. Also to trusse vp. Also to lode or burthen. 

Sufficiente, sufficient, enough, able.

Sufficienteménte, sufficiently.

Sufficienza, sufficiencie, abilitie.

Suffigine, a sweet perfume.

Suffiláre, to whistle, to whizze.

Suffilo, a kind of disease in the eares.

Suffiménto, as Suffumicatióne.

Suffocáre, as Soffocáre, to stifle.

Suffocatióne, a suffocation, a stifling.

Suffocatóre, a strangler, a stifler.

Suffogáre, as Soffocáre.

Suffoláre, to whistle, to hizze, to whizze.

Suffólcere, as Soffolcíre.

Suffolétto, a little whistle.

Suffolíno, a little whistle.

Súffolo, any kind of whistle or hisse.

Suffólto, as Soffolciúto.

Sufformatíuo, sufforming.

Suffragáno, as Soffragáno.

Suffragáre, as Soffragáre.

Suffragatióne, as Soffragatióne.

Suffragatóre, as Soffragatóre.

Suffragatório, as Soffragatório.

Suffraginóso, as Soffraginóso.

Suffrágio, as Soffrágio.

Suffrágo, as Soffrágo.

Suffrenáre, as Soffrenáre.

Suffrenáta, as Soffrenáta.

Suffrenatióne, as Soffrenatióne.

Sufftíggere, as Soffríggere.

Suffritto, as Soffrítto.

Suffúlccre, as Soffolcíre.

Suffuléno, a Bull-finch.

Suffumicáre, to vse suffumications, to fume or perfume vnderneath. Also to burne Incense or Sacrifice. Also to smoake or dry in the smoake.

Suffumicatióne, a suffumication, a fuming or perfuming from vnder. Also a burning of Sacrifice.

Suffumígij, as Suffumicatióne.

Suffusióne, a suffusion, a spreading abroad or vpon. Also a disease in the eyes called a pin and a web.

Sugáia cárta, paper that suckes inke.

Sugamáno, a hand-towell or wiper.

Sugáre, to wipe and dry, as Sciugáre. Also to sucke vp.

Súgaro, the tree or wood called Corke.

Sugatóio, a hand-towell or wiper.

Sugelláti, blacke and blew spots of dead bruised bloud vnder the skin.

Súgero, the tree or wood Corke.

Suggelláre, to seale, to signe, to stampe.

Suggellatióne, bloud congealed vnder the tunicle of the eyes, lying there.

Suggello, a seale, a signet, a stamp.

Súggere, súggo, suggéi, suggiúto, or sútto, to sucke dry, to sucke out or from.

Suggeríre, rísco, ríto, to suggest vnto or put in minde, to shew and tell withall. Also to minister, to finde or allow vnto. Also to yeeld and send forth things whereof are plentie. 



Suggestáre, to suggest or put in minde, to shew and tell withall.

Suggestióne, suggestion or putting in minde.

Suggesto, suggested or put in minde, shewed and told withall. Also ministred or allowed vnto.

Suggesto, a high chaire, a pulpit or chaire whereout Orations or Sermons are made. Also a high bush or tuff of hairs which ancient Matrons were wont to rowle somewhat high vpon their heads.

Suggettáre, to subiect, to bring vnder or in subiection, to submit.

Suggettéuole, that may be subiected or brought vnder.

Suggettióne, subiection, seruitude, thraldome, bondage.

Suggettíre, tísco, títo, as Suggettáre.

Suggettíto, subiected, brought vnder.

Suggettíuo, subiectiue, to be subiected.

Suggetto, a subiect, a vassall, an vnderling, a thrall, a bondman. Also a subiect, a ground or theame to write, to speake or worke vpon. Also subiected, brought vnder or enthralled. Also addicted, enclined or subiect vnto.

Suggiacére, as Soggiacére.

Suggiugáre, as Soggiocare.

Suggiúgnere, as Soggióngere.

Sugherello, an Elder-pipe. Also a little Súghero.

Súghero, the tree or wood called Corke. Also a deuise made of bladders or pieces of Corke fastned to ones shoulders to learne to swim with.

Sugliárda, as Sogliárda.

Sugliárdo, as Sogliárdo.

Súgna, as Sóngia.

Sugnáccio, filthy grease or tallow.

Sugnáre, as Songiáre, to tallow.

Sugnóso, as Songióso, tallowish.

Súgo, any iuice, sap, or moisture.

Sugóso, full of iuice, sap or moisture.

Súgulo, a kind of new must or sweet wine.

Suguméra. 

Suiaménto, a misleading or straying out of the way. Also a debauching or allurement.

Suiáre, to mislead or draw out of the right way, to debauch or entice to euill.

Suiáto, misled, straied or drawen out of the right way. Also suborned, enticed or debauched to euill. Also an vnthriftie, misled or debauched man.

Suigoríre, rísco, ríto, to weaken, to depriue of force, vigor or vertue.

Suillaneggiáre, to chide, to brawle or scold at. Also to offer wrong or villanie vnto.

Suilluppaménto, as Suillúppo.

Suilluppáre, to vnwrap, to disintangle, to vnsold, to rid free.

Suillúppo, an vnwrapping, a disintangling, a free riddance, an vnfolding.

Suináre, to leake out as wine doth.

Suinchiáre, to whiske with a riding wand, our Riders say to switch.

Suinchiáta, a whiske or switching giuen with a riding wand.

Suincoláre, to free from bonds or snares. Looke Víncolo.

Suisáre, to vnface, to disuisage. Also to slash or gash ouer the face. Also to neglect and not consider vpon.

Suisceráre, as Suentráre, to disinbowel.

Suiscerataménte, with all a mans heart and bowels, most-most hartely.

Suisceráto, vnpanched, vnboweled.

Suisceráto seruitóre, a most heartie, louing and affectionate seruant.

Suíssimo, most his, his most-most.

Suitiáre, as Disuitiáre.

Suiuacchiáre, as Viuacchiáre.

Sul, vpon thee, ouer thee. Also in and vpon, in the nicke, at the instant.

Sù leuáre, to rise or raise vp.

Sul far del giórno, vpon breake or by peep of day.

Sul far di nótte, vpon twilight or aproch of night.

Sulfurággine, sulphrinesse.

Sulfureo, sulphrie, of sulpher.

Sulimáto, Mercurie or Sublimate that Alchimists vse.

Sullunáre, of or belonging vnder the Moone.

Sultaníno, a kind of Turkish coine.

Sumácchio, Sumach to dye blacke with.

Sumína, a Hogs-panch, or billie with the paps vnto it, and so drest.

Súmma, as Somma, a summe.

Summáre, as Sommáre, to somme.

Summário, as Sommário, a summarie.

Summessióne, as Sommessione.

Summésso, as Somésso.

Summettére, as Sottométtere.

Summissíuo, as Sommissíuo.

Sumministráre, as Somministráre.

Sumministratione, as Somministratióne.

Summísta, a Summist, one that followes the opinion of Thomas Aquinas his summes.

Sumministratóre, as Somministratóre.

Sumptióne, a taking, a receiuing.

Sun, for Se uno, if one. Also for Sù.

Sunáre, to gather vp, or together.

Sunnét, a Turkish word, as much to say as circumcision.

Súnto, a summe, or totall rekening.

Suntuáriè léggi, Lat.

Suntuosaménte, sumptuously, gloriously.

Suntuosità, as Sontuosità.

Suntuóso, as Sontuóso, sumptuous. 

Súo, his, his owne, hers, her owne.

Súo, vsed of Dánte for Sù.

Suócerao, a wiues or husbands mother.

Suócero, a wiues or husbands father.

Súo dánno, at his perill, or danger.

Suogliáre, to bring out of taste or willingnes, to make vnwilling. Also to haue or giue one his longing.

Suogliataménte, vnwillingly, vnlustily, sadly, as it were against taste.

Suogliáto, vnwilling, vnlustie, tastelesse, sad, pensiue. Also nice or so altred, that nothing can please. Also had ones will or longing.

Suói, his, his owne, hers, her owne.

Suóla, a sole of a shoe, &c.

Suolacchiáre, as Suolazzáre.

Suoláio, as Soláio, or Soláro.

Suoláre, as Suolazzáre.

Suoláre, to sole as a paire of shoes. Also to seele, or floore, or roofe any roome.

Suolazzaménto, as Suolázzo.

Suolazzáre, to beate, to flap, to hoouer or flutter with ones wings. Also to waue in the winde. Also to pur as a Partridge.

Suolázzi, all manner of wauings or streamings, or banerols, namely, in Ships or head pieces.

Suolázzo, a beating, a flapping, a fluttring or hoouering with ones wings. Also a wauing in the winde. Also a purring of a Partridge.

Suolgarizzáre, to translate, to explaine, or make vulgar.

Suóle, he or she is wont or accustomed.

Suolóre, vóglio, vólsi, volúto, to nill, to be vnwilling, to vnwill.

Suólgere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, to turne or diuert away or from.

Suolgiménto, a turning or diuerting away or from.

Suólo, a thing that beareth any thing on it, as the earth, the ground, the hand, the bottome, the foundation or superficies of any thing. Also a groundworke, a pauement, a floore, a seeling, a roofe of any roome or place.

Suolo a suólo, piled in order, or ranged in ranks one vpon another, as Hearings be.

Suolontáre, to vnwill, as Suogliáre.

Suólsi, it is wont, the custome or fashion is.

Suólta, as Suolgiménto, a crankling, a winding, a turning.

Suoltáre, to tosse, to turne, to tumble, to welter, or wallow vp and downe, in or about.

Suólto, turned, or diuerted from, or away.

Suoltoláre, as Suoltáre.

Suolúto, nilled, vnwilled, bin vnwilling.

Suonánza, as Sonánza.



Suonáre, as Sonáre, to sound.

Suonáta, any sound of Musike.

Suonatóre, as Sonatóre.

Suóno, what noise or sound soeuer the eare of man can comprehend.

Suóno amórto, a knell, a tolling, or ringing, or peale for the dead.

Suóno di pálme, the noise of clapping of hands.

Suóra, a Sister. Also a title giuen to Nunnes or religious women. Also a Nunne.

Suorésco, Sister-like, Nunne-like.

Supeditánco, as Suppeditáneo.

Supeditáre, as Suppeditáre.

Supeditatióne, as Suppeditatióne.

Supelleticário, as Suppelleticário.

Supelletile, as Suppelletile.

Súper, vp, by, vp along, vp through.

Superábile, vanquishable, that may be surpassed or ouercome.

Superabondánza, superaboundance.

Superadditióne, an ouer-addition.

Superallegáto, ouer-bound. Also ouer-alleaged.

Superaltatióne, an ouer-extolling.

Superangelico, more then angelicall.

Superannáto, out-worne with yeares, out-yeared.

Superánza, as Superiorità.

Superáre, to ouercom, to surpasse, to surmount to ouer-match, to excell.

Superarogáre, to supererogate, to giue more then is required or expected.

Superarogatióne, supererogation, a giuing more then is required.

Superatióne, an ouercomming, a superation, a surmounting, a surpassing.

Superbaménte, proudly, stately.

Superbia, pride, disdaine, surquedrie, arrogancie, haughtinesse of minde.

Superbiloquente, proudly speaking, a proud or disdainefull speaker.

Superbiloquenza, proud or arrogant speach, disdainefull speaking.

Superbíne, the Proud-peare.

Superbio, as Superbo.

Superbióso, full of pride, arrogancie, or disdaine.

Superbíre, bísco, bíto, to make or become proud, disdainefull, haughtie, or arrogant.

Superbo, proud, disdainefull, surquedrous, arrogant, haughtie, or highminded, surlie. Also magnificent, sumptuous, stately, noble, representing maiestie.

Superbótto, sicke of pride, very proud.

Superbúzzo, a proud squall, a squeamish disdainefull man.

Superceleste, more then heauenly.

Supercessióne, a supersedies, Lat.

Superchiaménte, as Soperchiaménte.

Superchiáre, as Soperchiáre.

Superchiaría, as Soperchiería.

Superchiatóre, as Soperchiatóre.

Superchiatúra, as Soperchiatúra.

Superchio, as Soperchio.

Superchióso, as Soperchióso.

Superciglio, the vpper eye-lid of a mans eye, the eye-browes, or ridge of haires aboue the eye-lids. Also the knop, the brow, the top, the ridge, or highest part of any great hill, rocke, or crag. Also the seueritie, grauitie, pride, stately looke, or countenance of a man. Also the hanse of a dore, or mantle of a chimnie, &c.

Superciglióso, that hath big eye-lids, or eye-browes. Also high-looking, surlie, or grim in countenance, disdainefull, or haughtie-minded.

Supereminente, supereminent, being, appearing, or aloft aboue others.

Supereminenza, a prerogatiue, or excellencie aboue others.

Superessentiále, superessentiall.

Superessentialità, superessentialitie.

Superéuole, as Superábile.

Supersiciále, superficiall, not very deepe.

Superficiáre, to peruse ouer superficially.

Superficiáro, a superficiall man, one that hath no deepe skill. Also of or belonging to the out-side of a thing. Also he that buildeth a house on another mans ground, and therefore payeth quitrent.

Superfície, the surface, the superficies or outside of any thing.

Superfluaménte, with superfluitie.

Superfluáre, to ouerflow, to run ouer, to abound, to exceed, to bee superfluous.

Superfluíre, ísco, íto, as Superfluáre.

Superfluità, superfluitie, more then needes, profusenesse, ouerplus.

Superfluo, superfluous, ouer-much, enough, and much to spare, profuse, that runneth ouer.

Superfúgio, a flying away.

Superfusióne, as Embrocatióne.

Superfúso, powred vpon, ouerflowed.

Súperi, as Superióri.

Superimpendente, hanging ouer.

Superinfóndere, to infuse from aboue.

Superinfúso, infused from aboue.

Superióre, superior, vppermost, former, senior, higher, chiefer, elder, in better place.

Superióri, superiors, seniors, olders, ancestors, predecessors. Also Gods, Angels, Saints, or they that are in Heauen.

Superiorità, superioritie, preheminence, senioritie, abouenesse, eldership.

Superlatióne, the figure hiperbole, or excessiue amplifying. Also a surname giuen to one by excellencie.

Superlatiuaménte, superlatuely, in the 
highest degree.

Superlatíno, a superlatiue, or chiefe degree.

Superláto, excessiuely amplifide. Also preferred, borne vpon or ouer.

Superlimináre, the lintle ouer a dore.

Supernále, supernall, high, aboue, chiefe.

Supernalménte, supernally.

Supernatie, a kind of rare Peaches.

Supernáto, borne or growne ouer, or aboue.

Supernatirále, supernaturall.

Supernaturalità, supernaturalitie.

Superno, supernall, aboue, highest.

Súpero, as Superiórc.

Supersáta, a kind of Haggas, or Pudding.

Supersedére, as Soprasedére.

Supersedie, as Sopiasedie.

Superspicáce ingégno, a superspicuous wit.

Superste, as Superstíto.

Superstitióne, superstition, curiositie, scruple, a vaine religion or deuotion, an honouring of that should not be honoured, a spiced conscience in vaine things.

Superstitióso, superstitious scrupulous, curious, vaine or timorous in conscience, or religion without cause.

Superstito, escaped and safe from death, a suruiuor, one that ouerliueth others.

Superuacáno, out-worne with yeeres, out-yeered.

Superuácuo, vaine, to no vse, vnnecessarie, superfluous or ouermuch.

Supináre, to lay vpright or the bellie vpward. Also to goe stately or proudly as with the nose in the winde.

Supináto, laid vpright, turned vp, holden vp in the ayre. Also somewhat bowed backward.

Supinità, lying vpright with the face vpward. Vsed also for negligence.

Supíno, vpright, with the face or belly vpward. Also idle, lither or retchlesse. Also a Supine deriued of a verbe.

Supirióso, as Suspirióso, sighfull.

Suplantáre, to supplant.

Suplantatióne, a supplantation.

Suplantatóre, a supplantes.

Súplica, as Súpplica, &c.

Suplicáre, as Supplicáre.

Supositório, a suppository.

Súppa, as Sóppa, any kind of sop.

Suppáre, as Soppáre, to sop.

Suppedáneo, any thing set vnder the feet, a foot-stoole, a thing that images stand vpon.

Suppeditáre, to haue sufficient, to be able to giue and furnish to others. Also to subdue or bring low to ones feete.

Suppeditatióne, a giuing or ministring 



vnto another what he lacketh.

Suppeleucário, a slaue or bondman which is accounted for chattle. Also a seruant hauing a charge of houshold stuffe.

Suppeletile, all things mooueable in a house, all manner of houshould stuffe, goods or chattle or implements.

Suppiláre, to steale, to pilfer or purloine vnder hand, to rob or filch craftily.

Suppilatióne, a stealing or pilfering.

Supplantáre, to supplant.

Supplantatióne, a supplantation.

Supplantatóre, a supplanter.

Súpplica, a supplication, a sute, a request, an entreatie. Also a generall procession.

Supplicánte, humblie intreating or beseeching. Also a suppliant, or suter.

Supplicáre, bumblie to sue, to beseech or intreate by way of supplication.

Supplicatióne, as Súpplica.

Supplicatória lettera, a letter of beseeching, or earnest suing.

Súpplice, humblie intreating, suing, or beseeching, suppliantly, prostrately crauing.

Suppliceménte, in humble kneeling or beseeching manner, suppliantly crauing.

Supplichéuole, as Súpplice.

Supplicheuolménte, as Suppliceménte.

Supplício, punishment, torture or torment giuen or suffred for any offence.

Supplicióso, full of torture or punishment.

Suppliménto, a supplie of any want, a filling vp the number and places.

Supplíre, plísco, plíto, to supply or furnish any want, to make vp that which lacketh, to fill vp the number or place of what lacketh.

Supplíta, as Suppliménto.

Suppónere, to suppose or surmise. Also to put or set vnder.

Suppórre, as Suppónere.

Suppositalménte, supposedly.

Suppositítie, matters vpon surmise.

Suppositióne, a supposition. Also a puting of one thing vnder another.

Suppositítio, counterfeit, supposed. Also that may be supposed.

Supositíuo, suppositiue, that may be supposed or surmised.

Suppósito, vnder set or put vnder. Also a suppose or thing supposed.

Suppositório, a suppository.

Suppósto, as Suppósito. Also supposed.

Suppuránza, as Suppuratióne.

Suppuráre, to grow to an impostume or matter as a sore doth.

Suppuratióne, a gathering to rotten matter, an impostumation. 

Suppuratiuo, a salue to rot a sore or to bring it to run matter.

Supputáre, to suppose, to deeme or surmise. Also to count, to compute, to reckon. Also to prune or cut trees slightly.

Supputatióne, a supposing or surmise. Also a computation or reckoning. Also a pruning of trees.

Súpra, hath beene vsed for Sópra.

Supremità, supremity, supremacy, superiority, soueraignety, chiefe-dome.

Supremo, supreme, chiefe, soueraigne, highest or greatest of all. Also a mans last will and testament. Also death or funerall obsequies or latter daies.

Súr, as Sópra, ouer, namely vsed in words composed, as Surmontáre, &c.

Súra, a kind of precious liquor that distilleth from the branches that are riuen or cut from that tree that beareth the Indian great white nut, which the Indians vse to drinke, being new it is called Súra, but being setled and stall it is called Otráqua. Also the whole shanke or legge from the knee to the anckle. Also the calfe of the leg. Some haue also vsed Súra for the lesser bone of a mans legge or shanke.

Súrco, hath been vsed for Sólco.

Surculário, a kinde of greene Grassehopper.

Súrculo, a yongue slip, set, graffe, scien, shoote, twig, branch or burgeon.

Surdo, as Absúrdo, absurd. Also as Sórdo.

Surella, a fish called in Latine Lacertus.

Surétti, high corked chopinos or pantofles.

Surettióne, as Resurettióne.

Suretto, risen vp, as Resuretto.

Surétto, a kinde of compounded drinke vsed in Turkie instead of wine.

Surgente, rising, springing or growing vp. Also riding at anchor as a ship.

Súrgere, súrgo, súrsi, súrto, as Sórgere.

Súrgere in pórto, a ship to rid in an hauen or to come to anchor in any Port.

Surgitóre, as Sorgitóre, as Surgitório.

Surgitório, an anchoring place, a bay or rode for ships to ride in or at.

Surgíuo, as Sorgíuo, as Sortíuo.

Súrgo-Túrco, a kinde of cource graine or Corne.

Surlunáre, whatsoeuer is aboue the Moone.

Surmáre, as Ciurmáre, to hale, to halse to tug.

Surmontáre, to surmount.

Surmontéuole, surmountable.

Súrnag, a kind of medicinable roote.

Súro, as Surella.

Surprendere, to surprise or take on a suddaine.

Surprésa, a surprise or taking on a suddaine.

Surrentíno, a kind of wine.

Surrettióne, a rising vp.

Surretto, risen vp.

Súrro, the wood Corke.

Surrogáre, to subrogate, to substitute, to make a Deputie, to appoint in anothers roome.

Surrogatióne, a subrogation, a substituting or appointing in place of another.

Súrse, he did rise vp, he arose. Also vsed of Dáute for Súso.

Súrso, as Sórso. Also vp or vpward.

Súrto, risen, growen or sprung vp. Also ridden at anchor or in a rode as ships doe.

Suruissúto, suruiued, ouer-liued.

Suruíuere, to suruiue, to ouerliue.

Suruoláre, to ouer-flie.

Suruólo, an ouer-flight.

Susaiuólo, a wherne for a spindle.

Susaméli, a kind of daintie Plum.

Suscettibile, that may be enterprised or vndertaken.

Suscettióne, an enterprise or vndertaking.

Suscetto, enterprised or vndertaken. Also begotten. Also receiued.

Suscíno, as Susíno.

Suscípere, to beget, to conceiue. Also to vsurpe, to vndertake or enterprise.

Suscitábolo, a prouocation or stirring vp.

Suscitaménto, as Suscitatióne.

Suscitáre, to raise or rouze vp as from out a sleepe. Also to exhort, to prouoke or stirre vp. Also to mooue or stirre vp vnto some insurrection.

Suscitatióne, a raising or rouzing vp. Also an exhorting or prouoking vnto. Also an vprore or insurrection.

Suscitatóre, a raiser, a stirrer vp. Also a seditious man, a prouoker.

Susimáni, a kind of Plum in India.

Susína, a Damzen-plum or prune.

Susinaro, a Plum or Damzen-tree.

Susíne sécche, dried Prunes.

Susíno, a Plum or Damzen-tree. Also an oyle of Lillies.

Susíno seluático, a Skeg-tree.

Súso, vpon, ouer on or aboue. Also an Aduerbe of encouraging, as we say, vp, on, goe to, away, forward, lustily.

Susornáre, to thump or whirret on the head with the fist.

Susórno, a thump or whirret giuen with the fist vpon ones head.

Suspendere, as Sospendere.

Suspendio, a hanging vp or by.

Suspensióne, as Sospensióne.

Suspéso, as Sospéso.

Suspettáre, as Sospettáre.

Suspetto, as Sospetto.



Suspettóso, as Sospettóso.

Suspicáre, as Sospettáre.

Suspicóso, as Sospettóso.

Suspirio, as Sospirio.

Suspirióso, sighfull, panting, purcie, short-winded.

Suspittióne, as Sospittióne.

Susseguente, subsequent, next following or succeeding.

Susseguenteménte, succeedingly.

Susseguenza, a subsequence, a consequence.

Sussequente, as Susseguente.

Sussidiáli, as Sussidiárij.

Sussidiáre, to helpe, to aide, to relieue, to supply, to stand by to aide and defend. Also to subsidie or taske with subsidies.

Sussidiárij soldáti, subsidiarie souldiers or such as serue for defence of others, or that come or are sent to aide others. Also of or belonging to subsidies or helpes.

Sussídio, subsidie, helpe, reliefe, supply, assistance. Also a refuge or rescue. Also aide or succour at a pinch or need.

Sussiego, as Sossiego.

Sussistente, subsisting.

Sussistenza, subsistence.

Sussistere, sisto, sistéi, sistúto, to subsist.

Sustoláre, of or belonging aboue the Sunne.

Sussuráre, to whisper, to mutter or murmure. Also to humme or buzze as Bees. Also to charme or forespeake with whispring words. Also to make a low, a soft or still noise as a gentle winde among trees, or a gentle-gliding streame among pible-stones, or as birds chirping and chattring among woods.

Sussuratióne, a priuie whispring, murmuring, humming or buzzing.

Sussuratóre, a priuie whisprer, murmurer, buzzer, hummer, charmer or muttrer, a secret carie-tales, a priuie backbiter, &c.

Sussúrro, a priuie whispring, a soft murmure, a low humming or buzzing, a soft still noise of a gentle winde, of a running streame, of chirping birds.

Sussurróne, as Sussuratore.

Sussurroneggiáre, as Sussuráre.

Sústa, the name of one of the chiefe cables in a ship.

Sustánte, vp-standing, standing vpright.

Sustántia, as Sostánza.

Sustantiále, as Sostantiále.

Sustantíuo, as Sostantiuo.

Sustáre, to binde vp the sailes of a Ship.

Susteniménto, as Sosteniménto.

Sustentácolo, that holdeth vp.

Sustentáre, as Sostenére.

Sustentaménto, as Sosteniménto.

Sustentatióne, as Sostentatióne.

Susterello, ci restórono i denti susterelli.

Sustituíre, as Sostituíre.

Sustituíto, as Sostituíto.

Sustitutióne, as Sostitutióne.

Sustitutíuo, that may be substituted.

Sustitúto, as Sostituíto.

Susuráre, as Sussuráre, &c.

Susúrno, as Olfattório.

Sutéla, subtletie, craftie working, wilie deceit, cauillation inuented with purpose to deceiue a couenant.

Sutelóso, a craftie wrangler, a subtle cauiller, one full of cauillations.

Súto, as Státo, the Participle of E'ssere, bin. Also sewed or seamed.

Sutóre, a Shoemaker, a Souter.

Sutório, souterlie, shoemaker-like.

Sutterfuggíre, as Sotterfuggíre.

Sutterfúgio, as Sotterfúgio.

Suttilità, as Sottilità.

Suttilizzáre, as Sottigliáre.

Sútto, dry, dried, wiped dry. Also suckt or drawen dry. Also barren.

Sutúra, a suture, a seame, a fastning or toyning together. Also the twist or line vnder a mans yard. Also a ioyning together of bones in the head, like to a thing drawen together with long stitches: or that manner of composition seene in the head, wherein the bones being indented one within another, are like the teeth of a Sawe.

Sutúra retta., looke Sagittále.

Súuaro, as Súuero.

Suuerétto, a place full of Corke-trees.

Súuero, the tree or wood Corke.

Súui, for Iui sópra, thereupon.

Sù uia, on away, vp and away.

Suuotáre, to emptie.


T.
Ta', as Túa, thine, thine owne.

Ta', for Táli, such, such like.

Tabaccáre, to take Tabacco. Also as Tabacchináre.

Tabacchinare, to play the secret pander or close bawde namely about boies.

Tabacchíno, a secret pander for boies.

Tabácco, the hearbe Tabacco. Also a bunch or bumpe of flesh growing vnder the skin.

Taballáro, a Drummer, a Tabourer.

Tabálli, Drums, Drumslades, Tabours or Timbrels.

Tabanello, as Gabanello.

Tabáno, as Taffáno.

Tabáro, as Tabárro.

Tabarráre, to cloake or couer with a riding cloake that hath a hood.

Tabarríno, a short riding cloake with a hood. Also a Shepheards frocke.

Tabárro, a riding cloake or Shepheards frocke with a hood.

Tábe, a pining, a withering, a consuming or wasting of the body by long sicknesse, or for want of nourishing and lacke of naturall moistnesse, a tissike, a consumption and putrifying of the lungs. Also infection. Also putrefaction, rotten matter or corrupt bloud comming out of a wound or cankered fore. Vsed also for strength to putrifie and consume.

Tabefáre, to pine away, to corrupt, to consume or putrifie.

Tabefattióne, as Tábe.

Tabella, a writing table or tables.

Tabellionáto, Scriuener-ship.

Tabellióne, a Scriuener or publike Notarie.

Tabento, a kind of spungious stone.

Taberciáre, to patch, to botch, to piece, to clout, to mend.

Taberciatíua árte, the arte of patching, botching, clouting, pieceing or souting.

Taberciatóre, a patcher, a botcher, a clouter, a piecer, a tinkar, &c.

Tabernácolo, a Tabernacle, a shrine, a cubbord or box or chariot to carry or keepe images in. Also a Tent or a Pauilion or shed made of boords.

Tabernaríe, Comedies plaid by common base people, pertayning to Tauernes.

Taberníre, nísco, níto, as Tabescere.

Tabescere, besco, bescéi, besciúto, to consume, to pine and waste away as by a consumption. Looke Tabe.

Tabesciúto, consumed, wasted or pined away. Also corrupted and rotten.

Tabetúra, as Tábe.

Tábi, the staffe called Taby or Tabine.

Tábido, as Tabesciúto.

Tabifico, that bringeth into or causeth a consumption. Looke Tábe.

Tabíno, a stuffe called Tabine.

Tabíto, as Tabesciúto.

Tabitúdine, as Tábe.

Tábo, corrupt, goare, or rotten blood.

Táca, the name of a wheele in a clocke.

Tácca, a spot, a specke, a speckle, a blemmish, a blur, a dash of durt. Also a taint, a blame, a fault, a blemmish or imputation vpon a man. Also a bruze, a flaw, a dent, a cut, a gash, a skarre or marke in or vpon any thing. Also a smacke or relish. Also a size, a bignesse, or fashion. Also any trash or luggage.

Taccágna gente, dodging, wrangling, cogging, or paltrie people.

Taccagnággine, dodging, wrangling, 



cogging, foisting, paltrinesse, niggardlinesse, cauillous condition, incling, flinching, connie-catching.

Taccagnáre, to dodge, to wrangle, to cog, to foist, to palter, to cauill, to mich, to flinch, to cunnie-catch, to frum and iest withall.

Taccagnaría, as Taccagnággine.

Taccagnatóre, a dodger, a wrangler, a cogger, a foister, a cauiller, a paltrer, a micher, a niggard, a chuff, a cunnie-catcher.

Taccagníno, as Taccagnatóre.

Taccágno, as Taccagnatóre.

Taccagnóne, as Taccagnatóre.

Taccagnóso, full of dodging or wrangling. Looke Taccagnággine.

Taccáre, to spot, to speckle, to blur, to dash, to blemmish. Also to taint, to blame, to taxe with some fault or imputation. Looke Tácca. Also to tack.

Taccarelle, little spots, specks, blurs, blemishes, or dashings of durt. Vsed also for vices, defects or blemishes and imputations in a mans life.

Tácche, the braces of any wheele. Also the spindles or spokes of a cog-wheele.

Taccheggiáre, to blame or taxe one with some fault or blemmish. Also to prouoke or egge on with pricking. Also to spot, to speckle, or dash with durt.

Taccherelle, as Taccarelle.

Tácchie, remnants, fragments, scraps, cantlins.

Táccia, as Tácca. Also as Tássa. Also of Tacére, let him or her hold their peace.

Tacciáre, as Taccáre, as Tassáre.

Tácco, a shore, a prop, or vnder-layer that Gunners vse.

Táccola, as Tácca. Also a railing, a chiding, or scolding. Also a scold, or scolding woman. Also a tanting iest, or biting quip taxing one with some fault. Also a bungling, a patching or botching piece of worke. Also a Chough, a Rooke, or Iack-dawe.

Taccoláre, as Taccáre. Also to raile or scold at. Also as Taccheggiáre.

Taccoláta, a railing, a chiding or scolding. Also a flim-flam tale.

Táccolo, as Stoppíno.

Taccolóso, full of spots, speckles, or frickles.

Tacconántio, as Taccóne.

Tacconáre, to tacke, to cobble, to clout, to patch, to sout, to piece.

Tacconatóre, a tacker, a robler, a souter, a clouter, a patcher, a piecer, a linker.

Tacconcíni, little tacks, patches, or clouting pieces.

Taccone, a patching souterly fellow.

Tacconeggiáre, to cobble or play the souter.

Taccóni, great patching, cobling, souterlie or tacking pieces.

Taccuíre, to dodge, to wrangle or palter about any matter.

Tacendo, keeping silence, nothing speaking. Also not to be spoken.

Tacente, still, mum, silent, not speaking.

Tacére, táccio, tácqui, taciúto, to be silent, still, or mum, to hold ones peace, to be whoosh, to say nothing, to make no noise. Also to conceale, or be secret.

Tacitaménte, silently, without speaking, secretly, inwardly in the heart.

Tacitísta, a professor of, or skilfull in Cornelius Tacitus. Also a professor of silence.

Tácito, silent, still, mum, whoosh, quiet, without noise, that speaketh not, dumb, speachlesse. Also passiuely, not spoken of, kept secret, not vttred in words, let passe without mention. Luna tácita, the new Moone, or the coniunction of the Moone with the Sun, she being not seene.

Taciturnità, secretnesse of toong, silence, taciturnitie, secrecie.

Tacitúrno, silent, speaking no word, that keepeth counsell, or blabbeth nothing.

Taciúto, held his peace, kept silence, kept counsell, bin whoosht.

Tácola, as Táccola.

Tacoláre, as Taccoláre.

Tacuino, a foolish Astronomer, that foretels but by tokens and imagination. Also an Almanake or Prognostication made by imagination.

Taés, a coine in China worth ten Spanish rials.

Tafáno, as Taffano.

Tafanello, as Taffanello.

Taffáno, a Gad-Bee, a Breeze, a Hornet, an Oxe-flye, or a sore biting horseflye, and therefore are the horses bitten with it called Attafanáti, or Attauanáti.

Taffanello, a little or yong Taffáno.

Taffería, timber, beame, or rafterworke. Also a toole that Goldsmiths vse.

Tafferúgia, mirth, ioy, blithnesse, gladnesse, iollitie.

Tafferugiáre, to reioyce, to be glad, blithe, merrie, and iollie.

Tafferúgli, as Strauízzi.

Taffetà, all manner of Taffeta.

Taffetádo, any kind of Taffeta.

Tafonea, a kind of boate in India.

Tága, a beame, or rafter of timber.

Tagáce, a fellon on a mans finger.

Tagémie, a kind of long fish.

Tágha, as Tága.

Táglia, a pullie, but properly the little wheele in the pullie called a Shiuer. Also a tallie, a tale, a skore, such as our Bruers and Bakers vse. Also a taske, a size, a fine or fee set vpon ones head, a taxation or imposition of any payment, a ransome. Also a stature, a height, a proportion or pitch of any man or woman. Dónna di bella táglia, a woman of a goodly stature or height. Also vsed by Dánte for fashion, garbe, manner, making or qualitie of any thing. Also a faction, a sect, a combination or partialitie of men ioined in league together.

Tagliábile, that may be out. Looke Táglia.

Tagliabórse, a cut-purse, a pick-purse.

Tágliacantóni, a swash-buckler, a swagrer, a backster, a cutter of corners.

Táglia ferro, as Táglia cantóni.

Taglialégne, a wood-cleauer, or feller.

Tagliaménto, any kind of cutting, incision, gashing, shredding, or slicing. Also a slaughter, or hewing in pieces. Also a slice, a shiue, or a collop. Also a reaping of corne, or mowing of haie.

Tagliamónte, as Tagliacantóni.

Tagliánte, cutting, keene. Looke Tagliáre.

Tagliapietra, a stone-cutter, or hewer.

Tagliáre, to cut, to slice, to hacke, to make incision, to hew, to shred, to gash, to slash, to iag, to mince, to carue meate, to reape corne, to mowe haie, to clip or pare with any cutting weapon. Also to kill with the edge of a sword. Also as Taglieggiáre. Also to carue or cut vp meate.

Tagliáre a pezzi, to cut or hew or carue in pieces.

Tagliáre a piómbo, to cut leuell downeward.

Tagliáre il fieno, to mow haie.

Tagliáre il gráno, to reape corne.

Tagliáre inánzi, is vsed to carue before a Prince.

Tagliáre le cárte, to cut or heaue the cards.

Tagliarelli, all manner of little shreads or cuttings. Also a kinde of pastemeate sodden.

Tagliáre minúto, to cut, mince, or shred small.

Tagliaríni, as Tagliarelli.

Tagliáta, any cutting, shredding, or incision. Also a paling or railing in with boords.

Tagliatelli, as Tagliarelli.

Tagliatóre, any cutter.

Tagliatúra, as Tagliaménto.

Taglieggiáre, to sesse, to taxe, to fine, or lay any fine, taxation, or set a ransome vpon.

Tagliente, sharp, keene, cutting, trenchant.

Tagliére, a trencher, or trencher-plate. Vsed also for any square. Also the 



white clout that Archers vse to shoote at.

Tagliétti, little cuts, gashes, iags, or shreds. Also pinks in garments.

Táglij, cuts, incisions, gashes, slashes, iags, pinks, slicings, collops, &c.

Táglio, any kind of cut, incision, gash, shred, slash, pinke. Also any piece, slice, shiue, collop, or scantlin cut off from any other thing. Also the sharpnesse, edge, or keenenesse of any toole or weapon. Also a forme, a fashion, a garbe, a frame, a fitnesse, a fitting, a suting, or squaring with ones qualitie or humor. Looke In táglio. Also good occasion, fit opportunitie, or conueniencie to doe any thing. Also the graine of any wood or timber. Also the wooll or graine of any cloth.

Taglióla, any kind of little Táglio. Also a deuise to catch birds with.

Taglionáre, to impose any Taglióne or tallion law vpon one.

Taglióne, the tallion law, that is, an equall or like paine in recompence of a hurt, as we say, limme for limme. Also a fine, a see, a taxation, or sabsidie and imposition of any payment. Also a ransome.

Taglioneggiáre, as Taglionáre.

Tagliuóla, a Mouse-trap, any trap.

Tagliuóle, little tallies, tales, or skores.

Tagliuólo, a slice or thin cutting of any thing. Also the name of a Carpenters toole. Also an imp, a bud, a burgeon, a stalke, a stem, a graff, a set, a branch, a slip, a syen of a vine or other tree without a roote to be either graffed or inoculated.

Tagliuzzáre, to cut, to gash, to iag, to pinke small, namely, any garment. Also to slice or mince small.

Tagliuzzatóre, a cutter, a pinker, a iagger, namely, of clothes.

Tagliúzzi, little cuts, gashes, shreds or iagges. Also small pinkes in clothes.

Tágo, a Greeke word vsed in Xenophon for a Leader, a Chiefetaine or a Captaine.

Tái, such, such like or resembling.

Táia, as Táglia.

Tal', such, such like, resembling.

Tála, a Die to play with. Also a shred namely of a Vine.

Talacimáno, a watch, a guard of sentinell, but properly one that stands on the top of a Tower and cries what the clocke is, as they vse in Turkie.

Taládro, a leauer, a heauer or such instrument to mount pieces into their cariage.

Tálamo, a faire handsome lodging, but properly a bed-chamber.

Talapói, a kind of religious men among the Pagans or Moores. 

Taláre, a long garment or robe downe to the anckle. Also certain shooes with winglets as Mercury is fained to weare on his feet. Also the ioynt of the foote.

Talári, certaine gouty swellings in the anckles. Also the Plurall of Taláre.

Talário, of or belonging to playing Dice or to huckle or ankle bones.

Talasióne, a song contained in certaine verses vsed to be sung at marriages, an exclamation or cry vsed at mariages, first begun when Romulus and his Romans rauished the maidens of the Sabines.

Talassióne, as Talasióne.

Talátro, a roughnesse of the skin.

Talchè, so that, so then, why then.

Talcimáni, as Talacimáno.

Tálco, a drug called Talke, vsed among Chimikes. Also pargeting or plaistering.

Tále, such, such like, so or resembling. Also such a man, such a woman, or such a thing, A tále, so that. Also to that point or passe.

Taléni, sobs, grones, blubberings, or sighes.

Talentáre, to will, to grant, to yeeld, to please or consent vnto anothers inclinations.

Talento, a value of money among the Grecians, whereof were foure sorts, as Talento átticomaggióre worth, 133 pound and odde money starlin, Talento áttico minore, worth about, 99. pound starlin, Talento hebráico maggióne, worth 400. pound sterlin, and Talento hebráico minóre, worth halfe so much. Also an inclination of the minde, an earnest will, desire or appetite.

Tále quále, such as, euen such as.

Talfiáta, sometimes, at sometimes.

Talhóra, sometimes, at some houres.

Talhótta, sometimes, at some houres.

Táli, giuocáre a táli, ginóco puerile.

Tália, as Thália. Also a swelling of the gout about the anckle.

Talietro, Flux-wort or Laske-wort.

Talíno, a kind of penigreeke.

Tálla, as Tállo.

Tallióne, as Taglióne.

Tallíre, lísco, líto, to grow to a stalke or stem. Also to grow to haue strings or nerues in it as some rootes of hearbs haue, to come to a pith.

Tállo, any string or nerue that runnes thorow some rootes. Also the pith of any thing.

Tallonáre, to follow close at ones heeles. Also to kicke with ones heeles.

Tallóne, the heele of a mans foote. Also an anckle or huckle bone or pastern bone of a beast.

Talménte, in such manner, so as.

Talménte chè, so that, in such maner that.

Talmúda, as Thalmudísta.

Talmudista, as Thalmudísta.

Talodino, a kind of tauny colour.

Talonáre, as Tallonáre.

Talóne, as Tallóne.

Tálpa, a Mole, a Want, a Moodywarp.

Talpána, a kind of wine or grape.

Talpicída, a Mole-catcher.

Talquále, vsed for whosoeuer.

Talsía di vói, so be it with you, as you bake so brew, come of you what list.

Talúno, some one, such a one.

Taluólta, sometimes, now and than.

Táma, when with much trauell or going, the bloud commeth downe to the legges and causeth them to swell.

Tamacéto, the hearbe Tanzie.

Tamacéto acquático, Sneesing-wort.

Tamagníno, a little fellow that is elder then he seemeth or looketh. Vsed also for a turd or a shitten fellow.

Támaro, a kind of waight or measure in Ormuze.

Tamarigio, Tamaríce, as Tamarísco.

Tamaríndi, a fruit in India like a Damascen plum, and the tree like a Date-tree, whereof the Indians make a kind of dainty wine, it is very medicinable against the heat of choller.

Tamarísco, the shrube called Tamariske whereof there be two kinds.

Tamaríslo, as Tamarísco.

Tamárro, blacke Briony.

Tambáscia, as Gozzouiglie.

Tambasciáre, as Gozzouigliáre.

Tambelltóne, a word of disgrace, as we say a paltry fellow, a shitten slaue.

Tambúcco, some implement that Gunpowder makers vse.

Tambúggio, as Tambúcco.

Tamburagióne, a dubadub vpon a Drum.

Tambureggiáre, to dubadub vpon a Drum.

Tamburello, as Tamburríno.

Tamburiére, a Drummer, a Tabourer.

Tamburtíno, a little Drum a Tabour, a Timbrell, a Drumslade. Also a Drummer, a Timbrell or a Taboure and Pipe. Vsed also for a little round trunke.

Tambúrro, a Drum, a Timbrell, a Drumslade, a Tabour. Also a Drummer or a Tabourer. Also a round leather trunke.

Tambussáre, to dubadub, to drum. Also to rumble or rattle. Also to thumpe, to knocke, to bounse. Also to



rib-baste, to beate, to bange or knocke one well.

Tambustáre, to set in a combustion.

Tambustióne, a combustion.

Tambústo, a combustion.

Támen, yet not withstanding, for all that.

Tamendóa, a great beast in India, that feedeth onely on Pissemires or Emmets, which it takes by lelling out his tongue so long vntill it be full of them, and hath so long and so bushie a taile that hee will hide all his body vnder it.

Tameríce, as Tamerígia. Also a bottle or cup made of tamariske wood.

Tamerígia, the shrube Tamariske. Also a kind of cruse or drinking pot.

Tamigiáre, to sift, to sieue, to searce, to boult.

Tamígio, a sieue, a searce, a strainer.

Tamínia, a kind of grape or vine.

Tamisáre, as Tamigiáre.

Tamíscio, as Tamígio.

Tamiso, as Tamígio.

Tammurello, as Crótalo.

Tamnáco, Motherwort, or as some thinke Feuerfew.

Támo, the Gentle or Magot worm breeding in tallow or rotten flesh.

Támpano, as Tímpano. Also a certaine toole that Stone-cutters vse.

Támpo, a kind of drinke which is vsed in the Moluccos compounded of many things.

Tampóco, as Tanpóco.

Tamussáre, as Tambussáre.

Tána, a denne, a caue, a grot, a cauerne.

Tanacéto, the hearbe Tanzie.

Tanacéto acquático, sneesing wort.

Tanádo, a stinking fish of a Tauny colour.

Tanagliáre, to pinch or tanacle with tongs, with pincers or tanacles.

Tanáglie, tongs, Pincers, tanacles.

Tanáglie da mórso, pincers to pull out nailes.

Tanagliétte, little tongs, pincers or mullets.

Táncia, a kinde of damaske worke vpon Persian swords or daggers.

Tánco, any kind of beastly or vnnaturall lust, as the saultnesse of a bitch.

Tándem, in the meane time, whilest.

Tanè, the Tauny colour.

Tanéto, the Tauny colour.

Tanfanáre, as Tartassáre.

Tanfanáta, a thump, a bang, a stripe, a beating of a man.

Tánso, a noisome dampe or lothsome smell.

Tánga, a kind of coine in Góa.

Tángari, poore, base, or rogueing beggers. 

Tángere, tángo, tangéi, tangiúto, to touch, to feele, to ioine close vnto. Also to rub or hit.

Tánghero, a dodging, a drawling slouenly fellow.

Tangíbile, that may be touched.

Tángue, and ò al tángue dell' ísola per essere luógo gratióso.

Taníe, trickes, toies, conceites, humours.

Taniótica, a kind of paper anciently so called.

Táno, an hearbe.

Tanóse, a stone like an Emerauld.

Tanpóco, much lesse, as little, neither also.

Tánsa, a chiding, a shenting. Also an imputation or taxing of a man with some fault, but properly a taxing, a sessing or fining ratably for any paiement.

Tansáre, to chide, to shent, to scould or braule at. Also to tax a man with any imputation. Also to sesse, to tax, to rate or fine a man ratably for any paiment.

Tantaferáta, as Fagioláta.

Tantaráre, to swing in a halter.

Tántaro, a swinging in a halter.

Tant'e, so it is, so the case stands. Also so much it is, as much is.

Tánt'elóngi, as Tánto mánca.

Tantésima párte, the so much part either in number or quality.

Tante vólte, so many times.

Tant'hóra, so much time.

Tánti, so many. Also as many.

Tánti & tánti, so many, and so manie.

Tantíllo, as Tantíno.

Tantíno, a little little quantity.

Tánti póchi, so few.

Tánto, so much, as much, such, so great in quality or quantity. Also of so great value or estimation. Also as well as. Also so great, so deere or so worthy.

Tánto apresso, so neere, as neere.

Tánto chè, so much that, so that, then.

Tanto e, as Tánt'e.

Tánto e tánto, so much, and so much.

Tánto hauéstu fiáto, had'st thou no more breath or life.

Tantolíno, as Tantíno.

Tánto lontáno, so far, as far.

Tantolóso, so greedy as naught will satisfie.

Tanto maggiorménte, so much the more.

Tánto mánca, Tant s' in fault in french.

Tánto mánco, so much lesse.

Tanto méglio, so much the better.

Tánto méno, so much the lesse.

Tánto minorménte, so much the lesse.

Tánto o quánto, neuer so little.

Tánto peggio, so much the worse. 

Tánto più, so much the more.

Tánto più tósto, so much the sooner.

Tánto quánto, euen as much, as much as.

Tantósto, soone, sooneafter, anon, by and by.

Tantósto chè, so soone as.

Tánto sù, so high, so far vp.

Tánto tempo, so long, so long time.

Tánto vi dico, so much I tell you.

Tantúccio, as Tantíno.

Tánza, as Táncia.

Táo, a stone like a Peacocke.

Tápa, a kind of stuffe whereof they build houses in India.

Tapelóne, as Vranoscópo.

Tapéto, any kind of carpet.

Tapezzáre, to tapistrie, to hang with tapistrie, or dight with. Arras workes.

Tapezzaríe, all manner of tapestries or clothes wrought with pictures of diuers colours.

Tapezziero, a worker or weauer of tapestries. Also an Vpholster. Also a Princes Carpet-keeper or layer.

Taphtólogo, as much to say one that praiseth or commendeth himselfe.

Tapinára, as Tálpa.

Tapináre, to roame, to wander, to roaue, to loyter, to linger, or gad vp and downe poorely, wretchedly or begginglie. Also to tappie as a Deare.

Tapinelláre, as Tapináre.

Tapinelli, poore wandring beggers.

Tapinósi, a figure in speach or writing wherein base or low words are vsed to expresse any noble, high and heroike action.

Tapíno, a poore wandring begger. Also wretched, miserable and vnhappie.

Táppa, a tap to broach barrels.

Táppo., looke Periólo.

Tappóni, as Zappóni.

Tápsia, a yellow hearbe to dye withall.

Tápso bárbaro, as Verbásco.

Tápula, a Law made for feasts.

Tára, the tare or waste or garbish of any ware or marchandise.

Tarabára, helter-skelter, higle-pigledie.

Tarabásso, a fowle called a Bittour.

Tarabúso, a tooth-drawers instrument to draw teeth. Also a Woodpecker.

Taráca, a target, a shield, a paluoise.

Taracóne, a great target or shield. Also the hearbe Taragon or garden Dragon.

Taragnuóle, a kind of rauenous fowle.

Tarándo, a beast like a Buff, headed and borned like a Stag, of a red colour, but will change himselfe into the thing he toucheth or leaneth vnto.

Tarángola, a bird in Latine Phœpus.

Tarantato, bitten with a Tarántola.

Tarantelli, a kind of yong Tunnie-fish. 



Tarantello, the vtmost part of the bellie that couereth all the entrailes. Also a little Eft or Eute.

Taránto, a Greene-finch.

Tarántola, an Eft or Euet. Some take it to be a flie whose sting is deadly, yet curable by diuers sounds of musike. Also a kind of fish.

Tarantoláto, stung or bitten with Tarántola.

Taráre, to tare, to abate the allowance which commonly is allowed for waste vpon marchandise between Marchant and Chapman. Also to sound a Trumpet.

Tarassacóne, the Sow-thistle.

Taratantára, the clang or sound of a Trumpet.

Taratantaráre, to sound a Trumpet.

Taratantáro, a mill-clacke.

Tarátro, vsed for the braine.

Tarazzuóli, a kind of Ducke or Mallard.

Tarchiáre, to compact or trusse vp close and round together.

Tarchiáto, wel compact or trussed vp together. Also wel or strongly lim'd.

Tarcóne, as Targóne. Also Taragon or Garden-dragon.

Tárda, a Bussard. Also late, or slow.

Tárda hóra, a late howre.

Tardaménto, a delay, a slowing, a lingring, a tarying, a demur, a prolonging, a loitring.

Tardanáue, a Sea, -ship-fish, as Rémora.

Tardánza, as Tardaménto.

Tardáre, to retarde, to delay, to slow, to linger, to tarie, to demur, to stay. Also to defer or hinder. Also to keepe backe or withold.

Tardatióne, as Tardaménto.

Tardétto, somewhat slow, late, long. Also idle or lazie.

Tardézza, as Tardità.

Tárdi, late, very late. Also slowely.

Tárdi essere, to be late or slow.

Tárdifársi, to grow late.

Tardigrádo, that hath a slow pace.

Tardiloquenza, slow-speaking.

Tardilóquio, that speaketh slowely.

Tárdi mi páre, it seemes late to me,

Tardióla, a kind of flaune or cheesecake.

Tardipéde, that goeth slow, slow-footed.

Tardità, slownesse, slacknesse. Also latenesse. Also delay, lingring or hindring.

Tárdiueníre, to come late.

Tardítie, as Tardità.

Tárdo, slow, slacke, long in comming, late, lingring. Also dull or lazie.

Tareggiáre, to tare marchandise. Vsed for to correct. 

Tarello, a kind of cheese or cake.

Tarenco, that bracer, band or circle of iron that compasseth the wheele round about, in which are put the nailes or spikes.

Tarendo, as Tarándo.

Tárga, a target, a shield, a paluoise.

Targáre, to target, to shield, to couer.

Targhétta, a little target or shield.

Targhettiére, a Targettier or Shield-man.

Targóne, a great target or shield.

Taríffa, Arithmetike, casting of accompts.

Taríma, a foote-pace, as is vnder a cloth of State in a Princes chamber of Presence.

Tarláre, to worme-eat, to moth-eat.

Tarlatúra, worme or moth-eating. Also dust of rotten wood good to skin yong flesh.

Tarlíno, a fowle called a Curlue.

Tárlo, a worme breeding in timber. Also a moth breeding in cloth.

Tarlóso, full of wormes or worme-eaten.

Tárma, a moth or worme breeding in clothes.

Tarmáre, to moth-eat woollen clothes.

Tarmóso, full of mothes, or moth-eating.

Táro, a kind of drug or spice.

Taroccáre, to play at Tarócchi.

Tarócchi, a kind of playing cardes called Tarocks or Terestriall triumphs.

Taróccio, Okum made of vntwisted ropes.

Tarócco., looke Datarócco.

Taroláre, as Tarláre, to worme-eat. Also to grow to a cuntbotch.

Tarólo, a cuntbotch or Winchester-goose. Also as Tárlo.

Tarózzi, a kind of leather pouch, bag, or satchell.

Tarpáre, to clip the wings of a bird that he may not flie. Also to snatch, to catch or gather in.

Társia, any kind of marquetry or small inlaid workes of diuers colours of bone, horne, wood or Iuorie, as in tables, bedsteads or pauements.

Tarsiaménto, as Társia.

Tarsiáre, to worke any kind of fine or small inlaid marquetrie or checquie-worke.

Társo, the first part of the foot, which immediately succeeding the leg is answerable to the wrist of the hand.

Tartágio, a maffler, a stammerer, a stutter, a clipper of his language.

Tartáglia, as Tartágio.

Tartagliáre, to maffle, to stut, to stammer, to falter or clip ones speach.

Tartaglióne, as Tartágio.

Tártara, any kind of Tarte.

Tartaree pórte, the gates of Hell. 

Tartarella, any kind of little Tarte.

Tartareo, of hell, hellish, infernall.

Tartaréschi, Ioyners or Painters antike worke. Also hellish or infernall.

Tartarétta, as Tartarella.

Tartaríno, of or belonging to Tártaro. Also fearefull or terrible.

Tártaro, a kind of grauellie stone growing fast to the inside of wine vessels vsed in Phisike and for many other purposes called in English, Argall, Argoll or Tartare. Some late writers take it for the stone or grauell engendred in the reines of a mane bodie. And also for the grauell engendred in the ioints whereof the Gout is caused. Also a deep place in Hell, or Hell it selfe. Also a bird called a Woodpecker.

Tartarúga, a Tortoise or Shell-crab.

Tartassáre, to bang, to beat, to bounze, to rib-baste, to cudgell or swadle well. Also to hurrie, to tug, to hale. Also to vex, to misuse, to molest.

Tartassáta, a bang, a beating, a thumpe, a rib-basting.

Tartassáro, hardly vsed, tug'd, harroied, ill bestead, beaten, bang'd, ribbasted, thumped.

Tártera, any kind of Tarte.

Tarterella, any kind of little Tarte.

Tarterúcca, a Tortoise or Shell-crab.

Tarterúga, a Torotise or Shell-crab.

Tartócca, a Tartoise or Shell-crab.

Tartóffalo, as Tartúffo.

Tartóffola, a thump or blow giuen with ones knuckles vpon the head. Also a kirriemirie-buff. Also the marke, the swelling or blacke and blew of any stripe, blow or hurt.

Tartúffo, a kind of earth fruit much esteemed in Italie called Traffles, or Tartuffles.

Tartúffola, as Tartúffo.

Tartúga, a Tortoise or shell-crab.

Tartugella, a little Tortoise or shell-crab.

Tarúca, a kind of precious oyntment. Also a kind of Kingly ornament.

Tarulláre, to sweare, and forsweare, as a knight of the poste.

Tarúllo, a knight of the poste, that for hire will forsweare himselfe.

Taruoláre, as Taroláre.

Taruólo, as Tarólo.

Tásca, any kind of pouch, poake, hauking bag, satchell, scrip, pocket or budget.

Tascáccia, any filthy or greasie Tásca.

Tascáre, to put or pocket vp in a Tásca.

Taschétta, a little Tásca.

Taschina, as Taschétta.

Tascóccio, as Tascáccia.

Tascóne, any kind of great Tásca.

Tascónio, a kind of white clay or mar­



ble whereof Goldsmiths melting-cruses are made.

Tascotáto, as Trascuráto.

Tasentáre, to whoosht or put to silence.

Táso, as Tártaro.

Tássa, a tax, a taxing, a taxation, a sessing, a rate. Also a fine or ratable imposition. Vsed also for a blemmish, a blame or imputation laid to one. Also a pile or stacke of wood or corne.

Tassábile, taxable.

Tassáre, to tax, to sesse, to fine, to rate. Also to blame, to disparage, or disable ones reputation, to touch in credit. Also to stacke corne, or pile wood.

Tassúta, a taxing.

Tassatióne, as Tássa.

Tassatóre, a taxer, a sesser, a rater, a finer. Also a rebuker or taxer of faults.

Tassello, the vnder-roofe of a house before it be tiled or couered. Also a little rafter or single quarter of timber. Also a kind of little anuill.

Tasséuole, taxable.

Tássico, the tree Tásso. Also as Tóssico.

Tásso, a Gray, a Brocke, a Badger, which is said to sleepe sixe moneths in the yeare. Also an Ewe, or Yew tree, or another tree that beares a berrie venemous and against mans nature. Also a kind of anuill that Goldsmiths vse.

Tásso barbásso, as Verbesco.

Tassocáne, a kind of beast.

Tassopórco, a kind of beast.

Tásta, a Chirurgions probe or searching needle. Also a tent to put into a wound or sore. Also a taste, a touch, or feeling. Also a triall, or assay.

Tastáme, all manner of feeling or tasting things. Also the frets of Instruments.

Tastáre, to taste, to assay, to feele, to touch, to grope for, to trye. Also to fumble in the darke. Also to search a sore. Also to tent a sore or wound. Also to fret an instrument of Musike.

Tastatóre, a taster, a feeler, a toucher. Looke Tásta, and Tastáre.

Tastarúra, that which is called the touch vpon an instrument of musike. Also the frame of the keyes or frets in any Instrument.

Tásti, the frets or keyes of any musicall instruments.

Tásto, a taste, a touch, an assaie, a feeling, a triall. Also a fret of an instrument.

Tastóne, groping for, seeling or fumbling in the darke.

Tátà, the voice or speach of yong infants to their fathers, as dad, daddie, or bab. Also a darling, a minion, a pigsnye, a pillicocke, a sweete-heart. Also a wanton word in singing, wherwith one answereth another.

Tattamelláre, to play the pratling child, to play the coy or wanton foole. Also to babble or prattle idly.

Tattamelle, foolish, idle, or childish pratlings, toyes or vanities. Also a kind of musicall instrument. Also a kind of sweete fruite.

Tattamellíno, a nice wanton, a squeamish child, a cockred darling, one that is better fed then taught, a pratling fellow.

Tatteo, a kind of salt good for the eyes.

Táttere, tatters, clouts, rags, shreds. Also trash, luggage, or baggage stuffe.

Táttici, they whose office is to Marshall, or set an armie in araye.

Tátto, the sence of touching or feeling. Also felt or touched. Also a kind of very great and venemous Toade.

Tátula, a Chough with red feete, a Redshanke.

Tatúsia, a beast in India of the bignesse of a Hog, with a skalie hard shell, into which it drawes his head like a Tortoise.

Tauanello, as Taffanello.

Tauáni, as Taffáni.

Tauella, the buske, the cod, or shale of any thing, namely, of Silke-wormes.

Tauerna, a Tauerne, a wine-house, a tipling-house. Also an Inne, or victualing-house.

Tauernáro, a keeper of a Tauerne, a Vintner.

Tauerneggiáre, to frequent Tauerns.

Tauernésca, tipling, or Tauerne-like.

Tauerniére, a Tauerner, or Vintner.

Tauerníne, meane Tauernes, poore or base tipling-houses. Also foolish or wanton pendents for eares, as one would say, onely fit for base Tauerne-haunters.

Taugargánte, a kind of hearbe or roote.

Táugia, lettera o paróla hebrea portáta da gli Hebrei per inségna.

Táuola, any kind of table. Also any kind of planke or flat boord. Also a Tablet-booke, a iornall booke, a paper iournall, or register for memorie of things. Also the table or contents of any booke. Also any picture vpon boord. Also a stale at Chesse or dead mate when one hath nothing to play. Also a banquet, or set feast.

Tauolaccíno, any base hinde, swaine, or seruant, one readie at hand for all seruices, such base Seriants as wait vpon the Maior or Sheriffs of London.

Tauoláccio, any great planke or boord. Also any filthie great table. Also a but, or great marke of boords to shoote at. Also a great Target or Palueis.

Tauola del decálogo, the Table of the ten Commandements.

Tauolare, to boord, to planke, to table. Also to floore, to seele, to planke, to wanescot with boords or planks. Also to raile or paile in with boords. Also to table or boord at meate. Also to set in Musike or Prick-song. Also to bring or make a game at Chesses to a stale, or dead mate.

Tauoláta, a tabling, a table-full, a companie of fellow-boorders at one table.

Tauoláto, boorded, planked, floored, seeled, wane scotted. Also pailed in, railed in, fenced in with boords or planks. Also tabled or boorded at meate. Also feasted and banqueted. Also set to Musike or Prick-song. Also a floore, a seeling, a decke, a wall, a fence, a partition, a side, a raile, a paile, a fence, a penthouse, or any thing else made of boords or planks. Also a kind of measure.

Tauolatúra, any kind of Prick-song.

Táuole, writing-tables, playing-tables. Also the plurall of Táuola.

Tauolétta, any kind of little Táuola. Also a childs horne-booke.

Tauolétte, little writing-tables, tablets.

Tauoliére, a paire of tables to play with. Also a man that plaies at tables. Also a Chesse-boord.

Tauolíno, any little boord, table, tablet, or shelfe.

Tauolóni, great planks, and of gunners called the sides of the cariages, and sometimes blinders, that is, when they place them before the mouth of the Ordinance. Also great tables.

Táura, hath bin vsed for a Cow.

Taurea, a Target, a Shield or defence made of raw Bull-hides. Also a whip or scourge made of Neates-leather straps, or of a Bulls pizle.

Taurello, a yong Bull, Runt, or Steere.

Taureo, of or belonging to a Bull.

Taurifórme, Bull-formed, in fashion like a Bull.

Taurína, Goates-rue, or Italian Fitch.

Tauríno, borne vnder the signe, or of the nature of Taurus, of or belonging to a Bull.

Táuro, a Bull. Also one of the twelue signes in the Zodiake so called. Also a bird that hath a voice like a Bull. Some call it a Bittour. Also a kind of Beetle breeding in the ground.

Táusia, bárde lauoráte di táusia od alla gemmáta.

Tautología, a repeating of one and the selfe-same thing in other or superfluous words.

Tázza, a brode drinking boule, cup, goblet, or mazor.

Tazzétta, a little Tázza.



Tazziere, a Princes cup-bearer.

Tazzuólo, a kind of little Owle.

Tè, to thee, to thy selfe. Also thee, or thy selfe. Also from thee, or thy selfe.

Tè, take, take to thee, take and hold.

Teána, as Tégghia, or Tegáme.

Teátro, a Theatre. Looke Theátro.

Téca, as Tauella.

Técca, as Boccáta.

Teccále, a kind of coine in India.

Techési, an officer in China, answering the Iudge of the Admiraltie with vs.

Téco, with thee, in thy companie.

Tecolíto, a stone like an oliue stone, and very spungie, called the stone of India, good against the stone-collike.

Tecomedésimo, with thy selfe.

Teda, a tree called Torch-wood. Also a log, a blocke, or stump of wood, but properly the middle, heart, or pith of the Pine-tree, growne so fat and full of liquor, that being kindled it burneth like a torch. Also a wedding, or a song sung at weddings.

Tede, torches, lights, tapers, or firebrands, vsed to burne at weddings.

Tediáre, to wearie, to be tedious vnto, to molest, to importune, to trouble.

Tedio, tediousnesse, wearisomnesse of time, importunitie, heauinesse of mind, molestation.

Tedióso, tedious, wearisome, importunate, yrkesome, lothsome, mind-troubling.

Tédulo, a tedious or importunate pratler, that all shunne and be wearie of.

Tefríte, a blacke or Ash-colour stone, with the figure of a new Moone in it.

Téga, as Tauella.

Tegáme, as Tégghia.

Tegamétto, as Tegghiáme.

Tégghia, any kind of pan or pot, as a dripping, a frying, a tarte, or a cole-pan.

Tegghiáme, all manner of pots or pans for a kitchin, and to dresse meate in.

Tégghiola, as Tégghia.

Tegghiúzza, as Tégghia.

Téggia, as Tégghia.

Téggiola, as Tégghia.

Teggióne, any great lodging.

Tégia, as Tégola. Also as Tégghia.

Tegiáre, as Tegoláre.

Tegiáro, a Tiler. Also a Thatcher.

Tegiménto, a couer for a pan. Also any shed, houell, shelter, shroud, or cottage.

Tegioláre col tedio, to put off wantonly, to dallie, dandle, delay, or play with.

Tegiúzza, as Tégghia.

Téglia, as Tílio, a teyell or Linden tree. Also a Barble-fish.

Tégna, a head-scurfe, or scald.

Tegnáme, as Tégghia, or Tegáme.

Tegnente, a tenant, a houlder. Also as Tenáce.

Tegnentíssimo, most fast-holding, still gripping.

Tégnere, as Tíngere.

Tégni. Vsáto per A'rte.

Tegnóso, head-skaldie, skurfie, or sore.

Tégola, any kind of tile, or slate.

Tegoláio, a Tyler, or Tyle-maker.

Tegoláre, to tyle or slate a house.

Tel, for Te lo, or Te il, to thee it.

Téla, the liste within which they run at tilt. Also the toyle vsed in hunting.

Téla, any kind of thin, web or wouen cloth, namely of linnen, siluer or gold. Also a toyle or pay vsed in hunting. Also any worke or businesse or successe of it. Vsed also for the race of a mans life or for a mans life it selfe.

Téla battísta, Lawne or Cambricke.

Téla battistína, idem.

Teláccia, course canuase cloth or web.

Téla d'argento, cloth of siluer or tissue.

Téla di líno, all manner of linnen cloth.

Téla di rágno, a cobweb, a Spiders web.

Téla disangállo, Buckeram. Also Calico cloth.

Téla d'óro, cloth of gold or tissue.

Telaiuólo, as Telaruólo.

Telámi, all manner of linnen clothes. Also Hunters toyles or haies.

Telamóni, images or statues bearing vp pillars, postes or supporters in building.

Teláni, a kind of Fig.

Telarína, a Spiders web, a cobweb.

Telaríno, a little Weauers loome.

Teláro, a Weauers loome, a Printers frame for his letters. Also any frame else, as of a picture, a map or looking-glasse.

Teláro áuento, a kind of square thing made of pasted paper or parchment with a long string at one end, which children for sport cast and cause to flie in the aire and make it waue very high like a Kite.

Telaruólo, a little weauing loome. Also a Weauer of any thing. Also a Linnen-draper.

Telésio, Orpin, Wall-pepper or Stonewort.

Telenóne, as Telóne.

Teleríe, all manner of weauings, linnen clothes or naperies.

Telétta, any fine linnen cloth, tinzell or tissue. Also as Membrána.

Telétta d'óro, tinzell or tissue of gold.

Telicárdio, a stone resembling a heart both in forme and colour.

Teliccína, any little membrane, filme caule or skinlet ouer any thing.

Telífero, that beareth arrowes or dartes.

Telíno, a kind of precious sweet oyntment made of Fenigreeke. 

Telirrhízo, a stone whose bottome is white, and all the rest Ash-colour.

Tellicína, as Telicína.

Tellína, a small shell-fish as a Mauscle, a Cockle, a Whelke, or Paireawinkle. Also a Lamprey or Eelepout.

Téllo, the earth or ground. Vsed for our common mother the Earth.

Tellóne, the pastern-bone.

Tellúre, the Goddesse Tellus.

Télo, a darte, an arrow, a shaft, a flight, a bolt, a quarrey. Also a little speare or any weapon that may be cast or darted with the hands, be it stone, wood or iron, and by a metaphor taken for any helpe or defence. Also a vaile or curtaine. Also the Sunne-beames shaking. Also a cruell paine in the side with suddaine griefe, as if ones bodie were thrust through with a sword. Télo trifúlco, a thunder-bolt come with a lightning. Also any thing made of canuase as tents or pauillions. Also the whole sailes of a ship as our Mariners say all their canuase.

Telonário, a Tribute or Tole-gatherer.

Telóne, an instrument of warre like that which Bruers vse with a Crosse-beame to draw water with, called a Sweepe.

Telóssa, the hearbe Centorie.

Téma, feare, dread, suspect, doubt, timorousnesse. Also as Théma.

Témalo, a fish called in Latine Thymalus.

Temáro, a Grailing or Omber-fish.

Temebóndo, as Tremebóndo.

Temente, fearing, timorous, dreading.

Temenza, as Téma, feare.

Temerándo, to be violated or defiled, &c. Looke Temeráre.

Temeráre, to violate, to defile, to distaine, to pollute, to corrupt, to vnhallow, to profane, to defloure, to rauish. Also to commit adulterie.

Temerariaménte, rashly, vnaduisedly, at rouers, at all aduenture, hab or nab, indiscreetly, without aduise, reason or consideration.

Temerário, rash, vnaduised, headlong, foole-hardie, hare-brain'd, indiscreet.

Temeráto, violated, defiled. Looke Temeráre.

Temére, témo, teméi, temúto, to feare, to dread, to doubt, to suspect.

Temére di perícoli, to feare dangers.

Temerità, rashnesse, vnaduisednesse, indiscreetnesse, fond-hardinesse, hastinesse.

Temeritúdine, as Temerità.

Teméro, Temélo, as Temáro.

Teméto, the ancient name of any kind of wine. But now vsed for a kind of wine that in toxicateth the braine. 



Temmírio, a necessarie signe, or Seamarke.

Témo, the sterne, the helme or rudder of a ship. Also a beame, a limmer or a teeme of a wane, wagon or coach. Also a draught-tree of a yoke. Also an axell-tree. Also any beame, rafter or pole laid ouerthwart. Also vsed for the chariot of the Sunne, as we say Phebus his Car.

Témo chè non m'ingánni, I feare that thou wilt deceiue mee

Témo chè non sía, I feare that it be not.

Témo chè sía, I feare that it is.

Témolo, a kind of fish.

Temóne, as Témo.

Temoniére, the Helme or Steres-man of a ship.

Témo non sia, I feare lest it be.

Temóre, feare, dread, doubt.

Temoróso, timorous, fearefull, dreadfull.

Tempella, any plaine fiddle, kit or croud. Also a huge twanger, a swagring toole, a filthy dildoe. Also any beating staffe or cudgell.

Tempellaménto, a beating or bouncing. Also an earnest importuning or egging on.

Tempelláre, to beat, to hang, to strike, to swadle or knocke and bounce, and by a metaphor to vrge, to importune, to sollicite and egg-on.

Témpera, any temper or tempring. Also a temperatenesse or moderation.

Temperaménto, temperance, moderation, a meane, a proportion of the foure chiefe qualities of the bodie.

Temperánte, temperate, moderate, sober.

Temperánza, temperance, moderation, refraining of sensualitie or vnruly affections.

Temperáre, to temper, to moderate. Also to mitigate, to asswage, to allaie or supple.

Temperáre una pénna, to cut or make a writing pen.

Temperaríno, a little pen-knife.

Temperatióne, as Temperaménto.

Temperáto, tempred, temperate, moderate. Also modest, sober, milde, without excesse.

Temperatóio, a pen-knife, a litle knife.

Temperatúra, a temperatenesse, a tempring, a moderation in mingling of things.

Temperie, a temperatenesse in cold and heat.

Temperíno, as Temperaríno.

Tempesta, a tempest, a storme, a bluster, be it winde, haile or raine, but properly a tempest or storme of raine, winde and haile together. Also a commotion, a great trouble or ruffling in a Common-wealth, a storme of aduersitie.

Tempestáre, to tempest, to storme, to bluster. Also to fall as thicke as haile. Also to engraile, to beset or empaile with precious stones.

Tempestiuaménte, seasonably, timely, in due time and season, conueniently.

Tempestiuità, seasonablenesse, opportunitie, fitnesse of time, conueniencie of season.

Tempestíuo, seasonable, ripe for, done in due time and conuenient season.

Tempestósó, tempestuous, stormie, blustring, turbulent, boistrous.

Tempestuóso, as Tempestóso.

Tempiale, the flaps or labels that hang downe by the eares of a Bishops miter, or night-cap. Also a Weauers toole.

Tempiatúra, the temples or sides of a mans head or any thing else.

Tempicciuólo, a small time.

Tempie, the temples or sides of a mans head between the eye and the eare.

Tempiéri, Knights-templers, Temple-knights.

Tempiétto, a little Temple.

Tempio, a Temple, a Church, a Chappell or place consecrated to Diuine seruice.

Tempióne, any great Temple or Church. Also one that hath high or large temples. Also a logarhead, a iolthead, an idle or lazie companion. Also a blow, a clap or whirret giuen vpon the temples or eares of a man.

Tempissimo, very earely, most timely.

Tempo, time, the space of time, measure of motion, season, leasure, while. Also occasion, opportunitie or necessitie of the time present. Also the weather be it foule or faire, Bello tempo, faire weather, Cattíuo tempo, foule or ill weather. Also the monethly issues of women.

Tempo adietro, time past.

Tempo auueníre, time to come.

Tempo dell'ánno, the time of the yeere.

Tempo e luógo, time and place.

Tempo fù, of yore, the time was, in elder time, a while agoe.

Tempo futúro, the Future tense.

Tempo già, whilom, of yore.

Tempo inánzi, the time before.

Tempóne., Looke Fár tempóne, merie sporting time, time spent in making good cheere.

Tempo nuóuo, the spring-time.

Temporále, of or pertaining to time, temporall, that dureth or is made for a certaine time and season. Also a temporall, a secular or lay-man. Also temporalitie or laytie. Also a suddaine storme, blustring or tempest at Sea. Also a berrie, a gust or flaw of winde that dureth but a while.

Temporalità, Temporalitie or Layitie.

Temporáneo, momentarie, temporarie, pertaining to time. Also done suddenly or at a certaine time. Also a temporizer, a wordling, one that obeyeth times.

Temporário, idem as Temporáneo.

Temporeggiáre, to temporize, to obserue, to obey or follow times.

Temporeggiatóre, a temporizer, a wordling, an obseruer of times.

Temporíccio, timous, timely, earely ripe.

Temporíuo, as Temporíccio.

Tempo seréno, cleare or faire weather.

Tempra, as Tempera, A tempra, as A guázzo.

Tempráre, as Temperáre.

Tempre, tempers, temprings, moderations. Also manner, or fashions. Also the concordances, the feet or measures of rimes or verses.

Temulente, drunken, tipsie, cup-shotten.

Temulenza, the ancient name of Drunkennesse.

Témuli, a kind of Fishes.

Temúto, feared, dreaded, doubted.

Tén, as Tenè, to thee thereof or of it.

Tenáce, that holdeth fast, fast-holding. Also stedfast, firme, constant, headstrong, hard to be mooued, stiffe in his purpose. Also miserable, pinching, hard, hold-fast. Also a niggardly chuff, a hard pinch-pennie, a sure holder. Also gluish or clammie.

Tenacità, fast-holding, stedfastnesse, constancie, stiffnesse. Also sparingnesse, nigardlinesse, sure-keeping, gripingnesse. Also clamminesse, gluishnesse.

Tenacitúdine, as Tenacità.

Tenácule, as Tenáglie.

Tenagliáre, as Tanagliáre.

Tenáglie, as Tanáglie.

Tenagliétte, as Tanagliétte.

Tenasmóne, a great desire to goe often to the stoole and bee able to doe nothing.

Tenázza, a little hold or keep made of one bulwarke or curtine.

Ténca, a Fish called a Tench.

Tencionáre, as Tenzonáre.

Tencióne, as Tenzóne.

Tencóne, a cuntbotch, a Winchestergoose. Vsed also for a mans toole or priuie member. Also some toole that Chimnie-sweepers vse.

Tenda, a tent, a pauillion, a curtaine.

Tendáre, to entent, to pitch, to raise or set vp tents or pauillions.

Tendaría, a Farme or Manour-house.

Tendáttilo, a stoue named of the kidneis. 



Tendecchiáre, as Tendere. Also as Tendáre.

Tendente, tending, attending. Also extending. Also out-stretching.

Tendere, tendo, tési, tendúto, or téso, to tend, to extend, to spread, to reach, to display. Also to pitch downe, to bend toward, to lay a snare. Also to goe toward, about or straight on. Also to purpose, intend or pretend.

Tendícoli, snares, trammels, gins.

Tendíni, as Tendóni.

Tendóni, the tennons or instruments moouing in the top of the muscles made of sinnewes and ligatures, which knit them to the bones, and are harder then sinnewes, and not so hard as ligatures.

Tendúto, tended, extended, intended, pretended, spred, displaied. Looke Tendere.

Tenebráre, to darken, to obscure, to dim. Also to ouercloud. Looke Tenebre.

Tenebre, darknesse, obscuritie, dimnesse, pitchinesse, night, lacke of light.

Tenebrità, darknesse, obscuritie.

Tenebrosità, darknesse, obscuritie.

Tenebróso, darkesome, darke, obscure, dim.

Teneménto, a Tenement.

Tenente, holding. Also a holder, a tenent.

Tenenza, tenencie, holding, keeping.

Tenére, téngo, ténni, tenúto, to hold, to keep, to hold or keep in, to detaine, to containe, to keep backe or withhold. Also to possesse and hold fast. Also to abide or dwell. Also to repute or suppose. Also to keep in remembrance. Also any goods, wealth, geare holding, free-hold, possessing, tenure or holding of land or any thing else.

Tenére a báda, to hold in delay, to keep at a bay, to hold off or in suspence.

Tenére a badalúcco, to keep in continuall allaroms or skirmishes.

Tenére a battésimo, to hold at the font and be Godfather vnto.

Tenére a capitále, to hold in chiefe accompt as a mans stocke or freehold.

Tenére a diságio, to hold one lingring, or to make one wearie.

Tenére ad órdine, to keep in order, in a readinesse or prepared.

Tenére a ménte, to keep in minde.

Tenére a sténto, to keep in paine, languor or pining.

Tenére cáro, to hold deare.

Tenére compagnía, to keep companie.

Tenére con altrúi, to hold with others.

Tenére cónto, to keep accompt. Also to prise or esteeme.

Tenére dietro, to follow after. Also to hold behind. 

Tenére dozzéna, to keep an ordinarie or liuerie, to keepe Schollers at bed and bord at a certaine ordinarie rate.

Tenére hostería, to keep an Inne or lodging.

Tenére il filo al piéde, to walke vprightly, to looke to the maine chance.

Tenére il pásso, to keep or looke well to ones charge.

Tenére il pátto, to keepe a couenant, to performe a bargaine.

Tenére il sácco, to hold the bag, that is, to yeeld, to consent or be accessorie to another, to take part with, or keep ones secrets.

Tenére in bisténto, to keep in languor, to hold in paine.

Tenére in fío, to hold in Fee.

Tenére in piédi, to keep in state, on foot or in being.

Tenére la battúta, to keep time in Musike.

Tenére la bestia in capézza, to bridle his appetites, to liue chaste.

Tenére l'auanzo, to see ones last rest at any game, namely at Primero.

Tenére le máni a cíntola, to liue or stand idle.

Tenére le máni a sè, to hould or keepe ones hands to himselfe.

Tenére le óche in pastúra, to keepe wenches at racke and manger for monie.

Tenére le póste, to hould stakes or keep play still.

Tenére l'inuíto, to hould or accept of ones courtesie being enuited to doe any thing, to take ones offer or bidding. Also to see a vie at any game.

Tenerello, somewhat tender or soft. Looke Tenero.

Tenére l'ócchio a pénello, to looke to the pensill, to looke heedily about.

Tenére máno, as Tenéreil sácco.

Tenére memória, to remember well, to keepe in memory or minde.

Tenére ragióne, to keepe a court of law, right, reason, iustice or sessions.

Tenerézza, tendernesse, softnesse. Also tender or melting affection.

Teneri, any tendrels. Also all soft-skinned fishes.

Teneríccio, softish, tender, mellow.

Teneríno, somewhat soft or tender.

Teneríre, rísco, ríto, to mollifie, to soften, to make tender. Also to enmilden.

Tenerità, as Tenerézza.

Teneríto, softned, mollified, made tender.

Teneritúdine, tendernesse, sofinesse.

Tenero, soft, tender. Also pliant or easily induced to any thing. Also yoong, gentle, milde, nice, delicate or effeminate.

Teneróne lungóne, a long stripling, a tender tall lad, a stangrell boy.

Tenérsi, a man to containe or hold himselfe fast, a man to hould or esteeme himselfe.

Tenérsi huómo, to hould or repute himselfe a man.

Tenerúme, the soft braune, pithinesse or fleshinesse of any thing.

Tenerúme dell' orécchie, the flap of ones eares.

Tenesmóne, as Tenasmóne.

Téngere, as Tíngere, to die, to staine.

Ténia, a rowle that women were wont to weare one their heads. Also a wollen ornament like a turbant that men were wont to weare on their heades. Also a womans head-band, fillet or haire-lace. Also the knot or fastning of a fillet or haire-lace. Also a kinde of long and narrow Sea-fish. Also a kind of brow, Cornish out iutting out ouer pillers. Also along row of rockes or cliffes along the Sea-shore, or a Veine of white stones which to them that be a farre off vpon the sea appeareth long like to a coure-cheffe. Also a kind of worms that be long, broad and slender, of some called Graue-wormes, as engendering of the rotten flesh of dead bodies.

Teniense, any fish that liues by the borders or brimes of the sea.

Teniere, a tiller of a Crosse-bow. Also a houldfast or place to hould fast by.

Teniménto, a tenement, a free-hould. Also any hould or houlding.

Ténio, that hath thine baire.

Tenitóre, a houlder, a keeper.

Tenitóre delli béni, an Executer of a mans goods.

Tenitório, as Território.

Tenmelíno, a wine in Greece now out of vse.

Tenóre, a tenor a tenure, a forme, a content, a continuall order, state or continuance of any thing without interruption neuer changing maner. Also a tenor or degree in musik. Also a subiect or argument to write or speak of.

Tensíbile, that may be extended.

Tensióne, extension, out stretching.

Ténso, extended, out stretched.

Tentabóndo, attempting, assaying.

Tentáli, a kind of fish.

Tentaménto, an tempting, an attempting, an assay, a proouing, a triall, a sounding.

Tentáre, to tempt, to attempt, to try, to assay, to sound, to prooue, to offer or goe about to doe a thing. Also to handle or feele or grope for. Also to tempt one to doe some euill, to prouoake or egge one.

Tentataménte, attemptingly, by triall or assay. Also feelingly or gropinglie. 



Tentatióne, a tempting or temptation.

Tentatíuo, as Tentaménto.

Tentatóre, a tempter, an attempter.

Tenteníno, a tempting, an inticing man, woman, motion or spirit.

Tenténna pennácchio, a tisty-tosty-wag-feather, one that hath more haire then wit.

Tentennáre, as Nicchiáre. Also to shake or stagger and be ready to fall. Also as Tintinnáre.

Tentennáta, a yarking or sound of the stroake of a whip. Also a lash, a blow, a stripe or bang with any weapon.

Tentennóne, an easie-tempted gull or foole.

Tentígine, as Priapísmo.

Tentiginóso, troubled with Priapísmo.

Tentionáre, as Tenzonáre.

Tentióne, as Tenzóne.

Tentipellióne, a medicine or instrument to make the skin plain with out wrinkles.

Tentipelóne, as Tentipellióne.

Ténto, died, stained or coloured. Also a taint in a horse.

Tentonáre, to grope or fumble in the darke.

Tentóne, gropingly in the darke.

Tentón tontóne, as Tentóne.

Tentóre, a Dyer or stainer of colours.

Tentoría, the arte of dying. Also a Dye-house.

Tentório, a Field-tent or Pauillion made of sacke-cloath.

Tentúra, a dying or stayning, a colouring.

Tenturáre, to die, to staine, to colour.

Tenuáre, to make or become small, leane, thin, lesse or feeble, to extenuate.

Tenuatióne, a becomming or making small, leane or thin, an extenuation.

Tenuità, sllendernesse, leannesse, gantnesse, thinnesse, meagrenesse, smallnesse.

Ténuo, leane, meagre, thin, feeble, gant, small, sparing, spiny.

Tenúta, a holding, a tenament, a possession. Also contayning or capacitie.

Tenúta, held, kept. Looke Tenére.

Ténza, as Tenzóne.

Tenzáre, as Tenzonáre.

Tenzonare, to contend, to quarrell, to striue.

Tenzóne, a contention, a quarrell, a strife.

Tenzonóso, contentious, quarrellous.

Teofania, as Theofanía.

Teogonía, as Theogonía.

Teología, as Theología.

Teologizzáre, as Theologizzáre.

Teólogo, as Theólogo.

Te operánte, thee working.

Teórica, as Theórica.

Teórico, as Theórico.

Tepefáre, to heate or warme.

Tepére, as Intepidíre.

Tepidaménte, meanely warme, nor hot nor cold, faintly, nothing earnestlie.

Tepidário, a whot baine, bath, stoue or whot-house, but properly the entry into the stoue, baine or first chamber of it, where they were wont to wash themselues in warme water.

Tipidézza, naturall warmth, lew warmth, meanenesse betweene heate and cold.

Tepidíre, disco, díto, to make or becom lew warme, to become neither hot nor cold. Also to become faint or slow. Also to calme, to allay or asswage.

Tepidità, as Tepidézza.

Tepido, lew warme, indifferent, neither hot nor cold. Also faint or nothing earnest.

Tepóre, naturall warmth or heate.

Téppe, tufes or clods of earth.

Tè presente, thou being present.

Terágo, a kind of little fish.

Teramóne, a weed that killeth beanes in hard ground.

Terapestica, rimediále medicína.

Teraphíno, a kind of caruing or imagery worke so called.

Terázza, as Terráccia.

Terbichéto, a cucking-stoole.

Terdecimo, the thirteenth in order.

Terdúra, a kind of meat for poore folkes like to a hasty pudding.

Terebentína, Turpentine. Looke Terebínto.

Terebínto, the tree that yeeldeth Turpentine, the Terebinth-tree.

Teredíne, any kind of hand-worme. Also any timber-worme or Wooll-moath.

Terétro, an instrument that Founders or Turners vse to make any thing round.

Terfez, a kind of hearbe or roote.

Tergémmo, one of the three borne at one time. Also triple or threefold.

Terge re, tergo, tergéi, tergiúto, to backe or shield and couer. Also to backe. Also to retire or draw backe. Also to drie, to burnish, to scoure, to polish or make smooth.

Tergidutóre, a Seriant of a band that commonly followeth his troupes.

Tergiríno, a thin paile, wall or partition of hedges, rods, reedes or bushes.

Tergiuersáre, to turne backe or ones taile vnto. Also to shrinke or auoide from. Also to run away and fight still. Also to dodge, to deny and wrangle or to haft & by no meanes to come to any reasonable point. 

Terginersatióne, turning backe or ones taile vnto, shrinking or auoided from. Also a running away and fighting still. Also a dodging, a wrangling. Also a none suite in the law, when the Law, when the Plaintife letteth his suite fall.

Tergiuersatóre, one that with draweth and shrinketh backe and will not hold to a point, a wrangler, a hefter, a dodger, one that runneth backe.

Tergiuersióne, as Terginersatióne.

Tergiúto, backt, shield. Looke Tergere.

Tergo, the backe or shoulders of a man, any hinder part. Also a hide or skin.

Téri, a kind of coine in Naples.

Teriáca, Treacle against poison. Also a kind of Vine whose wine healeth bitings of venemous Serpents.

Terígio, as Pterígio.

Terígode, as Pterígode.

Terigóide, as Pterigóide.

Terióne, a kind of beast.

Terlígia, browne slacke-cloath worne in doublets.

Terlíno, a foule called a Curlue.

Terlísa, as Terlígia.

Terme, as Therme. Also a magot or gentle-worme.

Termentína, any kind of Turpentine.

Termigísto, a great boaster, quareller, killer, tamer or ruler of the Vniuerse, the child of the earth-quake and of the thunder, the brother of death, &c.

Terminábile, boundable, terminable. Also that may be ended or determined.

Terminále, of or belonging, or seruing vnto bounds, confines or limits. Also a meare-stone, a land-marke or bound to shew the limites of fields or lands. Also a kinde of Medlar or Saruice-fruite.

Terminálie, feastes instituted in the honour of the God Terminus, kept in February on the eight Calends of March, because that betweene Terminálie and Regifúgio the odde daies were put in.

Termináre, to terminate, to limit, to bound, to confine, to assigne bounds, or appoint Marches. Also to decide, to determine or define. Also to end.

Terminataménte, determinatly, conclusiuely, definitely.

Terminatióne, a termination, a limitation, a bounding, a decision, an ending.

Termine, the end or compasse of any thing, a tearme, a hound, a limit. Also a Meare-stone, a Land-marke, a signe declaring one mans land from another. Also an end, an ayme, a gole. Also a terme or state of being or 



time. Also a fit or stint of an ague.

Termine di febbre, a fit or stint of an ague.

Termincuole, as Terminábile.

Termíno, a God to whom Numa consecrated a Temple. Lat.

Terminóso, full of bounds or limits.

Termínto, a hard or red swelling rising sometimes in the crowne of the head, in the priuy parts or arme pits, called of our Chirurgions a Manchet or little loafe. Also as Terebínto.

Ternále, of or consisting of three.

Ternaría, a Magistrate in Venice that hath charge of the custome of Oyles.

Ternário, of three, consisting of three.

Ternétta, a kind of small lace or twist of silke or gold.

Terni, a cast of two treas vpon the dice.

Terníre, nísco, níto, to tarnish or darken and mist-ouer, as burnished plate or glasse will be being breathed vpon.

Ternità, a Trinity, a number of three. Vsed also for Eternità.

Terpentína, Turpentine.

Terque, vsed for, and three times.

Terra, the element called earth. Also our generall mother the earth. Vsed also for the whole world. Also any earth, or ground, or land. Also any land, countrie, prouince, region, or soile. Also any particular citie, towne, borough, village, or hamlet. Also any Mannor, Lordship, Farme-house, free-hold, or copie-hold.

Terrabása, a foule called a Bittour.

Terrà, of Tenére, he shall hold.

Terráccia, any filthie earth or ground. Also rubble or rubbish. Also a terrace, an open walk, or gallorie, a leades, a flat roofe, floore, or seeling. Also as Rauellíno. Also a little towre, hold, or keepe, where a sentinell or skout doeth sit and watch.

Terracciáno, a townes-man, or dweller in any towne or citie, a burges of a towne.

Terra cimólia, Tuckers-earth, Fullersweede.

Terra di Sán Páolo, as Terra Sámia.

Terra di vassellái, Potters-clay.

Terrádo, a kind of flat boate in India.

Terra ferma, the firme or maine land.

Terra fránca, a Free-towne, a Commonweale, a free-state. Also a free-hold.

Terrágho, as Terrapiéno.

Terrágna, any thing made of earth, mud or such thing. Also a mud-wall.

Terrágno., Looke Molíno. Vsed also of Dánte for Terréno.

Terrágnolo, drooping, downe looking, drouzie, dull, heauy, going as some heauy-going horses. Also earthen or leaden-witted. Also of or belonging vnto the earth, or breeding and liuing in or on the earth.

Terraiuólo, a Quoist or Stocke-doue or Ring-doue. Also as Terrágnolo.

Terra lénia, as Terra sigilláta.

Terráma, a worldly care or carking for worldly pelfe or earthly matters.

Terráme, any earthen pot, or made of earth.

Terra muráta, a walled towne.

Terrándola, a bird called a Bunting.

Terranéola, a bird called a Bunting.

Terrántola, a Salamander. Also a Bunting. Also as Tarántola.

Terrapianáto, razed, made euen or leuell to the ground. Also filled vp with earth or mud. Also ensconced, ramparded, enflanked or entrenched with earth.

Terrapiéno, a rampard, a bull-warke, a sconce, a blocke-house, a trench or other fence and fortification, rammed in, fortified or filled vp with earth or rubble. Also the earth or rubble rampired or filled vp vnto the inside of any rampard, wall or fortification.

Terra sámia, as Terra sigilláta.

Terra sigilláta, a kind of earth breeding in Samos, sealed with the great Turks seale, and very much esteemed among the Turkes if it be right, for it is very good against poison, but much of it is counterfeit.

Terráta, as Terrádo.

Terráto, as Terrapiéno. Also earthed.

Terrázza, as Terráccia.

Terrazzáno, as Terracciáno.

Terrazzáre la terra, to grub or breake vp the earth. Also to harrow land.

Terrefáre, to terrifie, to affright, to put in feare or terrour.

Terreistà, Terreità, as Terrestreità.

Terremótico, subiect to earthquakes or shaking of the earth.

Terremóto, an earth-quake or shaking of the earth.

Terrénà cámera, a low or ground chamber.

Terréna stánza, idem.

Terréni. Vsed for worldly men.

Terréno, terrestriall, earthly, made of earth. Also worldly. Also low on the ground. Also that breedeth, liueth or keepeth on land. Also earth, ground, land, soile or mound. Also a field or piece of land.

Terréno da suói ferri, per metáfora vuól díre, materia proportionáta.

Terreo, as Terrestre. Also of the colour or nature of earth.

Terrestre, terrestriall, earthly, of mud, belonging vnto, breeding or liuing on earth or land, worldly.

Terrestreità, earthlinesse, the nature or quality of the earth. 

Terríbile, terrible, horrible, gastly, cruell, fell, to be feared.

Terribilézza, as Terribilità.

(Terribilità, terriblenesse, horriblenesse.

Terricídio, a turfe, or clod of earth.

Terricciuóla, a little Towne, Village, or Hamlet.

Terríérì, townes-men, townes-dwellers.

Terriéro, the ground where on any thing stands. Also a townes-man, or townes-dweller.

Terrífero, earth-bearing, or bringing.

Terrificáre, to terrifie, to affright.

Terrísico, terrible, frightfull.

Terrigeneo, ingendred, begotten, borne, or bred of earth.

Terrilóquio, terribly-speaking.

Terrisonánte, terribly-sounding.

Terríto, terrifide, put in feare. Also fright or astonishment.

Território, a territorie, a circuit, a precinct or compasse of land lying within the bounds of any Citie.

Terróre, terror, horror, fright, dread.

Terróso, full of earth, earthie, grottie.

Terrulento, as Terróso.

Tersicóre, as Thersicóre.

Tersità, neatenesse, polishednes, smoothnesse.

Tersitáre, to quack as a Duck.

Terso, neate, polished, smooth, cleane.

Tertenére, to entertaine.

Terteniménto, entertainement.

Tertenúto, entertained.

Tertiána, as Terzána.

Tertiáni, souldiers of the third band or ranke.

Tertiáre, to third out. Also to entermit a day. Also to third the Pike, either to beare the same vpon his shoulders, or to charge the same ouer-hand. Also as Interzáre.

Tertiáre vn pezzo, to third a piece, that is, to part it in iust proportion.

Tertiário, a kind of course Tinne or Pewter. Also a Tierce, or Thirden-deale.

Tertio, the third in number. Also a little regiment of souldiers.

Tertúfalo, a Tertuffle, that is, a Puff, a Fist, or Toade-stoole full of winde. Also any swelling, knob, or bunch of flesh.

Tertúfo, as Tertúfalo.

Terza, the third in order. Also the houre that Priests call prime.

Terzaménte, thirdly.

Terzána, any thing that commeth by thirds, a third. Also a tertian ague. Also the mizon, or poope-saile of a Ship.

Terzána dóppia, a double tertian ague.

Terzanella, a weake tertian ague. 



Terzanello, a kind of slight silke stuffe.

Terzáre, as Tertiáre.

Terzaría, a payment, or taxing of the third part of any thing, a thirding.

Terzaruólo, a Firkin, a Tierce, or Thirden-deale vessell. Also a mizen, or poope-saile.

Terzeruólo, as Terzaruólo.

Terzétto, a terzet of rimes, when three and three verses rime together.

Terzíno, as Terzétto.

Terzo, as Tertio, the third.

Terzo genito, the third begotten.

Terzolétto, the fore-man or iack of a cast of Merlins. Also a mizen, or poope-saile.

Terzólo, a Tassell-gentle of a Hawke.

Terzúlo, as Terzólo.

Terzuólo, as Terzólo.

Terzulétto, as Terzolétto.

Tesca, rough places that lye vntilled, or that are hard to come vnto, where the Augures practised their diuinations by the flying of birds.

Teschio, the head or scull of any dead creature.

Tese, a generall question or indefinite argument.

Téso, tended, extended, attended, spread, displaied, stretched out. Looke Tendere.

Tesoreggiáre, as Thesoreggiáre.

Tesóro, as Thesóro, treasure.

Tesqua, as Tesca.

Tessándro, any web, or weauing.

Tessárella, as Tessitríce.

Tessarétta, as Tessitrice.

Tessáro, any kind of weauer.

Tessaruólo, any kind of weauer.

Tessella, a little piece or small toole to worke in-laid or marquetrie worke.

Tesselláre, to make or worke marquetrie, checker, or in-laid worke.

Tessello, portáua il mantello foderáto di váio col tessello di sópra.

Tessera, any thing that euery way is square, as a Dye, or Cube, any geometrical foure square figure, a dye to play withall. Also a signe, a note, a marke, or token. Also a token of leade, of leather, or any other thing that was wont to be giuen to the people as a dole, Also a score or tallie whereon the number of things deliuered are marked, such as our Bakers, our Bruers, and our Checquer-men vse to score vpon. Also a watch-word, a priuie signe or token whereby spies and enemies are discerned from companions and fellowes in armes, which was either a dumb signe, or vttred with the voice, our Sentinels call it the word, or watch-word. Also a deuise of iron called tarriers to play and passe away the time withall. Also some part of a weauers loome. Also a Printers frame for his letters. Also some part of a yoke. Also the name of a toole that Farriers vse.

Tesseracósto, the time of fortie dayes before and after a mans birth, wherein the mother might not be partaker of the holie ceremonies, which time being expired, they celebrated a feast called Tesseracósto.

Tesserándolo, as Tessitóre.

Tesserário, a tallie, or score-keeper, of or belonging to tessera, but properly a Seriant or watch-master, or he that chargeth the watch, and giueth or bringeth the watch-word among souldiers.

Tessere, tesso, tesséi, tessúto, to weaue. Also to make, to build, to worke or frame together. Also to complot, to contriue, to compact, to deuise. Also to endite, to write, to compose or gather together, to context.

Tesseríno, any kind of weauer, or loome-workeman. Also a kind of fine slight silke stuffe like Calimanco, or silke Mokado.

Tessíbile, that may be wouen, wrought, or contriued. Looke Tessere. 

Tessiménto, any kind of weauing, web, contexture, loome-worke, or working together. Also any complot, compact, or framing together. Looke Tessere.

Tessitóre, any kind of weauer. Looke Tessere. Also a kind of monstrous fish

Tessitríce, a woman-weauer, or maker of any loome-worke. Also a spinner.

Tessitúra, any contexture. Looke Tessiménto and Tessere.

Tesso, hath beene vsed for Testo.

Tessúto, wouen. Looke Tessere.

Testá, any head, skonce, pate, nole, or test, also a chiefe, a spring, or a beginning. Also a testerne, a lid or couer. Also a piece of broken bone, a shard of a pot, bricke or tile. Also any fish shell. Also the naue of a wheele. Also an earthen cup or gallie-pot, also a burnt tile or brick, it hath also beene vsed for a head-attire, or head-garland.

Testábile, that by the law may testifie or be testified.

Testáccia, any filthy head, a great nole, a iolt-head, a grose pate.

Testáccie, a kind of great Peare. Also the Costard-apple.

Testacciuóle, any little heads as lams or pigs heads.

Testacei animáli, all manner of hard shelfishes as Oysters or Scalops.

Testaceo, made of hard fish shels, of potshardes, of tile or bricke.

Testa délla ruóta, the naue of a wheele.

Testa delletto, the testerne of a bed. Also the head or forepart of any cariage for Ordinance.

Testa di cáne, the hearbe Dogs-head.

Testa erta, a proud man, a high minde.

Testa gróssa, a iolt-head, a grosse-pate, a logar-sconce. Also a kind of bird.

Testaménto, a last will or testament. Also the holy testament or gospell.

Testamentário, of or belonging to a last will and testament. Also a Scriuener or writer of a mans last will and testament. Also a forger or falsifier of dead mens wils and testaments.

Testa per testa, head for head.

Testardía, headdinesse, selfe-conceit, obstinacy, testinesse, willfulnesse.

Testárdo, headdy, testy, willfull, obstinate, stiffnecked, toyish, fond, humorous, opiniatiue, one that followes his owne head.

Testáre, to testifie, to beare witnesse or record, to attest, to tell openly. Also to testate or make ones last will and testament.

Testaréccio, as Testárdo.

Testariccio, as Testárdo.

Testáta, a head piece, a head attire. Also the head piece of any worke.

Testatióne, an attestation, a bearing witnesse or record.

Testáto, testified, borne witnesse or record, attested. Also openly proued, certaine, witnessed, approoued, confirmed, and as it were prooued by witnesse. Also made ones will and testament. Also that hath a head, a testerne or chiefe.

Testatóre, a testator, a testifier, a witnesse, one that maketh a last will and testament.

Testatríce, a woman attester or witnes.

Teste, euen now, a while since, whilom. Also all manner of heades. Also a testis, a giuer of witnesse, a bearer of record, a giuer of euidence, one that is priuy or witnesse to a thing. Also certaine eminent parts behind Salóide, in the extreame part of the braine, which the Anatomists called so, because they are like and somewhat resemble the stones of a man.

Testeríccio, as Testárdo.

Testéso, vsed of Dante for euen now.

Testésso, thou thy selfe, thy selfe.

Teste teste, euen very now.

Testeuolménte, teastily, headdily, willfully. Also with bowing or nodding of the head.

Testi, a kind of false Dice. Looke Teste.

Testicciuólo, a little head, pate or sconce.

Testícola di cáne, Rag-wort, Gandergoose.

Testicoláto, that hath Testícoli.

Testícoli, the cods or stones of any li­



uing creature.

Testicolóso, that hath great cods.

Testículi, as Testícoli.

Testiera, a head piece, a caske or helmet. Also a testerne or head of any thing. Also a head-stall of a bridle, a headstrain. Also a test or couer of any limbecke. Also a woman that is Testárdo.

Testiere, as Testárdo. Also a testern.

Testificánza, as Testificatióne.

Testificáre, to testifie, to attest, to beare witnesse or record.

Testificatióne, a testification, a witnesse bearing. Also a declaration.

Testificatóre, a testifier, a witnesse or record bearer, a witnesse.

Testimónia, any kind of witnesse or testimony.

Testimoniánza, a testimony, a witnesse, an euidence. Also a deposition.

Testimoniáre, to testifie, to witnesse, to beare record or witnesse.

Testimónio, a testimony, a witnesse, a record, an euidence.

Testína, a little, a fine or subtill head.

Testio, as Teschio.

Testióne, as Testa gróssa.

Testo, a text, an argument, a theame or ground of any subiect. Also the test of siluer or gold. Also the stile or maner of ones words or speaking. Also a Goldsmithes cruze or melting pot. Also a baking pan. Also a pitcher of carth. Also a flower pot. Also a potshard or a tile-shard. Also any kind of pot-lid or couer. Also any contexture or thing wouen, as the participle of Tessere.

Testolína, a little head, or skull.

Testóne, as Testáccia, or testa gróssa. Also a testone or coine in France worth eighteene pence sterlin.

Testóre, as Tessitóre.

Testóso, headie, as Testárdo.

Testríce, as Tessitríce.

Testúde, as Testúdine.

Testúdine, a Tortoise. Also any shellcrab, Crab-fish, Lobstar, or any great Snaile, with a shell both of land and sea. Also a shell-Toade. Also the bellie of a Lute, or Lute it selfe, because it somewhat resembleth a Tortoise shell. Also the roofe or vault of a house consisting of two arches, the one going crosse-wise ouer the other. Also a warlike fence or engine made of boords, couered ouer with raw hides, which serued against fire and stones flung against souldiers, vnder which they might safely assault the walles. Also a kind of target-fence, which was a close holding and ioining together of targets ouer-head, like a roofe, wherewith the foote-men being defended, did beare off the thick shot of arrowes or slinging of stones. Vsed also for any great Shield, Target, Paluoise, or buckler. Also the name of a Starre or Signe in heauen.

Testúdo, as Testúdine.

Testúgine, as Testúdine.

Testúina, as Testúdine.

Testúra, as Tessiménto, a contexture.

Tetánico, that hath the cricke in the necke or a kind of crampe which holdeth the necke so stiffe that it cannot turne or bow.

Tetáno, a kind of crampe hapning in the body that it can neither bow, bend or stir any way.

Tetanótri, as Tetánico.

Tetanótro, a medicine vsed to take away wrimples and to make the skin smooth.

Tetartemorióne, a quadrant or compasse in the Zodiake of three signes.

Tethea, a kind of Oyster.

Tetra, the number of foure in Greeke, and often vsed in composition.

Tetrábolo, as Tetróbolo.

Tetracolóne, of foure members.

Tetracórdo, an instrument of foure strings.

Tetradóro, foure handfull broad euery way. Also of bricke three foote long.

Tetradrámma, a Greeke coine of foure dragmas, worth about foure of our groates.

Tetraédro, a kind of Geometricall figure.

Tetragáno, any foure square or quadrangle. Also euer one and firme.

Tetragnáto, a kinde of venemous Spider.

Tetragóne, as Tetragáno.

Tetragonísmo, a squaring.

Tetragrámato, of foure letters. Also the essentiall name of God or Iehouah.

Tetralíce, the Star-thistle or Caltrop. Also heath, ling or broome.

Tetrálogo, a Dialogue of foure.

Tetramelo, a Meeter of foure feete.

Tetraménte, darklie, gastly, grizlie. hidiously, horribly, stinkingly.

Tetrámetro, a Meeter of foure feete.

Tetraplásio, foure-folde.

Tetrápoli, a City of foure parts, as one would say a foure-city.

Tetraptóti, declined in foure cases.

Tetrárca, a gouernment of a fourth part of a state or kingdome.

Tetrarchía, such a Lordship or gouernment.

Tetrasílabo, of foure sillables.

Tetrástico, a sentence of foure verses.

Tetricità, sourenesse, grimnesse or sadnesse of countenance. 

Tetrico, crabbed, grim or soure to looke on.

Tetrigometra, the mother or matrice of Grasse-hoppers.

Tetrigónia, a kinde of small Crickets or Grasse-hoppers.

Tetrináre, to cry as a Ducke doth.

Tetritúdine, as Tetricità.

Tetro, darke, hidious, pitchy, blake, gastly, grizly, duskie, horrible, stinking.

Tetróbolo, a Greeke coine of foure nobles, worth foure pence halfe-penny of our money.

Tétta, a pap, a dug, a teate. Also a sheepe reared in the house which we cal a Houselin.

Tettáre, to sucke or draw a dug.

Tettigónie, a kind of little Grasse-hopper that sings but seldome.

Tettína, a little dug, pap or teate.

Tétto, the roofe, ridge or couer of a house, be it slate, tile, leade or boord. Vsed also for a house or roofe. Also the deck or ouer-lop of a ship.

Tettóia, a roofe or penthouse, any house couer.

Tettonáre, to roofe or couer a house.

Tettonáto, roofed or couered. Also as Tétto.

Tettóra, the Plurall of Tétto.

Teuchíte, a kind of sweet rush or squinanth.

Téucrio, as Teucrióne.

Teucrióne, great or wild Germander, Ground-oake or Petioake.

Teuertíno, as Tiuertíno.

Teúrgia, Sórte di Cábala.

Teúrgo, sórte di Cabalista.

Tezzada áia, a Store-house or shelter to put corne in time of raine.

Tezzóne, a houell, a shed or shelter of boordes.

Thálamo, a marriage-chamber.

Thalásio, a Seawater-colour or blew like the Sea-waues.

Thalassagliéne, an hearbe very salt in taste.

Thalasséglie, as Potamánti.

Thalassiárca, an Admirall.

Thalassíno, as Thalásio.

Thalassinténo, a kind of salt wine vsed among the Grecians.

Thalassoméli, a kind of surrop made of salt sea-water.

Thália, one of the nine Muses, as much to say capacity.

Thaliétro, the hearbe Laske-wort or Flax-wort.

Thállo, vsed of the Florentines for the colour Greene. Vsed also for a bough that still continueth greene.

Thalmudísta, a professor of the Chaldeans or Egiptians old lawes.

Thalofóri, bringers of branches or 



boughes.

Thápsia, an hearbe like Dill, which being cut yeeldes a iuice as white as milke.

Thargélie feste, certaine feastes and games kept in honour of Apóllo.

Thásia, a kind of wine in Egypt. Also as Thápsia.

Tháspi, a kind of Mustard-seed.

Tháu, an Hebrew letter vsed often misteriously for the crosse of Christ, as also for the number of 400.

Theamede, a stone which contrary to the Adamant putteth away iron from it.

Theangélide, a kind of hearb.

Theatineríe, hipocriticall fryers trikes.

Theatíni, a kind of order of friers, that much dissemble and faine  purity.

Theatrále, of or belonging to a Theater.

Theátrico, a plaier in a Theater a Stage plaier.

Theátro, a Theater, an open place where all men may sit, see and behold, or wherein one sheweth, plaieth or declareth. Also a stage or skaffold. Also any spectacle or common-play.

Thebáide, a kind of poore drie Date.

Theicóne, as Trogéte.

Thelétteri, Female or shee Ferne.

Thélico, a stone like an Oliue-stone, which being beaten to pouder breaketh the stone in the kidneis.

Thelifóno, the hearbe Libard-bane, the roote whereof doth kill Serpents.

Theligónio, the hearb Culerage, Arsemart or as some call it the grace of God.

Thelipteríno, a kind of Ferne.

Théma, a theame, an argument, a subiect, a ground or matter supposed to be written or spoken of. Also a figure set by Astronomers containing the state of heauen and the planets at any certaine time. Also an horoscope or consideration of the time of ones birth or natiuity vnder this or that planet.

Themísia, Oke of Ierusalem or Millegraine.

Themología, as Ethimología.

Thenáre, the fleshy part of the hand between the thumbe and the middle finger.

Thendálida, as Sanguinária.

Theodía, Deity, God-head, the word of God, Diuinity. Also Dauids Psalmes.

Theogónia, the Originall, the beginning or generation of the Gods.

Theolepto, inspired of God.

Theologáre, to reason of holy things or preach diuinity.

Theología, reasoning of holy things, science of diuinity, profession of holy things. 

Theológico, theologicall, of or pertayning to diuinity or holy things.

Theologizzáre, as Theologáre.

Theólogo, a preacher or professer of diuinity or holy things, a deuine.

Theomachía, fighting against God.

Theómaco, a fighter against God.

Theománte, a professer of Theomantía.

Theomantía, a kinde of diuination or enchanting by abusiue calling vpon the secret, farfetcht, misterious and wrested names of God.

Theombrotióne, an hearbe.

Theomenía, Gods wrath.

Theonino, a slanderous man.

Theóphilo, a louer of God, louing God.

Theoréma, a theorem, any axiom or vndoubted truth of an arte, namely that respecteth speculation more then practise.

Theoremísta, a professor of theorems or axioms of vndoubted truth.

Theoretico, of or belonging to contemplation. Also as Theórico.

Theoría, contemplation, speculation, deepe study, insight or beholding.

Theóriea, as Theoría.

Theórica astronomía, that part of Astronomy chat giueth the view of the motions of the plants by their Orbes.

Theórico, a speculator or contemplatiue man. Also theoricall rather then practike. Also belonging to contemplation and view.

Theorítico, as Theorétíco.

Thephrite, a stone wherein is seene a new mone tipped with hornes.

Thereo, a birde called a Robin-redbreast.

Theriáca, triacle, a remedy against poison. Also a Viper.

Theriómata, an vlceration or sore about the priuy members, whereby all the parts about them are corrupted.

Therionárca, an hearbe with a floure like a Rose, whereon if wild beastes do but tread they become drouzie and sencelesse.

Therme, hot bathes or baines, properly waters that are naturally warme.

Thermíno, a kind of Oyle of Lillies.

Therone, the name of a dogge, as one would say kill-bucke or fierce-looke.

Therpsicóre, one of the nine Muses, as much to say Maiesty.

Thesanrizzáre, as Thesoreggiáre.

These, a generall question or indefinite argument.

Thesióne, an hearb very bitter in taste vsed in purges. Also a kind of wine in Egypt.

Thesmophórie, certaine feastes vnto Ceres vsed in Athens.

Thesoreggiáre, to lay vp treasure, to heape or hord vp riches.

Thesorería, a treasury, a place where treasure is kept, a secret store-house.

Thesoriere, a treasurer, a treasure-keeper.

Thesóro, treasure, riches, wealth.

Thessa, a kind of fish called the Purple-fish.

Thessálico, a kind of purple colour.

Theta, the Greeke letter Theta. Also a marke of condemnation to death.

Theúrgia, a kind of diuination or enchanting.

Thía, as Trogéte.

Thiáde, as Ménade, certaine religious women of the order of Bacchus.

Thiéio, the ancient name of Amber.

Thieldóni, a kinde of ambling Iennet bread in Asturia in Spaine.

Thifóne, as Tiphóne.

Thímalo, a kind of dainty fish.

Thímba, the hearbe Winter-sauory.

Thímbra, the hearb Winter-sauory.

Thímbro, a crest in Armory.

Thimelea, as Camelea.

Thími, a kinde of long and big warts that haue but a small roote.

Thimiamáte, an Altar of Gold in Salomons Temple, on which were burned sweete perfumes.

Thimióne, as Thími.

Thímo, the hearbe Tyme. Also a kernell or glandule vnder the canell bone, which in men is slender and in beastes thicke.

Thimóso mele, an excellent hony that Bees make of Thime.

Thínnide, the spaning Tunny fish.

Thínno, the Tunny fish, some take it for the Multer.

Thíphe, a kind of corne in Egipt.

Thiphóne, a kind of prodigious storme or tempest comixt with flashes and lightnings of fire, the firmament seeming to open, some say it is a blazing star resembling fire, plated or twisted in maner of a wreath very grimme and hideous to looke on.

Thiriatíno, a kind of faire bluish colour that Painters vse.

Thirsíte, a stone like vnto Corall, which vsed in drinke procureth sleepe.

Thírso, the stalke, the stocke or stem of any hearbe. Also a Iauelin wrapped about with Iuy, caried about by the Menades or Harlots in the feastes and sacrifices of Bacchus. Some haue also vsed the word for the enciting of a fury or violent motion.

Thisselióne, Water-parsly.

Thispe, an hearbe some take it for Senuie, others for Country-mustard.

Thóe, a kind of wilde beast, some take it for a kind of very great Woolfe.

Thombáre, thump. 



Thómbo, a thump.

Thopalóne, a water-rose.

Thoráce, as Toráce.

Thoriphétro, the hearbe Lions-paw.

Thóro, as Tóro, a bull.

Thrácia, a kinde of blacke stone or Agath, which being steeped in water, burneth, and sprinkled with Oyle, it quencheth.

Thrásia, a wind between the North and the summer-setting of the Sunne.

Thréni di Gieremía, the lamentations of Ieremy.

Threustone, a kind of sweet gum like Frankincense.

Thriálli, a kind of Primrose or Couslip.

Thridáce, Sper-hawke-hearb or Hawkweede.

Thridacea, the female Mandrágora.

Thrissa, a kind of Purple fish.

Thróno, a throne or seate of maiesty, an Emperours or Kings seate. Vsed also for a Kingdome.

Thù, Ground-pine or field-cipres. Vsed also for incense or Frankincense.

Thúmbo, a thump.

Thúnnide, as Thínnide.

Thúnno, as Thínno.

Thuríbolo, as Torríbolo.

Tì, to thee, thee. Also from thee. Looke for it in my rules.

Tiáde, as Ptiáde.

Tiáme, any Ouen or Furnace.

Tiáno, any Ouen or Furnace.

Tiára, a turbant or round wreath of linnen as Turks weare on their heads, but it was properly a round ornament or head-attire that Princes were wont to weare in Persia.

Tibia, any kind of flute, pipe or recorder. Also a trumpet. Also the shanke or shin-bone of a mans legge which, comprehendeth all the space betweene the knee and the foote, and containeth two bones, of which the greater is called Tibia, it hath also beene vsed for a thrashing of Corne.

Tibiále, a shin-piece, a greaue or leg-harnish. Also a nether-stocke or kneehose.

Tibiáre, to sound vpon any flute, a pipe or recorder. Also to thrash corne.

Tibiatóre, a piper vpon pipes, flutes or recorders, a trumpeter. Also a thrasher

Tibidrágo, a kinde of strong Spanish wine or sacke, we call it Rubiedauy.

Tibilústri, daies in which men were wont to go with pipes and trumpets, as it were in procession about their lands

Tíbis, a birde like a Storke feeding on Serpents egges.

Tibribástio, iargon, gibrish, pedlers french, fustian tongue, rogues language

Tíbulo, a kind of Pine-tree.

Tiburino, a monstruous Sea-fish which hath two rankes of sharpe teeth.

Ticcále, a kind of waight in India.

Ticcióne, hath beene vsed for Tizzóne.

Tichirnábo, a great Titimouse or Oxe-eye.

Tiella, any kind of Tarte-pan or Pudding-pan. Also hold hir or it fast.

Tiello, hold him or it fast.

Tiémo, as Témo, or Temóne.

Tienti buóno, one that can chuse or take hold of what is good.

Tiepidézza, as Tepidézza.

Tiepidíre, as Tepidíre.

Tiepido, as Tepido.

Tiepidóre, as Tepidézza.

Tiepóre, as Tepidézza.

Tiermíte, a kind of wilde Oliue.

Tífa, an hearbe growing by or in the water.

Tifoláre, as Strilláre.

Tífole, as Stríllo.

Tíglia, as Tília.

Tíglio, ficcólla al gigánte in mezo il tíglio.

Tígna, as Tégna. Also as Tárma.

Tignáme, the Lote-tree.

Tignáto, moth-eaten, worme-gnawne.

Tígno, a Mite, a Weeuell or Meale-worme.

Tígnola, as Tígno, but properly a moth that deuoureth cloathes.

Tignosíre, sísco, síto, to become scald-headed.

Tignóso, that hath a scald-head.

Tignosúzzo, as Foramello, a filthy scald-headed or scuruy fellow.

Tignuóla, as Tignóla.

Tigráme, a kinde of sweet gum or perfume.

Tígre, a Tiger, a most swift beast.

Tigríne, a wood whose graine curleth in and out.

Tigúrio, as Tugúrio.

Tília, the Linden-tree, the teile-tree.

Tílio, as Tília.

Tilóne, as Millepiédi, but properly a vermine called a Cheeselip.

Timállo, as Timálo.

Timálo, a fish called a flower, goodly to looke vpon, and sweet in taste and smell.

Timariótti, such men as liue vpon Timarros or hold land in Knights-seruice or Capite, vnder the great Turke.

Timárro, Lands, Farmes, Mannores, Lordships, Liuings or States of new conquered lands distributed and holden in Capite or Knights seruice vnder the great Turke by well-deseruing Captaines and souldiers.

Timbáde, witches, hagges or sorceresses which keepe about tombes and graues, and cut off some members from dead bodies, which they abuse in their enchantments.

Tímbo, a tombe, a graue, a sepulcher.

Timbreo, Watermints.

Timelea, a shrub bearing a kind of Pepper.

Timidézza, as Timidità.

Timidíre, dísco, díto, to make or become timorous or fearefull, to possesse with feare.

Timidità, timidity, feare, timerousnesse, dread, awe, fearefullnesse. Also bashfulnesse.

Tímido, timorous, fearefull, awefull. Also bashfull or faint. Also doubtfull hearted.

Timiópoli, Higlers, Engrossers or Regraters of Markets, which make victuals deare.

Timmóte, one that hath his limmes contracted, conuolued or shrunken vp.

Tímo, as Thímo. Also as Tímolo.

Tímolo, a kinde of Water-snake that swimmeth on hir backe, and hath six teeth.

Timología, as Etimología.

Timonáre, to steere or guide a ship. Also to wagle the taile as some birdes doe.

Timóne, the sterne, the helm or rudder of a ship. Also the limmer or beame of a Wagon or Waine or the draught-tree whereon the yoake hangeth. Also a yoake. Also an axeletree. Also any raster, beame or stake laide athwart, among riders Timóne is vsed for the riders hand that holdes the bridle, for that with it he gouerneth & directeth the horse.

Timoneggiáre, to steare a ship. Looke Timóne.

Timoniere, a Helm-man or Stearer of a ship.

Timonísta, as Timoniere.

Timorággine, fearefullnesse, awefullnesse.

Timotáto, indued with feare, respect and awe.

Timóre, feare, dread, fearefullnesse, scare.

Timorosità, fearefulnesse, as Timidità.

Timoróso, timorous, fearefull, awefull.

Timpanía, a bell-pearle.

Timpánico, diseased with a Timpanie.

Timpanísta, a Drumster, a Tabourer.

Timpaníte, a drie timpany or dropsie rising of much windinesse gathered betweene the skin Perítóneo and the bowels, which smitten vpon with the palme of the hand maketh a noise like a drumme.

Tímpano, a Timbrell, a Tabour, a 



drum, a Drum-slade. Also one of the instruments of hearing. Also a round bottomed dish or drinking mazor. Also any pearle fashioned like a bell. Also a Printers toole called a timpine. Also the Water-mill-wheele that in turning about taketh and deliuereth water. Also a Cog-wheele. Also a kind of bird.

Timpano a vólta. Looke Campanello.

Tímpano piáno., Looke Campanello.

Timpintáo, a chiefe officer in China as Lieutenant to a Viceroy.

Tímulo, a kinde of Water-snake that hath six feete and swimmeth on hir backe.

Tína, any kind of tunne or great vat.

Tináccio, as Tína, or as Mastello.

Tinacciuólo, as Mastello, or Tína.

Tinázzo, as Tína, or as Mastello.

Tínca, a fish called a Tench. Vsed also for a fresh water souldier, or vnexpert Captaine that will haue thirty men with him be it but to digge vp a Turnep.

Tinchétto, a Crosse or Maine-saile.

Tincóne, as Tencóne.

Tindáridi, the twins Castor and Pollux.

Tinello, a little tub, tray or washing-boule.

Tinellánti, ordinary seruing men that neuer wait or cate but in the common hall.

Tinellísta, as Tinellánte.

Tinello, any kind of tunne, wine-pipe, hogshead, barrell or tub, a Bruers vat. Also a hutch, a bing, &c. Also the Common-hall in any noble or Gentlemans house where ordinary seruants and waiters attend and dine.

Tinésino, as Tenasmóne.

Tínge, as Ptínge. Also he dieth.

Tíngere, tíngo, tínsi, tínto, to die, to staine or colour into any hew or colour.

Tínger chi fálla, a kinde of Christmas game where he that misseth is slurred ouer the face.

Tiniero, hauéua cíglia come árco da tiniero.

Tiniuella, a wimble, an augure, a piercer, a drill. Also a neuell, a niuell among Gunners.

Tiniuelláre, to wimble, to pierce, to drill, to boare or niuell thorow.

Tiniuelláto, a pice niuelled or newelled or boared. Also boared or wimbled thorow.

Tinniníre, nísco, níto, to chirpe like a Miskin or Titmouse.

Tinnisone, a kind of beast with a very rough skinne. 

Tinnitíre, tísco, títo, as Tintináre, to sound shrill.

Tinníto, as Tintíno, a shrill sounding.

Tinnúnculo, a Kestrell or Stannell.

Tíno, a kind of wilde Laurill or Bay. Also as Tína.

Tinóccio, a great woodden tunne or Vatte.

Tinóre, as Tenóre.

Tinósa, as Tinella.

Tinózzo, as Tinóccio.

Tínta, a dye, a dying, a hue, a colour, a colouring. Also the water or glasse of any precious stone.

Tintalhóra, a wanton, wily, tempting lasse.

Tintanéra, blacke dye or inke.

Tintarella, a pretty dye or hue.

Tinténe, a little shrill-sounding bell, a musicall instrument without strings.

Tintilláni, fine cloathes woadded or as we say died in wooll.

Tintinábulo, as Tinténe.

Tintinaménto, as Tintíno.

Tintinánte, tingling, shrill-ringing, tangling, sounding, sharpe or shrill in sound.

Tintináre, to tingle, to iangle, to gingle, to ring shril and sharpe as some bels.

Tintiníre, nísco, níto, as Tintináre.

Tintiníto, as Tintíno.

Tintíno, any kind of shrill tingling, gingling, or sharp sounding, as of basons or bels.

Tínto, dyed, stained or coloured, dipped or washed in any colour. Also blushed red.

Tinto in rósso, died in scarlet.

Tinto in grána, died in graine.

Tintóre, a Dyer or Stainer of colours.

Tintoría, a Dye-house, the trade of dying.

Tintúra, any dying, dye or colouring.

Tiórba, a musical instrument that blind men play vpon called a Theorba.

Típha, Typh-wheate or wheate of Rome.

Típha acquática, a flower that flyeth away like the downe of a thistle called Water-torch, Cass-taile, Redmace, Dutch-downe, Marsh-beetle or Marsh-pestle.

Típho, arogancy, haughtinesse of minde.

Tiphóne, as Thiphóne.

Tipicaménte, mistically, shadowingly, figuratiuely-representing.

Típico, misticall, as it were shadowed, and represented by some figure.

Típo, a tipe, a figure, a shadow, a forme, a likenesse or sample of any thing.

Tipecósmia, a tipe or figure of the world.

Tipografía, the Arte of Printing of bookes.

Tipógrafo, a Printer of Bookes.

Tipúlla, a Water-spider with six feete, that runneth on the water without sinking.

Tira, a drawing in length, a pulling.

Tiracóllo, a halter or drawer. Also as Tiradóri.

Tiradóri, the traces that belong to Cart-horses.

Tiralónga, a kinde of boies play in Italie.

Tiraménto, any pulling or hailing. Also any casting or throwing.

Tiráme, all manner of haling or drawing vnto, or shuting and throwing from one. Looke Tiráre.

Tiranello, a little Tyrant, one that is somewhat tyranous.

Tirannáre, as Tirannizzáre.

Tirannescaménte, tyranously, cruellie, like a tyrant.

Tirannía, tyrany, cruelty, a violent rule for priuate commodity and not the publike weale.

Tirannicída, a murtherer of a Tyrant.

Tirannicídio, murther of Tyrants.

Tiránnico, tyrannicall, cruell, tyranous.

Tiránnide, as Tirannía.

Tirannizzáre, to tyranize, to be cruell.

Tiránno, in old time it was taken for a King and in good part, but now it is vsed for a tyrant or cruell Lord and tyranicall King and murtherer. Also a kind of Eagle or Faulkon called a nine-murtherer.

Tirannóso, full of cruelty and tyranny.

Tiránte, drawing, stretching. Looke Tiráre. Also breeches or hosen in Pedlers french.

Tiraóro, a Gold-wire-drawer.

Tirapáncia, a great feeder, a stretchgut.

Tiráre, to draw, to pull, to hale, to plucke, to tug or attract vnto or towards ones selfe. Also to withdraw or retire. Also to shrinke in. Also to stretch in or out. Also to throw, to cast, to fling, to burle, to shoote, to darte, to sling or pitch from one. Also to yarke, to kicke or winze with ones heeles as a horse doth. Also to protract, to wire-draw, to prolong, to driue off, or draw in length. Also to entice, to perswade or draw and bend vnto. Also to draw or pourtray.

Tiráre a bótta difíco, to shoote alwaies in one place.

Tiráre ácqua, to draw water.

Tirare álla strácca, to shoote at the vttermost randam. 



Tiráre buón púnto, to cast a good cast at dice.

Tiráre cálci, to kick or winze with ones heeles as horses doe.

Tiráre costiero, to shoote wide or sidelin.

Tiráre da cánto, to draw or pull a side.

Tiráre d'árco, to draw or shoote in a bow.

Tiráre d'árme, to play at fence.

Tiráre d'artegliería, to shoot of or with great ordinance.

Tiráre dentro délla puntería, as Tiráre dentro il uíuo.

Tiráre dentro il uíuo, to shoot without the disparte. Look Víuo.

Tiráre di bócca, to beare too hard vpon the bit as some head-strong horses doe.

Tiráre diecinóue, to cast more then three dice haue, to goe beyond ones commission.

Tiráre di míra, to shoote leuell, or right.

Tiráre di puntería, that is when a shot is made by the concauity of the piece, which is to shoote by the disparte, and the disparte is when a piece of wax or sticke is set vpon the mouth of the piece in an euen line with the cornish of the breech.

Tiráre drírto, to shoot right, leuell or point-blanke. Also to draw straite.

Tiráre d'vn pezzo, the range of a piece. Also to shoote with a piece.

Tiráre fuóra délla puntería, as Tiráre fuóra del níuo, or di puntería.

Tiráre fuóra del víuo, to shoote without or beyond the disparte.

Tiráro fuóri di puntería, to shoote at randon, which is to make a shot vpon any degree of the quadrant, which doing the piece must be raised aboue point blanke.

Tiráre gióia per gióia, to shoote leuell, taken by the vpper part of the two cornishes at the breech and mouth of the piece, without helpe of disparting.

Tiráre inánzi, to draw or shoote forward.

Tiráre indiétro, to draw or shrinke backe.

Tiráre la bátca, to hale or towe a boate.

Tiráre la bárra, to throw or pitch the barre.

Tiráre la gióia, to shoote by the vpper superficies of the cornish of the mouth of the piece, which the Italians call point blanke, which I take to be when we shoot with a dispart of both cornishes, that is mouth and breech.

Tirár l'ainólo, to allure, to entice, to ensnare, to entrap.

Tiráre l'anciána, to hale, to halse, to tuge, to draw or tow a barge with cordes.

Tiráre la pága, to receiue or draw pay.

Tiráre la sórte, to cast or draw lots.

Tiráre le cálcie, to pull of ones hosen, id est, to die or yeeld vp the ghost.

Tiráre le póste, to draw stakes.

Tiráre per i crím, to draw to pull or tug by the haires.

Tiráre per il ráso dell' ánima, to shoote vp a iust leuell, which is when the concauity of the piece both, at mouth and breech is laide vpon a right line.

Tiráre per il ráso de metálli, to shoote by the extreames of the two cornishes of mouth and breech, which our Gunners improperly call Point blanke.

Tiráre per il ráso de metálli in giù, to shoote vnder mettall.

Tiráre per il ráso de metálli in sù, to shoot at randon.

Tiráre per l'ánima del pezzo, as Tiráre per il ráso dell' ánima.

Tiráre per linea retta, to shoote point blanke or in a direct line.

Tiráre púnto in biánco, to shoot point blanke, that is when a shot is made by the sight or leuell of both cornishes of the piece, shooting as gunners tearme it, neither aboue nor vnder mettall, that is vpon no degree.

Tiráre sótto, to draw or shoot vnder.

Tiráre vento, the wind to blow.

Tiráre úna coréggia, to let a girding farte.

Tiráre vn pétto, to let or guird out a fart.

Tiráre vn sásso, to hurle or fling a stone.

Tiráro, as Tiratóre. Also as Carrúccio.

Tiráta, a draught, a pulling or haling vnto. Also a twitch, a plucke, a snap. Also retiring or with drawing. Also a shrinking in. Also a stretching out. Also a throwing, a flinging, a hurleing, a shooting, a darting from oue, &c. Looke Tiráre or Tíro.

Tiráta d'árco, a bow-shoote.

Tiráta di sásso, a stones cast.

Tiratella, any little Tiráta.

Tiratíuo, drawing, pulling. Also attractiue. Also shrinking in or stretching out. Also casting, hurling or flinging. Looke Tiráre.

Tiráto, drawne, pulled, haled, pluct, tugged or attracted vnto one. Also retaired or withdrawne, shrunken in or stretched out. Also throwne, cast, flung, hurled, darted, pitched, or shot from one. Also protracted. Looke Tiráre.

Tiratóio, a till or drawing box, or any thing that may be drawne. Looke Tiráre.

Tiratóre, a drawer, a puller, a haler. Also a caster, a hurler, &c. Looke Tiráre.

Tireliráre, to sing as a Larke.

Tirémo, nè mónti, nè tirémi, nè bós chi, nè sélue.

Tireo, a stone of the nature of Scírio.

Tirésio, as much to say, blinde or sightlesse.

Tirimattáre, a play at tables like vnto our english tick-tacke.

Tírio, a kind of purple in graine died at Tirium.

Tíro, a drawing, a pulling, a hailing, a plucking, a tuging, an attracting vnto or toward ones self. Also a draught, a pul, a pluck, a tug, at witch or twiching vnto. Also a shrinking in. Also a stretching out. Also a draught or line in painting or writing. Also a throw, a cast, a fling, a hurle, a darling, a slinging, a pitching, a shot or shooting or tire from one as a cast of a stone, a stones cast, a tire of Ordinance, a shoot out of a bow or tiller. Also a draught at chesse. Also a draught of drinke, a sup of an egge, a whife of Tabacco. Also a stroke, a bang, a blow, a hit a nip or twang with a cudgell. Also a veny at fence. Also a pranke, a feat, a part, a tricke, a knacke, a deuise, a slight, a conceite, a drift or ayme at a thing. Also a reach. Also a distance, as for example, a mery pranke, a nimble feate, and odde part, a tricke of youth, a fine knacke, a cunning slight, a subtile drift, a rare conceite, a long reach, a farre distance, a cunning ayme, a tricke at cardes, a cast at dice, a nip on the head. Also a scoff, a taunt or quip giuen to the quicke, a hitting to the quicke. Also a dash of a penne. Also a slash or cut with any weapon. Also a yarke of a whip. Also a kicke or winzing with ones heeles. Also any kinde of shrinking in or contracting of sinnewes. Looke Tíro dinerui. Also he that first entreth into experience or practise of any feate, arte or science, a yongue nouice, a beginner or new learner. Also the name of a most venemous kinde of Viper, Adder or Serpent, whereof the best Triacle or Antidotes for poison is made, and thereof taketh it's name.

Tíroalla strácca, a shoote made at randon.

Tirocínio, vnskilfulnesse, lacke of knowledge, experience and wisedome. Also the first begining, entrance into or exercise of any thing, an apprentisage.

Tíro di máni, a legerdemaine tricke. Looke Tiráre, and Tiro.



Tíro di nerui, any contracting or shrinking of sinnewes. Italian riders say it is a disease in a horse which commeth of great could and heate, whereby the great sinnew in the necke is so restrained as the horse cannot well open his mouth.

Tiromantia, a kinde of deuination by cheese.

Tirománte, a deuiner by cheese.

Tiróne, a yongue nouice, a milke-sop, a faint-hearted souldier, a beginner to learne.

Tirréno, a kinde of stone which being whole swimmeth, and broken sinketh.

Tírsi, as Thírso. Also the circle without the wals of a towne, where in men may walke for their solace.

Tisána, Ptisan or Barly water sodden.

Tisbína, a kinde of childes play in Italie.

Tisichézza, Ptisiknesse, purcinesse, shortnesse of breath, the cough of the lungs.

Tisichíre, chísco, chíto, to become purcy, ptisike or grow short winded.

Tísico, ptisike, purcy, short winded.

Tisicúme, as Tisichézza.

Tisicúzzo, somewhat purcy or shortwinded.

Tísigo, as Tísico.

Tistéra, a hood of a cloake or cape of any garment.

Títa, a title in writing, a whit, a iot.

Titáno., Vsed for the Sunne.

Titalóra, a silly gull, a foolish ninny.

Titée, Tickes, Sowes, Woodlice or Cheeslips.

Titilláre, to tickle, to prouoke pleasantlie.

Titillatióne, a tickling, a ticklishnesse.

Titíllico, a tickling. Also ticklish.

Titillóso, ticklish, full of ticklings.

Titimáglio, Milke-thistle, Sea-lectuce or Wolfes-milke, or as some say Spurgehearbe.

Titimálo, as Titimáglio.

Titispíssa, a bird called a Wag-taile.

Titoláre, to title, to entitle, to surname, to nickename. Also titular.

Titolatióne, an entitling, a titulation.

Titoláto, titled, entitled, surnamed, nickenamed. Also a man of titles or dignities.

Títolo, a title, a pricke or point vsed in writing. Also a title as a surname, a name of dignity. Also a title or inscription of any act or worke.

Titubánte, wauering, staggering. Also stumbling, tripping, or reeling. Also faltring, stutting or stammering.

Titubánza, a wauering, a staggering, a stumbling, a tripping, a faltring or stammering.

Titubáre, to wauer, to stagger. Also to stumble or trip. Also to falter, to stut or stammer.

Titubatióne, as Titubánza.

Tituláre, as Titoláre.

Titulatióne, as Titolatióne.

Título, as Títolo.

Tiuertíno, a kind of building marble.

Tizerbétto, as Sorbétto.

Tizzáre, to stir vp the fire or firebrands. Also to irritat, to egge on or prouoke.

Tízzo, a fire-brand.

Tizzonáre, as Tizzáre.

Tizzóne, any fire-brand, but properly a quenched fire-brand halfe-burned.

Tizzoniéra, a fireforke to stir the fire or fire-brands. Also a busie woman that stirreth vp quarrels among hir neighbours or other people.

Tlaguáce, a wilde beast that carrieth hir yongue ones in a pouch or bag vnder hir belly.

Tlási, a rupture or bruising in a mans cods or stones.

Tláspi, the roote or hearbe called Raifort or Country mustard.

Tò, take, hold, catch, take to thee. Also he taketh. Also vsed for two, thine.

Tóca, a bird in India, of the bignesse of a Rooke with a white breast and guilt bill.

Tócca, a touch. Also a touching. Also a touch-stone. Also tinzell cloath of Gold or siluer.

Tóccaatè, it toucheth, concerneth or belongeth to thee.

Tócca a vói, it toucheth or concerneth you, it belongs to you, it fales to your lot.

Toccadíglio, a kinde of game at tables much like our Tick-tacke.

Tócca d'óro, Gold-tinzell or Tissue.

Toccaménto, any kinde of touching, touch, feeling or stroaking softly.

Toccáre, to touch, to feele. Also to hit, to ioyne close vnto. Also to touch, to write, to speake or mention any thing by the way. Also to smite, to strike. Also to guip or tante. Also to appertaine or belong vnto, to fall to ones lot.

Toccáre ad áltri, to belong, to concerne, to appertaine or fall to others lot.

Toccáre a martello, to ring the bels with a hammer or as we say backeward.

Toccáreil pólso, to touch or feele ones pulse.

Toccár' in párte, to fall to ones lot or share.

Toccár'in sórte, to fall to ones lot.

Toccár'la máno, to touch, to feele or take by the hand, as we say to shake hands.

Toccár la viceuda, to fall to ones turne.

Toccár la vólta, idem.

Toccáre li tásti, to touch the keyes or frets of an instrument, to touch to the quicke.

Toccáre sul víuo, to touch to the quick, to make one smart.

Toccáta, a touching, a feeling.

Toccáta d'vn músico, a preludium that cunning musitions vse to play as it were voluntary before any set lesson.

Toccáto d'óro, as Tócca d'óro.

Tocchétti, a kind of meat sliced, shread or cut in steakes or collops. Also a kind of little waight in Italy.

Tócco, with a close o, a touch, a feeling. Also a veny at fence, a hit, a stroake or knocke. Also a stroke of a bell or clocke. Also a touch-stone. Also a nod, a becke, a signe or glance at any thing. Also a certaine childes play vsed in Italie. Also touched or felt. Also hit or stroken. Also belonged or fallen to ones lot.

Tócco, with an open o, any piece, scrap, luncheon, cob, collop, mammocke, cut or shiue namely, of bread and cheese.

Tócco di campána, a knocke, a stroke, a knell, a peale or toule vpon a bell.

Toculáre, to touch, or feele.

Tódo, a Muskin or Titmouse.

Tófo, a kind of soft, sandy or mouldering stone.

Tofóso, sandy, mouldering.

Tóga, a goune, a roabe or long garment which the Romanes did euer vse to weare in times of peace.

Togále veste, a robe-like garment.

Togáto, gouned, that weareth a goune.

Tóga viríle, Looke virile.

Tógliere, tólgo, tólsi, tólto, to take, to receiue, to accept. Also to take away, to remooue from. Also to free from.

Tógliere a fítto, to take to farme or rent.

Tógliere a nuólo, to hire as a ship or horse.

Tógliere il vánto, to depriue another of vant or glory. Also to vant or boast of.

Tógliere in iscámbio, to take in exchange. Also to mistake one for another.

Tógliere l'assúnto, to take the charge or burthen vpon himselfe, to assume.

Tógliere vía, to take away or from, to depriue of, to remooue away.

Tógna, a fishing rod, an angling rod. Also a slut, a flurt, a driggle-draggle. 



Tóla, any kind of flat boord, table or planke. Also a broad flat stone, any thin plate.

Tólda, the fights about a ship. Some take it for the vpper decke.

Tóle, little thin boordes. Also as Tólle.

Toleóne, an engine to draw vp water as Bruers and Dyers vse with a great waight at the end, it is called a sweepe.

Tolerábile, tolerable, that may be suffered, endured or borne.

Tolerabilità, tolerablenesse.

Tolerándo, as Tolerábile.

Toleránza, toleration, sufferance, enduring, patience. Also permission.

Toleráre, to tolerate, to suffer, to endure, to beare with. Also to permit. Also to nourish or maintaine himselfe.

Toleratióne, as Toleránza.

Tólga Dío, God forbid.

Tólla, thin plate of Brasse or Latten, as Tóla.

Tólle, certaine glanduls, kernels, or swellings in the iawes. Also as Tólla.

Tollenóne, as Toleóne.

Tolleóne, as Toleóne.

Tóllere, as Tógliere.

Tolléta, theft, larceny, pilfering, filching, purloyning. Also any booty.

Tolléto, as Tolléta.

Tólto, taken, receiued, accepted. Also taken from or away. Looke Tógliere.

Tólto súso, taken vp.

Toluriloquenza, a kind of swift or hasty speaking.

Tomacella, a kind of Hagasse or Hogges pudding. Also a kind of meate made of the plucke, giblets, purtenances or tripes of beastes. Also that meat which we call Oliues of rosted Veale.

Tomáia, the rand of a shooe. Also a tack of clouting leather. Some take it for the vpper leather.

Tománo, a coine in Persia worth about twenty crownes.

Tomára, as Tomáia.

Tomáre, to tumble, to rumble, to roule or fall downe groueling.

Tomasella, as Tomacella.

Tómba, a tombe, a graue, a sepulcher, a monument or hollow darke place.

Tombáre, to entombe, to bury, to enter or laie in a graue.

Tomboláre, as Tomáre, to tumble.

Tomboláta, a tumbling tricke.

Tómbolo, a tumbling tricke. Also a measure of corne about a bushell of ours.

Tomento, flockes to fill Matarasses. 

Tómici denti, the fore-teeth.

Tomíno, a kind of cheese.

Tómo, a downefal, a tumbling, a rumbling, a rowling or falling downe.

Tómo, a tome or volume of a booke, where diuers workes of one Author be deuided into sundry parts.

Tomoláre, as Tomáre, to tumble downe.

Tómolo, as Tómbolo. Also as Tómo.

Tomothuriána, the sword-fish, or Emperour of the Sea.

Tónaca, any coate or iacket, a sleeuelesse coate. Also a womans peticote or kirtle and vpper sauegard. Also any couer like a pill, a rind or vpper skin. Also a coate that couereth the eie, whereof there be foure sortes, the first Cornea, which is white and resembleth horne, the second Vuea, which is like a Grape-kernell, the third Vitrea, which resembleth glasse, the fourth Cristallína, which in clearnesse resembleth Christal. Also a kind of Gillie-floure.

Tonánte, thundering. Also roaring, rumbling, ratling, loud-sounding, far-sounding, shrill. Also vsed for God.

Tonáre, to thunder, to rattle, to rumble, to crackle, to rore, to make a great noise or terrible sound. Also to tune any instrument or voice. Also to accent or set to any tune.

Tonarióne, a kind of shalme that hath a very sweet and shrill sound.

Tónda, a round. Also as Rónda.

Tondáre, to round, to make round. Also to circle or compasse. Also as Tóndere.

Tondarello, pritty round, circular.

Tondeggiáre, to round or make round.

Tóndere, tóndo, tondéi, tondúto or tóso, to pare or make round, to pole, to not, or cut ones haire, to sheare sheepe, to shaue a frier, to clip money, to crop corne, to reape Barly, to move Hay, to lop trees, to top flowres, to brouze or nibble round about. Tondére rnonéta, to clip money, to pare ones nailes.

Tondézza, roundnesse, rotundity.

Tondíno, as Fondello, a funnell. Also a little round or fruit-trencher.

Tondità, as Tondézza.

Tonditóte, a shauer, a notter, a poler, a clipper, a barber. Looke Tóndere.

Tonditúra, a shearing, a notting, a poling, a rounding, a clipping. Looke Tóndere.

Tóndo, a round, a circle, a compasse. Also a round trencher, a round plate or little dish. Also a mans bum, trill or arse. Also a Lump-fish. Also a round wheeling blow. Also rounded or made round. Also a shallow brain or a logger-head. Also il tondo, hath beene vsed for the round world, the whole vniuerse.

Tóndo délla lúna, the full of the Moone.

Tóndo sénza pélo, a yongue wenches quaint. Also a yongue mans bum.

Tondúto, pared, made round, poled, notted, shorne, shauen, chpped, cropt, reaped, mowed, lopt, topt, brouzed. Looke Tóndere.

Tónega, as Tónica, as Tónaca.

Toneggiánte, as Tonánte.

Toneggiáre, to thunder, to rattle, to rumble.

Tonello, any kinde of tunne or barrell. Also a Lump-fish.

Tónia, a Tunny-fish.

Tónica, as Tónaca.

Tonicáre, to goune or put on a Tónaca.

Tonicella, a body or waste-coate, any little Tónaca.

Tonína, a meate made of Tunny fish.

Tonitrábile, that may thunder or crackle.

Tonitrále, wherein is any thundering noise.

Tonitránte, as Tonánte.

Tonitráre, to thunder, as Tonáre.

Tónitro, any thunder or crackling noise.

Tónne, for Tógline, take some of it.

Tonnelláta, a tunne weight or burthen.

Tonnéra, the fishing of Tunny.

Tonnína, Tunny fish salted or dressed to be eaten.

Tónno, a Tunny fish.

Tóno, the space betweene the earth and the moon, so called of Pythagoras. Also thunder or any rumbling and crackling noise. Also any tune, note, ayre, accent or sound.

Tonollétto, a wooden cace in forme of a barrell, wherein Gunners put haile shot to shoot in morter pieces.

Totisíle, that may be shorne, notted, rounded, clipped or cropped. Looke Tóndere.

Tonsílle, spungeous kernels in mens throates.

Tonsóre, as Tonditóre.

Tonsúra, as Tonditúra.

Toos, a Serpent which sometimes is hairy and sometimes not.

Tópa, I take or hold the bye when one plaies at dice.

Topáio, a Rat-catcher. Also a Mousetrap.

Topárca, a Gouernor of any Shire or Prouince vnder another, as Sátrapo.



Toparchía, a Territory of a Shire or gouernment of a Prouince.

Topáre, as Toppáre.

Topátio, a yellow stone called a Topace, shining very cleare in the darke.

Topázo, as Topátio.

Topiária, the tame or garden Brank-vrsine. Also the arte or feate of making images. And also Arbours of trees, branches or flowers.

Topiário, a garland, a traile or harbour of floures for garnishment.

Tópica, a part of Logike noting the places of inuention. The arte of inuention, or finding out of arguments. Also pertaining to the places of inuention or arguments. Also topikes or bookes that treate or speake of places of inuention, in and touching Logike.

Topicello, any little Mouse, or Rat.

Topinára, a Mole-hill. Also a Rats-nest.

Topinári, the scratches in horses pasterns.

Topíno, a little Mouse or Rat.

Tópo, a Mouse, a Rat. Also a Sea-tortoise.

Tópo aláto, a night-bat, a Reare-mouse.

Topógrapho, a describer of places.

Topographía, a description of places.

Topolíno, a little Mouse or Rat.

Topomaríno, a Whale-guide or Sea-tortoise.

Toporágno, a Night-bat. Also the hardie-shrew.

Toporello, a little Mouse or rat.

Tóppa, the spring or ward of a springlocke. Also a latch or wodden locke of a poore Country house. Also a dripping par. Also vsed for Tópa.

Toppáre, to counter-shocke or giue a counter-buffe. Also to finde or meete withall by chance. Also to snatch or take away. Also to set, to cast at, to plaie at or hold the by or vie at any game namely at dice. Also to put to a dore and make it fast with a haspe or latch or wodden locke.

Tóppo, a counterbuffe, a counter shocke at Tilt.

Tór, as Tógliere, or Tórre.

Toráce, the breast or bulke of a man. Also the middle-space betweene the neck and the thighs, also a placket, a stomacher, or brest plate for the body.

Tór'a credito, to take vpon credite.

Torághe, the hollow of the eyes, the eyeholes.

Toragóntia, as Taragóne.

Tórbándo, to take banishment.

Torbánte, as Turbánte.

Tórbáscio, to take a kisse.

Torbidáre, to trouble, to disturbe, to confound, to pudle or make water thicke.

Torbidézza, disturbance, troublednesse, thicknesse or muddinesse of water.

Torbidíre, disco, díto, as Torbidáre.

Tórbido, troubled, thick, not cleare, muddie, also foule, duskie, gloomie, obscure, also turbulant or tempestuous.

Torbinále, fashioned brode aboue, and small below like a top or a gigge.

Torbináre, as Turbináre.

Tórbine, as Túrbine.

Torbineo, as Turbineo.

Tórbo, troubled, thicke. Also as Túrbine.

Torboláre, as Torbidáre.

Torbolente, turbulent, stiring, vnquiet, stormy, blustering, troublous, contentious.

Torbolenza, turbulence, disturbance, bluster, vnquietnesse, confusion.

Torcalétto, a Turners toole that he turnes and workes with. Also a little turne.

Tórce, a torche, a taper or linke.

Torcéllo, a wreath or wisp of any thing that women set vpon their heads to carrie vpon.

Tórcere, tórco, torcéi, torciúto, or tórto, to wrest, to wreath, to bend, to bow, to retorte, to make crooked. Also to twist, to wrap, to winde in or wherle about. Also to wring, to presse or squeese out, also to crisp, to curle or frizle. Also to torture or torment.

Tórcere il grífo a qualcúno, to make a scornefull mouth, or turne ones face from one.

Torcéuole, wrestable, to be wrested. Looke Tórcere, as Torcibile.

Tórchia, a torch or linke. Also a kind of measure of liquid things.

Torchiáre, to presse in a winding presse. Also to turne or wrest a presse.

Torchielláre, as Torchiare.

Torchiello, any litle winding presse.

Torchiéro, a torchmaker, or bearer.

Torchiétto, any little torch or linke or taper. Also any little winding presse.

Torchíno, an azure, turkie or blue colour.

Tórchio, a torch or linke. Also any kind of winding presse, a wine or printers presse.

Tórcia, any kinde of torch or linke.

Torciáre, as Torchiáre, to winde about.

Torciáro, a Torch-bearer or Maker.

Torcibile, that may be turned, bended or wrested, that is pliable.

Torcicóllo, a Hickway or Wrienecke. Vsed for a dissembling or puling Puritane.

Torciétta, any little Torch or Taperlight.

Torcitécci, a Grape or Crab-presse.

Torcifécciole, the dregges of wrung Grapes.

Torcigliáre, as Attorcigliáte.

Torcigliatúra, as Attorcigliatúra.

Torcimáno, as Torcimánno.

Torcimánno, an interpreter, a trouchman, a spokes man. Also a good lad or good fellow.

Torciménto, as Torcitúra, a wresting.

Torcíno, any little winding presse as for letters or napkins. Also a little torch.

Torcitóio, the pin, wrest, bar, handle or winder of any winding presse.

Torcitóre, a wrester. Looke Tórcere.

Torcitúra, a wresting. Looke Tórcere.

Torciúto, wrested, bended, made crooked, corbe, retorted. Looke. Tórcere.

Tórco, as Tórcolo. Also vsed for a chaine or a wreath.

Torcoláre, to presse as wine is.

Tórcolo, a wine or Oyle presse. Vsed also for the braine tunnell.

Tór comiáto, to take leaue.

Tór credenza, to take assay.

Torculáre, as Torcoláre.

Tór d'adósso, to take from ones backe.

Tordáio, a place to keepe Blacke-birdes in.

Tórdál móndo, to take from the world.

Tordárello, any little Tórdo.

Tordeila, a kind of water-foule.

Tór délle máni, to take from out ones hands.

Tordiglióne, a kind of dance in Spaine.

Tordilióne, the seede of Seseli of Candia.

Tór di mezzo, to take in the middle.

Tór di míra, to hit leuell.

Tór di víta, to take from life.

Tórdo, a Thrush, a Thrussell, a Mauis, an Owsell or Blackebird. Also a fish like a Tench, of a russet colour, with purple and white spots on his belly called a Sea-thresh.

Toreatore, a bull-baiter.

Torello, a yongue Bull, a Runt, Yearling or Steere. Also a Farriers instrument to cleanse and feele horses sores.

Toreutíce, the arte of grauery or embossing.

Toríbolo, a censer to burne incence in.

Torítio, bullish or rammish.

Tórla víta, to take ones life.

Tórla vólta, to take ones turne.

Tórlicenza, to take leaue.

Tórlo, a top, a gigge, a nunne or whirlegig that children play with. Also a 



spinners werule to put on a light spindle. Also the yolke of an egge. Also a twirle or round turning tricke in dancing.

Torlorù, a ninny or giddy headed foole.

Tórma, as Túrma.

Tormentáre, to torment, to torture.

Tormentatóre, a tormenter, a rackemaster.

Tormentéuole, tormentable.

Tormentílla, Tormentill, Septfoile or Seauen-leaued grasse.

Tormentína, as Trementína.

Torménto, torment, torture, affliction, smarting paine, any racke or engine to torment withall. Also any kinde of battering engine of war. Also a wrining or griping of the belly.

Tormentóso, grieuous or full of torments.

Tormína, a wringing or fretting in the guts.

Torminále, that doth or may cause wringing in the guts.

Torminóso, that wringeth or fretteth the guts, one that hath torment in his guts.

Tór móglie, to take a wife.

Tormóra, as Túrma.

Tornadura, a kind of measure in Italy.

Tornáio, a turner. Also a kinds of birde.

Tornaletto, the valences of a bed, but namely such ornaments as in Italy are vsed round about the lower part of bed steads.

Tornare, to turne, to returne, to reuert, to come againe, to yeeld vnto againe.

Tornáre a ménte, to bring or returne to minde, to call to remembrance.

Tornáre huómo, for a man to recouer his sences, and become a man againe.

Tornár a profítto, to fall or redound to ones profit or good.

Tornár a propósito, to returne to the purpose.

Tornarósto, a lacke, a turne-broach.

Tornasóle, the Turne-sole flower, which turneth with the Sunne. Also any kind of bright changeable silke.

Tornáta, any returne, a returning or comming home againe, a reuerting.

Tornátile, that turneth or may be turned, returnable.

Tornáto, returned, come home againe.

Tornatúra, a turning or rounding.

Torneaménto, a torneament or torney.

Torneáre, to torney. Also to ioust or tilt. Also as Torneggiáre. Also to inuiron.

Torneatóre, a torneyer, a iouster. Also a tilter. Also a turner.

Torneggiáre, to turne or worke with a wheele as turners doe. Also to polish or make smooth. Also to torney.

Tornelláre, as Torneggiáre.

Tornello, a Turners wheele or instrument that Turners vse to make things smooth and round. Also a Spinners wheele. Also the burden of a song.

Torneo, as Torneaménto.

Tornése, sórte di monéta víle. 

Tórni, our Gunners call them Rauuels. Also skids, sleds or truckes.

Torniaménto, as Torneaménto.

Torniáre, as Torneggiáre.

Torniáro, a Turner.

Torniatóre, as Torneatóre.

Tornidóre, Tornitóre, a Turner.

Tórnio, as Tornello. Also a drill.

Torníre, nísco, níto, to turne or worke round.

Tórno, a turne, a turning or winding about, a twirle. Also a place where a horse is taught to turne. Also thereabout or about. Also about or concerning. Also as Tornello. Also a compasse about. Also a turners turning instrument.

Tórnolo, as Tórno, or Tornello.

Tóro, a Bull. Also a great Oxe. Also a bird that loweth as a bull.

Toróni, a kind of big comfets.

Torosità, grossenesse or strength in the brawnes of the armes or legges.

Toróso, well flesht and brawned in the armes and legges, strongly made, tough, pithy, hard. Also that hath many knots in the stalkes.

Tór pátti, to take conditions.

Torpédine, as Torpóre. Also as Sgrámpho, the Cramp-fish.

Torpédo, as Torpóre, or as Sgrámpho.

Tór pégni, to take paunes.

Torpente, quási pígro, & otióso, dull, heauy, benummed, clumsie, sluggish.

Tórpere, tórpo, torpéi, torpúto, to make or become heauy, dull, sluggish, nummy, drouzie, num, clumzie, sencelesse or astonished. Also to loose the liuely brightnesse and colour, to tarnish.

Tór per móglie, to take to wife.

Torpidire, disco díto, as Tórpere.

Tórpido, heauy, dull, sluggish, clumsie, benummed. Look Tórpere.

Torpitúdine, as Torpóre.

Torporáre, as Tórpere.

Torpóre, a debilitation, a dulnesse, a drouzinesse, a sluggishnesse or numnesse of the minde, of the lims, of mouing and feeling, an vnaptnesse to doe any thing.

Torquáto, that weareth or hath a chaine or collar about his necke. Also a foule called a Kurlue.

Torquëlla, a Wrinecke or Hickeway.

Torquéto, as Astronomicall instrument.

Torquillo, as Torcicóllo.

Torrácci, old and ruinous Towers.

Tórre, any kind of Tower or Turret.

Tórre, as Tógliere, to take.

Tórre a cámbio, to take at exchange.

Tórre ad imprestito, to borrow.

Tórre ad interesse, to take at interest.

Tórre ad usúra, to take at vsery.

Tórre al móndo, to take from the world.

Tórre a petto, to take to heart.

Torreggiánte, touring, soaring high.

Torreggiáre, to toure or soare vp high.

Tórre in prestánza, to borrow, to take to lone.

Tórre la stráda, to hinder, to crosse, or let a man of his course or intention.

Tórre la víta, to take away ones life, to depriue of life.

Tórre la vólta, to take the turne, to get the start of one, to preuent one.

Torrente, a torrent, a land flood, a raine flood, a swift-running streame, that sweepes all away. Also rough and boisterous, as waters rumbling downe from rockes and mountaines. Also vehement, furious, or forcible.

Torríbolo, an incense-pan, a censer. Also the name of a starre in heauen.

Torricella, a little towre or turret.

Torridità, drinesse, stifnesse, parchednesse, scorchednesse.

Tórrido, parched, scorched, burnt, drie, stiffe and drie.

Torrifrága, the ancient name of great ordinance, Breake-towre.

Torrigiáno, a Ring-doue, a Quoist, a Stock-doue.

Torrióne, any great towre, or strong keepe in the midst of a castle.

Torróso, as Toróso. Also full of towers.

Torsáre, to cut off both armes and legs.

Tórsela, for Scla tórre, to take it to himselfe, to swallow a gudgeon.

Torsello di pánno, paróla usáta dal Villáni. , It is also vsed for a needlecase.

Tórsi a fáre, for a man to take vpon him to doe.

Tórsi di vísta, for a man to take himselfe from the sight of others.

Torsióne, a Porpuisefish, vsed also for extortion. Also as Torciménto. Also as Tormína.

Tórso, the bud or tendrell of any plant, namely of Cole-worts. Vsed also for a body or trunke without armes or legs.

Torsóne, any great Tórso. Vsed also for a hunting pole. Also a hawkes 



pearch. Also the name of some part of a horse.

Tórta, any kind of tarte.

Tórta mátta, a hasty tarte or pudding fried in a pan.

Tortaménte, crockedly, wrongfully.

Tortáno, a white pot or pudding pie.

Tortatella, as Tartarella.

Tortáro, a tarte maker.

Torteggiáre, to tart it, to eate tarts.

Tortegli, little tartes, or wreathed cakes.

Tortelli, as Tortegli.

Torteuolménte, wrongfully, crookedlie.

Tortézza, crookednesse.

Tortiéra, a tarte pan, a pudding pan.

Tortigliáre, as Attorcigliáre.

Tortiglióne, any wreath or wreathing.

Tortíle, that may be bent or crooked.

Tortilóquio, crooked speech winding talke.

Tortióne, any extorsion.

Tortíuo, the wine that runneth last out of the presse. Also that is or may be wrong, squeesed or pressed out.

Tórto, as Torciúto. Looke Tórcere.

Tórto, a wrong, a tort, an iniury.

Tortolétta, a yongue Turtle doue.

Tortolína, a yongue Turtle Doue.

Tórtora, a Turtle, a Turtle Doue.

Tortoráto, a Doues or Turtles colour.

Tortóre, a torturer, a tormenter, an executioner. Also a base Seriant or Catchpole such as waite vpon the Shriefes of London and that assist at the execution of men.

Tortorella, a yongue Turtle Doue.

Tortoríno, a yongue Turtle Doue. Vsed also for a mans pillicocke.

Tortumáglio, an hearbe growing in the water or as some say by the waters side.

Tortuóso, crooked, full of crookednesse, full of windings, crinkles and cranckles.

Tortuosità, crookednesse, bending, winding in and out, a crinkling or crankling.

Tortúra, any torture, torment, racking or fretting of body or minde.

Torturáre, to torture, to torment.

Toruáre, to loure, to frowne, to loute, to poute, to looke crabbedly or grimlie.

Tór via, to take away.

Toruíno, Toruígno, as Tóiuo.

Toruità, pouting, lowring, frowning, grimnesse, grim or crabbed and sterne looking.

Tóruo, soure, frowning, sterne, crabbed, powting, lowring, grim, fell, rough, horrid, cruell, rough, crooked and gastly to looke and gastly to looke vpon. 

Torzióne, extortion.

Tórzo, as Tórso.

Tósa, a yongue lasse, maiden, girle or wench. Also notted or shorne.

Tosábile, that may be notted or shorne.

Tosáre, as Tóndere.

Tosáre árbori, to shred, cut or lop trees.

Tosáre monéta, to clipe money.

Tosatóre, as Tonditóre, a clipper.

Tosatúra, as Tonditúra, a clipping.

Toscanésimo, Tuskanisme, any property of Tuskany.

Toscáre, as Tossicáre.

Tósco, as Tóssico.

Tósco, a Tuskane.

Toscóso, venemous, full of venome.

Tóso, a yongue boy, a lad, a stripling. Also as Tondúto

Tosóne, a fleece of a sheepe. Also a lad or boy whose haire is notted.

Tóssa, a cough, a coughing.

Tósse, a cough, a coughing.

Tóssere, tósso, tosséi, tossúto, to cough.

Tossicaménto, a poisoning.

Tossicáre, to enuenom, or to poison.

Tossicatóre, a poisoner, an enuenomer

Tóssico, venom, baine, or poison.

Tossicóso, venemous, poisonous.

Tossilágine, as Tussilágine.

Tossína, a little gentle cough.

Tossíre, sísco, síto, to cough.

Tossíto, coughed.

Tossóso, coughie, purcie, full of cough.

Tostaménte, quicklie, out of hand.

Tostáno, timely, quicklie, speedie.

Tostáno soccórso, speedie, or suddaine help.

Tostáre, to toste, or parch with heate.

Tostíssimo, most quickly and out of hand.

Tósto, quicklie, speedilie, soone, by and by.

Tósto che, so soone as.

Tósto cóme, idem.

Tósto tósto, very very quickly, and soone.

Tóta, as Tútto.

Totále, totall, comprehending all.

Totalità, totalitie, or the whole summe.

Totalménte, wholy, totally.

Totáno, a kind of Moore-hen.

Totela, as Tutela.

Toténa, a Cuttle-fish, or Calamarie.

Totilúnio, the full of the Moone.

Tóto, as Tútto.

Totobestiále, all-together, brute, or beastlie.

Totóne, a kind of Sea-Swallow.

Totósto, very soone, or quickly.

Tóttela, take hir or it vnto thee.

Tóttene, take to thy selfe of it.

Touáglia, a table-cloth, a boord-cloth.

Touagliétta, a napkin, or cubboord-cloth.

Touaglíni, napkins, drinking-clothes. 

Touagliuólo, a napkin. Also a towell.

Tozzámi, all manner of scraps or pieces.

Tozzáre, to breake into scraps or mammocks.

Tózzi, all manner of scraps or mammocks.

Tozzoláre, as Tozzáre.

Tózzoli, as Tozzámi.

Tozzolóni, great lunchions, or mammocks.

Trà, betweene, amongst, with. Also through. Also what with. Vsed much in composition of other words, namely Verbes, for, through, as Trauedére, to see through, Tralúcere, to shine through, &c. Also for the Latine Trans, ouer, from one place to another, beyond, or on the other side, and many times they vse to put an s vnto it, as Trapiantáre, or Traspiantáre, to transplant. Traportáre, or Trasportáre, yea and Transportáre, to transport. As for entre or betweene, as Trapónere, or Taméttere, to put or lay betweene, or enterpose, &c.

Trabácche, Pauillions, Tents, that are remooued too and fro, and suddainely set vp. Also boothes or bowres. Also shelters or skaffolds made of boords. Vsed also for sparuises about beds. Also the valances and curtins for a bed.

Traballáre, to reele or staggar as a drunken man, to shake or totter as a thing that is loose and readie to fall. Also to stutter, to stammer, or maffle.

Trabalzáre, to bound or skip as a ball. Also to make shift by hooke or crooke. Also to trucke or exchange one thing for another.

Trabálzo, a bound, a hop, or skip. Also any shift by hooke or crooke.

Trabáttere, bátto, battéi, battúto, to beate, to smite, to bang, or strike throughly.

Trabattúto, beaten, smitten, banged, or strucken ouer or throughly.

Trabea, a robe worne by Kings vnder their mantles of state. Also a robe that Augures were wont to weare.

Trabíno, a Tumbrell, a muck-cart.

Traboccaménto, an ouer-turning, or falling downe ouer and headlong.

Traboccánte, readie to fall, falling, or reeling and tumbling downe. Also as we say downe-waight. Also a kind of strong wine.

Traboccáre, to fall downe ouer and ouer, or groueling on the ground, or headlong. Also to reele, to stagger, or stumble. Also to powne foorth with furie.

Trabócco, a downe-fall, a groueling on the ground. Also a reeling, a staggring, or a stumbling. Also the pinne 



vpon which the ballances yeeld or goe. Also an engine of warre called a Ram, looke Ariete. Also a trap or pitfall to catch any thing with.

Trabócco di fiéle, the yellow iaundise, or ouerflowing of the gall.

Trabochétti, pitfalls, traps, or gins.

Trabúcco, as Trabócco. Also a piece of Ordinance called a Mortar-piece.

Tracagánte, a kind of hearbe, or shrub.

Tràcamíno, by the way.

Tracanárdo, an ambling, or rather racking hacknie. Also a hacknie pace.

Tracáne elúpo, about twy-light, when a Dog is not knowne from a Wolfe.

Tracannáre, to swallow downe, to quaffe, to bib, to tiple, to bouze, to drinke downe.

Trà cárne e pelle, betweene the flesh and the skinne.

Tracassáre, to destroy, to confound, to misuse. Also to hale or from one to another.

Trachè, what with, what betweene.

Trachea, the winde-pipe, or pipe of the lungs of any creature.

Trachelo, the chine of man or beast frm the head to the hanch.

Tracheríe, vsed for Arteries.

Tráchi, a kind of Baulme-tree.

Trachílo, a bird called a Wren.

Trachinea, a kind of red Rose.

Trachínia, a stone that is kindled with water, and quenched with oyle.

Trachíno, as Trabíno.

Tráccia, a trace, a tracing, a tracke, a footing, or foote-step.

Tracciáre, to trace, to tracke, or follow by the footing.

Trachè, what betweene.

Trache béne, what betweene.

Trácia, as Trachímia.

Tracidólce, the hearbe Galingale.

Traciò, betweene that.

Tracolláre, as Traboccáre.

Tracóllo, as Trabócco.

Tracon, what betweene with.

Tracóma, a roughnesse in the eyelids.

Tracorággine, as Trascurággine.

Tracorare, to pierce to or through the heart. Also as Trascuráre.

Tracórrere, córro, córsi, córso, to runne ouer, to ouer-run, to runne betweene. Also to ouer-view, or suruay in haste.

Tracórsa, an ouer-running. Also an ouer-looking, or suruaying in hoste.

Tracórso, ouer-runne, runne betweene. Also ouer-runne and suruaid in haste.

Tracotággine, as Trascurággine.

Tracotánza, as Trascurággine.

Tracotáre, to neglect, or exceede the bounds wherein one ought to keepe himselfe.

Tracotáto, as Trascuráto.

Trà da l'unoe dall áltro, what between one and the other.

Tracrédere, crédo, credéi, credúto, to ouer-weene or belieue, to be ouercredulous.

Tracredúto, ouerweened, or belieued.

Tracurággine, as Trascurággine.

Tracuránza, as Trascurággine.

Tracuráre, as Trascuráre.

Tracuráto, carelesse, inconsiderate.

Tracutággine, as Trascurággine.

Trà dà, what with, what betweene.

Trádere, to deliuer, to yeeld ouer, to commit in trust vnto anybody. Also to put in writing.

Tradigióne, treason or tretcherie.

Tradiménto, all manner of treason.

Tradíre, dísco, díto, to betray.

Traditióne, a tradition or doctrine left by word of man from age to age.

Tradíto, betraid, or bin a traitor.

Traditorággine, all manner of treason.

Traditóre, a traitor.

Traditório, traiterous, full of treason.

Tradoppiáre, to double and double againe.

Tradóppio, more then double.

Tradótre, sometimes.

Tradótto, as Tradútto, of Tradúrre.

Tráduce, a vine or branch brought along from tree to tree, or vpon the branches of other trees ioined as a traile together.

Tradúcere, as Tradúrre.

Tràdúe, betweene two.

Tràdue vólte, betweene twice.

Tradúrre, dúco, dússi, dútto, or dótto, to traduce, to transpose, to bring or leade ouer, to bring, to conuay, to remoue or transport from one place to another. Also to translate from out of one tongue vnto another.

Traduttióne, a transporting, a translating.

Tradútto, transported, transtated, traduced, led ouer or transferred. Also conuerted.

Tradúttore, a transporter, a translator, hee that bringeth from one place to another.

Traétta, a traile or border of a garment.

Trafeláre, to pant through wearinesse, when one hardly can draw his breath. Also to swelter with heat. Also as Trapeláre.

Trafelláre, as Trafeláre.

Trafelóne, one that faints through heat or wearinesse.

Traferfero, a cruell fell raskall. Also as Truffarello.

Traffáre, to canuase, to shift or practise for any place or office.

Traffatóre, a canuaser for voice.

Traffitta, soft, of Traffiggere, a transfiction. 

Traffiéro, a chirurgians probe or searching needle.

Traffiggere, fíggo, físsi, físso, fítto, to transfix, to pierce or thrust quite thorow.

Traficánte, a merchant, a trader, a chapman, one that doth traffique.

Traficáre, to traffique, to trade.

Trafichéuole, trafficable, tradable.

Trafichíno, a trader, a broker, a bargainer.

Tráfico, traffique, trade, bargaining.

Trafiere, a poignard, a little dagger, a stillet.

Trafila, a toole that wiredrawers vse, full of holes to draw wire with.

Trafíssa, a through-piercing.

Trafiggere, as Traffíggere.

Trafíslo, transfixed, pierced through.

Trafítta, a transfixing, a piercing thorow.

Trafítto, transfixed, thrust through.

Trafittura, as Trafítta.

Trafóglio, cóme un trafógilo à guisa d'un picciol' álbero.

Trafolcióna, a gadding trull, a riggish whore.

Traforáre, to bore or drill through.

Traforáto, bored or drilled through. Also hollow or through-worke.

Traforelleríe, as Truffaríe.

Traforello, as Truffarello.

Traforería, as Barattería.

Trafugáre, to put to ouerflight. Also to steale thorow or betweene. Also to steale, to filch, or pilfer. Also to run vp and downe like a fugitiue.

Trafuggíre, fúggo, fuggíj, fuggíto, to flie or runne away through, betweene, or from place to place.

Trafúgio, a running or flying away.

Trafúgo, a fugitiue, a runnagate, an outlawed, a wanderer vp and downe by stealth.

Trafugóne, by stealih, in hugger-mugger.

Trafuráre, to steale through.

Trasusoláte gámbe, spindle-shankes.

Tragacánthe, a shrub yeelding store of gum called Dragaganth.

Tragedia, a tragedie, or mournfull play, being a loftie kinde of poetrie, and representing personages of great state, and matter of much trouble, beginning prosperously, and ending vnfortunately.

Tragediánte, a tragedian, or maker of tragedies.

Tragëdico, as Tragediánte.

Tragedista, as Tragediánte.

Tragedo, as Tragediánte.

Tragelápho, a bearded or shag-haired stag like to a goat, called a stone-bucke or goat-hart.

Tragemáte, a kinde of wild and naught­



ie date.

Tragenda, vsed for Tragedia.

Tragettáre, to cost ouer, to fling betweene. Also as Traghettáre.

Tragettióne, a casting ouer, or flinging betweene. Also a passing ouer.

Tragétto, as Traghetto.

Trágga, let him draw or cast.

Traggea, all maner of comfets.

Trággere, as Trárre or Titáre.

Traghettáre, to passe, to ferrie, to conuey, to transport or saile ouer any place or riuer. Also to saile from shore to shore.

Traghettáro, a ferrie man, or transporter ouer any place or riuer.

Traghettiere, as Traghettáro.

Traghétto, any ferrie, a passage, a foard, or gozell ouer from shore to shore.

Traghiettáre, as Traghettáre.

Traghiétto, as Traghétto.

Traghiottíre, as Tranguggiáre.

Trágico, tragicall, dismall, deadly. Of or belonging to a tragedie.

Tragicomedia, a tragicomedie, beginning mournfully, and ending merily.

Tragicómico, tragicomicall.

Trágie, a kinde of penets or cough comfets that Apothecaries vse.

Trágio, false or bastard Dictame growing in Candia, much like vnto Iuniper, but sauoureth like the stinking of a Goat.

Tragióne, as Tregióne.

Tragiónto, enterioined, ioined together.

Tragisatiricomedia, a play whose beginning is tragicall and dolorous, whose middle pastorall and siluane, and whose end comicall and merie.

Tragítto, as Traghétto.

Tragiúngere, to enterioine, to ioine together or betweene.

Tragiuersáto, inuerted, misconstrued. Also as Tergiuersáto.

Tráglia, the throte, gullet, or vzell pipe of any creature. Also a pullie.

Tràgli áltri, among others.

Tráglio, any stalke, stemme, sprout, or spring. Also any yoong set or graffe.

Trágo, a goat. Also an hearbe called also Scorpióne. Also a shell-fish hauing a very stinking sauour. Also a kind of hard, thicke, and rough spunge, called the male spunge. Also a kinde of corne lesse nourishing then ours, and very hard of digestion. Also a kinde of drag-net. Also the embossement or bunching out of the eare. Also a kind of ptisan made of the graine Trágo.

Tragóne, the rereward of a battle or great squadron.

Tragónia, the herbe Taragon.

Tragopíro, the graine buckwheat, or beliming, good to fatten cattle.

Tragopógo, an herbe called goats beard, hauing leaues like to saffron, and a great knop or hud vpon a sharp stalke. Also the hearbe Comin.

Tragopogóne, as Tragopógo.

Tragopónide, a bird in Ethiopia greater then an Eagle, horned like a goat.

Tragorchíde, a kind of Satirion.

Tragorígano, wilde peniroyall.

Traguardáre, to looke through or leuell as gunners doe.

Traguárdi, spike, loope, or sight-holes to looke through.

Traguggiáre, as Tranguggiáre.

Trágula, a drag-net. Also a tranell.

Trahente, drawing or attracting. Also casting or flinging.

Tráhere, as Trággere or Tirate.

Traína, any kind of traine or traile. Also a traine for a hauke, a training. Also a drawling woman. Also a shuffling or racking pace of a nag.

Traína di póluere, a traine of powder.

Traináre, to traine, to traile, to draggle or draw along the ground. Also to make vp a traine. Also to goe a shuffling or racking pace.

Trainello, any little Tráino. Also a stale or a call for birds. Also a kinde of long horse fetters or pasterns, tied to horses feet that goe to grasse. Also as Tranello.

Traíno, a traine or company of followers. Also a kinde of barrow. Also a long wheele-barrow. Also a muck-cart or tumbrell.

Trál, as Tráil, betweene the.

Tralacciáre, to enterlace or tie together.

Tralasciáre, to omit, to neglect, to giue ouer. Also to ouerslip.

Traláscio, negligence, ouerpassing.

Tralatióne, as Traslatióne.

Tralciaménti, as Trálcij.

Tralciáre, to tie, to bind vp, or vnderlay hops or vines. Also to branch.

Trálcij, branches, boughes, yoong buds, or sprigs of a vine. Also poles, forkes, or props to hold vp vines or hops with. Also any entanglings. Also hedgestakes.

Trál di sopra, betweene the vpper.

Trà le máni, in hand, or betweene the hands.

Tralignánte, degenerating from kind.

Tralignánza, a degenerating srom kind.

Tralignáre, to degenerate from kind.

Trálla, betweene the.

Trálle máni, betweene the hands.

Tralígno, a degenerate from kinde.

Tra'l sì e'l nò, in doubt, twixt yea and nay.

Tralucente, through-shining.

Tralúcere, to shine through.

Tralúcido, through-shining.

Traluciménto, a through-shining.

Traluciúto, shined through. 

Tralunáti ócchij, staring or gogling eies.

Tráma, a weauers woofe or web prepared and set vpon the loome to be wouen. And by metaphor, any plot, complot, deuice, or secret contriuing. Also a deceitfull tricke or device in imagination. Also the mossinesse of the outward part of any fruit.

Tráma ciè, Some tricke, plot, or knauerie is in hand, as we say I smell a rat.

Tramáglio, a tramell or ensnaring.

Tramandáre, to send and send againe.

Tramáno, betweene or in hand.

Tramáre, to warp or set a web in hand. Also to plot, to deuise, to complot.

Tramatóre, a warper of a woofe. Also a plotter, a deuiser, a complotter.

Tramazzáre, to kill among, or between. Also to founder or be apt to be foundred.

Tramázzo, any orderlesse confusion, spoile or hurlie-burlie. Also the foundring of a horse. Also as Stramazzóne
.

Tramazzóne, as Stramazzóne.

Trambásciare, as Trafelláre. Also to become mad and furious through anger.

Trambásci áto, transported with anger and madnesse, furious, moodie, fell.

Trámbe, Trámbi, as Trámbo.

Trámbo, betweene both together.

Trambusciáre, to disorder, to confound, or bring to vtter spoile or desolation.

Trambustáre, as Trambusciáre.

Trambústo, disorder, confusion, spoile, desolation, hauocke, sturre, hurlie-burlie. Looke Borráccia.

Trameábile, that may be past through.

Trameáre, to passe through close passages.

Tramenáre, to handle, to shuffle or shake and wrigle any thing to and froe. Also to leade or bring through.

Tramenáre molti libri, to tosse, to shuffle and tumble many bookes ouer.

Tramendúe, betweene both-together.

Tramendúní, as Tramendúe.

Tramentíre, to lie beyond measure.

Tramentíto, lide ouer and beyond measure.

Trameschiánza, entermingling.

Trameschtáre, to entermixe or mingle.

Tramescolanza, an entermingling.

Tramescoláre, to entermix or mingle.

Tramésla, an entermesse or seruice betweene.

Tramésso, entermitted, or put betweene.

Traméttere, métto, mísi, mésso, to enterpose or lay. Also to put, to set 



or send betweene.

Tramettiménto, an enterposing, laying, putting or setting betweene.

Tramez zaménto, as Tramezzúra.

Tramezzáno, an enterposer, one that puts himself betweene others.

Tramezzáre, to deuide or part in halfs. Also to entermedle, to enterweaue, to put betweene, to worke together, to enterlace, to entermixe. Also to mediate or enterpose him selfe for others.

Tramezzíno, as Tramezzáno.

Tramezzo, any thing that lies or is put betweene. Also betweene the middle. Also a partition, a diuision, or a hedge that deuideth land. Also an enterlacing, an enterweauing. Also an entermixing. Also an enterposition.

Tramezzúra, as Tramezzo.

Tramigráre, as Trasmigráre.

Tramigratióne, as Trasmigratióne.

Trámito, a distance or space betweene place and place or time and time. Also a foote-path to and fro.

Trámito délla bálla, the range of a bullet.

Tramóggia, a mill-hatch, a mill-bin, or mill-chest. Also a dust-basket or place where sweepings are cast. Also any sluts corner.

Tramónta, a colde Northerly winde.

Tramontaménto, the Sunne set.

Tramontána, the North part of the world. Also the Northren winde. Also the North star, vsed also for the Sunne-set.

Tramontáni, such people as are borne or dwelt beyond the mountaines.

Tramontár del sóle, the time of Sunne-set.

Tramontáre, to passe or goe ouer and beyond the hills. Also to set or goe downe as the Sunne. Also to die and bid the world farewell.

Tramontáto, set as the Sunne, dead, deceased.

Tramortiménto, a swouning, a fainting, a falling into a swoune.

Tramortíre, tisco, títo, to swoune, to fainte, to fall into a swoune.

Tramortíto, swouned, sainted.

Trampelláre la uíta, to rub or hold out, to weare out ones life, as we say to keepe the wolfe from the dore.

Trampláre, as Trampolare.

Trámpli, as Trámpoli.

Trámpoláre, to goe on stilts or high startops. Also to goe staking.

Trámpoli, stilts or high startops.

Tramutábile, as Tramutéuole.

Tramutaménto, as Tramutatióne.

Tramutáre, to transmute, to change, to alter or shift from place to place.

Tramutatióne, a transmutation, an alteration or changing. 

Tramutéuole, transmutable, alterable, changeable.

Trána, vsed for Tráina, but commonly for a word of mockerie, as wee say, tush, nay, fie, or I smell a rat.

Tranáre, as Traináre. Also to passe or swim ouer.

Tranatáre, to swim ouer or betweene.

Tranelláre, to entramell, to ensnare, to entrap, or lay a snare for.

Tranelli, tramels, snares, entrappings, pitfalles. Also the traines of a hauke. Also cheating or cunnicatching tricks. Also as Trainello.

Tranghiottíre, tísco, títo, to gulp, to glut, to gorge, to deuoure or swallow downe.

Tranghiottíta, a swallowing vp.

Tranghiottíto, gulped, glutted, gorged, deuoured, or swallowed downe.

Trangoiáre, as Tranghiottíre.

Tranguggiáre, as Tranghiottíre.

Tranguggiatóre, a swallower downe.

Tranguiáre, as Tranghiottíre.

Traníézze, vsed as Stranézze.

Trannáre, to transfer, to transport.

Tráno, a traine, a traile, as Tráina.

Tranotáre, to swim or passe ouer.

Tranottáre, to passe ouer the night.

Tranquilláre, to appease, to calme, to quiet, to still, to pacifie.

Tranquillità, tranquillitie, calmenesse, quietnesse, stilnesse, quiet rest.

Tranquíllo, quiet, still, calme, at peace and rest, vntroubled, whoosht.

Tranquillóso, full of quietnesse, peace, rest, tranquillitie and calmenesse.

Tráns, a preposition much vsed in composition of other words, signifying ouer, beyond, or from one place to another, as in many words following.

Transalpino, a man that is borne or dwelling ouer or beyond the Alpes.

Transanimatióne, transanimation, or the passing of one soule into another.

Transattióne, a transaction, an agreement, a dispatch, a finishing.

Transcegliere, to picke or cull out from among.

Transcendente, transcendent, surmounting, or going beyond.

Transcendenza, a transcendencie, a surmounting or going beyond.

Transcendere, scendo, scési, scéso, to transcend, to surmount or go beyond, to exceed, to passe beyond.

Transcendéuole, that may be transcended or gone beyond.

Transcórrere, as Trascórrere.

Transégna, an vpper ensigne, or marke beyond others.

Transenna, the netting of a ship like a lettice seruing for defence.

Transeúnte, passing ouer or beyond.

Transferiménto, as Trasferiménto.

Transferíre, as Trasferíre.

Transferíto, as Trasferito.

Transfiggere, as Trafiggere.

Transfiguráre, as Trasfiguráre.

Transfiguratióne, as Trasfiguratióne.

Transfóndere, as Trasfóndere.

Transformáre, as Trasformáre.

Transformatióne, as Trasformatióne.

Transforméuole, as Trasforméuole.

Transfretáre, to passe ouer any straight.

Transfugáre, as Trafugáre.

Transfuggíre, as Trasfuggíre.

Transfúgio, as Trafúgio.

Transfúgo, as Trafúgo.

Transfugone, as Trafugóne.

Transfúlgido, as Trasfúlgido.

Transfusióne, a transfusion.

Transgredíre, as Trasgredíre.

Transgressióne, as Trasgressióne.

Transgressóre, as Trasgressóre.

Transhumanáre, to goe beyond humanity.

Transhumanatióne, a going beyond humanity.

Transhumanáto, gone beyond humanity.

Transíle, that groweth, goeth, reacheth or passeth ouer another.

Transíre, sísco, sito, to passe or goe ouer or thorow, to run thorow, to slip-ouer. Also to goe forth. Also to leaue vntouched and let passe vnspoken. Also to fall into a swoune. Also to die or yeeld vp the Ghost.

Transitare, as Transíre.

Transíto, past ouer, gone thorow, let slip. Also yeelded vp the ghost. Also any thing that hath beene past ouer and thorow.

Transito, a passage ouer, a going thorow, a passing or going from one place to another. Also a dead trance or swouning. Also the instance of ones giuing vp the gost, Per tránsito, cursory wise, a glance and goe by, without stop or stay.

Tránsito délla bálla, the range of a bullet.

Transitório, transitory, momentary, fraile, soone passing away, fading.

Translatáre, as Traslatáre.

Translatatóre, as Traslatóre.

Translatióne, as Traslatióne.

Transláto, as Trasláto.

Translúcere, to shine thorow.

Translúcido, thorow shining.

Transmandáre, to send ouer or thorow.

Transmaríno, that is borne or dwelleth or commeth from beyond the seas. Also a kind of precious blew colour that Painters vse. 



Transmeáre, to passe thorow.

Transmeatióne, a passing thorow.

Transméttere, as Trasméttere.

Transmigráre, as Trasmigráre.

Transmigratióne, as Trasmigratióne.

Transmissióne, a transmission.

Transmontáno, as Tramontáno.

Transmóro, remooued from one place to another.

Transmutáre, as Tramutáre.

Transmutatióne, as Tramutatióne.

Transmutéuole, as Tramutéuole.

Transmutaménto, as Tramutatióne.

Transnatáre, to swim ouer or thorow.

Transostantiále, transubstantiall.

Transostantialità, transubstantialitie.

Transostantiánte, being readie to be transubstantiated or to transubstantiate.

Transostantiáre, to transubstantiate or turne into another substance.

Transostantiatióne, transubstantiation.

Transostantióso, transubstantiall.

Transpiantáre, as Trapiantáre.

Transpiantatióne, a transplantation.

Transpórre, as Traspórre.

Transportábile, transportable.

Transportatióne, a transportation.

Transportatóre, a transporter.

Transportéuole, transportable.

Transpositióne, a transposition.

Transpórto, a transportation.

Transricchire, to grow ouer rich.

Tránstri, transtroms or crosse-beames.

Transuedére, as Trauedére.

Transuersáli heredi, collaterals heires.

Transuersário, the shorter and ouerthwart piece of a Iacobs staffe.

Transuersióne, a transuersion, that is a turning away or ouerthwart.

Transuerso, transuersed, a crosse, ouerthwart, out of order or ill placed. Also the midriffe.

Transuertere, to turne away.

Transúmere, súmo, súnsi, súnto, to transume or lift vp. Also to ouer-assume.

Transuntióne, a transumption, a transuming or lifting vp.

Transúnto, transumed or lifted vp. Also a transumpt, a transcript or exemplification written out of records or copie of any thing.

Trantrána, as Trána.

Tranuotáre, to swime ouer or beyond.

Trapanáre, to pierce, to drill or passe thorow. Also to open ones skull with a trepane. Also to grope or fumble for. Also to slide, to glide or slip thorow and away with speed and closely. 

Trápano, a Chirurgions instrument to open a mans skull with called a Trepane. Vsed also for a drill.

Trapassábile, that may be exceeded or out gone or past ouer, ouer-passable.

Trapassaménto, a passing ouer, an excesse or exceeding. Also a trespassing or transgression. Also a passing from life to death, a yeelding vp the ghost.

Trapassáre, to passe ouer or thorow, to exceed or excell. Also to trespasse or transgresse. Also to passe from life to death. Also to goe a shuffling pace.

Trapassáti, our deceased forefathers.

Trapásso, excesse, an out slip, an escape. Also a racking or shuffling pace. Also a passing ouer or thorow.

Trapásso di tempo, processe of time.

Trapazaróla, a ducklin or dob-chickin.

Trapeláre, to slide, to glide, to creepe, to slinke, to slip or steale thorow or away. Also to leake as a vessell or ship, to runne out by little and little as oyle or wine out of some pot or vessell.

Trapella, a little Mouse trap.

Trapelláre, to entrap, to insnare.

Tra per, what betweene or thorow.

Tra perchè, what betweene.

Trapére, hath beene vsed for a dagger.

Traperò, what betweene.

Trauése, hearb Orach or golden flower.

Trapétio equicrúre, figúra geometrica.

Trapétio scaléno, figúra geometrica.

Trape zóide, figúra geometrica.

Trapiantáre, to transplant.

Trapiantatióne, a transplantation.

Trapióuere, to raine thorow or betweene.

Trà più vólte, among many times.

Trapónere, as Traméttere.

Traponiménto, as Trapositióne.

Trapórre, as Traméttere.

Trapositióne, an interposition.

Trapósto, as Tramésso, put betweene.

Trappanáre, as Trapanáre.

Trappáre, to entrap, to catch, to ouerreach.

Tráppola, any kinde of trap, gin, snare or pitfall. Also a play that children vse called cat or trap. Also a kind of game at cardes.

Trappoláre, to entrap or catch in some gin or pitfall. Also to ouer reach.

Trappolatóre, an entrapper, a cheating knaue, as Barattiére.

Trappoleria, entrappings or cunnicatching trickes, as Barattería.

Trapporráre, to transport or carry ouer. 

Trapúngere, to pricke, to pierce, to pricke or stitch thorow or betweene. Also to quilt, to counterpoint, to stitch or imbroyder.

Trapúnta, a quilt or counterpoint for a bed.

Trapúnto, prickt, pierced, stitcht or prickt thorow or betweene. Also quilted, counterpointed or embroydered. Also a quilt or counterpoint for a bed. Also a kind of stitch called of Seamesters the hollow-stitch.

Trà quantúnque, among what or betweene how many soeuer.

Trà quésto, in this meane while. Also betweene this.

Trà quésto e quéllo, betweene this and that.

Tra quésto mezzo, in this meane while.

Trà quésto mezzo tempo, idem.

Trà quésto tempo, in this meane time.

Trà qui et là, betweene heere and there.

Trár, as Tiráre or Trárre.

Trár di bócca, to draw from ones mouth.

Trár fiáto, to draw breath.

Trár fuóri, to pull out.

Trár per dádo, to cast the dice for, to cast lots with dice, to rifle for any thing with casting the dice. Also to begin any thing.

Trárre, trággio, trássi, tratto, as Tiráre. Also to draw or allure.

Trárre a fine, to draw to an end.

Trárre il páne con la balestra, mostrársi hórrido & spauentóso.

Trárre il uento, the wind to blow.

Trárre la sórte, to cast or draw lots.

Trár sángue, to draw blood.

Trár sásso, to throw a stone.

Trár spáda, to draw a sword.

Trár vóglia, to haue ones longing.

Trarupáre, to tumble downe head-long as it were thorow or among rockes, cliffes or cragges.

Trarúpi, rockes, cragges or cliffes among other rockes and cragges.

Trás, as Tráns.

Trasandaménto, a going ouer, beyond, through or out of the way, as Trapassaménto.

Trasandáre, to goe or wend ouer, beyond, thorow or out of the way, to outgoe. Also to goe out of ones wits, to raue or dote. Also to yeelde vp the Ghost.

Trasapére, to ouer know, to be ouerwise.

Trasattáte, to transact.

Trasattióne, a transaction.

Trascendente, as Transcendente.

Trascendenza, as Transcendenza.

Trascendere, as Transcendere.



Trascéso, transcended or gone beyond.

Trascína, a Sea fish like a Ray or Skate.

Trascináre, as Strascináre.

Trascíno, as Strascíno.

Trascoloráre, to change from one colour to another. Also to discolour.

Trascorrente, ouerrunning.

Trascorrénza, as Trascórsa.

Trascórrere, córro, córsi, córso, to run ouer, betweene or thorow out, to outrun. Also to quest or hunt too and fro as a Spaniell. Also to passe ouer quicklie with short or no mention at all. Also to peruse ouer in hest.

Trascorriménto, as Trascórsa.

Trascórsa, a running ouer, thorow, beyond or from, a running or questing to and fro. Also a passing ouer slightly or quickly.

Trascórso, ouerrun, run thorow or beyond, out run. Also perused ouer a book. Look Trascórrere. Also the time ouer past.

Trascotággine, as Trascurággine.

Trascotánza, as Trascurággine.

Trascotáto, as Trascuráto.

Trascrittióne, a transcription.

Trascrítto, written or copied ouer. Also a transcript or manuscript.

Trascrittóre, a copier or writer ouer.

Trascriuere, to write or copy ouer. Also to transfer or giue ouer his right to another.

Trascurággine, carelessenesse, negligence, retchlesnesse, want of heed. Also vnaduisednesse or ouer sight. Also ouerweening.

Trascuránza, as Trascurággine.

Trascuráre, to neglect, to be carelesse of, to set at nought, to be heedlesse.

Trascuratággine, as Trascurággine.

Trascuratézza, as Trascurággine.

Trascuráto, neglected, set at naught, beene heedlesse. Also carelesse, heedlesse, retchlesse, negligent, rash or ouerweening.

Trascutággine, as Trascurággine.

Trascutánza, as Trascurággine.

Trascutáto, as Trascuráto.

Trasecoláre, to be rauished with some admiration or suddaine ioy, to become astonished or amazed, as it were to go from one world and age to another.

Trasfendere, to cleaue thorow.

Trasferiménto, a transferring, a translating or remoouing. Looke Trasferíre.

Trasferíre, to transfer, to transport, to remooue or carry away, ouer, beyond or from one place to another, to conuaigh or translate from one language to another.

Trasferíro, transferred, transported, translated, remooued. Looke Trasferíre.

Trasficcáre, to thrust or driue thorow.

Trasfíggere, to transfix.

Trasfiguráre, to transfigure or change from one change vnto another.

Trasfiguratióne, a transfiguration, a metamorphosis or changing of shapes.

Trasfiguréuole, that may be transfigured or metamorphized.

Trasfóndere, to transfuse, to powre out of one vessell into another.

Trasfórma, a transformation, or changing of shape.

Trasformáre, to transforme or change and alter forme and shape.

Trasformatióne, as Trasfiguratióne.

Trasforméuole, that may be transformed.

Trasfretáre, to passe ouer any strait.

Trassúga, a putting to flight or subduing.

Trasfugáre, to put to flight by some wile.

Trusfuggíre, as Trafuggíre.

Trasfúgio, as Trafúgio.

Trasfúgo, as Trafúgo.

Trasfugóne, as Trafugóne.

Trasfúlgido, thorow-shining.

Trasfumáre, to smoake ouer or thorow.

Trasfusióne, a transfusion.

Trasgredíre, dísco, díto, to transgresse, to passe or goe ouer and beyond. Also to degresse, to swarue or to trespasse.

Trasgredíto, transgressed, past ouer or beyond. Also swarued, degressed or trespassed.

Trasgressióne, a transgression, a passing or going ouer and beyond, a degression from one purpose to another. Also a trespasse, an offence, a swaruing.

Trasgresso, transgressed, infringed.

Trasgressóre, a transgresser, a trespasser, an offender, a swaruer.

Trasguardáre, to looke thorow.

Trasguárdo, a thorow looke or sight.

Trasguisáre, as Trasfoggiáre.

Trashumanáre, of humane to become deuine, to goe beyond humanity.

Trashumanatióne, a going from humanity and becomming deuine.

Trashumanáto, become from humane deuine.

Trási, a kind of fruit so called. Also the English Gallingale.

Tra sì & nò, in doubt, bewixt yea and nay.

Traslatáre, to translate or remooue from one place to another. Also as Tradúrre.

Traslatatóre, as Traslatóre.

Traslatióne, a translation, a transposition, a transferring or transporting ouer, beyond or from one to another. Also the vsing of a word in signification, lesse proper to argument or make the thing lesse. Also a metaphor.

Traslatítio, as Traslatíuo.

Traslatiuaménte, by way of translation, transposition or transporting.

Traslatíuo, to be transferred or transposed. Also taken from others. Also of no great waight, of the common sort, nothing curious or excellent.

Trasláto, transtated, transferred or transported ouer, beyond or from one to another. Also as Traslatióne. Also a metaphor or figuratiue speech.

Traslatóre, a translator, a transporter, a remoouer from one to another.

Traslattáre, as Tradúrre, to transelate.

Traslúcere, to shine thorow.

Traslúcido, thorow-shining or bright.

Trasmarináre, to goe ouer seas.

Trasmaríno, as Transmaríno.

Trasinesso, transmitted.

Trasméttere, to transmit, to set or send from one place to another or ouer.

Trasmigráre, to remooue further off or goe and a well from one place to another.

Trasmigratióne, a transmigration or departing from one dwelling to another.

Trasmissióne, a transmission.

Trasmodáre, to passe or exceed meane, measure, order or fashion.

Trasmutáre, to transmute, to shift or change from one place to another.

Trasmutábile, that may be transchanged or shifted or changed.

Trasmutabilità, transmutability.

Trasmutaménto, a transchanging.

Trasmuratióne, a trasmutation.

Trasmutéuole, transmutable.

Trasnatáre, to swim ouer or thorow.

Trasnaturáto, out from or beyond nature, out natured.

Trasognággine, a rauing, a doting, a dreaming, an idle drouzinesse.

Trasognáre, to raue or dreame. Also to goe out of ones wits. Also to passe away the time drouzily or dreaminglie.

Trasonáre, to become or play the Trasóne. Also to sound betweene.

Trasonarie, boastings, Thrasonian trickes, foolish ostentations or brags.

Trasóne, as Thráso, a braggard, a vanter, a boaster, a man full of ostentation.

Trasordinário, extraordinary.

Trasoriére, vsed for Tesoriére.

Traspaláre, to shouell together. Also to stake thorow as Turkes doe malefactors.



Trasparente, transparant, through shining or bright.

Trasparenza, transparancy or a thorow shining light or brightnesse.

Trasparére, páio, pársi, párso, or parúto, to be transparant, to shine or see through.

Traspárso, shined, seene or seemed thorow.

Trasparúto, as Traspárso.

Traspedáre, to thrust thorow as it were with a broach or spit.

Traspiantáre, to transplant.

Traspiantatióne, a transplantation.

Traspiantatóre, a transplanter.

Traspietáre, to transplant.

Traspónere, as Traspórre, to transpose.

Traspontáre, to quilt or counterpoint.

Traspontíno, a quilt or counter-point. Also a fine mattarasse. Also a little bridge ouer a ditch. Also a stile or yate ouer a hedge.

Traspórre, póngo, pósi, pósto, to transpose or set from one place to another.

Trasportábile, transportable.

Trasportaménto, a transportation.

Trasportáre, to transport or carry ouer.

Trasportatióne, a transportation.

Traspórto, a transportation, a transport.

Traspositióne, a transposition, a remouing.

Traspósto, transposed or remooued.

Trasrichíre, to become ouer rich.

Trassimáre, to shake or totter.

Trassináre, as Strascináre. Also as Tartassáre.

Trassináta, as Tartassáta.

Trassostantiále, transubstantiall.

Trassostantiáre, to transmute substance.

Trassostantiatióne, transubstantiation.

Trásti, transoms or crosse beames.

Trásti délla náue, the formes, the benches or seates in a gally or barge, whereon mariners sit when they row. Vsed also in Venice for the best or chiefe place in a Gondola, as we say the cushions in a paire of oares.

Trásto., looke Trásti.

Trastóne, the best kind of gumme called in Latine Ammoniacum.

Trastornáre, to turne ouer and ouer.

Trastrauáto, a horse that hath a forefoot and a hinderfoote crossewise white.

Trastulláre, to solace, to sport, to dandle or dally with. Also to still or quiet. 

Trastúllo, solace, sport, pastime, dalliance, delight. Also pleasant quietnes.

Trasuasáre, to put, or powre, or remoue from out one vessell into another.

Trasuasatióne, the powring or remouing from one vessell into another.

Trasuedére, to see ouer, beyond, or through.

Trasuedúto, seene ouer, through, or beyond.

Trasuersióne, a transuersion or crossing.

Trasuerso, transuersed. Also ouerthwart.

Trasuiaménto, a leading or going out of the way.

Trasuiáre, to leade or goe out of or beyond the way.

Trasumanáre, as Trashumanáre.

Trasumanatióne, as Trashumanatióne.

Trasumanáto, as Trashumanáto.

Trasuoláre, to flie ouer or beyond.

Trasuperbia, excessiue pride.

Trasuperbo, exceeding proud.

Tratánto, in the meane while or space.

Tratenére, to entertaine.

Tratenéuole, that may be entertained.

Trateniménto, entertainment.

Tratenúto, entertained.

Trátta, a tract, a space or distance. Also a tract, a range, or ranke of people, a rout, a troupe, a crue or companie. Also leaue, licence, permission or priuilege to transport from out any country any merchandice. Also a trade, a trading, or traffique, namely outward. Also as Tiráta. Also that custome that is paid for things carried out.

Trattábile, tractable, pliable, gentle, that may easily bee intreated or handled.

Trattabilità, tractablenesse, pliantnes.

Trátta d'árco, a bow-shoot.

Trattaménto, an entreating, an entertaining, an vsage, a dealing with or handling. Also a treating or parlie. Also a mans demeanour or behauiour.

Trattaméssa, the pricking of a naile. Also the retreate in a horse.

Trattáre, to treat, to entreat, to handle, to manage, to deale with, or vse a man. Also to parlie, to discourse, to negotiate, to describe or write of or vpon any matter. Also to manage, to order or see vnto. Also to practise, to contriue, to complot, or meddle with. Also to bargaine or condition.

Trattarello, any little trátto.

Trattár pátto, to make or treat a couenant.

Trattatióne, a tractation, a treating.

Trattáto, treated, entreated, handled, vsed, managed, dealt with. Also parlied, discoursed, negotiated. Also described or written vpon any subiect. Also ordred or seene vnto. Also practised, contriued, or meddled with. Also bargained or condicioned.

Trattáto, a treatie, a tract, a treatise, a poeme or discourse, a part of a booke wherein any thing is handled. Also a practise or complot. Also a bargaine or a couenant. Also a managing or handling.


Trattatóre, a treatter, a plotter, a contriuer. Looke Trattáre.

Tratteggiáre, to draw curious lines, or cast fine shadowes in painting.

Trattéggio, a wresting or drawing. Also a treating or vsage. Also a curious line or shadowing in painting.

Tratteniménto, entertainement.

Trattenitóre, an entertainer.

Trattéuole, tractable, pliant, gentle. Also that may be treated of or discoursed vpon. Also that may be handled and managed.

Tratti di córda, strappadoes, twinges, or plucks giuen as a torture with a corde.

Trátto, as Tíro. Also as Fiáta or Vólta, vn trátto one time, or once. Also a trat, a space or distance of time or place. Vn gran trátto, a great distance. Also a draught of drinke, a whiffe. béui un buón trátto, drinke a good draught. Inánzi trátto, before hand. In un trátto, at once, at a cast. Also drawne, prolonged or pulled out. Also a space, a countrie, a region or coast, &c.

Trátto d'árco, a bowes-shot.

Trátto di córda, as Strappádo.

Trátto di ináno, a stones cast.

Tratto di uíno, a draught of wine.

Trattolíno, any kind of little Trátto.

Trattório, a drawer, a winde-lace to draw vp heauie things.

Trattóso, quick and readie in answers, full of quips and wittie iests.

Tráttotrátto, euery hand while, euery foote, very often. Also forthright.

Trauaccáre, to stumble, to fall or tumble or wallow to the ground, to stagger, as a Cow.

Trauáglia, vsed for Trauáglio.

Trauagliáre, to trauell, to wander, to labour, to worke, to toyle, to moile, to busie whither with the bodie or minde. Also to trouble or molest.

Trauaglíno, a factor, a dealer, a negotiator. Also a busie body, a promoter.

Trauáglio, trauell, labour, care, trouble, molestation, toyling, moyling, swink, teene. Also the name of a farriers toole.

Trauáglio da buói, an oxestale, a cratch, a racke for oxen to feede in. 



Trauaglióne, a drudge, a painefull, labouring or toyling fellow

Trauaglióso, full of trauell, labour, care, or carke, laborious, busie, toylesome.

Traualcáre, as Traualicáre.

Traualicaménto, a passing ouer.

Traualicáre, to passe or go downe a riuer according to the streame, to goe a drift or flote downe the streame. Also as Trasgredíre.

Traualicatóre, a floter downe the streame. Also as Trasgressóre.

Trauaménti, all manner of timber or beame workes.

Trauariáre, to stray out of the right way. Also to dote or raue. Also to trifle.

Trauasáre, as Trasuasáre.

Trauasatióne, as Trasuasatióne.

Trauasatóre, such as our wine porters are that remooue wine from place to place.

Trauáta, any frame or houell made of beames or timber, as Trauáto.

Trauáti, all carpentrie or beame worke.

Trauatióne, as Trauáta.

Trauáto, a frame, a floore or roofe of timber. Also a horse that hath two white feete of any side.

Trauatúra, as Trauáta.

Traudíre, to ouer-heare.

Tráue, any kind of beame, ioist, raster, transome, summer, or quarter of timber. Looke Dáre la tráue.

Trauéggole, mistakings, or seeings a misse, a dimnesse of the eyes, an imperfection in the sight, which makes one mistake what he seeth. Also. Dáre trauéggole, as we say to make one belieue the Moone is made of a greene cheese.

Trauelli, ioystes or quarters of timber.

Trauérgole, as Trauéggole.

Trauersa, a thwarting or crosse fortune, a mishap or ill luck, a trauers, a trauerting, a thwarting or crosse ground. Also a trauers or curtine. Also a womans sauegard or round kirtle. Also a crosse tide, or crosse currant of waters. Also a crosse or thwart winde. Also a side-wall, or slanke of a wall.

Trauersále, the mantle of a chimnie. Also a thwart or a crosse.

Trauersaménte, crossely, thwartly, contrarie to ones will.

Trauersáre, to trauerse, to crosse, to thwart, to crosseburne, to transome.

Trauerse, the plurall of Trauersa. Also the trauises in a horse.

Trauersi, trenches or bankes of earth.

Trauersia, as Trauersa.

Tranersína, a womans sauegard. Also a waste-coate. Looke Trauersa.

Trauersíni, false-dice.

Trauerso, any transome or crosse-beame. Also as Strambúcco. Also crossely, a thwart, a crosse, crosseway. Also aduerse or contrarie.

Trauersóne, any great Trauerso. Also a thwart or crosse blow. Also a great tiller or crosbow.

Trauescio, a kind of faulkon. Also a kind of small house-hold wine.

Trauestíre, as Strauestíre, to disguise.

Trauestíto, as Strauestíto, disguised.

Trauétto, any kind of little Tráue.

Trauía, between or by the way.

Trauiainénto, a straying or going out of the way.

Trauiáre, to stray or wander out of the way. Also to passe or goe through.

Trauicello, any kind of little Tráue.

Trauí, o, a straying out of the way.

Trauisáre, to ouersee a misse, to mistake and see one thing for another. Also to cut, to gash, or marke one ouer the face with some cutting weapon. Also to disguise from knowledge.

Trauisceráre, to cut on through the bowels.

Trauíso, a disguisement.

Traulizzáre, to stammer, to maffle or speake with difficultie.

Tráulo, a stammerer, a stutterer, a muffler, one that can scarcely vtter his words.

Tráuo, hath bin vsed for Tráne.

Trauoláre, to ouerflie, to flie beyond.

Trà una vólta, betweene once.

Trauólgere, vólgo, vólsi, vólto, to tosse, to turne, to roule or tumble ouer.

Trauolgiménto, a tossing or tumbling and turning ouer.

Trauólto, ouerturned, tossed, tumbled or rouled ouer, vsed also for lame.

Trauoltúra, as Trauolgiménto.

Trauóni, all great beames, or blockes, or skids.

Trauóso, full of beames, or transoms.

Trázza, as Tráccia.

Trazzáre, as Tracciáre.

Trazzeína, a fish called a Viuer.

Trè, the number of three, a traie.

Treággio, a kind of very course rugged cloth that shepheards vse to weare.

Trebbeggiáre, to treble.

Trebbiáno, a kinde of excellent wine.

Trebbiáre, to thresh or winnow corne. Also to make merie in companie.

Trebbiatóre, a thresher or treader of Corne.

Trébbio, as Trebbiáno. Also a rout, a crue, or knot of good drinkers.

Trebellico víno, as Trebbiáno.

Trebello, a kinde of wine, as Trebbiáno.

Trebíce, hearbe Orage or Oracho.

Trebúto, as Tribúto.

Trecapóni, a kind of boies play in Italie.

Trécca, a woman fruterer or costermunger, a huckster.

Trecciáre, to plaite, to tie, to tramell, or roule vp in tresses as womens haires are.

Tréccie, plaits, tresses or tramels of haire, a womans tresses of haires.

Trecciuóli, tramels, traps, filets, ribands, or hairelaces to tie vp haires.

Tréccola, a rig, a flurt, a gixie, a trull, a squamish or skoulding woman.

Treccoláre, to rig vp and downe, to prate, to scold, as an idle huswife.

Treccóne, a fruterer, a costermunger, a huckster. Also a sad-sullen fellow that neuer laugheth. Also a busie, prying, sneaking or pickthank companion, a man that is euer full of sutes and businesse.

Trecéna, a kinde of hard shell fish.

Trecento, three hundreth.

Trecípite, hauing three heads.

Trecotánti, thrice as many.

Trédeci, the number thirteene.

Tredécimo, the thirteenth in order.

Tredicésimo, as Tredécimo.

Trè fiáte, thrice, three times.

Trè fià trè, three times three.

Trefóglio, as Trifóglio.

Tréga, as Trégua.

Tregáre, as Treguáre.

Tregenda, as Versiera, a witch, a hag.

Treggea, all manner of small comfets as biskets and carowaies. Also such little sticks or strawes as hirds build their neasts with.

Tréggia, a harrow. Also an instrument to thresh corne. Also a sled, a skid, or truck. Also a hurdle.

Treggiáre, to harrow. Also to thresh corne. Also to carrie vpon skids or trucks.

Treggiéia, treacle against poison.

Tregióne, a shrub like Terebintho, good against poisoned arrowes.

Tréglia, a barble fish, some take it for the Mullet.

Tregliúzza, a little Barble or Mullet.

Tregua, a truce, a league, an atonement. Also peace, rest, or quiet.

Treguáre, to make a truce, a league, a peace an atonement, or accord.

Tremacciáre, to shiuer, to quiuer, to quake or chatter for colde.

Tremáccio, a shiuering, a quiuering, a chilnesse, a quaking, a trembling, a chattering for colde or through suddaine feare. Also an earthquake. Also a suddaine or great feare. Also the shiuering of an ague.

Tremánte, trembling, shaking, quiuering, shiuering, chilling, chattering or quaking through cold or suddaine feare. Also quauering or warbling with the voice.

Tremáre, to tremble, to shake, to quiuer, to shiuer, to chill, to chatter, or quake through colde or feare. Also to qua­



uer or warble with the voice.

Tremár dì, to quake for.

Tremarína, as Tremáccio.

Tremaruóla, as Tremáccio.

Tremaruóle, spangles.

Tremázzo, as Tremáccio.

Tremboláre, as Tremoláre.

Trembolo, as Trémolo.

Tremebóndo, as Tremendo.

Tremélga, a kinde of fish.

Tremendaménte, dreadfully.

Tremendo, dreadfull, redoubted. Also to be feared, or that troubleth much.

Trementáio, shoe-makers blacke.

Trementína, turpentine. Also a kinde of slabber that curious women vse about their eiebrowes or temples, and forehead, to get and pull off ouer-saucie haires.

Trè míla, three thousand.

Tremíscere, mísco, miscéi, múto, as Tremáre.

Trémito, as Tremáccio.

Trémo, as Tremáccio.

Trémola, gold-foile, or thinne leaues of gold or siluer, namely thinne plate as our vintners adorn their bushes with. Vsed also for spangles or aglets. Also as Tremáccio.

Tremolánte, as Tremánte. Also as Trémola. Also a stop in some instruments called the quauering or warbling stop.

Tremoláre, as Tremáre.

Tremolázzo, as Tremáccio.

Trémolo, as Tremánte. Also as Sgrámfo. Also an aspen tree. Also a spangle.

Tremolóso, as Tremolánte.

Tremóre, as Tremáccio.

Tremoróso, as Tremolánte.

Tremóto, an earth-quake.

Trempella, as Stempella.

Trempelláre, as Stempelláre.

Trempellíno, a tressell for a table.

Trémulo, as Tremolánte.

Tremúto, shaked, trembled, quiuered.

Tréne, two traies vpon the dice.

Tréni, hath beene vsed of Panigaróla for the Lamentations of Ieremie.

Trénta, the number of thirty.

Trentacinquésimo, the fiue and thirtieth in order.

Tréntapáia, il tréntapáia, thirty paire. A curse they vse in Italie, as one would say, All the diuels in hell take thee.

Trentauecchia, as Trentína.

Trenténa, one number of thirty.

Trentéfimo, the thirtieth in order.

Trentína vecchia, an old trot, an old hagge, an old beldame, an old witch.

Trentiplicáre, to multiplie by thirties.

Trentuniera, a woman that either loueth to haue, or hath had a Trentúno.

Trentuniere, one of those that hath giuen or would giue a woman a Trentúno.

Trentúno, the number of one and thirtie. Also a game at cards called one and thirtie, or bone-ace. Also the game on the head. Also Dáre un Trentúno, is a punishment or reuenge that Ruffianly fellowes and Swaggerers vse to punish and inflict vpon raskally whores in Italie, who (as some vse to pumpe them, or duck them in the water in England) cause them to be iumbled one and thirtie seuerall times, by so many base rascals one after another without stop or stay: and if they be not so many men, looke how many there be, they must make vp the number by turnes. Also an occupying of one and thirty times giuen to such a common hedge-whore, or ouer-ridden iade, as we say in England. A pumping of a common whore.

Trenzéi, six and thirty.

Trepanáre, as Trapanáre.

Trepáno, as Trapáno.

Trepáre, to iest or dallie.

Trepése, hearbe Orach or Orage.

Trepidáre, to be fearefull, or quake for feare, to feare, to dread.

Trepidatióne, fearefulnesse, dread, quaking, or trembling for feare. Also a kinde of motion of primum mobile.

Trepido, fearefull, timorous, faint-hearted, trembling, or amazed with feare.

Trepiè, as Trepiedi.

Trepiedi, an iron triuet, any thing that hath three feet, or a tressle, a threefooted stoole or pot.

Trépo, a iesting or dalliance.

Trepóso, full of iest and dalliance.

Treppáre, to tickle, to dallie, to play, to wantonize and iest with action.

Treppiè, as Trepiédi.

Treppése, hearbe Orach or Orage.

Tréppo, a iesting, a tickling, a wantonizie, or dalliance in action.

Trepúdio, as Tripúdio.

Trésca, a kinde of Antike or merrie dance. Also a merrie rout, knot, or crue. Also a dalliance or wantonizing in action.

Trescaménti, dalliances, iestings.

Trescáre, to dance, to hop or skip. Also to iest, to dallie, or wantonize withall.

Trescáta, as Fagioláta.

Trescatóre, a iester, a dallier, a dandler.

Trespéggio, a rout or crue of good fellowes. Also a rumbling or crackling noise.

Tréspido, as Trepiédi, a tressell.

Tréspito, as Trepiédi, a tressell.

Tréspodo, as Trepiédi, a tressell.

Tréspolo, as Trepiédi, a tressell.

Trésse, ioysts or barres. Also skiddes or tressels. Also barres in armorie.

Tretanto, three times as much.

Treuella, as Triuella.

Treuelláre, as Triuelláre.

Treuellíno, as Triuellíno.

Treuisáto, a changeable or motly-color.

Treuísco, a kind of shrub whereon Coculus of India groweth.

Tre vólte, thrice, three times or turnes.

Trè vólte più, three times more.

Trè vólte tánto, three times as much.

Trézzare, as Trecciáre.

Trézze, as Tréccie.

Triáca, treacle against poison. By metaphor any present remedie.

Triáde, vsed for the holy Trinitie.

Triafármaco, a kinde of plaister vsed amongst horse-leaches.

Triangoláre, three-cornered. Also to make triangular.

Triángolo, a triangle, a figure that hath three corners. Also Galangale.

Triángolo equilátere, a triangle with equall sides.

Triángolo equictúre, a triangle that hath two equall sides.

Triángolo scaléno, a triangle with three vnequall sides.

Triárca, a master of a ship with three tops.

Triárij, souldiers among the Romanes that alwaies fought in the reareward, and were the strongest men. They euer fought standing, and some what bending their knees, as if they would rather die then yeeld or remooue their places.

Tribáli, a kinde of weapon, or rather engine of warre.

Tribálli, a kind of enchanters.

Tribbiáno, as Trebbiáno.

Tribbiáre, as Trebbiáre. Also to shake or quake for feare.

Tríbi, hath beene vsed for Tribù.

Tribílio, a kinde of Greeke measure.

Tribo, as Tribú.

Triboláre, to trouble, to molest, to afflict, to vex or bring into tribulation. Also to breake, to bruise, or thresh corne with a flaile. Also to teaze clothes. Also to stirre together. Also to enbrier, to entangle or ensnare. Also to loiter, or goe gazing idly vp and downe. Looke Tríbolo.

Tribolatióne, tribulation, anguish, griefe, paine, sorrow, or trouble of minde.

Tríbolo, at this day in the kingdome of Naples certaine poore women are said to keepe or Fáre il tríbolo, which hired for mony, ouer the dead corpes of any man weepe, waile, lament, wring their hands, scratch their faces, teare their haires, recount his vertues, and declare the great losse of such a man. 



Also a kinde of weapon like a flaile. Also caltrops vsed in warre to prick horses feet. They are so made with foure prickes, that which way soeuer they be cast, one pricke stands euer vp. Also the caltrop thistle, or rough teazle, vsed also for a bramble, a brier, or thorne.

Tribrácho, a foot in a verse of three short syllables.

Tribù, or Tribo, a tribe among the Romans. It was the 35 part of the people of Rome, because the whole number of citizens was diuided into 35. tribes. Wee may call them tribes, bands, or wards. Some say that in old times the said people were diuided into three parts only, and that the name Tribù did first rise thereof.

Tribù di cauallería, a troupe of horse.

Tribuíre, buisco, buí to, to attribute, to ascribe, to impute, to grant, to bestow, to apply or yeeld vnto, to giue or deliuer vnto. Also to fauour or set much by.

Tríbula, as Tríbolo.

Tribuláre, as Triboláre.

Tribulatióne, as Tribolatióne.

Tríbule, one of a tribe, or stocke, or one belonging to any one tribe or ward.

Tríbulo, as Tríbolo.

Tribúna, a tribunall, or royall court, a Court or seat of iustice, a Guild-hall.

Tribunále, a tribunall or iudgement Seat.

Tribunáto, the office or dignitie of a Tribune, the Protector-ship of the Commons.

Tribunítio, of or belonging to the Tribune. Also he that hath beene a Tribune.

Tribúno, a Tribune, as we may say, a Protector of the Commons, which office was first appointed to maintaine the liberties and benefits of the Commons against the power and pride of the Nobles, and for that cause had euer both night and day the gates of their houses standing open.

Tributáre, to bring to subiection, and cause to pay tribute vnto, to pay tribute.

Tributário, tributarie, tribute paying.

Tributióne, a tributation, a distribution.

Tribúto, a tribute, which is money raised vpon the goods of subiects, according to their meanes or abilitie.

Triccáre, to triftle, or loitringly spend the time. Also to toy with trifling words. Also to goe a shuffling or racking pace, to racke as some horses doe. Also to shuffile or iumble together. Also to hop, to skip or friske.

Triccatína, a kind of tripping dance. Also a nimble tripping or dancing wench. 

Trícche-trácche, a game at tables called Ticke-tacke.

Trícchia, a shell-fish called a Sare-dame.

Triccoláre, to make good cheare, to fare well, to eat and drinke merrilie, to quaffe.

Tríccolo, as Treccóne, a huckster.

Triccóne, as Treccóne, a huckster.

Tricentúplo, three hundred fold.

Tricephalo, hauing three heads.

Tricerbero, the hell-hound or dog.

Trichiási, a disease in some womens paps that giue sucke, which commeth by drinking downe some haire. Also a cleft about the back-bone running out in length, but so small that it cannot bee seene, which often times causeth death. Also a kinde of shell-fish like a Scardane.

Trichíte, a kinde of alome.

Trichnóne, Morell or Night-shade.

Trichro, as Tríco.

Triccipítio, as Precipítio.

Triclínio, a dining table where onely three might sit, made as a bed, Vsed also for a dining chamber, or supping parlor.

Tríco, a kinde of stone that hath three diuers colours in it: at the root it is perfect blacke, in the middle sanguine, and at the top white.

Tricócco, the Turnsoll-tricoccus. Also a kinde of medlers with three kernels.

Tricodato, hauing-three tailes.

Trícolo molíno, a kinde of hill.

Tricolóne, haung three members.

Tricolóre, of three colours.

Tricoméne, the hearbe Maiden-haire, or Goldie-lookes.

Tricóne, a sad or sullen fellow, that neuer laughes. Also a contentious wrangler.

Tricórne, hauing three hornes.

Tricorpóreo, hauing three bodies, threebodied.

Tridáchne, a kind of very great Oyster, as one may make three morsels of one.

Tridáttilo, a kind of withie.

Tridente, a trident or threeforked mace. Also any toole or instrument that hath three tooth, a graple.

Tridrámma, a coine in Greece of three dragmes.

Triduáno, of three daies continuance.

Tríduo, the space of three daies.

Tríegua, as Tregua, a truce.

Trieguáre, as Treguáre, to truce.

Triemáre, as Tremáre.

Triemito, as Tremáccio.

Triennále, of three yeeres.

Trienne, of three yeeres. Also as Triente.

Triennio, three yeeres space.

Triente, a small quoine worth our farthing, the third part of a Roman assis Vsed also for the third part of any thing.

Trientário, vsurie of three in the hundred.

Trienza, a pitch-forke, a dung-forke.

Trienzétta, a little pitch-forke.

Tricrárco, a master of a gallie.

Trieterico, that is euery third yeere.

Trifáce, a kinde of dart or quarew of three cubits length, shot out of a Catapúlia.

Trifágio, a word vsed by Botero in his relatióni uniuersáli, folio 175.

Trifário, of three sorts or waies.

Trifatídico, that is a great Prophet, a thrice Prophet.

Trifáuce, hauing three mouthes, throtes, or chaps, as Cerberus is described.

Trífero, that bringeth fruit thrice a yeere.

Trifído, diuided or cleaft in three parts.

Trifólio, Crowtoes, Clauergrasse, Trefoyle, or three-leaued grasse. Also the Club in cards.

Trifílo, a kind of ornament that women were wont to weare.

Triforcúto, threeforked.

Trifórme, of three formes or shapes. Also a surname giuen to the Moone.

Tríga, a kinde of chariot or cart drawen with three horses.

Trígamo, done that hath had three wiues.

Trigemini, three children at a birth, or one of those children. Also threefold.

Trigemme, twigs or sprouts with three buds or shootes.

Trigenário, of thirty yeeres.

Trigésimo, the thirtieth in order.

Triggea, as Traggea.

Trigia, as Trigillita.

Trigillita, a stone named of the Barble-fish.

Trigimóne, a kind of blacke that Painters vse.

Tríglia, as Tréglia.

Trigliáre, to quauer or warble in singing.

Triglífo, chamfred or wrought hollow like three gutters or furrowes, as we see in wanescot works.

Tríglio, a quauer or warble in singing.

Trigllte, a fish called a Mullet. Also a stone of the colour of a Mullet.

Trigoli, a kinde of Cardus, or Thistles, or Artichocks eaten in Italie.

Trigonále, of three angles or corners.

Trigonáre, to make three cornered.

Trigonía, the third age.

Trigónio, the Puffin or Fork-fish of the Sea.

Trigonísmo, of or about the third age.

Trigono, triangular, hauing three corners. 



Trigonóne, an hearbe or flower.

Trigránia, the three grained Medler or Neapolitane medlar.

Trilátero, hauing three sides.

Trilíngue, one that hath three tongues, one that speakes three languages. Also three forked.

Trilláre, as Trigliáre.

Tríllo, as Tríglio.

Trílogo, a dialogue of three speakers.

Trilóre, a kind of garment.

Trilústre, of or contayning three lusters, that is fifteene yeeres.

Trimácro, a foot of a verse of three long sillables.

Trimembre, of three members.

Trimenóne, as Trimestre.

Trimense, of three monthes.

Trimerma, hauing three faces.

Trimestre, corne that is sowne, groweth, ripeneth and is reaped in three monthes.

Trimetri, verses of three measures, which are six feete, as Iambikes.

Trimoríno, hauing three faces.

Trína, twist of gold or siluer.

Trináre, to chirp as a swallow.

Trinário, consisting of three, trinary.

Trínca, a game at cardes called swig or new-cut, Nuóua di trínca, as we say spick and span new.

Trincáre, to drinke, to quaffe, to bib or tipple merily and healthes. Also to trim or smug vp finely.

Trincáto, drunke, quaffed or tipled merily. Also spruce, fine, neat, smug, feate, tricksie-trim. Also crafly, wilie, slie, subtill, and wary.

Trincea, a trench, a dike or a sconce about a campe or fort.

Trinceáre, to entrench, to enskonce or fortifie with trenches.

Trinchétto, a small saile in a ship called a trinket.

Trínci, gardings, fringings, lacings. Also cuts, iags, snips, pinkes or any idle ornaments about garments.

Trinciánte, cutting, keene or sharpe. Also a caruing knife. Also a Caruer.

Trinciáre, to cut, to carue, to mince, to slice or breake vp any meat.

Trincieráre, to entrench.

Trinciere, trenches.

Tríne, twistes or purles of gold or siluer. Also as Trínci.

Trineáre, to slide or goe on sledges vpon the ice.

Trineo, a sledge to slide vpon the ice.

Trinepóte, one that is of three lineall descents from my childes child.

Trinétra, small twist or purle.

Tríne velutáte, a kind of silken stuffe.

Trinézza, shee that is three lineall descents from my childes childe.

Trinfáre, to chirpe as a Swallow. 

Trínga, a water or Moore-hen.

Tríni, three together. Also two treis vpon the dice cast at once.

Trinità, a number of three, the holy Trinity. Also the hearbe Hepátiea.

Trínna, the space of three yeeres.

Tríno, trine, threefold, of three.

Trinnúo, of three yeeres old.

Trinómio, of three names.

Trinóttio, three nights space.

Trinsáre, to chirp as a swallow.

Trinzánte, as Trinciánte.

Trióbolo, a Greeke coine of three oboles, worth two pence sterlin. Also a dandiprat.

Trióne, seauen starres being in the North called Charles-waine.

Trionfále, triumphant, of or belonging to triumph. Looke Coróna.

Trionfánte, triumphant, reioyceing.

Trionfáre, to triumph, to get the conquest. Also to reioyce greatly. Also to ruffe or trumpe at cards.

Trionfatóre, a triumpher, a reioycer.

Trionfétti, a game at cardes called trump.

Triónfo, a triumph, a ioy or gladnesse, that is, a solemne pomp or shew at the returne of a Captaine for some victory or conquest gotten. Also a trump at cardes, or the play called trump or ruffe.

Triórca, a kind of the hearbe Centory. Also a kind of beast which is said to haue three stones.

Triórchide, a Buzard or a kinde of Hawke so named because it feedes vpon Triórca.

Triórco, as Triórchide.

Triotálmo, a stone hauing the figure of three eies in it.

Tripára, as Trippára.

Tripárco, very sparing or niggish.

Tripartíre, to deuide into three parts.

Tripartíto, tripartite, deuided in three parts.

Trípe, a kinde of Moath resembling gnats.

Tripedále, that hath three feets, or that is three foote long.

Tripedánea, a kind of wine or grape.

Tripettore, thrice-breasted, or that hath three breasts.

Tripláre, to treble.

Triplicáre, to treble, to triple. Also to fold a thing three times.

Triplicatióne, a tripling, a triplication.

Triplicáto, tripled, three-folded.

Tríplice, triple, treble, threefold.

Triplicità, a triplicity, a three-foldnesse.

Tríplo, triple, threefold.

Tripóde, a table of gold threefoote long drawen vp in a net by certaine Fisher- men, and sent by Solon to Apollo. Also a kind of musicall instrument. Also a treuet or three footed-stoole. Also a tressell.

Tripólia, an earth called Goldsmithes earth.

Tripólio, the hearbe Serapions-Turbith, the iuice wherof is thought to be Turbith. Vsed to purge fleagme, some call it Blew-camomill or Blew-dazies.

Trípolo, a toole that Stone-cutters vse.

Tripóndio, of three pound weight.

Tripóne, as Trippóne.

Tripotiére, a Tenis-court keeper.

Tripotóne, a Noune of three cases.

Trippáccie, filthy stinking tripes.

Tríppa, any kind of tripe. Also a kind of tripe veluet as our fustion of Naples.

Trippára, a Tripe-woman.

Tríppe, all manner of tripes.

Trippiera, a tripe-woman.

Trippóne, a filthy, foule, fat, greasie or gorbellied fellow.

Tripricità, a triplicity.

Triptóti, Nounes hauing but three cases.

Tripudiáre, to dance or trip on the tooes.

Tripúdij, dancings or trippings on the tooes.

Tripúdio, a kind of tripping dance.

Tripúdio solistímo, the hearty feeding of birdes which Augures obserued and deemed to shew good successe.

Trirégno, a treble kingdome.

Trireme, a Gally of three oares on a side or bench.

Triságine, the hearbe Germander.

Triságio, as Treággio.

Trisáuo, Trisáuolo, a great great Grand-father.

Trisciáto, smirke, smug, spruce, vp-straight and handsomly drest vp.

Trisílabo, of three sillables.

Trismegísto, one that is often in authoritie.

Trisolcáre, to furrow or chamfer three waies.

Trisólchi, three-furrowed or chamfred.

Trispastóne, the name of an engine with a perpetuall skew in it, vsed by Archimedes to heaue vp huge waights.

Trispíggio, a trembling, a quiuering.

Tríssa, a kind of grate of timber which some ships haue for an vpper deck. Also a hurdle. Also a kind of fish.

Trisságine, the hearbe Ground-Oake or Petty-oake, or as some say the vpright Veruein.

Trissálide, a kind of Cricket, Worme or Locust without wings.

Trissílabo, of three sillables.

Trissíno, the plant Palma Christi.

Tristacciuólo, as Tristanzuólo.



Tristaménte, badly, leaudly, naughtilie. Also sadly or pensiuely.

Tristanzuólo, a crafty knauish wag. Also a wearish, crazed or sickly man.

Tristarello, a little Trísto, or that is somewhat Trísto. Also a Kestrell.

Tristézza, knauishnesse, naughtinesse, badnesse, leaudnesse, dishonesty, tretcherie.

Tristínculo, a Kestrell.

Tristíssimo, very sad, melancholy, pensiue. Also a very knaue, naught, bad, leaud or dishonest.

Tristítia, sadnesse, melancholinesse, pensiuenesse. Also as Tristézza.

Tristitiuále, subtle or slie knaueries.

Trísto, knauish, wily, crafty, bad, leaud. Also sad, pensiue, heauy, sorrowfull. Also of much grauity.

Trísto mè, woe is me wretched I.

Trísto lo fáccia Dio, God make him sorowfull.

Trisúlca, three-forked, three-edged. Also an arrow-headed tongue.

Tríta, worne and beaten, small, common. Also minced. Also tender or mortified. Also a kind of ship of burthen.

Tritále, an hearbe which hath flowers thrice a yeere. Vsed also for Houseleeke, Sengreene, Pricke-madanie or Euergreene.

Tritaménte, mincingly, smally, by piecemeale. Also commonly vsed.

Tritaménto, a mincing or cutting small. Also a wearing small.

Tritáre, to mince, to slice, to shred, to bruise, to crumble or to weare very small. Also to teare into ragges. Also to grinde corne. Also to thresh corne.

Tritáua, a great Grandmothers mother.

Tritáno, a great Grandfathers father.

Tritáuola, as Tritáua.

Tritáuolo, as Tritáuo.

Tritea, a tertian ague.

Tritello, a kind of ranged cource bread.

Triteo, a kind of measure.

Tritera, as Fagioláta.

Tritiáni, a kind of Cole or Cabage-Cole.

Trítico, all maner of corne that may be ground, we cal it in English greest, but it is properly red wheate.

Tritináre, to crie or hisse as a Goose.

Tríto, small, minced, brazed or crumbled very small. Also much vsed, worne out. Also broken or ground small or to dust. Also old and thrid-bare. Also vsuall and common. Also a kinde of blew powder made of Azore vsed in painting. Also the act of breaking, bruiting or grinding.

Tritoláre, as Tritáre. Also to trip or skud away as a Roe-deare. 

Trítolo, as Trito. Also as Boccáta.

Tritóne, a Triton. Also a great fish called a Sea-trumpeter.

Tritóno, consisting of three tunes.

Tritúme, the fragments or crumbles of any thing.

Tritúra, as Trituratúra.

Trituráre, as Tritáre.

Trituratúra, any kind of grinding smal, any breaking or crumming very small.

Triuella, a wimble, an augre, a piercer. Also a chiefe or master skrew.

Triuelláre, to boare or pierce with an auger or wimble. Also to skrew.

Triuellíno, a little wimble or augre.

Triuello, a wimble, an augre. Also the bore of any Cannon or piece.

Triuellóne, a boring iron to bore a cannon.

Tríuia, a name giuen to Diána as cheefe ouer high-waies that Bend three waies.

Triuiále, triniall, common, of small estimation, vsed or taught in high-waies.

Triuialità, triuiality, homelinesse.

Tríuio, any place that lookes three waies, or where three sundry waies do meete, a way that passeth outright, and parteth on the leaft and one the right side. Also a common and open marker place where people doe meet, and where common resort is. Also a poore cottage or Country house.

Triumuirálc, of or belonging to the office of Triumuiráto.

Triumuiráto, the office of three in like authority and power.

Triumvíro, one of the three officers that are in equall and like authority.

Triuolo, a threshing-flaile. Also as Tríbolo, Tríuolo molíno, a kinde of Mill.

Triuolóso, mourneful. Also ful of thistles or teazles. Looke Tríbolo.

Tribácica, a kind of sporte among wanton women to prouoke them to letcherie.

Trócciola, a pully of a well or ship. Also any kind of little wooden wheele.

Trocheo, a foote in a verse consisting of two feete, the first a long sillable and the last a short, so called of swiftnesse in running and because it is fit for dancing.

Trochilo, a kind of water foule frinde to the Crokodill, some take it for a Wagtaile, because his taile is euer waging, others for a Sea-woodcocke because it hath a long bill, some take it also for a Wren.

Trochisci, a kinde of round medicine, called of our Apothecaries Trochiskes.

Trocleo, as Trócciola. Also a wind-lace to draw vp heauy waights.

Tróco, a whirly-gig or childs top to play withall.

Trofeo, as Tropheo.

Trogéte, a tree yeelding a sweete odure and sweete wood, it is much like vnto a wilde Cipresse-tree.

Trogliáre, to stutter, to stammer, to maffle.

Tróglio, a stuttering, or stammering man.

Troglodíti, dwarfes enhabiting in dens or cauerns. Also hedge-Sparrowes.

Trogóne, a kind of night-bird, rarely seene.

Tróia, a farrowing Sow.

Troiáre, to Farrow or Pig, as a Sow doeth.

Troiáta, a Farrowing, or Sowes Pigging.

Trómba, any Trump or Trumpet. Also a Sackbut. Also a leather trunke. Also a pump in a Ship.

Trómba d'amóre, as Cóppa di Gióue.

Trómba di fuóco, a kinde of casting wild-fire, we call them fire-Squibs.

Trombáre, to sound a Trumpet. Also to make a ratling noise. Also to buzze. Also to play vpon a Sackbut. Also to proclaime aloud. Also to trump or braie as an Asse. Also to snort.

Trombáre ácqua, to pump water.

Trombatóre, a Trumpeter. Vsed also for a tryer of a Proclamation.

Trombeggiáre, as Trombáre.

Trombeggiáta, any march or point of warre sounded vpon a Trumpet.

Trombeggiatóre, a Trumpeter.

Trombétta, a Trumpet. Also a Trumpeter.

Trombettáre, as Trombáre.

Trombertáro, a Trumpeter.

Trombétta squarciáta, a kind of Trumpeter.

Trombettero, as Trombettiere.

Trombettiere, a Trumpeter, but vsed for a man that loueth to pratile much.

Tromboncino, a treble Sackbut.

Trombóne, a Base or great Trumpet, or Sackbut. Also a Foule called a Bittor.

Tronadóri, running Squibs of wild-fire.

Tronáre, to thunder.

Troncaménte, cuttingly by halfes.

Troncáre, to cut off, to cut short, to curtall, to abridge. Also to clip, or pare. Also to shiuer, or splitter. Also to maime, or mangle.

Troncáto, cut off, cut short. Looke Troncáre.

Trónco, any trunke or bodie without a head. Also a stump or stem without boughes, any stocke or blocke. Also a logarhead or block-headed fellow. Al­



so a trunchion, a cudgell, a bat, or crab-tree cudgell.

Tróncoli, the vailes of a Cooke, as Giblets, or shreds of any meate.

Troncóne, any great Trónco.

Tronera, a loope or spike-hole in a wall, to spie or shoote out at.

Tronfáre, to snort. Also to tramp at cards. Also to puffe, to swell or blow vp with anger and chafing, as a Cock doeth.

Tronfiáre, as Tronfáre.

Tronfiézza, a puffing, a swelling, a huffing, or strutting vp of an angrie Cocke.

Trónfio, a game at Cards called Trump, or Ruff, or a Trump-card. Also puffed, swalne, blowne vp with chafing chiefly as a Cock or Turkie-cock when he is angrie, and struts vp himselfe.

Trónfo, as Trónfio.

Tróno, a Throne, a supreame seate, a seate of Maiestie. Vsed also for Tuóno.

Trónzoli, the dung or truttles of any cattell, namely of Sheepe.

Tropello, any little troupe, band, rout, crue, knot, or companie. Also a flocke of Sheepe.

Tropheále, Looke Tropheo, of or belonging to Tropheo.

Tropheo, a trophey, a signe or token of a victorie, any spoiles gotten from the enemies, and kept in signe of victorie, a marke, or token and monument set vp where a victorie was gotten, and where enemies were vanquished, with their armes and spoiles hanged about it. Also a certaine winde moouing and stirring, which comes from the Sea to the land.

Tropiccáre, to stumble, or trip downe.

Tropicciáre, as Stropicciáre.

Trópici, two great circles in heauen being of equall distance from the Equator, the one called. Trópico di Capricórno, the other Trópico di Cáncro, at the which the Sunne turneth either higher, hauing bin at the lowest; or lower, hauing bin at the highest, whereof they haue their names.

Trópico, the Singular of Trópici. Also tropicall, or figuratiue.

Trópo, a figure, a fashion, or manner of speaking.

Trópolo, a conuersion of words.

Tropología, a figuratiue speaking.

Tropológico, that speaketh figuratiuely.

Tróscio, as Záttera, but properly when they are made to build bridges vpon them, as was often seene at the siege of Ostend.

Tropólio, a kind of hearbe.

Tróppa, a troup or band of men.

Troppézza, ouer-muchnesse. 

Tróppi, too-manie, ouer-manie.

Tróppo, too-much, ouer-much.

Tróppo non e, it is not ouer-much.

Tróppo non e, it is not long.

Tróppo gránde, too great, ouer-great.

Tróppo più, too much more.

Tróschi, as Trochísci.

Tróscia, a raging or violent showre of raine, or falling downe of waters. Also a flow, a plash, or hollow full of standing raine-water.

Trosciáre, to raine, or showre downe violently. Also to grow to a standing-flow, or plash of waters.

Trossáli, as Trissálide.

Tróssula, a delicate wench.

Tróssuli, as Flessumíni.

Tróssule, a daintie spruce fellow.

Tróta, as Trúta, a Trout-fish.

Trótta, as Trúta, a Trout-fish.

Trottánte, trotting. Also a trotting horse. Also a trudging fellow.

Trottáre, to trot. Also to trudge.

Trottatóre, a trotter. Also a trudger.

Trottiera, a place where horses are taught to trot. Also a word much vsed in Venice about their Magistrates.

Trottíno, an easie trot. Also a little or easie trotting nag.

Trótto, a trot, or trotting pace.

Tróttola, a top, a nunne, or whirlegig.

Trottoláre, to turne round, or twirle as a childs top, nunne, or whirlegig. Also to racke or goe a shuffling pace betweene an amble and a trot. Also to rumble or roule downe.

Tróttolo, a racking, or shuffling pace. Also a rumbling or tumbling downe. Also a kinde of Trout-fish. Also as Tróttola.

Trottóne, a trotting pace. Also a trotting iade.

Trouábile, that may be found.

Trouadelli, findlings, children found. Also any manner of findings.

Trouáre, to find, to find out. Also to seeke out, to deuise, or inuent.

Trouáre il púnto del pezzo, as Trouáre il víuo del pezzo.

Trouáre il ráso de metálli, as Trouáre il víuo del pezzo.

Trouáre il verso, as Trouáresefto.

Trouáre il víuo del pezzo, to find the dispart of a piece: all pieces are made lower at the mouth then at the breech, who so shootes by both extreames of the mettall shall euer ouer-shoote, therefore must the mouth be raised to the breech, which the Italians call Tirare per il raso de metalli, which to auoid, our gunners by rules they haue dispart their pieces, and call it the dispart, that is the height which the piece wants at the mouth. When they haue found this height, they set it with a little peg or piece of wax vpon the top of the cornish of the mouth, answering in a iust line the cornish of the breech, and that peg our gunners call the dispart, and the Italians, Il víuo, il púnto, or else, il ráso.

Trouáre módo, to finde meanes.

Trouáre la stíua, as Trouáre sesto.

Trouáresesto, to find order, or meane, or way.

Trouársi in sule sécche, for a man to find himselfe in a peck of troubles, the metaphor is taken from a Ship that is left on the dry sands, or from a fish that is on dry land, and can make no shift.

Trouársi in su le sécche di Barbería, for a man to finde himselfe on the dry and hot sands of Barbarie, that is, to haue the french pox.

Trouáto, found, found out. Also sought out, deuised, or inuented.

Trouáto, a finding, an inuention, a deuise. Also a fained shift, or excuse.

Trouatóre, a finder. Also a seeker out, or inuentor. Also vsed for a Poet.

Trouéuole, as Trouábile.

Trozzáre, as Tracciáre. Also as Strozzare.

Trozzétto, a little path, or narrow way.

Trózzo, a path, or high-troden way.

Trúcca, a fustian or roguish word for a whore or trull.

Truccabócca, a Sewers towell, or cloth.

Truccacoltelli, a cace of kniues.

Truccáre, to truck, to swab, to barter, to chap or change ware for ware. Also to skvd, to trudge, or packe away. Also to play at Billiards.

Trúcco, a Billiard-boord. Also the play at Billiards. Also a game vsed at May-games in England in the highwaies, with casting little bowles at a boord with thirteene holes in it, and numbers ouer them.

Trúce, cruell, fierce, murtherous, bloudie-minded.

Trucidáre, to murther or kill in most cruell and bloudie manner.

Trucidatióne, a murthering or killing in most bloudie and cruell manner.

Trucidatóre, a killer, a cruell murtherer, a bloudie queller.

Trucído, as Trúce.

Trucità, crueltie, or murther.

Trucitáre, to chirp as a Mauis or Thrush. Also as Trucidáre.

Trúco, as Trúce.

Truculente, cruell, fell, rough, terrible, grim, gastly, or horrid in lookes.

Truculenza, crueltie, gastlinesse, felnesse.

Trúffa, a cozening, a cheating, a pilfring, a cunnie-catching, or crosse-bi­



ting tricke.

Truffaldíno, as Truffarelio.

Truffáre, to cozen, to cheate, to purloyne, to pilfer, to cunnie-catch, or crosse-bite.

Truffarello, a craftie, cheating, pilfring, cunnie-catching, or crosse-biting knaue.

Truffaría, as Trúffa.

Truffaruóla, a cozening, a cheating, crosse-biting, or cunnie-catching woman.

Truffatóre, a cheater, a cozener, a crossebiter, a cunnie-catcher, a pilfrer, a filcher.

Trúffoli, a kind of paste-meate, or tartlets.

Truggioláre, to trudge, to tug, to touze.

Trúlla, any broad woodden tray, or washing bowle. Also a close stoole pan. Also a filthie slut or trull.

Trulláre, to fart or breake winde behinde. Also to shite, to cacke, or skommer.

Trúllo, a fart. Also a trill or bum-hole. Also a close stoole pan or chamberpot. Vsed also for a roche-fish.

Truógo, a trough to feede swine in.

Truógola, as Truógo.

Truouáre, as Trouáre, to finde out.

Truouáto, as Trouáto, found out.

Trusciáre, to pop or blurt with ones lips or tongue, to encourage a horse.

Trúscio di lábbra, a blurting or popping with ones lips or tongue, to encourage a horse.

Trúsulo, a thicke dwarfe.

Trúta, a trout-fish. Also a Salmond-trout, or Salmond-peale.

Trutánno, a trewand, a loiterer.

Trutiláre, to chirpe or sing as a blacke-bird.

Trutilláre, as Trutiláre.

Trútina, a little trout-fish. Also a diligent examination or curious considering. A good aduice or iudgement.

Trutína d'una biláncia, the linguet of a paire of ballance.

Trutináre, to weigh or examine diligently, to consider well and throughly.

Trútta, as Trúta, a trout-fish.

Tù, thou, thy selfe.

Túa, thine, thine owne.

Tuáca, a kinde of white liquer distilling from a tree in the Moluccos, and vsed there for drinke.

Tuáre, to thou a man. Also to make thine.

Túba, a trumpe, or a trumpet.

Tubatóre, a Trumpeter.

Túbera, a kinde of apple or plum. Also a great blemish or spot.

Tubercoli, little swellings, pushes, pimples or wheales. Also little knops or rounds in buildings. Looke Túbero.

Túbero, any knot, knur, snag, or knob in a tree. Also any swelling, bunch, knob, or round rising in a mans bodie, namely with a bruise, knocke, or fall. Also a winde-puffe growing on the ground, or on trees like a tode-stoole. Also a kinde of Peach or Apricot.

Túbero di terra, Swinebread or Sow-bread.

Tuberóne, the starre-royall.

Tuberóso, full of Túberi. Looke Túbero.

Tubertána, in French, Granate.

Tubicina, a trumpeter.

Tubicináre, to sound a trumpet.

Túbo, the pipe where through the marrow of the backe-bone runneth. Also a pipe where in water is conueied to a conduit.

Tuchísto, a certaine drug vsed of Gold-finers.

Túcco, vsed for Botúccolo.

Túcia, as Tútia.

Tuderna, a kinde of wine or grape.

Tudíce, a Printers inke-balles or pump-balles. Also a certaine printing-iron.

Tuditáno, a beetle-headed fellow.

Tudóne, a fowle called a Bittour.

Túe, as Tù, thou. Also thine.

Tuello, some part of a horses foot.

Tuendo, that is to be kept, maintained, or defended.

Tuente, prying or rooting into.

Tuffáre, to diue, to ducke or plunge vnder water. Also to dampe or stifle.

Tussáta, a diuing, a ducking, or plunging vnder water.

Tuffo, a dampe, or loath some smell comming out of some dungeon. Also a turfe of earth to burne. Also as Túfo.

Tuffoláre, as Tuffáre. Also to cramme, to pamper, or feed fat.

Tuffolótta guáncia, a fat, plum, round, apple or pampred cheeke.

Túfo, a kind of soft, crumbling, or mouldring stone to build withall.

Tuguriétto, any little Tugúrio.

Tugúrio, a poore country house, a shepheards cottage, bullie, or shed.

Tuietto. 

Tuíre, isco, íto, to looke earnestly.

Tuíssimo, most thine, very very thine.

Tuitióne, tuition, defending.

Tuíto, an earnest looking into.

Túl, as Túil, Túl vedi, thou seest it or him.

Tuliáne, a kinde of cheries.

Tulípa, a Narcissus flower.

Túma, a kinde of sowre curds.

Tumásso, a kinde of cheese made of soure curds.

Tumento, the nap on cloth, or cotton.

Túmere, túmo, tuméi, tumúto, to swell vp, to rise or puffe vp, to grow to some tumor, to burst out. Also to wax proud and disdainfull.

Tuméto, a Sepulchre.

Tumidaménte, swellingly, puffingly. Also proudly, haughtily, disdainfully.

Tumidétto, some what plum or swelling.

Tumidézza, swelling pride, disdainefull haughtinesse, surquedrie.

Tumidíre, dísco, díto, as Túmere. Also to swell, to festre and rankle.

Túmido, swollen or puffed vp. Also festred or rankled. Also proud and disdainefull, and as we say, swolne with pride.

Tummim, préso pet perfettióne. Essodo. 28. 30. 

Túmolo, a hillocke, or heap of any thing. Also a Tombe or Sepulchre.

Tumóre, a tumor, a swelling, a puffing vp, an inflammation, or rising of flesh by some malicious matter or ill humor. Also pride, disdaine, or haughtinesse.

Tumorosità, as Tumóre.

Tumoróso, full of Tumóre, tumorous.

Tumuláre, to heape vp on heapes. Also to make the ground hollow. Also to entombe.

Tumulerrte, drunken, tipsie.

Tumulenza, drunkennesse.

Túmulo, as Túmolo.

Tumulóso, full of heapes or hilles.

Tumúlto, a tumult, an vprore, a mutinie, an insurrection, a commotion of people, a ruffling stirre.

Tumultuánte, as Tumultuóso.

Tumultuáre, to raise a tumult, an vprore, a mutinie, an insurrection, a storme or commotion.

Tumultuário, tumultuous, tumultuary, vnorderly, done suddenly or rashly.

Tumultuatióne, as Tumúlto.

Tumultuóso, tumultuous, turbulent, seditious, mutinous, ruffing, tempestous.

Tunára, fishing for Tunnies.

Túne, a ginnie-hen.

Túnica, as Tónata.

Túo, thine, thine owne.

Tuò, take, hold, catch, haue to thee.

Tuói, thine, thine owne.

Tuonánte, thundring, rumbling, clattring. Also tuning, sounding, accenting.

Tuonáre, to thunder, to rumble, to clatter. Also to tune, to sound, or giue a true accent.

Tuoneggiáte, as Tuonáre, as Sonnacchiáre.

Tuónitro, a thundring, a clatting.

Tuóno, a thunder, a rumbling, a clatter. Also a tune, a sound, an accent.

Tuór, Tuórre, as Tógliere or Tórre.

Tuordello, as Tórdo, a thrush, a mauis.

Tuórdo, a thrush or mauis, as Tórdo.



Tuórlo, as Tórlo, the yolke of an egge.

Tuórre, as Tóghere, or as Tórre.

Tuósa, a purse of mony in the rogues language, or pedlers French.

Túppo, the docke or rumpe of a horses taile.

Turáccio, any stopple, bung, or muffler. Also a Gunners spunger or scouring-sticke.

Turácciolo, any little Turáccio.

Turáglio, as Turáccio.

Turáre, to stop, to muffle, to dam vp, but properly any hole, gap, or mouth.

Túrba, the multitude of common people, an assemblie, a rout, a crue, a swarme, a rabble, or throng of people. Vsed also for a ruffling, a trouble, or debate.

Turbábile, that may be troubled.

Turbaménto, a trouble, a molestation, or perturbation of the minde.

Turbánte, a turbant, that is a wreathed round attire of white linnen that the Turkes weare on their heads.

Turbáre, to trouble, to molest, to disturbe, to disorder, to confound or make vnquiet.

Turbársi, to be angrie and vexed.

Turbatióne, trouble, perturbation.

Turbáto, troubled, molested, disturbed, disordred, ruffled, or made vnquiet.

Turbatóre, a troubler, a disturber.

Turbe, turfs or turues of earth to burne.

Turbelíce, a kinde of bird.

Turbéuole, that may be troubled.

Túrbico, as Túrbine.

Turbidáre, as Torbidáre.

Túrbido, as Tórbido. Also darke and tempestuous.

Turbináre, to make round and sharpe like a top or gigge. Also looke Túrbine.

Turbinatióne, the fashion of a thing like a top, broad about and small beneath.

Turbináto, round, and broad aboue and sharpe beneath like a top or gigge.

Túrbine, a whirlewinde, a gust, a berry, a flaw, or sudden stormie and tempestuous blast of winde, a boisterous storme or tempest, or winde beating downe trees and houses, a tempestuous furie, sudden rage, or stormie danger. Also a whirlepoole, or violent and ruinoud streame. Also a top, a gigge, a nunne or whirligigge that children play withall. Also a kinde of still, stillatorie, or limbecke. Also a shellfish called a welke or wrinkle. Also a bird called a wrinecke. Some take it for a specht or wood-pecker.

Turbineo, like vnto, of, or belonging to a Túrbine. Also whirling round.

Turbístro, a thing mixt with liquor wherewith wooll is died, which maketh the die sinke into the wooll.

Túrbith, a root much vsed in physicke to purge fleagme with.

Túrbo, duskie, cloudie, mistie, gloomie, darke. Also as Túrbine. Also a top, a gigge, a childes whirligigge or nun.

Turbolente, as Torbolente.

Turbolenza, as Torbolenza.

Turbóne, a swaggerer, a ruffler, a swash-buckler.

Turbulente, as Torbolente.

Turcásso, a quiuer for arrowes. Also a goldsmiths case or box for his pounces.

Turchésa, a blew stone called a Turkoise.

Turchésca, turkish. Also as Turchésa.

Torchimáno, as Torcimáno.

Turchína, as Turchésa. Also as Turchíno.

Turchíno, blew, azure, watchet, bisse-colour.

Túrcico, Turkish wheat.

Turcimáno, as Torcimánno.

Túrco, a Turke. Also a Turkie-horse.

Turdella, as Tórdo, a thrush, a mauis.

Túrdo, as Tórdo, a thrush, a mauis.

Turésia, as Turchésa.

Turéuole, that may be stopped.

Túrgere, túrgo, turgéi, turgiúto, as Tumére.

Turgidézza, as Tumóre.

Turgidíre, dísco, díto, as Tumére.

Túrgido, swollen, inflate, festred, bigge.

Turgitúdine, as Tumóre.

Turgiúto, as Túrgido.

Turíbolo, as Toríbolo.

Turíni, a kinde of mushroms or todestooles.

Turlurù, a foole, a gull, a ninnie, a patch.

Turlurulláre, to chirpe or sing as some birds.

Turlurúllo, the noise, the chirping, or humming of some birds.

Túrma, a troupe, a crue, or companie of people, namely of two and thirty horsemen.

Turpáre, as Turpidíre.

Túrpe, filthie, dishonest, foule, shamefull, reprochfull, dishonourable, vnhonest.

Turpédine, filthinesse, foulenesse, reproch, dishonestie, shame, villanie, pollution.

Turpézza, as Turpédine.

Turpidíre, dísco, díto, to defile, to pollute, to dishonest, to foule, to taint with filth.

Túrpido, defiled, polluted, filthie, dishonest, foule, tainted.

Turpílla, as Sgrámfo.

Turpilóquio, filthy speaking.

Turpilúcro, filthie gaine.

Turpíssimo, most filthie and foule.

Turpitúdine, as Turpédine.

Turpóre, as Torpóre.

Turrapía, a kinde of wine or grape.

Turríbulo, as Torríbolo.

Tursióne, a king of fish, which some take for the Sturgion.

Turtusétto, a little tendrell of coleworts eaten in salades.

Turuglióne, Carpenters call it a Trunion or Munion.

Tusánti, as Tuttisánti.

Túscio, a kind of frankincense.

Tù sei désso, thou art he.

Túso, contused, bruised, beaten, braied.

Tussilágine, tussilage, coughwort, horsehoofe, folefoot, coltsfoot, horsefoot, or bullfoot. An hearbe very good for the cough, called also vnghia cauallína, or vnghia di cauállo, whose leaues are like Iuie, but somewhat bigger, with many corners, the vpper part greene, the nether whitish, and lieth flat on the ground.

Tussire, as Tossíre, to cough.

Tussíto, coughed.

Tutaménte, safely, securely, out of danger, in no perill.

Tutela, tuition, protection, safe-keeping. Also a wardship, a gardianship, or custodie of a childe in his noneage.

Tuteláre, to guard, to keepe, to protect, and haue in tuition. Also of or belonging to a guardian, to a tutor, to protection or custodie.

Tutelário, such a man as hath the custodie and keeping of Gods or Temples.

Tutelína, the name of a Goddesse fained to haue the tuition of corne.

Tútia, the heauier foile of brasse that sticketh to the higher places of furnaces or melting houses called Tutie.

Tutiláre, to chirpe as a thrush or blackebird.

Tutióne, a caution or defense.

Túto, sure, safe, secure, out of danger, defended from perill.

Tutóre, a tutor, a guardian, a protector, he that hath the tuition of a ward.

Tutoría, a tutorship, a protection. Also as Tutela.

Tutório, of or belonging to a tutor or guardian.

Tútra, a kind of drug.

Tútta fiáta, still, euery foot, euermore, continually. Also yet or neuerthelesse.

Tútta máne, all the morning.

Tútta séra, all the euening.

Tuttauía, as Tuttasiáta.

Tuttauía chè, whensoeuer that. Also not withstanding that.

Túttauólta, as Túttafiáta.

Tútta vólta chè, as Tuttauia chè.

Tútte le vólte, at all times.

Tútte vólte, at all times.

Tutthóra, at all houres or times.

Tútti quánti, all and euery one. 



Tuttisánti, All-Saints daie, All-hallowes.

Tútti tempi, at all times.

Tútto, all, euery whit or iot, the whole.

Tútto áltro, altogether different.

Tútto-ardisee, all-daring, that dareth all.

Tútto ad un tempo, all at one time.

Tútto a vn trátto, all at once, all at a cast.

Tútto chè, albeit, although. Also all that.

Tútto chè., Vsed for almost or very neere

Tútto ciò, as Tútto chè.

Tútto dì, all day long.

Tútto dì d'hóggi, all the daies now.

Tútto di hóggi, all this day.

Tútto e núlla, all is nothing.

Tútto fósse, albeit he or it were, al weare it.

Tútto fóssero, although they were.

Tútto fúmo, all smoake, a puff of smoake. a vaine glorious boaster, a Sir Petronell-flash.

Tútto giórno, all day long.

Tútto in sapóre, so earnestly, till ones teeth run a water.

Tútto in úno, all in one, all at once.

Tútto e per tútto, wholy and altogether.

Tútto l'giórno, all the day long.

Tútto-potente, all-mighty, all-powerfull.

Tútto quánto, all and euery whit.

Tuttóra, still, at all houres.

Tútto-sapiente, all-wise, all-knowing.

Tútto sella, the full time of mans or horses perfection in riding. Looke Huómo.

Tútto sía, albeit, although. Also be it all.

Tútto sólo, all alone, all onely.

Tútto solétto, as Tútto sólo.

Tútto tempo, all the time.

Tútto tútto, as Tutútto.

Tútto-vedente, all-seeing, seeing all.

Tútto uno e, all is one.

Tuttúno, all one, all a like.

Tútulo, the top of the haire wound with a purple lace or the crowne of a Matrons head, proper to the high Priests wife to discerne hir from other women.

Tutútto, altogether, euery whit and iot, as one would say Tútto Tútto.


V.
V, the letter v. which is sometimes a vowell, and sometimes a consonant.

V?, where? whither? 

V, there where. Also you.

Và, goe, goe thou. Also he goeth.

Vacábile, vacable, ceasable, empliable.

Vacalsúth, a tree in America, that beareth a fruite in forme of a mans heart, and smelleth very sweet.

Vaccantaría, as Vacánza

Vacánte, vacant, voide of, being without. Also that is at leasure, as hauing nothing to doe.

Vacánza, vacancy, vacation, leasure, vacation of time, ceasing, immunity.

Vacáre, to be or make empty, voide or without. Also to haue or be at leasure, to cease or be at leasure and from businesse. Also to study, to apply the time, to attend and giue his minde to any thing with heede and dilgence.

Vacatióne, as Vacánza.

Vácca, a cow. Also a kind of fish.

Vácca del giuóco, guile, fraude, deceit, collusion vnder faire shew or pretence.

Vaccaménte, like a cow, beastly.

Vaccaréccia, cowish. Also filthy cow-beefe.

Vaccarella, a yongue cow or Heiser.

Vaccáro, a Cow-heard, a Neate-heard.

Vaccheggiáre, to play the cow or whore.

Vacchétta, as Vaccarella. Also neates leather.

Vácci, goe thither.

Vacciáre, to speede, to hasten, to dispatch.

Vaccína, as Vacchétra. Also Cow-beefe.

Vaccinári, as Vacínio.

Vaccínio, as Vacínio. Also Cowes-cheese.

Váccio, speedily, hastily, quickly.

Vacconáccia, a filthy great Cow or whore.

Vacerra, a raile or perclose of timber wherein something is closed. Also a stake whereunto horses be tied in a stable.

Vacíle, a bason or lauer to wash in.

Vacillaménto, as Vacillatióne.

Vacillánte, wauering, reeling, staggering. Also fickle, inconstant, or mutable.

Vacilláre, to wauer, to stagger, to reele, to fickle, to totter, to be loose and vnconstant.

Vacillatióne, a wauering, a staggering, ficklenesse, inconstancy, mutabilitie.

Vacillóso, as Vacillánte.

Vacínio, the fruite of the great Bramble, a Blacke-berry, a Whort or Whortile-berry, some take it for the sweet Violet, the Garden-violet or March-violet, others for the flowre of Hyacinthus or Crow-toes. 

Vacínio palústre, Fen-berry or March-wort.

Vacuáre, to empty, to euacuate, to void. Also to make voide or hollow.

Vacuatióne, emptinesse, vacuation, vacuity, voidnesse. Also the boare of any piece.

Vacuicà, as Vacuatióne, hollownesse.

Vacuitíuo, emptying, laxatiue.

Vácuo, void, empty, hollow, open and wide, deuoide, free. Also vaine, idle, voide of care free or exempt from. Also hauing nothing to doe, at leasure, vnbusied. Also the voide, hollownesse or emptinesse of any thing. Also the bore of a piece of Ordinance.

Váda, let him, hir or it goe. Also a word vsed at Primero, as we say, passe, let it goe or play.

Váda del pári, let it goe on equall tearmes.

Váda il resto, let the rest goe.

Váda marcio, Geminetur spónsio. Lat.

Vadáre, to wade, to foard, to ferry or passe ouer a water. Also to run as a Riuer.

Vadásile, foardable, wadable.

Vadétti, narrow foards or wading places. Vsed also for button holes.

Vadia, some kind of mournefull habite that the widowes of Venice weare.

Vadimónio, a day of appearance, a bond or promise to appeare before a iudge at a day appointed.

Vádo, a foarde, a ferry, a passage, a wading or shadow place where men or beastes may goe ouer a foote or wade thorow whitout danger. Also I goe, of Andáre.

Vadóso, vadable, or foardable. Also full of foardes or shallow places. Also plashie.

Vadrito, a bride that seemes to chirpe and sing this word Vadrito.

Váe, hee, shee, or it goeth or wendeth.

Vaframénto, a craft, a wile, a guile.

Vafrítia, craft or craftynesse.

Vafto, crafty, wily, guilefull.

Vága, the feminine of Vágo.

Vagabóndo, wandering, gadding, ranging heere and there. Also a vagabond a wanderer, an earth-planet, a faituor, a rogue.

Vagáme, as Vagaménto, a vagary.

Vagánte, wandering from place to place.

Vagáre, to wander, to roame, to range, to stray, to vagary vp and down from coast to coast.

Vagatione, a wandering or straying about. Also a vagary of gadding of the minde.

Vagellaménti d' ócchi, a stareing or gloting or rowling of the eies. Also a 



dimnesse of them.

Vagelláre, to looke staringly or glotinglie. Also to dimme or turne vp ones eies.

Vagellétto, a kind of little gally-pot.

Vagghíre, ghísco, ghíto, to cry as a hare. Also to houle as a Woolfe.

Vagghíto, the cry of a Hare, the howle of a Woolfe.

Vaggiménto, a whining or puleing of a child.

Vaggíre, to whine or pule as an infant.

Vaggíto, an infants whining or puleing.

Vághe, certain running veines about and in the necke.

Vagheggiáre, to behold or view amorously, to court or make loue vnto with longing and loouing loookes, to desire, to admire or gaze vpon with delight.

Vagheggiatóre, an amorous beholder, a gazing louer, a viewer with loue and delight.

Vagheggíno, a nicely-wanton and louing beholder, an amorous viewer of himselfe.

Vaghézza, beawty, louing handsomnesse, louely grace, delightfull admiration, amorous lust or desire, loue-alluring delight. Vsed also for louing-hope.

Vaghíssimo., Looke Vago, as an Adiectiue.

Vaghíre, ghísco, ghíto, as Inuaghíre.

Vagillaménto, as Vacillaménto.

Vagilláre, as Vacilláre.

Vagillóso, as Vacillánte.

Vagiménto, a whining, a puleing, a wayling.

Vagína, any sheath or scabbard.

Vagináre, to sheath or scabbard vp.

Vagíre, as Vaggíre.

Vagitaménto, as Vagiménto.

Vagíto, as Vaggíto. Also whined.

Vagitáre, to whine or pule as an infant.

Vágli, sieues, fanes, serces or winnowes.

Váglia, let it auaile or be worth.

Vágliaci, let it auaile vs.

Váglia il véro, let truth auaile.

Vagliáre, to sift, to searce, or winnow corne.

Vágliami Dí, let God auaile mee.

Vagliatóre, a sifter, a searcer.

Váglio, a van, a sieue, a searce, a winnow.

Váglio, I am worth. Also a valuation.

Vagnele, as Guagnele.

Vágo, louely-faire, gracefully-beautious, blithe and comely, louing to the eie, gracious to behold, loue-alluring, handsome and buckesome, faire and bonny, delight-mouing, gay and trim, glad-seeming. Also glad, desirous, delightfull, amorous, louing, sheene. Also lustfull, affecting, couetous or thirsty of. Also wandring, ranging, roauing, fleeting, gadding vp and downe, vncertaine, vnconstant, abiding in no place, flickring, moouing & restlesse. Also ones minion, fauorite, loue, sweet heart, wanton, darling, paramour, hearts delight or secret louer.

Vagolággine, enueagling. Also idle or sportfull going vp and downe. Also a gadding of the minde, loytringnesse.

Vagoláre, to enueagle. Also to goe vp and downe merily and idly. Also to gad vp and downe with the minde, to loyter.

Vágolo, full of loytring and idle gadding vp and downe.

Vagolóso, enueagling. Also loytring, idly gadding vp and downe.

Vái, the rich fur called gray miniuer. Also thou goest.

Vaiáro, a Furrier, a Skinner.

Và in páce, goe in peace.

Váio, a beast called a Gray Miniuer. Also as Vái.

Vaiólo, the Singular of Vaiuóli. Also a fish called a bace.

Vairáro, as Vaiáro.

Vairóne, a Cob, a Guob or Gudgeon-fish.

Vaiuoláto, that is full of Vaiuóli.

Vaiuóli, all manner of fleckes, spots, whelkes or speckles in the skin. Also pockes, blanes, botches, plague-sores, carbuncles. Also cunt-botches or winchester-geese, but principally vsed for small pushes or blisters comming in yongue childrens faces.

Valà valà, goe to, goe there.

Valanghíno, the name of a smith's toole.

Valcare, as Valicáre. Also as Gaulcáre.

Valcáua, a hollow caue or vally, but vsed of Bocace for a womans quaint.

Valchéta, as Guálca.

Válci, for Ci uále, it auaileth vs.

Válco, as Guádo, vádo, or Vátco.

Valcostúra, a seame-vally, as Valcáua.

Valdráppa, a riding foote-cloath.

Vále, it is worth. Also it auaileth. Also a dew or farwell. Also as much to say.

Valendárno, chè vuói fáre dì quésti valendárni. 

Valente, valiant, valorous, much daring, in good health, that can doe much or that is much worth, worthy, that is of value, worth and estimation.

Valenteríe, valiant or valorous exploits. 

Valentía, valour, valiantnesse, value, worthines, courage, puissance, daringnesse.

Valentígia, as Valentía.

Valentre, as Valente.

Valentría, as Valentía.

Valentrígia, as Valentía.

Valenza, as Valentía, as Valóre.

Valenza, as Valenzána.

Valenzána, Say or Serge for bed-curtins or valances for beds.

Valenzána delletto, valences for beds.

Valére, váglio, válsi, valúto, to be worth, to be of value. Also to be much or greatly esteemed. Also to auaile or preuaile. Also to be able, to may or can, to serue or be good for. Also to be in health, to be puissant. Also to haue power or authority.

Valeria, as Melenateo, as Valeriána.

Valeriána, the hearbe Valerian, Capons-taile or Setwall.

Valérsi di, auaile or preuaile himself of or with.

Valetudinário, subiect to sicknesse, sicklie, queasie. Also an Hospitall for sicke folkes.

Valetúdine, health or welfare. Also sicknesse, crasinesse, weaknesse, imperfect health.

Valéuole, auailable, valuable, worth, of ability and might, fruitefull, profitable.

Valeuolézza, validily, auailablenesse.

Valgáre, to go with ones legges bending outward as Bakers doe.

Valgía, a writhing of the mouth in mockery.

Válgio, an instrument or toole that Carpenters vse to make floores smooth or straite.

Valgíre, gísco, gíto, to writhe the mouth in mockery.

Válgo, a man that hath his legges bending outward, narrow betweene the knees and the feet inward, crooked or wry in going, that goeth like a creuise.

Valgolatióne, a question in rebuke.

Valicábile, chè si può valicáre, wadeable foardable.

Valicáre, to flote or goe downe any riuer according to the streame & tide of it, to goe a drift. Also to foard, to wade or ferry ouer.

Valichéuolc, as Valicábile.

Valíco, as Várco, a passage ouer.

Validità, validity, forciblenesse, ability, might or power.

Válido, valide, of force, forcible. Also that can doe or is worth much, puissant; able.

Valígia, a male, a clokebag, a budget.

Valigiáre, to put vp into a male or clokebag. 



Valigiáro, a cloakebag, a budget or malemaker, it hath beene vsed for a Drummer.

Valigiétta, a little male, budget or portmanteaw or little cloake-bag.

Valigíno, as Valigiétta.

Valigióne, any great male. Also such as carry great males behind them.

Valiménto, value, valuation, worth.

Valímia. 

Valitudinárío, as Valetudinário.

Valitúdine, as Valetúdine.

Valizzáre, to vaile, to indale, to make low and plaine.

Valláre, to inually, to indale. Also to descend into a vally. Also to inclose, to entrench, to fortifie or hem in about. Also of or pertayning to a vally, or to a trench and enclosure. Looke Coróna.

Valláta, a vale, a vally, a dale.

Valláto, as vállo, or Vallóne.

Válle, a vale, a vally, a dale.

Vallea, a vale, a vally, a dale.

Válle di Acherónte, Hell. Also a womans quaint.

Válle di misérie, a vaile of misery, but taken for this world.

Válle oscúra, an obscure vally. And also taken for this world or vaile of misery.

Vallétta, a little vale, vally, or dale.

Vallétto, a varlet, a groome, a page, a squire, a seruing creature.

Vallicella, as Vallétta.

Vallicóso, a low place full of vallies.

Vállo, a deepe treench made to defend an army. Also a rampier, a sconce, a bulwarke or blockhouse made of wood or timber. Also a pole or long spar of timber, a pile, a post or stake sharp at one end to be driuen into the ground.

Valloncello, a little trench or vally.

Vallónc, a great vale or vally. Also any great Vállo.

Vallónia, a kinde of barke of a tree that Tanners vse to tan leathers.

Vallóso, full of dales, vales or vallies.

Vallúra, a low vally, vale or dale.

Valóppa, a kind of monstrous shell-fish somewhat shaped like a Beare.

Valoráre, as Aualoráre, to enualour.

Valóre, value, valour, worth, esteeme.

Valoría, as Valentía, or Valóre.

Valorosità, valour, valorousnesse.

Valoróso, valorous, valiant, full of valour.

Valsente, worth, value or valuation.

Válua, the inward part and locke and keye of a Emperours or Kings chiefe chamber, Bed-chamber, Priuy-chamber or chamber of State and Presence, the charge and trust where of was anciently wont to be deliuered to some special and chiefe man of trust, and he was called Valuasóre, that is to say Lord Chamberlaine or chiefe Gentleman Vsher. Vsed also for a folding doore or shut gate.

Valuáre, to value, to prise, to esteeme.

Valuasóre, a Vauoser, which is a principall officer of honour and dignity about a Prince, as hauing the keyes and charge of his person and chamber committed to his trust, a chiefe Lord or Commander in his owne precinct, a Kings or Princes Lord Chamberlaine or Keeper of the guilt or treble key, or as we may say, a chiefe Gentleman Vsher of the Priuy lodgings. It is now many times abusiuely taken in ill part and mockery, as we say a iolly fellow or a great man.

Váluolo, the shale, the huske, the peele or cod of any Beanes or Peason.

Valúta, worth, value or estimation.

Valutáre, to value, to prize, to esteeme.

Valúto, valued. Also beene worth.

Váluula, a valuule as Physicions call it, that is a shut gate or foulding doore.

Vámpa, a suddaine flame, flash or blaze of fire. Also a suddaine fury.

Vampáre, to flame, to blaze, to flash or burne suddainly. Also to rage furiously.

Vampeggiáre, as Vampáre.

Vampolóso, as Vampóso.

Vampóso, flashy, blazing, flamy, firy, furious, hasty.

Vanaglória, vaineglory or ostentation.

Vanagloriáre, to bragge vaine gloriously.

Vanaglorióso, vaineglorious, full of ostentation.

Vanáre, as Vaneggiáre.

Vanázzi, Buzzards or Goose wings.

Vanéggia, as Vanità. Also fondnesse in deeds and doting in words. Also emptinesse and voidnesse. Also a void place or grasse-plot in a garden.

Vaneggiaménto, a rauing, an idle doting, a vaine trifling. Also emptinesse.

Vaneggiáre, to raue, to dote, to trifle, to play any maner of vanity namely in words. Also to empty or make void and hollow.

Vanegglatóre, a rauer, a doater, a fondman, a vaine trifler.

Vanello, a bird called a Lapwing.

Vanézza, as Vanità, as Vanéggia.

Vánga, a goad. Also a weeding-hooke. Also a spade or a mattocke. Also a kind of fish.

Vangaiuóla, a little goade, weeding hooke, spade or mattocke. Also a fishing net.

Vangáre, to delue or digge with a mattocke. Also to pricke with a goade. Also to weed.

Vangaruóla, as Vangaiuóla.

Vangaticcio, delued or digged ground.

Vangatórc, a digger, a deluer.

Vangelio, the holy Gospell or gladsome true tidings.

Vangelísta, an Euangelist, a Gospeller, a bringer of glad tidings.

Vangelizzáre, to preach the Gospell, to bring glad tidings.

Vangelizzatóre, as Vangelísta.

Vangelo, as Vangelio.

Vanghétta, a little Vánga, as Márra.

Vanguárdia, a vangard, a fore ward. Also a vantgard of an helmet, of a caske or head piece.

Vánia, vanity. Also misery, ruth or wretchednesse. Also a wrong or an iniury, a quarrell pickt of malice.

Vanícola. 

Vanidíco, a vaine speaker, a lyer, a speaker of foolish and vaine things.

Vaniloquente, vaine speaking.

Vaniloquenza, vaine talke or babling.

Vanilóquio, a vaine discource or speech.

Vaníre, nísco, níto, to vanish out of sight. Also to come to vanity or miserie. Also to wrong or iniury.

Vanità, vanity, fondnesse, trifling, follie, inconstancy, lightnesse, leasing.

Vannáre, to flutter with wings, to fan with feathers Also to van or winnow corne.

Vánni, vsed for the whole wings of any bird. Also the principall forefeathers or sarcels of any birdes wings.

Vánno, a fan, a van to van or winnow corne with, and to clense it from chaff against the wind. Also they goe or wind, of Andáre.

Váno, vaine, void, hollow, empty. Also vaine, foolish, idle, fond, light, friuolous. Also forcelesse, frustrate or that misseth. Also false, lying or delighting in vanity and triftes. Also light of beliefe or credite. Also any hollow or void place. Also the bore of any piece or Cannon.

Vanórsa, a starre called the Vanbeare.

Vantaggiáre, to aduantage, to giue oddes. Also to saue or spare.

Vantaggiáti, aduantaged, such souldiers as haue more pay or priulledge then others.

Vantággio, any aduantage or ods.

Vantaggióso, aduantagious, hauing ods.

Vantaggiúzzo, a poore silly aduantage or ods.

Vantaménto, a vanting, a boasting.

Vantáre, to exalt with praise or magnifie with vanning or boasting.

Vantársi, to boast or vant himselfe 



and seeme to excell others.

Vantatóre, a boaster, a vanter, a bragger.

Vánto, a vaunt, a boast, a brag.

Vanuera, Looke A vanuera.

Vapiccáre, to catch or take hold of, to seaze on. Also to fasten vnto.

Vapidità, any stincking taste, an ill smacke, a soure sauour.

Vápido, stinking, that casteth an ill sauour or vapour, that giueth an ill smacke.

Vaporábile, that may breath or exhale, or that may be vaporated.

Vaporáre, to euaporate, to breath or send out vapours, to exhale, to vent. Also to fume, to smoke, to steame, or reeke foorth.

Vaporatióne, any vaporation, exhalation, or breathing foorth, a steaming, or reeking.

Vapóre, any vapour, hote breath or exhalation, any steaming, or reeking.

Vaporità, as Vaporatióne.

Vaporosità, as Vaporatióne.

Vaporóso, full of vapours, or exhalations.

Váppa, any wine that hath lost his force, colour, and strength. Vsed also for a man or woman without wit or reason.

Vappóne, a kind of flying beast.

Vára, a post set vpright, with a forke in the vpper end as a Musket-rest to beare vp another post ouer-laid. Also a kind of grape, looke V'ua vára. Also a kind of Ship or Boate in Ormuz. Also a kind of measure there.

Varáre, to goe with ones legs bending inward as some riders doe. Also to lanch a Ship from out the docke into the water.

Várca, vsed of Dante for the course of mans life. Also for Bárca.

Varcáre, to foord, to ferrie, to wade through, or passe ouer any passage.

Várco, any foard, ferrie, passage, or wading place ouer a riuer. Also any narrow passage, as a stile ouer a hedge. Also a kind of measure in Italie.

Vardáre, vsed for Guardáre, to looke.

Váre, net-shoares, little forkes wherewith nets are set and borne vp for wilde beasts. Vsed also for Varóle.

Vareila, a kind of Barge or Pinnace in Ormuz.

Várgo, certo spátio fra collonelli d'un silatóio., Also the groine neere the priuie parts of a man or woman.

Várguo, one that lispeth.

Vári, the rich Furre called gray Miniuer. Also varie in armorie.

Vária, a Iay or Pye called a Pyanet.

Variábile, as Variánte.

Variabilità, as Variatióne.

Variaménte, variously, variably, diuersly, changeably, vnconstantly.

Variaménto, a variation, a differing, a diuersitie, a charging.

Variána víte, a kind of vine or grape. Looke V'ua vára.

Variánte, varying, changing, mutable, inconstant, changeable. Also a changeable colour, or of diuers colours. Also varie or verrie in armorie.

Variánza, as Variatióne.

Variáre, to varie, to change, to alter, to differ. Also to be mutable. Also to varie, to disagree or square in opinion. Also to write diuersly. Also to varie in armorie. Also to make diuers or of sundrie fashions and colours, or mingle and enterlace diuersly.

Variataménte, variously, differently, changeably.

Variatióne, a variation, or alteration. Looke Variáre, or Varietà.

Variáto, varied, or changed. Also of a diuers or changeable fashion or colour. Also varrie or verrie in armorie.

Varíca, as Varíce.

Varicáre, to goe wide or stragling with the knees or legs. Also to transgresse, or goe ouer or passe by negligently.

Varíce, a crooked veine swelling with corrupt and melancholy bloud, namely, in the temples, bellie, or legs, a dilation or swelling of veines.

Varíci, crooked and swelling veines in mens legs, bellie, or temples.

Varíco, one that hath the veines of his legs swolne, and full of corrupt bloud. Also one that goeth wide and stradling.

Varícola, as Varíce.

Varicóso, as Varíco.

Varietà, varietie, diuersitie, change, difference, sicklenesse, inconstancie, choise.

Variéuole, variable, as Variánte.

Varíle, any kind of Barell, or caske.

Variloquente, diuersly speaking.

Vário, various, variable, diuers, different, vnlike, changeable, mutable, vnconstant, sundrie, flickering, of diuers fashions or sundrie colours. Also full of change or varietie. Also full of spots, freckled, or speckled. Also a man seene in diuers and sundrie matters. Vsed also for the rich Furre, called gray Miniuer, or for the beast that beareth the same. Vsed also for a Trout, or Burne-trout.

Varipéde, crooked-footed.

Varlótto, any little Barell, Rundlet, or Firkin.

Várne, ginnes, truckles, or tressles, or winches to mount Ordinance.

Váro, crooked, bending, awrie, winding. Also one that hath crooked legs bending inward. Also crooked in conditions, diuers and repugnant. Also that is open to gripe and embrace. Also a docke to build a Ship vpon. Also any spot, specke, flecke, or freckle, namely in ones face. Also the gray Miniuer beast, or Furre.

Varóla, any pocke. Also a Base-fish.

Varoláre, to infect with the poxe.

Varóle, any kind of poxe, but properly the small poxe, that is, little white nisings, but red round about. Also little red pimples, or specks on the face, being hard and round, such as wee see in drunkards faces, called buttrie-buttons.

Varóle grósse, the great or french poxe.

Varóle pícciole, the small poxe.

Varólo, as Vaiuólo. Also a Base-fish.

Varolóso, pockie, full of the poxe.

Varóne, a Cob, a Quob, or Gudgeon-fish.

Varotáio, a Furrier, or a Skinner.

Várra, any kind of Barre, as Bárra.

Varrella, a Wheele-barrow.

Varríle, any kind of Barrell, or Caske.

Varrilótto, any litle Barrell, or Rundlet.

Várro, a kind of long measure in Italy.

Várro, a kind of Cormorant.

Varuasóre, as Valuasóre.

Varuóla, any kind of pock. Also a Base-fish.

Varuoláre, to infect with the poxe.

Varuóle, as Varóle.

Varuóle grósse, the great or french poxe.

Varuóle pícciole, the small poxe.

Varuólo, as Vaiuólo, a cunt-botch.

Vas, as Váso, a vessell.

Vása, all manner of vessels.

Vasáio, a vessel-maker, a potter.

Vásca, as Tína.

Vascalágine, the hearbe Chameleon.

Vascápo, a kind of Monks habit.

Vascarágine, as Vascalágine.

Vascelláio, a potter, a vessell-maker.

Vascelláme, all manner of pots, vessels, or plate.

Vascellarnénto, as Vascelláme.

Vascellaríe, as Vascelláme.

Vascellaría, the arte of potterie.

Vascelláro, a potter, or vessell-maker.

Vascello, any kind of vessell.

Váse, any kind of vessell.

Vasella, all manner of vessels, or pots.

Vaselláme, as Vasellaménto.

Vasellaménto, all manner of pots, or vessels.

Vaselláro, a potter, or vessell-maker.

Vasello, any kind of vessell or pot. Vsed also for any Ship or Barke of burden.

Vasétto, any kind of little vessell, or pot.

Vasísero, vessels-bearing.

Váso, any kind of vessell, or pot.

Vaso di zibetto, a Siuet-boxe.

Vasolíno, any little vessell. 



Vasóne, any kind of great vessell.

Vassállo, a vessall, a subiect, a bondman.

Vassallággio, vassalage, subiection.

Vássene, for Sene và, he goeth hence.

Vássi, he goeth. Also one goeth.

Vastaménto, a wasting, a spoiling.

Vastatióne, a wasting, or destroying.

Vastáre, to bring to vastnesse or desolation. Also to waste, to make spoile or waste of.

Vasterna, a Horse-litter.

Vastézza, as Vastità.

Vastità, vastnesse, desertnesse, excessiue greatnesse, hugenesse. Also desolation.

Vásto, vaste, great beyond measure, broade and large, huge, wide. Also desert, desolate, or waste. Also insatiable, or outragiously couetous.

Váte, a Prophet, a Sooth-sayer, a speaker of Oracles. Also a Poet, a foreteller.

Vaticináre, to deuine, to fore-tell, to sooth-say, to prophecie.

Vaticinatióne, as Vaticínio.

Vaticinatóre, a Prophet, a Sooth-sayer, a fore-teller, a Bard, a deuiner.

Vaticínio, Sooth-saying, fore-telling, diuination, prophecie.

Vaticíno, Propheticall, of or belonging to diuination, or them that practise it.

Vatidicente, prophetizing, sooth-saying, speaking oracles, fore-telling.

Vatidícere, díco, díssi, détto, to foretell, to prophecie, to speake oracles.

Vatidíco, a fore-teller, a sooth-sayer.

Vátie, bow-legd, as Vátio.

Vatigáro, a Harrier, or Drouer of Cattell.

Vatínio, bow-legd, as Vátio.

Vátio, one whose legs are bowed inward, wide betweene the knees, and goeth with his feete out ward.

Vatíssima móle, a most huge and farre-extending frame.

Vatráce, one who hath ill legs from the knees downeward.

Váttelo a pigliáre, goe thy selfe and take or catch it.

Váttene, get thee hence and away.

Vátti, get thy selfe gone.

Vatti con dío, a farewall, or a taking leaue of one, goe with God.

Vattína, a standing-poole, or pond water. Also a Cesterne to keepe water in.

Vattíno, the name of an implement or toole that Apothecaries vse.

Và via, goe away, be gone.

Váuni, goe thether, or there.

Vbaldine, certaine fritters so called.

V'bbia, a foolish, false, or lying tale, as we say, a lying for the whetstone.

Vberáre, to make or be plentious, fruitefull and aboundant. Also to fatten or feede as it were with paps or dugs.

V'beri, breasts, paps, dugs, teats, vdders.

Vberífero, plentifull, aboundant, fruitfull, fat, fertile, store-bringing.

V'bero, as V'beri. Also as Vberífero. Also a spout or cocke of a Conduit. Also a bosome. Also a certaine colour of a Horse.

Vberosità, as Vbertà.

Vberóso, as Vberífero.

Vbertà, plentie, store, aboundance, fertilitie, fruitfulnesse, cheapenesse.

Vbertiéro, as Vberífero.

Vbertóso, as Vberífero.

Vbertuóso, as Vberifero.

Vbidiente, obedient, obeying.

Vbidienza, obedience, obeisance.

Vbidíre, dísco, díto, to obey.

Vbiero, a certaine colour of a Horse.

Vbinétto, a little Hobbie, or Irish horse.

Vbíno, a Hobbie, or Irish horse.

Vbiquibilità, as Vbiquità.

Vbiquinário, a professor of Vbiquitie.

Vbiquità, an vbiquitie in what place or thing soeuer.

Vbliánza, obliuion, forgetfulnesse.

Vbliáre, as Obliáre, to forget.

Vbligáre, as Obligáre, to oblige.

Vbligatióne, a bond, or obligation.

Vblio, as Oblío, obliuion, forgetfulnesse.

Vblióso, obliuious, forgetfull.

Vbriacársi, to become drunken.

Vbriachézza, drunkennesse.

Vbriáco, drunken, cup-shotten.

Vbrigáre, to bind, or oblige.

Vccellábile, that may be caught as a bird, that is to say cozened, or cunnie-catcht.

Vccelláccio, a filthie rauenous bird, which is often taken for the Cuckow. Vsed also for a simple gull, that may very easily be caught and cozened.

Vccellággine, as Vccellagióne.

Vccellagióne, all manner of fowle, or fowling, birding, or hawking. Also all manner of cheating, cozening, or cunnie-catching.

Vccelláia, any place where fowle or fowling is taken or kept in mue, a volerie.

Vccelláio, a fowler, a birder, a faulkner.

Vccelláme, as Vccellagióne.

Vccellaménto, as Vccellagióne.

Vccellámi, as Vccellagióne.

Vccelláre, to bird, to fowle, to hawke, to catch birds. Also to cozen, to cunnie-catch, to cheate, to crosse-bite, to catch in some snare. Also to goe sneakingly a wenching.

Vccellatóio, a fowling, or hawking-place.

Vccellatóre, a birder, a fowler, a faulkner. Also a keeper of fowle or poultrie Also a cheater, a cozener, a crossebiter.

Vccelléssa, a hen-bird. Also a craftie, cheating, cozening, or cunnie-catching woman.

Vccellétto, any kind of little bird.

Vccelléuole, as Vccellábile.

Vccelliéra, as Vccelláia. Also a bird-cage.

Vccelliére, as Vccellatóre.

Vccellíno, any kind of little bird.

Vccello, any kind of bird or fowle.

Vccello del Dúca, as Grótto molináro.

Vccello del paradíso, a Kings-fisher.

Vccello di Gióue, an Eagle, Ioues bird.

Vccello di néue, a Wag-taile.

Vccello di Sánta María, a Kings-fisher.

Vccello d'óro, a Witwall-bird.

Vccellóne, as Vccelláccio, any great bird.

Vccello vécchio, an old, sly, subtle bird, as we say an old craftie foxe.

Vcchiello, an oylet, or button-hole.

Vccídere, cído, císi, císo, to kill, to slay, to murther, to quell.

Vccidiménto, a killing, a slaughtring.

Vcciditóre, a killer, a slayer, a murtherer.

V'ccio, a termination much vsed in the Italian tongue to be added vnto any positiue noune to signifie sillinesse, wretchednesse, and pouertie deseruing compassion, as Mercantúccio, donnúccia, casúccia, &c.

Vccisióne, a killing, a slaying, a murthering.

Vccíso, killed, murthered, slaine, quelled.

Vccisóre, a killer, a murtherer, a slayer.

Vchè, where as, where-soeuer.

Vdente, hearing, harkning, listning.

Vdenza, audience, hearing.

Vdíbile, audible, that may be heard.

Vdiente, as Vdente.

Vdientia, audience. Also an auditorie.

Vdienza, as Vdientia.

Vdíre, ódo, vdíj, vdíto, to heare, to listen.

Vdíta, the sence of hearing. Also an audite.

Vdíto, heard, listned, harkned.

Vdíto, the sence of hearing.

Vditóre, a hearer, an auditor.

Vditório, a place of hearing, an auditorie.

V'do, wet, moist, humide, flashie, slabbie. Vsed also for well-tipled, or cup-shotten.

Vdóme, sè il pezzo e cárico di udóme la póluere farà effetto.

Vdriáre, to lure a hawke, to bring to the lure. Also to allure, on entice.

V'drio, a Hawkes lure. Also allurement. 



Ve, where? or whither? Also there, or in that place. Also there is for Viè.

Ve, see, view, behold, note, take heed.

Ve, to you. Also you. Also from you.

Vécca, the Pulse called Vetches.

Vecchia, old, aged. Also an old woman.

Vecchiáccia, a filthie old woman.

Vecchiáccio, a filthie old man.

Vecchiáia, age, eldernesse, agednesse.

Vecchiárdo, as Vegliárdo.

Vecchiáre, to grow, or become aged.

Vecchiarella, a sillie elderly woman.

Vecchíarello, a sillie elderly man.

Vecchia trentína, an old hag, or aged beldam, a very old woman, and yet would be taken but for thirtie.

Vecchiétta, a sillie little old woman.

Vecchiétto, a sillie little old man.

Vecchiézza, age, agednesse, eldership. Also quick-siluer, as Alchimists call it.

Vecchíle, some-what aged, enclining to age.

Vecchio, aged, old. Also an aged man.

Vecchio d'ánni, aged in yeares.

Vecchio maríno, a kind of Sea-monster or Fish, which some take for the Sea-calfe.

Vecchionáccio, a filthie aged man.

Vecchióne, a goodlie aged graue man.

Vecchitúdine, as Vecchiezza.

Vécci, a kind of Puffe, or Mushrom.

Véccia, the Pulse called Vetches, or Tares.

Véce, stead, place, liew, vice, or standing for another. Looke Více.

Vececónte, as Viscónte.

Vecende uolménte, as Vicendeuolménte.

Vecere, as Vicere.

Vecórde, mad, out of his wits, troubled in mind, without reason, wit-bereauen.

Vecórdia, madnesse, doting, lacke of wit or reason, trouble of mind.

Vedello, a Calfe, a yong Neate, a Steare.

Vedente, seeing. Also a Seere. Also vsed in the Scripture for a Prophet.

Vedére, védo, or véggo, or véggio, vídi, or víddi, vedúto, or vísto, to see, to looke, to behold, to view. Also to note, to marke, or prie into. Also to see to, to regard, to care and prouide for. Also to aduise, to perceiue, to foresee, to vnderstand, and consider.

Vedére con buon víso, to looke cheerefully vpon, or with a merie looke.

Vedére l'inimíco, to see ones enemie. Also a kind of march sounded in time of warre vpon the Trumpet and Drum when they discouer the enemie.

Vedére l'inuíto, to see a vie at play, to see ones rest at Primero.

Vedértórto, to see wrong, or asquint. 

Vedétta, a prying or peeping hole. Also a Sentinels standing-place. Also a watch-towre. Also a Beacon. Also a Lanterne or Loouer on the top of a house.

Veditóre, a seere, a viewer, a looker, a beholder, a suruayer. Looke Vedére.

Védiuè, see see, see and marke, view well.

Védoua, a Widow. Also alone, destitute, without, depriued of, bereaued of.

Vedouággio, as Vedouánza.

Vedouánza, widowhood. Also priuation or lack of things most deare.

Vedouáre, to widow, to make a widow, to leaue alone, to diuorce or take ones deare thing from, to bereaue, to leaue desolate, and make comfortlesse.

Vedouático, widowhood. Also whatsoeuer belongs vnto a widow of right.

Védoua víta, a solitarie or lone life.

Vedouétta, a sillie, poore, little widow.

Vedouíle, widuall, widow-like.

Vedouità, as Vedouánza.

Védouo, a widower. Also as Védoua.

Vedúta, the sight of any creature, the sence of seeing. Also knowledge or experience. Also an high prospect, or farre-seeing. Also seene or looked. Looke Vedére.

Vedúto, seene, viewed, looked, beheld, suruaid, &c. Looke Vedére.

Vegentána, a kind of gumme.

Vegetábile, vegetable, as hearbs, plants, trees, or stones. Looke Vegetatióne.

Vegetále, as Vegetábile.

Vegetána, a kind of stone found in Italie very blacke, but mingled with white spots.

Vegetáre, to quicken, to refresh, to grow, or become liuely, and strong.

Vegetatióne, that power in nature which God hath giuen to creatures, whereby they liue, growe, and are nourished, vegetation, quicknesse, life.

Vegetatíno, vegetatiue, that is quicke, growing, fresh, and sound.

Végga, let him or her see, that he may see.

Veggente, seeing, looking, beholding.

Végghia, a wake or a waking, a watch or a watching. Also a scout or a sentinell. Also a reuelling a nights, or meeting of good company that sits vp late a nights.

Vegghiáre, to watch, to wake. Also to scout or keepe sentinell. Also reuell and sit vp late a nights in good and merry sporting company.

Véggia, as Végghia. Also any kind of pipe, puncheon, hogshead, tun or barrell. Also let him or hir see. Also that hee or shee may see and behold. 

Veggiáre, as Vegghiáre.

Veggilánte, as Vigilánte, watchfull.

Veggilánza, as Vigilánza, watchfullnesse.

Véggio, I see, I looke, of Vedére.

Véggo, as Véggio.

Végli, aged or old men. Also see, view, or behold them.

Veglia, as Végghia. Also an old woman.

Vegliácco, as Vigliácco.

Vegliáia, age, eldernesse, agednesse.

Vegliánte, watchfull, vigilant, wakeing.

Vegliantíno, a crafty vigilant fellow.

Vegliánza, watchfullnesse, vigilance.

Vegliárdo, an aged elderly man. Also an old dotard, dotrell or foolish man.

Vegliáre, as Vegghiáre. Also to grow old or aged. Also to set, to stand or continue in any place sans ceasing.

Vegliatóri, wake-keepers, wakers, sentinels.

Vegliéuole, watchfull, vigilant.

Vegliézza, as Vecchiézza.

Veglíno, a silly little old man.

Veglio, as Vecchio, an old or aged man.

Vegnendo, comming.

Vegnente, comming.

Vehementáre, to vse vehemency, to violent, to vrge, to constraine, to make vehement.

Vehemente, vehement, violent, fierce, of great force, vrgent, fierce, rash.

Vehemenza, vehemency, violence, fiercnesse, rashnesse, strongnesse.

Vehícolo, a kind of cart, tumbrel or barrow.

Veientána, as Vegentána.

Vel, to you it, Io vel diedi, I gaue is you.

Vel., Vsed for, or, or else, either, Vel pría vel pói, either first or after.

Véla, any kind of saile for a ship. Also a vaile, a shadowing or a curtein.

Velábro, a booth or shrouding place. Also a tent in a Faire.

Veláme, all kinds of sailes. Also vailings, shadowings or curteins. Also couerings or hidings.

Veláre, to saile, to hoyse vp sailes and saile forth. Also to vaile, to shadow, to couer with Laune or Cipresse. Also to curte in or hide in. Also to obscure.

Velaregli, shadowes, vailes, Launes, Scarfes, Sipres or Bonegraces that women vse to weare one their faces or foreheads to keepe them from the Sunne.

Veláro, a vaile or sipres maker. Also as Irióne.

Valáta, a saling. Also a wailing. 



Velatióne, a vailing. Also a shadowing.

Veleggiáre, to waue as a saile. Also to saile with full sailes.

Velegílla, a kinde of little saile in a ship,

Velenáre, to poyson, to inuenome.

Velenário, as Venenário.

Velenatióne, a poisoning, an inuenoming.

Velenáto, poisoned, inuenomed.

Velenífero, venemous, poison bringing.

Veléno, any kind of poison, venome, bane or infection. Vsed also for witchcraft or sorcery by drinkes. Also ill will, grudge or bitternesse of minde.

Veléno di terra, a kind of Aristolochia that kils fishes.

Velenóso, venemous, poisonnous, bailefull, full of poison or venom.

Velétta, any little saile. Also a kind of fine laune or sipres. Also as Vedétta.

Velettáro, a vaile or sipres maker. Also a scout, aspie or eawes-dropper.

Velétte, a kind of souldiers garment or horsemans coate. Looke Cauálli delle velétte.

Velétto, as Velaregli, a little vaile.

Velína, peruénnero fino alle velíne délla città. 

Velitáre, to fight, to skirmish or brawle.

Velitáre háfta, a light iaueling.

Velitatóre, a skirmisher.

Velíti, Roman souldiers armed lightlie.

Velittolánte, running, swift, as it were flying with full-spread sailes.

Vellána, a filbird or small nut.

Velle, vsed of Dánte for Volontà.

Velleità, an vnresolute willingnesse.

Velleróso, full of fleeces or fels.

Velli, hath beene vsed for fleeces or fels. Also for haires. Also see or view them.

Vellificáre, to fleece or bring fleeces.

Vello, a fleece, a fell or skin that hath wooll on. Also see him or it.

Vello d' óro, a golden fleece.

Vellóso, woolly, fleecie, full of fleeces or wooll. Also soft and thrummy. Also hairy.

Vello-vello, see see and view him.

Vellutáre, as Velutáre.

Vellutáro, as Velutáro.

Vellutáto, as Velutáto.

Vellutíno, as Velutíno.

Vellúto, as Velúto.

Vélo, any kind of vaile, sipres, tiffany or laune. Also a saile in a ship. Also a vaile or curtein. Also mans mortall vaile, carkas or body. Also the roofe of a Church or Temple. Also a shield or obstacle for defence. Also to you, it or him.

Velóce, swift, speedie, fleete, nimble, light, lightly and quicklie passing away.

Velocità, swiftnesse, spedinesse, fleetnesse, quicknesse or nimblenesse, in motion.

Ve lo dirò, I will tell it you.

Velte, a kind of hurdles.

Veltra, a Gray-hound bitch.

Veltro, a Gray-hound dog.

Velúcchio, as Vilúcchio.

Velúme, as Volúme.

Velutáre, to make soft, plushy or thrummy like veluet.

Velutáro, a weauer or maker of Veluet.

Velutáto, soft or plushy like veluet.

Velutíno, fine, slender or thin veluet.

Velúto, veluet. Also plushy or fleecie.

Velúto álto básso, high and low Veluet.

Velúto figuráto, figured or wrought veluet.

Velúto pelóso, silke plush or shag.

Velúto ríccio, vnshorne veluet.

Velutóso, full of veluet, soft and plushy.

Vementáre, to vehement, as Vehementáre.

Vemente, vehement, as Vehemente.

Vemenza, vehemence, as Vehemenza.

Ven, to you thereof or it, as Venè.

Véna, any kind of veine. Also a pulse or an artery. Also a veine of the earth. Also a veine of water, a spring or well head. Also a naturall disposition, veine or instinct of a man. Also a veine or stile of writing or speaking. Also vsed for Auéna, Oates.

Venábulo, a boare-speare, a forest-bill or hunting-staffe.

Venaccióne, any great veine.

Véna di fontána, a veine, a spring or well-head of a fountaine, the belling, purling or rising vp of water out of a spring.

Véna dimetállo, any veine of the earth that yeeldeth mettall.

Véna d' mgégno, the veine of a mans wit or naturall inclination.

Véna di sángue, an artery or veine of blood.

Véna maéstra, the chief veine of a mans body.

Venále, venall, mercenary, that may be bought, that is set to sale. Also that will be bribed and sell his faith and troth for money.

Venalítio, a Market place where any thing is sold and may be bought. Also a place where seruants might be hired, and slaues were to be bought. Also the selling it selfe or the thing that may be bought and sold. 

Véna lustránte, gold according to the Alchimists phrase.

Véna mágna., looke Chíli.

Véna pórta, a veine which hauing diuers rootes in the hollow partes of the liuer, doeth at length ioyne together into one trunke or stocke, and so passeth foorth betweene the two eminences or rising parts of the liuer into the blader of choller, into the ventricle, into the spleene, into Mesenterio, into Oménto, and other parts of the body.

Venardì, the day called Friday.

Venáro, as Auenáro, an Auener.

Venasóne, Venizon, or Hunting game.

Venático, pertaining to hunting.

Venatióne, Venizon. Also any hunting.

Venatóre, a hunter, a huntsman.

Vencástro, as Vincástro.

Véncere, as Víncere.

Vénchi, as Vinchi.

Vencíbile, as Vincíbile.

Véncido, flexible, pliable, withy, soft.

Vencidíre, to be pliable and yealding soft.

Véncita, as Víncita.

Vencitóre, as Vincitóre.

Vendáce, that selleth or is to be sould.

Vendémmia, Grape gathering or haruest, Wine-haruest or vintage time.

Vendemmiále, of or belonging to vintage, gathering of Grapes or Grape-haruest.

Vendemmiáre, to vintage, to gather in Grapes or to make wine.

Vendemmiatóre, a vintager, a vineral, a gatherer in of Grapes or wine haruest, a maker of wine. Also a starre called the vintager or Grape-gatherer.

Vendere, vendo, vendéi, vendúto, to sell or set to saile, to alienate vpon some bargaine.

Vendere a contánti, to sell for ready money.

Vendere all' incánto, to sell at who giues most or by a Common Crier.

Vendere buóna derráta, to sell good cheape.

Vendere buón mercáto, to sell good cheape.

Vendere cáro, to sell deare.

Venderéccio, vendable, saleable, that is to be sould. Also as Venále.

Vender finócchio, to sell Pennell, that is, to flatter or blandish with.

Vendere óglio, to flatter and smooth vp for gaine and to deceiue.

Vendétta, reuenge, reuengement, vengeance. Also punishment. Also according to old stories, a rod which was laid vpon the head of a Seruant when he was made free, or a rod that the Lord deliuered to his bondmen 



when he set them at liberty.

Vendíbile, as Venderéccio, vendible.

Vendicáre, to reuenge, to auenge, to be auenged of, to wreake, to defend or deliuer from danger or wrong. Also to vindicate, to claime or challenge to himselfe.

Vendicársi di, to be auenged of.

Vendicatíuo, vindicatiue, reuengefull, inexorable, wreakefull, cruell.

Vendicatióne, a challenging.

Vendicatóre, a reuenger as Víndice.

Véndice, or Víndice, a reuenger of wrongs, a redresser of abuses, a defender, one that restoreth vnto liberty and freeth from dangers, a punisher.

Vendichéuole, that may be reuenged.

Véndico, reuenged, auenged.

Vendicóso, reuengefull.

Vendilégne, a Woodseller, a Woodmanger.

Vendiménto, as Vendita.

Vendióglio, one that sels Oyle.

Vendita, a vendition, a sale, a seling.

Venditéla, a Linnen Draper or seller.

Venditióne, as Vendita.

Venditóre, a seller, one that selleth.

Venditóre di óglio, a flatterer or soother for gaine and to deceiue.

Vendúto, sold, set to sale.

Venè, to you of it, to you therof, Io venè parlái, I spoke to you of it.

Vene, your selfe hence, thence or away, voi vene andáste mále sodisfátto, you went away or thence your selfe not well satisfied.

Veneficáre, to venome or infect with poison. Also to bewitch, to inchant, to charme.

Veneficatóre, one that poisoneth. Also a sorcerer, an Enchanter, a Magitian.

Venefício, the arte of poisoning, sorcery, magicke, witchcraft or enchanting.

Venéfico, venemous, full of poison, magicke, witchcraft or sorcery. Also a sorcerer, an enchanter, a witch, a magition. Also a poisoner.

Venenáre, to venom, to empoison.

Venenário, a prisoner. Also one that makes, sels or prouideth poisons.

Venenáro, as Venenário.

Venenifero, venome-bringing.

Venéno, as Veléno.

Venenosità, fulnesse of poison.

Venenóso, poisonous, venemous.

Venerábile, venerable, worshipfull, reuerend, worthy to be honoured.

Venerabilità, venerablinesse, worship, awefull-reuerence, honor.

Venerándo, as Venerábile.

Ven'erano, there weare of them.

Veneránza, as Venerabilità.

Veneráre, to reuerence, to worship.

Veneratióne, veneration, worshiping.

Venerdì, the day called Friday.

Venerdì sánto, holy or Good Friday.

Venere, the goddesse of loue, lust or wantonnesse and beawty. Also lust, luxury or lasciuiousnesse. Also beawty it selfe. Also the day or morning star, called Lucifer or Venus star. Vsed also for twylight or Cockeshut. Also the day called Friday.

Veneree, a kind of figge or cherry.

Venereo, venerian, veneriall, wanton, lustfull, luxurious, fleshly, giuen to Venus-sports, or letchery. Also faire and louely.

Venéria, a Scallop called a Purcelane or Venus-winkle.

Venéria, any kind of Ferne.

Venerio, a kind of white Chich-pease.

Veneriscríne, a blacke stone with red streakes thorow it wauing as haires.

Venetiáno, a coine of gold so called.

Véneto, a kind of blew, which Painters call a light or Venice blew. Also a Venetian.

Venghiáre, as Vendicáre, to reuenge.

Vengiár si di, to be reuenged of.

Vengióso, as Vendicatíuo.

Vénia, leaue, licence, permission, indulgence, pardon or remission.

Veniále, veniall, pardonable, tollerable, remissible.

Venícula víte, a kind of vine.

Veniménto, an aduent, a comming.

Veníre, vengo, vénni, venúto, to come. Also to grow, to deriue from or to spring out. Also to arriue or attaine to a place. Also to happen or come to passe.

Veníre a battáglia, to come to a battell.

Veníre a béne, to come to good.

Veníre a cápo, to come to a head, an end or conclusion of any matter.

Veníre a cása, to come home. Also to come to the matter or purpose, to be reclaimed.

Venit' a díre, to signifie, to meane or import. Also to come to say.

Veníre adósso, to fall or come vpon one.

Veníre ad huópo, to come at need.

Veníre ad orécchio, to come to ones eares.

Veníre a fine, to come to an end.

Venire a gálla, to flote vpon the water, to come a drift.

Veníre a grádo, to come acceptably.

Veníre al bisógno, to come at neede.

Veníre al di sópra, to come or haue the vpper hand.

Veníre al fátto, to come to the matter. 

Veníre alle brútte, to fall out and come to foule words and bandy-cuffes.

Venire álle máni, to come to handy blowes, to graple together.

Veníre álle prése, to come to grappleing.

Veníre álle strétte, to come to closings.

Veníre al móndo, to be borne, to come into the world, to begin the world as we say.

Veníre al quía, to come to a conclusion.

Veníre a mánco, to come to lesse, to faint.

Veníre a notítia, to come to the knowledge.

Venire a pátti, to come to couenants.

Veníre apresso, to come after or behind.

Veníre a questióne, to come to a quarrel or to words.

Veníre a sesto, to come to some good order.

Veníre a vólo, to come flying or in haste,

Veníre détto, to be said or reported.

Veníre fallíto, to misse a purpose.

Veníre fátto, to be done, to come to passe.

Veníre in cóncio, to come fitly.

Veníre in destro, idem.

Veníre in grádo, to come acceptably.

Veníre in grátia, to come in fauour.

Veníre in párte, to fall to a mans share. Also to come to some part.

Veníre in pruóua, to come to the triall.

Veníre in sórte, to fall to ones lot.

Veníre in súcchio, to come to so earnest a longing that ones teeth run a water.

Veníre in táglio, to sute well, to fall out handsomly and sutably.

Veníre méno, to faile or come lesse, to faint or fall in a swoune. Also to faile ones promise or breake ones word.

Veníre nel' ánimo, to come to a mans minde or remembrance.

Veníre per alcúno, to come for or call some body.

Veníre scontráto, to meete withall by chance.

Veníre trouáto, to happen to be found.

Venírsi, to be conuenient, decent, seemely or fitting.

Veníre vóglia, to haue a longing.

Venitíccio, a stranger that commeth and goeth. Also any thing that may happen.

Vénnero, they came, or did come.

Veníre vedúto, to chance to be seene.

Vènnono, as Vénnero.

Venolíne, little veines or arteries.

Venóso, full of veines or arteries.

Vensei, as Ventisei, six and twentie. 



Ventáglia, the buffie of a caske or headpiece.

Ventagliáre, to fan or make wind. Also to winnow or shake in the winde.

Ventáglio, any kinde of fan or flap to make wind with.

Ventáio, as Ventáglio.

Ventaiuólo, as Ventaruólo.

Ventánco, seeming dangerous where no danger is.

Ventáre, to blow or make wind. Also as Ventagliáre.

Ventarello, a pleasant or small gale of wind. Also as Ventáglio. Also a paper-windmill that children vse to play with at a stickes end.

Ventaruóla, a fane, a weather-cooke.

Ventaruólo, as Ventarello. Also a fan or winnow for corne. Also the name of a certaine wheele in a clocke.

Venteggiáre, to blow as the wind doth.

Venténa, a score or twenty in number.

Ventésimo, the twentieth in order.

Vénti, the number of twenty.

Venticello, a little pleasant gale of wind.

Venticínque, fiue and twenty.

Venticinquésimo, the fiue and twentieth.

Ventiéra, a casement of a window.

Ventiláre, to breath or blow as the wind doth. Also to waue in the aire, or houer in the wind. Also to fan or winnow corne. Also to canuase a matter too and fro, to suspend or keepe a thing in doubt. Also to examine or sift out a matter with diligence and curiosity.

Ventilatióne, a ventilation, a waueing, a houering, a panting, a breathing, a fanning or winnowing too and fro. Also a diligent sifting out of a matter.

Ventilégio, a fane or weather-cocke.

Ventinno, a kind of coine in Góa.

Ventimóla, a wind-mill.

Ventiplicáre, to twenty fold.

Ventitrésimo, the 23.

Vento, any kind of wind breath, blast or blowing. Also a puffe, a gale, a gust, a berry or flaw of winds. Also a rough wind or stormy blast. Also any one wind or point of the compasse. Vsed also for fauouor or reputation. Vsed also for vanity, self-conceit or for vain-glory and ambition.

Vento contrário, a contrary winde. Also as Vento in fáccia.

Vento della bálla., looke Dáre il vento álle bálle.

Vento in fáccia, the winde in ones face, that is to haue fortune against one, to haue no good successe in any attempt. 

Vento in póppa, the wind in the poope, that is to saile prosperously, to haue good lucke or all things fauorable as one would wish.

Ventola, any kind of fan or winnow.

Ventoláre, as Ventiláre.

Ventolíno, as Ventarello.

Ventolo, as Ventarello.

Vento próspero, a prosperous wind.

Ventosaménte, windily. Also proudlie.

Ventosáre, to cup or let bloud with cupping-glasses.

Ventóso, boxing or cupping-glasses.

Vento secóndo, a fauourable wind.

Ventóse paróle, idle big words.

Ventosità, windinesse, ventosity.

Ventóso, windy, full of wind.

Ventráccio, a gorbelly, a gully panch, a  great gulch, a grand gut.

Ventráglia, as Ventrésca.

Ventráia, as Ventrésca, or Ventráccio.

Ventraiuóla, a woman that sels tripes or such entrailes.

Ventraiuólo, a child that through ill diet hath a big, swolne and hard bellie.

Ventrále, a stomacher. Vsed also for a trusse to keepe vp the guts. Also an apron.

Ventre, the ventre, belly or paunch of any creature. Also a womans wombe or child she goeth with. Vsed also for Ventrícolo. Vsed also for belly-cheere.

Ventreggiáre, to follow belly-cheere, lust or sensuality, to wallow in sinne.

Ventrepiéno, a full belly or panch. Vsed also for a great turd.

Ventrésca, the panch, off all, guts, garbage or entrailes of any body, be it man or beast. Also an Ox-midriffe, a Calues-plucke, a Sheepes-gither, a Hogs-hastlet, the vmbles of a Deare, &c.

Ventrícchia, any meat made of tripes, chitterlings, guts, liuer, lungs, or any entrailes. Also as Ventrésca.

Ventrícchio, the gargle or throate-hole. Also the crop, the gorge or pannell of a Hawke. Also the gizard, the gestier, the craw or maw of any creature.

Ventricello, any little belly, panch or wombe of any creature.

Ventrícolo, the ventricle whereby the meat which we eat, being conuaighed thither by the stomacke is first digested, some vse it for Epigástrio. Some take it also for the stomacke or belly.

Ventrícoli del cuóre, two notable and large cauities sited after the sides of the heart: one on the right side, the other on the leaft, the sleeke or hollow partes of the heart.

Ventríglio, as Ventrícchio.

Ventríno, a little belly or wombe. Vsed Also for the calfe of a mans legge.

Ventróne, as Ventráccio.

Ventróso, bellied, panched, gulchy.

Ventrúto, as Ventróso.

Ventúra, aduenture, fortune, lucke, chance.

Venturáto, happy, fortunate, luckie.

Venturiéri, aduenturers, voluntaries. Also marchant aduenturers.

Ventúro, comming or that is to come.

Venturóso, as Venturáto.

Venustà, beawty, grace, comlinesse, fauour, seemelinesse, sightlinesse. Also a grace or pleasantnesse in speaking, a delight-mouing vtterance.

Venústo, beawtious, faire, graceful, welfauoured, comely, seemly, delectable to the eie.

Venúta, a comming, an arriuall.

Venúto, come, arriued. Looke Veníre.

Venúzza, a little veine or artery.

Venzéi, twenty six.

Venzóldi, twenty shillings.

Vepri, thornes, bryers, brambles, shrubs.

Veprétto, a thorne or brier or bramblebush.

Vepricóso, full of briers, brambles or thornes.

Vepróso, as Vepricóso.

Ver', as Véro. Also as Verso, toward.

Veráce, true, true-saying, sooth, veritable.

Veraccménte, truely, veritably, verily.

Veracità, truth, verity, sooth.

Veraménte, truely, verily, soothlie.

Verátro, Beares-foote, Ling-wort, Neesing-wort. Some take it for Hellebore.

Verbále, verbale, according to the word, consisting of words.

Verbásco, Taper-wort, Ling-wort, Hightaper, Bigtaper, Wooll-blade, Torch-hearbe, Beares-beard, french-sage, Mullein, or Woody-mullein.

Verbáscolo, the Petty-mullein.

Verbáscolo álbo, the Ox-lip.

Verbáscolo minóre, the Primrose.

Verbáscolo odoráto, the Cowslip.

Verbéna, the hearbe Veruein, whereof be two kinds, it is also vsed for all kinds of hearbes and boughes pertayning to purging and making holy, which were vsed in or about religious ceremonies, or were hanged about. Altars to garnish them, as the Mirtle, the Laurell and the Oliue. 



Verbéna colombína, vpright or straight Verueine.

Verbéna retta, as verbéna colombína.

Verbéna supína, base or flat Verueine.

Verbenário, a Herauld or embassadour which on his head bare a garland of Verueine when he was sent to the enemies.

Verberábile, that may or should be beaten, strooken or punished.

Verberáre, to beate, to strike or to hit against as the Sunne doeth.

Verberatióne, a beating, a verberation, a striking or hitting against.

Verbereo, that is worthie of beating.

Verbero, a heate, or hitting of the Sunbeames against any thing, a beating.

Verbésco, as Verbásco.

Verbigrátia, as for example sake.

Verbo, any word or terme. Also a Verbe. Also a whole sentence. Also a literall sence.

Verbo di Dío humanáto, taken for our Lord Iesus Christ.

Verbosità, verbositie, much talking, or words.

Verbóso, wordy, full of words, or talking

Verbum cáro, the holie writ, or Gospell. Also our Lord Iesus, or blessed Messias.

Verdácchij, a kind of great greene Plums.

Verdadero, as Veritiere.

Vérde, the colour called greene, or vert in armorie. Also new, yong, fresh, youthfull, in prime. Also the greene grasse. Also a greene, or greene plot of ground. Petrarke hath vsed the word Vérde for a finall end, when he saith, giónto al vérde, alluding to a Candle, which they were wont to colour greene with the iuice of hearbs at the big end, and to this day vse it in Ireland, as we would say in English, burning in the socket, decaying, drawing to an end, almost consumed, or beginning to faint.

Vérde azzúrro, a kind of colour that Painters vse.

Vérde brúno, a sad, or darke greene.

Verdécchio, as Verdíccio.

Verdeggiánte, verdent, greene, and flourishing, lustie and youthfull.

Verdeggiáre, to flourish, and be greene.

Verdegiállo, a yellowish greene.

Verdellétto, as Verdemezzo. Also some-what greenish.

Verdemezzo, greene, or halfe rosted, sodden, or baked.

Verdemontáno, a greene Finch.

Verdente, verdent in armorie.

Verdéra, a kind of white Muskadine-wine in Toscana. 

Verderáme, Verdie-greese, or greene Coperas.

Verdéro, a greene Finch.

Verdézza, verdure, greenenes.

Verdíccio, greenish, drawing to greene.

Verdiéro, a greene Finch.

Verdóne, a greene Finch. Also a darke, deepe, or french greene.

Verdoríno, a greene Finch.

Verdúgo, a Rapier, a Tucke, a little Sword.

Verdúme, as Verdúra.

Verdúra, verdure, greenenes, all manner of greene, as grasse, fields, boughs, or leaues. Also youth, or lustinesse.

Verecóndia, bashfulnesse, modestie, demurenesse, shamefulnesse, feare of doing euill, but properly belonging to the mind, where as Erubescenza, belongeth to the act or deede.

Verecóndo, bashfull, modest, shamefull, fearefull, or blushing to doe euill.

Verende, the priuities of man or woman.

Verétta, a chape of any sword or dagger, a tip of any weapon. Also as Verétto.

Veréttare, to chape or tip any weapon or sheath. Also to turne with a skrew.

Verétto, a kind of shaft, arrow or boult. Also the chape of a sword or dagger. Also a turning vice or skrew.

Verettóne, as Verétto.

Vérga, any kind of rod or verge. Also a whipping-rod. Also a wand, a switch, a little slicke, a twig, a sprig, or little branch. Also a royall Scepter, or warder, a Magistrates white or commanding staffe, an Officers verge, a Sergeants Mace. Also a Carpenters Rule or Squire. Also a Scriueners ruler. Also a Painters pensill, a measure of a yard. Also a mans yard, or priuie member. Also the Gnomon, or needle or index of a dyall. Also a plaine loopering of gold, or a gimnall Ring. Also a wedge, a gad, a sledge, an ingot or sowe of any mettall. Also a barre in armorie. Also a kind of play that boies vse in Italie.

Vérga aurea, the hearbe Golden-rod.

Vérga delsángue, as Vírga del sángue

Vérga di pastóre, a Shepheards rod or staffe. Also the Fullers Thistle, or Teazell.

Vérga d'óro, or d'argento, taken for a hoope-ring. Also a wedge of gold or siluer.

Vérga gránde, vsed for the maine yard of a Ship.

Vergáre, to whip or scourge with a rod. Also to rule, to write, or draw lines. Also to limme, to draw, or paint. Also to stripe or worke any striped stuffe, as some Canuas is. Also to beate or wind wooll. 

Vérgareále, vsed for a Kings Scepter.

Vergáte, stripes, or lashes with rods.

Vergáto, whipped or lashed with rods. Also ruled, or drawen with lines. Also limmed or drawne. Also made of rods or twigs. Also striped, or any striped stuffe. Also that hath rods or long rayes and stender strikes in it like rods. Also laced or laid ouer as a garment with stripes or rayes of gold or any thing else. Also partie-coloured, or motlie. Also Barrie in armorie.

Vérga viríle, vsed for a mans yard.

Vergelláto, hogs-grease clarifide or purifide. Also a kind of fish.

Vergelle, yong shootes or graffs, yong branches, vnder-wood, sprigs, or little rods.

Vérghe, the Plurall of Vérga.

Vergheggiáre, as Vergáre.

Vergheggiáta, a stripe, or lash with a rod.

Verghétta, any small or little Vérga.

Verghezzíno, a wooll-winder, or dresser.

Vérgie, all manner of Cole, or Coleworts.

Vergiero, an Hort-yard full of trees.

Vergílie, a Starre called the Broode-hen Starre, they are seauen, and about the taile of Taurus.

Verginále, virgin, or maiden-like. Also of or pertaining to a virgin.

Vérgine, a virgin, a maid, an vndefiled damzell. Also one of the twelue signes in the Zodiake. Also a kind of tormenting iron to torture men with.

Verginella, a yong virgin, or maiden.

Vergineo, as Verginále.

Verginíle, as Verginále.

Verginíssima, most vndefiled.

Verginità, virginitie, pucelage, chastitie, puritie, maidenhead.

Vergiótti, yong Cole, or hard Coleworts.

Vergitáre, to bend or encline ofter.

Vergitatióne, often-bending.

Vergógna, shame, reproch, infamie, dishonor. Also vsed for Verecóndia.

Vergognáre, to shame, or be ashamed.

Vergognársi, to be ashamed, or bashfull.

Vergógne, the priuities of man or woman.

Vergognosaménte, shamefully.

Vergognóso, shamefull, shamefast, bashfull.

Vergoláto, any kind of striped stuffe.

Vérgole, the stripes or cords wouen in any stuffe. Also the little Vérghe. Also a kind of little Bote vsed heretofore in Venice.

Vergóne, a Hawkes pearch. Also any kind of great Vérga.

Vergótta, nothing at all, not any thing. 



Vericída, a truth-teller, a true speaker.

Veridíco, as Vericída.

Verificábile, that may be verified.

Verificánza, as Verificatióne.

Verificáre, to verifie, to auerre, to approoue.

Verificatióne, a verifying, an approouing.

Verigoláre, to augre, to boare, to drill.

Verígolo, an augre, a wimble, a drill.

Verilóquio, a true speach or discourse. Also an etimologie, a true exposition or meaning of a word or sentence.

Verisimigliánza, likelyhood, semblance of truth, possibilitie.

Verisímile, likely, like the truth, possible.

Verisimilitúdine, as Verisimigliánza.

Verisimíllimo, most like vnto truth.

Verisimilménte, likely, possiblie.

Verità, truth, veritie, verie-sooth.

Veritéuole, veritable, hauing truth.

Veriteuolménte, truely, verily, veritably, soothly.

Veritiéro, a truth-teller, a soothsayer.

Ver lei, towards her.

Ver lúi, towards him.

Ver mè, to me-ward.

Verme, or Vermo, any kind of worme or vermine. Also a disease in a Horse called the bots. Also the worme or winding of any skrew.

Vermeggiáre, to crawle as wormes.

Verména, as Verbéna.

Vermena, a rod, a sprig, a twig, a graff, a yong shoote or imp of any tree.

Verme volatíco, the bots in a Horse.

Vermi, the winds of any skrew. Also little wrests.

Vermicáta, any ring-worme, or running tetter.

Vermicelli, all manner of little wormes, grubs, or vermine. Also a kinde of paste-meate cut small like wormes, which being dried, they boile in water and dresse them with butter, spice, and cheese, as Tagliarelli.

Vermiculáre, to creepe and craule as all wormes and vermine doe, to runne thicke and three-fold as Emmets doe. Also to breede or be full of vermine and wormes. Also to worke in-laid, Marquetrie, or Checker-worke, with very small pieces.

Vermiculatióne, a vermiculation, a breeding or crauling of vermine or grubs. Also a worme-eating of any fruite.

Vermiculáto, crauled as wormes or vermine. Also worme-eaten. Also full of wormes, vermine, or grubs. Also wrought with in-laid or Marquetrie worke.

Vermífero, worme-breeding, or bringing. 

Vermigliáre, as Vermiculáre.

Vermiglio, a red or vermillion colour. Also gueles in armorie. Also a kind of Silke-worme.

Vermína, as Verména.

Verminácola, Holy-hearbe, Pigeons-grasse, or Iunoes-teares.

Vermináre, to breede or fill with any kind of vermine or grubs. Also to haue, to breede, or void wormes. Also to haue a wringing in the bellie.

Verminatióne, a vehement paine, or wringing of the guts, as if they were gnawne with wormes. Also the worms or bots in any Cattell.

Vermini, all manner of vermine, or grubs.

Verminóso, full of wormes, vermine, or grubs. Also worme, or moth-eaten. Also troubled or pained with wormes, or gnawing in the guts.

Verminúcci, as Vermicelli, wormelets.

Vermo, as Verme.

Vermocáne, a creeping vlcer, or running tetter. Also the wormes or bots in a Horse. Vsed also for the french poxe.

Vermolíni, little wormes, grubs, or wormelets.

Vermóso, as Verminóso.

Vermo volánte, a cancrous vlcer in the nose of a horse, any running vlcer.

Vermo volático, as Vermo volánte.

Vernáccia, a kind of wine like Malmesie.

Vernacciuóla, as Vernáccia.

Vernácula, our naturall or mothers tongue.

Vernáculo, borne and brought vp together in one house or Country. Also proper and naturall.

Vernále, of or pertayning to winter.

Vernáre, to winter, to become winter.

Vernarécchie, any kinde of winter fruite.

Vernáta, a winters space, a wintring.

Vernatióne, the old or winter coate or skin of an Adder or Snake that hee castes off in the spring time. Vsed also for the Spring time of the yeere.

Vernecáre, to varnish.

Verneréccio, that groweth and keepes in Winter, winter fruites, of winter kind.

Vernicáre, to varnish.

Verníce, any kind of varnish. Also a kind of white stone. Also a kind of binding silken lace or riband.

Verníglia, la regína portáua sáia intiera di verníglia d'óro.

Verníle, seruile, and yet saucy and malapert.

Vernilità, flattering, and seruile behauiour.

Verno, the Winter or Winter-season.

Vernóc chio, the swelling of any blow.

Vernótico, a kind of excellent wine in Italy. Vsed to be drunke in winter.

Véro, true, sooth, right. Also truth or verity. Also vncorrupted, right or vnfained.

Veróchio, a winder in a Crane to draw vp waights.

Véro e, true it is, it is true and right.

Veróla, as Varóle, any kind of pox.

Veróla di ferro, a plate or clout of iron.

Veróla gróssa, the great or french pox.

Veróla pícciola, the small pox.

Veroláto, pockie or full of the pox.

Verolóso, as Veroláto.

Veróne, a ietting out of any building, an out butting bay window, or round out window, any out butting building in prospects or gallories.

Verónica, the hearbe Betony.

Verpa, vsed for Vérga, a mans yard.

Verpo, he that is circumcised and hath the foreskin of his yard cut off.

Verrà, hee, shee, or it shall come.

Verretóne, as Verétto.

Verríno, of or belonging to a boare.

Verro, any kind of boare-hog.

Verrò, I shall or will come.

Verróne, a great boare or barrow hog. Also as Veróne.

Verrúca., Looke Verrúche, any kind of wart.

Verrúca formicánte, a wart blacke like an Ant, and called an Ant-wart, which is commonly deepe rooted, broad below and little aboue, and being pulled at makes on feele, as it were the stinging of Ants.

Verrúca pensíle, a long and hanging wart with a great head and slender roote.

Verrucária, Wertwort or Turnesole.

Verrúca sessíle, as Verrúca formicánte.

Verrúcche, all maner of warts or knaps of hard flesh rising in the body, wherof be diuers kinds. Also hillockes or knaps of hils. Also holes in steeples or old buildings, where birds doe commonly breed in.

Verrucóso, full of warts or little knaps.

Versábile, that may be powred out. Also that may be turned or winded, conuersable.

Versáccij, dog-rimes, filthy verses.

Verságlio, as Berságlio, a shooting-marke.

Versánte, powring foorth. Also turning or moouing. Also conuersant or frequenting.

Versáre, to shead, to powre or skinke out or ouer as they doe wine from one pot 



to another. Also to reuerse or ouerturne. Also to leake as a ship or run out as some vessels. Also to turne or wind about. Also to conuerse with, or frequent often.

Versátile, that turneth or may be turned about. Also that may be frequented.

Versatióne, a sheading, a powring or skinking forth. Also a winding about, a turning or reuersing. Also a leaking of a ship. Also a conuersation or often frequenting.

Versáto, shed, poured or skinked. Also turned or reuersid. Also leaked or run ouer. Also conuersed with or frequented. Also conuersant or expert.

Versatúra, as Versatióne.

Verseggiáre, to versifie or make verses.

Versic áre, as Verseggiáre.

Versícolo, a versicle, a short verse.

Versiera, an old hag, beldame, wizard or witch walking about by night.

Versificáre, to versifie or make verses.

Versificatióne, a versifying.

Versificatóre, a versifier or maker of verses.

Versificatúra, a versifying or making verses.

Versífico, that versifieth or maketh verses.

Versíle, that turneth round. Also as Versábile.

Versióne, a turning or version. Also a translation.

Versipelle, people bewitched, forspoken or changed by witch craft. Also such as we cal turne-coates or changelings. Vsed also for a wily or crafty fellow, one that will change with euery fortune.

Verso, any kind of line, any verse or rime, a line of any writing. Also order, course, method, proportion or byace. Vsed for a point of the compasse. Also any part, side or situation of place or coast.

Verso, toward, towards. Also according to the haire, wooll or right byace. Also turned, changed or reuersed. Also ouer against. Also in comparison.

Verso cása, homeward, towards home.

Verso dentro, inward, or inwards.

Verso di lúi, towards him.

Verso di mè, towards mee.

Verso di tè, towards thee.

Verso dóue?, towards what place?

Verso di vói, to you ward.

Verso la séra, toward euening.

Versolíno, a little verse, a verselet.

Verso man destra, toward the right hand.

Verso ponente, Eastward. 

Verso quì, this way, hitherward.

Versória, the needle of a Mariners compasse.

Versório, that turneth any way.

Verso tè, towards thee.

Versúra, any kinde of verdure or greene.

Versútia, wilinesse, craft, slie, cunning, variablenesse, mutability, and changing.

Versúto, wily, crafty, quickwitted. Also variable, mutable, often turning.

Vertágo, a hound that wil hunt by himselfe and bring home his game.

Vertáre, as Versáre.

Vertebre, a ioynt in the body where the bones so meete that they may turne, as in the knuckle-bone.

Vertécchio, a wherue for a spindle.

Vertente, verticall, that turneth, twirleth or whirleth about or round.

Vertíbile, that may be turned.

Verticále, verticall, as Vertente.

Verticále ángolo, a verticall angle.

Vertíce, the top, the tip, the crowne or height of any thing, as of an hill or of a mans head. Also the seame in the head that runneth from the middle of the forehead directly ouer the crowne to the necke and deuideth the head and haire into two parts, as may easily be seene in a womans head, when hir haire falleth halfe to the right side, and half one the leaft side of the head. Vsed also for the hookes that a doore hangeth one by. Also a whirlepoole or the eddy and turning round of the water where tides doe front and meete. Also a round-turning or whirle-winde. Looke Vertíci.

Verticello, a Spinners wherue or wheele that shee puts on hir spindle.

Vertíci del móndo, the North and South Poles. Vsed also for the elect people of God that goe to heauen.

Verticílla, the Wrinecke or Hickway.

Verticilláto, apt to turne as a wherue. Also made turning wise. Also knit together as many ioynts are.

Vertícoli, the knuckles or turning ioynts of the chine-bone or backe-bone.

Verticórdio, any thing that turneth the heart and changeth the minde.

Verticóso, as Verticále, full of turnings.

Verticulário, a burglar or breaker of houses.

Vertígine, any whirling or turning round, any rowling about. Also a sicknesse proceeding of windinesse, which so troubleth some that all they see seemeth to turne round, we call it a vertigo, a giddinesse, a dizzinesse or swimming in the head with a mistinesse, a dimnesse, a sparkling or glimmering of the eies, namely if one stoop or looke downe ward. Also the eddy or round whirling of waters.

Vertiginóso, giddy brained, dizzie-headed, that is troubled with Vertígine.

Vertola, non cúrano portáre lafrónte piéna di vergógna per hauére le vertole piéne délla tóbba altrúi.

Vertù, vertue, honesty, grace, hatred of vice. Also the power, vigor, strength or properly in or of any thing.

Vertualità, the power or effect of vertue.

Vertudióso, vertuous, full of vertue.

Vertúe, as Vertù.

Vertueggiáre, as Virtueggiáre.

Vertuóso, vertuous, honest, full of vertue.

Veruátto, land ploughed vp in the spring time.

Veruíce, vsed for a Weather or Sheepe.

Veruilágine, a blacke Chameleon Thistle.

Veruína, a kinde of long dart or iauelin.

Verúle, a kind of Cherries in Italy.

Verunaménte, by no meanes, at no hand.

Verúno, any one. Also not any one.

Verúto, a casting dart with a sling.

Verzáglio, vsed for Berzáglio.

Verzaino, a Yellow or Gold-hammer-bird.

Verzáta, as Verzelláta.

Vérze, any Cole or Coleworts.

Verzelláta, a meat made of yongue Coleworts.

Verzelláta cárne, a kind of dressing of meat.

Verzelli, yongue little Cole-worts.

Verzéra, some part of a ship.

Verzerótto, as Verzaíno.

Verzétte, yongue and tender Coleworts.

Verzicáre, to grow greene.

Verziére, an Hortyard full of trees.

Verziére, a ground where Cole-worts grow.

Verzináre, to colour red with brazell.

Verzíno, Brazell-wood or Fernan-bucke.

Verzolíno, as Verzaíno.

Verzótti, Cabbage-Coleworts.

Verzúme, as Verzúra.

Verzúra, any greene or verdure.

Vesánia, madnesse, fury, rage.

Veschiáre, as Vischiáre.

Véschio, as Víschio, birdlime.

Veschióso, as Vischióso, viscous, slimie.

Véscia, any kinde of puffe, push, puffe-fist or fusse-ball or drie Toade-stoole full of dust or winde. Also any hollow blister or bladder. Also a fiste, a



fizzle, a close fart.

Vesciáre, to blister. Also to fiste or fizzle.

Vescíca, any kinde of bladder or blister.

Vescicáre, to blister, to bladder, to puffe.

Vescicóne di uento, a great bladder of winde. Also an idle gull or vaine-glorious asse.

Véscie di lúpo, fusse-bals, puffe-fistes.

Vescieggiáre, to fusse, to fiste, to fizzle.

Vescónte, as Viscónte.

Vesconádo, a Bishopricke or Sea.

Vescouáto, a Bishopricke or Sea.

Vescoueggiáre, to play the Bishop.

Véscouo, a Bishop.

Vesíca, as Vessíca.

Vesicáre, as Vessicáre.

Vesicária, as Vessicári.

Vesína, as Stambécco.

Vespa, any kind of Waspe or Hornet.

Vespáio, a Waspes or Hornets neast.

Vespáre, to Waspe or sting with Waspes.

Vespe, any kind of Waspe or Hornet.

Vesperna, an euening meale or supper.

Vespero, as Vespro.

Vesperricióne, a Night-bat or Reremouse.

Vespertiglióne, as Vesperticióne.

Vespertillo, as Vesperticióne.

Vespertillóne, as Vesperticióne.

Vespertína cognitióne, late knowledge, as we say an after-wit.

Vespertíno, of or belonging to the euening, or that is donne in the euening.

Vesperugíne, the euening starre.

Vespilóne, a digger of graues or pits, but properly he that carrieth forth dead bodies in the night-times to be buried, as they vse in times of plague or great sicknesse.

Vespra, the time or howre when they ring in to euening-praier.

Vesprále, pertayning to euening or euening-praier. Also of the Westerne partes.

Vespráta, an euen, an euening, an euening tide, an afternoone.

Vespro, an euen, an euening, that is to say the immediate time after the sun is set. Also euensong or euening praier. Also the euening star.

Véfla, as Véscia.

Vessáre, to vex, to molest, to trouble, to disturbe, to grieue, to disquiet, to cumber, to afflict, to torment, to doe all mischiefe that can be. Also as Vesciáre.

Vessatióne, vexation, molestation, trouble, torment, affliction or griefe.

Vessíca, any kinde of bladder or blister.

Vessicáre, to bladder, to blister, to gall. 

Vessicaria, Bladder-wort, Bladder-nut, Night-shade, Winter-cherry or Alkakengie.

Vessichétta, any little bladder or blister.

Vessicóni, any great bladders or blisters. Also winde galles in a horse. Also great puffes, fusse-bales, puffe-fistes or winde-pushes.

Vessíga, any bladder or blister.

Vessigóni, as Vessicóni.

Vessiláro, a Standard or Ensigne bearer.

Vessilatióne, a band of men vnder one ensigne, standard or banner.

Vessillo, a Standard, an Ensigne, a Banner, a flag or Streamer.

Vessiuíllo, a kinde of Sparrow. Some take it for a Thrush or Mauis.

Vesta, vsed for the Goddesse of chastity, to whom the ancient Romans did much honour.

Vestále, vestall, of or pertayning to the Goddesse of Chastity, Vérgini Vestáli, the vestal Virgines, whose charge was to keepe and preserue fire in a certaine temple in Rome from going out or being quenched.

Veste, any kind of vesture, garment, vestement, habite, weed, attire, robe, mantle, clothing, gowne or abillement. Also a cace to keepe any thing in.

Vestiária, a vestry, a wardrobe where apparell and all sorts of garments are kept and laid vp. Also a place where garments are sold.

Vestiário, a wardrobe keeper, a master or yeoman of a Wardrobe. Also one that sels clothes ready made. Also the act of clothing.

Veftíbolo, any place in a house where al manner of clothes, garments, hangings or any rich and best stuffe is kept and laide vp, as we would say a chief warderob, or a Princes robes, or where his robes are kept. Also a place where a Prince or Nobleman hath his robes brought him, and where he puts them on and makes himselfe readie. Vsed also for a porch, or void place before a doore. Also vsed for a lobbie or little vacant roome betweene other chambers. Also as A'trio.

Vestibulário, one that hath the charge of a Vestibolo, a master of the robes.

Vestíbulo, as Vestibolo.

Vesticciuóle, all maner of poore, meane, little, or simple clothes. Also vsed for cases to put any thing in. Also tykes for beds. Also pillow-beares.

Vestigáre, to seeke out diligently, to trace after, to hunt after, but properly to seeke out by the print of the foot.

Vestigabóndo, much or diligently seeking or tracing out. 

Vestigatióne, seeking or tracing out, diligent inuestigation.

Vestigatóre, a diligent seeker or hunter, one that seeketh and traceth out by steps.

Vestígio, a trace, a tracke, a footing, a footstep, the marke, the print, or signe of any thing, namely of a mans foot. Also as Anatomists say, as Pédio.

Vestiménto, as Veste, any vestiment or vesture. Also a suit of apparell.

Vestíno, a kinde of cheese in Italie.

Vestíre, vesto, vestíj, vestíto, to cloath, to apparell, to attire, to aray, to enrobe, to inuest. Also to decke, to garnish, to couer, to adorne. Vsed also as a noune, for any vestiment, vesture, garment, attire, or suit of apparell.

Vestírsi dì, for a man to put on or cloath him selfe with.

Vestitello, any meane garment.

Vestíti, all maner of wearing cloaths, vestures, or suits of apparell.

Vestíto, clad, apparelled, attired, araied, cloathed, enrobed, enmantled, inuested, yclad. Also decked, garnished, couered, adorned. Also vsed for any clothing, apparell, vesture, raiment, or sute of clothes. Also any ornament.

Vestíto a brúno, clad in mourning clothes, or apparelled in blacke.

Vestíto álla Francése, apparelled after the French fashion.

Vestíto d' afflitto, clad in mourning weedes.

Vestíto da furfánte, clothed as a rogue.

Vestíto di corrótto, clad in mourning weedes.

Vestíto di duólo, idem.

Vestíto di grána, attired in scarlet.

Vestíto di lugúbre, idem.

Vestitúra, as Inuestitúra.

Vestóne, an vpper, great, or wide garment.

Vestoriáno, a colour vsed by Painters.

Vestúra, as Veste, any kind of vesture

Vetera, old, aged, antient, eld.

Veteranaménte, agedly, anciently.

Veteraneo, after the ancient fashion.

Veteráno, old, aged, ancient, eld, veterate. Also one that hath serued long in a place or office.

Veteráre, to grow old, aged, or ancient.

Veterinaría, the trade of making glasses.

Veteríno, a burden-bearer.

Veterno, a drouzie disease, a continuall desire of sleeping, engendred through idlenesse, a slothfulnesse or drouzinesse.

Vetíca, as Vímine.

Vetoláro, a kinde of tub or cowle that they carrie grapes in to the presse betweene two men.

Vetónica, the hearbe called Betonie.

Vetráio, a glasier, or a glasse-maker. 



Vetrámi, all maner of glasse, or glasseworke.

Vetráre, to glase or couer with glasse.

Vetraría, a furnace where glasses are made, or shop where glasses are sold.

Vetráro, a glasier, or glasse-maker.

Vetriáre, to glase or couer with glasse.

Vetríce, a kinde of sallow or withie. Also Agnus castus, or Folefoot, as Tussilágine.

Vetríci, all maner of withs, as Vímini.

Vetríno, of glasse, glassie, vitrious.

Vetrióla, the hearbe Basill. Also as Vetríno.

Vetriólo, vitrioll, coper as. Also Basill-hearbe.

Vetriótto, a kinde of glassie alablaster.

Vétro, any kinde of glasse.

Vetróso, glassie or vitrious.

Vétta, as Vedétta. Also the toppe, the tipe, or highest part of any thing. Also a blocke, a stumpe, a snag, or stocke or logge of a tree. Also a cudgell, a sticke or bat of wood. Also the barke or rind of any tree. Also a wrest or hand-winder of any presse or screw. Also a with to binde any thing with. Also any small, thinne, or narrow ingot, wedge, or gad of any metall. Also a kinde of earthen pot with a narrow long necke set vpon some walles for birds to breede in. Also a kinde of linnen vaile, coife, head-band, or haire-lace, where with the Priests wiues did tie their haires, and dresse their heads. Also a garland or wreath and chaplet for the head.

Vétte, little sticks, as of Cinamond.

Vettína, any kinde of little Vétta. I finde it also vsed for a chime of belles, or for a squirels maze, going about with a cage, and belles in the same.

Vettória, as Vittória, a victorie.

Vettorióso, as Vittorióso, victorious.

Vettouáglia, al maner of victuals, meat, food, or sustenance.

Vettouagliáre, to victuall, to finde or store with food and sustenance.

Vettouagliere, a victualler, a vitler.

Vettouariáre, as Vettouagliáre.

Vettouárie, as Vettouáglie.

Vettúcce, the tender tops of any tree, flowre or hearbe.

Vettúra, the hire, or hiring of a horse, the price for any carriage.

Vetturále, as Vetturíno.

Vetturáre, to hire, or let foorth to hire, namely horses or mules of a hackneyman, or to bargaine with a carrier for the carriage of any thing.

Vettureggiáre, as Vetturáre.

Vetturíno, a hackney man, a muletier, one that lets foorth horses or mules to hire. Also a common carrier that carrieth any thing for hire or reward. 

Vetustà, age, ancientnesse, oldnesse, antiquitie, long continuance, elder time.

Vetustaménte, agedly, anciently, according to old times and fashions.

Vetustézza, as Vetustà.

Vetústo, aged, ancient, of long continuance.

Vézza, the pulse vitches, veccie or Tares.

Vezzataménte, deceitfully, craftily, maliciously, viciously.

Vezzeggiaménto, a wantonizing, a mignardizing, a dandling, a flattring with.
 
Vezzeggiáre, to wantonize, to mignardize, to dallie, to dandle, to quaint it, or play the wanton with, either in words or gestures.

Vézzi, wantonizings, wanton toies or iests, flatterings, dandlings. Looke Vézzo.

Vezzína, a kinde of fish in Muscouie, that is very good meat, and hath no bones in it.

Vézzo, a wantonnesse, a quaintnesse, a wantonizing, a mignardizing, a dandling, a dalliance, a toying, a merrie iesting, or playing with, a simpring squeamishnesse. Also a chaine or file of pearles, a necke-lace, a carkanet, or any quaint ornament worne about the neck for a grace and wanton shew, of the Latine word Vitta. Also vsed for a wont, a fashion, or any affected condition and custome. Vsed also for a vice, a fault, or errour, first vsed for wantonnesse, and then as an habit or custome that cannot easily bee left, of the Latine word Vitium.

Vezzosaménte, wantonly, dandlingly, squeamishly, quaintly. Looke Vézzo.

Vezzóso, wanton, mignard, full of wantonnesse, quaint, blithe, buckesome, gamesome, flattring, nice, coy, squeamish, peart, pleasant, full of affectation.

Vezzúra, any kinde of greene or verdure.

Vfficiále, of or pertaining to offices or duties. Also officiall or officious. Also an officer.

Vfficiále árma, armes that are giuen by some office, as Bishops are.

Vssiciaménti, all maner of offices or officers together.

Vfficiáre, to haue, to beare and serue the office of any function. Also to serue the cure of a Church.

Vfficiário, any kinde of officer.

Vfficiatúra, an officeship, officiousnesse.

Vffício, any kinde of office. Also a duty, a calling, a charge, a part or function of any man. Also a good turn, office, pleasure, kindnesse, benefit, or seruice done by any man for another. Also homage or honour done or to bee done of dutie. Also a Primer-booke, a praier-booke, or Seruice-booke read in Churches. Also the morning or euening praier, or Seruice that is said and read customarily in Churches.

Vfficiosità, dutifulnesse, officiousnesse.

Vfficióso, officious, dutifull, diligent.

Vfficiuólo, a little Primer or Praierbooke.

V'ffo, V'ffoli, some part or limme of a horse.

V'ggia, is properly that shadow that a greater tree doth cast ouer a lesser tree, whereby hee keepeth the Sunne from comming to it, and hindreth it from growing, or bearing any good or ripe fruits. Vsed also for Mill-deaw, or blasting with Mill-deaw. Also by a metaphor, ouershadowing, darkenesse, and obscuritie. Also malice, spight, or grudging. Also amazement, sudden feare. Also importunitie and combersome annoiance. Also a kinde of great Grasse-hopper.

Vggiáre, to ouer-shadow, to darken or obscure, as a greater tree doth a lesser, to hinder from growing. Also to blast with mill-deaw. Also to hate, to spight, or malice. Also to amaze with a sudden feare. Also to annoy. Looke V'ggia.

Vggióso, full of darknesse, ful of blasting, full of spight, noisome. Looke V'ggia.

V'gna, as V'nghia, in euery place.

Vgnea, a kinde of fearne, of whose ashes they make the best kinde of glasses.

V'gnere, as V'ngere.

Vgniánno, yeerely, euery yeere.

V'gnolo, single, slight, plaine, vnlined.

Vgnóne, a griping long-fingered fellow, one whose fingers bee as good as lime-twigs.

V'gola, as V'uola.

Vguagliánza, equalitie, paritie.

Vguagliáre, to equall, to match, to compare.

Vgualáre, as Vguagliáre.

Vguále, equall, alike, match, euen.

Vgualità, equalitie, paritie.

Vgualménte, equally, alike, euen as.

Vguánno, this yeere, this present yeere.

Vh vh, ohoh, alas.

Vì, to you, to your selfe, the Datiue case, Vì dò, I giue you.

Vì, you, your selfe, the Accusatiue case, Vì véggo, I see you.

Vía, from you, the Ablatiue case, Vì tólgo, I take from you.

Vía, there, in that place, to it, to the same.

Vía, a way, a high-way, a path a street.

Vía, a manner, a way, a method, a rule, or order to direct any thing by.

Vía, with the verbes, Andáre, Camináre, Cacciáre, Córrere, Gittáre, Leuáre, signifieth a way.



Vía, an aduerbe of encouraging much vsed by commanders, as also by riders to their horses, Goe on, forward, on, away, goe to, on quickly. Dí vía, say on, speake out.

Vía, being ioined vnto Mánco, Méno, or Più, standeth for much, or a great deale, as Via mánco, much lesse, via méno, a great deale lesse, via più, much more.

Vía croóce, a crosse high-way.

Viaggiánte, a voiager, a way-farer, a traueller, a wanderer, a way-faring man.

Viaggiáre, to voyage, to iourney, to trauell, to wander, to way-fare.

Viággio, a voyage, a iourney, a wayfaring.

Viággio délla bálla, the range or randan of a bullet.

Viále, a path, an allie, or walking-plate.

Vía lattea, the milke way in the skie.

Vía maéstra, a chiefe or high rode way.

Vía máanco, much lesse.

Vía méno, a great deale lesse.

Viandánte, as Viaggiánte.

Viandáre, as Viaggiáre.

Vía più, much or a great deale more.

Viarám, a kinde of witchcraft.

Viaticáre, to prouide necessaries or furnish with prouision for a iourney.

Viático, prouision of what soeuer is necessarie for a iourney, be it victuals, mony, or any thing else, voiage prouosion. Also a mans farewell, giuen him at his setting foorth to trauell.

Viátolo, a narrow path, allie, or causey.

Viatóre, a traueller, or way-faring man. Also a Seriant, a Pursiuant, a Beadle.

Viatório, that trauelleth, or may be remooued and carried away.

Vía vía, an Aduerbe of encouragement, on away, goe to, away, forward, goe on, dispatch.

Vibíce, a marke or print of a blow or stripe remaining in the flesh blacke and blew.

Víbio, any kinde of creature that liueth both on land and in the water.

Vibóne, the flowers of the hearbe Británica, which being eaten before it thunder, are thought to keepe men from feare of lightning or thunder.

Vibránte, brandishing or shaking in the aire. Also warbling or quauering.

Vibráre, to brandish, to shake, to flourish, to tosse, to quauer or warble any kinde of weapon in the aire. Also to warble or quauer in musicke or singing.

Vibratióne, a brandishing.

Vibríre, rísco, ríto, as Vibráre.

Vibrísse, the haires within the nostrill.

Víbro, a brandishing, a shaking or flourishing of any weapon in the aire. Also a warble, a quauer, or running in musicke or singing.

Vibúrno, the wilde vine.

Vicaría, a vicarship, a deputation, a Lieutenantship.

Vicariáto, a vicarage. Also a vicarship.

Vicário, a vicar, a deputie, an vnderseruant, one that is in stead of another, and doth the office of another.

Více, stead, lieu, place, vice, roome, course, turne, behalfe, or change for another. Also office or duty for another, and is much vsed in composition and in the beginning of other words, as for example.

Vicecameriére, a vice-chamberlaine.

Vícecancelliére, a vice-chancellour.

Vicecapitáno, a vice-captaine.

Vicecápo, a vice-roy, a vice-gouernor.

Vicecardinále, a vice-cardinall.

Vicecastelláno, a vice-gouernour of a Castle.

Vicecensóre, a vice-censor.

Viceciamberláno, a vice-chamberlaine.

Vicecomitáto, a Shrieualtie.

Vicecómite, a Shrieue of a Countie.

Vicecommessátio, a vice-commissarie.

Vicecónsole, a vice-consull, a Proconsull.

Vicecuóco, a deputie cooke, an vndercooke.

Vicedeputáto, one deputed for another.

Vicedominánza, a vice-gouernment.

Vicedómino, a deputie-lord, or ruler.

Vicedúca, a vice-duke, or leader.

Vicegenerále, a Lieutenant generall.

Vicegerente, a vicegerent, a deputie.

Vicegerenza, a vicegerencie.

Vicegiúdice, a deputie or vnder-Iudge.

Vicegouernatóre, a vice-gouernour.

Viceguardiáno, a deputie gardian or keeper.

Vicelettóre, a deputie-reader.

Vicemaéstro, a deputie, or vice-master.

Vicemáiro, a deputie or vice-maior.

Vicenda, the turne or course in changing or altering, now one, now another, an enterchangeable course. Also a mans share or part chosen by turnes. A vicenda, by course, by turne, enterchangeably, in order, successiuely, now one and then another. Vsed also for Facenda, a businesse or negotiation.

Vicende, as Scambiéuoli ambasciáte, mutuall or enterchangeable ambassages.

Vicendéuole, mutuall, enterchangeable, by turnes, by course. Looke Vicenda.

Vicendeuolménte, mutually, enterchangeably, orderly, successiuely, as A vicenda.

Vicenio, the space of twenty yeeres.

Vicenóme, a pronoune. Also a surname. 

Vicepodestà, a Deputy, Sherife or Maior.

Viceprencipáto, a Vice-principality.

Vicepréncipe, a Deputy Prince.

Vicepresidente, a Vice Precident.

Vicepretóre, a Vice Pretor.

Vice pretoriáto, a Vice Pretorship.

Vicere, a Vice Roy, a Deputy King.

Vicereggentáre, to rule by Deputation.

Vicereggente, a Vice Regent or Ruler.

Vicereggenza, a Vice Regency or Rule.

Viceregno, a Deputy Kingdome.

Vicerettóre, a Vice Rector or Ruler.

Viceseriuáno, a Deputy writer.

Vicesimo, the twentieth.

Vicesíndice, a Vice Gouernour or Iudge.

Vicetempo, one time in liew of another.

Vicetenente, a Deputy holder or keeper.

Vicetesoriére, a Vice-treasurer.

Viccuéscouo, a Vice or deputy Bishop.

Vichéria, a Townes-ship.

Víci, or Vícci, you there, or you vs there.

Vicína, shee that dwelleth next vnto or not far from vs, a neighbour.

Vicinále, belonging to neighbourhood.

Vicinánza, nighnesse, nearenesse, neighbourhood, proximity. Also the ioyning of houses one vnto another. Also company of neighbours dwelling neere or together.

Vicináre, to approach, to come, to border, to lie, or dwell neere together. Also to neighbour or confine vpon, to border neere vnto.

Vicináto, approached or dwelt and neighboured neere. Also as Vicinánza.

Vicinità, as Vicinánza.

Vicíno, a neere man, a neighbour, one that dwelleth next or neere vnto vs. Also neere, nigh, next, by, hard by, not farre off, adioyning vnto.

Vicissità, as Vicissitúdine.

Vicissitudinále, according to an alternall or enterchangeable course or order.

Vicissitudinarlaménte, successiuely, by turnes one after another.

Vicissitúdine, as Vicenda, a vicissitude or enterchangeable course.

Vicitáre, vsed for Visitáre.

Víco, a Village, a Hamlet, a Borough, an vnwalled town, but properly a row of houses close one to another with a way betweene them.

Vicónte, a Vicount, as Viscónte.

Vicontádo, a Vicounty.

Vidáre, as Vitáre, to skrew in with a vice.

Víde, as Víte, a vice or a skrew. 



Vidità. 

Vídole, a disease in a horse.

Viduità, widowhood.

Víe, as Vía, ioyned with méno or più.

Víe méno, much or a great deale lesse.

Viemme, for Mi viéne, to mee comes.

Viemmene, for Mene viéne, there comes to mee of it.

Viemmisi, for Mi si viéne, to mee himselfe comes.

Vienne, come away thence.

Víe più, much or a great deale more.

Viere, a kind of dart, light iaueling or speare easie to be broken.

Vieta, aged, stale, reazie, stinking, vnsauory.

Vietáre, to forbid, to prohibite, to inhibite, to interdict. Also to let or hinder.

Vietatóre, a forbidder, a prohibiter.

Viéto, a forbidding, an inhibition, a prohibition. Also a let, a stop, an obstacle, an hindrance. Also faint, lither, weake, feeble, or that hath lost his naturall strength. It hath also beene vsed for any forbidden thing. Also a mans or womans priuities. Also as Vieta.

Viétta, any little way, path, lane, causey, ally or walking place.

Vìeuà, a come and away, a suddaine time or space.

Vieuocáto, inuoked, called vnto, named.

Vigentésimo, the twentieth in order.

Vigére, to last, to continue, to keepe.

Vigesimário, tweenty yeeres old.

Vigesimo, the twentieth in order.

Vigiláce, as Vigilánte.

Vigilánte, vigilant, waking, watchfull, quicke sighted, neuersleeping, chary, diligent.

Vigilánza, vigilancy, watchfulnesse, wakefulnesse, diligence, charinesse.

Vigiláre, to watch, to wake. Also to fast or keepe the euen of any holy daie.

Vigilatióne, as Vigilánza.

Vígile, as Vigilánte, watchfull.

Vigília, vigilancy, watchfulnesse, watching or abstayning from sleepe. Also a watch by night, which was wont to be vsed in old time, deuiding the night into foure partes, whereof commeth the first, second, third and forth watch. Also an euen or vigill before any solemne feast or holy day, as we say a fasting day.

Vigintiuiráto, the office of twenty men of like authority.

Vigliaccaménte, rascally, skuruily, basely, roguishly, villanously.

Vigliaccaríe, rascally, scuruy, base, roguish, and knauish trickes.

Vigliácco, a rascall, a base varlet, a knauish scondrell, a scuruy fellow.

Vigliaccóne, a great, filthy, rascally, base and scuruy companion.

Vigliáre, as Vinchiáre. Also as Custodire. Vsed also for Vigiláre.

Vígna, a Vine or Vineyard. Also an engine of war made of timber and hurdles. Vsed by the Romans, like to a little house, wherewith they approached in safety to the wals of a towne, going vpon rowling timber or low truckles, called also Vinea.

Vignáccia, a great filthy Vineyard.

Vignáio, a vineroll, a viner, a vine dresser, a vineyard keeper. Also a prope or stake to stay vp a vine.

Vignaiuólo, as Vignáio.

Vignále, whatsoeuer pertaines to a vineyard or the rents and fruites thereof. Also a Vineyard.

Vignétta, any little vine or Vineyard. Also a vinet or such border as commonly are in or vpon printed bookes.

Vignóso, full of vines or vineyards.

Vigoráre, to make or become vigorous or strong, to shew vigor, to battle in strength, force or vigor, to enuigor or giue vigor and vertue vnto.

Vigóre, vigor, force, strength, courage, vertue, lustinesse or liuelinesse.

Vigoreggiáre, as Vigoráre.

Vigoría, as Vigóre.

Vigoriáre, as Vigoráre.

Vigoríre, rísco, ríto, as Vigoráre.

Vigorosaménte, vigorously, forceablie.

Vigorosità, vigorousnesse, as Vigóre.

Vigoróso, vigorous, strong, sturdy.

Vil', as Víle.

Vile, vile, base, abiect, to be scorned, contemptible, of no worth or value, of little price, dogge-cheape. Also crauen, baseminded or faint-hearted.

Vilézza, as Viltà.

Vilia, hath beene vsed for Vigília.

Viliáre, as Vigiláre.

Vilíco, a tract of a Country where no Cities are.

Vilificáre, to vilifie, to debase.

Vilificatióne, a vilifying.

Vilisicatóre, a vilifier, a debaser.

Viliménto, vilenesse, basenesse, contempt, scorne, vilifying. Looke Víle.

Vilióso, full of basenesse or vilenesse.

Vilipendere, pendo, pési, péso, to vilifie, to contemne, to scorne, to despise, to disable.

Vilipendio, contempt or scorne.

Vilipensióne, contempt or scorne.

Vilipéso, contempted, scorned, despised.

Vilíre, lísco, líto, to be, to make or become vile, base, abiect, of small worth or of no account, to vilifie. 

Vilita, vilenesse, lasenesie, contempt, scorne, cheapnesse.

Vilíto, made or become vile or base.

Villa, a towne, a village, a hamlet, a borough. Also a country farme, manor, place, house, pallace or habitation of pleasure or profite out of a City or towne. Vsed also for the Country it selfe or any part out of a City.

Vílla rústica, that part of a Country house wherin the farmer dwelleth that keepeth a Mannour house or Farme, with all manner of things pertayning to husbandry or a Farme to occupy husbandry in.

Vílla, vrbána, that part of a Mannour where the Lord himselfe doth lie, as we say in England the place, Mannor house, Hall, or cheefe house.

Villaccaríe, as Vigliaccaríe.

Villácco, as Vigliácco.

Villággio, a village, a country towne, a hamlet, a borough.

Villána, a Country wench or Hinde-woman. Also a kind of Haggard faulkon.

Villanaménte, villanously, clounishly, carterly, basely, inciuilly.

Villanáta, any kinde of Country song, gigge, or dance. Also a Country tricke or clownish part. Also a kind of Country water grewell for the poore.

Villancícco, abbellírono la processióne imottétti et villancícchi chè cantò la capella.

Villancióne, a grout-headded, rusticall, clounish, filthy or carterly clowne.

Villaneggiáre, to play the base companion, or country clowne. Also to abuse, to iniury or offer wrong vnto either in words or deeds. Also to tant, to rate or chide and raile vpon with bitter words.

Villanella, a pretty Country-lasse, a handsome or yongue Country-wench, a yongue Sheepheardesse, a Milkemaide. Also any Country dance, gig, roundelay, song, ballad, dance or hornpipe, such as Country wenches sing.

Villanésco, clounish-like, Country-like. Also basely, villanously, or iniuriously.

Villanétta, as Villanella.

Villanétto, a yongue Country lad, Hind, Swaine, Clowne, Boore or ploug-man.

Villanía, any rude, clownish, carterly or country tricke. Also villany, abuse, inciuility, wrong or iniury.

Villaníssimo, most clownish and rude.

Villáno, a Country man, one that dwels out of any City, a clowne, a plougman, a husbandman, a carterly fellow. Also a villan, a rascall, a rude fellow. Also ignoble or basely borne. 



Villantíssimo, as Villaníssimo.

Villáre, of or belonging to Villa.

Villáta, a village, a towne, a hamlet. Also a towneship, or corporation of a village.

Villeggiáre, to dwell, to abide, to liue, or frequent the country, or country-townes. Also to vse husbandrie, or to haue the rule of a village or farme.

Villerítia, any country or village thing. Also of or belonging to Vílla.

Villésco, clounish, rusticall, country-like, inciuill, or belonging to the country.

Villétta, a little village, hamlet, country towne, farme, or Manour house.

Villetráre, as Villeggiáre.

Villicáre, to dwell or goe in the country, to haue rule or be occupied about husbandrie and country affaires.

Villicatióne, rule or businesse about husbandrie and country affaires, vnder the Lord thereof.

Villicatóre, a bailiffe or ruler of husbandrie and country affaires vnder the Landlord.

Víllico, a cloune, or seruant holding in soccage. Also a bailiffe or steward of husbandrie, an officer belonging to a country Manour to ouersee and order husbandrie, and hath authoritie to pay quicke rents issuing out of the Manour, to distraine or impound cattle vpon the ground, to fell trees, and repaire houses, &c.

Villoso, full of townes or villages. Also hairie, shaggie, plushie, or hauing a high nap.

Villúzza, a poore hamlet or village, a paltrie towne.

Vilménte, vilely, rudely, basely, vnciuilly, clounishly, scornefully.

Vilpestrello, a night-bat or rearemouse.

Viltà, vilenesse, basenesse, or contempt. Also cheapnesse. Also dastardie or faintnesse of heart.

Vílrro, a strainer or collander.

Vilúcchio, the weede withie-winde, weede-binde, or hedge-belles. It is like Iuie.

Vilúcchio maggióre, the greater weedbinde, withie-winde, or hedge-bels.

Vilúme, vsed for Volúme.

Viluppáre, to enwrappe, to entangle, to bundle, to role, to fold, or fardle and trusse vp.

Vilúppo, an enwrapping, an entangling, a bundle, a fardle, a trusse, an enfolding.

Vilúppo d'ácque, a gathering of waters.

Vilúppo di vento, a gust of winde.

Vimáre, as Vimináre.

Víme, as Vímini.

Vími, as Vímini.

Viminále, of or belonging to osiers or twigs. Also apt to winde and binde.

Vimináre, to binde with withs or osiers.

Vimineo, as viminále.

Vímini, al maner of bonds, withs, twigs, sprigs, wands, osiers, binding-rods, or wicker that winde and are pliant to binde any thing with, or winde about any thing, such as coopers and basketmakers or fagot-makers vse.

Vímoli, as Vímini.

Vináccia, grape-stones, graines, seeds or kernels. Also the mother of wine.

Vináccio, the grapes that are pressed and giuen to hogs. Also any kinde of ill, bad, mustie, naughtie, or small wine. Also the tappings of wine.

Vinacciuóla víte, a kinde of vine.

Vinacciuóli, grape kernels, as Vináccia.

Vinaceo, of or belonging to wine, or to grapestones, graines, or kernels.

Vinágine, a kind of stockdoue.

Vinágro, sowre wine, or vinegre.

Vinaiuólo, as Vignáio. Also a Vintner.

Vinálie, feasts belonging to tastings of wine, heeretofore kept among the Painims, and yet obserued in some parts of Europe, called Saint Martins Feasts.

Vináli sacrifícij, sacrifices for preseruing of wines and wines.

Vinário, as Vinatiéro. Also of or belonging to wine.

Vinatiéro, a Vintner or Wine-merchant.

Vínca, the hearbe Perwincle.

Vincaperuínca, peruincle.

Vincastráre, to binde, to wrap, to gird about, or hoope with twigs or osiers, or all sorts of Vímini. Also to beat with a with, wand, or switch.

Vincastráta, a blow giuen with any with, wand, swith, or rod.

Vincástro, as Vímini, any kinde of wand, rod, or switch. Also a shepheards staffe, wand, rod, hooke or crooke.

Vincente, vanquishing, conquering, victorious. Also a victor, a conqueror, a vanquisher.

Víncere, vínco, vínsi, vínto or vítto, to ouercome, to conquish, to conquer, to subdue, or get victorie of. Also to win at play or any wager. Also to gaine or haue the vpper hand. Also to preuaile or take place. Also to passe, to excell or exceed. Also to conuince.

Vincéuole, vanquishable, conquerable, vincible, that may be ouercome.

Vinchéto, any place or ground where Vímini grow.

Vínchi, as Vímini. Also the shreds, loppings, or sprigs cut off from vines. Looke Cacauincígli.

Vinchiáre, to binde with rods or withs, to claspe or clinch very close and hard.

Vinchiáta, a binding with rods or withs, a clasping or clinching fast and hard.

Vínci, as Vínchi.

Vincíbile, as Vincéuole.

Vincibilità, a vanquishablenesse.

Vincibósco, wood-binde or hony-suckle.

Vincidíre, dísco, dito, to grow or become watrish or wallowish in taste. Also to wither.

Vincido, watrish or wallowish in taste. Also withered or faded away.

Vincigliáre, to bind with rods or withs.

Vincígli, as Vínchi. Looke Cácauincígli.

Vinciguerra, nóme di capitáno, di cane, o di cauállo.

Vinciménto, a vanquishing, a conquering.

Vincire, as Víncere.

Víncita, a conquest, a victorie. Looke Vincere. Also a winning. Also a good hand or maine at play or gaming.

Vincitóre, a conquerer, a vanquisher, a victor, a winner, a gainer. Looke Víncere.

Vínco, a bulrush, a bent, a reed, a sedge. Also an osier, a binding-rod, a with. Also as Víncolo.

Vincoláre, to binde, to tie, to fasten, to fetter, to manicle, to shackle. Looke Víncolo.

Víncolo, any kinde of thing or bond that bindeth, tieth, or fastneth. Also any bindings, shackles, manicles, fetters, giues, cords, or fastnings. Also as Vínco.

Vincótto, a kinde of strong sodden wine called Cuite, which they vse to put into other wines to make them keepe the longer and in strength.

Vinculáre, as Vincoláre.

Vínculo, as Víncolo.

Vindémmia, as Vendémmia.

Vindemmiáre, as Vendemmiáre.

Vindicáre, as Vendicáre.

Vindicatíuo, as Vendicatíuo.

Víndice, as Véndice, a reuenger of wrongs, a redresser of things.

Vinea, an engine of warre. Looke Vígna.

Vinéca, as Vináccia.

Vinéssa, as Vináccia.

Vinéto, a vine-close, a vine-plot.

Vinétto, any kind of small wine.

Vinghiáre, as Abbracciáre, as Vinchiáre.

Vinghiára, an embracing, as Vinchiáta.

Vingináre, chèi cruccióli sieno vingináti con filo di ferro, et bene lutáti. 

Vinífero, wine-bearing, wine-bringing.

Vínno, a locke of haire gently curled. 



Víno, any kind of wine. Also wine quaffing.

Víno accostánte, wine that is most pleasing to the taste and other sences.

Víno adacquáto, wine that is watered.

Víno béne battezzáto, wine well watered.

Víno cerasuólo, wine made of Cherries.

Víno chiarello, Claret-wine.

Víno Cóo, a kind of wine.

Vino Cótto, as Vincótto.

Víno del mónte, the best wine in Italie.

Víno délle sgonsiáte, a kind of the best and most excellent wine in Italy.

Víno di piáno, Low-country-wine.

Víno di postíccia, small houshold wine.

Víno gagliárdo, strong heady wine.

Víno gárbo, soure or sharpe wine.

Víno grándo, great, full or strong wine.

Víno helúcolo, a kind of wine.

Víno leggiéro, light, small or weake wine.

Víno liático, a kind of wine in Italy.

Vinolenza, drunkennesse with wine, ouer much drinking of or affection vnto wine.

Vinolento, drunken with wine, one ouer much affected to drinke wine.

Vínolo, tipsie, cupshotten, tipled with wine. Also warbling or wantonly blith, as it were merry with drinking of wine.

Víno mirrháto, wine mixt with Mirrh. Vsed also for wine mixt with wormewood. And vsed for that wine which the Iewes gaue our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ vpon the Crosse.

Víno muffáto, musty wine or tasting of the caske.

Víno múffo, as Víno muffáto.

Víno náto sótto acquário, small wine, wine borne vnder the watry signe Aquarius.

Víno nóbile, excellent good wine.

Vino nuóuo, new wine or must, wine that is not yet fined.

Víno pícciolo, small or weake wine.

Vínopotente, mighty, strong, full wine.

Víno prétto, neate, pure or vnmingled wine.

Víno raccente, sowre or sharpe wine.

Víno rauuólto, as Víno voltáto.

Vínorósso, red wine or Alligant.

Víno serbatóio, lasting or keeping wine.

Vínoso, full of wine, headdy, strong or fuming of wine, hauing a smacke or taste and sauour of wine. Also one that loues to drinke, to tipple or taste wine.

Víno sobbollíto, as Vin cótto.

Víno svaníto, dead wine, wine that hath lost both his strength and colour.

Víno tibidrágo, a kind of strong sacke or spanish wine.

Víno traboccánte, wine that is declining.

Víno trebbiáno, a kinde of Muskadin wine much esteemed in Italy.

Víno uermiglio, vsed for red wine.

Víno voltáto, dead wine or wine that is turned sowre by thunder or hot weather.

Vinténa, a score or twenty in number.

Vintésimo, the twentieth in order.

Vínti, the number of twenty.

Vínto, vanquished, conquered, subdued. Also woon or gotten, accoyed. Looke Víncere.

Vióla, a flowre called a Violet. Also a Violet colour. Also a Viollglasse. Also an instrument called a violl or violine.

Vióla biánca, the stocke Gilloflowre. Also the white Violet.

Violábile, violable, that may be violated, abused, forced or rauished. Looke Violáre.

Violaceo, of a Violet-colour, like a Violet. Also that is made of Violets.

Vióla da árco, a Bow-violin or Violl.

Vióla di gámba, a Violl de Gamba, because men hold it betweene or vpon their legges.

Vióla da bráccio, a violin.

Violaménto, as Violatióne.

Violáre, to violate, to defile, to pollute, to distaine, to corrupt, to make foule. Also to force, to rape, to deflowre or rauish a woman. Also to marre or spoile. Also to hurt to misuse or wrong Also to transgresse, to doe against, to breake or infringe a law or any good order. Also to adorne with Violets or to die a violet colour.

Violáro, a place or plot of Violets.

Violário, as Violáro.

Viola scrotína, the Purple stocke Gillofer.

Violáta, a woman rauished or distayned.

Violatióne, a violating, a defiling, a polluting, a deflowring. Looke Violáre.

Violáto, violated, defiled, polluted, &c. Also infringed or downe against. Looke Violáre. Also dressed with violets. Also a Violet, a Puke or Purple colour. Also blue silke.

Violatóre, a rauisher, a deflowrer, &c. a wronger, an infringer. Looke Violáre.

Vióle acciócche, a kind of doubble violets.

Violebbo, a iuleb made of violets.

Violeggiáre, to flowrish with Violets. 

Vióle mámniole, the doubble doubble violets.

Violentáre, to offer violence vnto, to force, to vrge, to constraine, to compell.

Violente, offring violence, violent, forcible, rash, headlong, iniurious, impacient.

Violenza, violence, vehemency, fiercenesse, force, compulsion, rashnesse, rage.

Violettíno, a violet or purple colour.

Violétto, a violet, a puke or purple colour.

Violína, a little violet flower.

Violíno, a violin. Also a viole-glasse.

Viólo, a kind of white violet.

Violóne, a great or base violl.

Viotórtolo, a drinking-glasse with a long, winding and crooked necke called a bubling glasse.

Viottello, as Vióttolo.

Vióttolo, an Ally, a Path, a Causey, a way.

Vípera, a Viper, an Adder, a Snake.

Viperále, hearbe Rew or hearbe of grace.

Viperáre, to enuiper. Also to enuenome.

Vipereo, viperous, serpentine.

Viperína, Snakes-grasse, Vipersgrasse.

Viperíno, viperous, serpentine.

Viperóso, viperous, snakie.

Vipióne, the lesser kind of Crane.

Vipistráre, to houer vp and downe about twylight as a Night-bat.

Vipiftrello, a Night-bat, a Reare-mouse.

Víra, a mannish woman.

Virágo, a manly or mankind woman.

Viráre, to turne or twirle round.

Viráta, a twirling round.

Virente, greene, flourishing, budding.

Vireóne, the Loriot, Greenefinch or Canary bird.

Vírga, as Vérga.

Virga aurea, an hearbe called Golden rod.

Virga del sángue, a shrube called the Blood-rod.

Virgífero, a Vergerer, one that beareth a Verge or Siluer wand or Rod before any Officer, namely before an Orator or Preacher.

Virgíle, as Vergílie.

Virginále, as Verginále.

Vírgine, as Vérgine.

Virginella, as Verginella.

Virgineo, as Vergineo.

Virginíssima, a most pure Virgin.

Virginità, as Verginità, virginity.

Vírgola, any kind of little Vérga.

Virgúlto, any kind of shrub. Also any twig, sprig, sprout, burgeon, yongue 
\


branch or shoot, but properly tender sprigs or sprouts growing together out of the ground.

Viricórda?, Doe you remember?

Viridário, any garden, hort-yard, plot, or place that is alwaies greene, or pertaining to them. Also a place wherein beasts or foule are kept.

Viridiále, a greene finch or Canarie-bird.

Viridità, verdure or greenenesse.

Viriere, a Glasier or a Glasse-maker.

Viríle, manlike, male, of mankinde. Also of, belonging vnto, or meete for a man. Also valiant, stout, or graue. Tógaviríle, a gowne or garment which was taken and worne when Pretesta was left off, to wit, after the age of sixteene yeers was expired, and was commonly worne of yoong beginners and new maried persons, a wedding-gowne, or gowne without welt, guard, stitch, ornament or lace.

Virilíre, lisco, líto, to grow or become a man. Also to grow or become strong.

Virilità, virilitie, manlinesse, manhood. Also a mans genitors, or priuy parts.

Viriólo, vitrioll or greene coperasse.

Viripotente, ripe for mariage, able to discharge the part of a man with a woman.

Víro, hath beene vsed for a man.

Viroláre, to skrew or winde in with a vice.

Virolétto, any turning skrew or vice.

Viróso, full of manly force, valiant as a man. Also desirous or lusting after man. Also rammish or of ill sauour and taste. Also venomous or full of poison.

Virtílla, a wrynecke or hickway.

Virtù, as Vertù.

Virtualità, the effect or power of vertue.

Virtualménte, according to the power of vertue, workingly, powerfully.

Virtudióso, as Vertuóso, vertuous.

Virtueggiáre, to vse, to shew, to practise, to professe, or proceed in vertue.

Virtuosità, vertuousnesse.

Virtuóso, as Vertuóso, vertuous.

Virulento, stinking, of an euill taste. Also venomous or full of poison.

Virulenza, virulencie, a stinking taste, a venomousnesse.

Visáccio, a filthie ill-fauoured face.

Visággio, the visage or face of a man.

Visáre, to marke, to note or aime at.

Visaruóla, a visard or maske, as Visiera.

Viscáppa, a double or a lined cape-cloke.

Viscárdo, a thrush, a mauis, or throssell.

Viscarúgine, the Chameleon, which bringeth foorth birdlime.

Visceglio, a groue of yoong okes. 

Viscenda, as Vicenda, or Facenda.

Visceráre, to panch, to vnbowell, or pull out the guts or bowels, to vnpanch.

Viscerataménte, proceeding from the bowels or entrailes. Also most heartilie and inwardly, euen from the heart.

Viscere, the entrailes, bowels, guts, or panch of any creature. Also the offall or garbage that hunters giue their dogs.

Visceróso, full of entrailes or bowels. Also full of heartie affection.

Vischiáre, to become or make slimie or clammie. Also to entangle, or catch with bird-lime.

Víschio, the shrub miscelden or mistle-toe. Also birdlime or any clammishnesse, slime, or gluish matter. Also all the flesh that is betweene the skin and bone. Also the chiefe entrailes of man or beast, as the heart, spleene, liuer, lungs, &c.

Visciatelle, lushes or lime-twigs.

Vischióso, viscous, slimie, clammy, gluish.

Víscido, as Vischióso.

Viscióla, a kinde of watrish cherie.

Vísco, as Víschio.

Viscontádo, a Vicountie.

Víscónte, a Vicount. Also a Sheriffe of a Shire or Countie.

Viscosità, viscousnesse, sliminesse, clamminesse, gluishnesse.

Viscóso, as Vischióso.

Visentéria, in Spanish Camáras.

Visera, as Vissera.

Visétto, any little or prettie face.

Visibile, visible, that may be seene.

Visibilità, visiblenesse, apparance.

Visibilménte, visibly, apparantly.

Visiera, a mans looke, aspect, or countenance. Also the sight hole of an helmet, of a caske, of a crosse-bow, of a stone-bow, or any other shooting peece. Also any prying or lurking hole. Also a paire of spectacles, or any thing to see through.

Visióne, the sight of the eie, or whatsoeuer the eie seeth, or any thing that is set before ones eies to behold. Also any vision, seeing, apparition, or fantasie, or any thing that one hath seene in his sleepe or dreame.

Visir, a chiefe counsellour, or chiefe states man about the great Turke, as much to say, a vice-roy, or deputy to a King.

Visiscórda?, Doe you forget?

Vísita, a view, a visiting, or visitation. Also a surueying.

Visitáre, to visit, to view, to suruey, or come and see often.

Visitatióne, as Vísita, a visitation.

Visitatoráto, the office of a visitor.

Visiua, visuall, pertaining to the sight.

Visiuaménte, visibly, apparantly. 

Visíuo, as Visibile, visible.

Visnepóte, a mans grand childes sonne.

Víso, the visage, face, sight, looke, or aspect of a man. Also the sense of sight or seeing. Dante sard, fù víso a me, meaning, mee thought, or it seemed vnto me.

Víso arcígno, a grim or frowning looke, a skouling face, a dusky lowring countenance.

Viso di cáne, a dogs face.

Visóne, a great, big, or huge face.

Visórij, the two optike nerues of the eies.

Vispertello, a night-bat, a reare-mouse.

Vísse, he, she, or it liued, of Víuere.

Vísso, liued, had life, of Víuere.

Vísta, the sense of sight, or seeing of any creature. Also a sight, a looke, a view. Also a shew, a view, or prospect, a sight or spectacle of any thing. Also a presence, a semblance, or countenance, or aspect of a man. Also seene, viewed, noted, or looked.

Vistaménte, as Vistosaménte. Also quickly or out of hand. But it is taken from the French.

Visto, seene, viewed, looked, of Vedére.

Vistosaménte, sightly, in sight, in open view. Also comely, seemely, well-fauouredly.

Vistosétta, somewhat sightly, comely, or well-fauoured to looke vpon.

Vistóso, sightly, making a good shew, worth the looking vpon. Also seemely.

Vistríci, as Vímini.

Visuále, visuall, pertaining to the sight.

Visualménte, visibly, apparantly.

Vita, life, spirit, naturall vigour, any bodies maner of life. Also, forme, fashion, or maner of liuing. Vsed also for the stature or proportion of man or woman.

Vitáccia, a filthie life.

Víta duránte, during life.

Vitálba, the wilde vine or tetterberie growing in hedges with red berries, and winding about sets, the iuice whereof will cause the skin to blister. Some call it the Traueller ioy. Some haue taken it for the hearbe Senegreene, house-leeke, or Prickmadame, and others for the hearbe Perwinkle. Others haue taken it for Brionie, wilde nip, or white wine. Also any belt or girdle of leather, or cord that Friers or hermites vse to weare about them.

Vitále, any thing pertaining to the maintenance of life, or that whereby we liue, and doth either bring or preserue life, vitall, liuely, that may liue or hope for life. Also the hearbe Sengreene, House-leeke, or Prickmadame the greater.

Vitáli, le párte vitáll, the liue parts, that is, the braine, the heart and liuer. 



Vitalíssimo, most vitall.

Vitalità, vitality, liuely-hood, the spirit of life whereby we liue and breath.

Víta militáre, a military or souldiors life.

Vitánza, a nickename of an idle liuer.

Vitáre, to screw, or wind with a vice.

Vitatíno, a gull, a ninny, a silly foole.

Víte, any kind of vine that bringeth grapes. Also an Arbour of vines. Also any kind of winding screw or vice.

Víte álba, a kind of wild vine that bringeth wilde and white grapes. Also as Vitálba.

Viteále, With-wind, or Binde-weed.

Víte fémina, the female screw, that is, the planke or timber screwed, thorow which the male serew is screwed.

Vitella, a Cow-calfe, a Veale or Heafer.

Vitelláre, to calue as a cow. Also to skip and leape for ioy as a yongue calfe.

Vitellína, a yongue Cow Calfe or Veale. Also the flesh or meate of a Calfe or Veale. Also Calfes or Neates leather.

Vitello, a Bull Calfe or Veale. Vsed also for the yolke of an egge.

Vitello di látte, a sucking Calfe.

Vitello maríno, a Seale-fish, or Sea-calfe.

Víte máschio, a male screw, that is, the spindle which is screwed and passeth thorow the timber screwed.

Vitétta, a pretty life or body.

Vitiáre, to vitiate, to spoile, to marre, to distaine, to sinne, as Violáre.

Vitiataménte, viciously, sinnefully, corruptedly, distainedly, violably.

Vitiatióne, viciousnesse, sinnefulnesse. Also a rauishing or deflouring.

Vitiatóre, a deflowrer, a rauisher, a corrupter or distainer.

Vítice, a kinde of Withy called Parke-leaues, Chaste-tree, Hempter or Abrahams-balme.

Viticella, a yongue springing vine. Also an hearbe which as the Vine doth, taketh hold of any thing next vnto it. Also the White briony.

Vítici délla víte, the tendrels of a vine or the shootes and branches of a vine cut away euery yeere, called vine shreads.

Vitiéuole, that may be vitiated, polluted, distained, rauished or deflowred.

Vitilágine, the leprosie.

Vítile, any kind of binding rod or twig, as Vímini.

Vítile, pliant, pliable, flexible, meet to binde with, that may be wounden.

Vitiligáre, to backebite, to detract, to haft, to slander with ill words.

Vitiligatóre, a backebiter, a detractor, a hafter, a slanderous tongue.

Vitiligine, the white Morphew vpon ones skin. Also the leprosie.

Vitiliginóso, full of the white Morphew or of the leprosie.

Vitína, a little screw or vice Also a little tub to keepe water in.

Vítio, a vice, a fault, an errour, a sinne, a defect, an imperfection, an impediment, a default, a blemish, a blame, the contrary vnto vertue.

Vitiosaménte, viciously, faultily.

Vitiosità, viciousnesse, naughtinesse, an inconstant affection of the minde, as Vítio.

Vitióso, vicious, faulty, sinfull, defectiue, imperfect, false, corrupted, blemished, full of vice. Also not sound, perished, crazed, worm-eaten.

Vitoperáre, as Vituperáre.

Vitoperio, as Vituperio.

Vitoperóso, as Vituperóso.

Vitrea., Looke Tónaca or Tónica.

Vatrearía, a Glasse-house or the trade of making of Glasses.

Vitreo, of or belonging to glasse, vitrous, glassie, transparant, brickle.

Vitriária or Vrccoláre, the hearbe Paritory vsed to scoure glasses or Pipkins.

Vitriáta, a Glasse-window. Also a window casement.

Vitriólo, vitriall or coperasse. Also a Kings fisher. Also as Vitriária.

Vitriólo murále, as Vitriária.

Vitriólo románo, greene Coperasse.

Vítta, as Vétta.

Víttima, any beast killed for sacrifice. Also an oblation or sacrifice.

Vittimári, one that hath the charge of or that killeth the sacrifices.

Vítto, vanquished, conquered, ouercome, subdued, let of his purpose or intent.

Vítto, all manner of sustenance, foode, victuals or prouision and things necessary to liue by, as meate and drinke. Vsed also in ieast for a mans priuy member.

Vittóre, a victor, a vanquisher, a conquerer, a conuincer, one that hath the victory.

Vittória, a victory, a conquest, a vanquishing, the goale or vpper hand.

Vittoriále, of or belonging to victorie.

Vittoriáre, to haue victory, to triumph.

Vittoriáto, a kind of old coine in Rome hauing the image of victory vpon it.

Vittorióla, Tongue-blade, Doubble-tougue, Horse-tongue, Tongue-lawrell, Lawrell of Alexandria. 

Vittorióso, victorious, triumphant.

Vittouáglia, as Vettováglia, victuals.

Vittouagliáre, to victuall.

Vittríce, a victorious woman.

Vittuária, victuals.

Vittuariáre, to victuall.

Vittúre, certaine earthen pots vsed to bury treasure in vnder ground.

Vitulánte, wantonly reioyceing.

Vitulinário, Calues-snout or Muzzle.

Vitulláre, as Vitelláre.

Vituperábile, as Vituperóso.

Vituperággine, as Vituperio.

Vituperáre, to disgrace, to shame, to reproach, to defame, to discommend, to dishonour.

Vituperatóre, a disgracer, a shamer, a reprocher, a defamer, a dishonourer.

Vituperéuole, as Vituperóso.

Vituperio, shame, reproch, defamation, disgrace, rebuke, dishonour, infamie.

Vitupero, as Vituperio.

Vituperóso, shamefull, reprochfull, disgracefull, dishonourable, defamed.

Víua, viuat, liue. Also Sempre víuo.

Víua ácqua, a liuing water.

Viuacchiáre, to make shift to liue, to rub and hold out, to liue carelesly.

Viuáce, liuely, full of life, quicke, nimble, strong of nature. Also lusty and gallant.

Viuaceménte, liuely, lustily, nimbly.

Viuacità, viuacity, liuelinesse, quickenesse, naturall strength, nimblenesse.

Viuágno, the list or seluage of any cloth, the end of any web. Also a hem or welt.

Viuáio, any place where wilde beasts, birds or fishes are kept aliue, as a Parke, a Warren, a Conigre, a Volery or great cage, a Pond or Poole for fish.

Víua il Re, God saue the King.

Viuánda, any kind of viands, foods or sustenance to maintaine life.

Viuandáio, a Victualer, a Viander, a Prouider for victuals.

Viuandiere, as Viuandáio.

Viuário, as Viuáio.

Víua vóce, a liuing voice.

Viuente, lining, a liue, quicke, breathing.

Viuere, uíuo, víssi, uiuúto, vísse or vissúto, to liue, to breath, to haue life.

Víuere a cása, to liue at home, to keepe ones wits about him.

Víuere a scrócco, védi Scrócco.

Víuere mólt'ánni, to liue many yeeres. 



Víueri, all maner of food or victuals.

Viuerra, a ferret to kill cunnies.

Viuerráre, to ferret out.

Viuerro, a ferret.

Víuer sénza, to liue without.

Víuer sicúro, to liue secure.

Víuer víta, to liue a life.

Viuézza, as Viuacità.

Víui, a kinde of rauenous fowle.

Viuido, as Viuáce.

Viuificáre, to quicken, to giue life vnto.

Viuificatióne, a quickning, a viuifying.

Viuífico, liuely, quicke, viuifying, quickning, that doth quicken.

Viuissimo, most quicke or liuely.

Víuo, aliue, quicke, liuing, breathing, that liueth. Also liuely, lusty, gallant, nimble, full of life or motion, or that neuer standeth still. Acqua víua, running or liuing water. Calcína víua, vnslaked lime.

Víuo, the life, liuelinesse, quicke, or true point of any thing.

Víuo del pezzo. Looke Trouáre, or Tìráre, or Smorzáre.

Víuo fiúme, a running streame.

Viuóla, an instrument of musicke called a violl, or violin.

Viuóla de gámba, a violl de gamba.

Víuole, the viues in a horse.

Viuuóla, a violin or violl.

Viuuólo, the stalke of gilly-flower. Vsed also for a gilly-flower.

Viuúto, liued, had life, of Víuere.

Vízza, a wrimple, a wrinkling, a crumple.

Vizzáre, to wrinkle, to wither, to crumple.

Vízzo, wrimpled, wrinkled, crumpled. Also soft, flappie, or saplesse as old womens dugs be.

Vizzóso, full of wrimples or wrinkles.

V'lcera, any kinde of vlcer, impostumation, bile, botch, running or matterie sore, a corrupt matter perishing in the skinne, and couered with a scab. Vsed also for a wound, a cut, a gash, or open place in the barke of a tree.

Vlceráre, to vlcerate to grow to an vlcer, a botch or impostumation.

Vlceratióne, an vlceration, a sorenesse or breaking out into a scab.

Vlcerária, the hearbe stinking Horehound.

Vlcerário, that maketh blisters.

V'lcere chirónie, incurable vlcers.

V'lcere fauíne, vlcers that run a kinde of matter like hony.

Vlceríno, vlcerous, full of vlcers, sores, botches or impostumations.

Vlceróso, as Vlceríno.

V'lco, a running botch or sore. Also an open place of the barke of a tree.

Vlesse, a shrub or bush like rosemary, and is said to draw gold vnto it. 

Vlezzáre, to smell, to sent, to sauour.

V'lice, as Vlesse.

Vlígine, the naturall moistnesse of the earth.

Vliginóso, euer moist, wet, or plashie. Also soaked with being long in the water.

Vlissipóna, the hearbe Serpentária.

Vlíua, any kinde of oliue.

Vliuále, in forme or colour of an oliue.

Vliuástro, as Oliuástro, as Vliuále.

Vliuétto, a groue full of oliue trees.

Vliuígno, of forme or colour of an oliue.

Vlíuo, any kinde of oliue-tree.

V'lla, as Mezzule.

V'lma, as Vlua, a kinde of Sea-weede.

V'lna, the vndermost and lesser of the two long bones of the cubit, which are both ioined together betweene themselues, as well with the shoulder-bone, as with the wrist of the hand: albeit Vlna, neere the wrist is committed to Rádio. It is also called Focílc minóre. Some construe it to be the distance or measure betweene the point of the elbow and the fingers ends.

Vlopholóne, as Cameleóne.

Vlpíco, great and wilde garlike.

Vlteriore, further, beyond, or behinde.

Vlterioritá, a further distance.

V'ltima genitúra, the last engendring.

Vltimaménte, lastly, at last, finally.

Vltimáre, to finish, to make an end.

Vltimataménte, as Vltimaménte.

Vltimatióne, a finishing last.

V'ltimo, last, finall, lag, hindmost. Also chiefe, extremest, or greatest.

Vltimogenito, last-begotten.

V'lto, that hath reuenged, or taken vengeance and punishment.

Vltóre, a reuenger, a punisher, hee that taketh reuenge, an executioner.

Vltríce, she that punisheth, reuengeth, or taketh vengeance.

V'lua, a kinde of sea-weede, rush, reede, or reike.

V'lula, any kinde of owle or bowlet.

Vlulánte, skreeking, howling, yelling.

Vlulare, to skreeke as an Owle. Also to howle or yell as a dog or wolfe, to lament.

Vluláto, skreeked. Also howled, yelled, or lamented. Also a skreeking, a yelling, a howling, a pitifull crying or lamenting.

Vlúlulo, as Vluláto.

Vlzóllo, as V'lzolo, a kid so called among the Grisons.

Vmanità, as Humanità.

Vmáno, as Humáno.

Vmbella, as Ombrella. Also the round head of any hearbe, as of fenell.

Vmbilicáli artérie., looke Ombilicáli.

Vmbilicário, as Ombilicário.

Vmbilicato, as Ombilicáto.

Vmbilrco, as Ombilíco.

Vmbilico dell' anello. looke Ombilíco.

Vmbilico dell' vuóuo., looke Ombilíco.

Vmbilíco del Sóle., looke Ombilico.

Vmbilíco di venere., looke Ombilíco.

V'mbra, as O'mbra.

Vmbráculo, as Ombráculo.

Vmbrella, as Ombrella.

V'mbria, as O'mbria.

Vmbrína, as Ombrína.

Vmbrosità, shadinesse.

Vmbróso, shadie.

Vmidézza, as Humidità, moistnesse.

Vmidíre, as Humidíre, to moisten.

Vmidita, as Humidità, moistnesse.

V'mido, as Húmido, moist.

Vmidóre, as Humidità, moistnesse.

Vmidóso, moist, full of moistnesse.

Vmiliáre, as Humiliáre, to humble.

Vmiliatióne, humiliation.

V'mile, as Húmile, humble.

Vmiltà, humility, humblenesse.

Vn, the number one. Vn'huómo, a man.

V'na, the number of one.

Vna buóna máncia, a good gift.

Vna buóna pezza, a good while.

Vna cotál cósa, such a thing.

Vna fiáta, once, one time. Also finally.

Vn' áltra vólta, another time, once more.

Vn'áltro, another, one more.

Vnáme, a fish in China, that, as the whale, produceth much oile.

Vnanimaménte, iointly, of or with one minde, heart, will, consent, or accord.

Vnanimità, vnanimitie, concord of mind, consent of heart and good will.

Vnánimo, of one minde, consent, heart, will and accord.

Vna pezza, a peece, a while.

Vna quálche, some one.

Vna qualche cósa, any one thing soeuer, whatsoeuer one thing.

Vna vólta, once, one time. Also finally.

Vn bátter d' ócchio, a moment, as wee say, the twinkling of an eie.

Vn bel che, a goodly thing, a faire what.

Vn certo, a certaintie, a certaine man.

V'nchie odoráte, a kinde of shell-fish.

Vnciária, of an ounce weight.

Vncígli, as Vncinelli.

Vncigliáre, as Vncináre.

Vncináre, to catch or drag with hookes, to hang on hookes, to set on tenterhookes. Also to hooke, to crooke, or make crooked. Also to tacke or chap.

Vncináto, catcht or dragd with hookes. hanged on hookes or crooks, set on tenter-hookes. Also hooked or crooked. Also fashioned as a hooke or a dragge, 



or armed with hookes. Also clasped. Also full of clawes or pounces.

Vncinatóre, a hooking, crooking, dragging, griping, scraping or grating fellow.

Vncinelli, any kind of little hooks, fleshhookes, tenter-hookes, fish-hookes, pothookes, crookes, tackes or nailes called tackes or tashes or trashes. Also claspes and hookes on garments.

Vncíni d'amóre, loue allurements, loue entanglings, loues hookes.

Vncíno, any kind of hooke, crooke, drag, flesh-hooke, tenter-hooke, fish-booke or pot-hooke. Also any claspe and hook for garments, any tack or tach or trash. Also a little anker. Also a broade arrow-bead or the crooked head of a shaft or dart. Also a little club or bat crooked at the end. Looke Attaccáre l'vncíno.

Vncinúto, as Vncináto.

V'nco, as Vncíno.

V'ndeci, the number of eleuen.

Vndecimo, the eleuenth in order.

Vndecirémi, a Gally with eleuen oares on a side.

Vndeláto, as Ondeláto.

Vndenário, belonging to eleuen.

Vndefáre, per vndesársi ed ammassársi più strettaménre.

Vn dì, one day. Also one of.

Vn dì auánti, one day before or sooner.

Vindicésimo, the eleuenth in order.

V'ndici, the number eleuen.

Vn dieci giórni, one ten daies.

Vn di più, one day more.

Vn di pói, one day after.

Vndisonánte, sounding like the Sea-waues.

V'ne, the number one.

Vnédine, the fruite of the Arbut or Strawberry-tree, it is in shew like an Apple, bitter and noysome both to the head and stomacke.

Vngelle, as Vnghia degliócchij.

V'ngere, úngo, unsi, ungiúto, or únto to anoint, to oint, to grease, to tallow, to smeare.

V'ngerei stiuáli, to grease ones bootes, that is to flatter or faune vpon.

V'nghia, as O'nghia.

V'nghia baldáno. looke O'nghia.

V'nghia cauallína, as Tussilagine.

V'nghia degl'ócchij., Looke O'nghia.

V'nghia dicauállo, as Tussilágine.

V'nghia odoráta., Looke O'nghia.

V'nghia odorósa., Looke O'nghia.

Vnghiáre, as Onghiáre.

Vnghiáro, as Onghiáro.

Vnghiáto, as Onghiáto.

Vnghiella, as Onghiella.

Vnghiétta, any kind of little O'nghia.

Vnghióne, any kind of great O'nghia.

Vnghióso, as Onghiáto.

Vngimáni, as Ongimáni.

Vngiúme, any kinde of unction, oyntment, grease, seame, fat, tallom, sewet, seame, butter of such oylie and fatty substance. Also any filth or greasinesse.

Vngrán fátto, a great deed.

Vngrán chè, a great matter.

Vngrán pezzo, a great while. Also a great piece.

Vngiúto, oynted, anointed, greased, tallowed or smeared. Looke V'ngere.

Vnguánno. Vsed for Vnguento.

V'ngue, a kind of Shell fish.

Vnguentáio, an Apothecary, an oyntment or salue maker. Also a purfumer on that maketh sweet oyles and selleth them.

Vngnentáre, to annoynt, to salue, to vse or dresse with vnctions.

Vnguentaría, an Apothecaries shop. Also the arte of perfuming or making sweet Oyles.

Vnguentáro, as Vnguentáio.

Vnguento, any kind of Oyntment, salue or vnction, any kind of sweet oyle or liquid perfume, any kinde of liquor mingled with Oyle. Vsed metaphorically for any comfort, remedy or saluing of a thing.

Vnguento caneróni, an insinuating fellow that will sticke close and pull seme thing from one.

Vnguénto da cáncheri, a subile, slie kuaue, a wily crafty fox.

Vnguétta, any little O'nghia.

Vnguinóso, vnctuous and fatty.

V'ni, vsed for the number of one.

Vníbile, that may be vnited into one.

Vnibilità, an vniting into one.

Vnicálamo, that hath but one stemme.

Vnicaménte, onely, alone, singularlie.

Vnicáti, as Vnguento cancróni.

Vnicauità, an euen hollownesse.

Vnicáulo, that hath but one stalke.

Vnicáuo, euen hollow.

V'nico, onely, one alone, singular.

Vnicogenito, an onely begotten child.

Vnicolóre, of one onely colour.

Vnicórde, agreeing in heart.

Vnicordialità, hearts-agreeing.

Vnicórno, an Vnicorne, or else his horn. Also hauing but one horne.

Vnicúba, a woman lying but with one man.

Vnifóglio, the single leafe Lilly.

Vnifólio, as Vnifóglio.

Vnifórme, vniforme, of one forme.

Vniformeménte, vniformly.

Vniformità, vniformity, one same shape.

Vnigamía, a marriage of one wife onelie.

Vnigámo, he that hath once been maried. 

Vnigenito, onely begotten, an onely childe.

Vnimáno, that hath but one hand.

Vnimodaménte, after one onely fashion.

Vnimódo, of one sort or fashion.

Vnióne, vnion, vnity, concord, agreement. Also a great, faire and orient pearle.

Vnióne perpetua, a perpetuity or entayling of lands in one name or bloud.

Vnipede, that hath but one foote.

Vnire, vnísco, vníto, to vnite or conioyne in one. Also as Oníre.

Vnisóne, an vnison in musike.

Vnistírpe, of one stocke or stemme.

Vnisuóno, of one onely sound.

Vnità, an vnity, a singlenesse, an vniting into one. Also a concord or attonement.

Vnitaménte, ioyntly together in one, vnitedly, of one minde and accord.

Vníto, vnited, conioyned in one, made one, attoned, accorded in one.

Vniuáluo, that hath but one shale, shell or huske.

Vniuersále, vniuersall, common vnto all.

Vniuersalità, vniuersality, generalitie.

Vniuersalménte, vniuersally, generallie.

Vninersare, to make vniuersall.

Vniuersipotente, that hath power ouer all.

Vniuersipotenza, power ouer all.

Vniuersità, vniuersality, generality, the whole frame of the world, the vniuersall world. Also a whole estate. Also an Vniuersity or publike schoole.

Vniuersità d'vn'arte, a Company or Society of a trade as of Mercers, &c.

Vniuerso, the Vniuerse or whole frame of the world, the whole publike.

Vniuerso, Vniuersall, generall, publike and common to all.

Vniuíra, a woman that hath but one only husband.

Vniuocatióne, a signification but of one thing.

Vniuóco, signifying but one thing.

Vnmóndo, a world.

Vnnon couelle, a thing of nothing, a thing importing not any thing.

Vn non núlla, as Vn non couelle.

V'no, the number of one. Also one or some body, or some one.

V'no ad úno, by one and one.

Vnóculo, that hath but one eie.

Vnnon sò chè, one I wot not what.

Vnoper vólta, one at once, or at one time.

V'no perun'áltro, one for another.

Vno quálche, some one. 



Vn páio, a paire, a couple, a yoke, a brace.

Vnpáio di nózze, a wedding.

Vnpár túo, one thy match.

Vnpásso e sálta, when a horse doth take one pace and a leape, which saults or leapes ought to bee Sálti aggroppáti, that is, high and strongly performed on the backe.

Vnpezzo, a peece, a while.

Vnpò, as Vnpóco.

Vnpochétto, as vnpopò.

Vnpóco, a little quantitie or space.

Vnpocolíno, as vn popò.

Vnpopò, a very little quantitie.

V'nqua, euer or neuer, at any time.

V'nquachè, as V'nqua.

Vnquálche, some one.

Vnquánco, as V'nqua.

V'nque, as V'nqua.

Vnquemái, as V'nqua.

Vntále, such a one, such a man.

Vntánto, one so much.

Vntempo, one time.

Vnticéio, as Vntóso.

Vntíno. 

Vntiro, as Vntrátta. Looke Tíro.

Vntione, an vnction, an anointing, a greasing or rubbing with any ointment or oilie substance. Also an anointing or consecrating of a King. Also one of the Roman Sacraments, called the extreme vnction.

V'nto, ointed, anointed, greased, smeared or rubbed with any vnction, ointment, oile or fattie substance. Also anointed or consecrated as a King.

V'nto, vsed for butter, or any fatty, oily, and greasie substance, but properly the leafe of a hogge, which is the fat that lieth by the backe and ribs, good for salues, or to frie meat withall. Also smooth, polished and glib.

Vntória medicína, any anointing, oily or fatty medicine, as salues or ointments.

Vntóso, vnctuous, fattie, oilie, greasie or buttery. Also smooth and glib.

Vnto sottíle, butter. Also seame of a hogge.

Vn trátto, once, one time. Also one cast, one throw, one tricke. Looke Trátto or Tiro.

Vntúme, as Vngiúme.

Vntuóso, as Vntóso.

Vò, the first person singular of the present tense of the Verbes Andáre and Volére, I goe, I wend. Looke Andáre. Also I will, I require. Looke Volére. Vsed also for vói, you.

Voarcadumia, a kinde of Alchimie, or transmutation of metals.

Voarcauména, as Voarcadúmia.

Vocabolário, a dictionarie, a register, or denominating of words and names.

Vocabolísta, as Vocabolário. Also a professor of words.

Vocábolo, a word, a name, a terme, or denomination of any thing.

Vocabulário, as Vocabolário.

Vocabulista, as Vocabolário.

Vocábulo, as Vocábolo.

Vocále, vocall, that hath a voice, that resounds or is loud. Also a vowell.

Vocáli nerui, those noble sinewes that haue the vertue of forming the voice.

Vocalità, a voice, a calling, a tune, a sound of a voice.

Vocáre, to call or crie vnto or after.

Vocatióne, a vocation, a calling.

Vocatíuo, vocatiue, belonging to calling.

Vocáto, called, named, hight, ycleepped.

Vóce, a voice, a sound, or repercussion of the aire. Also a word. Also a bruit, a report, a tune, a saying.

Vócehumána, humane or mans voice.

Vóce rótta, a broken voice.

Vocieráre, as Vociferáre.

Vociferánte, voicing out aloud.

Vociferáre, to voice it, to exclaime, to cry or call out aloud. Also to bray.

Vociferatióne, a crying out aloud.

Vocína, any small or shrill voice.

Vocitáre, as Vociferáre.

Vocolári, kernels, wartles, buttons, or glandules vnder a hogs iaw.

Vocónie, a kinde of figge or cherrie.

Voculatione, the due moderation or measuring of the voice in pronouncing a word, the accent of euery word.

Vóga, a rowing, but properly the stroke of an oare in the water when one roweth. Also a will, a desire, or hearts wish, successefull lucke or fortune. Also a vogue or happie successe. Also a good hand or maine at dice or other gaming. Vsed also for preheminence or credit aboue others.

Vogáre, to row with oares.

Vogáta, a rowing or draught of an oare.

Vogatóre, a rower, a skulier.

Vóglia, a will, a desire, a list, a wishing or extreme longing for.

Vóglia Dío, God grant, would to God.

Vóglia o nò, will he or nill he.

Vogliáre, to list, to will or long for.

Vogliarella, a little list or longing.

Vogliáte o nò, will ye or nill ye.

Vóglie, birth-markes, such markes as some children are borne with, proceeding of some things which the mother longed for and could not haue.

Vogliente, as Volente.

Voglienza, as Vóglia.

Vóglio, I will, my will and pleasure is, I am willing, of Volére.

Vogliolóso, as Voglióso.

Vogliosaménte, desirously, willingly, longingly, listingly.

Voglióso, willing, desirous, wishing, listing or longing, full of will.

Vogliúzza, a foolish womans will, desire, longing, conceit, or humour.

Vói, you, ye, your selues.

Vórme dé simo, you your selfe.

Vói stésso, you your selfe.

Vola, the palme or hollownes of the hand being halfe open and halfe shut. Also the hollownesse of the foot vnder the sole. Also he flieth.

Volaménto, a flying with wings, a fluttring. Also a running away swiftly.

Volándole, a rope-makers toole.

Volandrello, a kinde of owle or howlet.

Volánte, flying, volant in armorie. Also quick-siluer, as Chimikes call it.

Voláre, to flit in the aire. Also to passe, to fleete, or run in haste or swiftly.

Volarínà, the thistle-downe, but properlie the fine flowre or dust that flies away in the mill, and stickes to the walles. Also fine tiffanie or cobweb-lawne.

Volática, any thing that flieth, fleeteth, or passeth away quickly, or is vnconstant and wauering. Also any retter, itch, ringworme, on drie scabbe. Vsed also for the morphew. Vsed also for a gadding, witch, bagge, or sorceresse.

Volático, flying, fleeting, vnconstant, that passeth suddenly. Looke Verme.

Volaticóso, mangie, full of running tetters, scabs, or sores. Also a horse that hath the bots.

Volátile, any kinde of bird, foule, or poultrie. Also that flieth or can flie. Also any light thing that is easily caried, and flieth vp into the aire, as feathers, down, dust or ashes, any thing that is flitting or passeth away quicklie. Also quicke-siluer, according to Alchimists phrases.

Volatío, any kinde of foule or poultrie.

Volatío distia, any kinde of crammed fowle.

Volatíuo, as Volátile.

Voláto, a flight of birds. Also flowne.

Volatóre, a flier.

Volatúra, a flight, a flying. Also a traine for a hauke.

Volazzáre, to flutter or houer vp and doune in the aire.

Volcáno, a melting or hammering workman or forger, that is continually about the fire. Also any hill that continually burneth and casteth out flame and smoke. Also Vulcan the God of fire.

Voléne, a kinde of fig or cherie.

Volente, willing, voluntarie, desirous.

Volentierl, willingly, with a good will, faine.

Volenza, a willingnesse, as Vóglia.

Volére, vólio, or v&grave;, vólli or vólsi, 



volúto to will, to minde, to meane, to intend. Also to desire or require. Also to beare a will vnto. Also a wil, a minde, a meaning or desire.

Volére,, as a substantiue, a mans will, meaning, intention or desire.

Volén béne, to loue, to wish or beare good will vnto.

Volér díre, to meane, to signifie, che vuól díre? What meaneth?

Volér grán béne, to beare great good will vnto.

Volér la báia, to affect mocking.

Volérla con qualcúno, to wil, to picke or seeke a quarrell with some body.

Volér la gátta, to seeke or picke a quarrell.

Volér mále, to beare ill will vnto.

Volér mál di mórte, to hate deadly.

Volér meglio, to haue rather to loue better.

Volérsi, to need, to be needfull, requisite or necessary. Also to will, to wish or beare loue or hatred one to another.

Volésse Dío, would to God.

Volésse il cielo, oh that heauen would.

Volgáccio, the base common rout.

Volgáre, vulgar, generall, publike, common and vsuall to all. Also vile, base, much vsed or belonging to the common people.

Volgarità, vulgarity, generality, the common sort of people.

Volgarizzáre, to make common, to publish, to spread, to noise or bruite abroad. Also to translate into some common language.

Volgarizzatóre, a translater into any common language.

Volgarménte, vulgarly, commonly, after the vulgar and publike fashion.

Volgáta sentenza, a vulgar or common sentence or iudgement.

Volgáto, published and made vulgar and common. Also as Volgáre.

Vólge hóra l'ánno, it is now a tweluemonth since.

Volgendo gl'ánni, the yeeres turning.

Vólgere, vólgo, vólsi, or volgéi, volgiúto, or vólto, to turne, to wind, to turne ouer, or in and out, to wry, to wrest, to bend, to runne round as a riuer doth. Also to enuolue, to folde, to wrap or rowle vp. Also to conuert or transforme, to reuolt. Also to encline, to addict or bend vnto. Also to turne toward. Also to reuolue, to think or cast in the minde. Also to arch, to enarch or embow.

Vólger le spálle, to turne ones shoulders or backe.

Volgíbile, that may turne, winde or bend. Looke Vólgere.

Volgiménto, a turning, a changing, a bending. Looke Vólgere.

Volgiuágo, meane, base, of little value, common. Also vnconstant, wauering and changing as the common people, variable.

Volgiúto, turned, wounden, bended, &c. Looke Vólgere.

Vólgo, the vulgar people, the common multitude, the many headed monster.

Volitáre, to flie here and there.

Vólito, an vncertaine flight.

Vólli díre, I would haue said.

Vólo, a flight, a flying, a pitch in flying.

Volóni, such men as voluntarily offer themselues to goe to the warres.

Volontà, will, good will, minde, affection, meaning, consent, desire.

Volontariaménte, voluntarily, willinglie, of ones free will and consent.

Volontário, voluntary, willing, of ones accord, without occasion giuen or procuring, Herba volontária, any hearb growing naturally without sowing.

Volontaróso, as Volontário.

Volontataménte, as Volontariaménte.

Volonterosaménte, as Volontariaménte.

Volonteróso, as Volontário.

Volpáia, a Fox-hole, den, or caue.

Volpánsero, a Birgander, that is a bird of the kind of a Goose.

Volpáre, to yelpe, to bray or barke as a Fox. Also to squeake or screeke.

Vólpe, a Fox, a Cub, a Renard. Also a crafty-sneaking, subtle companion.

Volpeggiáre, to play the Fox, to deceiue with crafty wiles or subtilties.

Vólpemaríno, a fish called a Sea-fox.

Volpétta, a Cub or yongue Fox, a wily lad.

Volpicóda, the hearbe Fox-taile.

Volpináta, a blow giuen with a Volpino or Ox-pizle.

Volpíno, a Cub or yongue Fox. Also a Sea-fox. Also crafty, wily, subtle, slie. Vsed also for an Ox-pizle or such scourge to beat Gally-slaues with.

Volpóne, an old Fox or Renard. Also an old crafty, subtle sneaking companion.

Vólse o non uólse, would he or not.

Volsella, an instrument or paire of pincers to plucke out haires by the rootes.

Vólta, a turne, a course about, a turning round or comming about againe. Also a circuite or compasse of ground. Also a reuolt. Also the turne that cunning riders teach their horses. Also a chance or hazard at dice. Also a vault, an arch, an arched roofe, a bent or bow. Also a kind of turning french dance called a Vólta. Also once, one time, one course or one turne. Also a certain monster deuouring all graines and spoyling all fruits that it can com vnto. Also a round walke, a going round or any encompassing of ground. Also a turning about of a mans body. Also a flight or turning vnto route and running away of souldiers. Also a charge, a turne or place to ones lot to doe or speake.

Voltabandiéra, a turne-coate, one that runnes from his Captaine to another.

Voltábile, as Volgíbile.

Voltáccio, a filthy, grim or ill face.

Vólta colcáta, is when a horse doth lean in his turnes.

Vólta d'ócchio, a twinkling of an eye.

Vólta délla lúna, as Nouilúnio.

Voltafáccia, a kind of march sounded in time of war as a warning to retreate.

Vóltamiglióre, better lucke or better chance at Dice.

Vólta per vólta, time by time, turne by turne, sometimes, now and then.

Vólta radoppiáta, a doubble turne in dancing or riding of horses.

Voltáre, to turne any way, to reuolt, as Vólgere. Also to build arch-wise or vault-wise, to enarch or embow, it is properly to turne ones face.

Voltáre bandiera, to turne ones ensigne or colour, id est, to change minde.

Voltáre le spálle, to turne ones shoulders, id est, to shew a faire paire of heeles.

Voltarella, one onely time or turne. Also any kind of little turne.

Voltáre sozzópra, to turne or ouerturne topsie-turuy or vpside downe.

Voltáre testa, to turne head.

Voltaspiédi, a iacke or turne-spit, a turne-broach.

Voltáto, turned, changed, reuolted. Also enarched, embowed, built vaultwise.

Voltatúra, a vaulting, an enarching, an embowing. Also a turning.

Vólte assái, many times.

Volteggiaménto, as Volteggiáta.

Volteggiáre, to roaue or wander about. Also to tumble or vault on horsebacke.

Volteggiáta, a roauing or wandering about. Also a vaulting on horsebacke.

Volteggiatóre, a roauer or wanderer about. Also a tumbler or vaulter.

Voltesíni da póppa. 

Vólo, a face, a visage, a looke, a countenance, a fauour or cheere of a man.

Vólto, as Volgiúto. Looke Vólgere. Also vaulted, enarched or embowed. Also a vault in a Cellar or arch of a bridge. 



Vólto, as Volgiúto. Looke Vólgere. Also vaulted, enarched or embowed. Also a vault in a Cellar or arch of a bridge. 

Vólto di pónte sísto, taken for a brasen, bold, shamelesse, or vnblushing face.

Voltolaménto, a rowling, an ouerturning, a rumbling, a topsie-turuie.

Voltoláre, to ouerturne, to rowle, to tumble, to tosse, to rumble or wallow vp and downe.

Voltolóne, in rowling, rumbling, or ouerturning maner, topsie-turuie.

Voltóre, a rauenous bird called a vultur, a geyre, or grap, a greedie cormorant.

Voltoríno, of, like vnto, or belonging to a vultur. Also a kinde of gray colour.

Voltuóso, of a graue, sad, heauie, soune or big looke and countenance.

Voltúrio, a greedy cormorant, a rauenous fellow, an extortioner.

Vólua, a certaine pelide or cote that inuolueth things growing, as of any fruit.

Volúbile, voluble, fickle, inconstant, variable, wauering, changing, nimble, fleeting, rowling, euer turning. Also that may easily be turned. Also hauing a round and nimble pronunciation gathering it selfe together. Also as Volúcchio.

Volubilézza, as Volubilità.

Volubilità, volubilitie, mutability, ficklenesse, inconstancie, nimblenesse, aptnesse to rowle, facility to turne round. Also a round or quicke speaking without any impediment or staggering.

Volubilménte, volubly, waueringly, vnconstantly, nimbly, flittingly, rowlingly.

Volúcchio, a weede running vp by trees and hearbes, hauing red branches, and the leaues biting the tongue, called weede-binde or roape-weede.

Voluella, a kinde of mathematicall instrument.

Volúcra, a vermine that eateth tender vines, called a vine-fretter or the Diuels Gold-ring.

Volúcre, that is fledge and apt to flie. Also that is of the nature of any birds.

Volúcro, all maner of things that flie, as birds, foules, waspes, bees or flies. Also the after birth of a woman.

Voluente, reuoluing or turning round. Also reuoluing or considering in minde.

Volúme, the volume, scantlin, size, measure, or body of any thing. Also a volume, a tome, or part of a booke. Also folding, turning, or voluble and rowling about. It hath beene anciently vsed for confusion, disorder, or hurlyburly.

Volumétto, any little volume.

Voluóce, as Volúcra.

Vóluolo, a roller of timber, as they vse in gardens or allies to breake clods of carth, and make the ground smooth.

Volúra, that in the head or chapiter of a piller, which sticketh out or hangeth ouer in manner of a writhen circle or curled tuft, being a kinde of fucillage or leauie worke or such deuice turning diuers waies. Caruers and Painters call it cillerie or draperie. Some take it to be the square table of stone set vpon the chapiter of pillers.

Volutáre, to wallow, to tumble or turne, lying as a hogge in the mire. Also to reuolue, to cast or turne ouer in the minde.

Volutatióne, a wallowing, a tumbling or turning, lying as a hogge in the mire.

Volúto, willed, desired, affected, borne will vnto, beene willing. Looke Volére.

Volutríce fortúna, fleeting or changing fortune.

Voluttà, voluptuousnesse, sensualitie, delight, sensuall or worldly pleasure.

Voluttário, as Voluttóso. Also pleasure bringing, or of and belonging to pleasure.

Voluttuário, as Voluttário. Also as Voluttóso.

Voluttuóso, voluptuous, sensuall, insatiate in sensualitie, giuen to pleasure.

Vóma, the concauitie, or cope, or heauen.

Vomáre, to make concaue or hollow.

Vóme, he vomiteth or spueth.

Vómegli, for Mé gli uò, I will my selfe to him.

Vómer di pénna, vsed of Petrarke in stead of writing.

Vómere, the sough, the culter or plough-share, that is, the iron of the plough that pierceth the ground. Vsed also for a mans priuities. Also as Vomíre.

Vómero, as Vómere.

Vomíca, a red stone that yeeldeth quicksiluer. Also quick-siluer. Also a certaine Indian nut. Also as Vomíci.

Vomíci, sores or apostumes that runne stinking matter.

Vomicóso, full of Vomíci.

Vomíre, mísco, míto, to vomit, to spue, to cast vp, to perbreake.

Vomitáre, as Vomíre.

Vomitatióne, a vomitation, a vomiting, a spuing, a casting vp.

Vómito, a vomit, a casting vp, a spuing. Also that which is vomited.

Vomitótio, a kinde of bulbous root vsed in vomit. Also causing vomit or spuing.

Vómmene, for Me ne vádo, I goe hence.

Vómmi, I goe my selfe.

Vómo, vsed for Huómo, a man. 

Vò moríre, an oath, as we say, Let mee not liue, I will die.

Vónne, for Me ne vádo, or Ne vóglio, I goe hence. Also I will some of it.

Vónno, as Vógliono, they will.

Vopísco, of two twins or yong infants in a womans body, that which commeth to perfect birth is so called.

Vópo, need or necessitie.

Voráce, deuouring, rauenous, greedie, consuming. Also a greedy deuourer, a rauenous glutton, a deuouring glutton, a waste-good.

Voracità, a gulfe. Also greedy deuouring, rauenous feeding, excessiue gluttonie.

Vorágine, a maruellous deepe place that sucketh or swalloweth vp riuers, and whereout nothing can come againe, a swallow, a gulfe, a whirlepoole, a quaue-mire. Also gluttonie, greedie deuouring, or excessiue insacietie.

Voraginóso, full of gulfes, or swallowing pits and whirle-pooles. Also gluttonous or greedily deuouring.

Voráre, to swallow greedily or deuoure downe meat rauenously before it bee chewed, to gulfe in.

Vorásco, hauendo a pagáre il vorásco.

Voratóre, a greedy deuourer, a rauenous swallower, or insatiate feeder.

Vorrà, hee shall be willing, he shall will. Vsed also for Bórra.

Vortíce, as Górgo, or Búffera.

Vorticóso siúme, rápido, piéno di Górghi.

Vortumíno, the God of changing things, that is to say, of merchandise.

Vortúnno, as Vortumíno.

Vósa, the singular of Vosátti.

Vosattáre, to boote, to buskin.

Vosátti, buskins or high clownish shooes.

Vosattiére, a boot or buskin-maker.

Vósco, with you, in your companie.

Vóse, as Vosátti. Also as Vóce.

Vostrále, common or peculiar to you.

Vostra mercè, God a mercy you.

Vostra Signoría, your Lordship, worship, your mastership.

Vostrissimo, most-most-yours.

Vóftro, yours, your, your owne. Vsed also substantiuely, as il vóstro, yours, your goods, whatsoeuer is yours.

Vóta bótta, an empty or void blow.

Votacessi, as Vótadestri.

Vótadestri, an emptier of iakes or priuies, a iakes-farmer.

Votaménto, an empting, the act of empting. Also a vowing or promising.

Votáre, with a round and open o signifieth to emptie to make void or hollow.

Votáre, with a close and ouall o signifieth to vow, to make a vow, to promise with purpose to performe, to protest. 



Also to bequeath vnto.

Votário, a votary, a vow maker. Also of or belonging to any vow made.

Vóta spáda, a blunted sword.

Votatóre, a vower, a votary.

Votézza, emptinesse, vacuity.

Votíuo, a votiue, a thing that is vowed or promised by vow. Also that is or hath been greatly wished and earnestly desired.

Vóto, being pronounced with a close and ouall o signifieth, a vow, a promise, a prayer or protestation made to God. Also a thing obtained of God by praier. Also a wish, a desire, a request or a thing much desired. Also an affection or apetite of couetousnesse. Also a voice, a consent or suffrege giuen to one in any election.

Vóto, with an open and round o signifieth void, empty, hollow or concaue. Also as Vácuo, the voidnesse, hollownes or emptinesse and concauity of any thing.

Vóttene meglio, I loue thee or wish vnto thee the better for it.

Vóto di sénno, void of wit.

Vóto di intelletto, void of vnderstanding.

Vouále, ouall, more long then round, fashioned like an egge.

Vóuo, any kind of egge or round knob vpon any worke.

Vóuoli, as Vuóuoli.

Vozzácchio, a kind of long winged hawk

V'pega, as V'pupa.

Vpetála, a kind of speckled stone.

Vpiláre, to stop, to be bound or costiue, to haue an opilation of the liuer.

Vpilatióne, an opilation or stopping of the liuer, a costiuenesse in the belly.

Vpilatíuo, costiue, binding, restringent.

Vpiláto, stopt, bound or costiue in the belly or liuer.

V'pupa, a bird no bigger then a Thrush, with a crest from his bill to the vttermost part of his head, which he strouteth out or holdeth downe according to his affections, called a Houpe or a Dungbill-cocke, because it nestleth in mans dung. Some haue abusiuely taken V'pupa for a Chough, a Chuet or a Daw. It is also a kind of beetle, mattocke, pickaxe or such other iron toole to dig stones with out of a quarrey.

Vpupáre, to cry as an V'pupa.

Vráco, the way by which vrine is conuaighed from the infant being yet in the mothers wombe.

Vránico, vsed for heauenly.

Vráno, vsed for heauen.

Vranoscópo, a fish hauing but one eie in his head, which is so placed, that swimming he seemeth to looke still vp ward.

Vrbaníco, belonging to a City. 

Vrbanità, vrbanity, courtesie, ciuility, ciuill life, gentle behauiour, good maners, gentlenesse in speech or a pleasant grace in iesting.

Vrbáno, of a City, borne or dwelling in a City. Also courteous, ciuill, gentle in speech, pleasant in behauiour. Also a kind of Partridge.

Vrbína, a certaine long weapon.

V'rca, a Hulke, a kind of ship.

Vrceoláre, as Vitriária.

Vrea, a kind of Tunny-fish.

Vrea cíbia, square taile pieces of the fish Tunny.

Vrédine, the blasting of trees or hearbes with cold or frost. Also a kind of itch or burning in the skin.

Vrete, the pipe or conduit by which the vrine in a man passeth from the reines to the bladder called the vretors.

Vretro, as Vrete.

Vrgente, vrgent, vrging, forceing, pressing, strayning, calling earnestly vpon.

Vrgenza, vrging necessity, force, constraint, importunity.

V'rgere, úrgo, vrgéi, vrgiúto, to vrge, to presse on, to importune, to inforce, to call earnestly vpon, to labour and as it were to constraine.

Vrgiúto, vrged, pressed on, importuned, called earnestly vpon, constrained.

V'rgo, feríto da una schéggia di láncia in uno úrgo.

V'ri, a kind of wild bull in Hercynia, bigger then ours in body and very swift, some take it for the Bugle or Buffe.

Vríca, a Caterpiller of such fretting veruine. Also a hurt comming to all maner of graine by too much moisture.

Vrígine, a burning in sores by occasion of hot medicines or corrosiues. Also a blasting of corne or grasse or any thing else through parching heat.

Vrim, taken for light, Exod. 28. 30.

Vrína, vrine, pisse, stale or water of man or beast. Also the female of V'ri.

Vrína genitále, the seed of generation.

Vrináio, an vrinall, a pisse-pot, a chamber-pot. Also a medicine to prouoke vrine. Also as Vrete.

Vrinále, as Vrináio.

Vrináre, to vrine, to pisse, to stale, to make water. Also to diue vnder water.

Vrinárij, as Vrete, or Vritórij.

Vrinatióne, a pissing.

Vrinatríce, a Didopper, a Diuer, a ducker.

Vrinóso, full of vrine.

Vríno, a wind egge that hath no yolke, and will not be hatched.

Vrióne, a defect in mineral oare or earth when it is loose and brittle. 

Vritáre, to burne sore or vehemently with any burning corrosiue.

Vrítidi, as Vrete, or Vritórij.

Vritórij, the passages or conduites wherby the water or vrine passeth from the kidneis into the bladder called the vretors.

Vrlaménto, a howling, a yelling, a yelping, a barking, a baying, a braying.

Vrláre, to howle, to yell, to yelp, to barke, to bay, to bray. Also as Orláre.

Vrlatóre, a howler, a yeller, a yelper, a bayer, a barker, a brayer.

V'rlo, as Vrlaménto. Also as O'rlo.

V'rna, any kind of earthen pot or pitcher. Also a vessell or cophin wherein the ashes of the dead were kept. Also a graue, a tombe or sepulcher. Also according to Roman histories a measure of liquid things of about foure gallons and a halfe of oures, or a pot wherein the Pretor did put the names of the Iudges when they should be chosen.

Vrnáio, a Potter or maker of earthen vessels. Also a boord or shelfe in a kitching whereon all maner of pots or vessels are kept.

Vrnále, like vnto or of and belonging to any earthen vessell.

V'ro, as V'ri.

Vropígo, the narrowest and lowest part of the chine-bone, the rumpe.

V'rsa, a shee-beare. Looke O'rsa.

Vrsera, a kind of ship for burdens vsed anciently among the Venetians.

Vrsétta, as Orsétta, as Forácqua.

Vrsíno, of or belonging to a Beare.

Vrtáre, to hurt, to shoulder, to shooue, to thrust, to iustle, to but, to shocke, to front, to iob.

Vrtáta, as Vrtóne.

Vrtatúra, as Vrtóne.

Vrteggiáre, as Vrtáre.

Vrtíca, any kind of Nettle. Also the tickling of letchery. Also the Nettlefish.

Vrticáre, to nettle, to pricke, to sting. Also to itch or tickle.

V'rto, as Vrtóne.

Vrtóne, a hurt, a push, a iob, a shouldring, a iustling, a thrust, a shocke.

Vsánte, vsing, frequenting, wonting.

Vsánza, vse, guise, custome, fashion, maner, wont, vre, enurement.

Vsáre, to vse, to inure, to fashion, to accustome, to be wont. Also to make vse of, to put to vse, to occupy, to employ, to haue to doe with. Also to frequent, or conuerse with. Also to behaue or demeane or fashion himselfe.

Vsáre con altrúi, to vse with others.

Vsáre di díre, to be wont to say.

Vsáre diligenza, to vse all diligence.

Vsaría, as Vsúra.



Vsáro, as Vsuráro.

Vsáta, as V'so, vse or custome.

Vsáto, vsed, enured, accustomed. Also made vse of, or put to vse. Looke Vsáre. Also as V'so.

Vsato essere, to be wont.

Vsátti, buskins. Also high clownish shoes.

Vsbergáre, to arme with a breast-plate.

Vsbergo, a vant-plate, a breast-plate.

Vscente, issuing, going out, an out-tooth.

V'scia, the plurall of V'scio.

Vsciáli, any garnishings of doores.

Vscíbile, that may issue foorth.

Vsciere, an Vsher, a doore-keeper.

Vsciero, a kinde of ship so called.

Vscietríno, any little doore or wicket.

Vsciétto, as Vsciettino.

Vscignólo, a Nightingale.

Vsciménto, any issuing or going out.

V'scio, any doore or entrance.

V'scio di dietro, a backe doore.

Vsciólo, any kinde of little doore.

Vscíre, esco, vscíj, vscíto, to issue, to goe out, to goe foorth. Also as Riuscíre.

Vscíre dell' ánimo, to goe out of ones minde, to forget.

Vscíre del trótto, to goe out of ones pace or trot. Also to goe out of ones byace. Also to become calme, gentle, or milde againe.

Vscíre de' gángheri, to goe off, or out of the hinges, that is, to grow impatient, or out of order, to become madde, frantike or furious.

Vscíre d' ócchio, to vanish out of sight.

Vscíre di cása, to goe from home.

Vscíre di propósito, to goe from or out of the purpose.

Vscíre di debito, to come out of debt.

Vscíre di óbligo, to come out of bonds.

Vscíre di sè, to goe out of his wits.

Vscíre fuóri, to issue or goe foorth.

Vscíta, an issuing, a going forth, a dore, a gate, an egresse. Also a gap or opening. Also whatsoeuer goeth out.

Vscíti, vsed for Fuór' vscíti, men banished or outlawed.

Vscito, issued, gone out, gone forth. Also as Riuscíto.

Vscíto, hath beene taken for the skummering or ordure of any beast.

Vsciuólo, any little doore or wicker.

Vselláre, vsed for Vccelláre.

Vsello, vsed for Vccello. Also a gudgeon or loche-fish.

V'si, vsed for Vsátti.

V'sia, the substance or reall being of any thing.

Vsignólo, a Nightingale.

Vsitánza, vsage, vse, vre, wont, custome.

Vsitatióne, as Vsitánza.

Vsitáto, vsuall, much vsed or accustomed, wonted, customary, ordinary.

Vsiuíglio, any kinde of toole or vtensill, or necessarie thing of vse in a mans house. Also a store-house for all necessaries belonging to a house.

V'so, vse, vsage, custome, wont, guise, maner, fashion, vre, habit. Also the vse, the vsing, the exercise, the tenure or occupation of any thing. Also the profit, helpe, fruit, seruice, or possession of any commoditie.

V'so essere, to be wont or vsed.

Vsofrútto, as Vsufrútto.

Vsolieri, laces, points, or ribands with tags, such as women vse to lace their peticotes or bodies with. Also shirtstring or hose-strings.

Vsouiglio, as Vsiuíglio.

V'sla, il fuo mantello era almánco di trè ússe.

Vssignólo, a Nightingale.

Vssuncassáno, in the Persian tongue signifieth a great and maruellous man.

Vstinatióne, obstinacie, wilfulnesse.

Vstináto, obstinate, stiffe-necked.

Vstióne, a burning, a combustion. Also a searing or marking with a hot iron.

V'sto, burned, parched, seared.

Vstrígine, as Vrígine.

Vstrina, a place where dead bodies are buried. Also a melting house for metals.

Vstuláre, to burne, to parch, to scorch, to seare any thing. Also to frizle, or crispe and curle with a hot iron.

Vstulatióne, as Vrígine.

Vstúra, as Vrígine.

Vsuále, vsuall, common, wonted, much vsed, accustomed. Also as Vsuário.

Vsualità, the vse or vsing, or putting to vse of any thing.

Vsuário, that may be vsed, or serueth for our vse. Also that wee haue the vse of, but not the proprietie. Also a man that hath the vse of a thing, but neither the fruit nor the proprietie.

Vsucápere, to attaine vnto or become master, owner, or Lord of any thing by long vse, custome, or prescription, or by possession of long time.

Vsucattióne, the attaining of a thing by vse, prescription, or long possession.

Vsucátto, become possessor of any thing by long vse, custome, or prescription.

Vsufrútto, the vse, fruit, or profit (but not the proprietie) of another mans goods, with the consent of the owner, the stocke and substance being saued.

Vsufruttuáre, to haue the vse and profit of any thing, but not the proprietie.

Vsufruttuário, he that hath the vse and profit of any thing, but not the proprietie thereof. 

Vsúra, vsurie, vse, or interest of any thing, mony giuen aboue the principall summe for the lone of it.

Vsuráio, any thing let out to vsurie. Also he that is the vsurer, or receiueth vsurie. Also he that paieth vsurie.

Vsurático, of or pertaining to vsurie. Also the mony that is paid for vsurie.

Vsuríere, an vsurer, one that letteth or lendeth out mony to vsurie.

Vsurpaménto, vsurpation, an vsurping or interruption of possession, oft vsing or practising to disturbe prescription or another mans right.

Vsurpáre, to vsurp, to take against right and reason, to disturbe another mans right and possession. Also to vse often or much, be it in words or deeds.

Vsurpatióne, as Vsurpaménto.

Vsurpatóre, an vsurper of anothers right.

Vt, a note in musicke, Vt.

Vtello, as Vtrello.

Vtensile, as Vsiuiglio.

Vtenticáre, as Autenticáre.

Vtentico, as Autentico.

Vteríno, borne of one same mother or wombe. Fratello vteríno, a halfe-brother, or a brother by the mother, and not by the father.

V'tero, the matrix or wombe of a woman wherein the childe is conceiued and lieth. Vsed also for the childe in the mothers wombe.

V'tile, profit, vtilitie, gaine, cheuissance, commoditie, good or benefit.

V'tile, profitable, gainefull, commodious, beneficiall. Also good, conuenient or necessarie.

Vtilità, vtilitie, profit. Looke V'tile.

Vtilménte, profitably, gainfully.

V'tole, vsed anciently for V'tile.

Vtráio, a maker of bottles, flagons, bouges, or borachos of leather for wine or oile. Looke V'tro.

Vtrello, any kinde of little V'tro.

V'tria, as V'tro.

Vtriáca, treacle against poison.

Vtrícolo, as V'tero.

Vtrículo, as V'tero.

V'tro, a bouge, a budget, or borache, or bag made of goats skins which they vse in Spaine and Italie to carrie wine or oile in from place to place without danger of breaking. Vsed also for any bottle or flagon.

V'ua, any kinde of grape or reasin to make wine with. Also a cluster of grapes. Also a disease in the eies called a pin and a web. Also as V'uola. Also a kinde of fish called a Sea-grape.

V'ua acerba, any sowre grapes.

V'ua bumásta, a kind of swelling grape, 



called the Dug-grape.

V'ua crispína, Gooseberries, Thorneberries.

V'ua dátila, the Date-grape.

V'ua dólce, sweet grapes.

V'ua inauráta, yellow grapes.

V'ua lettorága, a kind of small grape.

V'ua lugliática, Grapes comming in Iulie.

V'ua luglióla, as V'ua lugliática.

V'ua marina, the Scorpion or Sea-grap-fish.

V'ua matúra, any ripe grapes.

V'ua moscatella, the Muskadine-grape.

V'ua dássa, dried Reysons or Grapes. Also dried Corinth-grapes or Corans.

V'ua precio, a kind of danty Grape.

V'ua schiáua, as V'ua pássa.

V'ua sécca, as, Vna pássa.

V'ua spína, as V'ua crespína.

V'ua spinella, as V'ua crespína.

V'ua taminia, Blacke-briony, our Ladies seale.

Vuatióne, a pin and a web in the eies.

V'ua uára, a rath grape or grapes beginning to be ripe.

V'ua vinósa, any Grape full of wine.

Vuea, like vnto a Grape, of a Grape. Looke Tónaca, or Tónica, the fourth thin membrane of thecie: Called also Chorióne, Corióne, Chorifórme, Corifórnte or Secondina, and is the first that cloatheth and couereth the optike sinew.

Vueo, of or like vnto a grape.

Vúi, as vói, you, your selues.

V'uido, humid, moist, wettish.

Vuífero, grape-bearing or bringing.

Vulcanália, feastes dedicated to Vulcane.

Vulcánij, Vulcans, Smithes, Forgers, alwaies about fire.

Vulcáno, as Volcáno.

Vulgágine, as Tussilágine.

Vulgáre, as Volgáre, vulgar.

Vulgarità, as Volgarità.

Vulgarizzáre, as Volgarizzáre.

Vulgáto, as Volgáre, or Volgáto.

Vulgiuágo, as Volgiuágo.

Vúlgo, as Vólgo.

Vulgóso, full of Vólgo.

Vúìna, a wound, a sore, or a hurt.

Vulnerábile, vulnerable, to be wounded.

Vulneráre, to wound or hurt sore.

Vulnerário, of or belonging to wounds as some hearbes be. Also a Chirurgion or Wound-healer.

Vulnerário medico, a Wound-healing Phisition.

Vulneroso, full of wounds.

Vulnisicare, to wound or hurt sore.

Vulnísico, that woundeth or hurteth.

Vulpáre, to crie or pule like a Kite.

Vulsióne, as Conuulsione.

Vultúrno, the Northeast winde. 

Vúlua, the matrix, the wombe passage, the priuy passage or way and entrance into the same, the place of conception in any somale.

Vuò, I will, of Volére.

Vuóga, as Vóga.

Vuogáre, as Vogáre, to row.

Vuógli, as Vuói, thou wilt.

Vuói, thou wilt.

Vuói tù áltro? wilt thou haue any thing else.

V'uola, a little piece of spungeous flesh much like the spur of a Cocke, whach hanging downe in the roofe of ones mouth, neere to the passages into the nostrils serueth for the vtterance of voice and pronounciation, which when it is distempered, the vpper part therof is thin and the lower purt blakish like the vtmost end of a grape, & then it is called V'ua or Staphile. but when it is swolne as round & big aboue as below in forme of a piller, then is it called Cióna, Colomella or Columella.

Vuolária, the hearbe Horse tongue.

Vuól' éssere, ought, should or would be.

Vuólsi, it is requisite one would.

Vuópo, neede or necessity.

Vuóso, full of grapes, grapy.

Vuotabórse, a nicke-name giuen to Lawyers or Phisicions, a purce-emptier.

Vuóta cessi, as Vóta destri.

Vuóta destri, as Vóta destri.

Vuóta pózzi, an emptier of wels.

Vuotáre, to empty, to void or hollow.

Vuotatóre, an emptier, a hollower.

Vuóto, empty, voide, concaue, as Vóto.

Vuóua, all manner of egges.

Vuouále, ouall, more long then round.

Vuóua maritáte, egges in Moone-shine.

Vuóuoli, a kinde of dainty Mushroms. Also the knobs or rootes of Canes or Reeds. Also knobs or bunches or wild Cucombers in building.

Vuóuolo, as Vuóuoli.

Vúrchio, a Hulke, a Hurke, or ship of burthen.

V'uula, as V'uola.

Vuuulária, the hearbe Horse-tongue. 


Z.
Zabaióne, a drinke made for sicke folkes called a Caudle.

Zaberna, a presse or cubbord to lay and keepe clothes in.

Zabratána, a trunke to shoot pellets with ones mouth. Also a fowling piece.

Zabúrro, a kind of corne in India which some take to be the Ginny-wheat.

Zácca, a bag-net, a fowling-net, a casting-net, a drag-net or hay-net.

Záccara, a driggle-draggle strumpet, a common harlot, a common filthy where.

Zaccaráre, to daggle, to dash, or spurt with durt or mire, to bemire.

Záccare, daglings, deshings or spurtings of durt or mire sticking about the skirts of any long garment. Also troubles, griefes or vexations. Also vsed for commen & filthy brothels or baudy houses or the whores in them.

Zaccarelle, as Záccare. Also idle toies, foolish trash, vaine trifles, vanities.

Zaccaría, Fióre, di Zaccaría, the flower called Blue-bottle.

Zaccheo, a slouenly dwarfe, a sluttish dandiprat, a little logarhead.

Zabaióne, a drinke made for sicke folkes called a Caudle.

Zácchera, as Záccara.

Zaccheráre, as Zaccaráre.

Zácchero, as Záccaro.

Zaccherelle, as Zaccarelle.

Zaccherétte di paróle, a huddle of foolish words, a flimflam tale without head or foot.

Zaccheríni, as Zaccatelle.

Zaccheróso, miry, durty, dabled or dashed with durt or mire.

Zacconáre, as Zazzeáre, as Anfanáre. Also as Zoccoláre.

Zadúra, Worme-seed.

Záffara, an iron drag or hooke that Dyers vse to draw their clothes out of their vats.

Zaffaráno, Safron.

Zaffáre, to gripe, to catch or seaze vpon with ones clawes. Also to catch or arest with a Seriant or Catch-pole.

Zaffaría, the order, rout, company or crue of catch-poles, seriants or such base officers. Also we would say a Marshals court. Also a catchpoles tricke.

Zaffáta, a blow or a pat with a claw or paw. Also a griping, a catching or a snatching.

Zaffáto, griped, snatcht, caught or seazed vpon by a catchpole or seriant.

Zaffeggiáre, to play the base Seriant or catchpole. Also to pat with ones pawes.

Záffera, a kind of colour vsed by Painters.

Zafferáno, any kind of Safferon.

Zaffiro, a precious stone called a Saphire. Also a kind of hawke with yellow legs and feet. Also a kind of fish of the kind of a Guilthead or Dorci.

Záffo, a common Seriant or base catchpole. Also the eares of a tub or cowle. Also the venting or working and boyling of must or new wine. 



Zaffóra, a kinde of soft and crumbling minerall oare or stone.

Zaffranáre, to ensaffran, to die or staine with Saffron.

Zaffráno, any kind of Saffron.

Zafíla, Zaphíla, as Tanádo.

Zafíro, as Zaffíro.

Zagáglia, a Captaines leading staffe. Also a iauelin. Also a Turkish sword or Persian cimitary. Also a short bending sword called a hanger.

Zaganella, a trunke to shoot pellets in. Also a running squibe of wild-fire, Also a kind of fine or small silke-lace vsed in Florence.

Zagarella, any kind of list, hem or welt about the skirts of a garment. Also a curb of leather instead of an iron curb or any other thing that is soft and gentle that riders vse to yongue coltes. Also cracking or flying squibes that children vse to make of paper.

Zágo, a priest Clarke that helpes him to say masse and Amen.

Zagóra, prendi délla céra Zagóra. 

Záina, any kind of drinking-glasse. Also a kind of tree in America whereof they make their Canoas or boates of one piece, and call that so by the name of the tree.

Zaináro, a budget-maker.

Zainétta, any kind of Záina.

Záino, a little leather budget or Palmers scrip. Also a certaine musicall instrument that sheapheards vse as an horne pipe or bagpipe. Also a horse that is altogether of one blacke or of any one colour without any marke, spot or star about him.

Zaldóne, a kinde of flower. Also any kind of Wafer-cake.

Zallóno, as Ménsola, Millers call them shiuers.

Zalolíno, a kind of colour, which some take to be the gingerline colour.

Zamára, an Irish rugge, a freese-gowne, a seamans gowne, a sheapheards frock, an Irish mantle. Also a kind of musical instrument with strings.

Zamárra, as Zamára.

Zamarrótto, as Zamára.

Zambaglióne, as Zabaióne.

Zambella, a pretty trull, a fine harlot, a flurting whore, a minx, a gixie.

Zambelláre, as Zimbelláre.

Zambelláro, a Wafer or cake-maker.

Zambelle, wafers or fine cakes.

Zambello, as Zimbello.

Zambellótto, the stuffe Chamlot.

Zamberlúcco, a kind of long Seamans or fishermans garment.

Zambétti, as Zampétti.

Zámbra, a Chamber-close-stoole.

Zambrácca, a common hedge whore.

Zambraccáre, to follow common whores Also to play the filthy whore.

Zambudelli, a kind of dried puddings. Vsed also for chitterlins.

Zámie, the Pine Apples that open hanging vpon the trees.

Zámpa, the paw, the claw, the clinch or pat or gripe of any beast.

Zampáre, to paw, to clinch or gripe and seaze on with pat or claw.

Zampettáre, to trip it or foote it daintily, to tread the measures fare and softly. Vsed also to tiple and quaffe merrily, till one reele and stagger in going.

Zampétte, all manner of little pats, pawes, clawes, clinches or gripes.

Zampétti, all manner of beastes feete that are drest to be eaten as Neates feete, Calues feete, Pigs feete, Sheepes trotters. Also little springs of Porke.

Zampilláre, to purle, to bubble, to spout, to spin or gush foorth as water doth out of a String or out of some little conduit holes. Also to bud, to sprout, to burgeon or spring as Vines doe.

Zampillétto, as Zampíllo.

Zampílli, little holes in pipes of water out of which it runs as from vnder ground.

Zampíllo, a purling, a bubbling, a spouting, a spinning or gushing foorth of water. Also any yongue bud, sprout, burgeon, shoote or spring of Vines.

Zampillóso, full of gushing or spouting holes. Also full of yongue buds, sprouts or burgeons.

Zampíni, palétte, mogliétte, zampíni, scaldaletti et schermágli.

Zampógna, an Oaten-pipe, Reede-pipe, a Sheapheards-pipe. Also a bell that is hung about a Goate or Bellweathers necke that leadeth the rest.

Zampognáre, to sound or play vpon any Sheapheards pipe or Reede. Also to babble, to tattle, to chat or prate idly and euer in one tune, the metaphor is taken from a Bell-weathers bel, which as he goeth sounds euer one tune.

Zampognaro, a plaier vpon any Reede or Shepheards-pipe. Also a Bellweather. Also a vaine pratler, chatter or babler. Looke Zampognáre.

Zampógne, vaine pratling, idle bableings. Looke Zampognáre.

Zampognóne, a pratler, an idle chatter, a foolish babler. Looke Zampognáre.

Zamponáre, to rake or stir vp the fire. Also to rake or drag for with some hooke.

Zampóne, a great iron fire-hooke. Also a great rake or dragging hooke.

Zampunáre, as Zamponáre.

Zampúne, as Zampóne.

Zána., Vsed in Florence for a Cradle, as Cúlla. Also a great Cesterne or Lauer to receiue water. Also a handbarrow to carry things vpon betweene two. Also a Cuntry wenches silken girdle or scarffe. Also a frump, a iest, a flout, as we say, a gull or gudgeon giuen to one.

Zanáda, a foolish tricke of a Záne.

Zanaiuólo, as Záne, as Zannuólo.

Zánca, the leaft side or hand, Dánte hath vsed Zánca for a legge.

Zancarúto, crookt-leg'd, hauing, crooked legges or shankes.

Zánche, stilts to goe withall in fenny places.

Zancheggiáre, to goe on stilts.

Záncia, as Ciáncia.

Zanciáre, as Cianciáre.

Zanciatóre, as Cianciatóre.

Zanciúme, as Cianciúme.

Zánco, a lefthanded man or blow.

Záne, the name of Iohn in some parts of Lombardy, but commonly vsed for a silly Iohn, a simple fellow, a seruile drudge or foolish clowne in any commedy or enterlude play.

Zanfróne, a lusty lad, a swaggering gallant, a tosse-pot companion. Vsed also for crownes, great pieces of gold, as our Countrymen say Red-ruddockes.

Zanganelle, a kind of flying squibes.

Zangarinelli, as Zangarnelli.

Zangarnelli, a kind of fenny fish.

Zángola, a Chamber-close-stoole.

Zánio, as Záino.

Zannáre, to bite, to snip to pinch, to teare or seaze on with tuskes. Also as Attalanáre.

Zánne, the tuskes or fore-teeth of a wild boare.

Zánni, as Atteláni. Vsed also for crosse biting or cunnycatching knaues.

Zannuólo, a silly Iohn, a foolish Iacke. Also a wanton darling or dilling.

Zanzála ficária, a kind of gnat breeding in figge-trees.

Zanzále, all kind of Gnats.

Zanzána, any kind of Gnat.

Zanzára, any kind of Gnat.

Zanzáre, as Cianciáre, to prattle, to chat, as Zampognáre.

Zanzaueráta, as Zanzeueráta. Vsed also as Fagioláta.

Zánze., Vsed for Ciáncie, pratlings.

Zanzeáre, to bite or be bitten with gnats. Also to goe idly loitring and buzzing vp and downe or to iet and braue it vp and downe wantonly, as it were minion-like to make a show of himselfe.

Zanzeóni, idle and foolish loitring fellowes that haue naught to doe but goe vp and downe gazing and to show themselues. Also vsed as an Aduerb, 



foolishly, carelesly, and wantonly.

Zanzéra, any kind of Gnat.

Zanzeráre, to nigle boyes or wantonly to play with them against nature.

Zánzeri, Ganimeds, Cinedos, Nigles, Wanton boies. Also knauish wags.

Zanzeríni, as Zánzeri.

Zanzeueríni, as Zánzeri.

Zánzola, a kind of tray or pan.

Zapíno, the Fir-tree. Some say a tree yeelding a liquor that cureth the leprosie.

Zapóti, a kind of fruit in India.

Záppa, a Sap, a Mattocke or Pickax to dig, to sap or delue with.

Zappaménto, a diging, a sapping, a deluing, a grubbing vp of the ground.

Zappáre, to digge, to sap, to delue or grub vp the ground.

Zappatóre, a sapper, a digger, a deluer or grubber of the ground.

Zappegaménto, as Calpéstio.

Zappegáre, as Calpestáre.

Zappolíno, a little Záppa.

Zappóne, any great Záppa.

Záppulo, a rake or Weeding-hooke.

Zára, il dádo con ché si giuóca. Also a hazzard at three dice, that is lesse then seauen and more then fifteene. Also a nicke at hazard. Also the game it selfe. Also a Iarre of Oyle. Also any kind of stony grauell or sand. Also as Ciáncia. Also the play which in England we call barly-breake.

Zára a chì tócca, hab or nab, haue amongst you, light on whom it list.

Zarabánda, a kind of tune or dance much vsed in Spaine.

Zarabattána, as Zabratána.

Zarabottána, as Zabratána.

Zarabúso, a foule called a Bittour.

Zaramella, as Ciaramella.

Zaramelláre, as Ciarmelláre.

Zaránto, a Greene-finch.

Zaráre, to play at hazards or throw hazards, to nike at hazard. Also as Cianzáre.

Zaratanáre, as Ciarlatanáre.

Zaratáno, as Ciarlatáno.

Zarauánda., Looke Incantonáre.

Zárba, a skipping, skittish, leaping wench.

Zarbattána, as Zabratána.

Zarchielláre, to weed, to rake or to harrow.

Zarchiello, a weeding hooke.

Zárda, a disease or kind of swelling that comes in horses legs and feete.

Zardóso, a horse that hath the disease called Zárda.

Zardíno, as Giardíno.

Zarlétte, cases in which Gunners shoot haile-shot.

Zaróso, grauely, rugged, gretty, sandy, stony. Also crabbed, thorny, hard, rough, dangerous.

Zárra, a Iarre of Oyle. Also stony grauell or course sand. Also a certaine implement that Apothecaries vse.

Zarróso, as Zaróso.

Zaruóli, a disease in a Hawkes mouth. Also casting stones for a Hawke.

Zarzaparíglia, as Salsaparíglia.

Zarzecáno, a kind of course cloath that Moores make and weare.

Zathene, a kinde of stone like Amber, now blacke, now yellow.

Zátta, as Zámpa. Also as Záttera.

Záttara, as Záttera.

Zattáre, as Brancáre, as Zampáre.

Záttari, as Zátteri.

Zátte, a kind of Gourd that is neither a Pumpion nor a Pepone nor a Muske-Melon, and yet very good to eat raw as Melons bee.

Záttera, a company of plankes, boords or peeces of timber tied together with withes and so conueighed downe the streame of Riuers, being steared and directed by men with long pooles, vsed in Germany instead of boates to carry marchandise and other things from place, to place. Also a flout boate or long boate to attend a great ship. Also a two hand or flat barrow made of boords or hurdles, to carry betweene two men.

Zátteri, those men that direct such floates or flat boates called Záttera.

Zauariáre, to raue or wauer in minde, to be humorous or giddy-headed.

Zauarióne, a wauering, a rauing, humorous, fond or giddy-headed fellow.

Zauátta, as Ciabátta, an old shooe.

Zauattáre, as Ciabattáre, to cobble.

Zauattáro, as Ciabattáro, a cobler.

Zauatteríe, as Ciabattaríe.

Zauattíno, as Ciabattíno, a cobler.

Zauórra, course stony grauell to ballast ships, ballast for ships.

Zauorráre, to ballast ships.

Zázzara, as Zázzera.

Zazzeáre, to stroake vp ones haire on the forehead. Also to play the fond conceited gull, or like a minion to goe idlely vp & downe stroking vp haire, handling of his forelocke, and courting of himselfe.

Zazzeatóre, an idle gazer vpon himselfe, one that courteth himselfe and takes pleasure to stroake vp his haire and shew his dangling lockes.

Zazzeíno, as Zazzeatóre.

Zazzeóne, as Zazzeatóre.

Zázzera, a bush, a tuffe or locke of haire of a mans head namely before.

Zazzeriéri, as Zánzeri, or as Zazzeatóre.

Zazzerína, a little bush, tuft or locke of haire vpon a mans forehead. 

Zazzeríno, as Zazzeatóre.

Zazzerúto, one that hath a bush, a tufft or locke of haire before.

Zéa, the corne Rie or Maslin, some take it for Spelt, others for Beere-corne or Beere-barly.

Zebe, the Plurall of Zebra.

Zebendále. 

Zebra, a Goate or a Kid, but properly a wilde beast as bigge as a Mule in Indie.

Zebíbo, as Zibíbo, dried Reisins.

Zécca, a Mint-house or place of coyning of money. Also a kind of Waspe, Hornet or biting Tike.

Zécca di búe, an Ox-tike.

Zeccáio, a Minter, a coyner, a Monoyer.

Zeccárda, to philip or phip with ones fingers.

Zeccardáre, to phipt or philip with ones fingers.

Zeccáre, to mint or stamp money.

Zécche, nits in the eie-lids. Also tikes that breed in dogs.

Zecchiere, as Zeccáio.

Zecchíno, a coine of Gold currant in Venice worth about seauen shillings and six pence sterlin.

Zedoária, the hearb Zedary or Wormeseede.

Zédola, a Quob, a Cob or Gudgeon-fish.

Zeduária, as Zedoária.

Zeffáta, as Ceffáta, as Schiáffo.

Zeffiro, the Westerne wind. Also the South-west-wind, called Zéphirus.

Zeganelle, such small and fine Networkes as Gentlewomen vse to make themselues and weare on their heads as caules.

Zeladína, vsed for Gelatína.

Zelamína, a kind of precious stone called a Zelamin-stone.

Zelánte, as Zelóso.

Zeláre, to haue a Zeale or earnest will to doe something. Also to be iealous, or so loue with iealousie that he will suffer none to be partaker with him.

Zelatóre, as Zelóso.

Zelo, Zeale, earnest affection, enuious loue or emulation, a iealous care.

Zelóso, zealous or affectionate, full of zeale and affection. Also iealous or carefully louing, and fearing lest the thing that he loueth should be common to another. Also hee that essayeth to follow another in liuing.

Zelotípia, gelosía & emulatióne.

Zemiláce, a kinde of stone greenish in the midst.

Zemína, a kind of fine damaske worke entermixed with gold vpon knifes or persian swords. 



Zenáre, chè sia béne legáta et Zenáta con filo di ferro.

Zendádo, Sendall or Taffata-Sarcenet.

Zendáli, the sendals or labels that hang downe a Bishops miter.

Zendálo, as Zendádo.

Zeníth, that point of the firmament directly ouer ones head wheresoeuer he is, called the verticall point.

Zénza, a great Horse-flie.

Zenzára, any kind of Gnat.

Zénzero, the spice called Ginger.

Zenzeneráta, a kind of Mermelade with store of ginger in it. Also as Fagioláta.

Zénzeuo, the spice called Ginger.

Zeo, a kinde of fish taken about Cáles in Spaine, called a Doree or Gold-fish very delicate in taste.

Zeóne, as Zeo.

Zephíria, egges deemed to be laid by the wind, called West-wind-egges.

Zephiro, as Zeffiro.

Zeppa, a clod of earth, a turfe of grasse, a lumpe of clay. Also a wedge. Also a shoare or vnder layer of wood made like a wedge to driue vnder some props or other thing. Also brimfull or topfull. Also withered and flaggie.

Zeppa a códa di róndine, a kind of vnder-laying wedge or toole of a Carpenters.

Zeppa-cauállo, a ground or common Thistle.

Zeppáre, to breake clods of earth, to make into turffes. Also to shoare vp and vnderlay with any thing made like a wedge. Also to fill brimfull, till it run ouer.

Zeppi zeppi, brim-full, top-full, heaped vp, as we say water-measure.

Zeppólla, a Ciboll or an Onion.

Zergo, as Gergo, Pedlers-french.

Zerlo, as Gierlo.

Zero, a figure of naught in Arithmetik. Also a iot, a whit, a crum, a nothing, a trifle, a flap with a Fox-taile. Also a kinde of Christall hauing white and blacke spots in it.

Zerzelíno, a kind of dainty plumbe.

Zessáre, to chalke, to marke with chalke.

Zesso, white Chalke or Marking-stone.

Zeta, the letter Z. Vsed also for a little chamber with windowes on three sides therefore to receiue light and the heat of the Sun in at.

Zette, the letter Z.

Zetti, the iesses of a Hawke.

Zeua, a kind of fruite whereof they make Oyle in India.

Zeugíte, a kinde of Cane so long and strong that they make poles and stakes of them. 

Zeugma, a figure whereby many clawses are ioyned with one Verbe.

Zezobráno, vsed for Saffron.

Zezzo, as Zesso. Also lag or last.

Zía, an Aunt, that is a fathers or mothers sister.

Ziazáa, a kind of stone which will make him that hath it see strange visions in his sleepe.

Zibeilíni, the rich furre called Sables.

Zibettáto, siueted, made sweet or perfumed with Siuet.

Zibettíni, Pomanders made of Muske or Siuet, Siuet-bals.

Zibetto, a Siuet-cat. Also Siuet.

Zibíbi, dried Reysons of the Sunne.

Zieggiáre, to Vnckle it or Aunt it.

Zifra, any kind of sipher.

Zifráio, Ciferer or Caster of accounts.

Zifráre, to cifer or cast accounts.

Zifratóre, as Zifráio.

Zífro, a kind of monstrous fish.

Zige, as Zígero.

Zigéna, a kind of monstrous fish.

Zigero, a kind of Cassia of a darke and purple colour, smelling like a Rose, and is much vsed in Physike.

Zigi, the wilde Betony growing vp in height.

Zígia, a kinde of Maple-tree. Also a kind of pipe in ancient times vsed to play on at weddings.

Zígno, the lesser Lizard.

Zigolo, a kind of water or fenny foule.

Zigríte, a kind of whitish stone.

Zigúlla, a fish, called in Latine Iulis.

Zilo, a tree in India which yeeldeth Balsamum.

Zillo, as Zigúlla.

Zíma, a neat, a smug or finicall woman, one whose care and felicity is to haue and weare gay and fine clothes. Also vsed for Címa.

Zimárra, as Zamára.

Zimbelláre, védi béne Zimbéllo.

Zimbelláta, any effect of Zimbello.

Zímbello, is properly an Owle bound to the ground who fluttering his wings makes other birds to come downe and light vpon lushes or limetwigs, and by metaphor a lure or inticing. Also a bagge full of bran, sawdust or grauell, bound to a cord, with which children in Italy at Shrouetide goe about and strike at poore Country people. Also a kinde of musicall instrument, Croud or fiddle. Also a wanton, alluring or effeminate fellow.

Zimíto, leauened bread.

Zimpípero, the spice Ginger.

Zinále, a childs bib or apron.

Zinciculáre, to chirpe as a Swallow.

Zinciuláre, to chirpe as a Swallow.

Zinfonía, as Zimphonía.

Zinganáre, to play the roguing Gypsie, to wander vp and downe the country rogueing and cheating with telling fortunes as Gypsies dot.

Zinganésco, like vnto, or of the nature of roguing Gypsies.

Zíngani, counterfeit Egiptians, runnagate Gypsies, roguing knaues which are thought by their witch-craft to be with folkes purces, and by telling mens fortunes and other secret meanes to picke away and cozen them of their mony. Also famous theeues.

Zingherlo, a kind of praying bird or rauenous foule.

Zínna, a dug, a pap, a teat, an vdder.

Zinnína, a kind of little pudding.

Zinziculáre, to chirpe as a swallow.

Zinzino, a bird called a Titmous. Vsed also for an Vrchin or Hedge-hog.

Zío, an Vncle, a fathers or mothers brother.

Zióllo, a greene Plouer.

Ziottáre, to hault, to limpe, to cripple.

Ziótto, as Zóppo, lame, halting.

Zípa, some part of a wheele.

Zípolo, a bung for a barrell.

Zipolla, a Ciboll, an Onion.

Zipolline, yongue Cibols or Ciues.

Zirbo, as Oménto, the cawle wherein bowels are kept.

Zirite, a stone which worne about ones necke stancheth blood.

Zisílla, a Swallow.

Zisilláre, to chirpe as a swallow.

Zíta, an Aduerbe to command silence, as we sey Isse, whost or s't. Also the name of a Saint much honoured in Lúcca. Also a girle, a lasse, a wench.

Zitella, a yong lasse, girle or wench.

Zitello, a yongue boy, lad or man childe.

Zítho, a kind of drinke made of corne in Egypt, like our Ale or Barly-water.

Zittáre, to whosht or command silence.

Zítto, whosht, still, mum, silent, any signe or word denoting or commanding silence.

Zizífo, the Iuiub or Bead-tree or the blossom and fruit thereof.

Zizípho, as Zizífo.

Zizíppa, as Zizífo.

Zizola, as Zizífo.

Zizola, as Zizífo.

Zízzalardóne, a licke-spit or picke-roste meat, a picker of good morsels.

Zizzánia, Iuray, Ray, Darnell or Cockie that growes amongst corne. Also discord, strife or contention sowen amongst men.

Zizzaniáre, to sow discord, strife or contention among men.


Zizzaniatóre, a sower of striffe, discord and contention among men. 



Zizzanióso, contentious, troublesome, full of strife or sedition.

Zizzorálla, as Zizifo.

Zóbbia., Vsed often for Thursday.

Zócca., Vsed as Ciócca.

Zoccáre, to stocke a piece. Also to reduce into logs, stockes or stumps.

Zoccarello, any little log, blocke, stocke, stumpe or trunke of wood.

Zocchétto, as Zoccarello.

Zócco, a log, a blocke, a stocke, a stump, a snag or shiue of wood.

Zoccolánti, certaine Franciscan friers that goe on high woodden pattens or startops.

Zoccoláre, to goe on woodden pattins, startops or galashes. Also as Zoccáre.

Zoccoláro, a maker of startops, galashes or wooden pattins.

Zoccolétti, little or low pattins, chopinos, startops or galashes of wood.

Zóccoli, woodden pattins, startops, galashes or chopinos, so called because they are made of a Zócco.

Zóccoli a scácca fáua, a kind of galoshes or chopinoes, open in the midst, tied with ribands, and close at the heeles.

Zóccoli Zóccoli, as we say in mockery, Tush-tush, away, in faith Sir no, or yea in my other hose. Also when speaking of any body in secrecy the party by chance commeth in, as the Latins say, Lupus est in fábula, so the Italians say, Zóccoli Zóccoli.

Zocconáre, as Zoccoláre.

Zocconáto, that weareth Zóccoli.

Zodíaco, the Zodiake, that is, that part of the firmament vnder which the Planets mooue, being a Circle about sixteene degrees broad, which the Ecliptike line cutteth in two equall parts, in which are the twelue signes or Asterismes, as Aries, Taurus, &c.

Zóia, often vsed for Gióia.

Zóilo, an enuious person, one that enuieth others.

Zoláia, the latchet or latch of a shooe. Also a spurleather.

Zólfa, solfa or prickesong.

Zolfanelli, matches to light a Candle with.

Zolfaríni, as Zolfanelli.

Zólfo, sulpher or brimstone.

Zolforeo, sulphury or sulphorous.

Zólforo, sulphur or brimstone.

Zolforóso, sulphury, sulphurous.

Zolfóso, as Zolforóso.

Zólio, a kind of small fish some what like a Calamary.

Zólla, a clod, a turfe or lump of earth.

Zolláre, to clod or grow together into hard clods or turfes. Also to tie or latch with a latchet.

Zóllo, a kind of fish.

Zollóso, clotty, turfie, full of clods.

Zombáre, to tosse vp in a blanket.

Zombáta, a tossing in a blanket.

Zomolibdéna, litharge or fome of Leade.

Zóna, a girdle or a belt, but properly taken for a certaine breadth in the Heauen or Earth from North to South, bounded out by some of the principall Circls, of the which there are fiue in all, the middlemost being betweene the two Tropikes is called Zóna tórrida, or the firy Zone, two that lie betweene the two Polare circles and his next Tropike, and they are called Zóne temperáte, or the temperate Zones, as being neither extreamely hot nor extreamely cold, and are most inhabited, the other two lye betweene the Polare circles and the two Poles of the world, and they are called Zóne frígide, as being extreame cold and little inhabited.

Zonára, an Ally or place to play at scales or nine pinnes in.

Zonáre, to girdle, to belt or gird and compasse about.

Zonella, any little Zóna, a little girdle or belt.

Zonétti, a kind of Venice drinking-glasses long and wide aboue.

Zóni, keeles, scales or nine pinnes to play at with a bowle.

Zoníte, a kind of Cadmia, hauing lines in it like girdles.

Zonzeáre, andáre a spásso., Looke Zónzo. Also to lie hulling at sea.

Zonzeóne, úno chè non fà chè andáre aspásso. Looke Zónzo.

Zónzo, any kind of recreating sport, glee, solace, pastime or idle play. Also Andáre a Zónzo, to goe or lie a hulling on the sea, as a ship when she hath no winde to saile by, or to goe a sporting.

Zoográphia, painting or describing of beastes.

Zoográpho, a Painter or describer of beastes.

Zophíte, that are in part liuing creatures, and in part plants, as Spunges or Oysters, &c. partly sensitiue and partly vegetatiue.

Zophiróne, a thing in forme of a border or girdle in which the shapes or diuers things and formes are wrought or grauen.

Zophtalmóne, Sengreene, Housleeke.

Zopíro, the hearbe called Pulioll of the mountaine, it is like a running Thime.

Zopiróne, as Zopíro.

Zopíssa, a kinde of ship-pitch or gumme scraped from ships that haue beene at Sea.

Zóppa, a clod, a clot, a turfe or lumpe of earth. Also a lame limping woman.

Zoppággine, lamenesse, haltingnesse, limpingnesse, criplenesse.

Zoppáre, as Zoppegáre.

Zoppegáre, to halt, to limpe or goe as a criple.

Zoppelli, as Zóccoli.

Zoppicaménto, a halting, a limping, a cripling.

Zoppicáre, to halt, to limpe, to cripple.

Zóppo, lame, halting, limping, cripple.

Zórlo, as Zorlútto.

Zorlútto, a Chough with red feete.

Zoronísio, a stone called the Magitians gem.

Zoronósio, as Zoronísio.

Zóstero, the disease we call shingles or as some say, Saint Anthonies fire or the running euill.

Zostéra, as Prasóne.

Zóstro, as Zóstero.

Zoticaménte, Zótico, as Zóttico.

Zottáre, to halt, to limp, to cripple.

Zottáta, a thumping blow, a bang.

Zotticaménte, clounishly, rustically, rudely, carter-like, bungler-like.

Zottichézza, clounishnesse, rudenesse, rusticity, blockishnesse, grossenesse.

Zóttico, clounish, rude, rusticall, blockish, homely, vnmannerly.

Zotticóne, a blockish, rude, rusticall, clounish or carter-like fellow.

Zótto, haulting, limping, cripple, lame.

Zóui, some part of a ship.

Zuáne, as Záne, as Zannuólo.

Zúcca, any kind of Gourd or Pumpion Vsed also metaphorically for a mans head, sconce, nole pate or scull. Also a scull or a head-piece or steele-cap. Also a kind of wine measure of about a pottle of oures. Also a kind of drinking-glasse. Also a salt-box, a bottle, or a Lanthorne. For in Italy they make such of the dried rindes of Pumpions. Also a casting bottle for sweet water.

Zúcca al vento, a witlesse-scull, an adle-head or shallow-braine.

Zúcca da sále, a salt-box made of a dried Gourd or Pumpion.

Zúcca fiaschétta, a flaske for Gunpowder.

Zuccáio, a place where Gourds grow.

Zúcca marína, a Turkie Coocomber or Sea-pumpion.

Zuccarína, a kind of drinking-glasse. Also a kind of bright Roche-allum. 



Zúccaro, any kind of Sugar.

Zúccaro di trè cótte, sugar thrice refined. Also, as wee say, a knaue in graine.

Zúcca saluática, as Vitálba. Also any kind of wilde Gourde.

Zúcca sénza sále, a sconce without wit, a noddy, a block-head, a shallowpate.

Zúcca spadáia, as Vitálba.

Zuccáta, a kind of meat made of Pumpions or Gourdes. Also any flim-flam tale or idle discourse without head or foote.

Zuccheráio, a Sugar-maker. Also a Confectionary or Comfet-maker.

Zuccheráre, to sugar, to candy, to confect, to preserue or dresse with sugar.

Zuccheráto, sweet, sugared.

Zuccheríni, all manner of pretty things made of sugar-paste.

Zúcchero, any kind of Sugar.

Zuccheróso, sweet, Candied, full of sugar.

Zucchétta, any little Gourd or Pumpion. Looke Zúcca, a little casting bottle.

Zucconáre, to pole, to not, to shaue.

Zuccóne, a shauen pate, a notted skull. Also a logarhead, a gullish pate.

Zúffa, a fray, a brawle, a quarrell, a bickering, a skirmishing, a riot.

Zuffáre, to quarrell, to brawle, to bicker, to skirmish, to make a fray.

Zúffo, any kind of whistle or pipe. Also some part of a horse.

Zuffoláre, to whistle or pipe.

Zuffoláta, any kind of wistling.

Zuffolatóre, a whistler, a piper.

Zuffolétto, any little whistle.

Zuffolíno, any little whistle.

Zúffolo, any whistle or pipe. 

Zuffuráre, to whistle. Also to whisper.

Zúgo, a gull, a ninny, a noddy, a silly foole. Also a darling, a wanton, a minion.

Zugóne, any great Zúgo.

Zúi, a kind of bird.

Zúppa, any kind of sop or sippet of bread in any drinke or broath. Also a messe of brewes.

Zuppáre, to sop, or sippet.

Zupparello, vsed for a little doublet.

Zúra, a White thorne berry.

Zúrlare, to scoffe, to mocke, to flout. Also to turne round as a top or whirligigge.

Zurlatóre, a scoffer, a flouter, a mocker.

Zúrlo, any kind of top, twirle, gigge nunne or whirligigge as children play withall. Also a round or turning trick in dansing. Also a giddinesse or dizzinesse in the head. Also a gull, a noddy or a ninny.

Zúrma, as Ciúrma.

Zurmáglia, as Ciurmáglia.

Zurmáre, as Ciurmáre.

Zurmatóre, as Ciurmatóre.

Zurnáppa, as Giráffa.

Zurumbet, a kind of strange tree.

Zúzo, vsed for an Owle or Howlet.

Zuzzáre, as Succiáre, or Succhiáre.

Zúzzos, a kind of beast very good to eat, fashioned like a Cunny, which carrieth hir yongue ones in a bag that hangs at hir belly.

Zuzzulíno, a kind of reddish colour called a Gingerline colour. 


X.
XA'gue, a kind of tree in India, the iuice whereof dieth all things blacke. 

Xanthéne, a precious stone like to Amber.

Xánto, a whitish stone, the ground wherof is of a yellowish tauny.

Xarbíle, a Turkish word, as much to say perforce.

Xéno, an Hospitall or Spittle.

Xenódio, as Xéno.

Xenoféggia, the first Moone in September so called of the Grecians.

Xerolíphio, a Sepulcher made of stones for Princes to be buried in.

Xerophtalmía, sorenesse or smarting of the eies.

Xífio, as Xíphio, or Xíphie.

Xilína, a kind of Linnen-cloath made of Gossipióne or Xilóne.

Xilobálsamo, the wood of the Balme-tree.

Xilocinamómo, the wood of the Cinamond-tree.

Xilóne, as Gossipióne, which is a kind of Cotten or Bumbace.

Xilophágo, a worme breeding in timber.

Xilophiláce, a Wood-man or Forrester.

Xíphie, blasing Starres short and sharp-pointed in the top, shaking and brandishing like a Darte, and very swift.

Xíphio, the Sword-fish or Emperour of the Sea, so called because it hath a beake like a sword. Also the weed Stinking-gladen or Spurge-wort, or as some say Glader or Flags.

Xiphióne, as Xíphio. Also Spurgewort.

Xistióne, a kind of precious stone.

Xistóne, a place of exercise in faire weather, a wrestling-place.





