





l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 1 2 8 8 9

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )




A Methode or comfortable
beginning for all vnlearned,
whereby they may bee taught to
read English. in a very short time,
With pleasure: So profitable as
straunge, put in light, by
I. H. Chester
Heralt.

Reason, the Mother of al humain perfections
Order, the Nurse of all humain perfections
Experience, the Teacher of all humain perfections

¶ Imprinted at London,
by Henrie Denham.
Anno. 1570.







The Preface.






Nowe in
what maner we doe misname our letters, you may vnderstande
by that which followeth. As for example. For such as are learned
in the names of things, by termes of other languages than their
mother tongue, and yet vnderstanding thereby the thing ment,
no doubt but they finde it sufficient for them so to vse the same
names they haue learned, though vnderstanding the etymologie
and meaning of such termes by their owne speach, they may well
thinke howe it shoulde giue the hearers (being onely acquainted
with their mother tongue) the better signification of the thing
wherfore it is spoken. But it must needes be, that eyther blind af­
fectation in some, and nice curiositie, or vaine initation in others,
haue caused our predecessors to consent to certaine straunge ter­
mes, when their owne mother speach might much better expresse
the qualitie of the thing (from the mother and nurse) to their suc­
cession. Howbeit, I must confesse it beautifieth an Orators tale,
which knoweth what he speaketh and to whome: but it hindereth
the vnlerned from vnderstanding of the matter, and causeth ma­
ny of the Countrie men to speake chalke for cheese, and so nick­
name such straunge tearmes as it pleaseth many well to heare 
them: 
as to say for temperate, temporall: 
for surrender, sullender:
for stature, statute: 
for abiect, obiect: 
for heare, heier: 
certisfied, for
both certified, and satisfied: 
dispence, for suspence: 
defende, for of­
fende: 
surgiant, for surgian: 
which the French and we doe vse
Biscuyte, which signifieth twise baekt: 
and for the Ouen heeder, 
furner, deriued from Four an Ouen: 
Barbier of Barbe, we saye
Barber, which deriued from the Englishe Primitiue Bearde,




should by the like reason be in English bearder: 
the like for Rasoer a
shauer, or euen maker:

"euen maker" not found in OED.

 
Furbisseur, a Skowrer: 
Cutteleir, a
Kniuer, or knife maker:

"kniver" not found in OED; and "knife maker" antedates the earliest OED citation (1632).

 
a garde or warde, a keepe or defence:
a Gardebras, or wardebras, an arm keeper:

"wardebras" and "arm keeper" not found in OED

 
Portier a gate
wayter, or gater:

"gate waiter" and "gater" not found in OED.

 
a Porteur, a bearer, or a burdener: 
a Pantier, or
Pantler, a Breadseruer:

"Breadseruer" not found in OED.


a Bottellier, a Bottelseruer:

"Bottelseruer" not found in OED.

 
Cordoa­
nier, a Shoomaker: 
a Marenier, a Seaman, or sayler: 
a Scribe, or
Scriuener, a writer: 
a Plumber, of Plumb for Lead: 
a Tailour,
 a cutter, or shaper, as we say for the woman, Shapester:

"Shapester" not found in OED.

 
a Mar­
chaunt a Monger: 
a Lauandier & Lauandiere, a washer, 
and ma­
ny others. And yet were our Predecessours contented for infinit
other wordes, 
as Arbalestraier, for Crossebowmaker: and such
like (as easie in French, as those aboue) to kepe them in their mo­
ther tongue, as good reason was, except they woulde haue chaun­
ged the whole Englishe Saxon language, to the French tongue,
or nere vnto it. These and such like hinderances to the rude, haue
so long continued, as they are hard to be reformed. And though
the rude doe endeuour to immitate the learned, though it be to a 
contrarye sence: yet I meruaile howe by any meanes the lyke
shoulde come in print, seeing it doth passe so many handes, 
as for
this worde Mestier in French, signifying a handie craft, I finde
imprinted by the worde misterie, signifying a worde or ceremo­
nie, sounding or shewing one thing, and meaning another.

And others there are of farre West, or North Countryes,
which vse differing English termnes from those of the Court and
London, where the flower of the English tongue is vsed. And of
some such one come to any good learning, by great continuance,
and putteth some worke in print, his authoritie maketh many a
rude English worde to be printed. And greatly they are not to be
blamed, bicause they thinke they do for the best: for fewe men
knowe of diuers wordes signifying one thing, which shoulde be
the best, and most meete to be preferred: except it be such as are
learned, and therewith much exercised with hearing, speaking,
and writing of the best: 
as for these wordes, the tone part and
the tother, who doubtes but it should be written, that one part,




and that other, and some will say and write, my thother, and thy
tother: 
we vse to say, commaundment, why should we be bounde
to write it as the Frenche worde is spoken commaundement,
 and infinite others which I doe omit at this time.





