



A COMMENTARIE OR EXPO­
sition of certaine proper names vsed in this Tale.



HArtfoord-shire: so called of the town.
King Alfred was the first that de­
uided this Land into Shires, Hun­
dreds, and Tenthes, whereby hee re­
pressed the outrages and robberies
which the English men (following
therein the Danes) committed one
vpon another. Hee appointed that e­
uery man should be in some hundred
or tenthe, and if he were accused of any offence, if he found not in
his hundred or tenth a suertie or pledge for hunself, he was grie­
uously punished: hereby he brought to passe, that hanging gol­
den bracelets by cros-waies, there was none durst steale or take
them away. This Shire aboundeth in plenty of corne, pasture,
medowes, water and woods: and hath in it 120 Parishes.
Hartfoord.

Lee, called also Lygan, Lygean and Luy.
Lee.

Caister. A riuer in Boetia, where is supposed the fairest and
largest Swannes doo breede.
Caister.

Fanshaw. One of the remembrancers of her Maiesties court
of Exchequer, an vpright Iusticer, and one that especially ten­
dereth the profit of Ware, whereof he hath purchased the Lord­
ship.
Fanshawe.

Ware. 
Ware. Builded in the yeare of our Lord 914. by K. Edward
the sonne of K. Alfred. This towne since the building thereof,



hath greatly increased, and by procuring to themselues the free
passage of their bridge, greatly hindred the Shire-towne of
Hartford: For in old time the bridge was chained and kept
by the Bailiefe of Hartford, but in the time of King Iohn,
when the Barons warred one against another, and against
the King himselfe. The townesmen trusting to their Lord
Wake, brake the chaine, and haue euer since enioyed their pas­
sage, whereby it is greatly encreased, and is likely still to doo
aswell, for that by means of the Lord Treasaurer, the riuer is
made passable for boates and barges, as also through the dili­
gence of the Townesmen, who, with helpe of M. Fanshaw haue
erected a newe markette house, with entent to procure cer­
taine Fayres to be helde there yeerely. The Bridge was reedi­
fied lately, and the arches made of stone at the charges, viz.
140. poundes geuen by her Maiestie. The rest by the towne
and Countrie.

Thames, the chiefest riuer of England: the name is deriued
of Tame and Isis, which rising in Glocester-shire, runneth to
the towne of Tame, where ioyning together, they make the
Thames, whereof read Leland or M. Harison in his descrip­
tion of Britaine.
Thames. 

Seuerne, a riuer that arriseth in Wales, passeth by Mount­
gomery, Shrewsburie, Brydgenorth, Bewdly, Worcester, Glo­
cester, and Bristoll: it parteth Wales and the West countrey,
and falleth into the sea betwyxt Mylford hauen and Padstow:
The course of this Riuer, as also the rest require a speciall
treatise,
Seuerne, 

Humber, or rather Hull, falleth into the Sea at Rauen­
spur, and ariseth out of sundrie Riuers, whose confluence make
a mighty water. &c.
Humber,

Trent is one of the most excellent riuers in England, and
as M. Harison saith, increased with so many Waters, as it
seemeth, it may be compared with Seuerne or Owse, of which
Riuer, whosoeuer is desirous to see or read more, may find the
same in M. Harisons workes, and therefore I omit to speake
further of it.
Trent. 



Cynthia, the Moone.
Cynthia,

Endymion, a shepheard, who (as the Poets faine) was cast
a sleepe vpon the hill Latmos an hundred yeares by the Moone,
to the intent she might inioy his loue.

Verolane.

Verolane, called by Antonine, Verolanium, of Tacitus, 
Verulanium, of Ptolomy, Verolattium: The Saxons called it
Watlingchester of the high-way called Watlingstreete, & Wer­
lanchester of the riuer Werlam that ran by it. And yet it is cal­
led Verulam, albeit there be nothing left but the ruines and rub­
bish of the walles. It hath bene a citie in olde time of great and 
especiall account, well walled, and defended with a great fishing 
pond, which wel neer did compasse it. There is yet to be seene 
(as M. Camden saith) ancient coyne with this inscription, Tasc 
Verul: which Doctor Powell interpreteth to be Tributum Ve­
rulamij for Tasc in walsh signifieth tribute, and Tascia a tri­
bute penie. This citie was greatly distressed in the time of Ne­
ro the Emperour, by the warres which Bundwica the Queene 
made against the Romans, as may easily appeare to such as 
be any thing at all conuersant in reading the Romane histories: 
yet did it flourish againe, and continued in good estate, and a­
mong other thinges famous, for bringing foorth to the world, 
Albon the Prothomartir, or first martyr of this land, of whome 
M. Gerard Leigh in his accidence of armorie wryteth. Albon
was knight of the Bath, and Lord of Verolane, nowe called 
Saint Albons: who in his youth, for the honour of this realme 
made a royall chalenge of Iustes at Rome, and did there 
other Knightly disportes in Armour, where hee had onelye 
the prise, and was made Knight by Dyoclesian then Empe­
rour of Rome, who had this Realme then in subiection.

   This Albon was Prince of Knightes, and soueraigne
Steward of Brittaines: and after was conuerted to the faith 
of Christ by Amphybalus that holy Knight, who went to
Rome with Bassianus the Sonne of Seuerus in the com­
panie of 1500 of the chiefe Lordes sonnes of Brittaine 
and Cornewall, where Zepherinus then Bishop, priuily instru­
cted him in the fayth of Christ, which, at his returne, he taught



to Albon in such sort, that openly professing the same, they were 
in the time of the Emperour Dyaclesian hath martired. Wher­
of you may reade in Gildas and Bede. After this, the Citie was 
yet in good estate, vntill the time of the Saxons, when Octa
and Oesa taking it for their refuge, were besieged by Vther 
Pendragon,, who brake the walles and defaced it. After this, by 
litle and litle it languished, so that it became a deane or harbour 
of theeues and harlots vntill King Offa, about the yeare of our 
Lord 793 builded an Abbey in honor of S. Albon, in a place 
called Hamlehurst: hencefoorth the olde citie decaied, and S. 
Albons flourished. And Alfricke the seuenth Abbot of the house, 
bought the fishing pond of the King: and for that the Fisher­
men dayly endomaged the religious people, it was with great
cost drayned, & made drie. There remaineth at this day a street 
in S. Albons, called Fishpoole street: and for that there hath  	 	
bene found about the Citie, Anchors, keles of beates, old nailes 
and such trash, some haue supposed the Thames to haue runne
that way, which errour grewe by corruption of Gyldas booke, 
where he mentioneth of S. Albons death: but it is not so: but 
heare what ancient recordes doo testifie concerning the same.

   In the time of King Edgar, when Aegelred was Abbot, he 
caused the ruines of Verolane to be searched, the vaultes to bee 
vncouered, and the pauements to be digged vp: where he found 
Pillers, peeces of antique worke, thresholds, door-frames, pil­
lers for windowes of fine masonrie worke, some of Porphyrie, 
some Touch, some Alablaster, all which were verie conuenient 
for his purpose: besides, hee found sockets of Lattyn, and of
brasse, with diuers other thinges which hee reserued towardes
the foundation of a new abbey, which he intended to build. But
being preuented by death, Edmerus his successor digged a­
gaine, and found Idols, Altars richly couered, Iugs and cruses
with pots, some of wood, some stone, and some gold, artificially
wrought and carued. And proceeding farther, hee found pots of 
gold, siluer, and some of brasse, some with coyne, and some with 
bones and ashes of such as haue bene burned or buried: all 
which were reserued, and the mettels melted, and kept for this



new Abbay which beyng at last finished was indowed with great 
store of liuinges and manifold priuileges, and the new towne of 
S. Albons dayly more and more increased, famous as well for 
the Abbay, as also for two notable ciuill battailes fought there, 
during the faction betwixt the two great houses of Yorke and
Lancaster. Thus much of Verobane whereof more might be 
said, which for breuitie sake I omit.

Bishops Hatfield or Hethfield. Iohn Morton bishop of Ely
builded there a house which nowe belongeth to her Maiestie.
Bishops Hat­
field, or Heth­
field.

Hunsdon as · Leland reporteth belonged once to the Bohuns
and Bernyers from thence to the Howards, The duke of Northf,
suspecting that a tower of the house would fall by reason of the 
height, tooke downe a part therof. And king Henrie the eight 
making an exchange with the Duke, newly reedified the house 
since whose time it is honoured with the title of a Baronnie,
which Henry Cary, Lord Chamberlaine of her Maiesties hous­
hold, liefetenant of Northfolke and Suffolke, and Captaine of
Barwike at this day enioyeth.
Hamdon. 

Hartfoord. 
Hartford called by Antonine & the Romans, Durocobriuas,
the Brittaines or Welshmen call red water Dur Cob, & Briua,
aswelwith them as also with the antient Galls signifieth ouer the 
water, as Briua Odera, Briua Issara which signifie passages 
ouer riuers of the same name. The Saxons called it Herud­
ford as in one booke remaining with Iohn Stowe (a diligent
searcher and preseruer of antiquities, it is written Heorutford.
Bede in the fourth booke of his Ecclesiasticall history mentio­
neth how Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury held a Synod 
or prouinciall counsell at Herudford, Anno. 670. but now it is
corruptly (as I thinke) called Hartford, which Leland inter­
preteth Cerne vadum the foord of Hartes it hath bene in olde 
time of good account, as well by reason of the castelles, also of
the priory the Castel was builded first by Edward senior in the
ninth yeare of his raigne as Henry Huntington saith, whose 
wordes be, Edwardus Anno. 9. regum sui construxit Herefor­
dium castrum non immonsum sed pulcherinum tamen in­
ter Beneficitio, Memeran, & sligran flumina non profunda 
sed clarissima tamen. This castle hath once been increased



by the Clares, and then by the Dukes of Lancaster, for Roger de 
Clare in Henry the second his time was created Erle of Hart­
ford. And Robert Fitzwalter that came of the same house in
king Steuens time did boldly affirme that the keeping of the 
Castle did of right belong vnto him: Henry the third gaue the 
Castle with the honour belonging to it to William Valence 
Erle of Penbroke, Anno. 1247. After it fell to the Dukes of 
Lancaster, who vsed to lodge at it verie often. In the yeare of 
our Lord 1357, the Queene of Scottes, sister to king Edward 
the third departed this life, lying at Hartford with her sister in 
law, the Queene of England, and in the yeare 1458 for a fray 
made in Fleetestreet in London, the king sent the principals of 
Clifford, Furniuall, and Barnardes In, as prisoners to Hart­
ford castle. King Henry the sixt vsed often to keepe his Christ­
mas there: and to conclude, king Edward the sixt was nursed 
and schooled there.

   The priorie was builded by Ralfe Lord Lymesey, who came 
into England with William the Conquerour, and was (as the 
Monkes reported) his sisters sonne.

   The townesmen of late haue procured to themselues a new
corporation, and haue on the Saterday a good market and eue­
ry yeare three faires. In Edward the 3. time, as I haue seene 
in an olde record, they had two markets in the weeke and but 
two fayres.

   In the time of Henry the eight viz. 1507 there was a paper 
Mill at Hartford, and belonged to Iohn Tate, whose father 
was Mayor of London.


Waltham, a market towne: the Abbay was builded by
king Harold, who shortly after hee had built it was slaine by
William the conqueror, his mother with great and earnest sute
obtained his body, and intoumbed the same in the Abbay.
Waltham

Aelners Crosse commonly called Waltham crosse. K. Henry 
the first set it vp in memory of his wife (who died in Lincoln­
shire) and wheresoeuer her body was caried, there hee erected 
a crosse with the armes of England, Castile and Pontoys, geuen 
on the same, of which the crosse in Chepe, and Charing crosse 
be two of the fayrest.
Aelnors 
Crosse. 



