





l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 5 7 1 1

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )



THE
ENGLISH SCHOOLE­
MAISTER,

Teaching all his Scholers, of what age
soeuer,the most easie, short, and perfect order of
distinct reading,and true writing our English tongue
that hath euer yet been knowne and
published by any.

And further also teacheth a direct course,how any vnskilfull
person may easily both vnderstand any hard english words, which they
shall in the Scriptures , Sermons, or elsewhere heare or reade : and also bee
made able to vse the same aptly themselues. And generally whatsoeuer is neces­
sary to be knowne for English speech: so that he which hath this booke on­
ly,needeth buy no other to make him fit, from his letters, vnto the
Grammar schoole, for an apprentise, or any other his owne pri­ 
uate vse, so farre as concerneth English. And therefore 
is made not onely for children, (though the first 
booke be meere childish for them)but 
also for all other especially that 
are ignorant in the La­
tine tongue. 

In the next page the Schoole-maister hangeth forth his table, to the 
view of all beholders, setting forth some of the chiefe 
commodities of his profession.

Deuised for thy sake that wantest any part of this skill,by Edmond Coote  
Maister of the Free-schoole in Bury S.Edmond.

Perused and approued by publike authoritie.

AT LONDON 

Printed by the Widow Orwin, for Ralph Iackson and 
Robert Dexter. 196.















The Schoole-maister his 
profession.


I Professe to teach thee, that art vtterly
1
ignorant, to reade perfectly, to write 
truly, and with iudgement to vnder­  
stand the reason of our English tongue  
with great expedition, ease , and plea­  
sure. 

 I will teach thee that art vnperfect  
2
in either of them, to perfect thy skill in  
few dayes with great ease.  

 I vndertake to teach all my scholers, that shall be trayned vp for  
3
any grammar schoole,that they shall neuer erre in writing the true 
orthography of any word truly pronounced: which what ease and  
benefite it will bring vnto Scholemaisters, they best know : and the  
same profit doe I offer vnto all other both men & women, that now  
for want hereof are ashamed to write vnto their best friends : for  
which I haue heard many gentlewomen offer much.  

I assure all Schoolemaisters of the English tongue,that they shall  
4
The preface
will shew you 
how this may 
certainely and 
easely be done.
not onely teach their scholers with greater perfection : but also they  
shal with more ease and profit,and in shorter time teach a hundreth  
scholers,then before they could teach forty.  

I hope by this plaine and short kinde of teaching to encourage  
5
many to read,that neuer otherwise would haue learned. And so  
more knowledge will be brought into this Land, and moe bookes  
bought, then otherwise would haue been.  

I shall ease the poorer sort,of much charge that they haue been at  
6
in maintayning their children long at Schoole and in buying many  
Bookes.  

Strangers that now blame our tongue of difficultie and vncer­  
7
taintie, shall by me plainly see and vnderstand those thinges which  
they haue thought hard.  





 
I doe teach thee,the first part of Arithmeticke,to know or write  
8
any nomber.  

By the practise thereunto adioyned all learners shall so frame &  
9
tune their voyce, as that they shall truely and naturally pronounce  
any kind of stile eyther in prose or verse.  

By the same practise Children shall learne in a Catechisme the  
10
knowledge of the principles of true Religion, with precepts of ver­  
tue and ciuill behauiour.  

I haue made a part of a briefe Chronologie for practise of rea­  
11
ding hard words,wherein also thou shalt be much helped for the un­  
derstanding of the Bible, and other histories : and a grammar  
Scholer learne to knowe when his authors both Greeke and Latine  
liued, and when the principall Histories in them were done.  

I haue set downe a Table conteining and teaching the true wri­  
12
ting and vnderstanding of any hard english word, borrowed from  
the Greeke, Latine, or French, and how to know the one from the  
other, with the interpretation thereof by a plaine English word:  
whereby Children shall be prepared for the vnderstanding of thou­  
sands of Latine words before they enter the grammar Schole, which  
also will bring much delight and iudgement to others. Therefore  
if thou vnderstandest not any word in this Booke, not before ex­ 
pounded, seeke the Table.  

If I may be generally receyued, I shall cause one vniforme maner  
13
of teaching: a thing which as it hath brought much profite vnto  
the Latine Tongue,so would it doe to all other languages,if the like  
were practised.  

Finally,I haue giuen thee such examples for fayre writing,wher­  
14
by in euery schoole all bad hands may bee abandoned, that if thou 
shouldest buy the like of any other (which thou shall seldome find in 
England) they alone would cost thee much more money then I aske  
thee for my whole profession.  

If thou desirest to bee further satisfied, for the performance of 
these things; reade the preface where thou shalt also see the 
reason of some things in the first booke; which thou mightest 
otherwise dislike. 
 





 


The Preface for direction to 
the Reader.
 

OTher men in their writings (gentle Reader) may 
iustly vse such stile,as may declare learning or elo­
quence fit for a scholer : but I am enforced of ne­
cessitie to affect that plaine rudenes, which may 
best fit the capacitie of those persons, with whom I
haue to deale. The learneder sort are able to vn­ 
derstand my purpose , and to teach this treatise 
without further direction , I am now therefore to 
direct my speech vnto the vnskilfull, which desire 
to make vse of it for their owne priuate benefit : And vnto such men and 
women of trades (as Taylors, Weauers, Shop-keepers, Seamsters,and such 
other) as haue vndertaken the charge of teaching others. Giue me leaue 
therefore (I beseech thee) to speake plainly and familiarly vnto thee, yea 
let me intreate thee to giue diligent regard to those things which I shall de­ 
liuer vnto thee, I seeke nothing by thee,but thine owne pleasure, ease and 
profit,and the good of thy scholers. If peraduenture for two or three dayes 
at the first,it may seeme somewhat hard or strange vnto thee, yet be not dis­ 
couraged,neither cast it from thee :for if thou take diligent paines in it but
foure dayes,thou shalt learne many very profitable things that thou neuer 
knewest,yea thou shalt know more for the English tongue, then any man of 
thy calling(not being a Grammarian)in England knoweth:thou shalt teach 
thy scholers with better commendation and profit then any other,not fol­ 
lowing this order,teacheth : And thou maiest sit on thy shop-bord,at thy 
loomes,or at thy needle,and neuer hinder thy worke,to heare thy scholers, 
after thou hast once made this little booke familiar vnto thee. The practise 
and order of studie I know is a stranger vnto thee : yet must thou now bee 
sure that thou passe not ouer any one word, before thou well vnderstandest
it.If thou canst not finde out the meaning and true vse of any rule or word,
and hauing none present to helpe thee, make a marke thereat with a pen or 
Thus must I 
lispe, and poynt 
with the finger,
or not to be vn­
derstoode.
pin,vntill thou meetest with your Minister, or other learned scholer of whom 
thou maist enquire: and do not think it any discredite to declare thy want, 
being in a matter pertayning to Grammar,or other such things,as those of 
thy condition,are vsually vnacquainted with : rather assure thy selfe,that al 
wise men will commend thee, that desirest knowledge, which may reiect: 





 
and they which refuse to be directed,I know are such as delight in their sot­
tish ignorance,like Scoggens priest, who because he had vsed his old annuni­ 
simus for these dozen yeres,would not forsake it,for the others new assump­
simus, though it were neuer so good. Two things generally you must marke 
for the vse of this booke : first,the true vnderstanding of it for the matter: 
secondly,the manner of learning it,if thou be onely a scholer,then the or­
der of teaching it,if thou bee also a teacher. And for the first,where I pro­ 
fesse to teach with farre more ease and pleasure to the learner,and therfore 
with greater speede then other : vnderstand the reason. Thou hast but two 
principall things to learne,to spell truly any word of one syllable,and to di­
uide truly any word of many. For the first I haue disposed syllables so in the 
first booke (howsoeuer at the first sight they may seeme common) as that 
thou canst meete none but either thou hast it there set downe,or at least so 
many like both for beginning or end,as that none can be propounded vnto 
thee,which thou shalt not be skilful in. And I haue so begun with the easiest, 
proceeding by degrees vnto harder, that the first learned,all the other will 
follow with very little labour. These syllables knowne,because al words be 
they neuer so long or hard be made of them, thou hast nothing to learne 
but to diuide them : for which I haue layd downe so easie & certaine rules, 
(beleeue me that haue tried)as that thou shalt neuer erre in any hard word: 
I doubt not, but thine owne experience shal finde this true, and so my pro­ 
mise in that point performed to the full. Maruaile not why in this first book 
I haue differed in writing many syllables from the vsuall manner, yea from 
my selfe in the rest of the worke: as templ without (e),tun with one (n) and 
plums,not plummes,&c. my reason is, I haue there put no moe letters then 
are absolute necessitie, when in the rest I haue followed custome : yea, 
often I write the same word diuersly (if it be vsed indifferently) the better 
to acquaint thee with any kinde of writing. Touching the speeches at the 
end of the 1. 2. 4. 7. and 8. chapters,regard not the matter (being vaine)but 
my purpose, which is to bring thee to present vse of reading words of one 
syllable, which thou hast learned to spell, and so thou maiest haue nothing 
in the second booke to learne,but only diuision of words, and other harder 
obseruations. The titles of the chapters and notes in the margent (which I 
would alwayes haue thee diligently read and marke)will make these things 
more plaine vnto thee. 

Also, where I vndertake to make thee to write the true Orthographie of 
any word truly pronounced, I must meane it of those words, whose writing 
is determined : for there are many wherein the best English men in this 
land are not agreed.As some write malicious, deriuing it from malice.Other 
write malitious, as from the Latine malitiosus. So some write German  from 
the Latine,some Germain from the French. Neither do I deale with proper 
names,strange words of arte in seuerall sciences,nor the vnknowne termes 
of peculiar countries, (if they differ from ordinary rules) vnles sometime 
vpon some speciall occasion. I know ere this , thou thirstest that art a tea­ 
cher,to heare how thou maiest with more ease and profit teach a hundreth 
scholers then before fortie : follow mine aduise, and I warrant the successe. 





 
Let euery one of thy scholers (for the best thou hast shall learne that here 
which he neuer knew, neither needeth he any other for English) prouide
and vse this booke : then diuide thy scholers into 2. 3. or 4 sorts,as thy num­
ber is (for moe thou needest not, although thou hast a hundreth scholers) 
and place so many of them as are neerest of like forwardnes,in one lesson 
or forme, as in Grammar schooles, and so go through thy whole number, 
not making aboue foure companies at the most : so that thou shalt haue but 
foure lectures to heare,though thou hast an hundreth scholers,whereas be­
fore thou haddest fortie lectures, though but fortie scholers. Then when 
thou wouldest heare any forme,call them forth all,bee they ten,twentie, or 
moe together : heare two or three that thou most suspectest to be most neg­ 
ligent,or of dullest conceit,and let all the other attend : or let one read one 
line,sentence or part,another the next,and so through : so that all do some­ 
what,and none know,when or what shall be required of him,encourage the 
most diligent and tenderest natures. And thus doubt not but thou shalt doe
more good vnto twentie in one houre, then before vnto foure in seuerall 
lessons : for the apposing each other, as I haue directed in the end of the se­
cond booke, emulation, and feare of discredite, will make them enuie who
shall excell. By this meanes also euery one in a higher forme shall be well 
able to helpe those vnder him, and that without losse of time, seeing there­
by he repeateth that which he lately learned. Now touching the framing 
and sweete tuning of thy voyce, I haue giuen thee this helpe, I haue added
for prose al sorts of stile both dialogue and other:and for verse, Psalmes and 
other verses of all the seuerall sorts vsuall,which being well taught,wil frame 
thee to the naturall reading of any English. But here I must make earnest
request vnto all carefull Ministers, that as they tender the good education 
of the youth in their parishes , they would sometimes repayre vnto the 
schooles of such teachers as are not Grammarians, to heare their children 
pronounce , and to helpe such with their direction, that desire to vse this 
booke in their schooles: for it is lamentable to see into what ignorant hand­ 
ling sillie little children chaunce, which should at the first bee most skilfully 
grounded,which is the only cause of such wofull ignorance in so many men 
and women, that cannot write without great error one sentence of true 
English : therefore let parents now bee wise vnto whom they commit their 
children.

But to returne vnto my teaching trades-man, if thou desirest to be enfor­ 
med how to teach this treatise, marke diligently the directions giuen in all
places of the booke : and as thy scholer is in saying his lesson,marke what 
words he misseth,and them note with a penne or pinne,and let him repeate 
them at the next lecture, and so vntill he bee perfect,not regarding those 
where he is skilfull.And let his fellowes also remember them to appose him 
in them in their appositions. But me thought I heard thee say that my 
reasons haue perswaded thee to be willing to teach this : but thou canst not 
moue all their parents to bee willing to bestow so much money on a booke 
at the first: Tell them from me that they need buy no moe, and then they 
shall saue much by the bargaine. But they will reply, that his little yong 





 
child will haue torne it before it be halfe learned. Then answer him, that a 
remedie is prouided for that also, which is this : first, the Printer vpon the 
sight hereof, hath framed his horne bookes, according to the order of 
this booke, making the most part of my second page the matter thereof:
which in mine opinion he did with good reason: for a child may by this trea­ 
tise almost learne to spell perfectly in as little time, as learne well the other 
horne-booke. But this latter being first learned, being the ground-worke of 
spelling,all the rest of this worke will be gotten with small labour.Secondly, 
I haue so disposed the placing of my first booke,that if the child should teare 
out euery leafe as fast as he learneth it, yet it shall not bee greatly hurtfull, 
for euery new following chapter repeateth and teacheth againe all that 
went before. I hope if he bee a reasonable man that this answer will suffice. 
Touching my Chronologie and table,I haue before the entrance into them 
prefixed the manner how to vnderstand the vse of them, whereunto I re­ 
ferre thee,hauing been alreadie ouer tedious. For the particular ordinary 
sounding of the letters, I wholly omit, leauing it to the ordering of the tea­ 
cher, especially it being before sufficiently and learnedly handled by ano­ 
ther. Thus haue I so plainly pratled and lisped vnto thee, as that I hope 
thou vnderstandest my purpose, and single heart for thy good: which if I 
finde thou acceptest, I may peraduenture hereafter proceede in my course 
for the easie and speedie attayning the learned languages, an argu­ 
ment which as it is more pertinent to my profession, so might it 
rather be expected from me then this poore pamphlet.
But in the meane time, if in this thou finde my 
words true, accept my good will, and 
giue glorie to God.








A. a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. r.s.   
s. t. v. u. w. x. y. z. &. 

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O.  
P. Q. R. S. T. V. W. X. Y. Z.  

A.a.b.c.d.e.f.g.h.i.k.l.m.n.o.p.q.r.s.s.t.u.w.  
x.y.z.&. 

A. B. C. D.E.F.G.H.I.K.L.M.N.O.P.Q.R.  
S.T.V.W.X.Y.Z. 

A.a.b.c.d.e.f.g.h.i.k.l.m.n.o.p.q.r.s.s.t.v.u.w.   
x.y.z.&.   

A.B.C.D.E.F.G.H.I.K.L.M.N.O.P.Q.R.S.  
T.V.W.X.Y.Z. 

ff. fl.ffl.sh.sl.st.ss.ct.  









The first Booke of the English
Schoole-maister.



CHAP. I.


TEaching all syllables of two letters,beginning with the ea­ 
The titles of the
Chapters must not be
taught the scholers:but
onely direct the tea­
chers.
siest,and ioyning them together that are of like sound, as
you may perceiue by placing(c)betwixt (k and s)& coupling
them as you see : and then teaching to read words of two let­
ters.

When your Scholer
hath perfectly learned
his letters, teach him
to knowe his vowels :
And after two or three
daies, when he is skil­ 
full in them, teach him
to call al the other let­ 
ters,consonants:and so
proceede with the o­ 
ther wordes of art, as
they stand in the mar­ 
gent, neuer troubling
his memory with a new
word,before he be per­ 
fect in the old.

*c.Before a.o.u. like
(k) but before e. or i.
like s. if no other letter
come betweene.
Now you may teach
your Scholer, that he
can spell nothing with­ 
out a vowell.

 a e i  o u.
 Ba be bi bo bu.
 Da de di do du.
 Fa fe fi fo fu.
 Ga ge gi go gu.
 Ha he hi ho hu.
 La le li lo lu.
 Ma me mi mo mu.
 Na ne ni no nu.
 Pa  pe  pi  po pu.
 Ra  re  ri  ro ru.
 Ta  te  ti  to tu.
  Ka*  ke  ki   ko   ku.
  Ca   ce   ci   co  cu.
 Sa   se  si  so su.
 Za  ze  zi  zo zu.
 Ia  ie  ii  io iu.
 Ya  ye  **  yo **.
 Va  ve  vi  vo vu.
 Wa we wi  wo **.
 Qua  que  qui  quo **. 

  a  e  i    o   u
  Ab  eb  ib  ob  ub.
  Ad  ed  id  od  ud.
  Af  ef  if  of  uf.
  Ag  eg  ig  og  ug.
  Ah  eh  **  oh  **.
  Al  el  il  ol  ul.
  Am  em  im  om  um 
  An  en  in  on  un.
  Ap  ep  ip  op  up.
  Ar  er  ir  or  ur. 
  At  et  it  ot  ut. 
   Ak   ek   ik   ok   uk. 
   Ac   ec   ic   oc   uc. 
  As  es  is  os  us. 
  Az  ez  iz  oz  uz. 
  Ai   ei  **   oi **. 
  Ay   ey  **   oy **. 
  Au   eu  **   ou **.
  Aw   ew  **   ow **.
 Ax  ex  ix  ox  ux.

diph­
thongs

If we do ill : fy on vs all:  
Teach him that (y)
is put for (i) the vowel,
and make him reade
these lines distinctly.
Ah is it so: is he my fo?   
Wo be to me,if I do so.
Vp go on : lo I see a py,
So it is,if I do ly
Wo is me,oh I dy
Ye see in me,no ly to be.







CHAP. 2.


TEacheth to ioyne the two former sorts of syllables together,I
meane (ba : and ab :) and so the rest : with practise of rea­ 
ding the same sortes of words of three letters : And heere you
see that this,and euery new Chapter, doth so repeate all that 
went before,that your scholer can forget nothing.

Ba bab ba bad ba bag bar ba bat bay.
Here you may teach
your Scholer , to call
these wordes syllabls,
and that so many let­ 
ters, as we spell toge­ 
ther, we call a syllable.
And you may repeate
the first two letters,as
often as the capaci­ 
tie of the child shall re­ 
quire it : And for the
more pleasure of the
child, I haue vsed such
syllabls as are vsed for
English words.
Be bed be beg be bet.
Bi bid bi big bill bi bit.
Bo bob bo bon bos bo box boy.
Bu bud buf bug bu bul bur bu but buz.
Da dad dag da dam daw day.
De den det de dew.
Di did dig di dim din dip.
Do dog dol do dop dor dot dow.
Du dug dul du dun.
Fa fal fan far fa fat.
Fe fed fel fe fen few.
Fi fil fi fir fit.  
Fo fog fop for fo fox. Fu full fur.  
Ga gag gad ga gap gad gay. Ge ges get.
Gi gib gig gil. Go gob god got.
Gu gub gug gul gu gum gun gup gut.
Ha had hag hap ha hat haw hay.
He hed hel hem hen hew.
Hi hid hil him hi hip his hit. 
Ho hog hod ho hom hot hop.
Hu huf hug hul hu hum hur.
If now your Scholer
be ready in the former
termes of a vowell, con­ 
sonant, and a syllable,
you may now teach
him what a diphthong
is, especially those in
the former Chapter :
ai. ei. oi.au. eu. ou.
La lad lag lap la las law lay.
Le led leg le les let.
Li lib lig lim li lip.
Lo lob log lo lol lop los lot low.
Lu lug lu lul.
Ma mad mam man ma map mas mat maw may






Me meg men mes. Mi mil mis.
Mo mop mos mow. Mu mul mum mur.
Na nag nam nan nay. Ne nel net ne new.
Ni nib nil ni nip nit. No nod nor not now.  
Nu num nun nu nut.
Pa pan pas pa pat paw pax pay.
Pe ped peg pen. Pi pig pil pir.
Po pod pot. Pu pul pur pus put.
Ra rag ram ran ra rap rat raw ray.
Re red rew. Ri rib rig rim rip.
Ro rob rod ros rot. Ru rub ruf rug run.
Ta tap tar tax. Te teg tel ten tew.    
*In these kinde of
wordes of one syllable,
we vse only(e)before (a.
o. u.) and (k) before (e)
and (i) and not other­ 
wise, except in feyned
words,as Cis for Cicely:
Kate for Katherine,or in
some proper names, as
Cis the Father of Saule.
But we vse s. before any
vowels, therefore haue
I placed them as you see.

Ti tib til tin tip tit. To tog tom top tos tow toy.
Tu tub tug tun tut.
*Ca cal cam can ca cap cat.
Ke ket key. Ki kid kis kit.
Co cob cod cog co com cow coy.
Cu cud cuf cul cu cup cur cut.
Sa sad sag sam sa saw. Se sel set.
Si sip sir sit. So sob som sop sot sow.
Su sum su sup.
Ia iag iar iaw. Ie iet iew. Io iob. Iu iud.
Ye yel yes yet.
Va van vat. Ve vex.
Wa wag wan wat was wax way.
*This speech is made
onely of the wordes
taught before, where
you are not to regarde
the sence, being friuo­ 
lous,but onely to teach
distinct reading : And
this obserue in the
rest, making your scho­
ler to reade them per­ 
fectly, but not the titles
of the Chapters,nor the
notes in the margent.

We web wel wet.
Wi wig wil win. Wo wol wot. 
Qua quaf quat. Qui quil quip quit. 

*Boy,go thy way vp to the top of the hill, and get me home
the bay nag, fill him well,and see he be fat, and I will rid me of
him;for he will be but dull,as his dam,yet if a man bid well for
him,I wil tel him of it : if not I do but rob him : And so God
will vex me,and may let me go to hel, if I get but a iaw-bone
of him ill:







CHAP. 3.


SEtting downe onely all those syllables, that are of three let­ 
ters beginning with two consonants.

Bla ble bli blo blu.
Bra bre bri bro bru. 
Cha che chi cho chu. 
Cla cle cli clo clu. 
Cra cre cri cro cru. 
Dra dre dri dro dru. 
Dwa dwe dwi dwo *.
Fla fle fli flo flu. 
Fra fre fri fro fru. 
Gla gle gli glo glu. 
Gna gne gni gno gnu. 
Gra gre gri gro gru  
Kna kne kni kno knu. 
Pla ple pli plo plu. 
Pra pre pri pro pru. 
Sca  sce  sci  sco  scu. 
Here examine your
Scholer , what conso­ 
nants wil follow (b)and
let him answer (l. or r.)
and so practise him in al
the rest. For the more
perfect he is in them,the
more ease and benefite
you shall finde , when
you come to the rules
of diuision , in the se­ 
cond Booke.
I call(h) a consonant
here, and els where for
examples sake , which
properly is not so, to a­ 
uoide multitude of
rules.
Ska  ske  ski  sko  sku. 
Sha she shi sho shu.
Sla sle sli slo slu.
Sma sme smi smo smu.
Sna sne sni sno snu.
Spa spe spi spo spu.
Sta ste sti sto stu.
Swa swe swi swo *.
Tha the thi tho thu. 
Tra tre tri tro tru.
Twa twe twi two *.
Wha whe whi who whu.
Wra wre wri wro wru.
Squa sque squi squo squu.


CHAP. 4.


HEre are adioyned the sillables of the former Chapter, with 
Although I haue so
disposed these words,as
that the latter Chapters
are a repetition of the
former, yet wold I haue
Scholers in euery forme
say ouer in part,some of
that hee hath learned,
& appose one another
as I haue taught in the
last Chapter of the se­ 
cond Booke.
the second sort of those in the first Chapter,beginning with 
(ab.) And then teach to read words made of those sillables.

Bla blab. Ble bled bles blew.Bli blis.Blo blot.Blu blur
Bra brag bran bra bras brat bray.
Bre bred bret brew. Bri brim. Bro brow.
Cha chas cham chap chat. Che chew.
Chi chil chip. Cho chod chop. Chu chub.
Cra crab crag cram. Cre crew. 
Cri crib. Cro crop cros crow. Cru crum.
Dra drab draf drag dram draw dray. 






Dre dreg dri drip. Dro drop dru drum.
Dwe dwel.
Fla flag flap flat fla flaw flax. Fle fled.
Fli flit. Flo flot flow flox. Flu flux.
Fra fray. Fre fret fri frig. Fro frog from frow.
Gla glad glas. Gle glew. Gli glid.
Glo glos glow. Glu glum glut.
Gna gnat gnaw.
Gra graf gras gray. Gri grig grip. Gro gros.
Kna knap knaw. Kni knit.
Kno knop knot know. Knu knub knug.
Pla plat play. Plo plod plot plow. Plu plum.
Pra prat pray. Pre pres. Pri prig.
*Sca scab scan scar.
*I haue placed(c. &
k.) all as in the second
Chapter,although you
shall finde (k) written
before (a) and(u) as in
skarlet, skull, yet doe
the most exact writers
say scarlet,scull:but ka­ 
lender.
Ske skeg skep skew. Ski skil skin skip.
Sco scof  scot scul scum.
Sha shed shag shal. Shed shel shew.
Shi ship. Sho shod shop shot. Shu shun shut.
Sla slab slay sle slew.
Sli slid slim slip slit. Slo slop slow. Slu slut.
Sme mel.Smi smit.Smo smot. Smu smut.
Sna snag snap snat.Sni snip. Sno snow.Snu snuf.
Spa span spar. Spe sped spel spew.
Spi spil spin spit. Spo spot. Spu spur.
Sta staf stag star stay. Ste stem.
Sti stif stil stir. Sto stod stow. Stu stub stuf stur.
Swa swad swag swan swap sway. Swe swell.
Swi swig swil swim.
Tha than that thaw. The them then they.
Thi thin this.Tho thou. Thu thus.
Tra trap tray. Tre trey. Tri trim trip.
Tro trot trow troy. Tru trub trus.
Twi twig. (whom.
Wha what. Whe when whey. Whi whip. Who whol
Wra wrap. Wre wren. Wri wrig writ. Wro wrot.
Squa squab squad squat. Squi squib.






I met a man by the way this day, who when he saw me, hit
me a blow,that it did swell:for that I did not stir my cap when
I met him. But I fled from him, and ran my way : Then did he
fret and out-ran me,and drew out his staf , that had a knot on
the end, and hit me a clap on the scul, and a cros-blow on the
leg,so that I did skip at it : yet was I glad to know and to see as
in a glas my bad spot: And I will pray him, that if he shall see 
me so gros,and so far out of the way,that he will whip me wel,
that so I may know, what I am to do.


CHAP. 5.


SEtteth downe all syllables of fower letters beginning with 
three consonants : Secondly ioyneth them like the former
Chapter, with like practise of reading:Lastly teacheth syllables
made of diphthongs.

 Scra  scre  scri  scro scru.
Appose your Scho­ 
ler in these,as I willed
you in the third Chap­ 
ter for the same pur­ 
pose : the first of these
is euer (s, or th.)
Skra  skre  skri  skro skru.
Scla  scle  scli  sclo sclu.
Skla  skle  skli  sklo sklu.
Shla shle shli shlo shlu.
Shra shre shri shro shru.
Stra stre stri stro stru.
Spla sple spli splo splu.
Spra spre spri spro spru.
Thra thre thri thro thru.
Thwa thwe thwi thwo.

Scra scrap scrat.Skre skrew. Scru scrub. (shrub shrug.
Shra shrap. Shre shred shrew. Shri shrig shril. Shru
Stra strag straw stray.Stre stres.Strip.Strop.Strut.
Spla splay. Spli split.
Spra sprat. Spre spred. Spri sprig.
Thra thral.Thro throt.Thru thrum.

Ai ail fail quail stai staid brai brain twain way wait. 
Make your Scholer
knowe perfectly these
diphthongs : And vse
him to spel the two last
by their sound, and not
Bra brau braul scraul lau laud.
Toi toil boil spoil. Ioi ioin coin hoi hois. 
Ou our your out stout fou foul soul cloud hou hous.






F'ee f'eed bl'eed sh'ee sh'eep f'eet f'eel h'eel qu'een. 
call them double ee. or
double oo.
Bo boo book hook look hood stood good fool stool hoof.


CHAP. 6.


TEaching all syllables of three letters,that can end any word
with two consonants.

Abl ebl ibl obl ubl.
The former Chapters
doe fully teach to begin
any word : these are for
endings, which we call
terminations, therefore
here I am enforced to
vse syllables that are not
words.
Abs ebs ibs obs ubs.
Ach ech ich och uch.
Acl  ecl  icl  ocl  ucl.
Akl  ekl  ikl  okl  ukl.
Adg edg idg odg udg.
Ads eds ids ods uds.
Alf elf ilf olf ulf.
Ald eld ild old uld.
Alf elf ilf olf ulf.
Alk elk ilk olk ulk.
Alm elm ilm olm ulm.
Aln eln iln oln uln.
Alp elp ilp olp ulp.
Als els ils ols uls.
Alt elt ilt olt ult.
Amb emb imb omb umb.
Amp emp imp omp ump.
Ams ems ims oms ums.
And end ind ond und.
Ang eng ing ong ung.
Ank enk ink onk unk.
Ans ens ins ons vns.
Ant ent int ont unt.
Apl epl ipl opl upl.
Aps eps ips ops ups.
Apt ept ipt opt upt.
Arb erb irb orb urb.
force
with
re.
Ard erd ird ord urd.
Arf erf irf orf urf.
Arg erg irg org urg.
Ark erk irk ork urk.
Arm erm irm orm urm.
Arn ern irn orn urn.
Arp erp irp orp urp.
Ars ers irs ors urs.
Art ert irt ort urt.
Ash esh ish osh ush.
Ask esk isk osk usk.
Asl esl isl osl usl.
Asp esp isp osp usp.
Ast est ist ost ust.
Ath eth ith oth uth.
Atl etl itl otl utl.


CHAP. 7.


ADioyneth the syllables of the former Chapter, with the first
of the first Chapter, and others that begin syllables, with
such practise of reading as before.

Ba bab babl ga gab gabl rabl wrab wrabl scrabl.






Pe peb pebl. Bi bib bibl nibl dri dribl scri scribl.
Co cob cobl go gob gobl hob hobl.
Hu hub hubl stu stub stubl.
Cra crab crabs dra drab drabs stab stabs.
We web webs. Ri rib ribs.
Lo lob lobs so sob sobs. Tu tub tubs stubs.
*Ri ich rich whi which. Mu uch much su such.
*You may
sometime spell
this way,if the
word will be
more easie,
which is especi­ 
ally when the
word endeth in
(ch.gh. or sh.)
for then they
cannot well be
deuided.
La lad lads shad shads. Squa squads. Be bed beds peds.
Li lid lids. Go god gods rods.
Ba baf bafl snafl. Mu mufl shufl rufl.
Ha haf haft craft. De def cleft.
Gi gif gift lift rift si sift clift.
Lo lof loft soft. Hu huf huft tuft. (throug.
La lau laugh. Hi high nigh. Plo plou plough through
Da dag dagl gagl pagl wagl dragl stragl.
Gi gig gigl higl wri wrig wrigl.
Go gog gogl.Stru strug strugl.
Ba bal bald sca scau scaul scauld.He hel held geld.
Gi gil gild mil mild pild child wi wild.
Bo bou boul bould cold gold hould would should. Cu culd.
Ca cal calf half. Ralf.
Pe pel pelf self shelf twel twelf. Gu gul gulf.
Ba bal balk chalk walk stalk.
Mi mil milk silk. Yo yol yolk. Hu hul hulk.
Ba bal balm calm palm. He hel helm. Fil film. Hol holm.
Fa fal faln. Sto stol stoln swo swol swoln.
Sca scal scalp. He hel help whe whelp. Gu gul gulp.
Fa fal fals. Pu pul puls.
Fa fal falt sha shalt. Be beb belt felt melt smelt.
Gi gil gilt hilt milt tilt wilt spilt.
*La lam lamb kem kemb. Com comb.Du dumb thumb.
*After (m) we
vse to giue lit­ 
tle or no sound
to (b.)
Cam camp damp lamp cramp stamp. Shri shrim shrimp.
Po pom pomp. Du dum dump. Iu iump lump cump stump.
Da dam dams hams. Ste stem stems. Plu plum plums.
Da dau daun daunc fraunc iaunc launc chaunc.
Fe fen fenc penc henc qui quinc sinc. Ou oun ounc.
Ba ban band hand land sand wand. Ben bend lend spend send






Fi fin find blind wind.  Bon bond ho hou hound round.
Ha han hang. Si sin sing thing string.
Yo you yong strong wrong.  Du dun dung.
Ba ban bank rank blank flank frank shank.
Li lin link brink pink drink shrink.  Mon monk.
Pa pan pant plant gra graunt haunt.
Be ben bent lent ment rent went shent spent.
Di din dint mint flint splint.
Fo fon font wont. Hu hunt lunt blunt.
Da dap dapl grapl.  Ni nip nipl gripl.  
Co cou coup coupl.
Ca cap caps raps traps chaps.  Hip hips lips quips.
So sop sops tops chops drops strops.
Ca cap capt grapt lapt chapt shrapt. Ke kep kept.
Di dip dipt ript tipt slipt skipt tript stript.
Do dop dopt sopt topt cropt.  Su sup supt.
He her herb.  Cu cur curb.
Ca car card gard lard quard ward yard.
Be ber berd.  Gi gir gird.  Lor lord word.  Cu cur curd.
Ca car carf dwarf scarf wharf.  Tu tur turf scurf.
Ba bar barg larg charg.  Ve ver verg.
Di dir dirg.  Go gor gorg forg.  Su sur surg spurg.
Ba bar bark dark hark mark park clark spark.
Wo wor work.  Lu lur lurk.
Ba bar barm farm harm warm charm swarm.
Te ter term.  Fi fir firm.  Wo wor worm storm.
Ba bar barn warn yarn.  Fer fern quern stern.
Bo bor born corn torn.  Bu bur burn turn spurn.
Ca car carp harp warp sharp.
Ver vers wor wors.  Cu cur curs purs.
Car cart dart hart part quart wart smart swart.
Di dir dirt.  For fort sort, short.  Hu hur hurt.
*The reason of
this difference
I shewed be­
fore.
Da dash da* ash dash lash ra rash gna gnash.
Fre fresh.  Fi ish fish.
Gu ush gush push rush tush blush brush chrush.
Ca cas cask mask task. Des desk. Hu hus husk musk.
Fri fris frisl wrisl.  Mu mus musl rusl.






Ga gas gasp hasp rasp wasp.  Ri ris risp wisp crisp.
Cas cast fast hast last tast vast wast chast.
Be bes best ie iest nest rest west yest chest wrest.
Fi fis fist list wist.  Co cos cost host lost most post.
Du dus dust lust must rust.
Ra rat ratl pratl.  Ke ket ketl.  Ti titl spitl. Ru rut rutl.
Ba ath bath fay fayth hath lath path sayth wrath.
Wi ith with sith.  Do oth doth moth mouth south slouth.
Thru thrust.  Thre thresh.  Thro throng.
Thwa thwai thwait thwaits.

Tell me now in truth,how rich art thou?
What hast thou that is thine own.
A cloth for my table,a horse in my stable:
Both bridle and sadle,and a child in the cradle
But no bag of gold,hous or free-hold.
My coyn is but small,find it who shall:
For I know this my self ; it is all but pelf.
Both cow and calf; you know not yet half,
She doth yeeld me milk,her skin soft as silk.
I got with-out help,a cat and a whelp.
A cap and a belt with a hog that is gelt :
With a pot of good drink,full vp to the brink.
And I had a lark,and a faune from the park.
Thus much in hast,may be for a tast :
And so must I end,no vayn word to spend.


CHAP. 8.


Teacheth words ending first in three,then in fower consonants,
containing the hardest syllables of all sorts,with practise of reading 
the same.

Ca cau caugh caught naught taught.
Ey eyght.  Hei height weight.  Si sight bright.
Bou bought ought fought wrought sought.
Ru rug rugl rugls.






Bel belch welch.  Fi fil filch milch pilch.
Am amb ambl brambl.Scra scrambl.Ni nimbl wimbl.
Fu fum fumbl mumbl stumbl. Ni nim nimph.
Am amp ampl sampl trampl. Tem templ. Pim pimpl.
Pu pum pump pumpl crumpl. Pomp pomps. Pumps.
Ba *blanch branch panch.  Ben bench wench wri wrinch.
*For (a) here
many put(au.)

Can cand candl handl. Spren sprendl.
Ma man mantl spra spran sprantl. Grun gruntl.
Ten tenth.Ni nin ninth.De dep depth.
Ca cam camp campt stampt. Tem tempt. Stum stumpt.
Ki kind kindl spindl. Bu bun bundl.
An* ankl. Wri wrinkl sprinkl. Vn vncl
*We may put
(c)before (k )
not pronoun-
ced.
Man mangl tangl strangl wrangl. Min mingl singl.
Ga gar garb garbl marbl warbl.Cur curb curbl.
Ci cir circ circl.
Far fard fardl. Gird girdl. Hu hur hurdl.  (turtl. 
Gar gargl. Pu pur purp purpl. Ki kir kirt kirtl mirtl. Tur
Wo wor world. Cu cur curl curld.
Bu bur burst curst durst.
Ca cast castl wra wrastl.  Thi thist thistl. Iust iustl.
Da dash dasht lasht swasht. Pu push pusht rusht.
As ask askt. Cla clas clasp claspt.
Ca cat catch watch scratch. It itch witch.

Leng length strength. Eyghth weigh weights. (Worlds.
Words ending
in fower con­
sonants most
of them being
the plurall
number.
Hand handl handls. Spin spindls hardls girdls. Turtls.

As I went through the castl yard, I did chaunce to stumbl in a
queach of brambls, so as I did scratch my heels and feet, and my
gay girdl of gold and purpl: then I sought how I might wrastl out,
but I dasht my hands into a bundl of thistls, till at length by the
strength of mine arms, and legs, I wrought my self out, but did
catch a cough,and caught a wrinch in myn ankl, and a scratch on 
my mouth : but now am I taught whilst I am in this world, how
to wrangl with such as ar too strong and full of might for me.










The second Booke of the English
Schoole-maister.


Wherein are taught plaine and easie rules , how to deuide truly
and certainly  any long and hard word of many syllables, with
rules of the true writing of any word.


CHAP. 1.


In this Chapter are set downe the words of art vsed in this trea­
tise, with other necessary rules, and obseruations , especially for
words of one syllable,both for true writing and reading.

Mai-ster. 
I deuide your
syllables for
you, vntill you
haue rules of
diuision,and
then I leaue
you to your
rule.

Looke not for
any exact defi-
nitions,but for
such descripti­
ons as are fit
for children.
I make (h) a
letter for plain­
nes,which ex­
actly is none
but a note of
breathing.

DOe you think your selfe so suf-fi-ci-ent-ly in-struc­
ted,to spell & read di-stinct-ly any word of one syl­
lable,that now we may pro-c'eed,to teach rules for
the true and ea-sy di-ui-si-on of a-ny word of ma­
ny syl-labls?

Scho-ler. 
  Sir: I do not well vn-der-stand what you meane by a syl­
lable. 

Mai. A syl-lable is a per-fect sound, made of so ma-ny let­
ters,as we spell to-ge-ther: as in di-ui-si-on you s'ee are fow­
er syl-lables.

Scho. How ma-ny let-ters may be in a syl-lable?

Mai. A-ny nom-ber vn-der nine,as: I do say that welch knight
brought strength. 

Scho. What let-ters may make a syl-lable a-lone?






Mai. A-ny of the fiue vo-wels : a.e.i.o.u. as a-ny e-uill I­
doll o-uer tur-neth v-ni-ty. 

Scho. But Sir, I som-time find two vo-wels to-ge-ther
Diphthong.
in one syl-lable: what shall I do with them?

Mai. You must then call them a * Diph-thong, which is
*Teach that a­
ny two vowels
that will make
a perfit sound,
is called a
diphthong.
no-thing els, but a sound made of two vo-wels.

Scho. Will a-ny two vo-wels make a diph-thong?

Mai. No: *none that are ful-ly soun-ded but these : ai,ei,
oi, au, eu, ou, oo, ee: as in say, ei-ther, coin , taught , eu-nuch,
ought, good, feed.  Which when you find you must ioyn to­
For when one 
is little soun­
ded, I call them
improper
diphthongs.
(ae and &#156;) in
latine words
make a diph­
thong.
ge-ther, ex-cept in some pro-per names , as in Be-er-she-ba, 
Na-tha-ne-ell:so in se-eth, a-gree-ing, & in such words,where a
syl-labl be-gin-ning with (e or i) is ad-ded to a per-fect word 
en-ding in (e) as see, a-gree, de-cree. But aa, ao, oe, and such
like make no diph-thongs, and there-fore may not b'ee ioy­
ned.

Scho. Yet do I find ja,je,jo,ju, and va,ve,vi,vo, ioy-ned to­
ge-ther, as in Iames, Ie-sus, ioyn, Iu-das, va-lew, ve-ri-ly, vi-sit,
vow. I pray you, are they then no diph-thongs?

Mai. No: for j , and v, ioy-ned with a vo-well in the be-
gin-ning of a syl-labl, are tur-ned from vo-wels in-to con­
so-nants, as in A-hi-jah. 

Scho. What mean you by a Con-so-nant?
Consonant.

Mai. I mean all the o-ther let-ters ex-cept the vo­
wels which can spell no-thing with-out one of the vo­
wels, as take, e, out of strength, and strngth will spell no­
thing.

Scho. Why Sir (by) did e-uen now spell a word, yet is
there in it non of the fiue vo-wels.

Mai. Ind'eed (y) is of-ten v-sed for (i) when it is a vo-well :
but when they be con-so-nants they dif-fer, for (y) is al-so a
con-so-nant, when it is ioy-ned in the be-gin-ning of a syl­
lable with a vo-well, as in yes,you:so jet, dif-fe-reth from yet :
and such like.

Scho. I pray shew me the rea-son, why in (like) which
was the last word you v-sed, and in ma-ny o-ther be-fore,






you put (e) in the end, which is not soun-ded?

Mai. This letter (e) in the end of a word not soun-ded
(e) Not soun­
ded.
hath two prin-ci-pall v-ses.  The first and chie-fest is to draw
the syl-lable long, as he is made mad
A mill dam : A shrewd dame.
My man hath cut my horse mane. 
A great gap : gape wide.
Spare this spar . Be-ware of war. 
*Feed vntil thou hast well fed.
*In this sound
when (e) is
long, it is com­
monly doub­
led and made
a diphthong.
You feele not my paine.  A wasp is fell.
He hid the oxe hide.
It is a mile to the mill.
A little pin: my flesh doth pine.
A branch of fir, good for the fire.
A dor sitteth on the dore.
Tos the ball: Tose the wooll.
Make your
Scholers very
perfectin these,
therefore you
may try them
in other like.
You haue a Dot on the nose: and you dote.
Rud is not rude.
A tun of wine: the tune of a song.

Scho. What is the se-cond vse?

Mai. It chan-geth the sound of some let-ters : but this vse
with the fur-ther de-cla-ra-ti-on of this let-ter, be-cause it
is har-der, then you will at the first ea-si-ly con-ceiue, I will
re-ferre vn-to a-no-ther place.

Scho. Are no o-ther let-ters not at all, or but lit-tle pro­
noun-ced?

Mai. Yes , Very ma-ny:as (a) is not pro-noun-ced in earth,
Letters not
pronounced.
goat : nor (e) in Georg : nor (i) in briefe : nor  (o) in people:
nei-ther is (u) pro-noun-ced in guide : all which words
of all sorts , I will set downe af-ter-ward, when I haue gi­
uen you more ne-ces-sary rules in these three first chapters,
and you bet-ter able to vse them.







CHAP. 2.


By this Chapter you shall easylie and plainly know, how many 
syllabls are in euery word.

Mai. IF you di-li-gent-ly obserue these things, you can-not 
erre in a-ny word of one syl-lable : There-fore I will 
pro-c'eed in the di-ui-si-on of syl-lables,which if you wil care­  
ful-ly marke, you shal ne-uer fayle in di-ui-ding the lon-gest 
or har-dest word,that e-uer you shall read. 

Scho. That will as-su-red-ly bring me great pro-fit and
plea-sure; for when I m'eet with a long hard word, I sticke so
fast in the mire, that I can nei-ther goe for-ward nor backe­
ward. And I ne-uer yet hard that a-ny such rules haue b'een
e-uer yet taught by a-ny : I pray there-fore tell me what is
the first ge-ne-rall rule,the chie-fest ground of this worke.

Mai. Brief-lie it is this:Marke how ma-ny vo-wels you
haue in a word,and in-to so ma-ny syl-labls must you di-uide
that word,as in strength,ti-ed, e-spi-ed, sub-mis-si-on, sa-lu-ta­
ti-on, re-ge-ne-ra-ti-on, ex-tra-or-di-na-ri-ly, in which sea-uen
words, you haue as ma-nie syl-labls as vo-wels, and a-boue
sea-uen syl-labls, I re-mem-ber no word.

Scho. But I finde the con-tra-rie,e-uen in this rule, for in
these words, you.haue.briefe. are mo vo-wels then syl-labls.

Mai. It is well ob-ser-ued : there-fore, you must know,
that you can hard-lie finde a ge-ne-rall rule with-out some
ex-cep-ti-ons.

Scho. How ma-ny ex-cep-ti-ons hath it?

Mai. Thr'ee. The first is, when there is (e) in the end of a
word,or a-ny o-ther vo-wel not at all, or but litle pro-noun­
ced, as in chiefe.haue.thwite. where-in wee sound not (i) in 
chiefe,nor the last (e) in a-ny of them.

Scho. What is the se-cond ex-cep-ti-on ?

Mai. The se-cond is,if there be a diph-thong, as in may.
your. then haue you two vo-wels in one sy-lable.

Scho. Are there not thr'ee vo-wels in your? 






Mai. No, for I tould you be-fore, that (y) be-fore a vo­
well in the same syl-lable is a con-so-nant.

Sch. What is the third ex-cep-ti-on?

Mai. Words en-ding in (es) haue a-boue one vo-well, as 
Iames. pre-serues.al-waies.names.hides.bones. But of these
more shall-be said here-af-ter.

Sch. Shall I ne-uer els finde two vo-wels in one syl­
lable?

Mai. Yes, af-ter (q) al-way is (u) with a-no-ther vo-
well,as in quaffe.queen.quick. and some-time af-ter (g) as in
Gual-ter.lan-guage. o-ther-wise ne-uer,vn-lesse w'ee say that
words en-ding in (ven) as Hea-uen. e-uen. are of one syl-lable,
because we com-mon-ly so pro-nounce them.


CHAP. 3.


This Chapter teacheth plaine rules, how to diuide truely the
longest and hardest English word that you shall finde.

Sch. I Haue al-rea-dy with ease and cer-tain-ty lear-ned
*For the latter
syllable must
not begin with
a vowell, ex­
cept the former
end in a vo­
well.
to know how ma-ny syl-labls are in a-ny word, so
soone as I s'ee it, yet know I not how to di-uide them tru-ly.

Mai. Marke then these few rules fol-lo-wing, and you 
shall ne-uer fayle : The first is , if you haue two vo-wels 
come to-ge-ther both ful-ly pro-nounced, and no diph-thong 
you must put the*for-mer of them in the for-mer syl-lable and
Double conso­
nant.
the lat-ter of them to the syl-lable fol-lo-wing, as in tri-all.
mu-tu-all.say-ing.tri-umph. E-phra-im. Like-wise when the
*The Plurall
nomber.
same con-so-nant is dou-bled , they must be di-ui-ded in like 
man-ner , as, ab-bot. ac-cord. ad-der. let-ter, dif-fer. com­
mon, ne-ces-si-tie,&c. ex-cept when they be neede-les-ly dou­
I will now
leaue diuiding
those syllabls
which I haue
taught by rule,
the better to
bring the scho­
ler to present
practise.
bled in words of the plu-rall nomber,as in plummes,whippes,
hilles,cragges, for plums,whips,hils,crags. 

Sch. What mean you by the *plu-rall nom-ber?

Mai. When na-ming a thing, we speake of mo then one,
as one whip, we call the sin-gu-ler nom-ber, be-cause it spea­






keth but of one, and whips, we call the plu-rall nom-ber, be­
cause it spea-keth of mo then one.

 Scho. But What shall I doo, when I finde but one con-so­
One conso­
nant.
nant be-twixt two vo-wels?

Mai. a You must put the con-so-nant vn-to the vo-well
a Because the
former syllable
cannot end
with a conso­
nant,except
the syllable
following be­
gin with a
consonant.
follo-wing him, as in e-uer, i-nough, v-sed, be-cause,re-port, 
de-li-uer,re-ioy-ced, di-li-gent,re-ge-ne-ra-ting,ex-cept in some
com-pound words.

Sch.What kind of words be they? 

Mai.When two seuerall words , which we call simple
words are ioyned toge-ther, as in saue-gard, two syllables, 
not sa-ue-gard,  thr'ee syllables, b because it is made or com­
b We call that
simple that is
not compoun­
ded.
poun-ded of two seuerall words,  saue and gard, so where-of,
there-in, here-out, vn-euen, lame-nes, wise-ly,  where you must
note , that if the last part be an addition one-ly, and sig-nifie
no-thing as (nes) in lame-nes,  w'ee call that a deriuatiue
c The syllable
will keepe the
same letters, as
when he was
simple.
word,and not a word compounded.c

Mai.  Also (x) is put to the vo-well before him, as in ox­
en,ex-er-cise, ex-or-cists, the reason is, because (x)d hath the
d Therefore(x) 
is called a dou­
ble consonant.
sound of two consonants, (c. and s. ) and (cs.) cannot begin a
syllable.

Sch. What if there come two diuers con-sonants, be­ 
twixt two vowels?
Two conso­
nants.

Mai.  Then, if they be such as may, they must be ioyned, 
for those that can begin a word, must begin a syllable, in any
part of the word.

Sch. How then shall I know which con-sonants may be­ 
gin a word,and therefore must be ioyned ?

Mai.  If you turne back vnto the third Chap-ter of the
first booke , they are all set down toge-ther: but because I
would haue you very per-fect in these letters,I wil giue you
of euery one an example: as blesse,brew,child,clap,creep,draw,
dwell,flame,fret,glasse,gnat,grace, know,play,praise,scab, shall,
skip,slow,smart,snuf, spend, squib, stand, sway, that, trap, twain,
when,wrought. 

Sch. I pray now giue examples, how these must be ioy­






ned in words of mo syllabls?

Mai. Marke then diligent-ly these: re-store, not thus res­
tore, because if (st) may begin a syllable, it must : nor thus, rest­ 
ore. because a consonant, (if there be any) must begin the syl­
able: so in re-frain,ex-e-crable. and such like : But in god-ly, 
sel-dom, trum-pet,lod-ged, mor-ning,&c. the midl consonants
must be diuided,because none of these:  (dl.ld.mp.dg.rn.) can
begin a word.  Therefore can they not begin a syllable. A­ 
gaine you may not spell thus,  lodg-ed,  because  (ge) may be­
gin a word.

Scho. Is then the same reason to b'ee obserued, if there
Three or moe
consonants
come thr'ee or moe consonants together in the middest of a 
word?

Mai. Yea, altogether, for as many consonants as can, 
must be ioyned,and the rest diuided.

Scho. How many consonants may come in the beginning
of a word?

Mai. Thr'ee, and no moe: Therefore, if in the middest
there come fower or moe, they must bee diuided , although
fower may end a syllable, as in worlds.

Scho. How shall I be sure, which thr'ee may be ioyned ?

Mai. They are all set downe in the beginning of the fift
Chapter of the first booke.  But for more plainnes sake, I
will giue of euery one of them an example, whereof we haue
any ordinary English word, as scrape, skrew, shrink, stroke, 
split, spring, thrale, thwite.

Scho. Giue an example for diuiding of those words, where­ 
in many consonants come together?

Mai. One or two may serue, if you remember what hath
b'een taught.  As in this word constraine, you may not say
co-nstraine, nor cons-traine, nor const-raine, nor constr-aine,
but con-strain, because (ns) cannot begin a syllable, and (str) 
can,therefore it must begin it, so im-ploy, king-dom, de-struc­
ti-on,ac-know-ledg, trans-gresse, &c. And this rule must you
carefully still practise, that you may readily giue the reason
in all such words, why euery consonant must goe to this syl­ 
lable,rather then to that.  But still looke as before, that some






compound words must be marked,as mis-take. dis-like. trans­
pose. with-out. through-out. &c.  Which if they had b'een sim­
ple words, we must haue spelled them thus, mi-stake. di-slike.
tran-spose. as you haue learned, because in composition euery 
word must haue his own letters not mingled with other.

Scho. But Sir, some men spell deriuatiue words thus, 
speak-eth. strength-en-ing. otherwise then you haue taught.

Mai. I know it well, yet because if such like words
should be so spelled, we must for them frame new rules
(which were to bring a n'eedlesse oppression vpon childrens
memory.) And that the former rules can bring no inconue­ 
nience in any word : therfore follow them without feare or
doubt .  And thus may you by this that you haue learned,spell
truly,certainly,and with iudgement,any English word that
can be laid before you.

Scho. Although all men will grant, that these rules must
Obiection
of necessity bring a sp'eedie course of reading to as many as
are of y'eeres able to discerne : yet many will not easily be­ 
leeue, that litle children can conceiue them, and make vse of
them: And then will they rather bring confusion then profit.

Mai. But experience hath taught the contrary , for a 
Answer.
child of an ordinary capacity will and hath easily conceiued
these rules, being orderly taught .  But discretion must be
vsed, not to trouble them with any new  rule before they be
perfect in the old: The words of art here vsed are not aboue
eyght in all, the most of them I would haue the child learne 
while he is learning to spell , in the first booke, as I haue gi­
uen direction there in the beginning, which words there,and
rules here, being orderly taught as is prescribed, neuer doubt
by the blessing of God of a comfortable successe: Therefore
I wish that no man with a preiudicat opinion do reiect them:
before he hath made diligent triall vpon some ordinary wits,
But would haue all such as teach to reade, that they would
make their Scholers as perfect in the rules of these thr'ee
Chapters as may be, being of the chiefest necessitie and vse :
the other that follow because some of them b'ee more hard,
containing onely differences of sounds of our English let­






ters,and other obseruations for true writing, if your child be
very yong or dull, trouble him with vnderstanding no moe
Although
these three
Chapters be of
greatest vse for
readers, yet let
your Scholer
diligently read
the rest: for al­
though he doe
not vnder­
stand some of
the rules fol­
lowing, at the
first reading, 
yet he may at
the second.
of them, then he is fit to conceiue and vse, yet let him learne
to read them all, for if it were graunted that he could vnder­
stand none of them, no nor yet some of the former,yet whilest
he readeth them, he learneth as much, and goeth on as fast,as
by reading any other matter : For I demaund what he vn­
derstandeth, when h'ee readeth a Chapter in the Bible, yet 
will no man deny him profite by reading: And this hath made
me longer by the one halfe for plainnes sake, then otherwise
I might,knowing that in practising to read,he loseth not his
labour.


CHAP. 4.


This Chapter layeth forth a more full declaration of certaine
rules mentioned before,as of (e) in the end of a word:of those let­
ters which are not pronounced: and for writing words of the plu­
rall number.

Scho. I Remember you told me that  (e) in the end of a word
Of (e) in the
end of a word.
not pronounced , beside that it draweth the syllable
long, it also changeth the sound of letters, I pray which are
they?

Mai. It changeth the sound of these letters, u. c. g.  when
any of these vowels go before, as in au. eu. iu.ou. ac. ic. uc. ag. 
ug.  so in ng. rg. as in hau*. haue. leu. leue. lou.loue.  so caue. saue.
*Here u) with 
(e) hath the
sound of a
consonant. 
And (ce) is as 
(se) And when 
a short word
end in (c) we
vse to ad (k.)
salue. hiue. thriue.  so ac.  without  (e)  is sounded like (ak)  but ace. 
with (e)  like ase.  as in ac-cord but place. race.  so lic. lice truc,
truce.Likewise ag. age.  as stag stage. so cag. cage. so  hug. huge.
deluge. so  hang. strange.string. fringe.  so larg. large.  in most of
which (e) doth also draw the syllable long, as you saw in ag.
age. hug. huge.  Where you must marke that the sound which 
(g) hath in age and huge being long:in short syllables is made 
by putting (d)  before (g) as in badg. trudg.  So is it also when
(e.i.) or (o)  come before (g) as in leg. ledg. rig. ridg. log. lodg.
which vowels before (g)  are neuer long except in lieg. sieg.
which is by putting in (i)






Scho. But Sir, you haue vsed (e) in the end of many words
not sounded, when neither it changeth sound, nor maketh the
syllable long : why is that?

Mai. We vse it in d'eed often, but rather of custome, (as 
they say) for * beauty then of necessitie , as after (i)  but not
*Especially af­
ter (i) and (u)
as in espie, ar
gue.
after (y)  as in bie. by.  and after two consonants, or a con­ 
sonant doubled , as in article , angle, barre, chaffe , sonne, 
whereas the learned languages , neither double the conso­ 
nant,nor vse such (e):as the Latines say, mel.asse. ros.  we mell.
asse. rosse. And sometime, we vse not (e) when the word is
long, as after (ll) as in all, fall, shall : yea wee vse (as) longer
without (e) then asse with it.  Yet sometime we vse (e) after
two consonants, to draw the syllable long , for difference
Whereas some
would make
such words as
able two syl­
lables, and that
(c) in the end
make (bl) to
be as it were a 
syllable, I can
see no reason
for it.
sake,principally if the one of them be (l) as in cradle,ladle,least
they should b'ee pronounced short, like sadl, radl,  which some
men would distinguish by doubling (dd) as saddle. But it is
both vnusuall and n'eedlesse to write bibbl and chilld, to make
them differ from bible and childe. Also some pronounce these 
words: blind, find, behind, short, other blinde, finde, behinde,
with (e) long. Which (e)  if wee should write after some
words,it would vtterly ouerthrow the naturall sound, as if
wee should write hang with (e) thus hange ,  wee must pro­
nounce it like strange.   And hence ariseth the difference of the
last syllable in hanger and stranger.  So words sounding as
long, song, and ending in ing, as in reading , writing, if they 
should haue (e) would sound like fringe,hinge as swing him in 
a rope: swinge him with a rod: which must not be written
with (dg) frindg,  (as some think)) as the former examples
shew, and these words, fringed, hinged, where (d) is neuer
written.

Scho. If this b'ee custom without reason, what certainty
shall I hold?

Mai. Although it were good and easy, both for our own
country learners and for strangers, that certaine rules were
known and practised, (which thing might easily be done) yet
because it lieth not in vs to reforme, I wish you rather to ob­ 
serue the best, and follow that which we haue, then to labour






for innouation which we cannot effect.  And let this admoni­ 
tion serue for all customs in the rest.

Scho. I remember you promised me to set down those words
which haue other letters besides this  (e) either not at all, or
but litle pronounced.

Mai.   I will either set you them down,or els giue you rules
A letter not
pronounced.
to know them,marke them therefore,as they follow.

(a) Is not pronounced when (ea or oa) come together, as
(a)
The ioyning
of these kind
of vowels may
be called im­
proper diph­
thongs, be­
cause one of
them is litle
heard.
in earth, wealth,beauty,abroad,roar,boat. where  (a)  doth draw
the syllable long, like (e) in the end , as appeareth by these
words, beast, best bread, bred, goad, god, coast, cost. as if you
wrot, brede, gode, &c.  And hereupon this word yeare. yeere.
yere. is diuersly written:yet we say be-atitude.cre-at.cre-ator, 
&c. but crea-ture. And in forraine proper names wee com­ 
monly pronounce both, as in Iehoshabe-ath. Gile-ad. Teko-a.
Bo-az.

(e) Not pronounced in Georg. trueth. 
(e)

(i) In shield. field. priest. chief. brief. shriefe. griece sieg. Mai­
(i)
ster. their. view. mischiefe. fierce. friese. atchieue. marueil.reliefe.
griefe. biere. adiew. interfier. kerchiefe. lieuetenant. fruit. suit.
bruise. bruit. 

(o) In people. floud. bloud. yeoman. ieoperdy.
(o)

(u) In guest. guise. buy. guid. prologue. build. tongue. guile. 
(u)
guilty. conduit. league. dialogue. plague. epilogue. synagogue.

(b) In lamb. comb. thumb. debt. doubt. bdelium.
(b)

(c) In backe. packe. decke. pecke. licke. sticke. rocke. knocke.
(c)
bucke. lucke. and all like, for we vse no short words ending
in (c) without (k) so in those that end in ackle.eckle.ickle.ockle.
vckle. 

Scho. Why may w'ee not say that (k) is not pronounced in
these, as well as (c.) 

Mai. It differeth not much which, for although that (k) 
doth end our English words, when they be long : as in bake.
cake. seeke. speake. like. loke. duke : yet these that w'ee make
short, the Latines make the same sound in (c) as lac. nec. dic.
sic. hoc. duc. when we say lacke.necke. dicke.sicke.hocke ducke.






(g) In signe. resigne. ensigne. flewgme. reigne, souereigne.
(g)
Gascoigne.

(h) In Christ. mirrh. Ghost. Iohn. whole scholer. eunuch. 
(h)
chronicles. authoritie. anchor. choller. christall. Rhene. Rhenish.
rhetorike. abhominable. melancholy. So in forraine proper
names, as Thomas Achaia. Cheaanah. Zacharias. Zichri. Chi­
os. Aristarchus: So those that end in arch. as Monarche : but in 
the beginning seldome , as Archangell, therefore commonly
written Arkangell.

(gh) Comming together, (except in Ghost) are of most
(gh)
men but little sounded, as might, sight: pronounced as mite, 
site:  but in the end of a word, some countries sound them ful­ 
ly,other not at all, as some say plough, bough, slough, other
plow, bou, slou : Thereupon some write burrough, some bor­
row: but the truest is both to write and pronounce them.

(n)  In solemne, hymne.
(n)

(p)  Inv Psalme. receit. accompt. 
(p)

(s) In Isle.
(s)

(t) Is alwaies written , but little sounded before (ch) 
(t)
when the syllable is short , not hauing another consonant
next before,as in Catch. stretch. ditch botch. smatch. except in
rich. which. much. such. in which custome hath preuayled a­
gainst rule : But if the syllable be long, or hath another con­ 
In such rules
of writing you 
must not only
vnderstand the 
first originall
word, but all
deriuatiues ri­
sing from them. 
Note that (e) 
long sounded
as in sea,not as
see: is alwaies
written with
ea.
sonant with (ch) then (t) is not written,as in attach. reproch. 
couch. belch. bench.&c.

Here againe obserue, that custome hath preuailed against
reason,els why should (a) be written in  boar,boat:rather then
in dore, dote: or (i) in fruite, rather then brute : But to know
when to write them, and when not, you shall finde all that 
may br'eed doubt,set down in the table,at the end of the booke, 
where you may aske counsaile , as your doubtes shall arise, 
and not for these sorts onely,but for any other hard or doubt­ 
full word,especially not mentioned before in this booke.

Scho. You tould m'ee you would obserue some thing more, 
in words ending in (es) I pray what is it ?

Mai. Well remembred : It is this, words ending in (es) 
Words of the
plurall nomber.






are most of the plurall nomber, & are made of the singular by
adding (s): for where it is not n'eedfull to vse (e)  in the end of
the singular nomber, it shall not be n'eedfull to vse (es)  in the 
Plurall, as in iewels, ingins : except the singular end in a vo­ 
well,or in (w)  put for (u)  as in flies, pies,toes, crowes.   There­ 
fore shall you finde, hands, things, words: more vsuall in the 
exactest writers, then handes, thinges, wordes with (e),  al­ 
though both wayes be common: and this maketh the diffe­ 
rence betwixt mils and miles : tuns and tunes : curs and cures,
and not by writing them being short with the consonant dou­ 
bled,as milles,tunnes,curres:  which is n'eedlesse  though vsuall: 
vnlesse it b'ee sometimes for difference of words , as to make
sonnes differ from the sound of the Latine word sons.

Scho. Are there then neuer moe syllables in the plurall
nomber,then in the singular?

Mai. Yes sometime, as when the singular nomber en­ 
deth in ce. ch. ge. gd. s. or sh. as in graces. places. churches. ca­
ges. hedges. noses. fishes. And this maketh the difference be­ 
twixt gags for the mouth, and gages for a vessell.  Note also
that if the singular nomber end in (f) it is turned in the plu­ 
rall into (v) as wife, knife, calfe, whose plurals are wiues,
kniues, calues. 

Scho. Do all words of the plurall nomber end in (s) ?

Mai. No : for we say, lice, mice, men, brethren, oxen, teeth,
feet,kine, and many other.  And sometime the singular & plu­ 
rall are both one:as sheepe,tenne sheepe, one mile, twen­
tie mile or miles. 


CHAP. 5.


This Chapter teacheth all other obseruations that are necessary
for the perfecting of a Scholer.

Scho. WHat is the first thing next to be learned?

Mai. You shall find some words written with (e & o) 
(e and o)
single, when they should be written with the diphthongs, ee
eo as be, he, she, me, we, do, mother, for bee, hee, doo &c. but






*thee,  when we speake vnto one, and  the,  otherwise, and so 
* Which Gram­
marians call 
the second 
person.
must their pronounciation differ,as I wil tell  thee, the  matter.

Secondly that ph, is as much as (f) and is vsed onely in
words borrowed from the Greeke tongue. As in  physicke, 
(ph)
prophet, Phillip, Phenice: for the rest looke the Table. 

Thirdly some letters beside those before mentioned , haue
(th)
* Like (θ,) the 
Greeke (th.) 
which onely 
Scholers vn­ 
derstand. 
not alwayes one and the same sound.  As, th.  is commonly
sounded, as in these words: * thanke,theefe,third,throt, thumpe: 
except in these words following: that, fatham, the, them, then,
there,their, these, brothell, furthest, thine,this,thither, worthy,thou,
though, thus, and in words of mo then one syllable, ending in
ther, thed, theth, thest, thing,  as  father, breathed , breathest, ba­
theth seething.

Also (g)when (e or i) follow, bringeth great hardnes to our
(ge) and (gi)
learners and strangers, being diuersly sounded : (ge) most of­ 
ten soundeth as (ie)as in *agent, gorget,gentle,Gentile. except
*The first sort 
are sounded 
like the latine 
(g): the other 
like the greeke 
(γ). 
in these words, together get, bragget, target burgen, gesse, geld,
gewgawes, vineger, anger, finger, hanger, hunger, eager,suger.
And (gi) as (ji) as in giant, ginger, Clergie, imagin.  &c. except
in begin, biggin, giddy, gift, gig, giglet, gild, gill, guiltie,gimlet,
ginnie hen, gird, girdle, girle, girth,gittron, giue,giues, Gibbon. 
And deriuatiues ending in ger, ged, geth, gest, ging , which
follow the sound of the words whereof they be made , as in
hanger, hanged, hangeth, hangest, hanging :  Some men thinke
that these words might be thus differently written, a childs
gig, and a Scottish jig : the gil of a fish, and a jill  of wine.  But
our English tongue will hardly beare (ji) in one syllable :
Therefore to be sure when to write (g,) and when (i,) know
that the sound (gi) is alwaies written  with (g): And write
(ie) alwaies with (i,) sauing in those words that you shall
finde written with (g) in the table.  But our English proper
names are written as it pleaseth the printer or as men haue
receiued them by tradition, otherwise why should Iermin be
written otherwise then the first syllable in German or Ieffe 
rather then Geffe. And this I take to be the reason, when Gif­
ford is diuersly pronounced, and made two different names, 
which is most like to b'ee at the first, but one : yea, I haue






known two naturall brethren, both learned, to write their
own names differently.

Moreouer (ti) before (on) is pronounced as (si)as in redemp­
(ti)
tion, (exccept (s, or x.) goe before, as question, adustion, mixti­
on)  and commonly before other vowels, as in patience , Æ­
gyptian, except when a syllable beginning with a vowell is
added to a perfect word ending in (ti) as if (ing) bee added to
pitty or (est) to lofty, it is pittying, loftiest. 

But the hardest thing in our English tongue, for true
writing, is to discerne when to writ (ce or se,)  (ci or si,) or
Ce,se,ci,si. 
both, asscience:  therfore many words that are meerely Eng­ 
lish, are almost left indifferent, As some write fausset some 
fauset, other faucet, so pincers or pinsers;bullace bullase,some bul­
leis:so Sissers,some Cisers, but exactly it is scissers. But because
the most are written with,s. as seat,serue,side,sicke, &c.Ther­ 
fore you may writ (s) before (e and i,) except in those words
that are written with (c) in the table, or any other made of
them by * deriuation or composition, as if you know how to
* That is by 
adding some 
thing to the 
beginning or 
end. 
write Cite, you must so write incite, Citation, incitation, and
so in other: Note that ance, ence,ince, once, ounce, ancy,ency, 
are vsually written with (c,) so is it after (a) in the end, as
temperance, prudence, excellency,grace, &c. except in case,base,
chase, or when (s) is sounded like (z) * as amase:words begin­ 
*(s,) Often 
like (z) as 
brasier, like 
brazier. 
ning with transbe alwaies written with(s,)and with  circum  
with (c)as transferre,circumstance, for other exceptions see the
table.

But to know when to write ci. si. ti. xi. before (on) obserue
Ci. si. ti. xi. 
that(ci)and (xi)are seldome,as suspicion, complexion:  (si)more
often, as in those that end in casion, cession, cision, cursion, fes­
sion,fusion,gression,hension,lusion,mission, passion, pression,pul­
sion,rision,session,swasion, version, vision,as  occasion, confession,
conuersion,&c. but most vsuall is (ti) as redemption, &c.but for
the particulars if you doubt view the table.

Scho. What els is to be obserued?

Mai. That diuers other words of the same pronounciation
Diuers writing 
of the same 
sound. 
by changing their signification, change also their writing, as
the  reigne of a Prince, the reine of a bridle, & the raine falleth.






Two men came to me. Their minds are there. 
Wait on me, and I will sell it by weight.
Nay, not so, the horse doth neigh.
The Sunne shineth, my sonne cryeth.
Stand still here, that you may heare.
A true Prophet, bringeth much profite.
I heard that which is hard.
This Mille wright cannot write.
Some men haue a great summe of money.
(o)before 
(m) or (n). 

Sometime we pronounce (o) before (m) or (n) as  (u) as in
come,nomber,custome,*some,sonne,&c. 
*The proper 
name is writ­ 
ten Some or 
Soame. 

Sometimes the same writing is diuersly sounded, as (s) 
sometimes like (z) , as wee vse this vse : And when   (i) doth so
come betwixt two vowels,as that it may be taken for a diph­ 
thong, or a consonant,as Iehoi-adah,or Ieho-jadah. 
The same wri­ 
ting of diuers 
sound. 

Sometimes we shall haue a word diuersly written in the
same sense,as (w) is written for (u),as in (browne, broune)but
especially in the ende of a word. Yet doe now, how, differ in
sound from know, blow. And therefore I see no reason why
now, and how, might not be written as thou and you, thus : 
nou,hou : that so to make a difference betw'eene these words, 
to bow a bow : to sow for the sow : we might write to bou a
bow, to sow for the sou : And so out,and ought,and such like.

Sometimes we vse the same writing and sound,in words
The same wri­ 
ting in a diuers 
sense. 
differing in signification, as the *hart of the hart panteth.

A foule can flye ouer a foule way.
Thou art skilfull in the art of Grammar.
*Which some 
write heart. 
The right eare. Eare thy land,for an eare of corne.
My brother May,may liue till may. 

Sometimes a word is diuersly written and sounded in the
Diuers sound 
and writing in 
the same sense. 
same sense, as many beginning with (in), as intent,informe, or
entent,enforme : so bottell, botle,yerk, or ierk, Iayle or  Gaole. So
words ending in (i) as monie, iornie, tansie, or money, iorney,
tansey. So words ending in (or) short may bee indifferently
written with (or) and (our) as  honor, fauor, or honour, fauour, 
(or)
except  for,dor,nor,abhor.

Further,you must marke that words of moe then one syl­





 
lable,ending in this sound (us) are written with (ous) as glo­
rious,friuolous. But words of one syllable (thus)us, trusse. 

But to know when a word endeth in (ike) as publike, when
(ike que) 
in (que) as oblique, being both of one sound, is hard, without
Write those 
that end in 
(cus) in latine 
as publicus  
with (k) pub­ 
like,and those 
that end in (quus)
as obli­ 
quus,  with (que 
oblique, but 
traffique,be­ 
cause it is 
French. 
the Latine tongue, from whence most of them be borowed.
The best help is deriuation, for we write publike because we
say publication,(for (c) and (k) here be both one) so Rhetorike,
because we say Rhetorician. 

The last thing I would haue you to marke, touching this
part of true writing, is to know when to write (y) for (i) the
vowell wherein almost so many men, so many minds : some
will haue it before certayne letters, other when it commeth
in a diphthong, but more reason they haue which write it
when another (i) followeth as in say.ing, or in the end of a
word sounded sharpe, as in deny. But I thinke naturally
(y)
and truely it ought not to be written but in words borrowed
of the Gr'eeke,as hypocrite,myrrhe, mysticall,all which words
you shall finde in the table, where you shall finde no other
written with (y) for difference sake, although other where I
haue written (y) for (i) without regard, following the vsuall
custome.

Scho. But Sir, I reade a little before Psalme, and you did
not teach me,that Ps. may begin a word.

Mai. Well remembred, such diligent marking what you
reade, will soone make you a scholer: the answer is this: That 
word is borowed from the Grecians, & they doo ioyne conso­ 
nants that our English tongue doo not, as  Mnason,Ptolemais,
Rhodes : ctenes, signifying the fower fore teeth:  pneuma a spirit, or
breth,  cnicus bastard saffron.  But these are very rare, so we haue 
many terminations in proper names , and Latine words, 
which are not vsuall in English, as fons, aruns, falx, arx.in
proper names, alz,anz, arz. &c. Thus  alb,is of the Latines : 
we vse also in Latine  stlata,not vsed in English : we vse also
contract words in English, as hangd,for hanged. 

Scho. Haue I now no more to obserue for distinct reading ?
Accent vsually 
omitted in our 
English printe. 

Mai. That which the Gramarians call accent, which is
the lifting vp of the voyce higher in one syllable then in ano­






ther, which sometime differeth in a word written with the
same letters, as an íncense,  to  incénse,  where  (in)  in the for­ 
mer word,and  cense  in the latter is lifted vp more. 

You must obserue also those which w'ee call *poynts or
The points 
are thus called: 
(,) a comma. 
(:) a colon. 
(.) a period.
staies in writing:as this marke (,) like a small halfe Moone, 
noteth a small stay: two prickes thus (:) maketh a longer
stay,and one pricke thus (.) is put for a full stay, as if we had
ended.

When a question is asked, we marke it thus (?)
(?) an interro­ 
gation 

When some words may b'ee left out, and yet the sentence
perfect, it is noted thus ( ) as teach me (I pray you) to reade,
() a paren­ 
thesis  
but for the true framing of your voyce in all these, you must
craue the help of your Maister.

You must also know the short kinde of writing vsed in
some words:as a strike ouer any vowel for m,or n. as man, for
man, con for   con,  the, for the,  that, for that, thou,for thou,  with, for with. &c.
*Called abbre­ 
uiations. 
for and so forth.  In written hand there be many other.  And so
a word ending in a vowell, doth lose it sometime, when the
next word beginneth with a vowel, as thintent, for the intent, 
which exactly should be written thus, * th'intent.
Called apo­ 
strophus. 

Lastly, you must write the first letter of euery proper
name, and of the first word of euery sentence, and verse, with
those that w'ee call great or capitall letters, as  Robert, Anne, 
England,Cambridge:  As also when we put a letter for a nom­
Capital letters.
ber,as V. for fiue, X. for ten. L. for fiftie. C. for a hundreth.D.
for fiue hundreth. M. for a thousand. Lastly, when we put a let­ 
ter for a word, as L. for Lord. LL. for Lords.  B. for Bishop.
BB. for  Bishops. 

Scho. Now am I sure, that I can neuer misse in spelling, 
or reading : nor (as I thinke) in writing.

Mai. I know not what can easily deceiue you in wri­ 
Corrupt pro­ 
nounciation 
and writing. 
ting, vnlesse it be by imitating the barbarous speech of your
countrie people, whereof I will giue you a taste, thereby to
offer you an occasion to take h'eed, not of these onely, but of a­ 
ny like: Some people speake thus:

The mell standeth on the hell for
The mill standeth on the hill :so






knet for knit : bredg for bridg : knaw for gnaw : knat for gnat :
belk for belch : yerb for herb : griffe for graffe : yelk for yolk :
ream for realm : aferd for afraid : durt for dirt : gurt for girth :
stomp for stamp:ship for sheep: hafe for halfe:sample for example:
parfit for perfect : dauter for daughter : carten for certaine : car­
char for carcheife : lease for leash : hur for hir : sur and suster for
sir and sister,to spat for to spit. &c. 
So doe they commonly put (v) for (f) as feale for  veale. 

And a nox, a nasse,my naunt, thy nuncle, for an ox, an asse, mine
aunt,thine vncle,&c.
We vse to put 
(n)to the words 
(a, my or thy) 
when the next 
word begin­ 
neth with a 
vowel,to a­ 
uoyde a ga­ 
ping ill sound.

Take heed also you put not (e) for (i) in the end of a word, 
as vnitee for vnitie, nor (id) for (ed)as vnitid for vnited,which is
Scottish : And some ignorantly write a cup a wine for a cup
of wine : and other like absurdities.

Scho. How shall I auoyd these dangers?

Mai. By diligent marking, how you reade them written.

Scho. May I then neuer vse my proper country termes, in 
writing?

Mai. Yes : if they be peculiar termes,and not corrupting
Peculiar 
termes.
of words:As the Northren man writing to his priuat neigh­ 
bour may say : My lathe standeth n'eere the kirke garth, for My
barne standeth n'eere the Churchyard. But if he should write
publikely,it is fittest to vse the most knowne words.

Scho. What can now hinder me, why I should not readily
and distinctly reade any english ?

Mai. Nothing at all, (if you throughly be perfect in this
that I haue taught you) vnlesse it be want of more practise, 
which (although this you haue learned, will so sufficiently
teach you, that you cannot faile in any word, though you
haue neuer any other teacher) yet  for your more chearefull
proc'eeding, I would wish you (if you can conueniently) not
to forsake your maister, vntill you haue gone through these
exercises following, of which I haue made choise of all sorts, 
both of prose and verse, that you may not be wanting in any
thing. 

Scho. Sir, I will follow your aduise, thanke you for your
paynes, and craue the Lord his blessing. And now will I ap­






pose some of my fellowes,to see how we can remember some
of these things taught.


CHAP. 6.


Here is set downe an order, how the teacher shall direct his
schollers to oppose one another.

  Iohn. WHo will aduenture his credite with me in op­ 
When your
Scholers first
learne this
Chapter,let
one read the
questions,and
another the
answer.
posing for the victorie ?

  Robert.  I will neither refuse you nor any in our forme,in 
any thing we haue learned : begin what you will.

  Iohn. How spell you lo?

  Robert. l,o.

  Iohn. Spell of?

  Robert. o,f.
When your
Scholers op­ 
pose one the
other,let the
answerer an­ 
swer without
booke.

  Iohn. Spell from?

  Robert. f,r,o,m.

  Iohn. How write you people?

  Robert. I cannot write.

  Iohn. I meane not so,but when I say write, I meane spell:
for in my meaning they are both one.

  Robert. Then I answer you,that p,e,o,p,l,e.

  Iohn. What vse hath (o) for you giue it no sound?

  Robert. True : yet we must write it, because it is one of
the words we learned, wherein (o) is not pronounced.

  Iohn. Are there any moe of them ?

  Robert. Yea many, I will repeat them,if you will. 

  Iohn. No,that would be ouer long. But tell me,why pro­
nounce you not (e) in the end of people?

  Robert. It is not pronounced in the end,if there be another 
vowell in that syllable. 

  Iohn. To what end then serueth it ?

  Robert. We haue learned two principall vses: one is, it 
draweth the syllable long,as h,a,t. spelleth hat : but h,a,t,e. is 
hate. 

  Iohn. How spell you Iesus?






  Robert. I,e,s,u,s.

  Iohn. How know you that it is not written with g.e?

  Robert. Because it is not in the table at the end of my 
booke : for all that be written with ge, be there, and our mai­ 
ster taught vs that all other of that sound must bee written 
with Ie.

  Iohn. How write you Circle ?

  Robert.S,i,r,c,l,e.

  Iohn Nay, now you misse: for if you looke in the table,you
shall find it Circle. Therefore now you must appose me. 

  Robert.I confesse mine error,therefore I will try if I can
requite it : What spell b,r,a,n,c,h?

  Iohn. branch.

  Robert.Nay,but you should put in (u)

  Iohn.  That skilleth not,for both waies be vsuall.

  Robert.How spell you might?

  Iohn. m,i,g,h,t.

  Robert.Why put you in (gh) for m,i,t,e. spelleth mite?

  Iohn. Truth, but with (gh) is the truer writing , and it
should haue a little sound.

  Robert.If your syllable beginneth with (b) what conso­
nants may follow?

  Iohn.  Onely (l) or (r).

  Robert.Where learne you that ?

  Iohn. In the third chapter of the first booke. 

  Robert.And which will follow (g)?

  Iohn. (l,n,or r)

  Robert.How proue you it?

  Iohn. Because g.l.a. spell gla, and g.n.a. gna, and g.r.a. spell 
gra.

  Robert.When thr'ee consonants begin a syllable , how
shall I know which they be?

  Iohn. We haue them before twise set downe, besides put a
vowell vnto them, and s'ee whether they then will spell any
thing,as to str put a,and it spelleth stra: but btra will spell no­
thing : therefore they cannot begin a syllable.

  Robert.Do not str spell star?






  Iohn.  It spelleth nothing without a vowell.  

Robert.  How many syllables are in this word rewarded?  
Make your
scholer reade
ouer this dia­
logue so often,
vntill he can
do it as readily
& pronounce
it as naturally,
as if he spake
without book.


  Iohn. Thr'ee. 

  Robert.  How proue you that?

  Iohn.  Because it hath thr'ee vowels , without any of the
thr'ee exceptions.

  Robert.  How diuide you them?

  Iohn. Re-war-ded. 

  Robert.  Why put you w  to a? 

  Iohn.  Because it is one consonant betw'eene two vowels. 

  Robert.  And why diuide you  r,  and  d? 

  Iohn.  Because they cannot begin a syllable.

  Robert.  What is the best way to spell a long word, as
this,  admonition? 

  Iohn.  I must marke how many syllables it hath, which I
find to be fiue, then take the first,  a, d, ad,  then take the next, 
m, o, mo,  then put them together,  admo,  so spell and put to
the third,  admoni,and so vntill you come vnto the end.

  Robert.  What if a man should bid you write this word ?

  Iohn.  I must follow the same order: first write downe  ad, 
then write vnto it  mo, admo, then ioyne vnto that  ni, admoni, 
so the rest  admoniti admonition. 

  Robert.  What is the best way to make vs perfect in spel­
ling hard syllables ?

  Iohn.  My maister doth sometime practise vs,in harsh coun­
terfeit syllables, through all the fiue vowels, as in thraugh,
threugh, thriugh, through, thruugh. Wrasht, wresht, wrisht,
wrosht, wrusht. Yarmble, yermble, yirmble, yormble, yurmble.
Whaights, wheights, &c. vaigh, veigh, &c. ianch, iench, jinch,
ionch, iunch. 

  Robert.  What if you cannot tell what vowell to spell the
syllable with, how will you do to finde it? as if you should
write  from, and know not whither you should write it with
a or  o. 

  Iohn.  I would trie it with all the vowels thus, fram,frem,
frim,from  : now I haue it.

  Robert.  But good man Taylor our Clarke when I went






to schoole with him, taught me to sound these vowels other­
wise then (me thinks) you do.

  Iohn.  How was that?

  Robert.  I remember he taught me these syllables thus: for 
Let the vnskil­
full teachers
take great heed
of this fault,
and let some
good scholers
heare their
children pro­
nounce these
syllables.
bad, bed, bid, bod, bud,  I learned to say, bad, bid, bide, bod,
bude, sounding a bed to lye vpon, as to bid, or command, and 
bid, as bide, long, as in abide : bud of a tr'ee, as bude, long, like 
rude : for these thr'ee vowels e, i, u, are very corruptly and ig­
norantly taught by many vnskilfull teachers, which is the
cause of so great ignorance in true writing in those that want
the Latine tongue.

  Iohn.  You say true : for so did my Dame teach me to pro­
nounce, for sa, se, si, so, su, to say, sa, see, si, so, sou : as if she had
sent me to see her sow, when as(se)should be sounded like the 
(sea) and (su) as to (sue) one at the law. 

  Robert.  But let me returne to appose you : How were we
taught to find out the naturall sound of consonants ? 

  Iohn. By the sp'eech of a stutter or stammerer,as to marke
how he laboureth to* sound the first letter of a word : as if
*For letters
were first de­
uised accor­
ding to sounds
the stammerer would pronounce Lord, before he can bring it
foorth, he expresseth the sound of  (l) which is the first letter, 
and so of all the other consonants. 

  Robert. How many waies may you expresse this sound(si)?  

  Iohn. Onely thr'ee : si, ci, and sci, or (xi) which is (csi)  

  Robert. Now you haue erred as well as I : for (ti) before a
vowell doth commonly sound (si) , and now I will giue you
ouer for this time : but I will challenge you againe to mor­ 
row,both in some new questions, in some part of that which
we haue learned, and also after euery lesson : and as you are
in saying, I will marke where you misse, and therein will I
deale with you. 

  Iohn. Do your worst, I wil prouide likewise for you:and
neuer giue you ouer, untill I haue gotten the victorie : for I
take not so much pleasure in any thing els all day. 

  Robert. I am of your mind : for I haue heard our maister
say, that this apposing doth very much sharpen our wits,






helpe our memorie, and many other commodities. But now
let vs looke vnto our Catechisme, for our maister will exa­ 
mine vs next in that. 

  Iohn. Nay, by your leaue we shall first reade ouer againe
all that we haue learned, with the preface, titles of the chap­ 
ters,and notes in the margent of our bookes, which we omit­ 
ted before, because they were too hard: for we shall go no fur­ 
ther before we be perfect in this. 

 The end of the second Booke.








 

A short Catechisme.
 

 WHat Religion doe you professe? 

 Christian Religion. 
Act.11.26.

 What is Christian Religion ? 

 It is the true profession, beleeuing, and following of those things,
Rom.10.9.10.
Act.4.12.
which are commanded and taught vs by God in the holy Scrip­
tures. 

 What call you the holy Scriptures ? 

The word of God contained in the bookes of the old and new te­
2.Tim.3.16.
stament. 

 Doth this Scripture or word of God containe in it all poynts of
true Religion,and euery thing necessarie for the saluation of a
Christian? 

 Yea. 

 Tell me then from this Scripture, how many Gods be there? 
2.Tim.3.16
17.

 One. 

 What is God ? 
Deut. 4.35.&
6.4.

 An euerlasting Spirite, immortall, inuisible, most strong, onely
Eph.4.6.
1.Tim.1.17.
Iohn 4.24.
1.Iohn 5.7.
Matth.3.16.17
wise. 

 How many persons are there? 

 Three. 

 Which be they? 

 The Father,the Sonne,and the holy Ghost. 
Matth. 28. 19.
1.Iohn 5.7.
Psal.19.1.7. &
29.3,4,5.
Rom. 1. 19. &
10.18

 How is God knowne?  

 By his workes, word and spirite. 

 Who created the world ? 

  *God. 
*Heb.11.3.
Gen.1.1.
Heb.11.3.

 Whereof did he create it ? 

 Of nothing,and that by his word. 






 Who made you ? 

 God the Father. 
Gen.1.27.
1.Cor.8 6.

 How did he create you ? 

 In holinesse and righteousnesse. 
Ephe.4.24.
Gen.1.27.
Rom.11.36.

 Why were you thus created ? 

 To glorifie him. 

 Are you able to doe this of your selfe ? 

 No. 
Rom.3.10,11
12.

 Why so ? 

 Because I am a sinner. 
Rom.3.23.
11.Ioh.1.8.10.

 How come you to be a sinner, seeing you were so perfectly created? 

 By the fall of Adam. 
Rom.5.12.18.
19.

 What was his sinne? 

 Disobedience against God, in eating of the forbidden fruite. 
Gen.3.6.
Rom.5.12.

 How commeth it to passe, that you are become a sinner in A­
dam? 

 Because he was the Father of all mankinde. 
Rom.5.12.

 How doe you proue that you are a sinner? 

 By the testimonie of mine owne conscience, and by the lawe of
Rom.2.15,&
3.20.
Gal.3.19.
God. 

 What is the lawe of God? 

 A perfect rule of righteousnes commaunding good, and forbid­
Psal.19.7.
ding euill : the summe whereof is contained in the commaunde­
ments. 

 How many be there ? 

 Tenne. 
Exod.34.28.

 Rehearse them ? 

 1 Then God spake all these words and said: I am the Lord thy
Exod.20.1.
God, which haue brought thee out of the land of AEgypt, out
of the house of bondage, thou shalt haue none other Gods but
me.

2 Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen Image, nor the
likenes of any thing that is in Heauen aboue, nor in the earth be­
neath nor in the water vnder the earth, thou shalt not bow down
to them,nor worship them, for I the Lord thy God, am a iealous
God,and visit the sinnes of the Fathers vpon the Children,vnto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and shew mer­






cie vnto thousands,to them that loue me,and keepe my comman­
dements.
3 Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine,
for the Lorde will not holde him guiltles that taketh his name in
vaine.
4 Remember that thou keepe holy the Sabboth day,sixe daies
shalt thou labour and doe all that thou hast to doe, but the sea­
uenth day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shalt doe
no manner of worke, thou, and thy Sonne, and thy Daughter, thy
manseruant, and thy maidseruant , thy cattell , and the stranger
that are within thy gates, for in sixe dayes the Lorde made hea­
uen and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the sea­
uenth daye, wherefore the Lord blessed the seauenth day,and hal­
lowed it.
5 Honour thy Father, and thy Mother,that thy dayes may bee
long in the land, which the Lord thy God giueth thee.
6 Thou shalt doe no murder.
7 Thou shalt not commit adulterie.
8 Thou shalt not steale.
9 Thou shalt not beare false witnes against thy neighbour.
10 Thou shalt not couet thy neighbours house, thou shalt not
couet thy neighbours Wife,nor his Seruant, nor his Maide, nor his
Oxe,nor his Asse,nor any thing that is his. 

 Are these words,I am the Lord thy God,&c.A commandement
or preface ? 

 A preface to the whole law. 
Leuit.19.2.9.

 How be the commandements deuided? 

 Into two tables or parts. 
Exod.31.18.
& 34.26.

 How many be there of the first table? 

 Foure. 

 How many of the second? 

 Sixe. 

 What doe the commaundements of the first table teach you? 

 My dutie towards God. 
Matth.22.37.

 What doe the commaundements of the second table teach you? 

 My duetie towards my neighbour. 
Matth.22.39.

 Are you to vse the commaundements as prayers? 






 No,because they be no petitions but commandements. 

 Are you able to keep them, without breaking any one of them, in 
thought,word,or deede? 

 No. 

 Why? 

 Because I am readie and disposed by nature, to offend both God
Ephe.2.3.
Rom.3.10.
and my neighbour. 

 To what end then serueth the lawe? 

 To shew vs our
Rom.3.10
Galat.3.24.
Pro.2,1,8.
Psal.119.105.
Rom.6.23.
miserie, and so leade vs to Christ : and to bee a rule
euer after for the well ordering of our liues. 

 What is the punishment for the breach of the lawe? 

 Eternall destruction of both body and soule. 

 Is there no way to escape it,and be saued? 

 Yes. 

 How? 

 By Iesus Christ. 
Act 4.12. 

 Who is this Christ? 

 The sonne of God, perfect God and perfect man. 
Mat 3.17.
Rom.9.5.
Esai.9 6.
Heb.1.6.

 Could there no other meane, nor person bee found in Heauen or
Earth to saue you, but the sonne of God must doe it? 

 No verely. 

 Must he needes be God and man? 

 Yea. 

 Why ? 

 First,because he must dye for vs,and God cannot dye,therefore he
Heb.9.22.
must be man.
Secondly, he must ouercome death, which being onely man,he
Heb.2. 14.
could not, therefore he must also be God. 

 How did he saue you ? 

 As he was man * perfectly righteous, he performed the perfect o­
*1.Pet.1.19.
& 2.22.
Heb.4.15
bedience of the law,and satisfied the *iustice of God for me. And
as hee was God, hee ouercame death, and raysed vp his bodie the
third day. 
*1.Pet.2.24.
& 4.1.
1.Pet.3.18.

 Are all men partakers of this benefit of redemption purchased
by Christ? 

 No,there are a number that shall haue their part in hell with the
Matth.25.46.
& 7.23.
Reuel. 22.15.
diuell and his Angels. 






 Who are they that haue their part in the death of Christ? 

 Onely such as truly beleeue. 
Iohn 3.16.
Galat.3.26.
*Heb.10.22.
Rom.4.20.21.
*Iohn 1.12.
*Act.4.12.

 What is faith ? 

 Faith,is* a full assurance of * my saluation in Iesus Christ*alone. 

 Hath euery man this faith in himselfe ? 

 No,for it is the * gift of God,and not of *nature. 
*2.Thes.3.2.
Phil.1.29.
*Mat.16.17.

 How is faith gotten? 

 By the outward hearing of the worde of God preached,and the in­
ward working of the Spirite. 
Rom.10.17.

 How is it strengthned and increased in you ? 
1.Cor.1.21.
Acts 2.41.
2.Cor.4.13.
Acts 16.14.
Iohn.8.31.and
6.17.
1.Pet.2.2.

 By the same preaching of the word,and the vse of the Sacraments,
and prayer. 

 How shall a man knowe whether hee haue this true and sauing
faith,or no? 

 By the fruites and markes thereof. 

 What be the fruites of faith? 

 A hatred of all sinne, a continuall care to please GOD in the
Acts 2.37.
Heb.11.7.
Psal.119.113.
1.Iohn 3.14.
dueties commaunded,an vnfained loue to Gods word and to his
people. 

 Rehearse the summe of your Faith ? 

 I beleeue in God the Father almightie, maker of heauen and
earth, and in Iesus Christ his onely Sonne our Lord : which was
conceiued by the holy Ghost,borne of the Virgin Marie, suf­
fered vnder Ponce Pilate, was crucified,dead,and buried, hee des­
cended into hell, the third day he rose againe from the dead, he as­
cended into heauen,and sitteth on the right hand of God the Fa­
ther almightie,from thence hee shall come to iudge the quicke
and the dead. I beleeue in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholique
Church,the communion of Saints,the forgiuenes of sinnes, the re­
surrection of the bodie, and the life euerlasting.Amen. 

 How many parts be there of this Creede? 

 Two. 

 Which be they? 

 The first is of God,the second is of the Church.
Let vs now come to the meanes of strengthning our faith, as
of the Sacraments and prayer : and first what is a Sacra­
ment ? 






A Sacrament is a seale and pledge of those benefits of my salua­
Rom. 4.11.
tion, which I receiue by Christ.

How many Sacraments be there in the Church of God?

Two.
Matth. 28.19
& 26 26.

Which be they ?

Baptisme,and the Supper of the Lord.
1. Cor.11.23.

Who ordained them ?

The Lord Iesus.
Matth. 26 26.
1. Cor.11.23.

To what end?

To strengthen our faith,and to further our repentance.

How many things are to be considered in a Sacrament ?

Two.

Which be they ?

The signe, and the thing signified.
Gen.17.11.
Rom. 4.11.

In Baptisme,which is the signe that may be seene?

Water.
Acts 8.36.

What is the thing signified?

The washing away of my sinnes by the blood of Christ.
Ioha 3.5.

How is your Faith strengthened by Baptisme?

By Baptisme I am receiued into the familie and congregation of
Mark. 16.16.
Acts 2.38.
the Lord,and am thereby fully assured,that both my sinnes are for­
giuen me,and the punishment due to the same.

What do you professe in Baptisme ?

To dye vnto sinne,and to liue vnto righteousnesse.
Rom.6.3.

In the Supper of the Lord, which bee the Signes that may bee 
seene?

Bread and Wine.
Mat.26.26.27.
1.Cor.11.23.
24 25.

What do they signifie?

The bodie and blood of Christ.

How is your Faith strengthned by the Supper of the Lord?

By the Supper of the Lord my Faith is strengthned, that as I re­
ceiue the bread and wine into my body to become mine : so doth
my soule receiue withall Iesus Christ, with all the benefits of his
death to be wholy mine.

Is the bread and wine turned into the naturall bodie and blood of 
Christ, flesh, blood,and bone?

No,the bread and wine of their owne nature are not changed,but






in vse they differ from other common bread and wine, because
they be appoynted of God to be signes of the bodie and blood of
Christ.

Why then doth Christ say ; This is my body?

It is a figuratiue speech vsuall in the Scripture , as circumcision is
Gen.17.10.11
Exod.12.11.
called the couenant, the Lambe is called the passeouer: and yet it
is not the couenant,nor the passeouer,but a signe of it.

How do you eate Christs bodie,and drinke his blood?

Spiritually, and by Faith.
Iohn 6.63.

Are all persons without exception to be admitted to the Supper 
of the Lord?

No.

Who are not to be admitted?

Children,Fooles, Mad-men, Ignorant persons, knowne heretikes,
1.Cor.11.28.
Tit.3.10.
open and notorious sinners not repenting.

What must he doe that will come worthily to the Supper of the 
Lord?

He must proue and examine himselfe.

Wherein must he examine himselfe ?
1.Cor.11.28.
29.

First, what knowledge he hath in the principles of Religion,and
especially in the matter of the Sacrament.
Secondly, whether he hath true faith in Iesus Christ,or no.
Thirdly, whether he bee penitent and sorie for his sinnes past,
Matth.5.23.
Rom.12.18.
Heb.12.14.
purposing to leaue them,and to liue godlie,endeuouring himselfe
to be in brotherly loue and charitie with all men.

Then it seemeth there be some, who albeit they come, yet they 
lose the benefit of this communion in themselues?

Yea.

Who be they ?
Such as come not in faith, and are not grieued for their sinnes past,
as hypocrites,vnciuill men, Church Papists,priuie enemies to Gods
1.Cor.11.30.
2.Chro.30.18
word,and so many of the godlie as come not sufficiently prepa­
red,procure a punishment.

What is the other helpe you haue to increase Faith ?

Prayer.

What is prayer ?

Prayer,is a spirituall action of Faith wherein we require of God
Rom.8.26.






in the name of Christ,all things necessarie,his glorie and our com­
Iam.1.6.
1 Iohn.5.14.
fort.

To whom must you pray ?

To God only.
Psal.50.14.15.

In whose name ?

In the name of Christ.
Iohn.16.23.

Then you may not pray to Saints,or Angels, or to God in the
name of a Saint or Angell ?

No.
Why ?

Because there is neither commandement,promise,nor example in
the Scripture for it.

How must you pray ?

As Christ hath taught me,saying:
Our Father which art in heauen, halowed be thy name. Thy
Matth.6.9.
kingdome come, thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen. Giue
vs this day our daily bread. And forgiue vs our trespasses. As we
forgiue them that trespasse against vs. And lead vs not into temp­
tation. But deliuer vs from all euill : for thine is the kingdome, the
power and glorie,for euer. Amen.

How many petitions be there in this prayer ?

Sixe,three concerning the glorie of God, and three our owne ne­
cessities.

What are these words; Our Father which art in heauen ?

A preface or introduction to the prayer.

What are these words : For thine is the kingdome , the power and
glorie for euer ?

The conclusion of the prayer.

What do you owe to God for all his benefits ?

Thanksgiuing.
Psalm.116.12.
13.

Is it enough that you thanke him with your lips alone ?

No,but I must bee obedient to his lawes and commaundements : 
Ephe.5.10.
Deut.8.3.6.
&c.
which grace the Lord graunt. Amen.









Sundry necessarie obseruations for 
a Christian.


1. THat we keepe a narrow a watch ouer our hearts, words,and
a 1.Pet.1.15.
deedes continually.

2. That with all care the b time bee redeemed, which hath been
b Ephes.5.16.
Col.4 5.
idly,carelesly,and vnprofitably spent.

3. That once in the day at the least priuate c prayer and medita­
c Col.4.2.
tion be vsed.

4. That care be had d to do,and receiue good in companie.
d Luk.14.15,
16.

5. That our familie bee with diligence and regard e instructed,
e Deut.4.9. &
6.7.
Gen.18 19.
f Pro.31.27.
28.
f watched ouer and gouerned.

6. That no more time or care be bestowed in g matters of the
world,then must needes.
g Col.3.2.

7. That we stirre vp our selues to h liberalitie to Gods Saints.
h Heb.13.16.
Gal.6.10.

8. That we giue not the least bridle to wandring i lusts and af­
i Col.3.5.
Ephe.5.3, 4.
fections.

9. That wee prepare our selues to k beare the crosse, by what
k Matth.16.24
meanes it shall please God to exercise vs.

10. That wee bestow sometime not onely in l mourning for
l Dan.9.3, 4.
&c.20.
Lament.1.1.
our owne sinnes,but also for the sinnes of the time and age where­
in we liue.

11. That we m looke daily for the comming of our Lord Iesus
m 1.Cor.1.7.
Tit.2.13.
Christ,for our full deliuerance out of this life.

12. That we vse (as we shall haue opportunitie, at least as we
shall haue necessitie) to n acquaint our selues with some godly
n Iam.5.16.
and faithfull person, with whom we may conferre of our christian
estate, and open our doubts, to the quickning vp of Gods graces
in vs.

13. That wee o obserue the departure of men out of this life,
o Eccles.7.4.
Philip.1.23.
Reuel.22.20.
their mortalitie, the vanitie and alteration of things belowe, the
more to contemne the world, & to continue our longing after the
life to come. And that wee meditate and muse often of our owne
death,and going out of this life, how we must lie in the graue, all
our glorie put off, which will serue to beate downe the pride of life
that is in vs.






14. That we p reade somewhat daily of the holy Scriptures, for
p Deut.17.19.
20.
Iosh.1 8.
Psal.1.2.
Dan.9 2.
the further increase of our knowledge.

15. That wee q enter into couenant with the Lord to striue a­
gainst all sinne,and especially against the speciall sinnes and cor­
ruptions of our hearts and liues, wherein we haue most dishonou­
q Nehem.9.38.
2.Chron.34.31.
red the Lord,and haue raised vp most guiltines to our owne con­
sciences,and that we carefully see our couenant bee kept and con­
tinued.

16. That wee r marke how sinne dyeth and is weakened in vs,
r 1.Pet.1.14.
2.Pet.2.20.21.
22.
s Matth.18.8.
1.Thes.5.22.
and that we turne not to our old sinnes againe,but wisely s auoide
all occasions to sinne. 

17. That we t fall not from our first loue,but continue still our
t Reuel.2.4.
affections to the liking of Gods word,and all the holy exercises of
religion, u diligently hearing it, and w faithfully practising the same
u Iam.1.19.
w Iam.1.22.
Rom.2.13.
x Eccl.4.17.
in our liues and conuersations : that wee x prepare our selues be­
fore we come, and meditate and conferre of that wee heare, either
by our selues, or with other : and so marke our daily profiting in
religion.

18. That we be often occupied in y meditating on Gods bene­
y Ephe.5.20.
Psal.116.12.13
& 118.15.
fits and workes,and sound forth his praises for the same.

19. That we z exercise our faith by taking comfort and delight
z Phil 1.23.
2.Tim.4.7.8.
in the great benefit of our redemption by Christ, and the fruition
of Gods presence, in his glorious and blessed kingdome.

20. Lastly,that we make not these holy practises of repentance
common in time,nor vse them for course.




A Prayer framed according to this
Catachisme.


ALmightie God and most mercifull father in Iesus Christ, as
Miserie.
thou hast plainly set before vs our cursed estate,in the cleare
glasse of thy heauenly word,so we beseech thee to open our
eyes to see it,and pierce our hearts to feele it, by the inward wor­
king of the holy spirit. For wee O Lorde,are most vaine and vile
creatures,iustly tainted with the rebellion of our first parents,con­
ceiued in sinne,bondslaues of satan, necessarily, and yet willingly
seruing diuers lusts,and committing innumerable sins against thy






Maiestie, whereby we deserue most iustly to endure all miseries in
this life, and to be tormented in hell for euer. But blessed bee thy
name O Lord our God, who when there was no power in vs, no,
Deliuerance.
not so much as any desire or endeuor to get out of this wofull e­
state,hast made vs see and feele, in what case wee were, and proui­
ded a most soueraigne remedie for vs, euen thy deare and onely
begotten Sonne,whome thou hast freely offered vnto vs,not onely
kindling in vs a desire to enioy him, but enabling vs by a true and
liuely faith,to lay hold vpon him, and to be partakers of all his be­
nefits, to the saluation of our soules. And now O Lorde, that it
Pietie.
hath pleased thee, by faith to ioyne vs to thy sonne Iesus Christ,
and by thy spirit, to make vs members of his body : wee humbly
beseech thee,by the same spirite, to renewe vs daily according to
thine owne image. Worke in our hearts a daily increase of true
faith, and repentance, and in our liues a holy and comfortable
change. O Lord enable vs in some good measure, to walke wor­
thie of all thy mercies , and to serue thee , who hast created and
chosen vs,and thy Sonne, who hath redeemed vs from death, and
made vs heires of glorie,and thy blessed spirit, who doth continu­
ally sanctifie and keepe vs, with faith, feare, and zeale, in true holi­
nesse,and righteousnesse all the dayes of our life. Finally,seeing of
thine infinite goodnesse and mercie, thou hast appoynted diuers
excellent and holy meanes for the daily encrease of thy graces in
vs,and for the confirming and quickning of vs in a Christian con­
uersation, we humbly beseech thee,to grant al those good meanes
vnto vs,and to continue them amongst vs, giuing vs grace to vse
them purely, constantly and zealously, to the glorie of thy name,
profit of our brethren, and saluation of our soules, through Iesus
Christ,to whom with thee O Father,and the holy Ghost, be giuen
all honor and glory for euer, Amen.




A thankesgiuing before meate.


O My heauenly Father, I thank thee through Iesus Christ for ma­
king these creatures to serue mee, and for giuing mee leaue to
feede on them: now I humbly pray thee to giue mee grace mode­
rately and soberly to vse them,that my bodily health may bee still






continued to thy glorie,the good of others,and mine owne com­
fort in Christ Iesus, Amen.




A thankesgiuing after meate.


O Lord,feeling my bodie to be refreshed with meate and drink,
and my minde also fitter to doe those things which thou re­
quirest of me:let it now bee my meate to doe thy will, and those
workes which belong to my dutie with all cheerefulnes and good
conscience, that for these and all other thy mercies, my thankful­
nesse in heart, word and deede, may bee acceptable in thy sight to
the ende of my life, through Iesus Christ,to whom with thee and
the holy Ghost be all honour,glorie, and thanksgiuing now and
for euer, Amen.




A Prayer for the Morning.


O Lord God our heauenly father , wee thy poore and wretched
creatures, giue thee most humble and heartie thanks for our
quiet and safe sleepe, and for raising vs vp from the same. We be­
seech thee for Iesus Christes sake, to prosper vs this daye in our la­
bour and trauell,that it may be to the discharging of our dutie in
our vocations, principally to thy glorie, next to the profit of this
Church and common-weale, and last of all to the benefite and
content of our Maisters. Graunt deare Father, that we may chere­
fully and conscionably doe our businesse and labours , not as
men-pleasers, but as seruing thee our God, knowing thee to bee
the chiefe maister of vs,and that thou seest and beholdest vs with
thy fatherly eyes, who hast promised reward to them that faithful-
ly and truely walke in their vocation, and threatned euerlasting
death and damnation to them that deceitfully and wickedly doe
their workes and labours. We beseech thee O heauenly father, to
giue vs the strength of thy spirit, that godly and gladly we may o­
uercome our labours,and that the tediousnesse of this irksome, la­
bour which thou for our sinnes hast powred vpon all mankinde,
may seeme to vs delectable and sweete. Fulfill now O Lord these
our requests,for thy sonne our Sauiours sake, in whose name wee
pray as he himselfe hath taught vs. Our Father,&c.









A Prayer for the Euening.


MOst mercifull God and tender Father, which besides thine in­
estimable mercies declared and giuen vnto vs in the making 
of the world for our sakes, in the redeeming of vs by the death of
thy deare Sonne Iesus Christ,in the calling of vs to the knowledge
of thy blessed worde,in keeping of vs hitherto in thy holy Church,
and in thy most gratious gouerning of vs, and all things hitherto
for our singular wealth and commoditie, hast also most fatherly
cared for vs,and kept vs this day from all daungers both of soule
and body, giuing vs health, foode, apparell, and all other things
necessary for the comfort and succour of this poore and miserable
life, which many other doe want:for these and all other thy good
giftes and gracious benefites, which thou of thine owne goodnes
onely and fatherly prouidence, hast hitherto powred vpon vs,and
doest presently powre vpon vs and many other, we most humbly
thanke thee and praise thy holy name , beseeching thee, that as
all things are now hidden by meanes of the darkenesse which thou
hast sent ouer the earth, so thou wouldest vouchsafe to hide and
burie all our sinnes, which this day or at any time heretofore wee
haue committed against thy holy commaundements: and as now
we purpose to lay our bodies to rest, so graunt the garde of thy
good Angels to keepe the same this night and for euermore : and
whensoeuer our last sleepe of death shall come,graunt that it may
be in thee good Father, so that our bodies may rest both tempo-
rally and eternally, to thy glorie and our ioy through Iesus Christ
our Lorde. So be it.




Psalme 119. The first part.


1. BLessed are those that are vndefiled in the way : and walke in
the way of the Lord.

2 Blessed are they that keepe his testimonies : and seeke him
with their whole heart.

3 For they which doe no wickednes : walke in his waies.

4 Thou hast charged: that we shall diligently keepe thy com­
mandements.






5 O that my waies were made so direct : that I might keepe
thy statutes.

6 So shall I not be confounded : while I haue respect vnto all
thy commandements.

7 I will thanke thee with an vnfained heart : when I shall haue
learned the iudgements of thy righteousnes.

8 I will keepe thy Ceremonies : O forsake me not vtterly.


The second part.


1 WHere withall shall a young man clense his way? euen by
ruling himselfe after thy word. 

2 With my whole heart haue I sought thee : O let me not goe
wrong out of thy commandements. 

3 Thy words haue I hid within my heart:that I should not sinne
against thee. 

4 Blessed art thou(O Lord)O teach me thy statutes. 

5 With my lips haue I been telling of all the iudgements of
thy mouth. 

6 I haue had great delight in the way of thy testimonies : as in
all manner of riches. 

7 I will talke of thy commandements, and haue respect vnto
thy waies. 

8 My delight shall be in thy statutes, and I will not forget thy
word.




Prouerbs Chapter .


1 HEare, O yee children, the instruction of a father,and giue
eare to learne vnderstanding. 

2 For I doe giue you a good doctrine : therefore forsake ye not
my law. 

3 For I was my fathers sonne, tender and deare in the sight of
my mother. 

4 When he taught me , and said vnto me, Let thine heart hold
fast my words:keep my commaundements,and thou shalt liue. 

5 Get wisdome:get vnderstanding : forget not,neither decline
from the words of my mouth. 

6 Forsake her not, and she shall keepe thee : loue  her, and shee
shall preserue thee. 

7 Wisedome is the beginning: get wisedome therefore : and a­ 






boue all thy possession get vnderstanding. 

8 Exalt her,and she shall exalt thee:she shall bring thee to ho­
nor,if thou embrace her. 

9 Shee shall giue a comely ornament vnto thine head, yea, she
shall giue thee a crowne of glory. 

10 Heare my sonne, and receiue my words, and the yeares of
thy life shall be many. 

11 I haue taught thee in the way of wisdome,and led thee in the
paths of righteousnes. 

12 When thou goest,thy gate shall not be straight, and when
thou runnest thou shalt not fall. 

13 Take hold of instru" lexeme="ction, and leaue not : keepe her, for she
is thy life. 

14 Enter not into the way of the wicked, and walke not in the
way of euill men. 

15 Auoyde it,and goe not by it:turne from it,and passe by. 

16 For they cannot sleepe,except they haue done euill,& their
sleepe departeth,except they cause some to fall. 

17 For they eate the bread of wickednes, and drinke the wine
of violence. 

18 But the way of the righteous shineth as the light that shi­
neth more and more vnto the perfite day. 

19 The way of the wicked is as the darknes : they knowe not
wherein they shall fall. 

20 My sonne,hearken vnto my words, incline thine eare vnto
my sayings. 

21 Let them not depart from thine eyes,but keepe them in the
middest of thine heart. 

22 For they are life vnto those that finde them,and health vnto
all their flesh. 

23 Keepe thy heart with all diligence:for thereout commeth life. 

24 Put away from thee a froward mouth, and put wicked lips
farre from thee. 

25 Let thine eyes beholde the right,and let thine ey-lids direct
the way before thee. 

26 Ponder the path of thy feete,and let all thy waies be ordered
aright. 






27 Turne not to the right hand, nor to the left,but remoue thy
foote from euill. 




The first Psalme.


THe man is blest that hath not bent,
to wicked rede his eare :
Nor led his life as sinners doe,
nor sat in scorners chayre.

2 But in the law of God the Lord,
doth set his whole delight:
And in that law doth exercise
himselfe both day and night.

3 He shall be like the tree that groweth,
fast by the water side :
Which bringeth forth most pleasant fruite
in her due time and tide.

4 Whose leafe shall neuer fade nor fall,
but flourish still and stand :
Euen so all things shall prosper well,
that this man takes in hand.

5 So shall not the vngodly men,
they shall be nothing so :
But as the dust which from the earth,
the windes driue to and fro.

6 Therefore shall not the wicked men,
in iudgement stand vpright :
Nor yet the sinners with the iust,
shall come in place or sight.

7 For why? the way of godly men,
vnto the Lord is knowne :
And eke the way of wicked men,
shall quite be ouerthrowne.









The 4.Psalme.


O God that art my righteousnesse,
Lord heare me when I call :
Thou hast set me at libertie,
when I was bound and thrall.

2 Haue mercie Lord therefore on me,
and grant me my request :
For vnto thee vncessantly
to crie I will not rest.

3 O mortall men how long will ye
my glorie thus despise ?
Why wander ye in vanitie,
and follow after lyes?

4 Know ye that good and godly men,
the Lord doth take and chuse :
And when to him I make my plaint,
he doth me not refuse.

5 Sinne not but stand in awe therefore,
examine well your heart :
And in your chamber quietly,
see you your selues conuert.

6 Offer to God the sacrifice
of righteousnesse I say :
And looke that in the liuing Lord,
you put your trust alway.

7 The greater sort craue worldly goods,
and riches do embrace :
But Lord grant vs thy countenance,
thy fauour and thy grace.

8 For thou thereby shalt make my heart
more ioyfull and more glad,
Then they that of their corne and wine
full great increase haue had.






9 In peace therefore lie downe will I,
taking my rest and sleepe :
For thou onely wilt me O Lord
alone in safetie keepe.




The 50. Psalme.


THe mightie God,
th'eternall hath thus spoke:
And all the world
he will call and prouoke:
Euen from the East,
and so foorth to the West.

2 From toward Sion
which place him liketh best:
God will appeare
in beautie most excellent :

3 Our God will come
before that long time be spent.
Deuouring fire
shall goe before his face :
A great tempest
shall round about him trace.

4 Then shall he call
the earth and heauens bright :
To iudge his folke,
with equitie and right.

5 Saying go to,
and now my Saints assemble :
My peace they keepe,
their gifts do not dissemble.

6 The heauens shall
declare his righteousnesse :
For God is iudge
of all things more or lesse. 






7 Heare my people,
for I will now reueale :
List Israel,
I will thee nought conceale :
Thy God,thy God
am I,and will not blame thee :

8 For giuing not
all manner offrings to me.

9 I haue no neede
to take of thee at all,
Goates of thy fold,
or calfe out of thy stall.

10 For all the beasts
are mine within the woods:
On thousand hils,
cattell are mine owne goods.

11 I know for mine,
all birds that are on mountaines:
All beasts are mine,
which haunt the fields and fountaines.




The 51.Psalme,the first part.


O Lord consider my distresse,
and now with speed some pitie take:
My sinnes deface, my faultes redresse,
good Lord for thy great mercies sake.

2 Wash me(O Lord)and make me cleane,
from this vniust and sinfull act:
And purifie yet once againe,
my hainous crime and bloody fa" lexeme="ct.

3 Remorse and sorow doth constraine
me to acknowledge mine excesse :
My sinnes alas do still remaine
before my face without release. 






4 For thee alone I haue offended,
committing euill in thy sight:
And if I were therefore condemned,
yet were thy iudgements iust and right.

5 It is too manifest alas,
that first I was conceiued in sinne:
Yea of my mother so borne was,
and yet vile wretch remaine therein.

6 Also behold Lord thou doest loue
the inward truth of a pure heart :
Therefore thy wisedome from aboue
thou hast reuealed me to conuert.

7 If thou with Isope purge this blot,
I shall be cleaner then the glasse:
And if thou wash away my spot,
the snow in whitenesse shall I passe.

8 Therefore O Lord such ioy me send,
that inwardly I may find grace:
And that my strength may now amend,
which thou hast swagde for my trespasse.

9 Turne backe thy face and frowning ire,
for I haue felt enough thy hand:
And purge my sinnes I thee desire,
which do in number passe the sand.

10 Make new my heart within my brest,
and frame it to thy holy will :
Thy constant spirit in me let rest,
which may these raging enemies kill.




The 67.Psalme.


HAue mercie on vs Lord,
and graunt to vs thy grace :
To shew to vs do thou accord,
the brightnes of thy face. 






2 That all the earth may know
the way to godly wealth :
And all the nations on a row
may see thy sauing health.

3 Let all the world O God,
giue praise vnto thy name :
O let the people all abroad,
extoll and laud the same.

4 Throughout the world so wide,
let all reioyce with mirth :
For thou with trueth and right doest guide
the nations of the earth.

5 Let all the world O God,
giue praise vnto thy name :
O let the people all abroad,
extoll and laud the same.

6 Then shall the earth encrease,
great store of fruit shall fall :
And then our God the God of peace,
shall blesse vs eke withall.

7 God shall vs blesse I say,
and then both farre and neare,
The folke throughout the earth alway,
of him shall stand in feare.




The 104.Psalme,the first part.


MY Soule praise the Lord,
speake good of his name :
O Lord our great God,
how doest thou appeare?
So passing in glorie,
that great is thy fame ?
Honour and maiestie
in thee shine most cleare.






With light as a robe,
thou hast thee be clad,
Whereby all the earth
thy greatnes may see.
The Heauens in such sort,
thou also hast spread,
That it to a curtaine,
compared may be.

3 His chamber beames lye
in the clowdes full sure,
Which as his Chariots
are made him to beare :
And there with much swiftnesse,
his course doth endure,
Vpon the wings riding
of winde in the ayre. 

4 He maketh his spirits,
as Heralds to go,
And lightnings to serue,
we see also prest :
His will to accomplish,
they runne to and fro,
To saue or consume things,
as seemeth him best.

5 He grounded the earth
so firmely and fast,
That it once to moue,
none shall haue such powers.

6 The deepe a faire couering
for it made thou hast :
Which by his owne nature,
the hils would deuoure.

7 But at thy rebuke,
the waters do fly,
And so giue due place,






thy word to obey :
At thy voyce of thunder,
so fearefull they be,
That in their great raging,
they hast soone away.

8 The mountaines full hye,
they then vp ascend,
If thou do but speake,
thy word they fulfill:
So likewise the vallyes,
most quickly descend,
Where thou them appoyntest
remaine they do still. 

9 Their bounds thou hast set,
how farre they shall run, 
So as in their rage,
not that passe they can :
For God hath appoynted,
they shall not returne
The earth to destroy more,
which made was for man.




The 112. Psalme.


THe man is blest that God doth feare,
And that his lawes doth loue indeed : 

2 His seede on earth God will vpreare,
And blesse such as from him proceed. 

3 His house with good he will fulfill,
His righteousnesse endure shall still. 

4 Vnto the righteous doth arise,
In trouble ioy,in darknes light,
Compassion is in his eyes,
And mercie alwaies in his sight : 

5 Yea pitie moueth such to lend,
He doth by iudgement things expend.






6 And surely such shall neuer faile,
For in remembrance had is he. 

7 No tydings ill can make him quaile,
Who in the Lord sure hope doth see.

8 His heart is firme,his feare is past,
For he shall see his foes downe cast. 

9 He did well for the poore to prouide,
His righteousnesse shall still remaine :
And his estate with praise abide, 
Though that the wicked man disdaine.

10 Yea gnash his teeth thereat shall he,
And so consume his state to see.




The 113. Psalme.


YE children which doe serue the Lord,
Praise ye his name with one accord,
Yea blessed be alwayes his name. 

3 Who from the rising of the Sun,
Till it returne where it begun,
Is to be praised with great fame.

4 The Lord all people doth surmount,
As for his glorie we may count,
Aboue the heauens high to be. 

5 With God the Lord who may compare,
Whose dwellings in the heauens are?
Of such great power and force is he. 

6 He doth abase himselfe we know,
Things to behold both here below,
And also in heauen aboue. 

7 The needy out of dust to draw,
And eke the poore which helpe none saw,
His only mercie did him moue.

8 And so him set in high degree,
With Princes of great dignitie,
That rule his people with great fame.






9 The barren he doth make to beare,
And with great ioy her fruit to reare,
Therefore praise ye his holy name.




The 120.Psalme.


IN trouble and in thrall,
Vnto the Lord I call,
And he doth me comfort. 

2 Deliuer me I say,
>From lyers lips alway,
And tongues of false report.

3 What vauntage or what thing,
Gets thou thus for to sting,
Thou false and flattering lyer?

4 Thy tongue doth hurt I weene,
No lesse then arrowes keene,
Of hote consuming fire.

5 Alas too long I slack,
Within these tents so black,
Which Kedars are by name:
By whom the flock elect,
And all of Isaacks sect,
Are put to open shame.

6 With them that peace did hate,
I came a peace to make,
And set a quiet life :

7 But when my word was told,
Causeles I was controld,
By them that would haue strife.




The 126. Psalme.


WHen that the Lord 
againe his Sion had forth brought,






From bondage great 
and also seruitude extreame:
His workes was such,
as did surmount mans heart and thought,
So that we were
much like to them that dreame :
Our mouthes were with 
laughter filled then, 
And eke our tongues
did shew vs ioyfull men.

2 The Heathen folke,
were forced then this to confesse,
How that the Lord 
for them also great things had done. 

3 But much more we,
and therefore can confesse no lesse,
Wherefore to ioy
we haue good cause as we begun. 

4 O Lord go forth,
thou canst our bondage end :
As to deserts
the flowing riuers send.

5 Full true it is 
that they which sow in teares indeed, 
A time will come
when they shall reape in mirth and ioy: 

6 They went and wept
in bearing of their precious seede:
For that their foes,
full oftentimes did them annoy.
But their returne
with ioy they shall sure see :
Their sheaues home bring,
and not impayred be.









The 148.Psalme.


GIue laud vnto the Lord,
From heauen that is so hye :
Praise him indeed and word,
Aboue the starrie skie.

2 And also yee,
His Angels all,
Armies royall,
Praise him with glee.

3 Praise him both Sunne and Moone,
Which are so cleere and bright :
The same of you be done,
Ye glistring stars of light. 

4 And eke no lesse
Ye heauens faire,
And clowdes of the aire,
His laud expresse.

5 For at his word they were 
All formed as we see :
At his voyce did appeare
All things in their degree.

6 Which he set fast,
To them he made 
A law and trade,
For aye to last.




The Schoole-maister to his Scholers.


MY child and scholer,take good heed,
vnto the words which here are set :
And see you do accordingly,
or els be sure you shall be beat.

First, I commaund thee God to serue,
then to thy parents dutie yeeld: 






Vnto all men be curteous,
and mannerly in towne and field.

Your cloathes vnbuttoned do not vse,
let not your hose vngartered be:
Haue handkerchiefe in readines,
wash hands and face,or see not me.

Lose not your bookes,inkhorne nor pen,
nor girdle,garters,hat nor band :
Let shoes be tied,pin shirtband close,
keepe well your poynts at any hand.

If broken hosed or shooed you goe,
or slouenly in your array:
Without a girdle,or vntrust,
then you and I must make a fray.

If that you crie,or talke aloud,
or bookes do rend,or strike with knife,
Or laugh, or play vnlawfully,
then you and I must be at strife.

If that you curse,miscall,or sweare,
if that you pick,filch,steale or lie :
If you forget a scholers part,
then must you sure your poynts vntie.

If to the schoole you do not goe,
when time doth call you to the same :
Or if you loyter in the streetes,
when we do meet,then look for blame.

Wherefore (my child) behaue thy selfe
so decently at all assaies,
That thou maist purchase parents loue,
and eke obtaine thy maisters praise.









The first part of Arithmeticke
called Numeration.


ALl nombers are made by the diuerse placing of these nine Fi­
gures. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. and this circle
(o)called a cypher. Now looke howe many of these stande toge­
ther, in so many seuerall places they must needs stand. But marke
that thou call that which is next the right hand, the first place, and
so goe (as it were) backeward, calling the next vnto him, toward
the left hand, the second place, the next, the third place. And so
forth, as farre as thou wilt. Secondly, the further any Figure stan­
deth from the first place, the greater he is : euery following place
being greater by tenne times, then that next before, as (5) in the
first place is but fiue, but in the seconde place , tenne times fiue,
that is, fiue times tenne, which is fiftie. In the third place, fiue hun­
dreth. In the fourth place, fiue thousand. And in the fift place,
fifty thousand. And so thou mayest proceed. As for example:this
nomber thus placed: 1596. beeing this present yeere from the
birth of Christ, is one thousand, fiue hundreth, ninetie, six. And
this nomber 5524. being this present yeere from the Creation
(though otherwise commonly taken) is fiue thousande, fiue hun­
dreth, twenty foure. But my booke growing greater then I pur­
posed : pardon me (I pray thee) though I breake off this matter,
sooner then (peraduenture thou mayest thinke) I promised.




Directions to the Ignorant.


FOr thy better vnderstanding this briefe Chronologie following,
I thought expedient to aduertise thee thus much. Thou must
first be perfect in the nombers aboue, so farre as concerneth the
fourth place. Then marke how I haue diuided the yeares of the
world into fiue parts, called fiue periods,which I for plainnesse sake
sticke not to call Chapters, therefore I beginne mine accompt fiue
times,best answering ( as I thinke ) thy demaunds, when such
one liued, or such a thing done: for thou commonly mouest thy
question one of these fiue wayes, eyther how long was it after the
Creation? or howe long after the Floud? howe long after the de­






parture out of Ægypt and the Lawe giuen ? How long before
Christ? or how long after Christ? as thou thinkest it nearest one of
these times. If then thou findest the name thou seekest, and the
yeare set by it, looke vpward from thence to the beginning of that
Chapter, and thou shalt see how long that thing thou seekest, was
from the time mentioned in the Title of that Chapter. Further I
haue set it downe (as thou seest ) in a diuerse letter, according to
the diuersitie of the matter. If then thou seekest for any thing pro­
per to the Bible, or ecclesiasticall story, seeke it in the Romaine &
Italica letters : which thou vsest to call the Latine letter, and passe
ouer these in the English letter, for they concerne not thy purpose.
Againe, if thou be a Grammar Scholer, or other that wouldest
find some thing onely concerning any prophane Authour , seeke
onely in the English letter, passing ouer the other. And because I
desire breuitie, I haue omitted the Kings of Israel, Ægypt, Assy­
ria, &c. & the Prophets which wrote not, whose times thou mayst
easily finde, by conference with the Iudges, and Kinges of Iudah.
And note that ( y ) alone standing by any nomber, signifieth
( yeare ). Finally my first purpose in making it , was for thy sake
that learnest reading. Therefore reade them so often, vntill thou
canst runne them ouer as fast as any other English.


CHAP. 1.
After the Creation.


yeare.

 God hauing made the world
and created Adam & Heuah.
Their posteritie was borne in
these yeers after as followeth.

130. Sheth. 

235. Enosh.

325. Kenan. 

395. Mahaliel. 

460. Iared. 

522. Enoch. 

687. Methushalah. 

yeere.

874. Lamech. 

1056. Noah. 

1556. Iaphet. 

1558. Shem. 

1656. The vniuersall Floud after 
which followeth the gene­
ration of Shem. 


CHAP. 2.
After the Floud.


2. Arpachshad. 

37. Shelah. 

67. Eber. 






yeere.

101. Peleg.

101. Tower of Babel built.

131. Reu.

163. Serug.

192. Nahor.

222. Terah.

292. Haran.

352. Abraham.

436. Ishmael.

452. Sodom destroyed.

452. Isaac.

512. Iacob.

587. Ruben.

588. Simeon.

589. Leui.

599. Iudah.

600. Dan.

601. Naphtali.

601. Asher.

602. Issachar.

602. Gad.

602. Zebulon.

604. Ioseph.

619. Beniamin.
These 12.were the Sonnes 
of Iacob called the 12. Pa­
triarches, of whom came the
12. Tribes of Israel.
Minerua.

629. Phares.

642. Hezron.

643. Iacob went into Aegypt,
where they were 215.yeere.
Hercules. Lyb.
Aram.
Prometheus.

yeere.

Atlas.
Aminadab.

778. Aaron.

781. Moses.
Iob.
Naasson.
Salmon.

858. Moses deliuered the chil­
dren of Israel out of Aegipt,
then was the law giuen.


CHAP. 3.
After the law giuen.


Phaeton burnt.

40. Iosua brought the people
out of the wildernesse into
the land of Canaan, and
reigned 18.yeares.

48. Iubilies began.

58. Othoniel iudged Israel 40.
yeares , whereof Chusham
the Aramite oppressed them
8.yeares.
Radamanthus.

80. Boaz of Rahab.

98. Ehud and Shamgar iudged
80. yeare , whereof Eglon
the Moabite oppressed 18.y.
Tros ruled in Dardania
and called it Troy.
Pegasus.
Orpheus.

178. Debora and Baruk iudged
40. y. whereof Iabin and
Sisera oppressed 20.y.






yeere.

198.  Obed borne of Ruth.

218. Gedeon iudged 40. y. wher­
of the Midianites oppres­
sed 7.y.  
Theseus.

358. Abimelech. 3. y.

261. Tholay. 23. y.

284. Iair iudged 22. y. whereof
the Ammonites and the
Philistims oppressed 18. y.
Amazones battel against
Thebes. 

306. Iephte. 6. y.

306. Iesse father of Dauid by O­
bed.

311. Ibzan iudged 7.y.

318. Elon 10. y. 
Troy destroyed.

329. Abdon the Piranothite. 8. y.

336. Samson 20 y.
In the time of these 6.Iud­
ges the Philistims oppres­
sed.

356. Ely the Priest. 40.y.

397. Samuel and Saul. 40. y.

432. Brutus came into Eng­
lande, if the storie bee
true.

437. Dauid reigned 40. y.
Nathan, Asaph, Heman,
and Ieduthun Prophets.

477. Salomon reigned 40. y. &

481. in his fourth yere built the
Temple before the birth of
Christ about 936.y.


CHAP. 4.
Before Christ.


yeere.

936. Temple built.

900.  Hesiod.

899. Rehoboam reigned ouer
Iudah 17.y.

882. Abijam. 3.y.

879. Asa. 41.y.

838. Iehoshaphat. 25. y.

813. Iehoram. 8.y.

805. Ahaziah. 1.y.

804. Athaliah. 6 y.

798. Ioash. 40. y.

758. Amaziah. 29. y.
Ionah prophesieth.

743. Rome built by Romulus 
vpon 4. hils, which are 
Palatinus, Capitolinus,  
Exquilinus, Auentinus,  
& after enlarged by Ser­ 
uius Tullus within the 
walles with other thr'ee 
hils, Coelius, Viminalis 
and Quirinalis.

729. Kingdome of Iudah voyd
11.y.

725. Sardanapalus.

718. Azariah. 52.y.
Kingdome of Israel voyde
22.y.

700. Numa Pompilius the 2.
Romane King.

685. Lycurgus the Lacede­
monian.






yeare.

Ioel, Hosea, Amos, and I­
saiah prophesie.
Tullus Hostilius the 3.
Romane King.

677.  Iotham ouer Iudah. 15.y.
Michaiah also prophesieth.

662. Ahaz. 16.y.

646. Ezechiah. 29.y.

628. Salmanasar carried the 10.
tribes of Israel captiue to
Babel , from whence they 
neuer returned. And here 
the race of the Kings of Is­
rael ceased.
Merodachbaladan began to 
bring the Empire from A­
shur to Babel.

628. Simonides.  
Aristoxenes.  
Ancus Martius the 4. Ro­ 
mane King.  
Archilocus: Zaleucus:  
Homer : Phararis.

617. Manasseh. 55.y. 
Ieremiah prophesieth.

610. Sappho: Milo: Stesico­ 
rus: Epimenides.

564. Nebuchadnezzar.

562. Amon. 2.y.

560. Iosiah. 31.y.
Zephaniah and Habakuk
prophesieth.

529. Iehoakim 11.y.

526. Captiuitie, wherein Nebu­
chadnezzar carried cap­
tiues Daniel, and many o­

yeare.

ther into Babylon , began
the 3.y. of Iehoakim.
Ieremiah continueth his
prophesie in Iudah.
Daniel prophesieth in Ba­
bel.

518. Zedekiah. 11. y.
Ezekiel prophesieth.

507. Ierusalem destroyed , and
Ieremiah with the remnant
of Iudah, carried into AE­
gypt, where Ieremiah pro­
phesieth.
Ezekiel continueth his pro­
phesie in Babel.

501. Consuls 2.yearely began
in Rome.

495. Horatius Cocles.

494. Salathiel. 

493. Dictators in Rome.

487. Tribunes of the people
began in Rome.

468. Zerobabel.

466.  Pythagoras:Pindarus: 
Democratus : Cresus :  
Heraclitus : Esop : So­ 
lon : Thales : 7. Wise 
men : Pisistratus.  

456. Darius and Cyrus his son
wan Babylon from Baltha­
zar : began the Empire of 
the Persians, & gaue leaue 
for the Iewes to returne and 
build the temple.

454. Temple began to be built. 
The historie of Ezra.






yeare.

Artahshashte called of pro­ 
phane writers Cambyses,
reigned with  Cyrus his fa­
ther.
The historie of Ester.
Ahashuerosh called Darius
Histaspis, diuorced Vastie,

440. maried Ester : hanged Ha­
mon, and aduanced Mor­
decai.

438. Tribuni Militum.

425. Darius of Persia called also
Artaxshast,and of prophane 
writers Darius Longima­
nus reigned 36.y.
Haggai prophesieth.
Zachariah prophesieth.

423. Malachi the last Prophet.

405.  Nehemiah his storie, who
builded the wals of Ierusalem.

397 Battell Peloponnesiack
for 27 y. till the Lacede­
monians ouercam Athens. 

386.  Rome taken by Gallus a
Britaine.

382.  Themistocles. Aristides
Aeschilus. Sophocles. 
Pericles. Empedocles
Hippocrates. Parmeni­
des. Aristarchus. Euri­
pides. Herodotus. Ari­
stobulus. Socrates. Al­
cibiades. Diogenes. Pla­
to. Xenophon. Agestlaus.

363. Philip of Macedonia con­
quered all Grecia, after

yeere.

the Thebanes had sub­
dued the Lacedemonians.

351. Marcus Curtius. Manli­
us Torquatus.

350. Aristoteles. Demosthe­
nes. Epicurus. Epima­
nondas. Theophrastus. 
Menander. Zenocrates.

344. Battell with the Sam­
nites at Rome continued
49. y.

332. Alexander the great con­ 
quered Persia, he entreated 
the Iewes honorably , and
reigned 12.yeeres.  
Now was the Empire of the
Grecians great, which after 
the death of Alexander was 
deuided vnto his.4 Captains 
whereof Syria & Egypt con­
tinued vntill the Empire of 
the Romaines, and alwayes
vexed the Iewes.
Now beginneth the Storie of 
the Maccabees.

301. Two Decii in Rome.

300. Zeno authour of the Sto­
ickes. Acatus. Demetri­
us. Phalerius.

288. Ptolemy Philadelphus cau­
sed 70.interpreters to tran­
slate the Law into Greeke.

283.  Hetruria yeelded to
Rome wholly.

272. Regulus. Polybius. Cle­
anthes.






yeere.

267. Battell of Carthage and
Rome. 22.y.

241. Battell Affrican with
Numidia.

237.  Iesus Sirach.

236. Neuius. Plautus

224. Antiochus magnus.

219. Second Battell of Car­
thage, because that Ha­
nibal had recouered
Spaine from Rome.

131. The thirde Battell of
Carthage : which was in
3.yeeres vtterly destroy­
ed by Scipio Iunior.

129. Pharisees, Sadducees, and
Essees began their Sectes.

89. Ciuill warre in Rome 8.
yeers betweene Marius
& Sylla, because Sylla
being younger was cho­
sen Captaine into Asia to
the Battell Mithridatike

78. Tigranes King of Arme­
nia.

65. Cato Vticensis. Salusti­
us.

57. Cicero Consul.

52. Britaine entred vpon by
Iulius Cesar.

47. Iulius Cesar reigned
Emperour 5 .yeares.

45. Virgil. Horace.Liui.O­
uid. Cornelius Nepos.

42.  Octauius Augustus Empe­ 
rour 56.yeers.

yeere.

34. Herod the great made 
King of Iurie: after whose 
death, his 4. sonnes were con­ 
firmed in his kingdome , and 
called Tetrarches.
See Luke 3. 1.
Temple againe sumptuously 
builded by Herod.
Christ borne in the 42. yeer 
of Augustus , from which 
beginneth our vsuall ac­ 
compt.


CHAP. 5.
After the birth of Christ.


16. Tiberius Emperour after 
the birth of Christ 16.yeer.

33. Christ crucified.

33. Steuen stoned.

34. Paul conuerted.

42. Herod Agrippa President 
in Iury,he beheaded Iames.

42. Matthew wrote his Gospel.

44. Iames beheaded.

44. Marke preached in Egypt

46.  Luke wrote.

50. Epistle to the Galathians
written from Antioch.

53. Epistle to the Thessal. from
Athens.

54. Philip martyred.

55. 1.Epistle to Corint.from E­
phesus.

55. 1. to Timothie from Troas.

55. To Titus from Troas.






yeere.

55. 2. To Corint. from Philippie.

55. Peters 1.Epistle.

56. Peters 2.Epistle.

56. To the Rom. from Corinth.

57. Claudius Nero persecutor.

59.  Epistles to the Philip.Ephes.
Colos. Philemon. from
Rome.

61. Actes by Luke nowe (as is 
thought.)

63. Iames throwne downe from 
a Pinacle.

69. 2. Epistle to Timothie.

69. Paul martyred at Rome.

73. Ierusalem destroyed by Ves­
pasian and Titus.

76. Ignatius Bishop of Antioch.

83. Domitian Emperour.

85. Nicholaitan Hereticks.

90. Cornelius Tacitus. Sue­
ton. Aulus Gellius. Plu­
tarch. Quintillian. Iuue­
nal.Appian.Apuleius.

93. Iohn banished to Pathmos,
where ( as is thought ) hee 
wrote his Gospel & the Re­ 
uelation.

yeere.

97. Iohn returned from Path­
mos to Ephesus.

100. Iohn dyed.

114. Plinie writeth for the Chri­ 
stians.

133. Galene.

170. Iustinus dyed a martyr.

180.  Ireneus of Lions.

187. England receiueth the Gos­ 
pel.

202. Clemens Alexandrinus.

210. Tertullian.

216. Origen.

249. Cyprian.

289. Constantius raigned in 
England.

307. Eusebius.

333. Athanasius.

347. Hillarie.

347.  Gregorie Nazianzene.

371. Ambrose B.of Millaine.

375. Hieronimus.

409. Chrysostome.

409. Augustine.

414. Theodoret.

500. Gothes conquered Italy,
then increased Barbarisme 
and Papistrie.





Directions for the 
vnskilfull.


IF thou hast not been acquainted with such a table as this follo­
wing, and desirest to make vse of it, thou must get the Alphabet,
that is, the order of the letters as they stand, without Booke per­
fectly: to know where euery letter standeth, as (b) neere the be­






ginning, (m) about the middest,and (v) toward the end. There­
fore if the word thou wouldest finde, begin with (a) looke in the
beginning of the Table,if with ( t ) looke toward the end : Againe,
if thy worde beginne with (ba) looke in the beginning of the
letter (b) but if with (bu) looke toward the end of that letter, and
if thou obseruest the same for the third and fourth letters,thou shalt
finde thy word presently. Secondly, thou must know the cause of
the difference of the letter,al written with the Romain, as in(abba)
are words taken from the Latine or other learned languages,these
with the Italike letter as (abandon) are French words made Eng­
lish : those with the English letter, are meerely English, or from
some other vulgar tongue. The word adioyned vnto it is euer in
English, and is the interpreter of it in a more familiar English
word. But those that haue no word expounding them , are set
down to let thee see their true writing,where I thought thou migh­
test otherwise erre. And vnderstand further, that all words , that
haue in them ( y  ), or ( ph ) together,or begin with(chr)(where
(h)is neuer pronounced ) or end in ( isme  )are all Greeke words,
as hypocrite. philosophie.Christ.Baptisme. But where I say they are
Greeke, I meane, with some difference of termination , for they
were brought from Greece  vnto vs through Rome,there they were
newly stamped,and when they came vnto vs, we coyned them af­
ter our fashion,as Christ is in Latine Christus, in Greeke Christos .
So Baptisme  is in Latine Baptismus, in Greeke Baptismos. The like
you must obserue for the Latine words, as those that we haue en­
ding in (ion) the Latine haue in (io) Creation remission,in Latine is
Creatio, remission. But touching the French, we haue some of them
with difference, and some without , and thus thou shalt discerne
them. Those with difference are marked with this starre (*) as
accomplish  in French is (accomplir) and therefore you shall finde
by it this marke('):the other haue none. Sometime I referre thee
from one word to another, as thus at this word ( brigantine  ) see
barke, then those two be of one signification and so shalt thou al­
so learne varietie of words. When a word hath two significations,
if one be well knowne, I omit that, as to barke as a dogge is well
knowne, but a barke  that is a little Shippe,is not so familiar,there­
fore I put downe that. If I shoulde put downe all deriuatiues, it






would be ouer long : therefore I hope the diligent Scholer will
soone learne by practise from the primitiue or originall, I haue
therefore set downe some fewe of the hardest , yet some rules for
them thou shalt find in the end. There are many moe from Latine
and French, but being well knowne, I omit them.

 
 Abandon  cast away.

 abba   father.

 abbesse abbatesse, mistresse of a 
Nunnerie.

 abbreuiat  shorten.

 abbridge   see abbreuiat.

 abbut. to lie vnto.

 abecedarie   the order of the let­
ters, or he that vseth them.

abet. to mainteine.

 abhominable.  

abhorre.  

abiect  base.

 abiure  renounce.

 abolish   make void.

k. standeth
for a kind of.
 abricot.    a kind of fruit.

abroad.  

 abrogate    see abolish.

 absolue   finish.

 absolute   perfect.

 absolution  forgiuenesse.

 abstinence   refraining.

 abstract  see abbreuiat. 

 absurd  foolish.

 accent   tune.

 accept    take liking.

 accesse    free comming to

 accessarie   partaker.

 accident   befall.

 accommodate   to fitte to.

 accomplish*   finish.

 accompt*  to recken.

 accord  agreement.

 accurate  cunning.

 accrew  grow.

 acertaine *   make sure.

achieue   see accomplish.

 acorne.  

 actiue  nimble.

 actuall   in act.

 acute  wittie.

 addict   giuen to

 adiew  farewell.

 addresse  prepare or direct.

 adiacent   lying to

 adiourn *  deferre.

 adjure   make to sweare.

 administer  gouerne or serue

 admire  maruaile at.

 admiral   chiefe by Sea.

 admission  receiuing.

 adopt   take for his child.

 adore  worshippe.

 adorne  beautifie.

 aduerse  contrarie.

 aduertise   giue knowledge.

 adulation  flatterie.

 adulterate  counterfait.

 aduocate  attournie.

 aduouson  patronage.

 adustion  burning.

 affable   readie and courteous 





 
in speach.

 affect   earnest desire.

 affinitie   kinne by marriage,

 affirmatiue  auouching.

 affiance  trust

 affianced  betrothed.

 agent  doer.

 aggrauat   make grieuous.

 agilitie  nimblenes.

 agonie g.  heauie passion.

 alacritie  cheerefulnes.

 alarum   a sound to the Battell.

 alien  a stranger.

 alienation  estranging.

 alight.  

 alledge *   bring proofe.

 alliance  kindred or league.

 allusion   pointing to.

 allude  to poynt to.

 aliment  nourishment.

almes.  

almightie.  

 alphabet g. order of letters.

 altercation  debate.

 allegorie g. similitude.

 allegiance  obedience.

 altitude  height.

 allegation  alledging.

 ambassadour  messenger.

 ambiguous  doubtfull.

 ambition   desire of honour.

 ambushment   priuie traine.

 amorous   full of loue.

 amplifie  enlarge.

 anatomie g. cutting vp.

 anathema g. accursed.

 andiron.  

anguish  griefe.

 anchor.  

 animate  encourage.

 annuall  yeerely.

 animaduersion  noting.

 antichrist   against Christ.

 antidate  a fore-date.

 anticipation  preuenting.

 angle  corner.

 anticke  disguised.

 g. or gr. stan­
deth for
Greeke.
 annihilate   make void.

 ancestour.  

 annullitie   see annihilate.

 aphorisme   generall rule.

 apostate g. a backeslider.

 apostocie   falling away.

 amen   so be it.

 apostle g. see ambassadour.

 apologie g.  defence.

 apocalypse  reuelation.

 alpha g.  the first Gr'eeke letter.

 apothecarie.* 

 apocrypha   not of authoritie.

 apparant   in sight.

 appeach  accurse.

 appeale   to seeke to a higher 
Iudge.

 appertaine  belong.

 appertinent 
appurtenance  belonging.

 appetite   desire to eate

 application  applying to.

 appose   aske question.

 apposition  apposing.

 approbation  allowance.

 approue  allow.

 approch *   come nigh.





 
 appropriat   make his owne.

 apt  fitte.

 arbiter. 
arbitratour. Vmpier.

 arbitrement  iudgement.

 arch. gr. chiefe.

 arch-angell gr. chiefe angell.

 arch-bishop  chiefe Bishop.

 architect  chiefe builder.

 argent  siluer.

 argue  to reason.

 Arithmeticke gr. Arte of nom­
bring.

 arke  Shippe.

 armorie house of armour.

 arraigne  

 arriue* come to land.

 arrerages debt vnpaid.

 artificer  handicrafts man.

 artificiall  workmanlike.

 articulate  iointed.

 ascend  goe vp.

 ascertaine*  assure.

 assent  agr'eement.

 ascent  a going vp.

 ascribe  giue to

 askew  a-side.

 aspect  looking vpon.

 aspire  climbe vp.

 asperat  rough.

 aspiration  breathing.

 assaie  proue.

 assaile*  set vpon.

 assault* see assaile.

 assentation  flatterie.

 assertion  affirming.

 assiduitie  continuance.

 asseueration  earnest affirming

 assigne  appoint.

 assignation  appointment.

 assises.  

 assistance  helpe.

 associat  accompanie.

 astrictiue 
astringent  binding.

astronomie. 
astrologie. gr. knowledg of the stars

 atheist g. without god.

 atheisme  the opinion of the
Atheist.

 attach  sease vpon.

 attaint conuict of crime.

 attainder  a conuiction.

 attempt *  set vpon.

 attentiue  heedy.

 attribute  giue to.

 auarice  coueteousnes.

 audacious  bould.

 audience  hearing.

 auditor  hearer or officer of
accompts.

  audible  easie to be heard.

 auerre*  auouch.

 augment  to increase.

 auouch  affirme with earnest­
nes.

 authenticall gr. of authoritie.

 axiome  certaine principle.

 autumne  the haruest.

 
 
 ballance a payer of skales.

 bailiffe  

 bankerupt  bankerout.

banquet  

baptist a baptiser.





 
 baptisme.  

barbarian a rude person.

 barbarisme  barbarousnes.

 barke* small shippe.

barretter  a contentious person.

barrester allowed to giue
counsell

 barter*  to bargaine.

 battrie  beating.

 baulme 

 beatitude  blessednes.

 beguile.  

 beneficiall  profitable.

 beneuolence  good will.

 benigne  fauorable.

 benignitie  bountie.

bereft depriued.

 besiege.  

 biere to carry a dead corps.

bishope ouers'eer.

 blanch* to make white.

 blaspheme g. speake ill of 
God.

bloud.  

boare.  

beast.  

boat.  

bough.  

bought.  

 bonnet  cap.

bracelet.  

bracer.  

breefe.  

brigandine coate of defence.

 brigantine see barke.

 brandish* to shake a sword.

broad.  

broath.  

brothel, keeper of a house of
 baudery.

 bruise.  

bruit.  

buggerie coniunction with
one of the same kind.

burgesse a head man of a
towne

build.  

 
 
 calliditie  craftines.

 capacitie conceipt or receipt.

cancell to vndoe.

 canon g. law.

canonise make a saint.

 capitall  deadly or great.

 capable  containing.

 capitulat.  

 captious  catching.

 captiue  prisoner.

 captiuate  make subiect.

 carbuncle a kind of disease or stone.

 carnalitie  fleshines.

 casualitie  chaunce.

 castigation  chastisment.

 cathedrall gr. church: chiefe in 
the diocesse.

 catholike g. vniuersall.

 cauldron.  

 caution  warning.

 celebrate  make famous.

 celestiall  heauenly.

 catalogue gr. bedroule.

 celeritie  swiftnes.

 censor  corrector.

 censure  correction.

 centurion  captaine.





 
 cease  

cement  

 centre middest.

 ceremonie.  

 certaine.  

 certifie.  

 ceruse.  white leade.

 cestern.  

 character g. the fashion of a
letter.

 chaunt*  sing.

champion  wild field.

chambering lightnes.

 charter  a graunt confirmed.

 chamberlaine,  

 chariot Princes coach.

 chauncerie.  

 cheualrie  knighthoode.

chiefe.  

 cherubin  order of Angels.

 chirograph gr. hand-writing.

 christ gr. annointed.

 chirurgeon gr. surgeon.

 choller gr. a humor causing 
anger.

 chronicler 
chronographer gr. historie
writer.

 chronologie. gr story of times.

church, faithfull people.

 chrystall gr. a kind of  glasse.

 cider,  drinke made of apples.

 cinamon.  

 circle.  

circuit.  

 cittren.  

citie.  

citizen.  

 circumcise  to cut the priuie 
skin.

 circumference  round circuit.

 circumspect  heedie.

 circumlocution  circumstance
of sp'eech.

 circumuent  preuent.

ciuet.  

 ciuil.  

 clamorous  ready to speake ill.

clemencie gentlenes.

 client  he that is defended.

cocatrice  a kind of  beast.

 collect  gather.

 colleague  companion.

 collation  recitall.

 coadiutor  helper.

 cogitation  thought.

 collusion  deceite.

 colume  one side of a page de­
uided.

 comedy  a kind of  stage playe. 

commencement  a beginning.

 comet gr. a blasing star.

 commentarie  exposition.

 commodious  profitable.

 commotion  rebellion.

 communicate  made partaker.

 communion  felowship.

 compact  ioyned together.

 compendious  short.

 competitor  h'ee that standeth 
with me for an office.

 compile  gather and make.

 complexion.  

 complices  colleagues.

 compose  make.





 
 composition  agr'eement.

 comprehend  conteine.

 comprise  s'ee comprehend.

 concoct  to digest meate.

 concord  agr'ee.

 concordance  agr'eement.

 competent  conuenient.

 comprimit, to make agr'ee.

 concauitie  hollownes.

 compulsion  force.

conceale.  

 conception  conceiuing in the 
wombe.

 concupisence  desire.

 concurre  agr'ee together.

 condiscend  agr'ee vnto.

 condigne  worthie.

 conduct  guiding.

 confection  compounding.

 confederate  s'ee compact.

 conferre  talke together.

 conferrence  communication.

 confidence  trust.

 confirme  establish.

 confiscate  forfiture of goods.

 conflict  battaile.

 confound  ouerthrow.

 congeale  harden.

 congestion  a heaping vp.

 congregate  gather together.

 congruitie  s'ee concord.

 coniunction  ioyning together

 coniecture  gesse.

 consent  agr'eement.

 conscent  harmonie.

 consequence  following.

 conserue  k'eepe.

 consecrate  make holy.

 consequent  following.

 consist  stand.

 consolation  comfort.

 consistorie  place of ciuil iudge­
ment.

consort s'ee consent.

 conspire  agr'ee together for il.

 construe  expound.

 consult  take counsaile.

 contagious  that corrupteth.

 contemplation  meditation.

 continent  modest abstei­
ning.

 contract  make short.

 contradiction  gainesaying.

 contribute  bestow.

 contrite  sorrowfull.

 contrition  sorrow.

 conuert  tourne.

 conuict  proued guiltie.

 conuent  bring before.

 conuerse  companie with.

 conuocation  calling together.

 conuulsion  a shrinking vp.

 copartener fellow.

 copious  plentifull.

 corps  dead bodie.

 corporall  bodilie.

corrasiue. fretting

 correspondent  answerable.

 corrigible  easilie corrected.

 coroborate  strengthen.

 couert hidden place.

costiue, bound in the bodie.

 cosmographie gr. description
of the world.





 
 counterpoise  make leuell.

countermand command
contrarie.

 compunction  pricking.

 cophin g. basket or corps
chest.

 creede  the beleefe.

 credence  beleefe.

 credulous  easie to beleeue.

 criminous  faultie.

 crucifie  fasten to a crosse.

 crocodile  a kind of  beast.

 culpable  blame worthie.

 cubite  a foote and a halfe.

cupboard.  

 cursorilie  running fast ouer

 cymball  an instrument.

 clyster  or glyster.

 cypresse  

 
 
 Deacon g. prouider for the
poore.

 debilitie  weaknes.

 deafe  that cannot heare.

 domage*  losse.

 decent  comlie.

 decline  fall away.

 decision  cutting away.

 decorum  comlines.

 decipher  describe.

 dedication  a deuoting.

 deduct  take out.

 defect  want.

 deflower  dishonest.

 defraude  deceiue.

 deformed  ill shapen.

 define  shew what it is.

 degenerate  be vnlike his an­
cestors.

 dehort  moue from.

 deitie  godhead.

 deifie  make like god.

 delectation  delight.

delicate daintie.

 delude  deceiue.

 deluge great flood.

 delusion  mockerie.

 demonstrate  shew plainely.

 denison  free man.

 denounce  declare sentence a­
gainst

 depend  hang vpon.

 deportation  carying away.

 depose  put from.

 depriue  see depose

 depute  accompte.

 deride  mocke.

 deriue  fetch from.

 deriuation  taken from ano­
ther.

derogate see detract.

 describe  set forth.

 descend  go downe.

 desert  wildernes.

 desist  leaue of.

 detest  hate greatlie.

 detect  bewray.

 detract  take from.

 detriment  losse.

 detrude  thrust from.

 deuote  giuen vnto.

 dexterity  aptnes.

 diabolicall  deuellish.

 diademe  crowne.

 diet  manner of foode.





 
 dialogue g. conference.

 defame.  

 difficult  hard,

 diocesse g. iurisdiction.

 diocesan  that hath iurisdiction

 digest  bring in order, see
concoct.

 dignitie  worthinesse.

 digresse  turne from.

 dilate  enlarge.

 direct  guide.

 diminution  lessening.

 disburse* lay out money.

 discend  see descend.

 disciple  scholer.

 discipline  instruction.

 dissent  disagr'ee.

 discerne  see.

disclose, discouerie.

 discord  disagr'eement.

 discusse  see dilate.

 disioyne  vnioyne.

 disfranchis  take away freedom.

 dismisse  let passe.

 disloiall  disobedient.

 disparagement  inequalitie of
birth.

 dispense  set fr'ee.

 disperse  spread abroad.

 dispeople  to vnpeople a
place.

 discent  from our ancestours.

 dissimilitude  vnlikelines.

 dissolue  vnloose

 dissolute  careles.

 dissonant  disagreeing.

 distinguish  put difference.

 dice.  

disable. make vnable.

disabilitie  vnablenes.

disanul, make void.

 disputable  questionable or
doubtfull.

diffine.  

 discomfit put to flight.

 discomfiture a putting to
flight.

 discipher  lay open.

 disgestion  bringing into
order.

 digression  departing from
the matter.

 difficultie  hardnes.

 diffamation  a slaundering.

 direction  ordering.

 dissimulation  dissembling.

 dimension  measuring.

 discourse.  

 dismember  part one p'eece
from another.

 disposition  naturall incli­
nation, or setting in or­
der.

 dissipation  scattering.

 dissolution  breaking.

 distillation  distilling or drop­
ping downe.

 distinct  differing. 

 distinction  a making of diffe­
rence

 diuulgate  make common.

 dispoyle  take away by vio­
lence.

 display  spread abroad.





 
 distracted  troubled in minde.

 distribution  diuision.

 disturbe  disquiet.

 disswade   see dehort.

 dittie  the matter of a song.

 diuerte  turne from.

 diuine  heauenly.

 diuinitie  heavenly doctrine.

 diuturnitie  dailinesse.

 doctrine learning.

 dolor  griefe.

 dolorous  grieuous.

 docilitie  easines to be taught.

 dolphine  a kind of  of fish.

 domesticall  at home.

 dominion  
domination  rule.

 
 
 Eclipse g. failing.

 ecclesiasticall  belonging to
 the Church.

 edict  commande ment.

 edifice  building.

 education  bringing vp.

 edition  putting forth.

 effect  a thing done.

 effectuall  forcible.

 effeminate  womanish.

 efficacie  force.

 effusion  pouring forth.

 egresse  forth going.

 enhaunce, make greater.

 election  choise.

 elect  chosen.

 elegancie  fine speech.

 elephant  a kind of  beast.

 emerods  a kind of  disease.

 eleuate  lift vp.

 emblem g. picture.

emmot or pismire.

 empire  gouernment.

encroach.  

 enarration  declaration.

encounter, set against.

 enduce  moue.

 enimitie enmitie  hatred betwixt.

 enchaunt*  bewitch.

 enfranchise*  make free.

 enflame  burne.

engrate, presse vpon.

 ensigne  flagge for warre.

 enormious  out of square.

 enterre  laie in the earth.

 enterlace  put betw'eene.

 enuiron  compasse about.

 epha  a kind of  measure.

 epitaph  the writing on a
tombe.

 epitome g. the briefe of a
booke.

 epitomise g. to make an 
 epitomie.

 epistle g. a letter sent.

 episcopall  bishoppelike.

 epicure  giuen to pleasure.

 epilogue  conclusion.

 equinoctiall  when the dayes
and nightes are equall.

 erect  set vp.

 erronious  full of errour.

escheat, forfeit.

 essence  substance.

 estimate  est'eeme.

 eternall  euerlasting.





 
 euangelist  bringer of glad
tidings.

 euict  ouercome.

 eunoch g. gelded or great of­
ficer.

 euocation  calling forth.

 exasperat  whet on.

 exact  perfect or require
with extremitie.

 exaggerate  heape vpon.

 exaltation  aduancing.

except.  

 excursion  running out.

exceed  

excell.  

 exchequer office of receipts.

 exclaime  crie out.

 execrable  cursed.

 execute  performe.

 excrement  doung.

 exempt  free.

 exemplifie  enlarge.

 exhibite  put vp.

 exile  banish.

 exorcist g. coniurer

 expedient  fit.

 expell  put out.

 expend  consider

expedition, hast.

 expect  looke for.

 expire  end

 explicate  declare.

 exploit  enterprise

 expulsion  driuing out

 exquisite  perfect.

 extend  spread forth.

 extenuate  lessen.

 extoll  aduance.

 extort  wring out.

 extract  drawne out.

 extemporall 
extemporarie   sodaine.

 
 
Fabulous, feigned.

 fact  deed.

faction deuision

factious that maketh deuision.

facilitie easines.

falconer.  

 fallacie  deceipt.

fantasie imagine.

fatall, by destinie.

festiuall ferst day.

festiuitie mirth.

 female 
feminine  the she.

fertile fruitfull.

 firuent  hot.

 feuer  ague.

 figuratiue  by figures.

finally lastly.

 fermament  sky.

 flagon great wine cup.

 flexible  easily bent.

 flux  disease of scouring.

 fornication  vncleannes be­
tweene single persons.

 fortification  strengthing.

 fountaine  head spring.

 fortitude  valiantnes.

 fragments  reliques.

 fragilitie  brittlenes.

 fragrant  sweete smelling.

 fraternitie  brotherhood





 
 fraudulent  deceiptfull.

 frequent  often.

 friuolous  vaine.

frontlet   a kind of  head attier.

 fructifie  make fruitfull.

 frustrate  make void.

 frugale  thriftie.

 fugitiue  runnagate.

 function  calling.

 funerall  buriall.

 furbusher,  dresser.

 furious  raging.

 future  time to come.

 
 
 Garboile  hurly burly.

 garner. corne chamber.

 gem  precious stone.

 gentilitie 
generositiegentrie.

 gentile  a heathen.

 generation  ofspring.

gender.  

 genealogie g. generation.

 genitor  father.

gesture.  

giues fetters.

ginger.  

 gourd a kind of  plant.

gorget.  

gorgious.  

gospell, glad tidings.

 geometrie g. Art of measu­
ring.

 gradation  by steppes.

 graduate  that hath taken 
degree.

 gratifie  to pleasure.

 gratis  freelie.

 guerdaine*  keeper.

 gulfe  deepe poole.

 
 
 Habilitie or 
abilitie  ablenes.

 habitable   able to be dwelt
in.

 habite  apparell.

 harmonie g. musicke.

 haleluiah  praise the Lord.

 herault kings messenger.

 hautie  loftie.

 hebrew  from Hebers stocke.

heathen, see gentile.


helmet, headpiece.

herbinger, sent before to pre­
pare.

 hereticall 
hereticke that holde heresie

homage, worship.

 hosan-na   saue I pray thee.

 horror  fearefull sorrow

 hostage  pleadge.

 host  armie.

 hostilitie  hatred.

 hymne  a kind of  song.

 humaine  gentle.

 humiditie  moisture.

 hipocrite g. 

hyssope.  

 
 
Idiot g. vnlearned.

 idolatrie g. false worship.

 ielous.  

 Iesus  Sauiour.

 ignominie  reproach.

 illegitimate  vnlawefully
borne.

 illusion  mockerie.





 
 imbecilitie  weakenes.

 imbark.  

 immediate  next to.

 imitation  following.

 immoderate  without mea­
sure.

 immortall  euerlasting.

impeach, accuse.

 immunitie  freedome.

 impediment  let.

 imperiall  belonging to the
crowne.

 imperfection  vnperfectnes.

 impenitent  vnrepentant.

 impietie  vngodlines.

 impose  lay vpon.

 impression  printing.

 impudent  shameles.

 impugne  disproue.

 impute  reckon.

 impunitie  without punish­
ment.

 impropriation  making proper.

 immanity  beastly crueltie.

 importune  to be earnest
with.

 imperious  desiring to rule.

 incessantly  earnestly.

 inquisition  searching.

 incense a kind of  offring.

incense  to stirre vp.

 incident  happening.

 inchant * bewitch.

 incitation  mouing.

 incline  leane vnto.

 incumber  trouble.

 incommodious  hurtfull.

 incompatible.  insufferable.

 incongruitie  without agree­
ment.

 incontinent  presently, or vn­
chast

 incurre  runne into.

 indemnitie  without losse.

 indignitie  vnworthinesse.

 indignation  hatred.

 induce  moue.

 induction  bringing in.

 indurate  harden.

 infamous  ill reported.

 infection  corrupting.

 inferre  bring in.

 infernall  belonging to hell.

 infirmitie  weakenes.

 inflamation  inflaming.

 infinit  without nomber.

 influence  a flowing in.

 informe  giue notice.

 ingraue  carue.

 ingredience  entrance.

 inhabite  dwell in.

 inhibite,  forbidde.

 inhibition  forbidding.

 iniunction  commaunding.

 iniurious  wrongfull or hurtful.

 innouate  make new

 innouation  making new.

 inordinate  out of order.

 inquisition  searching.

 insinuate  cr'eepe in.

 inspire  breath into.

 insolent  proud.

 instigation  prouoking.

 institute  appoint.

 intercept  preuent.





 
 intercession  going betw'eene.
or make intreatie.

interchange, exchaunge.

 intercourse  mutuall accesse.

interest, loane.

 interline  draw a line betwixt

intermeddle, deale with.

intermingle, mingle with.

 intermission  foreslowing.

 interpretor  expounder.

 interrogation  a question
asking.

 interrupt  breake off.

 intricate  inwrapped.

 introduction  entrance.

intrude, to thrust in violently 

 inuincible  not to be wonne.

 irruption  breaking in.

 irreuocable  not to be recalled.

 irreprehensible  without reproofe.

 Isralite gr. of Israel.

 iudiciall  belonging to iudge­
ment.

 iubilee  y'eere of ioy.

 iurors  sworne men.

iuice.  

 iustifie, approoue.

 
 
 Lapidarie skilfull in stones.

 largesse  or largis  liberalitie.

 lasciuious  wanton.

 laud  praise.

 laurell  bay-tree.

 laxitiue  loose.

 legacie gift by will or am­
bassage.

 legion  host

 legate  ambassador.

 legerdemaine  light handed.

 leprosie  a kind of  disease.

 libertine  loose in Religion.

 lethergie gr.  a kind of  drowsie disease

 licentious  taking libertie.

 liuetenant  deputie.

 limitation  appointment.

 literature  learning.

 lingell   shoemakers thr'eed.

 linguist  skilfull in tongues.

 litigious  quarrellous.

lore, law.

 lotarie* casting of lots.

 loyall  obedient.

 lunatick  wanting his wits.

 
 
 Magitian  vsing witchcraft.

 magistrate  gouernour.

 magnanimitie  valiantnes.

 magnificence  sumptuousnes.

 maladie  disease.

 malicious.  

 malecontent  discontented

 maligne  hate.

manicle fetter.

 manger. 

 maranatha  accursed.

 manumisse  set free.

 march.  goe in aray

 marte, faier.

 martiall  warlike.

marches borders.

 margent  edge of a booke.

marow.  

 martyr  witnes.

 matron  ancient woman.

 matrice  wombe.

 mature  ripe.





 
 mechanicall g. handicraftes.

 mediocritie  measure.

 medicine.  

 mercement  

 mediatour  aduocate.

mercer.  

mercie.  

 meditate  muse.

 menstruous  defiled.

 melancholie g. humor of so­
litarines.

 melodious g. sw'eet sounding.

 meritorius  that deserueth.

 method g. order.

 metaphor g. similitude.

 ministration  ministring.

 militant  warring.

 minoritie  vnder age.

 monasterie  colledge of monks

 miraculous  maruelous.

 mirror *  a looking glasse.

 mittigate  aswage.

 mixtion 
mixture   mingling.

 mobilitie  mouing.

 modest  sober.

 moderate  temperate.

 moderne of our time.

 moitie.   halfe

 moment  weight or sodaine.

 momentanie  sodaine.

 monarch g. one ruling all.

 moote argue.

 monument  antiquitie.

 moralitie  ciuill behauiour.

 mortall  that endeth.

 mortuarie  due for the deade.

 motiue  cause mouing.

 mortifie  kill.

 mountaine  great hill.

 munition  defence.

 mutable  changable.

 mustaches vpper lip haire.

malmesey.  

muses. goddesses of larning.

 mutation  chaunge.

 myrrhe  a kind of  of sweete gume.

 mysticall  that hath a mysterie
in it.

 mysterie  hidden secret.

 
 
 Natiue  borne.

 narration  declaration.

 n'eece  

 necessitie.  

 nauigation  sailing.

nephew.  

 nerue  sinew

 negligence.  

 neuter  of neither side.

 Nicholitan g. an heretick from
Nicholas.

 necromancie g. blacke art.

 nonage vnder age.

 nonsuit  not following.

nouice.  

 notifie  giue knowledge.

 numeration  numbring.

 nutriment  nourishment.

 
 
 obeissance  obedience.

 oblation  offring.

 oblique  croked.

 obliuious  forgetfull.

 obstinate  froward

 obscure  darke.





 
 obstruction  stopping.

 obtuse  dull.

 occidentall  belonging to the
West.

 odious  hatefull.

 odor  smell.

 odoriferous  sw'eet smelling.

 officious  duetifull.

 oliuet  place of oliues.

 omnipotent  almightie.

 operation  working.

 opportunitie  fitnes.

 oppose  set against.

 opprobrious  reproachfull.

 ordure  doung.

 originall  beginning.

 oracle  a sp'eech from God.

 ordination  ordeining.

 orphant g. without parents.

 orthographie g. true writing.

 ostentation  boasting.

 ouerplus  more then n'eedeth

 
 
 Pacifie  quiet.

 pamphlet  a small treatise.

 pantofle  slipper.

 paradise g. place of pleasure.

 paraphrase g.  exposition.

 paramour an amorous louer.

 parable  similitude.

parcell.  

parget.  

 partiall.  

 partition deuision.

 passion  suffering.

Passeouer, one of the Jewes
feastes.

 patheticall g. vehement.

 Patriarke g. chiefe father.

 patrimonie  fathers gift.

 patronage  defence.

 patronise  defend.

 pauillion  * tent.

 paucitie  fewnes.

 pauement.  

peccaui  I haue offended.

 peculiar  proper.

 pensiue  sorrowfull

 pentecost. g.  Whitesontide.

 perceiue. 

 peregrination  iourneing in a
strange land.

 peremptorie  resolute.

 perfect.  

 period g.  end.

 perilous *  dangerous.

 permit   suffer.

 permutable  changeable.

 perpetuitie  continewance.

 perplexitie  troubled griefe.

 persecute  

 persist 
perseuere   continue.

 perspicuous  euident.

 participate  partake.

 peruert  ouerthrow.

 perruke haire laie forth.

 peruerse  froward

 pettigree  stocke.

 petition  praier.

 phantasie: imagination.

 phesant 

 pharisee  one of that sect.

 physiognomie  knowledge by
the visage.





 
 physick.  

 phrase  forme of speach.

 phrensie g. madnes.

 philosophie  studie of wise­
dome.

 pigeon. 

 pirate sea robber.

 piety  godlines.

 pillage spoyle in warre.

 pilot *  maister, guider of a
shippe.

 plaintife  the complaynant.

 planet gr.  wandring starre.

 plausible  pleasing.

 plenitude  fulnes.

 plume  feather.

 pluralitie moe then one.

 policie. 

 poitrell ornament for a horse
breast.

 poetesse gr.  a woman Poet.

 polish  deck.

 pollute  defile.

 pomgranate* a kind of fruit.

 ponderous  waightie.

 populous  full of people.

 postscript  written after.

 protract  deferre.

 popularitie  pleasing the 
people.

 preamble  forespeech.

 precept.  

 predecessor  

 predestinate  appoint before.

 precious.  

 precinct  compasse.

 predominante  ruling.

 preface   see preamble.

 preiudice  hurt.

 preiudicate  forestalled.

 premunire  forfeiture of 
goods.

 preparatiue  preparation.

 preposterous  disordered.

 prerogatiue  priuiledge.

 presbyterie g.  Eldership.

 prescript  decree.

 prescription  limitation.

 prest  ready.

 primitiue  first.

 prioritie.  

 pristine  old.

 probation  allowance.

 prodigious  monstrous.

 proceed.  

 profound  deepe.

 profane  vngodlie.

 prognosticate  foretell.

 progenie  ofspring.

 prohibit  forbid.

 prologue g. see preface.

 prolixe  tedious.

 prompt  readie.

 promulgation   see publication.

 propitiation  sacrifice to
& pacifie.

 propose  propound.

 propriety  propertie.

 proroge   put off.

 prostitute  set open for vn­
cleannes.

 prophesie g.   foretell or ex­
pound.





 
 prophet gr.  he that prophe­
sieth.

 prospect   a sight farre off.

 prowesse   valiantnes.

 prose   that writing which is 
not verse.

 proselyte gr.   stranger con­
uerted.

 prostrate   fall downe.

 protect   defend.

 prouocation   prouoking.

 prouident   foreseeing.

 prudence   wisedome.

 psalme   heauenlie song.

 psalmographe 
psalmist   writer of
psalmes.

 psalter   booke of psalmes.

 publish   set abroad.

 publike   open.

 publican   towle gatherer.

 publication   publishing.

 purgatorie   place of purging.

 pursuit *   following.

 puissaunce   powerfulnes.

 putrifie  corrupt.

 
 
 Quadrangle   foure cornered.

 quadrant   foure square.

 queach,  thicke heape.

 qintessence  chiefe vertue.

 quotidian   dayly.

 
 
 Rapacitie 
rapine   violent
catching.

 ratifie   establish.

reall.  

 receipt.  

 recite.  

 recognissance   acknowledge.

 recoile *  goe backe.

 reconcile   bring into fauour.

 recreate   refresh.

 redeeme   buy againe.

 redemption   buying againe.

 refection   refreshing.

 reflexion   casting backe.

 referre   put ouer.

 refuge   succour.

 regenerate   borne againe.

 regiment   gouernement.

 register   kalender.

 reiect   cast away.

reioynder.  

 reiterate   repeat.

 relate   report.

 relation   reporting.

 relapse   backesliding.

 relaxation   refreshing.

 relinquish   forsake.

 remitte   forgiue.

 remisse   loose.

 remorse  pricke of conscience.

 renouate   renew.

 renounce*   forsake.

 repaste   food.

 repell   put backe.

 repeale   call backe.

 repose   put.

 represse   put downe.

 repulse   puting back.

 repugnancie   contrarietie.

 repugnant   contrarie.

 repute   accompt.

 resigne   giue ouer.

 restauration   restoring.

 resume   take againe.





 
 reuoke  call back.

 rhetoricke g.  art of eloquence.

 rhetorician g.  skilfull in rheto­
rick.

 rheume. gr.  

 rogue.  

 ruinous  readie to fall.

 rudiment  first instruction.

 rupture  breach.

 rusticall  clounish.

 
 
 Sabbaoth  rest.

 sacriledge  church robbing.

 sacrament  holie signe or oath.

 sacrifice.  

 Sadducee  a kind of   sectarie.

 safeconduit  safe keeping.

 saint  holie one.

 sanctification  holines.

 salubritie  holesomnes.

 sanctitie 
sanctimonie   holines.

 sanctuarie  holie place.

 sandals g. slippers.

 sapience  wisdome.

 satietie  fulnes.

 satyre  a nipping verse.

 saturitie  fulnes.

 sauage  wild.

 sauce.  

 scalpe  pate.

 scarrifie  launce a sore.

 scepter  signe of rule.

 schisme  breach.

 schismatike  that maketh a 
schisme.

 scripture  writing.

 scruple  doubte.

 scrupulous  full of doubts.

 scourge.  

 scurrilitie  sawcie scoffing.

 seclude  shut out.

 sectarie  see schismatick.

 secundarie  the second.

 seduce  deceiue.

 sedulitie  diligence.

 segniorie  lordshippe.

 seminarie  a nourcerie.

 senator  alderman.

 sensible  easily felt.

 sense. 

 sensuall  brutish.

 sepulcher  graue.

 sequele  following.

 sequester  put to an indiffe­
rent man

 seruice.  

 sergeant. 

 seruitude  bondage.

 seruile  slauish.

 seueritie  sharpnes.

 sexe  kinde.

 significant  plainly signifiyng.

 simplicitie  plainenes.

 sinister  vnhappie.

 situation  placing.

 slaughter.  

 slice.  

 sluce.  

 soare, mount high.

 sociable  felowlike.

 societie  felowship.

 solace  comfort.

 solution  vnloosing.

 solicit  moue.





 
 summarie   brief. 

 sophister  cauiller.

 sorcerie. 

 soueraigne  chiefe.

 spatious  large.

 specifie  signifie.

 speciall.  

 spicery.  

 splen g.  milt.

 spongeous  like a sponge.

 spruce.  

 squinancie   a kind of disease.

 station  standing.

 stabilitie  surenes.

 stillatorie  a distilling place.

 stipendarie  that serueth for
wages.

 studious  diligent.

 stile  manner of speech.

 submisse  lowlie.

 suborne  procure false wit­
nes.

 subscribe  write vnder.

 substract 
subtract  take from.

 substitute  deputie.

subtill  craftie.

 subuersion  ouerthrowing.

 succeed  follow.

 suggest  prompt.

 sulphure  brimstone.

 summarily briefly.

 superfices  vpper side.

 superfluous  needles.

 superscription  writing aboue.

 supplant  ouerthrowne.

 support  beare vp.

 supposition  supposing.

 suppresse.  

 supremacie  chiefdome.

 superior  higher.

 surcharge  ouercharge,

 surmount  exceed.

 surcingle.  

 suspense.  

 surplus see ouerplus.

 suruiue *  ouerliue.

 synagogue  place of assemblie.

 sycophant  tale bearer.

 synode  a generall assemblie.

 
 
 Tabernacle  tent.

 temerarious  rash.

 temeretie  rashnes.

 temperature  temperatenes.

 temperate  keepe a meane.

 temperance  sobrietie.

 temple  a church.

 tempestuous  boisterous.

 temporise to serue the time.

 temporarie  for a time.

 terrestriall  earthly.

 tenuitie  smalnes.

 tetrarch gr.  gouernour of a
fourth parte.

 tenure  hold.

 termination  ending.

 thwite  shaue.

 timorous  fearefull.

 tertian  euery other day.

 testification  witnessing.

 theologie gr.  diuinitie.

 thyme gr.  a kind of  hearbe.

 tractable  easie to handle.

 tractate  a treatise.





 
 tragedie  a solemne plaie.

 tradition  deliuering from one
to an other.

 traffique  bargaining.

 transfigure  change.

 transitorie  soone passing away

 tranquilitie  quietnes.

 transferre  conuaye ouer.

 transforme  transfigure.

 transgresse  breake.

 translate  turne.

 transport  cary ouer.

 transpose  change.

 triangle  three cornered.

 tribunall  iudgment seat.

 tripartite  threefold.

 triuiall  common.

 tribe  companie.

 trompe  deceiue.

 triumph  great ioy.

 triumphant  reioycing for the
conquest.

 tribute.  

 truce peace.

 turbulent.  

 tympany gr.  a kind of  dropsie.

 
 
 Vacant  voide.

 valor  value.

 vanquish  ouercome.

 vapor  moisture.

 vendible  saleable.

 venerable  worshipfull.

 versifie  make verses.

 veneriall  fleshlie.

 vesture 
vestiment   garment.

vice. 

vicious.  

view.  

vincible.  

 victorious  that hath gotten 
many victories.

 vineyard  orchard of grapes.

 vigilant  watchfull.

 visitation  going to see.

 vision  sight.

 vlcer  bile.

 vnion  vnitie.

 vnite  ioyne.

 vniuersall  generall.

 vrine  stale.

 vnsatiable  that hath not 
inough.

 vocation  calling.

 volubilitie  swiftnes.

 voluptuous  giuen to pleasure

 vrbanitie  courtesie.

 vsurpe  take vnlawful autho­
ritie.

 vtilitie  profit.

 vulgar  common.

 
 
 wages.  

wager.  

weight.  

wrought.  

 


FINIS.











To the Reader.


I purposed (gentle reader)somewhat heere to haue spoken, tou­
ching the true forming and signification of deriuatiues and com­
pounds as those that beginne with dis.circum. trans. in.&c, and
ende in ly.tie.on.ous.able.ible.&c. but speciall occasion hath for
the present altered my purpose : Also I craue pardon for many
faults escaped, especially in the Table, many words being mispla­
ced and the character mistaken. But I hope the learned will with
fauour see my purpose. And the vnskilfull reape the fruite, vntill
oportunitie may serue to reforme it.

If, notwithstanding my former reasons, thou doubtest that thy
little child will haue spoyled this booke before it be learned, thou
mayest fitly deuide it at the ende of the second booke, or thou
mayest reserue fayre the written copies, vntill he can read.

If thou thinke me either for hardnes of rule, or length of matter,
vnfit for children : plentifull experience in very young ones, (be­
leeue him that hath tryed)doth dayly confute thee. Therefore to
dislike before thou hast eyther tried or diligently read, were either
to be rash or vnkind.

Farewell.




Faults escaped.


Pag.3.li.2. read teacheth, pag. 5. li.29. in the margent for first

read last pag.22.lin.10. asse. pag.72.16. Constantius. pag.
78.lin.4. heedie.








AT LONDON.
Printed by the Widow Orwin, for
Ralph Iackson, and Robert Dextar.

1596.




