





l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 1 3 0 6 1

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )



To the Reader.


FOrasmuche as this present woorke shall come too
the hands of all men, as well of the rudest, vnskil­
fullest, and vnlearnedst sorte, that are vtterly ig­
norant of the Latin tong, and of the ryght vnder­
standing of such wordes, as are taken out of the Latin in­
too English, for the more beautifying of our speeche, and bet­
ter expressing of our myndes: as too the handes of the skilfull
and learned sort: I haue added a breefe declaration or expo­
sition of certein of those woordes vsed in this my Translati­
on. Wherein as I seeke and wish the furtherance of the one
sort, (for too read and not vnderstand would doo them small
pleasure:) so I desire the fauorable acceptation of the other
sort: whose helpe and ayde I gladly craue too the amende­
ment and gentle interpreting of such faults as haue escaped
either me in translating, or the Stacioner in printing.


A


ABandon, too giue ouer, too yeelde vp, too leaue or cast vp, too
forsake, too put intoo the hande or power of an other man,
too submit too an other mans wil or vse.

Absurditie, a thing clean contrary (or at least wise irksom)
too reason, suche a thing as it greeueth a man too heere it,
irksomnesse, fondnesse.

Accessorie, that which commeth from elsewhere, an appur­
tenaunce that is not properly or peculiarly belonging too
a thing, that which naturally is no parte or member of a 
thing, and yet goeth with it in such wyse as it may at all
times bee separated from it without impayring the for­
mer condition, estate, and nature of it. An accident or ex­
traordinarie.

Administration, the manner of disposing and ordering of 
things, as well in small matters, as in gouernement and
great affaires.

Admiration, woonderment or maruelling at a thing, hygh




commendation and prayse giuen too any thing, reioyce­
ment or delyght in a thing.

Admonition, admonishment, warning, inkling, foretelling
of any thing.

Aduocate, a spokesman, a counseller, such a one as by his
aduyse and trauell aydeth and comforteth a man in his
neede.

Affected, mynded, disposed, inclined, affectioned.

Aggrauate, too make heynous, too set out too the vtter­
moste, too burthen a man with a thing, too lay sore too
ones charge.

Allegorie, is a Sentence or Oration, importing in it a mee­
ning diuers or straunge from the common sense of the 
woords, and it is as it were a continuall Metaphor. Loke
Metaphor.

Aliaunce, kinred that commeth in by mariage, and by a Me­
taphor, it is the linking, knitting, or ioyning of folkes
willes and consents toogither in any thing.

Apprehended, too lay holde vppon a thing, too talke holde of a
thing, too catch a thing, too attein too a thing.

Ardent, feruent, burning, glowing, hotte, earnest, vn­
feyned.

Authenticall, that which is of authoritie, that whiche cary­
eth a weight, estimation, or maiestie, substanciall, effec­
tuall, aucthorized, allowed.


B

BArbarous, is properly he that is not a Greeke or a Roman, 
which name is now applyed too any that is in conditi­
ons, and manners rude, feerce, cruell, vnciuill, vnnurtu­
red, or in speeche grosse, vnlearned, harshe, vneloquent.
Also it signifieth an Alient, Forreyner, or Straunger
borne.

Benefactour, any body that bestoweth a good turne, pleasure,
benefite or frendship vpon vs.





C

CAlamitie, proprelye a laying of Corne by excesse of winde
and foule weather, and by a Metaphore, it signifieth
any manner of greate trouble, affliction, aduersitie, or
miserie that ouerthroweth a man or bringeth him vnder
foote.

Celebrate, too set foorth, too publishe, too solemnize, too vtter, too
declare, or too doo a thing with praise, deuotion, reuerence,
pompe, or ioyfulnesse.

Centurion, a Captaine of a hundred men.

Circumstance, a farre fetche or windlasse in a matter, a thing
that comprehendeth matters in it. Also the large setting
out of a thing by his seuerall membres and particulars. A
going about the bushe.

Circumstant, things that are about vs, things that beset or be
seege vs, things that enuyron and hem vs in on all sides,
things alwayes conuersaunt & at hand with vs, things
that accompanie vs.

Ciuilitie, curtesie, good behauiour, honest conuersation, comely
and gentle behauiour.

Communion, felloweship, partaking, partnership, companie, 
vse or enioying of a thing in common. Also the vniting 
or knitting toogither of diuers persones as it were in one 
league and bond of aliance, as well by inseperable consent 
of wil and affection of minde, as by outward conuersation 
and trade of life.

Consecrated, halowed, made holy, put or appoynted too a holye
vse, assigned too the seruice of God.

Constancie, a stedfast and continuall sticking too the truthe, &
an vnmouable abiding in all goodnesse. It is contrary too 
wauering.

Contrite, broosed or broken, as things are brayed in a morter.
Therof commeth Contrition, which is an inward remorse 
with an earneste sorrowe and gréefe of minde for sinne, or 
for offending God.




Conuince, too prooue a thing substancially, euidently & plainly:
too ouercome by manifest and apparant reason: too shew a 
thing by suche effectual and open arguments, that the ve­
ry aduersarie may not bée able too gainsay it.

Crosse, is put for any persecution, affliction, trouble, losse, hin­
derance, disease of body, or disquyetnesse of minde.

Curiositie, an ouermuche carefulnesse, or inquisitiuenesse in
other mennes matters. Hée that is infected with this vice, 
Paule termeth a Busybody.

Curiousnesse, is an ouermuche precisenesse in a mannes own 
dooings.


D

DElusion, or Illusion, Mockerie, mockage, a deceitfull thing,
and whatsoeuer bleareth mens eyes that they cannot 
discerne the truthe.

Demonstration, a pointing too a thing with the finger, a set­
ting foorth of a thing too the eye, an open, plaine, and mani­
fest shewing of a thing.

Depraue, too marre, too corrupt, too infect, too staine, too defile.

Distinguishe, too put a difference betwéene things; too sepe­
rate intoo partes or membres, too disseuer, too diuide.

Durable, longlasting, of long continuance, that which endu­
reth wel, that whiche is able too holde out.


E

EXclude, too shutte out, putte out, thruste out, or 
kéepe out.


F

FElicitie, happinesse, blissednesse, blisfulnesse, the full and
perfect state of béeing well, the full fruition or enioying of 
God and all good things.

Figurate, too signifie or pretend a thing after a couert & darke 
manner, too shadowe or represent, too méene or betoken, too 
imploy or purporte, too beare the Image or likenesse of a 
thing, too counterfet.





G

GLorie, is a renowmed and vniuersall reporte of woorthy­
nesse, purchased by deserts of many great benefites and 
good turnes.

Glorifie, too giue glorie, honoure, praise, or commendation too
any body, or too mainteine the good name, honour, and esti­
mation of a bodye. Also too bring too euerlasting blisse and 
heauenly felicitie.


H

HAbitation, a dwelling place.

Hypocrite, is suche a one as in outwarde apparel, counte­
nance, or behauioure, pretendeth too bée another man than 
hée is in déed, suche a one as counterfetteth himselfe too bée 
holy or rightuous, and is not.

Honour, is the estimation that is giuen by agréeable iudge­
ment and consent of good men too any body in commenda­
tion and rewarde of his singular vertues.


I

IMpediments, lets, hinderances, stoppes.

Incest, vnlawful copulation of man and woman within the 
degrées of kinred or aliance forbidden by Gods law, why­
ther it bée in mariage, or otherwise.

Incorporate, too grafte one thing intoo the body of an other, too 
make one body or substance of twoo, or mo, too mixt or put
toogither.

Incurre, too runne intoo.

Infallible, vndeceyuable, that whiche wil not deceiue, nor can 
bée beguyled, vnguileful, vndeceitful, deceitlesse, sure, cer­
teine, assured, soothfast.

Institute, too begin, too go in hande with a thing, too ordeine, 
too purpose, too appoint, too make, too found, too stablishe, too
decrée, too set vp a new, too bring in a new.

Interprete, expounde, open, make plaine and manifest too an
other mans vnderstanding, too shew the sence or méening 
of a thing. Also too accepte or take the meaning of a thing




in good or ill parte.

Iunocation, is a calling vpon any thing with trust in the same.
It consisteth of twoo partes, that is too witte, of prayer and 
thanksgiuing.

Iustified, found rightuous, made rightuous, accounted or ac­
cepted for rightuous, that is too say, frée and cléere from sin
or set frée from sinne and the penalties therof.


M

MAgistrates, are all Princes, Rulers, Gouernours, or 
Officers placed in authoritie by God, or by the soue­
rein of any common weale.

Maiestie, the stately porte and honorable renowme of any 
Prince, people, superior, or souereine: and the comely & 
beautifull grace of any thing that is excellent.

Matrone, an auncient, sober, and discréete woman, that ey­
ther hath, or hath had children, such a one as for hir sad be­
hauiour deserueth too bee called a mootherly woman.

Mediation, the earnest minding or thinking vpon a thing, 
the often consideration and musing vpon a thing, mindful­
nesse, studie.

Metaphor, is the putting ouer of a woorde from his proper 
and naturall signification to a forreine or vnproper signi­
fication. As Fol. 62. where the worlde is termed a fielde, 
Chryste a séedman, and his woord the séed: in whiche spée­
ches, the woords field, séedman, & séed, importe other things 
than their proper signification yéeldeth.

Minister, a seruant that is alwayes at hand, or that is redy 
too put his hande too all things. It is a name sitly giuen too 
the Clergie, as whiche putteth them or ought too put them 
continually in mind of their dutie and calling, which is too 
bée seruants of God and his Congregation, and not Lords 
ne seruants of the fleshe, the world, and the Diuel.

Morall, perteyning too manners, behauiour, conuersation, 
and life among men.

Misterie, a secret or hid thing, the vnderstanding & knowledge




wherof passeth the capacitie of common reason too teache 
vntoo.


O

ORacle, an aunswere or saying of God, or of a Prophet in 
Gods name, such as is certein and infallible.


P

PArable, is an applying of some thing that hath no life or 
no body, too our matter, fitly alledged for some likely­
nesse or vnlikelinesse which it hath too our purpose.

Particularitie, is the restrayning of the largenesse of Chrysts 
benefites (which are offered generally too all men) vntoo 
a feawe: And it is properly the occasion of falling which 
as well the wilfull as the weake do take by miswresting 
or by misvnderstanding the doctrine of Election and pre­
destination.

Pastors, Shepherds, a name aptly applyed too the Ministers 
and Curates of Chrysts church, wherby they are put in 
minde too féede their flockes with Gods woorde and Sa­
craments and good example of life.

Perplexitie, anguish, distresses, (according too our English 
prouerbe) a pecke of troubles. When men bée so snarled 
and entangled, that they wote not which waye too winde 
them selues out, or what way too turne them.

Pomp, the countenancing of things in furniture and setting 
foorth too the outward showe.

Prefigurate, couertly, darkly or slightly too foretoken, fore­
shew, import, shadow, or represent a thing too come.

Preposterously, aukly, frowardly, ouerthwartly, vntoward­
ly, vndaftly, setting the cart before the horses, arsiuersie, 
topsiteruie.

Priuation, the vtter taking away, voydance, or beréeuing of 
a thing, so as it haue no more being.

Prohibition, a forbidding, a forwarning, a forfending, a com­
maundement or lawe restrayning a man from dooing a 
thing.




Propiciation, procurement of mercy, forgiuenesse, attone­
ment and fauour.

Propiciatorie, that whiche reconcileth, or whiche purchaseth 
mercy, forgiuenesse, attonement, and fauour. Also it is 
put for the mercy seate.

Proposition, a ground or foundation in a sentence or oration, 
whervpon too builde, dilate, argue, gather and conclude 
the matter. Also it is sometime put for the full effect, con­
teint, purport, and méening of a sentence or matter.

Purifie, too purge, too clense, too make cleane, too make pure, 
too skowre.


R

REgeneration, or new birth is when by being washed out­
wardly by Baptim, and clenzed inwardly from sinne 
by the woorking of the holy Ghoste, wée are graffed intoo 
Chryste, and made the children of God, and heires of his 
heauenly kingdome.

Renegate, is he that renounceth or forsaketh his profession: 
as when a Protestant becommeth a Papist. A Turncote.

Reprobate, a castaway, a forlorne person. Also a frowarde, 
peruerse, wilfull and obstinate person, such a one as is gi­
uen vp too his own wickednesse, and hardned in his wil­
fulnesse, and so consequently past grace.


S

SAcriledge, is properly the stealing of Holy things, or of 
things dedicated and appoynted too a holye vse, or the 
stealing of things out of a holy or halowed place. And so 
by a maner of spéech, it is any spitefull or contemptuous 
fact doone too the derogation of Gods glorie or the breach 
of Religon, and is as it were high treason too God.

Sanctifie, too halow, too make holy, too kéepe holy: whereof 
commeth Sanctification, which is halowing, making ho­
ly, or holynesse. As Chryst is our Sanctification, that is 
to say, Chryst is our holynesse, or the thing that maketh 
vs holy.




Saluation, soulehealth, or rather perfect blisse, heauenly ioy, & 
euerlasting welfare bothe of bodye and soule. Or it is the 
cléere deliuerance and frée sauing of vs from sinne, death, 
hel, the Diuel, and damnation, by Iesus Chryst.

Satisfaction, is a making of amends for misdéeds, displesures, 
or wrongs doone, too the ful contentation of the partie that 
was gréeued.

Secular, worldly, of the world.

Societie, felowship, companie.

Solemnize, too doo a thing with great pompe, reuerence, or de­
uotion.

Sincere, pure, cleane, vncorrupt, vnmingled, vndefiled, vnfey­
ned, vnstayned, voyde of guile, voyde of craft, swéet, sound,
vpright.


T

TAbernacle, a Tent, Hall, or Pauilion, such as men of war 
pitch in the fields too lie in.

Testimonies, witnessings, witnesse bearings, recordes, deposi­
tions.

Throne, a Kings seate or chaire of estate, a séege Royall.

Tumult, vprore, hurlyburly, commotion, insurrection.

Type, a figure, shadow, signe, token, representation, or Image 
of a thing too come.


V

VNite, too make one thing of twoo or mo, too cupple, to knit 
too ioyne toogither.

Vocation, or calling is that estate, degrée, or trade of life too
which any man is allotted, eyther by birth, by commaun­
dement of God, by appoyntmente of the Magistrate, by o­
portunitie of time, or by necessitie.




FINIS.




