





l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 1 9 0 6 0

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )


Certayne rules of Geo­
graphie, for the vnderstanding of 
Mappes and Chartes.

THe perfect vnderstanding of Mappes
and the vse of the same dothe consiste
in the knowledge of these foure poynts.

1 The necessarie circles described in
Mappes.
2 The longitude & latitude of places.
3 The Clymats and Paraleles.
4 The measure of distaunce of one
place from another.


1 Of the Circles.

The circles expressed in Mappes are
fiue, the Equinoctiall, the 2. Tropikes, and
the two Polare circles.

The Equinoctiall or Equator, is a cir­
cle imagined iust in the midst betweene
the two Poles, compassing the whole
earth about.

1 This circle deuideth the worlde in­
to two equall parts, that is to saye, the




North and the South.

2 It serueth also to know the Longi­
tude of places, which is measured vpon
it, and the Latitude which is measured 
from it, either Northwarde or South­
warde.

3 When the Sunne is in it, the day is
equall with the nighte throughout all
the worlde.

4 When the Sunne is furthest from
it, the day is either shortest or longest.

The Tropikes are those circles which
the Sunne maketh about the worlde,
when it is furthest from the Equinoctial
either Northwarde or Southwarde.

If it be Northwarde it is called the
Tropike of Cancer, bicause the Sunne
then returning backwardes entreth into
that signe.

If it be Southwarde it is called the 
Tropike of Capricorne, bicause then the
Sunne entreth into the signe of Capri­
corne.

These circles do deuide the temperate
Zones from the burnt Zone.




The Polare circles are those which the
Poles of the Zodiake doe make aboute
the Poles of the worlde, in the space of
24. houres.

They deuide the temperate Zones
from the colde Zones: and are so farre
distant from their Poles (that is, the Ar­
ctike from the North, and the Antartike 
from the South Pole) as the Tropikes
are from the Equinoctiall.

The two Tropikes and the two Po­
lare circles do deuide the whole earthe
into fiue parts, which are called Zones.
Wherof that which lieth vnder the E­
quinoctiall betweene the two Tropikes,
is called the burnte Zone: the other
two betwixt either of the Tropikes and
the Polare circles are called Temperate
Zones: and the other two vnder either 
Pole are called colde Zones.






2 Of the Longitude and Latitude.

In reckning the  Longitude of  the world,
the auncient Geographers tooke their
beginning at a right line imagined to be
drawne from the one Pole to the other,
by the Ilandes called the Canaries, be­
yonde Hercules pillers (which lyne for
this purpose I call the Westerne line) so
that the Longitude of any place is the di­




staunce of the same from that line East­
warde, and so rounde aboute vnto the
same line agayne.

Some late writers do recken the Lon­
gitude from the Westerne line Eastward
180. degrees, and also from the same
westward, 180. degrees, which beeing ad­
ded togither do make. 360. describing it in
the middest betwene the two Poles, and
deuiding the world into. 2. equall partes,
wherof the Westerne they call the Po­
nent, and the Easterne the Levant.

The latitude is the distaunce of any
place from the Equinoctiall circle towards
either of the Poles.

Where so euer you are, imagine a
poynt or pricke directly ouer your head,
which is called Zenith, the distance wher­
of from the Westerne lyne, is the longi­
tude, and from the Equinoctiall the lati­
tude. And for this purpose in the vni­
uersall Chartes, you haue lines (called
Meridians) drawne in lengthe from
Pole to Pole, distant one from another
10. degrees, beginning at the Westerne
lyne, and so Eastwarde, which doe eui­




dently shew the Longitude of any place.

There are also drawne certaine Para­
leles from the Equinoctiall towardes ei­
ther of the Poles, differing one from an
other 10. degrees, declaring the Latitude.

Note that the latitude or distance from
the Equinoctiall line, and the eleuation
of the Pole in any place are equall.



3 Of Climates and Paraleles.

The Climates & Paraleles serue both
for one purpose, that is, the difference of
the longest dayes, whiche doe increase 
within certayne spaces from the Equi­
noctiall towards either of the Poles.

A Climate is a space of distance from
the Equinoctiall line, where the longest
day maketh difference of halfe an houre.

The olde writers do make but seuen
Climates, and doe name them of some
notable and famous place.

1 The first they name of Meroe a citie
in Afrike, vnder the burnt Zone, thys
conteineth in brodnesse. 7. degrees. 40. mi.




It beginneth at 12.deg. 45.mi.
[It] endeth [at] 20.deg. 30.mi.
The longest day. Prin. 12.h.45.m.
Fin. 13.h.15.m.

2. The seconde of Syena, a citie in the
confines of Ethiopia, vnder the Tropike
of Cancer, conteining in brodnesse. 7.degr.
beg. 20.g. 30.m. dies lo. 13.h.15.m.
end. 27.g. 30.m. dies lo. 13.h.45.m.

3. The third is named of Alexandria, a
famous Citie in Egypte, conteyning in
brodnesse. 6.g. 10.min.
beg. 27.g. 30.m. dies lo. 13.h.45.m.
end. 33.g. 40.m. dies lo. 14.h.15.m.

4 The fourth hath his denomination
of that noble Ilande of Rhodes in Asia
the lesse, whose brodnesse is .5.g. 20.m.
beg. 33.g. 40.m. dies lo. 14.h.15.m.
end. 39.g. dies lo. 14.h.45.m.

5 The fifte climate hath his name of
the citie of Rome, whiche conteineth in
brodnesse 4.g.30.m.




beg. 39.g. 40.m. dies lo. 14.h.45.m.
end. 43.g. 30.m. dies lo. 15.h.15.m.

6 The sixte of the sea Euxine called
Pontus, which is .3.g.45.m. brode.
beg. 43.g. 30.m. dies lo. 15.h.15.m.
end. 47.g. 15.m. dies lo. 15.h.45.m.

7 The seuenth is named of Boristhe­
nes a great riuer in Scythia, whose brod­
nesse is .3.g.15.m.
beg. 47.g. 15.m. dies lo. 15.h.45.m.
end. 50.g. 30.m. dies lo. 16.h.15.m.

Some do adde the eight Climat by the 
South partes of England, and the ninth
by the riuer Tanais.

The Southerne Climate, haue the same
names, putting only this Greeke propo­
sition, Anti, before them.

A Paralele is iuste halfe a Climate,
so that one Climate conteyneth two
Paraleles.






4 The measure of distance of one
place from another.

Diuers nations do diuersly measure the
distance of places.
The Egyptians by signes or markes.
The Persians by their Parasangas.
The Greekes by furlonges.
The Latines by miles, and sometimes
by stones or markes.
The Spaniards & Frenchmen by legues.
The Germanes and diuers other nations 
by myles, and those of diuers length.
Those which do write of these mat­
ters, do all in a maner agree in this, that
foure graynes of barly do make a finger.
Foure fingers a hande.
Foure hands a foote.
Foure foote a Geometricall pase, whiche
is two simple pases.
125. Geometricall pases a furlong.
8. Furlonges one mile.
16. Furlongs a French league, which is
two Italian miles.
3. Miles a great league.
30. Furlongs one Parasanga, which the 




Persians at this day call Farasanga.
40. Furlongs one Germaine mile.


To apply your degrees to the finding
out of the distance of one place from an
other, by the number of miles (as they
are commonly taken  amongst vs in Eng­
lande) you must vnderstande that euery
degree containeth, 60. miles on earth, so
that if you multiplie .360. degrees, which
is the compasse of the Equinoctial, by 60. 
you shall finde the worlde to conteine a­
boute the whole circumference of the
earth and water 21600. miles.

If you take your measure of distance
from the Equinoctiall line directly either
Northwarde or Southward, or else vp­
pon the Equinoctiall line Eastwarde or
Westwarde, you neede no more but
count your degrees, and for euery degree
count .60. miles: or if your Chart be true
in proportion, open your compasse as
wide as those two places are asunder,
whose distance you woulde knowe, and
apply the same to the Equinoctiall line,
and multiplye your degrees as before,
and so you shall haue your purpose.

In particular in Chorographical 




Chartes you may finde the true distance
of any place from another, either by the 
numbers of longitude and latitude de­
scribed in the margine of your Chart, or
by the Scale which is moste commonly
made for that purpose. And if you wante
bothe these helpes, take any two places
wherof you knowe or may learne the 
true distance, and measure that,
and according to that propor­
tion you may finde out
any distaunce in
the Chart.



