


 THE TABLE. 


Since nothing could so well express the meaning and intention of the Author, as the very Latin 
and Greek Words used in these Tracts, we have continued them expresly, and though in many 
Places I have given their meaning by Synonyma's, yet for the benefit of meer English Readers, we 
have here composed a Table Alphabetically of all the hard Greek and Latin Words, used in 
the whole Volume; as also of all Terms of Art, and many other Words derived from the 
Latin and Greek, tho' usual among Scholars, yet not frequently known to the vulgar, and 
therefore we have fully explained them, and rendred them intelligible to the meanest Capacity 
in the following Table.  

 
 
A TABLE of all the hard words derived from the Greek and 
Latin, of all Terms of Art and other words not vulgarly re­
ceived, with the Explanation of them. 
 

A

 ABdomen,  The lower part of the Belly from the 
Navel downwards. 

 Ablution,  A washing away. 

 Accension,  An Inkindling. 

 Accession,  A coming to or approach. 

 Acme,  The height or top of a thing. 

 Acid,  Sharp. 

 Acidity,  Sharpness. 

 Acidulæ,  Medicinal waters running forth from 
Veins of Iron, Copper, and such like, called Spaws 
from that famous place for Mineral-waters, the
 Spaw in Germany. 

 Acrimony,  Sharpness or sourness rather. 

 Actionobolism,  An Irradiation of Beams, or shoot­
ing forth of the spirits like beams of the Sun. 

 Aconite,  A venomous poisonus Herb put for Lib­
bards bane 

 Acute,  Sharp, or excessive painful, or that is quick 
and dangerous. 

 Aculeated,  Made sharp and prickly like a Needles 
point. 

 Adhæsion,  A sticking to. 

 Adjuted,  Helped. 

 Adventitious,  Coming by accident, or by the by. 

 Adust,  Burnt or parch'd. 

 Adustion,  A burning or parching. 

 Æquilibrium,  An equal or even poise when the 
Balance stands bending neither to the one side or the 
other. 

 Æquinox,  When the Sun is in the Equinoctial Line 
and divides the Day and Night into an equal 
length, and is about the 12. of March and a­
bout the 12. of September. 

 Ætherial,  Heavenly or belonging to the Air or 
Skie. 

 Ætiology,  The rendring of the Cause or Reason 
of a thing. 

 Affection,  Taken for the natural Condition, and 
often signifies sickness or disease. 

 Affected,  Distempered or diseased. Sometimes na­
tural disturbance. 

 Affusion,  A pouring forth of any thing. 

 Agaric,  A Drug that purges Phlegm. 

 Aggestion,  A heaping together of any thing. 

 Agitated,  A violent shaking or jogging together. 

 Alembic,  An Arabic word for a Still used by 
Chymists. 

 Alexipharmaca,  Medicines against Poisons and 
venom. 

 Alexiterion,  The same, being an Antidote against 
Poison. 

 Alchalisat,  A salt made of the herb Kali. Also 
taken and applyed to salts made of Herbs and 
shells of Fishes. 

 Alible.  Nourishable, or that nourishes. 

 Aliment,  Food. 

 Allision,  A striking or knocking together. 

 Aloes,  A juice made out of a bitter herb used in 
purging Medicines, also a sweet wood. 

 Amalgama,  A Chymical Term for the setling 
and mixture of several Minerals or Metals, or 
other things whereby a separation and extraction 
may be made. 

 Ambages,  A compassing or going about. 

 Ambient,  That invirons or compasses one about as 
the Air. 

 Amulets,  Pomanders or Bracelets made against 
Witchcraft, and Infection and Poison. 

 Analogy,  Proportion, or agreement or likeness. 

 Analasis,  The laying open or unfolding of the 
matter. 

 Anatomy,  A dissecting the Body, to see the several 
parts. 

 Anasarca,  The watry Dropsie swelling up the 
whole flesh. 

 Analesia,  A stupifying disease that takes away the 
sense from all parts of the Head. 

 Angle,  A Mathematical Term, being the nook or 
space at the cutting of two lines, and is of several 
sorts. A Corner or nook. 



 Anhelous,  Short-winded, or that puffeth for want 
of breath; that breatheth difficultly. 

 Annulary, Annular,  Ringy, or like Rings. 

 Anodynes,  Medicines procuring case from pains 
by sleep or other means. 

 Anomal,  Irregular, out of order. 

 Antasthmaticks,  Things good against the Cough or 
Asthma. 

 Anterior,  The former. 

 Antidote,  A Medecine against Poyson or any other 
disease. 

 Anticipate,  To go before. 

 Antihypnotics,  Medecines given against too much 
sleeping. 

 Antipyreuticon,  A Medecine against a Feaver, 
or a Feaver-Curer. 

 Antipyreticks,  Medecines against burning Fea­
vers. 

 Antispasmodicks,  Medecines against Convul­
sions. 

 Anus,  The Fundament or Arse-hole. 

 Aorta,  The great Artery the mother of all the rest, 
proceeding from the Heart, one branch ascending, 
another descending. 

 Apoplectic,  One subject to the Apoplexy. 

 Apoplexy,  A disease that stupifies and takes a­
way sense and motion. 

 Apozems,  Decoctions or drinking medecines made 
with herbs. 

 Appendixes,  Things belonging or depending on a­
nother, as the parts about the heart. 

 Aquosity,  Waterishness. 

 Area,  The void space in a Figure, as a Tri­
angle or Quadrangle: The Plat or Floor of 
any thing. 

 Armoniac,  Salt extracted out of stones. 

 Arteries,  The Vessels that carry the blood to the 
heart. 

 Arthritick,  Gouty or belonging to tbe Gout. 

 Arsnick,  Or Orpiment, a poisonous drug. 

 Archeus,  A cheif officer, Workman, or Opera­
tor, 

 Articulation,  A shooting of spriggs from the 
joynts. 

 Ascites,  A kind of Dropsie which swells between the 
skin and the flesh. 

 Asper,  Sharp, Asper artery, the wind-pipe. 

 Assimulation,  A growing or making like. 

 Assimulate,  To grow or make like. 

 Asthma,  A troublesome disease, when the lungs 
being stopped, one cannot take breath. 

 Asthmatical,  Belonging to that disease, or troubled 
with it. 

 Astringent,  Binding. 

 Ataxias,  Disorders, irregularities. 

 Atoms,  Small little Bodies, such as motes in the 
Sun-shine. 

 Atrabilous, Atrabilary,  Belonging to the black Bile or 
melancholy or to the melancho­
ly humour. 

 Atrophy,  A disease causing a pining away, or a 
wasting, or Consumption of the flesh. 

 Attrition,  A knocking, or bruising, or rubbing to­
gether. 

 Auditory,  An Assembly, or those who hear. 

 Aurum fulminans,  Or thundering Gold, a me­
tal prepared by Chymical Art, that being 
heated goes off like a Gun with a Thundering 
noise. 

 Austere,  Biting, harsh. 

 Axillarie,  Vein is a branch of the Vena Cava 
coming thorough the arm-hole from the 
chanel bone descends into the inside of 
the arm. 
Artery springs from the left side of the 
Aorta above the heart, and ascending 
obliquely thorow the arm-holes, and 
thence sending branches into the upper 
ribs, shoulder and chanel bone, it 
descends down to the bowing of the 
Elbow.

 Azygos vein,  is a branch of the upper Trunck of 
the Vena Cava, arising on the right side.


B

 Balneum Mariæ,  Is a way of distilling with a 
Glass-belly, holding the Ingredients put into a 
Vessel of water, and so fire being made under it, 
it distills with the heat of the water. 

 Balsamic,  Balsamie or belonging to Balsam. 

 Basilick Vein,  A large Vein into which the Axil­
larie vein is carried, called also the Liver vein. 

 Basis,  The foundation or foot of a thing. 

 Bechicks,  Medecines against the Cough. 

 Belly,   Vpper, the head so called. 
Middle, the region of the stomach. 
Lower, The parts below the Midriff, con­
taining the Intestines.

 Bezoartick,  Belonging or made of the precious stone 
Bezoar. 

 Bezoar,  A precious stone brought out of the Indies 
very Cordial. 

 Bile,  Choler. 

 Bilary,  Belonging to Bile or Choler, sometimes ap­
plyed to the vessel containing the Choler. 

 Bipartite,  Divided into two parts. 

 Bolus,  Is a Medecine made up into a thick sub­
stance to be swallow'd not liquid, but taken on a 
Knives point. 

 Botonick,  Pertaining to herbs or herby. 

 Brachial,  Belonging to the Arm. 

 Bronchia,  The grisly parts about the wind-pipe 

 Buboes,  Filthy swellings about the groin.


C

 Cachexia,  An evil disposition of the Body when all 
the nutriment turns into evil humours. 

 Cachectical,  To such evil state or disposition 



belonging, or one troubled with such evil disposi­
tion.

 Cachochymical,  Full of evil and bad juice in the 
body, of very ill digestion. 

 Callous,  Hard, fleshy and brawny. 

 Calx,  Ashes, Lime, sometime taken for the re­
maining parts of things Chymically drawn off. 

 Capillaments,  Small hairy threds of the Nerves. 

 Caput mortuum,  The dead head, being the last 
thing remaining after several Chymical extracti­
ons and good for nothing but to be flung away, all 
virtue being extracted. 

 Carbuncle,  A red fiery sore; a Plague-sore. 

 Cardiack,  Cordial, or belonging to the Heart. 

 Carotides,  Two arteries which arising out of the 
Axillarie Artery, are carried thorow the side 
of the Neck upwards into the skull. 

 Carthemums,  A little seed used in Medecines. 

 Caruncles,  Little peices of flesh. 

 Cartilage,  Is a gristle or tendril, a substance 
somewhat softer than a bone, and harder than a 
Ligament. 

 Cartilaginous,  Gristly, or belonging to, or full of 
such gristles. 

 Cassia,  A sweet shrub like Cinamon, also a drug 
that purgeth. 

 Cataplasm,  A Poultis or asswaging Plaister. 

 Catarrh,  A great Rheum falling from the head in­
to the mouth. 

 Cathartic,  A purging Medecine. 

 Cava vena,  The great Liver-vein going thorow the 
Body. 

 Cavity,  Hollowness. 

 Caustic, Cautery,  A Composition made to burn a hole in 
the skin and flesh to make Issues. 

 Celiac vessels,  Vessels belonging to the Belly. 

 Celebrated,  Performed or done. 

 Cephalalge,  The Head-ach. 

 Cephalic,  Belonging to the head, a Medecine pro­
per for the head. 

 Cephalic vein,  Which springing out of the Axil­
lary vein, passes between the first and second mus­
cle of the shoulder, and so passes evidently into 
the Arm. 

 Cephalic Artery,  Consists of two branches which 
springeth out of the great Artery, ascend up into 
the head. 

 Cerebel,  The hinder part of the Brain from whence 
the Nerves proceed that serve to the vital fun­
ction. 

 Cervical,  Belonging to the Neck. 

 Chalybeat,  A Medecine made of prepared Steel, 
or belonging to Steel. 

 Characteristical,  The notes, signs or figures be­
longing to a Character. 

 Chlorosis,  The Green-sickness, or the virgins di­
sease. 

 Choleduc vessels,  The vessels that hold and send 
forth the Gall. 

 Chorodeidal,  Belonging to the Net, like to the in­
foldings about the Brain. 

--->>>
|
|
V

 Chyle,  Is the juice or substance of of the meat di­
gested. 

 Chylification,  The making of Chyle. 

 Chyme,  Is the juice of the meat further di­
gested. 

 Chronical,  Long and tedious diseases. 

 Circumpulsion,  A driving about. 

 Classes,  Forms or Orders. 

 Coalition,  Nourishment. 

 Coagulation,  A curdling like milk, a turning 
into a Curd, or a separation of the parts like 
Curds and Whey. 

 Coagulum,  Any thing that causeth such a curd­
ling, as Rennet. 

 Coagulated,  Curdled. 

 Coction,  Boiling or seething, also digestion. 

 Cohobation,  A dreyning or pouring off from a 
settlement. 

 Coindications,  Things to be considered with the 
disease, also signs besides the disease it self. 

 Colcothar,  Dross of mettals. 

 Colical,  Belonging to the disease called the Co­
lick. 

 Colliquation,  A melting together. 

 Collation,  A comparing or coupling together. 

 Collated,  Compared or Coupled together. 

 Collision,  A striking or knocking together. 

 Colocynthida, Or Coloquintida,  a bitter purging 
Gourd or Apple. 

 Colon,  The fifth Gut, or that great Gut in which 
is seated the disease called the Colick. 

 Colluvies,  A filthy heap of anything. 

 Commissures,  The joynting or joyning of things 
together, as of the skull bones. 

 Complication,  A folding together. 

 Conarium,  A Kernel sticking to the outside of the 
Brain in form of a Pine-apple. 

 Concatenation,  A chaining or joyning together. 

 Concatenated,  Joyned, tyed, or fastned together. 

 Conflagration,  A burning out, or being in a flame, 
as in Great Feavers. 

 Conformation,  The framing, fashioning or dis­
position of a thing. 

 Congelation,  A Freezing or gathering together 
into an hard substance, as Ice of water. 

 Congeled,  Frozen, stifned. 

 Congestion,  An heaping or gathering together. 

 Conjugation,  A yoking together, a derivation of 
things of one kind. 

 Consistency,  Thickness or substance, as a Jelly. 

 Convolutions,  Roulings about or together, a twist­
ing together. 

 Contexture,  A weaving together, or a framing or 
composition. 

 Copula,  A Joyning of fastning together, fetter­
ing. 

 Corollary,  Addition, vantage, overplus. 

 Corrosive,  Gnawing, eating, corroding. 

 Corrugations,  Wrinkling together. 

 Cortex,  The bark, shell, peel, or rind. 

 Cortical,  Belonging to the bark, or rind, or peel of 
a thing 

 Crasis,  The disposition, complexion, temperature or 
mixture of natural humours. 

 Crass,  Thick. 

 Crassament,  A thickness or thick setling, as of 
dregs. 



 Cribrious,  Sivelike, or that hath holes like a sieve. 

 Crude,  Raw, undigested. 

 Crudities,  Raw and undigested humours, or raw­
ness, or undigestion of any thing. 

 Crisis.  Is the time of the turn of the disease when 
it either increases or diminishes, always observed 
by the Physitians. 

 Critical,  To the Crisis, or such time belonging. 

 Cremasteral,  Muscles belonging to the Testicles. 

 Crural,  belonging to the Log. 

 Crucible,  An earthen vessel used to melt Metal 
with. 

 Cucurbite,  A Glass-body with a great Belly, used 
in distillations. 


 Cuneform,  Wedge-like or inform of a Wedge: A 
bone so shap'd. 

 Cutaneous,  Belonging to the skin, or skinny. 

 Culinarie,  Belonging to the Kitchin. 

 Cuticula,  The little thin skin under the Cutis or 
the upper skin. 

 Cutis,  The upper or outward skin of the Body.


D

 Dead head,  The same with Caput mortuum. 

 Decapulation,  A pouring off. 

 Defection,  A failing, weakness or infirmity. 

 Decoction,  A boyling or seething. 

 Defecated,  made free from dregs. 

 Deflagration,  A flaming or burning forth. 

 Diliquium,  As of the salt of Tartar, a clear 
draining, also a swooning away, or a failing of 
the senses. 

 Dilirium,  A raving madness, as in Feavers. 

 Deltoides,  A muscle in the top of the Arm, having 
the figure of a Delta, the Greek D. 

 Demersed,  Drowned. 

 Depauperated,  Made poor or wasted. 

 Depraved,  Corrupted or marred. 

 Depurated,  Cleansed from dregs. 

 Depuration,  A cleansing or making pure. 

 Desultory,  Leaping, wavering or inconstant. 

 Diabetes,  The Pissing evil; a disease that causeth 
the party troubled therewith almost continually to 
piss, and in a great quantity a clear and sweetish 
water. 

 Diocodium,  A Syrup to procure sleep, made of 
the tops of Poppy. 

 Diagnosis,  Dilucidation, or Knowledge. 

 Diagridium,  See Scammony. 

 Diaphoresis,  Evaporation, as by sweating. 

 Diaphoretic,  That causeth Evaporation or sweat­
ing forth of humours. 

 Diaphanous,  Clear and splendid. 

 Diaphragma,  The Midriff that separateth the 
Heart and Lights from the stomach. 

 Diopneon, Diapnoe,  A breathing forth. 

 Diarrhæea,  A loosness of the Belly, without inflam­
mation, a Lask. 

 Diascordium,  A Cordial medicine made of Scor­
dium and other Ingredients. 

 Diastole,  The rising up of the Heart or Artery, 
the contrary motion of Systole. 

 Diathesis,  The affection or disposition. 

 Diluted,  Rinsed or washed. 

 Dilucidation,  An explaining or clearing. 

 Dioptric,  Belonging to the Perspective, or a Ma­
thematical Instrument, thorough which they look 
to take the height of a thing. 

 Divarications,  A varying or severing into parts 
running up and down, as the Veins and Nerves. 

 Diversory,  A diverting place, or a place to turn 
of one side out of the way. 

 Diuresis,  Evacuation by Vrine. 

 Diuretick,  A Medecine that causeth evacuation 
by Vrine. 

 Dogmatic,  Stiff in Opinion. 

 Duodenum,  The first Gut or Intestine of twelve 
fingers long. 

 Dura mater,  The hard membrane or tunicle that
encompasseth the brain next the skull. 

 Dyscrasie,  Intemperature, as some humour or qua­
lity abounding in the Body. 

 Dysentery,  A flux of the Belly that corrodes the 
Bowels and often causeth blood, called then the 
Bloudy flux. 

 Dyspathy,  A contrariety of affection. 

 Dyspnœea,  A pursiness or shortness of breathing, 
and a stopping of the Conduits of the Lights.


E

 Ebullition,  A boiling up. 

 Eccentric,  Without Centre. 

 Eccathartic,  Not purging. 

 Eccritic,  Not critical. 

 Edulcorated.  Made sweet. 

 Effervency,  Effervescency, A being very hot or inflamed. 

 Effluvia,  Things that flow out of the Body, as
steam and breath thorough the pores of the skin. 

 Egestion,  A casting forth as ordure from the body,
or any excrementitious homour. 

 Egritude,  Sickness or not being well. 

 Elastick,  That goeth off with a force like Gunpow­
der, or spreads forcibly forth with a jerk. 

 Elaterium,  A violent strong purging Medicine. 

 Elixation,  A boyling. 

 Elixir,  An Arabian word for Quintessence, high
Cordials so called. 

 Elogy,  A report in praise or dispraise of a thing. 

 Emanations,  Things that flow or proceed from the
Body or its parts; slowing forth. 

 Embryo,  The Child before it hath perfect shape in
the mothers womb. 

 Emissaries,  Places that send forth any thing as the
sinks of the body. 

 Empirical,  Belonging to an Empirick or of know­
ledge in Physick, got by practice only. 

 Empiric,  Such a Physitian who hath no Judgment,
but has all his skill from practice, or by experi­
ments. 



 Empyema,  An Imposthume or collection of corrupt
matter with inflammation between the breast and
the Lungs. 

 Empyreuma,  A smatch or taste of the fire, as
burnt too, or as in most waters newly drawn off
by distillation. 

 Emulgent, Emulging,  Vessels or Arteries, or veins: two large
Arteries so called springing out of the
great Artery, which being carried
near to the back bone are inserted into
the Reins. Also two large Veins
which springing out of the Vena Ca­
va under the ventricle, are carried
into the Kidnies. 

 Emunctories,  Sinks or cleansing places for the
Body. 

 Encephalon,  The head and all its parts. 

 Enema,  A Clister. 

 Energy,  The force or operation, or virtue of a
thing. 

 Enervation,  Unnerving, or a loosing of the strength,
a weakning or making feeble. 

 Enthymiama, Enthymeta,  Medecines used to express the flow­
ing of the Blood or other humours
to any place. 

 Ephemera,  Things of a days lasting: A short Fea­
ver of a day. 

 Epidemical,  General, universal, publick. 

 Ephidorsis,  A sudden sweat beginning about the
head and breast passing over the body, unprofi­
table and of small use for that evacuation of the
disease: Sometimes taken for sweating. 

 Epigastric,  Belonging to the Epigastrium. 

 Epigastrium,  The same with Abdomen, or the
outward part of the Belly, from the Navel to the
privy members. 

 Epilepsie,  The Disease called the Falling-sick­
ness. 

 Epiphysis,  Is an addition of some bone of a dif­
ferent description to the true bone to which it is
annexed: an addition or augmentation. 

 Epispasticks,  Certain Medecines used for the
drawing forth of ulcerous matter. 

 Epithema,  Moist Medecines used to bathe or fo­
ment the parts affected. 

 Epithymum,  Dodder of Time, used to purge
Melancholy. 

 Equinox,  When the day and night are of an equal
length, about the twelfth of March, and the twelfth
of September. 

 Eradicated,  Rooted out. 

 Erratic,  Creeping, wandring, or straying. 

 Escharotic,  A Plaister or Salve to heal up a
wound, and to bring it to a Crust. 

 Etymology,  The true Exposition or interpretation
of a thing. 

 Evident,  Plain, clear, manifest. 

 Eventilated,  Fannowed, or that receives wind. 

 Euphorbium,  The Gum os a certain Tree so cal­
led. 

 Excandescency,  A growing very hot and burning. 

 Excern,  Thrust out, to purge, or sift forth. 

 Excrementitious,  Belonging to Excrements: filthy,
polluted. 

 Excretion,  A voiding the Excrements, or super­
fluities of the body. 

 Excretory,  To such a thing belonging, that puts
forth the Excrements of the body. 

 Excrescencies,  Things that grow forth out of the
body, or any other thing besides the body, or thing,
as Warts or pieces of flesh. 

 Exert,  To shew or put forth. 

 Exitition,  A sparkling, boiling, bubling, or leap­
ing up, or forth. 

 Exonerate,  To disburden, or discharge, to purge
forth. 

 Expansion,  A stretching forth, spreading abroad,
or inlarging. 

 Expansed,  Spreadout at large, or stretched forth. 

 Expatiated,  A running forth or about, enlarged. 

 Explosion,  A driving forth with violence. 

 Exploded,  Thrust forth, or driven out. 

 Extravasated,  Put, or let forth of the Vessels as
Blood out of the veins. 

 Extraneous,  Strange, or of another kind. 

 Extirpated,  Rooted out, or plucked up by the Roots. 

 Extricated,  Delivered, or unintangled. 

 Exuberances,  Swellings forth, or risings up, in the
flesh or other parts.


F

 Fæces,  Dregs. 

 Fæculencies,  Dregs or settlements. 

 Farciments,  Stuffing or fillings of any thing. 

 Fermentation,  A fermenting or working, like leaven. 

 Fibrils,  Little small strings of Fibres, or of the 
Nerves or Veins. 

 Fibres,  The hairy strings of the Nerves and Veins. 

 Fibrated,  That has small and hairy strings. 

 Filaments,  Little, thin, slender Rags like threds, 
such as appear in Vrine. 

 Filter,  To strain: A Strainer. 

 Fissures,  Clefts, chaps, or divisions. 

 Fistulous,  Belonging to a Fistula, or sore running 
Boil. 

 Flatulent, Flatuous,  Windy or full of Wind. 

 Fluor,  A Flux. 

 Fluid,  Flowing or running. 

 Fluidity,  Apt to flow, flowing or wetness. 

 Fornix,  An hollow place in the Brain, bending like 
an Arch. 

 Forum,  A place in Rome where Judgments were 
given, and causes decided. 

 Friable,  That may be rubb'd to pouder between the 
Fingers. 

 Frictions,  Rubbings. 

 Fuliginous,  Sooty, or belonging to Soot. 



 Functions,  The Exercises or discharging of some 
Offices. 

 Fuse,  To melt as Mettals. 

 Fused,  Melted or running, as Mettals made li­
quid. 

 Fusion,  A pouring forth, also a melting of Metals
or other things.


G

 Ganglia,  Things like the heads of Mushrumps in 
the body. 

 Ganglioform,  Of the shape of Ganglias, or the 
heads of Mushrumps. 

 Galen,  An ancient learned Physitian. 

 Gargarisms,  Medecines to cleanse the mouth and 
Throat, and to wash them from filth. 

 Genesis,  Beginning, Nativity, or Generation, 

 Genuine,  True or natural. 

 Germination,  A springing or budding, or sprout­
ing forth, as of Trees in the spring. 

 Gesticulation,  A wanton moving up and down of 
the Legs and Arms or other parts of the body, like 
a Tumbler or Mimick. 

 Glandulas,  Are little round Kernels everywhere up 
and down in the flesh and other parts. 

 Glutæi,  Muscles of the Thigh. 

 Gonorrhea,  The running of the Reins, a flux of 
seed or matter at the privy parts of man or wo­
man. 

 Grumous,  Clottery like blood when congealed.


H

 Hæmorrage,  An excessive flux of Blood at the 
nose or elsewhere. 

 Halos,  A Circle about the moon or stars. 

 Hellebore,  The root of an herb used in Physick, 
two sorts, white and black. 

 Heptic,  Belonging to the Liver, and a Medecine 
proper to cure the diseases of the Liver. 

 Hermodactils,  Or Mercuries finger, white and 
red, used in Medecines. 

 Heterogeneous,  Of an other kind or Genus, strange, 
not agreeing. 


 Homogeneous,  of the same kind or Genus, a­
greeable, and sorting. 

 Horizon,  The Circle of the Firmament, termina­
ting our sight. 

 Humid,  Moist, wet. 


 Hydropic,  That hath the Dropsie, or belonging to 
the Dropsie. 

 Hydrotic,  A medicine evacuating watery hu­
mours. 

 Hydragogues,  Medecines that will draw forth the 
watery humour of those who have the Dropsie. 

 Hyoeides,  A forked bone like the letter Y, so called 
of the Anatomists, consisting of divers small 
bones which are the ground or foundation of the 
muscles of the Larynx, and the Tongue, and helps 
to breathing, and swallowing down meat and 
drink. 

 Hypercatharsis,  Overpurging, or in extreme. 

 Hypochondria,  The Præcordia: The forepart of 
the Belly and sides about the short Ribs and 
above the Navel, under which lyeth the Liver & 
the spleen. 

 Hypochondriac,  A windy Melancholy, bred in 
the Hypochondria, from whence a black phlegm 
arises that infects and troubles the mind, one 
troubled with such melancholy. 

 Hypnotic,  A medecine that causeth sleep. 

 Hypogastrium,  The lower part of the Belly, which 
reaches from the Navel downwards to the privy 
parts. 

 Hippocrates,  A learned ancient Physician, and the
first methodizer of Physick, and made it Arti­
ficial. 

 Hippocrates sleeve,  A long woollen straining bag, 
sharp at the bottom, so called, being almost in 
fashion of a sleeve or Doublet. 

 Hypothesis,  An argument or matter about which
one may dispute. 

 Hypostasis,  A substance or settlement, such as is 
in the bottom of an Vrin. 

 Hysterical,  Belonging to the womb or mother, or 
troubled with the disease called the Mother.


I

 Jalap,  A purging Drug. 

 Ichor,  The matter or corruption running forth of 
a sore or Vlcer. 

 Idocrasie,  The proper disposition or temperament 
of a thing or body. 

 Idiosyncrasie,  The property of the Temperament of 
Bodies. 

 Idiopathic,  Belonging to the proper passion of a di­
sease, thing or body. 

 Idiopathy,  The proper passion of a disease. 

 Idea,  The form or figure of a thing conceived in 
the Imagination. 

 Ilion,  The third Gut from the Ventricle, wherein 
the digested food or Chyle waxing thicker begins 
to rest; the thin Gut or small Gut. 

 Iliac,  Belonging to the Colick: The Colick in extre­
mity. Iliack passion. 

 Imbecillity,  Weakness, feebleness. 

 Impervious,  That cannot be passed or gone tho­
row. 

 Impetigo,  A certain kind of dry Itch or scurf 
like the Leprosie. 

 Impetuous,  Violently or with force, as it were rush­
ing upon a thing. 

 Impregnated,  Filled full with the vertue of a 
thing, as when any thing is infused in a liquid 
body, communicating its vertue to it. 

 Inanition,  Emptiness. 

 Incitement  A stirring up or provoking. 

 Indication,  A shewing or manifesting by sign. 

 Indomitable,  Vntamable, that cannot be sub­
dued. 

 Inflated,  Blown or puffed up as a Bladder with 
wind. 



 Ingestion,  A putting or pouring into a thing, as 
meat and drink into the stomach. 

 Inguinal,  belonging to the Groin. 

 Inordination,  Disorderings, irregularities, or 
out of order. 

 Insipid,  Without taste or smack. 

 Inspiration,  A Blowing in, or a drawing in of the 
breath. 

 Intense,  Strong, Violent, Great. 

 Intercostals,  Between the Ribs, Nerves, so called, 
because descending from the brain, they run be­
tween the Ribs, and so descend to the In­
wards. 

 Internodia,  Between the joynts or knots, as the 
spaces in a Ratoon Cane between the joynts or 
knots. 

 Interstitia,  The spaces between other distances as 
the spaces between the Ribs, or the joyntings of the 
back-bone. 

 Internuncius,  A messenger that goes between. 

 Intestines,  The entrails or the Guts. 

 Intrinsical,  Inward. 

 Inverse,  A turning inside out, or outside in, upside 
down, quite contrary. 

 Inverted,  Turned wrong-side out or upside-down; 
quite changed from its natural scituation. 

 Involuntary,  Not with the will, unwilling. 

 Irradiation,  A beaming forth or casting forth 
beams like the Sun. Sometimes applyed to the 
spirits beaming themselves forth, or running forth 
from their centre like beams. 

 Irrigation,  A watering, wetting or moistening. 

 Irritate,  To provoke, anger, or stir up. 

 Irritated,  Provoked, anger'd, or stirred up. 

 Ischuria,  The disease of the Bladder; the stoppage 
of the water, when it cannot comeforth but by 
drops and with pain. 

 Ischuretical,  one so troubled with that distem­
per. 

 Jugular,  Belonging to the Throat, the throat-vein 
and Artery. 

 Julap,  A cooling Cordial, or a mixed Potion to 
cool and refresh the heated spirits, used in Fea­
vers.


L

 Lactiform,  Like milk, or in the form of milk. 

 Languor,  Feebleness, failing or decay of strength, 
fainting, or weakness of Spirits. 

 Larynx,  The top of the Asper Artery, or the head 
thereof, which reacheth up to the Mouth or Jaw, 
which with the bone Hyoides joyned thereto, serves 
for breathing and forming of the voyce, or the air 
into articulate sounds. 

 Lassitude,  Weariness and irksomness. 

 Lateral,  Belonging to the side. 

 Latex,  Liquor or Juice of any sort in the body. 

 Laudanum,  A Medecine used by Physicians to 
cause rest, given in difficult Cases. 

 Lienary,  Belonging to the Spleen. 

 Leipothymy,  A swooning or fainting away of the 
spirits. 

 Lethiferous,  Deadly, that causeth death. 

 Leucophlegmacy,  The kind of Dropsie that ariseth 
of white Phlegm throughout all the body, and 
makes the flesh spongy. 

 Ligature,  A band or string bound hard about the 
Arm, Leg or any other part of the Body. 

 Limature,  The pouder or dust that cometh of file­
ing, the fileings of Steel and other mettals. 

 Limpid,  Clear, pure, and bright like water. 

 Linctus,  A Medecine that is to be lick'd with the 
Tongue. 

 Liniments,  Ointments. 

 Lixivial,  Belonging to lie made of ashes. 

 Lobes,  Lappets, or such as the Liver is distin­
guished into. 

 Lochia,  All that comes away from a woman after 
she is brought to bed. 

 Locomotive,  That moves from place to place. 

 Lucophlegmacy,  See Leucophlegmacy. 

 Lumbary,  Belonging to the loyns. 

 Luxuriat,  To grow rank or abound. 

 Limphic, Limphatic, Vessels:  That carry or contain the 
waterish humours of the body. 

 Limpheducts,  Water-Carriers, or Conveyors, the 
same sort of Vessels which carry forth the wa­
terish humours.


M

 Magma,  The blended dross and fæces of several 
Mettals, as also of Chymical Extractions. 

 Mammillary,  Processes in the Temples, Bones 
hanging down like broken brows of Banks repre­
senting the fashion of Teats and Cows Vd­
ders. 

 Mansorius, Massoterie,  A Muscle, which springing up circu­
larly from the Throat bone of the 
upper Jaw, moveth the nether 
Jaw. 

 Mandible,  The Jaw wherein the Teeth are set. 

 Mastic,  A certain Medecinal Gum. 

 Masticator,  The Pipe or Conduit that conveys the 
pituitous matter out of the Head into the Mouth. 

 Matrace,  A Vessel used for Chymical Distillati­
ons. 

 Maturation,  A ripening. 

 Maxilary, Maxillar,  Belonging to the Jaws. 

 Mechoacan,  A purging Drug brought from the 
Indies. 

 Meconium,  The juice of the Leaves and heads of Poppy. 

 Medastinum, Or Mediastinum:  The thin mem­
brane that divides the middle belly or the Breast, 
from the Throat to the Midriff into two bosoms or 
hollows: One on the right side, the other on the 
left. 

 Medullar,  Marrowy, or belonging to the marrow 
or pith, or the white substance of the Brain. 

 Membranes,  The little thin skins joyning the bones 
and sinews together in several parts of the body: 
The upper thin skins of any part. 

 Meninges,  The thin skins that enwrap the Brain, 



both of the pia mater & dura mater: one called 
the hard, the other the soft Meninx.

 Menstruum,  A preparation made by Chymists to 
dissolve metals, also to extract tinctures and the 
virtues of medecinal druggs, woods, flowers, 
herbs, &c. 

 Mesentery,  A certain thick fat skin, or the double 
skin that fastens the bowels to the back, and each 
to other. 

 Meseraic, Veins  arise, or are rather inclosed in the 
Mesentery, being branches of the great vein, by 
which the Guts are nourished, and the juice of the 
meat concocted, is conveyed to the Liver to be 
made blood. 


 Mercurie,  Quick-silver, and its preparations of 
it. 

 Metaphysical,  Supernatural; things of sublime spe­
culations beyond nature. 

 Mestasis,  Is a translation, or when a disease re­
moves out of one place into another. 

 Metathesis,  Is tranposing, the putting of one thing 
for another. 

 Miasm,  Infection or taint. 

 Microscope,  A Perpective-glass to behold minute, 
and very small bodies, a Magnifying glass. 

 Millepedes,  The hundred-feeted Creature, and He­
slog-sows, or Hog-lice. 

 Mirabolans,  A certain medecinal fruit brought out 
of the Indies. 

 Modifications,  A measuring or bringing into mea­
sure. 

 Morbid, Morbifick,  Sick, corrupt, filthy, or naughty. 
That causeth the Sickness or disease. 

 Mucilage,  Thick boiling up of a thing to a jelly, or 
thick consistency. 

 Munited,  Defended or fortified. 

 Muscle,  Parts of the body that serve for motion, 
softer, and more fleshly than the sinews. 

 Musculous,  Full of Muscles, or belonging to the 
Muscles. 

 Myology,  The Doctrine of the Muscles.


N

 Narcotick,  Stupifactive, or that makes the part 
sensless. 

 Nates,  Two prominences in the Brain, so called 
because in the form of Buttocks. 

 Natiform,  In the form of a Buttock. 

 Neoterics,  People or men of late Times. 

 Nepenthe,  A drink to drive away melancholy. 

 Nephritis,  A pain in the reins of the back, also the 
Stone or Gravel in the Reins. 

 Nephritic,  One troubled with the pain in the 
Reins. 

 Nerves,  Are the sinews which convey the spirits 
that serve for life and motion through the whole 
body. 

 Neurologie,  The doctrine of the Nerves. 

 Nitre,  That is usually called Saltpetre: A salt 
taken out of the earth. 

 Nitrosulphureous,  Nitre mix'd with Sulphur, or 
of a nitrous and sulphureous nature or quality.


O

 Oblique,  Cross, traverse, aslope, not straight or 
right. 

 Oblong,  Longish or somwhat long. 

 Oeconomie,  A certain order of doing any thing, 
an houshold rule, regiment or governance. 

 Oesophagus,  The mouth of the stomack. 

 Olibanum,  An outlandish Gum. 

 Opiologie,  The doctrine of Opium. 

 Opium,  Made up of the juice of wild poppie, used 
to stupifie and bring into a sensless sleep. 

 Opiats,  Medecines made of Opium for some part 
if its ingredients to cause sleep and ease for pains. 

 Optic,  Belonging to the sight, as the Nerves that 
bring the vertue of seeing to the eyes. 

 Opopanax,  The juice made of a certain herb. 

 Ophthalmic,  A medicine to cure the diseases of the 
eyes. 

 Orgasm,  Rage or fury. 

 Orifice,  The hole of a wound, or the mouth of any 
thing. 

 Origine,  Beginning, rise or birth of a thing. 

 Orbicular,  Of a round form or shape. 

 Orthopnœa.  Is such a straitness of breath, that 
one cannot breath, or fetch breath without stretch­
ing out of the neck, or holding it upright. 

 Os Pubis,  Is the bone at the bottom of the belly, 
just above the privie member. 

 Os Sacrum,  Or the sacred bone, is the great bone 
upon which the end of the ridge or back-bone 
resteth. 

 Oviparous,  Egg-bearing Creatures, or that lay Eggs.


P

 Panacea,  All-heal, or a plaister or medicine to 
heal all things. 

 Pancreas,  Called in a Hog the Sweet-bread. It 
is a remarkable kernel placed below the Ventri­
cle, and serves for a division of the Vena porta, 
as also to defend the Ventricle from touching the 
back. 

 Papillary,  Belonging to the Teats, or like paps or 
teats of a dug. 

 Papillæ,  Little paps, or little pieces of flesh in the 
body, so called of the shape of paps. 

 Paracentesis,  Is an incision made to draw forth the 
water from those swelled with the Dropsie, vul­
garly called a Tapping. 

 Paracelsus,  A famous Dutch Emperick, 

 Paradox,  A thing contrary to the common opinion, 

 Paralytick,  That is troubled with the Palsie. 

 Parallel,  Equal, alike, like a line drawn to write by 
another. 



 Parotida, 
Parotides.  The two chief Arteries and Veins on 
the right and left side the throat, 
going up towards the ears. 

 Parotid,  To them belonging. 

 Particles,  Little parts or portions of any thing. 

 Paroxisms,  Fits, or the returns of fits, as of an 
Ague or Feaver. 

 Pathetic,  To passion belonging, Nerves so called 
by Dr. Willis. 

 Pathologie,  The doctrine of the passions, also as 
Ætiologie. 

 Pathognomic, 
Pathognotic,  
That moveth the affections, or 
that properly belongs to the 
thing. 

 Pepasmus,  A kind of a concoction of the humors in 
the disease. 

 Percolation,  A straining thorow. 

 Pericardium,  The thin skin or membrane covering 
the whole heart like a case. 

 Peritonæum,  The inner skin or rim of the belly 
joyned to the Caul, wherewith all the Intrails are 
covered, called by the Anatomists Siphach. 

 Peripneumonia,  An Inflammation or Impostume of 
the Lungs, with a shortness of breath. 

 Peristaltick,  Motion, a certain motion compassing 
about as in certain convulsions. 

 Perspiration,  Breathing thorow, as sweat through 
the pores of the body. 

 Perturbations,  Disturbings, vexing troubles, di­
sturbances. 

 Pervious,  That may be passed through, or that 
has a passage or way through it. 

 Peruvian,  Belonging to the Country of Perue, as 
Peruvian, Balsom thence brought. 

 Pharmacy,  The Medicines of the Apothecharies; or 
the art of making them up. 

 Pharmaceuticks,  The part of Physick that cureth 
with Medicines. 

 Phænomena,  Appearances of things. 


 Philonium,  A Confection made of many ingre­
dients compounded together. 

 Philtre,  A potion to cause Love; or poysonous 
Medicines that operate magically, or not natu­
rally. 

 Phlebotomie,  Letting blood or opening of a 
Vein. 

 Phlegmon,  An inflammation of the blood, with a 
red swelling. 

 Phlegosis,  The like Inflammation fiery red. 

 Phthisis,  The Consumption of the Lungs, with a 
wasting away. 

 Phthisic,  Belonging to that disease, or that has 
it. 

 Physiologie,  The reasoning of the Nature of a 
thing, or the searching it out. 

 Pia Mater,  The thinner inward soft skin that in­
wrappeth the pith and marrow of the brain, and 
is every where joyned to it; called the thinner and 
soft Meninx, 

 Pica,  The longing disease of Women with Child. 

 Pineal,  Kirnel in the brain, in form of a Pine­
apple, called also Conarium. 

 Pituitous,  Snotty thick phlegmatick matter. 

 Plastic,  Formative or that worketh and formeth. 

 Plenitude,  Fulness or store. 

 Plethora,  A fulness or plenty of humours in the bo­
dy, good or bad. 

 Pleura,  A skin or membrane which clotheth the 
ribs on the inside, which being inflamed by the 
blood, causeth the Disease called the Pluri­
sie. 

 Pneumatic,  Windy or belonging to wind or breath. 

 Pneumonic,  One sick of the disease of the Lungs. 

 Polypus,  A filthy disease in the nose, breeding 
stinking and ulcerous flesh within the nostrils. 

 Pontic,  Belonging to the Sea or to the Country of 
Pontus. 

 Porta Vena,  Is a Vein that hath many small 
roots fastened to the Liver, from whence arising 
grow into one trunck or stock, which going forth 
from between two eminent lobes of the Liver, 
passes into the Gall, Ventricle, Spleen, Me­
sentery, and Caul, and other parts of the 
body. 

 Pores,  Are the little small holes or breathing 
places in the skin of the body, through which heat 
and moisture insensibly breath continually. 

 Porous,  Full of such like holes or pores. 

 Praxis,  Practice or action. 

 Præecipitation,  A casting down; used by the Chy­
mists for a certain way of distillation, when the 
matter is thrown back into the receiver. 

 Præternatural,  Besides or more than natural; not 
natural or besides nature. 

 Præceding,  Going before. 

 Prævious,  That went before. 

 Præcordia,  The parts about the heart, as the Dia­
phraghma, or midriff separating the heart from 
the other bowels. 

 Præmised,  Sent before, or before made known. 

 Præpolency,  Of very great force, strength, excel­
lency, or virtue. 

 Priapismus,  Is a disease in the Yard, that causeth 
it alwayes to be stretch'd forth, and extended 
without any thing provoking it. 

 Primigenious,  The first original; not having its 
beginning or birth of another. 

 Procatartic,  Remote, not next cause of a dis­
ease. 

 Processes,  The parts of a bone (or other parts) 
that exceed the natural height or posture, and are 
yet dependances of the bone and parts, and pro­
ceed or go out from it; as also some Nerves going 
forth of other Nerves, being still parts of the 
main stock. 

 Profusions,  A pouring forth, a running or spread­
ing abroad. 

 Profluvium,  A flowing of humors, a gushing forth 
in abundance, a flood. 

 Profligated,  Driven away, or overthrown, discom­
fited. 

 Prognosis;  The præscience or fore-knowledge, or 
Prognostication of the event of the disease. 

 Promptuary,  A Store-house, or place where any 
thing is laid up. 

 Prominences,  Bunchings forth, those parts that 
notably shew themselves above the rest, as a hill 
in a plain. 

 Prophasis,  The appearing or shewing of a thing. 



 Prophylactic, That part of Physick that prevent­
eth and preserveth from diseases. 

 Prostatæ,  Kernels in the Groyn, or about the 
privie-members. 

 Protension,  A stretching forth at length. 

 Protraction,  A drawing forth at length, also a 
prolonging. 

 Protuberance,  A bunching forth above the rest. 

 Protrusion,  A thrusting forward. 

 Psoa,  A great muscle beginning at the 11th. rib 
and going through the bowels to the privie­
members. 

 Psora,  The scabbado, or scabbiness with pustles. 

 Ptyalismus,  Sallivation, or a great flux of spit­
ting. 

 Ptisan,  Decocted Barly, with other ingredients. 

 Puretology,  The doctrine, or a discourse of Fea­
vers. 

 Pungitive,  Pricking like needles. 

 Purulent,  Full of matter or filthy corruption; as 
a Bile or Impostume. 

 Pubis,  That part of the privie-parts where the hair 
grows. 

 Pulsific,  That strikes as the Pulse or beating of the 
Arterie, or that causes such striking or pulse. 

 Pylorus,  Is the lower mouth of the stomach or 
ventricle, whereby the meat being digested, is 
transmitted into the Stomach-gut or Maw-gut. 

 Pyramidical,  Of the shape or form of a Pyramide, 
broad at bottom and sharp at the top. 

 Pyretology,  The doctrine of Feavers, or of fire.


Q

 Quotidian,  Daily or every day: an Ague that 
comes every day. 


 Quartan,  Every fourth day; an Ague that has 
two days of intermission, and comes on the fourth 
day again.


R

 Ramifications,  Branchings forth like the Veins, 
Arteries and Nerves up and down the body, re­
sembling the small twigs and branchings of 
Trees. 

 Rarefaction,  a making of any thing rare or thin. 

 Ratiocination,  Reasoning, debating, or arguing 
of any thing, or the facultie of reasoning. 

 Reciprocation,  a returning back, or a mutual 
partaking of a thing, or depending on another by 
a mutual consequence. 

 Recrement,  Any superfluous matter, or thing in 
the blood or body, or any of the parts. 

 Redundancy,  Superfluity, overflowing too much 
of a thing. 

 Recesses,  The private and hidden parts of the 
body or any hid place. 

 Refection,  A repast of meat and drink, a re­
freshing. 

 Refraction,  A breaking off, or rebounding back. 

 Reflection,  A bending back or rebounding. 

 Refrigerate,  To make cool, or to refresh with 
cooling; as fanning one in great heat. 

 Regurgitate,  To swallow up again; or to sup up 
again what it before had parted with. 

 Regulus,  The dross of metals. 

 Renal,  Belonging to the Reins. 

 Reiterated,  Repeated, or the same thing done or 
performed again. 

 Remora,  A stop, let, or stay to any thing; a figu­
rative speech taken from a little fish so called, 
which is said by cleaving to the keel of a ship, to 
stay it in its course. 

 Repletion,  A fulness or filling full, or abounding. 

 Repullulate,  To bud or spring forth again, as 
trees in the Spring. 

 Resine,  A Chymical extraction of several druggs 
so called being in substance like to Rosine or 
Resine. 

 Respiration,  A breathing forth or a venting. 

 Resolution,  A dissolving or unbinding, a loosning. 

 Retort,  A Chymical Vessel. 

 Reverberatory,  A furnace by which matter is 
calcined or consumed with the flame. 

 Rhomboides,  A Geometrical figure with unequal 
sides. 

 Rhombus,  A Geometrical figure with equal sides 
but not right angl'd, like a quarry of glass. 


 Rhubarb,  A root brought out of the East-Indies, 
almost like a dock root, used to purge choler. 

 Risibility,  Laughter, or the faculty of laughing. 

 Riverius,  A famous Physician. 

 Rotation,  A going round like a wheel, a moving 
round. 

 Rudiments,  the first beginnings and principles of 
thing.


S.

 Saline,  Saltish or belonging to Salt. 

 Salt-peter,  Or Salt of the Rock: a salt got out 
of the Earth, contracted from several dungs of 
Fowls or other Creatures, as Pigeons, Poultry, 
and Cattle, and from the Vrines of Beasts, and 
is one of the Ingredients of which they make Gun­
powder, much used in Chymistry. 

 Sal-prunella,  A Salt made out of Salt peter. 

 Sal-ammoniacus,  A Salt of the Earth, found a­
mong the Sands in Lybia. 

 Sal alcali,  Salt of ashes made of the herb Kali,
but used also for the salt of other herbs burnt to 
ashes and so extracted. 

 Salvatella, Vein,  is a branch, which springing 
out of a Cephalick Vein, in the outside of the 
Cubit, stretcheth above the wrist and extream 
part of the hand, between the Ring-finger and 
the little finger. 

 Salivate,  To spit or cause one to void much spittle. 

 Salivation,  A great flux of spitting, or avoiding 
of spittle more than ordinary at the mouth. 

 Sanguineous,  Bloody or belonging to the blood. 

 Sanguification,  The making of blood, or the 
changing the nourishment into blood. 



 Sanguiducts,  The Vessels that carry the blood 
through the body, as the Veins and Arteries. 

 Sarsaparilla,  A drugg brought from the West-­
Indies, used in many decoctions. 

 Sagapenum,  A kind of Gum or Rosin that runs 
forth of the Shrub called Ferula. 

 Scammony,  The juice of an herb which violently 
purgeth choler; it is also called Diagridium. 

 Scapular, Muscle;  a muscle belonging to the 
shoulders, and serves for the moving of them. 

 Scheam,  Is a figure or draught of a thing; also 
taken for an Astrological Table of the 12. Houses. 

 Schirri & 
Scirri,  
Are hard swellings in the flesh, with­
out pain but hardly curable. 

 Schirrous,  Full of such hard swellings. 

 Sclerotic,  That is troubled with some tumour in 
the third panicle of the eye, called the Cornea 
membrana, or somewhere thereabouts. 

 Scorbutick,  That is troubled with the disease called 
the Scorbute or Scurvey. 

 Scordium,  A useful herb in Physick, having leaves 
almost like Germander. 

 Scotomies, 
Scotomie,  
Turnings round; a disease in the 
head, when all things seem to turn 
round. 

 Scrotum,  The outward skin of the Cods, where 
the hair grows. 

 Scutiform,  In the form of a Shield or Buckler. 

 Sedal,  Veins in the Fundament. 

 Seclusion,  A thrusting forth or out. 

 Secundine,  The After-birth, or that which in­
wraps the Child, which follows after the Birth 
of the Child; vulgarly called the After burthen; 
of Anatomists the 4th. membrane of the eye, called 
Chorion; and that first clotheth the optic sinew 
is called the Secundine. 

 Secretion,  A separating or putting apart: 

 Secreted,  Separated apart. 

 Senna, Or Sena,  the leaves of a Plant, that Pur­
geth Phlegm, Choler and Melancholy. 

 Sensory,  The organ of feeling, or discrimina­
ting by the sences; the common sensory or seat of 
such organ, placed in the brain. 

 Septic,  That hath the force of corrupting or putri­
fying, or that maketh rotten or ripe the matter 
in a sore. 

 Series,  An order, course, or succession of things, a 
row or course of things orderly one after another. 

 Serous, Humour,  the whey or watery humour that 
accompanieth the blood, and which makes it fluid, 
and is separated and put off from the blood into the 
parts of the body. 

 Serosities,  Such serous humours abounding. 

 Serum,  The whey or watery humour ef the blood, the 
substance of the serous humour. 

 Sinus,  A bosom or hollow turning, or outlet of 
waters or an inlet or arm of the Sea. 

 Soldanella,  Is the Sea-colewort or Folefoot. 

 Solitive,  Loosening, or that maketh the body loose. 

 Solstices,  Are two, the Summer and the Winter 
solstice; the first is about the twelfth of June, 
when the Sun is nearest to us and makes with us 
the longest day; the last is about th: 12 of De­
cember, when the Sun is at its greatest distance 
from us, and makes with us the shortest day. 

 Solving,  Loosening or unbinding. 

 Solution,  A loosening or weakning, as of the Nerves 
or joynts. 

 Solvent,  That which dissolveth or openeth the parts 
of the matter to be wrought upon. 

 Spagiric,  Belonging to Alchymie, or to the Chymi­
cal art. 

 Spasms,  Cramps or Convulsions of the Nerves. 

 Spasmodic,  Belonging to the Cramp or Convulsion, 
or hauling of the sinews. 

 Spasmology,  The doctrine of the Convulsion or 
Cramp of the sinews. 

 Speculative,  Contemplative or notional. 

 Speculation,  A seeing or discovering a thing by 
contemplation. 

 Species,  A kind more particular than Genus, and 
may be communicated to more generals; as a Cow 
and an Horse are of a different species, but both 
Animals or Beasts. 

 Spermatic,  Belonging to the sperm or seed, 

 Sphacelismus,  A blasting or a mortification of a 
part. 

 Sphincter,  Is the round muscle that encompasses 
the mouth of the Arse gut, which keeps the ex­
crements from an involuntary coming forth. 

 Spine,  The back-bone, or long-joynted bone that 
goes down the back. 

 Spina dorsi,  The same; the bone of the back, the 
Chine. 

 Spinal,  Belonging to that bone. 

 Spiral,  A turning about, and as it were ascend­
ing. 

 Splanchnic, 
Splanchnical, 
 Belonging to the Spleen. 

 Splenitic,  Troubled with the disease of the Spleen. 

 Spodium,  A sort of soot made out of the making 
and trying of brass. 

 Spontaneous,  Willingly or of one accord, or by the 
command of the will. 

 Sporadical,  That seiseth not after an usual man­
ner, diseases that seize privately here and there 
on People dispersedly, not generally or epide­
mically. 

 Squinancy, Or Squincy,  is a swelling in the throat, 
with an inflammation. 

 Stagmas,  The mixtures of mettals, or other Chy­
mical things set together to ferment and operate 
one upon the other. 

 Stagnation,  A standing still without motion, as a 
pool. 

 Sternothyroeidal, Muscle,  A Muscle which 
reaches from the Sternon to the Os Pubis. 

 Sternon,  That part of the breast where the rib­
meet. 

 Stibium,  Antimony. 

 Stiptic, Or Styptic,  that straineth, bindeth, or 
is restrictive. 



Strumous,  That belongeth to the Kings evil, or 
he that hath that disease. 

 Subclavian, Vessels:  the vessels that belong to 
the little ribs of the breast. 

 Sublimate,  White Mercury, or Quick-silver Chy­
mically sublimed; Mercury sublimate: of a poy­
sonous nature. 

 Subside,  To sink down or fall to the bottom. 

 Subsidiare,  That cometh for aid, or to help, or 
bringing aid or help. 

 Subaction,  A kneading, working, exercising, or 
bringing under. 

 Suffusion,  A spreading abroad, or pouring forth. 

 Sudation,  A sweating. 

 Sudorifick,  That causeth sweating. 

 Sulphur,  Brimstone which is found in Mines in the 
Earth, taken also for one of the Chymists 
principles. 

 Sulphureous,  Brimstony, or belonging to Brim­
stone. 

 Superficies,  The outside or overmost part of any 
thing. 

 Suppuration,  A ripening or gathering together of 
the matter of a sore. 

 Surculs,  Little or small shoots or spriggs. 

 Sutures,  The joynings together of the bones of the 
head, which appear as if sowed together with 
long stitches. 

 Symptom,  Is an effect, accident or passion follow­
ing any sickness, or any sensible grief joyned 
with a disease, besides the disease it self, as 
Head-ach with a Feaver. 

 Sympathy,  Is a natural passion of one thing to a­
nother, or an agreement in qualities. 

 Sympathic,  Agreeing in affections or passions. 

 Symphony,  A consent or agreement in harmony. 

 Sympraxis,  A joynt exercising or agreement in 
practice or action, a consent in operation, 

 Syncope,  A swooning, or a loss of all sense. 

 Synochus,  Is a Feaver without changes or in­
termissions, a continual Feaver. 

 Synthesis,  A figure contrary to Analysis; a con­
cession of some things arising from the matter. 


 Systasis,  Constitution. 

 System,  The work or part of something that is con­
stituted or a theam or work compacted of several 
parts, a part of which is a System. 

 Systole,  Is the motion of the heart and arteries, 
contrary to Diastole, by which they are con­
tracted, but by this they are dilated. 

 Syzygies,  Are the Nerves that carry the sense from 
the brain to the whole body; also the conjunctions 
of the Sun, Moon and Stars.


T.

 Tabes dorsalis,  The mourning of the Chine; a 
wasting or consumption of the back. 

 Tabid,  Consumptive, pining, or wasting. 

 Tamarinds,  An outlandish fruit, good to quench 
thirst and to allay the heat of choler, used in 
Medicines. 

 Tarantula,  A little venomous creature found in 
Apulia, a part of Italy, whose poyson being by 
biting diffused through the body, strikes the 
Nerves with strange tumors and Convulsions, 
which is only curable by the party so bitten, being 
provoked to continual dancing, by which means 
the poyson is evacuated through the pores from the 
Nerves. 

 Tartar,  Is a concreted matter taken from the Lees 
of Wine, very medicinable. 

 Tenacious,  Holding or cleaving fast. 

 Tenasm,  A great desire of going to stool, and yet 
can do nothing. 

 Tenous,  Thin, slender, or small. 

 Tendons,  Certain parts in the top of the Muscles, 
which serve aptly for the moving the muscle, 
being the lodging place of the animal spirits, 
belonging to the Muscle, and out of which they 
issue into the muscle; they are harder than the 
muscles, yet softer than a gristle or ligature. 

 Terrestial,  Earthly, or belonging to the Earth. 

 Testes,  certain tubercles in the brain of a man 
and beasts, so called because like to the stones of a 
man. 

 Tetanism,  A kind of Cramp that so stretcheth 
forth the member that it cannot bow nor bend any 
way. 

 Texture,  Frame or make of a thing. 

 Theorie,  Contemplation, or speculative knowledge 
of a thing. 

 Theriacal, Or Treacle,  a Medicine of a diverse 
composition invented against poysons. 

 Therapeutick,  The curatory art of medicine, or 
that which belongs to the curing part. 

 Theorem,  An Axiom respecting contemplation. 

 Thesis,  A position or a general question or argu­
ment to be discussed. 

 Thorax,  The breast or the middle part of the 
body, reaching from the throat or neck to the 
lower ribs. 

 Thoracious,  Belonging to the Breast or Thorax, 
or medicines good to help the disease of the 
Thorax. 

 Tinged,  Dyed or dipped, or that has received a 
colour. 

 Tincture,  A dying or colouring, or the dye or co­
lour of any thing. It is used also for high Cor­
dials and Chymical medicines, of a liquid sub­
stance, and stained with some tincture or co­
lour. 

 Tolutan,  Balsom: A Balsom brought from the 
Indies, so called. 

 Topics,  General places or heads for invention; 
a part of Logick, noting the places of Inven­
tion. 

 Torpedo,  The Cramp-fish that benummeth the 
bands of the Fishers, holding the Net or Angle 
with a subtil poyson. 

 Torpor,  A numness, heaviness or stiffness and un­
aptness for any motion. 

 Torrid.  Dry, burned, or parched. 

 Torrified,  Made dry or parched, or burnt or 
scorched. 

 Trachea,  The Weasand or Wind-pipe; the sharp 
arterie. 



 Tragacanth, An outlandish Gum, commonly called 
Gum-dragganth. 

 Transpiration,  A breathing through as a vapour 
through the pores. 

 Transpire,  To breath through, as the humors in­
sensibly through the pores of the skin. 

 Trapezial,  Belonging to a Geometrical figure, so 
called of four sides. 

 Troches,  Are little round Cakes made up of pow­
ders, and used in medicines. 

 Trochlear, Muscle:  A muscle made almost like a 
windlas or pulley, where by things may be strong­
ly hauled or pulled. 

 Tropicks,  Two great imaginary Circles in the 
Heavens, being of equal distance from the Æqua­
tor, the one called the Tropic of Cancer, to 
which the Sun being come, he returns back towards 
the Tropick of Capricorn; to which being come 
here again, returns towards the Tropic of Can­
cer; being the limits of the Suns progress. 

 Tubes,  A Mathematical Instrument, hollow like 
a pipe. 

 Tubercles,  Little swellings or pushes, wealks or 
weales in the skin or flesh. 

 Tubuli,  Small little pipes, the Veins and very 
small Arteries, or little hollow parts of the 
bowels so called. 

 Tumified,  Swelled or puffed up. 

 Tumor,  An hard rising or swelling in any part of 
the body, with or without inflammation. 


 Turbith,  A root much used in Physick to purge 
phlegm. 

 Turgency, 
Turgescency,  
A swelling or rising up. 

 Turgid,  Swelled or risen up, puffed up, moved very 
much. 

 Tympany,  A kind of dry Dropsie, or windy swell­
ing of the belly, gathered between the peritoneum 
and the bowels, which if it be smitten upon, 
soundeth almost like a Drum.


V.

 Valves,  A part of the brain, made like folding 
doors so called. 

 Van Helmont,  A Famous Dutch Doctor. 


 Vapid,  Dead, decay'd, without tast or smack. 

 Vegetation,  A growing or putting forth, or flou­
rishing as a Plant. 

 Vegetal,  Belonging to such a growing or flourish­
ing. 

 Vegetable,  That which hath life, and growth, but 
not sense, as herbs and trees. 

 Vehicle,  That which carrieth or beareth another 
thing as the blood is of the animal spirits. 

 Vena Porta,  See Porta Vena. 

 Vena Cava,  See Cava Vena. 

 Venous.  Belonging or appertaining to a Vein. 

 Ventricle,  Is the stomach, or that part which re­
ceives the meat and drink, being swallowed down, 
and which hath in it self the virtue of digestion. 

 Ventricles,  Of the heart, two notable little hollow 
caverns on each side of the heart. 

 Ventricles, Of the Brain,  several not able caverns therein. 

 Vermiculations,  Creeping like a Worm, or motions 
like the creeping of a Worm. 

 Vernal,  Belonging to the Spring, or in the time of 
the Spring. 

 Verberation,  A beating or striking. 

 Vertigo,  A diziness, giddiness and turning round 
within the head. A certain disease, which 
causeth a turning within the head. 

 Vertebral,  Belonging to the joynts of the back­
bone. 

 Vertebræ,  Those several joyntings and knittings of 
the back-bone or chine, so called of Anatomists. 

 Vesicatories,  Medicines that raise or cause Blisters 
where applied. 

 Veterans,  Old Soldiers, or any thing that hath 
served long in a place. 

 Viaticum,  Voyage provisions, as meat and drink 
upon a journey. 

 Vibration,  A shaking, striking or quavering. 

 Vicinity,  Neighbourhood, or nearness of dwelling 
or being. 

 Viscid,  Clammy, or sticking like Bird-lime. 

 Viscosity,  A Clamminess or glewiness. 

 Viscera,  Are the chief Entrals or Inwards, as 
Heart, Liver, Lungs, Spleen, the Bowels, Of the Brain, &c. 

 Vitriol,  Copperas, a certain Mineral found in se­
veral Countreys used in Medicines. 

 Vitrolic,  Belonging or appertaining to Vitriol. 

 Umbilic,  Belonging to the Navel, or of the like­
ness or shape of the Navel 

 Undulation,  A wavering like the waters, where 
one follows upon the heels of the others. 

 Unctuosity,  An oyliness or juiciness. 

 Unctuous,  Oylie or juicy. 

 Volatile,  That easily flies away, or that is apt to 
flie or vanish. 

 Ureters,  The pipes or passages; by which the Vrine 
passes from the Reins to the Bladder. 

 Urinary,  Belonging to the Vrine, or the passages of 
the Vrine. 

 Uterine,  Belonging or appertaining to the Womb. 

 Uvea,  The fourth thin membrane of the eye, called 
also Of the Brain, Corion.


W.

 Wezand,  The Windpipe or Throat.


X.

 Xeroeus, Wine:  A Spanish Wine so called, I 
suppose they mean Tent.



 
Here ends the Table of hard names. 
 


